Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Ancient records: or, The abbey of Saint Oswythe: a romance
yr i H,«> . ^i w N il j*».> iii *. ii p*w .M II .HH1 ..r iil iOiji i ■ i .gw i i i i. fca»H iii )ui.mi mmmmm t HMmmyu mmt ti y mmft
ANCIENT RECORDS.
«—•»###|<^>^€>* (
\.vjtjtxi,i, « 1*
** t f like a nakeJ tree, my flwtter r;one» ** To winds u»J winter ftorms muft {land expoftd.** ** Fear r s trembling peRCjl, ever dipt jn black, * f Faints to the mind ftrange images of woe-** Almwa, *' Of Aipevft'tion feds the mceftant throb ** Of ghaftly panic * In whofe <laMK-J rar ** The knell ftill dc*.'i>cti$j and the raven croaks." OSALINE, by the united care of her people, who all crowded mund, and welt each emulous to give comfort to their dear vou ii, b young
young once more opened eyes % and when a^;iin reftored to fenfation, beheld the good old Norman, who, bending low his venerable head, thus addrelfed her— €€ The ways of Providence are wife and unfearchable ; and that which now feems an infupportable affliction, may, in the end, prove a lafting bleffing: and Jet that confideration, rry dear young miftrefs, eafe the weight of your forrow j doubtlefs all is for the bell. My Lord's departure from the Abbey being fo fudden, is, to be fure, a very heavy griev¬ ance to you, and to all your poo people, and none can lament it with more true fince* rity and refpecl: than myfeif i but as he will foon return, I hope you will let thst remem¬ brance cheer you for the grief of his ab- leoec ,, u Aye, aye, my Lady," interrupted Blanche, u do be comforted $ make thy dear heart quite eafy, and be affured all will go to thy heart's content. Your poor old fervants will
<riH do all in their power to make the Abbey as lively as pofllble.'* Rofaline, from infancy, had been accuf¬ tomed to allow the refpedful freedom of thefe Old domeftics; nor did her meek foul feel humiliated in receiving their well-meant con- . dolence. She endeavoured to appear com¬ pofed, and a friendly fliower of tears a little relieving her heart, fhe thanked them for their care, and difmifled them. ItmsnowaboutthedawnofmoQung. and Rofaline tried to compofe her agitated fpirits to repofe ; but the reftlefs ftate of lier mini admitted not of fleep, and fhe continued in a lethargy of forrow and regret. All around feemed dreary and defoiate $ her brain became whirled in a chaos of ideas; and fear, never known till now, took pofleffion of her inmoft thoughts. A long train of reSeftions and conjectures ftarted on her fincy as fhe recalled the paft, and deeply ruminated on the future* Qn her father's words flie b £ dwelt
dwelt with attention; but their -mean* ing was myfteri nifty enveloped be¬ yond rise power of the keeneft comprehen¬ sion to tmraveh Dejected, forlorn, and miferable, flic threw herfelf vn her couch ; and nt *pne moment was tempted to accufe Sir Alfred of cruelty ; till remembering that he was himfelf the victim of forrow and ac- knowledgal oppreflion—-"Ah! no, 1 wrong mv noble father by fo unjuft a fufpicion,** flie fished foith; "he loves me too well need- leffly to defert me. Some unknown caufe of deeper confequence than I have power to fathom, alone has impelled him to this re* greeted expedient. Yes, my beloved parent, 1 will obey your tender injunctions 1" flie exclaimed as fhe kifled his miniature that flie always wore j * c 1 will endea¬ vour to fupprefs thefe feififh, fruitlefs repinings at your abfence, that on your re¬ turn 1 may render myfeif worthy your prate, by not proving ungrateful for that parental gooclnefi, which, though myfterious and
mid unknown, is dii played in this voluntary abfence for ray future weif.rc and pn/pcrity.'* With thoughts firdi as thefe, Rofaline fue- ceeded in rep;fining fomet'dnnj li^e co ji* {J v I pofure of mind ; an i rho refled ion chat flie was ading i ight, added force to the effort. The firft clay paftl'd away in tears, *tis true, but they were t£ mii.l rearer, n-^'c <>/ pi ii >»i- ate impatience ; they relieved lier he.-.i:, a/id nature and you:h combined to give fu r :ci*fa ro the laudable-defign, which, aili ird wi:h buoyant hope, unchecked by ditappoinzment, enabled her co feel her deprivation lefs i:i- tjolerably.'— c * In a numb," ihe frequently during the day repeated, u my dear father will return.**—The thoujpt had a balmy in¬ fluence over her mind; and (he never once permitted herfelf to cVmk, ~r ever* i .ii^i ic, how m%ny i.ivincibL- circu n!lm;cs mij^t poffib.y intervene to del u his ani/.J o.i tlu appointed day. Whilft bufied in thefe refledions, a cou. ior b 3 from
from the Caftle arrived at the Abbey with difpatches j and Rofaline, unwillingly breaking their feals^ read as follows :—
* c The Baronefs of Urbandihe waits with the tendereft impatience to embrace the lovely daughter of her friend, Sir Alfred St. Ofwythej t\nd entreats th^ Lady Rofaline will no longer dtf^r her anxioufly defired v fit. Ruithvina would herfelf joyfully have efcorted her lovely ward from the Abbey, but is prevented by the fudden arrival and depar* ture of the Baron. She trulls her young friend will not fail to honour the Caftle with, her pretence ere the decline of day, " RUITHVINA URSANDINE.* 1
" Ah!'* fighed Rofaline, "how gladly would I remain in this dear, venerated Ipot, were it permitted \ for my mind will
will but ill accord with the lively brilliance of die Caftie, and I tremble left 1 fliould there encounter the unfeeling, indelicate Lady Paulina j or how am J affured that in the Baronefs 1 fliall find that warm, indulgent friend my father has prepared me to expect ?'* Again flie deeply fighed at the neceffity of her departure ; and but for the apprehenfion that in her refufal of quitting the Abbey, me mould offend her future guardian, and wound the nice feelings of her father, ftie would afluredly have declined a removal fo iU agree¬ ing with her fecret wifhes. The mind of Rofaline had imbibed that fixed principle of obedience to her father's fmalleft dcfires, that on this occafion fuffer¬ ed her not to difpute his commands j and though their performance had now the merit of a felf facrifice, flie refolved to comply. As if Ihe was parting for ever from a home that had long been dear to her, Rofaline took jb 4 a melancholy
a melancholy walk throughout the Abbey, and to each well-known fpot dear to me- mory: vith the forrow fhe felt at quitting their beloved haunts, was rniKed a kind of wonder at the ftrangenefs of fo fudden and unexpected a removal. Laftly, flie vlfitcd the fojeft and the gardens, and all the plants tliat had been fet by her own, and the hand of Conftantine. Thefe fhe moiftened with many tears ere fhe could fum man refolution to quit them; for there now fet nied a double charm that more clofeiy invited her ftay wkh thefe endeared fcenes of eariieft recolledion As flie was returning from the gardens* and had entered the lawn, her favourite little fawn came joyfully bounding towards her*« She gave the Iportive animal a double por¬ tion of carefles, and her grief, by this circum* ftance, feemed renewed $ but exerting her fortitude, fhe entered the faloon, in hopes her regret would fubfide when removed from theJeobje&s of her care and regard. But there
there ftood another group that more power¬ fully claimed her attention % among the fore* moft of the houfehold were Norman and Blanche, u And will you indeed leave us, my Lady ?" fobbed forth the latter, affected to tears, ** 'Tis my father's command* my good Blanche, that I fhould remain at the Caftle during his abfence," replied Rofaline, endea¬ vouring to fuppre 6 a tear. u But here, my good houfekeeper, U employment for you while I am away,** giving the latter a heavy purfe. ** You know," fhe added, " what 1 mean s don't neglect my poor old friends, nor forget mv little favourites V* '* That I'll be fworn fhe won't, my clear Lady," replied Norman. "She would be a bad Chriftian indeed, who could neglect to perform the commands of fuch an excellent miftrefs ! Heaven protect and profper her ! * But pardon your old Reward's freedom," he b 5 continued*
continued, wiping his eyes. " I pray the Virgin guard you, and let no evil harm my deareft Lady ! although I muft needs fay HIV heart ttTt^ivpc m#* larlli? &t flitc rarnncc. Forgive an old man's fears, my Lady, and pray you be cautioned againft the Baron. He is a great Nobleman, to be fure 5 but for all that, the world will talk, and many ftrange reports hath it given out to my Lord's pre¬ judice, which it does not become me to relate \ butv'tis as w<df/' added he, with a contraded brow and clouded countenance, that feemed to fey~I could reveal much, but durft not* " 'tis as well I fay, niy Lady," with great empha- lis, u to be on our guard againft an evil hour r* Rofaline filently gave her hand to Nor¬ man, in token of her thanks for his care and love, which the old gentleman refpedfully bowing upon, gently again refigned. She ms unable to fpeak *, but gracioufl^ bending to all the houfehold and tenantry, flie entered the covered car that waited to convey her to the
die C;ftle, and taking one laft agonizing look at the Abbey, bade Rowland proceed. Rofaline at length faid to her attendant, as fhe wiped the tears from her eyes— <c For che firft time, Jannetta, I fhall quit the beloved fliades of the foreft -, but with how fincere a reluctance, Heaven alone can witnefs," ** Lord 1 my Lady/* interrupted Jannetta, glad of an opportunity to hear herfelf talk-— u Lord ! my Lady, how can you give way tc* thefe melancholy ideas I I am fure I am almoft: out of my wits for joy, at once more , efcaping from our old frightful prifon—I beg pardon, my Lady—I mean the Abbey.** u That prifon, as you term it," replied Rofaline, with a figh, ** wa$ my fathers houfe, and my happieft home. I know no other, nor fhall I ever ceafe io regret the caufe that forces me to quit it." " Well certainly, my Lady, you muft be in love* for nobody but a perfon bewitched could. ever fancy a liking for fuch a foliury gloomy $ 6 place* 54
place. cheeks crimfoned deeply at this unexpeded remark. * c But J am fure, your Ladyfhip," added Jannetta, " will foon %kcr your tone when you partake of the grand tilts, and tournaments^ and dances, and enter- tammenrs of the Caftle. Oh 111 warrant you your Ladyfhip will foon regain your fpirits, and be as happy as to be fure you ought to be. Befides, only confider, my Lady, yon t Will be able to fee my Lord Conftantine every day, and——** * u Jannetta," angrily pronounced Rofa- line, in a tone of impreffive refentment, that f effcdually flopped the conclufion of.the talkative Jannetta*s fentence— cc Jannetta,'*' repeated Rofaline, " I mui% infift, I muft command that you abolifb this idle love* of talking, and that in future you reftram the freedom of your fpeech both tome and ofmy concerns, as you fear to excite my anger and difpleafure*" There was a degree of referve and dignity in her manner that inftantly awed her attendant into
into filence; and Rofaline* though fhe fe!t herfelf offended, fcarcely knew why fhe wis fo, although it produced a fulutary cffed on Jannetta, who reftrained herfelf during the reft of their Ihort journey. The fun had fet ere they arrived in fight of the Caftle, Rofahne viewed ha lofty battlements and ponderous black towers with a kind of inward dread flie was tinable to account for: a thoufand fears m\d doubts agitated her thoughts, and, with bit¬ ter regret, fhe wept the hard neceflity that had left her no choice of refidence bm this* The Abbey certainly was foiitary, nnd its venerable towers gloomy, and even awful to the fight i but ufe had rendered them fo fa¬ miliar, that in the mind of Rofaime they never excited any fear, or a with to quit them. But the majeftic towers of Urbandine railed very different lenfetions: within thur dark, unacquainted courts (he faw no hopes of a friendly flicker, ora tender concern for her future happinefs, Regrets
Regrets of this nature, however, fhe con^ fidered were now ufelefs; and fince it became a duty to her father's commands ter fupprefs them, ftie refolved, aa fhe v/iped the tears from her eyes, they fliould be the laft fhe would fhed j—but ftill they would flow, and not till flie bad pafled up the rugged fteep, and entered beneath the great archway of the portcullis, could flie entirely diveft herfelf of thofe that would fall to the memory ofthe regretted Abbey. As the carriage pafled through the courts* and arrived at the great gates of rhe Caftle hall, foe beheld Lord Conftantine* witfr anxious gaze, awaiting beneath the outward corridor, her approach* A foft heaving, agitated her bofom, and her heart, at the fight, feemed inclined to leap from its prifon^ but fhe fuppreffed the momentary emotion* and Conftantine, with rapturous joy, wel¬ comed her arrival to the Caftle : and as he conducted h ^r through a crowd of Knights * ^nd fpeftato* to the apartments ofthe Lady Ruithvina i ,
JRukhvina, he again foftly whifpered— ** Welcome, angelic Rofaline, thrice wel¬ come to Urbandine 1 Oh may its towers long poflefs fo fair an inmate ! and may the happinefs her loved prefence will difpenfe to all around (but moft of all to her adoring Conftantine) be as a prelude to future felicity!" Rofaline felt a little confufed at thk warm addrefs j nor did the preffure of her fingers within the hand of Conftantine ferve to dimimfh that fenfation. She made no other 51 reply than a filent bow * and fteadily fixed her eyes upon the pavement, fearing, fhould fhe raife them, flie fliould encounter thofe of Conftantine*. The opening of apair of magmftcently gilt folding doors faved her from further reftraint; and Rofaline, for the firft time, £iw the Baronefs, in w hole open majeftic countenance ftie felttmny of her fears vanifh, and much of that
that timidity, infeparable from doubt, ren* dered.utelefs j for the Ladv Ruitnvina, with looks that fpoke the finccrity of her prpfefljons, threw ner arms around her with all che warmth of a lon^-eftablifhed regard and fnendfliip, as flie thus faid— ire Welcome, moft wclcon«e, lovely Rofa^ line ! Believe me, charming Ladv, though I Sympathize with yourfelf in the deprivation you have' fuftained by the abfence of Sir Alfred* f am fo felfifo as to lyiih it prolonged^ fince it wllhafford me the long-defired gratis fication of his daughter's fociety, whom, f perceive already, T fhall love as much as if Nature had given me a prior claim to her heart and affedions. Let this embrace banifh ail referve, and aftlire you of the fin** cerity with whkh I greet your arrival at: the Caftle/' Rofaline, charmed with a reception fo % exceeding
exceeding in kindnefs her warniffl hopes, gratefully returned the friendly preffure, and with graceful delivery, (aid-—- u You alone, deareft Lady, can teach me how to exprefs, as 1 ought, my thanks for a reception, I fear, fo unmeritedly friendly ; my heart muft better fpeak my gratitude than %ny hngmge I am capable of nfmg, whofe fenfations, at' your kindnefi it is iiiipuiTible for me at prefent to aefcribe. Rofaline, as flie finifhed fpeaking, raifed the hand of the Baronefs to her lips i who, as flie prefented it, gazed upon the beautiful young ftranger with looks of pleafed furprife and admiration, Rofaline, after the falutations of welcome were over, caft her eyes around, and trem¬ bled as fhe, for the fecond time, encountcied the piercing glances of the young Countefs of Othin, whofe eyes weie rivetted with a pecu* ' liar
liar meaning on her face and perfon. Rofa¬ line remembered the fcene In the foreft, and was now difconcerted by the haughty manner with which the former returned her advances \ for the Baronefs, apologizing for her mo¬ mentary renuflhels, thus faid, as (lie intro¬ duced the former to her ward— u 1 prefent ta your notice and regard, Lady Paulina, the daughter of my noble friend, Lord St. Ofwythe, in whofe fociety I truft you will experience the pleafures of a* refined friendfhip/* Lady Paulina, putting afide the hand of Rofaline, which' the Baronefs had prefented her with, bowed flightly i and as the latter turned round, flie faid, with a low, almoft inaruculate found, as fhe ftill intendy gazed upon RofaUne**** u Methinks the Lady Rofaline has fome¬ what diminiflied in the beauty of her looks fince
fince I was laft honoured with a fight of her w* f perfon •. the luftre of her bright eyes feems faded, and the deep crimfon of modeft diffi¬ dence, that then mantled her cheeks, has given place to the pale bluih of the rofe. Really lam at a lofs for judgment fufficient to determine which is moft attradive ; and her eyes, though now deprived of their captivating potency, fcem armed afeeffi with an aftumed charader, too refifUefe to fear their retention of their prefent conqucft." The Baronefs, had, by this time, retaken her feat. She heard not the malicious dif- courfe of Paulina; and Rofefine, difdaining an anfwer, felt her cheeks glow with a fhame flie could not fupprefs, and an indignation fhe was unwilling to give way to in the prefence ofXady Ruithvina. From Paulina fhe was now convinced, by this firft fpecimen, how little either of kindnefs or refped flie had to hope for; and fighing deeply, fhe fuppreffed the rifyg tear that would force its pafiage to her
her eyes, that fhe nfi^ht not add to the cruet triumph foe Taw Iparkling in thofe of * •* ItVltKIVI. , Thp Bironrfs, though ftiU very beautiful, had loft many of thofe dnzzfng char.nis of perfon thar won at firft fight, and involun¬ tarily retained their powers upon the memory o r the beholder; an 1 though the radiance of her eyes was fomewhat dimmed, thev feemed tooue their fercing luftre more to forrow than time, and was now fucceeded by a penfive mildnefb that almoft immediately caught the, attention, and engaged the heart of Rofiline. She obferved that the Baronefs often fighe i, though feemingly involuntarily and uncon¬ feioufly to herfelf.— <f Ah !" inwardly ejacu* lated flie, * r can it be poffble that fuch a woman as Lady Ruithvina is unhappy ?"— Rofaline, as this idea fuggefted itfelfj remembered the accounts fhe had fre~ quently heard from Norman relative to the Baron, and npw dwelt on the cau- tfoo and advice that good old mun had given j it
it roufed her utmoft curiofity, and flie be¬ came anxious to brhold him, that Ihe iright form to herfelf a judgment of his difpofidon and character: I ut from the difc nsrie o-- her illuftrious hoflefs Ihe found his remm to the Caftle was uncertain* nor was any period fixed. The Baronefs entered into an elegant con- verfation with her gueft till the hour of ieure- ment arrived, when they parted mutually 1 pleaied with each other: I.ady Ruithvina charmed no lefs with the graceful fimplicity and matchlels beatity of her ward, than was - the latter with thecondefcending kindnt-1^ and infinuating maternal attentions of the Baronefs. Some days paffed in unruffled ferenity at the Caftle, and the Lady Paulina fcldom ap¬ pearing in the faloon, and only mix¬ ing with the family during the banquet hours, gave a great relief to the fpirits of Rofaline, who, feeling an unconquerable averlion to the Countefs, refolved to avoid as much as potli- ble her fociety; a circumftance Ihe found 3 no
rio difficulty in purfuing, fince Lady Paulina's exceffive referve and hauteur (for which the Baronefs kindly apologized to Rofaline), left the latter without the neceflity of explaining the litde defire flie had to cul¬ tivate an intimacy with a being who feemed to defpife and look down upon that fuperior beauty foe would have given worlds to have poffeffed. Rofdine and Paulina feldom met; and when they did, the latter only noticed her bya proud inclination of the head, and a forbidding glance of the eye, that, though it humbled, it had not power to roufe the refentment of Rofaline ; who, difdaining to notice this ftrange behaviour in any other language than expreflive filence, was in the end rather pleaied than otherwife that ftie was not obliged to live on terms of intimacy with one who had ex* cited fenfations unfek before. The increafing endearments of the Baronefs had a fudiien effed on the grateful mind of
iof Rofaline, who to that iliarp poignancy of regret for the abfence of Sir Alfred, and her mind to regain a de¬ gree of placidity and fatisfaction. The Caftle, wliich afforded Rolaline nisny a delighted ramble, was magnificently Gothic; and flie would repeatedly have loft herfeif in its intricate chambers and winding corridors, had flie not been attended by the gentle Jeffica, whom the Baronefs had ap¬ pointed to fhew to her ward the various ob- je#s and apartments of the interior as well as the exterior worthy of notice. Attended by Jannetta as well as Jeffica, fhe had fpent the greateft part of the fecond morning of her arrival in reviewing the Caftle, and now en¬ tered the eaftern gallery in her approach to her own chamber, which nearly adjoined the eaft apartmems. Thefe ftie had not yet fcen j and Jtflica, paufing at the door of Rofaiine's room, made no attempt to proceed further; but Rofaline, deftrous of inipe&ing the chambers of
ofthe eaft towers, exprefled her inclination to that effed. u Mercv^and the Virgin defend me from ever pnflingthe threfhold of yonder doori" exclaimed Jannetta, pale and terrified, as fhe pointed to the Gothic portal that was fixed at tl e end of the gallery,— <c Your Ladyfhip would never defire fuch a thing, if you were to be informed of all that relates ty thofe gloomy old towers -, I am fure, my Lady, bad as is the Abbey, I would rather enter any ofthe ruins at midnight, than venture in the noon* day into thofe frightful chambers !'* €C And wherefore fo ?'*~aflted Rofaline. u Why, pleafe you, my, Lady/* replied Jannetta, a ftill paler, look, dealing over her countenance, "they are haunted,and nobody has ever dared to approach the eaftern wing ofthe Caftle for many years. Rofdine caft her eyes on Jeffica for a refu¬ tation of Jannetta's words *, but flie made no attempt to contradid the afiertion ofthe latter. She
She obferved alfo a degree of confufion and terror in her countenance and manner, thac feemed ftrongly to confirm Jannetta ? s ac¬ count. Refolved, however, to be fatisfied, Rofaline demanded the keys.—** I am defi¬ rous to difcover if there is any caufe thk can have excited fuch a report.**-—And flie was proceeding down the gallery towards the door of the eaft chambers, when Jannetta, feisftng the arm of her Lady, loudly ex¬ claimed—* <c Stop, for Heaven's fake, flop, my Lady! and remember how dearly you fuffer¬ ed for your curiofity at St. Anna's tower.** The recollection of the fcene there wk- nefled, thqs recalled to her memory, detained Rofaline from purfuing her defign ; flie flop¬ ped, and turning to her guide, demanded if there really was any truth in the reports Jannetta had gathered concerning thefe towers ? " It is uixeruin, and the accounts vol. n. c various
various and intricate, Madam/* replied Jeffca, " from whence thefe reports dated their origin} nor can the truth be traced, fmce mv Lord and Ladv have iffued ftrid commands to all the fervants and retainers of the houfehold to be filent on the fubjeft; It is, however, undoubted that the eaftern angle towers have never been occupied of late vc^rs; nor has die whole fuite of apartmems they contain been opened fince the time of the prefent Baron and Baronefs. The in* terior cf thefe chambers is faid to have been the prifon of one ofthe Sovereign Princes of England, who, it is reported, expired there during his captivity. Whether from this, or any odier unexplained caufe, is unknown $ but certain it is, they have for many years been difuled, and the keys of all their en¬ trances taken from the Caftellain, by the par¬ ticular oiders of my Lord GonJemar, who lately demanded them, as it was flip* pofed, to fearch into the reality of the reports that had been circulated about thefe very chambers," Here
Here then ended all further poffibiiity of entering them, had Rofaline been fo inclined -, and gracefully returning her acknowledg¬ ments to Jefika, me palled from the corridor to her own apartments. Thefe were fituated at the top of the eaftern corridor $ they were lofry and magni¬ ficently decorated j the antichamber was lined, as was the fleeping room, with rich arras, depidive of die hoiy wars; the bed¬ chamber was fpaciouily large, and fuperbly ornamented ^ fuch parts of the walls as were not covered widi tapeftry, were lined with dark oak, richly empanelled with golden fretwork-: the ceiling prefented a deep azure iky, covered with innumerable ftars, and the bed was of embroidered velvet, the colour of the ceiling, the canopy hfty 7 and heavily emboffed with a deep cornice of gold, and plumages of white feathers; but notwith¬ standing the grandeur tliat every wliere met the eye, there was a fombre gloom thrown over the whole from the deep fixed fpaces of C 2 till?
the narrow painted cafemews, that feemed to thnMv a chill around, impreffive of unpleafinw fenfations to the beholder; and Rofaline found that the fmall oratory, vvhich was.divi- ded from this chamber onlv by a fiiort paf- fege, was infinitely more lively and prefera¬ ble than the dreary greatnefs of the others. In the paffage that led to it was a fmall door, ftrongly, as it appeared, faftened s and from its fituation, Rofahne judged it muft have a communication with feme of rhe leading en* trances to the eaft chambers; for in the tur¬ ret that compofed the fize uf the oratory, flic had from its windows, a full and near view of the adjoining toweis that enclofed theni. «* I wonder," feid Jannetta, as fhe fhut tlie door of the chamber, " my I ady, the liuK'nefs, fliould fo panicululy appoint thefe chambeis rer}oui uie, Madam. I am fure they are too near the tall luite ior your Lady¬ fhip to reft peaceably in your bed $ and for my part, I fhall tiemble to crofs that frightful gallery when it it dark : for though Jefiica was
was fo uncommunicative, five knows very well that every night, as the c loek ftrikes twelve, a li \!u is ft en pifiri? through the great eaftern cham' er, borne bv a tall fif»un-. Ahl if your Ladvfiiip was ro know oil the accounts th»t old Editha relates.," continued Jannetta, u it would be enough ro tcrrifv you out of your fenfes The ftories of Blanche are to be fure di final enough, and certainly the old Abbey is full of the ghofts of Nuns and Friars; hut that is nothing com¬ pared with the tranfadions reco mred of the great black tower in tin: eatern wl.i^ of the Caflle. u For Heaven's fake, J:rinecta," inter¬ rupted Rofdine, wearied vv.li me c intinued loquacity of her attendant, "ceafe thefe idle fables. Have you fb foon fryot my icllric- tions on this fubject ? 1 et me no morel.avc to repeat them - } audit mny oe a* well if y m flip- prefsenthely yom \ iolem devotion to the .mar¬ vellous, which, if indif^ed, may prove otln- fivc to the bhuo.kfy, and oolite me t^ re ue.ad q 3 \ <1
you to St. Ofifcythe, from whence you were fo joyfully ready to efcape." 1 his rebuke had us ekiireci eitet* *, for Jannetta was too much delighted with the change to wifh again to return to the Abbey : and the mild threat of Rofaline taught her in fwmre lo he more guarded in her expreflions. On the north fide"of the Caftle was a deep paved terrace, that overhung ihe ocean Itfelf, and had only a low baluftrade built at the extreme edge of the acclivity to fecure the foot paffenger from ^a too near approach to the dark abyfs of waters. This walk was of jpacious width, and extended far beyond } the battlements of the Caftie over the rocks which hung fufpended, as it were, above the deep caverns and excavations that ran along the fhores, amidft the ftupendous heights that crowned the uppermoft furface ofthe earth. Here Conftantine frequently led his adored Rofaline;
Rofaline i and together they would watch from this mountainous profped the glorious fuhlimity of the letting fun, as it gradually funk beneath the profound deep, leaving a golden track of fire that darted its dazzling refieftions among the glaffy waves, in all the fpiendour of that unrivalled brilliance, which no earthly efforts can properly do juftice to, when, they would feebly attempt to exprefs an admiration of the glorious perfections of the power of unfeen Majefty. From this airy and lofty fituation, the unU verfal profped of Nature was unobftruded by a fingle hill or eminence, and all around was fpace imnieafurable and unconfined. Often would the impafBoned Conftantine pafs his moft happy hours in the fociety of the objed of his love ; and here it was that his unceafing importunities and tender perfua¬ fions at length drew forth a timid confirma¬ tion of that return which he hoped to have excited in their Lift vifit in the foreft, 0 4 but
but which the' ifltrufion ; of Paulina and Gondemar had,' interrupted. 'Twas' after an explanation of this nature, almoft forced from the confHous maid, that Gon- ilantine refolved to obtain the interference of the Barone-fi'in favour of his fmt; for Eofa- .liiie, though-betrayed by the irrefiftible per- fuafions of her loyer, and the pleadings of her own heaitj to an acknowledgment of a mii- tual afiedlion, had exacted in return 0 pro- mile that he would never again'addreis her on the fubjefi: of love, without the en¬ tire fanftton and approbation of the Baron and Lady Rukhyiua; and Gonftantine was obliged co be contented with thisv con- frflion in his ftvour^ and rely on the Baroneis for his&£ure happusefe. *Tvvas one eveninsr thatRofaline hM retired from the terrace fooner than ufual to her own chamber? that the found of horns and cla¬ rions awoke the echoes of the cliffs, and pro¬ claimed the. approach of vifitorsj and Jan- netta
netta, foon after entering haflily Lady's apartments, thus exclaimed— *« Oh Lord, my Lady ! I am out of my wits with joy !" and there fhe paufed to take breath, for it feems her fpced had completely for a time prevented all articulation* but Rofa¬ line herfelf elated, fhe knew noc why, at the joy that fparklcd in the eyes of Jannetta, now quickly ftarting up, exclaimed— " Is your Lord returned ? Say, Jannetta, is my dear father in the Caftle r" u Oh no, my LaJy !" replied the former, now angry with herfelf for jaifing fuch an ungratijied hope, " no, my Lady," ihe re¬ peated, rather difconcerted, *' but the Baron is, with a noble train of Ivnights and Cava¬ liers, who my Lord's Squire fay* are coming with the Duke of York to partake of a banquet triumph, in honour of their late victory gained over the Lancaftrians. Now, my I ad*, only think how lively fuch grand company will make the Caftle. 1 dare fey there will be c 5 nothing
nothing the great courts, and dancings and rejoicings in the hall* I declare I can hardly fpeak for pleafure.'* " So it feems indeed, Jannetta!*' replied Lady Rofaline j t( and you have alfo loft your fears of the eaftern chambers, I perceive, by the alacrity with which you have arrived „ here." ,c Oh dear, my Lady ! but 1 was fent with a meflage, which made nie haften fo &ft, though I declare the fight of fuch noble ftrangers almoft put it all put of my head; but I fhould have told you, my Lady, that as I was haftening through the hall, to get out of the way of the Cavaliers, who, to be fure* are fome of theni the boldeft looking gentle¬ men I ever faw, and nearly put me out of countenance with ftaring fo at me—well, my Lady, among the fcremoft ftarted forth my confident young Lord Gondemar; and fays he, taking my hand, and fmiling in my face, quite good humouredly— * Will your Lady, pretty Jannetta, grant me a fmall favour, think you ?'-—*Oh yes, my Lord Baron, to be fure
fure flie will,* I replied, dropping him my loweft obedfence, c My Lady is al! affability and condefeenfion,—* Well then,* fays his Lordfhip, c luften to her with my earneft and moft refpedful entreaties that flie will allow me the honour of a vifit upon bufinels to me of the utmoft importance.*—So this, my Lady, was what brought mc here in fuch a hurry." Rofaline, with amazement, liftened to this ft range and ill-timed requeft; and feverely chiding Jannetta for her miftaken encomiums, bade her return to Lord Gondemar with a pofitive denial. Jannetta rather reludantly obeyed -, and Rofaline, having waited fome time for her return, and not finding that ihe did fo, concluded that Gondemar had refign¬ ed all thoughts of intruding on her notice for that night, though ihe felt at a lofs to account for what reafon he had defired fo uncommon a requeft. She now opened the door that led to the c 6 corridor,
Corridor, as fhe wifhed, ifpoflible, to obtain a fight qf the Baron j and approaching the lattice of the heavy gik baluflrade that ran along the floor of the gallery, flie caft her eyes into the hall below, where fhe faw feveral martial ftrangers, clothed in fteel armour; but one among rhe crowd, whofe tall figure and richly plumed helmet glittering with diamonds, and precious infignia, feemed fir- perior to the reft, flie was inftantly confirmed was the Baron, by the entrance of Lady Ruithvina, who, at that moment fuperb¬ ly habited, came from the oak parlour, and approaching the Knight, made a low obe* dience as flie kifled his hand,' and welcomed the Baron by his tide to the Caftle., The Baron, fainting her,-coldly thanke'd hrs Lady for her kindly greetings, and intro¬ duced feveral of the Cavaliers as they ftood waiting in the hall for that welcome, which the Baronefs, with the utmoft eafe and dignity, extended to them all Allured of "who was the Baron, Rofaline fixed her eyes with the minuteflt
minuteft ferufiny upon him, and as fer as the diftance would permit, found that many em¬ blems ofhis face and features exadiy anfwer¬ ed-the dcfcription fhe had received from Norman. There was a fomething in his countenance unprepoffefling, his lordly port and commanding perfon conveying that idea of felf~import,ant fuperiority that failed in engaging her approbation 5 his features were large, heavy, and mufcular; and if fhe was before {hocked at the formal cdklnefs w : th which he had received the Baronefe, flie was now afloniihed at the reverfe of his deport¬ ment to the Lady Paulina, whom he embra¬ ced with all the infinuadng courtefy of a warm and pleafed .regard. Gondemar fhe had flightly feen as he paid his refpeds to the Baronefs, and almoft immediately after difappeared* She was ftill leaning through the fmall lattice or fretwork of the baluilrade, that fecured her from being feen by the*
the company below, when an approaching' footfiep from the north extremity of the cor-' ridor, alarmed her j for as fhe had declined the preffing entreaties of the Baronefs to be pre¬ fent during the banquet, fhe was unwilling now to expofe herfelf to the fight of ftrangers i and rifing to regain her own chamber, flie turned round, and beheld Lord Gondemar approaching her*- Rather difconcerted by the fuddennefs of his appearance, and the ardent ga&e he rivet¬ ted upon her, ftie flightly bowed as fhe was pafling him; when placing himfelf, with a look of entreaty, refped, and humility conjointly blended in his countenance, againft the door oflier apartment, he thus addrefled her :—- ** Forgive, too charming Lady Rofaline, this intrufion of a man but too deeply fenfi* ble of the power of your all-fubduing beauty. The humbleft of your admirers ftands before youi and though fo pofidvely denied the voluntary confent of entering your prefence, yet
yet will you, I truft, generoufly pardon the trefpafles of love, and the impatience of a lover that thus enforce him to declare/* (and he funk cm his knees before the amazed Ro¬ faline), ** that you, and you only, moft lovely of womankind, have power to raife a flame within the bofoni of Gondemar. 1 love yoit with a paffion ardent and fincere 5 but trem¬ bling left, amidft the numerous throng of offi¬ cious Knights and contending Nobles that fhall to-morrow behold thofe charms which I alone afpire to poflefs, one fliould dare to profane the idol of my worfhip, by the offer of facrifice at rhe flirine that contains my all of riches, I am compelled thus impe- tuoufly to confefs my irrevocable regards, which are folely placed on Rofeline^ and while I acknowledge that my paffion has hur¬ ried me beyond the bounds of prudence, I muft here folemnly declare that no induce¬ ment fhall ever make me forego the delight¬ ful privilege of hoping, by my tendereft affi- duities, to warm her I adore into a mutual regard for the proftrate Gondemar, and that I 4 fhall
Ihall one day receive the ecftatic reward of my unalterable 1 w,: :-—in the mean-ime, you muft not refufe to gtant me fome token that *»«» j^\iwiiv*y vuftwiv iitv. %,\j ku-IMJIw* my tilwlvvl claim, in the tournaments ofthe coming mor-% row, to the triumphant felicity ofbeing the acknowledged Knight of Lady Rofaline Su Oftvytk," Amazement and terror filled the bofom of Rofahne as flie liftened to this wild, incohe¬ rent rhapfody. His fixed and fted faft gaze, bent confidently on her countenance, at once alarmed, difpleafed, and diftreffed her j and, together with the unexpeded confeffion he ^ad made, rendered her incapable of all power either to fpeak or to quit'him* A ftrong and refiftleft paffion had taken poffeflion of Gondemar : and though he well knew, from the difcovery of the fcene him* felf and Paulina had made in the foreft fome time back, that the object he now ioved with a feififh paffion, was devoted, by prior claims* ■* as
as well as thofe of the heart, to hk ; yet he did not fcruple to refolve on the flip- planting, if poffible, that near relative, for whom he had never entertained the regard of brotherhood, ortheconfiderations of a man, where he ftood between him and the advance¬ ment of his afphing willies. Returning this night fiom a hunting party, and fluflied with the juice of the grape, and the impetuofity of his paffions where his heart was really engaged, he was refolved upon declaring the impreffion he had receiv¬ ed, and the fpeedy gratification he expected i whilft the interpofing reflection, at what an expence this indulgence muft be purehaled, and the faerifices of every feeling of honour, juftice, or generofity, never once crofted his thoughts, or difturbed with upbraiding his already hardened confeience. lie had marked the devoted Rofaline for his own; and the antecedent ties that interfered to bar the attainment of his purpofe, were totally difregarded by a mind debafed by evil, and bent
oniy on He knew alfo that the fuccecding morn was defigned for a tournament, m honour of Duke Richard of Yen k, fhould he arrive at the Caftle ; and the proud triumph of wearing the badge of a being fo unrivalled in beauty as Rofaline during the combats, at which he meant openly to have difplayed the favours he had received^ and entered the lifts the champion ofhis avow¬ ed miftrefs, would, he doubted not, add ho¬ nour to himfelf; and eicite univerfalenvy atthe fuperior good fortune of his choice. And nowr the continued filence of Rofaline encouraging his hopes, he ventured thus to continue *•*- *« Afford me 9 charming Lady, hm one fmall token of your efteem \ be it but a glove or a bracelet, and „ I Ihall be fatisfied/* cf Niy Lord/' at length faid Rofaline* roufed, from her ftate of aftonirtiment, to re¬ fentment at fuch a requeft, " my Lord, this language, you muft be well affured, h little defired by me* nor muft you refufe your pardon*
pardon, if i declare the demand you made, fuits not the refped due to myfeif to qrant." Gondemar's countenance fuddenly fell j it affumed a degree of impatience and malicious refentment j and fixing a piercing glance, ex* preilive ofhis meaning, on the face of Rofa¬ line, he thus interrupted her :— c< *Tis well, Madam j though obdurate to Gondemar, my Lord Conftantine has doubt¬ lefs no caufe to complain, for whom alone in private I find the Lady Rofaline referves and lavifhes her favours. But know, Lady,'* * he added fternly, as he feized her hand, which flie had no means to free from his fecure grafp, " that from the firfl moment I beheld you, my foul itfelf acknowledged you its fovereign, and that I have fo long reftrained my paffion in filence and refpedful admira¬ tion, you have alone to thank yourfelf, fince, upon ail occafions, you have fhunned my fo¬ ciety, nor deigned to favour me with a (ingle chance
chance to make this confefifon. That chance too long delayed, thanks to my fortunate ftars,is atkngtharrived, and cannot be recalled :—^by Heaven and all the attributes above, I fwear ? lovi you! and by your beauteous felf I alfo fwear that I will difpute your heart with every competitor that dares to breathe a wifh or figh expreffive of his hopes \ In vain you will tell me that you cannot return mylove— that your heart is devoted to another ; but beware, Lady—Conftantine never fhall be your's : and fliould you obftinately perfift to meet with coldnefs my offered paffion, the flight may prove fatal to him, yourfelf, and all!'* cc Unhand me, my Lord !" interrupted Rofaline, with a look of extreme impatience and indignation. " You forget yourfelf, as well as the refped due to your father's vifitor, and the daughter of Sir Alfred St. Ofwythe*" cf I fee," replied Gondemar,fupprefling his anger, "I fee the Lady Rofaline canaffume the fembbncc of indignant virtue, although fhe feema
feems to forget the fufpicions of a latent tranfacTJon in the foreft. Conftantine is a fortunate lover, no doubt; and the frozen heart of Rofaline cannot long reniain infenfi¬ ble to his amorous confeftions: but let him tremble 1" he added, with an eye that fhot forth deadly fparks of rage. " Gondemar will not again brook his infolent interference, nor long endure a difappointment of his deareft wifhes.'* Rofaime now became ftill more alarmed; for, in the impetuous paffions of Gondemar, flie too, plainly faw what caufe cf future dread flie might experience from the execu¬ tions of a mind fo feemingly refolved in its daring purpofes j—fhe thought it bus prudent to fupprefs, if poffible, the juft indignation flie felt; and in order to (aftzn his prefent too ap¬ parent refentment, fhe mildly faid— €t My Lord, I beieech you leave me; the impropriety of this interview cannot but dif¬ trefs me. The hour grows late, and fliould the
the company leave the hall (jou will forgive me), but furely it will neither add to your honour or my feme, thus to compel me to liften fo an ill-timed converfation, whicli every circumftance renders ungenerous, and cannot fail exciting my ftrongeft difappro- bation." u I obey your wifhes, charming Lady Rofaline!*' replied Gondemar, with an in- finuating, foftened tone of voice, " and take fhame and repentance on me for any impro¬ per espreflions I may have ufed derogatory to the delicate purity of your all- perfed felf a only deign to grant me the-requefted token that fhall animate to yidory I Allow me the proud triumph of caftingmy conquered fpoils at your feet, and I will inftantly depart.** Rofaline found too furely, by the refolute ♦ manner in which this was uttered, flie had no hopes of enlargement from her painful filia¬ tion, but compliance with his determined fe¬ licitations* Almoft maddened at the confe¬ quences, and perhaps refentment, which fuch a meafure
tiieafure would excite Conftantine, fhe was compelled to the only refource that could free her from prefent importunities, and haftily tmclafping a bracelet of pearls that encircled her wrift, flie was prefenting it, when a diftant fooiftep in the gallery roufed afrefh her terror of a difcovery of her prefent en¬ forced difagreeable fituation. Her face and nerk now covered with a burning glow of fhame, indignation, and terror, fhe fuddenly ftarted, and freeing her garment, which Gondemar had as quickly feized, rufhed along the gallery, and tunJng down a dark paffage, continued her fpeed with unabating rapidity. The refledions from the lights that fhone from the hall and corridors, ferved at times to guide her impet fed footfteps, and convince her that ihe was ftill pur fued by the impetuous Gondemar. Almoft clefpairing, flie was about to turn, and courageoufly demand his defiftance fiom fo danng a gurfui:, HI the increafed
increafed noife that now echoed along the various corridors leading to the chambers of the guefts, convinced her they were retiring for the night; and dreading their encounter, flie ftill continued todart forward, regardlefs of , * the threats and entreaties of Gondemar for her ftay, and only anxious to preferve the token which, if once in the pofleffion of Gondemar, would perhaps prove fatal to her hopes of happinefs hereafter. As tlie pafiage became wider, flie found it branched off to the left -, but at length, overcome by the agony of her feelings, and the want of refpiration, which her fpeed had now deprived her of, fhe funk fainting againft a door, which, giving way, fhe had nearly fallen into a ftrange apartment, when her fall was broken, and fhe found herfelf fupported in the arms of a man. Con¬ cluding it was her purfuer, flie fhrieked, and faintly ftruggling, exclaimed— ** My Lord Gondemar, I command you , to defift i I will endure thefe infultsno longer, but will appeal to your father, the Baron, to proted
firotecT: me from injuries I am not accuftomed %o receive.'* An unknown voice replied— u You have ^10 prefent infults* Lady- to dread % nor fhall your plea pafs unregarded by him you have promifed to honour with the title of your guardian, who, by the law of hospitality, is doubly bound to preferve from danger all who refide beneath his roof," Rofaline, raifing herfelf and calling her "eyes on the ftranger who ftill held her, found herfelf in the arms of the Baron, whofe eyes ivere bent v m admiration and furprife, on her countenance. Releafing herfelf from his hold, fhe grace¬ fully bowed her acknowledgments for the trouble fhe had unknowingly occafioned, and was adring, when the Baron faid— f * Forgive the qucftion I would wifh to afk* but if my conjedures deceive me not, I vot * n* o now
now addreft the friend of the Baronefs, in the perfon of Lady Rofaline St. Ofwythe?*' Rofaline bowed in die afBrmative. iC It feems by your extraordinary excla¬ mations," continued the Baron, with a voice and manner expreflive of courtefy, " you have been perfecuted by my Lord Gondemar $ bi^t let me entreat that it may not alarm your fpirits, or difturb your repofe, and reft fatis* fied, charming Lady Rofaline, I will be anfwerable for his more refpedful behaviour in future | in the meantime allow me to thank you for the honour your prefence has con¬ ferred upon the owners of this Caftle. I ought indeed to chide my Lady, the Baronefs, for not giving me an earlier opportunity of f bidding welcome to her lovely ward, for whofe prefent fecurity I muft be permitted to accompany her to her Ladpfhip's cham¬ bers," Rofaline, covered with confufion, and vexed
^excd' at being feen at fo late an hour from her chamber, was now unable to fpeak, al¬ though fhe bowed her thanks for this offered attendance* • Arrived at the door of her own apartment, where ftood Jannetta, ftie thanked the Baron for his repeated aflurances of fafety, as, pro¬ foundly bowing, he retired from the gallery, and herfelf to her own chamber, where t cafting herfelf on the couch, overcome by the emotions that now powerfully agitated her frarfie, fhe could not refrain* from ex¬ claiming, as the tears ftarted to her relief— # u Oh my father! where, where are you now wandering ? Oh why were your com¬ mands fo ftrongly enjoined for my removal feom the dear Abbey f Ah! had I there re¬ mained, I had at leaft ^been freed Trom the fevere and mortifying degradations of this evening. Oh when will you return to releaft your Rofalin v from the cold forbidding looks and language of Lady Paulina, and tht more o 2 imponupate
importunate dangers of the daring purfuits ol Gondemar ?" As (lie lay reftleflly reflecting on the oc¬ currences of the night, fhe debated if it were not more prudent for her inftantly to return to the Abbey, than to continue in the Caftle, where flie might again be fubjed to evils of fhe hardly knew what nature. In this difturbed and undetcrminate ftate of mind flie paffed the two firft hours afief midnight, when fleep at length clofed her eyes in a Jeadep embrace* . Her repofe was* however, unrefrefhing and harafling, and imbittered by, dreams of horror and af?i%ht« During their continuance, the firft obje^ that prefented itfelS was a mil gaunt ^gMre^ whofe perfon was clpthed in a long black flowing garment i his face was rendered invt* fible by # mafk, but^ there feemed a refeni* llance in his gait and perfon to the ftrange myfterkui vifitor that ha*} ©ccafianed her fether's
s fether*s fudden abfence from the foreft. The %ure beckoned het forward, and fearful and trembling, fhe found herfelf irrefiftibly im* pelkd to follow. Her awful guide filently md flowly paffed down the corridor, and opening the door of the eaft chamber, fhe found herfelf in a fpacbus dreary apartment* Atrack of blood ftained the floor; advancing forward, her guide pointed to the ground, on which flie beheld the dead corpfe of a man, •whofe features, on examination, bore ftrong iefemblance to thofe of Conftantine* Before fhe had time to exprefe thr grief this terrific fpc&acle occafioned, the figure filently beckoned her fromthe fcene of death, Und as flie paffed through the chamber, Ihe ibund herfeIC by tfk unaccountable diverfity of vifionary fiction, in the great church of the Abbey. It appeared to be midnight, and the place more than really gloomy, from two or three tapers that faintly fhone from the , tniddleofthe grand aifle;—approaching thefe, •file perceived they were fufpended over a d 3 new-
new-made open grave, near which wat placed a coffin, covered with velvet, and ftrewed with fable plumes of feathers j—as flie eaft her eyes into the tomb, the lid of the coffin fuddenly fell to the ground, and a voice from within, hollow and piercing, audibly pronouncod-r-** Remember the myflerkus warning you have received* md hezmre of the Houfe of £dmQ//dvid/e"--Thc Yid, with no apparent aid, fuddenly returned to its former pofition. She was conveyed again to the Caftle by her awc»infpirsng guide, and witl the violence of her terror fhe awoke. It was fome time before fhe could ftern the trembling perfpiratioo that fo uncommon a 'dream excited, and never was daylight more joyfully welcomed : her agitations on this account, however, were foon forgotten in one of dearer moment, for fhe now miffed for the firft time her mother's bracelet, which though flie remembered to have taken from her arm, flie was pofitive flie had never yielded to Gondemar
Gondemar the preceding evening. Grieved for its lofs, for it had been the late Lady St. Ofwythe's, whom, though flie never knew, flie had inftindively learned to love and ve¬ nerate as much from the deep regret her father ever exprefled for her lofs, as from the en- thuftaftic 'reverence with which he always # infpired her towards the memory of her mother, Rofaline was deeply engigcd in fearching for this precious memorial, when Jarjnetta, with a face full of import¬ ance, entered the room. ,f Dear heart, my Lady," fhe exclaimed, u I wonder what can have made you look fo * unwell to-day. I declare you feem as though you had had no fleep all night j but here, my Lady—I have news for you that will furprife you. My Lord Conftantine laft night'en- countered his brother in th& very corridor leading to your apartments. Well, my noble young Lord demanded what bufinefs he had at fo late an hour to feek an entrance within your D 4 chambers §
chambers; but his haughty Lordfhip fefiifed to give his brother any fatisfaction, and ^ great many high words paflcd between themi and if my Lord the Baron had not arrived at that very critical moment, they would have drawn their fwords, and—-*-** ^ And what V 9 interrupted Rofaline, greatly agitated. « For Heaven's fajce, good Jannetta, be quick in acquainting me with all that paflcd/* ** Why, my Lady, as 1 faid before, the Baron came up in time to prevent their fight* ing i and r ulz: he had commanded thenv, both to put up their fwords, he took my. Lord Gondemar feverely to taflt for his rude* nefs in alarming your Ladyflup foi who was fo much ofifended by this very proper rebuke, that he commanded all his people to folknv him inftantly from the Caftle, notwithstanding the latenefi of the hour. All dits, my Lady,, I gathered from the young Baron's own Knight, Sir Julian* for it feems his Lord was coming along the eaft gallery when you raa down the other, My Lord had overheard a llttte
Ikeleofthe conversion thathadpafledbetween yourfelf and the young Lord Gondemar, and this it was that caufed the quarrel. But, dear me I the worft of alHs, there U to be no tour¬ nament, for my Lord the Duke of York has fent an ejtprefs to decline his intended vifit * the Qoeen is already on the march again, and the Baron is to return very fhoctly to the Atmy. ,f Rofaline liftened to the former part of this account with vexarion and diftrefs, for fhe found the tranfadions of the preceding'night had been made more public than ihe wtfhedi and fhe ruminated for a confiderable time on* die ptopereft means to put a flop co their continuance. The 1 only orte fatisfedory* both to the delicacy of her mind, and the ho** itourable purity of her fentiments that pre* fented icfeif, was lo lay open all her. heart to^ her indulgent friend and guardian, andjmaking the Baronefs inftantly, acquainted with the firft introdudion and fuccecding interviews o£ Conftantine. 0 $ Haftily
Haftily then adjufting her robe for this pur* pofe, and fupported by confeious rectitude and unblemiftied innocence, fhe proceeded to the apartments of that Lady. The Baronefe ms fitting with her back pppofite the door, ^which Rofaline had opened fo gently as not to have been heard : fhe had a handkerchief held to her eyes, and by a faint fob that iffued from her lips, Rofaline, with amazement, iotmd that flie was evidently the vidim of fome fecret forrow; and for the firft time fhe felt awed in the prefence of her only friend, and now became irrefolute, and debated whether it would not be more delicate to re¬ tire unnoticed, as (he had entered, thaa fcem tp have thus, though unintentionally, acquainted herfeif with what was doubdefe iiever intended for her knowledge* - The Baronefs fighed deeply, and in a mournful tone of voice ejaculated fomeindiftinft founds. At that moment an interior door opening, Rofaline had only time to fecrete herfelf b$ hind the one fiie held in lier hand § which as fhe
Ihe foftly drew it after her, flie heard the voice of the Baron, who thus loudly laid— <f Are you, Lady, refolved to yield me that which, if not freely given, you know full well I have power to obtain; and, by my holy dame, fhall yet be mine, though you fliould compel me to have recourfc to violence ?*' The harfli tones, in which thefe words were pronounced, made her almoft doubt the reality of who was the fpeaker, fo unlike was their delivery to the courteous manner with which the Baron had the preceding evening addrefled herfelf. Mufing on what fhe could not prevent her thoughts from dwelling upon, flie retired to her own chamber* It was on this fame evening, that the Baron had demanded from Paulina a full acknow¬ ledgment of the ftate of her heart, and die choice it had made* No fooner had fhe fa¬ tisfied her guardian on this fubject^ than d 6 Conftantint
Conftantine received a command to attend the Baron in his private chamber. His aftqmfhment and repugnance were too* sjnaffe&ed to be concealed as, liftening to hb father, he learned that the young Countefs h$4 given a pofitive denial to the fuit of Gonde¬ mar, and being urged by her guardian,, fhe at length acknowledged her partiality in jfovour of his younger Com « The will of the late Earl of Othin/* continued the Baron, H enjoins his heirefi tQ efpoufe herfelf with one of the heirs of Otho*' She has relufed your brother, and acknow¬ ledged her prepoflefiion for yourfelf 11 there* fore, my Lord, lay my ftriclt command upoa your duty, and have fixed the day of your nuptials within a fortnight of this, when I fhall expect you will joyfully receive the: offered hand of Lady Paulina/* Too much difconcerted, as weU as over¬ whelmed with aftonifliment and grief by thi% Juddca
fiidd^rt unwelcome news,* Conftantine was tunable to reply $ and the politic Otho haftened out of the chamber to prevent fuch a defigiv which he quitted with that ftately referve he fo well knew how to afiume when he meant to awe'the objed of his purpofes to fubmiffion, md obedience to his imperious will. Unpre¬ pared for fuch an unlooked-for demand, Conftantine was furprifed into a filent ac- quiefcence; and the Baron, who had ftudied the heart of his fon, and law each move* ment in his countenance, was determined ta give him no chance for a refufal, which he too plainly diftinguifhed in the features of Urbandine, Although the ktter loved as wel. as feared the BaronJ his affedions were too irrecoverably fined on Rofaline to render hit obedience an ad of voluntary fuhmiflion to that implicit authority he faw fo plainly, in the manner of his father's delivery, would be enforced to exad compliance with his defigns.
Starting from a deep and troubled reverie^ 3 h«
he foftly pronounced the name of Rofaline t "Ah! adored of my foul ! ,f he exclaimed with tranfport, " fliall I impotently refign the dear delightful hope of one day calling you my own ? Shall I, for the ckofs of fordid riches, forego the pofleffion of thy all-perfect: lovelinefs, and the exquifite happinefs I may hope only to enjoy in thy angelic fociety, for the imperious, the haughty Paulina, devoid of all that can.charm the fenfes, or enthral thd heart ?—Oh - no, no h adored being of my conftant regards, I am thine, and only? thine 1" Leaving the chamber of the Baron, he ^ retired to the north terrace, to determine or* fome fpeedy means for avoiding thefe hated nuptials; for ill as he knew the Baron would , brook a contradiction ofhis favourite fchemes^ he refolved never to yield an affent where every feeling of duty, honour, and love was at variance with the facrifice required j not only his heart but hia faith were pledged and rendered inviolable, by his engagements ta that
that beloved object, who had received the con- feflion of his paftion, and made obedience now impofBble. The refultof his meditation^ was inftantly m make known the ftate of his afFedion to the Baronefs, which the latter received with evident emotions of mixed pleafure and pain; for fhe already felt the warm regard of a maternal affection for the lovely object of Con- ftantine's choice^ though with a figh fhe con- feffed fhe had not fufficient influence with the Baron f to induce him to yield to the perfua- fions of love, againft thofe refblutions he had that morntng made known to herfelf, and fo peremptorily infilled on her confenting to* in the intended union of Paulina and.Coiv* ftantine* # The Baronefs had long refigned all inter¬ ference in matters that her high birth and im¬ menfe fortunes gave her a privilege to have a choice, or at leaft a negative, in * and from fomc Jate converfations of her Lord, ihe even trem* bled
bled for that fmall degree of felicity flie !ja# hitherto enjoyed, but which of late feemed approaching to a conclufion* With grief c*f heart flie difcovered the Baron had taken- fome deep impreffions to her prejudice, which his continued inflexible conduft but too ftrongly confirmed t for he now never encountered his meekly fubmittingLady, but; witli harfh language and. a clouded coua^ femance*.
CHAPi
CHAP. II.
** Remorfe and pity ** Are ftrangers to my heart. Whene'er they pkad,„ ** t*m adamant; weeping I never knew j ** Nature bu formM m^ rough j and "fmce ftern Fortunt *« Denies me her beft blefliags (power and nches), *« I wage etesnal war with their poflfeSbrs." ...■•*•«...«*•*... -. ** He is my bane— *l cannot bear him j. v One heaven and earth can never hold us both*" Rows* ** I raw myfeif the lambent eafy light * s Gild the brown horror, and difpel tin night." Drtmw. T toay be* remembered that the noble Conftantine had refcued an intended facrifice to
to the paffions of Gondemar from his dark defigns, . As the latter is deeply implicated, in the papers of thefe Ancient Recordlymd as feveral ©f them were in this place rendered intricate and unintelligible* from the total decay and difappearance of the characters, it may not be improper to give a finall infight into the fierce Gondemar's real viewi and danger* ous defigns* In thofe days of old, when every Baroniat Chief was a Prince upon his own domain, and fubject to ao law but his own will, the pafliona of a daring mind were not foftened by the influence of an enlightened education, $nd much cruelty and bloodfhed were the fad coa* fequence where the power of doing ev|l was (o ill reftrained by the ftrength and potency of the law. The heart of Gondemar was naturally prone to evil and daring projeftsj he had aever fubmitted to controul * and the free iihpref* fions
Hons it unfortunately acquired from the ex¬ amples of thofe whom from youth he had aflbctated with, ferved not to improve or amend the errors he had unreftrainedly in¬ dulged himfelf in. Imprcffed with a high idea of his own confequence, and the dignities he fhould one day inherit, he expeded every knee and iip that owned his father for their Lord, fliould proftrate and confefs the feme fuperiority of his will, and pay homage tohis future greatnefs; but Fate had in ftore a powerful humiliation to his growing infoknce, and in the fuperior and manly quality of % younger brother, raifed him -a rival to the OtcefBve pride ofhis afphing nature* Ambi¬ tion, cruelty, and the gratification ofhis paf- lions were the ruling principles ofhis heart s but in the virtues of Conftantine, he was to receive a check to his haughty mind, and that rifing authority and overbearing command he afpired to tyrannize over the weak and the refiftlefs. * With tempers fuch as thefe* that only waited
waited the long inflamed moment to blaise forth with defolating wildnefi> and aided by fhe encouragement of a confidential flave, devoted to his will and caprices,, he had long vowed the ruin of a brother, whom from in* fency he defpifed, and for whom he had felt the ftrongeft hatred, on account of the fupe* riorky of liis fortunes, and fhining qualifica* tions ofhis mind j to deprive whom ofthe rich, poffeflions he was heir to,, he had often form*- ed the darkeft plots and moft daring defigns* Twas from this caufe that, in a moment of fury and difappointed paffion, he had ut* tered threats and reviling taunts ttpon dte= feirth of hk brother, in hopes tto by fpread- ing & repoit difhononrable to the purity of the Baronefs, ihat circumftance, and the eidum* ny of an old fufpicion of her affeftfon for ano~ ther man in preference to her Lord; would caft a doubt to the prejudice of Conftantine^ rights, and give him a juft foundation todifpute their legality $ but from this daring project he was
•was deterred by his wary counfcllor: and con¬ vinced of the danger, as well as the fure failure, «cf fuch an undertaking, he in time relinquiihed the guilty defign, and thought it not unadvifa- ble to lull the r-efentmcnt of Conftantine (already toojuftly excited) by a feeming con¬ trition for the flanderous infinuations he had given way to in the foreft, when deprived by him of JefBca i and Co completely had he fmoothed his features and manners, that the unfufpe&ing Conftantine was deceived into a generous forgetfulnefs of that tranladian, But not .fo tjondemar j the humiliations he had received on thefe and fimilar occafions, funk deep to his foul, never to be forgotten j ano\ raifed fuch a ftorm of indignant rage and refentment, as made him, in the bitccrnefs of his paffion, folemnly invoke the powers of revenge, to whofe aid he flew to perpetrate thofe dark defigns that now fwayed his mLd, and appeared dreadful in their fulfilment even to himfelf. That he defifted from his cruel defigns on JeOica
Jefiica was owing to the more attractive charms of the irrefifttble Rofaline, whom he had no fooner beheld, than fhe became the object of his ardent admiration, and the being that he refolved to m?ke the inftrument of (to him> a glorious retaliation -, for was not Con¬ ftantine the hated bar that oppofed his ambi* tious hopes, and ftepped between him and the pofff ffion of the towers of Urbandine ? To Conftantine he owed the lofs of Jeffica ;-*-* Conftantine was the being who had deprived him of the haughty but wealthy heirefs 5 and Whilft he in fecret invoked curfes on this for¬ tunate brother, he refolved to have ample vengeance for thefe ideaHnjuries, and deftroy for ever his hop^s of happinefs, by fupplanting Mm in the affections of the object; ofhis un¬ revealed choice, whom he had no doubt df converting, by importunate afliduity and en¬ treaty, to his wifhes j or fhould thefe means fail, force was refolved on to accomplUh his unnatural thirft of vengeance:—but a very ftiort acquaintance with the fafcinating powers of Rofaiine's mind as well as perfon, ferved
'Sfrved to infpire a paffion as impetuous and real as it was in tlte end likely *.o prove dan¬ gerous to the objed that excited if, and he refolved to take his meafures accordingly. For this purpofe he had placed Harold, his confidant, a f py over the actions of the unfufpecting lovers, from whofe vigilance he learned their frequent meetings on the terrace, where he now ftationed his partner in ini* quity, to difcover, if poffible, their conven¬ tions during thefe interviews. Unfortunately, Harold had concealed himfelf on the very night that Conftantine had obtained the proof ofhis Rofaiine's regard, in tlie diffident con- ftffion he drew from her that he was really not indifferent fo her heart; and though Harold could not, with fafety of remaining undifcovered, hear all that pafled, he returned to his employer with fufficient to convince hirn that a mutual underftanding had'paffed between them. * * Rage and defpair at firft poffeffed his mind j but
fcut thefe pafllons fubfiding, he tefolved ta Force himfelf a way to the prefence of the tinconfeious objed of his paflion j and the arrival of the Baron he deemed a fortunate opportunity, fince the confufion that it created would render his abfence unnoticed* and prove favourable to his defign. The denial which Jannetta (whom he had bribed for his ambafladrefs) had brought him* ferved not to repel hfe purpofe* He had fol¬ lowed her with hfe eyes as fhe palled along the gallery to the chambers of her Lady, whofe fortunate {for him) appearance fooA lafter in the corridor, made him refolute to know at once what hopes he might in future entertain % snd governed by the unreftrained impetuofity ofhis paffions and difpofuion, ht aded as has been already related* The returns he met with to his real deck* rations of love, though flight, were too deci¬ dedly delivered to admit of any hope in his fevour hereafters and burning with increafed hatred
hatred towards his unoffending brother, and a fixed refolution to poflefs himfelf of Rofaline, he fcnipled mz to determine upon violent meafures, fhould ^U others fail, to force her to compliance. In his return from the inefFedual purfuit of Rofaline, he encountered Conftantine, who (retiring down the gallery in his approach to his own apartments) had witneffed fome parts of the converfadon and tranfedions that had followed.—Roufed to refentment at the in- dignity offered to the objed of his tendereft regards, he forgot his ufual prudence and for* , bearance, and fternly reproached his brother for hk inhofpitable and infulting condud, acknowledging in part < his prior attachment for Ihe .Lady Rofaline, and nobly declaring that he would maintain his right, and defend the objed ofhis regard from the infoknce of his pretenfions. Gondemar's reply was didated in a ianguage too infulting to be fubmitted- VOI.. I?. E £0;
to* and Conftantine had drawn his fword from its fcabbard, as had alfo Gondemar, when the Baron, returning from the door of Roialinc, fortunately arrived in time to pre¬ vent the alarming breach from ending mor¬ tal !v s Gondemar with impatience fubmitted to the rebuke of a father, from whom he had neither received an example or precept, but „ who was himfelf devoted to the gratification ofhis pleafures, nor had ever fhewn a proof cf tlie neceflity of curbing the indulged crav¬ ings of the paffions;—~ his remonftrance*s there- 5 fore were heard with filent difregard and in¬ ward fcorn j and making this a pretext for his quitting Urbandine, he retired in ap¬ parent anger to a fmall domain left him * by a maternal uncle independent of his fiither, when he had here lei fure to plot, u/i- difcovercd, thofe dark and alarming defigns that had too long been encouiaged in his guilty foul, for the luin of thofe that had powerfully aroufed his love and hatred. In
In the young Countefs of Othin, Rofaline was fated to find a determined enemy -, for that deep-rooted jealoufy that had taken pof¬ feflion of her heart from the moment flie difcovered the bent of Conftantine's inclina¬ tions, had fteeled her bofom againft tile per¬ fuafive looks of the innocent girl, whom flie now watched with a fcruriny unceafing, and even, if poffible, more fevere than the ran* corous hatred her paffion for the young Baron had infpired her with againft the innocent object ofhis love and her difappointment. Paulina was in perfon majeftically tall and well-proportioned ; her face was beautiful, but the pride of high birth and immenfe poffef- fions gave a haughty fuperiority to her man¬ ners and demeanour, very unfavourable to the impreflior\s flie wifhed to infpire. The Baronefs had found but little gratifi¬ cation in her fociety, for they fcldom met except at the hours of banquet s the referr¬ ed and haughty temper of Paulina ren* £ £ deling
•dering her incapable of a tafte for the ele¬ gant refinements of an intimate and delicate intcrcourfe with one whofe manners were everv wav fone rio r *-**** but the Baron's fociety was more congenial to her wiihes, wlvfe ex¬ treme courtefy and attention to her fmalleft, requefts rendered his prefence plrafing, and his abfence regretted. To Rofaline fhe ever maintained that diftant referve and clouded brow, which at times even wore the appearance of myftery, and feemed to owe itsdetermined continuance from fome hitherro unexplain¬ ed extraordinary reafon. But the moft ap¬ parent was afterwards explained in tlie jealous anser Gf her refentmenrat the fatal proof fhe had gained in the foreft, that her hopes of Conftantine were loft for ever in his too ftrongly attached regards for a rival fhe felt fue had double caufe of hatred againft. Amidft the whirlwind of paffions that had affailed her heart on this difcovery, defpair was the principal; and fhe in one moment re-* folvtd to tear from her heart the loved image of
of Conftantine, and in the Ke%t avenge her¬ felf fcr her flighted love, by hurling ruin on the object that prefunied to engrofs thofe affedions ihe af ire J to make her wn. But at length the proud triumph of deftroying the happinefs of this hated rival for ever, bore down everv feeling for her own difappoint¬ ment, an ! fiie refolved to appear ignorant of Conftantine's love for Rofaline, that, under the Baron's enforcement, fhe might at leaft divide the lovers, though all hope of bcin;; the bride of Conftantine fhould be for ever zt an end. With this defign fo fatal to the peace of Rofaline ami Conftantine, fhe made no fcruple of confeffing her regard for the latter, when the Baron had demanded which of his fons was her choice:—and for this purpofe the Baronefs was defired, in no very gentle term?, to break to Rofaline the refolutions of the Baron, who had difcovered the mutual attach¬ ment that fubfifted between herfelf and Con¬ ftantine in his converfation of the preceding & 3 nighl
ni£;bt with Gondemar, and by feveral other little eircmnftvures. that cleaned not the keen penetrations of Orho upon many former oc¬ cafions, undeniably confirming his fufpi¬ cions. . Ic was on this fubjed that Rofaline had caught time impcifed exprefllons that fell from the lips of the Baron, as (he retired from the apartments of Lady Ruithvina, who fuf- fered her not long to remain in fufpenfe as to their import; for foon after entering the chamber, of Roialine, flie with deep regret made known the will of the Baron, and the dcftined bride that was fated for her fon, Rofaline liftened in filence as the Baronefs in gentle terms unfolded her unwelcome tidings. She felt her cheeks glow with in- "dignant confufion, but flie attempted not to t'eny that her heart was indeed devoted to , Conftantine ; and though her wounded feel* ings or rather that proper degree of pride which flic pollened, enabled her to appear outwardh
outwardly compofed and eafy the tender manner of the Baronefs's recital, yet her inmoft fenfarions were painful in the ex¬ treme, and difficult to fupprefs : for fat ftdt as though a fudden wound had pierced her very foul, and all the tender attachments of its na¬ ture were burft afunder. <c TLe Baron, by what means I know nor, Las acquainted drimfilf with your mutual regards,'* continued the Baronefs, Cf which have, 1 own, been long known to me. I grieve to add that it ibexprdrd you fliould volun¬ tarily refign the hand of Conftantine, fhould he, as no doubt he wifhes to do, offer it to your acceptance. Such, my Rofaline, is my Lord's fevere requeft ; and with what regret I have delivered it, 1 truft you know my heart too well to misjudge it. Ah 1 could 1 have ruled the deftiny of my children (for i muft ever Confider you as my child), this unexped- ed trial had been fpared us all > but as Fate lus ordained it other wife, 1 have only to hope that your affedions are. not fo entirely e 4 engaged,
engaged, but time may foften the feverky of your difappointment." " It fliall do ih $ Madam, be affured,"* haftily interrupted Rofiline, reft raining a tear that would elfe have diferaccd her * cheek, and a degree of momentary refent¬ ment very unufual with her, «< with me, at leaft,, it fliall conquer. From Lady Paulina,'* rontinued flie, u I have ever received un* merited unkind nefs and unprovoked rebuke j the caufe is at length explained, and the de-< graded Rofaline will never more be the hated obftacle to her happier fortune. Yes/' flie added y the tears, in fpite of her efforts to reftfain them, forcing their wayfrom her eyes/* yes,l own my heart has been but too fufteptiblc of the meritvs of my Lord ConfUtitine, whofe ennobled virtuts won my tendereft finuments, end 1 fufFered my felf prcfumptuotifly to im¬ bibe a paffion that rill this moment X thought was pure *.s angels might acknowledge i but the humble Rofahne will no more interfere with the defigns of my Lord the Baron—-fne wil}
will this evening free him from his fears by her return to the fecluftons of her deareft home," " That muft not be, 1 * interrupted the Baronefs, with great tendernefs enforcing the weeping Rofdine j " nor will I allow my adopted child to dtbafe herfelf with felf- humiliations. Do not fuppofe, my love, that though, frc>m motives of policy, the Baron is averfe.to your union with our fon, he is infenfible to the merits of his firft choice. Had not his word X nonour been pledged to his departed friend, he would never have urged my Lord Conftantine againft his incli¬ nations, or oppofed their gratification. Un¬ willingly as I confefs I fliall receive Paulina for a daughter, I owe my Lord this juftifi¬ cation for the motive of his prefent conduft. Had flie, as was firft expected, made her election of Gondemar, my poor intereft fliould have been exerted to have given my fon a bride, the objeft of both our choices; but as it is fo, I dare no further incur my Lord's difpleafure by oppofing his decrees. e 5 And
And now fuffer me to entreat that you will for the prefent abandon your late hafty refo¬ lution of quitting the Caflle, and allow me to owe your continuance here to your free will, not ro the right, as your gu srdian, I might have to conftrain you to ftay ; for, Oh my Rofdine ! I feel it is impoflibie to conceal frr<m your penetration what you muft have too often obferved. The filent pity I have feen exprefled in ydur eyes, when caft on your maternal friend, convinces me that you have noticed her unhappinefs 5 and to you only will 1 acknowledge that I am not that envied being the world, would fain fuppofe me. The negleft, and fometimes even the feverity, ofthe Baron are but too juft ifiable a caufe of my forrow 1 but in you, beloved daughter ofmy angel friend Matilda, 1 have found an affedionate folace for the v/oundsof an anguifhed heart, and the loft affeftions of my Lord: and fliould yau quit the Caftle, I feel I fliall deeply regret the deprivation of your fociety, which has indeed been the only seal pleafure I oflate have known. Stay then,
then, my love, till Sir Alfied's return. I ftill retain influence enough in Urbandine to command fome refped to my withes; nor will the Lady Paulina prefume agahi to infufe a gueft, and my friend, whilft beneath this roof, and under my protedion." Rofalhe liftened attentively to this fpeech. She had indeed frequently remarked with commiferarion the filent melancholy depic¬ tured in the countenance of the Baronefs % and thus called upon, ihe no longer hefuated to facrifice the delicacy of her own feelings, whilft her remaining at the Caftle was an acknowledged relief to her now only friend, in the abfence of Sir Alfred. In the evening flie retired early to her own room, glad to free herfelf from che intolera¬ ble reftraint flie had put on her feelings during the reft of this memorable day, in ihe prefence of the Baronefs and the now triumphant; Paulina.
E 6 Lntcrimc
Entering the fmall detached clofel: that liad a north profped of the fea, and^ a fide view of the eaftern towers, flie threw herfelf \j%* a. v.\iiivii^ «»tvi qcttC iivij will, tu tilt hli^iiilil of her heart; and wiping the fail falling tears from her cheeks, fhe fofcly exclaimed^ ** It is then determined, and I have freely reigned all pretenfions to the affetftions of Conftantine 1 Btit> ah! can I ever ceafe to remember how dtzv is his image to the heart of Rofaline ? Wiy, ah why ! did I ever be¬ hold Mrft ? Why was it ever permitted him to fnatcli me ^from a threatened death, bnt to prefer ve me for greater tortures than thofe from which his favtng arm refcticd me ? Ah beloved, adored Conftantine ! though loft tp me for ever, 1 feel I fliall never ceafe to efteem thy virtues, and regret them, when irrevocably in the pofiefflonof another!—Of another ! Oh Heavens! but a few days re¬ main to make it criminal in me for ever after to think upon his name ; and at their expira¬ tion he becomes, not thine, fond, weak Rofoline,
Rofaline, but the hufband of Paulina. Ah me ! fhall I by force ftay to be the viditn of her triumph, to witnefs her fuccefs and my own fbame ? No, no, greatly as I revere the feelings of the Baronefs, fhe cannot mean,to esad fo bitter a facrifice. 1 * While he. mind was thus abforbed, her eyes tfnconfcioufly were turned towards the eaftern towers. From the mifery of her internal thoughts fhe had flown to this fmall apart¬ ment, wifhing to avoid all cheering fights, and had here remained in total darknefs,^ though the interior chambers of her fuite were illumined. The night was uncom¬ monly darkj but her deep reveries were fud- denly broke in upon by beholding a pale glimmer of light, which, for a minute, was feen through the halfclofed window (nutters of the great eaft tower, as it paffed flowly along feveral other of the Gothic cafements, and then difappeared* 4 This
This extraordinary circumftance flopped for a moment the current of her melancholy reflections, and a quick recollection of the repeated myfterious accounts fhe had received of thefe towers, joined to the prefent alarmr ing objeA, railed a Vmd of fuperftkious dread' that communicated itfelf fpecdily to her heart j and Ihe refolved to wait at the cafe¬ ment of her cbfet, in expectation that thia myflerious occurrence would again be re¬ peated : but after a confiderable Japfe oftime ipentin anxious watchings^ the light did not return, and (he fat deeply ruminating on fo extraordinary an event, till her thoughts he- cable confufcd in a vortex of ideas, and fhe fek powerfully inclined to give credence to a fupernatural exiftence, fince the myftery of > Sr* Anna's tower had never been explained^ and the well-known ccrcainty tha^ thefe un* inhabited parts of the Caftie had not of late years been opened. Whilft thus debating on thefe alarming incongruities, a violent fhriek aflailed her * cars;
ears : and the burfting open of the door of the antichamber made her rufn haftily from the clofct, where the firft objed that prefented Itfelf was the pale, affrighted Jannetta, who exclaiming, in a tone of horror and wild- oefs—** I have feen it, I have feen the fpec- tre !"—funk fpeechlefs upon a chair, point¬ ing to the open door which flic had neither power nor courage to approach and clofe. Rofaline, comprehending her meaning, fhut the door -, and after foothing with kindnefs the ftrong apparent terror of her attendant, Ihe at length obtained (though not without mapy paufes, and looks of wildne&caft round the room), an anfwer to her repeated demands of the caufe of her alarm. <* Oh my Lady/* fhe at Jength faid, i( as I was coming to attend your Ladylhip according to my duty, and had reached the kft ftep of the gallery flairs, which your Ladyfhip knows faces the old door of the eaftern end that opens into the haunted chambers—*
chambers—well, juft as 1 was about to (et my foot upon the corridor, all of a fudden the eaft door flew open, and a monftrous figure, clothed in long black flowing robes, and bearing a fmaU taper in its hand, flood full in fight beneath the arch of the portal. I ' fhrieked, as no doubt your Ladyfliip muffc - have heard, and the ghoft ftarting at the found, lifted up its pale ghaftly vifage, and fixing its hollow eyes full upon me, angrily frowned, and pointed for me- to be gone. I hady my Lady, loft all ufe of my limbs at firft, and could not move $ but terror foon reftored me to my fenfes, and by the blefling of the Virgin, I arrived ar your Ladyfhip*a chamber juft as the fpectre vanifhed into the apartment, and the door was thrown to with a tremendous crafo. I wonder ycur Lady* fhip did not hear it; but St. Thomas and all the blefled Martyrs preferve me again from this terrible fight! for indeed, my Lady, I am fure I fliall never dare to venture alone to the gallery ; and if your Ladyfliip don't fpeedily remove from thefe dangerous apart¬ ments,
ments, I fear you will foon have caufe to repent remaining fo near the haunted towers/' Rofaline having foothed the agitation of Jannetta, endeavoured at firft to argue her into a belief that what flie thought fhe had feen, was but the effeds of a ftrong imagina¬ tion, aided and encouraged by the natural timidity of* her mind on this fubjed, and the ftories fhe had heard of che tower; but Jan¬ netta perfifted fo refolutely in affirming the reality of what fhe had feen, that Rofaline^ who, but a few moments before, had witneffed fb extraordinary a, phenomenon, of which this ktter account feemed m undoubted aflhrance, now felt confirmed that there was fome dreaded myftery pertaining to this angle of the Caftle i and though fhe was herfelf courageous, and the fecurity of happy inno¬ cence guarded her from all danger of fhadowy beings (if fuch there really were), who muft themfelves fubmit to the Power that governs alj things, yet could fhe not prevent the alarm
alarm that this and a former circumftance now powerfully excited $ and fo deep were their impieflions on her mind, that all doubt of the exiftence of departed fpirits was converted into certainty : and, ^confirmed in her belief tlut fancy had not mifled her, fhe refolved to make known to the Baronefs the appear¬ ances flie had witneffed, and foficit a change of apartments. The Baronefs, when informed by Rofaline of the events of the preceding night, liftened to her with fome degree .pf agitation. At length, after a filence of fome moment^, fhe faid— u There k a degree of myftery relating to the eaft towers I have never been able to develpp. In the lifetime of my Lord and father, the late Baron of Uibandine, thofe chambers were, 1 well remember, ordered to be clofed, and never to be ufed 3 and the only caufe he afligned, was- the difgrace they had fuffered in being made the difioyal means
means of a of . who was heir to tlie Throne, but here con¬ fined under the guardianfliip of one ofthe former Barons of Urbandine -, but this ac¬ count is now entirely obfolete, and has only the teftimony of report for its confir¬ mation. That thefe apartments have been fo long fuffered to remain uninhabited, was partly occafioned by v the fuperftitious fears of fucceeding generations *, for the notion of their being the refott of unquiet fpirits once founded, the tale never died,, and at this mo¬ ment extfts as ftrongly in the bofoms of the prefent houfehold ofthe Caftle, as it did when it firft took its origin. From this caufe, together with the gloomy and ruinous afpect of the towers, which are coeval with the foundations of the Caftle itfelf, and have never undergone repair, they have been foffered to remain in their prefent dilapidated and ufelefs ftate." u If I am not mifinformed in the account X have gathered from the Caftle records,** interrupted Conftantine, who was prefent during
during the foregoing remark of Lady Rnkfi-* vina/* it is reported that the Prince ivhor was here confined, was one night murde/ed in the tower chamber ofhis prifon, bv nnfer of the Governor, who then had pofleffion of the ~ Caftle, and the care of the illuftrious Robert*; and though this tale n related to have hap¬ pened many years fince, it has ever been, md I find it ftill is, the prevailing belief of ther tenantry and retainers of the Caftle, that the ipedre of the murdered captive ftill haunts at midnight the fcene of his living fufferings. Several of our Sovereigns, both before and. fince, have/in their paffages to the Tea, * embarked from the Caftfc, and ffept, during thetr ft*on ftay, in thefe v%ry chambers j yet nothing ears deftroy the idea of their being haunted. I cannot fay I give much credence * Kobert, Puke of Normandy, deprived of hk inheritance to the Engltfh Throne by his bi other Henry the Firil, by whom it was fuppolfed he was ftcr&Uy put to death, after a very long tmpnfonment. He- was confined in more Caftle? thaa one j md the laft, where it is fuppoied he diedj was in the for* taste of Cardiff* inGiftmorganfhire,
to
to the latter account j yet as I know the ho¬ nour of our Houfe ftands impeached, and that there are fome who fcruple not to give a much later date to the horrific ftories recounted of the eaft towers, I am determined to pafs this very evening in them, as much for the fatis- fadion of my own curiofity as from a defire of filencing for ever thefe reports fb injurious to the dignity and name of ourfelves, as well as our anceftors.'* The Baronefs and Rofaline turned pale as Conftantine finifhed hia bold refolution, and even Paulina trembled. The former wa§ about to entreat him to decline To fearful an enterprife, but the fpeech of the Baron com¬ pelled her to refrain^ who thus faid—• * e I applaud and approve your intentions, my Lord, to which I give my fandion. It will at leaft force nty people to be kfe cla¬ morous in their fears, and in future filence complaint on thisfubjed. I fhall anticipate, though I cannot ftay to be a witnefs of your triumph,
triumph, which I prophefy will prove m flight prelude to the more fplendtd vidory you will fhortly attain, io the happinefs that He caft a glance of meaning firft on Con- ftantine, then on Paulina/and bowing to the latter, left the banquet table. A painful emotion crofled the heart df Rofaline, and her looks too evidently ex¬ prefled her fenfe of the Barons words, whofe impreflive geftures and manner needed no Interpretation j her looks encountered the eyes t*f Conftantine, in which fhe faw tender¬ nefs and love ftrongly painted, which was not unobferved by Paulina, who, with jealous fcrutiny, fat filently watching every move¬ ment of his countenance,' At length the Baronefs, willing to give a turn to their prefent difagreeable fituation, and Rofaline time to recover frdm the con¬ fufion
- fiifioii md diftrefs that fhe law ftrongly depiflured in her countenance, and which fbe was labouring to fupprefs, thus faid, as (he addreffed herfelf to her fon— €f You are hot really ferious I hope, my Lord, in your refolution of examining the eaftern chambers ? You do not confider the danger to which you may eKpofe your life by entering places that for fuch a number of years have never been opened, and the dilapidated Rate of which renders them unfafe for any onfe to approach," u If they have fo long withftood the attacks of time, and were able to brave a tem|veft fo deftrutHve as lately foook even the firmeft towers of the Caftle^ I think, Madam," re- plied Conftantine; « there can be no reafoa to doubt their fecurity, ac leaft for one night only j and fince my word is now engaged to tny Lord the Baron, it is not po&ible for me to retrafh*' " At leaft then, my Lord/' interrupted Paulina,
Paulina, <f permit your people maccompaoy you in this fearful enterprife/* Conftantine, fmiling for this aasaety ex¬ prefled for his fafety, gracefully replied-*- " That, Lady, muft not be. It k only fupernatural power {if any fuch there be), I fliall there have to contend wkh %. and fttould the airy fhado^m of departed beings be again ^permitted to revifit the earth for purpofes known only to divine wifdom, fe cannot be with hoftile intents to myfel( s fince I tm un* confeious of having done an a&kwt that fliould draw upoti me aft infliction fern a vifionary phantom, whofe ethereal &bflance can ne^er harm beings owr whom % fupreme Power holds a guard, that rio evils can touch without his almighty cognisance *, therefore in him alone will I tm& for d fence againft invifible agents of danger, nor fuffer any one to accompany me on a biaftnefs that needs no fear, and would call my courage in qucftion,
quefticn, were I capable of hefitating to per¬ form my promife/' This conclufive argument admitted of no appeal, and Conftantine was freed by it from further importunity, though the countenances of the party were fixed upon him with looks expreflive of fear, doubt, and apprehenfion, The mind of Rofaline was too much ab¬ forbed in her own gloomy reflections to bear longer the reftraint the was compelled to put upon her feelings. She arofe from the ban¬ quet, and alone retired to the north terrace, that, unwitnefled, ihe might give vent to the overburthened emotions that corroded her heart*
vol. n. r CHAP.
■WHPMWFMff,',flTf ■, M ,"lI-l lll ,ttJ l !WiaiMi
CHAP IIL <* Who in the paths of virtye perfeveres, ** Has nought to apprehend from impious men,** E. HAYWO0&. » So dear to heaven is faintly chaftlty, «« That when a foul is found fincerely fo, ** A thoufand K?ery*d angels lacquey her, « Driving far off each thing of fin and guilt.** Milton. It was ftill the meridian of evening, and the fun yet bright in the heavens, when Ro¬ fahne, willing, if poffible, to fly from her own thoughts, foon quitted the terrace by an armed poftern that defended the north-weft extremity
extremity of the Caftle, and led to the open caufeway, which afforded a narrow winding footpath among the cliffs down to the fhores of the fea. Acrofs this pafs was thrown an antique gate, with a contraded bridge that ran along the arch of its battlements, and communicated by an iron grate to the turret of the poftern that adjoined the walls of the terrace >, its oppofite end afforded a paffage to the high acclivities of the rocks, and led to the caufeway that was the only means of admiflion to the fhores. At no great diftance were the remains of a Gothic fort, that had been the fafcguard of the pafs in ancient times $ for this was the only opening that for many leagues gave an enemy a poflibility of landing, as the ihore was fecurely defended by the fteep perpendi¬ cular cliffs that rofe in Alpine heights fromthe furface of the fea, the guards and fafety of the Albion coait.
F 2
'T*!
- The fort was now nearly a ruin, but the gate and lower portcullis were ftill entire; to thefe Rofdine directed her courle, and perceiving the tide was yet far from the fhorej ihe htfitated not to defcend the narrow fteep, and alter fome little difficulty reached the latter j and deeply ruminating on the feverity of her deftiny, fhe proceeded forward. Her thoughts, varying and unfettled, fo?n paflcd from her own concerns to thofe of her flither, and flie now confidered the laft words he had uttered as the only real folace left hen From tbeir import file was refolved to'gather comfort; and in the wi (bed-for happinefs of his return, fhe determined, if poffible, to create to herfelf a mental re fer vation of good t'v.t fhe ck fpaired 'f ever experiencing from i:rv oth'. r circumftasu'c : ani whatever was x:k- unknown caik of his abfence, there at h : ft w<& reaf n ro coi ject pre, from what he lud l:\ld, tr-aticwa to promote his own and hk, chirrs lutuic* prof|:erity rod welfare. If he nally had a claim to unknown poflcflion?, which,
which, various circuinfninces, was almoft inclined to think he had beesi fraudu¬ lently deprived of— <c Ah !** fiie fofrly fighed, st what a profpect of felicity might their recovery afford me ! The haug'icy Urbandine would ceafe to defpife the lowly Rofaline St. Ofwythe, and her fortune being equivalent, he would no longer oppofe the happinefs ofhis fon/' Too unfiifpecting Rofaline ! thy pure bofom is untainted with the pride of greatnefs, or hardened by the feelings of avarice and ambition i the tenets of thy uncorrupted mind are replete oniy with the dictates of nature and fimplicity \ and thy mental argu¬ ments proceed from a heart where pity, love, and harmony find repofe, unalloyed by paf. fions that war with reafon, aad uancrve the fcnfibility of the foul. There was fomething fo pleafiogly fafcina¬ ting hi the foregoing chimeia of lur mi.n V that ihe could not eahly refign a kind of f 3 lamlxnt
that played about and, like an igwsfatuM, milled hsr judgment into a labyrinth, whofe fcducing wiles fhe was unable ro extricate herfelf from. In the prefeti* ftate of her thoughts, pride in vain came to her afliftance i her affections were too ardent to be fubdued by the recollect¬ ed humiliations of being thought unworthy an alliance with a family fb illuftrious as the Baron's. Rofaline had been an inmate in the Caftle nearly thiee weeks, during which time flic had fent repeatedly to the Abbey, in hopes of receiving tidings of her father $ but aU was dif¬ appointment and ufelefs expectation, fince no ktter or mellengcr had yet arrived, nor was there any thing that could give her the leaft cauie for hope when flie might again be blefled witn his return. Many anxious fears and apprehenfions had taken place iu her mind, and thefe alarming circumftances had of late filled her with prefendments of evil * for Sir Alfred had promifed rcgulariy to addrefs
addrefs her by letter during the rime he re¬ mained from the Abbey: no letter, however, had arrived, and this evening fhe more than ever fek impatient at the caufe of this breach of promife, whilft a dread of fhe knew not what aflailed her heart with fears tfmt his fafety alone had been endangered. Her fituation at the Caftle had been lately wounding and painful to her feelings -, md had not a fenfe of her duty, aided by that elaftic fpring which <c flows fpontaneous in the hu¬ man mind," fupported her under the trial, her fortitude muft have funk beneath its weight, and the many unpleafant circumftances her prefent forlorn fituation had expofed her to. Forgetful of the diftance fhe had wan¬ dered from t.x Caftie, flie ftill purfued her walk, till the beams of the fetti *g fun, fuddenly burfting from a heavy envelope of dask clouds, enlightened the fa^e of Nature with its laft departing rays, and roufed Rofa¬ line from the deep abforption of her mental f 4 faculties.
.She^ caft her eyn back on the road fhe had traced, and with aftonifhment Beheld the Caftle at an immenfe diftance* Thi lfah> as it (hone through the clouds, was refleded in golden radiance upoti the cafements of the moft prominent battle¬ ments, whicb, hanging in towering fublimity upon the edge of the rugged Alpine fteep that overlooked the deep abyfs, feemed to awe the waves themfelves as they ineAWlually wafiied againft their green incrufted bafes, terminating the lofiy profped with a gran¬ deur of imagery, indeicribably pleafing and romantic* Here and there, as the cliffs became lower, and the curve of the ftiore threw out the land" in the form of a huge peninfula, Rofaline caught an imperfed view of the tops of the foreft woods, whofe d^rk brown foliage gave a powerful contraft to the white turretcd bat¬ tlements and blazing retledions of the laft rays of the fun, wiiich illumined the embra- furts of the Caftle windows. The
The very confiderable unknowingly ftrolled from the Caftle now reminded her of the neceflity of her fpeedy return, left her f&kty fhould be endangered by the flowing of the tide towards the fliore. As flie was proceeding onwards, the turning of an immenfe jut of rocks pre¬ fented to her view the figures of two men at no great diftance , ana ou their ne^ r ap« proach, flie diflinguithcd them by their cloaks to be the fame thu had once alarmed her in St. Ofwythe's Foreft, whofe myfterious mention of a name ihe had been recently taught to dread, had never been remembered' but with wonder and terror. Alarmed at the danger which, from her prefent fone fituation flic might be expofed to, from beings whofe fornier ennverfe flie had heard enough of to excite no vtry go>d opinion of tlieir prefentdt funis, me confidered in whatmannci to ad,and ho.v to avoid them. F C If
If flie turned back, flie was retreating from the only near prcfped of fafety , It was im¬ poflibie for her to afcend the acclivities of the rocks, for there was no pafiage but the pafs beneath the Caftle terrace; and to pro¬ ceed to that fhe muft neceffirily pafs thefe unwelcome ftrangers, who, from certain circumftances that now ftruck her memory, flie had a vague conjedure were not entirely fuch, but more to be feared than if they had been different from what flie fufpeded them. Turning her eyes around, fhe perceived a deep t,nd hollow mofs-covered cell that was excavated in the rocks, which feemed to pro¬ mife a momentary concealment during the pafs of thefe dieaded ftrangers > and hoping (as they feemed engaged in deep dff- courfc) they had not noticed her, fhe haftily ran down the cell, and fecreting her- feU behind a projedion of chalk cliff that ihe thought promifed fecurity, awaited in anxious fufptnfe for their departure. But how grea wat* her tenor and amazement when, after few
few moments, the ftrangers entered the re¬ cefs, and the talleft cafting afide the outward vefture that had concealed his face and form, difcovered to the aftonifhed Rofaline the Lord Gondemar, who with a look of triumph¬ ant ! it icy, bent his full dark eyes upon her with a meaning too expreflive to need inter¬ pretation. Rofdine trembled, and fhrunk within her¬ felf j for his ftrange confeffion on a preceding evening gave her now, as it croffed her thoughts, a too juft apprehenfion of his pre¬ fent appearance ; and flie turned pale at the idea of what might be the conferences of this interview, for it was evident he had fought it by defign, and had watched her incautious fteps to this remote and foiitary place. Not long, however, was fiie kept in doubtj for Gondemar beckoning his colleague, tne latter approached, and proceeding up ieveral rough-hewn fteps of »ock that were placed at f 6 the
the extremity of the cavern, he threw back H fmall door that had been artfully concealed by an incruftatjon of chalk ftones and mofs,i Gondemar, taking Rofaline nearly in his arms (whofe terror and amazement haj fo ovt-icoTc her faculties, as to deprive her, both of fpeech and refiftance), was led, or rather carried up th** fteps, and in a moment beheld hei felf in the interior of a low iut fpa- cious cavern. The fmall entry wa;. inftantly clofed, and Harold immediately difaopeared* The cavern was in icfeif romantic, aiid on tury other more voluntary vifir, Rofaline nv^l t wid* wonder have viewed its beauties* h Lid upon a great r.fcen - , and from the boliiiefs of rhe fliore, w! ich here rofe confi¬ de rablv higher than the fwtll of the tide, was f;cme fro ii all ics approaches. The entry \\&i> voy fmall, for it had formerly been no injie than a narrow air fpace, though it is ^oiiible it vas enlajrtd fufiiciciiclv for a place of
of coneealment time of or for ftnugglers, who here fecured their con¬ traband booty. The door fo much rcfcmbled the form and likenefs of the lock itfelf, that not the minuteft fcrutiny could difcover that it re.dly was otherwife. From the excavated roof was fu'pen Ie \ a tripod filver lamp, which emitte 1 a hri<: it reflection around, fo.n the ^vukentfa of rhe chalky fides of t'ne caverni an 1 was here and there diveifiled wkh grten fca- weed and moll, that clung ko their fuiuies, and gave a kind of fombre animati >n to the whole. Hie uncvennefs of the botto.n, <*r ground, w;.s lilkd up hy dry fantls, aid covered with mats for a temporary ui.*, whilft in vat ious recefles were negligently difpofed feveral flats, and moil-Cv)/eud benches. Beneath a perforated gi»j:t ) ft od a table, co\eicd wit, j every dvlicacy t!^t lvtX'i'y
luKury could invent, and fiuirg, viands, and liquors the moft delicious, mo»*c like the produce of fome fpe!l*enthndHng power, raided by the hand of enchantment t.hnn reality, tempted the fight, and courted the ai petite to tafte them. Rofaline, notwithftanding her alarm, viewed this fcene of wonder ivith fileit ad- mir.thn -, but terror almoft overpowered her fnfts v\hen the conviction darted acrofe thr ni that fhe was now beyond the reach of ai i or pity, and whatever were the purpofe* of hei jailer, he had addfd fecurity for their proferution too po f ent for mortal forefight to baffle, whilft every concurring Circum¬ ftance powerfully affured ber that fhe had tvct'Y thir.g to drtad from fo dangerous and unexpected a fituation. Scarcely had Gondemar fecured beyond efcape his trembling, terrified prey, than 5 fcizing
fewing Bbth her hands, and fixing his eyes intently upon her, he thus faid—* u The means, charming RoVh*. t^at I h.tve praftifed to procure th«s u linterru.ited interview, though feemit iny vi Amt, ar** n»t fo intended j and I heir ti y u, by n\) t!»e vows moft binding, that no irjurv th I! be offered, unlefs provoked ny a denial to the demand I am aoout to make. That ! ^do**c y^u with the moft ardent love, my prtjlnt proccecings c.in.*ot bu: convince )\>u; and that I have refolution to maintain my pre¬ tenfions, let u fuflice to know that 1 vvill never part from the objeft 1 afpiie to the poiieflion of, till, by my tendereft a^Jiduiue?, and never-ceaiing conftancy and love, I have inlpired in that angel bofom a reg.\rd mutual as my v^ainuft wiihes, and lafting as my own. When tiie Lady Rofaline ihall bkfs me with that confeffion, tarn fliall (he be again reftored to the world; but till that happy moment arrives, ihe muft be content to
this poor grot with continued prefence 4 and the fociety. of him wh$ exift^ but to adore her.'* Rofaline liftened indeed to thefe words^ hut their uncommon and almoft impoflibie: meaning, together with the newnefe of the - fcene, feemed at firft to impreft her with an ulea that what ihe heard -md law was but* tho dream of fancy, misshapen and vifionary* only, till tf*e laft words of Gondemar rung in her ear with peculiar harfhneft, md awoke her to a convidion of their reality ; and flie no longtr doubted che full confirmation of lur danger, and the dreadful confequences to- whkh flie ^as expofed. The ardent and rude, triumphant gaze of her persecutor's eyes, which were bent full upon her indig¬ nant countenance, ferved as a ftimulauvc to* diat juft refentment width laboured in her heart, and vvhui once roufed, gave proofs that flie iiad courage to refill the gripe of villany. and oppreflion, hut which flie now. * endeavoured
endeavotu-ed to fmce her reafon too plainly affured her that her danger might be increafed, were flie to yield to its dictates ihe therefore commanded herfeif feflki- ently to %— * <* My Lord Gondemar, although your Lordfhip has been pleafed to exprefs for me fentiments chat I neither am deferving of, nor even wifh to hear, I truft you are v^eil aware of the charader and ftation of Rofaline St. Ofwythe, to need to be told the refped; due to her birth and perfon -, nor will yen, I dare avouch, longer perfift in a determination to exad an impoflibie demand, when flie tells you, with truth and finccrity undoubted, that flie never can confent to pledge imp^f- fible promifes to procure that libeity which none has a right to deprive her of. Do not forget, my Lord, that although Sir Alfred, my father, is abfent, and therefore cannot now proted his child from thi* unmannered violence, ihe is not quite devoid of protec¬ tion*
tion, or deftkute of noble friends to refcue her from a thraldom fo unjuft and inhuman.'* <f I &m well acquainted, Lady,*' angrily interrupted Gondemar, " to whom your allufions point; but beware, and fear to roufe the flumbertng, but never-dying, em¬ bers of my jealous love. Your champion I can crufh * you know not the fatal danger of provoking my wrath, which, once enkindled,* will pull down vengeance on the deftroyer of my hopes, and overwhelm him in the ruin himfelf has occafioned. But be not alarmed ) ,, obferving the pale looks of Rofa¬ line, whofe evident terrors could not be con- eealed; " 1 would owe my happinefs to a free choice, and the foft perfuafions of love and fympathy, not to oppreflion. *Tis the heart of the angelic enflaver, whofe captive I am, that I afpire to poflefs; and could I be affured of that, 1 would this inftant unbar the gates of this prilon, and at the altar reftore her to freedom and the arms of an adoring hufband. Speak, charming maid! pro¬ nounce
nounee my happinefs and your own enlarge¬ ment! fay that yuu will on thefe conditio ..a quit with me an otherwife lafting feclufiom Think well upon tue bnlliant advantages of an union with the heir of Caftlenuco, and, ere it be too kte, accept an offer which, if difdainingly you refufe, will not a fecond time be repeated* Gondemar was never born to fue for favours which his will can give him free poffeflion of, did he not hope by mild- nefs to obtain that which already is in his power, and of which no earthly aid can now deprive him.** " My Lord,** replied Rofaline firmly, " your demands are fuch as nature, and the dictates of reafon and virtue muft for ever forbid* Can you expeil a return to your profeffions, fuch as you require, whilft }our acknowledged pafhon inftrufts you to prac* tiie cruelty on its objeft ? or do you think that violence and injuftiee can promote your defigns, and enforce a voluntary cumpJu ice from a mind proudly confeious of its* o.^n integrity
integrity nnd honour, and too refined mi delicate to hmok an infiilc fo unmanly and oppreffivef— -If your Lord flu p would fecure the refped of Rofaline, {for be affured ^fteem is all that you can ever .hope m excite in her heart), you would do well tfr remember that ?he methods you have pur-, fued, are avowedly militant again,ft any falla¬ cious expedations you may have entertained of fuccefs j nor would any fordid induce¬ ment, however glittering and fortunate, tempt £cr to forfeit the approbation of her own heart, in the facrifice of her word, her truth/ and her affedions, where the only co.npen- iation flie could hope for would be the pot* feflion of worldly wealth, which on fuch terms the would difdain the acceptance of/' " *Tis well, Madam/* furioufiy inter¬ rupted Gondemar, " but beware that you do not oblige me to recal the remembered fcene of the foreft, or to remind the delicate Rof line that her cold, frozen heart can fometimes awake to feciet love. IL.d 1 not feca
feen her in the arms of the Urbandine, 'tis pofllble fhe might luve been fpared the humiliations of thii mo¬ ment/' The tears of wounded delicac; and un- meiited T eproach were faft grherng .1 rne eyes of the iniultcd Rofaline j bu: the danger of her fituation forbade all outward aoucar* anre of fextul loftncfs, which in che prefent moment, however painful to re-ftrain, Ihe felt was againft her fcvirity to give ver.t to. Supprefllng, therefore, trie rifing fi>rrwW, and fixing on Gondemar an exprHlive h>ik of indignation, and dignified virtuous refent¬ ment, that awed for a 'time his licentious advances, Ihe faid— u Were I again at liberty, yvir L rJfiiio. would bluih io icuiembcr fo bafe an infi sta¬ tion, as much as 1 fhould difiain to anfi\er it, did I not think it neccffary to a (fore vou that the foul or Rofahne is as incpihfe of difhonour, as her mmd is firmly endowed widi couiaiie
courage to refift unmerited oppreflion and prefumptuous iufult-, and let it be an un* doubted furety to your Lordfhip that as the acT-iuns of Rofaline St. Ofwythe are un- dvferving calumnious reproach, fo will this prefent proceeding roufe refentment, and convert all attempts to gain her attention, to indig.iation and averfion/* Gondemar liftened with anger and irrefo- lution to the fpirited manner in which thefe words were pronounced; he became indeter¬ minate, and paced the length of the cavern with hafty, perturbed fteps, fometimes call¬ ing glances of dangerous meaning on his alarmed captive^ who/ as fhe encountered the ; r paftionate expreflions, felt her foul ficken with terrified apprehenfion of fome dreadful mifchkf. At length approaching, he faid— <c If 1 thought that in reftoring you to liberty, i (houid foften your heart in my la vour, and weaken its attachment to a hated rival,
rival, I would this inftant condud you to the Caftle/' He paufed, and remained buried in fome deep meditation; and Rofaline, hoping that, from tier firmnefs, flie fhould impel him to forego his daring defigns, now felt a moment¬ ary refpite from thofe agonizing terrors that had nearly overwhelmed her fortitude. Fixing his eyes full upon her, as if awoke from fome pleafing leflectbn, Gondemar took the hand of Rofaline, and in a foftened voice began— " If you will give me a folemn promife that within three days of the prefent moment you will here voluntarily meet, and pledge to me your future vows, 1 wid this inihnc condud you from this rtcefs, relying on your ailurance that you will not attempt to fvverve from a promife which is now the only alternative left you/* The
The former hopes of Rofaline were hoifr deftroyed, and flie read too plainly in the refolute manner and expreflion of his dark' featured vifege, that flie could not hope to efeape on other terms 5 whilft the honourable pi.rity of her mind would not permit her, though the vidim of ftratagem, to have re- courfe to its frauds, by procuring not only prefent but future emancipation from an extorted demand, She hefuated, and re¬ mained filent. *' Speak 1" cried Gondemar, impatiently. <€ Do you conieiu?" Rofaline, widi a view of moving him to forbearance, now anfwered-— <f Gondemar, you have yourfelf acknow¬ ledged your acquaintance witi the affedionate regaids I bear to another; my prefent un¬ welcome fituation muft fandion the other- wife indelicate confcffion you compel me to make. My heart is irrevocably engaged paft recal,
tecal, and you know the objed of ks affedions. If, therefore, nature and gene- rofity are not qualities of which you are to¬ tally diverted, you will admit the juftice of my appeal, and ceafe all further urgings of a fuic thatexads an unwilling facrifice, which 1 have not powerto yield, or you a right to demand." €€ I have probed you to the utmoft, haughty lady T* fternly replied Gondemar, with a lowering countenance, " and find not even the apprehenfions of danger ; and the confe¬ quences that muft enfue, can bend your obdurate bofom to my wiihes. But fince you provoke your fate, hear and tremble ! You have dared to urge your regards fov the bafe-born Urbandine, for which 1 will take ample vengeance; for know he is the objed of my hate, on whom ihall fail the full puniflimenc of my flighted live. Let him then beware -, for, by the deftiny that rules, I fwear to avenge the ruin of my hopes on his accurfed head--—" The eyes of Gondemar fwellcd with VOL. H. c ihllyll
c i alliens and alarming looks of rage and h tied *, and Rofaline, tcnor-fbuck at the dicadful imprecations he was about to 1 ucr, wildly ic zed his hand, and, widi a J iok of horror, exclaimed—" Stop, flop )<'ir diculful o.,ih, .md remember it Is a lt'Qiht,r you woui 1 denounce !" €c ArcuMed be the name !' 5 furioufiy ejaculated ihe darkly*fio\^ning Goj.dtmar. Cl Ihis ///'/ he fisa'l uel my power, ahd hi ar my malediction !''«—Then fuddenly p ufrg, he ftiuck his forehead paCionitely v 1 h ids hand, and fixe* 1 a look of dreadful *.' • relfior. on dw trcmbline; Rofahne, whole foul funk widiin her .h he feized her hand, j»r.d Vdis, with calm, deliberate triumph, pi'jnou'.ce 1-— iC 1'ou v.ill no forger deceive > outil-lf, my cluumng prize, with a h* x pe ( lt ]i v t-, w>» n ii.'b»* ie ! ihat you a:e fo ^ r tin iy in n*.y po\ur, tiiac ,11 conditions I i .\ r \. ; n per to r uie, a; 1 you in prudence v ul. oi ft \ce ^ompl. v^idi, are the relult ir . \Uh i ig fince loured, an 1 now hap-* j 1; txecuted. Fou will ke, by the con¬ veniences
^^niences here provided," opening a fnuil door of an interior ceil, where Ro&lne with anguifli beheld every thing neceflary to make this place a continued abode, " that I am prepared for refiftance -, and fince you are fo courageous as to brave mv refentment, and flight my honourable offer of love, i will amply repay myfeif for the indignity you have thrown upon me. The prefent moment: gives me to your arms. You have dif- dained a tide that once miglit have been your's; but fince not mine, you fliall never be the wile of Urbandine. The dictates of love triumphant prompt me to the enter¬ prife, and this moment gives nie excefs of bliis and vengeance." The purpofes, the dreadful purpofes of Caftlenuco now flood confefled % and cvui the honourable offer he had made, wa, too clearly a pretence. lie approacheJ the helplefs cnlhared victim of hk tfiiikv love, and in hk aft ured looks Rofaline faw not aa emblem of pity or hope." Rare .dug O 1 tlOLl
from his grafp, fhe fell fuddenly on her knees, and with diftraded ea^ernefs, ejaculated— <J Have meicy, and lpare me! Oh fpare your proftrate vidim, and at the appointed moment flie folemnly fwears to become your bride !" A finile of triumph, love, and ironf accompanied the words of Gondemar as he thus replied-— " That offer you have once rejeded 5 it will not now be accepted. Gondemar would fcorn to force a viftim to his arms. His wife muft be the votary of kind confenting love, not of unwilling vows. You have openly confefled your partiality for Conftantine. Shall the defpifed Caftlenuco receive an heartlefs hand, whilft a rival brother pof- feffes that envied treafure ? No ! Had you confulted your interefts, you would have feen how dangerous it w r as to have contemned the offered hand of him who already commands your deftiny. Shall I now
now forego my glorious prize refign the brighteft moment of my life, and reiinquifti the golden opportunity of deftroy¬ ing for <cver the happinefs of him, as a juft retaliation for injuries he has done a brorher, and which are paft his forgive net ? Vain are your entreaties and fupplications -, for, by the eternal juftice of Heaven I have fworn that never, while I exift, fliall you become the bride of Urbandine; nor fliall you efcape the prefent moment by hereafter pleading the nullity of an extorted promife. Refiftance were ufelefs, and this blifsful period gives ample gratification to my love and vengeance.*' The foul of Rofaline died within her j all hope was at an end. The pictured paf¬ fions ofthe ferocious Gondemar were legibly imprinted on his haughty remorfelcfs counte¬ nance j and deftrudion, in all its horrors, awaited her. Flood* of tears gufned down her diftorted, an^uhhed feature*. Agiin ihe iuak meekly on her knees -, and railing her c 3 tLfp-J
clafped hands, and imploring, defpairingeyea to liis favaoe fiice, with a look of innocence and fJTaking entreaty, inch as angels might acknowledge, flie wildly ejaculated— " If pity be not dead within you—if mercy cut had entrance in a heart fo c-Uil, extend it now to the pleadings of a yt Ik.kfb creature, who fupplicates for death, lailur than diflionour. Oh Gondemar ! I acknowledge your power, and fue^ humbly fue, for your forbearance and compafflon. Spare me, as you hope hereafter for mercy and forgivenefs I" Vain were her prayers 3 the demoniac fury of confefled revenge, and his vicious appetite (for Gondemar,, refolved on retalia¬ tion, hr.d never ceafed to remember his difop- pointment, and the difgrace he had endured in the foreft,) hurried him to the coin* Rjiflion of a barbarous deed, for which ha had laid his fchcrn'.s with a too deliberate fmi determined fecurity to fail of fuccefs, and now
now urged iir-n, vvua r. f - iiher p'*iy nor re¬ morfe, to th'.' niin of an i-i.iocenn cr.Mtire, who, thou'di Ids hcait adored her with a tumultuous, un!-/>veriied paiiion, wai \eh thv? facrifice of love, than hatred ro the ob}: t «ji him beloved* lie w-15 asivanring towards the \->'\ Rofaline, v*hm the lat-rer, tir^ed by t'ie kel» ings of defpair, and that frantic rncdi jd ^L;ri Nature points our., bv w.iir'i to ev.):di our fenfc of lure dellru&io;*, faJek^.1 m-m 1, aud the caverns echoed with ner diiirACtc 1 cries for help. Oh God! what fudden exquifite joy revived thehopdcis Rofdine, when, in a paufe of her anguifhed exclamaiiono, flic heard a wdl« known voice Ci»ll—«* Roialinc 1 LaJy Rofa¬ line ! Jpcak ag.tin, that the ilmnd of your voice may direct our fearch 1" "Oh iavc me, pidlrvc ire, f-ve your own poor R'vi.i.i.iti" flic cxciuimcd, in a C 4 loudir
louder tone 5 nor could the efforts of Gon¬ demar icftrain their echoes. " Hell and Furies !** he exclaimed, with rage and difappointment, u am I for ever foiled ? is and thatching the fainting Rofaline in his nrms, he in a moment fecreted her in nn adjoining divifion 1 then furioufiy drawing his fword, placed himfelf againft the entry, which in an inftant was burft open, and ConlVinrinc, at* nded by feveral of hia, people, ruflied into the cell* u Approach, and you die V* ejaculated Gondemar, his eyes irradiated with fparks of fire, and deadly revenge lowering on his vifage. The attendants of Conftantine would have prcfled forward to guard their beloved Lord ; but his* eyes had eagerly fearched the cell, and not feeing the objed of his care, he addrefled bU brother in a tone of refolu¬ tion and ft erotic fb, as he defired his people to keep from the cavern—
« Gondemar!
ee Gondemar! I entreat you to confider the purpofe for vvhich I am here unwillingly armed againft you. Either refign the Lady Rofaline to my protection, or meet the event; for be affured I will never depart until I have refcued her from your diOionourable intentions/* i( And be thou alfo well affured, pre*- fumptuous boy P f replied the furious Gon¬ demar, haughtily frowning, and making a pafs with his fword at Conftantine, which the latter turned afide, fC I will retain my prize againft the armsoftwenty fuch brothers." Conftantine, with concern, was now com* peiled to defend himfelf againft the defperate attacks of Gondemar, whofe intentions aimed at his life ; for his paffes were levelkd with deadly violence. But watching his oppir- tunity, he, by a fudden movement, difarmed his antagonifti and giving his fword to Sir Julian, rufhed to the interior of the cdl, and received in his anus hia precious depofitj for Rofdine was infenfible, and had fainted c 5 cn
on hearing the clafh of arms j—and, in de¬ fiance of the efforts of Gondemar, he bore her to the boat rhat waited on the ft rand, where ihe was placed in fafety. Gondemar, following, as the pinnace was crowding towards the fea, caught with furious grafp the arm of Conftantine, and, in a voice rendered hollow by contending rage and paffion, pronounced—" Tremble /" aad dantd from the beach. The air had revived Rofaline ; and though not yet quite recovered, me heard and faw what iiad paffed. The word " tremble" funk to her heait in chilling coldnefsj and Ihe watched with trembling apprehenfion the receding form of the terrific Gondemar, 1 he baik, however, foon launched into the fea, and the dafhing of the waters convinced lur that ihe wns beyond the reach of danger. Tne agitation of her fpirits fubfided, and fhe became fenfibie of il.c prefent fcene. The under fupp.st and rc-idfuring attentions of Conftantine,
Conflantme, together wiih the certainty of her refcue from evils worfe than death, filled her with grateful cclUcy \ and flic uncon- fcioufly returned the thanks of a heart, not warmed by a grateful fenfe of the fervice Ihe had received from w friend, but fuch as were the too certain acknowledgments of a foul infpired with dearer leijtiments. Anxious to appear juftified in the eyes of Conftantine, fhe, with that artlefs fnn* plicity natural to the purity of her unper- verted mind, explained to his liftening ear the events from which lie had ib providentially refcued her, fupprefling only fuch parts as the openly outraged conduct of Gondemar had, in his deportment to Conftantine, at the moment of her refcue, rendered too apparent to need explanation. Conftantine liftened to this account, though delivered with the moft delicate re- tr J ibr a being lb nearly allied to him as Goiw c 6 dem a.*,
demar, with fenfations of impatient anger* He prcfled the hand of Rofaline tenderly to^ his lips, and foftly whifpered— * c My angelic Rofaline fliall never again be expofed to thefe infults!—No, by Hea¬ ven 1 I will guard her for ever from their confequences with a right which none will dare dilpute." Rofaline fighed, and now forcibly recol¬ leded that, forbidden as was their union, the delicate tendernefs and care of Conftantine would prove as dangerous to her future repofe, ag the inhuman defigns of Gondemar "would have been dcftrudive. She did not dare to truft her voice with an anfwer, left it fliould betray the inward agitation of her heart j and deeply ruminating on her way** ward deftiny, ihe fullered him ftill to retain her hand, which, in the exhaufted ftate of her fpirits, and the increafe of her tendernefs A ■* for
3
for an objed who fo powerfully claimed love, flie had not a defire to withdraw. Conftant!ne > wifliing to divert her thouglits, which feemed deeply engaged, as he con- jeftured, on the late fcene of violence, now related by ii'hat circtimftances lie had been tlie fortunate means of her refcue, which was to this effed. Pie had been purfuing his evening's ramble, and was returning home by the lea- fends, when fomcthing fparkling attraded his notice, which, on ftooping to pick up, he kne / to be the bracelet of Rofaline ; and not doubting but that it had flipped from her arm in tlieir accuftomed vialk, he haftened forward, in hopes of overtaking and reftoring to iier the valuable he concluJed flie had unknowingly loft. But he arrived at the caftle without meeting; her ; a;:J enter- ing the North Terrace, wns encountered by Sir Julian, who informed him that tie Luly Rofaline had not yet returned i that as he h*.l
obferved her from the watch-tower walking on the lands, a confiderable diftance from the Caftle, flie had fuddenly difap- peared behind a jutting curve of the rocks, and was followed to the fame fpot by two men, who, from their apparent caution, were eidicr foes or fmtiggkrs, who often infefted the coaft. * c I have been watching for fome time, my Lord," continued Sir Julian, " bur have not yet obferved her Ladyfhip; and your returning home,« in which you neceflirily palled the fpot ihe difappeared at, alarms me with apprehenfion for her fafety, fince it ii impoflibie foe can gain the head-land by any other p:*fs than that beneath the Caftlt terrace.'* No doubt was entertained but fome fudden danger had befallen his Rofaline ; and the impatience of Conftantine fcarcely admitted the neceffiry time for procuring fuch needful aid as could affift his fearch. Attended by his
his people, he was rowed to the fpot where Sir Julian had beheld her fudden difappearance ; and landing, they examined, with minureft fcrutiny, the exterior cavern, and fearched each little creek and hollow, but to no purpofe -, and they were proceeding to other excavations higher up the beach, when the cries of Rofaline, though but uintly heard through the immenfe thicknefs of the rocky bulwarks, aroufed their attention -, and being again repeated, guided the noble Conftantine to the recefs, where, with unfeigned tranf¬ port, he clafped his Rofaline fafely in his arms, at once the preferver of hk own hap¬ pinefs, and her honour. Rofaline again gratefully poured forth her thanks to her deliverer, and to thofe who accompanied him. With real joy ftie re¬ ceived again the picture of her mother, which fhe had no doubt Gondemar had by fome means obtained in the hurry of flying from his purfuit on a former occafion, fince Ihe was well affured tliat was the time flie had milled
milled it from her wrift, although flie knew not by what means it had fallen into his poffeflion ;—fhe, however, clafped it again- on her arm, refolving no further to expofe the bafcnels of Gondemar to the already^ inflamed anger ofhis brother. The boat, foon after the conclufion of Conftantine's account, was put to fliore beneath the terrace of the Caftle 5 and in a little time after, Rofaline beheld herfelf in the affedionate embraces of the Baronefs, whofe joy was too evident in her countenance to need exprciSon* Rofaline, as the hour was late, and herfelf much exhaufted with the terrors of the night, foon retired, after having entreated that the foregoing tranfadions might noc be a fubjeft of difference between Conftantine and his brother, and fervently requcfting that die whole rni&hx for ever be buried in oblivion*
vl l<f3»i *
CHAP. IV.
11 deep nmtmm'» ftruck mine tar, <« From airy voices whifpering through the glo^m* <* I lsftene<l««.when at once a wave of flame «* Burft, dimly fltfiung round me, and difdosM *< The hideous viftoii,** MAllfLTa *' Glorious hypycrify I what fools are they " Who, fbught with luftful or ambitious views, * f Wear not thy fpecious maik l" FRAN'ClSt •'Dilimululon dwJls ** As at her home, in every imjk he wears," C^ONSTANTIKE, though anxioufly im¬ patient for tin interview vvita hU 1 >v*dy
Rofaline, had too much compafKon fo require it after the evident fatigues fl*c had under- gone ; b»r he did not pafs the icSl of the night ia uidefv irrefoiuiion, for himfelf and the Batonefs remained c loft ted rill a very h*e hout , and his emwement in the chambers of the eaft towers totally flipped his memory till too Lite to be executed. He retired to his own apartment, and to hi? couch, though not to fleep, for his mind, rgitated with hopei, fears, and doubt* for the event of the coming morrow, pcraiucu not hk eyei to clofe in peaceful flu nber: and no fooner had the fun pierced through the cmbraft res, than he haftened to the window, and leaning from tfie cafement, fixed his eyes anxioufly oa thofe of Rofaline, whole apartments were in a diftant aiwle. though upon a line with his ov.ii, and, with a elegit c of tag*, rne fa bordering on impa¬ tience, av^aiud the opening of her window ihuttc..*, for vch he knew that flie was an urly rilli 1 a.ai a*diouJi the great turret clock
clock at this moment plainly chimed the of five, he thought it was fi^ till Su. Ofwythe's dccp.coned bell in an inftant after re-echoed that of the Cal lie* Since the Baron had fo peremptorily commanded him to receive the hand cf Paulina, he had been ncceliitated to be more guarded in his interviews with his beloved Rofaline -, and was therefore deprived of many a happier hour he would elk have lpenc in her fociety* At prefent he did not dare, for her fake, openly to brave the refentment of his father, or expofo the delicate and tender Rofaline to the vin* dictive fpirit of Paulina, by an exprefled difavowal of his union with the latter; and it was from this caufe he now anxioufly watched the opening of her caiement, fince the interview he defned wa> intended to be productive of confequences that were of the laft importance to himfdf, and there fiie necefLrily
neceilariJy unknown to the reft of the inha* bitants of the Caftle. At length, from the narrow pointed* recefs of the Gothic cafement, in the ftnallcft tower of her fuite of apartments, he beheld an outftretched arm giving fuftenance to the melancholy finging bird of eariieft Ipring and lateft autumn. It was the hand of Rofaline j and in an inftant he was before the door of her antichamber, where his fignal, though k aftonilhed, did not long remain unattended to by the gentle maid* Surprifed at fo early and unexpeded a vifitor, fhe afked who was there? * c It is I—your own Conftantine V* he foftly, but diftindly whifpered. " If you regard his happinefs, and your own future peace, you will not hefitate an inftant to meet him quickly in the library at the fouth end" Rofaline trcmbkd at die fuddennefi of this. requeft y
tequeft j fhe was about to refofe, but her heait pieuled ftrorgly againft the intiirJui, and reminded her that peihaps this was fhe only unwitnefled interview they might ever hwe ; and though fhe felt the indulgence was imprudent, fl.e coul 1 not deny hei felf, or the earneft entreaties of Conftantine, who, as foon as he had gained the ailurance, quitted precipitately the gallery. She had been drelTed fome time ; but a variety of emotions crowding on her mind, agitated her fpirits, and for a few moments fixe was obliged to fent herfelf to compote her mind j for already a kind of prefentiment icetned to have filled her thoughts as to the purpofe of this unexpected fummons, and flie knew fhe fhould med ail the for¬ titude of her foul to re lift tht conii*juences that might en fue. At length fe< ling the necefiky of this meeting tr.kirg place, fhe opened the door of the eonidor, and pro¬ ceeded towards the place appoi:ued, and, undifcoverei 1 , readied tlie lon«5 oafi];i>o time
Jed to the fouth library, at the door of which ftood Conftantine, whofe eyes fuddenly lighted with expreflive pleafure as, refpectfully taking her hand, he led her into the chamber, and filently clofed the door. Having prefented her a feat, he placed himfelf in another near her, and fixing a plance of tender aflection on her averted face, thus began— <e Lady Rofaline, the dangers of laft night, which with grief I beheld you expofed to, muft, with a heart fo open and liberal as your's, be a fufficient apology for the hafty, abrupt manner in which I now declare myfeif Perfecuted as you have been by rhe daring violence of a wretch, whole bafe intentions no tie but one can preferve you from the dreadful effects of, 1 tremble to refled on what \ou may ftill have to encounter from his lawlefs purfuits, from which there is only one alternative to fecure you. * 4 ITe
He paufed, then added,, with a trembling tone— *■* Do not think fo meanly of me, my own Rofaline, for fo indeed 1 would fain call you j judge me not felfifh if, in urging the ftrength and fuiecriry of my love, in a moment like the prefent, 1 take advan¬ tage of furrounding dangers, and feek to call the objed of my long-infpircel alfedions by that endearing title, rendered fucied nnd inviolable by holy marriage ties, wiiich can alone g^ve me the timdtr privilege of pro- teding you from every niture darker, aad which will amply fruit rate the dcfbns of him whom for ever I n?ufl now con fide r a> my bittereft eneniy : biu ^nareh d by ' ie fait!. fol arms of an aiiori ig .v.lhmd? t.er;' v *r WOuld CL'ife, and VOUt AW. C<)wY\y<\\ * • %y rendered h \yy forever.'* With tfnodc^ns of t'y*>.y\ie pain aot rlcaiure, Rolahne iiiu\i t i io this d'lhre- ,A-uedt:\<^- i a t r,t/ ^ rw„ r a:d fro.u nun > jy
^hom alone her heart was fenfibie of ten¬ dernefs and ftmpathy. But though aware of the truth ofhis arguments, and well knowing from experience the dauntlefc nature of the defigning Gondemar, yet as flie hoped her fether's fpeedy return would prote6l her from his further attempts, and as her mind was too delicately noble to enter a family whofe fuperior difdained her alliance, ihe refolved that neither the pleadings of her own heart, northe importunities of her lover, fhould make her forget the re fpect fhe owed herfelf; and though fiie fighed at the 'conviction that ihe did violence to her incli¬ nation, >et was fhe too generous to appear lefs fo than Conftantine, whofe delicate and noble offer, under fuch circumftances, flie could not think of taking advantage of but with felf condemnation ; and though her htait uas wayward, and but too fenfitivc to the fiattering profpect of happinefs, fhe refolveaher reaion fliouldnotyield toitsfeduc- tive ptrfi.afioni, and her judgment approved her refolution, as thus fhe gently replied— " My
« My Lord the Baron has exaded from nie a promife that, fhould his too generous fon honour the unworthy Rofaline with an offerlike the prefent, I fhould refufe to accept a hand, to whofe union with mine hisaflent* ing voice fliould never find a fandion ; and though I fcruple not to acknowledge that, had your fether's approbation not been wanting, I fliould have found happinefs in the title of my Lord Conftantine's wife, yet muft I confider the Baron's interdidion as an infupe-* rable bar which, while it teaches me humility, fliall alfo teach me to refped myfeif and the honour which, by my father, has been left unfullied to my care. Forgive me then, Conftantine, if, in juftice to myfeif and for our mutual peace, I entreat you will defift from a requeft, that duty and, I truft, a laudable pride enjoin me never to comply with under fuch inaufpicious circumftances/* The expreflive features of Conftantine fpoke too legibly the keennefs ofhis difap¬ pointment. vot. a. H *< I am
€C I am then deceived/* he at length exclaimed, with an impatient tone of voices <c Rofaline only beguiled me with falfe hopes flie never intended to realize. Had the trea- fure of her beau been Conftantine*s, fhe could not thus calmly oppofe the cold infen- fate didates of duty, pride, and prudence, to the force of a tender and mutually fincere aBedion." " This is a reproach I have not merited/ 1 replied Rofaline, with eyea bent confufedly on the floor, to avoid the penetrating perfuafive glances of Conftantine* Then hefitatingly added—" The fuperior pretenfions of the Countefs of Orhin muft in future diredthe condud of Rofaline, and teach her to regard herfelf/' " The pretenfions of the Countefs of Othin !" repeated Conftantine. €C Oh Rofa¬ line 1 is it poffible you can wrong yourfelf by harbouring a thought on a being that never can be any thing to me ? Do you really entertain fo degrading an idea of Con¬ ftantine as to imagine he can implicitly yield obedience
obedience to commands impofed ambition and a love of power? At leaft* do me the juftice €0 believe that, were yourfelf any other than what you are, and I had never &tn you, I never would fubmit to fo dif- graceful an alliance with a woman for whom my heart feels not, nor ever could, the ilighteft regard. % Paulina, be aflurcd, never Jlmll be the wife of Conftantine, nor will he everrefign the dear ecftatic hope of attaining the only earthly happinefs he feeks, topoffefs the hand ofhis firft, his only love." " Oh Conftantine ! ceafe, I beleech you, to urge me againft the conviction of my reafon. Would it be honourable, thinkyou, to ileal, unweicomed, unacknowledged, into a noble houfe, whofe head disapproves your choice, and forbids our union ? Ah ! think what might be the fad confequences of fo ill-omened a marriage ! Mull Inot expert to meet juft contempt and dtferved reproach ? Would not your father perfecute, and your mother, the noble-minded Ruithvina, con¬ temn, deteft the weak-minded creature who h 2 fullered
fuffered the pleadings of an imprudent paflioit to overturn her reafon, and deftroy her judgment?" t€ My father," replied Conftantine, with increafing ardour, * c would foon learn to value the rare virtuesand endowments ofmy Rofaiine's perfections, and repent his rnif- judging prejudices! aad for my mother, her exalted mind would applaud my choice, and bk fs the generous being who had confented to beftow on her fon fuch perfect felicity." " At leaft," cried a voice from the eloor of an oppofice angle, which, opening, difcovered the Baronefs, u at leaft my glad confent and approbation fliall not be wanting to your mutual happinefs. Pardon me, lovelieft Rofaline," continued the Baronefs, as with a fmiling countenance fhe advanced, u this little ftratagem, which 1 confefs was defigned to fecure your confent to our mea* fures, I acknowledge that, overcome by the perfuafions of my Lord Conftantine, and fhocked at the injuries you fo lately received, he has prevailed upon me to add my entreaties for
for your (I truft) mutual convinced as I am that the happinefs of my only fon can be fecured by an union with the object of his wrfhes, and that the reverfe muft be the fatal confequences, were lie to receive the hand of Paulina, I come, my love, with a guardian's privilege, to con¬ jure you to accede to our wifhes, and at the fame time to entreat you to give the tender title of hufband to my boy, and to confer the equally wifhed*for appellation of mother on myfeif. 1 know, for I have over¬ heard, all the honourable arguments of your pure and exalted mind againft the fuit we leek to have granted j but know, as I am myfeif a difobedient, and have fet you the example, 1 muH not now be rcfufed. AA fured as I am that Paulina is not a being calculated for the wife ofmy fon, 1 have dared to difobey my Lord's commands; and by preferving him from a late but fure repent¬ ance, and my children and myfeif from years of mifery and forrow, I will truft to time for my own juftification, and the ftrict H 3 p-opriuy
propriety of this act of apparent tranfgreflioa to his will." Rofaline, now almoft half vanquifhed by the fudden appearance and words of tho Baronefs, was at a lofs for a reply. At length recollecting herfelf, flie faid— " Surely, dear Madam, you forget that my father is not prtfenu I cannot, pardon me, unworthy as 1 am cf this goodnels, but I cannct confent to ent^r into ih folemn an tPyjyjtmtv.t without his knowledge and ap piobadonj and although honoured by fuch an unexampled proof of your condefcenfion* yet muft 1 not confent to expofe myfeif to the merited fcom and reproaches of my Lord the Baron.** 44 You fhall not encounter them, my* adored love,*' replied Conftantine i €i deign but to accompany me to the altar this even¬ ing, and youi devoted Uibandine ftiali fliield you fiom his anger and every other danger." * c This evening V replied Rofaline, gieatly
greatly perplexed and diftreffed at an ear- neftnefi of folicitation, though flattering, yet painful to her innate knk of right; and then wilhing to gain a refpite from an event that her reafon condemned, fhe quickly added— * c No, my Lord j think me not ungrateful, but indeed it muft not be fo foon ; at leaft wait till my father returns: if, on his arrival, you ftill perfift in this honoured requeft, I think I fliall feel lefs reludance under fuch circumftances, and blefled with his fupport and protedion, together with my dear Lady Ruithvina's approbation, in complying with your generous demands." cc But refled, my child," replied the Baronefs, " refled what dreadful confe¬ quences muft enfue, fhould Sir Alfred not return before the day that is already fixed for the nuptials of Paulina with Conftantine. A refufel would involve us all in ruin arid confufion -, or a fcene fo dreadful mult en¬ fue, that but to paufe on the tlvwghc*, makes me lhuddcr with apprehenfion for its confequences." H4 This
This laft argument, together with the irrefiftible perfuafions of both Conftantine and the Lady Ruithvina, had an effe&ual influence j and Rofaline, with much entreaty, was at length prevailed on to yield a reluc¬ tant promife to meet the former at the hour of midnight in the Caftle chapel. Imprint* ing an enraptured kifs upon the fair hand of the much-agitated Rofaline, and gratefully and tenderly thanking her for her condefeen* fion, Conftantine took leave of his deftined bride, as did the Baroneis, who, fainting the clieek of her intended daughter, they each, to avoid fufpicion, departed by feparate en¬ trances i and Rofaline was haftening to do the fame, but, overcome by a variety of fenfations* ihe funk again into her chair, and remained fome ti me bin ied in refledion. For fome mo¬ ments lbe continued in a ftate of total forget¬ fulnefs to all around. The late fcene was new and aftoniihing, and flie fcarcely conceived it real that ftie had ronfenu d to enter, in fo fhort a period, the folemn engagement of a clan- deftine
deftine marriage, unknown to f difapproved by herfelf, and which fhe was well afllired, did the haughty Baron of Caftle¬ nuco know of, he would oppofe widi im¬ placable refentment. €t Heavens!" fhe ejaculated, ftarting as> tt were from herfelf, as the laft refle&ior* paflcd ftrongly over her thoughts, and left $ fearful inipreffion— <€ Heavens !** fhe re¬ peated, C( what have you done, degenerate, imprudent Rofaime ?—You have deftroyed your own happinefs, and forced yourfelf inter a houfe whofe proud, imperious Lord will Ipurn, reject defpife you." Her pride and delicacy were deeply? wounded as thefe humiliating convidion^ occupied her mm t ; and Ijic now bitterly repented the too hafty, inconiiderate acquiefcence (lie had been unueiig.iediy betrayed into; for fie found ihe had' yielded no lefs t» the importunities of Conftantine, than the aifaiiing pleadings of H 5 hur
her own heart, which had, in her own judgment, been faulty and difaffeded, irre¬ folute and unfteady. For now that flie revieweu cac« muc pamon, lenument, and fenflition, fhe found that it was too w r eak to refift the trial, and her attachment too permanent and firm, to view wkh calm refignation the approaching union of the objed of its tendernefs wkh her haughty rival, the Countefs of Othin. But ftill that refined delicacy of mind, which was fo entirely her own, made her condemn the, affent ftie had been almoft compelled to yield to the too tender entreaties of her friends j nor did flie approve, though Ihe could not deny, the neceflity of fo hafty an union, which was this very night to take place. Among the many arguments ufed to obtain her confent by the Baronefs, was the daily expeded return of the Baron from the army ; and
and fhould he arrive before the ceremony was performed, it would be impoffible, or at leaft very hazardous, to attempt its cele¬ bration while he remained in the Caftle; but the approbation, and even earneft en¬ treaties of the Baronets for her compliance with the wifhes of her fon, could not fanftion fuch hafty nuptials, at vvhich neither the Baron nor Sir Alfred had been permitted to have an aflenting voice. It did not juftify her own judgment, nor could it filence that inward monitor,, whofe reproaches fhe felt were merited ; ami though it might now convince her that, in a moment of hafty inconfideration,, fhe had acred wrong, yet was her word given beyond the power of recal, from which honour, love, and grati¬ tude forbade her retreating. Severely upbraiding herfelf for what fhe confidered as a v/<*nt of proper fortitude to refill the weaknefs or a love-plead ing heart, fhe arofe, diHatisfitd with herfelr, to retire from the library; trembling and h 6 agitated.,
agitated, fhe entered the vaulted veftibule, and was purfuing, with quick uneven fteps, her way, when an opening door, which feemed to be moved with caution, made her fearfully turn round; and either her fancy or the darknefs of the paffage deceived her, or flie law a gliding form quickly diiappear through a diftant portal, whofe flowing fable robes almoft convinced her it was the Lady Taulina. This circumftance, in her prefent frame of mind, created fome alarm, left, from her being fo unufually early in a part of the Caftle but little frequented, fhe had made herfelf acquainted with tranfadions meant for no intruding ear to wirnefs. Again fhe deeply condemned herfelf, and bkterly re¬ pented that flie had fuffered any confideration to prevail on her to affent to an event, the impropriety of which flie was now more than ever convinced of; for the fecrecy fo necef- iary to all their fafeties to be obferved, fhe Cuufidered as doubly diflionourable to them¬ felves,
felves, and the facred purity of that ordination fhe was fo fuddenly about to enter upon. Opprefled with a keen fenfe of deep felf-humiliation, flie would have given the world, had it been her*s, to have been re¬ ftored to that inward efteem, which with grief flie felt fhe had deprived herfelf of; nor till this moment had fhe known what bitter fenfations attended that heart which, by one fingle action, one flight neglect of duty to the dictates of reafon and virtue, had refigned the innate principle of an applauding mind, and the bleflingsof an approving confeience. In mental reproof and increafing agita¬ tion the day flowly paffed away $ and as the hours drew towards the crifis of her fate, flie fek a ftrong compunctious difinclination, under fuch unpromifing circumftances, un- blefled by her fether's approbation and enccuraging prefence, and fro-vned upon by the Baron, for an union fo ill omened and unsanctioned. With eyes dejected and bent cn tlic ground, lbe fpent the reft of her time
time in her own apartments, trying, but vainly, to fubdue thefe ufelefs upbraid¬ ings, that fhe might not feem ungrateful to the excek of tendernefs of thofe deareft friends who were fo well difpofed in her behalf, as to give up all for her fecurity and happinefs. Conflantine paffed his time in n very different manner $ —within his mind all was tumultuous joy and anticipating happinefs; in a few hours the loved being ofhis fouPs adoration, the dear objeft of his youthful fancy, would be for ever and indiflblubly his own, beyond the power of worldly tyranny to feparate them j and whilft only fmiling profpefts of happinefs fwam on his dazzled fenfes, and obfcured the light: of reafon, he never once reflected there were fuch powerful opponents to his happi¬ nefs as his fat her, and the de (lined being defigned by him for his future partner. The ftrong affeftions of his heart he felt were too entirely devoted to permit him to facri- fice 5 at the altar of intereft and ambition, the
the avowed objed of tendereft regards j and the difappointment of Paulina, and the even expeded vengeance of the Baron, had not power to raife one fingle emotion of regret or doubt; nor could their united anger, even in thought, difturb the blifsful ferenity ofhis mind. After the timely reicue that Rofaline had found in the exertions of Conftantine, the latter had endured extreme anxiety ; and fhockecl at the danger to which flie had been expofed from the depravity and cruelty of Gondemar, whom as a brother he could not feek to chaftife, and dared not lift his arm againft, he debated how he might in future guard her from his daring attempts, of which there was but too sreat reafon to apprehend the confequences; and the only alternative that olFcred, was the hope of an immediate alliance wiih the Lady Rofeline, which would at once end all future fears, and give him the long defired claim of calling her for ever his own. With couclulions $ fui,h
fuch as thefe, he fought the Baronefs ta infure her influence in his behalf with Rofa¬ line i for well he knew the delicacy of her . mind would never admit of his plea, or confent to his entreaties for a fecret marriage. The Lady Ruithvina heard his perfuafive- .arguments in filent emotion and forrow j fhe fighed deeply at the recollection that (he now had not power voluntarily ro confer happinefs on two beings fo worthy her neareft regards; for, acquainted as (be was. with the favourite projected views of the Baron for the aggrandizement of his family, fhe trembled to thwart, by her confent to the wiihes of her fon, the defigns of his father; and though her heart acknowledged the merits of Rofaline, yet, under fuch forbidden aufptces, her prudence compelled her to oppofe their fecret union. Con¬ ftantine, however, pleaded lb powerfully the ftrength of lus paftion, and the dagger to which the nbjeft of his affedions was expoled* whiift unprotected againft the threatened
' threatened foares of Gondemar, that, toge¬ ther with his determined refolution never to become the hufband of Paulina, and the pleafinginnate fatisfadion ofbeing the means of preferving a being fo every way deferving her tendereft maternal care, fhe at length re* folved to yield to the only method that offered, to give fecurity to the daughter of her friend, md happinefs to her fon. It was therefore fettled that fhe fhould herfelf be prefent at their union on this very night \ and at the hour of midnight they were to meet feparately in the Caftle chapel, where her own chaplain was to perform the ceremony. The laft gleams of the declining fun were impatiently watched by Conftantine as they difappeared \ and each moment brought him nearer the bourn of his eager wifhes. A ftreaky rednefs only bounded the weftern horizon, and Evening began foon to caft her gloomy mantle on the ciofing profpeds of the expiring day. Evening hcrfeif declined gently into tlie thick embraces of N»ght ; a, d each
each bofom that was concerned In the event of the hour of midnight, was varioufly employed in ruminations on the cominw moment, when the flirill horn of the Caftle echoed among its towers, and loudly proclaimed the approach of ftrangers, and excited fome degree of agitation and alarm in the bofoms of the three friends. - i A trampling of many horfes founded on tlie hollow pavement of the courts, and in a few feconds the Baron* with his Knights and attendants entered the Caftle-hal! j Rofaline at the fight breathed freer, and felt relieved, from a heavy weight of confeious upbraid¬ ings. The arrival of the Baron fhe thought fortunate, as it muft undoubtedly poftpone the intended interview and marriage, which if deferred till her father's arrival^ fhe fhould no longer (under his tender approbation) hefitate to give her hand, where her heatx was already pledged by honour as well as love.
Conftantine*
Conftantine, although at firft difconcerted and furprifed at this unexpeded return of the Baron, foon recovered his compofure* and foftly whifpering in the ear of Rofaline— u Remember twelve,' f haflily arofe from her fide to welcome the Baron, and to avoid the denial he faw didated in the looks of his dcftined bride* The Baronefs, not expeding her Lord lb> foon, trembled and looked alarmed, whilft in the countenance of the Baron were dis¬ played ftrong marks of fcrutiny and anger* He foon quitted the Baronefs, and joining Paulina, they continued, apart from the reft of the company prelent, to pace the long aifle of the hall *, and by their geftures, par¬ ticularly thofe of Lady Paulina, the anxious Rofaline thought fhe diftmguifhed, as fire encountered her fupercilious glances, a anile of meaning that feemed to convey an idea of triumph and malice* Glad to efcape froA the painful reftraint £h$
flie laboured under whilft in the prefence of the ftrangers, Rofaline foon took an oppor¬ tunity to retire unperceived to her own apartments, that fhe might compofe her fpirits for the appointed hour, from which all hopes of receding were ended in the entrance of Jannetta, who, In filence, delivering 4 folded paper, fhe read thefe words—
" Be courageous, my adored Rofaline, nor difappoint the hopes of your expeding Coa- ftantine. Remember that he waits with Fathef Bcnedine for your promifed attendance atthe chapd i and as you value his future peace and happinefs, fail not to blefs him with the wiilied-for moment that infures you his for ever. zt cohstahtijse/*
Sim
She laid down the paper with a variety of fenfations too indekribabk to be explained* Her deftiny was then beyond recal; and fince it was not pofllble for her to retrad, flae refolved not to exprefs any outward difap- probation, but to afiume as much compofure as her agitated feelings would admit of The clock, however, chimed the hour of twelve ere flic had reafoned herfelf into fufficient refolution to enable her not to difappoint the expedations fhe had raifed. At length flie arofe, and Jannetta, covering her from head to foot with a thick white veil s (ht tremblingly took the arm of her attendant, and entered the gallery. AU around was folemnly ftill, and the hall below obfcured in total darknefs; fhe, however, thought it neccffary to fcreen the lamp, left fome of the vificors or houfehold of tlie Caftle, not yet retired, might perceive her, and which might raife in their minds dan¬ gerous conjedures to her peace and fame*
Jannetta
Jannetta fhook and trembled with terror as they proceeded through the gallery 5 for the only road fefe from difcovery was down the eaftern corridor, and of neceflity they muft pafs the great portal of the haunted chambers— a trial which only her fincere regard for her Lady could have tempted her to make % for it would have been impoflibie to arrive at the chapel without procuring the keys of the great hall gates from the caftellain—-a cir-* cumftance that muft infallibly have led to a difcovery, or fufpicion no ways honourable to Rofaline, and even dangerous to the caufe for which they were nectflary* The eaftern towers adjoined the Churchy and were only divided from the main build¬ ings by a flight of flairs and a veftibule pi?2za that ran along one fide of the ram- paits. Ihey were haftily proceeding down the corridor,and hadntariy paffed the door of the dreaded chamber, to avoid the fight of which Jannetta had clofed her eyes, when Rofaline, imjelkd by a forgetful curiofity, accidentally
accidentally caft her eyes on the portal, and mghaft fhe viewed its door flowly open, and a face of deadly hue appeared in the half- opened interfpace. For a moment it fixed a ghaftly* appalling frown on the affrighted Rofaline, and vanilhed within the portal, ivhich as inftantly doled with quickncft* Happily for Rofaline, terror had robbed her of all power of fpeech; and fhe was on the point of rufhing back to her own apartments, when fiie obferved that Jannetta had not witnefled the dreadful fpeflacle, whofe well-known horror of fuch appalling circum¬ ftances would have difplayed itfelf on this occafion, and perhaps expofed them both to a difcovery. Affuming, therefore, a kind of defperate courage, flie flew paft the tremen¬ dous door, that by her return flie might not alarm the fears of her attendant; and hurrying down the flairs, funk at length upon the baluftrade, fuming and exhaufted. A diftant approaching light, however, a,oufcJ
aroufed her, and foon after the impatient Conftantine appeared. His cheering voice and re-affuring tendernefs were never more gratefully received, nor ever more needed by the almoft vanquifhed Rofaline, who, r-eitored to a fmall degree of compofure, had refolution to avoid for the prefent informing him of the horrid apparitirn flie had too furely witneffed* Conftantine now fupported her through the veftibule, and paffing beneath a fmall open poller^ they croffed the dormitory, and arrived at the chapel gates in filence, for both were too deeply wrapped in mental engagements for converfe. Excefs of hap¬ pinefs prevented the fpeech of Conftantine, who, though he ufed no language, his eyes overflowed with love and tendernefs un* utterable. Conduced to the foot of the altar, Rofaline bowed meekly to the Father, but trembled
trembled too much to truft her voice to fpeak. He blefTed her, and fiie then anxioufly caft her eyes around. (€ Will not the Baronefs be prefent ?" fhe at length afked, in a low tremulous tone of voice, perceiving her not in the chapel. u Be not alarmed at her abfence/ 1 replied Lord Conftantine; " the fudden, une^peded return of my Lord the Baron might have rendered it dangerous to us all, had me quitted her apartments, and have occafioned fufpi¬ cions that would have proved detrimental to our little fcheme of happinefs.** Rofaline few the neceffity of the RaroneiVs abfence, and acquiefced in its propriety, but could not help feeling herfelf alone and uufupportcd; and not all the attentive ten¬ dernefs and te'pedful aflurances of Con¬ ftantine could ftill the increafing tcirors of her mind, or filence the agitation* of her trembling heart. vox,, ii* i Leaning
leaning on the arm of Jannetta, fhe prepared to receive the folemn vow, and Father Bcnedine began the marriage cere- JVIIf . When he reached that paffage where the neceflary queftions are afked, Conftan¬ tine was anfwering with an enraptured^ elevated toneiathe affirmative, when a fudden glare of light flatbed along the Gothic roof of the Church, which in a moment was filled with feveral people, and a voice from among them loudly exclaimed, in an authoritative tone— i( Defift, I command you, or meet a father's malediction!" The appearance of the Baron put an inflantftop to the nearly concluded ceremony, and Rofaline, whom the late terrors had agitated with extreme alarm, and whofe yielding fpirits had long been on the wing, now funk filently to the earth, infenfible to all around her.
The
approached the altar, and fternly commanded his people to take the fainting Lady St. Ofwythe from the arms of Conftantine, and bear her to her own chamber. The latter did not attempt to withftand the orders of his father j and though anguifh and difappointment inflicted their fliarpeft pangs on his heart, he did not dare oppofe his father's will, who, hiving thus publicly forbidden his nuptials, he knew, had Rofaline been fenfibie, would have been as equally declined by herfelf $ and with deep regret and maddened forrow for her lofs, he was compelled calmly to behold her torn from his arms at the very moment that fliould have made her iudiiiblubly his own ibr ever. The Baron, fixing on Lord Conftantine a calm, determined lojk, fiid—- €i Degenerate boy 1 fiom vou I never expected a conduct fo oppofite to my whncs: 1 2 but
but be allured, fhe who has your hoyifli fancy, and artfully enfimred your affedions, fliall riever be the wife of a fon-of niine. Retire, my Lord, and in private teach your heart obedience to my wifhes, that fo it may atone for this degraded mo¬ ment of folly and weaknefs. My word you well know is pledged for your alliance with the Countefs of Othin ; you will do well to recal your mifguided judgment, and let it sffiire you that no entreaties can induce me to forfeit my honour, or difnnnul my engage¬ ment. You will therefore prepare to receive, within three days, the hand of Paulina, or meet rhe eternal difpleafure of your father by refufal'* " My Lord/* interrupted Conftantine, his eheeKs flowing with the fuflfufrd crimfbn ofhis indignant, but fuppreffed feelings, "you are wdl affured I \rill not diffemble, nor con- de'cer.d to deceive you, when I folemnly declare that no command, either of duty or aftedioi, power or anger, ihall force me to refign ihofe claims to the Lady Rofaline, which
which I have ratified by facred vows ; nor can you hope 1 will bafely recal my plighted faith, to become the huiband of the Lady Paulina, whilft my word, my love, my honour, and my heart are now inviolably engiged to an objed every way her fuperior bnt in the fordid poiTdlions of wealth. Tlie ceremony vvhich you have interrupted, though n->t entirelj confummated, will bv me be held folemn and irrevocable ; and be affured, my Lord, that although I hive patiently }uldedthe fulfilment of my engige- tnent for the prefent, in obedience to your commands, and have calmly iulFered you to deprive me of the injured, the intuited Lady Rofaline, yet do 1 here, in the face of Hea¬ ven, acknowledge ucr my wife,—and in the prefence of yourfelf and this holy Father, fwear never to break to her my plighted affeftions, or permit myfeif to became the hufband of another, on any con fide radon whatever.** Totally regirdlek of the frowns of the i J Baton,
quitted the altar, and punned, with looks of love and pity, the infenfible foim ofhis now more loved than ever Rofaline, as it was borne to her own apartments, where the tender affiduities of Urbandine at length recalled her almoft fleet* ing fpirit, and fhe once more opened for a moment her eyes, but again clofed them. Fained by the fight of Conftantine, and pointing with her linger for his departure, lbe deeply fighed as feebly fhe ejaculated*-* " Leave nie, my Lord, 1 entreat you leave me ! Do not by your prefence kicreafe the painful fenfarions i now eadure. De* graded as 1 am, funk in the eyes of the world, mid loft for ever to you, do not increafe niy too exquifite humiliations b^ )our fight, but quit me for tver, and for* get that fuch a being as Rofaline ever had exigence." i€ Forgr t you !-—Great God, impoflibie f* inipetuoufly exclaimed Conftantine, fnatching her
her hand, which he kiffed, and bathed with his tears, " Oh Rofaline ! ihall not I eliln my own ?—You are my wife, more dear to the heart of your Conftantine than life itfelf! 1 cannot, will not leave you 1" and- he now funk Qn his knees behdc her, and pleaded with tendereft eurneftneb for tlieir immediate departure from the Caftle to fome prefent place of fecurity, where the ceremony might be again repeated, fafe from all interruptions i but Rofaline, already deeply repenting of the part fhe had been betrayed into by the too tender weaknefs of her heart, was re* folved to make ample atonement for the error of her conduct; and with that mild, but determined firmnefs that Conftantine law was not to be moved from its purpofe, fhe refilled ail his entreaties. " I entreat, I conjure you/* flie con¬ tinued, " by the ftrong regard you profcli for your Rolaline, urge her no more on a theme flie never will yield to, whilft oppofed by the interdiction of a too juftly ucenled 1 4 parent,
parent. I liave been wrong, and my dazzled reafon was blinded by a prefumptuous view of unattainable happinefs ; but no perfuafion fliall again tempt me to forget myfeif, or fuffer me to force myfeif on a noble Houfe, whofe head has publicly rejeded me, and forbidden our union. Go now, I conjure you, nor by your ftay increafe the mifery of this prohibited interview V —But he ftill remained, unwilling to depart, and again urged his fuit with all the vehe¬ mence of a tender paffion, and every motive that love itfelf could furnifli, to move her to quit with him that moment the Caftle. Rofaline painfully withftood the ftruggling pleadings of her own heart, and the im- paflloned Amplications of a kneeling lover. The trial was bitter, but duty and a ftrong fmfe of innate reditude at length conquered the perfuafive arguments of love ? and the entreaties of him beloved s and though flie keenly felt the facrifice, flie found it neccf¬ fary to exert herfelf to convince Conftantine of
of the neceffity of their parting, and at he unwillitjgly affented to her argument, and after obtaining a promife that flie would meet him in the library the following evening, (for Conftantine yielded more to the confide ration of the difordered i\,nc of her fpirits, than to a convidion of the real ncceflity of thur parting), he took his leave, and Rofaline was once more left to the entire poffeflion of her own fad thoughts, wdiicii now, liLe a torrent, rufhed to her heart, and fwept before them all oppofing obftrudions. Her fortitude vani (hed with the diiappearar.ee of Conftantine, and a tide of tumuku jus for- row for feveral moment* overwhelmed her; for, as ihe caught thr laft glimpfe of his receding form, ihe reflected, as the tears gufhed from her eyes, that ihe hid (cvn him for the laft rime, and that t.ds a > >mz i.:» interview wah Me only one they fhould ever have, fince the refolved, f^r 1*0 h their take-;, to avoid another lo du.p; roiKs to hcrlur a .d the determined pu p.»i s i! e ..n In ably conceived: there Ior io cicape hi* i >»tc u'''r
importunities in future, fhe meant to return to the Abbey on the fuccecding morning, that flie might no more be expofed to trials dan* gerous to both, and militant againft the lightt of her better reafon. Dejected and unhappy, flie paffed a reftlefi night, and in the morning fent an excufe for her abfence from the faloon, as much to avoid the fight of Conftantine as the unfeeling tri¬ umph of Paulina, to whom, fhe doubted not, was owing the fudden interruption of her nuptials. She fpent the morning in fuch little preparations for her fecret departure as were neccffary, and in writing to the Baron¬ efs, who, flie underftood from Jannetta, was confined to her apartments by a fudden indiipofition. Reiolved to quit the Caftle privately, fhe had for this purpofe com- miflioned Jannetta with inftructions to Row¬ land to attend with horfes at the poftern of the weft ramparts, beneath the terrace that opened among the cliffs.
Of
Of the Baruii and Lady fhe thought it unnecct a y to ake any other leave than a verbal meflage feat after her depar¬ ture j and fince the illnefs of the Lady Ruithvina obliged her to quit her unfeen, flie wrote a few lines expreflive of her gratitude for that lady's protection, and only afligned a reafon for her removal from the Caftle as being indifpenfible and prefling. Having folded this letter, and placed it on the cabinet, fhe fat down fomewhat compofed, from the innate fatisfaction that fhe was acting right, whatever might be the event § and fek a flignt touch of melancholy pleafure at the near profpect of her return to rhe.dear Abbey, and the foon expected meeting of her beloved parent. Evening began to approach, but Jannetta came not, and fhe now grew impatient for the moment of departure, when the door foftly opened; and concluding k to be the fignai for her quieting the Caftle, fhe was haftily throwing her veil over her fhoufders, 1 6 wheL,
when, to her inexpreffible aftonifhment, flie beheld not Jannetta, but the Baron of Urbandine, who, entering the apartment, flowly clofed the door, and advanced tovards the pale and trembling Rofaline, Over¬ powered by various fenfations at the fight of a vifitor fo unexpected, fhe ftood mutely fuf¬ pended between furprife and fear, till a flight degree of innate pride crofling her thoughts, nnd aroufing her refentment, fhe met the fteady ga'ze of the Baron with the confciouf* nefs of injured innocence and recovered felf-efteem j ancl with a tone of command flie could not conquer, fhe coldly demanded to what motive fhe v/as to attribute the honour of fo unexpected an interview. The Baron's countenance appeared clouded with trouble and uneafinefs, as he, with pro¬ found and courteous refpeft, thus began— " I am about to enter on a painfully unwelcome talk," he replied, with an infimi* ating and concerned tone of voice, that aftonifhed
aftoniflied his auditor, who had prepared herfelf for ftern upbraidings and angry lan¬ guage, " Will fhe lovely Lady Rofaline deign to forgive the feififh man whom flie mufl for ever view with juftly excited averfion and hatred, as being the deftroyer (Heaven can witnefs how unwillingly) of her own and his fon*s kticiiy ?" The Baron here paufed ; and, mterly dif¬ concerted and aftonilhed at an addrefs fo unexpeded, Rofaline continued-filent, and knew not how to anfwer, till the Baron fliould further unveil the concealed meaning ofhis words* " Do not, however,** he at length conti¬ nued, " too harihly judge my proceedings i for had my ion earlier made known to me the admirable choice he had made, I never fliould have oppofed his wiihes for an objed of fuch furpafling perfcaion; and it grieves me much to add that, i^aorant of his engagements t*) the Lady St. Oiwythe, 1 had
1 had irrevocably pledged my word to my departed friend for Conftantine's alliance with his daughter, the prefent Countefs of Othin; und although 1 fincerely repent my miftaken precipitancy in this unhappy event, and fhall never ceafe to regret it, yet is my honour given for its fulfilment, beyond my power of recal*' " Nor fhall you needtodo fo 1" fpirl.edly interrupted Rofaline, her face glowing with animated indignation, though her heart con** tradicted tbe e&preftions of her tongue* * € To have been the envied bride of my Lord Conftantine was, I confefs, a pre* fumptuous afpiration \ but know, my Lord, that I have atoned for my error, and have refigned that offered happinefs to the happier Lady Paulina. The defpifed* for¬ gotten Rofahne will never again counteract your defigns, or give you needlefe caufe for groundlefs apprehenfions on her ac¬ count. 1 fhall fhordy quit the Caftie, my Lord $ and with the affurance that, under fuch circumftances, the Lord Conftantine h freed
freed from his engagements to me. 1 pre- fume your Lordfhip is fatisfied with this only promife you can exped from Rofaline ?" <c While I applaud, I cannot but lament: the infurmountable neceflity of fo praife- worthy a determination," replied the Baron, his eyes iparkling with a degree of tri¬ umphant pleafure he could not fupprefs. u Your noble firmnefs," he continued, *' will teach Conftantine that manly fortitude necef- fary for, I confefs, fo difficult and unwelcome a trial, as refigning an objed fo richly de- fervipg his tendereft love, and lo far fur- pafling his hopes. But that I may appear juftified for the unhappinefe I have with deepeft reludance occafioned, and the feem¬ ing violence of my proceedings, allow me to explain what has never yet efcaped my lips in mortal hearing.—Conftantine, though inheritor of this Caftle, its once princely revenue, and extended domains, (a poffeflion fo immenfe, and feemingly inexhauftible, as fhould have given hira the free, undifputed right of following the impulfes of his heart in
in the choice of a partner for life), is, with remorfe and fhame I confefs it, obliged to have rccourfe to the fuperior fortunes of Paulina to amend the ruin ofhis own. Oh Lady Rofaline ! will you not dfteii me when I own to you, and only you, that I, his father, am the caufe of his deftrudion ; my miiguided profufion lu*> nearly robbed him of his birthright. 1 have madly drained the treafury of my fen's wealth of fuch immenfe fums, that only his union with Paulina of Othin can fave him fiom becoming the wretched heir ofhis father's unpardon¬ able follies. To preferve him from a fate fo terrible, and myfeif from the bitter up¬ braidings of having undone my fon, I feek to repair the ruin I have occafioned, in the propofed alliance nf rhe I loufes of Ur¬ bandine and Othin % for without the timely intervention of the latter, the other muft fall, and never would \ furvive the fhame of an o en expoiure. You alone," he continued with increafing fervour, " you alone caa fave nie from ddpair, and bid me
rne revive again to hope. Your interference, my much*wronged Rofaline, can conquer the unyielding refolution of my fon, who has fworn never to receive the only being that can now preferve the towers of Urban* dine from falling into the hands of ftrsngers, and fave a diftraded father from di (grace, difhonour, and irrevocable death." - Rofaline liftened with amazement, anxiety, and intenfe attention to this harangue j and as the Baron paufed, fhe at length ventured hefitatingly to caft her eyes towards his face, which, with concern and aftonifhment, fhe beheld was agonized with extreme emotion, ^nd even tears ftood in his eyes, which as foon as he became fenfibie that fhe had ob- ferved, he daihed away with his fingers, in apparent indignation of fo unmanly a weak¬ nefs. A proof fo feemingly undeniable, and confirming of the fince rity of the Baron's words, impreficd her unfuipeding heart widi aeon*
a convidion of their truth, which at firft, indeed, fhe had fome faint doubts ofi nay, ftie even felt confufed that flie had fuffered her mind to entertain fo unfavourable a pre¬ judice to his real charader, the keennefs of whofe felf-reproaches muft be dreadful, when they could produce fuch ftrong agitations of feeling where fiie fo little expeded to find any - t and though fighing at the certain con¬ vidion that this difcovery removed her ftill further from a hope of Conftantine, flie could not but acknowledge that, on the feore of worldly intereft, the Baron was juftified. Trembling, and with an almoft iu- artieulate tone of voice, that betrayed too tegiWy the ftate of her heart, ibe afked how her aid could in any fhape prove the tneaiii of promoting the defigns oi the Baron, The latter eagerly caught at the offered queftion, and feeing that he had made an impreffion fuitable to his wiili on the pliant heart of his vidim, quickly replied—
"The
ff The important requeft I would make is, indeed, a facrifke that only the know¬ ledge of your exalted virtues could enable me to hope you would comply with. 1 ' He then proceeded to inform her that, as Conftantine had peremptorily refuted tht hand of Paulina, his only expectations of fuccefs rcfted on her recalling publicly that part of the marriage ceremony which had paffed the preceding night, and ftrengthen- ing the aft by voiudtarily binding herfelf with folemn engagements never to receive the hand of Conftantine but with the free permiffion of himfelf "Thus deprived of all hope of an union with yourfelf/* he continued, t€ he will no longer remain obdurate to the claims of Paulina, or the neceilUy of preferviug, by her alliance, the fortunes ofhis I loufe from inevitable ruin/* Rdaline fhudderedat the almoft barbarous propofuion i
propofuion $ not only Hie ftrong and T im* mutable regard fhe fek for Lord Conftan* tine forbade the cruel facrifice, but flie could not help thinking that it was little lefs than tyranny to exact fuch a perform¬ ance, after the open, unfolicited promife flie had given, never to become the bride of her only choice." The Baron, as he narrowly watched the movements of her features, read in her varying countenance the feelings of her heart. He faw he had gone a ftep too lar, and almoft trembled left he fliould have deftroyed his tottering fabric: his heart too, as he viewed the innocent Rofaline, up¬ braided him, He fek that, from a being of fuch exalted fentiments and exquifite deli¬ cacy of thought, he ought to have refted fi tisfied with the voluntary conceffions fhe had already made, and on which he knew he might fifely rely -, but die Baron had other defigns in view, and though juftice demanded fome atonement to the deceived, unfufpecting
unfufpeding creature, he was too deter¬ mined upon the fuccefs ofhis projeds, to be moved by the pity and admiration whieh, in fpite of his n.Uure, he could not help feeling for the vidim defigned to be immo¬ lated at the fhrine of avarice and fordid interefL The flnfn of wounded feelings and indignant pride that he faw mantle over her face, gave an alarm to his hopes ; and dreading the copfcqu' nces that might enfue, fhould he not cfleduady divide her for ever from the impetus* f I area of Conftanrine, who was at this moment, he well knew, impatiently waiting for an interview, he prevented her repayh.g to ms former ucmand by thus continuing— u For myfeif, 1 feel tluxt my indifcretions have rendeicd me beneath a thought, nor have 1 any right to exped you fhould yield to my entreaties, a proof of fuck unex¬ ampled, exulted goouneis. But tha Barop.- eJs/'—-(Roi»diue iiarttd)—-** tf fave her from
the of that otherwife flie is no longer miftrefs of U rbandine——' * " I will do whatever you require !'* haftily and inconfiderately interrupted the generous girl, u 1 will do whatever you require !'* flie again repeated. " To be the humble inftrument of preferving that moft excellent lady from one moment of pain, I would cheerfully refign every profpect of happinefs," * f You will then condefcend, moft gene¬ rous Lady Rofaline,** exclaimed the in¬ wardly triumphing Otho, u to agree in the little ftratagem that muft be practifed, ,-> induce Lord Conftantine to meet us in the chapel ?" " I have already, my Lord, faid it ; Ro¬ faline will never recal her word once given/* fhe rather haughtily replied. iC To give eafe, and fecure happinefs," (fiie laid a full em* phafis on the latter word as fhe fpoke it) ** to the bofom of my friend, I will comply with aay retjutft that will tend to the pro¬ motion of either ,J a u 1 take
u I take you at your word then,** confu* fedly and haftily interrupted the Baron, " and fliall exped you to meet us to-morrow morning at the chapel, when, if after tliis noble facrifice due to the honourable purity of your mind and its exalted virtues, you ftill perfift to rob us of your charming fociety, you fhall be efcorted back to the Abbey, as befits the honour and everlafting gratitude of the Houfe of Urbandine to its generous preferver/' Paufing for a moment, and refpedfully raifing the hand of the deceived Rofaline to his lips, he added, n$ he fixed his eyes in¬ tently on her agitated countenance— " My own difappointment, lovely Lady Rofaline, is Iktle lefs poignant than will be that of Conftantine; forin his wifhed-for union with fuch a being, the dignity ofhis Houfe would have been in my mind amply ennobled, not debafed, had Fate fo ordained it, Oh charm¬ ing Rofaline ! had the flow moving hand of Time
Time not clogged your fate with unrevealed myftery, I could relate a tale that might, perhaps, repay you for the feverity and in- juflJce of this hour of trial—a fecret in which your own, as well as the happinefs of ano* ther being, is deeply invoSveay* The Baron paufed, appeared, much agi¬ tated, then continued— i( There is a man whofe thoughts, heart, and wifties, all centre in Rofaline $ and were he permitted to unveil the fecrets of his bofom, it would difcover only a foul filled with the moft ardent paffion that ever warmed the heart of man for the moft perfect and lovely of her fex." Again the Baron paufed in feeming con¬ fufion. He might, indeed, have fpoken till doomfday without interruption, for the thoughts of Rofaline were fo entirely engaged in painful ruminations, that flie fcarcely heard the words of the Baron, nor did her eyes
eyes oncct move from the floor, where, in deep eipreffive looks of forrow, they were caft.-—The Baron, as if fuddenly imprefled with fome new-created idea, inftantly drop¬ ped the paflive hand of Rofaline, and ear¬ neftly conjured her to remember her engagement, and oblige him by her pre¬ fence at the evening's banquet. Rofaline, rather furprifed at this requeft, raifed her eyes, and encountered the deep mean¬ ing expreflions which were contained in thofe of Otho, who fighed, and refpedfully, but emphatically, bidding her not forget what he had faid, again bowed profoundly, and quitted the apartment. For fome moments the diftrefled yet amazed Rofdine remained in mute fuf¬ penfe and wonder at the unaccountable language and adions of the Baron; nor did the myfterious parts of his fpeech pafs unnoticed. She cndeavouied to interpret them, when the idea fuggefted itfelf that Gon¬ demar had interefted the Baron in behalf vot. II. & of
of his paffion, and that to him the words of the latter alluded ; but it was an nn * welcome fuggeftion, and Ihe difmifled it ancl the fuijedl entirely from her thoughts by an inftanuneous forgetfulnefs: for now the affliding certainty that fhe had with her own mouth foaled her Idling mifery, came with fuch powerful convidion to her mind, that every other confideration gave way to the ovci whelming for row it* recollcdion occafioned. A kind of forlorn hope till this bitter moment had, unknown to herfelf, fupported hir fpirits $ but it was now loft for ever in the extorted promiie Ihe had given, and its every glimmering veftige annihi¬ lated. Pejeded, miferable, and completely wutvlwd, fhe funk upwn a coucn abforbed i, a vjifix ol pafho/ate fonowj Ihe had iciv*jn*ed evuy proijtcl: of happinefs in it:iu ,r *i 3m! nov, hiai i\n. was compelled to confider ComiahLiii«. oniy as a perfon in- uifiacnt to lier fete, ihe felt more than 5 ever
ever how entirely he was poffeffed of her undivided affedions. A fpirit of refentment for unmerited in¬ jury had fupported her, and withheld from outward expreflions the forrow of her heart whilft in the prefence of the Baron: but, left to the folttude of her unreftrained re* fledions, flie no longer was able to fup* prefs the emotions of her foul; and, over¬ come by the excefs of her feelings, and the harafling events of the two preceding evenings, fiie looked, as indeed flie was, the pale, haggard ftatue of melancholy, cure- lef* regret. Jannetta, entering with lights, difturbed the fed current of hrr ideas ; and obfervhg, by the importance pidured in her countenance, that fhe h :d fomething to communicate, flie afked her if Jhe had been able to make; Rowland LuffwHe of her defuvi of ouittinf* the Cattle, waivh foe now lecolkded mud «". 2 Of
of neceflity be poftponed till the dreadful event of the fuccecding day was over. " I have not been able to find him, my Lady," Jannetta replied, u but 1 have juft feen Sir Julian, and he has informed me, my Lady, that die young Baron is this very night to vifit the eaftern chambers of the haunted towers/* C£ Holy Mother T* exclaimed Rofaline, with wildnefs and terror in her countenance ftrongly depictured, u tins nightdid you fay ?" 4 < Yes, indeed, Madam, thu night ; and begging your Ladyihip's fbrgivenefs, but indeed as I knew how alarmed you would be, 1 could not help entreating Sir Julian to peifuadc his Lord, in your name, to give up fuch a fearful undertaking*: but all would nut do, my Lady, for he foon re¬ turned, and be ged me, in tiie name of the young Ikion, to deliver his tendereft ado¬ rations to your L dyihip, and requeft of you to j eniiit him .u two o'clock at mid¬ night, or rau.er the next morning, to fee you
you in your own apartments on his return from the haunted ones, which, from their near connedion with each other, he might eafily pds to, undifeovered, ac che hour ap- pointed," Rofaline now, remembering the terrnc fpedacle fhe had witneffed the preceding night, became almoft diftraded with her fears of the dreadful confequences that might tnCnt from fo rafh and daring aa enterprife. Ten thoufand fearful apprehenfi- ons rufhed on her mind, and fhe beheld i x mental vifion her Conftantine expofed to ghaftly, horrible fights that might appal Reafon herfelf Forgetful of the ntcefiky of avoiding an interview with Conftantine, and anxious if pofllble to prevent his* entering places that flie had an inllindive fore¬ boding ol their containing fome fpell-fraught fatality, fhe refolved if pofllble to fee and caution him againft the p.efentiment of rhe dangerous evih flie (dty and the convicted k 3 certainty
certainty of what fhe had witneffed, She not only difmifled Jannetta with a ready affent to his vifit, ; which flie confidered that by granting, flic fliould withdraw him the ear¬ lier from thefe regions of fupernatural vi¬ fitation) j but flie prepared herfelf to attend the banquet, hoping that fome fortunate chance might enable her to prevent en¬ tirely his too venturefome enterprife. With fpirits deprefled, and agitated with contending ftruggles, flie defcended &> the hall. The Baronefs was prefent, andi their meeting, though affectionate, was reftrained and confined; for the Lady Paulina and the Baron being in the hall, prevented them from communicating what both fo ardently defired. The pale looks of Lady Ruithvina were a fufficient tcftimony of her indifpofi- tkn, which vere not a iictle increafed as her eyes wtie often folemnly turneo during the repaft upon lier fun, whofe bold defign ihe viewed with under glances of reproach, and maternal dread of its confequences, Rofaline
Rofaline in vain fought for a opportunity to put in force her defign, She found that her every adion, look, and move¬ ment were fo thoroughly watched, as well as were Conftantine's by his father nnd Paulina, that no chance prefented itfelf of accompliChing her wiihes. As often, how¬ ever, as the eyes of Conftantine were bent on herfelf, (lie beheld with furprife amore than ufiul glow of animated joy and ten¬ dernefs, for which fhe was unable to ac¬ count, unlefs it proceeded from tlie hopes he entertained of the fuccrfi of their inter* view j a circumftance painfully agonizing t:> remember, fince fhe too well knew her fatal promife had placed an impaffible gulph to the fruitlef* attempts he might make to overcome tint 1 nmutaufe d joui flie had fo fuddeuly fe* led for the cefiiac¬ tion of the happiness of txnrn Tears of anguifh and r ptati »r for.ow, In fpite of hir eJ%u^ to iupptJ\ the.n, would force themftives from her iu : z k. 4 as
as thefe melancholy retrofpedions paffecl rapidly through her thoughts^ and the fight of Conftantine ogain caufed a re¬ newal of thofe tender, endearing fentiments which, in the innocent purity of her fpot- k fs mind, flie had fo entirely fek for a being fo every way deferving her warmeft affedions; but which fhe had now tried, though ineffedually, to fubdue: and to the forrows of her heart was now added a yet feverer pang in the contrition flie felt for her too great precipitancy in yielding her aflent to an extorted promife. Little did the injuied, deluded Rofaline think that the tale of the Baron to excite her companion, was a cold-blooded, unfeel* ing forgery, invented for the cruel purpofe of betraying hcrfeif to her own deftrudion, tk-ftroving forever the happinefs of his fon, from whofe peremptory refiftance the Baron knew well he iiad nothing to hope but a continued oppofition fiom Conftantine^ fiom whofe noble-minded rectitude of foul and
and large pofTefiions he had no chance of obedience to his tyrannical decrees, in a point fo interefting to his future happinefs. The politic Baron, however, knew how to diifemble, and he refolved to obtain his wifhes. He at length (pietending to be convinced of the juft nefs of Conftantine's arguments in favour of this defired union with Lady Rofaline), yielded, after much entreaty and perfuafion, a flow, unwilling confent that, if fhe herfelf made no ob¬ jection, his own concurrence fliould be granted. The Baron might perhaps have trembled for the danger of fuch a meafure, fo feem¬ ingly annihilating to his drfigns, had he nut known the open, unfufpedin 5 generofity of Rofaline was a fufficient finety for tlie fuc¬ cefs of his plan : and h-ivv fortunate his cruel politics have been in fubverting t.'.e mind and adions of that innocent girl to his rclentlefs purpofes, has already been iem. K S Nothing
Nothing remained then for the entire com¬ pletion of his defigns, but to prevent if poffible a private meeting cf the lovers, whicli, were it to take place, might lead to explanations unqueftionably deftruftive of his fine-fpim web of mifery, woven for the ruin of two amiable beings, the intended victims of a golden facrifice to unpkying pride and avaricious ambition. He propofed rather peremptorily the iblving of the myftery of the eaftern tow¬ ers; and thus, by depriving them of a dreaded interview, he hoped for ever to end his fears, and triumph in the fuccefs of thofe deep-laid plans for the aggrandize¬ ment of his Houfe, which not even the lafting mifery he was preparing for his fon could induce him to forego the completion of. Conftantine had f arlcfsly acceded to the wiihes of the Baron; and when the hour of his retirement arrived, he arofe to quit the hail, 1 he Baronefs faintly ejaculated--*" Hea¬ ven
ven guard my fon!" and funk her feat; whilft the inward agonies of 1\ ofahne, as fhe caught his laft look, were little ihort of diftradion, fince with his difappearance from the hall, all poflibility of fpeaking to him in private, that flie might warn him of his danger, was entirely at an end. It was not till fome time after his de¬ parture, that fhe was permitted to retire; for the Baron, as if by def gn, held her in converfe'till the hour of midnight, when flie then feized a paufe in the converfition to leave the banquet table, and retire for the night. As flie arrived, with trembling fteps, at the laft flair of the corridor, fhe held her lamp in a diredion to the eaftern chambers j but the immenfe fpuce of the lofty hall, and the feebiendi of her taper permitted her to obtain only an obfcured imperfect view of the Gothic portal of their entrancei and fhuddering wkh horror k 6 at
at what witneffed, and what its too courageous inmate might have to encounter, fhe fervently addrefled a prayer for the fafety of him who was the fole object of her waking care, and vifionary dreaming fancies. Once more, and for the laft time fhe hoped, ftie entered her own chamber, where Jannetta had already arrived. She bade the latter take pofleffion of her bed, being herfelf refolved to watch in the antichamber for tlie anxioufly defired entrance of Con¬ ftantine -, and placing herfelf upon a gilc leathern fofa in this apartment, fhe endea¬ voured, though vainly, to compofe her agi¬ tated fpirits, which to divert, fhe had recourfc to a volume of favourite poems -, but her eye paffed unconfeioufly over the pages, and her thoughts v^ere too much abibracd in nearer concerns to allow her to attend to the fub¬ jeft fhe was perufing. Often did fhe ftart convulfively wkh fear^ hope,
hope, and expectation as the cracking of the wainfcot founded hollow through the ftili- nefs of the nipht, and frequently did flie liften with anxious attention to the fighing of the wind as it whittled through the galleries, and even concluded them to be the approach of footfteps along the paflages, that led from the fecret entry of her clofct to the eaft chambers, At length, however, tired Nature, over* come with excels of watchings and diftratb- ing cares, would aflfert her claims; and iu fpite of her eiforts to the contrary, or of the bowlines of the temped, and the awfully rebounding thunders, Iier faculties were completely overpowered: (lie funk re* fiCllels upon the arm of the couch, and a heavy perturbed Dumber imprilbned her fenfes, whieh pit fenced nothing but images of horror to her difordered iancv.
CHAP
fttmm fmi fm mmtmmmmmimrmam^^
CHAP. V. M 0 d'.rv Ambition ! whit infernal power " Unduiln'dl tlwe from thy native depth of hell, * { To iblk the earth v, ith thy definitive uaU), ** Morder and Luft! to wa(!e domefiic peace, ^^/nd csvery htaitfelt jv>y t** BRuWNE. CoNSTANTINE, as he quitted the hall, recalled to his mind the anguifh he had, during the hour of banquet, obferved in the countenance of his lovely Rofaline \ he had alio marked ihe variation of her features, which feemed at times to exprefs a tender reproach for the boldnefs of his defign -, and once he even perceived the tear
tear ftart to her eye, which, when flie he had noticed, fhe ftruggled to fupprefs; and the pale faintnefs that he diftinguifhed in her countenance, almoft refolved him to abandon to fome future opportunity, when fhe would have no fufpicion of his defign, the enterprife he had engaged m-, for to her fears of its confequences he alone attri¬ buted the ftrong expreflions of anguifh he had witndfed in her whole behaviour dur¬ ing the late repaft. But his dread of exciting the ridicule of the Baron conquered this momentary hefita¬ tion of love's alarms ; and taking the lamp from one ofthe trembling attendants th ic ftood waiting in the hall, he purfued \m~ *oumtedly his wjy to the eaftern towers. Afcending the flairs, he crofled the wind¬ ing corridor, and entered upon the t\vft vault¬ ed angle of the gallery, which led to the fo much dreaded portal.
From
From what uncommon caufe Conftan¬ tine knew not, (for he was incapable of per- fonal fear), but as he reached the door, a fudden fp^fm feized with benumbing cold* nefs his heart, and the quick pulfation of its movements for fome inftants entirely ceafedj he felt it was not fear, but the fenfation was new, and never before ex¬ perienced, For a moment he flightly fek himfelf overcome by a fuperftiiioiis kind of awe that, like the throbbings of fome in¬ ward monitor, feemed to forbid his entering thefe defolated chambers ; but after a ftiorc debate with his reafon and his courage, he fhook off the enfeebling prefentiment of evil, afliamed of having yielded to a momentary alarm, fo weak and unfounded. Drawing his fword, he inwardly ejaculated— * c Wherefore fliould 1 yield to fuch idle apprehenfions? Am 1 not in the handsof one who can make my ftrength proportionate to any trial he fhall think proper to ordain me ?— If
If indeed there be a myftery contained in thefe old chambers, it is for the honour of my father's houfe tliat I fearch into its caufe, and refcue his name from thofe difioyal fufpicions and doubts it might elfe be involved in, fliould thefe alarming occurrences be pafled without a due inveftigation. Convinced of the rectitude of my intentions, I will proceed cheerfully in the enterprife, remembering that he who fuffers not the fparrow's fall without his fpe- cial leave, will alfo guard me in the moment of peril, fliould any really arrive, in which I need a more powerful aid than this good fword for my defence. " Re-animated by the foregoing reflections, he approached the Gothic portal, and regard¬ lefs of the thunders that ibook the towers of the Caftle, fixed the key within its rufty holds, and with fome litde exertion turned it in its wards, when the door fljwly grat¬ ing on its hinges, difplayed the glooms of the cliamber within, whofe murky and even
even terrific afpcA feemed to frown upon the bold intruder. The firft, and the one beyond it, as he ex¬ amined thefe defoiate ruined apanments* were fpacious, lofty, and extenfive s fome parti of their walls were lined with dark oaken wainfcot panels, whilft others retained only here and there the pieces of tattered arras which hung in difgufting fragments againft the bare walls j-»the floors were co¬ vered with a thick incruftation of damps and duft, mildewed to a hard fubftance, which rendered it flippery, and dangerous for the feet to tread upon. A few remnants of antique furniture were placed in tht receffes, and the win¬ dows were nearly ftripped of the fmall girt cafements, whofe open embrafures admitced the fulphureous flafhes of lightning which at flow intervals darted along the atmofphere, and difcovered the angry afpeft of the low¬ ering clouds, Conftantine's
Conftantine's fpirits felt the effed of this gloomy fcene; and in defiance ofhis courage, the univerfal ftillnefsand folemnity that reign¬ ed within, chilled him with feniations never known before. Shuddering, he fcarce knew wherefore, he croffed another chamber in like defolation and ruin with the former. Having here found litrle to engage attention, he proceeded toau oppofirc door, which ftood half open, and after a little hefication, entered what appeared to have once been a ftate bed¬ chamber i but its freezing dampnefs ftruck coldly to the heart of Conftantine, whilft its decaying dilapidated ftate, its fhattered and crumbling furniture, together with the nar¬ row pointed vaulted cafements, the many recefles of the walk, with here and there a dark broken ftatue ftarting from tlie gloom, and adding for a moment almoft living images of horror to the fcene, feemed to poiiK it out as a place well calculated to conjure up appalling idea* of dreaaful deeds tiiat, here performed, ihunned the fearch of fcrutiny ; for, remote, and even detached from uie
the more inhabited fides of the Caftle, k feemed a place but too well calculated for ads bold and terrific, The fmall high win¬ dows were fecured from all accels by croft bars of iron, that reached from the cei¬ ling of the chamber co the floor, and ktm- ed the only emblems of ftrength that were capable of refinance. * c In this very apartment, 1 ' mentally ejacu¬ lated Conftantine, ct recorded hiftory relate* Duke Robert was confined, and in this place of gloomy fecurity was, according to ancient belief, murdered!' 1 He ftarted at the thought} and as he fighed over the fate of the unfortunate Prince, fancied his figh was re-echoed, and for a rnomem he liftened in mute fufpended atten¬ tion, almoft expeding to have his mental sllufion confirmed by a repetition * but all was filent as deach, and he concluded that it was the defolate forlornnefs of the place that had raifed imaginary fantaiies. Approach*
Approaching the heavy canopied bed. and holding his lamp ftill nearer to its decaying grandeur, he was furprifed to find tliat it was by no means in a correfponding ftate of ruin with the other parts of the room. He knew that this very apartment had been the ftate bedchamber of King Richard the Second, who, after his deposition from the throne, had been here honourably enter¬ tained in his confinei^ent, till his removal to Pomfret Cftle was fallowed by his death and ftrongly fufpe&ed murder. The arms of that unfortunate Monarch, which were placed above the cornice of the canopy, ftrongly confirmed the account of his once inhabit* ing thefe now ruined apartments. The hangings and drapery of the bed were of dark green velvet, lined with a dingy coloured latin that once had been white, and edged with a deep fringe of gold lace 5 the defcending curtains were drawn afulc,
afide, and confined cords of tarniftred go!d, hung in irregular feftoons$ the bed itfelf was covered with what had once been a richly embroidered white velvet coverlid, but the bright beauties of its varied colours were now entirely deftroyed, and duft, age, and mildew had nearly reduced it to difgufting tatters. For fome time Conftantine ftood contem¬ plating this wreck of majefty, and remained deeply engaged in the meditations it occafi- onet | t —« Once/* he reflected, «' thefe now defoiate ruins were the fcene of beauty and pleafing tumult; they have glittered in the funfhine of profperity, and, like their laft inhabitant, ftione bright in the glare of regal pomp and greatnefsj though now it too plainly appears that, with the fening of their princely tnafter*s glories, the zenith of their once proud fuperiority has alio expired, and they are now the melancholy fad remnants of his rimed kite. Alas! how fallen! Where now is the movirg Ipring that gave life and anima¬ tion
tion to all around,—-where the bufy tribe of attending courtiers that here awaited the nod of a once illuftrious Monarch? Alas! like their ill-fated mafter, they have perifhed all beneath the fell deftroyer of nature, whilft here are only the laft mouldering remains of his diminiflied fpiendour, and a fcene of terror, defolation, and wildnefe have fucceed¬ ed to its once happy day of unrivalled mag¬ nificence ! *' How tranfitory and fhort-lived are all the pleafures of this life, and what a true pidure of its varied and mutable hiftory is pre¬ fented, in thefe forlorn and dreary cham¬ bers, of the fate of nian—who, in the fum- mer of his palling days, towers in all the luxuriant pride of Lardy manhood and vi¬ gorous adivicy ± but when the relentkfs foe of nature claims his dcftined prey, and grap¬ ples him in the marble jaws of the grave, ah! how quickly dots he decay, and in a fhort time nought remains of his former vigour and fuperiority but the filcn; uuft, for ever inanimate, anil in a little period for ever tu- gotten!" Conftantine
Conftantine found that thefe melancholy fcenes excited reflections rather oppofite to the courage neceflary for the occafion ; and to divert his thoughts, he quitted the couch, nnd proceeded in his examination of the room, not one quarter of which he was able to diftinguifh beyond the faint illumi¬ nations of his lamp -, whilft every other part remained buried in the deepeft fhades of darknefs, and mifty gloomy vapour increafed the dreary horrors of all around. Some antique remnants of furniture leaned their heavy frames for fupport againft the walls of the recefles, and near the black marble fire-place ftood a once richly embofled table $ clofeiy adjoining it was plac¬ ed a high-backed chair of flate, whofe heavy cumbrous frame was covered with maffy gilt ornaments, and inlaid with an embroidery of green velvet, though now moth*eaten and enveloped in a flimy coat of duft, decay, and mildew. It flood in a pofition that feemed
feemed to declare it had never been moved from the exact Ration that it had been kft in by the laft foiitary inhabitant of this nov/ gloomy chamber The dark green velvet curtains that hung in fragments againft the broken cafements, were agitated by the wind which whiftled moanfully among the bat¬ tlements of the towers, and forced its way into the interior ofthe fabric. One of thefe faft decaying remnants was left half drawn afide -, and the window bein^ lower and larger than the' others, Conftan¬ tine made a ladder of the crofs iron grat¬ ings that extended to the ground, and climbing to the top of the window fpace, had a faint view of the fky and the dif* tant profpect bounded by the foreft tops and the fteeps of the northern moun¬ tains. The ftorm feemed to increafe, and though the thunder founded only at flow and lengthened intervals, the lightnings vol. ii. u fue*
fucceeded each other in quick and brilli¬ ant flafhes, which, as they fhot athwart the tf-owning atmofphere, enlightened for a mo¬ ment the pitchy darknefs of the furrounding fc ne. Conftantine continued for fome time in tliis fituation -, for he felt that a fight of the warring elements wns a kind of in¬ terruption to the deathlike folemnity of the 'Yccne within, vvhich, at times, he could not help thinking, was well calculated to infpire ideas, if not realities, of its being the re- fort of fupernatural agency* There was an air of terror, defolation, and gloom fo ftrong¬ ly dtrpidured around, that, fpite of his cou¬ rage, he could not prevent the Healing awe which die place inlpircd in his mind : and he continued watching the irregular and grand difpUy of the forked and blazing luminaries of the heavens, as they darted through the deepened mills of night, and Jiftening to the hollow fighings of the wind, as at intervals it fwept along the trees of the foreft, and gathered itfelf in echoing blaib
around the turrets of the af¬ fording a foiitary amufement from the contemplations of thofe interior objects, whofe melancholy afpects conveyed an un- pleafing profpect of comfortkfs ruin and defolation. * While thus engaged in viewing the bat¬ tle of the elements, he was ftartled from his occupation by the faint echoes of a noife like the ciofing of a door, which founded as if it proceeded from the rooms beneath. For fome time he remained in fufpenfe as to the caufe of it, till he concluded that it was perhaps the wind which, being now tremendous, had forced itfelf through fome hollow inlet, and blown to the door of fome diftant room* that had been left open in the chambers below, the examination of which he intended to enter upon the fuccecding day. Satisfied with this very poffible conclu¬ fion, he fuffered not his mind to receive 1* a alarm
alarm from a circumftance fo eaGly recon¬ ciled j and having clofed the door of the chamber as well as the want of lock or bolts would permit (for the latter appeared as if they had been wrenched from their holds by fome violent rreans), he plrced a fmall pirce of furniture againft it, to pre¬ vent its being blown backwards and for- v.rrdstby the wind, and recroffing the room, I egan to learch the walls, to fee if in any of their teeeffes there were any concealed di- virions he had not yet difcovered; when, holding the hght beneath a heavy vaulted arch, he perceived a cabinet of ebony, curioufly enwrought with ivory and golden fretwork, and fupported by maffy oaken pillars of antique workmanfhip. The key ftill remaining, induced Con¬ ftantine to turn it in its rufty wards, which with fome difficulty he effected, and the fmall folding doors opening, difcovered fe¬ veral drawers and inner compartments 5 when accidentally touching a fmall piece of
of iron, which was a preff- ed it forcibly, and the lid of the cabinet unfaftening, he found it was defigned for a fhallow deception of the well that it concealed, and whkh only a fortunate chance could have discovered. Feeling his curiofity excited, he deter¬ mined to purfue its gratification; u for at leaft,' 1 he refleded, " here may be fomething to challenge fcrudny, and any thing, how¬ ever trivial, that aroufes the attention of the mind from the unpleafing fenfations thefe melancholy chambers, and their forlorn and dreary afped occafion, is juftifiable.** Proceeding in his examinations, he found the interior of the cabinet was lined witb crimfon velvet, and paned with inlayers of looking-glafs beneath a frame of ivory raif¬ ed fculpture, embofled with gold and filver. The whole ot the interior appeared in high preservation, M\d but little injured by time 11 m
or mildew. Preffing his hand tipon a Aiding panel, it gave way, and he difcovered another well, in which with aftonilhrnent he beheld feveral precious ornaments, jewels. and valuables; but looking ftill further, he found a fmall bundle of papers, which holding nearer to the light, difplayed on the outward envelope ieveral legibly written characters* His curiofity thus ftrongly engaged to know their content?, he proceeded no fur* ther in the examination of the cabinet, but ciofing it, haftily took poiTefiion of the great high backed chair, and drawing it ftill ncaier the lamp, which he retrimmed,, he broke the faftenings of the outward envelope, and unfolding the firft paper it prefented, pcrufcd, with horror and aftonifli¬ ment, the dark-meailing contents. Starting with amassed fufpenfe, he exclaim¬ ed, " Great God! what myfterious words are here!'*—Wiih eager attention he devoured
devoured with his eyes feveral different parts of iht manufcriptj then paufed to think on what he faw, and wonder if it was poffible that what he read was true; for with grief and indignation he perceived written, in evident certainty, the names of beings whofe pofleffors made w him trem¬ ble at their guilt, and even doubt the exiftence of the reality of what he few. The firft feniations ofhis aftonifhment fub¬ fiding at the dark dilcovery a few lines had made, now induced him to begin re¬ gularly the perufai of this record of myf* tery and dreadful fuffering j and as he proceeded ftill further in his occupation, exclamations of horror and difguft re¬ peatedly burft from his lips, and fo deeply and entirely was his attention engaged, that he forgot the melancholy of his gloomy fituation, and even his appointment with his loved Rofaline; nor could the fullen and almoft difmal notes of the Caftle clock, which fuccefiivcly fit tick the hours of twelve, one, and tv.o, aioufe him to i- 4 the
the remembrnce of his earneftly requcfted interview, v aich fliould have taken place at the hour jf appointment. Neither did he hear the diftant founds of a noife that foon after difturbed the fo¬ lemn ftillnefs of all around, nor did he fee the terrific opening of the floor, that in a diftant corner of the dreary chamber gave way, and admitted a figure which, as it approached, fixed its eyes full upon the deeply engaged Conftantine for fome few moments -, who was not difturbed till the fud¬ den removal of his fword from the table whereon he had placed it: but he now found it prefented to his own breaft, whilft a voice, awfully breaking upon the ftillnefs, of night, pronounced, in direful and deadly JOUiUib.— " TREMBLE !" The well-remembered tones and neves- to be forgotten expreflion were again, for the fecond time repeated, and ap* palled the heart of Conftantine. They aroufed
aroufed him indeed as a of death, to living ads of horror a ad amazement j and flowly raifing his eyes* with thoughts that but too well feemed to have anticipated his fate, he beheld no fpedre, but a being whofe dark intents were far more dreadful than all* that the imagery of fupernatural vifion could conceive, for they were fixed on the terrific countenance ©fa brother, in whofe ftern, unrelenting fea¬ tures he plainly read hi$> deftiny. The natural firmnefs of his heart, how¬ ever, did not defert him ; and he was rifing with feeming outvmrd compofure, whea Gondemar ( for k was himfelf), prefenting the fword of his brother to the heart of its mafter, ftowiy pronounced, in a voice,, whofe accents mi&ht have frozen the life's blood of the ftouteft heart— " Stir not! fpeak not! attempt not re* make the flighteft noife or movement from tliis place, for know my hour of triumph, l 5 is.
is at length arrived, and never—no* neves fliall you pafs the bourn of thefe cham* bers living!" Horror and defpair in an inftant feized the foul of the noble Conftantine j he faw his doom was indeed inevitable, and not the fainteft glimmer of a hope was left him. He had not a fingle weapon of defence ; for the oniy one he had armed himfelf with, was in the hands of his deadly foe, and levelled at his own defencelefs breaft 5 whilft at a fmall tliftance ftood die grim-vifaged attendant of his demoniac mafter, who was armed with a bow and barbed arrow, too- fecurely guarded to make refiftance in their victim even poffible* : In his now dreadful brother he beheld the direful enemy fo often avowedly threat¬ ened him ; and in his favage companion, the executioner of his employer's murder¬ ous defigns. Loft beyond all hope, he threw himfelf calmly into the chair, and refolved to
to meet a death he was fatally convinced there was for him no means to efcape, fince in the looks and words of Caftlenuco he perceived that indeed he never fhould pafe alive the portal of die prifon. Gondemar viewed the fudden changes that blanched the cheeks of his vidim with a look of gloomy, favage triumph; whilft the fierce, determined glances of deep revenge that fhot from his eyes, declared the horrid purpofes of his foul, as thus he continued—" That my vengeance may be complete, and my foul feaftcd with the joyful fight of your tortures, I will for a few moments fufpend the deed of re¬ venge, while I ring in your ears the makdidions of Gondemar, for thofe wrongs* diat now draw a juft retaliation on the deftroyer of his happinefs, and for which the retributive arm of Death can only make a juft atonement. The hour of thy fate is arrived ^ and when it ihall have paffed \\\i\\ ihy fpirit the confines of a nether world* l 6 oa
on whofe dread fhores thy unquiet ghoffi ihall feek for its return, to view the objects, when living, it had regarded—then, in the an¬ guifli of its fufferings. feek thou not Gon^ demar to trouble with remorfe of confeience for the deed his juftice and his injuries compelled him to inflict? but rather turn thy pale and angry fliade to them that taught thee to be the rival of a brother, who, though thy elder, was fcorned, for¬ gotten, and infulted by the outfhining^ greatnefs of a younger fon, for whofe late coming I was no longer looked on witb a father's eye of care and tendernefs, but thrown, like a cafl>off, to herd among the commoner things, that were unworthy his notice, and no further remembered as a creature really in exiftence: whilft on Conftantine was laviflied the treafure of his mother's love and hk father's proudeft ap¬ probation j—liis word was law, and his will was fate i nor could the winged arrow, that fpins through the airy immeaforable fpace ofheaven's concave, be more fudden hi its rebound, or fpeedier
its return to earth again, than was the fwift certainty with which the wiihes and dcfires of Urbandine were executed. In an uncontrouled plenitude of power you revelled without a check, whilft I was neg- leded, fcorned, and confidered only as a cipher in the houfe of my father—in the houfe of that father who, till thy accurfed birth, had loved me with a paternal regard that never had been annihilated but for thee. The faults of my youth were, from the moment that Nature gave thee being, enumerated to crimes -, whilft thine were never noticed but as the exuberant confe- cjuences of an heir fb proudly gifted with the inheritance of Fortune*s largeft treafures. From the days of infancy I detefted thee, for thou wert the bane of my laudable ambition, and bnt for thy exiftence, the towers of lofty Urbandine had owned Caftle¬ nuco for their future Lord j and when, fome few years fince, I liy icorching in the flames that confumed the chamber where I flept, I had been buried :n the general wreck of 3 diat
that mornent, not a menial me from deftrudion ; whilft my father's younger* fon was triumphantly refcued by the arms fliewn thee; and whilft to thee each voice^ each eye, each knee of Urbandine were taught to bend fobmiflive before its heir,. the fon of Otho, his eldeft fon, was re¬ jeded and defpifed, and the flave that dared' oppofe his will, and thwart his wifhes, efcaped his vengeance, and lived fecure, becaufe proteded from his juft chaftifement by a. power none dared to withftand. You info* lently prefumed to ftand between me and the wretch that had infulted me; you fnatched from merited punifliment the objeft of my juft indignation, and proteded him with fa¬ vour in fpite of me ; you were the proud imperious inheritor of Urbandine, and that title was confidered a fufficient excufe for the injuries you dared to inflid on an elder brother.
u |^ T 0W
* ( Now and tremble. you refted fatisfied with thefe triumphs, this hour of retribution had been delayed, and your life even in this moment been preferved; hm» inflated with your infolently obtained Superiority over Caftlenuco, you dared to crofs his very willies, and blaft the harveft of his piomifed joys. Wretch I does not thy foul Ihrink to remember that thy arrogant interference fnatched from my arms the ob¬ jed of my purfuits in the very moment that Fate had given her to my embraces? Haft thou foigotthe foreft of St. Ofwythe* or the threatened vengeance I fwore to exe¬ cute, or couldlt thou dare to hope that the foul of Gondemar, fmarting under the pangs of that accurfed moment, would fail to find means to avenge the injuries of his in¬ fringed rights ? But for thee, the heirefs of Othin hau been mine j and had ft thou nevee known exiftence, tbe foul-enflaving Rofaline had ere this given me perfed happinefs. Hope then is vain, for Gondemar bids thee defpair -, his day of retributive vengeance is arrived.,
arrived, and thou mufk ! 1 fwonv by every attribute of heaven, earth, and hell, thou fhouldft not longer foil my rifing pro* fheds *. thvfelf hafl wrnnohf thp nun *hat awaits riiee—thyfelf haft aroufed the too long numbering embers of my eariieft hatred, and nerved my arms with the weapons of death,. that now with retaliating juftice are hurled upon thee."—Here he made a defpcrate aim> at his vidim* u Yet ftay one moment/* cried Conftan* tine,putting afide with his hand thcdeadly level- ted inftrument of death, c< and hear me folemnly declare, I never—no, never injured thee !** ** Ah! never injured me!" interrupted Gondemar, flafhes of fury darting from his eyes as he repeated, * c not injured me 1** °I never injured thee/' continued Conftan** tine with unyielding firmnefs, difregarding the interruption, " Heaven is my wicnefs, never! And as 1 fhall anfwer it at my lateft account, 1 here folemnly appeal to God himfelf, who knows the fecrets of all hearts, and at his lateft hour fhall judge between us, whether 1 Miily fpeak or not. I fee," he calmly con- tinittdj
tinued, «' I fee my fate determined in your countenance $ and though death is now at hand, yet fufpend the blow a few moments, and I am then prepared.'*-— Paufmga moment, he thus continued, ** That was jborn the heir of Urbandine, was the will ! cf deft rny and nature, and furely cannot be a crime in me •> but that I never attempted either in thought, word, or a6tion to ali¬ enate the afife&ions of our mutual parent irom yomfdi], is a trmh which heaven and your own hearc can truly tcftify. To proteft the innocent and the opprefted is a duty to mankind which no tie, no alliance, however sear in birthj or Wood can warrant the negleft of Had the object you fought to. ruin, agreed to your wiihes with a free conieiu, I had not now been the preferver of an innocenr, nor excited the unmerited anger of a brother, whofe name but Lr my interference had been ftained with a crime, that would have dishonoured hu riung greatnefe, and, atthe UiQtnenc of calm reiledtion, inflicted pangs of
of repentant forrow and contrition never to be recalled. You fay it is a crime to have refcued Rofaline St, Ofwythe from intended deftrudion. To this I have only to anfwer, flie was, and now is the betrothed wife of your brother ; and were a thoufand lives the facrifice, and my own the price of all, again I would attempt to preferve her (if free ) from a fliamelefi, impotent oppreflion.** *' infolent boy, behold thy death!" furi¬ oufiy interrupted Gondemar, drawing a fhort dagger from the cafe of his belt. 14 Yet hold thy defperate deed P' criedCon^ ftantine, catching the arm of the gloomy mur«* derer. " Oh Gondemar I think, i conjure you think, refled one inftant on the horrid crime you meditate, and ere you pollute, with facri- legious guilt, heaven*s great commandments* Oh paufe again, and iu that little fpace of time, remember what lafting horror, and remorfe of confeience await the accurfed ad.'*~He paufed a moment i then laying his hand upon the bread of Gondemar,. added
added with folemn emphafis— <f Are there no calls of nature here, no compundious cries tha: fpeak aloud, and bid you hold your dreadful purpofe ? Does not an inward voice command you to tiefift ? Does it not fay, f Slay not thy brother ?** u Brother!"* repeated Gondemar with a ferocious glance of hedic paffion caft upon Conftantine, as he threw off the arm of the defpatring youth, u brother!" he again re¬ peated, " tlie namel know not; 'tis hated and accurfed i for hadft thou been any thing but what thou art, this hour had never arrived: but that 1 may doubly avenge my wrongs, in- creafe the pangs of thy lateft figh, and render every dying groan more agonizing, know that Rofaline is in my power—thisnighcl triumph!" " Oh God ! Oh God r wildly ejaculated Conftantine, iaifing his hands in fupplication to heaven.'* Gondemar continued—>" This night gives her to my arms beyond the ladi of mortal aid ; this night at once gives me pof¬ feflion of the hcirfhip of Urbandine atid love, and amply atones for a too long delayed
delayed vengeance !" And again he prepared to fulfil his horrid purpofe. u GreatGod of juftice I" ejacukted Conftan* tine, the laft woids of Gondemar entirely fub- duing his fiioincfs, " hear, Oh hear me, and ftay the dire defigns of this miftaken man 1'* Then turning to his # brother, he added, *' Think, Oh think on the awful retributions of divine wrath, and fpare my murdered foul the dread, tremendous office which at a future ftate it muft perform, when before the throne above it calls for vengeance and rcdrefs upon its deftroyer!" Pointing to the flcy, he added, <€ Refled that the Supreme Being now view& your fell intents, and fooner or later will hurl his fwift defending arm of juftice on you T* . lt Though hell itfelf fliould open to deftroy nie, I would not refign the dear-bought privi¬ lege ol this moment, nor fhouldft thou efcape the fate my juft vengeance gives thee j—this moment is thy laft P u Then Heaven have mercy on thee V pronounced Conftantine fervently ; " but Oh inhuman brother! as thou hopeft hereafter to obtain tbe mercy of an offended Deity, I charge
charge thee with my lateft breath to the innocence thathiever injured ihee, left, adding deeper to the crime of this horrible aft, you forfeit every claim of an hereafter, and render ufelefs every tear of penitence. Upon my kneel," and he knelt before the relentlefe Gondemar, <c upon my knees I en¬ treat you to forego your purpofe; fo fliall this outrage of a brother's murder be forgiven you : but, if remorfelefs, you perfift to plunge in mifery that angel being of a brother's love, then hear me, Heaven 1" and he raifed his eyes and hands in awful fervour to his God, as he thus continued, " may my prayer afcend to the throne of grace, and find acceptance 5 ifthe fhades of departed be¬ ings are permitted to revifit the earth, then be it granted that my murdered fpirit be delegated the guardian watch of her whom, living, I adored, to fave her helplefs ftate from the foil purpofes of a brother's Iuft, and ftrike his guilty foul with horror and remorfe !" ** Down, down forever!" exclaimed the fra¬ tricide, plunging with fure aim his dread til
dagger to the heart of his kneeling vi&iraj ^ho vainly ftruggled for life and freedom* He threw him on the ground—the horrid deed was perpetrated i and Conftantine, breathing a faint groan, was heard to fpeak no.more 1 whilft hi* impious brother, by the defperate aft, became a murderer. In that moment of horrible outrage, a foul*piercing fhriek, that might have called to earth the forms of the long-buried dead, rang echoing through the chambers of death. A form> cloathedin flowing robes of white, with diftraded countenance* wild uneven pace, and difheveiled hair,rtifhed through the door 1 and approaching the dying Conftantine, wkh hollow broken voice it exclaimed—*** Conftantine, my Lord! my life! my adored hufband, we will die to¬ gether !'* and funk motioniefs upon the bleeding body. Horror and remorfe now feized the foul of Gondemar £ and as he drew the reeking dagger from the fide ol his man¬ gled brother, and viewed the terrific work ofhis own hands, ten thoufand voices feemed to rkig in
In hisappalled ears the awful cries of "Murderer accurfed ! begone > for thee 1 thou fratricide, there is no hope but everh fling feas of miferv i * For a moment he hung over the bodies in all the heil of an upbraiding confeience, and in half-fupprefled accents he exclaimed, ** What have 1 done? whom have I flam? A brother! Stop, flop thy fateful arm !'* he fhrieked, as he violently caught hold ofhis attendant, in a kind of infinity that momentarily fliot an exquifite pang of repentance acrofs his trou¬ bled brain j <s fto% I command you, irom the horrid deed! 'Tis, Oh God I a brother that never indeed injured thee!' 5 —The mmia leaving him, he added in a hollow, inarticulate tone, as his teeth gnafhed together, and re¬ tained inwardly the founds ot hi*> voice— « Such are the damned curfes,fuch the victims of indulged avarice ani afpiring amotion !'* His eyes, rolling drcadruily iu their orbits, feemed ready ta fUit iron\ their recefles; pale honor blanched his features j he ftood conteiled the harrowing image ot guilt, defpair, and murder -, he had torn the bon s
bonds of brotherhood and love afunder, and perpetrated a deed of horror never to be recalled—a deed never to be concealed ; for its living witnefs, though now infenfible, kid before him, the terrible avenger of a bro** ther's murder—a deed at which man and God turn from with abhorrence. Such, Oh fatal Avarice ! are thy defperate works—fuch the faerifices that can alone fa- tme thy never-ceafing thirft of immolated victims! Thy votarifts, led by thy infuriate feduftions rendered forgetful ofthe laws of their Maker, or the dread of an hereafter, and callous to the fweet claims of nature, charity, and peace, become remorfelcfs to the widow's, mother's, orphan's tears and fufferings, whofe fighs and pleadings move not thy flinty bofom, and the touch of foft humanity is dc^i within thee. To gratify thy horrid cravings, the rights of the meek, the helplefs, and unprotected are trampled down, the barrier of juftice is defpifed, *md ruin anu injury precede thy footfteps where*
wherever thou followeft; nor do they paufe in their deadly work, till their hands are fteeped in the blood of innocence, and they have at* tained the glittering objed of their guilty ap¬ petites. Deaf to the facred ties of relation {hip, incapable of pity, devoid of feeling, and im¬ penetrable to the voice of mercy, thy maddened votaries hurry to the commiflion of thy impious mandates; and when too late they view aghaft the enormity of their mon¬ ftrous crimes, and vainly wifh to recal their deeds of blood and horror, they tlien confefs they have done too much, and curfe, but in vain, the baneful indulgence of fo guilty and ruinous a paffion as avarice. To account for the unexpeded appearance of Rofaline at a time fo big with horror, and which, had it taken place but a few moments fooner, might have preferved the life of Con¬ ftantine, but little is neceflary.—f ler mind ha,I from childhood received a fuperftitious hi is; and whether from this caufe, or from a real prefcmimeiit of evil, it had experienced ar. alarm at rhe idtaof the eaftern chambers, '$ vol, u. m uncciuiu \
uncertain; governed by an impulfe very like the latter, Qie had been anKioufly dcfir# ous of preventing the entrance ofConftantine t& the latter. In the laft chapter we beheld her fpirits weighed down by grief. At length, oppreflec} by a deep and heavy ftomber, in which the image of a terrific dream dtftra&ed her leeping fenfes, and preferued to her mental fight the prophetic warning of approaching yj, the firft objeAs ftie beheld were the two liradgers who had firft alarmed her in tiie forefti and whole myfterious words were now in vifion again repeated i till the fccne ftiift-» ing, difplayed to her view the interior of the eaftern chambers, and entering the laft, Ihe beheld the dreadful aftion there performed, but had not power to fave the dying vidim. A piercing Ihiiek, that iffucd from her hor¬ ror ftiutkfoul, iiwi.ke her from the dreadful vifh.n. Urged by a rrftillels impulfe that (he had not power to withiland, and a&Uuted only by a certainty uf the danger of Con- ftantine,
ftantine, flie flew" toward the (cent of hor¬ ror at the very inftant her imaginary re¬ presentation was realized, and fhe became at once mercifully infenfible to her own mifery, and to the anguifli that awaited her. The fufpenfion of Gondemar's acting powers was but momentary ; and though a fhort pang of remorfe had already avenged in his heart the lawlefs ad of horror he had committed, it did not deprive him of the neceflary confideration that the fecrilegious deed muft be concealed. Had not the mt- ferable Rofaline witneffed the harrowing act, he might have fcrcened it for ever fiom worldly cognizance j but now that flie had become an innocent witnefs to his guilt, he trembled as he reflected on the danger of a difcovery, and, madden d to think tiiat all his brilliant prospects of glittering fortiue were annihilated by this unlooked-for defini¬ tion to his golden dream of power and great¬ nefs, there was but one way Lit (he gloomuy confidered) by vvhich to make all idih. and ftill fecure his crime from bei g revca! d. M Z SO
So abfolute k guilt, that when once It dares overleap the bounds of fear and confeience, it trembks not to purfue the only means by which its power may be fupported, and its ends obtain fuccefs. One crime hurries to the commifficn of another -, and fcarcely does the dicadful culprit flop to confider the enormity of his offences, whilft neceflity obliges him to perpetrate frefli aels of iniquity to cover his original fin from ihe poflibility of adifclofurc: and at length, grown familiar with evil deeds, he thinks not of atonement rill fome fpeedy retribution ftrikes convidion to his foul of its atsouues, and prefents to his tortured mind the memoiy of his mifpent life and actions:—fowas it now with Gondemar; the dead revealed no hi iden fecrets, and he even paufed upon the dicadful alternative. Rofaline, rnce the objed of his guilty vrifhe% the bcLg whoe perfect beauties had aroufed his paffions, an 1 enkindled the fmoihcre i hatied of his heart—whofe fair poilcilion had belted his aim to ftrike the fatal
foul blow—to obtain whom he had waded through a brother's blood, and for whom he h?d formed the horrid defign of bearing her tliis evening from the Caftle, as foon as he fliould have immolated his deftined vidim, and by his brother's death deprived her of every chance of rcdrefs or aid—this hap* lefs creature now lay infenfible before him. He had none to oppofe his cruel defigns— none to fnatch her from her fated deftruo tion—ftie was defencelefs, at his mercy, and completely in his power; yet ftie, whom he had refolved to call his own at the facrifice of every feeling of honour and virtue, the fuperior claims of his brother, or the declared averfion of herfelf, nov; ex¬ cited very different fenfations; and he trem¬ bled at her prefence, and dreaded her as the object of h.s future punishment;—tor whiift (he was free, the murdered Conftantine's aven¬ ger lived, and himfelf was rendered infcune from the jull cfteih of his .horrid crimes; and now thb btiiiK* once the object of hri foul's u 3 puiiuits,
purfuits, the adored idol ofhis paffionate lova, was become hi one moment the objed of his hatred. The eariieft dawn of day now faintly broke through the eaftern hemifphere, and ftill found Gondemar undetermined. At length, how¬ ever, the point of his yet reeking dagger was entering the bofom of Rofaline, when the latter, by a flight movement, gave figns of returning animation) and as ftie flowly raifed her dejeded frame, a deep figh told that Ihe breathed j he paufed upon his defperate pur* pofe, whilft a momentary touch of pity crofled his breaft, as he caught a flight view of her haggard countenance, whkh was ftrongly depidive ofwildnefs, horror* and kfanity. Raifing herfelf on her knees, but ftill hanging over the bleeding corpfe, with her auburn lock* and difordered drefs clot¬ ted with blood, and with arid eyes, in which no commiferating moifture came to the relief
relief of her agonised heart, flie raifed them meekly, but defparingly to Heaven; theft cafting a glance af madrrefe md affright upon the irrefolute Caftlenuco, ffie faintly ejaculated, in a piteous tone— ** It was your brother, Gondemar ! Great God ! you have flain your own brother, the worfhipped love of the ruined, loft, dii* traded Rofaline!" A groan of mifery, too exquififely agoniz¬ ing to be conceived, followed thefe defpair¬ ing accents, and fhe fell again upon the body, regardlefs of ail around her. The dreadful idea that had a moment b^fora taken pofleffion of the mind of Gonde* mar, was as quickly abolifhed for the fug- geftiom of another: and now, determined on her fate, he rudely fhook the arm of Ro* faline, as with his grim attendant he removed her from tiie corpfe, exclaiming loudly— ** Rofaline, av\ake! awake, I fay, from this lethargy, and liften to the only altcrna- M 4 tive
tive left thee to preferve exiftence. Swear/* he continued with a voice dreadfully hollow and impreffive, " fwear by every attribute divine or human, by all the ties of conjura¬ tion, by heaven itfelf, its angels, and its minifters; and, iaftiy, fwear by all the dreads of hell, and future fears of punifh* ment, never to betray my fatal fecret, never in aclion, word, thought, or even look to denote your knowledge of the tranfadions of this evening. This fwear, as thou hopeft, for mercy 1" Rofaline was then forced upon her knees, and her form fupported by the crofled fword of the terrific murderers^ whilft Gondemar compelled her to take the horrid oath. Rofaline herfelf was, indeed, tinfettled in her fenfes, and too clearly it appeared they had fbrftkeri her, She paflively fub- mitted, for fhe, at firft, did not under- ftand the meaning of Caftlenuco's words; and only concluding that he held his dag¬ ger to her lips for the purpofe of deftroying her^
her, fhe raifed her eyes to heaven, and again ejaculated a prayer for mercy; then fixing them on the dark, frowning vifage of Gondemar, flie faintly articulated, ** Spare me, and have- pity on my conditio! V (t Take the oath demanded!" furioufiy pronounced Gondemar. " What is it you require?'* fhe trem¬ blingly again interrogated.--------Gondemar impatiently repeated his dreadful conjura¬ tion, every word of wnich iuuk to the chil¬ led foul ol Rofaline, whofe blood feemed freezing in her \ei s, aul the feat of life flawing from its throne j f r every wotd renewed the hon id fcene, and her ienies again became nearly dhoulercd, as :lu wild¬ ly uttered^— 4< i catu.ot obey \^i I" ** Then behold your fue!" co.itL.U'cd Gondeouir, fixi ^ ^n tn^ viciun a r..i uc io ^k, as he usc.i- atd ime tl-d >\.r to iui breutl. * f \\ ill njil y bui un o..rh pa. tv\ j, ?'* <c Sul*hi C: /* ..i .. \c i, vM'ii .a i ; : p * •.- ou^ ai.u iu wtitiir, 1 - nv » t \o.u'. M j
An inftindive hope, even in madnefs, made her turn her eyes towards the door for fuccour, then wildly around the room, till they again refted on the murdered Conftan¬ tine j—a convulfive movement feized her frame; flie would have fallen^ but was fe¬ curely held in the arms of the murderers, whiift the horrid oath was forcibly admi- niftered, and the words— u J fwear /" efcaped her lips, to which the bloody dagger was raifed \ and fhe became, in an inftant after, as motioniefs as the mur¬ dered Conftantine. Gondemar, commanding Harold to re¬ move the body, and clofe up the apart¬ ments, now took the infenfible and refift* lefs Rolaline in his arms, and proceeding to the fecret communication, by which h& liad entered, he once more defcended, bear¬ ing along his hapiefs burthen from the fcene of death and murder.
CHAP.
wmm i i n i i ii i.ii i h | iiii i im tii jii i iit r i a iiihi .LM i iia i g ^w g||^
CHAP. VI. ♦ So look« the chafdl lion ** Tfeta makts hu» tvsttiHig." tHAKESPEARE,
Jl HE next mtornirig w^as wi*nefs to a fcene of terror and confufion $ and tht Baron for once v\as doom d 'o feel the pang of a co i plete overthrow of nil his fchemes of ambition, and fclf-planncd views of future happinefs, Determined, by his hafty rrhafures to deprive Rofaline of the power of recalling M 6 the
the promifed facrifice fhe had made him, he had fixed this very day for the ruin of his fon's hopes, by rendering it impoflibie for him to receive the hand of Rofaline* For this purpofe he had entered the chapel at the hour appointed, but vainly waited for their arrival, and expected conclufion of his fears and wifhes. Neither Conftan¬ tine nor Rofaline approached ; and, mad with the apprehenfion that they had, per¬ haps, discovered his artful projects for their mutual fcparation, he flew to the chambers of the latter. But Lis fearch was vain; they were all vacant, and only the letter, addrefled the preceding day to the Baronefs, remained in the apartments to explain the alarming myftery. This he tore open, and read as follows :— >
<f Forgb'e, my more than parent, this hafty aad c^tiCeaicd d. parture of the unhappy
unhappy Rofaline; had it been permitted, fhe would perfonally have taken leave of your Ladyfhip.—From motives of preffing and indifpenlable neceffity, flie has quitted the caftle, and your maternal protedion; but fufpend your judgment for a little, and you will no longer withhold from your ward your approbation i which, though now con¬ cealed by a face of my fiery and fufpicion, deferves not to render her lefs worthy your efteem and love.—Adieu 1—Mother of God proted you V*
The Baron read this paper fo confirming of his fufpicions, with pafllons little fiiort of madnefs, for he had not the leaft doubt but that flie had voluntarily qu tted the caftie in the night j and (d<*'ruftion tfr his wiihes !) wab tertu'idy accompauk 1 In t\z Lord Urbandre, his Ion. DaUt ^ fi > n the chambers, he mfhed furioufiy t » t:. ^fe < f the eaftern toners, aavi bjrfii ^g o 4 c i iae OL.tA-ld
outward door (which Gondemar by defign had inwardly faftened up), he entered their dreavy Lkriors, but law not a veftige to alarm his though is, nor even a confirmation that Conftantine had ever entered them ;— they excited even in hi* mad an unpleafant fenfation, and be haftened to quit their for¬ lorn nnd gloomy precincts, whhft a ftronger feeling than di {appointed ambition feemed for a moment to fufpend his faculties, and abforb his inrnoft thoughts. Quitting the gallery, he entered the hall, where flood the wondering houfehold, who already had caught the alarm, and were, with fcrutinizing fear and apprehenfion, iiftcning to the varied reports that bad been raifed as to the fudden difappearance of their Lord. At length their exaggerated accounts ccafod in a peremptory command frcm the Baron for lheir inftant fearch throughout the caftle, and the adjoining hamlets i fut none of them dared to move from the fide cf his trembling companion* as
as they ail concluded their Lord defined them to feek fof their young mafter in the haunted tower$ s ~a place they openly avowed their onwillingnefs to enter into 3 whilft fome even loudly conjectured that the ghofti had certainly carried off their Lord, for having difturbed it in its dreadful place nf vifitation. Sir Juliaa at this moment, with looks of deep concern, entered the hall, and the B.tron, perceiving him, loudly commanded him to declare wliere his Lord had fecreted himfelf. ** So pleafe you, my Lord, I have not feen the young Baron fince laft night/' u *Tis falfe, flave !'* replied the Baron in a tone of fury f " you are his confident j you doubtlefs have afiifted him and his com¬ panion in thi»ir dif graceful, rebellious flight from the Caftle. Seize the wretch/' he added to his foldiers, ** and convey liim to the dungeon, till he reveals theplace ofhis maucf's concealment V* a My
" My Lord," replied Sir Julian firmly, ** this ufage is mmerted and injurious. I fwear I know not of the young Baron's abfence, but am joyfully ready to enter the call towers in his fearch, if you command me. Doubtlefs he is ftill there, and as his Lordfliip's iervant, 1 entreat permiffion to haften to his prefence/* " Thi c obfimate refiftance to my will thou fli alt dearly anfwer, prefumptuous minion!" more angrily interrupted the Baron; " in the meantime do as I command you," (to his people) 4i aiid convey the traitor to the dungeon ! Let him there inilruct himfelf in obedience to my wil', which here is not only abfolute, but privileged over his 1 feas well as his liberty. Away vrith him, I lay I'* As Sir Julian \va*> forcib*y dragged through the hali, aa attendant ei.ten ,p 5 p Jcmed the tr .wning Ot..o witii a foth.l pa^er, found as the ap ifuvub «'f C ».'fla -ti.^e. 'J'ne Baton, 'iiatC' iii 0 u .i;e. y .1 » a t ie t.em- bling kt\a*>i, thus i^uu; — " Attempt
H Attempt not to purfue me, for need- lefs will be your fearch. I have flown for ever from your fight 5 you have blafted the hopes of your fon, and deprived him of all that can make life defirabie: therefore, in future we are fiindered for eternity. The domains of Urbandine I bequeath to my Brother Gondemar, for never will you again behold the loft unhappy being, who once xvas your fon, but how is your wretched outcaft. " Co^STANTINI." HWMHMnMO The amazement of the Baron in perufing thefe lines, (for not the flighteft doubt rvoffed his mind refpeeting their real author,} is beyond the power of dcfcription. It was too apparent that Conftantine had difcovered his defign * and he now thought had certainly withdrawn himfelf from the Caftle, for the purpofe of preventing Rofaiine's recal of thofe vows, which muft in future funder them for even and he trembled
tremfLd left the long concealed deception 'of his charactu had been unfolded, and that he hid now loft every claim to the filial reverence and efteem of an exemplary fon, whofe abfence had po.\er to excite thofe fenfations of regret, that but rarely, or ever accompanied the actions of the Baron; and „k>w, for the ihif. time, he deeply refketed on the mifery he might have occafioned in the breaft of a child, whofe happinefs had been deftroyed by the felf* interefted avarice of his cruel politics and ambitious temper. But on the cold-hearted Otho, the flings of an upbraiding confeience inade flight impreffion $ his foul had never been attuned to the flexible emotions of ftature, or the refinements of fuperior feeling 1 and after the firft fenfations of contrition Were over, he felt more for his own dif- appointed wi flies on one particular circum* ftance, than for the lois of his fon, who, he doubted not, had written this letter but as a fcreen, and was now confummating his nuptials in fecurity with Rofaline. Otho,
Otho, Baron of Caftlenuco, and nominal Lord of Urbandine, in right of its heirefs, the Lady Ruithvina, his confort, was of a defpotic temper of foul—a bold and enter¬ prising genius. The fiercenefs and natural cruelty of his heart, though well concealed beneath the mafk of courtefy, rendered him invulnerable to all thofe more humanized emotions of pity, that might elfe have re¬ laxed the fanguinary difpofition of his nature, and curbed the exceffes of his pride and paffions ; add to thefe, he was in poffef- fion of a ftrong talent of the deepeft policy, and moft unrelenting ambition. ** He could wound the he&rt of his vidim with a golden inftrumeni, and fmile upon the ftroke that murdered it*** His figure, at firft fight, foiled not to command refped and ho* mage; whilft the haughty fuperiority and f#ferve of manners he ever afteded towdrds his inferiors, rendered him feared, and even defpifed* He had married the prefent Baronefs foon after the demife of his tormer Lady i but it was afterwards iuppofed that the great
great excefs of love he profoffed for Ruithvina, was but a deception, feigned to cover his real defigns on her large inheritance. Ruithvina had, with the ufual gentlenefs of her complying diipofition, obeyed the commands of her father, (who, indeed, was ever abfolute); and though Oiho was leaft to her wiih of any that folicited her hand, yet did flie meekly refign it to the will of her father, and became the wife of Caftlenuco. But on her father's death, the Biron*s character foon afiumed a very different afpccl| for the fortunes he had afpired to poffefs, were fo entirely iuvefted in his fon, the Lord Conftantine, and the Lady Ruith¬ vina, that without the permiffion of either, he could not command a fingle angel, but from the revenues of Caftlenuco, which he had confkkrably diminifhed* The former tendernefs with which he had treated the Baronefs, from the deceafe of her fire decreafed j and though Ihe had taught her heart to feci the mod perfed refpeft and regard
regard for her Lord, yet was flie fated to meet in enchange, only growing negted, cold nefs, and jealoufy. The latter paffion was revived by an idle calumny that had been repotted of Ruitluina, whole affedions weie fuppoied to have pievioufly owned another attachment more congenial to her heart. From this ot 1) aflig^ed caufe of her Lord's a'.tered conduct, flie was often doomed to experience the mifeiy of unmerited re¬ proach u-ad fe verity* which ac times wore tiie afped of c.ujhy and oppreflion, and which Ihe patiently endured with a duty and obedience, that ought to have recalled his wavering affedions, and procured her his admiration and efteem* Slie iiad cheerfully complied with his requeft for her refidence in the gloomy magnificent courts acid towers of Urbandiue; and though a gentle figh fomctimea doped her lips to the feencs of paft diminitiicd felicity, a.id a filent tear of regret wuuUt, in f^.t.* ui her dfort>, force itfelf a paila^c, yet never did ihe reproach Uim
htm for his changed condud, or openljr complain of her altered fate. The Baron, deprived of the power of dif- poling of the wealth he had married to obtain, became regardlefs of appearances, and but too often gave the Baronefs caufe to figh in fecret for her unhappy deftiny, that had linked her in a chain indiflblubly bind¬ ing, but often too heavy even for the meeknefsof her forbearing fpirit to endure. Of late fome defigns of dark and dreadful tendency had been eftabliibecl in his teeming brain. The Baronefs was the objed to which they tended ; flie was the only being that oppofed a hindrance to his gloomy projeds j and while fhe claimed the almoft nameleM dignity and title of his wife % he had ik) hopes they ever could be realized. His foul was daring in the execution of its purpofes, as his temper was ungovern¬ able and tyrannical; and but that he knew full 4
full well the blamelefi condud of her whole life would condemn his actions, and rife in open judgment againft his bold proceedings, he would not have been deterred fiom deeds that fhunned the light of fcrutiny and inveftigation. Paulina, who, though but flightly men¬ tioned, was in herfelf of infinite importance, had fet herfelf the tafk to obferve and watch the actions not only of Conftantine and the Lady St. Ofwythe, but even of the Baronefs herfelf. Rage and paffion for a few moments ftung her foul to madnefs, when acquainted that her offered hand had been fo peremptorily rejected, and her advances, even to friend¬ lhip, received with coldnefs and difregard. She foon, however, found the caufe > and though ihe could not enjoy the attainment of her own hopes, flie refolved to deftroy thofe of others, and blaft that happinefs flic was fated never to poflefs. Through the me¬ dium of her v.omen, whom flie iiad placed as fpies upon the principals of the Caftle, flie
fhe had obtained an intimation of the inter¬ view that took place between the lovers in the library. Thither at the hour appointed flie haftened* and fecreting herfelf, gained fuftkient information to enable her tocoun* teraci the defign, and deftroy the happinefs of the three fuends for ever. Paulina, in her own right, poflefled a train of retainers, entirely at her difpofal $ and, raging with unrequited love and jealous hatred, ftie h^d dispatched a meflenger to the camp, not twenty miles from the Caftle, to acquaint the Baron with the difcovery fhe had made; and begged his inftant prefence, ere it became too late, to flop the fatal conclufion of the intended nuptials. The Baron needed no additional fpur to expedite his fwift return f and his defire, on more accounts than one, to annihilate thefe engagements, io deftru&ive to his future hopo, hurried him, at every hazard, in his unexpeded appearance at Urbandine. Thus was
was the ruin of Conftantine's hopes, if not himfelf, accompliflied, and the in¬ nocent heart of Rofaline made wretched for ever. The Baron, in an interview with Lady Ruithvina, had been moft bitter in his reproaches for lier affent to the union of her fon with Rofaline; nor did he quit the private chamber, whither they had with¬ drawn, without fomc myfterioufly exprefled threats of fo dreadful a nature, that the unhappy Ruithvina had been overwhelmed with mifery at their poignancy, arid was afterwards difcovered infcnflblc and motion* lels upon the floor, by her attendants. When flic recovered recolledion, fhe refleded that it was beft not to inflame tlie mind of the Baron by an ufelefs oppoiition to bis will j and though fhe fighed at the mmiJiatirig fate of the innocent injuied Hofahne, the thought it moll prudent to drain from eutui. 1 " the ehape!, as ai r «t\.ri VOL. il? n upon,
wpon, which could now anfwer no good end, but fpread wider the. unhappy breach be* tween her Lord and felf, whofe laft words wrung her foul with grief, as flie paufed upon their dreadful myfterious meaning: and flie retired to her oratory to befeech the Provi¬ dence Supreme to fufpend thofe fearful woes, of which indeed fhe feemed to have a ftrong prefentiment would elfe fall heavy on herfelf, and thofe only objeds of her love and care. The Baron's mind, during the whole of this day, was agitated with the deepeft anxiety for the return of his fon. Almoft every tenant and domeftic were difpatched in the fruitlefs fearch j and pondering gloomily upon his myfterious abfence, which he doubt- eel not was voluntary, he once more haftened to the prefence of Lady Paulina.—*' I have no hopes, Lady Paulina," he began, " and do indeed tremble for the deftrudion of our mutual wifties/*
* Paulina
Paulina ftarted. Her eyes confefled the agitation and emotion of her foul, although her pride difdatned an open expreflion of her real innate feelingg. At length fhe feverely fatd—- ** See you not, my Lord, the meaning of this flight is to avoid an union with the rejeded, defpifed Paulina? The Lady Rofa¬ line is doubtlefs, ere this, the bride of my Lord of Urbandine.** " What feyft thou ?** interrupted the Baron, with a lowering countenance; u think you Rofaline is the companion of his flight ? M ** fs ita truth that needs tobequeftioned ?*' diftlainfully anfwered the haughty Countel?. ** My curfes light # upon them both if fo it proves!" furioufiy ejaculated the Baron. The Lady Paulina rofe from her feat; Ihe was of a temper too imperious to iloop to complaints, even inadilappointm^nt fo b;t* tcrly felt as tlie prefent. ** My Lord/ 3 (he replied majefticalir, u you muh. forgive uie tf, without your leave, N 2
leave, I peremptorily infift on my departure from the inhofpitable towers of Urbandine* Paulina," fhe added proudly, " cannot (loop tofue where flie ha^ a right to exact obedience; nor is your office, as guardian, afufEcient pri¬ vilege for infult from the ignoble heir of Urbandine, to a woman in birth his equal, and in fortune his fuperior. I have hum¬ bled myfeif fufBcieotly in my compliance with .your Lord Chip's willies $ they are now doubt¬ lefs annihilated. I never will accept the hand of my Lord Gondemar, nor will I be longer compelled to icmain in this Caftie, but fliall think myfeif free to leek in my own pcfleflions a retreat from thofe humiliating circumftances, which, with fhame 1 confefs I have already too fubmsflively endured here,"—She then, bowing to the Baron, haughtily quitted the apartment, who, much as he defired to retain her in, the Caftle, did not now think proper to exert his auihority to enforce her continuance, lince, as he couhl read every movement of the human breuft, dud decipher the adions, and almoft the
the thouglits that governed it, he did not defpair of her speedy return, for he well knew that her fecret impatbnee to hear of the retrograde Conftantine would foon again reftore her to his power. He was pacing fomc time after, v\ith quick and troubled fteps, the ramparts of the Caftle, his mind enveloped in a maze of doubt, anxiety, and fear, when a troop of horfemen paflcd beneath the he ivy portcullis' of the great gates, a r id wilding do.vn the mountain fteep, 0*1 which tiie caftle ftood, he found them to be the train of the depart¬ ing Count cf. She bowed haughtily to his courteous fignai, and turning a deep delving of the rocks, di (appeared from his view. The Baronet:*, with apprehen five gi ief and fear, icceived the news of her fon% on fterious difappearance, She trembled as ihe lubded on the anger of the Baron 5 and whci he K 3 entered
entered her apirtments foon after, flie faw the ftruggling conflid ofhis mind. His ftay was but very fhort, aad he oniy exclaimed, as he fixed on her an ill-boding frown— ** 'Tis well, Madam ! I find you have at length prefumed to difpute my pleafure, and encourage the rebellious Conftantine in his difobedience i you will now do well to re* member your own* and tremble at the expected punifliment due to your apoffocy.** *« My Lord and hufband," meekly re* plied the Baronefs, finking humbly on her knees before him, " you have indeed wronged me.—Heaven is my witnefs how much I lament the ill-timed abfence of my fon, although I folemnly proteft I am not his accomplice. That I fought to fliield the helplefs innocence of Rofaline from the dan* gerous defigns of Gondeimr, I do moft truly acknowledge j nor couhl her alliance have dif'raced our Houfe, vsho in nobility of blood
blood is no way inferior to our fon : therefore I pray you to afford a pardon to your fuppliant wife, and reftore to hei your alienated affections." The Baron caft a look of fevere meaning upon his proftrate Lady, and as he coldly put her from his robe, which flie had feized, he faid, as he moved towards the door— *< You doubclefs have n^t forgot our laft interview j had you deigned to have yielded an implicit obedience to a hufband*s com* mands, it might have preferved you from the confequences of that obflinacy ; which fhortly will mm& the iwi*ed foe it |ias provoked. In the meantime you will do well to confine yourfelf to your own apart- rnents.**—He then quitted the room* and the Baronefs, iaifing her eyes in tears to Heaven, exclaimed— ** Then my ruin is determined on 1 No hope is left nie ! I am become a prifoner in n 4 die
the houfe of my anceftors, and all that re¬ mains is r Agnation and fubmifiion.*'—The entrance of Jeffica aroufed the melancholy meditations of the unfortunate Ruithvina, and in her faithful bofom flie refted as much of thofe woes as flic dared reveal.
CHAP. VII. , , , , „„ . ■ ■,. .i „— ii » , ..« Oh confdeus guslti ** How dumb tby voice, tmtoek'd for, ftrike* the bold !** fill* I*. 11 Againft tfietiead which inrrcence C'cures, infidtouti Malice ahm her dart* in vain 5 tufitcd backwards by the powerful bn&tU of Heaven."* S.JOHHiON. CjtONDEM AR bore his infenfible burthen acrofi the dreary chamber, an 1 defeending the ftdis of fhe focat trap, refted the form
form of Rofaline upon the ftonefeatofa vaulted cavity, till flie fliould have recovered from her torpid lethargy. At length a deep figh give token of re¬ turning fenfe; and, opening her eyes, flie found herfelf fupported by Gondemar* and endofed in the precinds of a dreary vault, whofe difmal darknefs was illumined by fhe taper which, Alining faintly from a ho'low niche, where it was placed, feemed to add frefh horror to the furrounding gloom. She attempted ti liberate herfelf from the arms of her terrific compani >n, and feebly articulated fome words; but terror and the never-dying memory of tlic late harrowing tranfadions deprived her of the momentary gleam of rei'on that had fhot .'.ihw.o*t Ilt benighted fenfes. She arofe from the c»"*ld damp earth with -'i. ordered Audiefs, and, impelled by the iuftirdive !o.it!i ! ig ••vlrrh novV g«»\em*<l her thou.» ( 't, wrillt b th: fociety of Gondeniar, fhe th.w from hit, o:ll-red
aids, and darting along the caverned paf* fagcs of the earth, whofe yawning excavation re-echoed her fteps with reverberating founds asfliefiewalongs till, exhaufted by her fpeed, and the total darknefs to which flie was left, flie funk upon the projection of fome im¬ peding rock, whofe humid dampnefs chilled with cold her heart, and the dripping icicles of moifture that defcended from the vaulted roof, fell on her uncovered head like drops of freezing water, which fbook with agonizing pains her trembling frame, and made her again wildly endeavour to free herfelf from this fcene of horror. Again flie was darting forward, when the faint ftreaksof the light carried by Gondemar, appeared in the paffage; and his gigantic form approaching, forced her to defift, as loudly he exclaimed, ** Stop 1 or you plunge to eternal deftructionP*—Rofaline jpaiFivtly waited his nearer approach, and became fenfibie as the light faintly flione \spon a deepened cavity, md difplayed the brink
brink of a wide and feemingly bottomkfs abyfs. Gondemar, having found a fteep flight of rude flairs, that were cut in the almoft per¬ pendicular fid^s of the gul 4 h, now took the hand of Rofaline, and attempted to lead her forward -, when, ftarting from his grafp, as if appalled at the touch, fhe exclaimed, as fhe fixed a pale Jook of horror on his frowning countenance, " Thy hands are ftained with the precious blood of my worfhipped Lord ! Away I away I pollute not with thy facrile* gious approaches his wedded Roialine V* But Gondemar, regardlefj of her ftruggles, feized her arm, and led her down die imraeafurable fteep, whofe rugged flairs threatened every ftep they took to plunge them in the gulph below* At length they placed their feet upon a narrow platform, raifed acrofs the abyfs, and Rofaline, again regaining the bafis of the folid rock, demand¬ ed, " Whither will you lead me?'* but n 6 ihe
flie received no anfwer, and they in fileno* conunued to trace an immenfe track of earth and rocky cavities, whofe natural paiiages fometimes affumed a bold and lofty afpeft, and at others, by continued grada¬ tions, became compreffed fo fmall and ihallow, as fcarcely to admit of more than a fingle paiTenger's aeivance. At length the wretched fufferer became exhaufted, and nearly unable to move,—" I can go no further/* fhe defpairingly ex¬ claimed ^ ** in mercy let me here expire in peace !'* i€ Remember your oath !** exclaimed Gondemar, flarting from a deep and gloomy reverie, that had long engvofled his inward thoughts, " 'Tis now, alas! in vain, and ufelefs to remember it," (lie replied, a faint dawning of reafon glimmering over her difordered fenfes: " this h my grave —here let me reft for ever) I know the direful purpofes you meditate,
meditate, and am prepared to meet the ftrokfc of death. In pity ftrike but home, mid your fears will end with my miferies V* «* I would fpare thee," he fternly replied i ** do not (hun the offered mercy, but be thankful that you are ftill permitted to exift. Be careful of your words, and on the fubjecT: of this night's events be dumb for ever; for tremble to forget that the fafety of Gondemar hangs upon your ftps, and fliould you dare to bieathe a knowledge of this night*s bufi- nefs, you cancel your oath, and become the juft vidim of my vengeance and your own perjury. You are now near the end of your prefent terrors, but never ceafe to remember that you poflefs a foe deadly and revengeful; therefore, as you regard your fafety, be careful of your adions, for from this mo¬ ment they will be watched with unre nitting fcrutiny. Once morc% be on your guard, and fear to provoke your never fl umbering enemy !** <c I am already your vidim," flie faintly replied, as flic railed her defpairing eyes to hh
bis gloomy countenances u yot; fpinol inflid greater mifery than that I now feel, and to die by your hands is become familiar. Wherefore then fliould vou fpare wT * a life f whofe poflfeflbr is jecklefs of exiftence ? You have rendered its blefling a' loathing curfe, and but one poor little hope of com* fort is all that you have left me." " You have ftill a father !*' interrupted Gondemar. *« Have 1 ?" quickly interrogated Rofa-* line, fixing oji bim an eye of doubt, diftradion, and fufpicion* as fhe forrowfully added, ** Alas I perhaps you have murdered him alfoP' ** Beware!'* furioufiy pronounced Gon^ demar, his face growing ghaftly |nd pale, and his eyes emitting fpark$ of fudden fire, expreflive of horror, anguifli, and internal remorfe; ** beware,'* he repeated, ** kft I recal tbat mercy you affed to fcorn J M Rofaline crofled her arms upon her bofom, and raifing her eyes meekly to her God, feemed
feemed for a few moments to be deeply en¬ gaged in mental fupplication j a tear of exquifite anguifh ftarted to her eye as fhe flowly and awfully pronounced aloud-*— ** Oh Power Supreme, and Guider of the ways of life ! Father of the helplefs, and Sup¬ porter of the injured! deign from thy glorious feat of uufeen majefty to look with pity on thy lowlieft creature! Pierce with thy all-feeing eye the deep enfathomed receffes of thefe dreary caverns, and with an ear of mercy liften to my fad petition 1—Oh guard, with thy never-failing goodnefs, the life of htm who gave me being—ihiekl him with the power of thine almighty care, reftore him in peace- and fafety to his long deferted home, and I fliall die content P* Gondemar viewed the pious, fuffering Rofaline, as fhe was thus devoutly engaged, with looks that feemed to exprefs the har¬ rowing torturer of his foul, which, in this filent moment of uninterrupted fohtudc, 4 loudly
loudly fpoke, in accents terrible and aveng* ing, to his upbraiding confeience. As he proceeded along the vaults, he had begun to waver in his defigns, and from the dreadful fears that ever attend a guilt mind, trembling with apprehenfion for the dif* covery of its crimes, h6 had almoft refolved here, in thefe dungeons of everlafting night and fecrecy, n end the unhappy object of his future re ft lefs alarms. Often was he on the point of plunging ftill deeper in innocent blood ; but at this moment of indecifion he beheld his intended facrifice, as with thoughts pure as infancy, and a mind free from crime or ftain, caft up her fearlefs eyes to the direction of Heaven, and pray with confi¬ dence and virtuous fecurity. *T#as at this moment he curfed 1 is guilty felf, and felt that he was indeed fallen; no eve durft he raife in penitence and prayer to Iris offended Maker, nor dared he even hope for mercy. There is a facred guard that virtue wears, which, though invifible to keen pereapuoii.
perception, will defend its votaries at a time when no fubftantial power on earth can ap¬ proach to fave the deftined vidim of vice 5— an overruling Being now awed his dark inten¬ tions, and he did not dare approach the poor objeft of his defigned deftruftion. Such, fuch ever are thy immortal attributes* Oh Virtue! fuch the ftrength of thy in¬ fluence over guilty minds j and he, who, but a few moments before, had plunged headlong into the blacked crime of facrilege to Heaven, now trembled again to complete his murderous work; but at the prefence of thy votarefs, who, unguarded and defencelefs, was yet protefted from premeditated de- ftruftton by the all-povverful prevalence of thy facred impulfe, his fubdued weapoa returned harmlefi to its flicath, and the dark brooding purpofes of his Ioul recoiled with kidded poignancy upon his awakened confeience. The deep branching receffes of the ca¬ verns now bejran to leflen; and foon after the
the exhaufted Rofaline, as fhe ftill perfifted to drag her enfeebled frame without the fupport of her terrific companion's aid, per* ceived a f uall iron grated door near the extremity of the cavern. Concluding this was the extent of her journey, and that here flie was to remain hnprffoned for lifo, flie raifed, her defpairing eyes to the dark vifage of her perfecutoi, that flie might difcover in his look^his intentions * but Caftlenuco feemed fo deeply wrapped in meditation, that her enquiring looks were totally difregarde^, till be reached the door that interegpt^c} kh further pragreft, Thb he fpor, wtftafd, and in fil^nc^ they ^en^ered vthft appeared %gh$ % long vaulted corridor* rncjofcd $& th® extrtmity by another iron gm« ted portal, which beipg opened, JlQ&linft found herfelf in a wide extended plpce, that was but feebly illumined by fbe faint taper that ftione flightly through the mifty murky gioorn; and as her eyes glanced around this fcene of horror, flie beheld fc veral high piled heaps of mouldering coffins*
coffins. The ground itfelf was every where fo thickly covered with thefe me¬ morials of death, that it evidently appeared flie was walking in an ancient fepukhral receptacle. As fhe, with appalled terror, tried to avoid a coffm that crofled the very path fhe was compelled to purfue, the drapery of her veftments touched the mouldering form, and in an inftant it crumbled into duftj and fo momentary had been the tran- fition, that it feemed the work of magic, and for a time increafed the dreadful fenfa¬ tions that now overpowered her unfettled reafon. The fearful horrors of this drc*ry, difmal fcene, and the ghaftly fight of the frequent remains of human flteletons that lay fcattered in the pathway, occafioned perhaps by the burfting afunder of the cof¬ fins, worn to decay with extreme age, together with the noifome putridity of the confined humid vapours, at length fubdued the kft firuggling ehom of nature;—the fpirits
fpirits of Rofaime fled, and flie fell, refift- lefs, againft the appalling object that had overpowered her faculties. The hideous fcene was clofed rrom her horror-ftruck fi^ht, and thefe regions of death and eternity fhe no more bchdd.
chap. vnr. . « Thou md thy follows now &tx all at pence, ** Bm I Ime woes, unnumbered woes to come* « if any rflc, whole eyti are fore'd to fit,' ** llnhsilow'il view I a nturderVl lover's wrk*>* % <* Umy afk whoff arms ^xpe^ to«;|*fp , «' A si>itig fat&MHr in a Uft embrace— ** If any alk what orphan's tongue rauft charm ** The ghoft of forrow* - *'— *■" ■ ..... ■ —«* »»■ <* Condtsft them here* Jn ras behold that wretch» «« The fcene and centre of .ill human gritt!" «1WELL« OW long Rofaline continued infenfible, is uncertain j but on awakening from her trance of terror, ftie found herfelf in a purer atmofphere,
atmofphere, and the bright illuminarions of day had chuied the former darknefs from her memory. As flie caft her eves around, they reft¬ ed on objects familiar to her fight; and as foon as her waking fenfes permitted her, fhe was enabled to diftinguifh that fhe was now within the walls of the old detached libiary of the Abbey of Si. Ofwythe. Her mind, houe\ er, was too unfettled to feel either pleafure or aftomfhmcnr, although the fudden traafltton feemed to have reftored her to a perfect tsemblance of tbe paft, and with wonder fhep* ufed upon her prefent fituation ; fliii no tear c \me to the relief of her agonized heart, and her fenfes for a period feemed to have endured a total (lag- nation. The miferable certainty that the immolated Conftantine was o^rbaroufly de¬ prived of life, and loft to her for ever, funk her to the lo\eft ab)fs of wretchednefs, from which no dhn could rc^al her. Alcehani*
Mechanically fhe arofe from the feat on which flie had reclined, and recklefs of the future, moved toward the door of the chamber, which opening, gave her ad- mifllon to the fouth-weft gallery, that fed to the private turret chamber of her father. With forlorn, uneven fteps, and haggard, defpairing countenance, fhe afcended the fpiral flairs, and pufliing open the fmall door, found herfelf once more in the apart¬ ment of Sir Alfred. Paufing for a moment, and crofling her hand over her forehead, as if endeavouring to remember tlie well-beloved occurrences and various interefting inftrudions fhe had, in this very room, often experienced from the tender care of her father, who had here inflilled in her young mind thofe precepts of virtuous fortitude he had often told her fhe would one day need the pradice of— "Ah, my beloved parent!** fhe exclaimed aloud in anguifh, u how little did you think I fhould
I fhould fo foon experience the mournful certainty of yoor words! How little did you fuppofe your poor Rofaline was born for fuch excefs of mifery as now overwhelms her V 9 €t Rofefme !** cried a feeble voice, in a tone of enquiry—* fe Rofaline!'* it again re¬ peated, in a tender faint tone. A fiadden gleam of defpairing pleafure for a moment illumined the fad featured of the hapiefs, Bnconfcious Rofaline 5 the voice was Nature's felf fpeaking in thrilling accents ro her aching heart, and fhe haftily paffed through the open door of the fleeping cham¬ ber of Sir Alfred. She caft her eyes around, but faw not what fhe fought. <c Is it delufion," flie cried, impatiently lifting up the hangings that were doled round the lofty canopy of the bed. Rut
But ab, miferable child! what cdni* plicated increafe of woe awaits thy anguifhed fight! Her ear had not deceived her, and fhe had .(heard her father's voice. He lay reclined apon the bed, not in eafe and* health, but faft finking to the couch of bis eternal reft. " Oh God! Oh God ! what new anguifh opp^efles me !—My father I" fhe con* vulfivtly exclaimed, finking into his dying f arm$, " Oh iny father, ftay and take me with you V Already the palenefs of death fat on his countenance, and ftruck the unfpeakable agony of convidion to her benumbed fenfes, that he was paft recah A piercing fhriek rung echoing through the chamber, and the fcene of forrow that enfued renders dcfcrip¬ tion impoflibie. Sir Alfred \^as indeed within a few moments of ceafing to exift $ the cordage of his life was fhapj ed in twain, and the
the now completely wretched Rofaline came but in time to witnefe the laft gafpofaa adored parent, and receive his final flgh and bleffing* As foon as the cares of Ellinor and the weeping attendants had recovered Rofaline, flie placed herfelf, the mute image of defpair and grief, upon her knees beflde the bed of diffolution, and liftened with filence to the words of her dying parent, who* fpeaking with much difficulty, endeavoured vainly to infpire her with hope and comfort:—-but the agonies of his own concealed feelings totally overpowered him $ the heart-rending tortures of fuch a meeting, and fuch a parting, exhaufted his ftrength, and for fome moments he laid motioniefs, from the unavailable efforts he had made. At length, finding his moments limited, he again ftruggled for compofure and fpeech, and making a fignai for all but his vox, n, a daughter
to retire, with much difficulty and emotion—> <e My child, liave mercy on yourfelf and me, and fpare me in this awful moment the excruciating addition of witnefling your unavailing agony. 1 blefs Providence that has once more reftored you to my fight, and that 1 .am not quiie infenfible to that laft confolation left mc; but forbear, I entreat you, to imbittcr, with increafe of forrow, the only few remaining moments of my life. I have much to reveal, but fpeech, I fear, will be dented me. When 1 fhall be no moie, open the cabinet iu yonder clofct, and you will theie find the laft memorial ofmy ten* dercft wiihes for your welfare;—you will there receive the clue that will unfold the ni) fiery of your own and your father's for- rowlng fate/' Again Sir Alfred paufed, and fpeech became more painful; but, as if refolved to foae Nature hcrfeif to one laft effort, he a; xn
again ftruggled with death, and thus con¬ tinued:—* " To the noble Ruithvina 1 bequeath your worldly guardianfliip ; and fliould the hour of retribution ever arrive, flie will amply befriend your helplefs orphaned ftate. Although I am ftill compelled to bury in filence, even in this awful hour of account, the fecrets ofmy life; yet fliould Providence extend his juftice-dealing arm, and avenge the injuries of the injured, there may ftill be found means to unveil the dark con¬ cealed my fiery that overwhelms our houfe/* With a momentary animation he added folemnly— c< My child, 1 know the wifhes of yoor tis inr narent will be facred i ttuicfore 1 ac<act no further furety than your promiie to obey ii.*; fititiy the directions c jut lined in ihe paitti of the ca' inet ; aid when you open them, remember they fp.uk in the O 2 lltt.niMyc
language of your father, although himfelf is abfent.—Obey their inftrudions, as you regard the promife I now exad; exert your fortitude in the trying moment of adion that their perufai will occafion, and it may lead to happinefs and good ; remembering that though Providence has deprived you of your oniy parent, he can, and is willing, to be your ftrongeft fliield and never»failing fupporter. Let not your foul be weakened by this di^rading forrow, but exert your reafon, and roufe your fortitude to refift¬ ance.*' A (pdden fpafm cut fhort the remainder of his fpeech, and he fell back motioniefs. It was fome time before he was again able to articulate, and then only fo feebly, that Rofehne could hardly diftinguifh the found ofhis laft bleffing. At length he faintly ejaculated*-** You are the beliefs of this Abbey, and all its lands. Should your unqueftionable title be dilputed,
difputed, then fearch for the papers which relate to your future rights, according to the directions contained in the memorial you will find in the cabinet: they are concealed with the others in the fecret repofitory be¬ neath the ruined cloifters, and will amply repay your fe&rchv—Blefs thee, my child!™ Shun the ------ the houfe of Ed mond ------Ed- mondville : Beware of ------Oh !"——With a faint figh the breath of life efcaped, and the name died in quivering accents on his tongue ere the found could be diftinguilhed. The load of life had left its mortal habi¬ tation, and the fuffering St. Ofwythe refted in peace for ever. No tear, no wild, diftracted fhriek, not even a figh efcaped the unhappy furvi- vor: flie had raifed a fpeechlefs eye of defpair to heaven, and with the laft faint ftruggle of her father, became alike in* animate, and iiy almoft a corpfe in the arms of him that was mch already, iter aftectiona* were turn afunder j there was not o j one
one in the world who would fympathifce in her fufferings, or a beloved being kit that claimed her regard, or even wifhed for her exiftence: whilft the co-operating ftrokes of the foul-harrowing fate of Conftantme* and the unexpeded death of an adored only friend and parent, fo ardently loved, now overcame every remaining ftruggk of fortitude, and fhe was no longer ca* pable of refilling the death-deftroying evils that furrounded her, fhe felt that every glimmering veftige of hope had left her, and without that only ftay of mifery, nature became torpid, and anguifh and defpair fuc¬ ceeded, Rofaline was carried, infenfible and paf- five, from the chamber of the dcceafed to her o^vn. Excefs of grief caft a kind of Sleeping, haraflld ftupor over her fenfes, and fhe lay for many hours in a ftate of benumbed feeling :~~if at times fhe became moment aril) feaible, it was but to exprefs a lilent,
% filent, deep-drawn figh, painfully depictive of the forlorn ftate of her mind, and the forrow of her heart, * * On the third day her attendants, by ftra¬ tagem, procured a faint dawning of re¬ lief to her overftrained heart and fenfes,— She was by her own command carried to the chamber of the dcceafed : the corpfe, as it lay uncovered in the coffin, and furround¬ ed by all the melancholy infignia of death, at firft excited no additional emotions, and fhe continued to view it with that fpeech¬ lefs ftupor, more afflictive to the beholder than the fevereft indulgence of audible la¬ mentation. The weeping Ellinor, who had followed her fad miftrefs, now, with a defign to pro¬ voke her to tears, laid, as fhe pointed to the corpfe, " 'Tis your dear fluher, my Lady ! Do you not know him ?*' o 4 i# Ye ,
u Yes, yes!" impatiently replied Rofa¬ line, ftill gassing, tearlcfs, on tht inanimate clay* 91 He loved you, my deur Lady,*' conti¬ nued Ellinor, «« beyond every other thing on earth; are you not grieved for the lofs of fo good a father ?" « Oh God 1 Oh God r groaned forth Rofaline, «* and is he gone for ever ?** ** He is in heaven, my dear Lady; too happy to need the pity of his old fervant— But he was a good Lord, and all his poor vaflTak blefs him, and love his memory/* Ellinor wiped the tt^t of veneration, re« fpect, and gratitude from her eye, as fhe finifhed her little eulogy. Rofaline now began to be interefted, and the torpor of her grief became more fenfibie to feel* ing: ihe fix d a piercing, enquiring glance on her attendant, as fhe doubtingly en¬ quired—- a Do you weep indeed ?—Ah ! is there any
anyone to weep for poor Conftantine?— Are not all hearts hard as Gondemar's ?—• Mine is ib, for I cannot weep for him j and yet he is dead and gone, and my father is gone too, and yet I cannot weep !" «* Ah, my Lady!** replied Ellinor, " I weep not for my dear mafter, for he is a fainted angel; but, indeed, I grieve for you.*' ** For me!" mterrupted Rofaline, flill difordered and unsettled in her thoughts and fenfes, though now flightly moved by the tears of her attendants* " Yes," the add¬ ed, with an anguifhed fi^h, ** I need your pity, for I am, indeed, a poor, unhappy creature, with not a friend on earth, but he who never v.ill be fo again! —Oh my father! there is none to com¬ fort your forlorn, dtfertcd Rofaline!-— Oh! are you gone ior ever, never to return ? ■—Alas ! for ever filent is now that (peaking breath, on whofe dear accents I liave dwelt with edlacy : no more v* ill ihy Jo\eri voice cheer your wretched child \ and iho,c cye->, o 5 that
that once beamed on me with love and tm* dcrnefs unutterable, will never look upon me more, for they are clofed in eternal dark- ncf. Cold and clammy is now this once warm handj and Death, remorfetefs and obdurate, has chilled thy fufforing heart in iti> icy embiaces." A violent ftood of ftifled agony ruflied from her heart, and in a gulh of tears iclieved it of the long pent-up mifery; the flukes of hvr tears, at length unlocked, now found a fue paffage, and the priibncd feelings of nature once more gained their deftined cur- iuit:— the long continued ftupor of her di¬ vided grief now found a vent in exclamation ^ ♦md deliring all to leave the chamber, flie Xi. mained for fome time in the free, uu- rtftiained indulgence of her grief and la¬ mentation ; and after taking a laft kits of the pale, flirunk coipfe, (he knelt over it, and pnyed with pious fervour. ** Father of Heaven!" ftie ejaculated, " to
wh'^m
whom the children of forrow are ever free to fupplicate, Oh f heir the petitions of thy miferable creature! It ha? pleafed thy fu- preme wifdom to deprive me of aU, and in tbi* laft bitter trial, of the only friend I had on earth. I wifhed for death, and joy¬ fully fliould embrace it; but if it i* thy plea¬ fure that I fhould live, i bow lubmifftvely to the power of thy vvill, nor dare prefume to murmur at the fe verify of my contirued afflictions,—Forlorn aud defoiate, I hmd be¬ fore thee, un flickered, unprotected, and caft upon a worid of ftorms, deceits, and dangers* I know not if 1 fliall be able to endure ks frowns, cruelties, and inflictions ; but for whatever deftiny thy power referves me, how¬ ever miferable, ho a ever perfecuted, (for furely, in this world there is for me no hope of happinefs), 1 will bow beneath thy plea¬ fure with unrepining fubmiflion, trait in thy remembering mercy with faith, and rely upon thy pitying goodnefs with certainty. 1 hou haft taken to thy realms of b\d\ the father on whom my heart alone was fixed wiih a o 6 neur-
never-ending devotion* I know that he waa the victim of fecret forrow Am?;—-Oh 1 may the long-fuffering of his heart be rewarded hereafter with a feat of blifs, a crown of im* mortality ! May the long-enduring, patient meek nefs, with which he bore thofe un¬ known evils, for which I am now plunged into irremediable lamentation for his lofs* teach me, if poffible, that dear-bought lef¬ fon of fortitude, which can alone enable me to fuftain the foul-fubduing anguilb of this diftracting moment. Refigned, 1 commit mylelf to thy almighty direction, and with* humility and patience, I will await" the fate thou haft allotted me." Bowing meekly to fhe infcrutable will of Fate, flie arofe from her knees, caft another and yet another agonizing, tender glance of defpair on the coffin, but had not refolution to tear herfelf from the fight of the now fe¬ re nely placid countenance of the happy Sir Alfred.—The fortitude fhe had prayed for again forfook her* again fhe feaied her lips to | the
the inanimate form^ and remained for a length of time in a ftate of unavailable regret and ufelefs lamentation$ till, exhaufted, fhe funk niotionlefs upon the corpfe, and \%as again, and for ever, taken from the painful fpeda* de by her attendants. On the following night Sir Alfred was committed to*the earth. A train of Monks and Chorifters from the Abbey of St. Auftin arrived to pay the laft refpedful office to his remains, and he was borne to the Abbey Church, where he had particularly defired to be interred* Rofaline, whom no entreaties could prevent from attending this laft folemn duty, fup¬ ported the painful fcene with heroilm, or rather a falfe forbearance, which could alone be attributed to the hapkh ftate of her iUl difordered mind. The fullen hour of mid¬ night, was the fignai for the commencement of the iacrcd ceremony, and loun after the now happy Sir Alfred St, Olwythe was cum* mitted
miftecl fo the graver the torches, whicb gleamed over tlie coffin, but faintly illumin** ing the immenfe fpace of the vaulted Churchy were rendea*d indiftinguifhable by the deep** ened fhades of thofe parts where the lights did not refled, and were loft in fhapelefs, mifty vapours* A deep-toned dirge was fo¬ lemnly chanted over the grave with impref¬ five fervency and refped ; the Abbot then began the fervice of the dead with that reverential dignity fo fitted for the occafion, His deep-toned, impreflive voice, ashe pro* nout.ced the awful ceremony, funk to the hearts of the mourning fpedators; whilft: the hour, the place, the train of Fathers, habited in their long flowing garments added a folemnity that infpired ideas im* pofiibie to be delcriheJ, and only juftly conceived when really felt. When the miniltering Father srriveri at that paffage^ * i Duft to duft, 1 ' an auJible convulfive cry fhot from the* agonized, bletding heart of Rofaline ; and as the grave-digger was about to ipiinklc the mould upon the coffin, ihe felt
fek as if a dagger had fuddenly pierced her bofom : and though all power of fpeech was denied her, ftie impreflively waved her hand for him to defift^ that ftie might not yet be deprived of the laft remaining fight of the cclfin. 1 he ceremony, however, pro¬ ceeded ; and when ended, fhe funk befide the grave, and inwardly ejaculating a prayer for the peace of the departed, raifed in her hand the earth that had been thrown upon the coffm, to her lips, which killing, flic again let fall, exclaiming,-— ** Farewel my father, my friend, my cnly comforter, farewel for ever! We meet no more in this but in a better world our happinefs will be ia.mutablc/* She was then fupported by Blanche and Noiman from the Church ; and when the fit ft burft of her feelings had fubfided, fhe fonk into a ft date calm of lilent, umielding iunow, which, though nothing could re- n'ou*, flie ik ver alur openly complained
of j and a root taken mind, that it abforbed every other faculty,, which, preying upon her fpirits, daily began to weaken her conftitution: and though flie patiently bowed herfelf to the decrees. of Fate, yet was there an inward, fecret wifb for death, that often became her only hope; for in the privation of a loved being fo dear to her heart, ftie had not another connexion in exiftence to bind her to life, or render the* latter defirabie. Rofaline, however, was unknowingly and innocently miftaken; for great and irrepa¬ rable as was her lofs, and funk as flie was in the loweft depths of mifery and wretch¬ ed nefs, there is that indefcribable fomething in our natures wluch renders us infiindively tenacious of our being; and though over¬ whelmed in an abyfs of incurable forrow, will overpower our defire for a total ceffation of exiftence, to a mind juftly fenfibie of the mercies of a benevolent Deity, and the duties
duties he appoints it to fulfil. Grief, however fevere, cannot always kill* and though it may weaken nature, has at length the heal* ing privilege of exhauftbg itfelf: and when mellowed by time, it at length becomes foftened~*it finks into a chaftened, mild re* gret, that ends fometimes in the moft pleaf¬ ing and rational, though melancholy fenfa¬ tions. In the youthful mind, in particular, there is implanted that happy eiafticity which keeps its energies and feelings alive, that, though fo powerfully affailed, it will, in time, regain its native ftrength * 9 whilft a ftate of torpid flagnation is, by this invifible fprhig, kept from the heart, and all its pafr fions retained unimpaired. Had Rofaline been furrounded by friends, to a grief like her's their web-mea.iiny; ef¬ forts to conquer it had ccrtamly hided ; but kft to combat entirely by hcrielf her ago* nizing feelings, which though, perhaps, too abfolutely indulged, yet would Nature im* perceptibly work her own way, and at the cxpiratioa
expiration of a month, a degree of returning cafe overcame the violence of a firft forrow; and when, on fome time more being ekpfed, ihe at length had founds f&hitarv romooiurc ftealing over her heart, and lulling, for a moment, its diftracting emotions to a pen* five kind of melancholy calm, fhe fummoned up courage to fee, for the fiift time fince her father's death, the only companion of his fatal journey. Owen, at fight of his dear young Lady, felt the tear ftart to his eyes; but he had prudence fufficient to re* ft rain it, as Rofaline, with outward compo¬ fure, afked him the fad queftions of her father's actions during his abfence, and the caufe that had hurried him back but to breathe his lait furhon the morn ofhis return. u Alas, my Lady !° Owen began, ts 'tis a fad fubjeft; and I would rather, fo pleafe you, be commanded from talking about what will grieve afrefh the heart ofmy dear young miftrels." * % You miitakc me, my good Owen \ u Lady R Cilme
Rofaline replied; u it cannot increafe the mifery I already endure, and to the inflic¬ tions of Providence I am refigned.'* €i Why now, my Lady, it does my heart good to hear you fay fo*—Als! my dear mafter faid truly, that you would bear it meekly i and, the Virgin be praifed ! fo you do, and my dear Lord was right/' Owen then began a long detail in his owa privileged way, which was to this effcet.
CHAF
mmmmmmmmmmmmmmm
u Patience it more oft theexercife of Saints—the trial of their fortitude, making them each his own ddivercr an*3 vl£to« mcr all tint tjranny or fortune can io0i£t." MitTOW. ** Often are die lltps of the dead, m the dark eddying cf biails, when the moon, tt dull /hietd, from the eaft, i» roiled along tlte Iky. •' Thi ice from the windy talearofi: the ¥oice of Deaths." IR Alfred, from his extreme anxiety to ar* rive at ihe defttnarion of his juurney, had exerted himfelf be) ond the fmall remains of the fhattered ftrength ofhis corporeal frame* His conftitution, already impaired by a complication
S
complication of ills, the fad effcds of cor- rofive unrevealed forrow was feft finking to a rapid decline. He had, however, nearly arrived at the end of his journey, when, overcome by the exertions he had made, his ftrength failed him, and he lay dangeroufiy ill, without the power of moving fiom his bed.—The delay was death to the hopes he had entertained, as to the fuccefs of the caufe on which he had too precipitately em¬ barked, and the confequences proved fetal io his life ', for of whatever nature they were, his difappointment in being unable to purfue his journey to the end, together with the anguifh and impatience of mind he laboured under, fo greatly deranged his intelleds, that for many days rendered him infenfible. In one of his mofl lucid inter¬ vals, the myfterious ftranger, that had caufed him to leave the Abbey, again appeared, and for an hour was fhut up with him in private conference:—whatever was the fubjed of their dif courfe is unknown, but, ou the inftant of his departure, Sir Alficd commanded
commanded Owen to proeme the meana of their immediate return to the Abbey. The eflefts of the ftranger's vifit, Ovven remark* ed, had operated dreadfully; aud with alarm, he perceived the fudden change that in a few moments had been produced. Sir Alfred, confetous of his near approaching diftblu* tion, increaied his malady by the fears and agonies he endured on his daughter's ac¬ count ; and anxious to behold her once again, he quickened the laft moments of life by the fatigues he underwent in being carried again to the Abbey; where, by the care and attention of the faithful OAcn, he was brought and lodged in his own chamber, whilft a mellengcr, fent to the Cifile, was ordered to haften the return of Roialine, who arrived there nearly at the time «that the unhappy fufferer was concluded through the vaults of the Cade, whieh had a communication with thofe of the Abbey ; and hence it was tkit the d/tog Sr Alfred was laved tbe uftrefs that would huve enfued, had he known the Creadful
dreadful fcenes to which his loved child had been expofed. With the fudden, unlooked-for misfor¬ tune of her father's death, expired evtry pofiibie hope of diicovcring the long con- ceiled myftery of her own and his ifaf- trous fate ; the long hidden fecret, for which her father's death had too certainly been hafiened, ended in obicurity, and every veftige of its caufe feemed buried in his gra\ e. As foon as flie could command her trem¬ bling voxe to articulate, flie queftioned Owen if he had ever heard her hither ex¬ prefs any wifh that he might defire to have fulfilled ;— " No, my Lady," replied Owen ; " he indeed one day called me to his bedfide, and bade me never defert my young miftreh when he was gone ! ! could not fpeak, my Lidy, but he feemed (atisfied vrith my otherw/e
otherwife poor affurances, and bade me not grieve him by my forrow. He faid that your Ladyfliip fliould know all if he lived to return to the Abbey i but if he did not, he charged me to remind you to open the cabinet as foon as he was buried, as you va¬ lued your own precious happinefs and future welfare." Rofaline remembered, for the firft time, that flie had too long delayed this enjoined duty, and flie refolved this very night to peiform it. As foon as all the inhabitants of the Abbey had retired, and fleep pro* found had clofed every eye of its inmates but her own, ftie took her lamp, and quit¬ ting her apartment, approached that of Sir Alfred's. At the door of the latter fhe paufed, overcome with unpleafoig painful recollec¬ tions, and tt was fome moments before the could find refolution to open it:—at length flie entered. The filent ftillnefs and folemn melancholy that reigned around, increafed the fad dejedion of her fpirits ; nor did the fable
fible records that were ftrewed aho\t the chamber, and had never been removed fince the funeral, ferve to take from their poignancy of feeling the fenfations flie was ftruck with. At firft flie fhuddered as (lie caft a fearful, anguilhed g!ance upon the dark-covered bed ; but reanimating her drooping courage, (lie c ofled the now for¬ lorn apartment, and entered the leffer clo- fet, where ftood the cabinet. Her thoughts were this evening mce penilve and fad than ufual; md iK let down the hmp^ with a kind of unwii ing- nefs that feemed tobefpeak the repugnance of her mind to the purpofe ihe came to ex¬ ecute. The wind* gently a t »iuung the foreft tops, induced her to undofe the antique cafement 1 for her heart, uuftrims; ant! j^ .*rfe to the office ihe had undertaken, no,* te\z a momentary relief, as flie contemplated the folemn beautLs of the n ph • Tt\e melancholy hcavi gs of t e vr^ fajui i vi uniibn with her own Ud tthoughts, an.i ihe vol, n» i' Kuuu^d
remained profoundly meditating on the deepened glooms of the furrounding ice- nery, which gave birth to the following irregular fbmzas* TO THE MIDNIGHT HOUR. Soft thro* empyreal (kies ike filvcr moon appear, Calling bnghi influence o'er the tranquil fc*ne | Its beams, reflated thi a* the* mi ily air, Compel dun Night to ybld httr ebon reign. * Von ivy-mantled tower,* recdv'd a pajti^] light. Its royilic gloom* a Staling fear impart} Ancl fuperftition, to the drtad-ilrucfc heart. Paints the fad fhatle of funic poor murder'J Tptttr, The weft \vi«d > fweeplag o*cr the fable woods, Sighs, as it breathes the falling leaves among. And gently agitates the ttittrm'ting floods, 1 hat thro* the trees their wandVing cmtk prolong. Hail \ filent hour, that charms to peaceful reft. Ml hut deaths living victim, child of cyrelefj* giief^ Where Hope no longer iiays a chetaing gueii> Thy blow is welcome to that anguifh'd breaft Thatfe^ks alone a grave $ where mii<ry finds relief. Foi
For fome time her thoughts dwelt upon the mournful recollections (lie had thm portrayed, and the air revived, for a mo¬ ment, her finking fpirits. The fcene with¬ out was folemnly beautiful, arid fhe would ftill have remained in the melancholy in¬ dulgence of the painful review of buried fe¬ licity ftie had once partaken, when, with Con¬ ftantine and her beloved father for her com¬ panions, they had remarked upon the fyl* van charms of fuch a view, and, thoughiiefs of ills, enjoyed the pafling hour in blifs and happinefs; now how fad was the reverfe ! She did not dare to continue longer to in¬ dulge the painful ret rof pect ion of loft feli¬ city, and haftily ciofing the cafement, as the Abbey clock tolled one, flie proceeded on her unwilling tafk. Having opened the cabinet, and fearched for all tlie papers concealed in the drawers, ftie drew a chair to the table, and re- trimming her lamp, began to perufe tlie i z luh,
firft, which contained thefe impreffive and emphatic words:—
" Be cautioned againft the taking of en¬ forced oaths for ihey are the fure minifters of difhonour, and ultimately lead to mi- fery and deftrudion.—Such, Oh my child i are the caufcs of your own and your father's ruin !'*
Rofaline fhuddered : had the voice of her father from rhe grave been heard, it could not more forcibly have bcenimprefled on lier memory, and her blood chilled Vjithin her veins as fhe recalled the horrid vow ihe had been compelled to take. u Merciful God T* fhe exclaimed, " for what am I referred ?—Ol)! what dreadful confequences wid Joliow n y ioul harrovuog engagement!— My father was the viftun of forced
forced vows, and \m wretched child now doubly inherits them !" The paper dropped from her hand, and for fome moments the angmfhed remem* brance of a fcene of never to be forgotten honor convulfcd her frame with bittereft agony. At length, however, thefe feelings fubfiding, fhe again refmmd the paper, which lud Utile more to excite a minute perufai, aud only feenie ! to belong to fome others of no immediate confequence. Laying it afide, (he opened another; i's contents ran thus:—
u When you fliall open thefe memorials, let them teach you, my Rofmne, n it oily resignation to the decrees oi Piovi* dence, b-t to titude to fubarit to th: tnils that await you.—Oh mv child ! Oh mv daughter !— -thi^ is, perhaps the laft record I fhJI ever trace !--Vour foilur in iy never return—iiever agai-i cniold ym ai a ii.nl r j \^:i .d
paternal embrace 1—Great God! how fe* vere have heen thy inflictions!—My foul fmks under this load of furTering, and fome¬ thing tells me I fnail never more behold my child :—the melancholy prefentiment ia engraven on my heart, and fcarcely can my trembling arm direct my pen to blefs her,. and fay—farewel for ever!"—,—- A few words, that feemed blotted by tears* fpoke too legibly the truth of Sir Alfred's prophecy, and the dreadful ftate of his own anguifhed feelings. Rofaline dropped a fympathizing tear on the place where the running of the ink bad rendeted the reading illegible, and agaia proceeded :— « My mind is fome what relieved \ I will now finifh my melancholy talk/*
"My
« My child, fliould I not return alive, thefe inftrudions for your future welfire, will guide you to the means of doing juftice to yourfelf, and recovering, at full, theftory of your father** wiongs which now lie con¬ cealed, with the deeds and writings concern¬ ing the Abbey, in an iron cheft, of which the key is enclofed.
Rofaline looked in the envelope, bufe faw no key s and in endeavouring to perufe the writing to its end, flie again tried to find the concluding inftrudions, but with amazement, beheld the fruit- leffnefs of her fearch 5 for all the following paragraphs were violently, as it feemed, torn from tlie preceding part. A circumftance, fo myfterious and extraordinary, filled lier mind with wonder and conjedure. Jt was impoflibie, flic refleded, as fhe viewed the disfigured flicets—it was impoflibie that Sir Alfred could himfelf have deftroyed the i» 4 cjnnexion
connexion of a writing which, in his laft moments, he had fo earneftly recommended her to open. She turned the paper, and examined its back ; but it was plain, and totally unflahied wkh anv characters: and with aftonifliment and dread, fhe was now compelled to conclude tliat fome perfon had, by falfe keys, gained accefs to the cabinet, v hofo motives for fuch uncommon and fuf* I icious proceedings, now raifed a conjedure in her mind that recalled the words and circumftances which attended her father's concealed caufe of abfence from the Abbey: whilft the now recollected contents of the warning document, found by herfelf in St* Anna's ruin, ferved to convince her that ftie had an unknown foe, whofe dangerous fting flie muft guard againft, and who was, doubt* lefi, the long-concealed caufe of her la¬ mented father's forrows and myfterious ac* tions* That thb unknown being had deftroyed the
the only records left that led to a difcovery of thofe tranfadions fhe was uninformed of, was now too apparent to admit of a doubt j and the evident diforder in which fhe recolleded fhe had found the papers, confirmed the idea of the cabinet's hav¬ ing been fraudulently opened : and now the long-defired development of the myfte¬ rious warning, which the beginning of this paper had partly promiied to be a guide to, and whicii had fucceeded in exciting the intereft and attention of the unhappy Rofaline to curiofity, hope, and expedation, was doomed to experience a total defeat; and the fecret of her life and deftiny was, if poffible, more entirely obfcured than in the lifetime of her fiither, in whole grave every veftige of hops was buried. She endeavoured to examine feveral other papers; but their contents were more or lefs torn away at the point when they promifed to prove moft fatisfudory, and only their envelope;, kft entire. i* 5 Conjecture
Conjedure now became undeniable cer* tainty j ihe again examined the torn papers, and every other that prefented itfelf; but thofe that were not deftroyed, had no re* lation to thefe moft interefting to her pre* fent fearch. The only one that feemed to claim her attention, was dated on the night of her father's fatal departure, and by its contents, direded her to repair to the Caftle as foon as he fhould be no more,***- It thu* continued:—
41 My child will only there be fecured from the defigns of the heirefi of Edmond- vilie, in the guardianfliip and powerful grotedion of its noble Baron and Baron- <©&.—-The latter is acquainted with fome parts of my concerns, although the feal of fecrecy binds her to filence, and forbids htr revealing the little that is known to htr. Give into her poffeflion all the papett 3 you
you will find in the iron cheft* as as you have difcovered them; rely on her noble friendlhip, and truft in the mercy of an all-feeing Diredor* who, in his own good time, can crufh your proud oppreffors to the ground, and reftore to you thofe ufurped rights fo long treacheroufly wrefted from their lawful inheritors*'*
** Alas!** fighed Rofaline, €€ were they this inftant to be reftored, of what avail could be their fplendid acquisition to me, now thou art gone, my father—and with Ihee, alfo, the only other being that could render their pofleffiott valuable ?" A deep groan efcaped her lips at the remembrance of the double lofs, and incurable caufe of mifery flie endured; and this injun&ion*, to return again to the terrific Caftle, the horrid fcene of an F 6 adiotv
adion that was never thought of without fuch ftrong emotions as even made her trem¬ bling reafon totter on its throne, and threat* ened a delation of its faculties, riowcaufed her deeply to regret the command fli£ had received | and for fome moments flie remained buried in the unavailing mifery which thefe iad remembrances occaft? oned* At length, however, flie returned to the perufai of the paper, which finifhed with inftrudtons where to find her mothers jew¬ els, and fome other valuables, that would be needful witnefies of her claims at a future period. Thefe he advifed her to remove to the iron cheft as foon as found, which, with a fum of money, were now depofited in the fecret drawers of the cabinet, Rofaime opened the divinon defcribed $ flic there found her father's pidure, and a very
very confickral>k fum of money; but her moft minute fearch could not enable her to difcover the other valuables, which had evidently been removed £ and it was obvious the fraud had been perpetrated by no common needy robber, fmcr, whoever had thus cruelly deprived her of the jewels, and the poflibility of obeying the laft folemn commands of a dying parent, in the deftrudion of his papers, were, doubtlefs, one and the fome perfon; and from the mention of a name, that a former myfte¬ rious warning had taught her to guard againft, it feemed but too probable a con¬ jedure that the irreparable lofs fbe had fuftained, originated in an agent of this un¬ known foe to her future peace, Roialine fighed at this unexpected de¬ ftrudion of her expedation* ; the papers ftie was to feaich for, aud whkh, flie now fuppokd, w-mkl ten aiu'y lu\e ex¬ plained every thin», were, the weh knew, concealed in fomc ruck in the vaults of uu
the Abbey; but in what direction they *were fituated, or where flie was to feek for them, was an infurmountable dif* * ficulty no effort could lead to the hope of overcoming. From the repeated caution^ contained in thefe mutilated papers, and from the warning fhe had received in the fouth tower of the Abbey, fh$ was con¬ firmed in the affurance that fhe had an enemy to contend with, more dangerous, perhaps, than he really was, from being unknown and concealed : but not informed of the extent of what (he had really to dread, or how flie might avoid the effecls of a danger fo perplexing to the underftand- kg, and fo difficult and impoflibie to comprehend, was a myftery that no effort of reafon could fathom or unfold $ and flie felt her fituation rendered, if poffible, ftifl more defoiate, by this imperfect difcovery of evils fhe muft in future teach herfelf to dread. The neceflity of her quitting the Abbey for
for the fafer protection of the Caftle, how¬ ever, now forcibly ftruck her; and, un¬ willing as flie was to leave its beloved and venerated folitudes, fo congenial to her mind and heart, flie confidered that, by flaying longer, fhe might expofe herfelf to frefh clangers, of a nature that now power¬ fully aroufed her apprehenfions of their ob- fcure and imperfectly conjectured confe¬ quences. With a figh, that exprefled her hopefets ftate of ever obtaining a light upon this myftery, fhe clofed the cabinet, and quit* ting the chamber, was about to recrofs the other, when either the weaknefs of her eyes, whkh were rendered dim and imperfeft from the continual flow of her tears,— or from the deceptions of fancy, whofe images might prefent imaginary forms to her view, Ihe now thought fhe caught a fight of a gliding form, which, darting along the dinky fide^ of the bedchamber of
of Sir Alfred, had vanifhcd near the har^** ings of the canopy* A kind of defperate courage enabled her to caft hei eyes towards the fpot where it had difappeared, but her lamp fiiining but dim¬ ly, enabled her not todiflinguifh any moving object, and every thing remained awfully ftill. Concluding that the ftate of her mind had worked up her imagination to an un¬ ufual pitch, and that it had deceived her, flie was leaving ihe apartment, when a deep echoing figh too certainly broke upon her ear, and convinced her that fhe was not the only being in the* chamber that had an exiftence; for in .a moment after, a ckep-toncd, hollow voice pionounced, in flow and piercing accents— u Shun the dangers which here await you, and quit the Abbey ere you become its pi i foner F* IWaline was now convinced that flie hail not
not and the terrible cer¬ tainty that the apartments were fhe retort of fome beinsr, almoft overpowered her before weakened fpirits, and flie funk, over¬ whelmed with affrights upon the feat once occupied by Sir Alfred, muting, in dread expectancy, the appearance of an avriul apparition. Some monunta paffed in fearful fufpenfe, but nothing again interrupted the folemn filence that reigned around. A little re* animated, flie arofe from her feat, and as faft as her terror would permit, left the room $ then haftily faftening the door, flie glided fvviftly acrofi the corridors, and eiitered once more her own apartments.
CHAP.
mMm w Sm g msx m mae t }m 40
CHAP. IX.
'* ^ttalght tlte bm*\t roared.—*They mixed in echoing fray % like the muting of ghefti Ift the £mk wing of windi,** 0 J SI A JO «* O poItfiiM F«riiub:,t*on ! Golden tm t *' That k?ep$ the ports «f flumber ©peft wide <f To m«ny a wsfchlol nif»ht; «* ^- ....... „ IW ..... , nm ^wm^ Oh Mijefly! « Wuen thoo doll pinch the b*ar$r» thou doft fit ** L1k« a rich armour, worn in heat ©f day, « TH*e fetfcTft with fiifoty." AT was fome time before Rofaline regained compofure of mind * and as fhe reclined upon her couch, flie deeply refleded upon the !:,te terrific fcene. The voice flie had heard, fhe fat
felt convinced proceeded from the fpirit of her dcceafed parent; and fhe now feverely chid herfelf for being governed by fuch weak terrors, as to feel alarm at a circumftance which, thougli awful in itfelf, carried with it a kind of balmy confutation; for there was to her reflecting mmd, which dwelt delighted on the memory of her father, a confoling pleafure in the affurance that, though his mortal care w.is ended, his fpirit v^as ftill watchful over his afBi&ed daugh¬ ter's welfare: and as this idea gained ground in her mind, it became a melancholy means of comfort and resignation to the difpcnfatioRS of Providence, md the ne- ceflky of her fpeedy departure from tha Abbey* The Baron Cadlenueo, when informed of Sir Alfred's death and Ruia ine*s flight, though ftill at a lofs exactly to con¬ jedure the caufe of her lo privately ab* fencing herfeif fimn the Caftle, experU enced an unfeigned joy in the certainty thai Hie
fhe had flown no further than the Abbey, and really unaccompanied by his fon, to whofe entreaties he *ad hefore concluded her fudden difappearanee was to be attributed, that by the flight of both, flie might be pre¬ vented from taking an oath that would be fufficient to fever theni forever. And now that he found Rofaline was hequeathed by her father to the care of the Baroneis, and thai in the will Oi tlie decou ed hi» own name had been flightly mentioned as a mark of reipect and compliment due to the charaderand al¬ liance with the Lady Ruithvina* he reiolved to exert that authority which St. Otwythe had only intended to be executed by the Baronefs, and, invefting htmleif with the ufurped guardianfhipoi his daughter, claim a right over her adions, which he well knew was merely nominal and illegal. In the name, therefore, of Ruithvina, he had repeatedly fent to the Abbey, to requeft her return to the Cattle ; but Rotative fhud- dering at its mention, and the thought of being
ibeing again compelled to enter it, and de¬ voted with the fondcft cnthufiafm to tho be* loved glooms of the Abbey, and its folemn fhaded ruins, had ftill lingered from week to week, and delayed her uir.wlling removal; but the dilcovery oft; e preceding niglit, and the fupernatural warning flie had received, made her refolve upon au event fhe could no longer, with iafety to hcrielf, defer tne exe¬ cution o(, and fhe had fixed on the fuctetd* ing morning for her quitting, once more, the venerable pile; wimn G»ven (who had been commifiiuneri to fignify her intention at ihe Caftle) letun.cd, and file teU a pleat¬ ing refpite when in'ormed that it would be impoflibie for her to en*er Urbandine, fince it was become the feat of war and tumult; the Yorkiils having in a late defeat flown, to this fortrefs, as the neareft and only re¬ fuge from the conquering enemy, who, headed by Queen Margaret, liad beat the former, wtli great lois, from the field of battie, aud pur'tied the flying foe to the very gates of Urbandine. aguuft whole inacceffible
inacceffible towers Margaret had pointed the whole of her artillery, and was preparing, on the following day, to beficge their nearly impregnable bulwarks. Rofaline gave fuch neceflary orders for the fecurity of the Abbey, as feemed moft needful for the protedion of its inmates; and though from its weakened, undefended flate, it could not refift the attack of an invading foe, yet flie relied on its paffive flate, and the rcmoteiiels of its fitua¬ tion from the fcene of adion, for the fecu¬ rity of hcrfeif and its peaceful inhabitants. Thk day palled, as did the former, in unin¬ terrupted quiet, although the fate of battle had been nearly decided, and Urbandine, it was fuppoied from the accounts that Owen gathered of the flraggltng fodicry he had met in the foreft, had been the con¬ querors. The night was far advanced, and the in* inate^ of the Abbey were about to retire fo reft,
reft, when a loud knocking at the fouth gates of the ruins alarmed the trembling houfehold, and they all ran, affrighted, towards their Lady's chambeis. Rofaline herfelf, fomewliat flartlcd at fo unufual an alarm, entered the hall where her people already weie affembled, but too much terrified to inveftigate the caufe of it. The knoclring continuing, Rofaline com* manded them to lriften, and gi\c entrance to the flrangeis that occafioned ir. ** Give them entrance, my Lady !" ic- pcatedOwtn, with his ufual !ook of terror when danger claimed his afliflancc ; '* why, furely, your Lady (hip does not defign to admit the plundered ?—They will ftrip the Abbey of all it is worth in a twinkle, and leave // and us as bare as a blaftcd tree upon the fea beach," Roialinc
Rofaline could not refrain a fmile*— ei % do not think they are plunderers,'* fhe repli¬ ed, " but rather fuppofe them to be fome of the efcaped friends of the Lancaftrian forces, who are, perhaps, flying from the purfuit of their foes, and the tenipeft of the ele¬ ments ; if fo, tliis Abbey may afford them a prefent fheltcr. It is niy command, there¬ fore, that the gates be inftantly unbarred." " What, my Lady, crofs the great Church at this hour of the ;-Jght!" exclaimed Owen j " I am fure I dure not do it!" he added, with a look of terror. u Tiien I willl" replied Rofaline i— €i give me tlie keys! 1 * Owen, little imagining that his Lady really meant to do fo, prefented a heavy bunch to her; and Rofaline, whole bene¬ volent heart taught her to aflift the mi- fenes of others, was too firm in an ad of chanty to be daunted by fears for hex own fafety. She took the rufty keys, and unfaf- tening the Gothic portal, proceeded iwiltly down
down the arched corridor that opened upon the Church. The knocking increafed, and flie found that whoever were the intruders, they had gained admittance to the interior courts and cloifters through fome breach in the out¬ ward walh, and had now arrived at the great gates of the Abbey Churcli ; which enter¬ ing, (as fhe had too often done of late, un* known to all her people, by the fouth-weii gallery, to vifit the tomb of her father), fhe crofted the dreary aifles^ and reached the principal of the grand entrances, where the knocking ftill continued, She was about to open the gates, but remembering that the caution of Owen would not be ilbpractLed, flie demanded aloud the bufinefs of the ftrangers. A female voice replied, €i Qjick ! o^en your portal j we are purfued by enemies to vol. tu q the
ihe gates of your habitation, and demand a fhelter from their violence/* Rofaline with much difficulty fucceeded in undrawing the heavy, cumberous faften¬ ings, and the gates opening, prefented to her fight a lady of tall, majeftic perfon, who held by the hand a blooming boy; and by the brilliance of their fhining habili¬ ments, convinced Rofaline her guefts were of no common (lamp. A filver armour, richly ftudded with jewels, encafed the waift and arms of the lady, who wore upon her brow a helmet, whofe glittering creft was covered with a waving plume of feathers, that grace¬ fully nodded to the commanding dignity of her whole deportment j whilft beauty and majefty flione expreflive on her coun¬ tenance. Rofaline, as fhe viewed her, felt awed with refiftiefs admiration and refpeft.
The
The face of the lady feemed clouded by the ftruggles of grief, difappointment, and humiliation, unufual to her feelings.—At firft flic fcarcely noticed her young hoftefs, till after a moment fhe found it was im¬ poflibie to fee, without furprife, the beauty and mild melancholy of her appearance, fo cxpreffively imprinted on her countenance, and which her fable flowing habit feemed to explain. A degree of pity croffed tlie features of the ftranger, as Ihe faid~ <c From the fcnfibility of your look and manner, and the expreflion of forrow dcpided on your countenance, 1 judge affliction prefies heavy on your mind.—* Alas ! we arc ourfclves the fport of Fortune* and driven by her caprices, now (cek, in your ruined munfion, a fecurity to flhelter us from our perfecutors."—After a paufe fhe added, as ihe examined the features of Rolaline,— u There is an open finccrity in your aiped, that tells mc 1 may iately *ely «L ^ on
on your truth for our protedion. Say t can you with loyalty affoid us a (belter from our quick pur'uing enemies?" , ** Suci» fafety and protedion, noble Lady," diffidently replied Rolaline, ** as the Abbey affords* )ou may com nand, un* doubting thu honour of the orphan of St. T Oiwythe." " St. OfAytle!** repeated the lady with a degree of aftonilhrnent m her tace -, then adding, * c The charge you undertake js uf the utmoft conkqueiiO., and may invo»ve you iu (ianger mid troubh*, ior I fear we were di'coveicd ere vve gamed your gates 5 lofe, therefore* no time, vut haften to tome place of more concealment and iecunty." " This way tiRm, 0 (aid Rofaline, pro¬ ceeding to the vaulted veftibule. At that moment, however, their further progrels wa^ liopj ed- 9 for as they were about fo enter, a confufed 'ouud of unknown voices was diitmguiflied in die hali beyond the
the paffage ; and Rofaline heard her people exclaim aloud—** The Abbey is befct by foldiers 1" And her own name echoing through the din and noifo that on all fides founded through the hall and cor¬ ridors, which now blazed with fights, and fevetal armed men, as they ruihed paft the entry that opened upon the innabitcd fide of the Aubey, caught a glimpfe ot the light that was borne by Rofahne : one of tiie at lf.opp;ng before tne open portal of the cntiy, Aoudi" caned to his companions— ** We have found them 1 Here are the vanquilhed fugitive**!—follow ! fouowl'* u OhG«»dr' exekime. 1 he lady, match* ing her ion to her arms, *« the uritors nave diicovcred us, and we aie iuit nievaaoiyi'* Then feizing ihe arm of Roiaiiae, whilft her face di 1 placed the conienui:^ t^uotions of teror, anguith, and auteruoi dread for the prdervation of her child, ihe t with a Q. 3 proud*
proud, majeftic, deep-toned voice, pro» nounced— " Save us ! fave your Queen—your Prince, who now demand your duty and fidelity : Margaret, unufed to the language of entreaty, now fues for your protedion 1'* Rofdine was about to proftrate herfelf before her augufl fovereiyn $ but remember* ing thai in a moment of luch danger, her nn mediate afliftance was the trueft pledge of her reverence and fealty, a fudden thought, for the fafety of her royal guefts, darted on her recolledion. The foldiers were already hurrying down the vaulted pafiage, and only a moment could fave the endangered Queen from their purfuit: and with that forethought which ever accompa¬ nied her adions in a fudden unexpeded difficulty like the prefent, Rofaline extin* guifhed the taper flie carried, winch would doubtlefs occafion a lapfe of time ere ut l%. ii
their purfuers could difcover what path they had taken ; and holding the Prince by one arm, whilft the Queen, his mo* ther, retained the other, flie foftly whif¬ pered——* " Have faith, Royal Madam, in your true fubject, and rely on her willing obe¬ dience in your fervice l" Then by the help of the favouring light¬ nings, which darted through the broken Gothic windows, fhe haftily led them acrofs the Church, trolling to the mifty obfcurity of the ponderous pillars to fcreen them from the foldiery, who, as flie gained the cham¬ ber where St, Oiwythe found a fhelter on the night of his firft arrival at the Abbey had entered the Church, and feveral voices exclaimed—-** They are here concealed! Guard well the entrance ! —Let none pafs, but fearch through every part of the Abbey and the ruins V*
<L4 Hope
Hope now forfook the hitherto intrepid Margaret; fhe clafped her young fon wildly to her bread, as fhe ejaculated— * c They have us now, my Edward, and thy mother can no longer fave thee from the upraiied fword^ of the infulting blood- thirfty conqueror/ 1 ** Droop not, Royal Madam!" inter* rupted Rofaime, haftily forcing open the door«*f the fecond chamber that led to the fouth-well corridor; u there is yet apofll* bility of eft ape—-1 entreat you, therefore, ta pafs fcarlefs onward » this gallery has no im¬ pediment; and though in total darknefs, I know each ftep and turning, and can con* duft you fecurely." ** Lead on then," replied the fpirited Margaret, reanimated by the mild voice of hope i ** we commit ourfelves to your- mercy, and tryft in your fidelity.** Rofaline now fummoned to her aid ail the fortitude and prefence of mind ftie was miftrefs
miftrefs of, fof the ^reatnefs of the prefent dem id . but where fhe fhould conceal the illuflrious fugitives from their merciiefs, hoftile followers, flie fcarcely kn^^v At firft flic had a thought of condud'n 5 them to the old remote library, but even there they ivould doubtlefs purfue their fearch ; tdi in¬ wardly debating, fhe, tor the firft time, remembered the fecret di vifion of the laioon, where flie had feen her father, and the myf¬ terious ftranger enier, on the aienorable night he quitted the Abbey, never to re¬ turn but to his grave. She fighed for a pafling moment at this recalled idea, and in filence led forwaid the young Prince to the door of this chamber, which opened outwardly upon the corridor. Pauling a while, fhe liftened to hear if any one had entered, but all Has perfed ly ftill; and foftly unlaftening ihe folding doors, fhe cautioufty put her head through the opening,. and with glad nefs beheld the room vacant, and lighted as fhe had left it on the firft cc 5 alarm*
alarm. Throwing back the door, flie filently moved for her auguft vifitors to enter. Pi Whither have you led m ?*' cried the Queen j " this chamber has no fecurity, and will foon betray us !** Rofaline proceeded to the fecret panel; She knew not whither it led, but ftie found, though it had no faftening, its crevices were fo entirely concealed in the mouldings rf the wainfcot, that the minuteft examination could not difcover them ; and had ftie nol well remembered the fituation of the panel, fhe would never have been able to open it, which with much difficulty fhe now effeded, and at the moment it Aided back, a number of confufed voices founded from the corridor and hall. Margaret, fixing a look of agony on the Prince, in .which were dcpided the ftruggling emo¬ tions of her great heart contending againft the indignity and danger ihe endured for his fake, caught him again in her arms, and fled with
with" him precipitately through the opening. Rofaline prefented her with a taper, and the Queen, as flie received it, fixing a look of trouble, but expreflive of thanks on her young preferver, pointed to her fon, as flie with dignified majefty pronounced-— " Remember whom it is you guard, and betray not your injured fovereign !'* Rofaline laid her hand in filence upon her heart, as a folemn affurance of her allegiance and fidelity i and bowing reverently, clofed the panel. Almoft overcome by the un¬ common exertions fhe had made, ihe threw herfelf on a chair at the inftant that the doors of the apartment flew open, and the room became filled with armed men, who, with blazing torches and pointed wea* pons, furioufiy demanded the hunted fugi* tives. " This is the place I myfeif,faw them. inler r* exclaimed aloud a tali warrior* cu 6 whoftt
whofe fuperior accoutrements feemed to^ declare hrm the leader of the band.—? ** Search friends f** He caft an enquiiv ing glance around the chamber, when, per¬ ceiving Rofaline, he, with fome degree of furprife approached her, and demanded again the objefts of his purfuit, as he fixed on her a look exprefllve of admiration.— Rofaline, difconcerted and terrified as much at the looks of the ftranger and his com* panions, as at the danger fhe was expofed to, flighty anfwered fhe fcarce knew what* ** Forgive me, Lady,'* ihe warrior replied; €t we purfued Margaret and her fon from yonder gallery to this door, which well I noted ; nor could they have paffed thefe apartments without your knowledge. Re- iign them to our fearch, to the juftice of an offended Monarch, and exped the reward due ta your fidelity to the Sovereign York. 5 ' Hie hput of Rofaline leaped to her throat with excels of terror *, fhe did not dare to tarn her eyes towards the panel, to fee if the 3 foldiers
foldiers had difcovered it, left their diredion fhould guide their fearch, for fbe found every eye was rivetted upon her, and ail the movements of her features watched :— unable to fpeak, fhe could only make the attempt, and remained filent. €f Be not alarmed, lovely creature,'* the warrior continued, fixing on her an ardent gaze j i{ thy beauties might well engage whole armies in contention, or force them to forego the glorious toil. 1 am thy captive, not thy conqueror j command my ferviees —difcover to us the concealment of the wife and ton of Henry of Lancafter, and enfure our protection. 1 * ** Stranger!" replied Rofaline firmly, " I acknowledge two fuch perfons as you de- fcribe haftily paffed through this chamber, but whither they have betaken themfelves i know not. 11 In this Rofaline erred not, for as flie had never entered the fccret paffage, Ihe was totally unacquainted whither il led to*
** Search the Abbey then,** exclaimed- the warrior to his ferocious companions, «* they cannot be beyond purfuit; and you, Lady," turning to Rofaline and feiziog her arm, " mufi be content to become our hoftage till we find the fugitives/* He was then, with his impatient band, hurrying Rofaline out of the chamber, when the Baron of Urbandine entered, who, in a com¬ manding manner taking her hand from the impetuous young warrior, exclaimed— " Forbear this violence ! The Lady of St. Ofwythe is the ward of Otho of Urban¬ dine ; he gives himielf a pledge for her fidelity and loyalty to our Monarch/* The leader unwillingly refigned his prize to tlie fuperior claim of the Baron; and now, urged by his impatient followers, they waved their flaming torches, and in a mo¬ ment rufhed through halls and corridors, and ihe Abbey became a fcene of wild and lawlefs
lawlefs confufion j its ancient chambers for a moment blazed with lights, and its Gothic windows glartd with unufual iiluminations*; every part of it underwent examination, nor did its crumbling ruins efcape the general enquiry. The Baron, difmiffing his train from the apartments, took the hand of Rofaline, as fhe returned her acknowledgments for ins timely aid, and mildly upbraiding her for fo long remaining in her expofed, unfheltered fituation, fatd-— * 8 Lady Rofaline, by the power veiled in me as your guardian, I might demand to know where you have fecreted theufurpers; but I trutt my lovely ward wiil refign them freely to the juftice of their conquerors, convinced that in fo doing Ihe will perform an ad of duty to her rightful fovereign, aud of grace to afllic'Ld England, wlio, ib long opprctfed by the intcllinc broils of her oppofing children, and tlie deluge of blood ipi'c
fpilt ia her unnatural ftrifc, vvill now owe her returning peate to the heroic magoani- ir.ity of her mod pcerle(s daughter,*' The concealed, (ecluclive fophtftry of this fpeech could not jio^v deceive tlie virtuous mind of Roialinc, or weaken thofe principles of innate reftitu ie which baldly bade her affert the cauieot injured majefly; flie hail afforded (belter to the illuftriou ^ fufferers, and whatever might be the con'equences to her¬ felf, me refolved never to betray the truft repofed io her. She therefore continued filent* —The Baron, after a paufe, proceeded :■— ** *Tis in vain to hope longer to conceal them from our fearch -, why then will you not voluntarily enhance the merit of the fervice required, where you are certain to be overcome ? We are well allured the fu ;ttive& have here found refuge j fliould you perfift in fecreting diem, the confequences may prove fatal to your interells—nay, your life * for ia thefe endangered times they wijl ntitlur
neither be regarded, fliould you preferve the traitors fromthe jull punifliment that awaits them. Refign them then, and the prayers of England (hall bids her refcuer, whilft the munificent friendftiip of roval York will amply repay the generous aiiiftance you afforded in the deft ruction of his ufurpin& foes.** Rofeline's tremor increafed, and a fcene t fo new, fo unexpeded, and lo entirely de-* pending on hvrulf, almoit deprived her of the neceiiaiy powers of action; but th^ greatnefs of her heart, wluch burned with indignant forrow for her iniultcd Sovereign* gave her courage thus firmly io reply:— " I am at this moment, my Lord, un* acquainted with the fteps of the Queen and ber fon, nor ca»> I dtred your purfuit $ tor be aflurcd, had my royal milirefs here fought refuge from the difturbers of her throne and State, no price could have bought ihe faitii and allegiance of Roialiae St* Ofwythe*
Ofwythc, nor is there any inducement that could tempt her to betray a trufL fo facrcd, when committed to her honour for its fafety and protc&ian." Hie Baron viewed, with fmothcred paffion and difappointment, the undaunted firmncfe of Rofaline as fhe refolutely pronounced thefe words. He had entered the Abbey with Ihe proud flufh of a conqueror, infolemly triumphing over the unfortunate foe he hatl vanquished: for to the towers of Urbandine was owing the honour of this hard-earned vidoiy. Margaret, unprepared to find this fortrefs fo invincibly ftrong and impregnable, had too prematurely haftened to its fiege, ere the arrival of the promifed forces of the King came to ft lengthen the weakened ftate of her own army i and though herfelf aided in the eiig-igcment, and with her Generals did all tli it valour could to fave a defeat, yet th® natural fituation and fortifications of the Caftle rendeu-d her attacks vain of conqueft; tiie extreme height of the lofty battleiiientt enabling
enabling the befieged to hurl clown death and deftructiou on the royal army, which, unable to gain the heights, were at length routed» vanquished, md the leaders chafed from the field of bat^c, whilft Margaret and her fon were purfued to the very walls of the Abbey, aad but for the intre¬ pidity of Rofaline, muft have fallen into the hands of their mereiieU enemies. The Baron (to %\holh v* ily arts nnd politics much of Margaret's preftnt fallen ftate was owing) was now defirous to complete h'13 proud triumph over that injured Sjverebn* and had himfelf led the purfuit, in the hope of adding the ftill greater exultation of delivering the royal fuiferers into the hands of their enemies. That they weie flickered iu the winding lubyrimhs of tiie Abbey he was well comiucul, for he had traced than to the ndn% whofe friendly .ntricacics had fhclteied the Q^.een frum his firft feaiehj and now eseiy circumftance affured Lim tha RolaJwv was acewfliry to the it
their prefent concealment. From one fo foft and gentle of difpofition, (o generoufly imfu:picious, he cxpecled no refiftance; but he now difcovered that, though the opennefs of her narurc might be impofed upon, the firmnefs of her heart and principles could not be fnaken, nor could the threat of approaching danger incline hei to his pur* po'ts: and though he uas enraged at whaty he tunic, inwardly, an infolent tcliltance, he did nor dure to give open vent to Iii" * bought s, left he fhould uuvv il moicot uu rcaicharacut than t ewilhed iietacqu anted with, aud lofe the little hold he fud ou a former occafion fo treacheroufly i buined in her go *d opinion; but why he, who was regardlefs in general of the opinions anti ferhnts ot any one, fhould now fo parricuhrly defire to retain t!*at of Rolalmc, whom tie had formerly openly rejected and contemned, is a fecret known only to himfelf, and which time alone can develop. Refolved, however, to difcover the fugitives, he commenced a ftrift examination
examination of ihe oh imber j he even the wainfcot to try if it eeaoed hollow, and had nearly arrived at tae panel partition, when his purpofe was overruled by a num¬ ber of voices, who ihoutcd from the hall and galleries — u Fire the Abbey ! lire the Abbey 1 and burn alive the ulurper^ P' The founds flruck in horror on the ear of RoUline ; nut oniy heif If, her people, .and the onlv inheritance led ner were at ftitke, but die ijluftuous Mdt^aret mull now become the faeniiee ; (hecouid no longer be conceded, and muft cither iubmit to throw herfelf upon the mercy oi the conqueror-, or be buried amidtl tlw d-loUting fl mies, that ftiortly would deiboy ihe Abbe\ ; for un- knowiagof her dati' r, ihe might now have rareatcd bwo.id the hearing of the decrees oi her piufuers. This idea guned fuch bold upon her thoug.its, that, pa:itin rt %itU -horror aiid appruhenfton for ihc«r hue, Ihe debated
th bated whether it were not beft to expofe the fecret fan&uary of the Queen to the foldiery, that fbe might ut leaft refcue its inmate* from fo horrid a death, though flic could not, with fafety to their lives, longer preferve their liberty. At this moment the entrance was burft open, and a fcene of horror, anarchy, and eonuilon reigned throughout the Abbev; the foklieib, encouraged by tbe fecret orders of Oiho, were already tolling their flaming firebrands to the vaulted roof of the hail i n.any of them lay blazing upon the lodg¬ ments of the ratters, where they were thrown, and others were fcattered thiough- out the venerable corridors and velHbules, whilft. the houfehold and retainers of the Abbey were feen wildly flying through tlic fabric to cxtin^uilli the lighted brands as they fell* Uiged by tlie uncommon danger of tlie uioment, Rolaline fnatched her. hand from the
fhe Baron, and rufhing wildly amid ft the furious invaders, fell u^ori lier knees as flie loudly exclaimed— ** Stay, ftay your dreadful purpofe! A helplefs woman fues for mercy af your feet i i—Regard the rights you ought rather to defend than violate/* Her beauty, her fuppliant pofture, and entreating looks had fb powerful an eflltt upon the hoftile warriors, that many of tlie moft obdurate paufed, bent their eyes upon their leaders, and waited in doubt for Jthe inftrudions they were to follow. At this moment of fiYpaided adion a noble majeftic figure, cloathed in armour of burniihed fted, with oniy his vilor un¬ claimed, entered the hall; the magnificence of his embroidered fureoat, and the iuperb plume on lm helmet, caicd with a creft of gold, bcfpoKc the dignity of hb rank.
rank. He had heard the words of Rofaline as he entered j and now approaching, raifed her with marked refped and admiration.-** Grounding his battle-fpear loudly on the pavement, he command ingly exclaimed—* * c Defift!'* and was inftantly obeyed $ then turning to Rolaline, he courteoufly feid— * 4 Difmifs your alarms, gentle Lady !•—The Toldier of honour is alike fenfibie of the claims of beauty and mercy, although the neceflity of warfare fometimes compels him 'to teem regard lei s of the latter. You muft forgive the rude nitrations of my hoftile friends, who have forced an entrance into your manfion, in fearch of a vanquished foe, to find whom would greatly benefit iar caufe, aul end the civil difcords which too long have rent our bleeding kingdom.—Say, have not the fallen Margaret and her fon here fount* refuge? 0
Rofaline
Rofaline was now, ftie found, relieved from one dangerous fear to fall into another, more difficult to extricate herfelf from than the former. It was evident, from the fubnaflion and obedience with vvhich every man {who but a moment before were hur¬ rying in wild tumultuous fury to the com- miffion of ads of dreadful violence) paid to the ftranger, that he was their chief commander; and the timely fuccour his appearance had procured, demanded fmcerity for the fafety he had en fured to herfelf and the Abbey: yet to betray her anguft miftrefs was a laft refource, that (he would rather facrifice truth itfelf, than yield to. Thus refolved, fhe diffidently anfwered— " My Lord, fo pleafe you, I will cheer¬ fully condud you through every chamber and avenue of the Abbey, of wluch / am myfeif acquainted -, if at the end you find not the objeds of your fearch in any of the apartments of the manfion, you will, I truft, acquit me of deception, if 1 then, asl m?zv vol. ii. & tU\ f are^
.declare, that although the royal did enter here, as haftily they rufhed from the fouih galkry, I now know not whither they have betaken themfelves 5 although it is ray true belief that they have elcaped through fomediilar.t portal of the building, and fecret* td themfelves m die recefles of ihe foreft**' " 'tis very likcfy/' replied the noble gal* lant warrior, ** for there is a confirming teftimony in your looks that perfoades the verity of what you report; and 1 will not fuppofe a face fo fair and open, would fluop to diiiembie with ^mie ihe innocence of truth beneath the mafk of falfJiood." Rofaline, though fenfibie that hoc fpeech had been equivocal, fullered not the lifing bluih of confufion for unmerited praife to taint hir check; ior fhe inu-irdly felt her rcfil a» ce to the e« *- miesof h< r So\ ereign was but the 1 erfoiuiancc o' m act of duty as a fubject -, and juftice, though ftrid in her adherence to truth, would have been out¬ raged, could fhe have betrayed the illufhious fufferers.
fufferers, to whom her honour was firft pledged, and her confcienee now engaged in their fecurity. Satisfied that, ih a moment of fuch unexpeded trial and danger* flie had a$ed aright* flie fubdued that innate feeling of faife fhame, whicii would at firft have arifen in her mind. The warrior thus continued :— ** I will not conftrain you } Lady, to the fulfilment of your own propoial ; but as your refidence has been invaJed, and cannot iti future afford you a fecure, undifturbed fhelter from the confequent ravages of war, permit me to recc iimcnd you to the guardian fli ip of mv Lord of Uibandine, beneath whole lony dwell in •? f know you -\ill find a faie aud honourable fmutuary.'* ** Joyfully, your Highnef, do 1 accept and thank you for the truft/* the Baron quickly interrupted; Ct the Lady Roialinc has too long deprived the Caftle of us fain ft ornament. Tiie B .ronefs wl!l rejoice again to behold her lovely ward's return; and (he dangers of the times w ; ll, 1 hope> plead with k 2 mv
my young friend for her pardon of the gentle violence I enforce, and allow me to attend her, without further delay, to the fortrefs/* " Be it fo,'* replied the noble warrior, who was no other than Edward, the eldeft fon of the Duke of York, the contending rival, and commander of the oppofing army of Henry the Sixth, whofe crown and throne the former had long afpired to poflefs.— " Your claim is prior and indilputablc,* 5 he added. " Good my Lord, guard your fair charge ; myfeif and foldiers will purfue our fortunes in the feaich, and hope yet to recover our enemy." A decree fo fettled, admitted no repeal; and unprepared as Rofaline was for fo fud¬ den a departure fivm the Abbey, which might again be expofed to the daring and more determinate \ic'encc of its fierce invaders, whilft the impoffibility of now affording fuccour and counfel to the royal fugitives, almoft overwhelmed her with dread
diead and terror for the confequences thar might enfue as foon as flie had quitted the manfioni for fhe found, fromthe refolute manner of the Baron, he was not prepared to admit of any plea for her longer denial to his requeft, and flie now dared not infift on lier ftay, left it fhould excite fufpicions afrefh, that might prove injurious to the diftiefled Queen, and lead to a fearch of yet greater fcrutiny - 9 and with much relu&ance flie was hurried by the Baron through the hall, towards the foreft, whea a loud fhrill female voice ftruck on her ear, in diftreffed accents, as it thus exclaimed;— : * f Stop, flop, my Lady 1 for the bleffed Virgin's fake, don't go without me V* The Baron, impatient to fecure his prize, ftill hurried Rofaline onward ; but the latter knew the voice of her attendant, and per¬ fifted in waiting till Jannetta arrived, who, darting from a troop of warriors, that had furrounded her, haftened up to her miftrefs. R 3 " Deai'
*< Dear my l«ady," fhe exclaimed, totally regardlefs of the prefence of tlie Baron, and almoft weeping with affright, ** dear my Lady, don't leave me behind you! Old Norman and all the houfehold have locked themfelves up in one of the great fouthern apartments, and there among the left 1 fhould have remained, if thefe violent, furious warriors had not bui ft open the door, as they laid, to fearch for Queen Margaret,-*- Lord! what a terrible fr ight we were all thrown into, when a parcel of fierce Ipoking men ruflied in upon us ? and, to be fure, down on our knees we fell, and begged for mercy, for they had all their fwords diawn, and we cxps&ed nothing better than to be murdered in earneft: fo one of the foldiers, my Lady, rathcrciviller than the reft, foon fet mc on my feet again, and hurrying me out of the room, faid I was his prize, and if I expeded any mercy, I muft go along with bini $ he therefore dragged me into the hall, my Lady, where i joyfully efpied your Ladylhip, which, to be fure, gave me courage* to
to tell him who I was \ but lie minded not that at firfl, and if you had not flopped when I culled, the Virgin guard mo, but I believe he would h'lve murdered nie, or worfe, I'm fure'" " You lie, Lady Rofaline," Ciid the Bjron, 4t the danger oi longer remaining at the Abbey, and .\n>\ now, I truft, aif >rd your forgive nefs to the fo;ee i may have put on your inclinations, iu the ncceffitv oi your inftant removal/*—-Rofaline was too deeply engaged in her own bufy refledions to pay minute attention to theword&frfthe Baron by any othwr than a bow of lilent acquiescence ; and they now palled the iecond court of the Abbey, of whicii Rofaline took a longing, painful look of regret, end was hurried ai 1 olt immediately from its fight; for entering the long avenue oi trees, they loon flu Jed it entirely, a jd die fi^he d bitterly to the mcio.y of the once happy days ihe had palled pe^cs* fully withm its walls.
k 4 CHAP,
CHAP. XI. ** But o'er the twilight groves ant! dnffcy caves, *« Long fonntihtg aifles and intermingiwf gravc», t *• Biauk MtknchoSy fits, and round her throws *' A deathlike tiience, and a dread repofe t «« Her gloomy prefence (addens all the fcene, ** Shades eveiy flower, and darkens every green, ** Deepens the murmurs of the falling floods, ** And breathes a browner horror on the woods.** j[HE deep regret Rofaline felt for her abfence from the Abbey, was more affliftive than any other circumftance could now have been ; fince ics remote and gloomy folitudes were rendered doubly dear to her thoughts, from the prefent melancholy flaU
ftate of her mind, and her fpirits had found there a congenial indulgence to the agitating pleafure of retracing afrefh each well-remembered fcene and circum* ftance of former loft felicity;—there it was that a beloved parent had taught her the ftudy and admiration of the incomparable beauties of nature; every fpot, every once frequented glade of the foreft were rendered dear to her memory, and afforded fome faith¬ ful memorial to engage attention, and recal anew fome exquifite emotions of paft delight* 'Twas beneath the fhade of fuch a tree that her adored Conftantine had firft declared htV love j near yonder avenue he had firfi beheld, and refcued his lovely Rofaline from de¬ ftrudion. How often had he pointed out, With fouLfpeaking tenderneis, the varied beauty of fuch and fuch profpeds j and whilft engaged in their dcfcription, what love-bewitching glances fhot from his eyes, and fpoke the feelings ofhis heart, although. bis tongue had not pronounced— " i & 5 love P*
iovel ,f «-rIt was at the bottom af fuch and fuch an extenfivc avenue of foreft pine, that be had ftiewn her fome ruined tower of the Abbey as at lengthened diftance it termi* nated the romantic view, and received ad* ditional beauty by the gilded reflection of a bright funfhine * whilft: the place where they ftood pbferving the eflfect, was enveloped in a fombre gloom, and fliaded by the em¬ bowering trees from all approaches of the glorious luminary. Here, too, they had a feint and partial view of the river, which, rufhing over broken fragments of rock, formed a catara^, and then was feen *to wind its courfe amid the thick umbrageous fhades of the overhanging woods, forming of themfelves a clofe entwined areh, that excluded every ray of the cheering fun, Thefe banks, thickly cluftered wish many a weeping willow, whieh bowed its pendant branches to the ftteam, had once been the fe- vqurire haunts of Sir Alfred, and were now confidered facred to his memory 5 and thkhei* 3 none
none ever reforted ; it had, as if by a congeniality of fentiment and reverential reipeft, become lier own moft frequented walk; and pain* fully diftreflmg was the neceffity tbat.now compelled her to forego the only real tranquil enjoyment her fickening foul was Capable of partaking, for there, fecure of intrufion, (he had leifure to dwell on the loft perfections of the murdered Conftantine, till her eyes became nearly blinded by her tears; and flie wept in agony at the milery of a deftiny fo full of woe and wretchednefs, rendered infupportable by her double lofs. The myfterious uncertainty of her own fate,—the fecret foe flie had to dread and guard againft,—together with the terrific and horrible oath fhe had been compelled to take, which neither her honour nor her con¬ feience permitted her to break,—the dangers to which it might expofe her,—and, laftly, e 6 tjie
the fupernatuial warnings fhe had received, Bnifliecl the long train of torturing retrofpeo tions tlut in thefe foiitary, undifturbed retreats flie had given a free indulgence to j but now, compelled to refign thefe purfuits, fo congenial to her foul's affedions, and to be for the future obliged to hide an an¬ guifhed heart beneath the mafk of an affumed contentment, was (fbe inwardly thought) paying a price too dear for a pro¬ tedion that could only irritate and increafe the afftidions of her mind, and render her yet more miferable, from the exertions fhe muft make to conceal them. As the Baron hurried his companions through the woods, they fometimes caught a view of the diftant Ipires of the Abbey j and as they climbed tht fteep of a rifing ground, Rofaline arriving at its furnmit, again cafting back an anxious, tender glance, beheld its Gothic cafements blazing for an inftant with flreams of light, and faw diflindly, the flying forms of the foldiery 9
foldiery, who, rufhing momentarily through its antique chambers, foon left them again to total darknefs. By their continued fearch, Rofaline was inclined to hope the fecret panel had not been difcovered ; the face of its illuflrkms inmates, however, ftill agitated her with dread, and (he grieved that ihe was com* peiled to forego the fatisfa&ion of admi- uiftering fuccour to their exhaufted frames. Still fhe relied on the fecurity of the con¬ cealed crevices of the panel, which, flic trufled, would remain undifcovered^ and afford tiie royal fugitives the means of <t Ww* efcape. The party, now quitting the woods, enter¬ ed the plains below the fieep on whieh the Caftle ftood ; but here again new horror and confufion awaited to Ihock her fight, for here fhe difcovered the camp ot the Lancaftrians iffuing forth columns of fire, fpreauing
fprcading a blaze of light to the clouds themfelves,. and rendering the glooms of a darkened night more awful. The royai tent of Mai garet flood, like herfelf^ in awful majefty amid ft the furrounding wreck of ruined greatnefs; it had not yet been fired, but was referved for the plunder of the greedy conquerors, who, by the blazing flames that lighted all around, •Rofaline perceived were already defpoiling it of its magnificent trappings j whilft the field of battle was covered in every part with dead bodies, dreadfully proclaiming the carnage and deftrudion of civil war. At a diftance were diftinguifhed parties of foldiers ftill in hot purfuit of their flying enemy, whil'ft others remained to ftrip the dying and the dead, br bury them, by the glare of the flames, in a hafty grave. It was not without confiderable dhBculty Rofaline
Rofaline and Jannetta were able to pafi along without unavoidably treading on the flain. Rofaline fhuddered at the fight, and tho mifery it muft occafion to furviving friends; and if comparison, to a heart fo generous as her's, could huve eafed the great¬ nefs of her woe, flie might have found an ample antidote in the afflicting forrows of others; for here, perhaps, now lay clofed in eternal flumberss, the father and the fon, who, blindly milled by fiction and feudal dlfeord, had drawn their murderous wea¬ pons againft each other; here too had k>ng4undered brothers encountered in tho furious combat, and embracing one com¬ mon fete, forgot their enmity in the arms of death : hers might flic fee the agonized wife and moriier, wildly feeking through the field of both friends and foes, a huf¬ band or a child.—Dreadful meeting!—She finds them <xt laft, but finds them fallen as thoy fought, in open oppoiition to each ether!
Tears of commiferation and fympathy filled the eyes of Rofaline as fhe viewed this diftrading fcene of violence and de* ftrudion j flie was not long, however, per¬ mitted to behold it, for the watch-poft, loudly calling for them to quit the field, obliged her to haften onward from the dread fcene of death and fkughter, and the Baron afiifted her to climb the fteep accli¬ vities that led up to the Caftle gates* . As the circling flame blazed fierce* Jy from the burning camp, its red and angry glare was refleded on the black towen of Urbandine, ancl fliewed them not a .ittle injured by their late attack ^ nor hau the white rofe of York gained an eafy vidory, fince many of its champions- ftrewed the precipices as they had fallen from the ramparts of the Caftle, where they had received their, final doom, and lay thickly fcattered beneath the outer works of the fortifications. Some of the ftrongaft of its towers confefled the ravages of war, and
and fome of its breaches were wide as to admit a fight of the interior courts. Reflections, painful in the extreme, agi¬ tated the foul of Rofaline as (lie arrived at the huge towers of the entrance gates. Compelled, as fhe was, to return to the Caftle, it feemed as if flie was entering a place of confinement ; and not even the fincere pleafure of agiin beholding tha Baronefs could counterbalance the ftrong re¬ pugnance fhe felt again to become its in¬ mate. The remembrance ofthe never to be forgotten fcene of horror acted in its gloomy chambers, gave her a too juft dread and abhorrence of its interior - 9 and as the fmall poftern was flowly opened to them, flie felt her foul ihudder within her when it clofed, and fbe again found herfelf fecured in the interior of Urbandine's now dreaded battlements. The courts were thronged with the con« quering foldiery of York, as was tie great hail
hall with the warriors, chiefs, and leaders* The univerfal gaze of admiration and furprife that was caft upon Rofaline as foon as fhe entered the hall, dif¬ concerted herj for tluie was no other female but Jamieua, whom, as flic drew ilill lower the thick veil that conceded her features, flic took by the arm, and Icarcely returning the Baron's falute, haftened through the crowd to tha ilaira that led to her former chatwter. It was too lata in the night to eKp#dk to fee the Baronefs, who, douhtlcft, was unprepared for this fudden arrival of her ward ; and Rofaline now quickly paffed up the grand ftairca&, and arrived at the eaftern gallery, when .he fijit of the door of the tremendous apaitments almoft congealed her blood, and made her heart die within her: a faint ficknefs feized her fpirits, and pale horror and anguifh diftorted her features* <' Ok
« Oh God 1 Oh God 1—that night, that night of terror and dillradion is renewed* and my fenfes furely will again delert me!" " Ah me, my Lady! what night ?'* enquir¬ ed Jannetta, with a tone of feeling furprife andcuriofity, aftonilhed at the uncommon expreflion of agony depided in her Lady's- countenance. * c Seek not to know it," replied Rofa¬ line, with a tone pf wtldnets and deep inward fuffering, '* (eek not to know iti 'tis big with fete!" ftie rep^aM* ftarting haftily from the feat on which flie kwi fonk* thtn> rememlwing «gi»in* recalled her icatteied thouglits. S^e fighed deeply as, with a tone that for rude all fur¬ ther enquiry, fhe defired Jannetta to endea¬ vour fo pioeure a light; for the houfehold*. unuifomjed °f her return to the Caftle, had, doubtlefs, not prepared the apartments for her receprion. Jannetta, not without fome little heiuatinn, and expreflion of her feai% at length quitted the gallery -, and, left ta
to her own fad thoughts, Rofaline Re¬ mained for fome time deeply wrapped in bitter recolledions and vain regrets of paft fcenes, both of pain and pleafure. Jannetta did not return j and as the gallery was unlightcd, Rofaline knew fhe might remain in its fhades unfeen by the company in the hall. Leaning over the baluftrade to divert, for a moment, the corroding anguifli of her wounded mind, and to call off her attention from the pre- font objed of horror, which had almoft frozen the life's blood of her heart, flie continued to view the bufy fcene beneath her. The hall was lighted by feveral tripod- lamps, fufpended from the dark oaken rafters of the vaulted roof, and difplayed the confufion and diforder that prevailed in the tumultuous fcene belo.v. The ban¬ quet was a fcene of rude and boifteroua mirth.*
mirth; and its partakers, regaling them¬ felves on the fumptuous fare, alreuiy dif- played the freedom with which they had quaffed the nedared juces of the grape. The minftrels, and their refoundmg harps, though echoing along the vaulted ceiling, in loud triumphant peals, their celebration of the late gained vidory, were littie at¬ tended to; whilft the ill outs and riotous exclamation of tlie now ferocious conquer¬ ors difplayed a fcene of difguft that added a frefli pang to the heart of Rofaline, now more than ever repugnant to her prefent abode, and flie fighed again for the peaceful ferenity of the Abbey, With glad nefs the beheld Jannetta re¬ turn, who now approached, accompanied by Editha, and Rofaline, being welcomed by the latter, entered into her former chambers. As foon as the door of the apartment was clofed, Rofaline eagerly en¬ quired for the Baronefs. " Alas!
<c Alas 1 my good young Lady,'* the venerable houfekeepef replied, «« her Lady¬ fliip is very ill* flie grieves forely for the ftrange abfence of my Lord her fon, and the cruelty of the Baron fometimes afffids her even to tears.** t€ Indeed !—Is then the P ronefs fo very unhappy ? M enquired Lady Rofaline with deep concern. "Ah, my Lady!" fighed forth Editha, with a thing of the fhoulders, which feemed to fay there was more meant in this unex¬ plained exclamation than flie dared unfold, but which only needed encouragement to induce her to utter, Rofaline* interefted in the minuteft con* oerns of the Lady Ruithvina, with the native tendernefs of her charader, now urged the houfekeeper to reveal whatever fhe knew refpeding the only friend left her; and Editha, thus entreated, proceeded follows I *' c When
*» When vour Ladyfhip fo ftrangcly dif¬ appeared, it was reported you had left the Caftle with the young Baron. It was the -very morning yourfelf and my Lord Conftan¬ tine were miffing, that, as I was waiting in the anti chamber of my Lady's apartments, my Lord entered her fitting room, and cruelly upbraidtd bfc meek fuffering Baronefs as rhe caufe of your Ladylhip*s and his ion's abfence fum the Caftle; he even tittered fome daik hints of the juft puuifh- ment (as he teimed it) of his vengeance for her difobedience, and threatened to be divorced fiom my Lady, who, he faid, had ftained the honour of his name, and pro¬ voked the * uiii that a*vaited her. My poor Lady bore all his un tra une red reproofs with her ufual mild fubmiflkm; a.id when the Barori at length quitted the apa-tment, f could hear iier fob bitterly My h: ai was burfting at her i ju ies, but I did n*.rehire to (hew myfel-, left flie fliould think I had Overhead what h.d paffe h (for the fweet fufferer never complains) > 3 fo I left the cham¬ ber
ber unperceived, by another entry, *;,id fince then, have never feen her fwcet injured face. Ah, my Lady 1 to think how bafely fhe is treated, often makes my old heart weep; for if tliere is a creature under heaven irre¬ proachable, and free from error, I am fure ihe is fo/* " What has prohibited you, Editha/* queftioned Rofaline, extremely agitated, 4i from feeing your Lady as ufual ?" ** My Lord's pofitive commands/* flie replied, u and no one except Madam Jefrica is now permuted to enter my Lady's pre¬ fence j and even her the Baron wifhed to have replaced by fome of tlie inferior houfe- hold : but my Lady, all mild and forbearing ss fhe is, would not allow this laft piece of tyranny, and for once, exerting the fpirit and command flie ought never to have fore¬ gone, infiftcd that Jefiica and Ella fhould at no time quit her apartments but at her own defire. My Lord would have difputed this, but the Baronefs was too refolute, a*nd no longer perfiiled ; but it is all very plain, and
and thefe ftrange alterations are eafily gueffed at. Had my young Lord been at the Caftle, the Baron would not have dared to behave fo to his fuffering Lady j for fhe would have found a protector in her fon, who would have been a curb to the growing cruelty f the haughty Lord of Caftlenuco," " Has there ever been a caufe afligned for the abfence of your young Lord ?" en¬ quired Rofaline, with trembling and hurried accents., " None to be depended on" replied Editha myfterioufly, and with hefitation in her manner. '* 1 he letter found in Lord Conftantine's bedchamber, to be fure, was very extraordinary; a*id when the whole matter was difcovered, my Lord the Biron was much een fured for his oppofition (paidon me, my Lady) to your union with the young Baron. But," added Editha, cafting a fearching glance towards the door, * ; there were bad doings 1 fear in thofe old haunted rooms of the eaft towers j and fome of the houfehold, my Lady,** (lowering her vol. ii, s voice),
voice), " don't fcruple to fay the Baron fent my Lord, his fon, to watch there, that he might get rid of one who interfered in his dark defigns, and whofe gallant qualities he dreaded, becaufc all his people ivorlhipped their future mafter, and were im¬ patient for their emancipation from the Lord of Caftlenuco's tyranny/' ** Impoflibie!*' interrupted Rofaline; u this is an injurious fuppofition* For what reafon fhould the Baron dread the increafing virtues of his fon ?" " Ah 1 Heaven guard thee, fweet Lady, from the bad defigns of wicked men!** fighed forth the good old Editha, as fhe refpeftfuliy raifed the hand of Lady Rolaline to her lips. €t Thy pure innocence is but a feeble pro¬ tection againft the fnares of cunning craft and fubtile artifice. Forgive me, dear Lady, for I am old, and may be miftaken, yet ftill I feel for the dangers of others, and cannot help weeping to think how changed and altered for the worfe things are fmce the time of my dear dead Lord. Oh! I remember
remember, when he was alive, it was very difterent indeed to what it is now; then every knee bent in willing homage to their beloved Lady, and the young Baronefs was worfhipped as the Queen of Urbandine: but now flic h forgotten, neglected, and infultcd, and ftill uoite—I fear fhe is a prifoner in her own manfion !" " A prifoner!" interrupted Lady Rofa¬ line with aftonifliment, " Indeed, my Lady, I fear (o, u replied Editha, " and fome dark fpeeches that I heard of late fall unawares irom my Lord's page, almoft make me tremble for her fafety. Ah, had my dear young Lord ,e- turned in time, his noble mother had found a leaning ftaft" ior the dangers that I fear t are in ftore for her. But thole terrible, terrible chambers' ------ V* —(Roi aline givaned inwardiy; aud the laft uoicis of Editha -pie:ced deep to her foul, as flie in mental torture repeated, " terriblet;uieed!) iy —" My Lord GondaiKU, can wry well be fpared, s i ior
for none regret his abfence ; thougli it certainly looks very doubtful and myfterious, that he has never been fecn fince the ni'cdit of ray young Lord's departure!" " Was- lie feen on that very night? 11 afked Rofaline, with a faint tone of voice, " was he feen on the very night of LordConftantine*s abfence from the Caftle? 1 * I{ Yes, my Lady ! Sir Julian faw him (fiom his chamber window at midnight) crofs the north terrace, and loft fight of him near the haunted towers. The lightning was f* ftrong, that Sir Julian few his very featu; ,, as well as perfon, and could not be miftaken.'* Edifcha here flopped; and the emphafis with whicii fhe fpokc thefe words, feemed to convey another meaning than what flie outwardly exprefled, and ihe funk on a feat, with much difficulty, endeavour* ing to prevent the agony of her dreadful feelings from giving their emotion an un- reftrained paflage. At
At length, obferving the pale, anguifhed h*oks of defpair that were fpread over the countenance of Roiali.ie, Ediiha continued, ** I fear, my Lady, you are ill; the fatigues of the night have haraflbd your fpirits, and I have done wrong to keep you from your • fo much required repofe. The Virgin pro¬ ted you, Lady !*' ftie added, as flie was retiring; when Rofaline, recolle&ing her¬ felf, bade her, if pofiibie, inform the Baroneis of her arrival,, and procure her leave to wait on her. Editha again • repeated the falutations of tbe hour*, aud quirted the apartments} wlidft Rofaline,, * in the alaimiug accounts flie had received of the Baron, felt her mind filled with conjec¬ tures, and increafing caufe of dread. She had ever thought there was a degree of myf¬ tery relating to the Baronefs,, that feemed. beyond the power of circumftance or con* jechire to fathom ; and of whatever nature It was, fhe found too clearly that her lait only fnend, on whom (lie muft in future rely for protedion and fupport? was herfelf s 3 tlie
the vidim of unhappinefs, and perhaps unable to afford her that attention and ma¬ ternal kinduels fo neceflary to the forlorn ftate of her mind and hcai t. Rofaline's vicinity to the eaftern cham¬ bers permitted her no refpite from the horrible remembrance of traniadions perpe¬ trated there; and, though exhaufted with the exertions and fatigues of the night, ileep was banifiled from her heavy eyes, and daylight found her in that reftlcfs ftate of momentary forgetfulnefs, more harafling to the wretched than the reality of mental fuffering. The morning was indeed welcome, and flie arofe from her fleeplefs pillow; but fad aad wan were the looks of the once beautiful and bloom¬ ing Rofaline i the enlivening frefh nefs of her rofy cheeks had refigned their lovely hue to the pen five lily; no more the move¬ ments of her coral lips emitted the fafcinating fmile of happy thoughtleffhefs j and her exprcflive eyes had loft their brilliant, c animated
animated lovelineA in a cloud of conftant forrow, occafion d by the recollection of a loved parent, bitterly lamented, and from the deep, lacerated pangs of a heart bleeding at every pore at the horrible fate of an adored being, on whofe idea her Ioul dwelt with truth and conftaucy. She was now no more the gay, the happy Roialinc, that never fek a fingle riheontent;—ah, nol flie was truly the fad, fen fit ive child of woe, whom every rude blaft threatened with fpeedy annihilation. Her Heps, grave and flow, portrayed the habits of a d<:ep refleding mind, labouring under fevere, unmerited aiihdions; grief had weighed oppreflive on her fpirits, and was inacceffible to every effort for its removal ; a countenance loft to animation, clouded with deep, incurable forrow, and fecreted mifery corroding the vital fpring of life and adion, prefented but a forlorn counterpart of the once blooming Rofaline, who feemed a; if flie had bade adieu for ever to
to and the graves of a fatlier and a murdered lover. She, indued, Mil! adhered to the hard, felf- taught leffon ftie had firft ftrhed to pradHfe on her heart; but, alrhougii meekly refign¬ ed to the will of Providence, whofe wifdom was unerrit g, and experiencing in fome meafure, the pious rewards which time bt-ftows upon the levere poignancy of grief, yet ftill it could not abfolutely deaden tlie potency of memory, though it had blunted the edge of extreme regret; it could not fill that cold and empty vacuum, which in her heart was left unfUpplied by any living objed. All within was melancholy iadnefs, incapa¬ ble of the toucn ot joy or pleafure 3 the affedions of her foul were cleft afunder, and ail its refined fenfibilirics ftagnated by contending miieries; her only pleasure was fodiudt, where, unreftrained, ihe migut give free indulgence to tne mournful em¬ ployment of htr thought, in dwiling ia fecret on thofe once promiied hopes of felicity, now ruined ior ever!
The fine open countenance and grace- ful fymmctry of Rofaline had ai lived at tbeir moft fimflied ftandard of fema'e perfection. She was not tall, and peihaps, placed next the majeftic figures ot the Baronefs or Lady Paulina, might have appeared to lefs advantage in point of the commanding beauties of ftature ; but there was fuch a perfed hat mony in her figure, that the moft fcrutinizing cbferver could find no defect to rob her of the palm due to her unrivalled lovelinefs $ her iylph- like form moved with native graces all her own j and the dignified eafe of her de¬ portment counterbalanced her want of height. Her bright auburn locks, waving in carclels ringlets, were confined only by firings of peat Is, t. an ing on her white open forehead j and though opprcfled by woe and fadn^fs, the fweec placid me¬ lancholy which beamed over her countenance, and fp^ko the uncouiplai ung luUrfuhoa with wliich fhe bowed ufi^ncdiy to thv 1 rovi that chafuncd, ua% if j o*hble, .lojo Ll« i* ii.,:\.y
nating to *Iv beholder, than io Hie height of her priftine happine s. There was a meek, yet perfua'ivc miidn fs of expreflion in her eyes, when addrefling any perfon, that foftene l th- fierce, and won the fenfibie mind to admiration 5 and unconfcio -sof her power, the 0Vs,iy Rvfalinc en »; r.d, per¬ fectly innocent of the intention, the heartsof a 1 ! who faw her. Grief had, it is true, altered her complexion, ant ribbed it for a time Of its] ;im; tr nlparent bloom, but it 1 ad in¬ creafed the expreffion of her eyes, that rend ie ! them, if poffible, more poweifully attractive ; and with fuch an uncommon aflcmblage oi beauty and fv\eetnefs of de- nicanour, ihe was doomed to ngret that tl efe ornaments \\tre but the dangerous appendages of futt re unhappinefs, which involved lheir poffdlbr- in ievtrer tiials than Ids att.aftivc graces would expofe tli^em to. Rofaline remained through the reft of the day in her own apartments, willing to avoid n:ixiii£
mixing in a fcene which neither her heart nor fpirits rendered tuitable to her tafte j and fince flie found from Jannetta that the Baronefs never appeared either at the ban* quet or in the faloon uhile the ca\aliers were prefent, (he refolved to enjov the privilege of being alone till fc! ey had left the CafVe j impatient, however, to cl fp o; ce more her only friend to her heart, flie waited in anxiety the promiied vifit of Editha,, who came not till late in the evening. She informed Rofaline that it was with much difficulty fiie had been enabled to procure an interview with the Baiouefs, who feemed to receive the news of Rofaiine's arrival with evident joy.—" Her LaJy Chip," continued Editha, < c cannot immediately tee you, Madam, bur flie defied me to greet you with her ktndeft lalutations, and to in¬ form you hat as loon as my Lord returns to the army, you may cx^ea a vifit from her.—Ah, my poor de.ii- Lady!" ihe #dded with a figh, « I am afraid fhe has iome
fome unexplained caufe of forrow weighing heavy at her heart, for certainly never was a countenance fc altered ; once I remember itfofiir, fo heavenly !~~ But now, alas! thefe cruel wars have hardened the hearts of our great ones 1 think, for it was not always thus j and had my Lard Conftantine been here, his dear mother would not have needed the pity of her poor old fervant. n ~The tears ftood in Kditha's eyes as fhe, bowing lowly, quitted the apartment 5 and Rofaline, whofe agony was i ncrcafed by the unconfeious obfer- vations of the houfekeeper, now funk upon her couch, and even forgot in her own, to feel for the mifery of others.
END OF,VOL. II.
X.AN*, M1KERYA*FRZ9« 9 l*ADSKHAtl.*8T*t*f•
