Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Ethelwina: or, The house of Fitz-Auburne: a romance of former times
ETHELWINA. -
* ,— ***^ "kS^^^TCP^VOW—im^^mh"
GHAP. I.
ETHELWINA arofe refrefhed, and her mind and heart fomewhat calmed by the late repdfe (he had found. Her firft care was to drefs her wounded temples; and, chang¬ ing her fpotted garments, fhe employed her thoughts on the pleaflng pear approach of freedom,. She put every little Valuable into her pockets, fuch-as her parents*, miniatures, and others, not doubting but flie fliould loon regain-her liberty. She wiflied much VOL* III, B tO
to inform Arthur of the-pleaflng profpects in view,,that he -might be the better pre¬ pared for the trying adventure. Eihelwina's mind, though fomewhat eafed of the extreme -mifery of the preceding dity, was ftill in"" great agitation \ and the hope of an efcape from the caftle was a fortunate circumftance, as it helped, in fome meafure, to draw hm* attention from the many afflict¬ ing events that had taken place in the laft twelve months. The idea of being in the power of Ruthmer, whofe cruel, blood- thirfty nature would fuffer him not to paufe at any horrible deed to obtain his purpofes^ greatly alarmed her for the fafety of Emma; and fhe anxioufly .wiflied to know if ftie was fo unhappy as to be in his power, for fhe thought he would never dare to deprive her of life, if his difappointment of her confent had not provoked him to fuch an act of favage ferocity. Yet to live in hourly expectation of being again expofed to his brutal fury, fo alarmed her,
her, that fhe paced the room with quick and hurried fteps, at one moment refolving to fly to her brother's chamber for fafety, or fliould -Ruthmer again make another attempt on her life, to appear to temporize with him, that fhe might by that means gain time, and ultimately efcape him; or if not fb, fhe thought it might be poflible f to gain the door of her prifon, and that, by flying to the chambers" of Leopold, they might prove a fafe protection againft the violence of a murderer, when flie informed him of the propofals of liberty his vaflal had offered. Ethelwina had been now confined fome weeksinherterrificdungeon; flie had patient¬ ly endured all the accumulated horrors that the moft cruel enemy could inflict, but the want of proper attendants, the neceflity that the Human frame has for air and -exercife, together with 'the heart-fend ing terrors of her dangerous fituation, had to operated on her mind, that fhe was now reduced to the fliade of her former felf. Pale, weak, b 2 emaciated,
emaciated, her eyes had loft their fire of wonted animation; and every beholder muft nous have viewed her with pity, with ccmmife- ration, that had ever feen her in her days of happinefs;—forrow, grief, and fuffering were now the fad marks of her fine face, which had loft much of its former bewitching beauty; but ftill it fhone with that open,, native dignity, that neither £inie nor afflic¬ tion could deprive her of. Patient en¬ durance and refignation fat on her expref- five countenance, and rendered her a pity- moving, interefting object to hearts of true benevolence. Her beautiful, fine form was confiderably wafted, and now, inftead of florid health, difcovered a perfon ex¬ tremely thin; but ftill her figure retained more of the fylph, and lefs of the " en bon pointy* than flie ibrmeily poffefled, which, if poflible, rendered her whole ap¬ pearance more ftriking to the eye, and more engaging to the heart', than when fhe was in fier former happier days the j poffeffor of high
high health, and no oneafioefs preyed on her opening beauties. Her features, always beautiful, fbft, and animated, were now, from the pale, declin¬ ing wannefs of her cheeks, ftill more fink¬ ing; whilft deep meditation and long fiif- iering had meliorated her exprefSve, pene¬ trating dark eyes, and given them a plcaf- ing languor beyond the power of deicrip- tion. Such was the interefting Ethelwina, as, with arms- crofted on her bofbm, and eyes bent on the ground in deep thought, fhe unconfcioufly wandered round the fides of her dangerous abode, totally inattentive to the noife of the opening door; when Ruth¬ mer entered the prifon, accompanied by four dark-looking men, with drawn fwords in their hands. Ethelwina caught a glance of their fhining blades, and fell motionlefs on the floor;—on her recovery fhe found herfelf in the dungeon, with the foldiers furrounding her, and Ruthmer looking on her with favage triumph; who, taking her
by the hand, fed her to the decayed Mc of the chamber, hi whkh was a wbdow that commanded a view of the plain be¬ neath the mountain. Ethelwina^ fhrhik- iug with terror, emkmmr&i to avoid going to this fide of the chamber; but refiftance was ufelefs—he dragged her to the cakmenf, and bade her look out. Ethelwina, half fearful of fhe kaew not wb&£, did fb; and was furprifed to fee a fmali army encamped before the walls of the mountain; fhe looked a fecond time, and though at a great dif¬ tance, (am —t ranfportirtg fight!—the ftandard of her houfe, and the arms of Fitz-Anburne> blazing on the canvas. She funk in ecftacy on her knees, exclaiming^—" Powers of merqs accept my thanks I freedom may yet be mine, and I (hall fhortly be releafed from mifery and tyranny I** ** Before you triumph ever your fup¬ pofed yanquifhed enemy," faid Ruthmer, <c caft your eyes into the weftern court of the caftle—you will have a full view of it from this window;" and he forcibly led i her
her to the one fhe was accuftomed to ufe for the benefit of frefh air. What was her amazement to behold a high-railed fcaffold in the court! On it was pkced a coHn, a blocks and battle-axe; a fcreen of black cloth was drawn acrofs one part of the fcaffold, which feemed to hide fomething from further view, but every apparatus of an approaching execution was plainly perceived. Ethelwina caft a look on the dreadful object, then turned her eyes in ~ wildnefs on Ruthmer, in whofe face fhe faw a more than common look of meaning. Maddened with what (he endured, and beheld, fhe clafped her hands in agony, and, with a frenzied tone, exclaimed—** Oh Godl in fight of friends, of liberty, and now to perifh V But fuddenly turning to Ruth- , mer, the added, <c No! you dare not do the horrid deed! Your own confcience is my fafeguard; and Royal Edward will avenge mei"
B 4
This
This laft id&a fomewhat reconciled her, and ihe fubmit'ted to he conducted from the prifon by the foldiers, who had re¬ ceived a filent fignal from Ruthmer. She began to defcend the tower ftairs, endea¬ vouring to pacify her mind for the enfuing trial; but the thought of her brother, m the inftant, rufhed acrofs her brain; —to part with him, perhaps for ever, never to fee him more, was too much; and, but for a friendly gulh of tears, ftie would have funk, fenfelefs, at the feet of her mercilefs conductors. She was led down the deep, fpiral ftairs of the tower; but when fhe came to the fmali landing that (tie fuppofed muft lead to Arthur's chamber, her agitations increafed/her whole frame trembled; ftie caft a lingering, de¬ fpairing look on the door—the cruel bar which prevented her from bidding him, perhaps, an eternal farewel. She breathed a fervent, inward prayer that whatever might be her deftiny, his might be freedom and happinefs; and to the longeft moment that
were rivetted upon it; and when 1km couid no more perceive it, an agoehKed groan forced its way from her heart, which flartied even her guard-, and made them view her with expectation of feeing her fink to the ground; but the Countefs recovered her prefence of mind, and, with a defperate, defpairing courage, prepared to meet her approiching fate. After having travelled through all the rmny galleries, and intricate paflages, fhe entered one arched and vaulted, but in total darknefs; a torch was lighted, and by this fake light the Countefs was led through thL paflage to a im^ll iron door, which being unfaftened, admitted her into daylight, and to the hall of ftate, which looked into the weftern court, where fat the haughty, imperious Leopold, whofe coun¬ tenance received a more than commpn flernnefs from the ghaftly palenefs pf his complexion, which Was the remaining effect of his late illnefs. b 5 He
He had kft tbtt hot of faociccB, iafiEf- lest tnusiph; kfe &ee was mom hollow, teak* and gloomy, aad the &iu!®cMk)o of the injured Ethelwina feemed already to have begun its operation; his eyes were haggard, and odw and then a wildnefs diftorted his features, and gave him the appearance of a maniac. He was fc&ied on the chair of ftate, with his head reclined upon his hand, and his arm refting on the chair. Ethel¬ wina advanced towards him; flie recalled her fcattered thoughts, and endeavoured to aflume, what flie did not feel, compo¬ sure of mind. A chair ftood near to where Leopold fat,— ihe approached it; but, overcome with a variety of contending emotions, fhe caught hold of it to lupport herfelf, for a fudden faintnefs had feized her. The moment St. Iver perceived the Countefs, he ftarted back in horror; his guilty confcience planted daggers in his mind; the pale, grief-worn, fuffering form before him was all the work
and his felfilh aippctkes; ht hm& heaped tenfold mifery on the objed whom bis heart could not but love* though with an un* generous pafiioru A flafh of fhame for a moment crofled his pallid cheeks, and an exquifite fang rent his heart; but this hour feemed doomed for the crifis of hts future life, which could now be alone faved but through the means of Ethelwina, and pity and remorfc were foon fvvaiiowed up in nearer intereft. Endeavouring to foften his frown¬ ing brows into fomething like gentle¬ nefs, he arofe from his chair, took the hand of the Countefs, and begged fhe would be feated. Ethelwina, though faint, recovered her¬ felf fufficiently to withdraw her hand; but refufed the offered chair, refting herfelf alone on the back of it, and wondering what could be the meaning of this unexpeded courtefy, when fhe came prepared only to meet death. Her heart a little revived; and as b 6 N the
tk: pccf)k kit t&e Ml, fee, %ith c%« aky 9 thus ^Idre&d Ixopoid;— * 6 My Lord, for what new trial am I again brought tMo your prefence, from which I had before been prohibited for ever ? T it is to deprive me of lift,. I befcech you no further h.i prolong rny miferv;—the ex¬ cels of cruelty you have heaped upon me I cm no looger enddre; do not, therefore, aid ro the load of fufferings, but end me, ^t once. My death will fatkfy all your defires, for it sull give you riches; for them you have plunged into even" crime, ior them you have dipped your fword in a kiniman's blood, and done fuch deeds that Nature ftiudders to hear the relation of tl.em! God abhors, and man defpifes you! Your foci ftirunk not from an uncle's murder—why ihould it now fear to doom his child to death ?—Then rid me at once from life; or give a proof that manhood and pity are not dead within you, and fet me tree!"— " JStopI" interrupted Leopold, who had fallen
6Iks b^dt is his chair, his whole counte¬ nance affuming a deathlike pakodls, ** an¬ fwer me, from what caufe do you prefume to call mc murderer? Speak, I command yoo; tell me from what proof you daie with fuch certainty accufe me of murder?" w An awful one," anfwered Ethelwina, with a fbiermi, impreflive tone of voice; ** that Omnipotence which pierces through worlds unknown, and works unheard-of miracles, fees and knows the fecrets of alt hearts, and you ftand revealed a murderer! A father's awful fpirit hovers over me; its injured thade refts not in peace; it wanders on the earth, and vifib'y has called upon his child to do his murdered form juftice! If yet you doubt my knowledge of the deed* hear, and be convinced in full:—Beneath my bed¬ clothes, in my former prifon, chance dif¬ covered to my fight------Ah! horrible recol¬ lection 1—the parts of my father's armour, flained and incrulled by his precious blood, —my mother's picture, which my father iiad received from her hands on the morn¬ ing
ing he left Auburne, never to return to k again!—and the fatal dagger that fent him from the .world, unpityisg, and unrevenged. —Now mark, and tremble!— Hh hai* lowed, facred form lies yet unhuried in the vaults, concealed from the prying fight of mortals by a fal'e heap of ftones!" " Furies of hell!" cried Leopold, as he funk, convulfed, back in his chair. Even the fufferer could not help feeling com¬ paflion for the tortures which offended Juf¬ tice forced her to inflict. She called to the. attendants, who raifed Leopold; and ad¬ ministering a cordial, foon reftored him. He opened his eyes wildly upon Ethel- . wina, and groaned out,—-" This is retri¬ bution indeed ! Oh Fitz-Auburne! you are amply avenged; the torments of the damned cannot equal what I feel!" Then feeing the attendants as they gazed upon him with curiofity and furprife, he, by a violent ftruggle with his feelings, again affumed his former felf, and haughtily waving his hand, commanded them x to withdraw.
w^Mraw. Fbd^ his eyes m terrifying firowns oa the trembling Ommtefe, he ex¬ claimed,— u You know it tfemf—know all my guilt! but know not half my heart £m form, and will execute!—Mark met the enemy now befets my caftk, but vain are their attempts to reach me; for, fafe in my fecure hold, I can with cafe fhower down deftruction oa them; but they are your people, therefore I forbear, and not a man of mine fhall take a weapon againft them; my honour, perhaps my life, may be at ftake * Let your friends depart, and here be all the paft buried in eternal oblivion, which can only be accompliftied by your imme¬ diately becoming my bride; let the prieft this moment pronounce the marriage cere¬ mony, and to the world proclaim you are my wife. But mark me! if, forgetful of your ftate, you ftill dare to refufe, you will find that you have not yet endured all that I have power-to inflict;—nay, a life fliall anfwer for your obftinacy!—a life that might otherwife have been dear to you; and 6 for
fee youifel^ I «s»H yet fialt you lower tfaar the iave that be^ at my fct to be re- viikd* If you now refufe my olered kuid, you fhall then become my nnflrefe. I fhal er^>y thy mifery, and triumph irthy ago* nies; and when fatiated with iky cimrms, leave thee to curfe the hour that, madly, you dared io ftand betwixt me and my refentments, when you might have hud a happier choice of deftiny. Such fhall be the fate of the rich, haughty Countefs of Fitz-Auburne;—fhe, who once could com¬ mand the protection of hundreds of flaves, is now the. captive of a hated lover, with¬ out one friend to refcue, of one heart to foften with pity for the mifery^ fhe fhall trebly endure.—Refolve at once I deter¬ mines quickly—I allow no alternative; go inftantly to the caftle gates, difmifs your daring train; return, become my wife, and reign, unrivalled, miftrefs of my heart and actions."— , " Leopold,'' interrupted the Countefs,^ " the terms you offer I alike reject andj defpife^
deipkafek threats, or am, by high, on- meaning, empty oaeaaices, to be frightened into a compliance* Neither have you power to inflict the miferies yoa ipeak of:—a fool, fecore in innocence, fears not death; and to live free from ftaia or guilt, Ethel¬ wma would become her own deftroyer, fooner than live the wretched creature yoa dare to fuppofe her.—What, though you * now are fecure, and may, with impious hand,'deal life and death, think you that you will efcape the terrible retribution which hangs over you? Murderer, tremble! of¬ fended Heaven will no longer fuffer your enormities; its juftice foon fliall overtake you!"— " Not till I have glutted my heart with vengeance !'* furioufly cried Leopold j " guards, feize, and convey her to the weftern court! Weak woman, thou canft not conceive, or think on the mifery thou haft prepared for (hyfelf." " Great God, I am refigned!" cried the
. tht fecbfc Ethdwis^ •• Pinteft hnnf Qh* pmt6; him* heaTe^y Fatkarf* ^W a^ in m tetter voice; and then fee was hurried through the door of the window that opei^rd upon a tow balcony, that^ by a fear flepe, admitted her to the court* where wm placed tie icafbki of death. As fhe caught a fight of it, fhe involuntarily ftarted back; but laying ber hand on her bofira, flie feebly &k»,-*« Be firm, i»y heart, and defert uae not in this fearful moment!"
wsmm
CHAP» II* ETHELWINA wa* led down the fteps of the low balcony, and to the foot of the fcafTold; the bkck fcreeri was flowly undrawn, when, God of Heaven 1 what a fight prefented itfelf I Arthur was the ob¬ ject that froze her heart with horror j for he was kneeling before the block with his hands and feet chained* while the executioner was prepared with the fatal axe to give the death¬ blow to the unhappy victim 1 Ethelwina uttered a piercing fhriek, loudly exclaiming, and forgetting all neceflary cau¬ tion, " God of mercy, my brother!" and flying up the fteps of the fcaffold, funk convulfed into Arthur's arms. The
The rage and aftoniCbment of Leopold may be better conceived than defcribed ;— his intention had been to fhew Arthur to Ethelwina, and inform her who he was; hoping to take advantage of the moment of furprife and horror to gain her confent to become his wife, rarher than fee her brother die. That fhe fliould know Arthur, which her laft exclamation plainly evinced* ' exceeded all belief. He called to Ruthmer, and furiouflv demanded if he had betrayed him. Ruthmer profeffed himfeif equally afto¬ niflied, and declared that fome fupernatural means could onjy have informed them of each other.—" For well you know, my; Lord," added he, " that my hatred to the whole race of Auburne would rather exterminate them all, than betray you, or adminifter one/park of pify or afliftance to their relief. Your Lordfhip muft know that a fufpicion of this nature is injurious to my long-tried fervices and fidelity." , . . Leopold
Leopold was well acquainted with the caufe of Hurhoier's hatred, and was but too well convinced of his fervant's fkfeiity* Ethelwina fooa recovered from her mo¬ mentary fufpenfkm of feeling. Arthur em¬ braced her, and bathed her cheeks with his tears. She now caft her eyes wildly around, and faw the amazement of every counte¬ nance turned with curiofity upon her; and her imprudence now ftruck her. She haftily whifpefed Arthur not to acknowledge her j then darting from the fcafTold, fhe flew to the balcony where the aftoniflied Leopold ftood, and dropping on her knees, wildly exclaimed— *' Save him 1 Save my brother, and dif- pofe of me as you pleafe I'* " Before I determine on his fate," cried Leopold,'" anfwer me one .queftion : By what means have you difcovered the boy to be your t brother ? Speak truly; your lives depend on your anfwer !" The agonized, exhaufted Ethelwina ftill remained on the ground, and on her knees. She
She was now fenfible, when too late, of the indifcretion of the hafty acknowledgment of her brother before her tyrant, and which the powerful feelings of Nature in feeing fo beloved an object in fuch imminent danger had forced from her. To tell by what won¬ derful means fhe had difcovered him, was dangerous, and would certainly cut off every hope of an efcape; for it was plain Leopold was ignorant of the fecret communication of their different apartments. She hefitated to confider in what manner to free herfelf from fuch an alarming demand ; till Leo¬ pold, maddened with rage and impatience, loudly exclaimed, " Speak, or he dies I" " Spare, in pity fpare him!" cried Ethel¬ wina ; « Oh I let me not behold the horrid fight!" Then refolving on an innocent ftra¬ tagem,, (he arofe from the ground, and affuming as much compofure as poffible, faid, with an impreflive tone of voice— " Leopold ! that Power which revealed to me a parent's murder, informed me alfo of a bt other's deftiny. That he was living has
has long been known to me ;—and, Oh Leo» poki! look well on yonder youth - 9 can y<m not in his innocent face fee the exact refem- blance of his injured Cither? *Twas that refemblance, and the awful means that in¬ formed me of a brother's exiftence, pre¬ pared me to recognize that brother in the youth before me. I cannot be miftaken; behold his Sire's pidure—it wants but ani¬ mation to be the exad likenefs of my bro¬ ther ! Yet there are proofs that are beyond a doubt, and if he is my brother, he has three fpots upon his neck." Ethelwina forced the portrait into the frenzied, aftonifliedStiver's hands, and with well-difTembled eagernefs flew up the fteps, and hurrying open the breaft clothes of Ar¬ thur, loudly exclaimed, " "Tis he I it is my long loft brother!" i^nd now the real feelings of her agonized heart could be no longer reftrained ; fhe clafped him in her arms, and fhed torrents of tears over-him. This admirable prefence of mind had ^produced the defired effed. Leopold, who x had
had followed, and obferved her actions, faw the three fpots upon Arthur's neck, and he concluded this was certainly the firft time of their meeting each other. Stamping with rage, he eurfed the world, himfeif, and deftiny, that rendered abortive all his defigns; whilft the wonderful means by which fhe had become acquainted with the know¬ ledge of her brother's exiftence, filled his guilty foul with dread and alarm. He thought that if Ethelwina was indeed guard¬ ed by invifibie Power, all his ambitious hopes muft fink into air, and to attempt to force her to his purpofes, would but bring ultimate deftruction on his own head ;—for his mind, weakened by guilt, and the terrors of an upbraiding, haunted confcience, led him to give credence to the aid of fuper¬ natural agency, and his crimes had of late rendered him fuperftitious, and lefs hardy of heart than formerly; yet doubt and miftruft began .to hoici their fway over his mind as his other fears decreafed, and he confidered how was it. poflible, how was it likely that Ethelwina
Ethelwina fhould be fo certain that he was her brother; that even the very firft look fhe caft on Arthur, fhould make her, with fuch a confirmed furety, pronounce his name, who was by all the world fup¬ pofed, and acknowledged dead; and that not even feven or eight years' feparation fliould have fo much altered hisperfon,'that flie fhould recognize him after fo long a period. He now caft his eyes on the picture, then on Arthur; the likenefs was aftoniiliing, and he was obliged inwardly to confefs that Ethelwina was juftified by the uncommon refcmblance of Arthur to the picture. The miniature reprefcntcd the Earl of Fitz-Auburne in the prime of youth, which gave that almoft flnifhed fimilitude to his fon; it had been done at the requeft of the Earl's mother, and fome years before he married. The only diiferencc there was to the perfect refcmblance between it and Arthur, confifted in the pale, dejected, flirunk looks of the latter, whilft the pidure vol,, uu c was
was drawn as a 3 r outh, in the flufh of health and happinefs. Leopold again fixed his eyes upon it, but confcious recollection made him ficken with the view; he threw it with violence on the ground, exclaiming,—" Damning re¬ membrancer, away! and with thee go all idle fears; for here I fwear never to reft till I have gained the prize for which I have (6 long ftruggled; the power is mine, who fliall dare to ftay my will?—Con¬ fcience!—I laugh at it; and fmce I am fo far gone in guilt, fliall I now turn coward, and forfake myfelf?—No! the boy then muft die^—my fafety requires it; and for Ethelwina, (he fliall yet be mine; and fince every other means as yet have been ufelefs, force fliall prevail !** Such were the dark refolves that fired his waveiing thoughts;—he commanded the guards to part the Countefs from her bro¬ ther; and they, finding retiftance vain, fub- mitted. Ethelwina was Jed up to the haughty Leopold* there to receive the knowledge
knowledge of their doom, She was (b exhaufted that fhe was obliged to lean on the guards for fupport; and flie flood before her tyrant, with eyes clofed from terror and faintnefs, though her fenfes did not defert her as flie liftened to Leopold, who faid— ** Whether the tale you have related be truth or not, I have now no time to quef¬ tion, but it js fufflcient for you to know* and yield to my pleafure;—there is one way and that only by which you can fave the. boy's life,—you know my meaning, and I need not here repeat it;— if you confent, he is fafe, and fhall live; if you refufe, he dies; and for yourfelf, you already know the alternative." " Oh Godl fupport me in thh truivn» dous moment! Yet—no!" continued fhe, " you dare not do the bloody dtai! ihc world's contempt, its pum;hment<}, and execrations would follow fuch an open act of violencei even the creatures ttn fur- round you would turn, abhorrent, from the c a monitrom
rnonftrous deed of cruelty, and, fearing for their own lives, fhould they become part¬ ners in your guilt, would refufe to obey you* No! never fliall my lips pronounce ray own mifery, or my fenfes be weakly tenified into a compliance to avoid threats you dare not execute." Ethelwina had uttered this with more than her ufual firmnefs and dignity, and St. Iver beheld her with yet gi eater aftonifhmeht; that in a moment like the prefent, teeming with dreadful ills to herfelf, and deftruc¬ tion to her brother, flie fhould ftill re¬ main unintimidated, ftill retain her un¬ conquerable fortitude and refiftance, fhewed fuch a ftrength of mind fo far beyond his expectation, that it increafed the fury of his pafiions; and he loudly exclaimed,— « s Mad, infatuated Ethelwina, are you not yet convinced I dare do fill I fay ? If not, behold a proof, and be all the guilt on your own head,—you are a brother's deftroyer! Strike off his head!" cried he to the executioner, in a commanding tone of
^ of voice, that admitted not a doubt of his defign. Ethelwina caft a filent, ftupified gaze towards the fcaffold ;—^the powers of bodily and mental action for a moment ceafed their fun&ionsj fhe could not believe it „ poflible that a monfter in human fhape exifted, that had a hand capable, and a heart fo hard, as to comply with orders fo dreadful, and fhe ftood the exhauftad ftatue of a momentary furprife;—it was but mo¬ mentary, for ihe was foon convinced fhe 1 was in a deri of murderers, who dared, indeed, do any thing. Two guards feized the unrefifting victim, and forcing him • to the block, held him down to receive the death-blow, whilft the executioner, lifting up his arm with all his ftrength, the axe was falling on the bare neck of Arthur, and the head hi a moment would have been fevered from the trunk, when a fhriek, that pierced the air, and rung echoing through the hol¬ low rocks, reVerbe rating from mountain to mountain, iflued from the diftra&ed Ethel- •C3 , wina j—•
wina;— die flew, and as the axe was falling, reached the block, and threw herfelf com¬ pletely over the body of Arthur.— <f Strike! ftrike homer* was aft flie uttered; and the man, jnot -aware of her defign, ~niuft unavoidably have fent her to her laft fecure home, had not the faithful Bertram, who was on the fcaffold, caught his arm, and turned the dtredion of the fatal blow to the floor. The executioner ftood aghafl! ■ Leopold trembled at the wonderful i efcape, and an univerfal paufe of amaze¬ ment took place. Ethelwina lay ftill infenfible upon the block. Arthur had forcibly wrenched him¬ feif from his keepers, and now lifted his Biker gently from her dreadful pofture, and placing her on the ground, knelt by her fide, and fupported her head, whilft, between the contending emotions of his grief and refentment, he fixed an indignant look upon Leopold, his eyes emitting fparks of juft anger, as he exclaimed,— " Inhuman favage! Ruffians, were not your
your hearts dead to pity, a fight like this might turn them into ftone! Oh, for a fword, to do an ad of duty, of jullice—to rid the earth of fuch a villain! Monfter! infatiate murderer, cannot a father's blood fuffice? Muft his wretched children alfo bleed ? Oh God of vengeance ! fend thy fwifr, juftice on the tyrant! let him no longer live to be the fcourge and curfe of ' innocence! but give me, Oh! give the means to preferve a fifter from ■" At that moment a loud, but diftant fliout was heard; and as Ethelwina opened her * languid eyes, and joyfully embraced her preferved brother, a foldier, in hafte, en¬ tered, and thus addrefled Leopold :<— *•' My Lord, haften to the fouthern battlements; the enemy have difcovered the entrance to the mountain; they, by ftratagem, have afcended, and are already on the platform of the rock; the out- guards are feized, and they are now vigor- oufly attacking the caftle gates j our people c 4 are
are unarmed, v unprepared,—all will be loft if you deiay a moment! Leopold's aftonifhment exceeded utter¬ ance ;—he paufed oa what was belt to do, and was for a- moment confounded;. well he knew that when once the fecret entrance of the caftle was difcovered, the chief de- pendance of his fafety, and the caftle it- felf, might, in his now unprepared and unarmed fituation, be alfo conquered. No time was to be loft; and, with his ufual fubtilty when danger^ threatened, he com¬ manded the guards to defift from their pre¬ fent duty, to fufpend the fate of Arthur for a while, and to convey the Countefs to the towers of the gate of entrance. Refiftance was in vain;—fhe was hur¬ ried from Arthur's arms, and in a moment removed completely from his fight; led forward with a velocity that deprived her of her breath. Scarcely did her feet toqch the ground; for her guard rather carried than led her, till they came to the fouthern battlements, where Ethelwina caught a fight of
of Leopold as he flew up the fpiral flairs of one of the towers that defended the porta!. Ethelwina was alfo hurried up to the top, and, breathlefs, was obliged, when fhe ar¬ rived on the platform, to heave repeatedly before fhe could recover refpiration. But what a joyful fight prefented itfelf! On the area before the wails, fhe faw a fmali, but refolute party, well armed, and the' faithful old Rupert at their head, bearing the fword and ftandard of his matter's houfe; his face glowing with honeft refentment, and zeal¬ ous fidelity to his injured miftrefs, whilft, with well-tried experience, he was ifliiing his orders for a general afTault upon the caftle gates; and the faces of the whole party breathing determined perfeverance in their endeavours to releafe their wronged Lady from captivity. Already had they begun the attack; the clafti of their bat¬ tering pieces refounded through the air, fliowers of darts flew over the walls, and intimidated the unfufpecting-befieged, who, c 5 unprepared
unprepared for the fudden encounter, had flown, unarmed, to the ramparts, whilft their enemies were fuccefsfully making rapid breaches on the gates, when a fudden found of the horn of truce from the tower on which the Countefs ftood, made the good Rupert caft up his eyes to whence the fignal proceeded. But what a fight pre¬ fented itfelf to the good old warrior! It was the pale, flirunk figure of his beloved Lady; but fo altered, fo wan, fo unlike what fhe was when he had laft beheld her, that, but fot the majefty and dignity of her fine form, whLh no circumftance could rob of its i«atural gwees, he would not at fiift; have known her. He flarted at the fight, while grief forced a tear from his eye; a fecond view ferved but to add freOi vigour to his' arm, rage filled his heart, and he loudly called to Leopold, who ftood by the fide of the Countefs,—" Tyrant, tremble! thy power lhall ioon be ended." Then turning round to Lis well armed party, he bade them bung up
up all their forces to the great gate. In a moment the portcullis was furrounded; they refumed the attack, and Ethelwina was in a moment hurried from the tower, and brought to the lower platform that compofed the roof of the arch of the por¬ tal. Here fhe was in the utmoft danger from the arrows of her friends, for this fide of the caftle was the only one that was un¬ defended, as every other part, being built on the edge of the precipice, afforded no landing-place for an enemy to attack it; and even this fide had been fafe from afTault if the fecret entrance from the bottom of the mountain had remained undifcovered. But here, as Ethelwina was placed, her delicate limbs were in a moment, by the orders> of her tyrant, t weighed down by heavy chains of iron, and herfelf forcibly placed in the very front of the battle¬ ments, where it was impoflible to dis¬ charge a dart, but what muft prove her deftrudion. She was within a few yards of the ground, and the imminent danger of c 6 her
her fituation rendered it impoflible for her . to efcape inftant death. Such was the crafty policy of Leopold, who, had he been prepared for the prefent unlooked-for attack, could, with eafe, have repelled the-fmali force, whofe only hope of conqueft conflfted in the fuddennefs of their enterprize; but in this unexpected danger, hh people totally unprepared, and himfeif relying folely on , the fecurity of his' fituation, nothing but the prefent ftratagem could have faved him. It had the defired effect; for the moment Rupert faw the danger of the Countefs, he , flarted back, difmayed, and inftantly blpw- ' ing a fmail horn, ail the' men ceafed from the attack, and following the direction of tlieir leader's eyes, foon found that their intended fervices would, have been, by their' own hands, rendered abortive, and flie whom they came to fave, be, by their own means, a fifelefs corpfe. Pity, rage, and horror were legibly painted in every countenance; while Leopold ftood on the battlement, his dark vifage flufhed () - with
with exulting triumph, and openly avowing his joy at the fuccefs of his artifice. Turn¬ ing - to his people, he gave orders for every ' man to fly to the aimory, and prepare for a general engagement; then coming for¬ ward, he addrefled Rupert,— " Rafli old man, you fliall dearly repent this bold adventure; in a fhort fpace of time, thrice your numbers fliall convince you, that though Iver may be meanly furprifed, it cannot be conquered, or its mailer fub¬ dued. I give you a few moments to de¬ termine on your fate; either depart inftantly in peace, or ftay and meet the death your infolent attempt has diawn upon you. And do you, Madam, remember the terms on which the lives of thefe, your headftrong people, and one ftill dearer to you, are to be preferved. Compliance can alone prevent that flaughter which elfe fliall foon enfue." " No! never, inhuman tyrant!" cried the enraged Rupert; " never will we quit the caufe wexame ta ferve! Whilft one drop
drop of blood remains within us, we fwear to die in the refcue of our injured Lady!" " Thy hope is impotent, old man, for fee already are our ramparts covered with twice thy numbers; they will foon increafe, and one word would lay you all a heap of ' dead bodies before our waliSe Beware' in time; take our offered grace while it is yet in thy power." So faying, he flew to give his eager com¬ mands, but left a guard to watch* the mo¬ tions of Ethelwina, who, with grief and forrow, now faw the end for which fhe Jiad been placed in her horrible fituation; for it was almoft certain, had the gates been forced before flie was hurried to the plat¬ form, fhe would in a fhort fpace of time have been at liberty, as the fmali party were well armed, and might with eafe have con¬ ducted her from tlie caftle before any of its inhabitants, who were preparing for a feaft, and not for an afiauit, could have made any refiftance, and from whom the friends of Ethelwina could have received very
very little annoyance. Ethelwina approached ftill nearer the parapet of the wall, and leaning on it, partly for fupport to her en¬ feebled frame, and chiefly to be ftill nearer to her friends, with a firm, though defpairing voice, yet with a countenance that beamed v with a finile of thanks for their fidelity, fhe thus addrefled them— " My too generous friends, receive the only. offering your powerlefs miftrefs has left to beftow, and believe me, though un¬ fuccefsful, I gratefully feel this kind proof of your attachment and duty. Heaven N only knows whether I may live to reward it; but I thank you. And now, my peo¬ ple, obferve and obey me: whatever are my wrongs, whatever are my fufferings, leave them to Providence, on whom alone I muft rely for aid and fuccour; but if you defire to ferve me, quit inftantly this dan¬ gerous place;—all further attempts to free me are now in vain; the Baron's foldiers are in arms; the time they wanted, they have gained; and a fnort period may witnefs •—•horrible
—horrible fight!—the friends who came to fave me, fall, unnumbered, to the ground. Think; then, what muft be my everlafting miiery, to know myfelf to be the caufe of fuch an act of bloodflied!—The thought over¬ comes me!" and fhe paufed fiom the ex¬ cefs of her feelings; but fhe foon ad-ted, in a yet firmer tone,—" Rupert, Lam as yet a guiitiefs fufferer, and fo I will remain; tm- priftinment is all 1 have to complain of, but fliould you raflily provok% my foe by your ineffectual endeavours to releafe me, his revenge may drive him to the commiflion of acts I fliudder to think of; therefore, if you regard my future peace, depart in fafety, while yet you may." The whole party were much- affected by this addrefs; their love and veneration to their adored Countefs increafed, and they wiftied more than ever to have obtained the ends for which they came; till Rupert fuddenly exclaimed,—" We will yet releafe ,her!'* And flying to feveral of the men, they, by his orders, dripped off their furcoats,,
furcoats, and tying them clofely together, they, by a fecret movement, crept clofe to the walls, and by the orders of Rupert, placed themfelves clofe under the projecting baluftrade over the great gate, and each man firmly holding a corner, they flood prepared for the purpofes of their leader, who having marked with a pencil on' a piece of paper, thefe words,—" Leap from the battlement, and you are then at liberty/' —he put it on the point of his fpear, and reached it up to the Countefs, who read it. Ethelwina caft her eyes over the baluftrade, and then on the infide of the prifon; all the people had retired from the gate, even the guard had deferted his poft, to know what were the intentions of his Lord, or had hurried down the ramparts to procure -arms. Nothing impeded her but her chains. ^ " Liberty!" cried Ethelwina; « great God! 'tis in my view! yes, I will feize the fortunate moment—I will not difappoint you, my people, or longer endure thofe miferies that have weighed me down in forrow,
forrow, almoft to my grave. My friends, I come!*' Nor is it wonderful that in a moment like this, Ethelwina fhould forget flie had other claims; the tranfporting view of liberty prefented itfelf, and fuch accumu¬ lated cruelty and persecution as flie had endured, might well have rendered her regardlefs of every other feeling but the hope of an efcape. The chains were made for a man, and the faftenings fo large, that fhe with eafe flipped her delicate limbs thiough" them;—they fell to the ground; fhe caft her eyes around—fhe was unobferved by any one, and in breathlefs agitation fhe mounted the parapet. The eyes of all her friends were fixed in refpect¬ ful hope and expectation on her; not a voice was heard—not a lip moved; the men prepared to receive their lovely miftrefs, and flie was fpreading her arms, and nearly defcending, when her eye caught a view of the nodding northern tower. « Gracious,
ct Gracious God! I thank thee for the , timely fight," cried fhe; " it has reftored me to my fenfes; Oh! in one little mo¬ ment what unavoidable mifery had I in¬ volved myfelf in!—My brother, pardon , and forgive me!" So faying, fhe defcended from the para¬ pet, and leaned againft' the fide of the tower for Support. The aftoniftiment of Rupert and his party was indeicribable at this fudden change, when' nothing could prevent her flight, when Ethelwina herfelf had all but dropped into their arms, and to liberty; and at that very moment to ftart from her purpofe, and utter the name of brother, filled their minds with grief and difmay; and but one idea pofTeiTed them. Ethelwina, recovering from the horror of her own inward upbraiding feelings, faw the mute amazement of her people, and now for the firft time a plentiful flow of tears came to her relief; but fhe gave them only a momentary vent, and then feid to
to Rupert,— <c I cannot do as you would have me! Oh Rupert! a tale of horror have I to relate, but time and place pre¬ vent it; let this one reafon content you why I cannot leave the caftle—my brother Arthur ftill is in exiftence, and lives a pri- foner here! Providence has difcovered him to me, and whilft I am permitted to remain here, I cannot,* muft not, will not leave him;r—therefore, good fi*fendsi depart; I dare explain no more at prefent; Leopold returns ~I beg you to depart!" '-■■■"".". Never!" cried the whole party. ««■ No!" fingly anfwered Rupeft, " we will not forfake our noble Lady■■';. our caufe is juft, and Heaven will fpeed it! Tis in the defence of oppreiTed innocence; we have now another motive to urge us onl What, though the tyrant's numbers treble our's, his: guilt fliall rife in judgment againft, and confound hitrr. Attack the gates^ be refolute, and conquer !■ * « Stop, I command you all!" cried the determined Ethelwina, who well knew that, from
from the fmallnefs of their numbers, they muft all perifli againft the hoft of foes that were now armed for the defence of the caftle. " Defift, on your duty to.your mitrefs, who now demands your obedi¬ ence," added the Countefs, with a loud and angry voice. '" By the oath of. fealty you have fworn, and by the, allegi¬ ance and duty which I now claim from you, I conjure you to proceed no further in this dangerous undertaking; for here I folemnly pledge myfelf, before the face of Heaven, that if one man advances his fword but at my command, or if one drop of human blood be this day flied in my defence, though it fhould purchafe me my liberty, it fhould alfo fee me enclofed for ever from the world, to live a religious penitent for .this day's fcene of bloodflied, of horror T* Leopold had arrived on the platform in time to hear this folemn afleveration. The moment flie faw him, fhe dropped on her knee, while her whole appearance aflfumed an
' an indefcribable, commanding grandeur; her features were fluflied with that native, irreftftible dignity which fhe fo entirely poffefled, and which exacted obedience from all. Leopold beheld her with filent admiration and wonder, not daring to in¬ terrupt her; while the Countefs, bent to the earth, and with eyes lifted up to heaven, drew from her robe a concealed dagger, and in a ftill more elevated tone of voice, added,—" Swear to depart!" Rupert knew full well the piety and per¬ feverance of the Countefs; he well knew that an oath, taken by her fo folemnly, would be fulfilled, and he had no other alternative but to do as he was defired. He fwore, as did .all the reft of his people. " And now," continued Ethelwina, turn¬ ing to Leopold, « if you, my Lord, at¬ tempt to moleft, or in the fmalleft degree impede their free paflage from hence to my domains, I alfo call Heaven, to witnefs that if one drop of my people's blood be flied on my account, that moment fhall free me from
from the power of foes, or the ufelefs kind- nefs of friends;—never will I live to be the guilty caufe of death and flaughter! To Heaven I leave the punifhtnent of thofe who have opprefled and wronged me; but fhould any hand 'prefume to raife itfelf for or .againft me, orany danger befal my faith¬ ful yaffals, this poniard fhall find its fheath in my bofom, and end at once the unhappy { caufe of all prefent, all future contentions." Ethelwina had uttered this with un¬ daunted firmnefs; and as flie finifhed her * words, flie kifled a diamond crofs that hung on her neck, with fervent devotion, Leopold, aftonifhed, and a little fubdued ^ by fuch a proof of greatnefs and magna¬ nimity of mind, was for a moment ftaggered. He had gained the time, unmolefted, necef- fary to arm and collect all his people, and now came to the battlements with a fixed determination fo punifli the daring Rupert and his, friends; but the folemn oath that the Countefs had taken, not to furvive, fhould her people be molefted in their return home, deterred
, deterred him from putting his threats into execution, for he had fufflcfent reafon to be convinced that fhe would adhere to" it j — as in thofe dark days, when Bigotry and Prieftcraft reared their .fanatic heads under the fweet name of religion, fuperftition reigned in the minds of all, even the moft- hardy; and. the bloods thirfty Leopold fubmitted to its influence, and paid implicit belief to the vow Ethel¬ wina had made. But lie refolved to take advantage of it, and therefore addrefled her in a low tone of voice, faying, that the life of Arthur, and the fafety of her peo¬ ple, depended on herfelf ; that if flie con¬ fented freely to become, within three days, his wife, and acknowledge herfelf as fuch, Arthur Ihould be reftored to liberty, and they be permitted to depart, provided they agreed to go, without delay, to Auburne. Ethelwina faw through the crafty defigns of Leopold ; her vow for the fafety of her people, had paffed her lips in his prefence, and fhe had now no alternative left her to fecure
fecure them, herfelf, and her brother from declared violence, but to confent to the * terms of Leopold; yet, while her foul was rent with agony, her heart fpoke in the lan¬ guage of her eyes, and, flie fixed a look of fuch indignant contempt on the fuccefs¬ fui villain,' that her too powerful feelings could neither fubdue nor prevent. Leopold well underftood the anfwer; his * countenance fluflied with rage, and he turned round to bid his men begin the attack. Ethelwina foon perceived that the ftrength of her feelings had betrayed her, though involuntarily. She Caught the robe of Leo* pold as he was flying up the battlements— « Stop," fhe cried, " Lord St. Iver; if it be poflible, I will fubdue my mind, and bring it to confenf. , Reftore my brother to Auburne Caftle, and my people to fafety, and if after three days I car^ for their fakes,, bring my heart to .compliance (and flie'inwardly muddered,-^-that is impoflible) with your demands, I am then your's; ^ol* in. u my
my life is a.deyoted one; I may be refer¬ able, but no one (hall knowingly accufe me of havipg made them fo.V She then fuddenly dropped on her knees, and inwardly^ faid, " Oh God of Juftice, forgive thy perjured creature for break- - ing ihe oath fhe has folemnly pledged to Thee at the altar, never td become on her own account, or to preferve her own life, the wife of this man. But now, Oh Father of Heaven! may the caufe abfolve my broken faith to Thee, fince no other means are left to fave the life, of a brother, and the flaughter of my friends: I therefore offer up myfelf a facrifice, fince nothing but my death will appeafe the deftroyer of rny peace. But witnefs for me, Heaven, as here I fwear, that if that day arrives which beholds me the bride of Leopold, it fhall aifo fee me wedded to my grave, rather than live the loathed wife of a father's murderer!" The felf-devoted Ethelwina rofe from her * knees $ and Leopold now rejoiced in the accomplifhrnent
accomplifliment of all his views. He went wp to the baluftrade, and addreffing Rupert,' faid,—" My friends, depart in fecurity, your beloved miftrefs has yielded to my propofals, • and fhall be at liberty; retire, therefore, in peace, and in three days you may expert to behold your Lady at Auburne." Aftoniftiment fat on the faces of all pre¬ fent. ' - Leopold retired, but left a guard over the Countefs, who now determined to ufe fn ,nnot *nt ftratagem, as (he plainly f aw by the incredulity painted on the faces of «« her .people, that they dilbeliefed the prormfes of Leopold, and fhe dreaded tit even yet fome new danger might afTail them She advanced ftill nearer the parapet, and fa.d,-« My brave friends, you- have heard truly; Leopold is at laft weary of perfection, and if I cannot freely confent in three days to become his wife, he has promifed to reibre „ to liberty, upon * cond.tion that F procure for him, and all h« people, the full pardon of my ro yal B 3 .guardian,
- « guardian, the King; therefore retire^-you have now nothing to dread;—but firft tell me, is Auguftine —-" At that moment a meflcnger came from Leopold, with orders inftantly to conduct the Countefs to her apartment. The guards Surrounded her, and it was importable for her to proceed in 1ier fentence; for Leopold, fearful that jhe fliould betray the fecrets of Iver Caftle, or that fome plan fliould be formed for her releafe, had fent a guard to hurry her back to her prifon. The party belojl^ heard the orders, and Ethel- W ^^MP^ meant t0 nave enquired if the trtBPBfil 6 ^ °f ^ er f ecrer - inmoft thoughts g&k lived, was now prevented; flie knew rt, fwas dangerous to fpeak out on this fubject or on that of Arthur, whom flie wiflied to be inftantly acknowledged at Auburne, but was now obliged to leave it to the direction of Rupert's own judgment. She bowed gracioufly to her people, thanked them all for' their fervices, and bade Rupert to lemember that there was another being in exiftence
due; adding—*' He will well deferve thy fidelity/* ' /^ K The guards hurried hery.af&ii it was dan- gerous to fay, more; hut Rupert evinced by a look he underftood her. A fmali poftern gate opened, and fix of the Baron's msn came from it, unarmed, ex¬ cept with hunting fpears in their hands. They motioned for Rupert to depart, which reluctantly he began to d&$ his^venerkbfe eyes filled with tears as bqW^i-^rt Hea« ven, protect and preferve tnee,) grant that I may fooft be bleffed wH of my mafter*s offspring freed^ and returned to their own domai^ " My friends/adieu!*' cried feibetwTnaT fupprefflng her anguifh; « God be with you all I" Each man then made his refpectful obeifance to their miftrefs, and retreated down the fteps of the precipice. They had all difappeared but Rupert, who remained, that he might, to thelongdt
HH
moment, be in the fight of theCountefsi but when reminded by the guard that he muft depart, he lifted his eyes, which had been fixed in tears on Ethelwina, up to Heaven, and loudly ejaculated a prayer for her fafety; he caft another look on the Countefs, then bowing low, defcended* Ethelwina watched his receding form, m in a ■«« it funk fc» he" fight, flie heaved a deep-drawn figh, and an ex¬ cruciating pang of forrow rent her heart, as Ihe fiuid,*-^* And fo fink all my profpe&f of liberty for ever, and a few lhort houri of life arc all that remain to me J 1
mmamssasssssssessamm
CHAP* I1L
Jl H E unhappy Ethelwina was con¬ ducted down the battlement i~flie moved along, but knew not how* her eyes were caft in defpair upon the ground, and nothing appeared perceptible to* her fight. She would have continued in this pitiable con¬ dition, had not the voice of Leopold jarred on her. ear, as flie pafled bim,in the open gallery that led io the north tower. He now addrefled her, with his ufual fternntfs f?mewbat increafed by the late fuccefe of hb plant, his countenance affuming that frown which evet excited terror, while be fesd,~** Remember within |hree days you tern fworn to be minei if at the^pwa- &4 tkm
j6* MTmmtHA. tion of that time, you ftrll refufe me, the boy fhall die! Be careful how you again provoke my fury j and let the danger which your obftinacy has this day expofed him to, teach you that no prayers, no tears, fliall move me fnm my fixed determinations be, therefore, well-aflured I am no longer to be trifled with!" Ethelwina raifed her eyes from the ground, and fixing then in calm fteadinefs upon Leopold, faid, aa Ihe kid her band upon Jm heart,—" I fliall a& as the dignity and honour of tlic^Earl of Auburne's daughter demand, and at tke end of three days you fliall know my final decifion/* Without deigning to Ipeak another word, Ihe proceeded fonvard to her prifon, leaving St* Iver enraged at her firm calmncfs, and torturing his brain lo determine in what manner he fliould difpofe of Arthur, as now todeftroy him was impoffible $ for though he had at laft triumphed, Etbclwina's magnani¬ mity had taken from im w&oi?»and gt«atly annoyed one oi hb chiefeft def.gns^rt waa
her brother's exiftence—a circumftance that* in the hurry of arming his people, he had not forefeen, and had not taken the precaution to t prevent, and which, if once known be¬ yond the walls of Iver, would for ever blaft all his hopes, and high-raifed ambitious pro¬ fpects. He was in the midft of his uneafy meditations, when his chief minifter flood before him, and with his fawning, ufual humility to his Lord, begged to know the fubject that feemed to engrofs his mafter's deepeft thoughts. ** Ah! my trufty fellow, is it you? In good time are you come, Ruthmer, for I (land in need of couufeh but firft of all *tell me, have my fpies as yet been able to difcover the retreat of Godfred** wealth?** ♦* No, good my Lord,** replied Ruth¬ mer i w , they have entered each citify, hate fcarched each fubterraneous pafiage of Au¬ burne Caftle, but all has been difappoint* ment; no fignf of & fecret recefs can be . found, and the miniflers of tife King refufe P ,C to
Jiave commanded you inftantly to reftore the Lady Ethelwina to her,own domains £ if you difobey this oider, your own life is threatened, and Edward is foon expeded in England/* *« Regard it not!" furioufly cried Leo¬ polds " what they have denied,.will foon by right be mine! The Countefs of Auburne will, within three, days, be the Lady of StJver, and diis threatened life fbahV by her means, be doubly fecure! But there is yet another bar to my felicity,—this boy, this new-found brother,* whom thy weak fupcrftition fpared fome years fince, ftill lives —muft Jive I my own future fafety depends on his! He muft be acknowledged, and will foon become Auburne's Lord! 9 Tk m a rich and fplendid title i I have waded am nothing i and by Arthur's death only can I alone be any thing!" -Th^bbutone^mrLOKI, you -j»ow cannot avoid lettering him to liberty.— If
Tf the Counteis isonceydttr own, the world's fufpicions will be lulled to> fleep, and the breatji of Defamation ceafesj 'twilbthen be for her own, and her Lord's honour that.. flie fhould conceal the knowledge of certain myfteries. In that moment,, when all-is peace and fuppofed unity, fmail quantities ef poifon< may be adminiftered in the food of the young Earl, of fuch a nature as* will deftroy him,, yet* feem like the confequence of a= natural decay., Tflus you may foon * reach the fummit of your wifties, and be in reality what you have fo long ftruggled for." " How,fliall I repay thy fidelity and fer¬ vice?" cried Leopold, in a tranfport of horrible pleafure at the diabolical advice of the atrocious parafite;. ** afk what thou wilt—I will deny thee nothing that comes within the ftretch of my power/' ** Then, my Lord," anfwered Ruthmer, " I have nothing to requeft but what I have before been refufed at my repeated entreaties 5 give me but the ppifeflion of p 6 that
ETHE1WIN.A. tha:t qbjed you have jfe unjuftly withheld from me, and I-ant amply rewarded." The countenance of Leopold ftil, and the fmile of .pleafure that-had before enlivened it, was now fucceeded by a frown of anoer, which was returned by a determined look of Ruthmer, whofe eyes fuddenly loft their obfequious fawning fervility, and affumed all that daring infolenGe which was habitual to his character, except when in the prefence of his Lord; but now it feemed as if in one moment they had changed fituations, for * Leopold felt himfeif to be fecurely in the power of his vaflluV He knew full well the meaning of his fierce glances, and he, in a'moment, foftened his own; and taking Ruthmer by the hand, in a low voice, laid,—'* She fliall be your's; the moment that announces the death of the boy, fliall be rewarded by the utmoft of your wifhes." Ruthmer again became the obedient Have of his impious mafter; Jie bowed with duty and leverence, afluming the outward figns of fubmiflion; but retiring from his * Lord's
Lord's prefence with a bofom filled with refentment and revenge, whilft the dark and piercing glances of anger that he caft on Leopold as he departed frooi the gallery, told him he was in the power of one who would amply repay himfeif for the fervices he had done him. * Leopold caught the fide glance of defiance as it darted from the eye of his dependant; the hilt of his dagoer trembled in his hand, and but for the occa- fion that lie had for the fervices of Ruth¬ mer, it had been plunged into the heart of his partner and colleague in iniquity: but the confideration that he could not do with¬ out him, (laid his hand; whilft Ruthmer, as he departed, muttered to himfeif,—* " Leopold, beware! Remember,-you are in my power! Provoke me not to vengeance ! I will be your flave no longer than you con¬ tinue faithful to the oath of promife; which if you keep not, tremble 1 for I will finally reward and avenge myfelf!" , With mutual, but fmothercd hatred they parted. Leopold
Leopold, as the evening approached, retired' to the banquet^ there to drown the remem«- brance of horrible recollection, or in inebriety endeavour but vainly to ftill the loud call* ing voice of never-dying confcience ; whilft Ruthmer, like the fiend of darknefs, took delight in night, becaule it allowed him greater fecurity from the eye of open inflec¬ tion, to prowl in fearch of his intended prey, or plot frefli crimes of murderous import. Ethelwina'was conducted to her former prifon, and tlie door faftened on hen She funk on the couch, and now, unobferved by all, fuffered the tears to have their free courfe, whilft fhe feebly ejaculated,— " And is it at laft come to this?—this the end of all my hopes, my wifhes ? And have I at laft confented to——whatl become the wife of Leopold ?*—the hated wife of a parent's murderer ? God of ■ Heaven I muft this, indeed, be my fate? Oh! is there no way/no means, to avoid an union fo horrible, fb repugnant to nature?—No!—no! I will not yield,—I cannot—cannot make myfelf
fo very wretched!' Nature revolts at fuch- an ad! my foul loaths the very thought!— > Marry my father's murderer!—never! — never!—rBut then a brother's life remains- with me! Ah! can I fee his helplefs form' writhing in death ? Shall I, fejfiflily to pre¬ ferve myfelf, fuffer him to perifh? And can I fave his life ? If {o r fhall I not do it ?—Yes V Live then,. Oh! live my brother!—Yes, I will reftore thee to thy liberty and rights, and then die thy willing facrifice! But, Ah \ to perifli in my early morn of life, to bereave myfelf of every happinefs, and to become (fhuddering recolledion!) my own deftroyer I God of Heaven, be thy will obeyed! I can¬ not live the life of infamy and pollution!__ Agonising thought! I never will live the wife of a father's deftroyer! There is but one refource,—thou haft heard and witnefled my folemn oath, and to that I will abide,— fo ratify it, Heaven!" Such were the 'fad thoughts and deter¬ minations of the unhappy Countefs; and fo engaged was ihe in her' melancholy mental
mental occupations, that .fhe never once thought to bolt her prifon door within—a circumftance flie had never been neglectful of before. Night and darknefs foon approached; flie had neither light nor fuftenance, nor had fhe tafted-food fince the foregoing day;-—but thefe were circumftances (he difregarded: flie fat buried in profound meditation, and for feveral hours never moved from the place where flie had tlrrown herfelf. A violent flafli of lightning ftartlcd her from the intenfe thought and miiery the had long been m; it in fome meafure turned the courfe of her reflections to other fubjects; fhe anxioufly defired to fee her brother—to weep over "the innocent caufe of her fuffer¬ ings; but after the difcoveries that had taken place in the day, fhe thought it would be dangerous, at fo early an hour, lo venture to his apartment, as Leopold might have placed fpies at the doors of their prifons, and in his heart fufpect more than he chofe to own. Befides, Ethelwina feared that the evident
evident grief of her countenance might be¬ tray to Arthur more than me chofe or wiflied him to know, and the agony of her feelings Were almoft too flrong to be con¬ cealed from his penetrating glances. The dangerous efcape from the jaws of death, which by her uncommon exertions had been effeded, endeared him ftill more to her heart; and her tendernefs was ilrongly excited to know, to fee that he was really fafe. Might not his life have been endan¬ gered after ihe had been dragged from the fcafTold?—nay, perhaps Ihe had been hurried \away for the double purpofe of preferving St. Iver, and that by her abfence from her brother they might be enabled to finifli the bloody defigns; for well Ihe knew Leo¬ pold was capable of any acl of dark, atro¬ cious viilanyi '*' 'Tisthe monfter*s intereft ! J> cried (he, fuddenly ftarting from the couch/ " 'tis hisintereftto have him dead!—nay, he may he. fo already!'? and Ihe uttered a faint ihriekj at the fame time fpringing acrols "-'■ '■ the
the room,—" this fufpenfe is horrible!" added flie; and fhe refolved to go at ail hazards to his chamber. The lightnings now fhot violently acrofs the heavens, and the diftant thunder proclaimed an approaching tempeft. Ethelwina was beginning to find her way through the total darknefs of her prifon to the fecret pannel, when the loud tones of the clock ftruck, and flie counted the hour of midnight. A violent flafh of lightning directed her to the fecret, recefs; the foon opened it, and the want of a. light obliged her to ufe the utmoft precaution in de- fcending the narrow fpiral flairs, which at every turning rendered it dangerous for any perfon, not well directed, to fall over. At laft fhe gained the landing, and haftened to the pannel: flie liftened, but heard no noife within; her heart beat with ten thoufand emotions;—what if her fears fliould be're¬ alized? Breathlefs with anxiety, her agi¬ tation prevented her from immediately find¬ ing the fpring; but after fhe had laid her band upon it, it flew back, and her appre- henfions*
henflons ended by feeing Arthur, who was buried in fuch profound, deep meditation, that he heard not, faw not his fifter till fhe clafped him in her arms;—he returned her embrace, and his eyes filled with tears of tender gratitude to the preferver of his life, whom he felt more inclined to fall down and worfhip as a heavenly Being, than pay her what feemed to him cold in the extreme—a brother's love, which was not equal to the feelings of this uncorrupted child of nature. When their mutual tranfports were a little fubfided, they exclaimed alternately, —" My brother, you are indeed fafe, and I am happy!"—" My blefled fifter, you are fafe, and reftored to my loving eyes, and I am happy 1 But, my Ethelwina, what is the meaning of that more than common wannefs >of your countenance? Why do I fee your looks fo forrowful? Ah I tell me all!—Som^ new grief ?—Say I—* has ------" < c No, my brother! 'tis nothing; "or if any
any thing* 'tis but the trials of the day that have a little overcome me, and my anxiety for you has made me feem thus heavy and opprefled; but now that I find you are fafe, I am again myfelf,—fee you not I am ?" and flie endeavoured to force*a fmile; but the heart refufed to aid the head, and an unbidden tear, in fpite of her utmoft efforts to conceal it, would force'its way, which was perceived by the watchful Arthur; and he t. nderly kifled it from her cheek* " Ah, my fifter! is this a proof of eafe? Oh! if you love me, keep me not in fuf¬ penfe, but explain all! Jt is in vain you try to deceive me, fome new evil has afflicted you, and you muft tell it me,—nay, I will not be denied! I claim a brother's right to fhare your confidence! If you love me 1 im¬ part it, and, perhaps, together we may find the means to avert the threatening danger! Ah me! I guefs but too true! Leopold has dared------" " No, no! my brother, you are mif¬ taken ! I grieve not at any*#il. he can inflict;
that I am not prepared for;—but you I how will you efcape his iron hand, unlefs------" *« Never, Ethelwina! I guefs your mean¬ ing; but on fuch terms I will not accept life!—What! ihall you, the faireft of Hea- ven's works, be immolated to preferve my ignoble, ufelefs exiftence? Shall that beau¬ tiful mind be made the flave of a monfter —a tyrant ? Shall thofe arms receive a mur¬ derer ! a parent's deftroyer! to fave a bro¬ ther ? — Never 1 never! — Ethelwina, you wrong—you humble me!—you debafe your¬ felf as well as me, if, for a moment, you can fuppofe I would accept life at any hands upon fuch horrible terms. From the world I have long been immured,—its hap¬ pinefs'or its pleafures were never known to me,—therefore I cannot now repine for the lofs of-what I fcarce remember ever to have poffefled. I once, indeed, had a feeble hold on that world, but it has ceafed,— the hope of liberty is gone, quite vaniflied from my view; but the prayer and hope 5 for
for death have ever remained, and are ftill my conftant mental occupations. But you, my dear Ethelwina, formed as you are to live long and happy, to be known, and be beloved by a world of friends, ah! how would your unhappy lot be regrettecU whilft I, unknown to the world that**iuch a creature is in exiftence, might die un- lamented, unthought of.. Till thatvbleffed hour when firft I faw you, I knew not what the joys of life, or the impatient hopes for freedom were, and I confefs my thoughts have turned their courfe to thofe flattering, delicious profpects; but this day has con¬ vinced me of my error—I have fpent it in fubduing my mind to the deftiny that awaits me; I have taught my thoughts, in thefe few hours, to return to their former fource, and the hopes of' liberty and life are no more;—they are refigned to imprifonment— to death!—tis all I now look forward to; for folemnly have I fworn, as I now repeat it, never to behold you the wife of Leo¬ pold ! Sooner than be the caufe of fuch a horrible
horrible union, I call Heaven to witnefs I will not furvive the act, or live the bafe object of fuch diflionour! 'Tb in vain to at¬ tempt to weaken rny refolution—the folemn vow is regiftered above. I have now nothing to regret but leaving you, my beloved fifter; and all mat remains for me in this worlcl, is a continuation of that imprifonment which is now become famjliar; or, fliould it be ne¬ ceflary, prepare myfelf to die,"— " Then die this inftant!'* cried a thun¬ dering voice from the oppofite fide of the chamber, and at the fame moment the grim, horrible form of Ruthmer ruflied from the open-pannel, his fword drawn, and darting in fury on his defencelefs prey. Horrible moment i 'Jwas the act: of frenzy; for as Ruthmer had feized the arm of Arthur, Ethelwina ruflied between them, and plunged the poniard that had ftabbed her father, into the fide of his murderer. The thunder, which had been loud, at this moment ceafed. It was a fcene to harrow up the foul of the hardieft:—a - dark,
dark, gloomy, extended apartment, ruinous, and enlightened only by a feeble folitary lamp, not fuffkient to caft its rays over one- third fpace from whence it hung fufpended, while the thunder at ftated rimes pealing along the atmdfphere, and filling the foul of flnful men with,awe, yet not potent enough to intimidate the midnight murderer, who, v fearing no, earthly law, no future day of retribution, and unmoved by the warning voice of Heaven, ftaiked in fecret to the abode of miiery, to finifh the work his deadly malice had begun; he grafped the helplefs vidim, and his revengeful fword was falling on the defencelefs boy, when a frenzied fifter plunged the dagger into the monfter's fide, at the fame time that her foul recoiled with horror from, the deed which left her no-other means to preferve a brother's life ! The villain fell; in fpeechlefs amazement they rufhed into each other's arms, and funk to the earth in gratitude to that Power who had providentially afforded the means of prefervation.
CHAP. IV. A HEY had no time to think, and to act, was' all that was left them. Without ipeaking, but as if actuated by one defign, they ftarted from the ground—they looked not to fee if the fallen wretch had yet re¬ mains of life; they feized the lamp—they flew acrofs the room, fupported by each other;—-they tried the door of entrance*—it was faft;—the pannel was open; upon the landing they obferved fome faftenings—with eager hafte they undrew them;—a fmali door, which never had been obferved by Ethel¬ wina, gave way; they pafled fingly through the narrow aperture to the landing of the tower-flairs, and with palpitating hearts, and vol. m. e limbs
limbs trembling with cold horror and affright, they rufhed down the dark abyfs, continu¬ ing to defcend, but without exchanging one word. Nothing impeded their flight; and they ftopped not till they entered the vaults of the caftle. And now exhaufted with the unceafing velocity of flight, they paufed to recover refpiration, and in mute wonder, caft their eyes upon each other. " Ah, my fifter!" cried Arthur, <c what will become of us ? Shall we proceed through thefe abodes of filence and eternal darknefs, + or fhall we turn back, and become voluntary pritoners ? Your delicate form, my Ethel¬ wina, can ill fuftain the horrors of the place— you will fink under an attempt that may in, the end prove unavailable; the noifome vapours of thefe frightful vaults may fuf- focate us, and wc may at laft perifh the victims of our horrible fituation; let us, therefore, return, and not tempt the dangers of inevitable,deftruction." Arthur
Arthur fpoke more from what he felt for his fifter, fhould fhe, as he thcfught for the firft time, refolve to encounter the dangers of the caverns, (which by him were well remembered); but Ethelwina wildly ex¬ claimed—" Rather let us avoid inevitable deftruction by purfuing the path that lies before us, arid which Providence, in mercy, feems fo wonderfully to have brought us to. Should we return, a certain doom awaits us; and as to the horrors of thefe caverns, alas! I am become fo acquainted with them, that the moft terrific which can be here prefented, are as nothing to thofe I have witnefled. Therefore fear not for me, my brother; you fhall iee that no womanifli appreheqfions fhall deter me from * our prefent purfuit, however dangerous it may be; and fince you are my companion, and the hopes of liberty encourage us, I will tremble at nothing. Scenes like thefe, alas! are not unfamiliar to me. " Not unfamiliar!" repeated Arthur; ** Oh my fifter! 1 '. and there he paufed, £ 2 _jas - .
as if he could have afked a thoufand quef- tions, and conjectured more; but Ethel¬ wina, taking his hand, bade him be of good courage, and haften onward ; he therefore forbore to fpeak the full meaning of his heart. They now proceeded, and holding the lamp to the many vaults that prefented themfelves, they were undetermined which to chufe; and the further they examined, the more their perplexity increafed. They came to an arch, grated with a thick iron gate, ftrongly bolted, but fortunately on the fide they were on; they ufed their united efforts for fome time to undraw the rufty faftenings, and at laft, with infi¬ nite labour, fucceeding, it gave way fuffi- ciently to admit them. Ethelwina judged that this vault might lead to fome out¬ let, or opening, by its being fo ftrongly bolted, while all the other arches had no impediment to prevent a free paffage. They haftened down a long vault, at the end of which were too leffer arches: Ethelwina -» held
held the light to each, to try if ftie could difcover any thing as a guide to the opening they wiflied to find 5 but nothing was per¬ ceived farther than the rays of the lamp ex¬ tended—all beyond it was enveloped in dark¬ nefs.—Not knowing which to take r they committed themfelves to chance, and hur* ried along one of the winding vaults, which continued to a long extent, but without any opening. In fearful apprehenfion they ftill walked forward,, anxioufly wifhing for a termination to their difmal journey * in vain they fearched the walls for fome outlet—it feemed as if they were walking, or gradually finking, to fome other ivorld, for the paflage, though it had no fteps, was a continual de- fcent, whilft the roof of the vault became every moment as they proceeded onward, lower and lower. At laft the paffage nar* rowed fo much, that they were obliged to walk one before the other, and the ground became fo uneven, that it compelled them to flacken their pace, and almoft to <areep on their knees, left they fhould ftrike b J, their
tlteir hmd% apinft the iharp pi^^ of rock which hung from the roofi Their hafte was now entirely prevented, for the paffage narrowed ftill more, and they were obliged to crawl on their hands, with¬ out a poflibility of aflifihsg each other. With grief and forrow Arthur beheld hi« fifter patiently and mildly enduring the jmin of ter fituation, without the p&*er of rendering her my affiftance. Dcfpir feized them, and they concluded they had ur.far* tunateiy taken tlie wrong paflage, at there fecmed no end to the one before them, ar*d no fign of an opening appeared* To return would lofe time, and, perhaps, throw themfelves into the power of tlieir pur- fuen* «• No! ff tmd th& undaunted Ethelwina as they idPbd a moment from their exer¬ tions to confult what tbey Ihould do; ** no! we will MU fp forward while the paffage continues wide enough to admit ml —Shall the prefent momentary honon pre¬ vent us from eibpmg thofe that would be for
for ever?—No! we wi« ftill perfifl whilft there is a fpark of hope in eiiiknm** So faying, Ihe renewed ajpb her weaiy pilgrimage, though almoft cxhaultcd with fatigue and terror. They p^rfued their labours, but their principal difficulty was to preferve the light, left by a fudden fell, or jerk, they fliould lofe that only friend ©I their folitary fituation. At JaU they arrived at a termination at the paflage, which was by a fmali opening, fufBctcnt to admit the body through, Ethel¬ wina held the lamp to the cavity, to d'U- cover where this led to, and was gte&tiy ft* joiced ia finding it to be a large open vault; but it was impoflibte, from the feebkneft of the light, to fee what were its length mA dimenfioss;—fhe found they might with eafe fpring to the ground of ihe ootmaf vault; with caution mc dcicemled, and taking the lamp from Arthur, he (mm f >U lowed her. Oa the fide rf the levity from whkh they came, thqr pcreeiv cd a low arch* and which 14 fh«y
they rightly judged was the opening paflage they Ihould have at firft taken, too! in thai cafc mucli time had been faved, and them¬ felves not been espofed to half the fatigues md perils of the other railage. After they had examined tbc fault they were ln f they proceeded to the oppofite fide, stid m they endeavoured to difcover am opening, they pcttcifed an iron door* which wm double locked. Tim they had Kill greater difficulty to unfiftcn, but hope * fupported tkem* and they forced back the roily bar of the lock;—the door huag oa a, hinge, and they had no fooner entered the interior vault, than it immediately clofed by the 6my of its own weight, and the lock being a fprkg t it inftantly feftened to its hold, ami made them prifoners in a fmail mrroff vattlr, the greateft part of which was occupied by a large btgh-raifed tomb of rude Gothic architecture * the top was covered with a bkck marble flab, with many unknown rfmaekrs and Latin mfcriptions ®nii§ it no* old, aad muuldering to decay. - £tbdwioa»
Ethelwina, holding the lamp near it, read enough to difcover it was the monument of the founder of the caftle* From fuch m obitcl fhe turned, fhuddenng with ter* rot j but Arthur, who had perceived tome* thing glitter on the tomb, approached m Ethelwina kft $t f and laid bk band with weight upon it, to grafp the tparkhng bauble that had excited his attention; but he was ftartlcd by a tattling, hollow found¬ ing noife of fomething failing. Ethel* wirm turned round aghaft with horror, ex* peeling to fee the tomb open, and tbrne horrible fpedre ftart forth to punifh them for their daring intrufion. Arthur's hand ftill refted on the tomb without the power to withdraw if § the rattling continued, and founded loudly through the narrow cell* at laft it ceafed, and they berth darted to the other fide of the ^aolt, where they behdkl • tow flight of ftatts fitted bt the wail. EthcUina ran haflify up | ber bead touched the ceiling, but there was m opening, aid their mHery A $ i >.med
leaned complete, 1m m outlet wm there i^^t the one by which they had entered, and that was fecordy fattened ypoa them* Ddpair now (dmd the trembling Ethel- wim at ibe idea of beti^ fliut for ever in the manfiom of the 4ad f never more to leave thai bortibleiweptacle, and expeaing etery moment to 6ze the tottib pve yp to long forgoucn idiibicgiit. Tlie uocofn* »mi »o& thi^ imd imwl $ msulc them fix on each other look* of angu.fli and defpatr; thef wtild not fpeak i 'twas a moment big with aawplkattd tenojii their fadings were fo many and fo iwoai, that w^fdi were pcmerkC* to awfey s one meaning of what csch other felt. Tbc noife mm bmt% tfpeatcd, gxm EtM^ wiis cour^r, and Ibe ftimiiiofidi tlac for- tilttde to ber aid which m^m cntiidy de- fefted ber* Site cmrtd not utter amwd,for the (mod cwro of im mm wmm would live fr%itt€3@d shemi bdii Ihr cofifKkied within berfelf, stu? ihc ft^ir^ muft have beso jtm4 tkm (m the ptsrpok of pi tag ad* fnyjfewi jttiQ the fault § fhe agatfi alceuded
them, and fcrutinoyfly examined the recefs of the ceiling, and at laft difcovered a lock, but there was no key in iij—again all was hopclefs difappointment and defpair* and Ihe panted in agony til! a fudden re* collegian darted on her mind, and ihe eagerly fearched her pockets, and from thence took the key that Ihe had found on a former vifit to the vaults. With eager hope ftie tried it to the lockj it turned in the wards, and a fniall fide door opened. Tlie joy of thin moment exceeded the mifery of the paft; to Ethelwina it was but mo¬ mentary, for the ftififliine of joy that had brightened her countenance, mm fucaeded by an increafe of forrow, when having landed from the gloom of death, ihe tail her eye» around her, and dif cove a%i the well-known crofe, white the trapdoor that opened from the tomb, competed the front fide of the ftone attar which Ihe had once hyfare &e» in circumiUnccs painfully aiding to iemembef« Her eyes, ftiffened and glazed with trem* 16 bi'tng
Wing terror, werecaft,as if by an irrefiftibte imrnslfe, towaids the dreadful cell that con¬ tained her lather*! remains; (he wilhed, Ihe tried in vaia to turn her fight from an object of fach excruciating agony, but ter¬ ror flupified her fenfes; and at the moment when Arthur had landed from the vault, and turned his eyes ia queft of Ethelwina, a deep and hollow groan ftruck on their ear*. Arthur darted forward towards the paflagt tint the bunds had proceeded from* Ethel* wins flew after htm to detain him; but overcome with bmmr t file funk to the earth m the moment when the cell was fud¬ denly iUujuifted* and her eyes caught a fight ©Cdte fcoeft where her fiufacr's remains were expofed lo her view! EtbcJwwia bad Mien to the ground with* out nolle; and Arthur mm too much en- ga§id with the wonderful apparition before A final! blue flame horcred round the crll, wed m Wt txome ftmoon' before the
the recefs. A voice, in hollow accents, was heard to pronounce—*** The body of thy murdered father lies unburied before thee! Its reftlefs fpirit wanders, diflTatisfied, upon the earth I Revenge my murder, and re¬ move my afhes to holy, facred ground 1" The ghaftly putrid face was plainly to be feen; its eyes were fixed upon Arthur, who gazed upon the mangled form as it lay in the recefs till horror filled his heart, and he fiewt franticiy, from the view of fuch an object of terror; but he had nearly fallen on his filler, of whofe infenfible ftate he had no idea. He knelt by her fide, and raifed her in his arms, loudly calling upon her name, whilft thccaverns re-echoed with his cries, and awak¬ ened Ethelwina, who looking up, and per¬ ceiving they were ftill near the feene of ago* nizing affliction, feixed the affrighted Arthur's arm, and they flew along the many paflages and winding vaults, as chance directed them. Had an armed force been fent to take them prifoners, or to inflict inftant death, Ethel¬ wina^ fpeed and terror could not have been increafed;
increafed;—with fuch velocity did fhe fly, that Arthur had a difficulty to keep pace with her, and he was at laft obliged to en¬ treat her / to hefitate, for, weakened by fo many )ears' cpnftant confinement, he was unable 'to ufe his limbs with that pliancy, which the want of exercife had robbed him of. He begged her to explain the meaning of her too evident terror.— cc Did you too, Ethelwina," added he, " perceive any thing?" " Fly] fly!" cried Ethelwina, « from yon fcene of horror.! Alas! I have already feen too much! Oh! 'twas a fight that harrowed up my foul! Haften, good Arthur, haften; if we tarry longer, my fenfes will forfake me!—Oh! when fliall we be free?"—And again they darted down another winding cavern; but Ethelwina became exhaufted—fhe leaned againft the wall, for her ftrength failed, hope forfook her, and Che now feared they were, indeed, 4. loft,
loft, and doomed to perifli iri the bowels of the earth,. A fmali niche on one fide of the wall prefented a feat, and Ethelwina funk faint¬ ing upon it; whilft Arthur propofed taking the lamp, and going in fearch of fome other paflage. He walked" forward a few yards, and holding the light before him, perceived a flight of ftairs, whilft a draught of purer air ruQied up from the chafm, and feemed to promife fomething to encourage them to proceed. He returned to Ethel¬ wina, and informing her of his difcovery, fhe rofe to purfue it, a little revived by the faint hope that this circumftance might, perhaps, prove more fortunate. At the brink of the defcent, Arthur took Ethelwina's hand, and conducted her in fafety down a large flight of ftairs. At the bottom was a cavern of wide dimeniions, the roof exceedingly high, but dropping with damps; the ground was rocky, and dangerous to the feet, as it was uneven. ' They
They ftopped a moment to examine the place; and not far from the paflage they had defcended, was another arched opening. Ethelwina took the lamp, that fhe might difcover in what direction it laid; but how were all her former terrors furpafled, when flie plainly diftinguifhed the found of diftant hafty footfteps from the paffage! They viewed each other with increafed anguifh, and their terror for a moment rendered them immoveable; but Ethelwina, urged by de¬ fpair, hurried Arthur forward;—they darted over the rugged ground, acrofs the immenfe cavern, the found fometimes gaining upon tfr m, fometimes loft in diftance; but Ethel* wina, fearing their light might difcover them, and totally prevent all chance of an efcape, extinguifhed it, and threw it from her. They were now in total darknefs; not a ray of light broke in upon them; their fitua¬ tion was horrible; they every moment ex¬ pected either to be feized, or if they con¬ tinued forward, to fall into fome cavity, which the lofs of their light would prevent them from
from difcovering in time to avoid; yet hope ftill clung to them, and they mutually aided each other. They proceeded on for a confiderable time, till their out-ftretched hands touched a wall of rock, which for a great part of their way continued; but this guide they fuddenly loft, and it feemed as if they had turned the corner of fome peak, for in another moment, tranfporting fight! a fmali ray of day-light appeared.—» The joyful fenfations of fuch a fight are be¬ yond the powers of defcription; their droop¬ ing fpirits revived, and they felt fomething like an afTurance that they muft at laft be near fome outlet. Ethelwina urged her weary limbs, and they flew towards the direction, that the light pointed out: it increafed in fize as they walked forward, till they were at laft enabled -imperfectly to fee each other. A fide of the cavern was pafled, and they entered the very paffage from whence iflued the ftream of light; they hurried down it, and at laft reached a narrow cavity terminated by a fmali iron grate*
grate, which was all that impeded their paf- fage to freedom. With incredible ftrength, and laborious exertions, Arthur forced back the rufty bolts, and they found themfelves free, and in the open air; they ruflied for¬ ward, but their efcape in one moment was rendered abortive by the deep fides of the precipices, which rofe in oppofite direc¬ tions, whilft a chafm of rock hung bending over the gulph below, almoft reaching to the fides of that precipice on which they vainly hoped to find a pafTage. Their defpair was increafed, for the found of footfteps Was heard along the cavity they had quitted. Ethelwina diftractedly flew in fearch of means to avoid their pur- fuers; the platform on which fhe walked was narrow, and her danger of falling over the edge of the precipice extreme; fhe at length difcovered a fmali flat bridge, or rather an oaken plank, that had for ages been thrown acrofs the chafm of the two precipices, which at this particular place leaned over fo clofe to each other, as to . render
render fuch a paffage poffible, though very dangerous;—they both caft their eyes in hor¬ ror upon it; it was their only alternative; their foes gained upon them, and there were no other means to chufe but this, or remain and be taken. There was no hold or ftay to the bridge to prevent their falling over;—it was a moment big with awful terrors I Ethelwina offered a fervent prayer to Heaven for its protection, and vainly endeavouring to aflume courage, or flop the tremblhg agi¬ tation of her whole frame, ftie fet her foot on the decayed and crumbling plank, which, bending with age, feemed ready to part with the weight, and fink her to her eternal grave. In vain flie tried to hide from her fight the abyfs beneath—rtremendous pro- fpecl! Expeding to fall to inevitable de¬ ftruction, fhe flowly pafled on, and with equal care Arthur followed. They gained the oppofite precipice in fafety, and their arms enfolded each other; they ftood in mute wonder at their miraculous efcape, I , when
when the form of Ruthmer, with his arm bound up, (for his wound had been but flight) rufhed from the cavity, and though Ethelwina ftood waiting to re¬ ceive inftant death, (for fhe was unable to fly) yet at that moment of danger to her¬ felf, her heart felt eafed of half its burthen, and fhe inwardly exclaimed — « Thank Heaven! I am not a murderer!*' But the revengeful, ferocious looks of Ruthmer declared his horrid purpofe; he darted to the bridge, and with incautious hafte, and favage eagernefs, prepared to de- ftroy his victims. The plank, ruinous and worn with age, gave way; with the fudden weight it parted, and before the guilty wretch could reach the oppofite fide, the bridge funk*. and Ruthmej fell to-his eternal gravel
CHAP.
*—' 1
CHAP. V. JTIlRTHUR and Ethelwina had been en* deavouring to fly from the fpot; but as their eyes caught a fight of the finking, mifer¬ able wretch, they hurried back to the brink of the precipice in time to behold him a fpedacle of pity and horror. His death was the event of a moment, and a projed¬ ing point of the rock, half way down the tre¬ mendous gulph, had caught the mangled body. Amazement and reverential gratitude filled their hearts at the aftoniiliing efcape they had effeded, whilft the wretch that lay dead before them, was called to his laft ac¬ count in the very aft of cruelty and murder. , , With
With bended knees they adored that Power who had afforded them fuch a proof of its Almighty protection; they kifled the earth, and fhed tears of joy, unutterably thankful for their unexpected happinefs. Arthur gazed around; he inhaled the frefh air; he fpread forth his arms as if to catch that liberty he had obtained, whilft every motion of his foul was excited: fome¬ times he doubted whether he was really at liberty, and he caft his eyes in joy and won¬ der around him, and then uttered fome joyful, unintelligent exclamation of grateful adoration. Ethelwina having paid her thanks where they were moft due, rofe from her bended pofture, and her excruciating feelings were a little calmed. The morning was dark, the fun had not yet arifen, and the light of day had but juft begun to chafe away the heavy clouds that were left by the receding tempeft. As Ethelwina caft her eyes around, what were her te r ror and furprife to behold the well- known northern tower, as it hung fufperided over
over her! She was aftonifhed to find, that, after the innumerable turnings, and almoft endlefs paflages of the vaults they had pafled through* they fliould open immediately under the tower from whence they had efcaped; fhe plainly faw they muft have defcended a great depth into the bowels of the moun¬ tain, as the place where fhe now flood feemed, on cafting her eyes upwards, to be at leaft half way down the fides of the precipice, and many fathoms lower than the platform on which the tower flood, which in their prefent fituation rendered it an objed of fuch tremendous altitude, together with its tottering, bending form decaying and crumbling to fpeedy ruin, that Ethelwina, with increafed thankfulnefs, blefled Provi¬ dence for her releafe, and wondered it had not buried itfelf in the abyfs below, and that it fhould ftill be able to ftand againft the repeated ftorms that muft have endan¬ gered it. Now and then, as the clouds of mift and vapour hovered round the bafe of the rock, its amazing foundations were hid from
from the view, and from its immenfe mag*. nitude the eye was left in uncertainty whe¬ ther it was not a tower of clouds which fometimes are feen in a heavy day. From an object of fuch difguft and ter¬ ror, Ethelwina turned away, and the necef¬ lity of fpeedily finding fome path that might lead them up to the mountain's fun> mit, made them caft their, eyes around on all fides, in hopes to find an opening among the furrounding rocks, but all was one amazing wall of mountains; whichever way they turned, nothing was diftinguifh- able but the blue fky above their heads, and the gulph between the two precipices; the ftillnefs of morning was interrupted only by the fall of many torrents which, foaming from their high cavities in the rock, came thundering into the dafliing waters of the abyfs. With quick fteps they hurried onward, but the path was both narrow and fteep, and the clanger of falling over extreme; it now became rugged and uneven, and foon took the form of an acclivity;
acclivity. On one fide they difcovered a fmali vaulted opening in the cliffs, which at firft view feemed only a chafm, but on a nearer examination, it proved to be a fubter- raneous paflage, and Ethelwina debated whether they fliould enter it; however, on cafting her eyes around, flie found they had no other alternative, for to proceed any fur¬ ther by the open path they had come, was impoffible, as it terminated, upon exami¬ nation, by a bold perpendicular moun¬ tain, which rofe in one ftraight line from the vale below, without a fhelving of any kind either to climb round to its other fide, or to make it poflible for them to afcend to the top. Here then their progrefs ended, and all that remained for them was either to enter the cavity, a plan very dangerous, or elfe to return the way they had come, and feek for fome means to gain a paflage that way— a defign ftill more perilous, for in returning they might be difcovered by fome of Leo¬ pold's people from the caftle towers j no , vol. in. H f other
, other expedient then was left them but to enter the cavity, which they no„ longer hefi¬ tated to do. - It was a narrow caufew ( ay, and> at firft feemed only a fhort paflage, but it foon widened; and as they proceeded ^forward, they had again to encounter all the dangers of fuch a fituation in total darknefs; the laft glimpfe of day-l%ht from the opening they had pafltd was now entirely loll, not a cre¬ vice admitted .the fmalleft particle of light, and they continued to wander over the broken, uneven ground in momentary dread of fome ten ib!e calamity. . They had continued on for a confider¬ able length of time without*any appear¬ ance of day-light, when- their ears were , fuddenly faluted by the*, founds of diftant mufic; they flopped to liften, and found thcmfelves-,not deceived; the notes were heard, though faintly, as the wind feemed to waft them along. Ethelwina, weak and exhaufted, was a little rejoiced, and the hopes of fuccour gave her frefh courage to proceed;
, proceed;; they haftened on as fwiftly as their tired limbs would carry them, and m a fhort time were blefled with the return of day-light, which, though at a diftance, enabled them to fee tlieir way in,.fecu¬ rity. Arthur, with care and tendernefs, fupported his almoft finking fifter to the opening of the cavity, fimilar to that by which they had entered; but as they ap¬ proached ftill nearer, they heard more plainly the fweet tones of echoing harmony, which fecmed* to, their aftoniflied ears like the founds of many inftruments. As they cleared themfelves of the caverns, they en-' tered a plain, furrounded and enclofed on all fides by a wide range of lofty moun¬ tains, rifing in inacceflible height to the* ikies j—in the middle- of the p]ain flood a confufed heap of ftones in the forrn of a Druid's temple; many of its fides lay ftrag- gling on the ground, whilft its whole appear¬ ance bore marks of an almoft fhapelefs nufs of rubs. The mufic that had before furprifed F 2 , them,
them, was now increafed to drains of melody; and the*tones of the inftruments feemed to fwell louder and louder. They looked on .all fides to difcover tfte muficians, but no one appeared; nothing was feen but the tops of the mountains, which rofe in perpendicular height from the plain, their fumrnits crowned by the tall pine, and mountain jifh. Ethelwina approached fur¬ ther into the plain, to difcover, if po/fible, a path-way to the heights; and ;n turning the corner of a projeding fteep, fhe be¬ held, on the Oj jofite fide of the plain, a venerable old man feated on a low pro¬ jeding rock, with a harp, on which he was playing, and accompanying its fine tones with a deep, impreflive, fonorous voice; the mountains, refponfive to his harmonious notes, fent back the floating found in lengthened echo 5 , and the wind vasying, carried it to ftill more "diftant rocks, reverberating it back with in¬ creafed melody, and making it feem like the tones of more* inftruments than one only,
only, whilft the muflcian, paufing at every ftrain, ceafed till echo again became filent j then he refumed his exquifite notes, and fo finifhed them; diftance, lengthening and foftening the founds, rendered it in refcm¬ blance to the mufic of angels, rather than produced by the powers,of mortality. The fky was, clear, and the fun fhone with unufual brightrtefs, whilft the plain, enlivened by the melodious ftrains of thv aftoniQiing mufician, feemed to the weary, exhaufted .fugitives a terreftrial paradife; they had been eagerly liftening to the almoft heavenly founds, when Nature powerfully claimed her rights, and the hopes that they might obtain fuccour from the vene¬ rable hard, whofe white -locks and facred profeflion fecured them from all s appre-, henflons of danger, induced them to crofs the plain towards the place where he fat. The bard feemed fo much engaged by his pleaflng amufements, that he did not t perceive them till Arthur had dropped on his knee to fupport his finking fifter. As fj his
'iOl ETHELWmA; his ftrain fceafed, he caft his eyes downward, and in unutterable amazement beheld his vifiters; he could fcarcely believe his eyesl We$5 they indeed mortal ? No worldly foot- t fteps, in his remembrance, had ever de-* fcended the inacceflible fides of the mOuri^ tains to the plain below, and to which there Was but one paiTage, and that fo fecreted, as to be undifcoverable to any but himfeif and thofe of his profeflion. He ftarted upi and looking from his elevated fituation, de¬ manded, in a foft, benevolent accent, if they were mortals, what' he could do to ferve them, and by what means they had gained an entrance ? Ethelwina had funk exhaufted on the ground, and was unable to fpeak. Arthur 4 almoft as ill as his fifter, feebly anfwerecl,—* " Alas! holy Father, if you give riot inftant help, rny fifter will perifli;—I pray you hafte <—fhe finks for want of aid !'* The Druid was in a moment out of light, but foon again was feen haftening down the locks as faft as his age would permit; he approached
approached them, and mutually with Arthur fupported Ethelwina up the narrow foot¬ path, and they foon reached the platform of the low rock on which the Druid had fat. At the back oT the rifing precipice was an opening, concealed by the mountain afh and underwood; it was the entrance into the bard's habitation. As foon as he ar¬ rived there, he placed the fainting Ethel¬ wina on a couch of mats, and fprinkling her face with the cryftal water of the mountain fpring, fhe foon recovered j he then placed all the food his Ample dwelling* afforded before them, which conflfted of dates, mountain-wood nuts, wild fruits, and a plentiful beverage of goat*s milk; of thefe they made a refrefhing repaft, and the delicious flavour of the milk foon re* vived their fainting frames. The Druid partook but fparingly of the repaft, his whole attention being engrafted by the beautiful forms of his.unexpected vifiters, and wcrw dering^what caufe Could have driven them to the fhelter of his unknown dwelling; f 4 whilft
* whilft the noble dignity of their features convinced him his guefts were of no mean order. So rivetted were his attentions to their perfon*, that it at laft engaged the notice of Ethelwina, and fhe felt he had a powerful claim to her confidence; hisfilver fecks and venerable affect forbade all doubts to hh difadvantage, and fpeaking to him, the faid*—** The hofpitality and timely aid you have aflbtded, holy Father, claim our uinioft gratitude, and with your pcrmtffion I will explain the hiflory of two hapic«s orphans, who, deftitute and pei ilhing, muft have funk to the earth but for your generous affiftance.** She informed him who they were, and related the principal of her brother's and her own ftory, explaining for what purpofe they had been bei rayed into the power of St Iver, the fufferings they had endured, and the wonderful means by which they had efcaped i but flie concealed the other parts cf their dory* The bard liftened in filence % but when the
the name of De St. Iver wm mentioned, his benevolent countenance fuddenly af¬ fumed a frowning, angry afpect, and the deep furrows of his vi&ge fwelkd with the tumult i 'lis agitated feelings. No fooner had Ethelwina fmilhed her calamitous nar¬ rative, than lifting up his clafped hands to * Heaven, he fervently uttered—" God of Mercy, be praifed I they have efcaped the lion's dm in fafety! Obi my poor child, not fo wasthy hard deftiny!—Ob! agony of thought I — Bleffed, fainted martyi! — Accurfed, bloodlhirfty monfter!——Omni¬ potent Providence, powerful in mercy and ia juftice, why is the thunder of thy puwftV ments fo long delayed ? Obi why h the deftroyer fullircd to live fecure, and be the Icourge of innocence ?** With amazement they liftened to thb incoherent rhapfody, till the bard becom¬ ing more calm, and ob&rvtng their Went aftonifliment, thus continued :— *< Attend, my children* to the ftory of my mifery! I had once a daughter f lately, f j beauteous,
to* ' BVfeTSWnVk; • beauteous, and endowed -with the ftores of Nature's beft improvements. She was the joyofmy heart, and the t reafure I prized above the- riches of the earth. She foothed the thorns of life," and foftened the griefs-of my foul for the early death of her angel mother. She was the blefling Heaven had given .to crown my declining years of life with peace, and who fliould have clofed my eyes in my lateft hour. She was gentle, affectionate, and dutiful, and all that the fondeft parent 'could'wifh and defire. Mild was fhe as the fummer's evening breeze, and riot one agitating paflion ruffled the ferenity of ^ her bofom with a moment's uneafinefs. • The foft, yet tumultuous paflion of love was a ftranger to her heart, and (he knew no greater pleafure than in the enjoyment of my Society. * * ** In a delightful vale, fliaded by many a majeftic tall tree and flowering fhrub, ftood our'happy little manfion:—no title was ^dded to my namej there f we lived in - the bofom of retirement, unthought of and - r ^ ^ r 5 v ^even
even unknown but by the humble peafant who felt and owned t e bounty of my Bertha s hand. We had no wants*to 'upply„ no defires to gratify, but fuch as my final! paternal eftate could, with eafe, procure us ^ " beyond its limits we had no wifhes to in¬ dulge. A frugal plenty fpread our board,. at which the weary traveller ever found a hearty welcome; a fiveet garden (which with my 3ertha's aid I cultivated) ran round our houfe, which we enriched by the culture of many a mountain wild-flower and flirub, and which amply repaid our trou¬ ble by blooming with greater beauty and vigour in a more congenial foil: this was one of our principal occupations, or fome¬ times they were varied by my Bertha's harp, and exquifite voice/ ; We rofe early, arid. together from the mountain's point would watch the fun 3$ it darted from its caftern bed in all the fplendour of its golden ^fire.—Such were the occupations of our contented, happy lives, when one ^morning ~Oh that I could (hut ir for ever froor my jueiwiy, ?rid fdrget it was ^ day.?tbnt ever
her pale cheeks, to my eager enquiries flie faid,— c Oh "my father! vve muft haften hence! our fafety is endangered! the power¬ ful-St; Iver has dared to jnfult my ears by his rude love, and I have flown from him as with threats he vowed to force me to be his.'—She then related the paflion he had declared for her while under my roof, and which had been fince repeated in the laft morning walk my Bertha had ever taken, and there, in moft unequivocal terms, he had offered marriage, if flie would confent privately to retire from her father's houfe ; which was peremptorily refufed by my child, who defpifed fach an offer as much as flie did the wretch who made it. He left her in anger, and vowed revenge. The haughti- nefs of his manners was difgufting to the timid, gentle Bertha, and as long as fhe could, with fafety "to berfelf, conceal his in- folent advances, fo long had flie meant me to be a ftranger to them; but his laft vifit terrified her, and it was now become necef- fary, for the fafety of us both, that I fhouldbe made acquainted with the whole, * J liftened with
with indignation and alarm fo the tale of infult; but to hope redrefs was in vain, and our only fecurity was in an inftantaneous removal from the lawlefs power of a man whofe actions might prove dangerous to our peace, and whofe will was defpotic around the neighbouring country. " Near to the Caftle of Iver ftands a venerable Monaftery, and this feemed to pre¬ fent a fecure afyluni to my child. That even* ing, therefore, I conducted her to the gates of the Aobey, and with tears of forrow for the neceffity of our parting, I trufted my all, the treafurc of my heart, to the protec¬ tion of the facred hcufe, h-ping her pure in¬ nocence would find a fure fecurity in the manfion of God. We embraced in agony. Oh! why did not the dreadtul prelentiment of. my foul tell to my mifguided judg¬ ment that^ I had lefc her for ever—left her in the power of fanctified treachery? Ci Oh day of horror that enfued ! I have neither words nor meaning to exprefs the agony of my foul when the next evening at
at funfet, as I called at the Monaftery *to embrace my child, I was told flie had de¬ parted from the Abbey, and voluntarily fled to Iver Caftle. I heard no more j the gates of ihe accurfed Monaftery were clofed upon me, and I funk to the ground. On my recovery, I found myfelf fupported by a Monk, of charitable heart; he tried to footh and confole my diftracted mind, but inforn cd rrc that (lie Lady Abbefs, wifhing to gain the favour of Leopold, had imme¬ diately fent to acquaint him with the arrival of my child at the Monaftery. Leopold, that fame night, repaired to its gates; the , diedtful Abbefs teceived a large reward, and my child was forcibly delivered to the |-ower of her deftroyer, and dragged to the Caftle. Ah God! what were the agonies that rent this bofom? But two little days had intervened, and I Iiad been the hap- pkftof the happy! but now rage, defpair, and madnefs pofltffed me! Wild and furi¬ ous as the hungry lion, I flew along the precipices, I reached the mountain's bafe, and
and to my loud diftraded calls the rock unclofed, the iron door opened—I darted the fteps, and entering the halls of Iver, was in a moment at the feet of the in¬ human tyrant. Grovelling at his footftool, I flineked, I begged him'to reftore my child. He heard me with derifion and fcorn; I was dragged from his deftroying prefence, and caft into the dark glooms of a dungeon. As my favage jailers clofed the door upon me, they informed me my imprifonment, or freedom, depended on my daughter; that when fhe had learned obedience to their Lord's wifhes, I fhould then enjoy my liberty. Oh!. then who fhall conceive my added mifery! Should my child, to obtain her parent's releafe, confent to her own dif¬ lionour, what but an everlafting defpair muft be mine? " Bitter drops of agony rolled from my eyes; I threw myfelf upon-the earth; I could not pray, for my heart was wrung with anguifh; to fleep, how vain was the effort I Day after day paffed in the fame round of mifery,
mifery, and wretched fufpenf:, when one morning; my dungeon's ffloom was cnli^ht- ened by the door opening, and the pile, fhrunk form of my child flood before me! Our agitations were too great; we could neither of us fpeak. Oh! how did my longing arms ach to enfold her in a pater¬ nal embrace! but my*limbs had that morn¬ ing been favagely chained to the earth, and my child was withheld by the ftrong grafp of her inhuman guards from coming near me, though fhe ftruggled vainly for free¬ dom. The fcene was but momentary, for they foon withdrew her from my fight, and the only words we uttered were—* My child! my Bertha!'—.' My father! my dear father T fhrieked fhe out, in wild agony. The dreary vaults fent forth the echo of her voice; it funk upon my very foul; its defpairing tones are yet remembered; fancy again prefents them to my mind —again I hear thee, Oh my iuffefing child! ------ It is too much—1 cannot ipeak 1" And he paufed, whilft the agony of his iaddencd
1 faddened countenance bore teftimony of the mifery of his mind and feelings. Ethelwina and Arthur had liftened in forrow and lympathizing kind nefs; the big tears trickled from their eyes in unifon with the- unhappy narrator. Each of them took a hand of the afflicted old man, and with foothing tendernefs endeavoured to pour confolation into his wounded heart. Unufed for many years to fuch attentive proofs of kind nefs and commiferation, he embraced them both, and being fomewhat calmed by experiencing the real fympathy of compaflion, he proceeded with his melan¬ choly relation. " I will finiih my fad tale," continued he, " for why fliould I add to the griefs of two minds of fenfibiiiiy and virtue ? I will therefore only relate, in a few words, the end of our fad fate, nor afflict you with a full defcription of my indejeribabk fuffer¬ ings. It is furficient to add, that my pious child, ftruck with horror at the miferable fate of her father, (which for an intended purpofe
purpofe (lie was brought to witnefs) at laft, upon condition that 1 was inftantly reftored to liberty, confented to her own wretched- nefs. The marriage ceremony was per¬ formed, but fhe foon was acquainted that it was ufelefs, and that the pretended prieft was his rconfidential creature. The brutal raviftier triumphed over her haplefs ftate, and I was offered my liberty. *' I will not, cannot relate, or do juftice to the anguifh of my mind on the receipt of this fatal news;—a fit of madnefs feized me, and I refufed to quit my prifon; when, after a length of time, my fenfes returned, and I was alive only to exquifite mifery. I was again offered, my freedom; but,,as a punifhment to myfelf for being the caufe of my child's diflionour, I vowed never to quit the place, but rather chofe to live in eternal darknefs, than fee the upbraiding light of Heaven. I was allowed my choice, and my tyrants were, I believe, happy in the one I had made; but foon after this ^v<*nt of infamy and horror, my jailer entered f
enfered my prifon, and throwing me the, well-known fcarf of «my child, informed me flie was dead. " Poor, innocent fufferer! thy calamities were too potent for thy meek fpirit, and Heaven, in mercy, took thee from this world of woe and thy accurfed deftroyer!------Let me here clofe the remembrance of what this bitter event inflicted on my difordered mind; 1 only know I became from that day^a maniac, and was happily freed from feeling the acute tortures of my foul. I was permitted to range at freedom through the endlels cavities of the vaults, where fometimes I would, ilirieking,fly down many an avenue, my diftempered fancy prefenting to my fight the form of my child, Which, retreating from' me, I would wildly pur¬ fue till fome projecting rock in the caverns ftopped my progrefs; and, dunned with the violence wifh which (as it was unfeen) I daQied myfelf againft it, I have lain for hours weltering in my blood which iflued from my wounds, till life has again beat in
Il8 ETHELWINA. in my pulfe, and I would then return to my bed of ftraw, where, a? I groaned away the hours of night, I fometimes fancied I heard the flghs and groans of fome ex¬ piring wretch;—it was mufic to my foul, for I fancied' it was Leopold; and then I would lausii in hectic madnefs at the tor- ments my heated imagination had formed for him, and uttering curfes and execra¬ tions on his name, view him with delight ftruggling with the daemons of darknefs ; and, crying in a loud voice of triumph, I would exclaim— < My child ! look down from thy bright abodes, and view how amply are thy wrongs avenged!'—'Twas once that in the purfuit of my angel child," I darted down a long paflage that had no impedi¬ ment; I know not by what means I con¬ quered fuch difficulties, for madnefs giving me fuperior ftrength, enabled me to over¬ come them all, and I ftill purfued the ideal vifion of my mind till I arrived at the iron grate, which I wrenched open; but the fudden change of day-light from eternal darknefs,
* darknefs, and tafting the frefh air, reftored my fenfes, My tears came plentifully to my relief, and caftd my opprefled mind of a load of anguifh, whilft the pain of my wounded body and bleeding ieet feived to keep my fenfes entire, I tottered in fearch of fome means of affi(lance,■ fur my mind was coafufcd, and I had no recollection of the paft; nor could I at firft guels by what means 1 had been placed in fuch a fituation. " I came to the oak plank, which I crofted in fafety, unknowing of the dan¬ ger of my flipping to an eternal end of all my miferies. I have once fince vifit ed it, and wiflied that in my formei uncon- fcious moments. I had fallen over the plank, when, guiitiefs of my death, a period would have been put to my lothed exift¬ ence; but it was not permitted, and Pro- vidence alone guided my footfteps over the bridge, through the cavern, where, quite ex- hatuted, I funk- at the door of the temple, and fell into a deep flumber, from which I was roufed to new life, and, torturing, never- dying
dying remembrance by fome bards. Their facred order infpired refpect, and the aflift¬ ance they adminiftered both to my wants and wounds, engaged my gratitude. I freely related all that you have now heard, and they offered to admit me a member of their Society. 1 accepted their offer, on condition that I might be permitted to live in retirement, and make the caverns of the mountains 4 my only habitation;—they in¬ formed me that a brother of the holy order, who had formerly the care of the temple, was flhee dead, that his hermitage v/as vacant, and fituated on the other fide of the plain:—this is the place we are now in : they gave me rmny neceffaries, and all that had belonged to the deceafed bard. In this abode I found every requifite for the convenience of that kind of life it was my only wifh to lead, I was initiated into their myfteries, without which ceremony they refufed to allow me to remain in their fecret dwelling: it made no difference to me, for' I had determined never again to mix with
with the world;- nor have I ever wiflied to leave this my peaceful grot. " Here I am refolved to finifli the fmali remnant of my days in peace, and no tempt¬ ation could again lure me from my tranquil retreat. The bards, I fliould have added, having performed the facred rites of their profeflion (which was done but once in the year), all retired from the ruined temple, and left me in quiet poffeflion of my pre¬ fent abode They fhewed me the fecret pafB.ge up the mountains, where I fome¬ times go to gather fruits and fuftenance, and other fuch materials as enable me to live; perfectly to the extent of my humble wifhes; and here for ten years have I refided. The peaceful life I lead has foftened my griefs, and time has meliorated the bitternefs of my afflictions. I never ceafe for a mo¬ ment to think of my fainted child; yet as I know her pure foul is blefled and re¬ warded above the power of comprehenfion to conceive how much, I am now calmed, and refigned to the mifery of my calamitous vol. in. o deftiny;
deftiny; I look forward with transport to that period, when, at no great diftance of time, I fliall join my beatified child in the realms of never-ceafing happinefs. " I 3sad fuppofed the ftrength of my acute feeling's had been fubdued, but I find by this recal of paft fufTerings, that thefe bitter events are ftrong as ever in my re¬ membrance; but reflation and religion will calm my mind, and I will yet ftruggle as nrich as I can to banifh the paft from my memory, left I be tempted again to murmur at the infcrutable decrees of Pro¬ vidence. It was the menfter's name that excited in my bofom all thofe bitter recol- ledions of former mifery,"
CHAP.
CHAP. VI. iHUS ended the tale of the unfortu¬ nate old man. Ethelwina wondered not at hearing him-fay he had been infane. Du¬ ring his fad relation, a wild and terrifying fire fliot from his ej^es, and he referabled the poor maniac he had defcribed himfeif to have been; but towards the clofe of his narrative they filled with tears, they loft their wildnefs, and pity-moving grief fat on his venerable countenance. Ethelwina faid every thing that the ftrongeft fympathy and commiferation could didate; and, her eye bore teftimony to the gentle influence of her heart, which keenly felt the miferies of the poor unfortunate, who now remenv* g 2 bering
bering their fatigues, recommended them to refrefli their weary limbs with a few hours* reft, particularly as there were many hours to pafs before night, when only it would be fafe for them to venture up the moun¬ tains. The offer was gladly accepted; and Arthur ftretched himfeif on the mats in the fore cell, while Ethelwina was conducted to a fmaller, beyond the other. At one corner was a quantity of braided mafs, that had been the melancholy occupations of the baid; thefe he placed on the ground, and giving ^Ethelwina his blefling, clofed the little wicker door of the cave, and departed. In a recefs of the cell was a fmail raifed altar; on it was placed the memo¬ rials of death, and a facred volume; and a lamp hung fufpended over it. Ethelwina inftantly proftrated herfelf before it, and with reverential devotion returned thanks to Providence for the wonderful mercy of their late efcape; in pious prayer fhe fent up her thoughts to Heaven, and entreated a con-
a continuance of its late protection; then cafting her wearied frame on the mats, fhe foon funk into the flumbers of peace¬ ful fecurity. Towards night the good Father awoke his refrefhed guefts, and informed them they might now venture on with fecurity. Ethelwina entreated his advice and direc¬ tion as to the road they were to purfue. " My daughter,*' replied he, " I have provided for you the means of fafety, and under thefe pilgrim's garbs you may efcape the fearch that may be made for you."- He then advifed them to take a dif¬ ferent route to the one Ethelwina *had come, and to purfue their journey through the lower fides of the mountains, and through the cities in Wales, which would be a confiderable way nearer than the other. " By the track I fhall point out," he added, " you will be enabled to avoid pur- fuit, I have myfelf afcended the moun¬ tains, and beheld a body of horfemen crofs their fumrnits; and now I think it proper
that you fhould inftantly fet forward, for to delay till to-morrow, will be to face them on their return from their fearch; but as from the different directions you will take, you will, under the cover of night, be able fafely to crofs the lower heights, and when you arrive at fome of the cities, it is eafy for you to procure a ftrong efcort onwards/* Ethelwina and Arthur were foon equips ped, and under the facred hood of the pil¬ grim no one could ever difcover whom they really were. The bard conducted them up the rugged fides of the fteep mountain, and opening the concealed door of entrance, gave them his parting blefling. Their grateful hearts flied tears for his kindnefs, but more fo for his patient fufTering3 and mild refignation to them; they offered up a prayer for his peace of mind, and future happinefs; the little door clofed him from their view; Ethelwina heaved a figh for the haplefs fate of the gentle Bertha, apd anor ther for her afflicted parent, and fupported by their ftafi%they Durfued their journey.
Ethelwina, as fhe turned, caught a fight (and (lie fervently prayed for th^ laft time) of the»proud towers of Iver; its immen- fity, and Gothic gloomy grandeur were plainly perceptible by the light of the rifing moon. Shuddering with horror, {lie viewed it, remembering it to be the manfioa ^ of her father's deftrudion, and her own and her brother's fufTerings; but the neceflity of fpe'd, and the defire to fhut her eyes, and if polfible her thoughts, from its fight and remembrance, made them haften onward. The evening had but juft commenced, and was only in the fiift hour*of darknefs; the atmofphcre was clear, and the moon fheu- ding its mild light,,afforded the travellers fecurity from the dangers of the precipices^ all around was filence; not a found, but thofe of the tumbling torrents, or the wav¬ ing branches of the mountain fdreft brake on the ftillnefs of the air. They proceeded on, flopping only at times to recruit their limbs on fome parts g 4 qf
of the mountains, which afforded them a feat. The road they purfued was a fmali nar- j row footpath that wound half way down the lower fides of the cliffy; the bard had pointed this out to them, as it would lead them to the more inhabited parts of Wales, without obliging them to afcend the loftier - heights by which Ethelwina had befoie travelled. Ethelwina's reflections ha*d employed her for fome time in filence. Arthur's thoughts were not difengaged; and he was bufily recalling paft, remembrances when Ethel¬ wina afked him to explain by what means he had been brought into the court-yard, where fhe had refcued him from fuch threat¬ ened danger. ' Arthur informed her that Ruthmer had, on that morning, come early to his apart¬ ment, attended by guards, who defired him to follow them.—" Ah my fifter!" cried Arthur, " 1 trembled with apprehenfion, for I concluded our fecret was difcovered.
Almoft frantic left we were now to be parted for ever, I was on the point of darting up the private flairs to take a laft farewell, when the guards feized me, and conveyed me to the fcafTold, and I was placed behind the black fcreen. Aftoniflied at fiich uncommon proceedings, I repeatedly demanded for what purpofe I was brought there, but the guards refufed to anfwer me, only by faying that I fhould know foon enough. Ah Ethelwina! what were my fenfations when I faw the fcreen un¬ drawn, and beheld my fiftei ' or how can this grateful heart ever repay the love, the uncommon affedion of her who could ex- pofe her own life to fave mine from the murderous axe?" " No more, my dear Arthur," replied Ethelwina; " you have no gratitude to re¬ pay, or I to receive,—'tis I am your debtor; it was for my fake that you, my poor Arthur, were fb long confined, fo- long de- fpoiled of your inheritance:—and witnefs for me, Heaven," added fhe, « that I adore
and blefs that Providence with increafe of thankfulnefs, fines in conducting me to mifery and fuffering, I have difcovered a bro¬ ther, and faved his precious life. Alii" fighed (lie, and a tear ftarted to her eye, " Ah, that I had been gifted with powers to have been the preferver of one other dear beloved victim from the murderous dagger, and then------ >" Arthur was but too well acquainted with his father's fate to doubt whom that other victim meant, and he faid to her un- fmiftted fentence, —" My fifter, I have witnefled a fight that fn>ze my blood, and chilled my heart with horror;—fay, did you too fee the fad, the hornj^le fpectacle in the vaults ? s> " Alas!" fighed Ethelwina, overcome by painful recollections of the paft, when flie had firft been awfully guided > to the terrific cell, " alas! I have feen, Heaven knows, too much!" " It was a father's mangled form i" added Arthur, in a folemn tone. " It
« It was! it was!" repfied/Ethelwina, in great agitation. " Then witnefs for me, Heaven,'' con¬ tinued Arthur, " when I fwear, if guided by thy omnipotent aid, never to know what eate and happinefs are, till I have aveneed the murder of rny fire, and re- moved .his aflies Trbm its den of pollution and flaushter!" Ethelwina had no power or even wifh to difluade him5 flie thought his extreme youth would prevent him from at prefent fulfilling his engagements, and they now proceeded on their journey. At this period they began to defcend gradually from the heights. They had purfued their couric for fome hours, and began at laft to feel them* felvcs wearied of their long and tiretomc journey; they were yet many leagues from any town, and not even a hut ap¬ peared in the inhofpitable regions of the mountains; *the moon was now and then overeaft by clouds, which foretold an ap¬ proaching ftorms ftill they proceeded, and c 6 at
at laft defcended from the firft pafs of moun¬ tains, whPfl fo the right rofe the loftier points of die fecond chain which were feen (n* the moon ftill afforded an imperfect light) buried in the clouds, and their tops crowned with the mountain pine, reaching, in afpir* ing, awful fubiimity, to the fky itfelf. As the tired travellers entered upon an open flat heath, they were ftartlcd by a violent flafli of lightning. The moon now became quite obicured, and the darknefs increafed; not a free or a hut afforded them its friendly Jhcltcr from the ftorm, which foon burft with all its violence over them. The vivid flafhes of lightning continued, and tremendous peals of thunder rolled on the awc-ftruck car, wrapping ihc fouls of the travellers in religious, aftonifhed alarm. Hand in hand they wandered ia terror and hafte through the furrounding darknefs, till by one bright blaze of ire that en¬ lightened the whole atmofphetae f they were enabled to diftinguifli at fome diftance a lurge heap of buildings; they directed their 5 ftcp
fteps towards it, in hopes that it might afford them aid and fhelter from the ftorm* The moon breaking from Ihe heavy clouds at momentary interval?, enabled Ethelwina to difttnguifh the building, which was an ancient pile of ruins. It appeared to ha% # c been one of ihole an¬ tique halls that every where abound in Wales, but which, from tlxe idea of furies and fpeel res, are often delated, ami fuftcrcd to fall to decay, tinclwina had feert m*iny in her former paf&ge over the mountain;, and was at no lofs to account for the filent dc&rted courts and ruined towers oi ihe one they were now approaching. It feemed to have been of more thm common fize, and was mm crumbling into duft j the walls round the outward court laid extended on the area within, whilft tH ponderous Gothic arch of entrance had no gate* to clofe againft the intruder. Many of the towers by halt diimanlied on the ground, and one entire fide of this once frou4
proud manfioawas expofed to all thb ftorms of the elements, and its grand front lay bow a heap of extended rubbifli on the earth.— Every part of tlie- ruin rpore the mark of extreme age and dilapidation^ though there were yet remains left fufficient to bear teftimony of what had once been the* gran¬ deur of its former times. . Ethelwina "hefitated "whether they fhould venture to truft its nodding ruins, which might conceal other dangers befides its own ; yet its'extreme ruinous "appearance made it impoflible that any human creature would (by living in it) expofe themfelves to almoft certain deftrudion. The torrents of hail and rain that defcended, made any thing in the form of a fhelter defirable, and they pro¬ ceeded acrofs the loofe ftones and rubbifh, and arrived at that fide-which was open to fhe fky. They entered an immenle and rooflefs hall, overgrown with long grafs and weeds, whilft the quick fucceeding flafhes of light¬ ning enabled them to difcover what had been
been once the grand ftaircafe. They croffed the hall, with difficulty afcending the de¬ cayed and broken fteps; and feeljng their way along a gallery, which trembled under every flep they took, Arthur's hands hit againft the fattening of a door—he tried to open it, but it was fecured ; and fetting his foot againft it, being fo much .decayed, it gave way, and parted in two, and to their utter affright and amazement they found the room was lighted, and an elderly woman fitting by a fire. As they entered haftilys flie concealed fomething that fhe had been engaged upon ; the room appeared in every marjt of decay* though more fheltered from the inclemency of the weather than'the reft of the building they had feen. Ethelwina trembled, and drew her hood over her face, unable to fpeak ; whilft Arthur, feeing his lifter's - agitation, apoi 0 ^ gized for their intrufion, faying, ( u xt they were pilgrims who had been'benigtv.^j, and loft their way on the heath. That leemg
This timely fpeech had its effect j Ethel¬ wina recovered from her fright, and the woman defifted : but as fhe turned fiom the fuppofed pilgrim, fhe darted a glance upon her, which, as Ethelwina perceived, alarmed her, for its expreflion was of no friendly meaning, and fhe feared they were difcovered. The woman prefented. them fome goat's whey, of which they drank a plentiful draught, but refufed any other refrefbment. She then took the lamp, and bade them follow her, and flie would conduct them to , a place of reft. They,.in fearful filence, obeyed, and pafling along the gallery to another fide of the building," lefs decayed * - than the one they had quitted, their con- ductrefs opened an old Gothic arched door which admitted them to a fmali aparttnejit, but which had. not that extreme ruinous appearance -of the pile they had. left. She -muttered fomething, like a falutation , to 1 heir thanks,'then*clofed the door, and they heard her heavy footfteps regrofs the pallery. t . CHAP-
\ 1 ■ 11 CHAP. VII. ETHELWINA and Arthur examined the chamber; it was low and arched, and had once been lined with tapeftry, fome of the remains of which hung in tatters againft the walls; no kind of furniture remained in it except an old couch of more than com¬ mon fize. There was a door on the oppofife fide of - the room, exadly like the, one they had entered; but upon examination it was ftrongly N bolted on the outjide, for there was no faftenings whatever inwardly. The ceiling 4ike the walls, was black, and ruinous with age and decay. The heavy Gothic fretwork of the windows was compofed of ftone, and fhaped
(hafed (smilar lo thofe of a church, but the ca&menH i^cre eniirvly deflroyed j here and there on'y mere the remains of a few painted panes of gla% v.hich !iad not yet dctaicd their holds. The floor of the chamUr mas in many places broken, and cohered ^ithduft. They viewed this forlorn and dangerous ptoec with looks of affright, whilft the fuf- P'ciou* appearance of the woman, and the ftrangenels of any human beings living in fych a place, made them confult if it were notfaferfor them to purfuc their journey, as this place had fo myftcrious an appear- unce, that it might in the end cxpofe them to dangers and ills that they had better avoid. But ftill their exceffive wearinek and aching limbs claimed fome refpite,™ M At lead/* cried Arthur, « let us remain here till the iUwn of morning, when, refrefttcd by fleep, we txn leave the place too early for whGever are its inhabitants to know of our departure* This plan appeared plau* fible,
fible, and Ethelwina, at the entreaties of her brother, reclined hcrfelf on the couch. Arthur placed himieif on the door, and refted his head upon the foot of the couch, and they were faft finking into the arms of fleep, when they were fUrded by the found of a bell, which in loud deep tones flruck the hour of twelve. The horrors of their abode, and the reverberating founds of the dtfinal bell, made it feem like the toll of death's ftgnal. They could not help won¬ dering that a place fb ruined, and utterly void of every human comfort, mould ftill retain its clock, and, as it fecmed, in per¬ fect repair. The tone had fomethiug {o grating, and founded fo harfli on the ear, that it kept Ethelwina for fometimc awake ; but fleep again overcame her, and fhe was funk into a calm rcpofe, when fome noife ftruck on her ear, and fhe awoke at the moment. The clock again ftruck the hour of one, when, as (he opened her eyes, fhe beheld, with looks of ftiffened horror, the forms of three men, or rather in appearance murderers,
142 * ETHELWINA.' ' murderers, ftanding at the foot of the couch, and calling looks of horrible import on the fleeping Arthur: in the countenances of two of them flie plainly difcovered the ruf¬ fians who had borne her from the vaults of Auburne Caftle! She was unable to move or fpeak—the power of refpiration ceafed—her blood ran chilled in horror from her heart, as with glazed eyes flie obfcrved their motions from under her hood, which concealed her eyes from the glances of the ruffians. With frenzied wildnefs (lie watched their receding forms as they foftly croffed the room, whilft the foremoft, with his finger pointed to the door, went out; the others followed the fignal, when fhe obferved they had no arms on, and as they difappeared, fhe fuppofed they were only gone to procure them. With frenzied horror fhe ftarted from the couch as they left the room, and matching the infenfible Arthur from his found fleep, though ftill unable to fpeak, flie could only 5 point
point in filence to the door, to exprefs her meaning, Arthur, fuppofing that fome inevitable danger was the caufe of his filler's wild diftracted geftures, darted to the door, and then it was that Ethelwina found utterance. " Go not!" cried flie, " you will rufli on fure deftruction !"—Wildly flie ran to the broken cafements ; her purpofe was to drop from thence to the ground, but from its great height from the earth, that plan was rendered abortive. The other door pre¬ fented itfelf—they hurried to it—it was unfaftened, and flood ajar ; a ft ream of light iflued from a narrow paffage, and unknow¬ ing what they did, they ran forward, Ethelwina having flrft had theprecaution to bolt the door, which faftened on the outfide, and would at leaft for a moment delay pur¬ fuit. They haftened to the brink of a narrow winding ftaircafe, from the bottom of which proceeded the light they had before feen the diftant glimmer of As they defcended the laft
laft ftcp, and entered a long wide paflligc, tlieir ears were flruck with a lengthened groan.—Ethelwina took the lamp from the wall where it was placed, an~l they pro¬ ceeded forward with quick and hurried fteps. They reached nearly the end of the vaults ; on one fide of the wall was placed a thick iron -giate, which they were palling when the flgh v»as agafn repeated yet louder.— Ethelwina flopped ; her heart, alive only to compaflion, rendered her forgetful of her own dangers in the hope of relieving others. " Ah!*' faid fhe, " this is the den of murder, and perhaps heie is fume haplefs wretch finking the vidim of oppreffion and a lothed imprifonment.—Let us return to the grate, Arthur—we may pe/haps afford fuccour, if not freedom, to the poor fuf- ferer." The grate, on examination, was faftened by twocrofs bars of iron, and a chain hooked into a ftaple in the wall: but they foon removed diefe impediments, the door opened, and they beheld the figure of a man ftrctched on his bed
bed of ftraw ;—by his drefs, though difor¬ dered, he appeared to be noble; his hair was diflievelled and flowing about him, and his face refting on his arm, prevented them from feeing his countenance. He faw not their approach,, nor heard them till the foft voice of Ethelwina fpoke comfort to him. He then ftarted on his knees— " 'Tis flic i M he cried, cc 'tis my Ethel¬ wina i" " Oh God, helivcs! he Jives!—My beloved Auauftine !—it is himfeh' !" and they rufli- ed in wild tranfport into each other's arms. Their joyful ecftacy was but momentary, and a violent knocking awoke them from their fliort-lived happinefs.—Arthur, in a few words, explained their danger, cf which Auguftine, from experience, was fully aware, and they all darted *Vom the dungeon down the paffage. A current of air breathed upon them, and they difcovered a wide breach, which time ai.d decay had produced in the ruined fide of the wall; and, by the help of vol. in. h each
each other, they crept through the open¬ ing, which was large enough to admit them, to liberty. With the fpeed of the winds they flew along the heath: fometimes liftening, they fancied they heard the diftant voices of their purfuers. At laft they cleared themfelves of the heath, and entered the friendly covert of a clofe concealing wood. Their enemies gained ground, and the purfued darted ftill further into the impervious glades of the foreft, and the thick underwood happily concealed them from their fight, whom, with joy and gratitude, they at length difcovered purfuing another track. Not daring to flop for a moment to reft their exhaufted limbs, our travellers turned afide from the wood, and again gaining the open country, were at laft blefled with a fight of a diftant village. Arthur and Auguftine fupported the fink¬ ing Ethelwina between them, till after a fhort time they reached a lone houfe that flood at fome diftance from the town, and, o upon
upon knocking for adrniflion, the plain but friendly miftrefs of the cottage gave them a hearty welcome, paying to the garb of Ethelwina every mark of refpect. Refrefliments, fuch as the humble dwell* ing afforded, were foon placed before them ; but the joy of their efcape, and the un¬ looked-for meeting of the beloved friends, took from them all appetite to eat; whilft the fanctificd garb of Ethelwina prevented the impatient Auguftine from expreflingthe tranf¬ ports of his enraptured heart, and he was obliged only to addrefs her as the fuppofed pilgrim on a journey to the facred fhrine. The morning had begun to dawn when Ihc travellers reached the cottage. Auguf¬ tine told the friendly hoftefs they had been purfued by robbers, and cautioned her to beware of mentioning tliefrY, fliould any one come to enquire. He requefted beds, which were readily granted, and the weary travellers for a few hours refted their tired limbs, and awoke not till the evening, when they arofe refrelhed, though ftill agitated with the oc- a z. j:urrences .
currences of the preceding night, or rather morning. On defccnding to the neat parlour, they found all the little dainties of the houfe placed before them; it was then con ful ted whether it would not be fafer and better for them to procure hor(es. Ethelwina with gladnefs accepted the propofal, as fhe found herfelf but ill able to fupport the fatigues of the long and uearifome journey they had ftill to purfiK. The hoft was therefore commif- fioned to purchafe three, fuch as would fait them, at the next town ; he was fupplied with money for that purpofe, and aifo to buy feme few ncceflaries, which they, from thetr unprepared journey, flood in need of. Auguftine, refrefhed by fleep, and his pale cheek now re-animated by love, looked unlike the wan declining figure of the night before. His eyes now fparkled with hope and joy, and Ethelwina was enabled to dif- tinguilh the fame features of her beloved companion, whom for more than two years (he
flie had never feen, and whom flie had lately defpaired of ever again beholding. Though the neceflity of their remaining ftill difguifed prevented Auguftine from fpeaking as his heart directed to the beloved pilgrims, yet his eyes faid every thing, and fpoke in the language of all-powerful love. Ten thoufand queiiions were afked of Arthur, who fhared in the-joy of once more feeing his dear Auguftine, who with impatience waited for the return of their hoft with his purchafes., At laft he came, and it was agreed that they fliould lead their horfes tiil out of fight of the cottage, on account of Ethel¬ wina, who could not mount her horfe while la her prefent difguife. It was now evening; and the rifing moon feemed to promife them a guide. They par* took of the plentiful repaft, and in taking leave of their friendly hofts Ethelwina of¬ fered them a purfe, but the hoftefs refufed it; arid at the little gate of her dwelling fhe h 3 dropped
dropped on her knees, and begged the holy pilgrim to beftow his benediction on her, for that would prove a tenfold .reward ; add¬ ing, fhe was fure her houfe would profper, fince it had been fanctified by their facred perfons. Ethelwina complied with her defire, and ftretching her lovely arms over the kneeling hoftefs, whofe broad, fat, rofy cheeks gave her in her humble pofture a moft ludicrous appearance, efpecially as her wide flaring eyes were turned in all the extreme fervour of a devotee up to heaven, expecting to receive from the ceremony as much efficacy as if an angel had defcended, rather than an earthly being.—Ethelwina gave the blefling required with the trueft fincerity, and taking from her neck a crofs, flie placed it on that of the fuperftitious hoftefs, who kifling the garment of the fuppofed pilgrim, rofe from her knees, and curtfeying all the way backwards to the houfe, faid in a tranfport of joy, that fhe was now for ever and ever protected from the
the power of Satan and all his * Elfin imps, and that the peace of her houfe would no more be difturbed by the wicked little crewv The travellers were foon beyond the cot¬ tage, and the fight of its gazing inhabitants; Ethelwina and Arthur threw off their pil¬ grim's habits, and each putting, on a long. clofe concealing wrapper, they mounted their horfes, and, as k fpeed was neceffary, determined not to enter into any details till they had reached a place of fafety, as their purfuers might ftill be in queft of them.—• With unwearied hafte they travelled through the night, and pafling through many of the towns and villages of Wales, they at laft en¬ tered the dreary flats of Lancafter, whofe unfocial famenefs had very little to amufe the mind of the weary travellers. Theyjournied over great part of Wales and Lancafter, and at the clofe of the fecond day after Ethelwina's efcape, they arrived at
the borders of Weftmoreland, whofe native mountains and unruffled lakes excited the greateft joy in her heart. * ; Ah ! s> cried flie, " my much-wronged Arthur, foon will you arrive at your long deferted home—foon will the ancient gates fly open, and the lofty halls of Auburne receive and welcome their long loft Lord :—and fee, Auguftine—you perhaps have not forgot what Arthur cannot have a remembrance of —fee yonder is the afpiring Skiddaw, whofe lofty fides rifing from the bofom of the lakes in mountain height to the clouds 5 whilft its almoft inacceflible fides and top are covered with fnow, prefent it to my mind as one of the bold objects of the view from the caftle windows.—Look, my Arthur, towards the weft, and behind the diftant talleft moun¬ tain which I have now defcribed, ftands the manfion of our anceftors, A few hours more, and all our clangers are over." " But tell me, Ethelwina, is our fifter there ?—Does the dear Emma ftill live ?—■ Has fhe quite forgot her young playmate ?" Ethelwina,
Ethelwina felt a fudden pang at her heart on this queftion being afked, Remember- hzcr the words and prefuming fblicitation of the villain Ruthmer, when he demanded the lovely giri, flie now dreaded on her return left flie fliould find fome ill had befallem the innocent unprotected Emma, whom,, from the many varieties of her own fuf¬ ferings, flie had had no time to think on;. —and this fudden mention of her name made her tremble with apprehenfion; for,, expofed as Emma was, flie dreaded to find ills, of (lie hardly knew what nature, had been the confequence of the brutal conduct: of the wretch who had afpired to the pof- feflion of her perfon", and fhe was from, thefe reflections unable to anfwer; but from this tafk flie was releafed, as well as her mind made in part eafy, by Auguftine, who, faid to Arthur— " And do you ftill remember your little playfellow ?—Dear 1 Arthur, have not {o many years paft, that fhe muft have totally flipped your memory ?"
" Ahno! J> cried Arthur, "flie has never been forgotten ; for though enclofed within the walls of my dungeon, Fancy would lead back my thoughts and imaginations to for¬ mer happier times; and in my mind and heart I have ever retained her dear remem¬ brance frefh and entire—it was that only thought that cheered the horrors of expect¬ ing death ; and if ever hope entered my heart that I might one day live to be free, that hope conveyed a double blefllng—for then I fliould again behold my beloved little playmate.—But does fhe live ? is fhe fafe ?" " She does," cried Auguftine, " and is fafe in Auburne Caftle, where I have fince been.—-Ah Ethelwina! the laft time I faw its venerated towers was the night after I beheld you torn from its protecting roof, and I unable to refcue its adored, beloved miftrefs from the ruffian's grafp I" " It was you then," replied Ethelwina, " that I beheld fall in the chapel, as I have with grief fuppofed.—But fay, did you
you fee our fifter Emma ? did you leave her fafe in the caftle V* " Yes,** replied Auguftine, " her footh - ing' gentlenefs healed my wounds, and admi¬ niftered relief to my diftracted mind.—But let us now haften forward ; the night comes on, and we have yet a tedious journey to finiQi." Ethelwina,, eafed from her fears for the lovely Emma, and encouraged by the fecu¬ rity of being once more in her own county, and within a few hours of reaching home, they travelled on without interruption, and with increafed fpeed, when they reached a chain of mountains that abound in Weftmore¬ land and fome of the neighbouring counties. They afcended to the plains of the moun¬ tains, which they paffed over till they came to a deep valley, at the bottom of which was fituated a lone houfe tl]at ftood by it¬ felf, without a companion or a hut near it, and at a great diftance from any town or village. On their approach to this melan¬ choly habitation they difcovered it to be an h 6 inn,
inn, and denominated the half-wayiioufe of the mountains. * The weary travellers de¬ termined, as it was yet early in the night, and the moon was bright and unclouded, that they would flop here, and reft them¬ felves whilft.their horfes were feeding.
CHAP. VIII. HP JL HE travellers difmountcd, and entered the ancient porch of the houfe, which was full of people. Ethelwma would rather have returned; for round the blazing hearth fne- beheld a number of ill-look¬ ing men, whofe harfli vifages and fcru- tinizi'*g piercing eves were turned with eagernefs- on the tired travellers: they however rofe from their feats to make room 6 for
for the new comers. Ethelwina was (o muf¬ fled up in her cloak that, as they all three wore ihe fame, it was impoffible for her real fex to be diftinguifhed, and fhe took care that no part of her face fhould be (een^ The men converfed on the wars of France and England " Edward is a brave hero !" cried one of the men, as he fat his goblet of liquor on the table. " Coxie you from the battle of Crefly, young ftranger ?*' added the man, looking hard at Ethelwina; " or are you going to join the forces of Queen Phillipa, on the borders of Scotland ?" iC By St. George!" cried another man, 44 Phillipa Is as brave a General as her con- fort ; but ir was ard------d fcurvy trick of her to refufe our noble Captain's offer. Ah !. we were the boys to have faced a foe;—and* then for plunder! (hew me a gang that can equal us/' Ethelwina tremblingly caft her eyes around; every man fat gazing at her, and as her fight turned towards the door, fhe
beheld the fame face and perfon enter that had given her fuch alarm in the chamber of the ruin. Terror-ftruck at the fight, and forgetful of all caution, fhe let go her hold on her drefs, and it fell and difcovered her face. The ruffian's eyes inftantly en¬ countered her's; his looks bore evidence of his defign, and he inftantLy left the room. Ethelwina ftarted up, and faintly whiC- pered—" We are betrayed; let u& haften to our horfes—we may yet evade our purfuers." In a moment they all three arofe, and were leaving the room. ( The ftrangers rofe at the fame time, and Ethelwina faw they wore piftols and hangers fixed to' the girdles of their drefs. Their finewy arms were left bare, their legs had no covering, and their feet only were protected from the in¬ clemency of the air by a ftrong laced fandai; they wore a fhort black jacket, their bodies covered only by a breaft-plate of fteel, which gave them a terrifying, fero¬ cious look, that at once convinced them they were a banditti, which Ethelwina knew
knew had for many years infefted the moun¬ tains of Weftmoreland. Auguftine had no fword, or if he had, madnefs alone would have tempted him to ufe it againft at leaft thirty in number. The men all looked at each other, then at * the affrighted travellers, who in hafte quitted the room, but not without Ethelwina's hear¬ ing a harfli voice fay—" Shall we fuffer them to depart, noble Captain, and not fee if they have any plunder worth our feek- ing?" She heard no more, and they darted to the ftables, where, mounting their horfes,, they fled as faft as the tired beafts could carry them. But not far had they got from the houfe, when they heard the found 1 of a fhrill whittle, and in a moment were furrounded by a large party of men, whom from their drefs Ethelwina knew to be the foldiers of Leopold. The travellers endeavdured to gallop their horfes forward; but the rufBans feized them by the mane, and pointing their
their fwords to ihc breaft of the defence- kh Augufthe, cried—** Yield, or you die!'* At that moment a furious galoping of horfe were heard, and in an inftant ano¬ ther parly came up, which by their ar > cur Ethelwina discovered tn be the people that had akmied her a! the inn. Ethelwina fprang with akrtnrfs ^rorn her horfe, and throwing off I cr difguife, fell at the feet of ihe no longer terrifying robl^cr*, (for fuch they really were ^Iio had followed the rravellcts in purfuit of plunder;; and as the j*ople of St. Iver cndeaiouml to (the and drag her away, ft\e exch*tn^ecf aloud to the banditti—** Save ui! Oh\ &\c m front the power of cur dtdrove;*f thty feek owr liws! *Tis a woman v ho fues! Tis Ethel* »inacf Auburne, the ^aughirr of its gal¬ lant Lord, who begs your pity and aiEfi- ance to free us from the i\a< !y erafp o f a muitkri; g foe! (i^I!ai-i dran^rf, fiy to my brothers aid, %ho fights, in vm &Jt*u.tfi * hoft of eiKuiie^! Hate mem onus asd
claim what re.vard yon *»!*, and I fwe^r it fliillb^yoof'tr The foremoft of the banditti* wfco fcene 1 to be their leader, exclaimed to h;$ cam* rides—** It is a waimn utio claims our sOiftarice! We injure not she hetplff, but defend the weak! Come on, my fclijws, we will attack the daftardsf* The word no fooner pafled than *hy rufhed on the people of St. Iver* Auguftine and Arthur being rcf^m!, eacli fiMich*cI a fword from the facets of tlieir cnemtef, and darting on them, afiifteJ their ktidy friends in the combat. Ethelwma was try* ing wainfy m free herfelf from tlie anm of the villains « ho had febed hcr» and ^lio were now dragging her (mm the fcene of action with an intention of carrying her oflfj when, like the winged lightning, Att^uftintf Jwlto Imd km her danger) iew to kr aid, Wc Gt*gsge«l with the viltaim, *hm% he in n moment fclleJ to the enrtb, and caught hb feinting Ethel* t*«a a* fhe was finktng to the ground. In the nest moment the C«{Jtata
Captain of the banditti returned conqueror frcm the fray, md thepeopleof Leopold being fubdued* had fled to the mountains. With the leader of the robbers came Arthur, who, aifimated with the defire of faving his be¬ loved &&tt f had for the firft lime drawn his fword, which in hii imprifonment had bcea one of his principal ftudtes to learn the pra&icc and u'e of* Ethelwina then, taking fome rich jewel ornaments from her drefs, prefented them to the chief leader, as did alfo Auguftine; but which were gallantly refufed by the Captain, who laid, that though they had followed purpofely to ftrip them of what was now fo freely offered, yet as tbey had found their intended prey were opprefled, and that the lady had trufted to the mercy of a robber, and fought bis a0iftance, they would »ot now tarnifh the fervices they had reii* dered the little party by accepting what it *md been their determination to have plun¬ dered them of,—«• We are robben, Lady," added he, « and had you mt ftood in need
of our affiftance, we fhould have defpoiled you of thofe very baubles which now we refufe.'* ** Then name fome other means by which we may repay your generous affiftance/* cried Auguftine. •« We will accept none,** replied the leader, « f I know I can anfwer for all our party. The glory of having protected the feeble fhall for once be our greateft, only reward i and to make our fervices complete, we will conduct you to the gates of Auburne Caftle, where in fafety we will leave you. They then proceeded on, but the aftoniftV ment of Ethelwina and Auguftine was great when they beheld themfelves fur¬ rounded by a rude banditti, a fet of lawkfe mm whom no power could fubdue, who watched for the unhappy traveller but to plunder, if not deftroy bim. Yet thefe very people could give a ftrong proof that juftice and humanity were not entirely dead within them, and that they could render help
help fo the qpuflld, (boi^h tlemlettes had n mt but wsih the inlemion to cppiefs. Ethelwina fell t»e ftiangentls of I^cr fsiu- ation 5—to be cfcortcd by a banditti had ftimcthing hurfti in the hnrd io a mind of tlelicacy; but had not that very banditti icnderidl ihcra the melt effctttial fet vices, a«d proved ihm even their hardy br&m were g- vemed by a ftnfc ^ f honour? She caft her tyc$ ujn lhems thiu dark Tifgef, tin- coyih t<ahit$ 9 ttid formidable afjiannce» h^ fcmcthi«g tfuly tcnrif>ing; yet, obe¬ dient lo itttir leader* they had refcued the little party, and now followed to guard them to the caftle in rcfpe&ful filence. Ethrlftinifvfle&ed, with furprife end won¬ der, to fee one ma^ able to keep fo many daring fplritf under fuch perfect controul and fubjeaioii % md as flie ventured to lift her eyes to the face of the Captain, who rode m%% her, fhe found that though his features %ere ftrong, dark, and commanding, yet there was an air of fuperiority, and a lefi degree of ferocity in his whole afpeft
than in the countenances of his men s and flie ventured to fay-— •• Waik I return my thanks for the fer* vices you have mart generaufly afford jd us, noble Ciptain, let me alfo allure you that if Ethelwina of Auburne c*in at my time bs ofallfbnce to you, you mxy command her aid." EthcUina faivl this with her ufu4l kind- ncli when defirou» to convey an acl of favour or obligation upon thofe who felt inclined to folieit her tervkes; whilft her words bore a faint refcmblance of her inward ddigm, whkh were delirous of withdrawing a mind* (in which the teals oi virtue fecmed dill to dwell, though choaked and corroded by the weed* of a ml%uided unuVrftand- jog} not entirely loft, from its prefent debating occupations. The leader thanked her with much refpect in his manner, and by hb anfwer he feemed. to have pent** trated the real tuwanhg of her worJ^ % far he laid—
H lam
** I am not b) choice what f frnn, but dtma fiom my home by m tyrannical Either, who, togtittfy the avjuitioui piHiom of ait unfjaSuiil bfxxhct, difmhrritcd and difowiied me. Fofccd by M ntcdlh ♦ to u jindcr orer the world in mmti and a bcgg-ir, I foon fell m with <hc ptefest tribe, and with them for t<^ ? cat* hive 1 hved, and they know mM my ftory. I ftill itdpcd the rie of re- Utianfhip, mid I dire no! tdl my compi- nmm who 1 reilly am, left their hardy fouli fhmiU dt(em!i ^ to do me that juftice which a cruel parent hai denied me | but I hold the lives of a fatter and brother as lacied* Over the mind* of my comrades 1 bate abltlufe fway, mi if I were to fpeak the wwl, tbry utukl amply awage me, and in their fury to 4® me juftice, would ©be* 4 no voice but their emm* Tbeiefore I will ftill live in fectecy, and ftill mtift I continue to mmm amm& them, though I have often in ferret wiftied to quit our defperate courfe of Itfeg but as honour now bind* me to them, fo dori grauiudc continue the link, and at prefent
prefent to quit them might convert their efteem to hatred f but at fome Allure period I may, if fit occafion offers, throw myfelf on your proffered bounty. But behold, Lady, yonder are the towers of Auburne, and we will now bid you fiueweh M The caftle was juft perceptible when the banditti prepared to leave the miftrefs of it, and flie defired they might enter and receive a fuitable reward for their fervices, and re» frelhmenti for the fatigues of their long ojumeyi but the offer was refufed. The Captain thanked her for her confidence tit them, and kid—• "Noble Lady, and you, my Lords,fliould you ever need the aid of Huheri de Urle and his companions you will hear of m at the lone houfe on the mountains/*—He wat then following his men, who had already turned their horfes* head % " Stop one morntmt !'* exclaimed Ethel* wina | u accept this final! token of our gra¬ titude, and remember that you have only to claim our fervices, fliould you ever have oecafion for rhems ami this pledge will
procuie you not only our afliftance, but our (tiendftdp. Farewel, generous Hubert!*' putting a ring of value into his hand, which he placed on his finger, bowed low to Ethel¬ wina, and fpurring his fiery courfcr, he wa* out of fight in an inftant. The power* of language cannot find words to cxprels tic rapturous pleafure of Arthur, m his €$c% once more caught a fight of the caffic and m well-known turrets; his heart beat in unifon io his feeling*, and almoft threatened to choak all utterance, as it fprang to his throat, upon this return to the fcenes vf his childilh pleafures. He leaped from his boife* and running on In wild ecftacy, anived at the gates before Ethelwina md Auguftine, where he threw himfeif m his knees, and uttered half-fmothcred exclamations of joy, hi* eyes overflowing with grateful rapture and thankful g!ad- nef* that he was .permitted once more to return to his long lorfaken home. Ethel- win* had been inwardly employed in the feme manner; atnl though her joy was not io execfltve, it was equally thankful with her
her brother's, and fhe arrived with a milder delight at the drawbridge, which was drawn up. Not fo was it with Auguftine; the nearer he approached the caftle, the joy of his tranf¬ ports were decreafed, and a dejedion that had for fome time taken poffeflion of his mind, feemed to have weighed down his fpirits; fome painful reflections had taken from him thofe fenfations of exquifite delight which had accompanied his feelings when he prefled his long loft Ethelwina in his arms on the night of their difcovery of each other. Some fecret grief preyed on his mind* znd the continued alarm flie had been kepi in during their perilous journey, pre¬ vented Ethelwina from difcovering the too apparent dejection of his manners; nor did the hear the deep figh which accompanied liis words as they ftopped at the caftle, when taking her hand, and imprinting on it a fervent refpectful falute, he bade her wel¬ come once more to Auburne. Her mind was to much engaged by a quick fuccefiion of recollections, both pleaflng and painful, vol. 111. 1 that
that fhe did not obferve the fadnefs viiible in his manner, and fhe unconfcioufly an¬ fwered his figh by one from herfelf, given to the memory of paft occurrences. The clock ftruck the hour of two as they reached the moat, and from the latenefs of the time its inhabitants muft have been many hours in the arms of Sleep, Auguftine founded the horn, but it remained for fome time unan- fwered-; again he blew a louder blaft, and foon after they faw a light crofs the different courts, and the voice of Rupert, from the portal tower, demanded who was at the gate. « 'Tis I," cried Arthur, " quickly open the portal." " Who are you," anfwered Rupert, " that at this late hour feeks fuch untimely entrance into the caftle ?" Ethelwina was unable to anfwer from the variety of crowding emotions that power¬ fully aflailed her upon this her return to her home. Auguftine was the moft compofed, and faid— " Good
<£ Good Rupert, open your gates ; we are friends—-'tis the Lady Ethelwina who de¬ mands adrniflion/* " Ah, I know that voice," cried Rupert, " 'tis our dear young Lord Auguftine's; and he inftantly difappeared from the tower, whilft his impatience to unfaften the heavy bolts detained him the more ; at length the drawbridge funk, the portal flew open, and the party entered the courts of the caftle. Rupert, amazed, beheld them, whilft Ethelwina, recovering from the bitternefs of certain inward painful remembrances, ut¬ tered the name of Rupert. Aftonifliment and joy for a moment de* prived the good old fervant of power to fpeak ; but in a fhort time he cried, ct *Tis fhe herfelf—'tis my beloved Lady I" and he fell, almoft convulfed, at her feet. Ethelwina laid afide all forms of greatnefs, and only feeling at that moment the pleafure of having a faithful heart devoted to her fervice, fhe threw her arms round her venerable old pro¬ tector, as if he had been her parent, and the 1 2 good
good old man felt the honour of this filent proof of his dear Lady's efteem. Ethelwina bade him rife, faying— " There is yet another who has a greater claim of welcome; look, Rupert, do you not know him ? Need I tell you 'tis your long loft mafter, 'tis Arthur Fitz-Au- burne !" The good old man rofe from his knees but to fink on them again at the feet of the Earl, embracing his legs, and loudly praif- ing that Providence that had preferved from death the child which many years fmce had been torn from his powerlefs arms. The fcene became too tender; Rupert recollected himfeif, and rofe from his knees, refped- fully welcoming the return of the Baron Auguftine to the caftle. He informed them that himfeif and his party had not arrived at the caftle till the preceding day; that they had with great reluctance left the Caftle of Iver, fearing that Leopold had deceived them ; and, added he," It was my intention to have petitioned her Majefty, who has for fome
fome time been encamped near the Scottifh borders, to have granted a fufflcient force to conquer St. Iver, and releafe our beloved Lady; but Heaven has pleafed to effect it in a more peaceful manner, and infinite is my joy in once more beholding my matter's children in fafety. " Ah, my Lord," addrefling himfeif to Auguftine, " I feared you had fallen a victim to your too hafty zeal, and by leaving the caftle before your wounds were healed, had periflied, in your weakened ftate, for want of aid or fuccour; efpecially as, when I difcovered you had quitted Auburne, I fent people immediately after jyou, that you might not alone purfue your dangerous undertaking. But they returned, and af¬ fured me they had never been able to dif- cover you; and it was a fad thought to me, that you had either funk from your horfe, and died of your wounds, or elfe that you had alfo been captured by the tyrant. But* Heaven be praifed ! you are alive, and re* turned in fafety." t 3 The
The good old man uttered this with the allowed familiarity of a humble friend, more than a fervant; but ftill amidft his joy there appeared a cloud, and his eyes were caft forward through the open gates, as if ftill in fearch of fome one that he was difappointed in not feeing. Arthur, though he had but a faint re¬ collection of the changed features of the old fteward, well remembered his former guardian in the foreft, and his delighted heart returned the old man*s embrace with equal warmth. They then entered the caftle hall, but Arthur, cafting his eyes around him, dxclaimcd— " Where is Emma, my dear little play. mite?" " Where is my fweet girl, my compa¬ nion, and friend ?" interrupted Ethelwina. u Is my fifter ftill at reft, ot has flie not been informed of ouranival?" exclaimed Auguftine. Rupert's
Rupert's, joy received a fevere fhock—he was unable to fpeak. Ethelwina looked at him—fhe faw the change in his countenance. " Oh ! where is my Emma," cried fhe, in extreme alarm ; " ah ! has the lovely child been torn from Auburne?'* " Is fhe not here ?" cried the whole party, " Then flie came not with you !" for- rowfully exclaimed Rupert. ** Alas i why muft I be the narrator of ill news; but many a day has paffed fince I laft faw the Lady Emma. I arofe one morning, my Lord," added Rupert to Auguftine, " after your laft departure from the caftle, and prepared to attend her Ladyfhip as ufual; but fhe came not to the eating parlour, and two hours pafled. I began to be alarmed, and fent to her chamber; fhe was not there, her *clothes lay fcattered and difordered about the room. I fearch ed the caftle and gardens, but without fuccefs; the gates were all faft, and it was impoffible fhe fliould have gone voluntarily away; but from 1 4 that
that day I have never feen her, and I had hoped, when I was bleffed with a fight of my Lords and Lady, that the Lady Emma was of the party." The grief and aftonifhment of this fad account excited a momentary paufe, and they caft looks of filent forrow on each other ; but Arthur and Auguftine, ftarting up, exclaimed— " Let us inftantly fet forth -in fearch of the haplefs maid. Ah ! I fear flie is in the power of St. Iver 1 Go, good Rupert, pre¬ pare our fteeds; we will not reft a moment till fhe is found." " Stop/' cried Ethelwina, c< it would be madnefs at this late hour to venture forth. ^ Remember, my brothers, the dangers we fo lately have efcaped ; the people of Leopold may ftill be lurking near the foreft ; you will but expofe yourfelves needlefsly to ills that may make me miferable, and defeat the fervices you would render to my poor Emma. Stay, therefore, one day ; our people will then be recruited from their late fatigues,
fatigues, and better prepared for frefh fer- vice°; and I fhall at lead part with my bro¬ thers in greater fecurity,. when I know they will be well protected." The anxiety and terror painted fo ftrongly on the face of Ethelwina as (he pronounced thefe words, had its effect. Auguftine and Arthur filently complied j and though they felt incrcafed impatience to difcover the fate of the gentle Emma, yet at the earned entreaties of Ethelwina they gave up their intention of purfuing their journey till the enfuing day, and the weary party retired to reft, but not to fleep. Melancholy and unhappy, Ethelwina arofe early ; her feelings had received within the lad year fo many afflictive terrible fhocks, that it required a work of time toreftore them to their former cafe and tranquillity. Her nerves and health, broken by the uncommon trials fhe had endured in Tver Caftle, required peace of mind, and reft of frame, to reflore her again to that ftate of almoft perfed beauty, which of late fucceeding miieries had faded $ 15 and
and now, on^ this her return once more to her beloved home, the feelings of her fuf¬ ceptible heart had again to fuftain " frefh forrpws and agitations for the fate of her friend, the lucklefs Emma: whilft the fecret grief of Auguftine was increafed. by the lofs of his fifter, and the fears that fhe was fo unhappy as to be the prifoner of Leopold ; and if fhe was fuch, wed he knew how dangerous muft be her prefent fitu¬ ation. The impatient Arthur, knowing from fad experience what mifery muft attend the unfortunate captives of St. Iver, yet forgetful of the danger to himfeif of again approaching the place of all his long continued fufferings, felt only anxious to releafe his beloved Emma from the power of wretches, whom he doubted not would freely perpetrate every ill that cruelty or lawlefs paffion could inflict. Eager to be gone, he arofe early from his bed, and each entered the oak parlour dejected and forrowful :—thus was the bright profpect of their happy efcape over¬ eaft,
caft, and all the exquifite delights of the meeting between long parted friends, daflied by the cup of forrow and difappoint¬ ment.
CHAP. IX.
THE morning's repaft flood untouched, and Ethelwina, wifhing to detain them as long as** poflible, requefted Auguftine to relate the events he had been engaged in fince the time of his firft departure. Auguftine pafled over the time when, during the renewal of the war, he had fought under the victorious Edward, fignalizing himfeif by feats of heroic atchievements, glorioirfly fighting by his Monarch's fide, and intrepidly fharing in all the dangers of i 6 that
that proud day to England, which raifed the fame of the mighty Edward to ages of fucceeding martial honour. Valiantly and bravely fought the noble Auguftine, afto¬ niQiing the Monarch by the undaunted courage with which he plunged fearlefs into the hotteft of the action. Excited by his love, and actuated by the laudable defire of refcuing his name for ever from the ftain that his father had caft upon it, the gallant youth had performed deeds of wonder; and, when the battle ended, received the praifes and thanks of his great Mafter with becom¬ ing eafe and refpectful dignity. Jt was during a truce between the two contending powers, that Auguftine folicited and obtained leave to return to Weftmore¬ land, to pay his duty to his dying protec- trefs, the widowed Countefs of Auburne; and from that period Auguftine now began his narrative. " It was on that very night," faid he, *' that memorable night which fhut the beloved 3
beloved Lady Urfuline from this world, that I entered the forefts of Auburne, in my way to the caftle. The tempeft was dreadful; but what was my excruciating agony, wfien pafling onwards, I faw, by the blaze of lightning that at that moment pierced the woods, the form and well-known features of Ethelwina. I faw alfo the detefted * Leopold, though fucceeding darknefs hid his countenance from my fight ; but his gigantic figure was recognized by my jea¬ lous feelings ! Yes, Ethelwina, I was tor¬ tured by the pangs of jealoufy, for at that moment I remembered he had once offered himfeif to the Baronefs of Caftle Acre ; and when I beheld you (feemingly by your own. confent) at fuch an hour, and in fuch a night, with your hands grafped in. his, I at once concluded the wretched Auguftine uas no]more remembered. I dared to fufpect thy angel truth, and impioufly believed you had met the deftroyer of my peace by your own free confent,
" Burning
4C Burning with jealous rage againft the fuppofed happy Leopold, 1 approached nearer fo the fpot Where you ftood; but the loud orafti of thunders prevented me from hearing your difcouife, till, in a paufe of the" tempeft, I heard you fay— * Promife me that you will fuffer me to remain as I now am till that unhappy hour fhall arrive which deprives me of my mo¬ ther, and I will take the demanded oath.*— " Too much diftraded to attend properly to the meaning of thefe words, which I doubted not were voluntary, and paying no attention to the anfwer of Leopold, I was alive only to the horrible idea of having loft you for ever. I darted wildly upon Leopold, determined for that time at leaft to prevent you from taking in my hearing an oath which would for ever crufli my afpiring hopes. " We fought; it was my chance to dif- arm the haughty Chief, and a flight wound made him faint. I fupported him till fome of his people came up, and then darting through the foreft, arrived time enough
to behold you conveyed into the caftle. 6ut, Ah! not. for me was deftined the lovely maid of my foul's adoration! Ethel¬ wina had ceafed to remember her friend, and with bitter agony I gave way to the belief of my mind, that I was no more beloved, and that the powerful St. Iver was a fuccefsfui rival. Ah! how did mine eyes„ drain their light to keep the lovely form of the dear faithlefs Ethelwina in view to the longeft moment; but when, as I flowly followed you, the gares opened, and again clofed you from my view, and I could no more behold you—then it was that de¬ fpair feized my foul; I curfed my deftiny that had left me nothing but an empty title. But the lofs of my Ethelwina's regards (if I had ever been blefled with them) was too much, and it was the only ftroke of mifery that Fate had left to inflict; life became hateful, and I refolved to return to France immediately without feeing the objed of my love and wretchednefs, or paying my duty to my more than mother. iC I had left the veflei which brought me
to England, clofe to the. fliores of Weft¬ moreland, and thither I haftened, more eager to efcape from the. hated, once-be¬ loved fcenes of happier days, and P-arrived. in France. " In the battles I plunged,, unheeding of exiftence, and only anxious to efcape from my felf-created torments, hoping to receive an end to a life that promifed little elfe but mifery and difappointment. But I was deceived; the engagement ended, and at the expiration of another month I re¬ ceived a packet from my fifter. Trem^ blingly I opened the letters, expecting to find a confirmation of my wretchednefs; but they informed me. that my beloved parent was dead, and the Countefs Ethelwina recovered froni the threatening grave that feemed ready to devour her. " At the bottom of the epiftle I read the well-known characters of my Ethelr wina's hand, and thefe remembered words were again repeated,—* Be careful of your life for my fake, and plunge not into needlefs danger.'
danger.*—Amazed, I again perufed the paper.—Would the open, generous Ethel¬ wina ftoop fo low as to dhTemble? And if fhe no longer regards me with that honoured affedion I was once bleffed with, would ftie not rather own, nobly own, her diU affection, than endeavour to keep alive a hope ihe never meant ferioufty to encou¬ rage? Then it was that for the firft time I entered into the foreft adventure, and viewed it in a new and different light;-— yes, a conviction forced itfelf on my mind, and the blefled idea that I might ftill be beloved, again refcued my diftracted thoughts from the horrors of defpair; yet ftill a doubt preyed on my heart, and I refolved to take advantage of the prefent ceflation of hoftilities, and in feeret withdraw myfelf from the camp, that. I might be convinced by one word from my Ethelwina, of what I had to hope, and in one fhort moment receive the happy confirmation that I was ftill beloved. This was all I refolved upon, all I wilhed; and then to haften back to the
the army before even my departure could have been difcovered. " With revived hope I again fct foot on my native fliores; and reaching the foreft, haftened down its deep (hade*. It was almoft midnight when I was ftartlcd by a diftant glimmer of !ight f which feemed to proceed from a hollow beneath me I ap¬ proached a finall valley in the wood, which was deeply overgrown with wild fhrubs and tangling briars, where I plainly per- ctived the figures of fome men as they moved along, and prefentfy difappeared, ** I darted into the valley, and by the receding rays of the light difcovered a fmali aperture, through which I faw fevcral men had entered. I refolved to fee what were tlieir intentions in thus, at fo late an hour, ftealing as it were near the domains of Au¬ burne ; I concluded they muft be robbers, who concealing themfelves in this cave (as it feemed to mc to be), might in the tnd prove dangerous to the repofe and fafety of the inhabitants of the caftle. As foon, therefore.
as the light was nearly out of fight, I de¬ fcended fome rude fteps from the mouth of the aperture, and followed at a diftance my myfterious guides j but foon after, by afudden turning of the cavern, I loft fight of them, I was left in total darknefi, and from the many turnings of the place, miftook the path they had taken; I knevV not which way to follow them, but was convinced by the direction that I took, that thefe muft be the vaults of Auburne Caftle, and the idea excited me to hurry forward. H I had Iseen wandering about for a length of time, vainly trying to difcover a glimpfe of the unaccountable forms that I had purfued, when turning the comer of fome paffage, I again beheld the faint gleams of light, which was moft welcomely difco¬ vered ; I followed the direction of its rays, but was furprifed to find it fixed on the ground, and not a creature near it. On cafting my eyes around, I beheld at a little diftance a flight of ftairsj thefe I afcended, but what a fight prefented itfelf, —it
—it was my Ethelwina in the ami* of ruf¬ fians! «* 1, alas! had but the ftrength and fword of one man againft numbers; I wilhed in vain for more: but 1 fell, and my eyes clofed {as 1 then diought) the bcbvcd object of my adoration for ever from my view. My wounds w^e bot flight; on opening my eyes I found myfclf in my chamber in the caftle, and the affectionate Emma weep¬ ing hefide mc. I fcarcely believed what I faw to be real, and demanded if Ethel¬ wina had, indeed, been conveyed from the caftle. On recovering my recollection, I related to Emma what had pafled j and Ihe, drowned in forrow for her Ethelwina's fete, informed me of every circumftance that had happened fince my firft departure from the caftle. « Then it was that I was blefled widi the convi&ion that my Ethelwina ftill deigned to think on me with that conde- fcendingregard which Che had promifed never fliould be another's! and this happy affu- rance
I
ranee was fo compofing to my diftracted mind, that I felt not my wounds; but in two days I refolved to fet forward in the refcue of my Ethelwina, or perifh in the attempt. The good Rupert was ahvays determined todo the fame; but as he had a body of men to collect and difcipline, and it would take fome time before he could be properly prepared for the attack of fo im¬ portant a fonrefs as Iver Caftle, t refolved not tg wait fo tedious a time, but haften thither, and truft to chance or ftratagem for a quicker accomplifhrnent of our united purpofes. " Therefore, on the fecond morning sites the fatal night that tore you from my fight, I hurried on my armour, and difregardtng tlie prayers and entreaties of Emma, haft¬ ened forward, in hopes that I might imd fome means to free you from the monfter who had fo treacheroufly feized and carried you oft*. " But my ftrength did not equal my impatience; my wounds opened, and bled afrefh
afrcfii from the too quick motion of my horfe i and faint with lo& of blood, I turned towards a diftant building whkh ftood on die heath; the horfe in fafety guided me to the ruin, and there I fell infenfible to the ground. I know not how long I remained in this fituation, hut on recovering from my weaknefs, I found my fclf in a dark dun¬ geon: in defpair I caft my eyes around, and beheld one of the wretches who had aflifted in the villaaouj projeft of carrying you, Ethelwina, from Auburne. «« I wildly demanded whither you had been com f cycd, and for what purpofe fo atrocious ait aft had been perpetrated, and why they prefumed to detain me in my prefent fituation. u The wretch anfwered that you were by this time fafe in Iver Caftle, for pur* pofcs beft known to Lord Leopold j and as for myfelf, he added, I might rely on a fecure (helter for the prefent, as that dun¬ geon was die extent of my liberty, <f The diftriction of my thoughts, toge* ther
ih&t with my weaknefs from lofs of blood, threw me into a delirious fever, from which 1 recovered to lament more poignantly the cruelty of that deftiny which deprived me of the means of releafmg my adored Ethel¬ wina from her tyrant* It was in giving vent to the bitter agony of my mind, that a deep groan efcaped mc on the night when Providence, in mercy, releafed my Ethelwina, and gracioufly fent her the guardian angel, and reitorer of my life and liberty ! n —Auguftine here finifhed liss fliort narrative. Ethelwina had repaid him ampiy for the evils he had endured, by a frntie or a figh of pity and admiration j and after a paufe, Ihe then related the various occurrences of her own and Arthur's late eventful fufferings, glofling over thofe moil dangerous and pain¬ ful fcenes that appertained more chiefly to her¬ felf, and only fpeaking of the leading events that had produced the difcovery of her father's and brother's fates, and explaining fuch
fuch circumflanccs as were neceflary to con¬ nect the Hories of the different parties. When flie had finifhed, fhe perceived Auguftine was overcome with forrow and indignation, and Ihe prevented him from giving way to the abhorrence and anger which his fine formed countenance portrayed, by adding—* € Auguftine, you muft, on no account, perftft in going to the Caftle of Iver. Excufe me, my friend, and do not fupf>ofe that I love my dear Emma the lefs, if I fhould attempt to uk the influence I may hold over the affections of her bro¬ ther, or refufe to a fifter the right fhe ha* to fraternal affiftatice—fuch is not the csfe; and as for me % the honour of Auguf- tire may have received a tarnifh, fa it js neceflary that ttrwgi me it fhould again be reftored to its original brightoefs, (and a faint blufh croffed the cheeks of the gene¬ rous Ethelwina). Go now then," flie added, ** ro the camp of the illuftrious Queen of England j and, that the lovely Emma may not want the protection of a brother
brother to relieve her from her prefent fad fituation, I will fubftitute one in his place to be the refcuer of his fifter: judge how much I love her, when I can confent to part with my dear, long-loft Arthur to haften to her aid ; he fliall be the brother which I have pre fumed to ilnd in the place of her own. Providence," &"*$ added, and a tear flarted to her eye, " Providence will ftill prcfe;ve tier, even in the mid ft of this pre¬ fent danger. Now then depart, my bro¬ thers ; and may thit God of Juftice, on whom I ever have, ever will firmly rely, fight on your fidco, and return you in hap¬ pinefs and fifety to my exp„„ung, anxious heart!" Auguftine felt t\v: delicacy ztul propriety of fuch a propola!, and he arumptcd not to make the leaft objection, while he ex- prcflld his incieaiir.g love and admiration, in a profufion of giatcf.d acknowledgments, for her kind convern regarding his honour, and her great facrifice for the uruy of his vol. in. k filter,
After, whom he tenderly loved, but whom he was well aflured would, in the gallant youthful Lord of Auburne, find as fure a guardian and refcuer as if himfeif had been on the fame purfuit.
CHAP. X. HP JL HESE concerns had no fooner been adjufted, than Rupert entered, ufhering in a ftranger, whom Ethelwina difcovered to be the friendly Bertram, the- guard who had promifed her his afliftance to efcape from Iver Caftle. He fell on his knee before Ethelwina, who bade him rife ; he then informed her, that as he was one of the men who were fent in queft of herfelf and her brother, he had
ETHELWINA. I95 taken advantage of this favourable oppor¬ tunity to make his efcape, and thus throw himfeif on her clemency. " Rife," repeated Ethelwina; " if it is really your wifh to become a vafTal to the Caftle of Auburne, I will entertain you as fuch." " Such are my hopes and greateft wiflhes," anfwered Bertram, " if you will vouchfafe to receive the fidelity and grateful attach¬ ment of one, who from henceforward fwears to devote himfeif to your fervices, noble Lady." " Let it be fo then," replied Ethelwina, " I will trnft to your honefty. But now inform us if you can, if yet there are any female prifoners in the Caftle of Iver." " None, my Lady," anfwered he, " none that I know of. Stay ! yes, now I recoiled, I faw a female face from the window of the weft court tower; but I only faw it momen¬ tarily, as the perfon caft her eyes into the court on the day you were brought there."
" It muft be Emma," cried Arthur.— Say, friend," added he, « are you willing to give us a proof of your fidelity, by again accompanying us to Iver Caftle immediately. 'Tis to releafe that prifoner you now fpeak of." " I am ready to obey you," replied Bertram ; " and as I know each fecret avenue of the caftle, lean with eafe conduct vou (when once within its walls) to any of its apartments." ," 'Tis well," exclaimed Ethelwina; " re- tiie now and partake of refrefliments, but hold yourfelf in readinefs for the intended enterprife," The arrival of this man feemed a for¬ tunate event, and Ethelwina, from former occurrences, judged fhe might with fafety rely on his loyalty. Arthur had informed the fenefchal of Auburne of the fate of his father, the late Eail, and his prefent intention of returning to the mountain Caftle. That good old man, alarmed for the dangers his young mafter
company him, determining to take with him the proper means of paying every honour to the murdered Godfred, and if they were fo happy as to return fafe and un¬ molefted to Auburne, he refolved to provide fuch n^ceflaries as would be convenient to bring the facred remains to the repofitory of its auceftors. A divifion of the vaffals of Auburne was made, and one half was to remain under the command of the keeper of the caftle, for the protection and defence of the Lady Ethelwina, whilft the other, headed by Arthur and Rupert, was to proceed with their young Earl to the Caftle of Iver.— They all ftood ready in the courts to attend their recovered Lord. Ethelwina, with ftreaming eyes, embraced her brother, and gave her hand to Auguftine, on which he imprinted a fervent kifs. The Baronefs had given Rupert a ftrict charge never to let the people defert for a moment k 3 from
from the fide of Arthur, and they all de¬ parted from the caftle. Ethelwina, as their flying-fteeds bore them from her view, offered a fervent prayer that Heaven might be pleafed to reftore them in fafety, and accompanied by the dear object: of their purfuit. Arthur and his party purfued their way over the mountains, whilft Auguftine, at¬ tended only by his Squire, proceeded to the Engl ifh camp. The long threatened decifive war between - England and Scotland had at length corn- meneed, and the - magnanimous Queen Phillipa, at the head of ten thoufand men, had repaired to the field of action. Auguf¬ tine arrived at the camp upon the eve of an enfuing battle ; the warlike intrepid Queen was herfelf animating and cheering the fol¬ diers, riding amidft the ranks, and exhort¬ ing them to deeds of glory. It was a noble cheering fight to each willing fubject and. foldier to behold their royal Miftrefs, ar¬ rayed in a breaft-plate of filyev with a helmet
helmet of the fame, covered with the waving plume, forgetting the delicate weaknefs of her fex, and bravely refo*ved, with heart determined, to defend her ill ufti bus partner's and her fubjects 9 rights againft the daring foe who had prefumed to make inroads, and committed miaous depredations on the En2:1 ifh borders. We will leave the gallant Auguftine, who had gracefully bent his knee at the feet of the heroic Queen, and '* vvifh noble ardour glowing," ten led his fervices to the Ama¬ zonian PhiUipa, who as gracioufly, and with a fmile of benign majefty, accepted the tenders oi the noble younj warrior; and return to the fj.d Ethelwina, who felt moll poignantly the abfence of her beloved bro¬ thers, and alfo for the extreme dangers they were expoled to. Sometimes her terrors became fo great at the idea of Arthur's being difcovered in thiodan^e.ous enterprife, that flie v.as, for the fiift fe.v hour) from his[ departure, almoft on the point cf di.j atchufg meffengers after him to entreat his r.tuin ; k 4 but
but the fuffering form of Emma again ftarted to her view, and fhe penerouflv endeavoured to conquer her former wifhes, whilft flie would fit for hours deeply reflecting on the late fhocking occurrences, and thinking with bitter anguilh whcit muft have been the horrible fate her fire had fu flained when a prifoner in the tremendous towers of Iver. Her mind, unoccupied by any terrors or anxieties for herfelf, would dwell even to madnefs on thole fcenes of horror ihe had fo lately efcaped from; and her fears for the beloved objects engaged in their perilous undertakings, would add to, and increafe the fadnefs of her inward reflections, till remembering the awful words of her father's fpirit, fhe would endeavour to regain her fortitude. Yet, though now reftored to the beloved fhades of Auburne, ftill thofe fcenes of happier times did but increafe her fadnefs: every chamber afforded fome memorial of her departed mother, and called forth her feelings afrefh. Some-
Sometimes fhe would pace the pidure gallery, anddifmifllngher attendants, would place herfelf, before,the full-length portrait of her father, and when no eye was witnefs of her adions, flie would fink on her knee before the inanimate canvas, and in the agony of her feelings wildly entreat forgive¬ nefs of her parent for being the guilty, yet innocent caufe of his death; till, blinded by her tears, fhe would rife, and hurrying from the portraits in inconfolable forrow, have recourfe to her harp (on which fhe played exquifitely), and its gentler notes would lull ber mind again into compofure, and fhe would then remember the words which fancy, fleeping or waking, had fo ftrongly impreffed on her mind, when in the northern tower of Iver flie had ftarted from her flumbers, and believed fhe had feen the fliade of her father pafs through the pannel, who in her dream had blefled her, and in¬ formed her his fad fate was the event of deftiny.
k 5 In
In this manner would Ethelwina pafs the hours of her brothers' abfence, and from the laft .mentioned circumftance. recover in part that ferenity of mind which of late had been too much fhaken* In one of her calmer moments fhe fummoned the tenants and vaffals oL Auburne to the hall of the caftle, and there related in part fome of the late eventful difcoveries. With wonder they liftened to the account of Arthur's exiftence and fufTerings, which were defcribed in all the moving forrow of affection,; and the generous Ethelwina refigning, in the prefence of all her people the title of Countefs of Auburne, defired them no longer to confider her as fuch, but transfer their duty and fealty to her brother, their late rcec\ered Lord,her title of Countefs of Auburne bting now fucceeded by that of the Baronefs of Caftle Aire, which (he in* htritcd from her naternal grandfather.—- This proof of Ethelwina's fifteily affection being diftharged, flie wrote a circumftan- tiul account of all the late occurrences and
and difcoveries to her royal guardian ; and. with that noble fincerity which was ever a foremoft virtue in her mind, ftated exadly the events that had prevented Auguftine'& return to that high poft of honour fois royal Mafter iiad atIL>ne 1 him. Ethelwina ^ principles and underftanding,. than which none could be more delicately and ftrictiy alive to female propriety, dif- dained to be ;;fhamed to confefs an honour* able regard, when the oi jed that excited it was fo every way de'.erving of it. It was neceffary, (in order that the Monarch might mare fully comprehend the fuppofed cle- fcrtion of his young warrior in its true light) that he fhould be informed, that it w*is in the rdcue of the objed of his affection from the hands of \Uany that he had for awhile left the camp, and his return to it rendered impoffible by his un¬ looked-for imprifonment. The e circum** ftances the Baronefs in the moft delicate, yet energetic terms, explained, finiflbjng her letter with entreating his Majefty to & 6 ratify
ratify the juft claims of Arthur to his pof¬ feflions, and his pardon to the fuppofed delinquency of the noble Auguftine. " He fuffers for my fake," faid the gene¬ rous Ethelwina, a£ fhe clofed the packet, " and it is but juft, that /, who am the caufe, fhould remove from him an imputed crime, that if it be fuch, the weight of the punifliment fhould fall on me alone." A meffenger w r as difpatched with the letter to Edward, for fhe felt anxious and unhappy till the fame of the generous Auguftine was declared unfullied and un- fpotted. This duty (as flie confidered it) performed, fhe gave orders that the ftate chambers of the caftle might be hung with black, to receive (if the adventurers return¬ ed) the facred relics that would accompany them. The fourth day after their depar¬ ture Ethelwina placed herfelf on the bat¬ tlements of the caftle, to watch if the objects of her attention appeared in view.— We will for the prefent leave the anxious Ethelwina, and return to the morning which followed
followed the fortunate deliverance of,the Baronefs and her brother from Iver Caftle. It may be remembered that Bertram had promifed to affift in the Lady Ethelwina's efcape on the very night on which it had been effeded ; but was prevented by the unhappy Ruthmer, who having entered the tower for no very friendly purpofe, had bolted the great gate of entrance to the prifon on the infide, by which means the friendly Bertram was effcdually prevented front performing his generous purpofes, as he concluded Ruthmer had himfeif fecured the keys: and the guard knew the danger of making a demand, for' them. But as a great part of the fucceeding morning pafled, and Ruthmer had never been (een, nor could be difcovered in any parts of the caftle, (for fearch had been made for him by the com¬ mands of Leopold, who was impatient at the long abfence of his vaflal), Bertram, fearing fome frefli evil to the objed of his compaflion, took proper inftruments, and
and forcibly wrenched open the tower gates; but what were his joy and furpdJe to find the prlf mis entirely clear! He did not mike known the efcape of the captives, coiifider- ing that the longer the dilcoyery was de- laved, the more fecure and unmolefted might be tlieir progrcfs to a place of fafety; but frefli Officers were fent by Leopold to fearch the tower. Ruthmer was fought for in vain, and the open priions declared to the aftoniflied iren that their captives were free; and Ruthiv.er,-who was warder of the caftle, and kept the keys of every place of entrance, ■was immediately fuppofed to be the caufe of \ he efcape of the prifoners, f But who (hall defcribe the rage of Leo* poM when informed of the late difcovery ? Furioufly gi.afliing his teeth, his whole body wiithLg in an agony oi paffion, in a voice of thunder he loudly demanded where was Ruthmer? « Gone from the caftle, my Lord," an¬ fwered the trembling fodier* "we have fcarched
fcarched every part of it, but neither he nor-hh captives can be found." " Eternal torments light upon him i" ciied the ftill more furious Leopold; " 'tis he has betrayed me,-and fhortly I fliall be¬ hold myfelf the vidim of the offended laws, (and his guilty foul quaked within him).— Fly !" -he added, " fly with the fwiftnefs of the whirlwind ; overtake the traitor ; he that brings me his head (hall receive the richeft reward my power can beftow ; and thofe of my people that reftore the efcaped prifoners again to me, fliall know no end to the favours I wi!l load them with,—Away ! be¬ gone all of you 1 purfue them to the gates of Auburne; take the fwifteft horfes—you cannot* fail to overtake them ! Step not, delay not a moment! Thy mailer's peace, his life depend upon the* iflfue. Begone 1" ' With wild incoherence, and a voice hoarfe with paffion, he delivered his broken fen- tences; his people, trembhng at the vio¬ lence of his geftures and whole appearance, battened
i-
haftened from him to execute his commands; but Leopold dared not become their leader. The companion of all his enormities gone (as he fuppofed) to betray him to the juf¬ tice of offended laws,- his guiit-ftruck heart turned coward within him, and Iver Caftle was his laft only refource againft the Officers of the infulted State. Trembling he fat in his hall, and now felt for the firft time how vain, how ufelefs are the riches of the earth, fince by one man's voice all his crimes would be difcover¬ ed, and his bloody deeds no longer be con¬ cealed, but the horrors of an ignominious punifhment be the juft reward of all his heap of added iniquities. Terrible as was ihe lofs of Ethelwina and Arthur, the dereliction of Ruthmer was more to be feared, and now the crimes of his guilty foul rofe in dire array before him. The caftle gates, and every place of entrance were ordered to be ftrongly barricadoed and ftrictiy guarded, and every man that was not fent in purfuit of the fugitives, to keep
keep himfeif in arms. Watches were fet at every part of the caftle, and every means taken for its fecurity and defence; but vain and futile were his endeavours to preclude fear, or clofe that never-ceafing inward tormenter, Confcience—which loudly pro¬ claimed the four of retributive juftice was near at hand. From chamber to chamber the panic- ftruckSt. Iver flies ; but ah ! guilty wretch ! he can find no reft, no ceflation from inward torture. Ignorant of the real fate of his guilty aflbciate, and believing, from the well-remembered looks of refentment which he had the night before feen in the coun¬ tenance of his confident in cruelty, that he had deferted, and was refolved to be re¬ venged on his Lord for having broken an oath in which the interefts of the former were concerned ; Leopold now doubted not but it was to put that vengeance in practice that Ruthmer had fuffered the haplefs pri- fonerb to efcape, and fo make them his inftruments-
inftiuments of revenge for the difappoint- ment of his ambitious hope. Ah 1 could the trembli.ig Leopold have feen from his toners the mangled body of his wretched partner in iniquity, how would all his prefent fears and guilty terrors be con- % verted into gladnefs 1 for, incapable of rc- morfe or repentance, he would have rejoiced in the death of one, who was the only per* fon tlut had any controul over h«m. Ia Ruthmer (could he have known his mifer* able end) he wes iiccd from a nua who had long held him in painful fu jeetion by his repeated demands on his fortune, and which the proud haughty Leopold dared not refufe, Liftening, therefore, only to lis fears, he rulhed onward, vainly endeavour¬ ing to that remembrance from his guilty thoughts. He entered, unknowingly, the former chambers of Ethelwina, t<.e place of his own black deeds. Ho v did his eyes roll wildly in their fockef $ I His hair rofe on his head; he tiled to reach the door, but his
liis limbs, convulfed and trembling, would not fupport him ; his eyes fell wildly on the well-remembered fcene of murder, and avenging Confcience prelented to his haunted deranged imagination the form of the bleed* ing Godfred rifing from the bed, whilft his guilty fancy (hewed to his fight the gaping wounds which his own hands had helped to give to his fleeping uncle* Sad fighs and difmal groans flruck on his appalled ear, and thefe word* wrim^ his lu>rror*f'iiitten foul— ** Murderer accurfed I the hmr &f terrible retribution is come /"—The fpectre waved its hand towards the door»hut Leopold was unable to obey the awful fignal, and funk convulfed to the floor, feeing nought but the torments of the damned, and enduring fucb horrors of mind as are indefcribable. Such muft be the agonies of a guilty confcience { He awoke from his trance in a cold and freezing tremor, but his fenfes again recovered; he darted from thechamber of fatal, damning recollections, and fliaking off aU knk of crimes*
crimes, he refolved to forget the paft, if poffible, in plots for frefli mifchicf, and ichemes of future villany. Two days pafled in increafmg terrors, fpite of his utmoft resolutions to fubdue them ; and upon reviewing his men, he found but a handful in phec of hundreds : for his people, tired of his tyranny, and dreading, from the fears of their Lord, for their own fafety, many of them had deferted, and only fuch hardy daring fpirits as were devoted to acts of villany, and had no other means to fcreen them from the power of offended juftice, ftill remained faithful to St. Iver, whofe rage and difappointment were beyond defcription on the return of the party to the caftle, in their unfuccefsful attempt to bring b?ck the objects of their fearch. The heart of Leopold now failed him, and Ruthmer, entirely efcaped from his power, left him nothing to hope but a fpeedy downfal j but the caftle, fo long as the iecret entrance re¬ mained undifcovered, he knew would preferve him froma hoftof foes, and that thought fome- L " what
what foftencd th- Cnfiin ointment of all his lr>p«;-, my) «.. ; vur"i t *> the O'umiflijn of fivth c i.rc^ to danvu the rc.nembrance oftormerg^iJt, An unhappy objed ftill remained ia his - power—that objtd was no other than the lovely Emma, who had been then by the monfterRuthmer, and who had demanded her of Leopold as a reward for his late villanies. Leopold had never feen her but when fhe was a child, and being little in- terefted in her fate at that time, gave his confent to Emma's being brought to the caftle, but forbade Ruthmer to claim her for his own, till himfeif had become the Lord of Auburne. With this half confent Ruthmer was forced for the time to abide, and the haplefs Emma was in an unguarded moment dragged to the Caftfe of Iver. It fo happened that the defigns of Ruthmer were defeated; for his wife Agatha, the con- dudrefs of the caftle, became jealous of the unfortunate captive, and that fhe might withdraw her faithlefs bufcand from this new objed
object of his vicious love, flie fo much ex¬ tolled the beauty of Emma to Leopold, that he determined to fee her^ He was conduded to her prifon by Agatha, and lie no fooner faw her than he commanded Ruthmer to think no more of Emma dc Mount favillc. Himfeif at prefent was too much engaged in deep concerns, and the hopes of foon reducing Ethelwina to his purpofes, bad for a time delayed the fate of poor Emma. But now all hopes of the Baronefs43eiog loft, incapable of penitence, and dead to pity or mercy, he refolved more deeply to damn his foul with added crimes, and for this purpofe he repaired io the chamber of his viftirm
,ii" i ,'!' " '"iluj "„......■........ ■",', an
CHAP. XL JIN the meantime the impatient Arthur had, by break of d ly, reached the moun¬ tains of Wales, and before funfet on the fecond day, arrived at the foreft of the pines that crowned the entrance of the bard*s chain of mountain?, Tlie good man was fortunately in the foreft, gathering his ftores of fruits and herbs; and with furprife he beheld fo large a party winding along the woods, Arthur foon difcovered the benevo¬ lent old man, and leaping from his horfe, he joined the bard, and haftily explained the fe bufinefe he came upon. That unfortunate fufferer, keenly alive to female danger, immediately offered every
affiibncc in his power. The patty dif- niuuntcd, and fecuring their hcrics, kit tlicm in the foreft, and then all folioA*wi tlie venerable old man, who opening his fecure nfr^i, they defcended the mountains to tin plain, where the bard Weftowing a prayer and bkflii.g on th^ir juft cndcavojrs, the whole party haftened to the cavern, uhich by the light of torches, they eafily paffed through in fafety, and placing fame firm oak phnU (which had been brought by tlie diicAion of Arthur) acrofs the precipices, they all in fccurity paffrd over to the other fide, the whole party aftonifocd at the dan¬ gers of fuch a fituation, which Ethelwina and Arthur had encountered, and won¬ derfully efcaped from. The grate was yet open, and it appeared that the means of their late efcape had not bcendifcovead; this might in the end be a fortunate cireumftance, ami relighting the torches, thev entered the vaults. Wish terror the good old Rupert beheld thee reaions of fearful daikocfs, remembering to 6 what
what perils his beloved Lady muft have been expofed ; he tried, though vainly, to dif- fuade Arthur from going on, but to fuffer Bertram alone to purfue the enterprife; but the gallant, animated "youth refufed, and not till he icached the well-known altar and direful cell, did his firm heart fhrink in the leaft, and then only on account of the melancholy fpectacle he again witnefled. The afflicted Arthur was now fubdued, and unable to fpeak, he could only point to the cell; grief and indignation over¬ came him, and his heart filled with anguifli for a parent's fufferings and horrible end. Rupert, who obferved his emotions, was at no lofs to account for the filent agony of his Lord's countenance; and rightly fup¬ pofing this to be the place where the remains were depofited, gave directions for fome of the people to follow him, leaving the af¬ flicted youth in the care of the remaining party. He afcended the fteps of the cell, and by the light of the torches foon difcovered a fight fhocking to the feelings of huma* vol. in. l nity;
nity;—his aged eyes filled with tears, and the office he had afligned to himfeif would now have been declined, but that the ten¬ dernefs of his heart led him to fuppofe he alore could perform the fad tafk with more gentlenefs than a ft: anger would to the gallant fpirit that once inhabited the de¬ cayed and almoft fkeleton form of the miferable victim of St. Iver. A large black velvet wrapper was fpread on the ground. Arthur, at this moment overcoming his forrowful emotions in thoughts of deep revenge, now rufhed up to the cell, and in filence aflifted in the folemn fervice. Not the leaft noife dis¬ turbed the fad ceremony; the form wa,s at laft flowly removed, and the wrapper being wound repeatedly round it, clofed the me¬ lancholy fpectae'e from the fight. With pious tears Arthur bedewed the corpfe, and they bore it in fafety through the vaults; the temporary bridge was again croffed, and at the mouth of the cavern the venerable bard flood
flood to receive it, when Arthur configned it to the care of him and Rupert. That good old man, divided between his anxieties for his living and his dead Lords, at firft objected to leave the former; but Arthur, with much perfuafion, overcame his fcruples, and leaving him with the re¬ mains, it was borne down the cavern by two of the party, and attended by Rupert and the benevolent bard. Arthur recrofTed the bridge, and fol¬ lowed by Bertram, and his faithful peo¬ ple, he again encountered the cavern's glooms. Bertram, well acquainted with each avenue of the vaults, propofed a nearer way, and Arthur with gladnefs ac¬ cepted the offer, wifhing if poflible to avoid all further fcenes of horror. They weie foon clear of the vaults; and Arthur was furprifed to find that not one- third of the ground was now pafled which himfeif and Ethelwina had traverfed on the memorable night of their efcape. When they had reached the top of the tower- i- 2 flairs,
flairs, they extinguifhed their torches; the night was favourable, for it was dark, and not a Angle ftar in the Heavens was to be feen;—the party in filence gained the court of the tower,' and proceeding in darknefs along the vaulted paflages and galleries, arrived undifcovered at the weftern court of the caftle. Arthur, trembling with impatience, caft his eyes around its extenfive area, and on the oppofite fide obferved a ftream of light iffuing from the higheft window of a fmali round to*er.—" That is the very cafe¬ ment," cried Bertram, " where I faw the lady;—follow me 1" But they had proceeded only a few paces when Bertram ftopped; and turning from the fides of the building, where they had been filently winding round the court to the gate of the tower, he now entered an arch that apparently led from the fpot they moft defired to arrive at. " What mean you?" cried Arthur; " For what purpofe do you guide us from the
the objed of our fearch, to penetrate this contrary paflage ?" « Do not fpeak fo loud, my Lord," re¬ plied Bertram, in a whifper; " Leopold," added he, u is no doubt in yonder turret* for 1 plainly perceived his guard, as the rays of light fhone from the window on their arms;—to approach by the way we were firft purfuing, is but to expofe us to irremediable danger. Have faith in me, my Lord, and truft me I will conduct you in fafety to the weft tower by a fecret paflage, which of late years has never been ufed, and is now probably forgotten by all but myfelf." The torches were foon relighted, and at the end of the arched paffage was a fmali door, which opened to the efforts of Ber¬ tram, and on entering, they faftened it within, that in cafe of difcovery they might prevent an attack from this quar¬ ter; for the whole party foon difcovered that this was the immenfe armoury of the Caftle of Iver. Bertram led the way acrofs the l 3 chamber,
chamber, and removing fome heavy pieces of armour, he drew back a pannel in the wainfcot, and they afcended fome fteps that were built in the thicknefs of the walls, but fo narrow that only one perfon at a time could pafs up them. They arrived at a landing, and were afcending another and broader flight of (lairs, when a diftant fhriek and a cry for help aflailed their ears. Arthur darted up the remaining flairs; when Bertram touching a fpring in the wainf¬ cot wall that terminated the ending of the laft gallery, a pannel flew back, and Leo¬ pold from within was heard to fay— i u Refiftance is in vain! this moment gives you to my arms!" , Arthur fprang through the pannel, and beheld a beautiful young female ftruggling to free herfelf from the grafp of the favage Leopold; like the quick lightnings of Heaven, the intrepid youth darted on the aftoniflied Leopold, but who in a moment recovered from his furprife, and blowing a fhrill blaft upon a fmali pendant horn that he
he always wore, feveral of his people rufhed into the room. A combat in a moment enfued; whilft Leopold, drawing his fword on the inftant he had beheld Arthur enter, rufhed furioufly on the gallant youth, and by one ftroke would have felled him dead at his feet, had not Arthur fprang nimbly upon the moofter, and clafping him round the waift, rendered the intended ftroke abortive, at the fame time plunging his, dagger to the very heart of St. Iver;—his fword fell powerlefs from his hand, he tot¬ tered, funk, and with an hideous yell fell to the ground 1 «« The arm of Juftice ftrikes the blow!" cried Arthur. " My father!*' added the heroic youth, finking on his knees, " my father, thou art obeyed!—thy mur¬ der is avenged, and the earth no longer groans with the monfter! Let thy injured fpirit now fleep in peace; Heaven has guided my hand, and thy fon has avenged thee!" The pious fury of filial vengeance lighted the countenance of the youth, which being l 4 animated
animated with more than mortal expreflion, he looked like the angry angel of miniftering punifhment, as with the well-known dagger reeking in his hand, he ftood over the ex¬ piring wretch, who, fhfieking in all the agonies of unrepented guilt, now fued to his God for that mercy he had himfeif denied to others. t " Have mercy!" cried the dying wretch; " mercy! 1 dare not afk it!-——Ha! fee, — the earth parts from under me! — hell opens! — I fink! — I fink to ever¬ lafting perdition!------The fiends furround —they drag me to the burning gulph !------■ See, Godfred's pale ghoft appears!—Oh! how terribly flafhes the lightning of its angry eyes upon me!—Said he not, the hour of retribution was at hand? —Oh God! 'tis come! and what am 1 ?—what fhall I be ?—freezing petrifying thought!------See! fee! they drive me on!—Spare! Oh fpare me!—in mercy fpare me!------The flames have feized my limbs!—I fink — yet lower!—And now—I—am—loft—for—for —ever!
__ ------Mercy, Oh 1" fhrieked out the guilty, horror-ftruck foul, as it winged its way from its wretched manfion, and Leopold funk, convulfed, to his laft tremendous account in all the agonies of an unrepented life of murder and iniquity. Arthur had taken a fure aim, and the time between it and death was but momen¬ tary. The deed of juft vengeance due to his father performed, he ftarted from his knees, and flew to the aid of the finking Emma (for it was herfelf) time enough to receive her in his arms, as (lie was faintly finking to tlie floor. The people of St. Iver, feeing their mafter fall, no longer attempted to oppofe the victors, and yield up their arms to the conquerors. The py Emma foon re¬ covered; and in the exquifite joy of her heart, threw her arms round Arthur, 'wildly exclaiming—" My Arthur, is my deliverer!—Ah! it is, it muft be him¬ feif ! fi l s " Arid*
" And thou art the companion of my infancy 1" in a tranfport of pleafure cried Arthur, as he preffed her in his arms* c< Yes, that dear, well-known fmile, of which I have fo ftrong a remembrance, tells to my heart it is the fmile of my dear Emmai" They enfolded each other in their arms, and the pleafure of fuch a meeting can only be felt, not defcribed, by thofe who meet again nfter a long and painful feparation. Neither having entertained an idea of meet¬ ing again in this world, their joy was there¬ fore greater,, becaufe fo every way unex¬ peded. Emma's tranfports being fomewhat calmed, ftie propoicd to leave the tower. " Come," added flie, " condud me in¬ ftantly to my beloved filler; full well I know flic is a prifoner here, for I have feen her; aye, and you too, Arthur, though unknown to yourfelf, I have lately.beheld; and fpite of tlie many, many, long years that have 6
have intervened, I knew you almoft at the firft fight. I fee you are amazed, but I cannot now tell you any thing, fo pray^x"- convey me to my dear Ethelwina—I long to v embrace her." " You indeed amaze me," replied Arthur, «* but this is no place for expla¬ nations ; kt - us now haften from thefe de- tefted walls." It was then confulted and agreed upon, that as the people of Leopold were nume¬ rous, and the fmali party of friends might not be able to overcome them, fliould they be attacked, they Ihould retire, if pof¬ fible, in the fame fecret manner they had entered; but firft fecuring thofe few guards of Leopold who had been fubdued, left, if they were fuffered to efcape, they might in¬ form their companions, who were engaged in the more diftant parts of the caftle, or watch¬ ing from the ramparts, which would expofe the courageous Arthur and his followers to an unequal attack. Bertram then led the way to the dungeons of the tower, where they l 6 enclofed
enclofed all thofe who had oppofed them, and fccuring them within the ftrong holds of the iron faftenings, left them to be re¬ leafed by their companions when they fhould difcover the late events. Emma then, fupported by her beloved Arthur, defcended the tower, and crofling the courts and vaulted paflages, they arrived at the northern tower, and again Arthur penetrated the vaults. Emma, too happy in her late unex¬ pected delivery, and cheered by the prefence of her dear companion, forgot all fears of clanger, and they arrived in fafety at the grate. Arthur, in a kind of playful action, threw his mantle over the eyes of Emma, and fhe unfufpecting the danger, he conduct¬ ed her over the planks. The torches were relighted, and they once more paffed through the caverns, and arrived in fafety at the hermitage. Rupert, with unfeigned joy, welcomed and embraced them alternately, and with terror liftened to the dangers of his young 5 Lord*
Lord; but the bard, on receiving the news of the cruel St. Iver's death, fell on his knees: for, alas! even ten years had not been able to erale the ftrong enmity, or weaken the hatred and deteftation which he had but too juft a caufe for. He blefled Heaven, faying, with uncommon energy in every word he-uttered—" My child, thou art at laft avenged; the monfter has received las juft reward! I fliall now die in peace, and in the realms of the blefled fliall foon be reftored to the fight of my beatific Bertha.' , He arofe from his, knees, and embracing the aftoniflied Emma, congratulated her on her happy efcape; adding, with a deep- drawn figh,—" Ah! had it pleafed Hea¬ ven fo to have refcued my poor child, I had ftill been happy; but fhe died a victim
A tear ftarted into his eye; the fufcepti¬ ble heart of Emma caught the infection, and flie wept, though flie knew not why; yet ihe faw the poor old man was a furTerer,
and that was enough to influence her com¬ paflion. The bard fiiw and thanked her for her filent commiferation; he could not utter another, word, but he kiffed her cheek, and turned away. Recover¬ ing outward compofure, ha fpread his table with his own and the provifions that had been brought by the party, and they all partook of the neceffary refrefliments. The venerable inhabitant of the cell then fpreading them feme mats, the whole party refigned themfelves to the arms of Sleep, whilft the gentle, thrice happy Emma, being conducted to the inner cave, refted fecurely on the couch of her friend. With the early dawn they rofe from their fliort flumbers, and bidding an af¬ fectionate farewel to the good bard (who-n Arthur and Emma had vainly^perfuaded to accompany them), they all afcended the mountain, and purfued their way towards Auburne,
CHAP.
....... .."- ' i 1 —- V^ilxVx • JyJJ. ETHELWINA had fpent all the morn¬ ing of the fourth day after Arthur's abfence on the battlements of the tower of defence, counting the hours and moments when they fliould return, and in conftant terror left Arthur fliould have been difcovered, and again made a prifoner. She remained on the tower, totally difregarding the entreaties of her attendants, and as night advanced, fo did her terrors increafe. Impatient, and forgetful how long and dangerous were the roads that the party muft pafs over, fhe gave herfelf up to defpair, and but one fad thought poffefled her mind, which was that flie fhould never again behold her brother. The
The caftle clock founded the hour of night; and at that moment fhe caught a gleam of light blazing through the woods. It moved through the foreft; nearer it ap¬ proached, ftill nearer it came, and as a group of people pafled on to the caftle gates* Ethelwina, by the glare of the torches, dif¬ covered her brother, and the objed of both their cares;—the fudden, joyful furprife was too much; fhe haftened down the battle¬ ments, but ere fhe reached the drawbridge, her heart funk, and fhe fainted with excefs of joy. The too fufceptible Ethelwina could with unequalled firmnefs brave every ill— almoft without a murmur endure every horror; but unexpeded happinefs had now overcome her, and fhe awoke not till re¬ called to life by the cries of Arthur and Emma, who had fupported her in their arms. The meeting may be eafily fuppofed, and it was fome hours before the tumults of their emotions fubfided; when they did, the
the whole party retired to their beds for the night, and P.upert, taking advantage of this hour, repaired to a fmali Gothic build¬ ing in the foreft, where the remains of the ill-fated Godfred had refted. The good old fteward, knowing too well that the extreme fenfibility of the Baronefs would receive a fevere fhock by the melancholy light, had waited till all in the caftle had retired to reft; and being well affured that the Lady Ethelwina was in her chamber, he then had the corpfe removed from its laft reft- ing-place to the ftate apartments which had been prepared for the purpofe, where it re¬ mained for fome days, and then was carried in ail the magnificence of funeral pomp to the vaults of its anceftors. Ethelwina, clothed entirely in robes of black, and a veil of the fame, followed the relics of her father to its facred repofitory, and fupported this fcene of fad folemnity with all the dignified firmnefs of her great and noble mind;—fhe per fitted in paying this
this laft only duty which was left her to perform to her lamented parent. The ceremony being ended, flie defired to be left to herfelf in the vault; but Arthur and Emma, with fears and entreaties, re¬ fufed to leave her, till Ethelwina urged her fait with determined earneftnefs, fay¬ ing that her future happinefs, and peace of mind depended on their compliance: —they then with flow, reludant fteps retired, as did all the weeping attend¬ ants. Ethelwina, left to herfelf, give \*ay to all the heart-rending agony of her feelings,. which flie had fo well concealed from her affedionatc friends \ embrac¬ ing the coffin, flie flicd a deluge of tears over it, of fad regret, till at laft fuinmon- ing her fortitude, fhe Cent up a pious prayer to the God of Peace, that her father's fpi¬ rit might now know eternal reft and hap¬ pinefs in the blefled manfions of Heaven. ! Again flie alternately threw her arms round ! the coffins of both her parents, and giving | free vent to her overcharged heart, ftie arofe ! exhaufted, j
exhaufted, and almoft powerlefs to move; but on turning round, ihe beheld the equally afllided Emma and Arthur, who having flied the tears of filial remembrance and affection over their mother's tomb, and of forrow over that of their father's, they each of them took the arm of Ethelwina, who fuffered them freely to conduce her from the vaults of death, which were foon after clofed, and the filent toub fhut from the fight of the Jiving; when the heart of Ethel¬ wina was fomewhat eafed by having paid this duty to her martyred fire's memory. She retired early to reft, and dreams of heavenly confolation attended her; in tliem flie fancied herfelf ftill in the vaults, lament* ing over the early death of her mother, and the more untimely end of her father, when fuddenly a ftrain of heavenly mufic ftruck on ber fafcinated fenfes5 and as Ihe liftened, flie forgot her griefs in a thrilling fenfation of delight that Hole infenfibly over her charmed mind 1—the coffins of her parents fuddenly burft afunder, and the fpirits of each rofe in
in a cloud of gjkwy from their earthly rccep« tad^i arrayed in roixi of puicft v,hitc, and their count^na^xs beaming with angelic Immiy. Arthsr (be fancied was d(o in the tomb, and tU facet of their parents glowed with a look of fmiling divinity upuu tkm hfb, mliilft the voice of her father's fpirk pronounced, io fweet and plcafmg tooei—** My children, well have you obeyed tuy voice! your father is now luppy and bfcflcd beyond the conception of mo j tab to think bow much fo! Well haw you performed the work which Hea- wm h» (m&y^md^im you tlterrforc liappy I hctcjftcr we Hull meet again in the realms cf tvcrUftif.g peace l fi The voice ceafed, and the fpkit of Urfii- Ibe then ftpetche4 fi»th itt wmm t feyingi— «* My cliiWftn, be yon happy! kt pow» . mi compofiife potkfk the days oi my Ethel¬ wina, and be the fwttiie life of my Arthur pfoionged—be his 6te profperous ami full of honour i—Tte bteffingi of your mother attf i^i ber chtUien!—I go to the tegM* of Parmdifei
beatified fpirits, fupported by each other, afcended through a ftream of glory * the clouds parted, and a ftrain of immortal bar* , mony welcomed them to the Ikies, and clofed them from the view of Ethelwina, who, wrapt in wonder and admiration, lift* cned to the founds of voices which feemed to chant celcftiol choruffe* till the ftrain$ be* came fo Joud that they awoke her from her delicious vifions, almoft expecting to behold them realized* *Twa$ a delightful mornings the fun never Ihone with more refplendent luftre through the cafements of her chamber than it appeared now to do j flie arofe refrefhed, and her mind, in perfect tranquillity, feemed eafed of a load of grief j—her heart and fpirits were revived by her biifsful vifions; for certainly they had a wonderful effect in calming her agitated feelings, and reftoring her to that compofed ferenity of mind that ever attends the good and virtuous. Of ibe lofs of her parents the no longer thought with
with that afHictive fadnefs; but her forrow, tempered by reafon, taught her to fubmit with proper and becoming refignation to the deftiny that had befallen them: and let us add, the idea of their immortal hap¬ pinefs which the vifion reprefented to her fleeping fancy, helped powerfully to calm her mind; and for the future fhe only thought on them with that pleaflng regret, that conftant affectionate remembrance which to the mind of fufceptibility muft ever attend the lofs of friends fo beloved. The peace, and even cheerfulnefs of the caftle were in a few days reftored, as time began to banifh the remembrance of the late dreadful occurrences; and only one cir¬ cumftance remained to prevent its being a fcene of growing happinefs. It was about this time that the beloved trio were walk¬ ing in the fine lawns and extenfive gardens of the caftle, when Ethelwina requefted Emma to explain the events that had caufed her to be in the power of St. Iver. The evening was beautiful and ferene, and
behind the tall point of the mountainous Skiddaw; not a breath of air difturbed the repofe of Nature—all was a happy fcene of calm ferenity and fmiling peace; the tran¬ quillity of the party was unalloyed, except Ethelwina's heart, which was now rather uneafy for the fdte of her Auguftine, and the dangers 40 which he might be expofed. >The idea of any ill that might befal him, alone interrupted the perfect eafe of her mind, and gave to her expreflive counte¬ nance a penfive fliade, as (he liftened to the artlefs tale of Emma, who, placing herfelf between Arthur and Ethelwina, thus be¬ gan;— ." I need not attempt to defcribe," faid fhe, " the agony of my mind when I dif¬ covered that you, Ethelwina, were torn from the caftle, or the diftraction I was in when the mangled, bleeding form of my brother was brought from the chapel, where they had been to fearch for you, and where we were confirmed you had really been, by
by finding the picture of Arthur, which I had myfelf that very morning kifled as I braced it to your arm. My grief for Auguftine made me for a moment ceafe from the agony of my thoughts for your lofs, for it was the utmoft I could do to foften his rage and defpair, who required all my attention and entreaties to pre¬ vent him from following you, mangled and covered with wounds as he was; nor had 1 influence to detain him longer than two days. He tore himfeif from me, and till lately I had the affliction to fuppofe he had fallen a victim to his wounds, and died in his too hafty departure from the caftle before they were healed, or even clofed. Melancholy and fad, I retired to bed* but could not fleep, and almoft before it was light, I arofe from my couch. Uncon¬ fcioufly my feet carried me to the gar¬ dens; and nearly diftracted, I entered our favourite pavilion at the end of the long walk, which you know was built at a corner of the rampart walls, and looked into
into the caftle moat and the foreft. I fat there for fome time, giving way to the un- happinefs and dejedion of my hsrart, when I was alarmed by the entrance of tiiree men. They feized me; I fhrieked aloud, but I was beyond all help from the caftle, and they foon ftifled my cries. Two of the men, taking me in their arms, lifted me over the garden rampart, and conveying me down a ladder that was fixed in the river,* they placed me in a boat, and I was quickly rowed to the other fide of the moat. They hurried me on fhore, and we entered the foreft ;■ they did not fpeak to me, but placing me in a fmali carriage, they took the binder from my mouth, but re¬ fufed to inform me where I was to be con¬ veyed to. Wretched and unhappy, I faw myfelf in the power of ruffians, from whom there was no chance of an efcape, and I had nothing to hope but that I might fhare the prifon of my Ethelwina. Over horrible tremendous heights did we journey, and in¬ ftant death was all that I expeded. Ex- vol. uu m haufted,
haufted, fatigued, and ill, I at laft arrived at the teiror-ftriking towers of Iver; they dragged me up the fteep rock, the gates opened, and 1 wildly demanded of my con¬ ductors to be carried to my fifter, to the Countefs of Auburne; but they difregarded my entreaties, and I was conveyed to the tower in the weftern court. A melancholy dreary dungeon now became my new abode, its lofty height and bare walls adding to the forlorn nefs of my fate. A woman brought me my food, and fome days were pafled in increafmg mifery, when one morning the tall figure of a man entered my chamber; it was the wretch who had helped to convey me from Auburne. He » approached me, and before I could be aware of his defign, prefumed to fnatch my hand, which he kifled with violence, and faid,/that my freedom depended on him¬ feif; that if I would confent to become his, he would conduct me from the caftle to a place of fecurity, far from the reach of Xeopold, by whofe commands I had been brought
brought to the Caftle of Iver, to gratify his own bafe intentions." Alarmed and terrified as much at the wretch, as at his information, I fnatched my hand wildly from his grafp, and indig¬ nantly commanded him to quit the roonr; he did fo, but with a malicious grin he told me I fliould bitterly repent my arro¬ gance, and in threatened anger he left me, which threats he foon put in practice by depriving me of thofe only little comforts that could cheer for a moment the horrors of imprifonment. This I bore with pati¬ ence, and as my unlucky fate had caft me in the power of fuch wretches, I refolved to fummon all the fortitude and refiftance I was miftrefs of. The only amufement that was left me to employ my folitary hours, conflfted in climbing up the high grated window of my prifon $ there for hours I have fat, and cafting my eyes on every cafement of the caftle that laid in the direc¬ tion of my fight, I would vainly ftrain my eyes in hopes to catch a diftant glance of m 2 my
my Ethelwina, for I entertained not a doubt but that )ou were a prifoner in the caftle as well as myfelf. Alas ! I faw you not! Weeks and weeks paffed away in watching but for one look, that I might know where you were confined; but it was plain you inhabited not that fide of the caftle. <c One day as I was fitting at my window", the tyrant Leopold entered my chamber.— He approached me, and without fuffering him to fpeak, I fell on my knees, and en¬ treated him to allow me to fhare the fate of my more than fifter. He in a moment fnatched me from the ground, faying, that in his anus I fliould know a happier fate.— I fprung from him with open declared de- tcftation and abhorrence; he foftened his features, and promifed me that 1 fhould for the prefent remain unmolefted, if I would at fome future period be more complying to his pretended love. i Let this proof of my forbearance,' faid he, * excite a lefs degree of avcrfion. I adore you, charming Emma,* m ' added
added he; < beware how you provoke my anger—on yourfelf alone depends your fafety. Remember you are in the power of St. Iver, who gives not himfeif fuch trouble to obtain the object of his wifhes, to meet rejection.'—I felt too certainly that I was at his mercy, and nothing was to be hoped for ; but I thought that if time could be gained, fomething fortunate might intervene, and I condefcended to diflemble, for it was the only prefervative left me againft open vio¬ lence: and, conquering fox a moment the'' infulted feelings of my indignant heart, I demanded three months to be at my own difpofal; by this, I added, I fhould have a proof of his love, and perhaps the trial might end in his favour.^ " He hefitated, but after a paufe, faid, « Be it fo, lo\ely Emma ! but recollect that at the end of that time you are mine, and be affured, with or without your confent, I will no longer delay the pofteflion of what I have made fo long a facrifice of, and fliall expect your heart as well as your perfon.'—
I made no other reply, for fear my feelings fliould betray me, except informing him of the infolence of Ruthmer, which had been fince repeated ; and he left me, with a pro- mife to fecure me from him in future. r But to what increafmg mifery did I become the prey of! I had freed myfelf from the info- lent importunities of one wretch, but to yield at laft to the greater power of the other ; yet I reflected that I had gained time, and young, fanguine, and inexperienced, I entertained not a doubt but that I ihould be free from both, long before the appointed time expired, and that thought compen- fated for the dangers that I beheld only at a diftance, and I reflected that they might never arrive. Again I had recourfe to my window, from which I had a full view of the north tower, which tottering, and al¬ moft falling, had often filled my foul with terror, left my beloved Ethelwina fliouldbe there confinecl. " One day in particular, as I caft my eyes up to its afpiring top, I was alarmed by ■■•feftira*-
feeing a white arm ftrctched out of the higheft window, and feemingly breaking away the ivy which nearly covered the cafement. < Heavenly powers!' cried 1, ' is it in the heart of cruelty itfelf to make yon crumbling ruin, that every inftant feems threatening to fall from its high ftation, the prifon of the noble Ethelwina.'—The idea had fomething fo horrific, that I almoft difmiffed it immediately ; yet I had cer¬ tainly feen the extended white hand and arm, and whofe could it be but Ethel¬ wina's ? " 1 continued at the window in hopes of catching another glance or a fight of the form to whom the arm belonged; but the mantling ivy fhut all within from my outftretched view. Still in extreme ardta- tion I remained at the window, till darknefs and night covered all in gloom and mift from further infpection. " But ah i what keen forrows rent my heart, when I plainly perceived the light fhine through the window of the
tower! and all night I remained in my watchful ftaticn; and when next day the hated Ruthmer entered my chamber, I de* manded, with itreaming eyes, if the north tower was really the prifon of the Coimte'fs of Auburne.—* It is,* replied he.—* Good God P I exclaimed, ' lives there fuch a monfter as to have the heart to confine the angelic Ethelwina in fuch a place of dangerous horror! Oh ! that I had but for a few moments the wings of an angel, that I might bear the beautiful fufferer from the gates of yonder horrible dungeon i* ' Lefs heavenly means may accomplifh that/ cried Ruthmer ; * tis in your power.'— * In my power/ impatiently interrupted I ; * if it be fo, name inftantly the meanfc, and I will haften to perform them.' • < Confent to become mine/ he eagerly replied, « and I fwear to you, lovely >maid, the Countefs of Auburne fhall be free, and accompany us from Iver/—At firft a cold fhivcr thrilled in my veins, and I inwardly faid, ^Become thy wife—never;' but again I viewed
I viewed the horrible dungeon, and there, tliere was my Ethelwina confined 1 No longer then did I hefitate ; < Go,' cried I $ c bring the gentle fufferer to my arms; con¬ duct us both in fafety to Auburne Caftle, and I am your's. 1 " My too generous Emma !" exclaimed Ethelwina, interrupting her. She proceeded.—" Ruthmer left the chamber; I thought not of him, I forgot that fuch a creature was in exiftence, or that he was by myfelf deftined to become my hufband. I faw only the terrible tower, and thought only on the joy of being able to free my beloved Ethelwina. " The day declined ; I went to reft, but not to fleep, and the returning light of morning was welcomed with pleafure.— Ruthmer towards night entered, and ia gloomy angry words informed me that my dear, my heroic more than fifter would not confent to be at liberty at my ex- pence, and peremptorily refufed to be M 5 the
the caufe of mifery (as flie generoufly fup¬ pofed) to me, rather chufing to fubmit to her dreadful dangers, than plunge another into them to fecure herfelf. " Again I placed myfelf at the cafement, and in agony of heart paffed that whole day in watching, and my nights in trem¬ bling, left from the repeated tempefts of the air, I fliould, in the morning, no more fee the crumbling tower, but as a fallen ruin. All that day I watched, and beheld in the court more than common preparations, and fomething in the fhape of a fcaffold met my anxious fight. " Oh ! what were my fenfations, when I beheld you, Ethelwina, pale, thin, emaci¬ ated, enter the court, yet ftill retaining that commanding majeftic perfon which could awe the guilty into confufion ! I faw you as with firm flow fteps you approached the fcaffold. The black cloth was withdrawn, and a youth, whofe, features I feemed to have a faint remembrance of, was prefented torny view. In' agony indefcribable, I fixed my A e y es
eyes in fearching eagernefs on him, and my heart and tongue wildly proclaimed that I knew the youth before me; but in the next moment I heard— 4 On God ! my bro¬ ther, my Arthur!' repeated by )Ou, as the winds bore upward the founds on my ear r and you rufhed into each other's arms.— * s Tis he, 'tis he—he lives '.' I fhrieked out, wringing my hands in agony, whilft my heart was torn between diitrading joy and fearful apprehenfion. I flew to the door ; vain effort 1 to open it, was impoffible.— Mad with fuch a variety of complicated feelings, I rufhed back again to the window, and at that moment, Ethelwina, you tore open the neck-clothes of Arthur. < 'Tis he, it is my long loft brother,' you exclaimed, and" funjc again into each other's arms.— Oh then! who can, or how fliall I exprefs my tranfports-? My eyes, my heart had not deceived me, and it was really the living Arthur preferved from the monfter's fury. " Loudly I called upon your names, but you could not hear me ; the wind carried m 6 the
the founds upwards, and my cries were loft in air. Again F beheld my Ethelwina pro- flrate at the feet of the inhuman Leopold. My dear Arthur was feized, the ax was falling on his defencelefs neck. I rent the air with my, flifieks—- 'twas a moment big with dif- trachng, complicated horror ; my brain became bewildered, my fenfes almoft for¬ fook me, and I loudly uttered, < Monfters, bear!' " At that moment you ran, you flew, you threw yourfelf in time over his threatened body, but your own precious v life was near becoming the facrifice; the Goo 1 of juftice preferved you both, and in the awful moment of danger ftopped the winged courfe of deftruction. In frantic joy I be¬ held you fafe, and offered^ my thanks to Heaven. A wild confufion enfued ; my Ethelwina was hurried away, and Arthur v/as alfo * removed from my fight. Nature in me, ftrained to its utmoft extent of feel¬ ing, could bear no more, and I funk in¬ fenfible to the floor. Three
Three days more pafled away in mifery, and watchings ; the evening of the fourth arrived, and Leopold fuddenly entered my chamber. His purpofes were fatal to my peace, but my Arthur came, and pre- ferved my life and honour. "* " The joy with which I welcomed the long loft objed of my earlieft affec¬ tions, it is not in the power of words to exprefs; and the now no longer terrific journey over the mountains," added fhe, with an arch fmile on her charming countenance, which fhe caft on Arthur, " had on my return, loft all its horror whilft yoU was my protector."
s
LriAPo
f
CHAP. XIII.
ETHELWINA and Arthur mutually embraced her, and thanked her for the affectionate love that flie fo ardently enter¬ tained for them. A courier from the Queen at that moment arrived, and Etfielwina's prefence was required in the caftle ; fhe left the young lovers mutually to exprefs their joyful thoughts, and they paffed their time in relating to each other every little well- remembered token of formei affection, and all thq long chain of incidents and dangers they had known fince their long abfence. The meffenger informed the Baronefs that the Queen, having vi&orioufly conquered her daring enemies, and fubdued and taken. prifoner
prifoner the Scottifh King, propofed, with a chofen few of her train, to pafs that night under the roof of Auburne Caftle, in her way to the fliores of France, for which kingdom fhe was fpeedily to embark.— Ethelwina,, agitated and trembling, de¬ manded of the mefl'enger if Sir Auguftine Mountferville attended in the fuite of her Majefty; but the courier had been dif- miffed in hafte, and could not anfwer the queftion. Ethelwina, with fear and apprehenfion, waited at the gate of the drawbridge to receive her auguft vifiter, who foon after arrived, followed by many of - her noble gallant Knights, covered with the fpoils of conqueft and bright renown. The illuftrious Phillipa was conducted by a warrior of noble and commanding mien, but his face was concealed by the vifor of his helmet, being drawn down. Ethelwina, with her native grace and dignity, received her Sovereign, who was vifibly charmed with her beauty ; and fhe prefented the young Arthur to her Majefty* The
The Royal Phillipa received the homage of the future Earl of Auburne, who gracefully bending his knee, rofe not till the honour of Knighthood had been conferred on him by the hand of her Majefty, who had already been informed of his eventful life. The ceremony of welcome being over, Ethelwina conducted the illuftrious Queen and the Knights of her train to the magnificent ftate apartments, where the Royal Phillipa, taking the hand of Ethelwina, placed it in that of the Knight who wore the vifor. " Be thou the reward of valour," faid her Majefty; " receive from my hand, noble youth, a rich bequeft for the fervices thou haft rendered us. Ethelwina will, I know, joyfully admit, as her future Knight, him who has been the conqueror of our foes, and the preferver of his Queen." v At that moment the gallant ftranger dropped on his knee, and withdrawing the vifor, difcovered to the trembling confufed Ethelwina the weU^own, features of Au¬ guftine. « Will
« Will the lovely Ethelwina deign to allow the claim of her prefuming Knight ? Will flie, at the requeft of the Queen of England, admit him to the honoured felicity of being indeed her faithful Knight, and conftitute him as her fure defender f" With a dignified expreflive fmile, and with a noble entire confidence, though with a dovvncaft eye of modeft fimpli- city, Ethelwina prefented her hand to the enraptured Auguftine, who, imprinting a fervent kifs upon it, rofe gracefully from his knee; but too full of love, yet as full of refped, he repreffed his tranfports before the prefence of his Royal Miftrefs and his adored Ethelwina, contenting himfeif with beholding in filent rapture the objed of his tendered affedions: and though he fpoke not, his eyes faid more than the moft elo¬ quent harangue could have uttered, fpeak¬ ing in the true language of his tranfportcd heart, as now for the flrft time he ventured to give free indulgent to the full tide of his tranfcendent delighted love; for now he • had
had no impediments to prevent the joyful certainty of foon, without a blufh, afpiring to the poffeffion of his heart's image. His good fortune, and his own heroic magnanimity, that had always attended him in the field, did not in the laft engagement defert him* and with wonder and pleafure the Royal Phillipa beheld her young war¬ rior rufh to the field of battle with all the courage and experience of a General, per¬ forming ads of undaunted valour, and bravely facing the hotteft of the battle. In the midft of die engagement a con¬ cealed arrow was fliot at the illuftrious Phillipa, who ftood fome paces from the fcene of adion, courageoufly viewing the battle, and encouraging her heroes to the glory of conqueft. Auguftine faw the courfe of the arrow as it winged its way to the breaft of the unfufpeding Queen;—he flew with the fpeed of the rufliing winds, and covering the Queen with his buckler, pre¬ ferved her from tlf threatened, inevitable death. The noble Phillipa faw, and after the
the battle remembered, the valorous achieve¬ ment, when flie refolved to reward her gal¬ lant preferver. She fent for the ftranger Knight, and without noticing her defign, demanded from whence he came, and who he was? which, upon learning, ftie -commanded him to give her an account of all the late events of the inhabitants of Auburne Caftle. Auguftine related each circumftance as briefly as poflible, and from him the Royal Phillipa learned the hiftory of Arthur, and the fufTerings of Ethelwina; and though the modeft Auguftine fpoke not of his love, the illuftrious Phillipa was too penetrating not to read the lover in his whole account, and (lie refolved by a little condefcending ftratagem to reward her hero, and flie doubted not make happy the fair Baronefs. For this purpofe fhe haftened, on her return from the borders, to Auburne Caftle, which never fhone with greater magnificence and fplendour than on this evening; the banquet feaft was pre¬ pared for the palate, and the loud* founding inftruments
inftruments of war, joined to the fofter and more pleafing notes of the peaceful inftruments of the caftle, entertained the noble vifiters as they fat at the tables of ancient Englifh hofpitality. The feafts and entertainments of the night ended ; the auguft Phillipa and her warriors retired to their chambers, pleafed and gratified with their amufement, and the hofpitality of their welcome, but more fo with the noble miftrefs of the manfion j and*many an heroic heart N that preffed its downy pillow, felt fleep to be a ftranger, remembering only the wonderous and rare perfedions of Ethelwina of Auburne. ©n the morning of the enfuing day the Queen and her fuite with regret quitted their lovely hoftefs, and haftened to the fliores of France, there to witnefs the glory of the great Edward in having at laft con* quered the proud, creft-fallen heart of Gallia, and taken her Sovereign a captive. There too, did the pious and heavenly- minded
minded Phillipa obtain on her knees that mercy, and performed thofe adsofchriftian, Godlike charity for her conforms foes, which iiluftrated her name to fucceeding ages. Auguftinehad accompanied the.Queen to France,^and again returned to. Au¬ burne, but no longer poor and difinherited ; he was now reftored to all the fplen- dour of his titles and ancient pofTeflions; loaded with honours and bright renown, and high in the favour of his mighty Mafter; crowned with laurels of conqueft and, un- blemiflied fame, he arrived at Auburne Caftle, The marriage ceremony foon after took place, and the happy Auguftine received from the hands of the youthful Arthur, the blooming Ethelwina; and blefled in the con¬ ftant love of each other, their future days pafled in unruffled happinefs, and mutual fcene* of ferene delight. The remainder of Ethelwina's life was calm, tranquil, and happy; on the bofom of her tender Lord, Ethelwina repofed her every 5 thought;
thought; the fcenes of pad fuffering were no more recalled to her mind, or if at any time a fudden remembrance of them croffed their thoughts, it ferved but more fully to make them feel their prefent biffs. The paper that had been entrufted to the care of Rupert, by the late Earl of Auburne, was delivered by him to Ethel¬ wina; it contained only a fclemn injunc¬ tion to her to refufe the hand of Leopold, fliould he again prefume to offer himfeif to her acceptance;—the reft of the packet con- fifted of the will of her father, which more fully explained and fecured to Ethelwina the titles and eftates of her maternal grand¬ father, together with a large fortune of pro¬ perty fecured in the fecret repofitory of the caftle vaults. It became neceflary, according to her father's will, that Ethelwina fliould vifit her own eftates; when, accompanied by her Lord, and her bother and After, (he obeyed the inftrudions of her parent, and they reached her magnificent caftle in Nor- fojk,
her Auguftine the homage of her people; and giving orders for the eftates and the manfion of Caftle Acre to be kept in repair and improvement, they all returned again to the dear fcenes of Auburne, where for fome years the Baron and Baronefs confented to refide, at the entreaties of Arthur, who was now the acknowledged Lord of Auburne, and had received fhe oath of fealty from the people on his recovered domain. The repofitory of the caftle was opened; Ethelwina and her beloved Lord were too generous to take any of the large fortune that had been accumulating for years, and was by the will of her father left to the .Baronefs of Caftle Acre* but thefe im- menk fums the noble-minded Ethelwina refufed to accept, and unly claimed the in- tereft of the property that belonged to her own eftates, which fhe immediately added to the fplendid poffeflions of her Lord - 9 and with the delicacyof her fufceptible mind, fhe begged that the fortune Ihe inherited from the
the houfe of her father might remain in the repofitory as a dower for the lovely Emma, who, a very few years after thefe events, be¬ came the bride of Arthur, and the, tender af¬ fection of the dear companions was at laft re¬ warded with the infeparable happinefs of their future lives. Unalloyed by one moment's uneafinefs, they lived the blefling of their people, and followed the noble example of Ethelwina and Auguftine, who took delight ** in feeing their tenants and vaffals as happy as themfelves j and they, by their readihefs to defend the rights of their Lord and miftrefs, proved that they knew no happinefs fupe¬ rior to being under their controul. At the marriage of Arthur and Emma, the Baron of Mountferville and his illuftri¬ ous Lady removed from Auburne to take poffvflion of his own clomain. The vene¬ rable Caftle of Mountferville had undergone a thorough repairs mucfi of its heavy Gothic, gloomy grandeur was taken away, many of the trees which intercepted the rays of the fun, were cut downj the fmali Gothic
Gothic windows were enlarged, and the tower that had witnefled the melancholy end of the late Baron, was entirely deftroyed, and not a ftone remained to me w a veftige of that fad cataftrophe. The caftle, once the feat of darknefs and folitude, now became enlightened and lively, and by its well-judged alterations wore a more pleafing, airy form, whilft the re¬ fined taftes of its noble owners foon con¬ verted it into, a beautiful and happy manfionj and though it loft not its ancient grandeur, yet it now appeared a noble and fplendid pile of building* Every part of it was completely repaired, and it fecmed now to rival its neighbour Auburne in the heart of Ethelwina; for, devoted to her Lord, (he became foon as much attached to it as Auguftine was; and though her brother and fifter moftly refided at Auburne, yet, as their offspring increafed, Ethelwina removed entirely to the Caftle of Mountferville. Excepting a yearly vifit that fhe ever paid to her own domains, vol. m. N ihe
flie conftantly refided there ; where, bleffed in a fuperior degree with the happinefs that her piety and noble virtues had fo richly merited, fhe lived with her affec¬ tionate and grateful Auguftine in all thofe true delights which ever .attend fouls fo blamelefs, and hearts fo fining and attuned to every refined emotion that awaits on the real purity of love, and the poffeffors of each moral and noble virtue. Ethelwina fent private commiflioners to the Caftle of Iver, to inter the wretched Leopold, and if poflible to draw the body of the criminal Ruthmer from the gulph, and depofit it in holy ground; flie alfo gave orders that the northern tower fliould be deftroyed. The horrors fhe had there endured were never entirely erafed from her memory j and as fhe became the ipheritor of the Caftle of Iver, fhe refolved that none fliould ever experience after her fimilar miferies. Her ord:rs were faithfully obeyed; the unhappy Leopold's body, as well as his con- 5 * ftdant's,
fidant's in wickednefs, were buried, and to the exalted forgivenefs of the injured Ethel¬ wina did their remains owe the laft offices of decent humanity. The caftle itfelf was found deferted; for the people of Leopold, dreading the ven¬ geance of offended juftice, and feeling now no refpect for the cold, infenfible corpfe, which, when living, had often frowned them into obedience, but, regardlefs of its wounds, hurried from the caftle, leaving in their hafte the fecret aperture open; by which means the commiflioners with eafe gained admif- flon, and all Ethelwina's orders were ftrictiy performed. The northern tower was foon battered to ruins, and caft into the foam¬ ing abyfs; its foundations were deflroyed, and no longer had a being. The benevolent Ethelwina did not for¬ get the poor fufferer of the mountains, to whom fhe fent, urging him to quit his inhofpitable dwelling, and find in herfelf a compenfation for what he had loft. The bard gratefully felt the kindnefs of N z the
the offer, but his heart, devoted to grief and folitude, could find no pleafure in fociety, and as the Caftle of Iver was now totally uninhabited, he folicited her leave to pafs fome of his hours there; which being readily granted, he ufed to enter its folitary courts, a^d dreary, defolate galleries, where wandering from Toorn to room, or fbmetimes,weeping over the grave of his child, who had been buried in the caftle chapel, he fpent the remainder of his fhort life. The ruin on the heath, that had been the prifon of Auguftine, and the rendezvous of Leopold's fpies, fhared the fame fate with the northern tower of Iver. The grateful Ethelwina had, foon after her return to Auburne, fent by the hands of her trufty Rupert a large bag of money to be diftributed among the generous rob¬ bers who had protected her in the hour of need; and tiey, feeling their gratitude ex¬ cited by this unexpected bounty, held a confultation, and thofe who had not totally overftepped $
overftepped the barrier of virtue and honour, voluntarily confented to abandon their law- lefs courfes of life; and fome of them, under the protedion of Auguftine and his Ethelwina, and encouraged by the example of their virtues, paffed their lives in ftrid ads of juftice and propriety. Among the reft was Hubert de Urle, the leader of the banditti, who joyfully took advantage of this opportunity to free himfeif from a courfe of life, that wounded pride and deferted merit had forced him to have recourfe to. His father dying fhortly after this event, he, by the powerful aid of his late ac¬ quired friends, recovered his birthright, and his future life proved a continuation of that honour and inborn virtue which he had given his benefadors fo convincing and noble a proof of. The honeft fidelity of Bertram was not forgotten, or unrewarded; and he became the fteady, faithful attendant on his gene¬ rous protedors. And
And now, having ^m the life of Arthur prefcrvcd by* the courage and affection of his heroic fifter, and his liberty, rights, and affectionate Emma, all reftored to him,— having faithfully attended the pious Ethel¬ wina through ail her dangers, all her fuf¬ ferings,—and having in the end feen her blefled and rewarded by increafmg years of connubial happinefs, let the recorder clofe his feeble effort with this one re¬ flection-^ That however unhappily fituated, how¬ ever deprefTed by forrow, or overwhelmed by the inflictions of the depraved, yet ftill the noble mind fhould never defert itfelf, but rather rife fuperior to each new trial; and if, like Ethelwina, the fufferer is blefled with the fhielding armour of virtue, he is poffefled of a tower of inward ftrength. In¬ vincibly was fhe enclofed from the attacks of her oppreffors; and though Virtue may for a time fink under the envenomed hand of Vice, yet jliall it rife refplerident from its power, purified and unfullied, and enriched by
, by a tenfold added luftre: and that fame hand who permits the afllided to tremble under the fcourge of the wicked, will reftore again the fufferer to his former happinefs, here or hereafter, and, like the heroic Ethel¬ wina, prove that virtue muft ultimately reward itfelf.
FINIS.
