Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Sir Ethelbert: or, The dissolution of monasteries: a romance
SIR ETHELBERT; OB, THE DISSOLUTION' OF MONASTERIES.
V- 1 л л\ JL * Ă » Bv ancient legends we are told, " That in the beginning of boli chirche, peepull cam to the chirche on the Eve of St, John the Baptist, with candellys brennyng, and wold wake ; " but that when " they fell into songs, daunces, harpings, piping, glotony, and sinne, holi faders ordeined the peepull to leve that w T aking ; but that in the worship of St. John menne wake ydtte at home." In the у ear, 1516, when the latter method of paying homage to this saint prevailed, /ţ$Yihhabitants of a hamlet upon the éOtitr'àf Wales assembled upon vol. i. * \ - »
tlie Eve of St. John Baptist, as it seemed, for the purpose of discovering if pastime could weary. In jocund flocks they clambered to that part of an overhanging mountain, where the great blaze they were about to kinelle might prove coib spicuous*; anel where accommodation was amply afforded for every department of their vigil, even to their making merry withal. These gay Cambrians promptly ar¬ ranged ail preparations for their feasting ; and when calleel into action to elo honour to St. John at the festive board, per¬ formed, with manifest pleasure, tlie most unquestionable homage to the sublunary creatures spread out before them : and then proceeded to set " holi faders " at defiance in more than "glotony;" for they sung, they piped, they danced, and the indefatigable harper twanged many a
burst of spontaneous accompaniment to his fits of music * f now generally yielded without tlie accustomed groat, wearying Echo in response, for the power was his to sing or say — *« For my harp is made of a good mare's skyn. The strynges be of horsehair, and make t h a good din." f Nor was the crwth less diligent in proclaiming the devotion of its player to the saint ; for it sounded the attestation of its homage, until it growled and squeaked in testimony of its industry. The triluminous fires necessary were kindled in due time; for according to the legends alreaely quoted, " Menne in worship of St. John Baptist make three manner of íyre. t " By virtue of the
в 2
first of these fires, they believed all evil spirits would be put to flight ; the second was to enlighten all around, as St. John had enlightened men ; and the third was deemed emblematic of the sainťs martyrdom. Around these fires they danced and performed the exploits of ordeal ; if awkwardly, the more popu¬ larly', as plaudits merrily testified ; leaping through, over, or perchance into them, with indefatigable animation and rash temerity. But Time performed as industriously as Mirth, and the hour stole upon them when Superstition summoned many of her votaries to the still and awful purpose of watching for the phenomenon attri¬ buted to the specific aieler in necromantic influence, the fern-seed*, and many more,
to prepare for the more active measure of a portentuous race round the church- yard at midnight, which was to develop the secrets of Fate. Many a panting and half trembling damsel stood in anxious readiness to scamper away to the distant consecrated field of action, to sow the wondrous seed *, whicli they firmly believed would conjure up the shadow of their destined spouse, swiftly to follow in the triple round, with scythe prepared to mow down the miraculous hemp, which was to prove the instantaneous produce of their mystic agriculture. In this moment of solemn expectation, when the harp, the crwth, and even fe¬ male voices, were hushed by Superstition's influence, all were electrified by the Sud¬ eten toll of a bell, sounding most awful! v from the neighbouring priory of Dun¬ raven : which bell, by its portentous one- note toll, unequivocally proclaimed, " the fyre of clene bony es" had lost its efficacy ; since evil spirits were unquestionably even
then not far distant, toiling for the de¬ struction of devoted mortals. The first sound of a bell, whose pro¬ vince was to chase every evil spirit from its district, led all eyes to turn in wild alarm, from their anxious observations of the fern-seed, to seek through the twi¬ light of a midsummer's night for the ap¬ palling symptoms of the loss of influence in their heretofore talismanic " boyne fyre," thus unequivocally made public. No telescopical invention had at this period reached the lower classes in Great Britain; these villagers, therefore, were slow in discerning in the distance of the scene before them, when even rocks, and mountain tops, and rolling waves had be¬ come no longer distinct objects in the prospect, the nature of that alarm, given by supernatural intuition to this portent¬ ous bell. The mountain upon which these Cam¬ brians were elevated overhung St.George*s Channel : a wide expanse of water, there¬ fore, flowed beneath this lofty eminence ; and as to this expanse their searching
glances were directed, thev at length per¬ ceived a ship of the first magnitude, a«? if in course for Milfbrtl Haven ; and in it* wake they shortly discerned a balinger, or small sailing vessel, hovering, as if either riding in respectful distance, or as a cautious observer of the noble carick» or great ship. The fishermen who were amongst the assemblage on the mountain» possessing more knowledge of maritime and military transactions than the cottiers of the coa^t, pronounced this "an invasion from Ire¬ land, and which, no doubt, formed the evil-sprited visitation the holy friars of Dunraven Priorv had providentially de- tected, atid were thus in process of re¬ pelling by 7 the influence of monastic miracle." To arm for defensive warfare was not in the power of these Cambrians, had they considered such hostile measures neces¬ sary ; which they did not, since the in¬ fallible bell was now at work for their protection ; and consequently they stood в 4
earnestly gazing with assured expectation of a speedy miracle, which they firmly believed accomplished when they beheld the sudden darting of a spkula ignita from the balinger, shaping its destructive course to the vessel in advance, and that with too sure an aim at fatal purpose. The remorseless fire made rapid pro¬ gress through the unfurled sails, and sunk in destructive embassy into the area between the clumsy galleries of the fore¬ castle and the stern, which then was the style of maritime architecture; and ere symptoms had become distinctly visible that the deed of cruelty had been too surely perpetrated, the light vessel had tacked and disappeared, leaving the su¬ perstitious observers in firm conviction of the balinger being of witches-craft, and that, like the nautilus, it could sink or swim at pleasure· Signals of distress were promptly heard from the devoted carick, and persons on board could now be distinctly seen in as wild commotion as the devouring flames ; whilst all on shore who possessed a co-
racle·, and found a spark of humanity capable of ignition within them, would have put to sea to aid the sufferers, had it not been for the unfortunate superstition which taught them to believe this fire to be the work of preternatural agency for the deliverance of the principality. The fire increased and raged with vio¬ lence, proclaiming such inevitable de¬ struction that the ship*s boats, being quickly launched, were filled to an over¬ flow, and almost instantaneously foun¬ dered, when every hapless individual, who had sought refuge in them and could not swim back to the flaming wreck, found an immediate grave. At this dread period, the wildfire which haei fallen through the hatchway, in de¬ fiance of every counter-effort to subdue it, perpetrated its destructive mission so fearfully that none could remain below deck j and soon the stern and galleries were thronged with despairing individuals, crying aloud for succour, which no one came, alas ! to offer.
в .5
One boat alone remained on board, and which, being private property, had been securely fastened by a chain to a masl -, and from which not even the force of despair could wrest it without its key, and that was no where to be found. A swell of sea came on and tossed the devoted wreck most piteously. The con¬ flagration raged with fast increasing vio¬ lence, and darkness seemed more visible around, from thefierceglareof the blazing broadside of the carick ; when suddenly t he flam es assumed a blue liquid brilliancy, beaming far and wide a ghastly hue, which could scarcely fail to awaken, in the superstitious beholder, appalling appre¬ hensions of supernatural agency. By this transparent light, which now diffused its influence around, the elis- tracted sufferers upon the blazing wreck became still more perceptible. Amid the flaming sails and masts hung by ropes, not yet in actual conflagration, despairing mortals, whose groans and shrieks and frantic cries for succour rent the air, and pierced the hearts of all who heard them,
but those of their destroyers. And now appeared, in almost the very moment this portentuous blue softened the glare of the dire element, that very boat, which no force could, ere this eventful moment, disengage from its firm mooring, making from the consuming wreck, with oars which seemed plied by preternatural power, gifted with dragons wings to waft it from the devouring flames* The monastic bell now tolled more heavily ; and every Cambrian near felt as if relief to superstitious terrors ap¬ proached, when a solemn chant struck con¬ solation through their ears, proclaiming the approach of the monks from Dun¬ raven Priory, who now came pouring down the winding pathway from their monastery to the shore, bearing conse¬ crated torches and crosses, and chanting with all their energies anthems of exor¬ cism ; and with the daring courage of pious inspiration, making their rapid march to the nearest spot they could reach of that point of supernatural juris¬ diction, which, for many a year, had в б
filled this part of the Cambrian population with dismay. This spot of terror was named no doubt »•Uli »лпсап ic TiiA vtT:*^.^»* и '„4, a t*- niuiicasuiif — ine »τ ItCiìCs xOiîlt. it was a rocky headland, which ran out con¬ siderably to sea, and contained within its spreading arms a fatal gulf, from whence none who entered were ever heard of more. Above the Witches* Point arose'the beautifully romantic Rock of Llanellen, where, when peril foamed around the mariners on the deep, lights of that luminous brilliancy, which awakened sus¬ picion of their not being the composition of mortal hands, constantly appeared antl lured the devoted unfortunates to de¬ struction. It had been observed in the moment when the light of the conflagration had changed its hue, that, in suspicious coin¬ cidence, the treacherous beacons appeared upon Llanellen's Rock. As all who were aware of the influence of these lights ex¬ pected, the boat from the wreck, in de¬ spite of every signal, from those aware of the impending peril, to change its course,
obstinately steered for the Witches* Point. The boat drew near to this new menace of destruction, when the shouts of de¬ terring import, becoming almost frantic yells, reached the ear of the imperiled adventurers, and arrested the attention of the principal of them ; a young and noble looking gentleman, of surpassing attractions, who was supporting a young ladyoftranscendantbeauty, who, although on her part almost exhausted by recent dire terrors, held fondly grasped to her maternal bosom a lovely cherub boy in the first stage of infancy. This attractive stranger, although not comprehending one word which humanity now loudly sounded forth for his pre¬ servation, being uttered in the Welch language, of which he was wholly igno¬ rant; yet construing the import by at¬ tendant circumstances, commanded his rowers to make for that spot, where the monks with their bright torches were assembled. But vain to all appearance proved the conspicuous exertions of these mariners to change their course; some
preternatural influence seemed to impel them irresistibly to the very ρ int they so apparently endeavoured to avoid. The notes of the chanting monks were now suddenly suspended} but the night owl shrieked, and in every coming breeze were wafted melancholy sounds, as if forboding evil. The rowers of the boat still evinced every appearance of determined resistance ; yet something, they declared, of magical impulsion Jed them on, and vanquished each effort for coun¬ teraction. The devoted bark entered the fatal gulf beneath Llanellen's Rock; and the solemn chant of the monks again broke on the stillness of night : but their pious dirge was now, a sad — a pitying Requiem. Of Llanellen's Rock, strange traditions were in circulation, through the prin¬ cipality. Upon this beautifully romantic rock a magnificent castle had, in the early ages, been erected by one of the princes of South Wales * ; but from
the reign of the first Edward» it had belonged to the Barons de Courland, one of whom, rumour declared, <f had bartered his supremacy of Llanellen to a horde of witches, for a philter to subdue the disdain of a lady whom he wooed ; and that these witches from that moment possessed power» through their occult art, to allure shipwrecked mariners into their toils» to feed the demons who performed their spells.** This wild legend of superstition the monks of Dunraven Priory sanctioned, by their acknowledged belief of its au¬ thenticity ; to the infinite marvel of those who patronised the rather more probable tradition, *« of the Barons de Courland having bartered their imma¬ terial spirit to a fell purchaser» who in¬ spired the remorseless atrocity of alluring by lights, and other devices, imperiled voyagers into the whirlpool which Lianei-
the names of these tlivisions were, Deemetia, or South Wales ; Povesia, or Powis Land ; and Va- netlotia, or North Wales.
len's Rock encompassed and concealed." Ma^y of these victims being rieh mer¬ chants, or pilgrims on their return from foreign shores, accounting for the won¬ derfully increasing wealth of these pros¬ perous barons, certainly yielded proba¬ bility to the horrid rumour. But of the present baron, none had found cause to shelter any dire suspicion : for he never visited his Castle of Llanellen, and re¬ sided in England, or in Flanders ; and in each country was esteemed a just man. Whilst of his heir Ethelbert, all believed that to cherish one degrading suspicion would be to defame truth and honour, Ethelbert was young, and eminently gifted with mental and personal advan¬ tages ; and with a disposition so evidently gentle and humane, that none had yet been able to detect a flaw in the texture of his composition. Fortune, as well as Nature, had show¬ ered her favours upon Ethelbert de Cour¬ land. His young sovereign particularly regarded him; well earned laurels crowned his yet juvenile brow j his own estates in-
herited from his deceased mother were superabundant ; and he had been long an object of envy to his compeers» through his betrothment to one of the most per¬ fect daughters of creation, the only child of Earl St. Oswald.
CHAP. IL Amongst the junior friars, who h« been calleel bv the custom of Du ura ven Priory to join in the superstitions just recounted, was Kenrick Blundel, a monk who had very recently become a member of this community ; one of those intellec- tual beings, whose mind cannot confine its powers in circumscription, and whose light of reason can, like the orb of day, break through those clouds which vainly endeavour to conceal its splendour. Kenrick had often reflected deeply upon those mystic bubbles, which, from his junior rank in the monastery, he was employed to act in as a too!, though not in council as a projector. With those few fathers of his community who would listen to so juvenile a censor, he had sometimes argued upon these measures of deception, but in vain ; yet Kenrick believed that the unerring arranger of
the universe, when he left the actions oí man within his own power to reg? date, for the wise purpose of earning his own destiny in futurity, never intended that the ignorant ohould thus be lured, and fooled, and intimidated into passive hood¬ winked obedience to their spiritual guides. A firm foe, therefore, to every species of delusion, Feather Kenrick formed other opinions relative to the events connected with the destruction of the carick, than those of preternatural influence; and with a heart as compassionate as his mind was firm, he resolved to investigate the dire matter, as far as he might individually, (for any coadjutor he knew it utterly impossible to obtain,) and thus haply discover and aid those who had been so cruelly entoiled. The first difficulty encountered by Father Kenrick was, in procuring con¬ venient time for his bold enterprise ; so much of that fleeting commodity was in requisition, day and night, for conven¬ tual duties ; but, at length, he managed to sally forth early on the morning after
those events he so highly deplored had been perpetrated; and, provided with many things he conceived might be ne¬ cessary for the success of his undertak¬ ing, he at low water commenced his fearful achievement, of climbing by the rocks into the mystic catacomb of Llan¬ ellen. It was just as the sun hatl sent forth his first penetrating rays, to chase from the path of observation, all those whose deeds shrank from the eye of detection, that Father* Kenrick entered this gulf of terrors, where each new daring of advance he felt he had a new thanks¬ giving to breathe, for an escape from slipping into the alarmingly agitated abyss. He had not long traversed this difficult and perilous pass ere, by means of an iron-tipped staff*, which aided him in the dangers and diffi¬ culties of his progress, he discovered the possible witchery which had impelled the devoted boat into the fatal bay ; for the rocks encompassing the entrance, he per¬ ceived, were intermingled with load-
stone attractors% but whether placed there bv nature, chance, or mortal in- genuîty, he could not pause iu such a moment to investigate, and with wiiich magnetic influence, he entertained no doubt, the boat's prow haei been ma¬ nufactured to co-operate, This dis¬ covery of the opinions he had previ¬ ously formed, of the nature of the agency which here prevailed, being but too well founded, might have induced his penetrating no further into the secrets of the Witches' Point, had he not known, that the dangers which this fearful pass were presenting were those only, he had to encounter in this intru¬ sion ; for he had delved so far into the secrets of Dunraven Priory, as to feel assured, the garb which encom¬ passed him would protect him from hostilities, did he encounter even the very Witches themselves, to whose ex¬ ploits his convent bell had lately tolleel so loudly in solemn counteraction.
By the nigged path of danger, which his wary observation of its course led Father Kenrick to attempt, he at length safely skirted the foaming gulf, vyhich he perceived was no absolute Charybdis, but a mere impetus, which propelled that which came within its vortex into a cavern harbour beneath the lofty rock of Llanellen ; and into which formielable port the intrepid monk made his daring way, where he soon discovered a regula 1 ' path, whicli although impeded by many labyrinthian intricacies ultimately con- ducteel him up to the lofty cresset, where those attractive lights, so fatal to many¬ an helpless victim, were occasionally hoisted ; and which, from the chemical preparations he beheld there 1 , he felt as- surcel, were manufactured by mortal not demoniac craft. From this elevated point the acute observatiem of this intellectual monk soon guided him, by subtle passes, down a long descent into a subterranean arcade, lighted by spiracles fram above, and which arcade terminated with a barrier
of iron railing, reaching to its very roof. But the dauntless Kenrick would not re¬ treat, without fully exploring, what in pos¬ sibility might await his achievement ; and by this perseverance in accurate inve>tiga- ation of all things around him, he at length detected the ingenious pass, through this apparently inaccessible barrier. Having accomplished this almost marvellous ex¬ ploit for further progress, Kenrick paused a while to arrange some plausible excuse to offer, for thus unceremoniously pene¬ trating into Llanellen Castle ; for into its cemetery vaults he plainly perceived he had wound his wearv way, ami not being » » CT verseti in the courtesies of polished life, he coukl form no plea which he believed could prove admissible; and whilst thus engaged in perplexing rumination, he was appalled by perceiving traces ot newly shed blood upon the very ground where he now stood musing. CT The voice of compassion now urged Kenrick on at every hazard. The san¬ guinary track before him serveti as an unerring guide upon his now unimpeded
way to the castle chapel; but, when on the tessellated pavement, he for some time lost bis appalling clew, and in searching for its re-appearance his humane anxiety at length induced his uuclosing a door, which opened into a gloomy 7 gothic hall of great, extent : out of wiiich, in the very moment of his intrusion, he beheld tw r o men flitting ; one in evident retreat from the other, who held an unsheathed dagger in his hand. The wild cry of the dismayed Kenrick arrested the band of the evident assassin ; who, looking back, perceived the holy man, and instantly disappeared ; whilst the monk rushed forward to aid him, whom he expected to find a bleeding victim to sanguinary turpitude ; nor was Father Kenrick mistaken. The Monks of Dunraven Priory had the surprise con¬ veyed to them, ere many hours elapsed, of intelligence that the junior father of their community had rescued the young heir of Llanellen from the dagger of a mys¬ terious antl. unknown assassin; antl that he was detained by the wounded Sir
Ethelbert at his couch, to prove hi« guard, his counsellor, and leech. And all this was true : and Father Kenrick had much of menace to protect this young knight from ; had indeed important coun¬ sel to impart ; and had lecehcraft to exercise for no common ailments. Amongst other important services, now assigned by the hand of Providence to our adventurous monk, was charge of the very babe who had been seen in its tender mother's arms the preceding night in her flight from the burning wreck ; for this cruelly bereaved heir of an illustrious house was now thrown by relentless fate, in the first moments of that orphan helplessness which demo¬ niac barbarity 7 had caused to him, upon the protection of utter strangers. But in the breast of our poor Kenrick of Dunraven were centered a host ot'auxili¬ aries, for such an important charge, in every human virtue.
VOL, I,
J -Ч WW A W-fc 'W" Τ Τ L НАГ. III. Ат the eventful period in which the mysterious conflagration of the carick upon the coast of Wales was cruelly ef¬ fected, the Earl of St. Oswald, fiither of the betrothed of Sir Ethelbert, was bowed down in premature old age by the sor¬ rows and disappointments of his life : but, to the better understanding of the tale we are about to communicate, we must lead our readers back to years anterior to the melancholy catastrophe of the destruction of the carick antl its numerous passen¬ gers, ere we proceed with the present state of Lord St. Oswaltl, and his onlv surviving chikl, the lovely and inestimable Lady Atlela tie Mandeville. The ancestor of Lortl St Oswald, de¬ scended from Oswaltl King of Northum¬ berland, had been amongst the first peers whom William of Normandy raised to the dignity of earl ; and from the period in
which amity was thus sealed between the sovereign and this noble», until the battle of Bosvvorth field, nothing had inter¬ vened to cause the eye of suspicion to glance toward an Earl of St. Oswald: but at Bosworth field, the present peer, then in the blossom of his youth, in con¬ tinuance of hereditary loyalty, had de¬ voted himself, heart and prowess, like Thomas Howard Earl of Surrey, to the cause of the reigning monarch ; and Henry VIL, through misconception of the genuine motives which actuated this adherence, never forgave St, Oswald, nor bestowed upon him one conciliating smile; for although he was so far more fortunate than Surrey, in escaping committal to the Tower, yet amongst those enemies whom the late political discords, which had de¬ luged England with its best blood, had created for Lorel St. Oswalt!, were many implacable enemies, who mined in secret to turn the king's favour from him, and not in vain. St. Oswald, proud in conscious inte¬ grity, disdained excuses for contluct he с ii
felt meritorious — " fidelity to the so- vereigu to whom he had sworn alle¬ giance ;" — anel no friendly incident hav- ingarisen to call forth the loyal effusions of his heart, as in the case of Surrey *, Lorel St. Oswald withdrew from court unfor- given ; and being devotedly attached ίο a ladv of illustrious birth, and celebrated for mental anel personal perfection, he wooed anel won her: and whenever his duty in parliament did not interpose to call him from domestic happiness, resided in his own magnificent court, — for the establishment of wealthy peers was little less in those days, — in the castle of Al¬ balanda, or some other dwelling upon his various domains. Albalanda Castle was situated upon the coast of Yorkshire ; but exactly in what spot is now uncertain ; all remains of its site, and the groves and forest by which it was surrounded, having been swept away by the encroachments of'the sea, or destroyed by other devastations ;
but is supposed to have stood not far distant from Whitby. This castle had been erected by one of the first Barons St. Oswaltl, with permission of the so¬ vereign, whicli was then a necessary preliminary, and was Ci a faire and goodlie structure :" and upon its site was to be found all that constituted ancient mag¬ nificence ; yielding accommodation, not only for state purposes and the comforts of the noble residents and their princely household; but for the hereditary retain¬ ers, such as infested every great establish¬ ment until their reduction b ν the decree of Henry VII. ; and for the motley as- semblage of mechanics, who here resided like citizensofa small republic, supplying the wants of their lord, and of each other. Here were gardens, and orchards, and tilt-yards, antl tennis-courts ; mews for hawks, eagles, herons, &c.» and stables, and kennels, and deer parks, which iu the aggregate might have afforded ample space for the erection of a city. Time advanced, and the eight Henry was called to the throne. Lord St. с 3
Oswald promptly paid his homage to his new sovereign ; but the secret enemies who had mined in the court of the late king, had spread their baneful influence over the mind of his successor, and Lortl St. Oswald was received by Henry VOL as if he had been convicted of having aimed at the crown of England for his own brow : anel so sensibly did this loyal peer feel this misconception of his prin¬ ciples, that he remained not a day in the metropolis after his frigid reception at court ; and nothing but the arbitrary call of duty would have led him back to it, in a few weeks after, to attenti the ceremony of" the coronation, when the magnificence his lordship displayed in compliment to his young sovereign was invidiously construed into disloyal in¬ solence : and Lady St. Oswald, not at¬ tending the queen consort upon this great occasion, increased the misde¬ meanor of her lord ; for her excuse of ill health was disbelieved : but conviction of its truth too soon arrived, in tidings of Lady St. Oswald's decease, in a few
weeks after the return of her lord to Albalanda. The offspring of Lord and Lady St. Oswald had been four sons and one daughter ; but ere the first two lovely blos¬ soms of fair promise had expanded from infancy into childhood, their adoring parents were bereaved of them by con¬ sumption ; and in about three years after, their third son, and now their promising heir, was wrested from them and the world by a stroke of fate so cruel, that the anguish it conveyed to the maternal heart laid the foundation of that ill health which at length terminated Lady St. Oswald's existence; and when her surviving son hatl just entered bis thir¬ teenth year, and her daughter her eighth. Lortl St. Oswaltl, devotedly attached to all ancient customs which the great charter and other causes hatl not over¬ thrown, hatl scrupulously despatched his only surviving son, at four years old, to be enrolled amongst the pages of a neigh¬ bouring prelate, to be initiated in the mysteries of learning antl courtesy essen- c 4
tiai for his station ; and after a lapse of six years, most industriously spent by this diligent child anil his able instructors, he had been removed from the study to obtain the necessary excellence in field sports; antl at length was bereaved of his amiable mother, whose maternal tender¬ ness had been bowed to submission, in yielding up her almost babe for edu¬ cation, far fioni her fostering wing, in full conviction of such being her impe¬ rative dutv, or Erasmus would not have expressed himself so severely against those mothers " who kept their children at home, till thev were at the advanced age of six ;" and, by an unfortunate coin¬ cidence, almost at the same perinei in which the voung heir of Albalanda had %l CT to bewail the death of his mother, his right reverend lord was translatée! to a better world. Upon this second calamity 7 , paternal tenderness prevailed over ancestral usage, and Lord St. Osvvakl determined upon completing the education of his son in bis own castle, where, amongst his own
faithful adherents, were many gentlemen qualified for the undertaking ; gymnastic accomplishments alone being wanting to its completion. Amongst many vvho had been cotem¬ porary pages with Edward Lortl de Man¬ deville, in the episcopal palace of L. was Ethelbert de Couriand ; and the Baron tie Couriand, vvho chiefly resided in Westmorland, having the advantages of his promising heir much at heart, ob¬ tained for Ethelbert, through the interest of bis young companion De Mandeville*, the appointment of page to Lord St. Os¬ waltl. Lady Atlela de Mandeville was at this period receiving her education from learned professors, under the superin¬ tendence of her competent father, and aided bv Dame Bostock, а discreet gen- tlewoman of intellectual merit and in¬ trinsic worth. From the manners ofthat age, in which premature atlultness was universal, it would not have appearenl surprising, bad Lady Adela presided in her mother's place at the banquet, and с 5
distributed prizes in the gymnasium, with the polished unembarrassed address which in our age can scarcely be ex¬ pected before eighteen : but her lady¬ ship's early competence for such womanly undertakings was not called to the test at Albalanda at this period ; since its sor¬ rowing lord, in genuine grief for his deservedly adored wife», would neither have kept hall, nor have held tourna¬ ments, for the first two years after his domestic calamity 7 , even had his neigh¬ bourhood presented sufficient population to yield guests lor the one or spectators for the either: but the long continued civil discords of England had desolated that part of Yorkshire», where this castle stooel, with melancholy effect. Many a noble owner of the deserted mansions around had been slain iu the satl war¬ fare ; antl many were gone into involun¬ tary 7 or voluntary exile ; whilst the few who remained, either from difference in politics, or through apprehension of having their loyalty called in question, should they appear on amicable terms
with a peer whose faith was suspected by the sovereign, kept aloof from Alba¬ landa. But Lady Adela's proficiency in the forms of polished life was not decreed to remain conjectural ; for Lord St. Oswald, in the spring after the decease of his lamented wife, was called into Kent to hold a baron's court ; and feeling the disadvantage the retirement of Alba¬ landa must prove to the young persons under his care, took them in cavalcade to Vespasian Tower; that, whilst he should be engaged in his baronial business there, they might benefit by some little intercourse with societv. At this period the calenels of May were attended to with great animation by all ranks ; for, as Stowe informs us in his Survey of London, " On May-day morning, every man would walke into the svveete meadows and greene woodcs, to rejoice his spirit with the beauty and savour of sweete flowers, and with the harmony of birds, praysing God in their kinde :" anel we are also told by Hall, in
his Chronicle, " that the sovereign, and his consort likewise, entered into the simple and healthful sports of these ca¬ lends;"—in proof of which he relates their pleasant adventure*, upon the May¬ day morning, in the year lõ 15, with two hundred archers, attired as Robin Hood and his merry men. But as upon the adventure, which anti¬ cipated this pleasant one to their High¬ nesses, Hall and other chroniclers have been hitherto silent ; we will endeavour to give it as faithfully to our readers, as an historian ought to do, even when not present at scenes they tell of. Henry and Katherine being on a pro¬ gress through the most beautiful part of Kent, in the spring of 1510, determined to perform their May games in a roman¬ tic wood, not far distant from one of the barons' baronial castles, they were about to honour with theii presence ; and this determination had been no sooner formed than made public. It so happened, that the very track through this wild wood, which presented the only possible road
for passing, was intersected by a portion of the Vespasian Tower domain ; and which portion had in the early ages been a druid's grove, and still, by the care of the successive Lords of St. Oswald, retained the appearance of its ancient designation ; and still contained ruins of the temple, and other proofs of the in¬ habitants it once had sheltered. The king, queen, and courtiers, attired, as usual on their Maying parties, in white satin, the yeoman and guards in white sarsnet, proceeded, on palfreys gaily trapped, to the skirts of this extensive wood, on M ay-day morning at early dawn ; but where, from the intricacies of the places they had to rove through, they found it expedient to dismount. The king, aware of the bisection of Lord St. Oswald's domain, felt much displeasure on perceiving no complimen¬ tary attention paid to him and his fair consort as they passed through the boun¬ daries of this peer's grounds; and as he mentally now added this failure in loyal respect to the well remembered misdeeds
of poor Lord St. Oswald, whom he knew to be in Kent, loudly proclaimed his satis¬ faction " that their route did not lie througli more of tlie Vespasian Tower domain, since the wood belonging to it, which they had skirted, wore too sombre and gloomy 7 an aspect for accordance with that joyous day." The royal pair and train passed on un¬ molested to the spot destined, by previous arrangement, for the exercise of their archery, and for obtaining the trophies of their Maying ; and with well earned appetites, they were at length returning home to breakfast through the path they had before trodden, when, at the en¬ trance of the very grove which the king had so scoffed at for its gloom, they per¬ ceived a venerable arch-druid, in the full dress habit of his order, awaiting to pay homage to the royal pair, antl to in¬ vite them and their gay train to enter his sombre abode. Although the king, at one glance, per¬ ceived that in this venerable druid he beheld Lord St. Oswald, love of novelty
induced his oblivion for the moment of the peer's supposed offences; and, to general surprise, graciously uttered ac¬ quiescence even to entering the gloomy grove. The moment this gracious acquies¬ cence was articulated, Lord St. Oswald, who w Y as attended by the blooming De Mandeville attired as a druidical pupil, presented his son as an hostage to his sovereign ; who, pleaseel with the circum¬ stance, kindly took the blushing youth by the hand, and presented him to the queen as her escort ; and then walked onward with the arch-druid, who now conducted his royal companion, followed by the whole court party, through a short copse ; when turning a sharp angle they at once came upon the entrance to the druid's grove which now, having its natural exemption from the light of day artificially aided to increase the effect of glittering lamps, was brilliantly illumin¬ ated internally ; and from the style of iu planting, forming the appearance of a ma¬ jestic aisle in a gothic cathedral of great
extent, struck at once upon the vision with imposing splendour, which was aided by a grand display in the termina¬ tion of the vista of a blazing fire upon an altar, surrounded by druidical priests, as if in performance of a sacrifice ; and which fire, being composed of the most pleasing aromatics, delighted more senses than that of vision ; whilst on each side of this extensive arcade were happily grouped bards and other druidical pupils, apparently occupied in their usual mode of studying by lamp-light. The delighted anel surprised sovereign and bis train had not proceeded many paces in this semblance of scenes long past, ere notes of sweetest melody stole softly through the air around them, like magic sounds breathing from the foliage by which they were encompassed : but long they were not doomed to the marvel of whence this harmonic enchantment issued ; for soon came, penetrating their way between the boles of 1 the clustered trees, a band of bards composed of cele¬ brated musicians of various nations, now
playing exquisitely on every sort of in¬ strument on which the ancient minstrels hatl been wont to perform, and ever and anon aiding the fascinations of their melody by the human voice divine, — chanting forth strains of complimentary homage to the royal visitors in supposed predictions of what England was to boast on its throne in the sixteenth century. After some time had been devoted in yielding these unexpected pleasures to the evidently delighted king, the arch-druid informed His Highness, that through domestic sorrow he was under a vow never voluntarily to enter scenes of joy- ousness for a certain period ; therefore, when His Grace should wish to quit this grove, bis young hostage should, as the representative of the arch-druid, have the honour of conducting him and his fair consort to more enlivening scenes ; and where, as an humble representative of a Ganymede, he trusted his young de¬ legate would be permitted to serve some possible substitute for nectar, to the
gracious sovereign and his fair queen of happy England. At this intimation of refreshment being in contemplation for Lord St. Oswald's guests, those feelings which the morning air and healthful exercise hatl awakened to hurry 7 His Highness homeward to his breakfast now at once returned, as if more keenly, through that suspension which the surprises and pleasures which had arrested his progress had awakened ; and, though charmed to enthusiasm by the melody now pouring into his delighted ears, he felt himself unwillingly 7 compelled to own the truth to his venerable enter¬ tainer, to whom His Highness and consort bade a gracious adieu. Lortl tie Mandeville now leni his sove¬ reign and train from the druid's grove into the striking transition of an extensive area in the same romantic wood, where the sunbeams of the morning had availed themselves of their unimpeded power of penetrating, and played most cheerily; and where, through many a vista, might be seen in the distance hills and dales,
groves and waters : but, from roaming ίο distant objects, the eye was soon arrested to tìx upon points in the landscape not so remote, and upon the animated repre¬ sentations within the immediate scene of action. Only one wholly unimpeded view of the country had been permitted, in the growth of the luxinanthy umbrageous boundaries of this circular area, and that proved a judicious one for riveting ad¬ miration. It opened on a narrow curving valley, wooded up to the very summit of its lofty enclosures; whilst through it murmured a deep and silvery stream, enamelled here and there with little ro¬ mantic islets, whilst in the extremity of the distance appeared a pkmsing view of Vespasian Tower. The spring, now in its young verdure, presented its most lively green on the verdant sward ; and foliage had only budded forth sufficiently with gay blossoms, for beauty, and not to intercept the vision; the flocks, there¬ fore, of sheep and goats, which now grazed along the sloping boundaries of
this valley 7 , were seen with good effect ; whilst fiiuns antl dryads, and water nymphs and river gods, were beheld pleasingly grouped on the valley's em¬ bankments, or sporting with picturesque grace in each islet, and gaily decorat¬ ed boats were playing hide and seek with the admiring eye of observation, behind the intervening thickets, on their progress up the stream, conveying May- lads and lasses to our woodland circus, where bands of naiads awaited to aid them in their landing. Wedged, like massive buttresses, at the exterior semicircle of each bole of the lofty boundaries of this cirque, stood riveted shoals of grinning rustics, anil other interlopers of the populace, whom nothing could exclude at that period from infesting every spot where spectacle was exhibited or royalty to be seen ; antl more particularly the latter, for at this period Henry was the delight of his people. He had arisen to govern them, like the sun of that May 7 morning, glo¬ rious, cloudless, and genial to all beneath
his influence : his subjects had therefore become absolute Persians in their ador¬ ation, in readiness to fall down and wor¬ ship him ; little foreseeing that this bril¬ liant orb of their idolatry would so dire¬ ful ly change his aspect ere his course was run. Within the umbrageous boundaries of this area were ranged a phalanx of fauni, as svlvan guards, to secure it from anv further intrusion ; whilst in the centre of the cirque was placed, for a May-pole, a majestic American aloe, lately brought from the New World, by Sebastian Cabot, as a tribute of gratitude to Lortl St. Os¬ wald ; and although not then in bloom, yet its exotic value, its noble appear¬ ance, antl novelty of aspecr, matle it an object even for royal admiration; more es¬ pecially, when from its towering branches hung, by wreaths of flowers, cages con¬ taining rare tropical birds of exquisite plumage j whilst wreaths of flo wens grace¬ fully fell downward, in canopy curving, to mingle into one fragrant garland, en¬ twining and concealing the large tub
which contained the aloe's root. Around were nymphs and swains pleasingly grouped, intermingled with playful ze¬ phyrs, who, with feathered wings antl fans, flitted every where to bestow their gentle breezes ; whilst Flora's pages dis¬ persed her fragrant gifts wheresoever the feet of royalty seemed purposing to tread. The moment the queen emerged from the druid's grove, Lady Adela de Man¬ deville, attired with simple elegance as the May-day 7 queen, and seated in an attractive little chariot, apparently 7 com¬ posed of green flags antl gay flowers, and drawn by/ six milk-white kids, aided by gentle zephyrs in a harness of May gar¬ lands, was whirled up to the royal visi¬ tors, and instantly 7 sprang from her seat ; and, although trembling and blushing with juvenile unsophisticated timidity, gracefully laid her fragrant crown at Queen Katherine's feet, as she knelt to offer homage and invite Her Grace to take her place in the almost fairy chariot. Katherine, with winning graciousness,
re-crowned the young May queen, and said she would gladly accompany her rural Highness in her beautiful chariot, were it of sufficient magnitude to contain them both ; when instantly, as if under the influence of magic,—and such seemed indeed the abetter of many of the pa¬ geantries of those days of scenic devices, — the fairy chariot began to expand, until sufficiently enlarged to accommo¬ date the queens of England and of May, both of whom the delighted young king gallantly handed into it ; when the beau¬ tiful kids, and their beautiful leaders, set forward in a solemn state pace. Yet not very long were the two attractive queens and their royal escort doomed to the gaze of the admiring spectators; as a very few moments conveyed them to Flora's bower, — a gay pavilion erected for the morning banquet, where, under a cloth of estate, or royal canopy, breakfast was laid for the king and queen; and, branch¬ ing off from this elevated place of honour, accommodation for the rest of the court party, and their entertainers.
The breakfast boards were covered with the most delicate déjeuné of those times, not only with cheats and manchates, but with geese, capons, herons, god- witters, dotterils, shovelers, knots, swans, morts, sepys, storks, &c. kc, with every sort of seemly, substantial, marvellous subtleties, and goodlie beverage befitting the occasion.* The blushing and still trembling May queen was honoureel by a seat at their Highnesses' board enei; whilst her brother not only performed most gracefully and attentively as Ganymede, but, in accorti- ance with the custom of the times, as carver too ; anel between him and Ethel¬ bert ele Couriand there seemed to exist an amicable rivalry ; and none could de¬ termine which most deserveel the prize, in the masterly elegance with which they
each could breke the deer, lescfie the braun, border the pastie, lyste the swan, aiaye the retard, barbe the lobster, and disfigure the peacock.* This breakfast, and all its appointments, the taste of the various arrangements, the magic of music in the perfection of harmony', combined in yielding the royal visitants much unfeigned pleasure ; and nothing more than Lord St. Oswald's jester, who sat at the sovereign's feet, and, whenever occasion yielded an auspicious opportunity, breathed into the royal ears his quaint fancies; but being bon mots founded on localities, their wit proved, like the radiation of a rainbow, that ceases to exist, when the sunbeams, the humid drops, and the dense cloud which ré¬ fractée! and reflected them, no longer coalesce, they could not, therefore, en¬ liven these pages as they did the déjeuné of Lord St. Oswald. Henry at length arose from the banquet, and, full of vivacity, and tonel of pastime,
VOL. I,
XL
hied him to the May-pole to dance a merry round with its young queen ; and wliere, to His Majesty's high amusement, be found a rival for homage — even Pan himself! whose pipe he had for some time heard most melodiously sounding, ere he had quitted the pavilion ; and vvho now appeared tei exert his sovereign sway 7 , not only over his own liege worshippers, the fauni aud dryades, but over the May lads and lasses, with the most lu¬ dicrous effect ; but soon, to Pan's evi¬ dent chagrin, anel to the marvel of all, a competitor for the excitement of mirth sprang up, in a youth whom no one knew. Pan had had a deputy 7 or vice appointed, to share in the fatigue of his exertions, and to arouse increase of merriment by 7 awkward attempts to rival Pan in buf¬ foonery, like our pantomimic clown ; but this deputy, either panic-stricken by the presence of royalty, orby rustic timidity, soon gave in ; when poor Pan, in dismay, implored a new aide de camp from amid the grinning out-posts, and almost iu-
stau tiv α smiling youth of rare personal grace and beauty sprang forward to yield him service. This youth seemed about the age of Lord de Mandeville; and, CT although clothed in а rustic garb, evinced, bv every turn and movement, that such attire was but assumed in mumming. A few words of instruction from Pan seemed gifted with intuitive influence: for iu one moment he appeared to have arrived at pro'Viency ; and like his senior contem¬ porary, Sir Thomas More, when page in Bislmp Morton's family 7 , " never studying for the matter, made a part of his own there p* esenti v amongst them, which made the lookers-on more sport than all the plavci s beside." Nor did the notoriety and applause, which this airling so spontaneously ac¬ quired, emanate from his antic pranks alone; for, although evidently the pos¬ sessor of an extraordinary exuberance of animated spirits, his attention seemed alive to every thing around him; and not a courtier present appeared more ex¬ pert in affording graceful services ; and to
none more frequently, than to the young May queen, who could neit but feel amaze, that almost ere she became aware she was about to require such serv ices, they were courteously performed for her by the rustic stranger, with whom, at length, the king became so pleased, that he desired one of bis attendants to make enquiry' of the youth himself, as the sovereign's command, the true state of his condition : but, to the astonishment of all, this order hatl no sooner been given, antl ere time coukl have allowed its execution, the inte¬ resting animated youth had disappeared; nor could any individual present tell whence he came, nor whither gone : ■— all that could be discovered was, that, a few moments prior to his vanishment, some¬ thing bearing semblance to an okl witch haei been observed angrily speaking to him ; and through her malicious incant¬ ations, it was generally supposed, his mysterious disappearance had been ac¬ complished. At length recollection of engagements, formed ere this unexpected detention
uponVespasian Tower domain, and which for some time vainly haunted the un- willing reminiscence of Henry, were suf- fered to operate-, when the king and queen took a gracious leave of the young host¬ age and his sister; and with their train proceedeei through a copse into a lawn, where the palfreys of the court cavalcade were in waiting, and where the arch- druid reappeared, to present some valu¬ able offerings to his rovai visitants, anel to pay them every loyal courtesy ami at¬ tention at their departure. The king and his consort retired from the \espasian Tower woods, much pleaseel with Lorel St. Oswald, as well as with his entertainment: His Highness almost de¬ tenni ned to banish all suspicion of this hospitable and munificent peer's loyalty, and quite resolved to send for the young De Mandevilles to court. But soon the influence of active enemies overthrew these favourable impressions on the mind of this capricious monarch : the young De Mandevilles were not summoned to court, although Ethelbert de Couriand u a
was very speedily, and many favours heaped upon him,—amongst which, and not that least prized, was the honour of knighthood,—from the hand of his gra¬ cious sovereign.
CHAP. IV. Some symptoms of the sweating sickness, which haei raged very fatally in the me¬ tropolis the preceding year, began to make their alarming appearance in the neighbourhood of Vespasian Tower, in the summer succeeding the May-day visit of Henrv and Katharine to tlie druid's grove ; and which, though not so direfully as Hall portrays this extraordi¬ nary and tremendous pestilence, yet so "greuously pangncdso many, and vexed their blood with its areiêt beate*," that Lord St. Oswald, alarmed for the safety of his children, removed without delay to Albalanela Castle. When Laely Adela had completed her twelfth year, Lord St. Oswald haei so iar vanquished his connubial sorrow, as te> indulge the ardent wish of his darling
D if
hoy in keeping hall during the festival of Christmas in all the state of ancient baronial magnificence. With floor well strewn with rushes, and with cupboard of massy plate gilt and parcel gilt, each stage arranged on costly tapestry, the lord of the castle, and his lovely daughter, appeared each day at the banquet beneath the dais, attended by gentlemen aud pages of no common order. On every day during the twelve of this festivity, not less than one hundretl individuais found places above and below the salt ; for, intelligence of the royal visit at Vespasian Tower having travelled into Yorkshire, none longer feared to approach Albalanda, and take their station at the stout oaken board, on which was now daily spread a sumptuous feast, upon a marvel¬ lous show of costly pewter dishes and plates, dazzling to behold and delighting the eyes of the admiring beholders, as much as the solid good cheer they dis¬ played challenged and von the appro¬ bation of all who came to feed ; whilst at least two hundretl persons, beside the
household, were regaled with less dainty messes in the inferior halls and chambers : uor could it prove a matter of surprise that many oxen, and other substantial provisions, were disposeel of at a meal ; since, like the profusion oí* Lord War¬ wick's hospitality in the reign of Edwartl IV., all who fed eluring Christmas at Albalauda lutei permission to take away with them as much food as their haneU con hi carry. Hawking, hunting, or the amusements of the tilt-yard, or the palme-play*, oc¬ cupied each morning ; and every evening the lord *>f misrule, or master of the revels, bv his devises of jugglers or . ч' C7C3 mummers, or of dancing, furnished the pastime; unless when the servants of the household, —4hcn no uncommon occur¬ rence, — performed mysteries or moral¬ ities, dramatised for the united purpose of edification and entertainment. So much of chivalric manner even then prevailed, that youthful females, sifted
D 5
by Nature and Fortune like Lady Adela, received homage from every man who approached her, as if to a deity f . Strains of love and admiration were for ever sounding in her ears ; lances broken in testimony of her charms ; and the most ingenious devices formed to betray the smouldering flame that fed on those, who, however, did not consume ; and, as the chivalrous in England were then closely imitating the French custom of impresses, knights and esquires, pages, strangers, — and, during the festival, all who presented themselves for admission, were entertained for three whole days, without the puzzling impertinence of demanding name or con¬ dition, — who performed in the tilts ami tournays, all sporteti some intelligible impress, to inform the peerless young beauty of Albalanda that she reigned in the heart and fancy of the wearer. But immature as Lady Aelela's years might be, her judgment had alreaely formed itself upon a steady basis ; and she thought so little of her own perfec¬ tions, that adulation struck like spent
balls upon her ears, making no impression; for when the joust, the banquet, or the dance were ended, Adela would have found herself perplexed in the identifi¬ cation of the impress of any individual save her brother, or in repeating to Dame Bostock the flowery compliments, which had made her smile, to have pro¬ nounced by whom tney 7 bad actually been uttered. Yet it was not decreed ever to remain thus. The impress, the language, and the individual, were doomed to fitul their influence. Ethelbert de Couriand, under the sanction of both paternal peers, wooed Adela, and was accepted ; but these parental lords, not quite approving so immature an entrance upon the serious duties of wedded life as custom then adopted, determined to give them the sapience of α year or two more, ere their hands should be united: but whilst Sir Ethelbert and his betrothed were await¬ ing, in dutiful acquiescence, for this sage time towed, а dire event occurred, which r> (i
changed Albalanda Castle into the house of bitter and lasting affliction. At the Christmas festivities just men¬ tioned, some foreign strangers had been entertained, whom,it was conject ureel, had, upon return to their native country, told of the surpassing pen lection of the youths of Albalanda Castle in chivalric prowess : for in some months after, six striplings landed at Whitbv from the Netherlands, attended by a numerous retinue ; and shortly after landing, sent a formal chal¬ lenge to six youths of Albalanda, to tour- nay with them on a certain spot. At this moment, Lord St. Oswaltl was in the metropolis, drawn thither by parliamen¬ tary duties : and Ethelbert de Couriand, ripe in jutlgment, advised the spirited antl volatile heir of Albalanda to postpone the acceptance of this challenge until the return of his fai her. With difficulty Sir Ethelbert prevailed ; for Lord de Mandevdie's spirit, was like an overcharged gun, ready to explode at even the reflected beams of ignition : whilst the idea, too, of being the leader
in cabinet and fieltl operating noi a iittle upon his juvenile vanity of self-import¬ ance, leel his wishes to an immediate ac¬ ceptance of this call to combat ; yet, mènerons in his friendships as ardent in CT * affection, he looked up to Ethelbert as his superior iu all things but rank and birthdom ; and, though with a pang from restrained ardour, acquiesced in tho pru¬ dence of postponement. But, unfortu¬ nately, some sarcastic observations of the challengers, upon the young chicken awaiting the return of the paternal wing, to prove his shield in peril, having been repeated to De Mandeville, nothing could shackle him in the trammels of prudence one moment longer; and with all the impetuosity which indignant feel¬ ing prompted, he despatched his hendel, Sir Guy tie Lancy, a celebrateti warrior, with a spirited summons to immediate tou may. No official of civil authority knew of the manœuvres of these youthful com¬ batants, who, left to their own devices, the following day was fixed upon for this
fatal test of chivalric prowess. This change in measures liad been effected wholly without the participation of Adela or Ethelbert ; and all that was left for them to do, when they became informed of the final decision, wás vainly to regret it:—the former to send an immediate express to her father, with information of the pending matter ; and the latter to place in the most impressive form of language, the necessity which Edward ought to feel of taking cool and steady prudence for his shield to the jousting ; and secretly to promise the trembling Adela to watch, like a guardian spirit, over the safety of her beloved brother. But fate was rnthless. On the eve of the day in vyhich the final arrangement of the time for this tournay had been adjusted, an express arrived to summon Sir Ethelbert into Westmoreland, to re- ceive the last blessing of his rather, who was now pronounced on the bed of death : and overwhelmed by sorrow and alarm for his father and his young friend, and in grief unutterable at parting from
Adela, in such an anxious moment, Sir Ethelbert winged his way from Albalanda Castle. At length the hour appointed for this anxious contest arrived, when the foreign and English youths met on Eskdale-side, to prove the supremacy in chivalric prowess of their respective couutries. Six striplings, led on by Edward Lord de Mandeville, and attended by a magnifi¬ cent retinue, were received with great, though not perhaps with equal, splendour by their adversaries. Through some co- a incidence in the fatalities which lowered upon this meeting, the change of time for this expected tournay seemed not to have been generally known ; and few indeed were the spectators assembled — to the infinite mortification of the band of embryo warriors from Albalanda Castle. Antagonists being arranged, the contest commenced· The adversary of Lord dc Mandevillct when his visor was unclosed, appeared to all as a youth about the same age, and of congenial powers ; and Edward, in the
first onset of these gymnastic exploits, appeared to the spectators as fully 7 equal, if not superior, to his competitor in skill and strength ; but when at length his opponent's visor was closed, and the final grand onset of attack commenced on horseback, the heir of Albalanela felt as if a mountain torrent was pouring down to overwhelm a purling rill. Valour, pride, and a keen recollection of the galling sarcasms which had leel him on to immediate combat, sealed the lips of De Mandeville, vvho, promptly feeling he must be vanquished, set all his force in prowess to the forlorn object of resist¬ ance. The youthful spirit was too mighty for its powers of action ; it burst its bound¬ ary ; and in its fatal exertions the vital spark was, alas ! extinguished. In the moment this sad catastrophe was ascertained, Guy 7 tie Lancy 7 , with the tones and gestures of a maniac, accused the opponent of his young lortl of foul sorcery 7 , which had suddenly inspired him with a giant's strength, to contend with the nerveless arm of a stripling; and, de-
mandtng instant satisfaction by single combat, threw down his gage. Tfie adversary of De Mandeville, after some moments of hesitation, in which his closely surrounding friends and coun¬ trymen loudly uttered their encourage¬ ments, accepted De Lancy's challenge; antl then, to prove that no unfair advan¬ tage, in an unequal adversary, had been opposed to the valorous deceased, wholly uncovered his face ; when the unques¬ tionable juvenility of the victor van¬ quished every suspicion of unfair prepon¬ derance in physical power. Sir Guy de Lancy revoked his accusation and his challenge, and, in the keen anguish of affliction, mournfully wound his lingering »' СТО way with the sorrenving band, that bore with them to the castle of his ancestors the pale corse of the beauteous youth, whom they all regarded to almost idola¬ trous adoration; who had come forth with them but a few short hours since, as the rising sun of their pride, their hope, their future glory—and that sun was now set to them, alas ! for ever.
Adela adored her brother ; her afflic¬ tion, consequently, was deep and lasting ; but that of Lortl St. Oswald was sad and piteous. He beheld no visions in love's enchanting perspective to beguile him of the intensity of his woes. His pride, his boast, his fond expectations, his prop which had led him still to cling to life without a murmur, were roughly 7 wrested from him ; and he had now 7 no hopes, antl for a long long time no resignation, for Adela was not his idol boy : — no hopes, for Atlela would be torn from his protec¬ tion to adorn the family of her husband; and his doleful journey through the vale of life was now to find its sombre way in cheerless desolation, widowed, child¬ less, and forlorn. Unhappily for Lord St. Oswald, he had no spiritual pastor, in whom he had con¬ fidence, to supply him with those pre¬ cious balms, which only coukl have proved salutary in his heart's sore malady. During his travels in early life through foreign climes, he had imbibed indelible impressions, hostile to the superstitions
of the Roman creed : his mint!, conse¬ quently, was in a genial tone for receiv¬ ing the doctrine of W ickliffe with effect ; but, unluckily, he had only obtained suf¬ ficient of bis writings to shake more for¬ cibly bis tottering faith, without supply¬ ing him with firm foundation for fixing him in another. The high priest of his own chapel at Albalanda possessed a heart much clearer than his head ; even when the latter bad been in the prime of influential power : but now his mind, enfeebled by the weight of fourscore years, was taking refuge for its imbe¬ cility in pitiable bigotr . To confide his scruples, therefore, in Father Richard, would be for no effective purpose ; and to others of the priesthood in his vicinity he dared not entrust such a tearful cir¬ cumstance as his apostasy, even waver¬ ing as it was. When prayers would have proved to Lord St. Oswald the cordial tranquillisers of his troubled mind, he knew of no form in which to offer them, that he now con¬ sidered efficacious: and finding himself
thus launched upon the perilous sea of uncertainty 7 , without pilot or rudder, he trembled and strove to right himself; but, bis ballast gone, he found nothing but new breakers of doubt to ruffle bis course, and next his temper ; until per¬ petual irritation clouded the natural serenity of his elisposition, and he be¬ came almost angry with fate, for per¬ mitting his being thus perplexed and doubtful of the beneficence of Provi¬ dence, which could thus overwhelm him with affliction ; whilst of his surviving child his feeling became almost jea¬ lous, for life having been spared to her, whilst wrested so cruelly from her bro¬ thers. Adela, unconscious of the dire conflict within her father's bosom, saw nothing there, save the sad blight of earthly hap¬ piness ; and her sympathising heart led her to every anxious tenderness towards her sorrowing parent, that affection and duty coukl inspire : but, alas ! without auspicious effect; since emanating from her, who seemed to have usurped her
brother's place, turned every tender care to bitterness. H was not unnatural, that Lord St. Oswald should turn in anguish from the appearance of blooming youths in Alba¬ landa Castle ; their removal thence was, therefore, promptly effected: and no longer feeling pride in ancestral customs, he sent off the supernumeraries of his dependants to comfortable settlements. His wish seemed now to make his castle, like his own mind, a scene of desolation. The absence of Sir Ethelbert at this period yielded something of consolation to Lord St. Oswaltl ; who felt towards this young knight a portion of that jealous irritation awakened towards Atle¬ la : for he mentally argued, " that, had not Ethelbert been absent from Alba¬ landa, he, as its most celebrated tilter, would have been opposed to the fell victor, and his darling boy spared the unequal contest; " for of its being unequal he felt conviction, from the flight of Sir Guy de Lancy, who would not have
absconded from Albalanda, \ here his sole dependence rested, his lordship felt assured, hatl he not considereel himself in fault for permitting such fearful odds, and dared not stant! before the parent, whose mortal happiness he had thus cruelly 7 blighted. Such being Lord St. Oswald's feelings, it proved uo regret to him, intelligence brought by express from Sir Ethelbert, " that, by oreler of his father's physician, Lord de Couriand was to try the efficacy of foreign climes immediately ; that he, Ethelbert, was to accompany him, and without tlie possibility of his visitmg Al¬ balanda to utter his painful farewell." , Regular posts not having been esta¬ blished through England for many sub¬ sequent years, communication by letter was difficult, except by special messen¬ gers. Atlela, consequently, seldom heard from her betrothed ; and, as her father and Ethelbert were now almost the whole world to her, she felt grateful, that whilst separated from the one, she was permitted the society of the other, — if
society it might be termed, when she was admitted to Lord St. Oswald's pre¬ sence only at meals, or during the cele¬ bration of Divine worship : for the un¬ just suspicions awaked against his po¬ litical faith, taught him the policy of shielding his religious apostasy from the danger of detection ; and feeling most sensibly, that this device of conforming to ceremonies he no longer tolerated was nothing short of spiritual hypocrisy, the celebration of masses iu his chapel grievously augmented his mental misery. Time passed gloomily in Albalanda Castle sine 1 ihe fatal tilting in Esktlale- side, and without hearing tidings of Guy de Lancy, or of the return of Sir Ethel¬ bert to England ; and, for a whole tedi¬ ous year, not a guest was admitted with¬ in the castle walls ; and all of its former hospitable prodigality which now ap¬ peared, was in the profusion oi* pro¬ visions distributed daily at its gates. Fortunately for Lady Adela, the jea¬ lous irritation of her unhappy father did nut operate in depriving her of the ad-
vantages of mental improvement or accomplishments ; for instructors attend¬ ed her as usual, and the library of Lord St. Oswald, and the collection of MSS. by Father Hubert, presented no con¬ temptible store for knowledge : she, therefore, found full employment for time ; since, when the classic page was closed, and the lute, the virginals, and pricksong, laid aside for the morning, she plied her needle, su noun tied by her gentlewomen and damsels, who worked industriously under her fancy's guidance, as the inventory of the St. Oswald house- hold stuff could amply testify : " viz. Item. A tester paved with purple velvet and satin, embroidered richly 7 with lilies and roses, and pasment lace. Item. Coverings for eight window-cushions of silk, wrought and fashioned like a park, with trees, water men, women, and beasts. Item. Two shields of the Earl's arms, wrought curiously 7 upon the hand. Item. A pair of crimson velvet listes, of the best Altar clothes, with three cha¬ lices and two stoxves, embroidered richly ;
with sixteen fee f of chalices, curiously wrought. Baelges for yeomen, cxxx. Badges for grooms, xxxvi. Garters for the counterpoint to the silver tissue bed, DDxxii, and iLiv. arms belonging to the same garters," * kc. kc. At other times, Lady Aeleìa's hours were devoted to humanity, by endea¬ vouring to acquire skill in what was then termed anel considérée! surgery, as prac¬ tised by the benevolent nuns surround¬ ing Albalanda. Sometimes her occu¬ pations were the distillation of medi¬ cinal or fragrant waters, or in the acquirement of culinary knowledge; of which acquirement was left some valu¬ able vouchers for posterity, in many a choice recipe, viz. The craft to make Ypocrasse ; The craft to make Clary, &c. kc. &c. By these specimens of how the heiress of Albalanda passed her time, we may perceive, that amongst the degener icies
If/If I
Ы
which the present race of mortals have cause to deplore, and infinitely more to be lamented than the supposed decrease in the physical strength antl stature of the human race, is a lapse from skill in the management of time : or, rather, we may almost suspect, in an evident abridg¬ ment of the day's duration ; for our female ancestors have left us what may almost be pronounced incontrovertible testimony of their day having been gifted with triple longitude ; since no¬ thing escaped the fangs of that industry, for which they were allowed most ample scope. We are told of— for our envious regrets — how, two or three centuries back, ladies could study to proficiency the dead antl living languages, trompóse works in them, or translate from them into English the classic performances of others ; could excel in all elegant accom¬ plishments; in the crafts of spinning and needle-work ; in surgery, and in every species of domestic information ; and could be reaely, at the expiration of the first fourteen years of their lives,
to commence the undertaking — which was then in truth no sinecure — of the ponderous duties of the matron's character.
g_a
(ПАР. V. Лвоит six years anterior to the death of Laely 7 St. Oswald, she found, in a de¬ tached garden belonging to Albalauda, a lovely female infant, picturesquely laid upon a bank of flowers. No investigation could jienetrate the mystery attendant upon this deposit; and although by the judicious act of the late sove: ,f jm, in prohibiting retainers from shielding them¬ selves and crimes from judicial investiga¬ tion by shelter in the livery of their patronal lortl, the castle of Albalanda had been wed of many 7 a profligate de¬ pendant, the countess entertained nò doubt that some such still remained unsuspected by her lord, and to whom this insulated babe was not only indebted for birth, but for the ingenious device of* leaving her thus for the lady of the castle herself to find ; and feeling full of compassion for a helpless being, thus
ushered into life, the shame and outcast of its parents, procured for it a careful nurse ; and had the poor foundling named Rosamond Lily, from the com¬ binations presented to her fancy by the overhanging almond tree, with the prim¬ roses and lilies which covered the bank upon vyhich the helpless outcast had been laid. From the moment in which this found¬ ling had been discovered, the voung and CT * tf о compassionate Atlela had évincée! the most tender interest for her ; and after the iamenteel eleath of Ladv St. Osvvakl, continneei her benevolent kindness to the helpless Rosamond, by every possible means her youthful powers could devise ; and perceiving the child's beauty 7 to promise transcendence, she, in the ro¬ mantic partiality of her juvenile inex¬ perience, determined upon her education being superlative 1 , to coalesce with her personal perfection. Adela, therefore, had her removed from the care of her foster-dam, to the protection of the abbess of St. Mildred's monastery, the most fi 3
contiguous to Albalanda of any con¬ ventual establishment in the neighbour¬ hood. Lord St. Oswald, not taking the trouble of investigating the propriety of the measure, contented himself with ordering "that the protegee of his la¬ mented wife should be kindly treated; but never, upon any pretence, to be introduced within the walls of Albalanda Castle :" anel this decree of exclusion his Lordship had issued through appre¬ hension of the possible future influence of her extraordinary beauty upon his darling son ; but after the premature death of that beloved son, the prompt removal of all juveniles, who were move¬ able, from the premises, presented an interdict to Adela's offering her petition for admitting her darling little Rosamond into the castle. The period at length drew near, which had been determined upon for the union of Sir Ethelbert and Lady r Adela, when a confidential letter arrived from the Baron de Courland to Lorel St. Oswald, confessing that he had not been so for-
tunate in the choice of his second help¬ mate, as in his first; that the present Lady de Courland having a numerous progeny, who were not so nobly por¬ tioned as the sole offspring of her pre¬ decessor, had imbibed so dire a hatred to Sir Ethelbert in consequence, that he, Lord de Courland, absolutely feared to allow of the residence of the young pair in the same abode with her; and that therefore, with the earl's good leave, he would arrange for their dwelling either in the Netherlands or in Llanellen Castle. As Lord St. Oswald perused this letter some chord was touched, that vibrated through his heart a soft tone of paternal tenderness ; and so sweet he found its harmony, that not a moment intervencel ere a responding express con vey eel to Lord dc Couriand an earnest request for the residence of Sir Ethelbert and Lady Adela to be Albalanda Castle. From this moment something less sad, yet with no approach to cheerfulness, was visible in the aspect and manners of £ 4
Lord St. Osvvakl. The dutiful and af¬ fectionate Adela would now, he trusted, be spared to him, to disarm his closing years of the dread horrors of kindred desolation ; and for this unexpected blessing he felt, that through gratitude he ought to exert the energies of' his mind, to endure the preparations for, and the actual arrival of, the nuptial festivi¬ ties in his long melancholy^ castle. Sir Ethelbert at length arrived, for his espousals, at Albalanda, with all the ardour of tender unsubdued attachment, improved in personal graces antl fascina¬ tion of manner and conversation ; as his heart acknowledged, and his accents enthusiastically 7 proclaimed, was strik¬ ingly the case with the peerless Atlela ; and his conduct had been so noble towards his unamiablc and vindictive step-dame, antl so generous to all his brothers and sisters, in arranging for their ample provision, upon the lately expected death of his father, that the feelings of Lord St. Oswald's approbation warmed so cordially, they melted all
remaining unwillingness to receive him once more as an inhabitant of his castle ; although every turn and movement of the blooming polished Ethelbert pre¬ sented, before the heart-wrung parent, the painful apparition of the lost De Mandeville. Every thing in the form of tournament was out of the code of preparations ordered by Lord St. Oswald for the celebration of his daughter's marriage ; but all else, that coukl not so effectively send barbed arrows through his wincing heart, his Lordship anxiously 7 devised to do honour to the nuptials. Open house was once more proclaimed ; and nothing of hospitality or magnificence was omit¬ ted, in the splcndiel arrangements for this long expected event. Of paraphernalia for the lovely young bride arrived, in due time, a splendid store, from the most celebrated of the foreign artizans, who had flocked to London in conse¬ quence of the then existing mania in England for foreign costume. French, and Venetian, antl Spanish gowns, mar- E 5
vellously fashioned in taste and splendour, with kirtles of murrey velvet and taw- ney taffeta, and of various other coloured damasks and satins, paved, and embroid¬ ered, aud trappet!, with every species of magnificence; placareis cdgeel with er¬ mine, and sable, and minever ; besides vertingalcs, and trunk-sleeves, and fore- sleeves, and partiets, kc. kc. kc. quite sufficient to puzzle her descendants te> unravel and identify the uses of; whilst of carkanets, and billymeants, and pearls, and precious stones, with goldsmith's work, there was a goodly show, antl dazzling to behold.* As the marriage day drew near, Lord St. Oswald betrayed some symptoms of anticipating parental suffering; for he issued positive orders " that no trump should be sounded within his hearing ; that no sport should be permitted, which could lead to individual affliction;" and, above all, " that no foreigner, nor none in masks or visors, shouhl try their skill
in any species of contest upon his do¬ main :" adding, " that if all showed con¬ tentation in such play-pleasures as found accordance with his behest, they should have prizes distributcel for their vantage and jouisance, amongst which, for the best cheviseance at the quinten*, a pea- cockf should be the guerdon." On the eve of the marriage day, throngs of the old retainers of this ba¬ ronial establishment collected around Albalanda Castle, to be in readiness against its gates shoulel once more unclose to permit their re-entrance. Bands, also, of pedkrs, and jugglers, and rustics, assembled in vast numbers, expecting that something of a fair might be per¬ mitted. Booths, both for merchandise and exhibitions of various sorts, were erected ; am! every t rosemary tree in the chatellany and its vicinity at length were despoiled of their branches, in readiness to strew in every path the fair
E 6
bride was destined to walk over on the nuptial day 7 , and likewise to deck the habits of all those who were to have the honour of entering the marriage circle. vSo great was the multitude assembled on the night preceding this long talked of marriage feast, that accommodations without the castle were so inefficient, that Lord St. Oswald, in the tone of his natural kindness to his vassals, permitted all of his former retainers, vvho had not forfeited his favour, to find shelter in their ancient quarters within his gates. Those who remained without, or had fount! accommodation in the vicinity of the castle, were on the alert by morn¬ ing's dawn, to watch for the first symp¬ toms within the castle of this clay's promised festivities having commenced : but ere this impatiently looked for morn¬ ing dawn had been illumined by one bright beam of the rising orb of day 7 , or any visible sign evinced to the gazers, of the expected bustle within, the castle gates were suddenly unclosed, the draw¬ bridge promptly lowered, and, to the
amazement of the anxious observers, the bridegroom elect himself darted forth, mounted on his own fleet Arabian steed ; his habiliments those he had been seen ciad in the preceding day,—close mourn¬ ing for his lately deceased maternal grandam ; his face as pale as the hue which had been the last seen on the visage of that grandam : and all w ho were expert enough to form observations during so transient a view pronounced horror, or despair, or terror, marked his quivering countenance, as with frantic speed he rushed forward in flight from Albalanda Castle, wholly unattended. But what were the amazement and conjectures of those without to those within the castle walls? Some amongst the latter had arisen betimes, to get for¬ ward in the domestic business of the day ; and, lo ! they perceived the retinue of the bridegroom preparing for departure*, maintaining a total and ambiguous silence upon the subject of their extraordinary proceeding; and shortly after beheld them quit the castle in а troop, with
sorrow and marvel at the orders which were thus actuating their conduct por¬ trayed on every countenance of the re¬ treating group, as they made their rapid and mvsterious exit. Scarcely had this strange and imex- pected scene of silent mystery passed awav, when surmises and rumours were whispered forth amongst the household ; it being generally known, that at the identical moment in which these mute equestrians were preparing for departure, Dame Bostock sent a request to Lortl St. Oswald, for his granting the.Lady Atlela an immediate interview 7 . Subsequently, it was observed, the interview was per¬ mitted,— that it was not of short continu¬ ance ; and that at length their lord was seen, in evident agitation, bearing his swooning child in his trembling arms to her own chamber ; and from thence it was known be had retreated to his own apart¬ ments, where he summoned his chaplains, and principal gentlemen of'the household, and with pitiable internal conflict pro¬ claimed " that Lady Adela's spousals
with Sir Ethelbert were never to take place ; and that, by desire of Latly Adela, he announced that all censure relative to the breach of contract was to rest upon her." This statement was made public throughout the household ; but it pos¬ sessed no influential power to enforce general belief: — those were days of superstition's ascendency ; and it proved more congenial to the taste of the house¬ hold, to gift such incomprehensible trans¬ actions with that mysterious complection, than with the possibility of their beloved Lady 7 Adola acting reprehensibly. The provisions prepared for three days open hospitality were now distributed to the disappointed multitude ; and as the old retainers, who had been favoured with refuge within the castle precincts during this eventful night, poured out to join forces with the feasted throng, tales of nocturnal wonders, and surmises, which α sense of duty had restrained whilst beneath their lord's own roof, now under the canopy of heaven were confidentially
breathed from friend to friend, until Echo, or some equally attentive babbler, defeated secrecy, atulat length it was un¬ reservedly discusscel, " that in the confu¬ sion of'the unexpected lodgement of such numbers where there had not been suffi¬ cient sacks of chaff* prepared to rest all heads upon, sleep had been banished from many, who had therefore passed the night sauntering through the cloisters belonging to the quadrangle they occupied, talking- over the happy days thev had formerly passed in Albalanela Castle ; by which means they had unintentionally beheld strange lights anel appalling figures flit¬ ting about various parts of the castle, but more particularly in and near the chapel :" and many of these observers scrupleel not the animation, to the infinite gratification of those who derived awful pleasure from believing such assertions, " that amongst the moving figures which had appalled them, they hatl positively and distinctly seen, not only their dear departed laely, and
their ever to be regretted beloved young lord, but the hermit of Eskdale-side, whom tradition bad positively announced as having been murdered four hundred long years anterior to this period." After such various testimon ies, repeated with solemn asseverations, of such impressive person¬ ages having arrived to forbid the banns, none could wonder that, however myste- rions the termination of these long talked of nuptials might appear, they should, in consequence, be absolutely dissevered ; — nor that, under the influence of horror, or despair, or terror, Sir Ethelbert should have fled from Albalanda Castle, to seek refuge or peace, or at least to escape present observation, in his father's formi¬ dable castle on Llanellen's Rock, where we still shall leave him, under the pro- tection of'the good Father Kenrick,
епЛг, \ l. Adela did recover from her long con¬ tinued swoon, and by her aspect evinced to all around her, that had her restoration from insensibility never been effected, it would have proved more humane. Horror and woe could be traced through every line of her touchiugly eloquent coun¬ tenance ; yet with them a tone of sub- limateti fortitude, resolute in the per¬ formance of duty, however torturing. The venerable Father Richard de¬ manded the confidence of the suffering Adela, that he might pour spiritual balms into her wounded mind : but even in his sacred function he could not prevail ; nor could Lord St. Oswald aid him, with parental influence, to overcome this con¬ tumacious silence ; for the sympathising parent's irrevocable word as a true knight now tied his tongue in painful silence ; for it had so happened, that on the eve of her appointed nuptial day, he had volun-
tarily promised Adela, on the sacred bond of chivalric honour, " that the first boon she should ask him on the moriow, should be faithfully granted ;"—and that boon was demanded at early dawn, in her mysterious interview, and was this :— " that he himself would not command her to become more explicit upon matters which she was about to communicate, than her anxiety 7 for his happiness would permit her to reveal ; nor allow others to attempt the developement of secrets which, in mercy to others, she haei bound herself to conceal." Laely Adela had no consequent illness ; she seemeel to bear up to meet the tor¬ turing conflict, lest bodily ailment might unnerve her firmness, and sink her to the craven cowardice of yielding to entreaties or intimidation the dire secret which oppressed her. Lord St. Oswald marked, and mourned, the intensity of that agonizing conflict which mysterious duties compelled bis Adela to endure: and as he trembled when he dared surmise, and became transfixed
with horror at the suggestions of direful possibilities ; he felt the warmest glow of gratitude spring in his bosom towards his suffering child, for sparing him pangs of mental anguish too mighty for his for¬ titude. " Let us wend our way hence, my child," at length he said to Adela ; " and try if other climes can breathe less wail¬ ful breezes for our peace than Britain." With gratitude Lady Adela accedetl to her father's proposition ; assured that no clime coukl breathe barbed arrows in every breeze which now blew on her, like Albalanda. Father Richard being too far advanced in years to admit of bis attendance, allowed Lady Adela the opportunity of recommending Father Hubert de Bourge, her classical preceptor, as travelling chap¬ lain to her father ; antl this amiable and learnetl priest, Dame Bostock, antl a suitable retinue, at length set out with Lord St. Oswald and Lady Aelela from Albalanda. Travelling was not, in the 16th century,
the luxurious pastime for the affluent that it is at present ; but the season was now genial for the tedious process on horse¬ back ; and by this mode, the one then in chief use for long marches, the sorrow- stricken peer, and his lovely child, with their attendants, accomplished their re¬ moval to the metropolis ; where, in Lord St. Oswald's princely mansion in Thames Street, they were to pause awhile, to pro¬ cure many requisites to yield them com¬ forts on their travels; and amongst these, his lordship purchased a sort of rheda caballaria, or horse litter, to diversify, oc¬ casionally, their mode of travelling. To experience the boasted comforts of this machine, ere they should encumber themselves with it on their vova*re, it was arranged that Lady Adela and Dame Bostock shoulel use it for their convey¬ ance to Vespasian Tower, where the whole party on wing for the Continent were to make a short sojourn on their progress to the coast. All at length being ready to start from London, Lord St. Oswald and suite set
out on horseback early in the evening of the celebrated May-day Eve 1517,* afterwards denominated Evil May-day \ and, without any rumour having pene¬ trated into the retirement of Oswald House relative to the expected disturb¬ ance of public tranquillity-, Latly Adela, Dame Bostock, anel two gentlewomen, in the rheda caballaria, with attendants in cavalcade, were immediately to have fol¬ lowed his lordship ; but some u nex· pecteel delays occurred to retard this arrangement a full hour. Thames, or Thamise, Street at this pe¬ riod measured its extent longitudinally from Baynard's Castle, Black Friars, to London Bridge ; and, as Oswald House was veiy near its western termination, it was rather a long traverse through this then noble street to reach the only bridge the metropolis then boasted for crossing the Thames. Lady Adela, ever feeling unconquerable alarm in going over the "jeopardous and noyons" highway which
was then permitted to stand as London Bridge, ordered the hangings of the litter to be closely drawn around her, that she might remain unconscious when the mo¬ ments of what she termed peril might be passing. She therefore saw nothing, until too late, of the assembling crowds of ap¬ prentices and others, who, upon the cry of " Clubs and 'prentices," were rushing from all quarters to Cosin Lane, Tower Hill, Southvvark, Sec, with hostile intent against the foreign merchantsand artizans, inhabitants of these particularplaces, vvho, by the encouragement they bad received, and their consequent insolence,had excited the jealous indignation of the citizens. Our rheda caballaria, although abso¬ lutely formed by native artizans, bore every external appearance of the con¬ trary ; and the moment these impetuous rioters, vvho were speeding their vindic¬ tive way to wreak their vengeance upon every foreign offender they might find, beheld the rheda caballaria, they pro¬ nounced it а German culprit; and simul¬ taneously determined upon its prompt
destruction ; — to effect which, they dragged the postillions from their horses, and at once cut off* all resistance from the troop of horsemen they beheld ready for salliance to attend it, by dexterously 7 closing the court-yard gates of Oswald House, antl erecting exterior barriers of carts and wains, which they nimbly pressed into their service ; and with such firm effect as completely 7 to form an in¬ surmountable blockade. Tlie next exploit of these young en¬ thusiasts was to tear away the hangings of the offending vehicle, to the utter dis¬ may of the alarmed females who had been sheltered by them. The very mo¬ ment the beautiful Aelela was thus roughly unveiled to public view 7 , a very young man, in the same species of attire which identified the situation of the as¬ sembling apprentices, sprang up into the litter, and with brandished club pro¬ claimed his intent of protecting the lady thus uncourteously assailed, even at the hazard of his life. The youth, with dexterity and strength
beyond every expectation which could be formed from his appearance, flung off several ruffians who attempted to enter the rheda to annoy the terrified females, or rout their champion ; and the spi¬ rited and gallant manner in which he effected this soon enlisteel for him a host of partisans. Ere many moments elapsed, his efforts for a hearing were crowned with success ; when this brave stripling, a model of beauty in face, anel evidently so in form, as far as the attire he was enveloped in did not clumsily disguise, now poured forth a burst of elo¬ quence, :n harmony of language and ingenuity of argument only to be equalled bv the grace of his movements anel the %/ CT energy of his actions : and this strain of eloquence was breathed forth to convince the assailants of the unmanliness of this attack upon females, whom they had so ungallanlly deprived of their protectors ; and to assure them, that if the vehicle which had thus excited their avenge- CT ment were foreign, the lovely occupant of it, he could vouch to the declare- VfîL. i. F
ment, w T as a native plant as sweet as beautiful. There was mingled with the young champion's eloquence, an arch vivacity of eye, tone, and expression, that won upon all ; and to the apprentices of each trade, surrounding the car which he thus guarded, he addressed something so wittily 7 and humorously 7 appropriate to their individual calling, that soon, as if by power of magic, he disarmed their mischievous intentions relative to the destruction of the litter, or further an¬ noyance of its fair occupant. All that remained of tk urtains were replaced, and the rheda borne back in triumph tt> Oswald House ; where the advice of her gallant protector, and her own alarms, determined Lady Adela to remain all night : as none could say 7 to what extent tins rising tumult might prevail ; or that, although her conveyance had escaped the serious hostility of these first assailants, but it might, in proceeding on her way through Southvvark, encounter others who might not prove so harmless.
The manner in which Lady Adela had been thus providentially rescued from the hostilities of these assailants, precluded the possibility of seeking for the pu¬ nishment of the offenders ; lest, by so doing, vengeance might be retaliated upon her brave rescuer, whom she re¬ quested to leave his address, that her father might have the power of thanking him for the protection of his chilei : but compliance with this request he eluden!, by r saying, the safety 7 of some friends callee! him another way 7 , incontinently, but that he would call at the gate on the morrow, with his anxious enquiries after her ladyship; and shoulel Lorel St. Os¬ wald then desire to see him, he shoulel be happy in the honour of attending his lorelship's commands. The gallant youth then departed, with a multitude of apprentices, to ex¬ ecute the purposes they had armed to effect; and the moment they left Oswald House, Lady Atlela sent off an express to Vespasian Tower, to acquaint her f 2
father with the cause of her detention in the disturbed metropolis. The alarmed father lost not a moment in flying back to the protection of his child; but by the time that he, with Father Hubert, arrived in town, they had the happiness to find the rioters had dis¬ persed, and that the city was restored to order. The glowing gratitude of Lord St. Oswald would not permit liis setting out upon his journey until he should have evinced his sense of his obligation to the CT defender of his child; but May-day passed away, and the champion of Lady Atlela did not appear. Independent of the gal¬ lant conduct of this youth in his rescue of Lady 7 Aelela, much interest was felt for him by all the St. Oswald household, and a strong anxiety 7 , impelled by curiosity 7 , ex¬ isted for his reappearance; since, although seven years had shot up the beautiful boy into a transcendently handsome young man, every sweet, arch, and expressive turn in his fine countenance recalled, at one glance, to recognition, in this gallant
protector of Lady Adela, the animated and mirthful aide-decamp of Pan, in the May morning of 1510, and who had so mysteriously disappeared ; antl the same necromantic vanishment, many of the family began to entertain apprehensions, was again in operation, when the secontl and third of May passed away without his appearing, or Lortl St. Oswald being able to obtain any intelligence of whom he was, to what master articled, or to what tratte belonging, although his lorel- ship offered large rewards for inform¬ ation. But no offer of recompence eliciting intelligence, Lord St. Oswald's apprehen¬ sions were awakened, of this young cham¬ pion being unfortunately amongst those committed to prison for their outrage against the foreigners ; and apprehensive that his own suspected kıy alty might prove injurious to the defender of* his Adela, should he appear anxious to be¬ friend him, he employed competent agents, whose solicitude could occasion no mischief to the object of their re- v 3 K
search, to visit and make enquiry at every prison where these offenders were in confinement ; but all to no effect, Nor did it avail more successfully his lordship's awaiting in London for the final decree against the culprits; or his emissaries attending at Westminster Hall on the twentv-second of Mav, to witness the king's clemency, in pardoning the four hundred offenders who cried aloud to him for mercy; for the brave de¬ fender of Lady Adela was not amongst them. As the royal clemency removed every apprehension of those who had borne any part in the tumult, this young champion not subsequently appearing, left no fur¬ ther expectation of his doing so upon the mind of Lord St. Oswald ; who, there¬ fore, delayed no longer his departure for the Continent; but left instructions with his steward at Oswald House relative to the mode in which his lordship's wished to evince his gratitude, should the efc- f ender of his child ever appear during the absence of the family from England.
This tour of our travellers was very shortly attended with one fortunate con¬ sequence — that of revealing Father Hubert and Lord St. Oswald's religious feelings to each other ; and with joyful- ness the latter now found he had a safe counsellor in wdiom he might confide. Father Hubert had long been a secret receder from the Roman creed ; and hav¬ ing been much in the society of Jerome of Prague, Luther, and other reform¬ ers, anel having studied the Scriptures until they were engraven upon his heart, lie was fully equal to yielding to his lordship cveiy information that he re¬ quired, With internal peace and comfort, Lord St. Oswald now proceeded on this tour through France 1 , Italy, and some part of Germany; and, in little less than two years after he quitted home, he returned with Adela and the suite he had embarked with, to Albalanda—no longer shuddering at a residence in that Castle; as lie now could behold serenely the tomb which contained all whom he had loved most f j.
on earth — secure, that when his mortal substance should lie mouldering within its marble boundaries, his spirit would rejoin those whom in life he had adored. The stiff silently sorrowing Adela found her favourite Rosamond improved so conspicuously in personal loveliness and mental acquirements, that more than ever she wished for the removal of her protégée to the castle : but this project Lord St. Oswald peremptorily negatived ; for, although lie had seen but little of her, there was something about Rosamond CT Lily that, notwithstanding her apparent naivete, led him to fear her. She was now arrived at an age to make observ¬ ations upon all that might transpire upon the subject of religion, and all which he doubted not would be whispered in the ears of her friends in St. Mildreel's mo¬ nastery ; and so much presentiment of evil to his family, arising from the ingra¬ titude of thb foundling, disturbed his lordship's mind, notwithstanding every effort lie made to subdue a prejudice for which he could find no certain basis,
that he would have sent her, with a com¬ petent provision, far from Albalanda, had she not been a charge committed to his care in the last moments of his tenderly lamen teel wife. But matters of more importance than anticipations ofingratitude, soon painfully occupied the minel of Lorel St. Osvvakl. To his amazement, he received friendly intimations of his secret enemies having been mining for his destruction during his absence from England, empoisoning the king's minel with representations of his being abroad upon a treasonable pro¬ ject relative to the De la Poles. Not one unnecessary; moment did Lord St, Osvvakl linger, ere he proceedeei to London, where, with due form, he ad¬ dressed his sovereign, praying to know his accusers, anel demanding a trial by his peers. But it was not for the invi¬ dious purposes of his lordship's enemies to have these reasonable requests com¬ plied with: an unsatisfactory answer wib returned, neither acquitting, nor <leci- F .5
dedly accusing him of disaffection to the reigning monarch. FOr some hours after the receipt of this reply, Lord St. Oswald's indignant feel¬ ings of conscious innocence led him to the determination of never more appear¬ ing at that court where his loyalty was so unwarrantably suspected ; but some mo¬ ments of cooler reflection leel him to be- licve it more judicious to go thither in conscious integrity, than, by 7 absence, to allow of its being saitl he had been banished thence. Accordingly he did appear at court, and conducted himself with such dignified composure, that each unprejudiced person present pronounced his innocence ; and Wolsey 7 whispered to the king, that he could not but suspect that calumny was at work in the case of of this nobly comporting peer. Lord St. Oswald, vvho had, through the aid of Father Hubert, found efficacious balms for those misfortunes which the All-wise bad ordained for his endurance, could not distil even from these precious balms an anodyne for those ills which his
lellow beings had thus devised for him ; and his irritation upon this subject, very shortly after his return to Albalanda, evinced its manifest effect, not only upon his temper, but his health : one amongst other sources for mental disquietude to his lordship, arose, about this period, from the sudelen death of the next lineal de¬ scendant after Laely Adela opening the presumptive succession to the title anel estates of St. Oswald to a man, not only of moral infamy, but of disloyal notoriety. " I feel no bodement," he would say- to Father Hubert, in his moments of confidential murmuring, "that my sorrovv- whelmed chile! will again feel the cherish- ment of love ; I can, therefore, never have the cruelness to urge her upon the hope¬ less theme of her espousals : and, unless I tunefully make my salliance from this world scene of life, to yield the king a wealthy ward, to make vantage for ome court iavourite iu needment, there must at length exist an Earl of St. Oswald, who İs in heart a traitor ; and misweening f б
posterity will identify my imputed dis¬ affection, with his absolute disloyalty; and thus, my reverend friend, for my conten¬ tation, I have the certainty to wot my posthumous fame wil meet the blastment of dire calumny.""
CHAP. VIL Ат length, in about two years and a half subsequent to the mysterious termination of the betrothment of Sir Ethelbert and Lady Adela, Maud, the favourite attend¬ ant of the latter, having some missions to perform for her lady, where a horse coukl not very conveniently take her, set out upon her pedestrianism without any com¬ panion. The kind-hearted Maud pos¬ sessed so inherently the true spirit of abigailism, that she loved gossiping above all things, save her dear Laely Adela : she therefore loitered some ten minutes with Dame Gabble ; some twenty, according to her own calculation, with Goody Sayso; and, perhaps, some thirty or forty, or it might have been fifty, with Cicely Home- stall, observing Cottar Ilomestall and his two comely sons piling " so deftly" а woodstack : by whicli inadvertent pro¬ digality of her precious minutes, poor
Maud found, when she arrived at a cer¬ tain brook, over which she might have readily passed ere its current had been c wol I en by the influx of the sea, from which the tide reached it, her passage utterly impracticable. How was she to reach St. Mildred's in time for her mission to prove effective? was now the puzzling question : either waiting for the refl u ' of the tide, or to scamper home for a genet, would equally impede her arrival at the monastery ere too late ; anel " then poor young Mrs. Rosamond would feel so contentless at the disappointment of her gaudery ; and her own dear dear young latly 7 would be so aggrieved." " Marry, if I e'er again so warelessly tarry to gossip with such chattering bab¬ blers, or fbrespend my time gazing after comely churls, may I be nipped and bob¬ bed into stock-fish !" poor Aland at length exclaimed, in consternation, as she tried her weight upon the branch of a tree which overhung the brook, meditating the possibility of aid that way ; but at
this moment her project was stayed, and her resolution utterly demolished " of never forespending time in tarriance to gaze at comely sights ;" for a transcend¬ ent! ν handsome voting man at this moment appeared, winding by the water's margin, mounted upon a prajicing bayard. Whether it might be the noble mien of the traveller which formed such re¬ sistless attraction; or his riding-coat of black velvet, faceei with murrev taffeta, and cape of frizardo, guarded upon with velvet and rieh embroidery; or his beau¬ tiful black velvet cap, gracefully orna¬ mented vv'th drooping feathers ; or his shirt, garnished with silk and silver; or his pinched partiets of linen cloth ; all proclaiming, by act of parliament, that he classed with no plebeian herd; but so it was: pretty Mistress Maud instantly reclaimed the shapely leg which she had sent roaming round the tree's branch, adjusted her petticoat and kirile in be¬ seeming order, and herself in readiness to drop a respectful courtesy. " Heaven's blessing wend with yon,
my pretty damsel!" exclaimed the eques¬ trian, smiling; "but is it contentless with life you have waxed, that to tlaft it is your rash intendment? Or haps it you are on salliance to a folkmöte with the water nymphs? If so, let me not berob you of your pastime." "In good sooth, noble sir, I am not so dareful," responded Maud : " I was on salliance to make experiment to swing athwart the rivulet, without cndanger- ment of being drent ; for I have need¬ ment to speeel incontinently with this fardel, to a monastery fbreby ; and hav- ing warelessly lost m v pass at low water, were I to return home for a genet to bear me over, and to wend my 7 way back ever so featly, I could not be eft enough »'' CT for this day's jubilee at St. Mildred's West." " Spring upon this bank, and mount behind me, if you list, and mint! not the lack of a pillion," said the kind-hearted traveller: "I'll guarantee your waftage without being drent, and your safe arriv¬ ance at St. Mildred's soonly 7 ."
Maud with thankfulness accepted this kind offer, feeling no alarm of impro¬ priety or danger in tlie measure—so much of chivalric honour and courtesy still remained ; and, thanks to the wise ma¬ nagement of Wolsey, highway robbers hatl so decreased, that, as Erasmus ex¬ pressed it, the nation was not more free " of wild beasts than of harmful men :" and being thus devoid of apprehension, antl full of gratitude for this rapici con¬ veyance, she was not tardy in expressing her cause of' obligation, " in the great disappointment it must have proved to Mrs. Rosamond, had she not arrived at St. Mildred's in time, with a pair of beautiful foreslceves, and some other little matters ofgauderv", which had been forgotten when the other things had been sent for her appearing at the jubilee ofthat day." " May I ask, who is Mrs. Rosamond?" demanded the stranger. c* Maud, without hesitation, repeated the history of the beautiful foundling; be¬ cause it yielded her a channel, in which
to run forth the well-merited praises of' Lady Adela. " Wot you, will this paragon of yours and mine, attend this day's jubilee at St. Mildred's?" exclaimed the stranger anxiously 7 , the moment Maud had finished her concise history of Rosamond : " 1 say my paragon, for I have long time felt her such." " Gramercv, noble sir! where coukl you have seen my laely?" said the won¬ dering Maud, now more than ever certain her belief was just, of having somewhere beheld this stranger anel heard his voice ere now. " Where could it have befor¬ tuned you to behold the Lady Adela ? for, since our arrivance from abroad, the nuns themselves lead not a more dern life, and are not half so emmewed as she has been since my lord's ill health has become so dureful." " Albeit, I have seen the Lady Adela," responded the stranger; " and each time I was so befortuned is bright in my memory's recordation. But now, kind damsel, if my aidance has in sooth been
serviceable to you, respond yours to me. Bethink you of some friendly window in your castle, where, percase, I might ob¬ tain a view of this bellibone of ours : for to advance you a little more into my secrets, I have garcd my stceel to foam, in a scamper of many miles hitherward, with a hope of' accomplishing even this transient gleam of happiness." " Gramercy! But have you no know¬ ledge t)f my lorel, or of Father Hubert, or of any of the habitants of our castle? for Lady Adela is not a gaper out o' windows." ** Alack !" rejoined the stranger, " the higher powers have decreed no avowed approachment for mc to Albalanda." Maud felt amazement ; and although anxious to develope more, perceiving they had arrived within view of St. Mil¬ dred's, requested pei mission to alight; and the moment she dismounted, she commenced her expression of grateful feeling, w hilst she intently used the power, which now had become hers, of an unim¬ peded examination of the stranger's conn-
tenance ; but scarcely had her sincere acknowledgments began a rapid flow from her lips, ere every feeling was ar¬ restee! by surprise, and she exclaimeel — " Gramercy ! My eyes in their per- civance almost astert me! It seemeth me, I once again behold the disporting youth who chafed with envy our lortl of misrule in Vespasian Wood ; and albeit, diversely r apparelled, our champion too of courteous valiance." Anel that he was indeed apparelled diŕ- ferently T , the evident astonishment of the staring Maud t stiried ; for now there was no appearance of apprentice-gear—no doublet of canvas, orsackcloth, or English leather—no hose of white, blue, or russet kersey ; but, fearless of detection, was he arrayed iu silks, velvets, and cloth of ravnes, with enrichments besotting one of high estate And if all were in good sooth accordant with their seem- ing, Maud began to fear his strangely suspicious vanishments hail been really the work of necromancy ; anel at this suggestion her heart beat painfully, and
she began almost to doubt if she herself yet remained in a state of visibility — feared to touch her own arm in quest of conviction of her yet being there, lest the attempted touch might prove impalpable —and above all she feared to look a mune!, lest the transmuting personage with whom she had so warelessly betrusted her safety, might be in the very chevisance of his awful sorcery ; but to some decrease of superstitious panic was she soon encou¬ raged by hearing once again the sound of her mysterious escort's melodious ac- cents, as in tones something approaching to chagrin he said — " It luul been more for my contenta- 1 ion, had you laekeel this talent of récog¬ nition, my fait- damsel. Yet, I feel -tir- ance vou have no evil intendment against me; and 1 make cnfreatanee von will utter no betrayal to your peeile^s iadv of having met here, for 1 would not that the Laely Adela, aud her noble sire, shouiil wot I made avoidance of the honour be¬ stowed on me erewhiles of liberty to make approachmeut to their habitance. But,
to my sorrow, I am enfettered by the commandment of those I am bounden to obey 7 , not to go thitherward ; yet I betrust me a season of more promise for my 7 hap¬ piness may eftsoons arrive. Antl now, lest I should be encountered of those who might make evil availmcnt of it, I must say farewell ; and I earnestly pray you to accept these marcs of my good wishes, to make purchase of a few aigulets, as aidant to your recollection of y our now old acquaintance — Villars de Rhone." Maud received the noble gift with gra- CT CT titude, and purchased the aigulets the first opportunity ; but eliel not prove faith¬ ful to her implied compact in all its point* ; for the moment she returned from Ht. Mildred's to Albalanda, she informed her beloven! laely of her marvellous adventure; and repeated every w end which De Rhone had uttered to her, — communications that were shortly after conveyed by Adela to her father, with the omission only of allusion to the admiration which De Rhone had expressed relative to herself.
Lord St. Oswald, scarcely making a comment upon the champion of his Adela having appeared one moment in the homely apparel of an apprentice, and in another in that of a personage of high estate, at once pronounced, and in terms proclaiming his heart was pained by the conviction, " that the au¬ thority to which De Rhone thus reluct- antly bowed, was no other than the sove¬ reign's: ami the cause — the supposed disloyalty of the lord of Albalanda Castle and Oswald House, Through the busy trump of rumour, at length reached the royal ear, the po¬ litical principles of the man next in suc¬ cession to Lady Adela de Mandeville, should she die without issue; and Henry, after mentally adding this presumptive successor's culpability to the heap accu¬ mulated by calumny upon St. Oswald's head, determined to turn this recent in¬ formation to the advantage of a needy favourite, and therefore sent off; without delay, an express to Albalauda, to an¬ nounce, «« that if Lortl St. Oswaltl wished
to prove his lately boasted faith in loyalty sincere, he would prevent the possibility of his titles and estates ultimately de¬ scending toa disloyal man, by complying with the king's desire immediately 7 , antl bestowing the hand of his daughter upon Eustace Baron Warburg." Lord Warburg was too near α neigh¬ bour, and too well known to Lord St. Oswald, not to cause this alliance to be recoiled from in horror by this upright peer; who, without one moment's pause, replied in terms of profound respect to his sovereign, but with striking firm¬ ness, importing, " that he knew the Baron Warburg — knew him for one of his calumniators; and that therefore liis vengement was portentous. Albeit he woulel brave it, without one recreant fear; and incontinently 7 prepare for the deaths-man upon the scaffold, sooner than yield consentment to the despiteous sacrifice of his inestimable child to Eustace Warburg." The manly 7 , dignified reply of Lord St. Oswald penetrated its difficult way
through the respondent feelings of the king, whose small portion of the softer sensibilities were powerfully touched by the parental tenderness breathed through every line from the man who haei thus heroically dared to thwart his wishes ; yet, wincing from the idea of yielding alto¬ gether, he resolved, that although he might relinquish his determination rela¬ tive to Lord Warburg, the daughter's hand should ultimately protect the father's head. Shortly after forming this determin- ation, the king, on passing to the queen's apartment?, encountered Villars de Rhone, who was pacing, with another coin tier, the gallery when His Majesty* unexpect¬ edly entered. The difficulty with which the companion of De Rhone suppressed his before audible risibility, upon the en¬ trance of his sovereign, was observed, almost with envy, by the mirth-loving monarch, who instantly commanded par-
ticipation in their merry fancies ; when De Rhone in obedience recounted some ludicrous anecdotes, with such comic effect, that the delighted Henry deter¬ mined that his reward should be the hand of the heiress of St. Oswald. Villars de Rhone was transported with joy and gratitude. A new express was in consequence despatched to Albalan¬ da, with a proposition for this marriage, accompanied by unequivocal threats of all that an arbitrary monarch could, and would, perform. But threats in this case were unnecessary. The first wish of Lord St. Oswald's earthly projects had now become the marriage of his daughter, to prevent the possible disgrace to his line of an unworthy successor : and, as he firmly believed a dutiful and affection- ate son could scarcely 7 fail of proving a kind if not a tender husband, this new- project e>f his sovereign's met his un¬ qualified approbation ; whilst Laely Adela herself felt it as an absolute reprieve from mortal misery, as, fiom the period her father's health had so visibly declined, v'
she had felt conviction that she ought to accumulate fortitude for some day be¬ coming а victim to the arbitrary power of lier royal guardian ; and her ago¬ nising apprehensions thus relieved, by an object proclaimed by fame most amiable, excited too much gratitude to fate to admît of her utterance of a negative — could negative avail where Henry VII L had issued his decree. Maud's encounter with Villars de Rhone had enabled Lord St. Oswald to make enquiries after the champion of Ladv Adela by name, and satisfactory information upon the subject of these enquiries hatl reached his lordship ere the royal mantlate for this Mav-ffame hero to become his son. Villars ele Rhone was a posthumous child, for whom, through some repre¬ hensible carelessness iu the arrangements of marriage-settlements, there hatl been no provision secured by his father, the late Baron Dalincourt. His brothers and sisters were all minors at the neriod of this young destitute's birth, and could form о 2
no contribution for his provision:—all the expenses, therefore, of his rearing had fallen upon his mother, whose jointure was very inconsiderable. But no priva¬ tions were shrunk from,by this affectionate parent, that coukl yield advantage to this darling chilei ; and whilst sacrificing every appendage of her state, to defray the ex¬ penses of his education, she haei lived in the most complete seclusion ; and at one period when she had retired to a small hamlet near Vespasian Tower, was that in which Villars performed his first May- tide frolic. He had developed, through his mother's landlord being employed in the execution of the requisite prepar¬ ations, the gay scenes which Lord St. Os¬ wald was arranging to exhibit for the amusement of the king and queen ; and in compliance with his wild anxiety to become a spectator of them, Latly Dalin- couit permitted him to attend in the disguise of a rustic, and she herself as¬ sumed the garb of an old cottage gam¬ mer, for the purpose of watching over the conduct of her volatile bov whilst
herding with the multitude ; and soon she beheld, with dismay, the active part he spontaneously undertook in a moment of her separation from him, and with im¬ patience she watched for an opportunity of calling him away ; for it was not her wish to permit his attracting notice, until his education should have been sufficiently advanced to gift him with the power of securing approbation. But when she dis¬ covered symptoms of the fascinations of the youthful May Queen being in evident operation over the fancy of this treasure of her anxious care, terror at the dire consequences to be apprehended, were he to become eventually attached to the daughter of a suspected traitor, led her, without a moment's hesitation, to exert her maternal influence; and not only eliti she fly away with her reluctant son from the gay scenes ofthat morning, but from the neighbourhood altogether; and, shortly after, the removal of the St. Oswald family into Yorkshire lulled her alarm relative to those symptoms of early fascination most happily to rest
But at length that determined operator, fate, counteracted the manoeuvring of the anxious mother ; vvho, by r practising the most rigid economy, had accomplished the education of her precious charge, with credit to hersehy to him, and to his able instructors ; antl at length returned with him from the University of Paris to London, full of hope, that, through the influence of her friends at court, the king might be induced to provide for Villars» The friends of Lady Dalincourt proved sterling. They awakened a strong pre¬ disposition in the sovereigns mind to befriend De Rhone, and which, upon introduction, Villars improveel effectu¬ ally by the graceful fascinations of his animated manners ; although his long wished for introduction to the king had been effected under the inauspicious ap¬ pearance of a state culprit. Lady Dalincourt was establishing her¬ self in something of a suitable residence in the village of Charing, — to be thus near the metropolis, to await the golden
opportunity of her son's introduction to Henry—when the volatile Villars, anxious to see the pastimes of the morrow, took French leave of his mother, proceeded to Westminster on foot, on the evening of the 30th of April IJI7, antl then pro¬ ceeded in a beiat to Tower Hill, where his foster-brothcr was apprentice to a goldsmith, to enquire from him, if any of the city parishes were to unite on the morrow, to bring in May-poles, that he might attenel the procession as a specta¬ tor : and scarcely haei he arrived on lower Hill, when the tumult calleel his foster-brother and fellow apprentices to prepare for joining the insurgents. The fosterdam of 1 Villars had lately formed a second marriage, and it was with a foreign¬ er. Affection to the tender nurse of his infancy led him instantaneously to sally forth to her residence, and to aid in her defence ; and in the Sunday suit of his foster-brother, promptly assumed, enter the city, that, as a London 'prentice, he might be able to effect more for the pre¬ servation of his nurse's property and
personal safety, than as an interloping stranger. He made his salliance, ac¬ companied by the young goldsmith ; and on his way to the place of the destination of his anxious prowess, he was Jed most unexpectedly 7 to the protection of her whose youthful image still retained the first place in his admiration. From acknowledging his name, whilst in the garb he then wore, the juvenile pride or Villars revolted ; neither could his feelings of duty acquiesce in his doing so without the permission of his mother. That permission he flattered himself he should obtain ; and that, in attire beseem¬ ing his estate, he should, on the morrow, present himself at the gate of Oswald House. But the morrow 7 found him in .prison confounded with the culprits who had acted both in the excitement to, and the performance of; the outrages ; when the explanation necessary to pro¬ cure his liberation, led to his presenta¬ tion to the king, who not only per¬ mitted, but advised, his immediate de¬ parture for the Continent, as the most
effectual means of hushing every un¬ pleasant animadversion upon his thought¬ less frolic with associates so imsuited to his rank. For one year longer Villars ele Rhone remained upon the Continent, chiefly at Boulogne, deriving every possible advan¬ tage of academic instruction there ; but, through the Argus-eytnl manoeuvring of bis mother, never once encountering Lorel St. Oswald, or his heart-rived daugh¬ ter, on their progress through Italy.— At the expiration of that year Villars was recalled by the king, and received the appointment of one of the chief pages to Henry, who promised, 'when he ac¬ quired a little more steadiness in his seeming, to promote him to some far higher station at court: but scarcely had Laely Dalincourt thus returned to Lon¬ don, to find the accomplishments of her maternal wishes in the sovereign's favour and protection foe her son, when a ne¬ glected cold deprived her of all use of her limbs, as if on purpose to yield Villars an opportunity of evincing bow deeply he
felt his debt of gratitude to his suffering mother; for nothing could exceed his attention to her, or the affecting ten¬ derness with which he regulated all her comforts.
CHAP. VIII. A compliant answer being speedily re¬ turned from Lord St. Oswaltl to the king's mantlate, the joy almost maddened Villars; who set out for Albalanda with a com¬ mand from Henry—who was no patron of long wooing — to marry forthwith, as his presence would be shortly wanting at court to aiel in some approaching fes¬ tivities. Whcthe.Mtwas, that the sombre melan* choly of Albalanda Castle cooled the ardour of De Rhone's passion ; but soon something very like dismay 7 assailed him, at the thought of wedding in so dolorous a mansion, and to a bride, who hatl ceased to charm him;—for Adela no longer possessed the perfection of beauty which had dazzled and fascinated his youthful fancy ; for, although the shaft that destroyed her happiness had pene¬ trated her heart ere her second meeting
with Dc Rhone, and the canker had en¬ tered the rose, its blighting influence ' сто was not, in that early progress of its effects, perceptible. Now, nearly three years of corroding gricci and months of anxious vigil by the pillow of her suffering father, had cruelly faded the naturally transcend¬ ent loveliness of Lady Adela. De Rhone felt conviction, that Adela still was interesting in aspect, amiable, and accomplished; anel saw, ly all around him in Albalauda, the splendour of the alliance his gracious sovereign had se¬ en reel for him : but his heart was no longer joyful in the prospect of this union. A royal command for the nuptials im¬ mediately to be celebrated had been sent to Lorel St. Oswald, and the mandate was complice! with as speedily as possible; and De Rhone, in further obedience to his royal master's wishes, took his bride from the sombre honors of Alba¬ landa Castle, very shortly titer the sacred knot was tied, to the gay metropolis, where Lord St. Oswald promised tojóin
these new votaries of Hymen as soon as a confirmed invalid like himself could perform so long a progress. At the moment in which the heart- wrung Adela invoked the parting blessing of her sire, the observant Father Hubert read in his patron's countenance an ex¬ pression of touching sadness, almost bor¬ dering on despair, which puzzled the good priest, as his lordship was <o shortly to follow his departing child : but this anxious friend was not long allowed to wander in the mazes of conjecture ; for, upon asking Lorel St. Oswald some ques¬ tions redating to the subject of arrange¬ ments for their journey, his lordship in mournful tones reiilied — " I shall not accomplish this repair tu London, my reverend friend. Father Hubert, the manelate for my salliance to brighter realms arrived erewhiles. It came in spenni through my long-break¬ ing heart, when the despairful eonvince- ment struck me of mv ill-fated chilei being consigned to dureful misery by this unlucky marriage. In the very moment
when I obeyed the king's behest, in the spousals of my spotless sacrifice, I deve¬ loped that he whom we thus marvellously riched by such a treasure was contentless with his precious bride. Oh, holy Sir! my sw T eet, my blighted flower, sneapcd in her young hour of budding beauty by the cruelness of that silent uncomplain¬ ing heroism which duty long assigned her, is foredoomed to scornful treatment, like a noxious weed. Oh, Father Hubert, my child, my child!" And Lord St. Oswald burst into an agony of tears, and sobbed most piteously. Father Hubert, on whom the fascinat¬ ing manners and amiable character of De Rhone had made a most favourable impression, now strove, in every kind tone of sympathising feeling, to dissipate such inauspicious predictions ; but in vain. " Oh ! had I but wist de Rhone's in¬ difference to my Adela ere the fatal knot was fettered," continued the agitated rather, " I should, beshrew me! have snatched the hapless victim from the breme sacrifice, even at the altar's greeze,
as well it might become me ; and have then with gladfulness expiated my dar¬ ing on the deathsman's block. You, Father Hubert, who havebebolden Adela's endurance of her mental sufferings like to a smiling martyr on wing for her native heaven — You, who have seen how she dured the unkindly petulance of her peevish sire*, until, by the never-clouded sun of tenderness and duty, she warmed me into all that could beseem a grateful and adoring parent — you cannot feel amazedness if my heart should quail at this final vanquishment of earthly happi¬ ness for Adela." Feeling, through every fibre of his sink¬ ing frame, that the leveller of all was hovering near him, Lorel St. Osvvakl w r asted not one precious moment ere he effected all things within his power for the temporal advantage and security of his child and her descendants ; and this important business satisfactorily arranged, and every worldly concern promptly executed, his lordship devoutly turned his thoughts to sacred themes, anel shortly
after closed his life of sorrow and dis¬ appointment. Lady Adela was scarcely settled in Oswald House, and had undergone her presentation to their Majesties, and in¬ troduction to the Dalincourt family, ere an express arrived from Father Hubert to prepare her for the dissolution of her parent. Aelela woulel have flow n on the wings of arelen' feeling, to take the station of'duty and affection by the couch of her beloved father, had not De Rhone de¬ sired her compliance with the advice of her reverend correspondent, not to set out for Albalanda until summoned bv him : but that summons came not ; for the next express conveyed intelligence that all was over. The ffrief of the new Countess of St. Oswald* for the individual loss of her parent was poignant : but his last illness anel death occurring when bereft of all kindred consolation, added agony to her
sorrow ; and she had no one near to yield her comfort. Adela had been loved-—to adoration loved—by Ethelbert : and thus early in¬ itiated in the tenderness of the passion which she had inspired, she soon detected its nonexistence in the bosom of her hus¬ band ; and whilst endeavouring to call up all the forces of her fortitude upon this discovery, to bear her still on with firm¬ ness through a continued life of uncom¬ plaining misery» she y r et hoped anel prayed that De Rhone might not betray this mortifying indifference to all around ť Cv them : but, too soon, the alacrity with which he entered into every project which calleel him from her society led her to the conviction that this inattention would soon become evident to all observers. Although Adela coukl no longer boast the brilliancy of beauty which had cap¬ tivated the youthful fancy of her husband, she yet was lovely ; anel De Rhone might have cherished hope that domestic hap¬ piness would restore her to the aspect he had so long, so ardently, admired. — But
no: De Rhone, alas! neither hoped nor wished to admire Adela more. Lorel Warburg, writh enmity to the house of Mandeville for its scorn of his alliance, and envy to De Rhone for obtaining the rich prize he coveted, determined to make the union an inauspicious one ; and, for this purpose, entered into a combin¬ ation with the abbess and nuns of St. î^ildred, who had also imbibed enmity to' Lorel St. Oswald and his daughter, because the munificent dole which had formerly been given to their hands for charitable purposes had lately flowed through other channels into the habit- ations of the sick anel needy ; anel impa¬ tiently they haei awaited an opportunity for revenge. Upon the death of Father Richard, which had some time since occurred, a promotion in the clerical establishment at Albalanda had occasioned a vacancy, which was filled up by a priest recom¬ mended by the abbess of St. Mildred's named Ralph. Upon the arrival of De Rhone at Albalanda to wed the heiress,
this wily Father Ralph soon insinuated himself into the good graces of the guile¬ less Villars, through his cheerfulness and plausibility ; and, under the pretence of strenuous efforts to strike out amusement for the poor moped youth, inveigled him to St. Mildred's West, to view the curio¬ sities which the church contained, anel from the church leel him into the repo¬ sitory, where the various works of the nuns were exhibiteel for sale. The two old members of the sisterhood, who ap¬ peared as venders of these industrious and ingenious performances, wore the aspect of Sibylla?, and were not unlike them in manner too ; for soon, almost as if writing it on the mysterious leaf, they 7 began to gabble about De Rhone's future CT CT fortunes, and, as if he haei fascinated them into sudden anxiety for his hap¬ piness, threw out many 7 ambiguous hints, as if they more hoped, than expected, felicity to be his through a union with ' CT Adela of Albalanda : then, as if in re¬ gret that they had suffered this anxiety to beguile them into betraying secrets,
endeavouring to unsay what they had hinted at, in that artful way in which more disclosures seemed to drop inadvertently through that confusion which a sense of having acted wrong had awakened, until they manoeuvred to allow it to appear that Latly Adela had been engaged in necromantic practices ; that she had used Sir Ethelbert cruelly ; and that, through the murmurs of fame, it had been ru¬ moured her conduct in prudence had not been too scrupulous. Villars, perfectly guileless in his own nature, and through the seclusion of his early life, was little aware of the dupli¬ city with which the world abounded. He knew that the recluse of monasteries were prone to superstition ; and that, if they did not absolutely believe in the miraculous themselves, they sedulously endeavoured to establish it in the faith of others; and, not feeling any tendency towards becoming a proselyte to this spe¬ cies of doctrine», he invvardly laughed to scorn the supposition of Laely 7 Adela e Ver having been engaged in forming
magic spells — unless such, indeed, as she had performed upon himself in their two first interviews. But the other insinu¬ ations of these venal tools of defamation fell with better aim ; anil, trembling with apprehension that something must be true of what was so kindly betrayed to him, he complied with the prompt sum¬ mons of Father Ralph, who affected to appear much distressed at such untoward communications, to the parlour of the abbess, where, through the medium of' his obliging and reverenti cicerone, he had been invited to partake of some re¬ freshment. The ladv abbess of St. Mildred was in the zenith of superior beauty, and the possessor of captivating manners : con¬ cealing not only art, but vices, under the most prepossessing form ofguilelenss truth, striking elegance, and surpassing mental acquirements; and, as if she feared her own attractions might not prove efficient for the purpose of beguiling, the trans¬ cendently beautiful Rosamond Lily, bud¬ ding blossom of rare and dazzling bril-
liane} 7 , she had selected for her com¬ panion]; under the pretence of Rosamond's amiable anxiety for an introduction to him, who was so shortly to be allied to the family which so benevolently pro¬ tected her. Ml lars de Rhone, from having received his education principally 7 beneath the ma¬ ternal wing, had naturally imbibed much of the effeminacy of bestowing too much consequence upon exterior excellence. Beauty 7 and gracefulness were therefore, in his estimation, the superlatives of hu¬ man perfection ; so that even in the first interview, these dazzling infatuators pe¬ netrateti with their bewitching spells so deeply and firmlyjinto his admiration, that, whilst he remained in their neighbour¬ hood, not one hour which he could extri¬ cate from the society 7 of Laely Adela, and the gloom of her father's castle, but was devoted to his new fascinators ; who, be¬ side this exploit of alluring his fealty from his destined bride to themselves, artfully and diabolically contrived, from time to time, whilst as if in the act of
eulogising Lady Adela, to drop some suspicious word of counter import, then hastily to abandon it in this untoward situ¬ ation, without its termination, as if recol¬ lections haei fortunately 7 come post, in time only to save some fearful truth against Laely Adela's perfections from ill-timed transpiration : anel thus they completely succeeded iu adding force to the suspicions which the nuns first had awakened of Lady Adela not being fault¬ less, until at length nothing but appre¬ hension of the fearful wrath of the arbitrary monarch, vvho bad willed this alliance for him, could have prevented the recoiling De Rhone from withdrawing from this engagement; and, influenced by these subverted feelings and disgusts, De Rhone had reluctantly wedded the inestimable heiress of St. Oswald. The pleasure-loving monarch, not brooking a postponement to his pending jousts and revels througli respect to the remains of а suspected peer, peremptorily commanded Villars de Rhone not to attend the obsequies of Lord St. Os-
wähl : but the heart-wrung Adela would have fled to Albalanda, even unaccom¬ panied by her truant husband, had not the shock, thus added to her affliction, in this irreverence to the remains of her noble father, closed her pinions in a bed of sickness, until too late for the utility of such a flight ; and, when sufficiently recovered to make any removal practica¬ ble, she was surprised by a proposition, couched in the pleasing form of interest for her renovated health, of removing im- mediately to the coast of Kent for the benefit of the sea breezes. But this pretended kindness was but the delusion of political deception. The interview which aiterwards took place at Guisnes, between Henry and Francis, was now in the contemplation of our mo¬ narch ; who having formed hopes in na¬ tional pride of effecting the magnificent scene in England, he and Wolsey judged it necessary to have some individual com- petcnt to the undertaking to spend a few weeks on the coast, to make observation upon e veiy spot of the land opposite to
France, to determine upon the capa¬ bilities which we possessed for such a measure; and none appearing so equal to the purpose as De Rhone, who pos¬ sessed unrivalled taste in every species of pageant or exhibition meet for the occa¬ sion, he was nominated for the task ; anil secrecy 7 being at present wished for by the roy-al projector, the opportune state of Lady 7 St. Oswald's health, was hailed as an admirable excuse for her husband's so¬ journ upon the coast; and in the then comparatively small town of Dover, they were almost immediately established, with the accompaniment of another invalid, in Latly Dalincourt. Every hour that Atlela now Jived she more deeply felt conviction that the rose- deckeel hill of domestic happiness was not for her ascent. In vain were the most tender attentions paid by her to Lady Dalincourt ; for they seemed to have no effect upon either mother or son : but their influence upon poor Adela hcrsehy too soon became apparent. To evince respect and attention to the VOL JL H
kind parent of her husband, she had exerted herself prematurely, after her recent severe indisposition ; and, conse¬ quently, she once more was consigned to her chamber ; there uninterruptedly to nourish the recollection of her varied griefs, without one sympathising being near her, save poor Maud. For Mrs. Bostock bad not accompanied her from Albalanda upon her marriage ; and the circumscribed accommodations which Dover afforded presented an interdict to summoning this wished for maternal friend : but soon, too soon, in despite of' this lack of accommodation, an ad¬ dition to their party was most unexpect¬ edly presenteei in the beautiful Mrs. Rosamond Lily, who announced *<that her dear benefactress having promised, that when a fair opportunity offered for her conveyance to her protection, she would send for her to tarry a while ; so that upon two of the boarders being summoned from St. Mildred's, to their home at Paris, she had seized the fair opportunity thus unexpectedly offered,
anel had travelled with them to join her dear kind friend, whom she longed most ardently to see." ¡f But longing ardour evinced much temperance in its gratification ; for after the first interview, very short ones suf¬ ficed for Rosamond, who soon announced, " that Lady Dalincourt had taken a strange fancy to her style of reading, and wished her to read constantly to her," Latly St. Oswald, under the full influence of duty, would not interfere with any wish of Lady Dalincourt ; and although she felt grieved that her dear jn'otégee shoulel at length be under the same roof with her, and she not to be indulged with her society, uttered not one murmur. To the utterance of murmurs Maud also was deterred by the feelings of duty. But Maud could have murmured, and that with every effusion of indigna¬ tion against ingratitude and Mrs. Lily, had not anxiety for the peace of her adored lady kept her silent. For about half an hour each day this и c l
young and wily deceiver read to, or otherwise amused, Lady Dalincourt ; and the rest of her time was wholly devoted to De Rhone, who, ere her arrival, had been oppressed with ennui. Now Rosa¬ mond was the fascinating companion of all his excursions, and yielded beauty and captivation to every spot they visited together ; and so complete a fascinator De Rhone found her, that when his hapless wife was once more able to quit her chamber, it could not be concealed from her observation, no more than from that of all around them, that Rosamond had become her potent and determined rival.
CHAP. IX. No inspiration of connubial duty, nor of Christian forbearance, could have operated in detaining Lady St. Oswalt! much longer in Dover, to sanction, by lier presence, that imprudence whicli had become the public theme ; and she was only pausing to arrange some method of withdrawing herself and protégée to Albalanda without hostilities, when a personage arrived to change the current of the tide which had threatened to overwhelm her. Gilbert Warburg, next brother to the baron of that name, a handsome, dissipated young man, with little property, and no expectations, made his appearance in Dover, to claim the promised hand of Mrs. Lily ; whose project for quitting St. Mildred's had originally been for the purpose of operat¬ ing upon the partiality of her benefac¬ tress, into granting her a nobler provision и 3
than that arranged for her by Lord St Oswald, with her permission to wed Gilbert Warburg. The enamoured Gilbert had arranged with his fascinator to follow her to Dover in due time; and scarcely had he arrived there, when the palfrey of Rosamond, gaily trapped ready for her mounting, passed the hostelry where he had lodged himself and drew remarks from those around him, which filled his bosom with the most jealous apprehensions, and in¬ duced him to present himselfi without a moment for reflection, before the as¬ tonished Adela, to state his serious en¬ gagement with Mrs. Lily. Upon Rosamond's return from her excursion, she positively denied her be- trothment ; and so aroused the indig¬ nation of De Rhone, at such presump¬ tuous falsehood, that the most fatal con¬ sequences would most probably r have ensued, had not a royal mandate arrived express, most opportunelys to call him on the instant to Greenwich. A moment's delay in obedience to the
royal mandate might prove more than his head was worth \ to take Rosamond with him impracticable ; and to leave her in the same spot with the arrogant pretender, were tortures to De Rhone: the only balm, therefore, that he could de¬ vise for consolation w/as, to obtain assur¬ ances from the ready promise-maker, Rosamond, " that no lures of the pre¬ sumptuous Gilbert should ensnare her into becoming his;" and to issue his mandate to Adela, " not to sanction the pretensions of a man for her protégée, whose family had been deemed, by her own honourable father, unworthy of alli¬ ance with the children of integrity." Atlela haei neither wish nor intention of sacrificing her protégée to any man : but after her husband's solemn mandate, she declined all further communication, either by interview or letter, w/ith the importunate Gilbert; who, however, very shortly after the departure of De Rhone, was most unexpectedly furnished with an auxiliary of resistless force for winning the inconstant Rosamond, in ш 4-
the intelligence of the death of his elder brother; and no sooner was this event communicated to Mrs. Rosamond, than she commenced her serious calcu¬ lations upon whether becoming a ba¬ roness immediately might not prove a wiser speculation, than involving herself further in her unwary entanglement with De Rhone. De Rhone, impatient to terminate the daring hopes of his presumptuous rival, made no delay, after his departure from Greenwich was permitted, in flying back to Dover, where he was received by the wily Rosamond with the most flattering welcome, and parted from her at night as her sanctioned lover, looking forward to some kindly stroke of future fate, to rescue from love's miseries : but on the morrow the deceiver had vanished ; eloped with the new Lord Walburg to the Continent, there to effect a marriage whenever the peculiar circumstances attendant upon her birth could render it lawful; and having embarked in the night, on board a smuggling vessel,
under that veil of secrecy and caution wiiich contraband traffic rendered neces¬ sary, all clew to their route was effectually ties troy ed. Rosamond, in the artful manufacture of her tissue of deception, fabricated a pathetic epistle to De Rhone, in the affecting language of heroic magna¬ nimity, stating, " that gratitude to the St. Osvvakl family had led her from the man of her heart's uuvanquishable affec¬ tion, to become the wife of an individual she loved not, for the conscientious pur¬ pose of restoring peace to the bosom of her benefactress." This epistle Rosa¬ mond left on her dressing-table, directed for De Rhone, and which was discovereel by the domestic, who had as usual en¬ tered the young tleceiver's dormitory to arouse her from her morning slumbers. Under a firm belief that all communi¬ cations from Mrs. Rosamond were of the first importance to his master, Ende), the valet of De Rhone, delivered the packet the moment he was summoned to attend him in his dressing-room; and π 5
De Rhone, having dismissed Endo from attendance, that he might read without an observer this unexpected, antl there¬ fore alarming, communication, he had no one near to save him from falling to the ground ; where, with every 7 faculty 7 suspended, he sank on perusing the in¬ telligence of Rosamond being lost to him for ever. The deep groan which preceded, and the noise that accompanied, the fall of De Rhone, drew the grief-blighted Atlela, in wild alarm, into this sacred apartment of her husband, when her piercing shriek, penetrating through the small dwelling, drew Endo promptly to her side, to aid in every effort for the reco¬ very of his master; but soon they 7 judged it necessary to summon Father James, the chaplain and leech of Lady Dalin¬ court. The letter of Rosamond, still grasped in the clenched hand of De Rhone, made too conspicuous a figure in the scene to escape the observation and recognition of the heart-wrung wife, who, disdaining
to penetrate unncessarily the secret which evidently had occasioned this alarming effect, and shrinking from the possibility of ever being suspected upon the sub¬ ject, caused Endo to secure it from all inspectors, before the arrival of Father James, who found it necessary to open a vein, ere the love-stricken De Rhone evinced symptoms of returning sensi¬ bility. But re-animation only recalled him to a sense of suffering, vyhich in a few hours reduced him to a bed of sickness, in a fever of so malignant a nature that nothing but the influence of gold could retain any subordinate attend¬ ant near him ; but Adela never leti her station by his pillow, day 7 nor night, al¬ though his wild ravings were incessantly of his devoted attachment to her rival, anel of his own abhorrence of his wife, as the bane of his happiness with the peer¬ less Rosamond. During three melancholy weeks, which passed heavily 7 on ere De Rhone^'s fever came to its crisis, the death and burial of II (i
Lady Dalincourt had taken place; for the elopement of Rosamond, and its fearful effect upon her son, having been incautiously disclosed to her, during the absence of Father James, brought on a fatal attack of paralysis, which in a few hours terminated her existence. In the first dawning of De Rhone's perception, he observed his hated wife at her anxious station; and he would have fled in detestation from her presence, or commanded her from his, had he then possessed power to effect either purpose : but thus compelled to endure her pre¬ sence, his augmenting perception gradu¬ ally 7 unfolded to his sensibility, that by Adela's hand alone comfort was ever conveyed to him, that night nor day her tender assiduities never slumbered, though the hireling nurse snored, and Endo nodded ; antl in eight and forty hours of these observations, allowed through intervals from the beneficial slumbers of bis abating malady, horror at the presence of Adela completely ceased ; and the first effort he achieved,
to evince consciousness of her presence, was a gentle pressure of her hand. This unexpected symptom of long despaired of amity penetrated with such touching effect to the susceptibility of Atlela, that tears burst forth in torrents to betray how much she was affected. Her tears were gifted with sympathetic influence, for they 7 tlrcvv spontaneously a copious flood from the eyes of De Rhone, and with such beneficial tendency, that v' 7 his long-suspended faculty of speaking was by them restored, but to little present profit ; for had Father James wished for its unrestrained exercise, De Rhone him¬ self did not, for what could he say to Adela ? and to talk to others, and not to her, his now grateful heart revolted from. In a moment of Adela's absence, he en¬ quired for Rosamond's letter, and learned from Endo " where, by order of the Countess, it had been secured from all inspectors;" and this trait of honourable feeling penetratcnl so deeply, that when the hand of Adela again came in contact with his own he pressed it to his lips with
grateful fervour ; and in a moment after, in a tone of thrilling sensibility, expressed the assurance that he felt, of her not having allowed his poor invalid mother to be neglected during his unfortunate illness. These words struck with such an elec¬ tric shock to the heart of Adela, that the susceptible Dc Rhone felt it rebound through her hand to his own heart. In¬ stantly his bed perceptibly quivered under him ; and the alarmed and sympathising Adela summoned Father James, vvho gave him opium immediatelyn " This medicine," said the agonised son, the moment he received it, " makes announcement, that afflicting news awaits my hearing ;" and when the operation of the potent soporific permitted his eyes to unclose once more, he fount! his wife at her usual station ; and she looked so mild, so sweet, so anxious, so full of sym¬ pathy 7 , that for a moment he forgot his alarm about his mother in the rising wish, " that he had never beheld the too fascinating Rosamond." A conference with Father James con-
firmed too fatally all his sad forebodings ; and bis intense affliction for his inesti¬ mable mother, by calling his melancholy thoughts from dwelling exclusively upon his loss of Rosamond, seemed, through the equilibrium afforded by the opposing conflict, to save him from sinking in the tide of grief, which luul threatened to overwhelm him. When the tender care of Adela became no longer necessary, with delicate atten- tion to what she conceived would be her husband's wish, she withdrew from a constant station by his pillow, but inex¬ plicably to himself her absence grieved him ; and whether from selfish motives, which led him to believe that there was only safety for him in her constant attend¬ ance, or that feeling himself now alone in the w T orld, he wished to fitul solace in her gentle friendship, he summoned her so frequently to resume her old seat, that she at length seldom quitted him ; when mutually compassionating each other for the individual misery they had each been doomed to sufler from inauspicious love,
for the unfavourable construction given by the nuns of St. Mildred to the termin¬ ation of Aelcla's betrothment were fading into total oblivion in the mind of Do Rhone, the kindlings of pity called up a softening feeling in their growing friend¬ ship, which might have shortly ripened into conjugal tenderness, had it not been lor the reciprocal belief, that the heart of each was irrevocably pre-occupicd. At length, De Rhone removed to Vespasian Tower ; and upon his visiting court, the king perceiving his mirthful countenance veiled in sadness, and his vivacity extinct, readily yielded him per¬ mission to remove to Albalanda, where he continued until after his amiable countess haei presented him with a son anel heir, when the title of Baron of St. Oswald being now his right by usage *, and that of earl through the original hereditary grant, he repaired to London to take his seat in the House of Peers. But as he journeyed his first stage on this
route from Albalanda, he encountered one of the fathers attached to St. Mildred's East, also on horseback. After riding the same road for some time, Lord' St. Oswald summoned resolution to enquire from him, " if any intelligence had reached their community relative to Mrs. Rosamond Lily ?" When the communicative priest replied in the affirmative, stating, " that she was yet abroad with her husband, — that she had become a mother to a lovely female infant ; but had encountered much and severe pecuniary difficulties through the gambling and other dissipated pro¬ pensities of her lord, until the Countess St Oswald, hearing of her distress through the Abbess of St. Mildreel's, had forwarded to her а noble sum, which she haei long since obtained from her late father, and kept by her for the purpose of presenting to her protegee, shoulel she marry with her approbation. The first impulse of Lord St. Oswald's feeling upon this intelligence was, to gallop back to Albalanda Castle, and clasp Adela to his grateful bosom for this
noble conduct to Rosamond, whom the voice of contrast whispered painfully did not deserve it from Atlela. But a mo¬ ment's reflection led him onward ; since, how could he return, and not account for his appearance and burst of gratitude, by awkwarel acknowdeelgments : however, he solacee! himself as he journeyeel for- warel, in arranging, that when time should have mellow r eti their unfortunate attach¬ ment into sober friendship, he might again meet Rosamond, even sanctioned by r the generous, exalteel Adela, and a union be effected between his own lovely heir anel the daughter of the peerless Kosamond. When our new Lorel St. Oswald arrived in London, he found the whole court in eager preparation for the meeting of the French and English sovereigns at Guisne, and as the dolor of his voice and coun¬ tenance had considerably subsided, and that he possessed ample power to make a magnificent addition in his suite to the the imposing spectacle in arrangement, Henry commanded his attendance upon
this occasion. For tiie first time, Lord St. Oswald felt a mandate from his sove¬ reign a painful grievance ; since it was to separate him for an indefinite time from his adored boy : nor, to bis infinite surprise, did he feel quite contented at the idea of a lengthened separation from Adela herself; for his anticipations of how tenderly she would comport herself in the maternal character ; how interest¬ ing she would appear, with her smiling babe, gracefully encircled within her very beautiful arms, now often formed a favour¬ ite picture in his day dreams, arresting his thoughts from their impassioned recol¬ lections of the fascinator Rosamond. The chaste taste and munificent spirit of Lady St. Oswald, notwithstanding the impeding circumstance of distance, re¬ gulated the preparations of her lord for the splendid regal interview which at length took place ; and as soon as Lord St. Oswald was emancipated from at¬ tendance upon his sovereign, and received the kind caution, « to live warily after his late expenditure," he hastened to
Albalanda, happy instead of jealous, that Sir Francis Briant had successfully suc¬ ceeded him in the department of devising amusement for the king : and although feeling no necessity for living warily, he felt rejoiced to have the power of living quietly in his own castle ; where, with transport, he folded his lovely r babe to his throbbing bosom ; and with the kindly feeling of genuine friendship, embraced the countess, whom he thought must have been absolutely practising necromancy with her aspect during bis absence; so much had maternal hap¬ piness, and exemption from connubial mortification and anxiety, improveel her beauty ; anel often and often as his Lord¬ ship now looked upon his lovely wife, he believed that could she be exonerated from every impropriety relative to Sir Ethelbert, that it would prove no difficult task to wean his heart from Rosamond. But, alas ! poor Adela was not doomed to continue long a pacer in the pleasant path that seemed to be leading her to felicity; for, as on all prior occasions,
when she firmly trusted she had entered the road to certain happiness, she found it terminate in misery. The idol heir sickened and died ; and the almost distracted parents were separated in the moment of their dire calamity 7 , by a royal mandate for Lortl St. Oswald to repair to Rome, to be present when the Dean of Windsor presented His Ma¬ jesty's treatise against Martin Luther to the Pope ; and to let his Majesty know, truly 7 and honestly, what Leo and his conclave thought, or said, relative to this composition. Nothing for the peace of this now almost tenderly at- tacheel pair coukl have proved more inauspicious ; for in Rome his Lordship unfortunately encounteretl the baneful Rosamond, matured into dazzling beauty of surpassing brilliancy ; her skill in accomplishments improveel by Italian influence to fascinating perfection, and her natural arts and allurements expanded by precept and example, into the resist¬ less spells of witchery. Upon the susceptibilities of Lord St.
Oswald she promptly exercised her be¬ witching powers, and he as promptly fell a ready victim to her lures. His heart again became all her own, — and soon his purse also ; and notwithstanding his copious flow of wealth from England, he could scarcely supply the unreasonable demands of the unprincipled Rosamond, to feed her own extravagance, and the profligacy of her rapacious husband. Unfortunately for the infatuated St. Oswald, he still was detained by his mission, in the spot which Rosamond illumined ; and coldly 7 he at length re¬ ceived the intelligence from Rome, " that. Lady St. Oswald was again a parent ; and that the young stranger was a daughter." The madly devoted idolater St. Os¬ wald sent, with his heartless congratu¬ lations upon her safety 7 , a request to Adela, for their infant daughter to be named Rosamond, after the most admired woman of the age, who had conferred upon him the honour of calling her only 7 child Rhona, after him ; and to this
request his heart-wrung wife replied, "that ere his request reached Albalanda, in full belief that she was anticipating his wishes, she had had his daughter baptized, by the name borne by T a woman deservedly admired in the age wdiich she had adorned, — Maty, after his own inestimable mother." This reply struck upon the gratitude and conscience of Lord St. Oswald so forcibly that he would have set out for home immediately, had not his actions been under political control. But a few interviews with the resistless Laely War¬ burg obliterated every favourable home- tenelency ; so that, when at length his recall from Italy arrived, it proved little less than annihilation to tear himself from Rosamond, whom he madly pro¬ mised to make speedy arrangements, out of his ample stores, for her husband to return with her to England, Consciousness of ingratitude to the in- estimable Adela, to whom he owed all that influx of wealth whicli he had lavished so reprehensibly upon her 'nu
fatuating rival, gifted his movements homeward with tardy motion ; and though" when he did at last arrive at Albalanda he acknowledged to himself his spouse looked most lovely, yet y the more dazzling charms of Rosamond spell-bonnet all auspicious effect upon his admiration ; and in that state of per¬ verted feeling, which reprehensible at¬ tachments invariably^ occasion, almost pronounced poor Adela a culprit, for looking well after the calamity her ma¬ ternal happiness had sustained scarcely one year since ; not once accusing his own transgressing looks, or reflecting how completely he had ceased to re¬ collect and bewail his lost cherub in the society of Rosamond. But returned to his own castle, he never ceased to re¬ member and lament him ; the new infant, the heroine of these pages, completely failing to awaken paternal interest : for, unluckily, Lady Mary had not, like her late brother, personal attractions to allure by ; for she seemed a mere ball of fat and good temper ; and her dissatisfied father
pronounced she had neither nose nor eves discernible, and turned in horror from her, even as she smiled and crowed her allurements, in full belief of her strongly resembling a hideous dwarf latelv exhibited at Rome; and in this moment of recoiling disgust, recalling to his contemplation, in striking contrast, the little Rhona Warburg, then almost three years old, the most complete para¬ gon of infant grace and beauty ever formed. This unfortunate disgust, thus in¬ creased by contrast, could not be over¬ come ; and with sorrow poor Adela perceived it, and her own diminution in the esteem of her lortl : esteem she despaired of ever now r regaining, as his lordship seldom yielded her any oppor¬ tunity,— spending his time chiefly 7 at York, or at Warburg Castle, arranging tor the performance of his promise to Rosamond ; but which bis susceptible feelings of honour led him to find a com fort less pursuit, and at length compelled his relinquishing it altogether ; for upon VOL. I. [
investigating all the difficulties of the case, he felt conviction that nothing short of the direct robbery of Adela and her progeny could enable the Warburgs to return to their native country, and establish them in their baronial castle : when in love-lorn despair at this bitter disappointment, he daily quitted his home to brood in lonely 7 walks and rides upon his wretchedness, in the horrors of indefinite absence from the peerless Rosamond. But these rides and walks w r ere through those paths most likely to regain for Adela that prized ground she feared for ever lost; since, go whithersoever, or encounter whomsoever, lie might, affect¬ ing anecdotes in proof of the beauties of his wife's heart perpetually assailed him ; and, day after day 7 , he at length returned to Albalanda, with looks and tones soft¬ ening once more to tenderness: and just as the merry Mary had attained her eighteenth month, without having been able to crow, or caper, or manoeuvre herself by any infantile stratagem, into
tlie better graces of her father, and with out having expanded much more promise of visible nose and eyes, another blossom was added to the daily opening flowers of conjugal felicity in Al balanda Castle, by the birth of a lovely boy.
12
CHAP. X. 1 he birth of this son and heir was not haileel with more rapture by his parents than by his sister; for the animated Mary shrieked with wild delight when she first beheld, and was permitted to kiss, her brother ; and the only alloy felt upon the appearance of this new Lord de Mandeville, was found in the mind of Lord St. Oswald, arising iu regret upon that disparity in years which might here¬ after interfere with the union, his heart coveted for hiin, with the beautiful Uhona, The new Edward de Mandeville was hourly advancing in strength and beauty, and his mother in the tender friendship of his father, when intelligence arrived of the death of Baron Warburg iu an affray at a gaming-house in Rome. The dire pang conveyed to the heart of Lorel St. Oswald, on Rosamond being free,
whilst he was fettered, foreboded no¬ thing propitious to the cause of Adela : and this foreboding pang bad many α successor, when the abbess of St. Mil¬ dred's conveyed a letter from the beauti¬ ful widow to him, iu which she stateel herself and chikl to be left in absolute penury ; for that even the trifle whieh Lady St. Oswald had so bountifully sent to her, had been appropriated by Lord Warburg to his own dissipated purposes : anel whilst writhing in agony 7 , inflicted by the tone of this artfully fabricated epistle, his lordship was compelled by some do- mestic occurrence to enter the presence of her he was meditating α flight from, that he might rescue Rosamond from the fangs of poverty, and place her and her chikl in safe protection. Lord St. Oswald perceived that Adela was agitated, and "that his unexpected entrance had led her to the effort of sub¬ duing tears. After a moment's struggle with her feelings, Adela addressed her lord ; but whilst she did so, delicateJv averted her glances as she spoke of Ro«
rámond, and informed him, that she had received intimation from the abbess of St, Mildred's, of the great affliction the cliüd of her early affection was whelmed in by the death of her unworthy hus¬ band. " You, dear Villars," she continued in a thrilling tone of sweetness, " can make better management in aidance for poor Rosamond than I can, let me bethink me as I may, to yield assuagement in her sorrowed need. Perchance, through your advisement, our ambassador at Rome might foresee all things for vou in accordance with our good intent. Or, as it seemeth me, some one express from us would aggrace our sympathy with bet¬ ter fitment. Father Hubert, as our envoy, would be apt and meet to go ; and would do all for Rosamond's comfort and conso¬ lation which might by man's wit or kind¬ liness be imagined : nor will he, I know I may avouch, deem aught of hurry or travail discommodious in an unheedy salliance, but will make as much speed- iness onward as conveniently becomes
him. Or haply, Villars, you may wis of some one more to your approof, who might accomplish this repair to poor afflicted Rosamond more excellently to your contentation than even our good Father Hubert." Adela could not utter all this kindness with a steady voice: forgiving mercy almost overpowered her melting cadences, but when she came to her concluding sentence, an agonising thrill bounded through her palpitating heart, in appre¬ hension of whom Villars might pronounce the agent for this mission, and her last period sounded lowly and tremulously ; anel in this moment she was clasped by 7 her agitated husband to his panting bosom ; and without power or inclination to restrain them, he wept over her the flowing tears of all the varied feelings she had touched : and for many minutes Adela w T cpt with him. At length Adela, starting from the trembling arms of Villars, brought water to revive him ; and now, in continuance of her long habit of sparing the feelings
of others, by concealing her own, sent her agitation from the surface to the confines of her generous heart, and gently saitl, " I would request you to consider ere your déchirement of our meet plan of aidance for Laely Warburg, did not her needmcnt forefend all restful tarriance in our measures : but, perchance, you may deem it more to your contentment to hold consultation with the abbess of St. Mildred's ; if so, you must seek her incontinently." " I will avise with none, but my angelic- wife !" exclaimed Lord St. Oswald. *' Let Father Hubert wend his way to Rome, my Adela ; he will do all that beseemeth our intendment for the poor sufferer's behoof, with the same delicacy 7 , faith, and honour, that Adela would aggrace with." " Whither is your advisement for the holy man to engard the poor mourner ? To what h abitan ce, do you wis, meet for her, Villars, in her wailful state?—To .— to—" and the voice of Adela falterééi, in union with the tumultuous bounding
of her anticipating heart: 4 * to St. Mil¬ dred's, or whither, my good Lorel?" Every fibre in St. Oswald's frame now shook with convulsive agitation, and so did Adela. — St. Oswald snatched up the cruise of water, swallowed a large gulp, then threw himself into the arms of his wife, and clasped them around him, as if he thus himself constituted her his shield from error; and then with some difficulty articulated his desire, which was for Father Hubert to attend Lady War¬ burg to Trent, where an aunt of her late husband was superior of a monastery ; and which he thought would be her most eligible place of sojourn for the two first years of her widowhood. Adela, feeling as if her rescue from destruction had been now achieved by her husband's magnanimous victory over his own wishes, pressed his hand in ten¬ der gratitude to her trembling lips, and silently withdrew to prepare Father H li¬ ber for his unexpected embassy. In a very few hours Father Hubert departed for Rome, charged with a beau- i 5
tifully kind letter from Adela, and one befitting the husband of such an Adela, from Lord St.Oswald, to Lady Warburg; and in due time arrived at his place of destination. He found the disconsolate and pennyless widow in a superb villa about a mile out of the city, surrounded by magnificence and luxury, and looking as if no " — worm i' tlie bud fed on her damask cheek.'* Father Hubert delivered his creden¬ tials, and a heavy purse of marcs, which the countess bad sent for the present individual use of Rosamond. Latly War¬ burg requested two days to arrange for her departure for Trent, and appointed the hour upon which she would be in readi¬ ness to accompany the good Father to the protection of her deceased husband's aunt ; and gave him various addresses where he was to pay different sums of money, to enable her to quit Rome with¬ out molestation : but when lhe holy man returned to her villa, according to Lady Warburg's own arrangement, the ignis
fatuus was gone ; having left a letter, to inform him that she had fled to an asylum more likely tó effect the restor¬ ation of her happiness thaii that appointed for her by his noble patrórife The place of this arch-designer's destination was St. Mildred's monastery ! and, ere poor Father Hubert's statement of how she had absconded could arrive at Albalanda, a letter from the fugitive herself was delivered to Lord St. Oswald, dated St. Mildred's, stating, " That dis¬ traction at his cruelty, in consigning her to banishment from that individual so¬ ciety in which alone existence was prized by her, bad led her to use the purse be¬ stowed in ostentatious charity upon her by the liappy Lady St. Oswald, in bring¬ ing her on the wings of agonised affection into Yorkshire, to ascertain if lingering death was to be her doom, in conviction that he bad ceased to love her." How the melting pathos of this artful composition operated upon the heart of Lord St. Oswald must be left at present for conjecture to determine ; but the 1 6
magic of her love epistles assailed him every hour this day, and attracted answers back to her at St. Mildred's until even¬ tide, when his lordship, with the appear¬ ance almost of a distracted man, set out on horseback from Albalanda, attended by Eudo ; and iu about two hours after his eleparture from the castle, a letter arrived from his lordship to the dire- fully alarmed Adela, to whom the secret of Laely W r arburg's arrival at St. Mild¬ red's that morning had been revealed by the mischief-loving Father Ralph. From the moment this unwelcome in¬ telligence hat! been imparted by Father Ralph to the countess, trembling agitation and touching sadness marked her aspect and her manner, until after the arrival of lier lord's express, which seemed to con¬ vey some most efficacious balm to her tranquillity; for, after a short retirement to her own sacred oratory, she apjieared to all around her as absolutely treading in air; and ere Maud took leave of her beloved lady for the night, poor Adela confided to her, that she, her child-
ren, and her favourite attendants, were immediately to set out with her lord upon the Continent, to travel for three years. Adela had lately found it an efficacious measure to walk before breakfast, when title permitted, upon the beach, which formed one boundary of the Albalanda domain. It therefore awakenetl no sur¬ prise amongst the household, her setting out alone, the morning after the sudden departure of her lord, upon her usual pedestrianism ; nor was the procrastina¬ tion of her absence observed, until the volatile Laely Mary began to evince im¬ patience for her mother's morning ca¬ resses; when Maud, vvho had been ex¬ tremely 7 busy, making private preparations for the meditated tour, was aroused to wonder her lady had not yet returned ; and which wonder leel to a sudden recol¬ lection that this was the first morning of an expected springtide — that probably the swell had come unexpectedly upon her, and that perforce she was sojourning on some exalted rock for safety.
The gentlemen of the household and attendants, upon this recollection, in¬ stantly sallied forth to extricate their idolised lady from the inconvenience, or perhaps alarm, of her situation ; some descending to the rocks from higher cliffs, while others set out in boats upon the ocean, in case that by this means her extrication might be more conveniently and speedily 7 effected : but nowhere could they discern her whom they anxiously sought ; no call, no shout, attracted the response they panted for; and the most agonising alarms were at length awak¬ ened. Nor were these alarms without sad, most sad foundation. Every 7 man, who could procure a horse to mount, gallop¬ ed off in wild affright to spread the alarm, and seek information relative to her they sought ; whilst those who could not expand their anxious wings remained near the shore, in direful agonies of ex¬ pectation upon what the ebbing or the subsequent returning tide might bring of fatal intelligence ; and, far and wide the
alarm being spread, a few hours found the whole country in a tumult : the sheriff, the nobles, the religious, the yeomen, all turned out to seek, to trace, to find her whom all esteemed; whilst her own household and dependants were like dis¬ tracted parents, wives, husbands, children, seeking in dire alarm, and lamenting in agonised anticipation, their most beloved in these kindred relatives ; and those af¬ fecting deeds of charity and kindness, which Adela's right hand bad never re¬ vealed to her left, now were blazoned forth as trophies ready to adorn her tomb. The tide ebbed, and in agonised terror proofs were sought, which all recoiled from finding. A shoe, a sleeve, and a veil, were discovered ; anel the heart- rived Maud, ascertaining their having formed part of the countess's attire when she had set out upon her fatal walk, the sad confirmation of the fate of Adela was believed by all her mourners — and these were all the county, save those whom the wails of St. Mildred's monas¬ teries then encompassed.
From this sorrowful moment nets were laid along the coast, and mourning anxious groups appeared, almost sta¬ tionary, morning, noon, and night, in the sad hope of the coming waves restoring their lost treasure, to receive the rites of Christian sepulture. But the realising of this sad hope was deferred for nearly three weeks; when, on the return of an early morning tide, was discovered, by the unwearied votaries of gratitude, the body of a female floating on the deep ; and as each coming wave brought it nearer and still nearer to the shore, the lamentations of anticipating sorrow sounded forth its touching dirge, and the sympathetic bells of St. Mildred's, East and West, were almost instantaneous in their loud and dolefully tolled response. The body reached the shore ; and those whose hearts bled at receiving this afflict¬ ing restitution, found the revered corse so direfully decomposed, that no trace of the Countess of St. Oswald could be discovered ; but every part of the dress, which immersion had not- too much de-
stroyed for recognition, yielded incontro¬ vertible testimony that this was too surely the corruptible of her who had put on in¬ corruptibility. The coffins had been prepared in ex¬ pectation of this possible restitution ; but, to the grief of all, the revered remains were, through dire necessity 7 , soldered up without the usual ceremonies. The coffins, thus sadly tenanted, were laid in state, and every prepararion for the funeral ar¬ ranged in readiness for the momentarily looked for arrival of Lortl St. Oswald, after whom an express with the melan¬ choly tidings had been forwarded to London, whither it was supposed he had winged his way from Albalanda. His lordship's eldest brother arrived, antl Fa¬ ther Hubert arrived, but no St. Oswald ; and the intelligence brought by the holy man gave assurance that his lord¬ ship could not be iu Yorkshire in time for the interment, since the reverend father had encountered Lord St. Oswald in France, on his rapid way to Geneva, whither he had been commissioned by his
lordship to conduct the countess and her babes, without delay, tojóin him. Upon this information Lord Dalincourt took upon himself to act in conjunction with Father Hubert de Bourge, who had been her ladyship's trustee, and one of the Jate lord's executors ; and with grief of heart the sorrow-stricken preceptor of the inestimable Adela set about this af¬ flicting duty ; in doing which he had perpetually 7 to encounter her, whom, in the existing state of his feelings, he most recoiled from, — the ignis ja tuns vvho had eluded him in Italy, and whom the shrewd Hubert believed was now acting for deep effect in her usual path of wily artifice, which haei now placed her in Al¬ balauda Castle. The deep designer Rosamond had, upon the first alarm for the fate of Adela, presented herself before the gate of Alba¬ landa Castle, in a state of apparent agita¬ tion befitting the anxiety of the moment, obtained entrance, and established herself in the nursery ; where she declared, that should the reported late melan-
choly bearings of the inestimable coun¬ tess have led her to any dire act of self destruction, she should strive to repay in some degree the debt of gratitude she owed her dear protectress, by devoting herself to her two helpless babes. And this intention Lady Warburg too soon found occasion for pronouncing her¬ self called upon to perform ; for Adela had too surely disappeared, and ere her important maternal task towards her in¬ fant son had been terminated. This deprivation fell with serious menace upon the poor babe, ere a proper substitute coukl be obtained ; and upon this trying occasion the tenderness of Rosamond's attentions to the suffering Edward, called forth the admiration of all — but those who knew her. The little Maiy, too, it was the object of this deep designer to attract by kind¬ ness; not then in the secret, that poor Mary's attachments were unlikely to in¬ fluence her father : but Mary, soon дег- eeiving this obliging lady procured for her everything she asked for, took it into
her imagination, that, through the same power, she could bring her mother to her. Every moment, therefore, in which she coukl attract the attention of this stranger, her cry became more anel more e_-/ ^f importunate and affecting—" To go for her mother! — To hring her mother back to Mary and brother!" — until this ex¬ traordinary child at length took it into her head, that though the lady could, ьке would not, bring back her mother : and in consequence of this belief) her resentment awakened an invincible elislikc to Latly Warburg, which unfortunately became mutual ; and, in the mind of Lady 7 War¬ burg, assumed a deadly hue — menacing the future happiness of an innocent babe, whose attachment to an adoring mother had led her to offend. Although Ladv Warburg could not deceive Father Hubert, Dame Bostock, Weewitte, or Maud, she completely suc¬ ceeded in convincimr Lord Dalincourt that shervvas an angel in a human mould ; and, in her affected artlcssncss, detecting her ardent attachment to Lord St Os-
wald, lie pronounced his brother fortu¬ nate, since, through this attachment, he could give his children another celestial being to yield a mother's care ; and, in his despatches to Lord St. Oswald, railed not to paint the conduct of the fair Rosa¬ mond iu the most fascinating form. The young Rhona Warburg had her pe)st assigned lier, too, in this drama of attraction. She had been instructed to find her way into Albalanda Castle, batheel in tears at separation from her mother; anel when established theie, to win the affection of all around her by her sweet docile mannens; and, finally, to profess perfect adoration of the tender plant, De Mandeville, and to exen t all her win¬ ning wiles to render their attachment reciprocal. This miniature lorel seemed to enter veny amicably into the views and wishes of Laely Warburg, ior he took very peaceably to the partialities with which she toiled for his being inspucd : but not so Lady Mary ; for, after having appeared for some days quietly to endure the soft and gentle coaxings of this new com-
panion, she suddenly evinced such un¬ equivocal hostility to every approach of amity from the gentle Rhona, that at length Lorel Dalincourt, who was a pro- fesseel admirer of the elegant cherub Rho¬ na, ordered a separate suite of chambers to be established instantly for the wild savage Mary, apart from her toward bro¬ ther and his'kind friends; and where possibly, under the control of Dame Rostock and the damsel Maud, wiio both seemed so strangely partial to the young vixen, she might at length be tamed into something civilised. The powerful admiration which Lord Dalincourt had imbibed for the fasci¬ nating Rhona, had arisen to enthusiasm during the solemn ritual of Adela's in¬ terment. Mingled in the procession was what was termed " A scochonc of inno. centes clothed in white, every innocent bearying a taper in its lianele ;" * and the leader of this troop of the most beautiful children to be procured for this purpose, was the matchless actress, Rhona War-
burg; vvho moved so gracefully 7 , and dropped her tears so judiciously 7 , that Lorel Dálitlcourt forgot his sorrow as chief mourner, in admiration of this bewitching innocent ; and even whilst the solemn chanting of the requiem was subduing every individual present, but the enemies of departed worth, with agonising tears, his lordship was absolutely 7 calculating upon the speculation of happiness with twenty years advance in age, were he to await his chance of ultimate success with this young fascinator, and tarry nine years for his baroness, until Rhona was fourteen. As Lorel Dalincourt was not tardy in making his admiration known to the infant coquet, Rosamond, although not a little envious of her child's attractions, determined to turn this favourable im¬ pression to advantage, by interesting his lordship for the prospects of Rhona, which were menaced by 7 the next heir to the title and estates of Warburg, upon the plea of some informalities attending the marriage of her pareuts.
The romantic speculations which filled the mind of Lord Dalincourt relatíve to this juvenile captivator, enlisted him at once as a zealous agent i u her cause ; and, ere his departure from Albalanda, he arranged with Rosamond, that she, Rhona, Lorel de Mandeville*, and suite, should remove ere long to Nonpareille Bower, his lordship's seat in Middlesex, where his eldest sister, Lady r Worlington, recently become a widow, at present re¬ sided withbim; and where, írom its vicinity to the capital, they coukl conveniently arrange all legal measures for the preserv¬ ation of the young Baroness Rhona's birth¬ right; whilst, the infant Edward being taken to the protection of an affectionate aunt, yet still under the observation of his kind and tender friend, Lady Warburg, could not fail of meeting the approbation of Lord St. Oswald. This arrangement was therefore, without much delay,effected; and through it Lady Warburg doubted not she should shortly re-enter Albalanda Castle*, as successor to her benefactress, under the auspices
of Lord St. Oswald's family : and at Nompareille Bower she found afl things in conformity to her wishes, except that Lord St. Oswald remained upon the Con¬ tinent upwards of a year after the sad catastrophe of Adela's death had been announced to him, so desultory in his movements thai none coukl succeed in a premeditated encounter with him ; anei when he diel at length join the long- expecting party at Nompareille Bower, it was evident to all that be had been more than a nominal mourner. To reanimate the evidently weakened passion of Lord St. Oswald, became the fixed determination of the mortified and angry Rosamond; who, although she had successfully fascinated his brother anel sister into potent auxiliaries, found it no easy 7 achievement to rekindle a flame once so ardent: but not until the full expiration of his second year of mourning would he lead her to the altar; and although at length united to the woman whom he had for years adoren!, the union did not appear to restore him to hap- vol. ь к
piness. — A sad and solemn expression sat on- his naturally cheerful counte¬ nance ; and if by any chance it disap¬ peared, its absence was but momentary, and ever seemed to return with even more impressive melancholy, as if in sor¬ row 7 for its late suspension.
CHAP. XL At the period in which Lord St. Oswald had attended the regal interviewât Gu'isne, a romantic adventure, whilst in full chi- valric influence upon his feelings, led his lordship to pledge his honour as a knight that he would, when called upon, take a singularly situated male orphan under his protection, to be educated with his own son. " This orphan boy," his inform¬ ation stated, " was of noble descent ; but so mysteriously menaced, that those who haei solemnly sworn to protect him from the sanguinary dagger of an hereditary foe dared not detain him under their own care, as that would inevitably lead to discovery and destruction ; but that under the fostering wing of Lorel St. Os¬ wald suspicion of his identity would be defeated, and an unoffending innocent saved from pitiless immolation." Scarcely had this promise passed his lips к Я
ere his lordship felt repentant; and the more he contemplated the subject, the more dissatisfied he became with his hasty promise, since alarm mingled with conviction tliat at least he had been raslily imprudent : for should this child of mystery turn out to be, what was not improbable, an offset of the Plantage¬ nets, therefore noxious to the Tudors,— united as he was, although through the king's own management, with a family whose loyalty 7 had been for some time sus¬ pected,—what a flood of troubled waters might he not thus, by his chivalric pity, have turned into a ready course for overwhelm¬ ing him and his ; nor could the ingenuous declaration which had assailed his vanity, through flattering homage to his honour and generosity, — " that it was a man vvho hated him who thus dared to confide this sacred deposit to his care," — in less dazzled moments, when the pageantries of the " Field of the Cloth of Gold" were not in action upon his chivalric feelings, fail of adding to his alarm of future evil. Thç domestic calamity in the loss of'
his first-born, his embassy to Rome, ant! subsequent distress of mind, interfered with Lord St. Oswald's meditations upon the imprudent promise which he bad been excited hito making; and at length, when other causes led him into adopting his desultory movements during his first year of mourning for his wife, he almost hoped every clew to him might be lost, until time pressing for the education of the mysterious orphan might induce his protector to make some other arrange¬ ment for his asvlum. But in this cherished expectation his lordship was disappoint¬ ed ; for, in an obscure village in Nor¬ mandy, whilst he was resting himselfj horses, anel suite, on his way to Englanti, his mysterious protégé was presented to him for a page, by a monk of most pre¬ possessing manners, whom Lord St. Os¬ wald found had been preceptor to his young charge whilst on travel through various countries for the last three years. This most pleasing and enlightened monk informed Lord St. Oswald pri¬ vately, that the name by which he \хщ к 3
to know his young page was Algernon Fitzrivers ; and that this interesting and promising youth believed himself to be the offspring of parents then in volun¬ tary banishment, — a sort of exile not uncommon at this period. And most interesting and promising, Lord St. Os¬ wald soon pronounced Algernon : nor was the youth's prompt passport to fa¬ vourable impression in a strikingly fine exterior a false light, that emanated lustre to deceive ; for the heart and minel of Algernon were full as perfect works of Nature as his form and face* Many months had not elapsed, after his establishment in the family of his new patron, ere the graceful Fitzrivers became as high in the favour of every individual who composed it as the fas¬ cinating Rhona himself; and in the parental affection which Lord St. Oswald ere long conceived for this grateful and intelligent youth, he lost every feeling of repentance for having entered into his rash promise. At this period every noble could boast
many places for residence; to each of which they usually migrated for some period every year, with the inconve¬ nience of the migration also of their household stuff*. The chief of these man¬ sions devolved to Lord St. Oswald, and his heirs, were Albalanda Castle, Oswald House, and Vespasian Tower. Lord St. Oswald, now recoiling from the idea of ever beholding his Yorkshire castle more, determined to make Vespasian Tower his chief abode. A large portion, there¬ fore;' of the household stuff* was ordered up from Albalanda to Vespasian Tower, immediately 7 upon Lord St. Oswald's se¬ contl marriage ; and also Father Hubert, to superintend the education of Lord de Mandeville, the young Worlingtons, Rho¬ na, and Algernon ; whilst as to Lady Maryn her father's own early prejudices led him to attend to those also of Lord Dalincourt, and the insidious remarks and representations of the designing Rosamond : consequently, this poor child was, by general vote, deemed not к 4
moveable, but left iu exile at Albalanda, with her attached governess, Mrs. Bos¬ tock, the damsel Maud, and a few of the old adherents and domestics, who all, fÌOin Laely 7 Alary to the most ancient of the household, felt as if a precious blessing had been cruelly wrested from them when the unwelcome mandate be¬ reaved them of Father Hubert, who, on his part, was overwhelmed with sorrow at parting from his earthly itlol Mary, for whom his heart cherished all the paternal affection he had borne her mo¬ ther; and, with solemn and affecting exhortations, gave the aliened child into the charge of Father Jonathan, his successor in Albalanda ; to whom, and also to Mrs. Bostock, he gave his opinion, " that upon those vvho reareel the volatile, yet susceptible, Mary solely depended whether she matured into an ornament to human naturen or the sad reverse." But, unfortunately for Laely Mary, Father Jonathan was so obstinately de-
voted to literature, that he considered nothing else worth existing for ; and, fully 7 satisfied with his own capabilities, he had determined to astonish the worhl with a learned work, to aid antl illustrate the labours of Martin Luther ; and was most anxiously engaged thereon when the unwelcome appointment assailed him, of preceptor to Lady Mary. And like vital drops from his heart's stream of life, was the sacrifice of each moment Father Jonathan was necessarilv com- peiled to waste upen his pupil, they were as few as possibility could devise ; decreasing dally, as the rapidly declining health of Dame Bostock exonerated him more and morc /rom the annoying task of teaching the young idea how to shoot, whilst he required matured ideas to shoot into laurel chaplets for binding his own brow : anel this exoneration, so productive of augmenting abstruse pages for his work, was soon sealed in a total cessation by the death of the amiable Mrs. Bostock, whose grief for the loss of her adored Adela, with the dire sur¬ ît 5
mises which agitated her mind, and the faithful Maud's, upon the painful subject, destroyed her health, and terminated her existence. Shortly after the death of Dame Bos¬ tock was known at Vespasian Tower, a successor, selected by the Abbess of St. Mildred's, was appointed to supply the place of the inestimable deceased ; but this successor became almost immediately the avowed detestation of her pupil, wdio resolutely recoiled from every acquire¬ ment to be obtaineel through the medium of her new governante, except proficiency in burle sepie mimicry, for which the singularities anel awkward defects of Dame Vintry afforded ample scope. But not thus was the procedure of edu¬ cation in Vespasian Tower — for there it flourished ; for there were established all things which coukl embellish the mind and manners of youth ; and wheresoever Father Hubert's jurisdiction governed, all that could render human nature ad¬ mirable was in full influence, and for the most part with intrinsical effect. Here
was also to be found, as in the earlier ages, every exercise for the promotion of chivalrous accomplishments, as well as every instruction in the more modern literature, then rapidly circulating through the kingdom ; and by all of these acquire¬ ments, according with her sex, the young inimitable Rhona was embellished : and from the wondrous perfection of her pre¬ maturely formed manners, yielding her early qualifications for the conspicuous service, she was, by general consent, the bestovver of all the chief prizes for gym¬ nastic merit, whenever her beautiful mother fek disinclined to that exertion. Under the guidance of Lorel Dalin¬ court, the new Lady 7 St, Oswald was contesting her daughter's claims to the title and estates of her progenitors ; and the universal belief that these claims would be allowed, aiding the exquisite beauty and seductive manners of Rhona Warburg, yielded to her such import¬ ance in every circle, that no wonder ro¬ mantic gallantly, encouraged by chival¬ rous education, led the youths assembled к 6
in Vespasian Tower, whether sojourn¬ ers or occasional guests, vety early to pronounce the peerless Rhona the arbi- tress of their future fate : amongst this number the all-subekung Rhona early CT ,ί felt an anxious desire to enrol the capti¬ vating page, Algernon Fitzrivers; and elften, more especially as time advanced, Lord Dalincourt feared his plan of wait¬ ing for his baremess was doomed to be subverteel hy tho interloping protégé of Lord St. Oswald. Business, whicli could not be evaded, at length arbitrarily compelled Lord St. Oswald to visit Albalanda ; anel as a companion, who would interest without annoying him with the trouble of ce¬ remony, selected Algernon to accom¬ pany him into Yorkshire. With trem¬ bling fear the vindictive Rosamond saw her lord set out on this portentous jour¬ ney, anticipating " that parental feelings might awaken interest for the hateful CT Магу, to the subversion of her ruthless plans, shoulel her agents not have toiled effectually in preparing a fell blight for
every germ of approof that otherwise might blossom into partiality 7 for Mary." As Lord St. Oswald, his protégé, anel attendants entered upon the domain of Albalanda, Algernon, riding by his lord¬ ship's side, suddenly began to look arou nel with great earnestness, and at length exclaimed, " Forsooth, but I bethink me I have traversed hitherward, good my lord, aforetime !" íť Have you so?" responded his lord¬ ship, aroused by 7 the exclamation from painful retrospections. (t In very sooth, with my dear and good Father Kenrick, erewhiles we maile travel abroad. But my revered precep¬ tor gave no advisement, whatever was his motive, of the name of the county through which we made salliance ; I was there¬ fore unweeting of ever having been in Yorkshire, or shoulel have vaunted of it." " What object has y r our gazeful recog¬ nition found to give you 'surance of this tact ?" demanded Lord St. Oswald, glael to escape from his own painful reminis¬ cences.
" The yet remaining ruin of yon cot. In the dern moment it was enfired Father Kenrick providentially made hisapproach- ment, wending his onward wav to a 'CT ./ monastery, where was to be our abidance for the night." " It fortuned him to be useful then ?" " Some parent must soonly have been unchilded by the despiteous flames, had he not happed to be at hand," responded Algernon. — " There was tlie baptism of a bell at some monastery nighly ; and to which the attendants of two children made repair, with a marvellous multi¬ tude, in witness of the ceremony 7 , leav¬ ing the poor babes bereft of all engard- ment in y 7 on cot, Whether through design ment or accident, a fire soon en¬ kindled amid the rushes, where the poor children had been warelessly and scath- fully left sleeping on the floor. At this moment of peril Father Kenrick matle ap¬ proachment in his travel, when, attracted by the smoke, he speeded him onward to give aidance : juvenile cries of piteous pathos soon gave wings to his motion.
The door of the hut despairfully defied his prowess, yet through chasms in its fit¬ ment issued volcanic bursts of smoke and flame. Father Kenrick now per¬ ceived a window, which he incontinently burst in ; but, being too small for his pass, I was the implement he found apt for his prompt purpose. On my entrance, I found myself in a chamber adjoining that in flames, with no outlet but the window I had entered, and a door which was now threatfully 7 emitting flames ; emerging through which, I on the instant beheld two children ; one of whom, an almost infant, lay reckless of peril, sleep¬ ing tranquilly upon a sack, which the other bantling, vvho in good sooth, my honoured lord, albeit not much more than one year older, was with all her baby niight dragging in wild affrightment from the pursuing flames, anel as it seemed to sure destruction, yet, through the in¬ tuition of merciful Providence, to the only spot in which a dern fate could have proved avoidless : anel even in these moments of almost miraculous exertion,
the affectionate little heroine, in dread- lessness of self- haza rd ry, bending her own fairy form over her more helpless and unconscious brother to engard him from the despiteous flames." "Incontinently now the poor babes found their rescue from the breme fate that haei seemed so shunless ; but the little heroine firmly lisped her refusal to tell aught for our enlightenment, since those who had left them without gardage had made threatful promises to endamage her brother, if she noised their estate to any : so, as we could make no cause of the matter by 7 her appointment, we wist no other means to service these our foundlings than to follow the guidance of our ears, which led us eftsoons, by the sounding of a convent bell, to a monas¬ tery of goodly 7 and venerable structure, rbreby ; where, when we produced our freight of bantlings, the consternation we awakened was not scant, and the babes were received with glad feelings by the nuns, who would make no declarement of whom the babes belonged to ; albeit
they bruited, ť that the neglectful at¬ tendants of these poor innocents were in their chapel, beholding the awful cere¬ mony which was then enduring, with right excellent solemnity.'" At this moment, and ere Lord St. Osvvakl could utter a comment upon Algernon's communication, a female child, most shabbily attired, darted through a gap in the stone boundary of the road which our travellers, as they discoursed, were slowly pacing, and, heedless of danger, rushed to their horses' heads, and in piteous tones of melting supplication "implored alms for a sick sufferer, vvho was perishing for lack of fbod :" and although there was nothing CT CT strikingly 7 attractive in the appearance of this very voung mendicant, vet the en- ergy of her manner, with the resistless pathos of her dulcet voice, drew forth instantaneously а favourable response to her petition, from the purses of the travellers, when a flash of joy irradiat¬ ed her countenance to almost celestial beauty; and utteringa short, but affect-
ing burst of gratitude, she darted back through the aperture which she had emerged from, and with the speed of a lapwing soaretl her rapid way up a rising ground. " Gramercy !" exclaimed the page, raising himself in his stirrups, to obtain an unimpeded view of the fleet racer, «— " this featly r -wingetl aiding must be a zephyr, I ween. — Look ! see ! my ho¬ noured lord, how marvellously graceful the urchin is, whom, at first view, I w r ist so homely. — See ! she lacks no shape- smith : never did I make observance of any whose form and movement more meetly challenged approof." " She is, forsooth, a graceful zephyr," said Lord St. Oswald ; " and also mar¬ vellously apt and meet for her men¬ dicity : for the tones speeded to the heart in which she craved for dole ; albeit, her lack of a bell and clack dish*
made declarement that she is not by craft a mendicant. Flowbeit, I much fear me, page, the boon which she so touch- ingly implored was for some habitant of this chatellany, to whom the castle Al¬ moner ought to have yielded aidance in their needment." Shortly now they reached the portal of Albalanda Castle, where, after sounding a loud peal, the gates creaked a slowly unclosing response; and Weewitte upon this occasion performed portgreve, the office of jester having long become a sinecure in the deserted castle. Weewitte, upon beholding who now demanded entrance, rapidly lowered the draw¬ bridge ; and whilst his cheeks blanched, antl his lips quivered, he attempted to articulate a cheerful welcome to his un¬ expected lord. Lord St. Oswald's heart was too full of the memory of Adela at this moment to admit of more than a gracious wave of the hand, in recognition of poor Wee¬ witte ; and the moment he entered the base court, antl had dismounted from
bis horse, he darted along the cloister which led to the chapel, leaving his faithful Eudo to perform the honours to Algernon, who was speedily ushered into the castle, where the desolation of non- residence, which saddened this noble structure, with the solemn echo of the footfalls wiiicb now broke the melan¬ choly silence, struck our page with the inhospitable chill of cheerless depopula¬ tion. His lordship haying private reasons for not apprising the Albalanda household of his coming, had despatched no avant- coureur to announce it : the consterna¬ tion, therefore, with the novel tv of action now spread by 7 Weewitte, were indeed animating ; and painfully 7 so to Father Ralph, who, through the absence of Father Jonathan, was calleel to the fore¬ ground in the reception of his lord. By an accidental detention on the road of an express from Rosamond, the abbess of St. Mildred was deprived of instructions how to act ; and her agents in the castle, of intimation that would
have spared them much embarrassment. However, this visit of Lord St. Oswald's to the chapel seemetl to yield comfort to the disconcerted priest, in its promise of time for certain arrangements relative to Lady Mary, and which he instantly hied him to accomplish. Through this absence of Father Ralph, with the per¬ sonal preparation which sent all others to their toilette, poor doleful Weewitte was tlie only Aibalandian in attend¬ ance when his lordship at length emerged from the chape!, and entered the hall. "What! Master Jester, are your wits agazed?" said his lordship, endeavouring to exert his firmness: " what has betided to ¡scathe them thus, that you lack all merry conceits to greet me with? Come, sparkle up for my solace 1 , and yield me a jest withal." " Odd's gloom ! myself then must it be, I wis, my earl right worthy," *
" How now ! what in yourself can you elance, good Fool ?" " A sorry jester is a jest in sooth." " Your craft of wit has not improved by keeping, I perceive, in your eleclare- ment," returned his lordship languidly, not cheered by the tone of Weewitte's responses. " Not by keeping silent," retorted Weewitte: " mine has been pent in so long, it has lost its enfiring cunning;— but should a mute be in recpiest for way- ment*, Heaven wots my meet fitment to enterprize the same." " But, Sir Jester," demanded Alger¬ non hastily, perceiving the last response struck harshly upon the feelings of Lord St. Oswald, " where is the Lady Mary?" " The Lady Mary ! youth ? Make entreatance of her dareful jailors to let you wot," returnee! poor Weewitte with strong emotion. " What is this advisement?" demanded Lord St. Oswald. " G — d y elei me ! but I wot not what
may fortune me if I turn babbler : Dame Vintry may soberly belowt* me, and the present head of our church may peril me with excommunication ; albeit, I'll stand the hazardry," replied the jester, who was a sorry one indeed. " They ween not how to make right view, or advise¬ ment, in managing Laely Mary, or they would find no travail; for she is a blos¬ som which exhales right excellent sweets of promise, when gentle winds blow r on her: but when the blast comes favour- less and fiercely, the tender shoot be¬ comes eftly a sturdy oak sapling, unbend¬ ing to the nips anei bumps of the breme hurricane ; and when the lofty ancestral spirit leads her to resistance, the despite¬ ous abbey r -lubbers reverse their climax in severity and descent, to make their super¬ lative in oflenceful punishment." " Descendí!" " Ay, my earl right worthy, e'en below the level of the castle keep. Ay, odd's damons dire, to asterting dungeons with our noble sapling !"
MR ETHELBERT. The fine eyes of Lorel St. Oswald flashed imlignant ire, whilst his heart felt the first throb of parental affection it had ever experienced for poor Mary ; anel, louldly shouting for the seneschal, he was flying from the hall to seek his child, when he encountered Father Ralph. Instantly his lordship changed his tone, from the eftervescenee of parental feeling to that of politic dissembling, and, bestow¬ ing something like gracious lecognition CT CT о о upon the evidentali у agitated Ralph, de¬ manded to see the Lad ν Marv. íe Dame Vintrv is agone to veld ail- virement to her \oung chai ge how to receive the paternal blessing, and will bring the Laely Mary hitherward ett- soons," replied the trembling Ralph. " That advisement cannot be of long durance, and must have come to end· ment ere I can have enterpiised a sal¬ liance to my child's chambers. I wiil, therefore, wind thitherward. — Lead on, good father. The good father did not lead, foi scarcely could he stand through agi-
tation ; and with difficulty articulated, " I am sorely aggrieved, gooei my lord, that upon Father Jonathan being loofed* ~ summoned to attend a chapter — " " A chapter of his own composition," muttered Weewitte. " A chapter at York," continued Ralph, —" the task fell to my allotment; and a gladsome task I thought to find it, the guidance of our young frisking lamb in soberness to the good shepherd. But one word in privacy, my lord — well may r your lordship tremble, for so do I — the diabolical damsel Maud, I soonly tlisceivered, had dearnly turneel the hap¬ less child from the true faith ; and she impiously made declarement, she woidd not homage the sacred representations of our Holy Saints. " My gooei lord, bounden İn duty r , we were contentless, and made our , fforts to withelraw a soul from heresy ; but ^vainly proved every exertion whilst the fell tempter remained: we thereupon
VOL. I.
L
sent the serpent hence, in the form of the damsel Maud." " How now!" exclaimed his lordship, sternly: "send the faithful Maud from Albalanda, without my consension !" " It was our bounden duty, good my lord, albeit it proved of little availment. Nothing of gentleness, for gentleness was our first missionary, could lure back the young and dareful apostate. There¬ fore, it became us,— yet with sorrowed hearts we did so,—it became us just to place her, — not, my good lord, for tarri¬ ance, but for the meet punishment that might recall her to the true faith, — it behoved us, I say, good my lord, to·—to .— place the Lady Mary—just in the first chamber— below—below the keep. But to lead back the Lady Mary, through affrightment, to the path she had sirayeti from, was not to befortune us; for even alone, with all the flesh-quaking, asterting gloom of loneliness around her, she made her plan to retí .liate alarm upon us. We gave no heedful ness to the matter of the spiricles of the enclosure
being formed to exclude the egress of grown captives, and bethought us not that, as our jester makes declarement, the Lady Mary's form is so subtile, it can, when she listeth, glide through key¬ holes, and find in nut-shells lodgment to her contentation, and through one of these spiricles she has made avengement on us, by abscondance." The life's blood of Lord St. Oswald seemed now to flow back from liis heart with a sudden chill, which almost froze the current through his veins ; and stag¬ gering a few paces, he w r as caught and supported by Algernon and Weewitte ; but at length revived through а powerful cordial, conveyed in a sudden recollec¬ tion, he eagerly exclaimed: — " My child is safe from the perils of her escape!— For, despite of her disguise¬ ment, I recognize her. Yes! it was Ade¬ la's tones that struck to the heart of hen- unconscious father.— But, Weewitte, in« continently tell me,—for 1 am prepared for the averment of your being her aidance L 2
in escape, and the supplier of her dis- guisement, which might, it seemeth me, have borne better accordance with her estate,—for whom was she under the de¬ grading needment of imploring alms, which she ought herself to have been able to supply?" " For Maud I dare avouch," responded Weewitte. " Maud is in a state of famish¬ ment, and none but the Lady Mary would be so dareful as to give her dole; and so doleful is Lady Mary's means, she has no dole to y eld to others." " Lead me anon to the habitance of poor ill-requited Maud," exclaimed Lord St. Oswald, in evident agitation ; antl catching the arm of Father Ralph, to stay him, continued, — " Hold, reverend sir! I prohibit your anticipation of my visit there.—Seneschal! neither do you make salliance from my view: you must find contentation in walking with me to Maud's residence, with Weewitte for our guide. Algernon, your arm. I prophesy, that soonly we shall learn
the declarement of how your charitable dole has been disposed ofV* In total silence, the above-named party proceeded to the very ruins of the hovel which Algernon had pointed out to his lord; and not more evident agi¬ tation did the anxious father evince on this walk than the holy man betrayed, for he shook perceptibly. When they arrived at the wretched hovel, Weewitte addressed his lord ; — " This, odd's pity! is the dern habit¬ ance of the faithful Maud. Through the breaches made by fire in the walls, our earl right worthy may behold his daughter — in disguisement truly : but such garnish was not of my r devisement, I am proud to state." These breaches presented to the vision of the agitated parent, and ids young friend, a miserable pallet of rushes on the mud floor within, upon which a human form lay extended, and by whom the youthful mendicant was kneeling, to ac¬ commodate her action more conveniently of arranging the sack of chaff which L 3
served for poor Maud's pillow. The ejaculation of horror which escaped his lordship's lips, on his first glance into the sick chamber of Adela's most faithful and favourite attendant, aroused the startled and tender nurse of poor Maud to her feet, when, through the chasms in the wall, perceiving Father Ralph, Mary wildly shrieked as she threw herself across the pallet, and grasping Maud with all her might, exclaimed, — " He shall not tear me from you, Maudy !" «- Fear not, Mary," said his lordship mildly 7 , as he now entered the hovel; when Mary, upon seeing him whom she had just received kindness from, conceiv¬ ing that, although accompanied thither by the stern Father Ralph, he was not likely to have come to harm her, started up to implore further assistance from the benevolent stranger for the comforts of poor Maud—antl in that instant she was clasped tc the bosom of him she was about to supplicate. " Mary," said Lord St. Oswald ten-
derly,— " Mary, does no internal feeling whisper, that I am your father?" Lord St. Oswald felt, as he held his daughter in his arms, the electricity con¬ veyed by this question through the frame of the sensitive Mary ; upon whom sur¬ prise, joy, hope, and fear so powerfully operateti, that in less than a moment the alarmed father found his child had fainted in his arms. The consternation was excessive, as this miserable ruin afforded no restor¬ ative, save the pure element that purled near the door; but this simple remedy proved quickly efficacious, Mary un¬ closed eyes that were no longer invisible, smiled up at her father, burst into tears, and hid her head upon his bosom. But a painful recollection soon recalled her from this indulgence of sobbingon apillow of tenderness — anxiety for poor Maud, like an undulating breeze turning the ivy's straying tendril from the oak it was entwining, to rest upon some intervening bough ; and softly Mary whispered her L 4
earnest petition for the rescue of Maud from persecution. " Maud, for your contentation, shall find herself incontinently in her home at Albalanda; where you shall yield her every cherishment, Mary," said his lord¬ ship ; and then turning to Maud, kindly enquired her ailment. Maud's tale was short, but piteous. She had been first turned out a wanderer from the castle ; then from the charitable roofs that had sheltered her, through threats of ecclesiastic vengeance; and when a cold, caught in the hovel's ruin, in which she had been driven to seek shel¬ ter, deprived her of the power of longer working for her bread, she must have perished for lack of food, only for Wee¬ witte, who brought some daily to her. But even of this relief the angry church, by threats of excommunication, had for the last two days deprived her ; and she was gradually sinking to eternal rest, when, late in the preceding evening, her fleeting spirit had been recalled to sensibility by the tears and caresses of
Lady Mary, who had sat on the ground weeping by her all the night ; and, after a short disappearance since morning, had brought her food, in despite of every denunciation. During the latter part of Maud's dis¬ tressing narrative, uttered in the tremu¬ lous tones of pitiable weakness, the cheeks of Mary were mantled by the brightest blushes of modest sensibility, pained at hearing her own praises ; and at length she endeavoured to hide her glowing face upon the bosom of her father, who de¬ manded in a tone of kindness, — " Where she had obtained the food ?" "I dare not make declarement," Mary softly replied : " Father Ralph, and other fathers, would be so rilled with avengement against the kind dame 1 coaxed the pottage from ; and who is gone straightway s to a drugster's, at Whit¬ by, for me, to bring me balms to do my Maudy good. But it was your dole, antl the young boy's, my honoured father, that bought the mess I brought for poor hungered Maud ; who, albeit, was no L 5
wise in fault that I would not cower tò the graven images, antl so I told them ; but they would yield me no more cre¬ dence than if the father of lies was my known parent." Lord St. Oswald now gave orders to the seneschal and Weewitte to repair to the castle for a comfortable Jitter for the conveyance of Maud; "and while we are awaiting the arrivance of this conveyance for poor Maud," continued his lordship, " this benevolent child will, I trust me, recover the surprisal that so whelmed her sensibility, and feel apt to wend her way 7 , with your support antl mine, Master Algernon, to the castle." Mary, starting, turned with eager scrutiny to observe the page, when after a momentary investigation she turned away with a look of disappointment. '*Why, Maiy, would you not bewray the names of those by whose advisement you deemed it unmeet to homage graven images?" demanded Lord St. Oswald. " By such a declarement you might have gared for Maud, the avoidance of all the
despiteous treatment she has had most haplessly for durance." " I did make declarement," responded Maiy, " that it was Father Jonathan : but," and she blushed to the brightest vermilion of indignation, " they were as mindless of Mary of Albalanda's word as if she were a churl's bratling ; and sent my poor Maudy into the harmful world, to sorrow me and make me weep." " But you did not weep," said Father Ralph, with bitterness : " tears woidd have beseemed contrition. No, in despite of her birthdom, the Lady Mary of Alba¬ landa transmewed into a fury." " Was such your chevisance, Mary ?" said his lordship. "In sooth it was," returned Maiy, blushing again, " and a very great and displacent fury. Incontinently, as they dragged my Maudy from my grasp, though I implored them piteously not to take her to her murderment, the fury came into me, all boiling up ; and as it enchafed my swelling heart, it made me h 0
strong and dareful, and eft I called them base names, and made mows at them ; and mo, I mocked them, turning my wimpled face upside down, to gar its being enough hideous, to look like them." Lady Mary now, as a climax to her ingenuousness, performed the distortion of her face into the similitude of Father Ralph ; but, although a caricature, yet so ludicrously resembling him, that none could remain in doubt of the original, and so nearly did she overthrow the gravity of her father by her comic powers, that with difficulty he preserved his composure. But not so successful was poor Algernon, for, in defiance of every feeling of respect for the sacred function, he laughed outright ; nor could he call his risible faculties to order, even though tears trickled, as it seemed in penitence, down his dimpled cheeks. Father Ralph marked all this, and never forgave Fitzrivers. At length the litter arrived ; poor Maud was tenderly placed in it, and
borne away towards Albalanda, followed by Father Ralph in high dudgeon, Lord St. Oswald, Algernon, and the delighted Lady Mary. In the pathway to the castle, it was necessary to cross that brook where, some years back, Maud had encountered the gay De Rhone. The tide was now at the ebb, and stepping-stones made a pass for pedestrians. The litter was borne safely across ; and Father Ralph pacing immediately after, in the careless¬ ness of action which his moodiness in¬ spired, slipped off the stones into the w r ater. Lord St. Oswald and Fitzrivers, possibly through contempt of the man from his inhumanity, had not been par¬ ticularly alert in springing forward to afford assistance ; however that might be, the little Mary had preceded them, and had caught his hand with the kind intent to aid him with all the power she possessed, exclaiming in a tone of soft compassion, — " Oh ! poor Father Ralph !" But Father Ralph flung her hand from
him as he recovered his equilibrium, and his footing on the stones. Lord St. Os¬ wald seized up his child into his arms, and pressed her to his bosom with pa¬ rental exultation ; and, after a moment of excited sensibility, addressed Father Ralph with a smile : — " Have we not conviction now, holy father, that the faith of this child is, with¬ out disguisement, purely Christian ?" Father Ralph's cheeks blanched, and he made no reply ; for the spirit within him, which worshipped mammon, whis¬ pered that lie had injured his own in¬ terest, by punishing the Lady Mary for heresy 7 , since he now perceived the noxious germ had proceeded from the parent stock. Full of this discovery, he panted for unconfined wings to bear him fleetly to St. Mildred's, there to spread the alarm, and to consult upon the measures which might be there de¬ creed for his adoption. The arrival of the party at Albalanda procured his liberation, and Father Ralph lost not a moment in visiting St. Mildred's ; at
length he returned to the castle, fully instructed to bend and bow to Lord St. Oswald, antl in all things to deceive him.
CHAP. XII. It proved a mournful necessity for Lord St. Oswaltl to go over the castle with the seneschal, to arrange for requisite repairs; but, in his now frequent perambulations through these sombre and despoiled premises, he found the little Mary con¬ tinually crossing his path with some wild or hoyden prank, which too often shocked his courtly 7 refinements, yet frequently excited his risibility, and elicited tole¬ rance, as they reminded him of his own juvenile sportiveness ; until at length he pronounced ber a most enlivening ap¬ pendage to the castle, yet still accom¬ panied with murmurs at her not having inherited her mother's beauty 7 , as she had the vivacity of her father. But, unluckily for Mary, his lordship's devoteelness to exterior embellishments wofully impeded her way to the full paternal tenderness of his heart. She
had awakened unqualified approbation for the excellence of disposition which she had evinced on the first day of his arrival, so powerfully, that had she pos¬ sessed even half the personal beauty which he required to ornament his off¬ spring, he would have taken her to his heart's core at once ; but the exquisite fascinations of Rhona Warburg, still glittering in his eyes, operated like the glare of overpowering light upon all other objects. Under the influence of this unfair contrast, his lordship almost embodied his poor daughter in the shell of downright homeliness. It was true, he acknowledged, Mary's cheeks had compressed so marvellously, as to permit a very fair promise of a nose to appear ; anel that eyes had ac¬ tually 7 shot forth in large and brilliant luminaries ; that her limbs, and form al¬ together, no longer enveloped in vulgar fat, yielded fair conviction of future surpassing symmetry : but her complex¬ ion seemed as if it had been imported by some pilgrim or croises from Pales-
tine, so inveterately had it been bronzed through lack of care. Above all, her dimpled mouth repelled her power of at¬ tracting unqualified and unresisting pa¬ ternal tenderness ; for poor Lady Mary was, at this unlucky 7 juncture, in the process of disfiguration through dentition; and in her mirthful laughter, and wild grimaces, her depopulated gums were ever and anon, Hke hideous phantoms, scaring to flight her father's hovering affection. Of these impeders to paternal love Mary was unconscious ; and, clinging to kindred influence, every moment she could spare from tender attentions to poor Maud, or from the innovation of instruction from Dame Vintry, she gam¬ bolled round her father, or followed his footsteps, both in and out of the castle, whenever she found opportunity. In a few days after his lordship's arrival at Albalanda, wishing to make personal en¬ quiries for some of the tenantry upon the domain, he sallied forth, accompanied by Algernon. Maiy, unobserved and
uninvited scampered after them. Ere aware of being so accompanied, Lord St. Oswald perceiving a cottier at some dis¬ tance in advance, whom he thought he recognised, shouted after the man, but without effect, for the poor rustic was almost impenetrably deaf. Again antl again his lordship shouted, and so did Algernon, but still in vain — when sud¬ denly a yell assailed their ears, issuing from behind them, so shrill, so discord¬ ant, so out of Nature's class of tones, and withal so terrific, that Lord St. Oswald, a man of dauntless courage, rushed for¬ ward to escape the pending danger — no WOiider, then, the youthful page awaited no second call from his paramount to fly with him. On they scudded until nearly breath¬ less, when his lordship's intrepidity rallied, from having escapee! the onslaught from the wild animal they fled from, and he faced about to reconnoitre what sort of form the creature wore, when the only living object which met his eager scrutiny was the fleet Mary scampering towards
him, with the most determined exertions of her active perseverance. His lordship, in dismay at her peril, rushed back, and snatching his child up into his arms, fled to the tree into which Algernon had by this time climbed for refuge, from wdiat he conceived no com¬ mon source of alarm ; for, on their travel from the capital, they had heard in one of the hostels where they had rested, that a gleekman, or juggler, who had passed into Yorkshire the day before, to attend some fairs and wakes, had got for show a formidable wdld beast, which he had purchased of some pirate on the coast ; and that this beast, though small, was untameable, and that its yell was, be¬ yond all compare, shrill and terrific. This beast, whose name, and species, and form and strength of make, they were un¬ acquainted with, they concluded had broken from the gleekman, and in its wanderings had got scent of them. Scarcely had this trie obtained firm establishment in their widely spreading sanctuary, and Lord St. Oswald ejacu-
iated a fervent thanksgiving for their de¬ liverance from this beast of prey, when the alarmed page demanded from Lady Mary, who was in high delight at this un¬ expected elevation, " if she had seen the wild animal that had yelled so dircfully ?" " It was I who yelled," returned Mary calmly. " But what gared your afľright- ment ?" " Why, Lady Mary did — if Lady Mary did shout forth that yell of yells for her chevisance," replied Algernon, half laughing at the possibility, yet half incre¬ dulous. " To make jest is your intendment, for you assert an impossibility, child," exclaimed his lordship. " Nathless, 'tis true ; and what em- moved me was, wising your courtly shouts were not belike to reach the unapt hearing of gaffer Beetlehead — so I bethought me to make aidance for you." " But how could you comport your tones to such ungraceful, unfeminine, unnatural, terrific discordancy, child ?"
demanded his lordship fretfully, writhing with irritation, at a female of the house of De Rhone having given utter¬ ance to sounds of such wild savage vo¬ cal i ty. " Why, it is the very way that cottier Belowbear always shouts to poor Beetle- head ; and be alone, of all our noiseful shouters, can make the gaffer hear." " Alas! how unlike the dear Rhona i" exclaimed Lord St. Oswald with а painful sigh. " But, Lady Mary, it is not meet for you, a babe, a female of high estate, to imitate the masculine discordance of an uncouth clown." " I wot the blatter was not а seemly, pretty one, for it made my own flesh to creep to hear ¡is dm," returned Mary meekly, looking elo w n abashed and sor¬ rowful ;— "but 1 squeaked the displea¬ sant b latter for ibe intendment I avouched, my honoureel ioni and father." " I am beholden to you, Mary ; but must foresee sonun lung in advisement to prevent such unbefitting articulations in future," said nis lordship as he com-
menced his descent from the tree, in no very amicable humour with poor Mary ; for in addition to her misdemeanor of dissimilitude to the elegant Rhona, was added the humiliation of conscious ab¬ surdity' in the alarm which had led him into his umbrageous sanctuary. Before his lordship's feet had touched the ground, or Algernon moved to the point wbich he conceived most convenient for passing Lady Mary into her father's receiving arms, that volatile spirit had evaporated from the tree and escaped his aid, by swinging down upon a lower branch, and from thence dropping herself unhurt, by the side of the astonished peer. * ť From these desports," exclaimed his lordship, half alarmed and half annoyed, yet almost inclining to risibility, " we must give credence to some monkey having purloined from Albalanda the true Lady Mary tie Rhone, leaving me one of its own active offspring to have upbrought as mine. W r hat bethink you, Algernon ?"
" Algernon ! Algernon !" repeated Mary thoughtfully, as she now walked onward with the page. — "I w r ish I knew where to find another kindly r boy Alger¬ non— not so big by half as this one, and with somewhat less curling hair/' " Why, where have you encountered such an Algernon ?" demanded Fitz- rivers eagerly. " It seemeth to me that I once saw Lady Maty, when she was not half so big as she now is. And to let Laely Mary into a secret whicli she seems weetless of, I was erewhiles an Algernon not half so big as I now am, and then haei hair too short for curling." *' Then it was you — you, your own very self! that saved my toward darling from being brent alive i" exclaimed Mary* in an elevated tone of extatic joy, as she fled back to her father shouting audibly ; but the tones, being her own natural ones, were thrillingly melodious. " My lord ! my honoured father ! this Master Algernon it was who so aptly repaired to the aidance of my baby bro¬ ther, and saved him from the shunless
Harnes!" and Mary now, having made this announcement, burst into tears. Lord St. Oswald, whohad loitered behind his companion, to meditate upon the pos¬ sible causes of this rough gem having received so little polish from those in¬ structors whom he had been led to believe fitJJy competent to the task assigned to them, now caught the extended hands of the agitated Maiy, whose tears of gratitude taught his own to start to his eyes ; and, turning from her, he clasped in his expanding arms the preserver of hi<* children. Algernon received the ebullitions ot his lortlship's gratitude with modestgrace ; though shrinking in apprehension that it might appear he hatl been conscious whose children he had been the instru¬ ment of saving from destruction, when he had mentioned the circumstance to Lord St. Oswald ; or, at least, that it had not been inadvertcnitly, his aiding the awakening recognition of Lady Mary. " But how came you tobe encounteretl with such wailful peril, Lady Mary?" VOL L M
demanded Algernon, anxious to escape from his lord's oppressive gratitude. " I have not very apt recordation of it," returned Maiy ; " for it was whilom ere my towarel darling, the last of all my kindred, was taken from me. It was when Maudy was close pent up in tend¬ ance upon my own Dame Bostock, who was marvellously sick. So the dear to¬ ward baby Edward's fosterdam, and the damsels of his nursery, took me from mine, as a meet copematc to disport with Edward whiles they went to a folkmöte to be gladsome ; but, I wot not why, they left us biding iu that darksome hovel, where a grim old Gooddy sat in the middle on the hearth, breaking sticks and enfiring them ; and when the baby mewled himself to sleep, the Goodely put on a clean coiffure, neckatee, and placket, and then, telling me if I stirred it should be for the murderment of my brother, went her way. So I bestirred me not until the rushes on the floor enfired info a blazement : then I shrieked too in aflrightment; and anon the good little
boy Algernon, like a succouring angel, flew in at the window to our aidance, and took the sweet baby from the breme flames, that but for him must have soonly stroyed my brother. " What marvel is this, Maiy," said his lordship, " that all your gratitude to Master Fitzrivers makes its lavis li¬ ment upon the preservation of your bro¬ ther ; whilst all souvenance of his having saved your own life seems totally for¬ gotten ?" Mary started, blushed, and frankly ac¬ knowledged she had never once remem- о beret! her individual obligation. Lorel St. Oswald, with a smile, en¬ quired from the preserver of his children, whether he thought this extraordinary omission in Lady Mary's recollection pro¬ ceeded from a flaw iu the preceptions of her gratitude, or was caused hy the acuteness of affection for her brother monopolizing every thought from self? The interesting page was firmly con¬ vinced there existed no flaw in the sensi¬ bilities of Laely Mary ; and such being γ Q
also the opinion of Lord St. Oswald, his lordship sighed in anticipating apprehen¬ sion for her future happiness, when such enthusiasm in susceptibility should be combined with an exterior, little likely to elicit any reciprocity, at least in the most tender sympathy of the heart. Mary bad now taken such hold upon her father's interest, that she often formed the theme of his discourse with his young companion, Algernon ; and his lament- ation was frequent upon the striking and unfortunate contrast she exhibit¬ ed, in attractive graces, to Rosamond ami her daughter : and this wail, as it teemed with eulogiums upon the beautiful Rhona, was not likely to weary his au¬ ditor, whose susceptible heart was in training, through the inspirations of his own fascinated fancy and the unceasing admiration of' all others, to become the serious captive of this universal capti- vator. Yet still Fitzrivers had power to shelter minor partialities : the young De Mandeville he tenderly loved as a bro¬ ther ; anel for Lady Mary he felt such a
rapidly augmenting interest, that he ex¬ perienced almost as much anxiety as his lordship himself for the immediate adop¬ tion of some measure to insure her im¬ provement; and often he joined his own lamentations with those of Lord St. Os¬ wald, that the prejudice imbibed by many individuals of his lordship's family against Lady Mary remained so unvan- quishable, as to render it injudicious, at least, if not impracticable, to remove her in her present wild state to Vespasian Tower, where else she might imbibe re¬ finement and fascination through the in¬ fluence of Lady St. Oswald and the peer¬ less Rhona. Although Rosamond's ingratitude to her benefactress had wakened Lord St. Oswald's estimation of her moral excel¬ lence almost to an overthrow, his belief of her intellectual pre-eminence was un¬ impaired ; and his infatuated attachment being still unsubdued, though not in the idolatrous climax it once had soared to, he firmly credited all her statements rela¬ tive to those in whom his daughter'-» m 3
education had been confided ; — nor did his interviews with the abbess of St. Mildred's upon this important subject promise any thing auspicious for poor Mary : for the elegant and wily abbess assured his lordship, that Lady Mary's incapacity for acquirement was unvan- quishable ; that her intractability could not be subdued ; and that Dame Vint* was fully equal to the embellishing ; second Rhona, had nature here presentees her with such a docile being for her tuition. It was after a long conference with this wily abbess, upon the forlorn hope of his volatile child's improvement, that Lord St. Oswald, on re-entering his castle, en¬ countered the wild Mary sporting her way down a staircase, with no very grace¬ ful show of that comic buffoonery her buoyancy of animal spirits just then in¬ spired. His lordship, being in no very placid humour with his daughter, (for the state¬ ments of the invidious abbess were in full operation,) exclaimed, as sternlyas the not
yet extinct feeling of chivalric courtesy would permit towards a female — "is such the seemly 7 method, Maiy de Rhone. for a young lady to make descent of n staircase ?" " In sooth, I wot not," responded Mary, smiling ; " for it ne'er betided me to see a lady go up or down a greeze, since I w T as of age to make meet heed- ment of it." This innocent, unconscious reproof tin the method of her rearing went promptly to her father's conscience ; as the tones of sweetness in which it was uttered thrilled to his heart, with conviction, that in fascination of voice in speaking thh wild plant infinitely 7 surpassed both Rosa¬ mond and her daughter; and while these dulcet tones vibrated through his parental feelings, something kindly 7 whispered, " Surely nature never left such melody unaccompanied; and there must be othei harmonies within, could we but strike their sounding:" and from this sugges¬ tion his lordship demanded an immediate interview with Mrs. Vintry, who had m 4<
hitherto evaded this measure, to form his own judgment, if possible, upon whom the fault rested of the unrefined bearings of his daughter. Fortunately for poor Lady Mary, Dame Vintry was strikingly hideous ; had clumsy reti hands, which were intru¬ sively conspicuous, through the awkward mismanagement of these unruly mem¬ bers ; and had in her articulation a sort of lisp, which, combined with plebeian diction, and the then almost unintelligible pronunciation of the rustics of York¬ shire, gave to her elocution a degree of barbarism from which the ear of* refine¬ ment could not but recoil : therefore. upon achieving one glance at her de¬ formities, and hearing one speech of her oratory, his lordship felt conviction of the total incapacity of this blur in nature for the preceptress of Lady Maty de Rhone : and, in profound amazement at how the elegant and talented abbess of St. Mildred's could i.i possibility have been infatuated into a contrary opinion, determined to dispel the magic which
must be in operation upon her judgment, by his absolute decree against this Dame Vintry ; and to request the kind abbe^ to seek a competent successor to this un¬ couth animal, such as her own jutlgment and refinements could approve. The business which had brought Lortl St. Oswald to Albalanda being at length arranged, the hour of his departure drew near; and, Father Jonathan having re¬ turned to the castle, was solemnly tn- vesteel by his lordship with the sole caie of Lady Mary's religious principles; and à mandate as solemnly issued that Father Ralph was never more to hold jurisdic¬ tion over Lady Mary. The day arrived in which Lortl >t. Oswald and his little suite were to set out for Kent, and Mary was permitted to loin the breakfast party of her tati un : but sorrow was her banquet ; aud ar length, overshadowing her pale and pen¬ sive face with both her hands, she sobbed m silent grief. The hands which Lady- Mary gave thus to full view were beauti¬ fully formed ; the tears, therefore, wiiich
trickled through her taper fingers pene¬ trated to a chord of tender sympathy in her father's bosom; and when ať length he was compelled to leave his insulated child, and in the care of those with whom he was not satisfied, her burst of artless affliction, sounding in the soft and touching tones of'the heart's sore anguish, filled his breast with tender parental feel¬ ings, not only 7 upon this parting, but in glowing interest for lier future happiness.
CHAP. XIII. Lord St. Oswald, through close attend : ance upon his sovereign in the gay scenes devised at this period by Sd Thomas W T yatte, as well as in his progress to many attractive places, and not ι* little aided by the wily management of the in¬ vidious Rosamond, was gradually losing those lively impressions of parental in¬ terest for his forlorn child, which her arl- lessness and affectionate sensibility had inspired; when a singular coincidence occurred, in his lordship receiving, at almost the same moment, a letter from Rhona Warburg, and one from Lady- Mary : and a niore striking contrast coukl scarcely have been arranged by the ¿nost ingenious contriver, than these compositions exhibited. Rhona was at this period with the Worlingtons in Paris ; consequently her epistle was from thence; and it was written with mathe- M 6
matical parallelism, in what was then deemed perfection in chirography : every line betraying her mental acquisitions, the admiration she excited, or the plau¬ dits she bad elicited from her various in¬ structors; and all these betrayals ma¬ naged as the effect of innocent inad¬ vertence, as if the arts of display were not amongst the most cherished princi¬ ples of her code of manoeuvre for ad¬ miration. Mary's achievement was written in the straggling varieties of serpentine meandering, in all sized cha¬ racters, and diversified with blots of con¬ spicuous opacity ; the subject, chiefly, assurances that she had made cherishment of all her father's orders, manifold and puzzling as they were. " In proof i'* saitl Lady Mary, " albeit full of affright at the unapt management of my cranklyng pen, I obey your be¬ hest, my honoured lord and fader, by my wrytyng as soonly as Fader Jonathan has lacked displeasaunce at the giddy pace of' my performance. Fie has counselled me to begin my rude letter, with my heart's
commendacyons to my good lord. But it my letter be rude, my heart is gentyl towards my own fader, albeit with all the cunnyng I yet possess in forming letters, I feel assured I shall make no good cause of the matter. But I am panged with impatience to tell my honoured lord and fader, that, in accordance w r ith his be¬ hest, I have done with my lackbrain tricks ; that is, forsooth, a marvellous company of them. I no longer bite my lips ; nor wink my eyelids ; nor make mows ; nor writhe my forehead ; nor frown ; nor stare : and now it haps, I never stand on one foot, whiles I spank the other to and fro to the rousement of the dust and rushes. I no longer wax noiseful: no; nor emmove noble peers and pages to wild scampers from my as¬ terting blatter. I have ceased the unmeet lodgement of my elbows upon tables, I no longer spin down a greeze* as if at hey¬ dcgives t ; nor pounce headformost into guest chambers. I have doffed the guise
of deafness; never now garing travail to repeat that which was beforetime uttered to me, and attend to those who speak to me. I neither cough nor sneeze now at the breakfast board, albeit great may be my needment; nor mime, though apt I feel to do it ; nor make my own face uglier, by mocking. But, my lord, and honoured iader, I do styII ryde the roan ginnet without saddle or housing, and tease and chafe the old coistril by 7 tiekli tig him with his own leash ; for I cannot mo- moriz your having said your nayward to these gambols. Oh ! but I wis — nay I am sure, I oftimes mouth, in talking, like Dame Vintry, albeit not in miming; but, in despite of me, her strange jargon elances from my ears to my tongue ; and that incontinently, after it has for¬ tuned me to endure her monishment or tutorage." Lord St. Oswald and Algernon Fitz¬ rivers were in the apartments of Rosa¬ mond when Lady Mary's epistle was delivered to his lordship ; who, although shocked and conscience-stricken, could
scarcely subdue symptoms of risibility at this artless egotism ; which Lady St. Os¬ wald perceiving, she requested to be favoured with hearing read a perform¬ ance which seemed amusing. During his lordship's compliance with this request, Rosamond looked conscien¬ tiously shocked ; and when he had ended, she exclaimed, with a sigh of compassion¬ ate regret, " Alas ! how unlike to Rho¬ na's !" " Rhona has been a fortunate lamb brought up with its dam ; Mary a be¬ reaved cosset *," replied Lord St. Os- walel in a tone of chagrin, " This epistle of poor Mary's is, it sorrows me to say, not meet for her estate ; vet there is much in the composition that yields me contentation. It seemeth me to promise, that if my daughter is not to become man's assassin, like yours, Rosamond, she may prove his friend ! Here, Algernon, make your own view of Laely Mary's letter, and tell me, albeit it is scant of
method, may we not forethink improve¬ ment in this artless child ?" Algernon, in approaching his lordship to receive the letter, perceived on the ground, amid the rushes and patches of carpeting, a second letter from Lady- Mary, which had fallen unobserved by- her father from the envelope, and bore the date of nearly a year after its com¬ panion ; it was written much more steadily than its predecessor, and in its commencement she announced that the seneschal had forgotten to send off her first letter, — a matter that had not been discovered sooner, " My honoured father," she continued, " will be apt to imagine him, by the displacent forget of my rude letter, that lack of memory is a disease in Albalanda Castle ; but, in sooth, mine has found rc j - pair since the good little boy Algernon, having whilom saved my life as well as baby's, becomes each day more dureful in my remembrance. Neither do 1 become mindless of the visit of my father : no, forsooth ; since it w r as like the rising of
the sun in spring-tide after a drear win¬ ter, and, when it set, left rays behind stilt to warm the wild plant it shone upon. But I cannot imagine me that the reck¬ less memory which has made partage from me lias strayed to Edward ; for I still wis he has not forgotten me ; and knowing so deftly how to wield liis pen, he would not have ceased to glad me with his letters. I therefore bethink you have some forgetful seneschal at Ves¬ pasian Tower, who has bereaved me of my joyance. Oh, prithee, honoured lord and father, uprouse his memory, and see to the repair of this matter, and let the long looked for letters of my darling- brother be sent eftsoons to his lorn sister ; for in sooth, my father, as that bright sun which so saddened me when it went down the valley from Albalanda arose no more to shine on me, I do want some good to cheer me." Rosamond, having failed in the intended effect of her insidious observation, was undecided upon the course she should pursue, effectively to obliterate the interest
which Latly Mary's letter hatl awakened in the paternal bosom : his lordship, therefore, encountered nothing to abstract liis anxious thoughts from his poor ne¬ glected child ; and ere the day closed, he despatched a packet to Albalanda, containing, besides an affectionate epistle and gifts from himself to Maiy, a per¬ emptory 7 order to Father Jonathan for the immediate dismissal of Dame Vintry, whether a successor could be obtained or not, — so much did apprehension of her uncouth diction and elocution being en¬ grafted on his child alarm him. Nor did his lordship permit the departure of his messenger for Albalanda Castle, with¬ out a long letter and presents for Lady Mary from her brother, who assured his father that he had never suffered any opportunity to escape him of writing to Mary ; although the ingenious method of reply which she had Jong adopted, of sending him bits of cloth or paper cui out or worked into some emblem of her affection, or of Albalanda, long had ceased.
Algernon, too, retired from Lady St. CT Oswald's chambers to write, and also about Lady Mary ; and for many a year after, Algernon remained unconscious that this epistle of his operated as the fate of Mary of Albalanda, — and yet it was so. Lord St, Oswald was led to believe his mandate was about to be instantly obeyeel, for Father Jonathan wrote him intimation that the abbess of St. Mildred's had at length found a competent successor for Dame Vintry. His lorelship's parental anxieties relative to Mary were thus con¬ signed to rest ; and, with his solicitude, hi.s remembrance of her seemed to sink into a calm repose, from which his political employments ordained that he shoulel not find leisure to awíiken ; for not α year now elapsed in which he did not spend the greater part in some con¬ tinental embassy, defeating or aiding alternately the schemes of Charles, Fran¬ cis, or the Roman See ; but upon which excursions the beautiful Rosamond had latent reasons for not accompanying him :
and although the task was difficult, to withhold her society upon these occasions, without awakening suspicion or wounding Lord St. Oswald's affection, she contrived her difficult manoeuvring to her heart's contentment ; and during these periods of her lord's absence she held her court with almost regal splendour at Vespasian Tow r er, the admiration of all whom the hospitality and magnificence of her revels allured to this beautiful domain. Time thus advanced, until Edward Lord de Mandeville had entered his thirteenth, Algernon completed his eight¬ eenth, and the peerless Rhona advanced in her seventeenth year. Lord de Mandeville was indebted to nature for a most beautiful exterior, and many mental treasures ; and to Father Hubert de Bourg for as solid a store of intellectual advantages as a learned, pious, diligent, and anxious preceptor could enrich so very a youth with. But Lortl de Mandeville was not the perfect being that good Father Hubert had toiled so sedulously to make him ; for the often
injudicious lenity of his adoring father, and the pernicious indulgences of his designing stepdame, gave energy to his faults, amongst which contumacy of re¬ solution in serious matters was the most prominent ; whilst, in minor concerns, the whimsicalities of his caprices and the petulance of his froward humours were tormenting even to those, who, knowing the excellence of his heart, sincerely loved him. These minor foibles had been augmented by no small degree of personal vanity, awakened by the unqualified ad¬ miration he excited, when, by the com¬ mand of his sovereign, he performed, though scarcely six years old, one of the principal characters in the play enacted by children at Greenwich, when the am¬ bassadors from Francis invested Henry with the order of St. Michael. Algernon Fitzrivers, now arrived at the honour of squire in chivalry, was also indebted to nature for a strikingly fine and prepossessing exterior; even such as to awaken the prompt admiration, and fix the approving gaze, of every beholder.
Nature, too, in the superabundance of partiality, enriched him with a heart wherein all of human excellence was centred ; and an understanding equal to every attainment, both in solidity and embellishment ; and, gifted with the rare power of detecting his own foibles, the firmness of his mind had leel him, even from his earliest days, unshrinkingly to vanquish them. With courage the most dauntless, yet the dove of peace seemed the genial nestling of his bosom ; for, though his valour could glow into hero¬ ism, he did not delight in warfare. Do¬ mestic life, the tenderness of parental love, the unity of affectionate brother¬ hood, were the sunbeams which his heart coveted ; but these w T ere not for him. Algernon was an insulated being, without one kindred tie to warm his heart, and unknowing of all things relative to his family 7 , but that they were honourable, unfortunate, voluntary exiles ; and that his guardian himself; all mystery, had been called by his own ambiguous fate from Britain.
The premature perfections of Rhona Warburg awakened no expectation, in the mind of sober reasoners, of improve¬ ment ; for she had seemed to reach the climax of perfection in the moment of creation. But those who did not think upon the subject, perhaps, expected something even still more exquisite to dazzle admiration, as she expanded into maturity of formand understanding; and, probably-, disappointment in this expecta¬ tion might have operated to her disad¬ vantage, had notart, her potent auxiliary, contrived for her a vestment of brilliant deception to conceal deficiencies. Rho¬ na's book of study was, " The knowledge how to attract ;" and every thought, and wish, and action, were to promote that darling purpose. Nature and education having so eminently gifted her with every exterior grace and beauty, her toils were superfluous, when aimed to rivet the eye of admiration ; but her minel being far from perfect, and possessing not one in¬ nate treasure of the heart, it had earl v ' ι/ become her project to establish counter-
feit virtues that should pass current for celestial. All things, therefore, which were sweet, and gentle, and obliging, and forbearing, and friendly, and charitable, she personated sedulously. To the aged she w r as venerating—to the foolish, com¬ passionate— to the sick, tender—to the faulty 7 , lenient — to the indigent, charita¬ ble ; and all this Rhona performed most winningly, even without one drop of the sweet milk of human kindness in her composition ; while, in the execution of her benevolence, she sustained no indi¬ vidual privations — for when, with well arranged display 7 , she bore alms to the poor, the purse or buttery of Lord St. Oswald supplied the dole. While employed in these exhibitions, the eye of admiration rested on her path, as she went to comfort the afflicted, or while she flitted round the bed of sickness : and the voice of homage hailed her on her return, in the tones of increased adoration ; for ever she ingeniously con¬ trived that the discovery of her haunts in absence should precede her reappear-
anC e — whilst, as to her manoeuvring for the concealment of her intellectual im¬ perfections, her mother, who was neither defective in ability nor information, was ever at hand as a prompt rescue from detection, by adroitly taking up the sub- ject for her when at fault, anel making the requisite responses; so that, by this management, Rhona was rarely even sus¬ pected of deficiency of talent or infor¬ mation : but if she were, some bewitch¬ ing smile, or turn of graceful magic, obliterated the suspicion by the wiles of fascination ; and yet, though thus accom¬ plished for prowess against the heart of* .man, Rhona was, at the then considereel far advanced stage of spinsterism,—seven¬ teen,— not only ununited, but without engagement. But this disengaged state was not occa¬ sioned by lack of adorers ; and she haei absolutely only to name the elected, to make numbers wretched. But, as the law of the land only allowed one mate at a time, it was no trivial matter to choose that one judiciously. Rhona, therefore, vol. i, N
with admirable dexterity, kept all her gamc in view, consigning none to despair; yet without encouragement, that could twine into embarrassing entanglement ; not choosing to accept a peer of the second or third degree, whilst hope pre¬ sented the possibility of a serious suitor amongst the first. Had Rhona's heart been the sole agent ш the disposal of her hand, Algernon Fitzrivers had probably been the elect- eel ; but, as ambition was the chief actuater in Rhona's bosom, Algernon could neit be chosen whilst mystery thus hung around his origin anel estate. — Yef to demolish the hopes of him, vvho might emanate into one of princely race, — for of this Rosamond herself was in¬ fected with strong forebodings, — would indeed prove unsound policy. However, for the comfort of mother and daughter's speculations, Algernon comported him¬ self most consonantly to their wishes. He was evidently an adorer of Rhona, yet a silent one, ~ at ¿east, silent upon the subject of his admiration ; for, not
knowing what might prove his individual pretensions, honour chained his tongue and assiduities. Lord de Mandeville, in despite of his extreme youth, was another of these speculations Rhona held in suspension, ready to swoop upon should ambition pronounce it expedient ; his rank, his fami lyn his wealth, were all unexception¬ able, so long as no superior quarry should spring; and as Rhona flattered herself she already hekl the most elevated place in his affections,—she having from his infancy toiled for that purpose, — she doubted not being able, by judicious management, to fan that partiality into α tender flame. To disparity in years, her surpassing fascinations she pronounced would prevent objections ; and of Lorel St. Oswald's approbation of her union with his son she was quite secure, as his lordship had often, amongst other regrets for the death of' his first-born, lamented, in her hearing, the destruction of his cherished wish of uniting him to Rhona. As to Lord Dalincourt, he still weak- N 2
iy cherished bis romantic project for his espousal with his early captivator; but, whilst her claims upon the Warburg estates remained undecided, prudence negatived his making any declaration of his passion, as his fortunes, through the inadvertent prodigality of his early days when attending the nuptial pro¬ cession of the Princess Mary to Paris, were not sufficiently flourishing to permit love alone to regulate his spousals : and, independent of all pecuniary motives, disparity of years had lately made its way into apparent evidence that fate could scarcely have designed Rhona for his baroness ; and he now, at times, almost shrunk from the idea of attempting the enterprise, lest, in its failure, he might be laughed to scorn by younger men. And amongst those younger men, the one whom he most dreaded was his own nephew 7 , Sir Leoline Worlington ; one of those self-satisfied wits, who, ar¬ rogating to themselves infallibility in all things, dub themselves sole patentees of judgment ; and, from the supreme court
of their decisions, send out shafts of con¬ demnation in potent ridicule upon all whom it pleases them to satirize. To laugh at, or with, his companions, was this young man's general pastime : but against those who betrayed before him any pretensions" to Rhona's favour his satiric artillery knew no mercy ; since the siege of Rhona's heart he would himself have gladly undertaken, had not maternal menaces even of the horrors of parental malediction compelled him to desist, until the Warburg cause should deter¬ mine upon the eligibility of the measure. About the period when our young drama th personæ had attained those ages just mentioned, the long pending decision upon the Warburg succession was brought to a final hearing. Rhona, through the interest awakened by the magic of her charms, more than through the unquestionable establishment of her legitimate right, was pronounced the lawful heir. She therefore assumed the title of Baroness Warburg : but with estates so embarrassed — so taxed with N 3
forfeitures to the crown for the misdeeds of her progenitors — so charged with imposts for the royal authority to use her own, — that her means of supporting her dignity were scarcely more than no¬ minal. Long ere the pending suit had termi¬ nated, Rhona had, in the imprudence of castle-building hospitality, promised her young companions in Vespasian Tower that they should accompany her when she took possession of Warburg Castle ; where she would entertain them with pageants and revels of the most beautiful deftription. To rescind from this pro¬ mise without hostility to her popularity, she deemed impossible ; and how to manage its performance, without betray¬ ing the barrenness of the soil that was to furnish the supplies, for a time puzzled her and her more experienced mother ; as Lord St. Osw ? ald bad lately adopted stronger measures than merely murmur¬ ing at the unprincipled extravagance they practised ; — he had suspended their unlimited credit upon his steward.
At length Rosamond formeel a project worthy of her, which would throw the whole party bound for Warburg Castle into that of Albalanda ; where they should remain at her now niggardly lord's sole expense, until she coukl work upon his generosity through some new stratagem, to permit their proceeding to their place of ostensible destination with desirable effect. This prefect contained a second at¬ traction for the designing Rosamond ; for, in the absence of lier lord, it wou İd afford an opportunity for presenting Latly Mary to those whom she wished to recoil from her, in that garb of inattractive uncouth ignorance and un refinement, which she had toiled to consolidate into an impenetrable shell for this object oi her diabolic hatred. Lord St. Oswald was at this moment on a continental mission, from whieii there was no immediate prospect of Vis being released ; and the absence of Fallit s Hubert from scenes where the daughtei of his levered Countess Adela vvs to be N 1
exhibited as an object for derision and disgust was also important. A plausible excuse w ; as therefore devised for not inviting the preceptor of Lady Warburg tojóin the partyn— -an excuse so managed as to wear the aspect of kindness to the holy man, who, however, was scarcely grateful ; for father Hubert's heart mourned in disappointment at not being permitted to visit the neighbourhood where he might once more see the child of liis affection — the volatile Mary, — and Jearn, from fiis own observations, how she had been trained. As soon as the excursion w r as arranged for Warburg Castle, Rosamond began, as it were, to anticipate the sarcastic remarks of Sir Leoline upon the elis- comforts awaiting the party in Rhona's mansion, by portraying, in the most ludicrous terms, the straw pallettes, and dogswain or hopharlot coverlettes, and the gootl round Jogges for their heads ; and presenting them with inventories of the household stuff they might expect at Warburg, as miserable and comfortless
as may be found in Hollinshed's de¬ scription of Britain* : ending her alarm¬ ing items, with requesting each lady to take her own mirror with her, since nonef, she dare affirm, would be found in Yorkshire. And during these mock inventories, the young baroness lookeel sentimentally sorrowful ; anel audibly sighed her affliction at the sad idea ot such dear kinel friends being doomed to the endurance of such discomforts, to gratify her with the happiness of their society, until the angelic disposition thus displayed, with the fascinating beauty of the displayer, led all, at least all the male individuals of the invitee! party, to consider such menaced pri\a- tions not worth, a passing thought, when endured where such a paragon of per¬ fection was to gild the scene ;ud leail them to conceive themselves in paradise. At length the travelling vehicles, — light waggons gaily trapped, — set out from Vespasian Tower, accompanied by
N О
a numerous cavalcade antl attendants ; and as the enchantress Rhona could not yield the sun of her presence to illumine all at the same moment, she benignly promised to bestow her cheering influence alternately upon each party as they jou Γ¬ η ied to Warburg Castle. Rosamond had taken especial care that all things tending to her own and Rhona's comfort and advantage should find place in the household carts which conveyed the necessaries for this pro¬ gress. Besides provisions of all kinds, — the inns of that period not being, like those of the present day, stored with every luxury 7 , even for the unexpected traveller,—they bad also lutes, antl flutes, and hawks, hounds, and hunters, in their profuse accompaniments upon this ex¬ cursion : and had not Rosamond found mortifying conviction, during the days tîevotet! to this long progress, that the rising found more devout worshippers than the meridian sun ; antl that Lord de Mandeville also felt disconcerted, on perceiving himself of little consequence
where Rhona reigned sole paramount ; all would have boen pleased with their travel to---------, where it was determined to pause for the recreation of hawking, the season having just commenced. All the party 'had evinced unusually wild spirits during the hours of their field sports; and when they adjourned to the hostel for the night, Rosi mond. as if influenced by r a sudden ebullition of this whole day's exuberant vivacity, proposed the admirable frolic of surpris. ing the unsophisticated Laely Mary and the drones of Albalanda by an unex¬ pected visit, as the sovereign, consort, and court, on a progress. The thoughtless Edward gladly se¬ conded the motion, because he believed that in his father's castle he must be deemed a personage of consequence; anel Sir Leoline gave it his firm support, since he felt assured the adoption of the frolic must afford him ample scope for satire. But Algernon Fitzrivers, vvho was just retur neel from Paris, whither he had accompanied the Duke n б
of Richmond and Lord Surrey two years prior, to study at the university there, could not approve the measure; because he felt it as unfair, if not cruel, to poor Lady Mary, who must, he feared, be scarcely equal to receive the party as they stood in their own indi¬ vidual rank, even had she and the castle household been prepared for their re¬ ception : but for such a host to come unexpectedly upon her, as her sovereign and court, in a dwelling despoiled, by non-residence, not onlv of 1 every house- hold adornment, but of absolute neces¬ saries, was, he considereel, more than common humanity could justify : and all the»se feelings relative to poor Mary so filled his benevolent mind with pity and interest for her, that whilst his com¬ panions exercised their ingenuity for schemes to yield force to the ludicrous effect of tins meditated frolic, he toiled with h\% for feasible projects to coun¬ teract their sportive cruelty. No sooner was tus long mentally arranged, though suddenly announced,
proposition of Lady St. Oswald accedetl to, than all who were to be engaged in the performance of it were appointed to the characters they were to personate in this masque of a royal progress. Lord Dalincourt, as king; Lady Warburg, the beautiful new consort Jane Seymour ; Sir Leoline, as Sir Thomas Wyatte ; Algernon, as Duke of Richmond ; &c\ &c. kc,
CHAR XIV. Indefatigably as the imagination of the kind Algernon toiled in efforts to befriend poor Mary, the party of'frolickers drew within one day's march to Alba¬ landa Castle without his having been able to turn them from their project. He felt, as a portentous cloud over his love-horoscope, the offending Lady St. Oswald by circumventing her mirthful scheme ; yet he also felt that he should act unfaithfully by his lord, were he to allow а matter to take full effect, that would so keenly wound anel mortify his parental pride and tenderness, in the absence of Father Hubert, he had none to consult with ; nor had he any one near, in whom he dared confide the con¬ veyance of intimation to Lady 7 Mary that might lessen the surprise awaiting her. At length the fair star Rhona and her
satellites quartered for the night within a few miles of Albalanda; and scarcely were they assembled in the hostelry, ere they were most unexpectedly joined by Sir Rupert Warburg, the late opponent of Rhona for the honours of their an¬ cestors. Sir Rupert was a genuine scion of the genealogical tree, — a determined dauntless sem of dissipation, with a fine exterior, a clear head, and a depraved heart. His fortunes through the late decree hat! become to the last extremity desperate ; and ere he should embrace the profession of a freebooter, the penal liabilities of which not promising much pleasure hi perspective, he had followed his fair and fortunate opponent into Yorkshire, to develop how she might prove useful to him : not to win, or seize her for his bride, through the wiles of love or by the force of villany, since the canon law did not yet permit the marriage of such near relatives. The hope of winning the royal influ¬ ence upon the decree of his pending cause had led the vile Rupert to become
one of the principal of the suborned wit¬ nesses, vvho had, in full career of perjury, given fatal testimony against the unfortu¬ nate and thoughtless Anne Boleyn; and although the interest of the Seymours for Rhona had operated against him in this speculation, yet still it was believed he was in high favour with his sovereign for this late nefarious service : his plausi¬ ble excuses, therefore, for being in that auspicious spot so opportunely to greet his fair kinswoman, were received as the very essence of veracity ; antl his forming an addition to the party assembled ar¬ ranged with all the courtly grace of poli¬ tical sincerity, as if it were ine boon most craved by those upon whom he thus voluntarily conferred his society ; yet the courtesy of Rosamond to Sir Rupert was accompanied by secret alarm. This unexpected addition to the party bound for Albalanda only increased Al¬ gernon's anxiety to apprise Lady Mary of the approaching guests ; and ere he retired for the night, he, with a bright blush of shame for the trespass against
veracity he was thus induced to commit, informed Lord Dalincourt of his inten¬ tion to set out, ere dawn of day, to give the surprise of an unexpected visit to a friend, vvho was staying at a neighbouring monastery, and that, therefore, he might not be in attendance to start with the party for Albalanda ; but should, in that case, meet them on the road to form one in the royal procession. Having arranged for a pair of fleet horses and a trusty 7 guide to be in readi¬ ness ere the day appeared, Algernon set off through all the intricacies and dan¬ gers of a shortened route to Albalanda ; and when at length he hatl arrived at a convenient position for his purpose, sent his guide, carefully schooled in the neces¬ sary caution of his mission, and nobly feed to secure his faith, to summon Weewitte to a secret conference. Algernon had not been long solus in his ambush, when a motley 7 garb appeared in view. Promptly our young squire haileel the wearer, assured it must be the very motley he wished to see : nor was
he mistaken ; for in a moment he recog¬ nised Weewitte, little altered since they had met : but the striking change which had taken place in the boy, now' sprouted into an adult, bewildered the recollection of the jester ; and Fitzrivers, having promptly announced himselfj inquired how fared the Laely Maiy. " Odd's pity ! I left the Lady Mary, good sir," responded Weewitte, " like to the grass beneath us here, bathed in pearly distillation. As usual, Master Algernon, when the seneschal replenishes the dear child's emmenai*, anon the cash makes vanishment ; and none can tell, by any cunning they possess, the manage¬ ment of this dorn matter. Having lately made bartery against quarter-day for a strong box, engarded as craftily as might be invented, or by man's wit imagined, the dear chikl, full of the contentation of security, made promise of a deed of cha¬ rity to find performance this very morn- tide ; when, lo! to her aggriefe, and our
great marvel, the cash again had va¬ nished." " This loss is untoward on many ac¬ counts," said Algernon ; " but cannot you, by taking good advisement with Mrs. Maud, make cunning management in replacing it from my purse?'* " Nay 7 , Sir Squire, the hawk is not more quick of sight than our young Eyas. She would make apt discovery, 1 wot, belike any astrologer, that the marcs were not her own ; and the spirit of the noble race she sprang from would chafe her at the imposition. Oftimes have Maud, 1, and others, made effort at such jugglement, but without avail. Nathless, when the claimants for the marcs of her charity were marvellously distressful, she would accept the dole ; but in our name she woidd conscien¬ tiously bestow it, that we might reap the harvest of the blessing." " Present the promised dole even now," returned Algernon impatiently, " for we must not allow grief now to whelm her; for eft she will have much surprisal to
encounter : and albeit forbidden to make apprisement of it, I could not rest me, to have her agazed by the arrivance of unexpected illustrious guests, even now in progress hither." " Beshrew them ! Not the court in pro¬ gress, I betrust me," exclaimed Weewitte; " for then, odd's peril ! our dear Lady Mary would anon become a decaputated seraph to bedeck the tomb of poor Anne Boleyn." " Your meaning, good Master Jester ?" " Why, Sir Squire, our kindly neigh¬ bour, the new lorel abbot of St. Stephen's, presented erewhiles to our Laely Mary, as the gift of an unnamed friend of hers, a fairy book of devotion, written upon vellum, and in a cover of solid gold, with a ring to append it to the neck-chain or girdle j and being advised Queen Anne was apt to make presentment of such, and that Bishop Latimer was in corre¬ spondence with this lord abbot, it be- struck us that the gracious queen was the secret sender of this precious gift. Thus gratitude to Queen Anne found emblaze-
ment in the heart of Lady Mary, and gared her grief right sorely for the dern fate of the martyred ladyy and enchafed her against those who decreeet a fate of so much cruelness. Lady Mary not hay¬ ing yet learneel the worldly disguisement of her honest feelings, it imagineth me the king's repair to Albalanda may lack good promise to our dear child's safety." " But, my gooei Weewitte, you must caution Laely Mary upon her comport¬ ance ; and make strong advisement upon the hazardry of wareless ingenuity." " Odd's gree ! * Sir Squire, as glowful gratitude for all our youthful laely owes to you has never hapt to slumber at its post, I will counsel her that you make the advisement; anel then, percase, she may make a more prudent view of the matter," " Lady Mary must not have apprise¬ ment of my performing herald," ex¬ claimed Algernon in alarm, "lest, in her ingenuousness, it might make salliance
to the ears of those I would not in will¬ ingness offend." "Odd's faith!" lesponeknl Weewitte, " gratitude to Master Algernon will em- gird her with discreetness. Yet may my r bauble knock down the brains of my 7 wit, as а meet bargain for those who lack the scant commodity, if I can bethink me how our dear nestling will comport her in this surprisal of illustrious guests." " But I cannot imagine me, ta wis, that the successor of Dame Vintry has been heedless of the apt refinements meet for Lady Mary's estate." " Gentle blood being the native stream of Lady Mary's veins," returned Wee 1 - witte, " the refining process was not so difficult of chevisance as «ome had made bodement. No. beshrew their malice! it came genially, like the ^olishing touch of goldsmith's work upon the pure oie; and Mary of Albalanda, I wis, wears not one mark assorted with base metal." " This is joyance to me," responded Algernon; " 1 would you could give me surance that Lady Mary has been ако
riched by time with some personal ad¬ vantages." " I may approve myself but a partial witness,"said W r cevvitte, "yetdolbethink me, Master Fitzrivers, that not a sw T eeter visnomy will be amongst you. It is my declarement, that the admiration of our earl right woithy may now be taken by the nose. That leading feature, though, odd's sloth ! not apt in progress for rising in the world, has at length, I ween, formed its altitude in high beauty on the face of Lady Mary." Algernon expressed his surprise and pleasure ; and then proceeded to state his wishes that Lady Mary's toilette should be made with care, to receive the coming guests ; while as to the castle, he said, he cared not how comfortless they might find it : and then, upon the appearance of the guide on his return from seeking an interview with the absent Jester, this important conference was ended, and Algernon gallopeel away to join the party on its progress, and Wet 1 -
witte hastened home to perform his mission. It is now time to mention, that shortly after Lord St. Oswald's peremptory mandate for the dismissal of Dame Vin¬ try had reached Albalanda Castle, a new lord abbot w/as appointed to the supre¬ macy of the monastery 7 of St. Stephen's, lately 7 become vacant ; and to the utter amazement of Father Jonathan, this new lord abbot presented him with advanta¬ geous church preferment : and being, as lord abbot of St. Stephen's; one of the trustees appointed by the late Lord St. Oswald for the care of Lady Adela's younger children's portions, took upon himself as such trustee to request per¬ mission of Lord Si. Oswald to act a tutelary guardian's part by his fair young neighbour Lady Mary, and as such to recommend a successor for Father Jon¬ athan ; a request to which the delighted parent most gratefully acceded : and scarcely had the venerable Father Adrian made his appearance in Albalanda Cas¬ tle as preceptor to Lady Mary, when a
successor for Dame Mntry was procured also by the active lord abbot, and not objected to by the abbess of St. Mildreel's ; and this new governess, — an ex-recluse from one of the lately dissolved monas¬ teries,— Sister Isabella, now styled Dame or Mrs. Morton, was so completely every thing that could be wished for in the department she now filled, that Weewitte would have immediately 7 given the intel¬ ligence received from Algernon to Mrs. Morton, for her to use her own discretion relative to Laely 7 Mary, only that he felt he coukl not withhold the name of the herald from Mrs. Morton ; therefore, in faith to Fitzrivers, he despatched his communications by Matul to Laely Mary. These communications were heard with surprise, but not with pleasure, by Lady Mary, who with glowing cheeks vehemently 7 exclaimed, " No rede nor best shall lead my comportance to be, for the king's comfort and consolation, be¬ seeming a right loyal subject. If His Majesty chooses to wend hitherward with < vol. i. о
out advisement, he must lack contentation in all that here betides him, in damp un- garnished chambers. Ay, in sooth, neither to Master Fitzrivers nor his avize will I yield intendment ; for I will not apparel me with any 7 needfulness, nor be loyal in any wise. No ; w 7 ere I to peril my life by it, I would not endamage my gratitude to poor Queen Anne to aptly 7 homage her assassin. And were Master Algernon, also, to get some hurtful cold, and to moan ever so wailfully, I will not, — let gratitude feel ever so contentless, -— I will not bepity him, nor send him messes to do him good in needment, since he thus cowers as courtier to the sanguinary Henry. And yet if imagineth me, my Maudy," continued Maiy, as a sudden thrill of more kindly emotion be¬ gan to melt the vehemence of her childish petulance, " that would be cruelness, not to feel pitiful for Master Algernon ; and crimeful too, I wis, to yield him no assuage¬ ment; for he took pity on my cries, when the despiteous flames encompassed my
baby brother and myself. Ay, in sooth» and pity gave him wings in aidance ; foi¬ be flew İn througli the window where the fire was rageful, nor ere paused for con- siderance if those were sanguinary who placed us in our peril. Yes, yes, Maudy ; it would be disuatured to show reckless¬ ness to Algernon, should illness betide him through the clamps of our unaired chambers :" and pearly drops now came trickling down the cheeks of Mary, called forth by gratitude, and increased by penitence for the cruelty she had medi¬ tated ; but very soon her tears were arrested by a new apprehension which struck her active fancy—that were the king not received with every meet de¬ monstration of loyal respect, he might avenge it upon Algernon as being squire to the lord of Albalanda Castle ; as Henry was not one to hear the plea of justice in his court of conscience. " And should he discover," continued Mary, " that Algernon gave advisement of his repair to Albalanda, he might lay die blamefulness of his scant and о a
shabby reception upon poor Algernon's misorder." " Certes," at length Mary exclaimed, " it is my bounden duty to feel loyal. My sovereign not making good view of his duties is no excusation for any lack in mine. No, my Maudy, that would not plead in my behoof at the bar of bars. So I must receive this despiteous king with meet comportance, as if he were the goodly Alfred himselri or the dear Black Prince. But it will wilder me to dissem¬ ble, I wot, — to smile in welcome's guise upmi those I wish afar. I was never schooled to dissemble ; and it despairs me to imagine for my portance being aught but bungling, when I play recreant with sincerity." « But Maud," continued Mary, dim¬ pled smiles making playful efforts to become more visible around her mouth, " bethink you hair ever really stands uprightly through influence of affright- ment? If so, as mine has made extend- ment in growth, and now endureth to a good length, albeit my honoured father
had once forethought I was befortuned to a bald pate, like a scareful dwarf he had seen at Rome, it may arise to bewray me when I behold this king of terrors. Must I shave my head to keep it on ? or think you we can muster enough of array of bodkins to bind over this said witness from appearing against my loyalty?" This burst of natural vivacity was succeeded by thoughtful ness upon the possibilities to be attempted in prepar¬ ation for the coming guests ; and wish¬ ing to question Weewitte upon all that Fitzriver: said, she had him summoned. " Are you quite in certainty, Wee¬ witte," demanded Mary, " that Master Fitzrivers said it cared him not how the castle might be trapped?" " As certain, lady," said Weewitte, " as that, in the bright days which are agone, I should have had my gaudery and my wit to brush up for this day's bedazzle- ment." " But in our dark age," responded Mary smiling, " you must leave your о 3
wit and gaudery to lack their burnish- ment ; or they would outdaze our disfur- nished castle, that cannot upraise one foot of arras to bedight its walls, or a measure of fair tapestry, or a glittering cruise to deck a cupboard withal in wonted garnish." " Ah, odd's wail ! all swept off the stage of once shining talents, of silver and of gold ;" rejoined the jester. " In solitary so'3th, our sovereign lord the king will soonly hie him hence in sove¬ reign contempt of this once vaunted castle. But bear memory, latly, our young forespurrer expressed his wish right heartily, that you should make appearance in so much contrast to the reft castle as conveniently became you. Y r ei, heaven forefend there is no prize to be made of Mary of Albalanda in intend¬ ment, that the daze of shewy clinquants is thus thought meet 1 but no, no ; Master Fitzrivers would not in that guise have meddled in the matter." "Nay, Weewitte, your memory is scant," exclaimed Mary, " or it would hold in
recordation, that Mary of Albalanda is not so embraved by fortune's marcs, as to enrange her amid prizes meet to covet or bestow." " If fortune's marks do not form the Lady Mary's garnish," said the jester, " there are nobles in her heart's coffer meet for domestic consolation, more e?mobling than her birthdom, and of more vantage than fortune ever riched with. But rumour has whispered in the ear of folly, — antl fools and children, all weet, are vehicles for truth's waftage, — that our late honoured lord took especial guardment for the contentation of Lady Adela's younger race. Antl rumour's blasterz may have blown their clarion in the hearing of court-folk, as aptly 7 as of other long-eared animals ; and through this apprizement they make repair hither¬ ward, to foresee if Lady' Mary's manors (manners) are attractive, her hyde (hide) fair, and her fyfe (ufe) accomplishments in harmony with their wishes." " Hold, good jester," said Mary ; " and do not toil your cunning to imagine о 4
approachment of phantoms when sub¬ stantial matters have taken displeasant forms for our perplexity ; anel none of which aggrieve me like my sad breach in promise of the dole." Wewitte now f ventured to announce to Mary, that Master Fitzrivers, knowing that she could not, without betraying to the steward the intimation he had secretly given of the coming guests, demand a supply for largesse to heralds and other causes, had done himself the honour of leaving in her father's place a purse to answer present exigencies. With gratitude Lady Mary accepted Algernon's kind loan ; and as they were not to expect the coming guests ere noontide, she set out immediately, under the protection of Maud and Weewitte, to restore peace and comfort to a elistressed neighbour ; and then to wend her way 7 to the hermitage of St. Stephen's valley, to request the venerable recluse who inha¬ bited this lonely dwelling not to visit the castle at present. To the utter mar¬ vel of Latly Mary, she found the recluse
in full possession of that information which, in faith to Algernon, she had not even imparted to Mrs. Morton or Father Adrian. How the hermit in his lonely dell had acquired intelligence of a party being in progress for Albalanda, and that Fitzrivers liad conveyed secret iti¬ ti mation of it to her, she reared to ask him ; but his knowledge of the matter afforded her great comfort ; since she felt assured he would not betray Alger¬ non, and she had now an adviser open to her upon whose counsel she could rely. Maiy, feeling that her absence from the castle must be brief, else she coukl not comply with the request of Algernon relative to her own appearance, coukl only tarry to obtain a very few words of advice; and with a heart glowing with gratitude to this venerable recluse, to whom she felt her debt of moral and religious obligation incalculable, she arose from the moss-clad bench on which she had rested, to take her departure : the hermit also arose ; and, to the surprise of о 5
Mary, took up his staff and set out with her. " I will make salliance through the valley ΛνίίΙι you," said he : " your attend¬ ants will not miswend in the path of respectful distance ; therefore, dreadless of their babblement, I may venture to accomplish the cause of my repair, anel speak upon the concernments of the amiable Fitzrivers. Mary of Albalanda, learn, that through the discontentation of this youth upon the method in which you were upbrought, the friends and foes of his house were led to exertions for your behoof. Through his view of the matter, I, who bad only just enter- prised my habitance of yon dwelling, was let! 1 "ielel to you the impartible knowledge of which I made acquirement in a life of travel, study, and experience. From much opportunities thus yielded me of developing your character, I feel perfect suraiice in betrusting you, albeit wild your portance bears its seeming. Causes forefend my yet seeking Algernon Fitzrivers; it could serve for no avail-
ment, and I forbear to encounter him with the cruelness of uncertainties. But teli him you, my child, when none is near to voice the matter, he has a friend whom yet he knows not ; whose gree is with him : one vvho will not pause in rest- fulness, until he vantages the means to wrest his fortunes from the foemen of his illustrious house:—and give full need¬ ment to my hest, clear child; when you tell him this, it must be with the lack of all clew for guidance to me individually." The amazed Lady Mary attempted to give utterance to some of those powerful feelings, which these communications had awakened ; but excess of gratitude for all the benefits which she had re¬ ceived from this recluse, with those he thus promised for Algernon, destroyed her eloquence: however, the hermit was satisfied ; and kindly 7 turned the conversa¬ tion to a question which she had asked ere tliey had left the hermitage, antl had not yet been answered ;— " Whether the concealments necessary for the continu¬ ance of her progress in knowledge, whicli о 6
was thougVıt advisable for her adoption, were to be extended to Fitzrivers? " " There is no needment for my saying to the daughter of the peerless Adela," he now replied, " to make no unmeet declarement of her acquisitions, even to her truest friends. But, mv child, ever doff disguise with Fitzrivers, when it haps none are near for observance, whom it is convenient not to undeceive in their credence of your mind having remained as piteously disfurnishcel as had been ima¬ gined for y T ou by your foes. But, alack for my discontentation ! wc have made arrivance at the point where we must make our present valediction.—Farewell ! — May heaven's meetcst blessings wend with you, my child í " Laely Mary now parted from this vene¬ rable and mysterious fiiend, full of gi ati¬ tude for herself and Algernon ; yet, not untinctured with some uneasy fears of preternatural influence. The knowledge of Algernon's inteiview with Weewitte, and Us purport, having reached the her¬ mitage of St. Stephen's Valley as if
borne thither on the wings of magic, re¬ stored some dormant apprehensions to her bosom of the recluse, its present in¬ habitant, being verseti in necromancy ; •"CT »f for she had sometimes fancied the ever closely r -hoodeel hermit could don or doff' old age at pleasure : since, at times, her accurate eye had detected the soft and gentle falter of decreasing vocal energy, in her friend of the valley, changed to the less natural tones of a more powerful voice, creaking its efforts to imitate senescence; her observant eye had marked the graceful bending of de¬ clining strength, transformed to the sharper curving of one who could stanti erectly : and, in long watchfulness for the testimony 7 of the hand in attestation oi* these transmutations into compara¬ tive youth, Latly Mary had awaited to impart her surmises to Maud, but in vain; for only when the form and voice of age were unequivocal, were his hands displayed unmuffied : — never, but in this sage age of transmutation, wert» his instructions for Mary's improvement
yielded. Although in both forms, she marked, he had appeared to, antl con¬ versed with, not only Maud, Weewitte, Mrs. Morton, and Father Adrian, but with the lord abbot of St. Stephen's himself; yet none of them had seemed aware of the changes she perceived, and which she acknowledged to herself were certainly scarcely perceptible.
CHAI'. XV. Ihe rays of the sun announced to Mary and attendants, that they had no time to lose in regaining home, to make their toilette for the reception of the ex¬ pected guests ; their speed homeward was, therefore, fleet from the moment they parted with the recluse ; yet, only had they entered the base court of the castle, and Ma'y and Maud merely making a momentaiy pause for a restoration of exhausted breath, to make their ascent to the former's chamber, when the suel¬ den sound of trumpets, and of the trampling of horses upon the draw* b ridge, which had not been raised since lowered for the regress of Latly Mary, proclaimed to them, and to the amazed porter, the approach of something like a multitude. The voice of a pursuivant now, with pompous gravity, demanded entrance
for his sovereign lord the king, consort, and suite, into the Castle of Albalanda. Mary, trembling like an aspen branch, faltered out the order for admission, which the portgreve with tremulous hands obeyed, and Latly Mary, almost intuitively,advanced, with lingering steps and bounding heart, to perform her pain¬ ful task of giving welcome to the sove¬ reign whom gratitude to the memory of Anne Boleyn bid her recoil from ; and poor Mary was destined thus to make, in this presentation of herself; an exhibition that yielded pastime for the frolickers, such as they expected. Although to Henry the Eighth we are indebted for the first institution of the comfortable system which enables us to travel with speed and convenience, yet the bye-ways, in 1530, which pedestrians had to wade through, had not yet come under the royal consideration, and bore no similitude to those in our days of im¬ provement; although they weveJdaniized, or literally, as Adam had found them, the work of Nature's own unsophisticated
hand. The hose, placket, and kirtle, therefore, of Lady Maiy, bore conspicu¬ ous testimony in the purße which paved or powdered its broad bordering up to her very knees, of how much wet had fallen in the night, and of how much clay and mud could become portable, upon the rashness of disturbing their repose ; and even had she been unadorned by such a striking guard of russet embroidery, her garb was not such as Maiy of Albalanda should ever have been doomed to wear : but her apparel was furnished by the abbess of Saint Mildreel's; and, through the influence of Rosamond, was ever calculated to impede the acquirement of any taste in the fancy or arrangement of her attire. Such was the state of Mary's dress at this critical moment ; but to describe her personal appearance is a task no less difficult than mortifying to the partiality of the author, thus to present the por¬ trait of a heroine in the glowing colours of inattractiveness ; — for glowing, in¬ deed, were the colours which in this
moment glared upon the cheeks of Mary ; even such as might have awakened envy in the bosom of any buffoon, painting his visage for morris-dancing exhibition ; for the pale-faced infant, and sun-bronzed child, had at length blossomed into per¬ fection of rose and lily tints, of such transparent delicacy, that every effect in its variations became at once conspi¬ cuous : the traces, therefore, of the copious floods of tears which she had that morning shed upon the discovery that her means of charity had vanished, still were visible on all her features ; the varied sensations which had agitated her mind since the first intelligence conveyed from Algernon to the present moment, with her rapid flight from St. Stephen's Valleys had beamed their accumulating flushes over her countenance to a disfi¬ guring degree ; and now alarm, and other painful sensations, lent their potent aid to take from her appearance every symptom of composure ; and, over¬ powered by amazement at all that was opening before her, she stqruel perfectly
planet-stricken ; her large and brilliant eyes staring as if about to bound from their sockets, as if in eagerness to view all that she trembled to behold — her mouth gaping—her heart panting—and her beautifully moulded limbs, straying from all management, seeking every po¬ sition but those of easy 7 grace. With the j^trsuivant and heralds, first came prancing into tke court a group of the pretended lords and ladies attendant upon their Majesties ; amongst whom were the laughter-loving Sir Leoline Worling¬ ton and the portentous Sir Rupert War¬ burg. Next in the gorgeous cavalcade came pacing in, on beautiful white pal¬ freys gaily' trapped, the representatives of the king and queen ; then followed the fair and smiling Blanch Worlington and CT CT Algernon Fitzrivers ; after whom, came rumbling over the hollow-sounding draw¬ bridge, the first of the ahowily garnished pleasure-waggons. But the scarce! spirit of poor Mary waited not to behold more of the imposing pageant : for heralds, and squires, and knights, and ladies, and
queens, and kings, she had never seen be¬ fore except in pictures : the embodying such spectacles, and under such circum¬ stances, proved too mighty for the volatile Mary, who achieved but one actual glance at the entering gtoups, and the next moment found her extended at the feet of Maud in total insensibility. The anxious Algernon, who had taken in at one penetrating glance the whole unprepossessing appearance which Latly Mary had thus exhibited, was full of bitter disappointment relative to this object of his long fraternal interest ; and, not a little mortified at her so obviously s paying no attention to his earnest request relative to her toilette, he was not in activity 7 of mind to prove the first, as he was usually known to be, in offering kindly assistance. To Sir Rupert War¬ burg, therefore, was it by fate decreed tí) be the first to vault from his steed, and to raise up the swooning lady of the casfle from the encircling arms of the kneeling and distressed Maud ; and to bear her triumphantly ? into the hall,
where, on an oaken table, she was placed by him with a show of seemly tender¬ ness becoming a knight or courteous gentleman : and no man present, not even Sir Leoline himself, considered that tenderness misapplied, when they looked upon the alabaster statue of graceful recumbency, there transformed from the rubricated, scared, if not scaring, wild bird they had come thither to make their sport. The trumpets of the pretended heralds had attracted every inhabitant of the castle, with all convenient speed, to view or learn the cause of the 1 resound¬ ing of a clarion within the chatellany of forsaken Albalanela ; — some in terror, as if they 7 feared it as the last trump ; some to ease their pangs of curiosity; but all in deshabille : for seclusion with in¬ action, and a total absence of all stimulus to emulation or exertion, had engendered sloth and carelessness to appearance in the household and retainers in this once populous and magnificent castle. In strange diversity of apparel, therefore, —
some completing their toilette as they rushed onward,—this general muster ap¬ peared ; and this strange gathering had but just commenceel their assembling in the base court, when Laely Mary fainted ; but soon the reiterated cry that she was dead led all from ihe seeiie so gratifying to their own amazeel curiosity 7 , to relieve their alarms and anxiety relative to Mary by following Sir Rupert into the hall. The general grief of the household, and evident interest of many amongst the new arrivals, for the swooning Marv, struck with discord upon the observation of the invidious Re)samond, who, shrink¬ ing from premature recognition, had entered the castle closely veiled ; and, with increased discord in her feelings, she with dismay beheld, in the inanimate face and form before her, destruction to almost every hope and expectation her enmity had cherished ; whilst, in that very inanimation, a guarantee for sen- sensibility appeared, that might, on other occasions as well as the present, excite an interest which she had predetermined
the hateful Mary never should awaken : for now she beheld, whilst standing in ambush to detect their treasons, even the seneschal, wdiose devotedncss to her cause she had been fully 7 assured of, and the traitor Father Ralph, evincing un¬ necessary sympathy ; particularly 7 the former, who flew about to procure re¬ storatives, as if his own life was depend¬ ant upon the recovery of Lady Mary. To terminate these annoyances for the present, and to impede the progress of interest for tlie noxious Mary, Rosamond hastened to instruct the pretended queen to issue her royal mandate, in the soft and alluring semblance of humanity, to CT %/ ' have the poor suffering invaliti conveyed to her own chamber, — a mandate whicli was accordingly obeyed. This removal of Laely Maiy from public view allowed the thoughts of all the amazed inhabitants of the castle, who did not accompany the beloved object of their interest to her chamber, to turn upon the late arrivals ; and, finding it seriously pronounced to be the royal
party on a progress, the consternation awakened became highly relished amuse¬ ment for those who caused it; for whom every arrangement in accommodation was instantly commenced, with every devoted- ness to the innovation of industry : yet, save in the instance of removing the glass winelows from the depositories of care to a reinstatement in the frames they were formeel to occupy', all was pitiable, nay pitiful, deficiency. But at length the aspect of all things changed, upon the arrival of the carts bearing the household stuff from Ves¬ pasian Tower, and which now were introduced as pertaining to the court ; but, strange to the perplexed household, whose vigour of memory Rosamond had failed to calculate upon, almost every individual of them descried some¬ thing they had before seen, —- some old acquaintance, which seemed to find its ready fitment, as if in an ancient resting place : and while the lading up of tapes¬ try and arras on the walls —■ spreading them out on cupboards — laying down
patches of curious carpets amid newly strewn rushes — resting cushions on long beraved chairs and window-seats—hoist¬ ing canopies over bedsteads and seats of estate, — scarcely one bant! now worked in this animating employment, vvho did not detect some article, in this supply from the royal stores, to awak¬ en suspicion that the providers must be elcalers, at least in necromancy, if not in other sleight of hauti ; so marvellously had they suited their suppletory cargo to the various ranges of apartments and offices upon the premises. And most of the comparatively few individuals ηυ,ν in Albalanda Castle to fill up these once regally suppliée! departments, at length ventured to murmur conjectures to each other upon the appalling possibi¬ lity 7 of some dire magic being once more in operation over the house of St. Os¬ vvakl ; and, upon those who were thus superstitiously alarmed, fear of indivi¬ dual consequences proved an excellent impellent to industry for the accommo¬ dation of the powerful fiends vvho worked vol. ι. i»
these spells : whilst those amongst them, who believed the visitation was nothing more nor less terrific than the king who martyred his own consort, toiled, amid other exertions of worldly wisdom, for the preservation of that part of the castle property which had been forthcoming ere the arrival of these strange guests and their suspicious household stuff; by employing the countercaster and scribe to the household to copy out, as fairly 7 and speedily as he could, notices in refer¬ ence to the act of the 17th of Henry : — " That as it was expected the officers of the king's squillery should see silver and pewter vessels kept safe ; so, such was the custom in Albalanda Castle : and to remind all, who could read the notice, and to request those who could not, to repeat it to their brethcren, that the said act forbad the king's attendants to steal locks or keys from cupboards, or other articles of furniture out of noble¬ men's or gentlemen's houses where His Majesty 7 made tarriance." But whilst all this alarm of magic and
liglıi fingers, and this revival of long- dormant industry, w T erc operating through the household, the thoughts of Rosamond found full ant! active employment too. The long eye-lashes, the ñnely formed eye-brows, nose, and mouth, which the face of Lady Mary had exhibited as she lay inanimate, fii led her stepelame with amazement how 7 a child coukl have so completely changed its mould in growing towards maturity 7 ; anel with dismay, be¬ cause, in this transformation, she por¬ trayed a striking resemblance to her father. How, therefore, could she (Ro¬ samond) ever attempt to lead the general voice against the beauty of his daughter, without offending the personally vain Lord St. Oswald. The botiseli old, she had fou n el reason to believe, were all devoted to this object of her long che¬ rished enmitv ; anel how to take anv effec- tive measure to counteract this partiality, whilst under her assumed character, she could not devise : and, miserable in this state of suspended malice, she determined to betray her identity to Father Ralph, ρ 2
with whom she soon effected a private conference. To her amazed auditor, Lady St. Os¬ vvakl acknowledged the deception of personages vvho had entered the castle with her; commanding, at the same time, the preservation of the secret, until she should grant permission to disclose it; and this confession made, she gave full scope to her irritated feelings, by de¬ manding indignantly 7 , " Why he had evinced so much anxiety about Lady Mary?" The tone in w 7 hich this query was de¬ livered, informed the sagacious Ralph how he must reply ; and, waving the fact, of what had actually operated upon him, until he should receive instructions from the abbess of St. Mildred's, he with plau¬ sible craft replied to this effect :— " That being known by all the household as devoted to her interest, he had con¬ ceived it sound policy, for her sake, to assume the aspect of strong interest for her stepchild ; and to impress His Ma¬ jesty and courtiers, by whom he had
believed himself surrounded, with the conviction, that this seeming kindliness beamed through his bosom as the mere reflection from that of his influential sun, —his generous and kind-hearted patroness and honoured lady." This wily fabrication fully satisfied Rosamond of his fealty ; yet she re¬ mained doubtful whether to admit the solidity 7 of the policy in its effect ; — whether she should acquire more gratifi¬ cation from this favourable impression of her as a stepdame, or from having it sup¬ posed that the child of her long-cherished bitter batı ed could not inspire those amongst whom she lived with any kindly sentiments. " But," she peevishly exclaimed, " is it also for my contentation, to conject that Davenant, by taking the same view and advisement of the matter, has become assotted with the semblance of lively gree towards Lady Mary. If his was mumming, it marvellously took the guise, I ween, of dareful faithbreach." Davenant, the seneschal, was at this V 2
identical moment at open warfare with Father Ralph, upon a recent occurrence in the castle ; the holy father, therefore, felt it wholly unnecessary to make the peace of Master Seneschal with the indig¬ nant countess : he consequently answered dryly, that he was not in Davenant's secrets. " It is my designment incontinently, to fathom if he is a guiler," said the alarmed Rosamond. — " Cite him hither¬ ward ; and under the shadow of my hood, and in this murksome corner, I can sit in ambushment, whiles you make question how he stands faithed to me ? " The seneschal was accordingly sum¬ moned, aud Father Ralph, in continuance of recent hostility 7 , yielded no intimation of how fearfully he might commit him¬ self by replying ingenuously 7 to the abrupt question — " How he came to accoil so marvellously around Lady Mary, and beseem so despairful, when she was in her swoon ? " " What is that to thee, most holy sire?" returned tlie seneschal contemptuously,
casting his penetrating eyes in bitter scorn щюп his interrogator. " It seemeth me, it would be more meet for the cloth you honour, to appoint thyself to the com¬ posing of moralities right excellently, to deck the strong boxes of the new-come guests. Such like, as, ( lionesty T is the best policy.' " Father Ralph, although visibly discon¬ certed, made no comment upon this rude retort ; but, with more conciliatory mild¬ ness, repeated his question, " By whose behest am I cited to the question?" demandée! the seneschal haughtily. " Beshrew me, if I answer thee, until I know the mover of this daring," " The mandate for this question came from sovereign authority," responded Father Ralph mildly. " If from the holy office itself," re¬ turned the seneschal, " I have only one reply for my averment — Through gra¬ titude." "Traitor! base and recreant!" ex¬ claimed the agitated Rosamond, led y by p L·
her frantic indignation, out of self-pos¬ session. " Does the inmark of gratitude to Mary of' Albalanda make accordance with what you aforetime owed to him, whom the cruelness of this very Mary's mother befortuned to dureful misery ? " " Lady," replied the startled Dave- nent, resuming quickly his composure, " I am no traitor ; although gratitude to Lady Mary has found dureful lodgment in my breast. It is now three years since, in making repair to the castle battlements to foresee some matters that were in jeopardous state, I fell through an embrasure, to the dislocation of an arm and the fracturement of a leg; I w r as alone ; and, all ad read for the conse¬ quences of my aventure, I soonly fainted. At length percei vanee was restored to me ; when I found my head supported by pity's gentle child ; — she whom, for two long years, I had betreated with every species of unkindness that could irk her; nay, in my cruelness, with more than unkindly treatment. Yes; Mary of Albalanda, lady, in the wild rovings of
her unrestful spirits, heard my loud groanful murmurs, and winged her way, in angel's guise, to find out who was there so ruefully aggrieved ; and there, to her marvel, she found the surly, sa¬ vage seneschal in breme and dureful needment, and in that moment her heart expunged all recordation of my disna- tured and despiteous offences. Revenge- ment is not the infix of Lady 7 Mary's heart — but Christian kindness and cha¬ rity ; for scantly was she from my sight, ere she brought me aidance — she de¬ vised for my comfort and consolation all that might be invented, or by com¬ passion's wit anel cunning found meet to be imagined. Laely 7 Mary foresaw that there was nothing lacking to make help for my recovery ; and to her I owe it. This Lady Mary I found agazed into a swoon, I am no monster, upbrought by base ingratitude ; and condign aidance and sympathy were but meet in me, to pay to my preserver." The agitated seneschal now wiped away the tears of gratitude which had p 5
started to his eyes ; and, with a more steady voice, continued — " I tarried not one moment in needlessness, ere I matle advisement to the laely 7 abbess of St. Mildred's, that no feeling of vengement for the cruelness of Lady Adela to my beloved master should gar the conti¬ nuance of enmity's designments for the impairment of Lady Mary's good. The lady of St. Mildred's reply was, to wit— that I had only forespoken the Countess of St. Oswald's intendment; for that the apt wish in the cherishment of that august lady's heart was for the prospcrousness of Lady Mary. If the holy mother made false vouchment, the fault is not of me. The matter of' my purpv n? is now without disguisement before my honoured lady ; that purpose can never wot vanquish- incut, I will now retire, and in respect¬ fulness await the decision, as to my fit¬ ment, or otherwise, of retaining my present station." Davenant now made his profound obeisance and retired, leaving the alanneel and highly disconcerted Rosamond con-
vinced that her friend's policy was good, in affirming a change in plans and wishes to one who had unequivocally confessed a variation in his own ; and under the influence of this policy she would have instantly acted, had she not been too much unhinged by this unexpected de¬ sertion of the seneschal, to accomplish it with her usual deceptions management ; whilst as to Father Ralph, he was not that acquiescent spirit, to yiekl up, with¬ out strenuous efforts to retain it, the ad¬ vantage thus gained over his domestic foe. The wary priest perceived, that although Davenant's own statement had pronounced his devotion to the interests of Lady Mary, yet the countess had expressed no displeasure : and this in. explicable tendency to continued favour he resolved to subvert at once, by assuring her ladyship that Daveuant was no longei to be trusted ; since his apostasy, even in his religious faith, was unequivocal, antl fully 7 manifested by the irreverence in his allusions to the Holy Inquisition. Rosamond still professed the persua- p б
sion of the Romish Church, as those to whom she had committed herself in her vengeful projects announced themselves ofthat faith ; and she therefore believed she should bind them more firmly to her interest by this conformity in creed : but the horrid fact was— Rosamond hatl no religion. The idols of her heart's homage were uncurbed passions, and all that coukl promote the sublunary hap¬ piness and aggrandizement of herself and daughter. These doubts, therefore, of Davenant's veneration for the holy office were thought off' with perfect indifference by her ; yet, to bind Father Ralph more effectively to her projects, she affected to feel as he wished upon the subject, and in all things to distrust the seneschal. So many circumstances had cooperated to awaken the alarm of Rosamond, since her arrival at Albalanda, relative to the success of her operations against the well¬ doing of Lady Mary, that her prompt de¬ termination was that this hated individual should not appear amongst the guests, or be seen by any of them, until she herself
should have effected u private interview with the abbess of St. Mildred's. Lady St. Oswald, who lived as if she feared not death, yet was provided with that remedy against such a possible contingency, whicli an able physician in her household could supply. The seventh son of a seventh son, Doctor Septimus Balmfield, was ever her attendant when she moved her residence ; consequently, this eminent personage had arrived with the other useful appendages, antl now received commands to visit Lady Maryn antl to find her too much indisposed to quit her chamber with safetyn This decree for the imprisonment of Lady Mary soon announced to the guests, that they must strike out other amuse¬ ment for themselves, than the wilel game they had looked to for their pastime. Accordingly, ranging over the extensive and magnificent premises wiled them through one day 7 , undetected by the gene¬ ral mass of the old residents, notwith¬ standing the betraying appearance of so many old acquaintances amid the rogai
stores. But ere the mantle ot'night had spread its sombre shade over the once more thickly inhabited Castle of' Alba- landa, this strange revisit of the household stuff was not the only mystery in discus¬ sion amongst the disrmiyed residents. Mrs.Morton, Lady Mary's governe^, had disappeared ; and none could discover through what means. Dame Morton being enquired for in the chamber of her pupil, led to the knowledge there of this mysterious dis¬ appearance: but, although grieved at her absence, Maiy was notalarmeel, for many secrets had travelled to her even in her prcr.v-nt prison ; and amongst others, that of whom she was to develope beneath the guise of a royal progress. The sene- schal, under influence superior to Rosa¬ mond's in his estimation, conveyed through Maud all his interesting intelli¬ gence to Lady Marv ; and also a stock of nobles and marcs beyond what she had evei before even seei at one moment, to answer every demand which might be made upon her justice or generosity ; and
a new strong box, which Daven ant trusted might def'v even witchcraft or any other* craft to explore. The suspension of Mary's faculties not having proceedeei from previous in¬ disposition, her recovery, enee efľectcel, left no languor to prevent subsequent ex¬ ertion ; yet she was not altogether sorry for Doctor Balmfiekľs interdiction to her quitting her chamber, since it yielded time to reflecfcniipon the part she might be doomed to act before those whom she had quite as much cause to fear as the terrific Henry himself: and although curiosity panted to peep at Rhona, anel affection throbbed to hear something of CT her brother, who, it had not yet trans* pired to her, was amongst the arrivals; and she felt almost painfully anxious to denver the hermit's message to Alger- nan, and to repay him the sum he had so kindly lent her ; yet, in despite of het volatility, she did contrive to remam a peaceable unmurmuring prisoner in her chuinber until the following day.
CHAP. XVI. IImrly in the succeeding morning, Sir Leoline Worlington was actively employ- eel, exploring, around the elomain, all tliat was likely to yield out-door sport for him¬ self anel party during their sojourn in this sombre castle of his uncle. Sir Rupert Warburg was likewise a timely wanderer ; and, upon something of a more interest¬ ed speculation, was noting the chatellany in all its bearings which might eie vol ve to the Lady Mary, should the puny aspect of her brother foretoken his early dissolu¬ tion. Algernon had passed his night upon a sleepless pillow > for his mysterious fate, and the certainty of his passion for Rhona, were at warfare within his bosom. Lady Warburg, on this progress, comporting herself as a young heiress leading her friends to celebrate her taking possession
of her long withheld property with such fascinating sweetness, had looked and enacted the beauteous young queen with such captivating grace, that he found him¬ self more enthralled than he had ever be¬ fore feared he was ; and full of Rhona's potent charms and his own hopelessness, he could not sleep : and, in the cogitations of his vigil, he sometimes beamed a sor¬ rowing thought upon Laely Mary, anel on the prediction of her father — Cť that so much susceptibility might too probably cause much future misery to one so little favoureel in exterior." For Algernon haei only beheld Maiy in the moments of' her wild appearance in the base court, prior to her swoon ; as Rhona seized his atten¬ tions, and riveted them and his thoughts exclusively to herself) through her well managed display of tender sympathy for " poor Lady Mary! " until " poor Lady Mary" was safely deposited in her cham, ber. Recapitulation of the causes which ap¬ parently occasioned Mary's fainting, by recalling all his interest for this his long
favourite, led him to early rising, to seek a conference with Weewitte, to learn from him the cause why Laely Maiy had not complied with his request, of attending to her own individual appearance ; but, upon inquiry for the jester, he learned that he was gone to St. Slephen's Valley ; and, under a hope of meeting him on his return thence, Algernon set out in the direction for that purpose, yet with a heart more agitated by the anxieties of his hopeless passion than by those of pity and interest for poor Maiy. But long Algernon had ne>t breathed the morning breezes, ere he was hailed by Lord Dalincourt, requesting him to pause until he could come up to liim to join in his pedestriauism. To a sleepless night, devoted to con¬ templation of Rhona's fascinations, his lordship's early salliance was also to be ascribed; for his lomantic passion, che¬ rished so long against his judgment, had been worked up to hs climax of lender- ness the preceding day, by the encourage¬ ment given to his hopes through the per-
sonations allotted to them for perform¬ ance as the newly wedded king and consort. Whilst in his fascinator's pre¬ sence, his lordship could only think of Rhona; but, absent from his enchantress, thoughts of others glided into his icmcm- brance : when the recollection of Мну and her swoon at length maintained their ground, and led to the conviction that Jie had yielded his concurrence to an act of cruelty in such an overpowering sur¬ prise ; and, full of contrition, he had for¬ saken his couch betimes, for the purpose of consulting Fitzrivers upon a remedy for the unkindness they had unwittingly practised, without giving up the mum¬ ming pastime Lady St. Oswald had assigned them to perform. Having overtaken his young counsellor, he instantly commenced his consultation, which was soon, however, interrupted by Sirs Leoline and Rupert, who joined them, and announced that the rain which had been in menace had at length commenced ; and that, when out of the shelter of the widely spreading trees of*
the avenue, in which they then walked, they would find it no slight shower. The costume of beaux in the sixteenth century was not formed to encounter the inclemency of humid clouds; for the silken materials, of which it was chiefly com¬ posed, seemed more meet for the shelter of a band-box ; they 7 , accordingly, Unding the shower indeed no slight one, though promising not to prove of long continu¬ ance, drew up into the umbrageous covert thus afforded them, to await the expected cessation, ere they commenced their return to the castle. The trees which they 7 had chosen for their retreat were clumped on the summit of a high land, where they 7 were presented with a beautifully picturesque view of a winding valley, diversified by rills and falls of limpid water, am! by thickets grouped in the most scenic luxuriance. Whilst this party of ramblers were gazing upon and expressing their admir¬ ation of the richly decked landscape be- ι;λ d h them, the scene became more animated and more interesting by the
sudden appearance of human beings meandering amid the woodlands and broken paths of the glen below ; and soon they were able to identify three individuals — one male, another female, but what the third could in possibility prove filled our weathcr-bounden so¬ journers with varied conjecture ; yet all agreeing in its being some marvellously long-legged personage, topped with some¬ thing of conspicuous altitudinal enor¬ mity. " Motley ! Motley ! by my halidom !" at length exclaimed Sir Leoline. " By all that is grimaceful in miming, 'tis a saltinbanco we ken, in salliance to Albalanda for our play pleasurance, through kindly rumour sounding the king being tarrying there. By Mom us ! he journeys thitherward to set a rainy day a winging off from longsome time. The female is, I wis, some wire-bounder, or other marvel in his train : Master Longshanks bears the legerdemaincry of the matter high in air, to signify how superlatively 'tis vaunted of withal."
These conjectures were adopted by all : but as the pedestrians arose nearer to view in their ascent towards their eager observers, the speculations upon what in possibility the altitudinal mona¬ ster coukl transform into animated all their wonder, anel set every conjecture at defiance ; for, in every disappearance occasioneel by the intervention of the w r ooels and rills in the wintling pathway, it became still more puzzling to their comprehension, from its wild speeds its agility, its gxotesque form, and antic bearings. " By my halidom I" at length Sit Leolinc exclaimed, " but this nonde¬ script fills me with adread. Aroynt thee, Mage ! but thou dost gar my craven heart to sink within me through affright- men t." " And mine, G —dyeld me! to bound and palpitate," said Sir Rupert, laugh¬ ing. " It will doubtless transmute into some¬ thing marvellously portentous to all," said Algernon, smiling ·, " it seemeth me
to have made such impressible bold upon our hearts and fancies." " A will o' wisp ! I bedub myself herald to proclaim," rejoined Sir Leoline : " see, see, how it dances onward as though something supernatural were its impel- lant ! Now it makes divergement to the right, now, now to the left; anel, by my holidam i in absolutely the most graceful sort of heydcgives it e'er befortuned me to see in performance :" and after α short pause, and anxious gaze in eveiy direction, Sir Leoline continued—" And now, gra¬ mercy ! but it has performed its vanish¬ ment altogether ; and well, odd's hearts, my friends, without our bewitchment-— at least that we wot of" " They have betaken some forthright way to the castle, which those luxuriant knolls conceal from our detection," said Lord Dalincourt." " I hope as much," responded the mirth-loving knight ; "and as my curiosity is em moved to pangf ulness, I hail with joyance ynm gleam of Sol's resplendence, as a bright omen that we may eftsoons
set a joggmg without menace to our gaudery." A soft dulcet tone of the human voice now thrilled through the ears of this party of morning ramblers, and converted them into entranced listeners, eager again to catch sounds of fascinating melody 7 ; buť they listened in vain : and soon their anxious expectations were interrupted by the man in motley garb suddenly arising, close to the very spot which sheltered them, from an almost perpendicular ascent diverging from that part of the valley in which he and his companions had so lately been meandering ; and scarcely had the surprised party recognised in Master Motley the castle jester himself) ere the will o' the wisp bounded into full view immediately before their, eyes, anel in altitude out-topping the towering Weewitte, who had often caused the re¬ pining warrior to envy buffoonery a structure so noble, so befitting military prowess ; and in one moment after this incomprehensibility stood before their ken, it was hailed by a burst
of incontrollable risibility from Sirs Leo¬ line and Rupert, as if they had that moment bitten the sardoa herba.* This uncourteous though resistless burst of sardonic grinning ant! laughing first announced to Weewitte and his party that they 7 haei thus landed in the close vicinity of' observers ; and this electric proclamation instantaneously dismounted the object of their recent conjectural speculations and present mirth, from the pinnacle of admiration to the usual alti¬ tude "of growing damsels : and with this descent from elevation appeared a com¬ plete downfal of all self-possession ; for, in evielent discomposure, Mary of Albalanda had shrunk down from her exaltation into an almost petrified statue of dismay and mortification; not venturing to raise her eyes, nor daring to move even to as¬ certain if she was absolutely disentangled from the awkward embarrassment of her late supporters. The strange appearance, which had so
VOL._I.
-ä
completely puzzled her observers, was indeed no other than Lady Mary ; who had sallied forth at early dawn, to learn from the recluse of the valley if she was not to hope for the return of her highly estimated governess as soon as the castle should be relieved from its present guests. And not forgetful of the state of the passes she haei to wade through in her route, and alive to the memory of the conspicuous embroidery she had been garnished withthepreceding day, and shrinking from a secontl im¬ pression of the same stamp upon those whom she bad been informed would hail all things with joy, that they coukl con¬ vert into shafts of ridicule to turn upon her ; she mounted upon a pair of im¬ mensely high stilts, which had been imported long since from the Pyrenees, and had lain inactively in Albalanda Castle until discovered by Lady Mary, who bad often scampered about on them within the precincts of the castle, to the infinite delight of herself and those who wished to see her happy : but never
before had she ventured on them outside the gates ; and would most certainly not now have exhibited in them so far from home, had not the seneschal assured her that her return from St. Stephen's Valley would undoubtedly be effected long ere the strangers would have descended from their chambers. The apparel of Lady 7 Mary was scarcely one degree removed from that worn bv CT ·/ the rustic class ; yet, being the last new 7 kirtle, placket, neckatee, and hair-lace, which she had received from her mistress of the wardrobe, the abbess of St. Mil¬ dred's ; and having been adjusted with more attention to appearance than she usually bestowed upon her employment while dressing ; she might have pleased the fancy' as a picturesquely attired pea¬ sant, had she not, to the amazement of her wondering beholders, and chagrin of herself and attendants, mounted a pyra- midical brown birch basket upon her head to save her tire from the pelting shower ; for anxiety to reach home with¬ out encountering the observation of the φ Or
pretended royal party had not allowed her to pause in shelter from the rain. Weewitte, as much annoyed for Lady- Mary as site was herself at this encoun¬ ter, called up ail his self-possession for her relief, and, with the licensed flippancy of a jester, exclaimed, " Albeit I may abash by my intend¬ ment, I must unhood my young hawk, now I have brought her to the field, lest it might be told of, that ' she joketh !'* when joking in any guise is not seemly ior young females in strange company, either as game or in gamesomeness. And now, for our sovereign lord the king's comfort and consolation, I will transmew this unmeet heatl-gear into an apt enthronement for the restful sojourn of His gracious Majesty, awhile we bend the knee in loyal homage, as well be¬ comes us." While Weewitte thus held forth, he withdrew the basket from its overshadow¬ ing station, and placed it beneath a luxu-
riant tree, as a bench of estate for Lord Dalincourt, vvho good-humouredly seat¬ ed himself; and, in sovereign gracious- ness, gently drew Lady Mary towards Jiim to bestow 7 upon her the honour of a royal salutation. " By Jove's own nectar !" Sir Rupert audibly exclaimed, " but I would that I were playing the king !" " What! then, sir knight, the knave does not content ye ?" exclaimed the jester as audibly, whilst he proceeded to take his official station at the feet of the mock sovereign, whom, with much show of homage, ne addressed. " I trust I shall not stumble me in my comportance, liege ; sithence this is not the first time it has fortuned me to en¬ counter the mighty honour of sic ap¬ proachment. It is more than а score of years agone last M ay tide, since I made eme in the disports which gareel apt joli¬ ment to our young Henry of England, whograciously made commcndacion of my 'haviour, as right excellent in my craft. Odd's changelings !" continued Wee-
witte, looking demurely solemn ; " but that was, in sooth, when your Grace— a gamesome airling — had towered to a higher altitude than now you stand at : but askings cannot, in royal convenience, do wrong, your Majesty shortening thus surprisingly, I must not clepe a decrease in any vantage. But, ah ! it came, I ween, of bending down your ear too graciously to footlikers and groveling courtiers.— Odd's Maypoles ! had it betidetl for the royal ear to have been lent to me, it would, I wot, have been for the exalt¬ ation of us both. — Your Grace's eyes likewise have, I wis, in contrariwise, waxed marvellously in extendment. Ah ! ha i but it can imagine me the cause of this last chevisance: — Ah ! it was agap- ing to ken the rare beauties of your royal court, my sovereign. Odd's peril ! but my 7 rude guessments seem to irk my monarch, as if I had stumbled me in apt respect, or elanced them without warrant- ty r . And so in sooth I did, for my bauble lies in tarriance at home; for nothing voiced to me that I should lack its
aidment. But, if yon versemen, Wyatte, whom, as it seemeth me, has yielded no feet of his measures toward the eleva¬ tion of his sovereign, will enterprise the part of my bauble, we shall, atween us, make babblement in prose and verse meet for our sovereign's contentation." Whilst Weewitte was thus gabbling, to attract attention from the disconcerted Mary, Fitzrivers stood gazing upon her in amazement. Not at the unexpected improvements in her personal beauties, butat the singular inconsistency her con¬ duct evinced. Only the preceding day, she had absolutely swooned in conster¬ nation on beholding him whom she sup¬ posed to be her sovereign ; and this — the very subsequent morning—although still agitated and timid, she yet received this supposed sovereign's kiss with no apparent reluctance,—even seeming more inclined to give scope to a suppressed smile, than to withdraw the hand taken by this personage. As Fitzrivers continued to contemplate the conduct of this his young favourite, o 4f
without his meed of approbation ; Mary, whose vexation at this unexpected en¬ counter had felt considerable decrease upon Weewitte kaving relieved her from her wicker coiffure, summoned sufficient courage to address her uncle, whom, al¬ though she had heard he bore no amity towards her, yet, as her father's brother, she felt disposed to venerate ; and with a fascinating advance in that smile, which Algernon, with something like grief, had detected in its bud, inquired, " If she might not be vantaged by the boon of a blessing from her gracious sove¬ reign ?" These few words, although lowly arti¬ culated, informed her auditors that her's hatl been the dulcet tones which they had heard, and so anxiously wished to hear again. " A blessing !" responded Lortl Dalin¬ court, who was resolved that Weewitte's implied detection of the imposture should notunkinghim ; and now looking m pleased surprise upon that relative whom he had been accustomed to consider the posses-
sor of nothing concordant with harmony — " Blessings are boons of aggrace from princes to their subjects, bestowed in deeds, not words, Lady Mary." " Odd boons, that when showered on rustic folks, without apprisement, can be received with insensibility" said Wee¬ witte smiling. " That cannot marvel you, if those rustics are not weetless of being deemed subjects only for arrision, unmeet for blessing," faltered out the sensitive Mary, ready to weep because her own uncle thus declined to bless her. " Nay, Lady Mary, imagine yourself more aptly for your contentation, I pri¬ thee, than to wis we would permit for our well-beloved subjects in Albalanda Castle the designment of displacent en¬ counter from arrision's shafts. By whom was bruited for us this disnatured in¬ tendment ?" " Echo, Sire, finds many a channel for her babblement," replied the trembling Mary, blushing like a rose, yet led on in her reply by sensibly feeling the Q 5
cruelty of the plan which had been formed to perplex and to deride her. " Soonly, therefore, it made waftage to us, of the forces come in surprisal upon our unpre¬ pared castle having, amid their leaders, a knight of valiance who storms weak places with pointed missiles from his apt stores. And albeit the garnish of our castle, and in good sooth of our apparel, make declarement, that we have not visited Wyatte's closet*, yet the secrets of that closet have made transpiration even to recluse rustics ; anel thus wotting how kindliness beams from Wyatte in town, we will cry for mercy to Wyatte in the country." Lord Dalincourt, although still highly pleased with Mary individually, was by no means so with the tenour of what site uttered; since, like the jester's reminis¬ cence, it seemed to menace a speeely dissolution to his regal happiness.
Sir Leoline, although overpowered with amazement, upon finding the being, whom he had been led, by report to embody in his ludicrous fancies as a pointing stock, one whom he now felt convinced was sparkling with the very mettle which would yield him zest to sport with, not against her ; and although convinced, by the glance which had shot its identifying recognition of the Knight of the Pointed Missiles, from those eyes which beamed with intelligence, that he stood confessed to his saucy cousin as an impostor; yet, as his uncle did not seem inclined to pa¬ tronise his detection and confession, he felt compelled to remain Sir Thomas Wyatte. The pretended sovereign now con¬ ferred upon Lady Mary the honour of taking her hand, to conduct her home¬ ward ; when the anxiously observing Fitzrivers, perceiving that she gave her hand without reluctance, and walked on with firmness, felt assured that the evident restoration of her composure, and the allusions in lier repues to her q 6
uncle, had been occasioned by the real individuality of the arrived party having been by some means revealed to her ; and, under this conviction, his lively re- collection of her ladyship's having beamed no glance of recognition towards him wounded his susceptible feelings most acutely. The animated interest which he had ever experienced for Lady Mary, and had upon every possible occasion evinced for her, made Algernon feel this as a painful and unmerited slight ; anel the wakeful hours he had passed the pre¬ ceding night, contemplating his own insulation, had aroused such sensitive mortifications upon the subject of his own insignificance in the world, that he felt this inattention more sensibly than he otherwise would have done : with his bosom, thus glowing with indignant throbs of wounded friendship, he drew back to the point farthest from that oc¬ cupied by Latly Alary and her escort ; and, in the moment of this recognition, he beheld an eloquent glance beam from
the eyes of Mary, first to Weewitte, and then upon the basket which had so re¬ cently been exalted as her tire,—a glance which the jester promptly answered, by placing the object of her evident anxiety carefully in his arms, along with the un¬ wieldy and bemired Pyrenean stilts. Sir Leoline Worlington also observed the expressive glance of Mary ; and, full of curiosity as he was of mirth and sa¬ tire, determined upon delving into the bottom of this mysterious basket; and consequently, without impeding cere¬ mony, joined the jester in his walk, and demanded the history of this strange head-gear. " Odd's pity ! sir knight of poetic fancy, " respon tied Weewitte, " but I, even prosy dullard as I may be clept, can depaiut for you that which may im¬ agine your muse incontinently. Our young latly made salliance from the cas¬ tle, bearing in her fair hand a portable canopy for guardage against sun and rain, which had sojourned in our family possession since the days of our brave
King Stephen. # Into our pathway a cottier dame strayed, bending beneath the burden of sickness and this clumsy basket, wending thitherward to St. Mil¬ dred's for elole to feed her hungered brood. Soonly r , and without forespending many words, our wild though trueborn child of pity placed this discommodious array upon her own head, to shield that as it might from the pelting rain, and expanded the meet shelter of her own bravely trapped umbrei for the behoof of the consumptive spectre; to whom she gave aelvisement to hie homeward, and a promise to send supplies from Albalanda, to lay to rest- fulness all fears of famishment." This simple tale of the wild Mary's benevolence made its prompt way to the feeling heart of Algernon, and taught him to regret still more that such a Mary could unkindly slight a long-tried faithful friend. Upon this tale for his muse, the pre-
yol. ti.
tended poet descanted in the tone of admiration which the partial jester seemed to expect ; whilst the deep designer, Sir Rupert, shaping bis course from his recollection of Maud's affliction when her young lady had swooned the pre¬ ceding day, now fastened upon this faith¬ ful adherent, to speak of Lady Mary in those wily strains which he trusted would rebound through the voice of this effective echo to the ear of the young Maiy, as the basis of a structure which he thought İt no unsound policy to have in commence¬ ment, should interest, inclination, revenge, or any other incentive, hereafter issue a mandate for its completion.
v>II AI . JrW V Xx. lhe distance of the spot where the wild Mary had encountered the pretended sovereign and his attendants was- so trifling from home, that they were not now very long ere thev reached the cas. tie ; when Lady Mary ceremoniously con¬ ducted the fictitious monarch to the hall, where the sewer had arranged the break¬ fast-boards for the guests; and at the door of which, making her parting obeisance with graceful respect, she gravely sait?, whilst she bent her eyes to the ground lest any any glance which sportcél there might betray that she too was bantering, *' My liege, I now must wetul mc to my chamber, there to bide me until the ar¬ rivance of Her kind Majesty's physician to make his declarement upon further view of my case ; when, without periling mý¬ lite, I may adventure my salliance from thence, to yield for the guests who now
honour Albalanda with their gracious pre¬ sence that pastime which it is expected I may conveniently afford them." Lady Mary had no sooner uttered this, than she felt its point had been too saucy for her years ; but much as she wished she had been more guarded, she coukl not now recall her words : she therefore, as she proceeded towards her chamber, strove to convince herself that the party 7 , for the greater number, well deserved every sarcasm or rebuke she might be able to conceive or utter ; for she had learned, with her knowledge of the real individuality of those vvho formed the late arrivals, much of the plans in meditation at her expense : and whilst her humanity condemned the cruelty of such a design, her pride glowed indig¬ nantly 7 , that she, the immediate offspring of the lord of the castle, should thus be marked out as the intended butt for the derision of her father's guests ; and in the effervescence of her ire was mingled mortification upon her loss of self-posses¬ sion the preceding day, whilst under false
impressions upon the identity of the arrivals ; since, by such pusillanimity 7 , she had to fear having established an impres¬ sion that she might easily be tortured into any guise which ridicule might im¬ agine for her. " And yet," thought Mary, " it might have been for my bettci idvisement, had I made continuance iu the guise of wild¬ eret! timidity, and have allowed them to arride me as long as they listed ; and thus have accomplished an apt guardage of the true state of my knowledge. Yes, in sooth, such a lackbrained guise might have advantaged me ; but I, who speed me so extemporaneously in all my words and actions, could not, I feel convince- ment, long tarry in a part of cunning im masked semblance, albeit I am ap¬ pointed to cumber mc in deception which does not fashion my nature. My meet friend of the valley avizes * to make seeming of as much ignorance in every point as may conveniently become me ; and this apt management of the matter, to preserve to me the means of my future
advance in knowledge.' — And, in sooth, aptly was I attending to his view of the matter, when I babbled of the fashion of Sir Thomas Wyatte's closet ; for it must marvel them how I could wot of it. For¬ sooth, it does behove me not to act so ware¬ lessly. — But, perchance, it was joyance that reft me of discretion, upon Weewitte's whisper, «that Master Fitzrivers was pre¬ sent.' I knowitengirded me incontinently with courage : for, oh ! it did cordial my heart, to wis I had a real friend near ; and so, I suppose, matle scant prudence for me — save in the one point, of not stealing even one glance at Master Algernon. Had I made chevisance of such a daring, matters would have waxed tenfold more harmful ; since had I beholden him, vvho was always kind to me in every need¬ ment, I should have hailed him, reckless of betrayal, and pranced about like one bestraught." Mary now, saddened by the perplexi¬ ties of her situation, turned her course to her own chambers through the most unfrequented passes, lest she might en-
counter any of the strangers — Maud having left her, to repair to the pantler's and dairy butteries to order up the mess r or Lady Mary's breakfast; which Mary, adhering to the simplicity of nursery habits only permitted to consist of bread and milk ; not like the peerless Rhona, who feasted on animal productions of solidity, and the most enlivening bever¬ age. The moment Laely Mary haei taken leave of his fictitious Majesty r , Sir Leo¬ line advaneeel to his uncle, and with a countenance of chagrin, softly said, *' By my halidom ! Earn,* not only that saucy kinsv. oman of ours, has detected our imposture, but every slubberdcgrullion in the household. Ay, betrust me, every varlet of them has made betrayal of sus¬ picious variance in the portance of their homage. This day's respect seemeth that of sober-minded men to their supe¬ riors ; while that of yesterday was fa- shioneel as idolaters to demigods; ay, forsooth, with heads quivering at the
scant tenure by which they r believed they held them on their shoulders, should they spare travail for our accommoda¬ tion, or apt homage in our condign adu¬ lation. Beshrew me! Earn, if I bethink me your sovereignty 7 is in dureful plight for the meet purchase of one hour." These observations proved unwel¬ come to Lord Dalincourt, who clung to the assumption of the crown with all the romantic ardour his passion for the young baroness inspired ; as, while per¬ sonating her consort, opportunities were afforded of bestowing his tender assidui¬ ties upon her, antl monopolizing her at¬ tentions : the masque of royalty ended, and he should be thrown into that dis¬ tance, where apprehension of ridicule had hitherto placet! him. His reply, there¬ fore, to Sir Leoline was, an order to persevere unshrinkingly in the assump¬ tion of those characters they personated. His lordship now advanced into the hall, where many of his pretended court were assembled to breakfast in public, to enjoy the pastime of overpowering the scared
senses of the household by their suppos¬ ed pre-eminence ; but, in the moment of the fictitious monaichS cntiance, the scneschtd t'ni\e\etl to him intelligence of alarming impoit. Loi d de Manden ille had arrived the preceding d<\\ at Albalanda, in no л cry amicable humour with anv of his fellow tiav ellers, thiough jealousy of their inat¬ tention to him; it theiefoie proved no very difficult achievement to displease him stdl moie, by the cenu t necessarily paid to K hona and Lord Dalincouri, as queen and king, whilst he seemed com- paiativeiy neglected, 'liiere had long existed, in this spoiled youth's mimi, a str mg inheient propensity to affection foi his sister, even though in semai ation ; but the manœmring of Rosamond and Rhona had at length succeeded in chill¬ ing this amiable propensity ; and when, at last, he beheld the being who appear¬ ed in the base court of the castle as Mary of Albalanda, although prepared to sec an individual of whom he should not feel vain, he found his fraternal love
had not been effectually destroyed ; tb* the grief, simmen and mortification, which assailed hisbeisom, convevcnl comiction, through the agonv thev inflicted, that he still regarded Marv: but, incensed bevond measure at her suffering herself to become so complete a scarecrow, he n;vcr ap¬ proached whilst she remained below in her swoon, nor matle any enquiry tor her after her removal: and yet she never was absent from his thoughts, except when some new cause arose to increase hi* indignant mortification, until, as even¬ ing advanced, these accummulating vex¬ ations haei irritated him into bodily ail¬ ment ; and at length, finding himself too ill to remain out of bis beni, he withdrew from the hall without mentioning to am one that he found himself indisposed. Hitherto Lord de Mandeville haei not announced himself to anv of the house- hold, so apprehensive was he of drawing that uncouth animal down upon him as his sister ; but when ushered to erne of the inferior chambers, arranged for him as one of the king's pages, the indignation
of his wounded consequence knew no contvo\ and he proclaimed his real es¬ tate to the seneschal, and demanded to be put into immediate possession of his own former nursery chambers. In vain the disconcerted seneschal as¬ sured his lordship that the chambers ofthat nursery could not become tenant- able that night, for they were not only unaired, but filled with cumbrous stores ; the dormitory belonging to that suite, having been converted into a strong¬ room, w T as consequently filled with papers and other matters of importance», which he could notanswer it to his lord to have removed ere a place of equal security was arranged for their reception . But no argument, however respectfully delivered, could avail. Reason could ñnd no influence over this child of perni¬ cious indulgence. His own dormitory he would have, and no other would he enter; and informing the perplexed se¬ neschal, that his own individual bed¬ ding, marked as his, had arrived with the household stuff that day, and being
förmed for prompt arrangement, he should expect to find all ready for him in that especial dormitory in one hour's time. Within the specified time all was in readiness for Lorel de Mandeville's ac¬ commodation ; yet this unavoidable delay adding to his lordship's present irritation, his valet A'Pany had small chance of finding favour in his sight, when he ap¬ peared before him to aid in Jus prepara¬ tion for repose, in that state which, of all others, Lord de Mandeville most recoiled from. The attendants belonging to the party of new arrivals, having determined upon a glorious wassail, had made a disem¬ bogue of principal and interest of all the years oť drought which could be laid to the account both of ale and wine re¬ positories in the castle. The valet of the heir of the domain had considered that, even for example*s sake, he ought to become a conspicuous performer on such an occasion ; and so diligently had he exerted his industry, that the moment he vol. í. R
appearenl betou* Uto irritated youth, lu- louKhip oidcrctl the bacn banahan írom he- pu'stnice, and pasionate ly chned the d"or attt*r the t»flcinlcr ; ami ere A'Pany could stammer out the prohibition of the ч lu-schal to the use of oue particula! fastening upon fhe door, until mfoi mcd upon the nature of its actuating machi¬ nery. A night's repose had ι est f и ml I lu offending valet to his senses, and, full oi contrition, he repaired to Lord do Mantle- ν die's door at the usual hour for awaken¬ ing his lordship, but he found it f istened , and no knock or call obtaining a ie- spouse, A'Parry became alarmeli, and hastened to the seneschal to express his f eai s. The tower m which this dormitory formed the attic had been constructed proof against every species of assault, for the security of the infant treasure** vvho might be fated to repose there ; and, from the nature of it** architectures there was no mode of entrance but through the door, and that Davenant knew 7 was
ertèctually rltbod a^iiii^t ť\ery elľort ot -îri^iîgîh and 1ПгХ%.пш%\ щ ifît ìuuì bren absolutely м cured by that tlbteiiiiiíí н Inch lu* ïmd po-îtivelv ¡titeidìctctL Flit* ^eui^ili ìì proceeded with Λ*1\ιπ*\ to tlie dormitoiy dtuir, where noeıtîreaty tora iCNjiouse proxiug* «cco^fiil, A'l'arry clung ti> the posilile hope that bis lord w;n merely exercïMîig one ol his hactimn humours ; ami, upon this Miiru^Mioii, Da venant !ia>tened to inform lii> pre» tended Majesty of tfie circuniMance, lu the hope ihat, if petulance caused such лп alat'iuuig silence, it might be dispelled bv rovai aıiîiıoritv. Ан 1ч t iiri vers had ever proved tiit* in- dividual most geiieially Micce»inl m al¬ luring thi> spoded child out of hi^ perverse nuHuls, Loi d Dalincourt sent him on the mission, to request the young hen of Albalauda to come anel elo the honom > of his ancestral hall te> his sovereign. Algernon, who felt the attachment ot an atïèetiemate brother tor De Mande- ville, Hew off on the wings of anxiety with the seneschal ; who, not thinking it r 4 2
meet to conduct the royal ambassador tluough the parages which he had trod¬ den with A'Parrv to their voung lord's donnitorv, led the wav through a mag- m' ι Π CT n í fic*eni range of apartments, which in former times haei been iu requisition for balls and pageants, but had long ceasctl even to be entered for any purpose but that of disturbing the industry of the CT · spiderdooms. Proceeding thiough this suite, the seneschal found, to his annoy¬ ance, that a door they had to pass through w as secured on the other side ; and re¬ questing Algernon to tarry there а few moments, whilst he went round through some intricate passes to unclose the bar- rier, retired. The moment Daveuant quitted thi> apartment, Laely Mary entered it on her expected solitary route ; but on finding that expectation not realized, she was gliding back unobserved, when, glancing her eyes upon the stranger from whom she was retreating, *he started, and in breathless agitation exclaimed, " Master Fitzrivers !"
Sensİblv hurt a^ Algernon had been by Lady МагуЧ conduct towanfo him» the inclinent she pronounced lii> name, magic iu the tone bv which she did чг disarmed resentment, and he flew to greet her. ** Then vou arc in sooth mv own, own fnend. good, kind Master Algernon." said Mary, looking up at him in timid joy ; the resplendence of her brilliant eves softencnl by the peatlv drops of sen¬ sibility. *« Will it be apt for your conve¬ nience to tarry here somewhile and speak lo me? And can you now, indeed, thus darefulK make acknowledgment of a grateful friend '^ ** Will Lady Mary make tarriance to speak toand evidence hen* recognition of an esteeming frlond J " replien! the astonished Algernon : " it could not have been weet¬ less to y on, Lady Mary, our eiunmnter ot this morning." " Cortes, I wot we end meet ere¬ whiles," responden! Maiy; % *lmt M;nuľ< observance that you made no repair to the 1е\ч*е rountl the swooning sroibi» U 3
making advisement that your acknow¬ ledgment of mc was not then meet, led me to avoidance of even turning my eyes to where they could make encounter of you this morning, lest joyance at beholding one real friend amongst the strangers might have guiled me into wareless déchirements, so that you might imagine me of scant cunning in discretion. But may we now, my ever apt friend, speak as we list ; for I have much things to say of 9 not in babblement, but serious guise." Algernon, convinced that Mary had not meant to slight him, now, with all the kindness of an affectionate brother, hastened to express his regrets that this was not a moment for confidential con¬ ference, as he was there awaiting the reappearance of the seneschal to conduct him to the chamber of Lortl ele Man¬ deville. Mary uttered a faint cry, as her cheeks blanched, and with tearful eyes she faltered out — "Oh, say not Mande¬ ville is in this castle ! Not my own bro*
ther! —No, no ; you do not in surance mean, dear kind Algernon, my r own, own Edward de Mandeville!—for he could not have remained so many hours in con¬ tentation so near to Mary, without re¬ membrance that this poor oftenceless alien was his own sister." Algernon was sensibly affected by the tones of Mary, and the expression of her countenance as she spoke ; and, angry with himself for inadvertence which he could not rectify by disclosing the true state of the matter, he was compelled, for the purpose of tranquillizing her wounded affection, to assure her, that the tram¬ mels with which the mumming perform¬ ances in the castle had entwineel her brother alone prevented De Mandeville from seeking the embrace of his be¬ loved sister. In the moment Algernon had given utterance to this excuse for the inatten¬ tion of Lord de Mandeville to his sister, the sound of the door unclosing gave the signal to Lady Mary for flight; and now rapidly she winged her way to her own n 4
chamber, at the entrance to which she beheld a strange woman knocking loudly and impatiently for admission. Mary in alarm demanded the stranger's business ; when the woman prostrated herself with profound reverence before the now astonished Lady 7 Mary, antl an¬ nounced herself to be Dame Cicely 7 , the nurse who had succeeded the late count¬ ess in the task of suckling Lord cle Man¬ deville : then, although the very woman who had left the two poor helpless babes to encounter their providential escape from fire, and had never been amicably inclined towards her nursling's sister, she launched forth into the most adulating praises of Lady Mary's infant beauty and cherubinical virtues. The amazed and disgusted Alary de¬ sired Cicely to arise, and, in the plain and simple language of truth, to say what had brought her there to demand en¬ trance with such alarming vehemence. Dame Cicely, feeling some uneasy twinges from her rheumatism, most gladly obeyed the mandate for arising; and, then
without much consideration for Lady Mary's feelings, hastened to state the choice which Lord dé Mandeville had made of a dormitory the preceding night, antl all the alarms now existing relative to his safety ; but that she, feeling internal conviction that a warluck had flown off with her nursling in the night, had come in breathless speed, to be the first to congratulate Lady Mary 7 upon her succession to the heirship of the St. Os¬ wald honours. Mary·, uttering a wild cry of terror, fled at once from her adulating congratulator ; and, upon the expanding wings of affec¬ tion's alarms, soared her rapid way to the spot of painful anxiety. To such adventurous flights Maiy had been first attracted, in pursuit of a raven that hatl purloined a toy which had been sent to her from the metropolis by her brother ; and finding, in this pursuit over the roof of'the castle, a wide scope for her sportive fancies, she for many a year after found attraction in these perilous regions, until Father Adrian, Dame Morton, and the r 5
hermit of the valley, taught her more rational methods to procure employment. But now this course, so long untrodden, had become one of much more for¬ midable peril ; for the inlets and the outlets of the intricacies she had to tra¬ verse found the battlements less certain protection, than they bad been ere her increase in stature and circumference deprived them of much of their security in shielding her from falling : but Mary thought not of individual peril ; she only thought of her brother's perils — that he was too ill to make responses, or perhaps to hear—and that no other method than that she had undertaken, could be adopted in any efficient time to prove of service. But the performance of this exploit of Mary's was not doomed to be effected in secret j for the eye of observation had been attracted, and the alarmed domestics, in painful terror, had collected every «ack and cado w within their reach in the base court, to save, if diie necessity should call forth their utility, the idol of them all from the impending peril of her wilel
temerity. And now in silent, breathless agony, lest even aspiration or respiration might reach her ear and withdraw bel¬ atten tion from her path, her almost paralysed observers remained, until they beheld the intrepid Mary enter a window in the summit of tlie highest tower of the castle ; when simultaneous shouts of joy iiecame almost deafening, and pre¬ vented the loud signals at the portal from being forsorne time heard, of some impa¬ tient candidate for admission being in waiting at the gate. This candidate was Rosamond; who, with her attendants, had just returned from passing the night in the monastery of St Mildred's.
R б
CHAP. XVIIL The arrival of Lady St. Oswald in York¬ shire had overwhelmed the abbess of St. Mildred's with consternation ; for this worthy recluse had become an apostate in her faith to Rosamond. The mother of Rosamond had been a transgressing sister belonging to the com¬ munity of St. Mildred ; and when the trespass occurred which gave birth to Rosamond, a novice in the community named Constance was the defaulter's confidante, and by the contrivance of Constance the new-born babe was placed in the path, for the Countess of St. Os¬ wald to discover, antl in consequence to protect. By the management also of Constance, who, passing for a saint in her commu¬ nity, had won the esteem of the young and unsuspecting Adela, Rosamond was placed under her immediate care in St.
Mildred's monastery : and never could instructor and pupil have coalesced more aptly; for no art, no vice, could have been more gladly taught by the one, than joyfully learned by the other. As time travelled, Rosamond's mother deceased, and her vile confidante was ele¬ vated to the supremacy of that commu¬ nity which she had long publicly orna¬ mented and privately 7 disgraced. One of the few beings in existence whom this fascinating semblance of sanctity regard¬ ed, was the child of her care,—the beauti¬ ful Rosamoud ; and to become the aider and abetter of her schemes of cunning, or of vengeance, were pleasurable per¬ formances for the abbess of St. Mildred's ; antl that more especially 7 when they menaced evil to the St. Oswald race, to whom was never to be forgiven by her that change in the channel of their mu¬ nificent dole which the change in their religious creed had inspired. The plan which the vindictive Rosa¬ mond projected, for the destruction of all things beneficial to Lady Mary, was so
genial to the wishes of the diabolical Constance, that she aided its progress with all her powers, until the letter writ¬ ten bv Algernon Fitzrivers in sympathy for poor Maiy's insulation, to Falhei Kenrick, Ins early tutor, turned at once, as if through supernatural agency, the 4 title which had been freighteel with the rough breakers of cruelty, to wreck poor Mary 's happiness. Amongst the numerous acts of pietv performed by the candidates for canon¬ ized renown, vvho from time to tune bad held the supremacy of St, Mildred's, was to devote many hours in each month to solitary devotion in a sequestered chape! at some little distance from the monastery* On eme day, when the abbess Constance had credit from the sisterhood for being thus piously employed in this devotional retreat, she was suddenly disturbed from her intense application to the subject hei mind was riveted upon — the perusal of a romance — by a pidmer of command¬ ing appearance, who suddenly stood be¬ fore her.
The abbess neither started nor fek the least alarm, until the voice* of th«* pilgrim electrified her; when, in evident divom - ром ire*, she endeavoured to conceal the profane manuscript, her late -study, a·» *hr excLJnunl—" Brothen ï !" " Brother ! Be it so, Constance, as kmt as your comportance in private guiv yields surance, as meetly as in public life, that mv permission for that appellative is condign! v hekl bv voti," mpÜed j he pilgrim solemnly — " affined through the same sire, but in the maternul tie no pat tage ever sped >o far in sunelerancen But hohl, I will not enchafe you by allu*1on*i. It tenth rs men to know and feel my mother was of angel mould, and that I had the woe to lo -е her ; I will thereto! e onlv sav, iti legardanee to your mother, Constance*, that it wa< natural, when he whom she terms her »educer entered into lawful bonds the wife and chikl of that honourable father shouhl be held dislikefullv by her : but it marvels me, why she upbrought you in bitter hate and v enget ulness to me.
It would have vantaged you more aptly here, if she had not ; and infinitely more so hereafter, had you not yourself perilled your precious soul in devoteilness to that fiend of black ingratitude, the dia¬ bolic Rosamond Ldy!—Your fate—— " " Ethelbert! how dare you thus------?" " Ethelbert dares much, Constance," responded the pilgrim, interrupting her. " He darefully inflicts upon himself the anguish of braving this return to a spot where all the hope he ever entertained of earthly happiness was reft; and, in the moment of behight, when riched in expectation of my------." Agitation dire and pitiable compelled the trem¬ bling palmer to sink upon the bench the abbess had just risen from ; ami throwing off the pilgrim's hood to give himself air, presented to the view of Constance the pale, the sael, nay, almost haggard countenance of the yet majestic, but once transcendently handsome Sir Ethelbert tie Couriand, now sobbing in tears of agonv as if his heart were burst- ing. Yet the Religious was melted not
to pity — she steod beside htm, beaming satanic smiles in Jovauce at Ьи mental anguish. Without the consolation of a :·. *er*s kind soothing, Sir Ethelbert reanimated his firmness, conquered his flood?* of agony, and impressively though tremu¬ lously said — " Yes, Constance ; Ethel¬ bert acknowledges he is dareful : for he CT has valiance for the displacency to tell vou that he wots more of vou and the dire successor of the angel Adela than CT mav be for vour contentation. — List ye! il alter Sangui(¡e is prisoned in Kthelbcrťs safe guardauce. Nay, nay, shriek ve nc>t !" continúen! Ethelbert ; '* proclaim not vour own guiltfulness. I » CT — Compose your portance*. — lit* silent as the sknq> which you anil Walter and Rosamond can aptly aventure. I am come hitherward not to bewray, but to temporize. Tiansfer your be- hooveful services fremi Rosamond to me : do this ; and I will not make declarement of that confession I hohl in custody, made on oath bv Walter San- * İr
guiffe. —Do but this; and, if the rapacity of power should reave vou of vour abbev of St. Mildred's, I plight meinsolemnness incontinently to rich von with as fair and goodly а monastery in the Netherlands. But if, in drenidlewiess, you yield me not .our aidance, as apt as eie you per¬ formed by Rosamond, Walter shall come forth ami delivei you up lo justicement." " Oh, Ethelbert ! dear ¡шаце of our sue!" whined out Constance, pale antl tiembling with dismay, as she dropped upon her knees before her brother, to pour out in recreant servility pietcnded contrition for {>ast enmity, antl solemn promises of devoteelness to his com¬ mands. Although Sir Ethelbert placed no re¬ liance upon bei promises as morally bind¬ ing, he believed that he might confide in them as upon adamantine security, since they were founded upon her own preserv¬ ation from condign punishment, and that worldly adversity whiel w as pending over the religious communities in England.
"Rise 1 , Constance; and kneel only where Mich tribute can meetly vantage you," said Sir Ethelbert. " Seat your¬ self: list, anel take heedment oi' what 1 require for your performance ; for it will perd your life if you take not good advisement of* the matter, and keep so¬ lemnly fait bed to me. «* Into that seclusion I had sped to when the elearn w oriti became a solitude for nu*, the tidings penetrated of the daughter of Adela being upbrought un- meetly and in lone insulation. By my view of the matter, I was led to query the culprit Sanguiffc; and his declarement was of ihe most baleful cruelness formed against the well being of a helpkss inno¬ cent that ere was tolel of. Incontinently 1 made salliance hitherward ; and, to vantage the olitici of A deda, my îesolve- ment is to tarry near to Albalanda, w hen, if I find vour aidance not to m v full contentation, I will whelm you and Ho- samotni in the whirlpool of my venge- ment."
" You, brother, tarry nigh to Alba¬ landa!" exclaimed the shuddering abbess, with a voice and countenance of alarm. " You, Sir Ethelbert, turn knight errant for ihe behoof of the offspring of that faithbreach------!" " Iti very sooth, Constance," saitl Sir Ethelbert impatiently, " for the be¬ hoof of the daughter of that very being whe> consigned my life to dureful misery. This may marvel you ; but, to speeel me iti my purpose, I will you to accept this rich jewel, in suraiice of what 1 can do, and mean for accomplishment in your recompence, if you yield aidance with all your ingenuity iu deceiving Rosa¬ mond. The new lorel abbot of St. Ste¬ phen's is my devoted friend, and he can vantage my ititendment in no common guise." " The new lord abbot of St. Stephen's !" murmured out the heart-trembling ('oil- stance; and whether it might be this lord abboťs unblemished fame, the dazzling brilliancy of the rich jewel now
bestowed upon her, the fair promise* of favour in perspective, or the ¿crtou* threats held out in menaces or through л combination ofall these cau*e> ; but from that verv hour her determinat ion was made to ludd faith with Sir Ethelbert, excepting only where the possibility might arise of* doing otherwise without mis. piciou. ** I have adherents," continued Sir Ethelbert, ** of my own, spread far and wide*, to collect me from each part of the known world all things in needment to CT vantage and protect the young alien of Albalar.thi, whom I am resolute, even much of travail and anxietv it mav endure for me, to establish in the path that shall lennel her in after-life condiçnlv to join her angel motilen-, vvho even in her cruelness to me was influenced by celestial advise¬ ment. Yes : Adela believed in that viewv of matters which, for the veneration I owed to others, I dared not to ref lite ; and while she planted despairful anguish in my bosom, she increased my adoration
of her \ il tues. As a Cľhristian sufferer, I bowed to my elearn fate without upbraid- ment of her ; anel I forgave her all she tloomed for my endurance — until she married." The painfullvatiitatenl Ethelbert shortly after teiok leave of the abbess of St* Mildred's, so fully convinced that she would be bound to keep fiith with him only through apprehe siein for her own safety, that he determined to place no confidence unnecessarily in her aidance ; am! even to deceive her, whenever the interest or safety of Lady Mary should render it expedient. It had so happened, that shortly after Sir Ethelbert had been chased by affliction from the busy scenes of life, one of those considered most attached to him of all his adherents absconded, dnd none could account for the cause : great, therefore*, was the surprise of' Ethelbert, when drawn into Yorkshire through Algernon's communications to lather Kenrick, to ñnd his missing adherent, Godfrey Dave-
uant, in the e>ffice of seneschal at Alba« landi Castle. In his pilgrim'h habit, Ethelliert con¬ trived a private conference with Du ve¬ nant, fremi whom he learned, that he (DavenanO had withdrawn from hi* suite for the sole purpose of effecting vengeance upon the whole race of St. Oswald for having dest roveti the earthly happiness of his highly ivgareled patron ; that to effect his design, he had, under theauspices of the abbess of St. Mildred's, entered Albalanda Castle as a crenature of the present Countess of St, Oswald, to per¬ lonu c'.ief agent of her enmitv to the daughter of Lady Adela; but that long he had not performed his cruel agency, ere he discovered the child to be of seraph mouki, before whose influence every evil passion melteei ; that, consequently, faith to his employer anel vengeance for his pa¬ tron had long been vanquished, and he had only remained latterly, lest a successor might prene a dureful foe to Laely Mary. Sir Ethelbert found no difficulty in arranging all things with Daveuant, as his
trusty agent in the castle, for the benefit of Lady Mary ; whilst, through the sug¬ gestions of prudent caution, he was to conceal his lapse from faith to the count¬ ess ^ven more cautiously than he yet had done from those aronne! devoted to Ro¬ samond, The long apparent difficulty of finding an eligible successor for Dame Mntry was now achieved by the new abbot of St. Stephen's, without a tlemur from the abbess of St. Mildreel's; as well as the place of Father Jonathan supplied by an estimable man, who would yield from his own studies and pursuits some of his valuable time to the improvement of his pupil : and although the too long un¬ tamed Mary shrank like a wild colt from the bridle, upon the accomplished Mrs. Morton and the learned Father Adrian's first attempts to break her in, she soon was led to obey the rein without a wince ; although not always without some sport· tive crupade, that never failed to steal а smile from her instructors. Although Sir Ethelbert had thus, by
his fortunate exertions, obtaineel invalu¬ able instruction for the long cruelly ne¬ glected daughter of Atlela, he still felt dissatisfied at not being himself calleel into requisition to aid in the education of Mary ; for his acquirements in the liv- hw languages, iu the arts anel sciences, anel in every branch of reviving literature, he thought, might not only prove orna¬ mental but useful to her ; and all these acquirements he believed he could im¬ part to her u neler his palmer's weeels, witliout suspicion of his identity. But to this project the lord abbot of St. Stephen's pronounced his decided nega¬ tive, in hostile arguments agaiiM its eli¬ gibility ;— advising him to beware of increasing thus the intercí>t which he already so powerfully entertained for the daughter of Adela : reminding him, that he was not advanced beyond the possible susceptibilities oí' the tender passion ; that Laely Mary would be hourly expanding into the season to inspire it ; and, whilst causes existed to render an union be¬ tween the houses of St. Oswald and De vol. î. s
Courland impossible, not to tempt the renewal of misery to himself) or occasion it to another amiable young creature. But however the sage advice of the lorel abbot operated, a venerable re¬ cluse was established in the hermitage of St. Stephen's Valley shortly after, which recluse entered into a close intimacy with Fatlier Adrian ; and through this friendship, deviating from the usual se¬ clusion of his oreler, dropt in daily 7 to visit his friend at the hour in which Laely 7 Mary was receiving her classical instructions; when, by winning the favour of the volatile child, the venerable hermit contrived to steal into her mind the most valuable information, and in those very branches coveted for her by Sir Ethel¬ bert. Like Elmer, the celebrated precepto» of Lady Jane Gray, the hermit of oui valley made learning so alluring, that Mary never wished to escape her lessons when this highly giftnl recluse w r as her preceptor in them. And so paternally kind was his manner, that the grateful
Mary soon experienced for him much of the feelings of a dutiful child, and was not tartly in prevailing upon Maud and Weewitte to stray with her to St. Ste¬ phen's Valley, to ascertain if the hermit¬ age was a residence of comfort for her venerable friend ; that if it were not, they might endeavour to improve it even from the circumscribed stores of Alba¬ landa Castle. And a visit once made to the hermit, was not unfrequently repeated whenever Mary had fruit or flowers to offer as tributes of gratitude to the kind recluse ; who was, however, suspected by mair* of the chatellany and of the household of Albalanda as no less an¬ cient a personage than the before-men¬ tioned hermit of Ealkdale-side, who was, they believed, interested, in some awful form, for the St. Osvvakl family; as many of them affirmed he was clad in the identical garb, and performed the act of walking in the self-same gait, of the chief amongst the portentous forms who were senni flitting in and about the castle chapel the night before the ex- s ^
pected nuptials of Lady Adela and Sir Ethelbert. About the very period in which Sir Ethelbert had so effectively put his knight errantry for Lady Mary's benefit into re¬ quisition, as if to harmonise with his wishes and intentions, α minstrel belong¬ ing to Albalanda Castle establishment returnetl from Italy, after an absence of about seven years. This man had been sent by the Countess Adela, a short period prior to the dire calamity that bereaved her attached adherents of so kind a pa¬ troness, to have his surpassing musical abilities cultivated in the place of his nati¬ vity, Florence, to accomplish him for the instruction of her children in the science of music ; and she had calculated that, by the time he should have arisen to the proficiency his genius guaranteed, her little Mary would be old enough to com¬ mence as his pupil : but various causes had combined to detain Zarini abroad until the very period when Lady Mary could benefit by his capability ; and he arrived at Albalanda, without the intelligence
ever having reached him of the loss he had sustained in the deprivation of his generous antl liberal patroness. Although the accomplished Mrs. Mor¬ ton had held a distinguished place in the choir of the monastery she had professed in, she yet was in no comparison equal to Zarini in the perfections of the science, and, shortly after his recommencing his station in Albalanda Castle, bis instruc¬ tions to Lady Maiy commenced ; when Sir Ethelbert, alarmed lest the fame of Zarini's excellence niight induce Rosa¬ mond to dispossess poor Maiy of the advantages of such a teacher, by remov¬ ing him to Vespasian Tower, arranged with Davenant tor converting the nurse- ry dormitory, in consequence of its appro¬ priate construction, into a music chamber for Laely Mary and the great professor himself; as there, from the thick and vaulted walls, anel its altitude above all around, the improvement of the one and the superexcellence of the either stood little chance of being detected : and, to secure the pupil and instructor from dis- s 3
covery or interruption when at practice there, Daveuant placed upon the door that invincible fastening, which had been brought by some traveller to Albalanda as a masterpiece of ingenuity, that defied all craft to puzzle out or strength to force without a clew. The intelligence conveyed by the her¬ mit of the valley to the abbot of St. Stephen's, relative to the expected arriv¬ als at Albalanda Castle, awakened appre¬ hensions of its not being improbable that the Countess of St. Oswald was to form one of the party to perform the honours of the castle to the sovereign and his consort; and that, were she to see and converse with the refined Isabella Mor¬ ton, she would cause her prompt removal, as one too much infected with elegance and its refinements, not to fear the con¬ tagion over the mind and manners of one destined for the rude garb of vulgar¬ ity and ignorance. Under the auspices of Daveuant, therefore, the governess of Lady Mary was removed to safe quarters, for the temporary sojourn of her, at
present, advisable invisibility : and soon after the accomplishment of this measure, Sir Kthelberl visited the monastery of St. Mildred's, to inform the abbess that he knew Rosamond was amongst the arrivals at Albalauda Castle ; and to pro¬ mise her still greater rewards if she kept faith with him, anel dire and condign punishment il* she deceiveel him. Constance, although highly disconcert¬ ed at this prospect of seeing her beloved Rosamond under existing circumstances, yet again most solemnly promised ael- herence to her brother and the cause oí Mary«
S h
CHAP. XIX. The abbess of St. Mildred's now, for the first time for many a year, found herself at a loss for stratagems to relieve her from embarrassment. Although not aware of half the advantages Lady Mary- had realised since the expulsion of Dame Vintry, she yet could not doubt of a discovery, to Rosamond, of deceit in those agents in whom she haei confided ; anel how to avert the too possible conse¬ quences, by the removal from Albalanda of all those who aided in refining and instructing Lady Mary, puzzled even Constance. To disclose the dire and unexpected menace which spell-bound her guilty self eliti not coalesce with the present policy of the wily abbess ; since such a communication would at once pa¬ ralyse all the enmities of Rosamond to Adela's daughter, and suspend all action
of mischief in that channel, however deep antl hidden in its flow : and thus every alarm in the mind of Ethelbert, for his now earthly idol Maty tie Rhone, would be lulled to rest; and she — the abbess — would then be deprived of the rich rewards which had been so solemnly pro- mised to her for her services. By 7 the time Rosamond reached St. Mildred's Abbey, the ladv abbess had achieved perfect self-possession ; and, in the wily 7 lullaby she had prepared for the displeasure and discontents of her confe¬ derate, she acknowledged being herself the remover of the ex-nun Isabella from Albalanda, in consequence of her believ¬ ing the arrivals at the castle literally the personages announced, anel fearing such a governess being found with Laely Mary might cause unpleasant suspicions to rest upon her own dear Rosamond : whilst, relative to the apostasy of the se¬ neschal from their causen she affirmed that she had sent a despatch to Vespa¬ sian Tower upon the subject ; but not having been seilt by an especial messen- s ô
ger, supposed the communication had been lost. The blandishments and plausibility of Constance, but, more than all, conviction of her attachment, led Rosamond to be¬ lieve that the errors manifest in the ar¬ rangement of matters relative to Mary- arose through failure in judgment, not through breach of faith ; and although thus mananı vred into conviction of the unabated sincerity of* her oldest, kindest friend, she yet could derive no consolation from her upon the score of Mary, as all that observation presenteei to her ocular demonstration haunted her bitter enmity in lenend array : anei therefore, what project now to adopt for working more effective mischief against Laely Mary she could by no means determine; neither coukl her anxious friend Constance aid lier, although she mused and pondered, and pondered and mused, antl audibly in¬ voked and re-invoked the influence of her hitherto fertile 'mention, with a semblance of anxiety quite sufficient to satisfy even Rosamond.
Nor were these vexations relative te» the noxious Mary the only heait-pangs whicli agonized the bosom of Lady St. Oswald; )et she, who haei without a blush confbbseel even crimes to this ac¬ complice, indepeneient of those they had mutually devised for the destruction oí others, now shrunk from full confession to her female shriver; anel not until driven to her morţii) ing communications, to pievent her heart fio m bursting with its burelen, coukl <liepicvail upon berseli to acknowleelge her hour tor universal eonquest was already on its wane, and that her own idolized child had, with 1кье ingi atitude, wrested from her the admitation ot mankind* Rosamond, with bitlei teats, assiued hei h tend that her child's treacheiy in- ihtted moie anguish m her bosom than even the eolation of universal Ьопкшч о ίο her eliaims; and stated how this spe¬ cies oí' agony had foi some time past Ikcu dart mi» ¡avelins oi torture thiou<rh he ¡ bosom, although aiKetum loi het aggressing child had labotued to close s fi
her senses against the painful conviction : but that, during their unfortunate pro¬ gress into Yorkshire, to close her eyes against facts was no longer possible ; and she had now the agony to state that Rhona's greatest happiness, after making her own individual prowess in conquest, w r as to bereave that mother, to whom her elebt of gratitude was incalculable, of every meed of admiration, and to inflict upon her every possible mortification. "Oh! rede* me, my friend, I make entreatment, how to swoop upon the in¬ grate Rhona with reprisal," exclaimed Rosamond, convulsed with anguish. " Iu the lacking hours of sleep, in which í have wailed my child's misuse of herself in the bitter humiliations she has gared ior my endurance, I have imagined me how 7 I might retort mortification in apt revengement." " Your memory must have recordation of what I have told of in mv letters to you, mv much löveti friend, how I have sped me in every cunning guise to vantage
this idol of my own and the world's atíoration, by contrivance for none to accost her in seriousness ; it not being meet for her behoof, for one to be suf¬ fered to address her, whilst some other might soonly 7 make avowments more to tlie contentation of our ambition. These admirers being therefore in readiness, antl apt for entanglement, I can, without travail, any her to one scant in birthdom honours ; and thus make dureful impair¬ ment to every hope of outlustring, in right excellent rank, one whom she takes the undutiful advisement to mor¬ tify 7 in every guise." Rosamond now, wound up by the in¬ dignant spirit of her irritated feelings into almost a determination to adopt this plan of reprisal, enumerated, amongst the innamorati of her daughter who might, CT CT or must, destroy every prospect of eleva¬ tion to superiority in rank, Algernon Fitzrivers, who might ultimately 7 prove of ignoble extraction; and Sir Rupert Warburg, an un thrift not likely to raise his rank or fortune ; and although re-
latetl to Rhona in the forbidden degree, she knew how to obtain a dispensation from His Holiness for the union : antl these two names were treasured in the mind of the subtile Constance, as those of two individuals upon whom she might speculate ; one for her own interested purposes, the other as her instrument of revenge. Tke abbess Constance, almost equal in political intrigue to her cotemporary Machiavel, had spread her wiles so craft¬ ily as to have caught within her toils an apostate adherent of Sir Ethelbert ; and so completely 7 , that she had wheedled the recreant out of numberless anecdotes connected with her brother's private life, for the purpose of using this knowledge when occasion should elicit it for her own advantage. Amongst other of these facts, she learned that the youth Fitz¬ rivers, so much in favour at Vespasian Tower, was mysteriously connected with Sir Ethelbert; but whether by blood, or by blood-shedding, this profligate in¬ former had not fathomed : but he af-
firmed that Sir Ethelbert was deeply interested in his welfare, and yet was strangely, if not suspiciously 7 , unwilling that any one should detect in him the protector of Fitzrivers; and seemed, upon every occasion which brought this youth to his mind, so overpowered with seriousness, if not actual sorrow — so unhinged and restless —that many were of opinion Fitzrivers had been a gift to Sir Ethelbert from the witches of Llan¬ ellen's Rock. This mention of Llanellen's Rock re¬ called to the mind of Constance many reminiscences connected with that por¬ tentous spot, out of which she doubled not being able to imbody something effective to combat those threats so uncourteously levelled at her bv her imperative brother. And now, upon Rosamond's mention of this identical Fitzrivers, Constance mentally determin¬ ed that he should weel Rhona ; and the vile Rupert Warburg, the noxious Mary : anel so craftily' she trusted to work her spells to completion, that although sue-
cess should crown her daring undertaking to her full contentment, she should re¬ main unseen and unsuspected. But notwithstanding all this wily spe¬ culation was passing in the mind of Con¬ stance, she yet uttered not one word upon the subject to her agitated friend ; for she resolved to ponder Jong and deeply 7 ere she ventured to confide her promising projects even to lier dear Ro¬ samond, who at length returned to Al¬ balanda with her mind still undecieled how to act towards her ungrateful CT child, and still torn with hopes antl fears relative to her vengeance upon Mary : and thus unhinged, anel in no very amicable mood towards any one, she was not in a disposition to bear com¬ posedly 7 the delay with which her reael- mission to the castle had been attended, nor to hear with calmness that interest for the fate of the adventurous and affectionate Laely Mary had occasioneel her detention at the portal ; and, smarting from various vexations, she entered the hall to encounter an increase to her
acidities, on finding the beautiful young representative of majesty had given her royal mandate for the breakfast messes to be served without the ceremony of awaiting her return from St. Mildred's. Rosamond, happy in an opportunity of convincing· those around them that their idol of perfection coukl deserve censure, now affected the utmost astonishment at the possibility of finding Her Majesty 7 so perfectly composed, in a moment when fears of the first magnitude were enter- tained for the safety of the heir of the castle in which they then sojourned. The pretended sovereign having de¬ spatched his ambassador with the sene¬ schal, without thinking it necessary to awaken alarm for Lortl tie Mandeville, whom he believed merely laboured under the malady of waywardness, this intima¬ tion of Latly St. Oswald was the пЫ con¬ veyed of any apprehension relative to Lorel de Mandeville's safety to the fair Rhona, vvho now received it with an effec¬ tive display of affectionate feeling and interest for the young heir of the castle ;
and immediately despatched envoys to penetrate into the cause of this menace to public tranquillity ; in which diploma¬ tic boely, the speculating deep designer, Sir Rupert Warburg, eagerly enrolled himself.
CHAP. XX. Ijady Mary had, with merely the dishe¬ velling her beautiful hair and a few bruises of her shins in her route, accom¬ plished her enterprise, by a safe entrance through a window into the apartment which had so lately been devoted to her musical instruction. With her heart pal¬ pitating in alarm and affection for her brother, and with nerves and frame not a little paralysed th rough the physical exertions she haei just achieved and the perils she had intrepidly braved, she sprung into the room ; and was speeding towards the bed, to hail her brother, and enquire the nature of that ailment which had interdicted his replies, or at least had prevented their being sufficiently audible ; when suddenly the transition from the infant she had last beheld as her " toward baby Edward" to the tall youth she saw recumbent there, and the chamber strewn
around with masculine apparel, made her start, and pause, and doubt. Were she — could she be — certain she bad then unceremoniously entered the dormitory of her own actual brother ? Were not all the personages arrived at Al¬ balanda, come thither in performance of fictitious characters, for the purpose of making sport of her withal. Might not this be one of'the performances to arride her? But no, no; the kind Algernon would not deceive her, by making de¬ clarement of being going in that direction to the chamber of Mandeville, had it not been fact. — But might not Algernon have been himself deceived by 7 their mumming? Poor Mary, in consternation at such a possibility, glanced her eyes wistfully towards the bed, anel lowly and tremu¬ lously articulated — " As you are faithed in honour, say for me, are you, or are you not, Edward tie Mandeville — my own, oxen brother? " Mary, from long practice, had matle so Httle noise in unclosing the casement, that
her voice first announced her proximity to his lordship ; who, too ill to arise to ad¬ mit A'Pany, and too indignant at the door not having been promptly opened by other means, to condescend to any 7 effort of replying to those who impor¬ tuned for his response, now turned his eyes in surprise upon the trembling Maty, who, standing with her back to the window, her face in shadow, he could only see distinctly the outline of a form, clad in the rustic vestment by which his sister the preceding day 7 had scared him into illness; be therefore, with a pettish ejaculation, hastily turned his head in disdain, and covered bis eves, lest he might be longer doomed to view a spectre so appalling. Laely Mary now in horror, convinced she had been eleceived, bounded to the tloor, antl, full of indignation, dashed it open, to the great relief and joy of those who had vainly attempted to procure a reply or an entrance, and who bad just in this very moment learned the adven¬ turous flight Lady Mary was engaged
in ; one of the alarmed adherents having speeded to the tower she was making for, there, if possible, through some in¬ tervening window or loop-hole, to render her assistance. " Oh, Master Fitzrivers !" Marv ex- claimed; "this cruel disport, in my 7 natural anxiety for the fate of my own brother, has beguiled me to misuse my¬ self by entering the chamber of an utter stranger." Algernon, still trembling with the dire alarm by which he had been assailed for the fate of both brother and sister, now took Mary's hands, which he press¬ ed to his lips in affectionate congratula¬ tion upon her safety : and as his eyes glistened in the humid lustre of sensibly felt approbation, replied, — " There has been no disport here, dear Lady Mary. Feel contentation that you have not misused yourself in your intrepid provement of sisterly affec¬ tion. This, betrust me, is fhe dormitory of your own brother, who, I imagine me, was too much quailed by indisposi-
tion to recognise, in the guise of a stranger, that sister who whilom, as apt as now, perilled her life for his aidance. Come then, dear Lady Mary ! Jet me honour myself by conducting you to rich our dear Edward with an introduc¬ tion to his kindred treasure; and to make advisement of his ill, that we mav hasten his recovery." Mary mo veel not ; for in one moment she was bathed in tears : antl withdraw¬ ing her trembling hands from Algernon to clasp them in her mental agony, she soon was compelled to lean, for support to hec trembling frame, against the wainscot of the lobby. " Oh, Algernon !" she said, in tones of touching anguish; " if that were De Mandeville, he could in sooth have spoken ; yet be turned in displacence from mc, and would not hail me, albeit I had led him f о wot I was his own sister. Oh, Algernon ! Algernon ! it sorrows me to find that the heart of not one relative beats in sympathy for the outcast Mary."
Davenant, with tears trembling in his eyes, snatched up Mary in his arms, antl bore her as he would have done his owni child, followed by the sympathizing Algernon, into the chamber of Lord de Mandeville, and placed her in a chair near to the window she had left open upon her entrance. Algernon pressed her hand, and in a whisper told her to take comfort, for that he would guaran¬ tee for Edward's soon evincing himself an affectionate brother. Mary's reply was a grateful smile, but still she sobbed as if her heart were breaking ; and the seneschal hovered near her, quite in des¬ pair because he knew not how to cheer her. Algernon now approached the bed, from which there was no view of Mary where she was seated : kindly he took the froward boy by the hand, and anxi¬ ously enquired what was his ailment. " Mary of Albalanda is my chief' ail¬ ment !" responded the agitated youth, bursting into a beneficial flood of tears. "Oh, Algernon! you wo L the cherish-
ment I made, even in absence, of her, — ay, by my sooth, in the inmost recesses of my heart, as Father Hubert ever said it well became me ; and that, in despite- ment of every aftrightful portrait pre¬ sented by others to waitl my affection : then do but wis how it embittered me in agony anel dismay, when I beheld that slubberdcgrullion in our base-court yes- ternoon, as the being I haei aptly 7 trea¬ sured in my love, and by whom I was encountered erewhiles to------" " Oh, Edwartl, Edward ! my brother ! my own—own brother! enlink me yet in the cherishment of your affectionate lirait, I implore you !" faltered out the piteously sobbing Mary, flying towards the couch upon which her brother was extended ; and as she did so, the light beamed full upon her face. Edwartl, electrified, started up. " My sister !" he exclaimed, and clasped poor Mary to his bosom, now throbbing with fraternal recognition. Scarcely had the agitated Mary been vol. ι. τ
encircled in her brother's embrace, when she started from it iu alarm. £t My brother, you are fevered !" she cried; " and this wareless agitation must prove scatliful to vou. If your ailment lequires the aidance of a physician, we can soonly summon from St. Stephen's Monastery one skilled in all the cun¬ ning of his ari, under the regretted Linacre ; that is, we can make summon of our physieian, if I imagine me cor- rectly that Her Majesty's leech is only comporting himself such as a sober mum* Ш'П' of your masking." .- CT " In good sooth, he is uo masker, but a physician whose advisement is vaunted of by fame," said Algernon ; " and I bethink me, we had better declare for Doctor Balmfield to speed him hither; for, to evident perceivance, our dear Edward is not iu health to our contentment." <£ I will speed me to summon him, and will return when Ed ware! is wishful for my return — but not till then," said Marv ; the expression of tender rapture, which had for some moments prior
illumed her animated countenance, now changed to grief, if tmt despair: "for it sorrows me to learn declarement, that I have not yet found readmission where 1 was erewhiles so kindly cherished. But, De Mandeville, my own brother, I con¬ jure you, by the memory of our angel mother to permit my giving you meet surance of what poor Mary is in sooth ; and then will I wager with you — ' A tear of sorrow at our parting' — that you will eftsoons cherish for me some¬ thing more apt of kindred sympathy." Mary awaited no reply, but fled like a lapwing, to ceineeal her flowing tears at the conviction of ungenial influence being e>nee more in operation, inimienil to fraternal sympathy, in her brother's bo¬ som ; —yet, in the moment of her agitated flight, aware that in person she coukl not summon Doctor Balmfield, she motioned for the seneschal to follow her, and gave her directions to Daveuant upon all things she wished to flave done relative to Lord de Mandeville. The acute sensibility of Lady Mary τ 2
conveyed to her perceptions but too cor¬ rectly tho suddenly chilled feeling of her brother towards her. Those fraternal sympathies, which had been surprised into kindred tones by the loveliness of his sister's countenance, too soon were chilled through the influence of his juvenile pride. Whilst Mary was approaching his couch, be only 7 gazed upon her face, for the fascination of its expression monopo¬ lized his undivided attention ; but when clasped to his bosom, the touch of her homely attire electrified his refinements with a thrill of horror : when, shrinking from such a rustic as his sister, his affec¬ tions relaxed, and a sort of dismay at what he had recognised as the being he had so long in fancy fondly cherished in his heart almost effectively chilieni his fever; and lucklessly recalling to remem¬ brance the elegance of Rhona, he dropped, as ifin disgust, the hand of his sister, and averted his face, lest his dignity should be shocked more deeply by beholding on Mary of Albalanda the vestments of the vulgar.
" Oh, De Mandeville ! " exclaimed Algernon, the moment our heroine disap¬ peared, " could you have wist all the af¬ fectionate Lady 7 Mary has made encounter of for your vantage wliilere, you coukl not have looked so coldly on her. When you areinvalesceiit, I will make marvel for you of all the hazardry in which she perilleni herself to aid you ; but in the interven¬ ing time, bear in the recordation of your heart that your sister made more treasure of your safety than of her own." " 1 feel surance, my dear and honoured lard," said A'Pany, at length venturing to address his beloved though untoward young master, " you could not choose but feel displeasance with yourself, had you but seen the daze of the beautiful eyes you drent in tears," " I cannot imagine me, Algernon, how Maty could have made encounter of ha¬ zardry for my behoof^" said his lordship ; " but I shall, I feel, be soonly very grate¬ ful ; for I am sorrowed that I made be¬ trayal that I was contentless with her, I did for one moment see her eyes, τ 3
and bethought me, like A'Pany, that they were lustrously beautiful ; are they so, Fitzrivers ? " " Most certainly thev are." " But not so beautiful as Rhona's, for¬ sooth ? " " We must see the sun in splendour, as nieetlv as in humidity, ere we can in soeith pronounce upon its brilliancy," re- spondetl Algernon. " But there was no wimple," said A'Pany, " to welk the unrivalled beauty of Lady Mary's dazzling teeth. Thcrin must Lady 7 Warburg, to her sorrowance, void withouten α epiestion to our lady of Albalanela. I wis the Laely Warburg would show wiseness, to practise her in abstinence from spiced plates, comfitures, and subtilties ; or, by my troth, must she fashion her in other guise than smiling ever anel anon in a broael expanse of sweetness. An ebony purfle, to a pave¬ ment of pearl, is not a quaint------" " Hush, A'Pany! you will distraught vour lord, whose heavy eyes yield ad¬ visement that he requires some restful
moments," said Algernon, somewhat pettishly 7 ; anxious to terminate disclo¬ sures grating to the ears of love, And о CT silence being thus obtained, all indulged in uninterrupted meditation until the return of the seneschal with Doctor Balmfield, who pronounced Lord de Mandeville to be labouring under a smart degree of fever, requiring care anel quiet. " Let Laely Mary come hitherward when she lists," said the invaliti, as soon as Doctor Balmfield had taken leave : " in my meditations, Algernon, I have found that to contrition me. From all which you have told, and our dear Fa- ther Hubert too, of Mary's infant gren 1 to me. mv haviour was denatured and displacent to her. She seems, forsooth, of gentle, kindly bearing,·—a very lamb in wolf's clothing. Oh ! how I do wish me she was but gentle in charactery ; ay, and that she had something of be¬ seeming gaudery about her gear." Daveuant undertook to intorni the Laely Mary of her brother's wish to see her, " as he was going straightway," he τ í·
said, "to give her advisement of the view the leech had taken of her brother's case ; and he had no doubt Lady Mary would be in his lordship's dormitory eftsoons." But the seneschal's prediction of Lady Mary's prompt appearance in this cham¬ ber was not verified ; and Lord de Man¬ deville became so indignant, and uttered so many threats of not admitting her, that the kind Algernon at length was induced to go in quest of the truant; by which means he was fated to extricate her from a most embarrassing detention, and to prove her safe convoy to the chamber of her impatient brother. AVhen the envoys of the fair Rhona rallied from the hall to bring intelligence to Her i>raeious Majesty ol the heir of the castle, the person who performed guide upon the occasion, not being versed in the geography of those parts of the castle not commonly frequented, took them through a circuitou" route, still hoping to stumble into the right track to the dormitory of Lorel de Mandeville;
in doing which he fell into the present haunt of Weewitte, who was anxiously hovering near the ehambeis of Laely Mary, in hopes of obtaining ocular demolisti at ion for his almost pai ental solicitude that she haei absolutely es¬ caped all injury in her perilous achieve¬ ment. "Jla, Master Jester!" exclaimed Sir Leohne, who formed one of tnis diplo¬ macy ; "what dost thou here, quivering like blue gleams of electric \ape>ur in a murky corner?" "Well may 1 look blue, ami quiver too, I imagine me, Sir Knight," re¬ sponded Weewitte. "(îiameicy! but we had all been in vapouis, if that affection which, like to a veiy subtle vapour, speel over house tops, though not evaporating in smoke, hail sent by waftage our Lady Mary into our base- court, as the fell arrow oí grief to pierce many a heart/' A demand ior his meaning drew a solution from Weevv itte, who giv ing his picture with all the iinisheel touches and
in the glowing colours supplied by bis attachment to the heroine he portrayed, it occupied no inconsiderable time ; and the consequent questions and replies con¬ tinued until Maiy, in compliance with the summons conveveel b ν the seneschal, had, accompanied by Maud, commenceel her anxious route to the chamber of her brother ; but very few paces had she advanced, ere she most unexpectedly came upon the group surrounding Wee¬ witte : and so completely had the tloor which Maud had opened for their pas¬ sage hetnryed her young charge to public view, that ere poor Mary was aware of the encounter she was surrouneled by congratulators, offering their meed of admiring approbation, with their sym¬ pathy for her alarms and their joy at her safety, in strains of adulating gallantry to which the ears of' the insulated Mary had been strangers ; and by no means comprehending these strains, yet not doubting they were making sport of her antl her feelings, ami half alarmeli at the impassioned temes and manner of
Sir Rupert, she fled for shelter from the party into an adjoining turret, where she inclosed herself and Maud ; and from which she would not emerge until Al- gemou requested her lo come forth, as all her annoyers had returned to the hall. The kind excuses made by Fitzrivers to Lady Mary for the chilling conduct of Edvvarel, as they proceeded together on their way, gave her much consola¬ tion * and tliat consolati 011 wk increased to happiness in prospect, by a reception from her brother which bore the au¬ spicious promise of future affectionate amity. Maud brought to Lord eie Mandeville some nourishment of the species pre¬ scribed by Doctor Balmfield; antl whilst his agitated sister was kindly aiding him in his insipid mend, he abruptly demanded "why she was not apparelled in accord¬ ance with her rank ?" "Are you not all mumming in the castle?" returned Mary with a smile: " and can it marvel vou, .should I have
apparelled me to pass for a rustic amongst vou?" " Not so, Lady Mary ; we found you so attirée!, albeit you wot neit of our coming." " What if it should be by mv lorel and father's behest 1 am thus habited, Edward, The abbess of St. Mildred's supplies my wardrobe; and 1 have been led to imagine me of this being the true advisement upon the matter." " Were this abbess the representative of His Holiness biniseli^ I would not faith me in her statement," responded Ed¬ ward warmly. " My lord and father decree her thus to dight his chikl ! — Marry! but to prove my denay, I will speed an express to York, and get deft clothing to revest you. It mars my peace to see you thus, and have to ьау — ay, and to feel, forsooth—that you are my own sister." " Do not send to York, dear Edwartl," said the giateful Mary ; " for no vantage can toil me into disobedience to a behest I am told of as mv honoured father's.—
But when it can conveniently become you to make such request, kindly азк his gracious permission that I may change my guise, and I will gladly doff this sack¬ cloth that so angers you. In the inter- vening time mind no more my clothing, CT . t_' yet feel 1 am your sister still ; and only blush for mc when in word or deed I make reason for displeasance with me. Edward, were you vested in the most unmeet gabardine, I would aptly take my brother to my heart ; and, by my feelings, learn to wis the texture of all things appertaining to consanguinity as superfine." " \our portance and language are not besorting your raiment," saiel Edwartl : and then earnestly 7 rega relin g her for a moment, he laid his cheek to hers ; and from this period, dropping the formality of Lady, called her simply Mary. A summons from their Majesties to Algernon now called him from the dor¬ mitory of Lorel de Mandeville, whither through various causes he was not per¬ mitted to return until after dinner; when
he quickly perceived, and without sur¬ prise, that Mary's clothing was no longer thought of bv her brother, who seemed to attenel to all she saitl and did with evident pleasure, a fiel to comply with her wishes unmurmuringly—-and that, even when not exactly in unison with his own. Lorel de Mandeville announcetl him¬ self much better. " Nor could it be otherwise," he told Algernon, " since he had never been so tenderly nursed in any illness." Creat, therefore, was the poor youth's astonishment, and that of his companions, when Doctor Balmfield announced, upon his evening visit, that his lordship was not better; and after a few grave anel consequential looks, and а number of questions, requested а pri¬ vate conference with Latly Mary and Master Fitzrivers : when he informed them there were strong symptoms of fever, or other infectious malady, about Lord de Mandeville ; and that therefore it was expedient for them to withdraw, and to leave him to the care of an bos-
pital nurse from some neighbouring monastery — and that immedia ly, as the malady wore the aspect of alarm. But in its effect upon Maiy it seemed as if he were mi-taken ; for though she blanched to the lily hue, and trembled, she firmly announced she would not withdiaw, nor yield her post of duty to any hospital sister so long as >he should be able to maintain it. "As to vou, Master Fit/rivers,'' saiil Marv, "vour endurance is not by the pillow of sickness, albeit the head of a friend is restful upon it ; but to wot that you aie neai and leady to yiekl me aidance, will be meet comtort antl con¬ solation." The kmd hearted Algernon made eflbrts to eonv ince Latly Maiy that it would be hat batons in him to hnn e her antl her biother to their fate; but they were all oven uletí by Doctoi Balmfield, who peiemptonly decreed that Master Fitzriveis w on hi do more harm than good CT by remaining, and would not depart with¬ out hun.
Whilst preparations were making for the night in the alarmed invalid's dormi- tory, the agitated Mary visited her own to make hasty arrangements for an inde¬ finite absence ; anel whilst thus engaged, she despatched Maud to inform the seneschal of the prognostics of Doctor Balmfield, and to desire to have a com¬ petent hospital sister procured to instruct her in the care of her brother : when Davenant desired Maud to tell her lady, that when the sewer served in the supper messes in the banquet-hall, some one shoulel speed to her more welcome than an hospital sister; and in the mean¬ time not to sorrow or alarm herself, but not to bruit her expectations before the valet of' her brother, as none coukl yet wot if he were trustworthy. END OI THE FIRST VOLUME.
Lo PnoN : Printed by A. Sc lt. Snottiswoode, New- Street- Square.
