Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Confessions of the nun of St. Omer: a tale
mm ■■■ ri ...u.,. ^ . ι. ............. mm , I ■ Β ιι W n CONFESSIONS OF THE NUN OF ST. OMER.
CHAP. I. TH« FATAL ENCOUNTER. DREADFUL conflia Ϊ— whether to acknowledge to a fon, who reveres me, the melancholy errors of an unfortunate mother, or by fuŕľering him to remain in ignorance of thofe fad truths it is røy л з duty
о
duty to inform him οζ retain, only by an effort of duplicity, his unmerited re- fpeci: and love ! And wilt thou then, dear boy—wilt thou indeed defpife me ?—if thou doft, thou art unlike St. Elmer. Wilt thou not draw a veil over my errors^ and in Heti of keen contempt gaze on my grave with pity ?—Yes, thou fhalc know all, my Lindorf % and may it teach thee to confider, from the forrows of thy parent, her unhappy fex as defencelefs ; and thus deriving a dearer claim on thy protection, rather than from the emi¬ nence of manhood, view them as the * ready - formed viâims for deceit. and cruelty. Yes, though at the riík of iofing the only joy that is left roe, thy affeciion
1 affeciion and refpečr, dear fon of tears, I will make atonement (if fuch there can be)* for my guilt, by inflifling on my lacerated heart the pain of unequivocal cònteflìon, and remembering that he who will perufe it is my only friend, the only being whofe love I am defirous to retain. When I have furmounted the melancholy ftruggle, a ray of peace may faintly gild my bofom # # # - # the fevered philofophy and the conflicts of my whole life can extort no more than this—Lin¬ dorf, I will lay open to thy knowledge my agonizing tale ****** Should the inclofed jacket, as I truft, Come facred to the hands of Dorvil Lin¬ dorf, let him not, as he refpects the me¬ mory of an ill-fated mother, perufe it в 4 till
i
lill the cold and friendly grave hatlı Jamped for c^er the warm fiufhed cheek of fliame«. ##*####·#
« · ♦ ♦ tøv father was the Mar¬ quis Arieni; —making the toar of Eu¬ rope, he became acquainted with an Englifh family of difuncÍkm rending in England ; and, probably imagining he beheld in my mother the woman he had ever defired as a wife, he made pro- pofâls to her parents, which were ac¬ cepted, and they became united. Arieni was an haughty Italian—dar¬ ing, a great {peculator, fond of pre¬ eminence and of iirong abilities;—his perfon was fhort, yet graceful—and his manners* though referveu, infidious—~ a fpirit
9 a fpirit of enterpnfe Mid Ûirewdnefs oi imagination calculated him for die at- chievement of events the moft ha¬ zardous ; and an eloquential flow of language,dazzling and fententious,made to hira continual converts of the weak and wife. My mother was bis enthufiaftic ad¬ mirer— fhe contemplated bis talents with the fame awe-ftruck wonder as a child view.4 the afcenfion ofa fky-rocket :—fhe was innocent, young, and romantic to z fault, eafily fwayed, and too foft to be energetic, or repel by dignified per¬ feverance the influx of opprefliun. After their marriage my parents launched into a Iplendour beyond their и 5 power
Ю
power to continue— eight years rolled on araid the vortex of folly» but at the expiration of that period, the em barrai!"- ments of the Marquis would furier him no longer to remain %hh fafety in the metropolis, and yielding to the fuggef- tions of his friends he confented to fly, caufing me to accompany him, who håd ever been his favorite—unfortunate child î on whofe innocent head Fate had already let her gloomy mark. Now left wretched and forlorn with two children younger than myfelf, my mother retired into an obfcure village— (here, her heart breaking with defpon- dency, Oie puffed her hours in tears, in praying for her huiband, in dreaming over his image, and in inftručting her children. For
li
For me, wild and carelefs as the breeie which wafted over me, I lìtde dreamt the forrow.« of my parents ; and with the childifh art of eight ye^rs endeavoured to awaken the attention of the Marquis. Italy was the place of deftination^— fome connexions he had there, with, per¬ haps, an involuntary defire ш revifit his native country, had confpired in his choice of an abode.—We arrived after a long and fatiguing journey, when my father, defirous of refting as early as pof¬ fible, alighted at the firft Locanda (an inn) which prefented itfelf—he was in¬ formed the apartments were all occupied either by families or individuals. " But could you not prevail on any в б individual,
31
* î 'dividual, friead P inquired røy Mier with an expreffive fmik,and accompany- big i'ie fimle by a műre exprefBre do« nadon» ** There is one apartment, Sinor, the beft wc have, in the poffeffion of only um lady, but ihe is a lady of rank, Sinor, and perhaps might objeci.** 4 * Go, friend» and ufe your influence 3 if you fucceed—» you underftand me'*·— aed again my father fmiied ; the man bowed obfcquioufly and withdrew on his emb;dfy«*»in about tive minutes he returned, *· The Sinoia gives confent, Sinor,*' ex l! aimed the enraptured mercury. lv Lead
*3 " Lead on uien," faid roy father, alighting and taking me in his arms. We*were ufhered intoa fuperb apart¬ ment, where a lady of elegant figure and fhewy appearance had been evi¬ dently ftudying an attitude againft our entrance, and now half rofe from the fopha, on which, nymph-like, fhe re¬ clined; the Marquis appeared ftruck, yet in a graceful manner apologized for his intrufion, and half hefitating, half pre- ftiming, feated himfelf near the reclin¬ ing nymph. Ί hey entered into converfation—fad and diabolical woman İ ------ infamous fouree of all my errors and my woes I why did no kind prefage, no inftinčtive emotion
n emotion inform me of the forrows thou waft fated to heap upon me ?—- playfully I hung around the fyren fmiler, and fportiveîy amufed myfelf with f*r rc- fplendent ornaments. The Countefs Rofendorf was a Ger¬ man of noble extrachon ; but high brth, which might have reflexed additional lüfere on her virtues, feemed only tar- niihed by her crimes: one exalted vi¬ cious character, from whom the mul¬ titude take lead, is of more momen¬ tous danger m fociety then twenty of a common call. She lud been married in her youth to a man flie could little appre¬ ciate, whofe mifplaccd affection not al¬ lowing him to rcfent her infamous con- du8, bat whofe heart, incapable of fup¬ porting
ч porting it, burß beneath the variety of wretchednefs flie infliåed, and left her to purfue alone a life which had already become tainted with every vice.—She had two children, fuppofed to be Count Rofendorf's; for feveral years after his death her conduct had given rife to va¬ rious reports, as in its fulleft extent fhe followed the motto of hbetty, literally fhunned and difdained by the noble family flie had difgraced. She was artful, vivacious, and elegant —of an enterprifing and atrocious fpirit —a depraved heart, falaciousdifpofition, and infenfible foul ;—fhe appeared to have determined the fubjugation of my father ; he appeared worthy of the tafk— her fortune, from the uucircumfcribed courfe
ϊβ
courfc ihe had puffued, was more than íhatíered ; bul ber fpirit llill remained unbroken^ und fhe prefumed to hope that his notions of independence ac¬ corded with her own. From thi% fateful period my doom affumed its caft ; 'twas of gloomy black— my doom was alber¬ gai ned, thaï of my unfortunate family, andj perhaps, it might have afleded the future fate of myriads yet unborn ; for have not the revolutions of empires depended on the influence of the mo« menr* and the long chain of events which, Ш11 hidden in embryo, taken from it their fubfequent calls * * * * #####* ###### * # # # # let me not dwell upon the maddening theme, but bañen on.— Fate now fmiied gloomy upon my blafíed
17 biafled davs — a defìructive and illicit 0 union was gradually cemented between my father and the Rofendorf; and the fragment ofa letter which I accidentally difcovered, and by chance prefcrvcd, fufficiently evinces the unblufhing tur¬ pitude of this female feducer.—It ran thus ; ** Alieni, you are а шап to whom the prejudices of the world are a» nothing ; I confefs, from the ideas I had conceived of you, I bad not imagined this advance on my fide would have been neceffary. Arieni appeared to me to act fiom himfelf, not from others ; is your mind big with any project,/and do you fear to avow it?—Are not you and ï above the common kind ; have we not
ϊβ
not each been moft prcpoíteroufly mif- matehed by the idle prevalence of a political iiiftitution?—our minds are congenial and ought to be united ;—of what conféquence fhould be to us the rrťí?A/s fminion ?—you arc ruined, and will they affifl you?—Of what confe«. quencc the ties of prejudice*«·reafon ftnd right evidently point out to man the path of happinefs:—«he is a fool—no philofopher, if he purfue it not, My motto is liberty Mia indépendance î Arieni has called me dangerous, but wherefore if 1 convince him I am juß ? —if not, how can I be dangerous ?«— You tell me of your wife·—fallacious obltacle!—truft to her affeffionfor pardon, to her reafúii for toleration ; if fhe love you
*9 you as you fay, (he can never feck re* venge~-~for her tendernefs will yield to the arguments you will know fo well how to adduce ; if fhe prove rcfraöory fhe has then no affection, and we are juftified in peremptorily retaining ourfree agency : remember t that our fortunes arc /haltered ţ that together we may redore them, and that Ше who offers you her friendíhip and her perfori, la pofftft ut once of fpirU to conam and promptneft \o execute.'* Was my young heart inilrucìed then in the fateful net, weaving forever againft 'its future happinefs ?—I know not, but I viewed the Rofendorf with increaßng terror and diflike, A fuperb palace was hired in the heart of the Campania
ao
Campania de Roma, and whatever were the fpeculations of ambition, for which fo much had been facrificed, they were by no means aerial. The palace Arieni became rapidly crouded with the firft nobility of Italy, and feftive mirth ap· peared to reign throughout*
2 1
CHAP. II. JUVENILE ATTACHMENTS. AMONG the various influx of fo¬ ciety that vifited the palace of the Mar¬ quis, was a young Englifh Nobleman, called St. Elmer; dear and unfortunate being, whofe lot was fo deeply tinctured with the fatality of mine ! St. Elmer was of the firft order of human beings ; his character was too fine for delineation ; all that was generous, ail that was fin« cere
sa
cere and noble: of virtue the moil re¬ fined—of fentiments divine—philanthro¬ pic—oh ! how much infpired by that lovely enthufiafm which elevates, not maddens, the heart in which it dwells. II is countenance was a touching index of his pure and heavenly mind % his large blue eyes contained an ехргеШоп of voluptuous fentiment almoft too fine to look upon, yet would a caft of mild feverity pafs fomctiracs over his fafci- nating features;— -the tint of his com« plexioii, without brilliancy, was fuch as at once to imercfl the hearts while the graceful elegance of his figure, the fe- duclive melody of his voice, and the re» finement of his manners, feemed to en* chant into his favor beings the moft íiubbom
ч ílubborn and the moft mifanthro· pical. Though differing fo widely from Ita¬ lian characier, he was generally courted; for me, if I but heard his foft footftep in the ball, my young heart underwent a peculiar agitation ; I have fince often dwelt on him with wondering emotion—I wouid fly from childifh amufement, from juvenile aífociates, to welcome him, to hover near him, and attract, his notice. I would twine my fingers in his auburn ringlets, and relate to him the occur¬ rences of the day ;—with fportive viva¬ city he would return my innocent ad¬ vances, and feem delighted when I bounded to his arms. Graduallv ï forgot ŕ О my deferted home, and all who apper¬ tained
tamed to iti pîeafure and St. Elmer employed wholly my ideas. At this period, I was fcarcely more than eight years of age. Three years more rolled on, and things continued thus fituated, when an affair in which the Marquis had unfortunately engaged together with fome young men of rank, rendered him, in a land of bravos, in momentary danger of his life 5 he had been involuntarily drawn into the tranf- a8ion at the requeft of fome friends, which not having terminated with the expected eclat, threw a fort of odium, however unmerited, upon all who had been engaged in it. He determined to quit Italy, and the perílvering Rofen¬ dorf determined to accompany him ; both
2 5 both agreed as to the policy and pro¬ priety of returning into Germany, where the degenerate Countefs profeffcâ to have connections, who however fcorned to countenance her. Preparations were concluded with the utmoft expedition, and in a. paroxyfm of grief bordering on defpair, / was torn from the bofom of St. Elmer.— Was it wonderful that I movhdfeel ? —I was now eleven years of age—in a mind, of ftrong fufceptibility the emotions are early matured. I affirm that I felt at being torn from St. Elmer, and even at this moment I can recollect, with a keen¬ nefs of fenfation almoft incredible, the excefs of fadnefs I then experienced.— St, Elmer was a man, and yet he wept ! voi., i, г more
more than one warm tear fell into my bofom ; and my ftrong agony commu¬ nicated to his fufceptible bofom an emotion whieh was fufficiently appâ¬ tent. " Dear Cazire," he faid in a melo¬ dious accent, ** my dear little girl, wc flialì meet again/' « Oh ! never, never!" I fobbed with emphatic eaineftncfs. íť But indeed we fiaUf he replied, preffing mc in his arms and gizing on me with a teai ful eye— u Begone, Cazire/* cried the Coun¬ tefs ; *' my Lord St. Elmer, forgive »he child!" <c Pardon
27 " Pardon her rudenefs, " added the Marquis. Oh í cruel perverfion 1 arc then the fineft emotions of the heart fo iil appre¬ ciated as to be íly led rude? ťí Dear girl," cried St. Elmer, (i I wiih ihe was not going;" and looked expreffively at my father. " And would your Lordihip be troubled with the imp?'' inquired the Rofendoif. " Ohi might I be permitted to re« tain her/' anfwered St. Elmer, as he viewed my ftarting tears, momentarily arrefted by the fuggeftions ot' hope.
с 2
My
¿8
My father laughed; <f You are wild," he csied, Ci St, Elmer, in your requeft; but I could as foon refign my life, as that child!—fhe has been for eleven years my chiefeft joy, and, in all my va¬ rious forrows and difappointments, my only confolation/' 4S And far be it from me,'* returned St. Elmer, *' to intrude upon the facred afleBion of a father for his child ; but you muft leave me, love—you muft in¬ deed !-—thefe warm tears unman me quite/' He feated himfelfon the fopha, and as the Marquis approached to take me from his arms, I clung round his neck with renovated angui flu
Butj
29 But, alas! what could my ftrugglcs avail ?-—I was configned to the care of a fervant, my young heart agonized with the violence of my forrow.
c 3
ЗО
CHAP. III. EEÏROSPbCTION. I WENTto bed weepingand unhappy, In the morning, on awaking, 1 found a little medallion fet in diamonds, with i Ji e cypher of St. Elmer in his hair, fuf- periuKi from my neck by a black ribbon. " And bow came 1 by this ?" I in¬ quired of Jean my fervant. i( My Lord St. Elmer, as you flept —" " And why was I not awakened?" í pettiíhly demanded. íť My
3* " My Lord would not permit." How did this incident imprefs my mind! how did u flatter the little va¬ nity of my bofom ! Ì rofe fomewhat happier; we were to depait immedîately, and commence our journey. My fa¬ ther was thoughtful and referved ; the Rofendorf amufed herfelf with an Italian grey-hound ; and I meditated on my dear medallion. Sweet and noble country ï what a mine of ideas muft thy fubiimely beau¬ tiful profpefts excite in a reflective mind ! with how much rapture muft it dwell emon thy glowing imagery of va¬ rious nature, on thy trembling moun- c 4 tains,
32 tains, fecming fufpended between fea and air, on flaming Vcfuvius majeftically dreadful, on the afpiring Alps ! to gaze upon the diftant heavens feeming near, or on the varying fhades tinting the ridgy rocks! to hang over the narrow point of a precipice, and dwell with luxuriant horror from its dizzying height upon the dangerous depths below ! And then, the gay Carvi nal— not to mix in its diffipaied crouds 1 long, but from far to watch with pleafing fad nefs the joys, the filly amufements /fhall ne¬ ver more partake—to hear from a diftant caKment the tempeicd note ftealing loft over the riphng wave—to hearken wiih fad emotion to the diftant hum of men—the cardeis jocund laugh breaking on
33 on the ftillnefs of the night—the fplaihing of the oars—thegradually finking cadence of the whining fong—the lights now feen miffily, now fhining at intervals through various breaks—the crouds— ι he thought- itfs myriads of moital men laughing and fighting among eacli other like fo many children in a garden—the tricked*out gondolas failing meirily along, and the foft founds of the ferinaders afcending in aerial ftrams, awaking the mel incinil y heart to emotions various as indefcrib- able ! But whither am î wanderin? ? a cai η j о in the fairy labyrinths of fancy P — m the wildb of Imagination ?—oh ! dear and dangerous power, why do 1 ilill indulge in iha ?—haft thou not yet withdrawn с 5 thy
34 thy ruinous fpeil from my fhattered heat t ?■— who hears?—who lidens? — Cazite, art thou not an inmate of St. Omer ?—who hears thee, then, within the dieary convent walls?«— Hai к to the folemn midnip.ht chaunt! Hark! now it fwells—away with worldly feelings-— ¿way too with emotions of the heart— the gloom of fuperftition owns them * not!
í
35
CHAP. IV. CLOUDS STILL GATHER. MY dear Lindorf, my lad was in a melancholy drain ; I will endeavour, if poffible, to check in future the per* fonalhies of grief. A variety of objecis cannot fan* of amufinga youthful mind yet untinBured by evil, and a few days after my arrival in Germany, I regained my ufual vivacity. We proceeded to a feat of the Rofm- dorPs, who propofcd to my father that с β the
3θ the young Ellcnburgh, her daughter, íhouid be taken from the convent, where from her earlieft childhood fhe had been placed, and then, by introducing her to the world of fafhion, (peculate upon a maniage with fome fool of fortune- My father did not objecì to this motion, and her fon, who was at an academy near the convent of Ellenburgh, was to accom¬ pany his filler home ; this plan was foon executed, I was amufmg myfelf in the garden which furrounded the houfe, when the young Orangers alighted ; in · ftinchvcly my heart fell, and I followed them up ftaiis with looks ofdžVčdcfpon- dcncy. " What has happened ?'* inquired my lather as 1 entered. 1 flew towards him, imd clafping my hands around his neck, I exclaimed with agony ofgiief, point-
37 ing to Ellenburgh and her brother, "Alas í I fhall now be deprived forever of your love!'* " Silly girl," replied my father, preff¬ ing me in his arms, as though he did it by Health; <ť why fliould you think fo ?" *' St. Elmer is not here—I have no friend but you. 7 * " I think the little girl is very rude," faid Ellenburgh, going to the glafs. ťí And fo think 1," added her brother Donamar, fcizing his fiHer round the neck, and giving her a kifs. My teai s redoubled! *'And what now ?" inquired my father.
38 ** I have no brother nor fifler to kifs me/ 4 " But do not / love you, Cazire ?*' ť * But you will not love me always, my dear father/* " How can you humor that capri¬ cious girl, Arieni?" faid the Rofen¬ dorf; <{ I affure you it's vaftly ridicu¬ lous/' {i Forbear a word on the fubječt," faid my father ; " dear child ! my heart would break if fhe were miferable." " And ah! my father, what crime did I commit when I w T as thruft an exile from your arms?—-had you but ever loved
39 loved me thus—thus ever have afferied your love, never, never would your un¬ fortunate Cazire have been facrificed to deilruclion ! I had never fecn Arieni fo much affe8ed; I fek his kind nefs, for í felt deferted; but to me, expreflions of his affeciioii were no novei tv : with me he was all doting fondnefs, indul¬ gent tendernefs, and affability ; with others, haughty, failidious^ and referved. 1 feemed to conflitute his chief delight, and I adored him with unbounded en¬ ih ufi a fm. By degrees, however, 1 became fa¬ miliari fed to the young Π rangers; we did not regard each other with fuch in¬ quiring jealoufy, and appeared inclined to amity. EUenbur^h was about fifteen, vain
40 vain and affected, though with fome íhare of natural beauty, intended to be heightened by a recourfe to arts which had a contrary effe& ; and her childifh figure, decked abfurdly in the habili- meiits of the woman, formed an appear¬ ance difpleafing and grotefque. Of her mind I can obferve little ; it was one of thofe we fee every day clafped in the unafpiring rank of non-entities ; ihe had no will but her mother's, and no wijk to have a will of her own. Her brother Donamarwas a tall half- formed boy, with a íhrilí irregular voice ; he was noify, prefumptuous, and tyranni¬ cal ; Ыъ countenance fair, with large grey eyes, but vacant ; and for his mindj it might rank with his filter's, claiming
4i claiming the addition only of exceffive arrogance. However inclined I might have been to view the faireft fide of the picture, I foon perceived my fituation became irk- fome and unhappy. I was neglected and impofed on, without power to ex¬ plain myfelf ; and faw with increafing anguifh the mind of my father biafled againft me, and his cherifhed affections gradually diminifh. In folitude I pined and wept the commencement of my forrows ! The following inftance which occurred, perhaps, accelerated the alien¬ ation of my father's heart ; and, though trifling, may elucidate the unhappinefs of my fituation.
We
42 We were all three playing one even¬ ing in a long gallery leading from va™ rious apartments to the fitting room, then occupied by my father and the Countefs;-—-Donamar, ever bo ; fterous in his mirth, pufhed me fo forcibly againft his fifter ftanding near the door of the apartment, that it burft open, and fhe fell forwards to the utter con- fternation of her mother, who imme¬ diately rifing and perceiving me only near, (for Donamar had made his ef¬ cape,) revenged on me her daughter's fall, with a blow which brought the tears into my eye?. To fee me perfonally in¬ jured, even yet my father could not hear, and rifing with indignation, he repaid the infuît on the late exulting check of Ellenburgh. This occafioned a battle
43 a battle between the parents of each ; when my father, eager to fave me from further ill treatment, thruft me up a couple of fteps into an adjoining cham¬ ber, and locked me in. High words and bitter language then enfued, and 1 heard at intervals the trembling voice of El¬ lenburgh diffuading the opponents from their fray; ftili it continued, and they parted at length mutually enraged. Thus it may eafily be perceived, that however the compact; of inter efts may agree, the union of hearts muft be ef¬ fected on a nobler bafis. Alas! theaffection of the Marquis, tem¬ porarily roufed by my injuries, ftili de- creafed : when he reflected on the dif- agreeable
4i agreeable reproaches it had expofed Ыя] to, he looked on me as the caufe, how¬ ever innocent, of his breach with the Rofendorf; and fhe viewed me with a fiend-like hatred, as the inftigator of her impolitic language towards my fa¬ ther, whofe affection, or at leaft good· will, fhe had an intereft in preferving.
45
CHAP. VI. DANGERS OF FALSE SENTIMENT. YOUNG as I was, obfervation con¬ vinced me I fhould not long remain in my prefent fituation, and a converfation between my father and the Rofendorf (which, as it refpeåed myfelf, I made no fcruple of endeavouring from an adjoin¬ ing room to overhear) confirmed me in my melancholy fufpicions.
** Arieni/*
4б <s Arieni," faid the Countefs, (i our quarrels methinks have of late be¬ come frequent. I remember with re¬ gret the time when harmony reigned for ever/' si And why do we quarrel, Rofen¬ dorf?'* *' There à a caufe, which, though apparently trifling, is the only one, and imprudently difregarded." if What mean you?" ^ That Cazire, (it pains me to fay,) for a gul of her age, is capable of art moft exccflîve, and adds to it a mali¬ cious tongin, j which, if either of my
47 my own children unfortunately were curfed with, they fhould not dwell an hour under the same roof with me ƒ'* a You are prejudiced againft th&t child, (he is too young to be artful ; but I do not expcci; your affection for her —-fhe is not your child.*' * r I am not fo illiberal, Arieni —let us compromis ; remove Cazire for a fiiort time ; and if every difagreement, quarrel, or unpleafant difturbance ceafe not from her departure, I will not onlv agree to facilitate her re- turn, but bring her back myfelf, and acknowledge my error."
" You
43 íc You muíl not expeft me to agree immediately to a propofal of this na¬ ture; I will have fome converfation with her, watch hrr conduci, and try her fome time longer ; if fhe prove incorrigible, I will place her in a convent." The Countefs urged no further, and the fubjecì changed· But from this lucklefs hour, as the Rofendoif had made an opening, fhe never ceafed till her deiire was obtained j in vain was, on my fide, conduci the more irreproach¬ able—in vain did I bear and forbear—in vain endure all that malice could fug¬ ged, or the moil determined cruelty in O' * vent; í fa w with forrow, fa w my de parture dravs nearer every day. Mean«
49 Meantime the letters of my mother increafed indefpondency;—ihe begged» fhe fupplicated of my father to return ; —fhe offered to work, to ftarve, to die for him ! little confcious of the influence he was enjoying—-little confcious of the fad events which had taken place ; and, laflly, fhe talked of joining him if he did not fpeedily revifit England. This lad infinuaiion roufed the Marquis ai from a dream of torpor ; he faw it be¬ came neceffdty to account for an ab- fence lengthened already beyond the bounds of equivocal palliations« and de¬ termined on revealing as cautioufly as poffible what 'O u Id not for ever jemain concealed, ι what language Le ex¬ plained to her the ücp he had taken, or how he prevailed on her to toleran ir, VOL. J. Ώ I k' ow
5° 1 know not, but he permitted her to Vifit Germany, and bought for her a beautiful and romantic cottage in the village of Staub. Her anfwer pourtrays fufficiently the idolatrous love flie bore røy father and the romantic quixotifm of her nature ; fhews too, that falfe fenti¬ ment and chimerical notions of magnani¬ mity are the moft fatal rocks for a mind, unaided by the ftronger powers of ener¬ getic reafon, to encounter. * f Cruel Arieni! think you not I could have difpenfed with fo dreadful, fo def¬ perate a proof of your affection?—your letter of horrors lies before me, and my ftrcaming eyes glare on it confufedly, fcarcely able to credit the contents. I feem to view as along illufive dream the laft
5t laft five years of my exiftence ; from which, on awaking, I find myfelf op- preffed by real accumulated horrors, and chief of the gloomy proceffion İs the defertion of ^rieni. Was it then to fave me ?—to fave your innocent fa¬ mily from ruin, that you ftabbed me with your abfence to the heart, and now only draw forth the barbed arrow to plunge if*deeper in?—why did you recover me from a five years* delufion to fend me mad at laft ? oh ! why, I afk, was this cruel \>x oof neceffary? —together we could have conjectured a thoufand plans ; fime could not have failed ; but feparated, torn afuudcr like the ivy from the oak ! the oak may fJouriíh ; flourifh long 'tis true, but the devoted ivy already fecks the earth. и » Forgive
5 й €β Forgive you, Arieni — alas! I muft —did real love ever feek revenge ? you filali not find me your inferior in the affection you profefs; and if you had mag¬ nanimity enough to become a facrifice, ï have magnanimity enough to water that facrifice with my tears ! but I have not magnanimity to fmile on it. * Alas! how dicadfui it is for iove to increafe and hope to decay! for, Arieni, we are feparated, and î am determined, fince you dare not be mine from choice, yon never ihall from coercion. Will I come ? you afk-—alas! how many have underftanding enough to condemn thofe actions they have not forlunde to refifl; and come I muß, though all ihe powers of reafon battled againft it. *· Amelia Arieni/*
What
53 What could be more indicative of a romantic mind, but of naturally good principles, than this letter! Had my mif- taken mother, in lieu of listening to the mad diciates of imaginary enthufiafm, attended to its milder opponent reafon, and been fwayed by common fenfe, how much mifery might have been avoided ! The torrent oîfalft fentiment, thepomp of found y which lure fo many to de¬ ftruciion, bore down ali before İt ; and a delufjve attachment, poifeffing for its bafis a fomething fatal which cannot be defcribed (for it was evidently nei¬ ther reafon nor virtue tended to accelerate the melancholy frenzy,) while the fubtle influence of my father, impofing on the dangerous weaknefc he íhouid have pi¬ tied, fealedyor ever the fad fiat of my future misfortunes. n 3 Never
54 Never fhould the fuggeftions of wild infidious fancy preponderate againft real good, or the defire of appearing vainly enthufiaftic, militate againft virtue or happinefs. It is not ourfclves alone we injure, by the felfiih fallacy ; for no hu¬ man being, unlefb ifoiated from the world, can befngly unfortunate by his own folly : we are all invifibly linked, and the fall of one includes the fall of many. We may effect by one falfe ftep the fate of myriads unborn, and render ourfelves unaccountable for the vices and follies unmerited calamity may entail upon them, by the irrefiftible con¬ fluence of events.
55
CHAP. VI. THE EXILE. AT length an anfwer, wrung from me in the bitternefs of my heart towards the rancorous Rofendorf for fome un¬ merited reproach, which my proud bofom fw elled to fuffer, accelerated at once the ftorm which had long been gathering, and fent me an exile from the bofom of my father. It was de¬ termined to place me for a year ot two, d 4 at
at lea ft, in fome elegant convent for the occafional reception of boarders, and fometimes, though feldom, to fuffer my vifits to the fancied Eden, from which I had fo cruelly been driven. Meantime my mother having figni- fied her confent to the propofition of my father, he procured for her a romantic cottage, fuch as he knew would indulge the effervefcence of her brain, where fhe might live ifoiated and penfive, in a bower of rural íweets, imaginarily happy in the innocence of her conduct, and carclcfs alike of the low opprobrium or vulgar pity of an infenfible world. This was to make amends to her for the in¬ jury flic had fuftaíned, and footh her fancy while her happinefs was betrayed. Here
57 Here it was likewife intended I fhould fometimes vifit her ; and when the period for my ftay at the convent fhould be completed, take up with her my con¬ tinued refidence. Notwithftanding the unhappinefs of my fituation, the unkind treatment I had experienced from the Rofendoif and her children, I ftili felt (independant of the pain I experienced at quitting my fa¬ ther) an emotion of regret almoft to agony; for the heart muft be ftrangely infenfible that can quit with tearlcfs eye eaily afi'ociations, almoft endeared from habit and places, which acquire a fort of magic charm, merely becaufe they will be feen no more ; for fuch prefen- timent affailcd me at the time of depar* n 5 ture.
б** ture. The Countefs too was more kind than ï had ever known her ; but too art- lefs to inveftigate motives^ I faw not ill- concealed joy beneath the treacherous fmile which marked her features, and fancied the fame affeciion infpired her m this moment 1 felt ftruggling in my own bofoiru I forgot her paft treat¬ ment, and wept with unaffected forrow. My.father placed me in the carnage ; a female fervant attended me to the convent, and my eyes blinded by tears^ my heart heaving with unexpreífed for- row> I was driven a melancholy exile from his fight. Towards the fall of evening we ar¬ rived on the borders of a beautiful fo- reft;
59 reft ; an edifice of majeftic and exquifite ftru&ure attracted my fight: " Oh ľ' I exclaimed to my companion, " if that were but the Convent/' c * That« the Convent of St. Omer," anfwered Jean, We continued drawing near—a ftrain of melodious harmony rofe on the fül¬ len air; the folemn organ fent forth its melancholy found, and a tone of celeftial foftnefs, that feemed calculated to fearch the foul, hrň ftole gently on the bofom of the fwelling gale; till, gradu¬ ally rifing to the full chorus of harmony, it funk again imperceptibly upon the ravifhed ear in a flow declining chaunt, leaving the mind open to the moft η β lively
6ο lively impreffions of delightful fadnefs, and ftili reverberating in the fancied choir of imagination. At length we reached the feducive habitation, where the mifery of the moment, feeking to be amelioiated, is entailed for ever; whence the unfor¬ tunate victim, mifantrophi) ed by long and repented feclufion, endeavours with lur¬ ing colors to attract the un weary fool who fports without. Thus a decoyed fongfter of the woods, enclofed within a wiry cage, feeks to entrap its heedlefs fellow to a fimilar fate. This is the ad- verfity which hardens the heart. To be compelled to mourn when the heart would reanimate ; to be forced into hor¬ rors and ifolation! this gives not to tlie foul the penfive philanthropie forrow fo fa 11 aci ou fly depicted; it fte el s the heart to
6ı f to every foft imprefíion, and bids us de¬ ftroy the liberty we can no longer enjoy. We entered the Convent, and as I w f aited in the parlour for the abbefs, a number of boarders crouded round me, and appearecfrejoiced in the acquifkion ofa new aííociate. In early youth the impreffions of grief and joy are equally ¿ranfient Ì the emotions of each are the tear and fmile ofa moment : like feathers borne on the untteady gale, we are aÉtuated by each faccejfive breath, care- lefsand unmindful how or where. I began to think the monaftery of St. Omer (although I was compelled thi¬ ther) might be a charming place ; and to
6â
to wifli I had been led by choice rather than coercion ; for the very idea of that either funk my heart with defpondency, or fwelled it with indignation : in fhort, î faw Jean depart with comparative eafi- nefs, and endeavoured to return with gratitude the affiduous attention of my young aífociates. Thus two or three months ftole away pîeafânily enough ; I was inftrucied in various branches of fuperficial educa¬ tion, but reading was my chief delight ; dangerous, though charming power, ca¬ pable alike to improve or to deftroy! Jean, to entertain me, procured fome¬ times fuch books as flie could take un- perceived from my father's library Her choice was in general fixed by the title; and
and íhe purchafed for me at my own defire thofe which from fimilar reafons ihe fuppofed moft pleafing. Thefe, like the poifonous poppy, affected my brain with their dangerous influence, and dazzled my fenfes with the vivid ftrength of their coloring. Under the fallacious mafk of conveying virtue to the heart, the moft fubtle and agreeable emotions were infufed ; paffionate feenes were de¬ picted in all the glowing imagery of voluptuous language, to fhew the wonderful efcapes of innocence : what¬ ever was calculated to inflame the fenfes, and enervate die heart to rational pleafures, was drawn with dangerous fafcination. The feducer was decked in all the charms of beauty, involuntary error, but acknowledged principle ;— his
ч his wanderings thofe of the head merely, not the heart ; and the rofes were thus too thickly ftrewn to difcover the thorns. Inftead of feeling the indignation which thus is deprecated, treacherous emotions of pity fteal into the deluded bofom !— love and defire follow : the pretended guard and camion become in reality the chief feducers ! the heart is enflaved through the medium of the fenfes; for thefe are firft enervated, and, concentrat- ing their feducive powers, call every paffion to their aid. Thefe delude the heart, which, drowned in the indefcrib- able voluptuoufnefs of its own fenfations, falls a ready and rcfiftlefs martyr. Mine, warm and fufceptible from nas¬ ture to a degree of madnefs—every feeling
65 feeling а paffion, and every paffion a principle, could not restrain the fedu- cive torrent which thus poured in upon its dangerous fentiments. RefieBion might warn, but her voice was loft in the tu¬ mult of the paffions ; and the dear emo* tions which accompanied their gradual accefs to the mind,blinded the very eyes of Reafon with a tear of tranfport.
ßS
CHAP, VIL DANGEROUS READING. I SHALL pafs over two years of my refidence in the convent of St. Omer, and content myfelf with informing you that my furor for dangerous reading in¬ creafed with the injury it did me. Na¬ turally of a difpofition and ideas that required the utmoft power of education to check, I was abandoned (at an age when every imprefíion, whether deftruc- tive
β/ tive or otherwife, remains fixed on the heart with unabated ftrength) to my own guidance; that is, I was inftrucied in all that is nece fía ry for a female to know ; my exterior was polifhed, but that which required precifely the greatefl care was difregarded—my mind was the wildeft feat of anarchy and error ; my imagina¬ tion wandering uncontrolled in the fairy regions of fiction and romance, my heart feduced by its reuftlefs power* while my reafon feemed like adiftrefled pilot in a ftorm, effaying in vain to rute the boifterous gales which threatened its deftruciion. At fifteen it is in vain to attempt what was omitted at eleven; the mind cannot too early be guarded againft the wild influx
68
influx of paffion ; for in youth imagina¬ tion is ftrong and reafon weak ; we con¬ ceive an idea, it becomes pleafing, we dwell on it repeatedly, it entwines with our exiftence, it fafcinates the brain—for the heart would always bribe the reafon to a partnerfhip; like a child, fearful it is on the point of committing fomething rafh, would inveigle its wifer parent as a fanction. Perhaps this idea may be fallacious and deftructive, but it has in- corded with the fibres of the heart, and, like the treacherous ivy, poifon is in its grafp. What can now be done? to root it out is imponible, or along with it we muft root out the heart; the evil muft grow with our growth, and its deftructive influence fpread around. No fkilful philanthropift analized my young fenfa¬ tions,
69 tbns, and weeded away when it could not have been felt the poiforious jhms- plants that mingled with the flowers, anxious to arrogate the foil to them* felvés. The mind in irtfancy is a blank íheet; a charaâer is impreffed—then another and another, but in vain/though a thoufand different impreffions fhould afterwards ne made, the character of the firft willy?/// be ascertained, and influ¬ ence in* a degree the character of every after-impreflion. The mind muft be employed-^-if it do not! good, it will do ill. The mo¬ nastery of St. Omer had foon loft its charms with me, and my imagination, naturally variable, required fomething on Which to fix its attention. As I read I dif*
70 I difcovered with rapture that I had fprung a mine of inexhauftible delight; but I foon grew weary of reading the aÜions of others ι I longed myfelf to be called into energetic exertion, and de¬ fpifed the dull, unvaried routine of my exiilence. Jean, who loved me, and whofe ho* neft indignation feemed excited by the treatment I had experienced, furnifhed me clandeftinely with volumes as ro¬ mantic as the mod avaricious fancy could defire. Here too I trace thy fatal in¬ fluence, ever barbarous Rofendorf!—by infpiring honeft hearts with pity at the fituation thou hadft un neceffarily driven me to, their well-meaning zeal, undi¬ rected by difcernment, turned into fubtle poifon
7i poifon that which they intended as balm, tincturing my future exiftence with its deftruÛive influence. Some of the books I peru fed were more calculated than others to corrupt the underftanding ; thefe were moft dan¬ gerous; they tolerated the free fern ments they infufed, and fpoke to the fufceptible heart in a language wholly irrefiftible; love was painted happy only when unfettered ; I felt, as I became en- {laved with the brilliancy of the lan¬ guage and fpecioufnefs of the arguments, that they muß be juft: thus did my fenti¬ ments become more dangerous than ever, for they affumed the garb of reafon.
Sophiftry
7« Sophiiìry (the pîaufible incendiary) but clears the way for its pupil Vice« í felt it imponible to read without loving the author, and deemed it the climax of prejudice to withhold the tribute of un¬ bounded admiration. By degrees my tafte became more felečt, a flimfy com- * «lion flood no chance with me, and I fhrcw it by in difgLsft; I defired a work wherein I might tread with the vifionary hero or heroine in all the enchanting mazes of love and fentiment, where my native enthufiafm and originality might find ample food; and, in fliort, a work of fpirit, to give f reih zeit to my vitiated tafte, and warm with fires new and vari¬ ous my deluded heart,
n
CHAP. VIII. SIXTEEN ANU ТИ REE-AN D-TW £ N Τ Y. DURING my ref¿dence of two years àt the convent of St. Omer I had paid a few vifits to my father, which latterly were lefsfrequent than ever ; fometimes roo I faw mv mother, who İmâ arrived as early as poffible after the intimation fhe had givf i, and refided with her children in a beautifully romantic cottage in the village of Staub. From the fhort vifits vol, ΐ. e I had
74 1 had paid there it was impoftible I could form much idea of the family ; my mo¬ ther appeared amiable and unhappy, and confequcntly interefted a heart foftened beyond the intentions of Nature from books which had refined fenfibility to a pitch of agony; for my fifler and my brother I feit affeäion and kindntfs. One morning î was informed, by let¬ ter from my father, that he would vifit me at the Convert, and take me back with him to dinner, requeuing Ì would be ready at the time appointed I had not fecn him for more than two months, therefore obeyed him with alacrity, and remained waiting in the parlour for the diftant found of the carriage round the walls. Prefcntly I heard the rumbling of
IB oï wheels—the carriage flopped—the door opened—my father entered, ac¬ companied by St. Elmer—yes, it was St. Elmer who accompanied my father. In an inftant 1 foTgot the hypocritical referve of a romantic heroine, and fpringing from the chair, threw myftlf into the expanded arms of my child¬ hood's dear remembered friend. fi Cazire !" cried my father in an an¬ gry voice. 4< Cazire!'* repeated St. E mer in an emphatic accent. 41 Yes" I replied, prefilng his hand K Z to
to my lips with all the fervor of a bigot, devoid of his hypocrify. fff Ísyourďge Jlill eleven?" cried my father with a frownj '* your manners, I perceive are the fame." ' Ê Oh! be not offended, my father," I replied htuíhing; ,f I am indeed re¬ joiced to fee St. Elmer/' u Is it poffible?'' exclaimed St. El¬ mer, furveying me with an expreffion which communicated fomething like de¬ lighted vanity to my heart. fs Tell her flic is an angel, 1 * laid my father laughing*
u I wilj
77 <* I will tell her truth; 1 replied St. Elmer—· " In the language of flattery," pur¬ fued my father. ·* Never from my lips,** returned Su Elmer. ** Be then her mentor, not her fe¬ ducer," faid my father; " vanity is the betrayer of woman and thefri^nd of man ; we could do nothing without that agree¬ able aid-de-camp, St, Elmer, to admi- nifler our vows forgofpel/' St. Elmer only Pniled ; he took my hand, wh'ch he affectionately preftcd, and led me to the carriage. e g He
He wasr nineteen when Ì laft beheld him-—now he was three-and-twenty. Fifteen is a dangerous period for a young woman to conceive an attachment for a youth of three-and-twenty; İn vain do the prejudices of age exclaim, the prejudices of yOutk are incontrovert¬ ible; in vain all their reafoning; youth cannot fee with the eyes of age, and ex¬ perience only can teach what precept fails to inculcate. H Every age, every ftation/' I believe R ou ffeau obfervesm La Nouvelle Heloife, ** has its maxims and its virtues; what in fome might be prudence, would în others be hvpocrKy, and inftead of rendering us wife or vh- tuouSj they make us imprudent and guilty, by confounding thefe charaBer- iftic attributes/* I was
79 I was fcarcely welcomed by the Ro* fendorf with common politenefs; in¬ deed her neglect was obvious ; and I quitted the apartment for one more cal¬ culated to reflore my fpirits ; I mean the mufic-rcom. I executed feveral lively airs with much tafte but no judgment; confcious of my want of excellence, I was rather hurt than pleafed at beholding St. Elmer in a liftening attitude at the furtbermoft door. He approached me, and I imme¬ diately ceafed, " I do not afli you to continue," faid he, " for I wiíh rather to gratify my heart than amufe my fenfes, and î E 4 prefer
to prefer your converfation to your mufic,»* I feh my heart involuntarily palpitate, for I felt like a culprit arraigned at the bar of juftice, and fearful his guilty eloquence fhall not avail; 1 feared St. Elmer's kctn rnveftigation of my fenti- rnents¿ and dreaded his difcovering the anarchical ftate of my ideas. í t was evidently hie intention to fearch my mind, to difcover my ideas on par¬ ticular fubjeclsj and fee if they fhrunk fr^ m fcrutiny : to tiace, as he fince ac¬ knowledged, the various mazes of my hearî, and by leading me through ад imperceptible chain of arguments* to ânalyie my tuiing paffion. « Alas!
8í
ct Alas! my dearCazire, 1 ' heobferves in fome one of his letters, <! dare I ac¬ knowledge I did not then difcover in you all I wifhed ; I found you bewil¬ dered in the delufive labyrinths of falfe fentiment, afpiring to be an heroine in fame inftead of virtue, and with a heart capable of the divineft attributes, loft and perverted by this melancholy furor. You poffeffed a fenfitivenefs, which, while it filled me with inexpreffible rap¬ ture, bade me tremble for the wounds it muft reeeive ; a ftrong imagination and charačteriftic enthufiafm gratified my fenfibility, but alarmed m love; for I faw, dear and unfortunate girl, the dan¬ gers and fatal errors into which they would precipitate you. Buried beneath e 5 thofe
Ss îîıofe thick pervading clouds, I difco- vered all that was noble in danger of being defiroyed ; ï faw philanthropy the moft refined in want of a guide, ever ready to become the prey of the impoflor or the dupe of the unworthy ; a total dif¬ rega rd of prejudice, and under that fpe- cious mafk of prudence alfo, {for there are even neceffary prejudices,) a difdain of all opinion, and this but too often precedes a defperate contempt of our own ; a romantic generofity of fentimen% willing to view the moft imprudent deeds of others through the falfe medium of enthufiafm; you had alio fome very dan¬ gerous notions of love ; and this paffion, when conceived for an improper objecis is the certain innovator of all principle. You
You would have fold yourfelf to deftruc¬ tion for the man who could have gained your heart ; but this, though your fuf¬ ceptibility was extreme, was fortunately counteracted by a tenacity of fentiment and jealoufy of difpofition» that, while it fhewed at once the delicacy and ardour of your imagination, would, I fome¬ times hoped, prefervc you from incau- tioufly bartering your peace for an un-. certain reciprocity of affection. " I admired you once as an agreeable child ; then, by an eafy natural tranfition, I loved you as an enchanting girl; then I trembled for you, and confidered you as a beautifully ftupendous pyramid, whicb a while it forcibly interefts our Е б admiration ìx
»4 admiration, (till tinctures it with involun¬ tary horror left its towering grandeur fhould, from its very exaltation, be more liable to fall/'
«5
CHAP. IX.
HABITS BECOME PRINCIPLES. PLEASED to have engaged the at¬ tention of St. Elmer from the reft of the company, fomething whifpered more than the fportivenefs of infancy muft now be his attraBion. I felt delighted and thrown entirely off my guai d by the eafy careleflhefs of his manner ; I was led to fay more than I had firft intended» and then imagining ï had gone too far to retract:,
86 retraB, anfwered his pofìtions with free¬ dom and unreferve, argued with him on topics the moft intereßing, and at once betrayed my fallacious fentiments to his wounded ear» St. Elmer grew referved ; he had dis¬ covered more than he wifhed—an ample foil where die dangerous p>ppy fprung unmoleficd near the gentle rofe, and threatened to overpower its fweetnefs with a fubtle poifon ; he fuffered me to proceed as I pleafed; I imagined be was pa u fing on what 1 advanced, and felt chagrined, when taking my hand he faid· with an impreffive fmile, u And where, my dear Cazire, did you learn all this ? what are the books you perufe ?" I ffiCD fc
8 7 I mentioned hefitatingly fome of my favourite authors, remarkable for the fweet deftruction they conveyed in the garb of fentiment. He was filent. I expatiated upon their fancied me¬ rits. €i I could have wifhed/* faid St. El¬ mer at length, u that your tafte for reading had been better cultivated ; you would then have been a creature amiable and fafcinating as you are now danger¬ ous and unfortunate/' Did I hear aright ? î turned my eyes full upon St. Elmer, and blufhed the deepeft
88 deepeft fcarlet 5 then î caft them on the ground—then again upon St. Elmer— then they once more fought the ground, andj unable to conquer my ftruggling emotions, unable to recover from the blow which vanity had received, î burft into tears. st Cazire?" exclaimed St. Elmer, vi« fıbîy affeâed, and his face crimfoned with emotion, «« í conjure you forbear. I cannot endure to fee a female weep— to íce you weep/* He faltered. " For heaven*s fakeceafe, or with ali my boafted philofophy you will fee me diffolved in, fimilar wcaknefs at your feet/* My tears continued—I could not ftay them. i( Alas!
89 " Alas! what have I done!" he pur¬ fued in an agitated voice, f( I have been too harfli, too fudden. Will you not for¬ give me?" he added, bending overme with increafed emotion, ' r will you not pardon me ? I have wounded the fenfi¬ bility I adore—I have given pain to the moft fufceptible of bofoms. Cazire, I befeech you extend the olive branch/* I fmiied through my tears upon the agitation of St. Elmer—I gave him my hand·—his trembled as he received it ; and, incapable of purfuing a converfa¬ tion which had already coft us both fo much, he led me as I recovered to the drawing room ****###
It
cp It was now fettled that one year more fhould terminate mv refidence at the convent of St. Omer, and I fliould then take up my abode with my mother. I left home early the following morn¬ ing, and St. Elmer accompanied me on horfeback to the gates of the monaftery. ï know not how logicians will explain it, but though the remembrance of St* Elmer vanifhed not from шг with bis prefence, though he ftili dwelt on my mind with fomething warmer than friend* ßip 3 yet was it fomething colder than love—I did not experience for him that paffionate fenfation which is the invari¬ able attendant of love ; I confidered himas too fupcìior a being to infpire more
91 more than a fort of awful refpeã ; and J found myfelf in no danger of imbibing for him an enthufiaftic and lafting at¬ tachment fuch as I have depicted. During this prefcribed year ï received feveral vifits from my father, always ac¬ companied by St. Elmer. Sometimes my father would ride a few miles fur¬ ther, and St. Elmer then remained with metili his return; but never more would he expofe himfelf to my tears by touch· ing on the flighteft chord that could have excited them; he heard all I boldly ad¬ vanced, but heard me with a fmile of anguifh which more than the mod elo¬ quent language fpoke his feelings; fome* times too he brought me books, but he was fcrupuloufly felett in his offering, and
ô 2 and in that alone delicately betrayed his anxiety for the alteration of my fenti¬ ments. Thefe fhewed the dangers of fallacious fyftems, of unreftrained paf¬ fion and enthufiafm; their doctrines were the doctrines of reafon and of vir¬ tue s they pointed out with the finger of ¿ruth the errors in which I had become involved; and fometimes the melodious voice of St. Elmer read me aloud a paffage here and there with an emphafis at once pointed and impreífive. I liften- ed in filence; almoft fancied myfelf con* vinced; when fuddenly he ceafed, and I difcovered, or imagined I difcovered the wh 'le merit of what I had heard to confili in the figure, the delivery of the charming reader. We cannot diveft ourfelves of early aflbctations or youth* ful
93 ful habits ; it was in vain I attempted to dwc\\ ßncerely on the books given me by St. Elmer; I did not find them conge¬ nial to my feelings as thofe to which I had long been habituated, and with re¬ novated eagernefs I refumed my dif¬ graced favourites.
9i
ï
CHAP. X, MELANCHOLY ANTICIPATIONS. AT length the year terminated; an apartment was prepared for my recep¬ tion in my mother's houfe, and the time fixed for my departure from St. Omer's drew rapidly near, I had hoped and expected a vifit from St. Elmer previous, but I received only a letter, which ran thus :
" To
95
" To Cazire. " I know not in what light you may regard what I am going to fay, whether you will deem me officioufly intntfive or impertinently fevere ; but this I know, that the motives which inftigate me I need not blu ih to acknowledge t they are founded in an anxious folicitude (more anxious than it is poffible for you to con¬ ceive) for your welfare. You have ac¬ quired, I perceive, and it is with forrow I make the obfervation, a fet of ideas, a chain of fentiments, which, if not timely checked, will involve you in inevitable deflruBion* Nay, ftart not, I will be free; have í not known you from an infant ? this, independent of other con¬ federations,
9 e fsderations, deeply interefts me İn your happinefs, and fills my bofom with an¬ guifh for your future fate. Already, young as you are, you broach your documents with the pride of a philofo- pher without his prudence; you have adopted a certain mode of thinking ra¬ ther on account of its eccentricity than its juftice» and the language of your fen¬ timents is more eloquential than per¬ fect. " But are you aware, my dear Ca¬ pire, that while you thus purfue a meteor the broad beam of reafon is obfcured ? your imagination takes the lead, and de¬ ftroy s with its force the weak bloffoms of rifing intellect. Why fhould powers like yours become unhappily perverted? why
91 why do you prefer radier fwimming in the glittering whirlpool of deftruction to lavingin the placid waters of rationality. You travel in fairy-land; all is fiction, all is madnefs, romance, and folly ; you tread with the light ftep of an aerial nymph over rofy parterres, little dream¬ ing of the fnakes which lurk in ambufh —little dreaming of the w T atchful ruin that even now gapes for its heedlefs prey* Sometimes above the horizon of wild enthufiafm appears the fun of reafon; gloomy and overcaft it feems, but you heed it not, and chufe rather to purfue the path of certain danger than re-trace the backward way. ** I forefee from the extreme, the on* controlled acutenefs of your feelings, vol. i, f you
98 you will have much unhappinefs to en¬ counter; you are a felf-tormentor, and with Űern and gloomy eye view ever the darker fide of the picture—-your antici¬ pations are thofe of a melancholy en- thufiaft. ť * From the fufceptibility of your heart you will be involved in dangers of all dangers the moft imminent—I mean thofe of love— perhaps I fhould fay paffion. 46 From the philanthropy and warmth of your difpofition, ever ready to at¬ tach the befi motives to the worfi actions, I fear you will meet offener with decep¬ tion than gratitude. Perhaps you may hate me for all this, and confider the dangers^
99 daggers, which by amplifying on I would warn you of, as the mifanthropi- cal ebullitions of a cynic j but judge lefs harfhly of me ; St. Elmer is your friend ¡ he wouid warn you of the delu¬ fions of paffion and falfe fentiment, which,like fafcinating treacherous guides, lure along their vicìim by a meteor flame to the very brink of the precipice. €t I fhall not fee you perhaps for long; your mother, to whom you are now going, fufľers, I am informed by your father, no male viiuants at her refidence, and few of jour own fex, therefore all communication, fave by letter, is cut off between us ; you will, however, fometimes hear from me if you uo not fee me; but no more, I hope,
100 in a drain like this, Cazjrei it was a painful duty, which í felt impelled to ex- ecute e Adieu î " ï íhouid have ïttn you once ere your departure, but î dared not attempt to combat your dangerous eloquence, affifted by the expreffion of eyes which almoft tempt one to forget their delufion. Once more adieu I u Louis St. Elmer."
1 will confefs that the former part of Si, Elmer's letter, from the frightful pic- tin e be drew as the effect of my fenti¬ ments,
ΙΟΙ
ments, filled me at firft with gloomy fen¬ fations ; my fate, as though by a fudden flafh, feemed unwillingly to reveal her future horrid flores, and I fhrunk invo¬ luntarily appalled ; the latter part, how¬ ever, proved an antidote; and fince St. Elmer was fearful of trufiİng hİmfelf with me, he muft have felt the truth of my arguments,, and dreaded conviction ; then was I ftili right; thus from the very bofom of caution did vanity extract % additional honey for its food, and I be¬ came more than ever intoxicated with the glittering fabric I had reared ; every thing aiound me appeared to increafe my delufion, like the fury of a maniac is augmented by whatever offers to op- poie it. I viewed St. Elmer as a friend, ψ 3 notwith-
102 notwithftanding I remembered him as the dear companion of my childhood, but regarded him with an admit ation totally devoid of love.
ЮЗ
CHAP. XL YOUTHFUL ENTHUSIASM. I REACHED the village of Staub as evening fpread around her many- coloured mantle ; the fcenery was de¬ lightful, and I traced with fportive fancy imaginary joys for my future days. Ah ! fad delufive dreams! why did you dance before my laughing h^pes ? too fatally were all your fairy vifions owithrown, and experience pointed pale and item to f 4 the
ï04 the bleak defolatcd heath where they had gamboled. It was the latter end of June; the air was calm and temperately warm; a red ftreak in the weRern iky reflected its glowing luflre on my countenance—I f elt my heart bound in my bofom, and exhilarated by indefinable fenfations. There was a fomething in the atmofphere that would have cheered me, methinks, under ills the moft depreffing. A deep ftillnefs reigned around, and the diftant monaftery receded from my view. As I proceeded, my bufy fancy feemed con¬ necting a ctiain of improbable events, and I panted involuntarily for a fome¬ what î could not defcribe ; I endea¬ voured to analyze my wifhes, but in vain;
ios vain; an ardent defire of attainment, a meteor that mocked my grafp, an un¬ known requifite [feemed itili neceffary> but neither reafon nor imagination could identify it. I fmiied at my own enthufiafm, and to banifh its influence, looked out for the cottage of my mother. I beheld at a diftance its white front emerging from among the trees, and formed to myfelf a bower of felicity of which I fhould be* come the idol. As I indulged in thefe fairy fancies the chaife flopped. I fprang up the garden, and haftily entering the cottage beheld, not as I had figured, fmiles of joy and rapturous welcome, but my ΐ 5 mother,
ιοβ
mother, with gloom and difcontent written in her afbeet, ftanding near a window, my fifter weeping bitterly in a corner, and my brother, with a pair of little hands that might have vied in co¬ lour with Othello's, feated on the ground by her fide r and wiping with a handker¬ chief the tears from her cheek. My entrance caufed a temporary fuf- penfion of hoftilities. I was fincerely welcomed by my mother, while my fifter fufpendingher tears, and my brother his innocent good offices, approached to furvey me. I had been the darling of my father, an inmate in his houfe near his perfon ; was not this fufficient to make me wel¬ come
107 come to my mother ? Never was fhe weary of inquiring concerning Arieni— Did he appear really fond of the Rofen¬ dorf? did he prefer her children ? did he ever mention her to me ? I replied to my mother's interroga¬ tions as I thought ihe wifhed, not as I believed fincere. î confidered with at¬ tention the objects round me, I endea¬ voured to difcover the mode of living which appeared predominant; the refult of my übfervations were diffatisfaclion and regret. I miffed the càfy elegance of my father's houfe—the peaceful re¬ finement of St, Omcr's ; and in lieu of thefe, a gloomy mifanthropy and melan¬ choly ennui appeared to reign through¬ out; there was nothing that lenders f б feclufion
ïo8 feclufion from the world delightful ; not a philanthropic pity for, but a hatred of, mankind, had feemed the refult of this ifolation. With a fenfation of uneafi- nefs different to any I had yet experi¬ enced, I retired early to my allotted chamber. The exhilarating fun beams darted warm in at the window, the gay birds carrolled to the morn, and the beauty of the furroimding landfcape infpired me with chccrfulnefs; I rofe, and began to hope the fenfations of the preceding evening had arifen from fatigue, difcon- tcnt, or aught but reality. Determined to view all with the eye of a philo fo- pher, and accord where I could not re» me ly, 1 defcended to the parlour. 1 found
Ю9 found the family aíTenibled ; again I was treated with dillindion, again admired; but fpite of all, again I felt the damp ftealing over my heart; for I faid men¬ tally, " When the novelty of my ap¬ pearance filali be over, it will be fuc- ceeded by the gloom and imfociability I have only temporarily bammed." But a fhort period had elapfed, and my fad predictions were verified. I had no one with whom I could converfe; the means by which I had obtained books were completely cut off; and, add to this, Arieni, who when my mo¬ ther firft arrhed had frequently vifited her, by degrees grew weary of the fad reproaches of an unfortunate deluded wife, and feldom fubjecied him fel í to a view
ito view of the mournful horrors he had caufed. Gradually I felt myfelf finking into defpondency ; my feelings preyed up m me, and I feared the morning of my days would be fpent in chetrlcfis gloom. In this temperament of mind, refleci- ing with bitternefs on the cruelty of the Rofendorf who was the occafion of my fadnefs, í walked one morning into the garden behind the houfe; a ftranger, who lived on the adjacent fide, but whom I had never before feen, was carefully watering a few plants ; he perceived and faluted me. As he raifi d his counte¬ nance, not its beauty, but the lingular expreffion
İti
expreffion it contained riveued my atten¬ tion. I leaned over the palings, and feemed obferving his employment, when it was in reality, if chance permitted, to ileal another look at his features. " I love to attend to thefe children of Nature," faid he, perceiving that I noticed him ; i( ere long the fun reiches its meridian, and parches them to no¬ thing/* " I thoi ght it cherifhed them,"* fat J I. IC It might do fo/'he replied, ** were they bettir proteried; but now, like а fai thief's lover, expofed and uníhekereJ as they are, his ardency de ft roy s them. Here,** he continued, plucking a rofe , fro πι
1Í2 fi om its fragrant bed, Ji place this in your bofom, and truft me it will live longer there than its unfortunate neigh¬ bour will do here/' " Think you then/' faid Í, " the ípot vou have felecfed isS ίο cold ?** α Its fanciity will prefervc it there/* he replied. " But can that bofom be already fufccntible "of warmth?'* conti¬ nued he, raifing his expreffive eyes to mv countenance» There was nothing in the ftranger*s ¿lance—why then did I bluffi ? sC Whence is it," purfued he, ** that yeur fex earlier than ours can define its fenfations.
^3 fenfations. The fentiments of a boy at fifteen are unknown to himfelf—a tem¬ porary paffion inflames his fenfes—gra¬ tification ends it, and fatiety fucceeds ; at fifteen your fex can love, can combat their defires, can ftruggle with their feel¬ ings, and ultimately conquer; their re¬ finement and their delicacy aim at fome¬ thing nobler than fenfual happinefs— they feek to attach the heart, and droop at finding they only intereft the fenfes." " But may not the heart be feduced through the medium of the fenfes?" faid I. 4t Rarely with us/' he replied ; * f pof- ieffion ι wU our jo\4. it is ihe toub of 'uve/ 44 I think/
114 44 ï think," faid I, " the reafon is this : c u ílom authorifes man to feek, to obtain the gratification of his wiihes— no ftigma attends his conduci, no cen¬ fure deters, the road lies open before him, ftrewed with flowers and inviting his ileps ; gratified almoft before he can analyze his wifhes, there is no room for him to refine upon them ; and, led bv paffion, he often remains the viciim of its folly. Women, on the contrary, ihackled by the laws of cuftom, withheld by worldly prudence, and taught perpe¬ tual rebellion againil the whifperings of Nature, early learn to confine their wiihes to the filent folitarineís of their own bofoms ; they know the [mailed iapfeof decorum ъ attended with cver- lailing opprobrium, anu fli linking they retiin
i J 5 retire from the hydra-headed mon ft er raifed by cuftom; by dwelling on their deep concealed emotions they learn at length to refine upon them, to fhake off as it were the fenfualifm of Nature, be¬ come nobly difinterefted in their love, and gradually change it into a refined friendíhip. It is true ere they can ac~ complifh this they muft learn Conceal¬ ment, the mother of Art; they muft exchange for it her lovely niter Nature. But cuilom commands—the world will have it fo—perhaps we become better and happier than }ou are by the law." The dranger did not immediately re¬ ply ; he examined mc attentively, and appeared furpricti, 1 fmiltd—it feemed to
ΐΐβ to awaken hiin fiom his reverie, and bending over the palings he faid, " I entreat you to continue ; you are the only fcmab for fix years I have found it poffible to converfe with.** <k Indeed/' fan ï, if I pity you fin- cerei y , and thank you in the name of the fex at large/* '* What age are you ?'* inquired he fmiling. ζ( Six f een/* ς< Do voa love rculi.tü r '
líc
ii; He did indeed J touch upon the firing' on which hung all my wiflies. " It is the only thing I do love/' I eagerly rejoined. " I am forry to hear you fay fo/' he replied; " if you hadaloveryou would be happier, he would be"— Cť Miferable/' interrupted I, if mifer- able would be the man I loved/* The ftranger fmiied incrcduloufty. " My tenacious fpirit/' purfued I, 4i my high ideas of what we love ought to be, my dcipair if for a moment I thought he did not prefer me to every other
ii8 other woman, to himfelf, to the world, would tend to make him miferable, me diftracied. It would not be cold pro- feffions which could content me—it would not be abfurd encomiums on my mind or perforì —it would not be luke¬ warm aíľection ? unmeaning compliments; no; his heart, his mind, his feelings, his fentiments, muft all be congenial tomine, his eyes, his actions muft declare his love, his idolatry ; he muft adore me with enthufiafm, fhim,dacft thofe whom î hated > admire, effeem thofe 1 loved, think no facrifice loo great for me, not his life if mine could he preferved, and defpife even that if I e\i!led no longer; know no happinefs bur in my fociety, lament to quit and joy in returning to it, watch over my couch in ficknefs, and droop
XI 9 droop when Τ giieved, liften with tranf¬ port to my flighted wifhes, let nor ennui nor fatiety blaft our peace, but look on me as his world, his treafure, and his life. Never, never could I meet a be¬ ing who would love me thus ; none other could pofľefs my love ; better then ne» ver tafte the dangerous dream but in its higheft, pureft flate, or mevitable wretchednefs would be our mutual lot ; for I difdain the thought ofa f iuke-warm attachment/ a * fincere regard! 1 " " And would you love as you require to be loved?" faid the dranger ear- nedly. " Or I íhouid not dare require it," í rejoined,
IZO
rejoined. " I would voluntarily con¬ figli myfelf to deftruciion to purchafe happinefs for the being who could love me thus." si Young and innocent enthufiaft, 1 * exclaimed the ftranger, " pity the vile world fhould chill the ardor of fuch fentiments; but alasi you cannot mix with its miferable inhabitants without imbibing their mercenary doctrines ; like wretches infected with the plague, no purity can refidc among them, in¬ evitable contamination is the refult of aíTociating with them.*' tl They never can change my fenti¬ ments," faid I, ·' Sad
121
" Sad experience will convince you you have reared for yourfelf a fairy fa¬ bric ; bitter will be to you its gradual yet fure deftruction/' " You are a mifanthropift/' faid I. * c I am a veteran in the fchool of ad· verfity/' he replied ; " and though I have fuffered deeply by my companions, I yet view them with no angry eye; pity for their misfortunes is my firft fenfation, contempt for the errors which generate them is ray fécond." *' You are ** philofopher then/' faid I.
VOL* I,
с
The
\%г
The uranger fmiled, and remember¬ ing how long I had been converfing with him, *' Adieu!" 1 cried, «4 fland no chance with a philofopher.*'
12$
CHAP. XIL THE PHILOSOPHER DEFEATED. AFTER this I went more frequently into the garden. Fribourg (fo was the ftranger called) was always in his. My converfations with him became frequent, and I fought his fociety with avidity as my only refourcc from ennui. His per¬ fon was above the middling height, and poffeffing an air of dignity which feemed to befpeak the independent majefty of Q 2 hİS
his intellect; his countenance was of that expreffive caft giving the idea of fuperiority ; dark and piercing eyes, which feemed at once to fearch and un¬ derftand the foul, illumined with their glowing luflre the flight vermillion of his cheek; when he fmiied it was with an expreffion penfive and fevere. as though deeply he had felt the hand of forrow, but fcorned the impotency of complaint ; his forehead feemed the feat of grandeur in its towering form ; his intire afpect was fafcination itfelf, his age about cight-and-twenty. His ideas on every fubject were un- circumfcribcd by common opinions ; he attacked imhdiutingly the received doc¬ trines of ages, defpifed cuílom, and formed
12 5 formed his actions from the refult of his own inferences: his pleafurc feemed in differing from others cftablifhed laws he confidered prejudices the principles he avowed were dangerous and ftdučÍive, he affirmed they were the offspring of cool difcrimination and difpailionatc re- flcciion, the diüatcs of nature, reafon, and common fenfe; and yet Fribourg had acted conti ary to his theory, he had voluntarily bound himfelf by the moil arbitrary law. Fribourg was married— had been married for fix years. One evening when he was inveighing againft the tyranny and kbfurdity of cuftom, I allied him, with a fmile half ferious half farcaftic, what had ever induced him to yield to it?
с 3 ŕí Necef-
i&B
** Neceflity!" he replied. a Could Fribourg meanly facrifice his feelings and his fentiments to in¬ tereft !·' €i Man is the creature of predica¬ ment/ 8 he anfweicd. " I loved Elinor, лпа found no path open to my happinefs but yielding a portion of my independ¬ ence, î thought the gain worthy of the facrifice; but it could never influence my ideas; it was a ftep productive of no revolution in my fentiments, nor ac¬ corded to but asit forwarded a wiíh/* " Think you fo lightly then ofa fa¬ cred ceremony ?"
» It
12; íf It İs a ceremony/' anfwered he, '* invented by men; Nature knows it not, therefore it is contemptible ; in~ conftancy and licentioufnefs firft ren¬ dered it neceffary, the perverted ftate of fociety ftamped it with the feal of law ; it exifts now as well for thofe who de¬ fpife as thofe who need it ; invented for the vulgar many, it fhackles all alike, and ftamps with unjuft opprobrium thofe who difdain acceding to it." ** But would you fubvert the prefent order of fociety, could you fubftitutc a better ?*' *· Undoubtedly. I would not fix a boundary to love ; I would not fay, 4 fo far muft you extend, and no further/ α 4 The
128 The f exes íhouid be linked by affeciion, not law. When that ccafcs, how fhall we fill the dreary vacuum ? by mutual difguft, or affected regard? For two perfons to be linked together when hearts have long fince feparatcd, is raifing a wall of impregnable flicngth to fee u re a decayed building/' u But at this rate you would new- model the univerfe/' * c I would, if it were poffible, and think it would be benefited by the change.** '- 1 How could you ever introduce/* laid I, * f (allowing for a moment the j u ilice
IÄ9
juftice of your opinion,) fo vaft, fo mul¬ tiplied a reform?" " The growth of perfection/' here- turned, " muft be gradual ; the arts and fciences were fo/' *' I do not think your project feafible; you would turn the world inro a fa vage wildernefs. In obviating laws whieh are only tremendous to the profligate and the bafe, you would entirely banith civilization, and the virtuous few would eventually become the. victims of bar¬ barous innovations and de ruch ve inc- gularity. You remind me of t;»o!e fan- guinaiy rebeU who fought to huri a peaceful monat ch fiom Ьь throne ť* G 5 eüabaÜı
ago eftablıîlı a monfter of their own crea¬ tion, whofe vices and whofe indolence render them obnoxious to fociety, and who willingly profited by the general devaftation to attain a guilty eminence on the mangled bodies of their fellow- creatures ; blood alone could fatisfy their thirfty ibuls ; heated by dwelling on the fancied injuftice they experienced, they longed to wade through the purple current» to gorge their hearts with mur¬ der, and fink to their own gloomy level thofe whom they could not rife to equal/* (ζ Even if a flight reform were poffi¬ ble to be effected, better far neglect it than wade through feas of blood to its completion.
13 1 completion. Truft me, in attempting to mend you would only deftroy—it is un¬ dermining mountains to level a mole¬ hill." " You talk the language/* anfwered Fribourg, '* of one in love with feeurity and fearful the flighteft change íhouid endanger it. But to return ; marriage, for inftance ; you who defire fuch un¬ bounded enthufiafm in love, do you, I afk, ever obferve the flighteft fymptoms of it in a married life? With ail your boafted love of order, wretchedly in¬ deed would you fuftain the character of a wife. What I would propofe is, to al¬ low no room for fatiety to enter. When two of eppofite fexes can no longer be с б every
every 4 thing to each other-—when the prefence of a third becomes ncceftary as a charm to exclude the ípečtre ennui**-* when no longer they meet with rapture and divide with grief—then would î have them feparate, and not till then/' u Better then/* cried I, " for them never to unite, than already, ere they have even tailed the happinefs of affoci- ating, provide againfl a neceflity for its continuance ; it is admitting a doubt of affeciion, it is outraging the very nature of love to ftipulatc fo eariy for its free¬ dom ; it is unequivocally faying, c let us not bind ourfelvcs beyond the poífibility of retracting/ Cold-hearted, wretched feeurity! No, no* Fribourg; poor in¬ deed
»33 deed muft be the Jove that would not feek out a tie more iirong even than marriage, (if fuch exiiled,) and delight to be riveted in that. The inftances of unhappinefs you adduce would exift in any ilate ; they could not love before marriage who would not always love ; they then íhouid never have been united—they were not deflined for each other/* " And what muft be the love, my young enthufidft, which needs a tie fo İtrong ? Come, come, you arc led a\\¿y by ycur feelings; hereafter we will pur¬ fue the fubjecf, and í do not defpair of your converlion.'* n Pervcifion \ou íhould Ĺ\y^ Fri¬ bourg j
*34 bourg; the truth is, you cannot purfue the argument, therefore I willingly ad¬ mit a truce, and give you leave to rally your forces againil next we meet.*'
*35
CHAP. XIII. THE CONFESSION. WHILE I wasdifcourfing with Fri¬ bourg, and combating his arguments, I felt as though I had reafon on my fide ; yet I will confefs the novelty of his tenets made me frequently dwell on them ; by fo doing they gradually impreffed my mind, and I fometimes believed, as he had faid, in my converfion. The natu¬ ral inconfiftency of my character was fuch»
л 3 e fuch. that I feldom viewed an opinion twice in the fame light ; what ï one day believed an immutable truth admitted the next of variation, and conviction was the reful t of reflection only till it was difplaced by a later idea. So many circumftanccs methought occurred to make me doubt of any general defini¬ tion, that í almorí imagined there were no fixed principles, nor any pofition not hable to be found imperfect in different predicaments ; vice or virtue might even be d efe å ive terms in certain fi t nations; and tiiub, from the mutability of my own uluib, was a channel open for the inno¬ vations of others. I и luh ed not to fhrink from the ar- gumei.u ui ľnbourg; to him it might imply
137 imply a doubt of the juftice of my own, of the ftrength of my principles, which I did not defire him to afcertain. Detei- mined to hear all, I daily laid my ft l f more open to the boldnefs of his reafon- ings, for I judged if right í muft ever find arguments to oppofe him, and retire with added ftrength from oppofition; if wrong, why fhould I dread conviciion? I reflected thus; and perhaps I fought excufes to continue my interviews with Fribourg; perhaps I felt a pîeafure in his fociety ; I did not dare acknowledge to myfelf, for Fribourg was married ; and unlcfb I adopted the freedom of his tenets, to indulge too far even that pleafurc would be criminal. I would inot inveftľ'ite tuv fentiments further, eft rigid prudt nee íhouid have bade me fori wear
s 3 8 forfwear his fociety, at that time my chief, my only confolation. Not unfrequently was Fribourg ac¬ companied by a young nobleman called Count Lindorf. I was fomewhat piqued at this, for I thought had he wifhed fingly for my fociety he would have deemed every other an intrufiou. But to revenge myfelf for this, I fometimes came accompanied by a female ; but was this manœuvre really dictated by a fpirit of revenge, or the mere finefle of grow¬ ing predilection to engage from us the attention of Count Lindorf? Sometimes, however, he tortured me with his notice ; baffling my every en¬ deavour to decline it, Fribourg appeared to
139 to remark and feel gratified at my ftra- tagem. He took occafion to fay to me when for a moment the Count had left us, " I am forry that ever I introduced Lindorf to you; he follows me like my íhadow, he watches my entrance into the garden, and never fails to accom¬ pany me/* * f He feems a charming young man,** faid I. ** He is a very dangerous fellow. I would advife you to beware of him/' " Why did you bring him with you ?" ť He
" He refides with rne, and İ cannot avoid it—he forces himfelf on me."— Juft then the Count returned, and ended our dialogue. On my return in¬ to the houfe I found a letter for me from an unknown correfpondent. It ran thus: " 1 entreat you to be lefs frequent in your vifits to the garden. I fee a gloomy train of evils likely to enfue· You are young and enthufiaftic, Fribourg fpeci- ous and infinuating ; already Cazire loves him. With faddened eye I look forward to a melancholy termination of your prefent conduci. Fribourg is mar*. ried —what then can you hope ? Think but for a moment, deluded girl ; would you
4t you facrifice to the tranfîtory pîeafure of infpiring him with a reciprocal paffion the happinefs of an unfortunate, doting wife ? would vou calf down the curfes of his children ? Think but of your own mother—her misfortunes and yours are entailed by the defertion of an huiband. Yet forbear while you have power—fee him no more; and fince you cannot conquer temptation, learn to fly it. " Ariel." Who was it that, thus affuming the empire of my conduQ, dared to arraign my a&ions? Was it St. Elmer? im- poffible. He flüt occafionally corre- fponded with me, but it was unlike his hand-
142 hand-writing, and more unlike his ftyle. The letters I had of late received from him were in general fhort, lively, and for the moft part accompanied with ele¬ gant felcBions from modern authors^ pieces of mufic, or original drawings. Never more had he ventured a letter in the ftyle of die laft which I tranferibed. So far from diQating to me a line of conduci, he feemed totally ignorant of my every purfuit. He refided at a con« fiderable di dance. Yet who could this cenfor be ? one evidently who knows me—one dwelling with me almoft in the houfe it íhouid appear. It w r as in vain J anemped to afecrtain th~ author—-! could lix with probability on no one—I knew no (uic—I converfed with no one but my family, Fribourg, and Lindorf, As
43 As I continued turning it in my hand I faw a few lines which, from being on the inner page, had efcaped my notice ; ct Your letters will be in future placed at the bottom of the garden- chance will direct you to them." Notwithftanding, however, the pur¬ port of this letter, it failed of its in¬ tended effect; it did indeed open my eyes on the daj.ger I was incurring ; but I was like one enjoying a peaceful flumber rudely awakened by an alarm of fire, who fees around him the fpread ing flames, and finding it impoftiole to efcape, croffes his arms upon гш bofom, and voluntarily rcfigns himfelf to de¬ ftruciion. 1 knew not that 1 loved ¥i t- bourg.
44 bourg. Was it then fo apparent that a ftranger could perceive it?—it was too late then to ftruggle againft the tide, Thus did 1 convert the very knowledge of danger into an excufc for continuing in it. Mufing one evening in the garden upon a late converfation with Fribourg, wherein he had convinced me that to avoid that which is denominated fin it is onlv neceffury to follow the natural im¬ pui fes of the heart, í little dreamt of meeting wiih him, for it was later than ever we had before converfed. The moon had rifen, the evening was chill ; fuddcnly he glided fiom behind fome trees.
fi Come
*45 <ť Come nearer," he cried, as at a diftance I regarded him with a fmile. ec í have traverfed this day an extent οΐ country that would have unfitted me for any thing but fleepjhad I not, afcending to my bed-room, difcerned Cazire through the window." ie I beg/' fa:d I, c ' I may not frus¬ trate your intentions.'* * ť I have told you before/' he replied, fi I am a neceflitarian. I could not avoid descending, and now I cannot re¬ tire; therefore feat yourfelf as near as poffible to thefe monadic gratings, I will do the lame, and let tb converfe awhile/* " Pardon me," I replied, (t it h too vol, ι, h late
ι iS late ? and you muft neceffarily be fa¬ tigued/' βί Cazire, I entreat you to acqui- cfee?" I ftili hef'tated. ef Perhaps I may not foon again re¬ cueil a fimilar favor/* ï hefitated no longer-—in a moment I was feated near him, my heart panting with a thoufand namelefs fenfations; fear and ao ехревапоп of I knew not what were uppermoft, 2i You muft enfer this garden no more/'
чу more," laid Fribourg at length, gazing on me with tender earneftnefs. <tf No î Do you find the evenings too cold then * l " afked L ff Alas! no!" he anfwered with a pe¬ culiar emphafis. I blufhed, and remained filent. He continued, " Do not deteft me, Cazire—do not look upon me as the vileft of men,— Contrary to my own ideas I have en¬ deavoured long to ftruggle agamft a paf¬ fion which daily, which hourly becomes ftronger—either you muft love, Cazire, or for ever banifh me your prefence/' n 2 While
î 4 S WKiîe Fribourg was fpeaking, my ideas had fuccecded each other with fo much rapidity, my heart beat ΐο vio¬ lently, and my whole foul had received fuch an agitating fliock—a tranfport fo unknown, fo fudden, that I Mill ie- mained incapable of anfwering. To be loved by Fribourg ! it was a fomething fo deílred, fo unhoped, fo delightful, fo feduciive, I could not fpeak. ** Cazire, 1 ' he faid > his voice finking in a tender cadence, " Cazire, can you look upon me?" He drew my hand over the railings which Sepaiated us, and preffing it fer¬ vently to his heart, looked at me with a befleching
49 befeeching languor that fpoke in noveï accents to my foul. I felt his heart beat hard beneath my hand—I felt him remove it, and trem¬ blingly his glowing lips were riveted upon it. The action roufed me, and ia hurried accents I exclaimed, " Let me go, Fribourg, for Heaven's fake. You know I mud not—dare not —Cruel"— I druggled to unloofe my hand. ** I obey," he faid, letting it go. if I truft to your mercy, Cazire, to your generofity. Fly me not, but grant me fome reply." h 3 ** \\ hat
Ci What can I fay, Fribourg. You know the avowal is—is—»'* cc is what?' 3 interrupted Fribourg with emotion. ec s Criminal for vou to make and me to hear/* «' Prejudice, miferable innovator of the fineft movements of the heart, why fhould thv chill influence ever intervene to blaft the promifed joy ! Ob î Cazire, how can you give utterance to the term criminal ? Alas! no ! cold-hearted, pru¬ denza! girl, you are guided by fyftema- tic frigidity ; to the world you yield your feelings and your wifhes—to the world
*5 l world you leave the arbitration of your aciions/* *' Forbear, Fribourg, cruel and unjuft to load me thus. I yield but to my ideas of duty, not the world." " Mİftaken girl, it is to tbe barbarous policy of cuftom you are fubjecì. Born with every fentiment to ennoble and de¬ light, gifted with ftrength of mind to defpife the vulgar errors of mankind, poífefľed of an emanation of foul that íhouid have (hot triumphant through the gloomy mifts of ignorance and folly, yet has the fair germ been blafted in its earlieft green, yet has it been warped and fmothered by the prevailing fyftems of an illiberal perverted world," h 4 fî Νοε
*5* €β Not willingly have I refigned my¬ felf the victim you defcribe. No, Fri¬ bourg, my unbiaffed heart, my moft un¬ bounded enthufiafm, the further! limits of unfettered fentiment, never could lead me to confider as prejudice the injury Ì might caufe another. How can it be guiltlefs to ftab with keeneft agony the bofom of a wife? How can it be guilt· lefs to heap deftruction on your children? Forbear! Have I not a continual pic¬ ture before my eyes of the cruel confe- quences of fuch aåions? do not ï fee a mother, fcarcely paft the bloom of youth, a mifeiabie exile fiom the fociety fhe might ha. e graced ? buried in ungeniai obfeurity the dawning talents of her children formed for the pride and hope of an united family ? do í not feel my¬ felf
Í53 feîf a wretched alien from a father's heart? do I not load with endlefs curfes the diabolical woman whofe cruelty hath caufed this lift of horrors ?*' As I fpoke thus the eldeft boy of Fri¬ bourg, about four years of age, came running towards us. The child loved me, and no fooner perceived me in con¬ verfe with his father, than he got over the fence to embrace me in his little arms. Convulfively I prefled the inno¬ cent to my bofom. *■ Sweet boy," faid I with mixed emo¬ tions, '* could I thus look upon thee, thus receive thy fpotlefs carefles, if I were plotting thy ruin? Could I gaze on tbee without blufhing, unconfcious^ h 5 guiltlefs
î$4 guiltlefs child? with one hand prefs tbee to my heart, and aim w* the other the fanguínary blow of treachery at thy mo¬ ther's life ? No, no ! it is not the privi¬ lege of guilt to meet the innocent fmile—■ it is not the privilege of guilt to contem» plate a victory over felf.'* I burft into a paflion of tears, and turned afide* u Return into the houfe," faid Fri¬ bourg fternly to the child* " Are not you coming too, father ?*' be artlefsly replied; " my mother is wailing to play over for you a fong I have juft taught her/*
*' Return
** Return into the houfe/' repeated Fribourg. The poor child was retiring; when calling him back, ** Play awhile in the garden/* I faid» w till your father is ready.** For perhaps I experienced fear, the immediate attendant of guilt, left the boy fhould mention to Elinor it wa» I detained her huiband. I dreaded too left the knowledge of this fhould mortify the pride or hurt thè tender feelings of a wife. ** You determine then/* purfued the h 6 unaltered
Ïg6 unaltered Fribourg, " you determine on purfuing your fallacious fyftem?" « Whatever it may coft me, Fribourg —I do.* r " Farewell then, Cazire; for from this hour we muft part for "*™»— " Forbear the сопскпоп!** I ex¬ claimed, blufhing at the eagernefs I be¬ trayed. €c Debar me not of your foci« ety/* I tremuloufty added, M You cannot love me, Cazire. We muÜ" ------ « I do—I muft.«—Oh! cruel Fri« bcmrgj to wring from me the guilty ac- knowledg-
*57 knowledgment. ***** р аге- well!'* I continued, my voice broken with emotion, " I can bear this fcene no longer.'* And rufhing from the gar¬ den I fought my chamber.
CHAP. XIV.
THE SOPHIST. SLEEP was a ftranger to my wearied eyes!—I dared not truft myfelf to re¬ view my conduct: 1 felt its inconfiftency^ its impropriety, but in vain; ftronger than all 1 fek my love ! my brain whirled in anarchy, and the earlieft dawn was my fignal for rifing. ï hurried into the garden ; and ere I could гесоПев how I got there;, í was gating with raptured eye
49 eye upon the feat, the railings, the very fpot where Fribourg had told me that he loved me. I thought over every word he had uttered ; I retraced every look, every anion : fond memory re¬ verted to his fpeaking figure, his ex- prefEve countenance, as he had faid, I love you. Alas ! how dangerous are the firft approaches of paflion to an enthu¬ fiaftic fufceptible foul 1 I was deep in my vifionary bower, and perceived not that Fribourg flood before me. * f So early rifen from your bed!" faid a melodious voice. I turned, but did not look at him.
4t Was
fi( Was it an uneafy one ?" he added', fmiling with ill-concealed delight. *' I thought you did not intend feeing me any more?" I replied without no¬ ticing his remark ; " how comes it you fo foon relent?** returning his fmile. " I have been confidering,'* replied he, etf that life is íhort ; if then in my path are iirewn fome rofes, why íhouid ï pafs them by to pluck the thorns?" " Becaufe the thorns," I replied^ ** will only give probationary wounds ; the rofes are ftrewn in our path to try our fortitude, and teach us to avoid temptation ; beneath them lurks the poi- fonous
ιβι fonoiis adder; they are far more dange¬ rous than the thorns." " And more inviting,** he replied, " life is too fhort to admit of thefe de- ftinclions. Let us then, Cazirc, pluck the rofes while we can ; the fenfelcfs bigot only would prefer the thorns-— ere he can reach the rofe—he dies.*' u A brighter rofe awaits him," re¬ turned I ; *' a glorious immortality !" u What would you think/' faid Fri¬ bourg, " of a ftarving wretch, who be¬ holding within his reach a cluiler of ripened grapes looked higher, and de¬ termined to remain unfatisried till thofe above him had attained maturiry ?** ·< í íhouid
IÖ3
" 1 íhouid think him," rephed I„ unconfcious to what his queftion tended, * c incapable of fuch forbearance, ridi¬ culous in aiming at it." " Thus then it. is/' he anfwered ; u of the prefent we are aflurcd·—of the future we have but a vague and imper- fečHdeas philofophy nor reafon can af- certain the nature of our rewards .or pu- nifbments ; the higheft ftretch of human inteîleü cannot foar beyond a given point ; there our refearches flop ; reafon finds itfelf inadequate to identify its own concep* ions ; it can attach proba¬ bility to none/* u The future/' returned I s alarmed at finding to what his inference tended,
" is purpofely hid from ouf knowledge, to render ftronger and more firm our truft in the Deity ; becaufe the weak powers of man cannot pierce beyond the clouds. Is he to arraign the fupe- riority of the Being who refides there ? The knowledge you lament as unobtain¬ able, would be beyond the power of man to bear; he is too inferior a creature to be trufted with perceptions fo divine. He knows not how to exift ; he is even ignorant of how the formation of his own flruciure renders him capable of fuch and fuch exertions—-the ephe¬ mera of an hour—the prefumptuous defpot of a day ! To relea fe him from his ignorance would di veft him of his faith; he beholds the univerfe formül for his ufe ; he fees around him the glorious
гб4 glorious prefence of a Divinity ; he feels- it in his heart, in his fenfes : he can ac¬ count for all he fees by believing in God ; why then fhould he doubt fo won¬ derful a Being, poffeffed of every great and noble attribute ? why was he en¬ dowed with the inílinčtive idea? how came it ever into his brain, that he would fain expel it ? By believing that which we cannot comprehend; by feel¬ ing affured of its truth only, can we ex¬ pect: hereafter to have it afcertained/* st The language of education, not one natural idea ! Cä?ire, more reflec¬ tion, uucircumfcribed by fcholaftic rules, would teach you to argue differently ; t« believe what we cannot comprehend, to doubt what reafon whiipers, implies a Being
ιβ5 a Being relying on our ignorance for our faith ; implies too that a higher portion of intellect, by enlarging our ideas and developing, the myfteries which now baffle our conception, would fhow us the fallacy of our prefent fyftem of belief, the impotency and folly of any enacied religion. Befides, it is not you and I only who differ; moft nations differ from each other in their laws, their fyflems, and their faith. Why, if you would fupport your argument, was not an uni¬ verfal religion given to mankind? All cannot be right ; and if all are wrong fave one, are we to infer the partiality of a Supreme Being to a chofcn few ? are we to infer that all pro fe fling a dif¬ ferent perfuafion from this one, yet ail purfuing the fyftem of worihip in whieh they
1бб
they were originally taught, fhall be curfcd for their involuntary apoftacy to the true ? Yet how, in the midii of fuch variety, fhall we determine right ? and if every nation may purfue its own code, it follows that religion is the fabrication of man, not of divine inftitutionj or does it imply a different God for every different mode of woríhip? AVhy then muil individui Is accord, if nations dif¬ fer ? I have as much ground for the purfuance of my own fyftem as you for yours, or the Indian for his." " Fribourg,'* faid I, f< purfue this no fin ther, left for ever you fink in my efleem. On this point my principles are immutable, perhaps on this alone; for İt is a received maxim with me—no one
167 one wiíhes to doubt the facred truth of religion, or the unqueftionablc being of a God, but fuch as feek a licenfe for de¬ pravity, and who willingly would difbe- lieve a future ftate, fearlefsly to outftrip the boundaries of virtue, and dread no late account. It appears to me as though a maniac only could give utter¬ ance to fuch ideas. How ihall we ac¬ count for the formation of the univerfe? for the regular fucceflion of the feafons ? of day and night, of infcrutable time, of birth, exiftence, and death? how ihall we account for the varied chain of won¬ ders that daily ftrike upon our fenfes, but by attributing all to a Power un¬ fathomable as the wotks which we be¬ hold ? Chance, fay you and others of your feci, originally produced them.—- Chance ?
î68 'Chance?—4is well—we differ then about the name aJone; for you, as well as me, allow a firft caufe. Chance was ne¬ ver yet the parent of continued regu¬ larity ; its effects could not pierce through the lengthened mifts of time, and difleminate foi a duration of ages. The name you have given your firft caufe is erroneous, is abfurd ; it is Chance you dignify inftead of God.— Oh ! how could we even live if we poffeffed not faith, and confequently hope ? how bear affliction, pain, ά. J all the numeicus ills that follow in fad proceffion on the life of man ? Think you that life affords happinefs fufficient to render unneceflary the cheering hope of future greater blifs ? Again, you fay nations differ in their mode of worfhip : in
ζβ9 in themode they do, not in the purport— all worfhip a God —they worlhip him under various denominatio..s—iike you, they differ only in the name, agreeing all in themain point. God is too juft, too noble, to curie thofe who varioufly addrefs him ; as well you might lay one language only can be pure. God re¬ gards the heart, not the formation of the prayer—it is the actions of the man, his fentiments, his foul, and not his mode of worihip—the untutored Negro ar the civilized Chriilian will alike be heard by an impaniai judge ; the grievances, the unjad fìripcs of the former, mall not pafs unreversed, nor the virtuous aciions of the lauer unrewarded. But how came we upon this fubjecl? it is too ferious—· let us change it,'' vol. j. ι « Willingly,
170 ct Willingly. But are you then fliil averfe, Cazire, tr my enjoying the rofes which grow beneath my feet ?*' * * If you mean literally the rofes, no ; if metaphorically, I am/* * f Why then were they placed fo near me? are they ftrewn in our way but to be paft? isit in your fyftem to become ftok Л to every earthly good ? why have we pafftons, wifhes, or inclinations ?" u To conquer them, Fribourg. I f we were never tempted we could never tri¬ umph ; where is the merit of viüory if we are notfolicited to yield ?" ** You are determined then to con¬ quer,
ι 7 ι quer, and teach me forbearance likewife. Since we have inclinations onl/ to make us miferable, and paffions only to in¬ ftruct us how to conquer them; crown your happinefs with the barren wreath of victory, over pleafure, liberty, and love.'* ** Liberty and love I Alas !" fighed I, r * I cannot give you the firft—-you dare not offer me the fécond." • ť And if ΐ durit, you arc above temptation, Cazire. But tell me, if without injuring in the fmalleft point fociety or the individual, you could fol¬ low a fyftem of independence, would you ftili hefitate?"
ι 2
4t If
%i lï it was myfelf alone I injured by the purfuance of an inclination, í might feel authorifed to follow it." Fallacious doctrine, as I have fince difcovcrcd, and dangerous latitude to indulge in; ih long аь example can influ¬ ence the manners of fociety, ur taint the habits of an individual, fo long will it be unjuft to adopt a felf-created fyftem,— Man can never be independent of his fellows—he dare not commence free agent. In wandering from the beaten track, without any guide but the ignis /a ¿uus of fancied right, we Fall, and drag alone: with lis manv an unconfeious wretch, following with imagined feeurity our footfteps, the fate even of ihoufands may be remotely affected* But î did not
*73 not think thus in the exigency of the moment; and Fribourg continued, " At lean, then, to fee me, to con¬ verfe, to walk with me, can injure no one but m)felf; will you refufe me this?" u Shall ï not debar your wife of her juft right/* I hefitatingly rejoined, '* your fociety, Fribourg?" u Do you make methe property of anyone?*' replied he haughtily, u do you talk of fettering my fieps, of con¬ fining my perfon ?" u Surely, Fribourg, you would be encircled by your family if not walking or converting with me ?" 13 ** Coiiftu
374 ** Confcicntious girl. Long ere you entered the village I wasabfent for whole days ; the very night bounded not my wanderings. Lately I have been more at horae^ confcious perhaps ray happinefs was nearer. But fay, do you confent? The buly world will prefcntly be Ainring, and fee us thus early in converfe ; for myfelf I care not; you have not yet learned to defpife its formati tiet/' * c Alas! Fribourg, is concealment ne- ceffary where no wrong is meant ?** " But what the heart feels innocent the world condemns, and you cannot delineate its fine-drawn fenfations to the vulgar eye. To avoid then equally its cenfure or itsmifconftruBion, it is better retire from its fcrutiny. Here," he con¬ tinued,
*75 tmûed, <f at your leifure you may perufe this/' giving jne a paper, 'ik is a poem to the Mountain Violet." As I ftretchcd forth my*harid to re¬ ceive it, he prefled and gently retained it. *' Do you walk this evening ?'· I hefitated. u Where P' " Any where with you," he eagerly rejoined. f * Come, do not deny me every things Cazire."
14 " I grant
Ij6 " I grant too much already, Fri¬ bourg —but—I will come." u Be in the avenue leading to the foreft at eight—it is moonlight—you need not fear.' · * f And if it were as Cimmerian ob¬ feurity, is not Fribourg my protection ?" His eyes fparkled with pleafure as I faid this, I was happy to have cheered him ; he imprinted a kifs upon my hand —and we feparated, When I returned to my chamber I perufed the following poem:
то
177
TO THE MOUNTAIN VIOLET. Sweet fragile flower, that bloom'ft unfought, And bloom'ft by many an eye unfeen, Thy worth awakes my penfive thought— Fit fubječt for the Mufe's theme. Thy lowly head with patience bent Unfhelter'd to the nothern blaft, As fiercely by the whirlwinds fent, Nor deign'd to cruih thee as they paft. Expanding4vİîd, thy rich perfume Impregnates round th' unhallow'd air, That reek lefs of thy virgin bloom Sweeps not o'er thee more mild or fair- Now brighten'd by the morning ray Luxuriant fpreads thy grateful breaft; Now evening comes with tyrant fway, And chills thy little form to reft. J 5 Swcîî
278 b weet emblem of the foul-fraught mind, Expos'd life's keeneft floras to bear, Yet, like thee, tenderly reán'd And ¿blinking from ungeniai air. Like thee too, from the vulgar eye The ehaňerni mind iîıaîl live forlorn ; And though no kindred foul may figb, In folitude there's none to fcom. The ray which gilds with lucid gleam Is the firm mmd which none can wreft j The evening chili, which íhrouds the beam, The iad reflexions of the breaft. 1 )ear tìuvvei , be thou roy favorite fvvect ; I'll rear with care thy lowly head; Save thy fuft brcalt ltom guatdìefs ftet, And court young zephyrs to thy bed. Yet if perchance in evii hour Seme lavtlcfs hand invade thy íhnne, Oí nightly blaft with ruthlefs power Sap the июп Ые whtch might be ишш j Ál
m Ahî then with fad regret I'll kneel, And try thy beauties dimm'd to cheer; If vain, alas ! my hopes I feel, I'll dead, embalm thee with a tear.
i f
i8o
CHAP. XV. THE SOPHISTRY OF FASSIÖH. FAITHFUL to røy appointment, I found myfelf at eight in the avenue. Fribourg was already there. He linked my arm in his* and drew me on. How f wife the moments pafs when we would have them linger. Already through the diftant crevices of the furrounding cot¬ tages beamed the evening taper; light no longer trembled on the mountain top; no
iSi no more the blue mifts of even obfcured the furrounding íky, but the pale moon¬ beams fhed their fentimentai radiance on the fleeping beauty of the fcene. I could not have imagined half an hour had elapfed, but the even pace of time neither flackening nor increaßng with our wifhes, had already told two hours. The diftant tinkling of the village bell alarmed me» ft Can it be fo late, Fribourg?*' I ex¬ claimed* u Has the time then palled unheeded by you ?*' he replied, ťť It has indeed. Let us make amends/' I continued, « for our negli« gence/*
îSa
gence ;·* and hurried onwards. As we came within fight of the avenue í fepa¬ rated from him, and returned home* The following morning I promifed again to be in the avenue. For foms: months this dan gérons intercourfe con¬ tinued, and when for the whole day we had not (cm each other, the avenue at eight witneffcd our delighted meeting» It was one evening when, as ufual, I had flown to the appointed fpot; for Fribourg had long fince filenced my fcrupleson that fubject, he had faid that on me alone depended the domeftic tranquillity of an innocent wife, that as I railed or depreffed his foul by my com¬ pliance or refula! of what he termed his guikleh wi fixes, the effects wouid be perceptible
perceptible in his family. Happy in be¬ ing thus furnifhed with excufes for the wildnefs of a difaftrous paffion, I fuf¬ fered its fatal innovations with fome¬ thing fo like pleafure that all my philo¬ fophy became power! e fs to refift it. On this evening then, encountering Fri¬ bourg, methought he feemed overcaft with an uncommon forrow ; not as afual his extended arms and eager eyes had anticipated my approach, fcarcely he increafed his pace to welcome me, and as he drew my atm through hir, I heard him deeply figh. 11 Fribourg!'* I exclaimed with beat¬ ing heart, and preffing his hand to my trembling lips, " Fribourg, what has happened? whence the gloom fo viiible и po г:
upon thofe features. Tell me·—tell me quick or I cannot fupport myfelf.** My agitation almoft incapacitated me from ftanding ; I encircled his arm with my clafped hands, and my head drooped upon it. a Cazire, my love/* he faid, " my only charm in exiftence, be not alarmed, I am not gloomy—you miftake, indeed yoo—nothing has happened—you"— He feared me on a bank befide us, and folded me to his breaft, fcarcely confcious í fuffered him to retain me in his arms. For the firft time our lips met—it thrilled in liquid fire to my bean— i ick the ardent blufhes of my cheek,
i*5 cheeks and returned with tranfport hi¬ therto unknown, the kifs of Fribourg.— Amazed, delighted, he prefled me clofer to his throbbing bofom—his head fank oh mine—for fome minutes we remained in the firft ecftatic trance of love * # Suddenly I recolleded the wild in¬ voluntary tranfport I had indulged in—» the firft moft ferious latitude I had given my feelings. With blufhes no more of ardent paffion, but ihame and confcious guilt, with deep regret and almoft hor¬ ror for my conduct, I felt how dangerous it is to admit the flighteft toleration of error to the heart. I endeavoured to rife—the fafcinating countenance of Fribourg was hid on my bofom-—trem¬ blingly
1 86 bíingly 1 raiíed him, &nå withdrew fur¬ ther. '· Come, Fribourg, let us walk," í faid, *« henceforward to myfelf alone muft I truft for fafety. Fribourg is ilill more weak than I am, ftili lefs than me can he command his feelings/' " Forbear, Cazire," be replied, look¬ ing mournfully upon me, ** is it then nothing to converfe, to walk every even¬ ing with her my foul adores, and never till this hour have prefumed a kifs upon her lips? You know not how í have commanded my feelings-—how at this moment Ì ftiii hold them in ftruggling fubjertion—how often when my full heart has ached to madnefs, have I ftili rep re it
i87 lepreft the keennefs of its emotions, ft ill buried deep in my bofom its confufed fenfations, left, ungenerous t reprover, I fhould alarm the fcrupulous delicacy of your ideas, left I fhould be unable to re fu me the reins if once I relaxed my grafp ; but now the ftruggle is over— lean bear it no longer; this evening I had intended to confefs my weaknefs, you have anticipated me. I can conti¬ nue thus no more. I over-rated my own fortitude^ my forbearance, when I demanded your converfe, your fociety. Ob,Caziic," hecontinued, finking on his knee* and embracing mine, while his love-fraught cys were raifed to my countenance, tc cordent to grant me that fociety fo dear, fo prized for ever ; íl ν with ше where the world fhall never find
ì88 find us - юге, beyond thofe mountains, beyond the precincts of inhabited nature, to the remateli defart of circling crea« tion, you would form my happinefs in the wildeft care ; without you I am wretched^ without you folitary in the bofom of fociety *ï fpeak, Cazire, deter¬ mine j your fiat reprieves me from, or condemns me to———-—" βί Fribourg/* î interrupted, tremb· ling, " do 1 hear aright? this from you í Your wife, your family, have you forgotten all ?" " Ήο, ï ren)çmher them well j if you rcfufeme, henceforward they become as blank in mv cftimation—-I know them <( Defperate,
j8 9
" Defperate, cruel man, what would you do ?" if Fly them for ever, and wander defolate through the world ; your refufai avails them nothing, your compliance may/* u What but mifery to them could my compliance avail ? Oh, no, Fribourg, you play upon my feelings you cannot mean as you fay/' €i Do not diilracì methu*/' he cried, " I cannot live without you; why would you continually urge the viclory of felfovci happinefs?'* * ť Would you have me plunge head¬ long
igo long in a fea of vice, pui fie a deliberate fyftem of the blackeft guilt, at once over¬ turn the only pleafurc of which is left me—-that of not injuring another?" *' You have already done all the injury you can—acquired the preference of my afleclion ; not to return it now to its fulled extent, would be but adding to your fancied guilt a real injury—that of deftroying mc." * ( Cruel Fribourg, is this my reward? but no matter, you fhall not render me guilty as you arc unjuft." u Guilty,'* he returned with a dif« damful fmile ; ut what would you infer from the term guilty ?" « The
*9 l ** The fubverfìon of amoral fyftem/* I returned. " Of what moral fyftem ?" " That of marriage, for inftance/* faid I, " which entails on its innovator the blackeft guilt; it is a facred iniiitu- tion, the cement of fociety, the parent of affinity, and all its tender claims ; the incendiary who would deftroy one link ofa chain fo fine, is a traitor to fociety and an enemy to mankind/* ic And to blot an individval from the face of mirthful day, to deftroy at one blow the fine-wrought wonders of the human frame, is nothing in the fcale/*
" Fribourg
192 " Fribourg calls himfelf a philofo- pher, and yet knows not the firft article of his creed—-Fortitude in the endur¬ ance of evil/' u Evils which cannot be remedied/' he refumed.. " Philofophy diciates perfeverance when they can/* u ' But when the remedy is more def- perate than the evil, Fribourg ----- ** " We fhall always find cold-hearted calculators enough to draw us back, to point at diibmt joys with the wan finger of fufpicion, and bid us explore away our lives in doubt ere we attempt to certify. Cazire, be not always the prti* dendai moraìizer ; you yield enough to
ï93 to the prejudices of the world, yield fomewhat to nature, to the heart." <* Well, Fribourg,** I replied, as I felt my love ftruggling with my reafon, as though determined upon victory, t( give me but this night to refolve; grant me/* I falteringly added, « grant me a refpite from myfelf/* " Be it fo, and to-morrow then—** 41 To-morrow you fhall have my anfwer—now farewell/* " I reffgn you, Cazire—I purfue no farther the faint dawnings of acqui- efcence ; let my forbearance teach you mercy/* vol, i. * So
*94 So faying he fuffered my departure; it was neceffary I fhould pafs his houfe to reach my brother's; I could not for¬ bear ftealing a,confcious glance at the windows; the fhutters of that which fronted the road, and which were low enough to admit obfervation of what was paffing in the room, were only partially clofed ; the light which ¡fhone through the opening tempted me nearer ; I ap¬ proached, and beheld the wife of Fribourg feated in a melancholy attitude by the fire, her cheek relied on her hand, and an open volume laid on the table before her; two children were playing on the floor, and methought the grief which preyed upon her mind diffracted her attention from the book; doubtlefs ihe lamented the continual defertion of
*95 of her huiband, and deprecated me as the caufe ; and yet, no—her counte¬ nance was all that refignation could pourtray, a melancholy langour over- fpread her penfive features, but there was no expreffion of anger or defpair; one fhould have thought from her looks the deftroying paffions of mankind were ftrangers to her breaft ; a fanČtified for¬ row and holy meek nefs, which it w 7 ere a crime to outrage, feemed alone to reign there. Never before had I felt lo keenly the deep humiliation of guilt; how differ¬ ent did I feel m\ feif to this injured, wretched woman ; it was I who caufed that look of deeply hidden forro w—it was í who barbed with agony the mor- v 3 tifyin?
£$6 tifying fhaft of fcorn that rankled in her patient breaft—it was î who taught an hufband's hand to hurl the cruel dart; yet ihe, poor innocent, had never in¬ jured me, but, lurking in ambufli, I was her bittereft, her ranked foe ; in fecret I wove a wreath of thorns to lacerate her chaftened brow ; wretched mon (1er that Ì felt myfelf, how durft 1 live, and know that an all-feeing eye contemplated her and me at once ! \ k ! was on the point of rufhing into her prefence and confeffing all my guilt, of fwearing never more to fee her huiband, of abjuring for ever at her feet my fatal paffion ; in her keen reproaches I íhouid half expiate my crime; by future re¬ pentance
*97
pentance perhaps blot it from ihe book of the recording angel. Suddenly I felt myfelf haftily drawn back ; I turned—'twas Fribourg. " Raih, romantic girl," he cried, M what do you here ?" My heart was too full to anfwer; I fuffered hi to lead me from the gate; a»d r a prey to the kecucft cmutiuus, returned borne,
*3
iö8
CHAP. XVL THE TRIUMPH. THAT my agitation might not be remarked, I walked into the garden, hoping the air would recover me ; it was feparatcd at the end by a flight fence fr om an adjoining field, and î approached í ome fìowcr pots as though I intended to remove them ; after difplacing feveral, fcarcely onfcious of what I was doing, i discovered beneath one a letter ; im¬ mediately
*99 mediately I remembered what my unknown coirefpondent had faid, í made no doubt but the letter was from him, which chance had indeed directed mc to it; I placed it in my bofom, and when I retired to my chamber, read aj follows : " Miferable girl ! if yet a fpark oí virtue glimmers in your benighted bofom forbear ) our pi e fent conduct ; with grief and horror, but not furprife, I view your growing intimacy with the dangerous Fribourg; he is a free thinker and an athcift; your only chance of fakty и to fly him ; in vain would you addı t Is his fcepiic find in the langim^e of vir¬ tue ; nothing with hiin is virtue but the gratification of his boundieb paffions ; к 4 ho
ŽOO he acknowledges no God but pîeafure, md therefore fears no punifhment—» religion, is a farce with him, therefore can he never feel compunciion ; he believes in no law, divine or human, theiefore never imagines he can break any ; the avenue to his fophiflicated heart is guarded with the ñrength of hell—like a pefîİlential vauit, in feeking to purify it you will yourfclf become infeBed—and to feek his refr mation is a tafk fo dangerous, it will entail your own fedu6lion e ' ť I feel it my duty to warn you, for yet it may not be too late ι you Hand upon the verge of a precipice ; while yet you can İhımk back, there is more ment, Cai-ire, fuddcnly to flop in the path
SOI path of deftruBion than never to have entered it. ** Beware, I entreat you, the dan¬ gerous fophifms of this maa ; he acts upon a fyftem of his own—be his con¬ vert, and you inevitably become his victim. Reafon with yourfelf awhile, unbiaffed by the falfe alluring vifions of a madman ; let not his fpecious argu¬ ments ftifte the confcious whifperings of 'infulted virtue ; for, believe me, where there is no guilt J we feel no doubt—we feek not bv refinement to reconcile that which reafon already approves. ** An ι Et/*
к 5 So fi c ne d
202 Softened as I was, this letter deeply imprcft my fpirits ; already I faw myfelf half funk in vice—-I almoft feared that ftruggling would nut fave me; it was evident my unknown advifer knew my frequent meetings with Fribourg—- evi¬ dent too he dreaded the intereft he was daily gaining overme, and abhorred the lingular freedom of his tenets; but the Uranger had faid, he faw my conduct with horror, not fuiprife. Had I ever given proofs then of future depravity ?— was he acquainted with the wild effer¬ vefcence of mv fentiments?-—and was üïQ height of romantic enthufiafm nearly allied to vice? Alas! I have fince iearnt that liability of principle and con¬ fi ftency of idea not liable to be fhaken
203 by the dangerous gales of fophiftry, are the fureft foundations of virtue. It was yet midnight, and thoughtfully î ruminated on my conduct ; methought till now I had been hum ing onwards to an abyfs of guilt ; I determined to make a laft effort to roufc, as it were, my dor¬ mant faculties to ftruggle againft the delufions of paffion, and fee Fribourg no more. Scarcely had î refolvedonthis, when I fancied him before me, trembling, anxious for the fuccefs of his love, liften¬ ing with panting hope formy dtcifion î overwhelmed, d.fpairing as with ago¬ nized reluctance, 1 pionounced my duty*
к 6
" Ко,
204 » " No, never can I execute the tafk/' I exclaimed, ftarting from the fide of my bed ; " no, if it is a crime to love, that crime is paft ; I will fly with him then to fome remote defart, together we will pafs the few fhort hours of exiftence ; it is folly thus to ftruggle againft the heart — together we will tread at dawn the flower-befprinkled mead, feek out from their fad abode the gloomy children of forrow, and fill their hearts with reno¬ vated hope. Yes, yes, by the virtue of our future aciions will we obtain for- givenefs for a fingìe crime/* But I had no fooner ended my rhap* fody, when before the buoyant eye of fancy flitted the pale fhadows of Fri- bourg's wife and children ; menacing at me
aos me they pointed ; I pierced into their gloomy retreat ; together I faw them mourn the defertion of a father and an huiband; dim and cold feemed their cheerlefs habitation—the ftillnefs of death appeared to reign among them ; fhuddering I withdrew my vifionary gaze, and covered my face with my hands. « Oh, heaven affift me to decide,'* I faid, " inftruct me how to act ; oh ! Fribourg, could I but guide thy wander¬ ing judgment, reform thy apoftate fen¬ timents; once convinced by the divine truth of virtue, Fribourg would fave me from m) felf. I will write to him ; but Ariel had faid, to attempt his reforma¬ tion
2ôS
tion was to entail my own fedučtion. Well then, Fribourg is noble, is capable of heroic magnanimity when he be· lievcs himfelf inftigated by duty; yes, I will write to him, and, confcious of my weaknefs, throw myfelf upon his mercy for protection. At length by dawn, after deftroying feveral letters, I produced the follow¬ ing: *' î am going, Fribourg, to folick your compaffion ; oppofe not rry weak¬ nefs with your ftrength, but lend your arm to ftay me*
« 'Tis
207 tf 'Tis in vain I would believe that yielding the reins to inclination is crimi¬ nal only in the eyes of prejudice ; if fo, whence the confufion of my prefent fenfations?—whence the palpitation of my doubting heart ?—whence the chill horror which bedews my brow ?—»how, if I am actuated by prejudice alone, do I feel, when refolving to yield all to iove, a fentiment of guilt, till then unknown? —how, if withheld by prejudice alone 5 does a determination to abide by it, footh at once my mental perturbation, cool the glowing anguifh of my agitated bofom В Sutely the power that can caufe emotions fo varied, fo widely dif¬ ferent from each other as anarchy and peace, muft be fomething more than prejudice j or, allowing it were not, fiilî entering
20S
entering fo firmly in the heart, ought iţ with dangerous violence to be rooted thence ! €i ï feel that to refign myfelf to you, to abide by the dictates of my love alone would yield me ; why fliould ï not ac¬ knowledge it, for that at leaft may be allowed; joy inexpreffible! never to mifs you from my fide, to reafon with you oni the fallacy of your principles ; and, oh, rapture! inftead of becoming your convert, to render you mine ; this wouid indeed be to me the climax of earthly happinefs ; but it would be an happinefs which I dare not indulge, the hopes of which I dare not even believe ; like the glow-worm which fhines brightly in the night , at dawn of day it fades ; it is
Sü 9 is a pleafmg dream that vanifhes as I awake, that effaying to deep would again recall ; when a child I have clofed my €yt& upon the light, and fancied vifions of fuch dazzling fplendor, that me· thought to open them again and deftroy my fairy fabric were a pain. " I almoft wifh, Fribourg, that I could think as you do; but to act in dire£t oppofition to my ideas of right would in me at lea it be guilt ι place yourfelf in my fituation ţ if you thought your love for me a crime, would you nor ftruggle againft it? —would you ftili urge me to return it? No—for true love never yet fought the degradation of its objeci. Convince, if you can, my reafon in addition to my feelings ι con¬ vince
vince me that to fhudder at deftroying the peace of a family is prejudice ; con¬ vince me if you can that it is an imagi¬ nary crime to flab the bofom of a wife, and ruin the early profpečl of her children ; tell me that the woild is all a cheat, that pain and pîeafure are the diftinctions of an hypochondriac, that vice and virtue are but the terms of folly or the tools of knaves ; tell me that the univerfe is an ample pkafure garden, formed alike for the recreation of all; or, tell me rather it is a barbarous wil- dernefs, whence civilization is exploded, and the tumultuous favage revels at large as fancy dictates, or as defire excites ; fay that man is at bberty to purfue his prey tìv.oug' the panting hcait of his neighbour, if diere it could take refuge and
211 and fay at once that univerfal anarchy is the law of nature. * e Fribourg, can that be real happi¬ nefs which íhrinks from the analyfis of truth?—the fuperior fentiment I expe¬ rience when 1 refolve to conquer my wifhes—when 1 think that not for me íhall the pillow of your wife be fteeped in tears, nor the afcending curfes of your children reach to heaven ; oh ! then í feel that the deepefl fenfation of mifery is luxury when compared to confcious guilt. ·* Fiibourg, let us endeavour to con¬ quer the fatality of our paffion, let us not purine к to the gates of deftruciion ; to
2Ï2 to forbear to love may be an ufeleft attempt ; to love, yet forbear to gratify it, may be noble ; humanity, as near as poffible, reaches perfection, when in mercy to others it difclaims the prefer¬ ence of fclf, 4i Tell mc, Fribourg, that I am right, that we may love without guilt, that it even becomes a virtue when we with* uand in feduQiuns. 41 Capire Ашвш/' After î had written this, ШИ ¿¡Satis¬ fied, ftili fearing I had not energetically enough exprefled tø Fribourg my frt n* fationsi
fations ; I threw myfelf upon the bed, and endeavouring to rejoice in my pain¬ ful victory, fought in fleep a temporary forgetful nefs.
Че
CHAP. XVIL THE RELAPSE. ON awaking ï dew immediately to the window— -Fribourg was walking in the garden— ï foftly called him, and he railed his eyes. 4i I have been walking here thefe two hours/' he faid in a reproachful accent, Idefcendcd; ï approached the rail-
215 ïngs, and placing my letter in his hand, retired with precipitancy. Towards evening I again fought the garden; Fribourg was already there; I received from him a letter ; he trembled with agitation as he gave it me, and then retired as l liad done. I read thus : 4i Confidence is the only bafis on which a Medio n builds its towering py¬ ramid ; doubt is the damp which mould¬ ers it away—it is the canker-worm that never dies ; like the fair rofe, inly in- fefted by a fecret foe, ftili its bright leaves retain their hue; ftili to the out¬ ward
Sl6 ward eye looks fair even at the moment 'm which it falls; but, Cazire, the heart is defiroyed. * ! Could I be content with fuch a fancied Eden ? could I revel in your fmiles, and know the ftorm within, doubt deftroying doubt, which grows by what it feeds on, and views with microfcopic eye all earthly joy, making in the end that real, which appeared fo ?—confidence in yourfelf, Cazire; confidence un¬ bounded, can be alone unbounded affec¬ tion ; yours is fhackìed, is defiroyed by die fetters of prejudice» íÉ Love is like a beauteous bird; it feeks to neftle in your bofom, you place a chain of iron upon its downy wing, vou. ■f
217 you affix a boundary to its foft approach * " In the romance of my earlieft youth. I have contracted friendfhips with thofe who feemed congenial to me : perhaps at the time they were fincere; but in¬ tereft, circumftance, predicament, ftep- ped in between them and their friend¬ íhip- —ihey deferted me, they grieved me—but ï fcorned to purfue them ; 1 looked round upon the aggregate of fociety, ï found them ready at all times to laugh away the hours of exiftence, but I fought a hiend who could improve, or bid them pafs in rational delight; vo í . τ, i rav
2l8 my heart fhrunk with apathy from the coldnefs of worldly connections, and, wrapped in its filent forrow, lamented theinfenfibility of man. " At length I married ; it was a ftep of defederation,, and failed of yielding me the fol ace I expected ; it fmoothed not in its placid, even chain the effer¬ vefcence of my foul, and again I felt myfelf condemned to feek in fociety that fympathy I could not find in the bofom of my family ; yet there too was I ftili difappointed, difgufted, and left an ifoiated being on the face of ani¬ mated nature. tc The gradual decay of hope filled me
219 me with gloomy mifanthropy ; the re- fources I poffeffed in myfelf became my only confolation ; in philofophic feclufion I indulged them, yet were they not fufficiently ftrong to ftifte the longings of an ardent and fufceptible heart for loving a beloved object ; need I fay I found in you the latter ?—you have fince acknowledged the former; I imbibed for you an unbounded and ex- quifite attachment—you gave me hop^, you bade it arife from the afhes of defpair, bade it bloom over its tomb, yet now again all is crufhed, and again I fhut my lattice on th^ world. ^ Ml í have experienced fickens mv L 2 foul
U20 íbul with forrow : I fhall turn flote, and view mankind as from an emi¬ nence. ** Methought the injuftice I had fuf- tained in my intercourfe with fociety was fufficient ; I did not believe that Cazire, who had fo nearly filled my exhaufted cup with fupreme felicity, would fuddeiily daih. it to the earth ere my parched lips had tafted ; this indeed was giving the climax to my difappoint- ments. ** I fhall not, however, attempt to combat your arguments : you are a flave to prejudice, but they are prejudices which make your happinefs; and fo long
221
long as we are happy, Cazire, it does not matter how ; you was formed for a ge¬ nuine child of nature ; you would have been fo, but the tide of cuftom has proved too ftrong—It tinctures our ideas with its gloomy influence, it becomes incorporated with our adions, our thoughts ; you have been fuffered to run wild, yet have learnt prudence— prejudice I would fay, in the very lap of folitude ; but remember, Cazire, that real life, and life depicied in romance, are widely different; through all its variations, the former feldom concludes happily ; the latter is twirled from the breaft of probability ; events are made fubfervient, and the falfe imagery ends in a delufive peace ; romances corrupt 1 3 the
2 a -л
the imagination, and fill it with vifions of chaotic inconfiftencies, si The die however is now caft; hap¬ pinefs is of a texture too fine to bear anatomifing, and I muft feek no further to influence you. 48 I never before imagined it my duty to relinquifh you ; now I begin to perceive that were I even fuccefsful in revolu- tionifing your fentiments, I fliould only render you miferable; .at ibis idea my heart chills ; you never would be firmly eftablifhed in the juftice of your own conduct—a corroding fear would prey upon your every pîeafure ; oh ! not to purchafe to myfelf the joy of your ex- clufive
223 clufive poffeffion, of your dear fociety, would I gaze upon the careworn traces of your cheek, hear your defpondent ftruggling figh, or haunt your foul with the dread vifion ofa future curfe. (i I refign then my happinefs to yours ; for you I would forego my fou!, my life, my all ; 'twould be a crime too great to convince your reafon, unlefs, by doing fo, I could for ever exterminate your doubts ; age would creep on, the enthu¬ fiafm which might temporarily gild your converfion, the warm tide of youthful paffion which might fpread a charm over your fancied apoftacy, muft gradually fubfide, the evening of your days would clofe in gloom, and the wretched Fri- L 4 bou ig
224 bourg would receive the dying curie of Cazirc. ** Thus far have 1 painfully brought myfelf, ever fwayed by that which I con¬ ceive my duty, unbiaffed, 4is true, by what the worid denominates fuch. I reìinquìfli you, Cazire, rehnquifh you, and feel as though I tore the heart from my bofom to fave it from a future ft ab. One thing only I require ; I have yielded to the dreadful impulfe of juftice, hut I can do no more-—I cannot wield with fmiles its fiery torch, and gaze upon the havoc it has caufed ; í dare not truft myfelf amid your fyren fafcinati- ons, left I be tempted to curfe my hard wrung neceffary facrifice; I can fee you no
225 no more-—voluntarily I have figned my own condemnation; Cazire's mercy will preferve me from the rack. "Augustus Fribourg/*
With what varied fenfations did I perufe this letter; how did I lament, admire, and adore the noble heroifm of my beloved Fribourg ; how, with in¬ vincible anguifli, did I gaze upon the words, " I relinquifh you, Cazire ;** how did I yet reverence him for his noble refignation of an heart that long had been his own ; deeper than ever now reigned his image in my ĺ 5 bofom.
2%ß bofom. Surely I had been too precipi¬ tate—duty, juílice, never could require fuch a facrifice ; ï had trampled on a love the moil ardent—I now faw the moft difinterefted, the moft generous ; how» at any future period of exiftence, could ever í make him or myfelf amends?—! had ftabbed him to his bofom's core, yet, without a murmur, did he bear the lacerated wound. * But/* whifpered felf-love, <f would Fribourg, could he debar himfelf from lecing me?·—would he abide by the magnanimity of his refolve ŕ I ftıouîd lave vri/hcd him to pofľefs the power, but î was not fufficiently philofophic. Vanry made me hope, imprudent as I felt
227 fbit it, that again he had over-rated his fortitude ; variable and inconftant being that I was, the creature of paffion and the moment, continually aware of what virtue required, tremblingly alive to ií¿; flighteft deviations, yet without fortitude to abide by its decifions, without even firmncfb at all times to defire it» All day was I employed near the window, watching for the enti ance ol Fribouig, to triumph in the wcaknefs I fhould have deplored, (which a monuııt before I had been endeavour.r.g to arm) and fee reviving, Lke the phœni>. from its allies, the afcendancy I had gained o\u'him; c\cnmg however came·—night approached, and yet no 1 6 fiat».
&а8 figns of Fribourg. Difcontented, angry with myfelf, and almoft doubting his love, I retired defpondent to my room, but I flept not during the night; at dawn again I was at the window, again I glowed with hope, again my blood fer¬ mented with the agitation of my mind ; the fun gained its meridian, declined in the weft ; he came not ; pride only favcd me from entering the garden ; he defpifed me fu rely for the eafmefs of my love, for the franknefs with which I had acknowledged it ; his wife had re¬ gained her juft empire over his mind— the empire 1 had refigned ; or, perhaps, he fought a kinder, a lefs fcrupulous heart than mine·—madnefs !—had then the ftriiggtes of my foul, in refigning him^
229 him, availed nothing to his wife ?—was it for another, a wretch, probably, whofe only merit would coniift in returning the ardor of his love, that I had given up the joy of my foul ? Miferable tor¬ mentor !—no î If the love of Fribourg was fo eafy of transfer, it muft be worth« lefs; and yet to make no effort, no more endeavour to attach me to him, to influence my decifion, fo readily at once to refign all ! he could not have loved me ever—human nature was incapable of fuch fudden, (iich immediate victory ; 'twas folly, 'twas madnefs to believe he had ever loved ; and yet, heaven ! per¬ haps Fribourg was ill, or wandering in fome gloomy w ild a prey to defpondency and woe ; perhaps reclining on the earth» he
2 3 0 he lamented the heedlefs capture of his heart—perhaps no fleep had vifited his eyes. " Oh, Fribourg, Fribourg," I ex¬ claimed, " where art thou ? let me retrae Л— let me ftili be thine/' Evening fpread around her many- coloured mantle—night clofed on my woes— ï felt it impoffible to exift another day in fuch refined torture ; an intenfe fever fwelled in my veins, my heart beat agonizing rapidity, and a wild, irregular pulfation betrayed the derangement of my bodily, as well as mental fyftem. At the firft flreak of dawn 1 arofe with an
23i an heavy figh —it was the third morning that I had not feen my Fribourg ; was it poffible he had exifted fo long without me ?—that I ftili breathed debarred of his fociety ; how great a charm did it leave in my exiftence—I felt how dear he was to my foul; no more I endeavoured to conquer the fatality of my paffbn—I believed it a vain attempt; the day paft on, I faw him not; in a diffraction of mind, impoffible to be depicted, fcarcely confcious how I began or finifhed, I wrote a few lines, while my eyes failed to identify the traces of my tumbling pen. ** I feel myfelf incapable longer of loppor t íng
232 fupporting your abfence : if ever you loved, if you even wiih me to retain my faculties entire, come, I befeech you, into the garden ; I am no more the implacable judge, refining on your tor- t u re—-you diali be judge, and hold my fiat in your hands ; hope what you will, I can ftruggle no longer againft the overwhelming tide« « Cazire/* Pride fave d røe no farther; its whif¬ perings were difregarded, and as the dews of evening defcended, í entered the garden» Half an hour had elapfed ; pre fent lv I perceived the little fon of Fribourg,
43 Fribourg, who, as ufual, poor innocent, flew towards me; where was the deli" cacy of my virtue flown, where its former fufceptibility, where the purity of my intentions, when I could make the unconfcious child, who had before affeäed me with fuch lively rranfports of remorfe and forrow, the conductor of a letter to his father ?~~ail, all fwallowed up in the devouring fever of an ungo¬ vernable paffion. My band Аюок as I gave it into hb, î bJuíhcd the dye of fcarlet; and a fìngle feeding tear,which evinced my compun8ion and my wcak¬ nefs, fell upon his innocent countenance as he raifed it for а kifs, ** Go," I faid in a v>ke almoft in- -inculate
234 articulate from emotion, β< and give that to your father/* He flew to obey me, but Ì could no longer fupport the humiliating reflection of my own guilt, I co Id no longer fup- port the light of Heaven, the ferene majcíly of its unclouded expanfe, and flew with agony from the fpot.
END OF THE FIÚS! YOLUM Г.
VRlN4EDBYD.N.SHVRY,»UìV'tCK-ST» I L, ïOliv
