Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Sir Francis Darrell: or, The vortex: a novel
SIR FRANCIS DARRELL; OR THE VORTEX.
LETTER XXXVIII. Mr. Vernon to Sir Francis Darrell. Mount Vernon, Der. MY DEAR DARRELL, You are ill, and you must be well. If I did not see the antidote as well as the bane, your letter would give me the most serious alarm. That conscious unworthi- ness, those choked avenues of love, that comparison of the damnable present in¬ dicative with the blessed prseterpluper- fect of the subjuuetive, am with might have been, are all symptomatic oif melan* VOL, HI, b
cholia, black bile, or, which is the same thing, blue devils. Why, one would sup¬ pose, that you had made it your sole em¬ ployment to be constantly cracking all the commandments in regular succession one after the other, and that you knew so little of the nature of love as to sup¬ pose it essentially repellant, instead of attractive. Come, come, let me be your physician; — I know your case, and I engage for your cure, I will write my prescription, and, as a friend, I will at¬ tend to the making of it up, and assist in administering it myself, You will not have to make mouths at it: — you have no 5 objection to syrup of squills; it is not a bit more nauseous : Dulce vi^entem Lalagen amato - horse xxiv. Dulce loquentem ... quant, suf- Adde ' j Vocum et nervorum cantus - pro re nata. ,. Sumenda exteraplo, et per viiara adducta. Sir Fiancis Darrell. L.V. Nonsense, Darrell! Love not your disease! Well then, let it be your me¬ dicine. But as I am the M» D. called in,
I must claim my prerogative ot complete confidence and implicit obedience. None cf .your raising the cup to your lip, and putting it away like a wayward child, or I must have you held, andthe whole dose poured down your throat at once. .• Before I resume mon serieux, in reply¬ ing to yours from London,, let me scribble a dozen French lines, which, I think, give a very fair, as well as pleasant ac¬ count of love: J II est aimable quand il pleure, II est aimable quand il rit; 1 On Ie rappelle quand il fuit, On I'adore quand il deraeure. Cest le plus aimable boudeur Qui soit deLondres tiCytberej Cest le plus aimable imposteur Qui soit ne pour tromper la terre; II fait vingt sermens aujourd'hui, Et demain il les desavoue: , ' On sait qu'il blesse quand il joue, Et l*on veut jouer avec Uii. , • , < " -. f ■■■ , Now, my friend, try if you cannot trace him under one or all of these charac¬ teristics in that region of your frame which he is known to claim as his. abode j and, unless you like him better weeping than laughing, make the place gay, and give b 2
hini a cheerful welcome. Stay he" will, you' may be assured, and I advise you not to put him out of sorts with glout- ing and blue devils for his companions in your heart. Your, letter, my dear Darrell, is the most serious one I ever received from you. I do not feel myself at all disposed to laugh at you, but I hope still to laugh with you, and often. I approve of your studies, and I heartily wish you success, but I- fear your nerves and the scrupu¬ losity of your imagination. You have not only to conquer the serpent, and the astronomy and chronology, the zodiac of Jacob's children, and the dishonourable practices of Moses himself by divine com¬ mand ; but when you have gained the victory, you will be for asking yourself whether it is your head or your heart that has gained it; and your doubt will turn the day against ypu — Now, with such a cynosure before me, methinks I should beat you all to nothing in sailing through the 7 ocean I was so commanded to explore. i It is not my intention to preach
hypocrisy, my dear Darrell, but in the state of your heart, and let me add, irf the state of hers, you owe it to yourself you owe it to her, not to be too nice in your revisions. I would convince myself as far as I could, and I would-take the rest upon trust, and then you will be on a par, for that is exactly what she does. You see I obey you in believing that you love, but that I am not so obedient as to your swearing that you would not marry her : II fait vingt sermens aujourd*hui, Et domain il les desavoue. So far from running to your solicitor's with instructions for the settlements, I shall not even think of it on this side of Christmas, but I am not the less dis¬ posed to convince you of my friendship, by doing my best to turn your gloom to brightness, to make you a happy man. Whatever has soured your mind has been suffered to corrode too long — it consumes you daily—it is time to be wise. B 3
Your opening your heart to me is the strongest incentive to mine to share your feelings and to relieve them; but I know your heart better than you do yourself and upon my better knowledge wili I pro¬ ceeds Tt is-diseased, and I am free^to own, thatr I think it never could have heen cured but for an interposition which I am half inclined.to ascribe, in the lan¬ guage of the most exalted of her sex*' to Jleavcn. »Yes, the language' is strong, but I will: not* recalh it. My opinion of women, though not so derogatory to their dignity as you have 'at times expressed yours to be, has seldom raised them to that eminence of mind which, where found, justifies the sentiment you once quoted in ridicule from Milton —* I almost daily see a " creature in whom excels Whatever can to sight or thought be form'd Holy, divine, good, amiable, or sweet." And if one, there may be more; but it has not been your lot or mine to find them in groups — perhaps it never will; but take my word for it, we have in
this instance, and let us not suffer it to pass without its due effect. ' * I was very sincere in my rapture, and how could I speak otherwise of a woman who, with endowments s to command deference, and beauty that might almost warrant vanity, wins by unaffected con¬ descension and humility ? I am no flat¬ terer, Darrell — I will not tell you I think that you deserve her; but, upon- my honour, I do not think there is a man on earth who would so completely, deserve her, if you were once fortunate- enough to make her yours; and so far are your arguments against, offering yourself'to her sound ones, they are precisely such as I should use to incite you .to it -j- an empty and a desolate heart she will fill, and she will lenovate. , ,You will be ,311 that you ought to have been —• such a woman is all you want — such a woman does not present herself every >day. 1 conjure you by the friendship you prp- fess for* me, by the feelings of your heart in saving her, by her goodness and by her beauty, not to sacrifice happi- b 4 i
ness to the indulgence of a morbid sensibility. She has sensibility too, natural, health¬ ful sensibility, and it will be your fault if, in respect to you, it continues t con- fined to your soul. If it were not sa¬ crilege in the present state of your mind to . say it, I would say she loves you. Think I have said so, Darrell, — think I have some judgment, and that it is the fact. Do this, and you will experience that change of spirit, which I sincerely and ardently wish to take place in your feelings. That you are in love every line of your letter testifies, and those most which contain the strongest denial. Your vestal fire, your contrast of the weak and the virtuous woman, your abstinence in shak¬ ing the hand you could have devoured with kisses, the " momentary some¬ thing" that passed " uncomprehended and unexamined" at the Cecilian captiv¬ ation of your ear, the October day, the visions of the night of the October day, the gazings of the twilight of the suc¬ ceeding morning, the pressure in the
bower, et cetera — What is all this but — love ? What would you say if I sent'you indications as undeniable on her part? Nay, you don't wish it—and if I could ' I ought not. So for the present ponder my words, and persist not,in the reso¬ lution of being your own enemy, and, what I shall forgive you.for still less, the enemy ofthis noble-minded, beautiful woman. " And why not young Dartford have her, &c." ^ How very sincerely, disinterestedly, and piously was that paragraph of your letter penned! It is an admirable piece of moral and religious reasoning. It is a regular argument— it has a beginning, a middle, and an end — the beginning sets forth a proposition for saving a young man by sacrificing a young wo in an ; the middle proves the humanity of it, by showing how it will also save an affection¬ ate mother; and the end infers that the young woman, this beauty of mine, should be left to her own choice, which she has too much good sense to make in a hurry. A Tully or a Demosthenes, an u 5
Eldon or an Erskine, could not have laid the argument more scientifically, or brought it to a more accurate conclusion. f Nowy what is- to be done ? In "spite of your nice adherence to the rules of logic, facts are stubborn things, and set all the labours of Aristotle and Cicero'at defi¬ ance •— they leave the lady no alternative. What fact can possibly do that? say you, trembling for the intelligence of her having accepted young Dartford, or his mother. Shall I leave it by way of a Christmas riddle for you to solve? Christmas is at hand, and Christmas twelvemonth would leave you puzzling- out a solution, which, when known, is as natural and clear as the sense of your aforesaid argument. I shall therefore tell it you at once — her Geneva lover has completely thrown her off, and will have nothing more to say to her. So you see that, between this volatile fellow and your conscious unworthiness, the poor girl is doomed to remain a vestal, or turn nun in her own defence, unless I take pity upon her ; and really, if she goes on this way, daily winning more and more
admiration, there will be some risk of her supplanting La Belle; in which case I shall immediately set about supplanting you, soul and body, after having per¬ suaded myself that there is more true happiness in a cottage than in a palace. To be serious: that foolish lad Dart¬ ford is going to be married fo an Italian girl at Rome of the name of Belvoce. Miss Saville knows her, and speaks well of her father, but, with a candour that does her honour, acknowledges that the lady is not such a daughter as might be wished for Mrs. Dartford.—Thus'guard¬ ed by the invaluable interference of friendship, the mother, whose Undue and injurious fondness of her son had incited her to a resolution of depending upon his not entering on so serious a ■ con¬ tract without a certainty of those virtues and manners of which he well knew her estimation, and who was accordingly about to write in a style' to < please him, has written in the most firm yet affectionate manner to him; conjuring him, nay, commanding him to return to England on receiving her letter,' and b 6
not to think of forming any engagement till he sees . her. I am angry, but what does it signify — there is fate in it as in all things else, and men and women are but its puppets differently dressed up to act different parts. Though perhaps fate is Pottering on its throne with you -r take care — it is a resolute despot, and mar¬ rying Dartfbrd to a Belvoce may make a monk of you, as you are so determined not to marry. - The most absurd part of the history yet remains to be told. The same oppor¬ tunity which brought his letter to his mo¬ ther, brought one to Miss Saville, from her friend at Florence ; who, when she .wrote, had him enrolled on her list of suitors. Ofthis lady she talks as ofa second self) and wishes he had been wor¬ thy of her. Her name is Pisani-—per¬ haps you have heard of her before. They were brought up as sisters, and the af¬ fection of that tie exists between them in its dearest and purest state. It is de¬ lightful to hear the language of such friendship uttered by such beauty. I heard of your mauvaise aventure on
the Malvern road, from Godfrey, when the party returned to Manor House, and I felt for you — it was devilish mal-a- propos. I don't exactly know what they think of it — After the first unavoidable notice of occurrences, the family ceased the mention ofthe Bramblebears. I once asked Miss Saville her opinion of Lady Betty : —the answer was short. " I can only speak of her person," said she, " I think her handsome, and well- formed." She immediately spokeof somethingelse. Silence indicates thought; but, be that what it will, it is softened, if not altogether obliterated, by the impressions at Grove Park, by the happy 26th of October. You are no longer a dreaded character at God¬ frey's ; every individual extols you, loves you, prays for you — are you not mad in refusing the hearts of this group ? Your account of the arrival at Grove Park made my heart beat quicker than usual — I thank you for the sensation — that your feelings were as you tell me is not to be doubted, but I almost doubt my senses, when I hear that you reject
all repetition of them—that you dash the bowl of bliss out of the hand that offers it to you. In following you to your bower next morning, I have no wish to penetrate in¬ to the sanctuary, at the expence of a pang, such as I see it must cost you to open it. I can easily conceive, Darrell, what it all means, and how such an ima¬ gination as yours can work up a com¬ mon incident, into all the refinements of a deep tragedy; — but, my friend, a fine imagination is the worst gift of Nature, when employed upon the sinister events oflife f and it behoves Reason to curb it. Without this check Nature is her own enemy, sacrificing all her joys to the in¬ dulgence of one gloomy fancy. . Poor Miss Saville must have been dreadfully shocked, when the idea of suicide presented itself to her, — what action of your's could have raised such an idea, so contrary to the resolutions I have heard you express on that sub¬ ject ? But be that what it may, every thing that passed in the bower, convinces me of the state of your heart, and I
really believe I may say of her's: and 1 sincerely hope that your studies will lead you to the worship of the God of Love, whether you find him in your Bible, or in the hearts of each other. Nothing wiil give me greater pleasure, than to be the medium of conveying to her sentiments that may promote the hap¬ piness I wish you both. I would repeat to you, that you have no time to be dis¬ cussing delicate points of imagination, were I not of opinion that her heart is at anchor — yet trust not to this — If the ground be unsure and open to storms, the anchor may be weighed and cast in a safer harbour. A few days ago, my sister gave an en¬ tertainment — it was a pleasant one, but I saw to what point admiration flowed, and in the midst of my gaiety, I thought of you, and wished my friend Lord Ma¬ riton at the devil. There are others touched, but he seems the most desper¬ ately wounded. The Godfreys '^ive a ball on Christmas-eve. Will you not come down here before ? You will find a friend in Lady Mount-Vernon 5 I won't swear
that the Godfreys and Savilles have not made her quite in love with you, but I suppose you wiil take no advantage of this intelligence, as you are sure thatyou are no gallant. — Pray put your books aside for the holidays, and come down, -and if you like I will invite Rufus for fun. Of La Belle I shall nothing at pre¬ sent— she and her dear Augusta, as she calls her, are so much together, that I cannot even breathe a sigh ; but I fear I begin to be too seriously of your opi¬ nion that "she is beautiful."—I some¬ times venture a look, as I accompany my guitar — She sings sweetly herself— but ^of voice none can be boasted near her Florence cousin. I do not wonder at the " momentary uncomprehended some¬ thing," that hers in unison with the or¬ gan created. I have myself felt some¬ thing like that something — only I com- preh^ded it, and it was not momentary ,— whin I have listened enchanted as she sungi;o the havmony ofthe piano. She plays and sings, however, but seldom, and seems to prefer painting. She makes
her cousin sing and play, and pretends to Jike to hear me make a noise with the guitar. I conjure you, my dear Darrell, to come down next week, and stay till we go to town, which is to be about the end of January, before Parliament meets. — If you will not come, let me hear from you. Ever yours,
L. Vernon.
LETTER XXXIX, Sir Francis Darrell to Mr. Vernon. May Fair, Dec. JNo, my dear Vernon, no—-I cannot present myself at balls and concerts — I thank you for your invitation, and Lady Mount-Vernon, and your other friends for their good will. I neither sing nor dance at present, but it is some hap¬ piness to know that you are all so happy, and that you are all enjoying life at this exhilarating season — Why should I dis¬ turb the fancy? If happiness can be fancied, fancy it by all means —but if you value the fancy, beware how you look skin-deep into one another's faces, lest you meet opinions to sweep away the smiles that compose the joys of the hete¬ rogeneous assemblage. How many in the hundreds that will be dancing about
the Savilles and Godfreys on Christmas- eve would shed a tear if they were to die to-morrow ? Which would be the greater grief, the death or the* disappoint¬ ment ? Is there a man or a woman among them, that could bear to lay open the thoughts of the heart to the fellow- being entitled bosom-friend ? Will there be a spinster in the room, who will not dart the venom of envy on matchless beauty?—a he creature whose swimming eye will not tarnish it/with the licen¬ tious effusions ofhis rank thoughts? — a Mariton who will not presume on his sweet person hung to the tinsel cords of a title ? Oh Vernon, Vernon ! Is this adul¬ terated existence worth'clinging to? No, " man's happiest lot is not to be." And shall this " beauty, too rich* for use, for earth too dear," be exposed to the inde¬ licate gaze of every lord and commoner of your brother's and of Mr. Godfrey's acquaintance? You will tell me yes; and you will turn some jest upon the love-feeling jealousy, and all that, which your letter has created in my stormy bo-
som — I know it — I give you leave — I will bear every thing from you, Ver¬ non ; for, in spite of your participation in the nature ofthis hodge-podge of for¬ tuitous atoms, I have found in you, and in you only, a realizing of what my early reading taught me to picture as friend¬ ship. You bear with me, and I confess there is much to bear — and, if I wanted further conviction, it lies unfolded before me in the letter I have just received from you. I thank you for it — if it probes, it also cleanses and refreshes — I thank you for it — it has given me some pain; it has given me much pleasure. I am not so wedded to my opini¬ ons, or so blinded by my peculiar feel¬ ings, as not to perceive that I have given you the usual grounds of judging the state of my heart towards Miss Saville to be what is denominated the passion of love; —nay, I am half persuaded myself that it is; but there is one undeniable proof to the contrary : I have never yet combined, nor ever can combine, her image in my mind with the idea of mar-
riage. I am sensible that she possesses the greatest interest in my heart — an interest, call it a love, that would impel me to devote my fortune to her, to lay down my life for her; but it raises not the hope or the wish of making her mine. On the other hand, I seem to detect something, — for you are not more clear-sighted than I am watchful on this point — in the repugnance I feel, and which I know I have already be¬ trayed in this letter, to image her as another's; —but then, though this would be a symptom in ordinary cases, it is not so in mine; mine is not an ordinary case.—I think no man deserves her, and thence my repugnance: —she is divine, and corrupt mortals should not approach her, I least of all — I, who never would be accepted if known; and to be accepted, not known, would be to commit a murder worse than the first — that I mean which deserved the curse of Cain. — It is very clear, Vernon, very clear, that my heart, im¬ pressed as it is, does not lead me to think of Miss Saville, with the passion of a lover; and all that you have said, and
said so sweetly, but serves to animate my resolution of never carrying cor¬ ruption and horror to her arms. — Oh! never. You exclaim : " What neither think of her yourself, nor sufier another ? Doom her to a life of celibacy! Send her back to Italy to be in time promoted to the government of a nunnery! — I do not say so — she ought to bless ------ whom ? Let your imagination create me a man worthy of her, give him a name, and tell it to me, that I may answer. But tell me not of fops, and loungers, and lords; and your friend Mariton is all three com¬ bined in one. Sweep him off, I beseech you, as you would a wasp from the finest ripening peach on your tree. Ifl talked Of Dartford for i a moment, it was that I looked on him as a being yet unformed, whom she might mould, and raise to some degree of worthiness—but among the beings already formed, let her not search — besides, he is abroad, and there was time to give judgment and circumstances their chance—but here are your beaux
t ;
regularly summoned/to taste the nectar of her: eye*: and; bid largely for the vin¬ tage^ sLibeseech'you,. Vernon, by the friendship you. profess for me, : by the Sanctity; of, yet .unblemished beauty^ by the enchantment^ of ■ yirgin-loye, to pro¬ tect- the bloom -of this incomparable girl. Do I not ;know men ? ; Do I not know thisj Lord;Mariton ? Would I suffer him ^ hiimy house?; Your brother is, very care¬ less in these things,: but Mr. Godfrey is not, i.and perhaps 'ihe ;is not invited to Manor; House, ;on .Christmas-eve. But hej or any} other contaminate -of the source of love;, ; wherever,.that source is found ; ; pure,; shpuld: be. rigidly fenced 4 out —• laugh j yVernon, ; laugh, if you plea.se, but think not that I have forgot¬ ten myself—; I say where :that ; ; is found pure. —,This is ; no preaching of a sinner against himself ;-r-I have told you again and again,, corrupting; others was nevei' my sin—-yet sinner I am, and even she, my tasking angel, could not wish a sincerer penitent than I also am ;—This by the way ------
Your pleasant prescription would re¬ quire no force if I were in a state to take it. — Mine is no childish shuddering — but an insurmountable impediment. My dear Vernon, your language is indeed very strong, but you are mistaken ; I am sure you are mistaken, if not altogether in the state of my heart, completely in the state of HERS, which your empha¬ tical dashes would try to persuade me beat but for me. It is not, it must not be so — wretched indeed would be her lot, and doubly wretched mine — we never can be united. Could I forget this, and you would prove that conception of yours true, I — but why do I yield me to this groundless suggestion of your buoyant spirits! —You were right before, when you said that the saving of my soul was the concern she had for me; — it was nothing else — it is nothing else. I do think your judgment good — good in general; but you see when you came to the indications on her part, you could not proceed, you could specify none. Pon¬ der ! I ponder to madness. — Her enemy ! I should indeed be her enemy were I to 2
attempt to gain her affections. I believe I must beg you to desist writing on the subject. Take care, take care, do not persuade me to so damnable an act. — I have saved her from some savage villain, and shall I place a canker-worm in her breast ? — You speak of her as she de¬ serves : — « Such a woman does not pre* sent herself every day/' It may be even true that " such a woman is all I want;" — but think not, my friend, that all that is wanted by her soul (for she has a soul) can be found in me. I am "no longer the dreaded character at Godfrey's." — Why? They know me not; and they estimate me by a few late acts, which sparkle.—Vernon, I must open my heart to you, cost me what it will—but not now — not on paper— when we next meet it will be time enough. You shall judge whether it be madness iu me, or virtue, to refuse " the hearts of this group/* I merit not love, but 1 would not be hated —abhorrence from ruch beings would be the height of misery. Refuse their hearts! Why, man, I would give the world to possess them but VOL. III. c
jbhinkyou it is on me they would bestow them ? No, it is on virtue : — what of that they have seen in me effaces even slander by its native brightness, which illumines every agent of it vvith its glory. They know no more, they seek no more ; but the heart itself rejects that homage which it cannot claim. I know not whether hatred is not more tolerable than love, which a clear sight of its object would convert to abhorrence. " An empty ancl a desolate heart she will fill, and she will renovate." What honied words are these! Where have you collected such sweet poison ? It is the insane root That takes the reason prisoner. — It binds the senses to imagination, and gives a seeming reality to the unsubstan¬ tial conceptions of the brain — the thought alone filled my heart, renovated my blood — for a moment—but for a moment — and the void and + he desola¬ tion became more intolerable. You see I answer your letter almost word by word. You are, in general, as
attentive to points as myself; in yours —■ but it is very excusable where you are — one or two things escaped you to which mine might have suggested a reply. I expressed an inclination to have the meeting with Lady Betty at Malvern cleared up, to have it satisfac¬ torily proved that it was accidental. This is, one thing you make no reply- to. I requested, if you had an oppor¬ tunity, that you would let Miss Saville know how Iwas occupied: — a second point unnoticed. I think I may mention, as a third, your not telling me whether you had had an opportunity of not say¬ ing that I was unhappy or gloomy, that is, of contradicting the idea, if it hap¬ pened to be expressed. Pray laugh on; but after your laugh, be serious. I will now tell you something of my studies, of which you may impart as much as your friendship appreciates. __ I cannot boast of much progress in the religious history of the Jews. I meet stumbling-blocks at every step I take. The subsequent dispensation in favour of the rest of the world equally gravels c 2
me. Vicarious compensation! and the victim a Deity! — One advance in favour pf the Bible I have made — I do not open it to laugh. 1 do not, it is true, find conviction in it; but I have met with many sublime and exquisite passages. I have shut it up for a time, but intend to return to it; meanwhile I have been studying Plato, and with rather more success, If the Son of Joseph and Mary had had sufiicient education, I should suspect he too had studied him. In the works of that divine philosopher we find the embryo of a Trinity, and the full birth of immortality. You must read these works, Vernon, with great atten¬ tion j you must resume your Greek —. tbat I know will cost you but little time 5 but if it took you ten years it would repay you. That great mind conceived Divine attributes; and the Being possessed of them must be a Deity. He conceived noble qualities flowing from a deity to a being created by him. Man must be this noble creature: — the existence ofa good God and ofa good man necessarily implies Omnipotence in the former and
immortality in the latter: if a good man dies eternally, what shall be said of the goodness, of the justice of the Deity ? What is chance ? Incongruity, or a soli¬ tary consonance amidst universal dis¬ order. — What is order ? Unifbrm direc¬ tion. — Order is the proof of intention — intention proves mind—infinite inten¬ tion an infinite mind — an infinite mind is God. So far these deductions are clear; but there is one.attribute of a, God. wanting, or is not so clear, a prime m attribute too in respect to 1 mankind. I I told you I could not be a» Manichean. What am I to do ? 1 every where see signs of malignity. Here it is then that my faith is to have its first trial* -*- There is a God proved in every other respect to my understanding -*- it only remains for me not to believe either in my senses or in the reasoning faculty with which nature has endowed me. It is a hard morsel to digest — I must give, it time. I do not hesitate, however, to say at once — that there is a God, and that there ought to be an immortality, but not an immortality of vipers. These c 3
confessions, I fear, will appear to the Tasking Angel but a poor progress, but, such as it is, if it will give her pleasure, do not withhold it. Shall I write a scrap myself in the envelope of my letter for you to tear off and give her? Will it not be presuming on the interest I may have excited ? Wili it appear odd to her father or her cousins ? It shall be but a few words, and I will leave it to your discretion. . In concluding, letmethank you fbryour pleasant airy French lines, and Mr. John Partford's amorous versatility. Ifl had your gaiete de cceur, I would run this John and Rufus as a pair, and marry the one to Miss Kitty, the other to Martha. But I am in too serious a mood—so adieu. Write to me very soon, and let me know if Lord Mariton is invited. Ever yours,
F. Darrell*
Written on the cover qf the foregoing letter. If the Task has ever been thought of again by Miss Saville, it may not dis¬ please her to learn that her catechumen, if slow, is serious ; that he has found a God, and thinks that there ought to be an im¬ mortality. F. D.
c 4>
LETTER XL. Mr* Vernon to Sir Francis Darrell. Mount-Vernon^ Dec. 26th* MY DEAR DARRELL, You know me too well to suspect for a moment that I should be so brutal as to have delayed answering your letter till to-day, had I received it in time to com¬ ply with your desire of writing without delay, though, upon the whole, I am not sorry that the delay unavoidably occurred — why it did, you shall know presently : meanwhile be easy, perturbed spirit, and patiently await your fate. We have been to Bath. As soon as I tell you what pro¬ duced the excursion, away flies the blood again up to your head, and the Lord have mercy upon you! You ought to be cautious, Darrell, for the flying of the blood to the head is the prevalent mode at the court ofthe scythe-sceptred Dry-
bones, and has been for some years — pray send for a surgeon, and be bled before j ou read any farther. Well, taking for granted that a vein has been breathed, and ten or twelve ounces of blood subtracted, you may go on. A fixed head-ach for a day or two, attended with an unaccountable depres¬ sion of spirits, had made a slight alter¬ ation on the countenance and whole ap¬ pearance of La Belle's dear Augusta, Sir Francis Darreli*s tasker, Mr. Vernon's beauty, Lord Mariton's — what shall I say ? charmer, divinity, idol, whichever of these you please. It was first observed by Mr. Saville, next day by her cousins both. At dinner Godfrey proposed, as the best remedy, a change of place; 4 and that, without more ado, we should set out the very next morning, and take a run to Bath:—it was immediately agreed upon and executed. It proved a very pleasant trip, and had the desired effect; for La Belle's dear Augusta — Homer and Vir¬ gil repeat whole passages, mayn't I ? — Sir Francis Darrell's tasker, Mr. Vernon's beauty, Lord Mariton's — what shall I, c 5
say ? is returned perfectly restored — with the exception of a slight degree of a symptomatic affection, called mus¬ ing, observable by an experienced prac- 'titioner about the muscles of the lips, 'and hy the narrowing of the space between the eyelids, while the eye it¬ self seems occupied with no external object. This, is observed by nobody but me, and it is by no means a dangerous affec¬ tion, though it probably prevented her dancing so much the night before last, as she would otherwise have done. Be quiet ; — she did not once dance with Mari¬ ton. — Surely, there is anodyne enough in that to let me go on regularly, that is, in my own way, without reversing the order of things, to come to the ball at Manor House before we have been to the pump-room at Bath. I really feel for you, my dear Darrell, but I must not treat your disease too tenderly; I must not sigh and moan with you; I must rally, and laugh to rouse you, and roused you shalibe to happiness, if ever happiness was known on earth, or your romantic caprice and wire-drawn refinements de~ not overset it all.
I have told you the immediate cause of our going to Bath, but the remote cause is to be traced some hundred and thirty or forty miles nearer lo the cele¬ brated region of- fire-worship, in a cer¬ tain spot called May Fair. Now listen: — you were more than half angry with me for not forcing a conversation with Miss Saville, on the subject of your gallop with Lady Betty. — AIM could do at that time I did, and I told you how she cut the concern. — Her manner taught me that it was not to be repeated.-— Circumstances remaining as they were, I should never have introduced it again ; but it was your good or bad fate, that Lady Barbara liked the joke; and having heard Miss Saville mention you with some degree of enthusiasm — " Ay, my dear," said she to her, be¬ fore Lady Mount-Vernon and me,' " Tel advise you to take care of him; — he is a very good creature in some things, and a confounded bad one in others. They say he is very bold, and makes love to every woman he meets." ** "He appeared to me the reverse of c 6
bold," said your beautiful champion, " and I hope that he is belied in other respects as well as in that." " Law ! my dear," replied Bab, " you know nothing at all about him y — he has behaved very well to you, to be sure, but there's no knowing where things will end with such a chap," I watched Miss Saville's countenance: I saw her muster resolution not to let it vary. " Don't be severe, Bab," said my sis¬ ter, "you know nothing but by hear¬ say." -— " That's so like you," replied she; " I should be glad to know," continued she, laughing, " how I should know any thing but by hearsay ? Dear me! I like the fellow — there's no fear of his doing me any harm. I don*t wish to scandalize him, only I would not have this dear girl like him too well/* "My dear Lady Barbara," said she, " do not be afraid of that; — I wish him well, but I shall never like him too well/' A slight stress on tbe word' too con-
veyed something of equivocation to my ear. " The devil's in the man," resumed Lady Bab, laughing, " why does not he get married himself and leave other peo¬ ple's wives alone ?" Miss Saville said not a word, but kept her eyes on Lady Bab, as if afraid they should meet mine. I said — " Darrell is slandered." " Hah! Lewy!" cried she, " hold you your tongue, or— •" here she stopped and laughed. " I rather think with my brother," said Lady Mount-Vernon. " Well," pursued Lady Bab, laughing, " if you won't believe your ears, believe this dear girl's eyes." "Mine!" cried Miss Saville, slightly colouring. " Law I my dear, to be sure, at Mal¬ vern : —-1 don't know the particulars; but Tim Dawson says he had his arms about Lady Bet, and that you saw it. — But I saw enough myself at Bramblebear Hall befpre ever you knew him. It's an old affair now." Confounded, but not confused, the
lovely girl was at a loss how to attend to a conversation as new as improper for her ear: — but, invoked in testimony ■against you, she coloured deeper than before,- and with a look in which there was dignity mingled with some anger and more sorrow, she said, she was not surprised that the man who could take such a liberty with her name, did not scruple to report a falsehood of Sir Francis Darrell. " Law, my dear," cried Lady Bar¬ bara. " And permit me to add," continued Miss Saville, without suffering the in¬ terruption, " we cannot have a stronger lesson of caution how we give ear to report." " Why, my dear," roared Lady Bab. -— " And," said your persisting defender, " I must observe, that the detection of this falsehood affords me grounds to be¬ lieve that all else reported against him may be false." — ' Lady Barbara essayed another inter¬ ruption, but in vain; truth and feeling were afloat, and the tide of sentiment
on which they rode was not to be stopped. " Sir Francis Darrell's actions as far as I know them," continued she, " bespeak a very high character: his generosity is un¬ bounded, and his attention to the rules of delicacy scrupulous in the extreme. I must repeat, Lady Barbara, that I am in no danger of liking him too well; but the gratitude I shall always feel towards him prompts me to wish that my esteem may not fall short of what is his due. It is a pity that the falsehoods of reports cannot be all as fully and as quickly detected as this; they might then re¬ dound to the credit of the slandered person, as this does." Lady Barbara did not laugh as usual, but looked rather sorry. " My dear," said she, " you take this thing too serious by half: — but Tim Dawson did not invent it — I'll be shot if he did ; and it was natural enough for me to believe it, after what I saw with my own eyes at Bramblebear Hall iri the summer." ** Bab," said my sister, " let us drop
the conversation, it cannot be agreeable to Miss Saville;—your eyes were per r haps deceived." — " You mean they were perhaps too sharp," cried Bab, —" but, law! I would not hurt.this dear girl for the world; and, as I told her, I myself think Darrell a very good creature; don't you be angry, my dear.''^— " Indeed Lady Barbara," saicl she, " I am not angry; I have no cause to be angry with you ; and, as far as concerns my opinion of Sir Francis Darrell, this foolish assertion of the gentleman, your friend" — " No friend of mine, my dear," cried the rapid Barbara, " no friend of mine ; — hunts with my cousin, takes a hunting dinner here now and then, rides well, but got the deuce of a somerset about this time twelvemonth, the 11th y I should not have pulled up to look after him if he had broke his neck, not I: — no particular .friend of mine I assure you." , . This eloquent rebutter of my cousin Bab's was in. fact 4nspjred by a consGi-
ousness that Mr. Timothy Dawson, em¬ boldened by the concern she had ex¬ pressed at his fall, and certain consols to the amount of thirty thousand pounds, with a squint at a cousin's right of chase at Mount-Vernon, had shown symptoms of aspiring at her Ladyship's third finger of the left hand. Diana did not set the hounds upon him to worry him up ; but then his case was distinguishable from Acteon's; it was all fair and above board, and though his goddess laughed him into a mute centaur, she continued, and continues, to hunt with him when¬ ever he pleases to join. the hounds. Lady Mount-Vernon smiled. " Barbara," said I —. " None of your jokes, Mr. Vernon," cried she, with her pleasant soft laugh. " I'll have none of your jokes; come, my dear," putting out her hand as she went across the room to Miss Saville — " kiss and be friends." And down she popped her head and ravished a kiss. You would have been as jealous as Kitely, had you been there and in my position. She had on her
riding-habit and a round black hat; and as she bent I saw only her bust, with, her florid cheeks and round face: if you had not taken her for a Bacchus embracing Ariadne, you would have sworn it Avas an impudent fellow kissing your Tasker, — only there was no re¬ sistance on her part, and on Bab's part she gave a smack as if she liked it; — but remember Bab's a woman. I longed to trim her, both for the scandal and the kiss, but I thought it better not to bandy jests with her; and therefore I only took the opportu¬ nity of assuring the party with a serious face, that I knew for a certainty, to which I pledged my honour, that the meeting at Malvern was unexpected by you. In spite of Bab's beginning a laugh, which she curtailed of more than three parts of her usual ha ha's, your champion was pleased even in a higher degree than was perceived by her two friends. I thought she thanked me by her look, and the more that she deemed it proper to restrain her own instrument of words. Now comes a blast, in the shape of
Mariton : bear it well, it will soon be over. But in he came, just at the con¬ clusion of this smacking pacification of the Belligerent Powers, a newspaper in his hand. His devoirs were no sooner paid than he exclaimed, — " Well! who can this couple be ?" " A couple of hounds ?" asked Lady Bab. «« A couple of distinction," replied he. " Another elopement ?" quoth Bab. « c Even so," responded my Lord, " another and another." Some of our Vortex, thought I. " Let me see," said I, taking the paper out of his hand. I easily found the paragraph^ as a cross in ink was put to it by way"of reference. " I wonder Caroline is so long," said Miss Saville, not liking the topic, or dreading the perusal of the paragraph, " she was to have taken me up at two, and it is ten minutes past." " Dear! my dear," said Lady Barbara, " you always give half an hour's law: — come Lewy, an't you going to read ?'*
I handed the paper back to Lord Mariton, who read as follows: — " Report talks of the elopement of a lady in her way from Cheltenham to Bath with a gentleman, the intimate friend of her husband:-— they are whis* pered to be a couple of distinction, Sir * * * * and Lady ***** who are off for the continent." — — " I think I hear the carriage," said Miss Saville, rising and going to the window. " So it is," added Lady Bab, following her, " there it is yonder, turning round the fir plantation: outlaw! my dear, what good ears you must have to hear it a mile off!" " These reports, my Lord," said my sister, " deserve nothing but contempt: this will be contradicted to-morrow." " If it is not true," replied Mariton, ',' and I were Sir Francis Darrell — " -—"Sir Francis Darrell!" said I, " you know that he is my friend ?" — * " I do, and I therefore give you my authority: it is the talk at Acheson's, House in Hereford,"
" I take upon me" said I, " to pledge myself to you that it is false; may I then beg of you to contradict it ?" He assured me he would: — I then declared loud enough to be heard in every part of the room, that I had lately received a letter from you, and knew that you were much engaged at your house in town. You see what it is, Darrell, to have a character. — There was fo me, who was watching every muscle of indication, an evident agita¬ tion in the bosom of your lovely friend: I fear it was not unobserved by Lady- Barbara and my sister. She made seve¬ ral blunders in her replies to Lord Mari¬ ton, and was all but rude to him. The Godfreys soon took her away. They had left her, at her own desire, to pass an hour with Lady Mount-Vernon ; and, after visiting the Thomsons and the Westerns, whose places in this neigh¬ bourhood you know, they returned to take her up. Whatever my sister, or Lady Barbara thought, they disclosed no suspicion respecting the state of her heart, but in perfect unison resounded
her praise, which Mariton echoed with idolatrous grimaces and contortions. You may depend upon it, he is desper¬ ately in love; and you have no right to be angry with him for having eyes as well as you : the truth is, that he is not above the level of the herd, and that instead of being an ornament to his title, his title is his <ihief ornament. Miss Saville's discernment should have been enough to set you at your ease with respect to him; but since that is not sufficient, have patience to go through vyhat I have to write, and you shall have more vulgar inducements. A day or too after this, I rode over to Manor House, and observed the change in Miss Saville which I have mentioned, and which I could not but attribute then, and still do, to the effects produced on her feelings that day at .Mount-Vernon. I naturally made the observation of a change to Godfrey, and found it had struck .them all, but very free from my attributions. Considerable ■uneasiness was the consequence, and Godt- frey, as I told you, proposed at dinner 3
the excursion to Bath; Mr. Saville, as he seconded the motion, saying, " Ver¬ non, you must go with us." — Vous con~ cevez bien, that I did not want much pressing on the occasion. The only question was, what was to be done with the ball for Christmas eve ? It did not require a debate; after a short convers¬ ation across the table, it was agreed, that the whole affair, decorations, taste and all, should be left to the experience of the housekeeper and butler, who were to receive such friends as had been in¬ vited to come a day or two before and take their beds in the house, if the mas¬ ter and mistress were not at home in .time to do the honours of hospitality themselves ; and that, if Miss Saville was not better in the course of a week, the ball should be put off altogether, and apologies written to the company in¬ vited. Thank Heaven! Miss Saville was better in the course of the very first day, and, before the end of the proba¬ tionary week, was as well as ever she was in her life, and more beautiful than ever,
Something of our story at Bath you will naturally expect of me. Miss Saville was the only one of the party to whom that city was new, and she admired it much. She observed that the Italians, as far as she had yet been able to judge, sur¬ passed us in the magnificence of their edifices, their churches, and their palaces, but that for moderate domestic habit¬ ations, cleanliness, and comfort, she had seen no town in any part of the world which could at all compare with Bath. The baths, the public rooms, the assem¬ blage of company from every part of the kingdom, excited her admiration. Having cordially expressed all she felt in appro¬ bation of the town, she with equal can¬ dour owned that she was struck with one effect of its being a popular rendezvous, which she could not but think was to be lamented, that was, it was a centre of attraction for all the loungers ofthe king¬ dom, a character painful to contemplate, as well as dangerous to virtue; not that this was more the character of Bath than that of every other such rendezvous. And the fact, Darrell, is, that the Vortex
is generally peopled with loungers, and beings that have nothing to do but amuse themselves. I think she was rather fastidious on the subject; however, it is certain that she unconsciously marked to her cousin with displeasure some persons, who, I knew, only preserved their places in company by means of the Spartan virtue. Above all, she could not bear the personal exposure of our Vor¬ tical ladies. I have seen her look at her cousin with a kind of reflected shame, when she has found herself near any of those Nudes ofthe Vortex ; — ahd to the Vortex, I believe, they peculiarly helong: indeed I must own this Vortical expo¬ sure, which classes women in their taste and appearance with the abandoned, is always considered among us as the signal of unprotected virtue. Qn the "whole* she admired Bath, But I must not confine myself to tell¬ ing you how she admired; — I must change to the passive voicd, and tell you how she was admired: though you will imagine this better than I should paint VOL. III. d
it, yet even your imagination must be allowed its full scope to come near the fact. Were I to dwell upon all that hap¬ pened, and all that was asked and said, my letter, already long, would not come to an end this week, and I have yet much to add. Vortical subjects in mass I must leave behind at Bath, where our whirling friends generally conglomerate about Christmas. You would be asto¬ nished at the variety of personages con¬ stitutional and professional that enter the system. We have not only Vortical loungers, like myselfi but Vortical states¬ men, Vortical legislators, Vortical law¬ yers, Vortical physicians, Vortical sur¬ geons, Vortical divines, — these are in general, the evangelical Rufus's friends— Vortical hunters, Vortical farmers, Vor¬ tical brewers, Vortical actors, Vortical musicians, authors, philosophers, soldiers, sailors, lords and ladies of all ranks, matrons and spinsters Of all ages, twirling away j and, as the crowd moves round, it is perpetually attracting new, thought¬ less subjects:
'* The gathering number as it moves along, Involves a vabt involuntary throng," all in pursuit of the fascinating idol, whose bells mark her circle, and lead them on to " Roll in her vortex, and her power confess." Among those whom we left at Bath, you may be sure I was not a little pleased to include the Bramblebears; — they arrrived the day before we set out on our return to Herefordshire. It had a better,effect than all the mineral waters in the world could have had, and if any thing was wanting to the complete restor¬ ation of our patient's spirits, as well as her general health, here we had it. One ofthe Vortex we brought away, — for one, notwithstanding your exclusion of him, my friend Rufus undoubtedly is, evangelically, though no divine. I found him in the pump-room, discoursing to a group of Vortical females in scriptural phraseology, than which nothing can be more injurious to the Scriptures. I be¬ lieve he left them in the middle of a sentence to fly to us, and such transfu- d 2 '
sions!- He hinted so plainly, then begged so hard to spend a few of the holidays with us, that not to indulge him was im¬ possible, though I fear the poor devil will long repent the freak; but more of this anon. Before I proceed, my dear Darrell, I will attend as seriously as I caUj or rather as I ought, to the state of your disease, for by my skill in nosology, after some doubt whether it was syncope or palpi- tatio, I am clearly of opinion it is a compound genus, belonging to different orders, but of the same class, to wit, neuroses, and that it requires a light treatment; we must, therefore, fall upon some means of removing the impediment you are sensible of, to your taking the pleasant dose I prescribed for you, and a better cannot be. I have again been studying your case in your last letter, and my opinion of the nature of it is completely confirmed. It is unnecessary to enumerate all the new confirming symptoms; the grand obstruction in the oesophagus, in plain English, is nothing more than a lump in the throat, an hys-
terical ball, more common to be sure in female subjects. They take drops of ether; you shall have ethereal draughts! this is a medicine that will make its way in spite of all lumpy. Dear Darrell, if 1 leave this strain for another, it must be to vent rage. Here is bliss, bliss un¬ paralleled, meeting you, and there are you curvetting and skipping from one side of the road to the other to let it go by. I do think you avo mad . Corrup¬ tion and horror! Zounds! — I can't help swearing. And what is this cor¬ ruption and this horror ? I don't want you to tell me particulars ; — I can tell you generals, which you know contain particulars. — A girl breaks her heart for a boy : — to dissipate chagrin, he plunges into follies, called by the grave ones vices: — hence a tremendous character. This is your corruption and horror, I have no doubt. Well now; allowing it, have not you suffered enough to wash it away? Don't you declare yourself a sincere penitent ? — you are half a Chris¬ tian already. Talk as you will, you never were iu love before. Love is the passion d 3
of a man; in a child it is an aftection without judgment; it is too mighty for a half-grown heart. It may be sweet and something like it, but it is not love ; ■— not such a passion as at this moment fills and/expands your heart for your Au¬ gusta. What words! How unexpect¬ edly did they flash upon your eye ! Yes, your Augusta. — Yours — that is, if you please, Sir Francis, no compulsion bping intended- "Darrell, ^uu say, you will never marry her; — she says the same of you ; the meaning of which, in our mother-tongue, is,, that you aie both de¬ termined to go a great way round to come at last to your destination, all to avoid a style or two in the short cut, which I am ready to help you over. The truth is you are a couple of congeeing folks, perpetually hoXQ-d'ye-do-ing and good-bye-ing " And now you salute her with congen profound, Then her ladyship curtsies halfway to the ground." Now this is all very fine, but to my mind it is neither so natural, nor so plea¬ sant as Lady Bab's plump, " Come, my dear, let's kiss and be friends."
In giving me credit for my gaiete' du cmur, my dear Darrell, I know you think me incapable of indulging it wantonly, while you are suffering seriously. I re¬ ceived your letter only on the evening previous to the ball at Manor-House. I believe I read it with an emotion almost, if not altogether, equal to yours when you wrote it. I read it again the next morning, and it left a very serious im¬ pression upon my mind, one that would be the most painful I ever received in my life, if it were not accompanied with a hope that your good sense will inter¬ pose, and assist me in determining you to combat and to conquer the monsters of your imagination, monsters more dangerous than the paw of the Hon or of the bear. Real evils may be over¬ come, but the shadowy evils of the brain defy the utmost skill of man. If I jest upon your feelings, my friend, it is with the view of reducing them to the proper standard of human nature, and to pre¬ vent that elevation of mind, which tends to exalt you beyond it, from rising to an exaltation of the brain. I entreat you to d 4
listen to me with patience, both when I am serious" and when I jest. I am most seripus now in telling you that you are in danger of the most dreadful horrors, if you do not get rid Of those imaginary ones with which you clothe some boyish acts, and from which it is incumbent upon/ypu s to deliver your mind. You say,-ypu f«; would never be accepted if Icnown" and that you " cannot bear the thought of being accepted; not known* 9 ' I agree with you in the latter part ofthis sentencej: .but not in; the former. I am sure jthat. riotlnngfvyhich you can possibly have to disclose) would sway the senti¬ ment of; such a woman as Miss Saville: but.-jput-it out of doubt. You will fe- mind-inecthat ybuwould once have;done this,.-, and /that; : she rejected the confi¬ dence.;:' That is no goodargument. She could riot, with delicacy, have done other¬ wise- at the time, or even now, as cir¬ cumstances stand : but there is an ob¬ vious^ way of obtaining her ear to all that you;,would impart. [Solicit her hand; You; must do this, and soon, or you ought, in honour, to think of her no more.
I know that the place you occupy in her mind excludes at present every other man; you are, therefore, bound, my friend, to take a decisive part, either to lock the chain upon her heart, or let her be convinced that it ought to be thrown cff. r You desire of my imagination to create you a man worthy of her, and to baptize him, that you may consent to her bless¬ ing him. Now, though such a creation as you ask for requires only something of a poetical fancy, neither the creation nor the christening is necessary: a little moulding is all that is wanted, and his name is Francis. The moulding work, I own, I find rather difficult; but if you will give me a hand heartily, we shall soon complete the figure most worthily, and then we will have his Worthiness blessed with all possible dispatch. I see that I am running into levity too soon again. Then, all trifling apart, I will now, before I attempt to amuse you, seriously consider your letter, and seri¬ ously perform the office cf friendship. I will not lose time in convincing you, that d 5
you are, in love. You already own it yourself in spite of your unintelligible distinction of never combining the image of your mistress with the idea of mar¬ riage. Another acknowledged fact is, that you would give the world to pos¬ sess the esteem and affection of her friends. The possession of such love as hers, and of such friendship as theirs, would be, beyond doubt, the summit of human felicity. I take upon me to say, that it is in your reach. You do not expect to hear that Miss Saville has been so weak as to declare such an attach¬ ment, nor would I have her suppose that I know her heart so well as I do. Dar¬ rell, she loves you : but she is not one of those damsels that lose their hearts. She has not lost her heart; she never will lose it. I am convinced she will give it to you, if you will but choose tp beg it. She is one.of those who can love what appears lovely, but who can, unin¬ jured, withdraw affection on being un¬ deceived. She speaks of you with a zeal, which, I well see, covers love, but also with a prudence which satisfies herself
that she may bestow her heart upon another man, if she finds that you are not the person to whom she ought to give it, I have the pleasure of con¬ versing with her frequently, and some¬ times, though rarely, alone, I have never lost an opportunity of speaking of you to her when 1 could do it without a risk of betraying my drift. I am a little selfish in doing this: it confirms my place in her good graces, for I won't give you all the merit of her favour, and makes me doubly agreeable, for there is no topic so agreeable to her. Now, my life on't, you will upbraid me with unkindness, or indolence, or I know not what, for not writing out all our conversations in re¬ gular dialogues; Vernon, Augusta, Ver¬ non, Augusta, through a whole quire of large post: Vernon. A cold morning, Miss Saville. Augusta. Very, indeed. Vernon. Where's Mrs. Godfrey. Augusta. She has a head-ach thisu morning* D 6
Vernon. I am sorry for it ~ I will send her some eau de Cologne —some. that Darrell brought from Paris. Augusta. Does Sir Francis recom¬ mend it ? Vernon. To rub.the temples when the head aches. Augusta, r Will you fill my bottle also ? Finis dialogic Godfrey came in, and thus ended a. dialogue, which contains more solid ar¬ gument in proof of a soul than you have found in the Phaadon you have been studying.— But again to be serious: I cannot give you all the little symptomatic traits that daily occur; but, though out of its order, you shall here have one which to me is decisive. I was puzzled how to deliver your note to her. I wished to aee the effect, but I did not wish others to observe it. I knew she would read it to her cousin,.hut, had I given it before her, it would have been in' such a man¬ ner as notf to produce any visible, effect — if done alone, I could indulge my
design suddenly, I had an opportunity of the latter. —Leaving Rufus to Lady Bab, if he should appear before I re¬ turned, which I had some reason to doubt, I rode over on the morning ofthe ball to Manor-house —I found her in her cousin's little book-room playing on the sofa with Caroline. I put a good deal of eagerness in my manner. •• Miss Saville," said I, " I have rode over myself from Mount-Vernon, with a letter for you." , "From Lady Mount-Vernon ?" " Oh no, from Darrell." I could at that moment have knocked my head against thewall, for daring to wit¬ ness so tell-tale a sensation. She would have hidden it. I hope she thinks that she did. If she had not been sitting, I think she would have fallen as if shot, by the sud¬ denness of my manner. As it was, she threw her face upon Caroline, and rub¬ bed it on her little neck, as if in con¬ tinuation of their play, which to be sure the child was courting; but I caught a sight ofthe blood lushing to her face before she could bury it between the
neck and the shoulder of the sweet laughing little girl, who looked like a Love fondled by one of the Graces. — But, though she could thus avert her features, she could not conceal the colour on her neck, so deep was the tinge produced by the name I had pronounced. " I beg your pardon, Mr. Vernon, this little rogue —" She went on, Caroline laughing the while, till she thought she was sufficiently relieved of her rosy hue, to show me her face, when she again begged pardon, and made the best of it, which I helped her to do, being as unconcerned and unob¬ servant as she could wish. I suffered the delay of her reply to rest with the little girl, and presented the cover of your letter. " It is directed to you," said she, "and open." " It is a short note," replied I, " writ¬ ten ,on, the envelope of a letter to me. He says it is for you." On reading it, not the slightest confu¬ sion .remaining on her countenance, she smiled, and said: —
" This is very delightful, Mr. Vernon ; if Sir Francis could know what real pleasure it has given me, it would per¬ haps be some gratification to him, for I believe he honours me with his esteem. Will you have the goodness to assure him that I am truly happy to hear of his pro¬ gress, and that I feel much obliged and flattered?" " I certainly will, if you please," said I, "but his gratification would be height¬ ened, if your pleasure were expressed in ar. answer to the note, under your own hand." " I believe," replied she, "that I must consider the note, though directed to you, addressed to me." " Clearly," said I. I firmly believe she danced less at night, by two dances at least, in conse¬ quence of receiving this note in the morning. Yesterday she gave me her answer, which you mill find enclosed—- w/#find! as if it was not read the first thing and kissed a dozen times, before you began with my letter!
But to be serious again, for I do some¬ how naturally slide out of the serious, which proves I was born for the Vortex, unless by a dilemma it may be proved that the Vortex has generated my levity — But to be serious, my dear Darrell. — In the face of demonstration you are doubt¬ ing, and frittering away happiness.— Your impediment you can, and must get rid of; yon must be worthy of her. — You are worthy,of her; your feelings prove it. You must confess yourself to her, and my life on't she will absolve you. — Her impediment must also be got rid of: but I fear it is of a more in- ' surmountable nature, and I find it less easy to advise you. It is her declared determination not to marry a man who is not a Christian, of course she cannot con¬ nect you with the idea of marriage.- I can only repeat seriously what I said jest- ■ ingly in; a former letter, I would have you do ,as all men of all religions do, aud'nothing more I believe is required — ' convince yourself, ' as far as you can,' and take the rest upon trust. I have. banished those subjects from my thoughts 7
long, but that is what I would do, if I were to take them up again; and I cer¬ tainly would take them up again, if I had such incitement to the study. You have already made an extraordinary pro¬ gress, such a one as has awakened some desire in me to see how you have brought it about — but zooks ! it is not time for me to think yet — the lively Vortex does not lose its charm at four-and-twenty: let those think who cannot dance ; let those reason who cannot laugh. There are two epochas in a man's life, when he ouglit to begin to think: the one is when he is going tobe married ; and the pther, when he is going to die. What use is there in thinking till one or other of these epochas? Now one of your epochas is at hand, and you are pro¬ perly occupied. I can't direct,you in mysterious matters, or I would most wil¬ lingly ; but I think your mistress could give you some hints that you might im¬ prove, and I shall wind up this serious part of my letter by advising you, by conjuring you, to declare your feelings to her, and let her reply be your guide how
to act. You will have no peace till you do this. And now I think I may go back to my friend Rufus, whom I left under Lady Bab's protection, when I rode over with your note to Manor-House in the morning of the day ofthe ball. He is a sinner, every inch, soul and body. — He is rapidly quitting all reserve with me — I once said to you that I thought of mak¬ ing a sinner of him ; he was ready made to my hand; he only wanted a little drill¬ ing to make him sin like a gentleman. His leer-is ahommahly parlante. I absolutely blush at times when I observe it, but it is all ascrihed by the ladies to his evangelical transfusing: I think he is making love to three at once, -Lady Mount-Vernon, La Belle, and her cousin. He has been trying to convert the last, and has actu¬ ally consulted me upon the possibility of a Cnristian marrying a Papist, assuring me that it is his only objection to offering himself to the young lady, and hoping that the light of reason might remove it. They seem to have forgotten or forgiven his taste for statues, after a successful
essay he made in the pump-room at Bath to recover himself; for when he eyed us, I clearly saw that the silk-stocking day was on his mind, and that he doubt¬ ed his reception by the ladies. Their " how-do-you-do Mr. Palmer," revived him, and he patted me on the shoulder, saying, as he pointed to the figure of Beau Nash: " That was the patron of the place and a man of true taste, and you see he has his clothes on. This is the resort of peo¬ ple of the finest taste, and yet you see they don't take his clothes off; tell me no more, my friend Mr. Vernon, of Praxitiles and Canova; their beautiful, vile works ought to be kept in their proper places, in long galleries and dark museums, and not erected along public roads to annoy modest pas¬ sengers, and scandalize our pure reli¬ gion. — " Here he squinted or leered at Miss Saville. " Yes, I say our pure religion, which admits of no statues or images, clothed or not clothed—I understand you," said
he, seeing me bend my brows, " 1 am talking of Beau Nash." Conceiving from my look that he was on forbidden ground, he lost his train of thought, and brought himself up with putting us in mind that he was talking of the figure before us, and he came to a dead halt. There was'a smile round our party, but it was one of kindness and pity, not of contempt — the very show of religion and virtue was enough with these kind hearts to ward off the last; and they thought, what was the fact, that his object was to atone for his error, and remove any unfavourable impression his simplicity might have made — this was enough for them. But the rogue did not deserve'thcir lenity. It was an outward and interested act. As they walked on I kept him back by the arm, and said, . " Don't you see, why the statuary did not undress Beau Nash?" "I protest, I don't," replied he, look* ing up at the Beau, " Look again." He looked*
" I did not think you so dull, Rufus," said I; " can you tell why the ancient Greek aad modern Italian sculptors gave their gods and goddesses slight or no drapery ?" " No doubt," replied he leering, «* to show the beauty of the figure." "Now," said I, "look at'Beau Nash — don't you think they did right to clothe him ?" " Yes, yes," said he, laughing out, and sporting wit, " I see clearly that the beauty of a beau is in his clothes; but one must conform to please, and I am very sure, that neither Mi's. Godfrey nor her handsome cousin would visit Kitty and Miss Palmer, if I had left the Venus in the grove," " Why, what have you been doing with your statues, Rufus ?" " They cost me too much," quoth Rufus, " to think of destroying them — you have not an idea of the expence, so I let the Faunus and the Water-Nymph stay in their places, by the advice of Hamilton, and only removed the- Venus."
"Pity!" cried I, "and where have you put her ?" " Safe enough," said he, " where only those may^ see her, who have an antique taste — in the oval recess of my study, where she stands most elegantly — the recess positively seemed made for her; and I have had a nice green Persian cur¬ tain fixed on a brass rod to slide occa¬ sionally before the recess. You have not an idea how the study is improved by it.— Libraries are proper places for statues." " Was that Hamilton's taste or yours ?" . " My own truly," cried he ; " posi¬ tively, my own." " 1 thought so," said I; " I was sure you had an antique taste ever since that morning that Martha caught you in the washhouse taking away the flannel petticoat." * Here Rufus transfusedideas—he would not speak, being mindful of his friend Hamilton's turpe dictu. He moved as he leered, and, joining the ladies, re¬ newed his demureness, and his sanctified phraseology. One such evangelical hy-
pocrite does more harm to the truths that may be found in the Bible than a dozen freethinkers. I shall keep him up a little longer, and then expose him to the God¬ freys. He has met with a ridiculous acci¬ dent, the account of which wili come in here very well. It was this that enabled me to leave him in the hands of Lady Bab, who, by-the-bye, is not so much taken in by him as my sister and our otlier friends. It was a fortunate accident for you, what¬ ever it was for him, as, if he could have sat on a horse, he would have accompa¬ nied me to Manor-House, and spoiled that delicious blush which was destined to send your blood in rapid waves pidsing to your heart. The frost had set in very sharply be¬ fore we left Bath, and still continues severe. — On the day we arrived, the housemaid was ordered to see the room prepared for Rufus well aired, and to warm his bed at night. He was in high spirits at the reception he met with, par¬ ticularly from Lady Mount-Vernon; and at night before we separated, he took his glass of brandy and water, in the mix-
ture of which I observed that the crystal ofthe water had not much attenuated the amber colour ofthe brandy, and I pre¬ sumed that he was preparing for a sound sleep. Whether it began to have a sopo¬ rific effect before he meant it should, or from some other cause, I don't know, but Rufus retired the first, and nearly half an hour before we separated. Lady Mount-Vernon and Bab were gone, and I had sent off Lord Mariton and Aspell, who had beds with us for the night, to their respective apartments. My brother remained below talking to his man, and I was marching up stairs to my chamber, when I met the housemaid running down in a fright. As soon as she savv me, she cried out "Oh! Sir! Oh, Mr. Vernon." " What ails the girl ?" — said I. "Oh! Sir! the gentleman — the gen¬ tleman —" " What gentleman ?" " The tall, slim, fair, red-headed gen¬ tleman." "What of him?"
*'Oh! Sir, I have warmed him—the warming-pan" — " What the deuce do you mean, child?" " It was quite a mistake. — Oh dear Sir, I shall never forgive myself if I have injured him. — I have warmed him, Sir. Pray think of my Lady's salve —" and away she darted on hearing Rufus roar. I flew to his room, which w r as contigu¬ ous to mine. There he was, standing by a fire going out in his shirt, which he held off behind that it might not touch hira. The maid had left her candle on tlie floor as she went in, and, unconscious of Rufus's danger, she had made more use of her hands than her eyes in untuck¬ ing the clothes at the foot of the bed, and had rapidly inserted the dire machine. Curled up by the cold like a dog on a rug, and set asleep by the brandy, the fire-charged pan came in contact with the roundest part of poor Rufus's body, and produced a roar, which Miss Broom took for a ghost; andshe fled, leaving the mischievous instrument unextricated to its vengeance, and not recollecting till VOL. Ill, e
she met me, that her fancied ghost might be the red-headed gentleman. There; sure enough, in the bed stuck the warm¬ ing-pan j there at the door was the can¬ dle, and there at the dying fire stood the dismayed, groaning Rufus. I cannot help laughing at the recollection, as the worst is over, for it was serious at the time — but being over we may as well laugh. " My dear fellow," said I, " what's the matter ?" " Oh oh-h!" " Let me see, pray—" " Oh-h-h ! Don't touch it." Upon examining the hurt, I found it was no serious injury j on which I said j " It must be touched." " Oh !"• cried he, " not for the world." " I knovv what will ease the pain," said I, recollecting the maid's advice to think , of her Lady's salve. Seeing it was only a little smarting, I wouid again have recommended Mate de Cologne, but I had too tender a heart, so I said 5 . , * « s My dear Rufus, stand just as you are till I come back." - t " I will," said he; " make haste."
H It was intensely cold, and I stirred the fire for him before I left him. — While I was doing it, I wickedly asked him if he thought Lord Mariton or Aspell could be of any service; if so, I would bring them back with me. " For Jesus' sake, don't," said he, and groaned. " Be easy then," said I. — "I won't; and they shan't even know what has hap¬ pened." * " Thank you! — make haste." I found Mount-Vernon still in the room below — he had heard of something be¬ ing the matter, and hearing that I was with the red-headed gentleman, he was staying to know what it was. — He was sorry, but could not help laughing. The waiting-women were with their ladies. " Go yourself to Bab's door," said Mount-Vernon, " and ask her for some salve." I took the hint. " Bab," said I, knocking at her door, *' I want to speak to you; I know you are not in bed yet." The door opened on a jar, and out E 2
popped Barbara's pleasant, round, ruddy face, surmounted with a man's double cotton night-cap. She knew something had happened. " What's the matter, what's the mat¬ ter ?" cried she, " More than you are aware of)" re¬ plied I, with a serious face. Bab opened the door, and came forward at the impulse of curiosity — she was in a flannel wrapping-gown. " Come, now, tell me what's the mat¬ ter, Lewy ?" " My dear Bab — I'll tell you to-mor¬ row, but do, for Heaven's sake, give me some salve for the present." " Tell me now," said she. ."One of the maids," said I, "has burnt poor Palmer almost to death." " Law! How did she manage that ?" quoth Bab. " I can't stay telling you all the parti¬ culars now— do give me some salve." " I will, if I have any — but, law! Lewy, how, and where, and with what is he burnt?" "Ifl tell you these, will you give me the salve without asking anymore questions?"
**.Lawl to be sure." ':«How?" V /*' Grievously." ; '« What with?" " A warming-pan." V** Where?" " . '".'I'll.-tell_ you to-morrow — do, give me the salve." % "Go along — what do you talk to. me about salve for5.1 have got no salve — go, and ask Lady Mount-Vernon; she has got plenty j I never keep any. — What should I do with it ?" " This is cruel of you, Bab." " Pho! ypu fool! tell him to put a handful of salt in a bason of cold water, and use that." > , She laughed and, retreating, slapped the door in my face. Mount*Vernon, who stood out of sight listening, with difficulty restrained his laughter till this dialogue was oyerj he then got some salve for me from his wife, and we both repaired to llufus's chamber to relieve and comfort him. When he saw my brother, he did not know what to do with himself. —There he stood as I left ■.-.'.'. e 3 ....;■.
him, like his own Callipyges, as motion¬ less, but not so devoid of sensation, still pro¬ tecting the injured part from the touch of * the linen that hungover it. Mount-Vernon said he was very sorry for the accident. " Truly, my Lord, it is to be deplored." " Vernon tells mc that it will soon be well." " It is to be hoped, my Lord, but I must say it was a wicked deed in the young Jezebel, who could not but have seen me; — I hope she will be properly punished—but I am in great pain." He was evidently so at the moment, and therefore we could not then make if a subject of pleasantry. I spread the salve ,. on some rag, and bound it on him; it gave him immediate relief. We said what we could to comfort him, and got him to bed; The next was an awful morning to poor Rufus. He had had little sleep during the night; less, as he confessed, frdmpain, than from reflecting on the position he should stand in at Mount- Vernon. and Manor-House. I went to him as soon as I was up. My knocking at his door woke him; I found him well enough to laugh and to be laughed at,
though sore. Having advised him to sleep another hour, and take his break¬ fast in his room, I was going to leave him to his rest, when he called me back. "My good friend," said he, " do you think the thing willbeknown to theladies?" The occasion was irresistible. " How shall we prevent it ?" said I. " Are you so free of pain as not to betray it in walking ?" ^ " I will bear any pain rather than it sliould be known to the ladies — though I feel some in one place where the skin is broken." ." Oh, as for that," said I, " the salve will completely heal it before night; you must dance." " Oh! I must dance, if its only to show it's no such thing." " That something is the matter it will be impossible to conceal. How shall we hide the place ? The rag was got from the housekeeper, and the salve from Lady Mount-Vernon herself." " Can't we put it all upon my thumb ?" " Let me look — a happy thought — but"how came your thumb so burnt ?" B 4<
" Why. the jade left the pan in the bed, and I put rny hand down to poke it away, but 1 was obliged to jump out at the bolster." " Come, this is lucky — they say every evil has some good attending it; — this is a lucky burn ofthe thumb; we may now call the unfortunate part the thumb — go to sleep now; I'll come and see you after breakfast." " Thank you," quoth he ; " but I say, had not we better bind some rag about the thumb?" " Yes, certainly." " And," cried he, with a smile, " we will get a thumb-stall for night." " Good bye," said I. " But as to that girl," sard he, «* who has got me into this scrape, I do hope your brother the Lord will make a point of turning her away. — I would have her whipped at the cart's tail." " Oh! my friend," said I, " it was an accident." " An accident, Mr, Vernon! Damn her, she did it on purpose." This was the first time I had heard the emphatic verb damn out of Rufus's mouth
-—but it is one ofthe properties of fami¬ liarity to withdraw,the, veil that .covers the heart of a hypocrite, and I neither thought the better nor the worse of him for it. The fellow's pretensipn to pecu¬ liar purity iu a religion of which forgive¬ ness is the basis—and, by the bye, the very best argument in favour of its truth, which, Darrell, you may keep in mind in your studies—had shown me his charac¬ ter before:—<this want of mercy only added the view of a vindictive spirit, and I determined to make him suffer for it. " The girl," said I, " is to be turned away this morning, if she is not gone already. — Now, Rufus, if she is not gone, my opinion is, that you had better beg for her." , " Beg for her, Mr. Vernon; beg for the fire-shoving monster that singed me!" " Not for her sake," replied I; " she deserves to be broiled herself; but don't you see what will be the consequence to you ?" "Consequence," quoth he, "from a slut like that!" " She," said I, " knows all; and, if E 5
pushed to extremities, she will certainly tell all, and there will be no hiding it from the ladies." «Eh! what?" " Besides, my good friend," continued I, ««there's no knowing how far the mat¬ ter will go.— There are ballad-makers in everv town: at Hereford I know two * * -—nothing so easy — for instance, off¬ hand: Though cruel his heart, his complexion was fair, His stature was lofty, and red was his hair j This beau, who from Hampshire to dancing was come, Took a horror to Molly for burning his thumb. " Lord! oh Lord!" exclaimed Rufus.' I went on. " You are a poet yourself, and know that where your taste would be an hour adopting a rhyme, the journeymen poets do off hundreds by habit, never much caring about the' delicacy of the jingle, and, unfortunately, for you, a thumb- stall won't hide a rhyme, and, there are so many to fit your case." - Poor Rufus was in an agony of trans¬ fusion. i " Shall I," continued I, " convince
you, by giving you another stanza off¬ hand." " By no means, my friend — I am con¬ vinced «— fly, I beseech you to my wor¬ thy lord, and intercede in the strongest terms you can use for poor Molly — tell him from me, that forgiveness is a Christian duty, and that I forgive her — do, run, do." " I fear," said I, " it is too late, but I will do my best — meanwhile do you get some sleep, and, by repose and compo¬ sure through the day, get yourself in proper cue for the ball; — you must ab¬ solutely dance to-night with Mrs. God¬ frey, x Miss Saville, and Lady Bab." I had got out ofthe room s and was shutting the door, when I heard him bawl out — " For Jesus' sake I not Lady Bab." I found Mount-Vernon, my sister, and Lady Barbara, at the breakfast-table — Lord Mariton and Aspell were frost- bound in bed—- " 'Pon my word," said I, as I entered the room, " that poor fellow Palmer has hurt his thumb prodigiously." - " Choke your impudence," cried Bab, e 6
" what business had yoii to come to me for sah r e?" ' /; s ' I swore that Mount-Vernon sent roe — he that he never told me that Bab used salveVboth'ofus felling truth like ^Esop's two thieves. Lady Mount-VernOn asking seriously how he did, I made.them all easy by assuring-her that.there was no harm done, and that I left him talking ofthe ball, and picking and chusing his partners. Bab laughed, but ended with saying: ..... < .■•: * - «" An't you ashamed now to play any¬ body such a trick as that ?" I was surprised by the sudden expres¬ sion' of this suspicion, though on a mo¬ ment's reflection I did not wonder at her- entertaining it»; — and as I saw- my sis¬ ter's hope in her face, that it was not my contrivance, I thought it necessary to disavow it formally, and to convince her of its- being completely accidental. She thanked me in her sweet, gracious man¬ ner, as if she were obliged to me, for its not being premeditated under her roof. — She is a most amiable creature. The, conversation ended with our resolving to
favour the demonstration of the thtfmb- stall. You may suppose that, on Rufus's appearance, it was not easy for Bab to pre¬ serve her serieux .* — as for me, though I was bound not to 'peach, I way not bound not to laugh. On this score, however, the day went off very well for Rufus; but he was ridiculously precise, andonce was venturing on an atonement for following my task in sculpture, similar to his essay on Beau Nash, which I put a stop to by asking hiuT if there was not a recess'in his study at Hants Cottage. In the evening we set out in proper time for Manor-House. The Mount- Vernons, Lady Barbara, and Lord Mari¬ ton in the coach ; Aspell, Rufus, and I in the chariot. Rufus had managed very well at dinner to appear at his ease, and all the necessaiy compliments and con¬ dolences were paid to his thumb, for which Molly, out of gratitude for his interces¬ sion, or*rather in penitence for her .wick* ed fire-shoving'precipitation — she being of the intercession as ignorant as the warming-pan, which had. done the mis¬ chief— had provided a very handsome
black silk case, which she herself, while begging and receiving pardon, had gently fixed upon the thumb, and tied round his wrist in a handsome bow of black ribbon; but when he came to get into the chariot, the ease was not so clearly assumed. — Placing him and Aspell in the corners, I took the middle : — I no sooner sat down than he gave a loud, Oh I « What's the matter, Sir ?" cried As¬ pell. " Nothing," replied he, " only our friend pressed in a little suddenly." Aspell could not help laughing, though I declare he knew nothing of the matter, for I had religiously kept contract with Lady MountrVernon, whose thanks in the morning I considered as binding.— I put myself forward. — On going on, the mo¬ tion of the carriage made Rufus bite his lips, accompanied now and then with a gentle, half-smothered Oh /, till entering upon the beginning of the first hill, the coachman not immediately abating his speed, I was thrown involuntarily back, and jammed between, my companions,
which suddenly forced a loud and length¬ ened Oh ! from the suffering one. V Gently," cried I to the man, recover¬ ing my accommodating position. Aspell turned his head round, and stared at Rufus. " By the Lord!" exclaimed the latter, " I'd rather walk all the way." " Why ?" asked Aspell. " Eh!" stammered the wincing youth: « Why ? Because I'd rather warm my blood by walking, than perish by cold in this vehicle — o, o, o, o." By the O's I mean an accompaniment to shuddering and chattering of teeth, to blind Aspell. Upon walking, up the hill at least, be was determined, till I remind¬ ed him that he had his dancing shoes on. He then bethought him of requesting to be made bodkin, and he took my place. He rode the rest ofthe way com¬ paratively in Heaven, using the glass straps as a purchase, by means of which he managed to humour his posture the rest of the way. The Ball! — I shall not keep you long- in pumps—I wish to Heaven you had
yours on, and more profitably study¬ ing heavenly truths, in the steps of your Augusta, all-life, than in the despotic in¬ terrogations of Xantippe's ugly husband, all death and roison. It was a very pleasant ball in spite of the sharpness of the frost, the nipping of which was sus¬ pended in 1 the rooms by large fires, con¬ stant motion, and good spirits—animal ones, I mean. Lady Bab never touches brandy, except that of her hunting poc¬ ket-flask on raw mornings, when the hounds lose scent. To hope that you will read on in the order I write, I must consent;to write in the order you will read. „ . Well then — She — not Lady Bab — was all that you can imagine of .beauty, and a thousand times more than I can picture. , This must do for her person; and as for her white satin bodice, and gauze skirt, the plaits on her head, the shoes on her feet, the silk stocking on her ankle 7—I must not say leg—the bracelet on her arm, and the„cross on her breast, all the innumerable episodi¬ cal embellishments of beauty, I must thus
leave lumped, to come with but half the speed you require to the point, of how she did not happen to dance with Lord Mariton — and here in spite of your im¬ patient forecast, in justice to my friend Rufus, — now don't damn him — re* member your studies, and if you don't damn him before, I am sure you won't after — I have done him the justice to demand your eternal friendship for him in future, which you will give him as readily as you would at this moment give me a box on the ear, when you know your eternal obligation to him, for to him is due the praise and gratitude for her not dancing with your com¬ pound of fop, lounger, and lord — and now for the " by what means ?" Some of the beaux of the ball were staying at Manor-Housed and she was engaged five deep, when we arrived. — We had the start of the coach, and the first thing Rufus did, on entering the room, was to make his way, as soon as he got a glimpse of her, in a direct line, as fast as he could, in a half hobble, half frisk, to engageher; and he had the hap*
piness of being nominated the sixth of her chevaliers. I; less active than your friend, not having been wounded, only managed to secure the seventh, and As¬ pell was the fortunate eighth — but, as it turned out, we had not the bliss of danc¬ ing with her, for in came my lord, and he came in too for the ninth promise of dancing felicity. As the night advanced the happy candidates were scotched off' one after another, and it was fast ap¬ proaching to Rufus's turn, who had danced one dance with La Belle, and hav¬ ing suffered not a little for his gallantry, was reserving himself entirely for his sixth with Miss Saville, on whom, in spite of my other attractions, I kept my eye. I found her sitting out now and then when she ought to have been dancing. I di¬ vined that the protracting of her engage¬ ments was the motive : — I saw too that, with every politeness, she disliked and avoided Lord Mariton. At length came Rufus's turn. — I ob¬ served his perturbation between the thoughts of his approaching honour, and the dread of what it doomed liim to su£
fer. He made his bow at the appointed epocha, and offered to lead her to her place. " Will you allow me," said she, " to sit out this dance ?" " Gladly! — I mean, certainly," re¬ plied Rufus, whose features as well as his gladly plainly betokened a reprieve. " Iiave you hurt your thumb, Mr. Palmer?" said she, observing Molly's silk case. " An accident— a trifling wound.—" " He spoke to her, but he gazed at me, who was standing at her side, over- preserving my gravity, the exertion for which he saw in my eyes, and by some convulsions of my cheeks, on which he looked, " for Jesus' sake!" as much as if he had spoke the words. " How happened it ?" said she. Conceive what a question — Rufus never moved his eyes,from mine, and could not move his tongue to her. I would have helped him, to please my sis¬ ter, but I was obliged to desert him : — I must have laughed out-right if I had at-
tempted to speak. He was relieved by that dear woman, who said—- " He'burned it accidentally in his room." ■. .:■.■• '■••{■'/ ■;■,. - 1 ' ^ If Lady Bab had been by, instead of Lady Mount-Vernon, I should not have spared him — and when I think ofhis pre¬ tended sanctity," and his determined re¬ venge on the maid, he does not deserve mercy. The conversation changed, and he got off then, but not through the night. ■■■.■■■.■'■':■.. " How goes the thumb, Mr. Palmer?" met his ears now and then,, with a signi¬ ficant look, from Mount-Vernon —■ and Bab was wicked enough to make kind enquiries about it, and to advise his not enflaming it by dancing too much, —• an advice he was disposed to take, even at the loss of the honour he had solicited. He was happy to hear his partner pro¬ pose giving up a second and a third dance. More and more convinced of her motive, I rather thought of promoting her design than- of urging my claim, which rank-. ed next. —- Supper was over, and still Rufus was her partner, and truly happy
I believe he was to hear her declare she wished to be excused dancing more. " By all means," said he. " Answer for yourself, my friend," said I; " I can only consent, if those af¬ ter me do not take advantage of my con¬ sent, and I'll determine that directly." She thanked me, but without knowing how much I deserved it. I went to Aspell and Mariton; the former hastened to declare his resignation himself: —Ma¬ riton was sullen. " Certainly — it was as she pleased — he had no idea of its coming to his turn." Though she had treated him in every respect as good manners required, he was piqued that he had been able to gain no particular attention from her. He long- strove to single her out for the evening; but, all his exertions proving inefiectual, the stream ofhis passion took a contrary direction, and during the latter part of the night he pointedly avoided her. I think, Darrell, you are now at your ease with respect to this milk-and-water Lord j and so, I assure you, you may be
as to all the Lords and Commoners of Godfrey's acquaintance, good, bad, and indifferent, that is, for the present. I will repeat it to you: my firm opinion is, that she may be yours; but if you want any more specific indications, I own I do, not see how they are to be obtained, but by putting the question to herself! We shall now* soon be in town, and I trust you will not persist in secluding yourself from our society. This immense volume of a letter calls loudly for a conclusion, or I could yet amuse you with some of the other characters at Mrs. Godfrey's ball; — but as to the thing itself; a ball is a ball, and I could not make more of it. If I had the pleasure of not dancing with Miss Saville, I had also the double plea¬ sure of dancing twice with her beauti¬ ful, lovely cousin ; no matter: — in most balls, and this was no exception, there is as you know a certain portion of Vortical Nudes and Spartans. Miss Saville was shocked. — They are out of their places in modest company; — there thev shock even me. — One of the 12
Nudes made a downright attack on Rufus. Her first question to me about him was, " who is the thumb ?" — " A man of fortune near Alton in Hampshire." — This was enough : — she made a dead set, and the interior of her bosom was as little concealed as the exterior. And now, adieu! I think I have left no points of your letter unanswered this time, except perhaps as to reading Plato. The name, though great in most things, has given coinage to an epithet, the idea of which is rather-repulsive to my na¬ ture. It seems, indeed, ,to agree wjth your present humour of being un¬ worthy of any but a Platonic affection from the Goddess qf Love. Had you chosen the Goddess of Hunting, or even Lady Bab, for such a German passion, there might have been some consis¬ tency; but with such a creature! I'll read Plato, by-and-bye, when I am rich enough to marry, or if ever I find myself in the humour of the suicide of Utica; and if neither of these happen before I am tired of the Vortex, I'll begin to re-
vise my Greek when that begins to pall. Seriously, you have inclined me to the study, but I have not virtue enough to set" about it just now. — Once more, adieu J Ever yours, L. Vernon. NOTE Prom Augusta to Sir F. Darrell, in reply to, his delivered ly Mr. Vetmoii. Miss Saville thanks Sir Francis Darrell for the note delivered to her by Mr. Vernon. ~ The contents of it cannot but be most agreeable, and are very flattering, to her. Nothing could give her more pleasure than the complete success of Sir Francis in the pursuit which he treats as a Tash set by her. He has her prayers for it, and also those of her familv>
LETTER XLL Sir Francis Darrell to Mr. Vernon. London, Jan. MY DEAR VERNON, After losing you so long, I am happy to find you again. I could not divine that my letter was lying unopened on your table at Mount-Vernon, while you were flying about the country; and I cannot but own that I was rather sore at your silence. What sport does Fancy make of human feelings! It is a faculty peculiar to man: nay the metaphysicians tell you that it is not the gift of God, like our other faculties, but a compound made up by himself from some of the others, just as he makes gun-powder by mixing nitre, charcoal, and sulphur; and very similar too they are in their pro¬ perties. A certain quantity, moderately prepared with learning, but here and there left to itself in the compartments VOL. III. F
of the brain, forms those beautiful fire¬ works we call Poets, Novelists, and Merry-Andrews : — in gross and unpre¬ pared, it lets off those destructive deto¬ nating explosions which produce mad¬ men and fools : — it delights or de¬ stroys. Mischievous imp! where could he have got the art of turning pleasure to horror, utility to destruction, good to evil ? Where ? It could not be from his Creator, for God is good: — without goodness there can be no God; — what¬ ever appearances may say to the con¬ trary, if he is at all, he must be good. In this it is not necessary to say errare malo cum Platone, it is the dictate of common sense; and, by-the-bye, there is nothing in Plato to equal \he sublimity of the Hebrew laconisms in the book of Genesis. " And God saw that it was good," is exquisitely repeated after va¬ rious, acts of creation. — " Let there be light, • and there was light, and He saw that it was good." — " Let it be, and it* was so."—"And God saw every thing that he had made, and it was very
good" The rapidity of the fiat, and good, the immediate effect, surpasses all * I have ever met, in the expression of divine grandeur. Nor can it, on reflec¬ tion, be doubted that what a God creates must be good : — but then, how is re¬ flection contradicted by the senses! We see, we feel, we know that every thing he has created is not good; — that there is more evil than good, and that man, said to be the last and noblest of his s terrestrial creation, is a compound of malignity and misery; that his vice is real, and his virtue imaginary; that his happiness is momentary and uncertain — his wretchedness certain and sure. What is to be done ? Must I embrace the doc¬ trine of a devil ? In truth I see no alter¬ native : I must either retread my steps, and again lose the God I have found, or I must believe in the devil. I am unwilling to give up the hold I have acquired, but the devil shakes my grasp. I must think. I will tell you more of my studies by-and-bye: at present I will return to the thought, which led to these reflections. v o.
What sport does Fancy make of hu¬ man feelings! How has it been tossing mine about for the last three weeks! I have connected all possible mishaps and woeful results with your silence. The confirmation of the story of Lady Betty, supported by the newspaper para¬ graph, which I saw, and which some malignant friend of mine probably aimed at me ; the effect at Manor-House ; — the advantage to Lord Mariton; his Molly face smirking at the joke; the complacent pity of Lady Mount-Vernon ; Lady Barbara's view-hollo; the regret of the Godfreys and Saville; the melan¬ choly conviction of the loveliest of wo¬ men ; and your reluctance to inflict wounds till you could collect some balm to assuage the pain — were the floating ideas of my brain. Other will-o'-the- wisps in the bogs of Fancy, misled me at times different ways, while simple truth lay unheeded before me, and the probability of my letter not having reach¬ ed you never entered my head. What a dangerous and destructive compound is Fancy! I think it is settled that the discovery of gun-powder, however para-
doxical the assertion seemed at first, has rendered war less murderous ; but with respect to Fancy, the reverse conclusion evidently takes place ; for, since the in¬ vention of that Faculty, it has produced infinitely more madmen than poets, though lately, indeed, there seems to be a wonderful press among the fanciful crowd, in rushing into the theatre of life, to avoid the pit of the former, and to mount into the upper gallery of the latter, whence, in their heal and eagerness for places, Fate and Fancy topple them over into their appropriate receptacle. I have read your delightful letter, my. dear Vernon, with the lively and varied , sensations it is calculated to excite. Sweet of itself, it was rendered more so hy its con¬ trast to my gloomy anticipations. It has relieved me ofa great weight 5 but I must be ungrateful enough to tell you that it inspires no hope; — no hope of a hap¬ piness you so kindly predestine for me; of a happiness which even Fancy in her best humour could not parallel. I am not skipping and curvetting out of its way; — I am not congeeing, or fritter- f 3
ing, or doubting: I tell you seriously,* that neither my impediment nor hers can be removed — yet, for it would be folly to disown it to such a friend, 1 love, — love as you say I do, love to distraction — to distraction, because I love with de¬ spair, not with hope. " My Augusta!" How delightful the sounds! how impossible to realize them! I know, Vernon, that you would not blame me, and that most men would so act, if -I were to yield me to the delicious colourings of Hope, which your friendly pencil has painted. I should not blame you, or t^em; but I have within me an, it may be overweaning, principle, that calls imperiously upon me to resist this passion. It is not, my dear Vernon, a Vortical passion raised by selfish, transient pleasure. My question is not, can she make me happy ? but, can she be happy with me ? Alas! my answer still is — she cannot. Even if all your indications of her favourable feelings were acknow¬ ledged proofs of love, it is love of an ideal object. To surmount my impedi¬ ment, she must first hear horrors, and then swear she loves me: — the thought
distracts me ; — the impossibility drives me mad: t — " My Augusta !" delicious, empty words! — " She wili absolve you." Never: — she will not even hear my confession. Her note — yes, Vernon, I kissed it — might seduce my imagin¬ ation into a hope that, ignorant of my objections, she would be pleased to have her own removed: — say that mine could be swept away by the feelings of remorse and repentance, which had filled my heart exclusively till I knew her, how is the impediment on her side tobe removed? Shall I deceive her? tell her that I have faith solvent enough to digest all the miracles of the New Testament ? and the supernumerary ones in the tradition of her own church? Your advice is good; — you say, " convince yourself as far as you can, and take the rest upon trust." This, my dear Vernon, is not only a principle as to religious creeds; it is the principle in belief of every kind. Give me a man of known truth, one incapable of de¬ ceiving me; and I will - believe his unac¬ countable assertions ; I will take thera f 4
upon trust; but if I hear him utter contradictory assertions, I may as well be required- to believe that two and two make five, as that he is not an impostor, or out of his senses. Still I must own that some things appear contradictory, which experience shows not to be so. •When we are first told that heat hardens wax, and that heat melts wax, it is a .contradiction in terms; yet we know that it is the case; that the heat of the sun has the one effect, and the heat of fire has the other. It therefore requires great discrimination in rejecting all that at first appears even contradictory. . But to come to myself. — It does not appear likely that I shall ever surmount these difficulties; and I would sooner die than unite her to falsehood, by professing what I did not think. There is no cor¬ ruption more hideous than hypocrisy. I know you don't advise this, when you say, " take upon trust," nor that my con¬ victions should be swayed by my passions — they never can — they never shall; it would be courting misery, I am deter¬ mined to investigate sincerely for my oum sake, and to endeavour to stifle my pas-
i sion for hers. But I do not see the necessity of determining so suddenly as you say. —Never be in a hurry; — always take time : —you are all coming to town. You I shall see daily; perhaps 1 may see them once or twice during the winter. How delightful would it be to learn Truth from her lips! I am glad she saw the Bramblebears at Bath. They are coming to town about the middle ofthe month: I shall certainly avoid them as much as possible, and rather than that the idea of an attachmentshould be revived in the minds ofthe Godfreys, I will fly into Northamptonshire — to the North Pole, rather than have it revived in that of their cousin. I read your letter again and again ; 1 have never received one that gave me half the pleasure. Your incidents, your epi¬ thets, the whole style when you speak of Miss Saville, all is calculated to charm. Lady Barbara's barbarous attack is • so sweetly defeated by my beautiful cham¬ pion, and the malice of Mariton by your¬ self. 7"he hearing of Godfrey's coach a mile off—your ethereal draughts — the f 5
unexpected flash ofthe electric possessive pronoun coupled with the elegant name of Augusta — your moulding me into a being worthy of her—• your just deli¬ neation of her character, formed with dignity above losing her heart, though possessed of tenderness to bestow it — your admirable little Platonic dialogue, proving from Eau de Cologne the existence of the soul — and, above all, that blush I It should have been told in numbers : Indum sanguineo veluti violaverit ostro Si quisebur; vei mixta rubent ubi lilia nuilta Alba rosa: tales virgo dabat ore colores. But what do I say ? What is Virgil's Tyrian-stained ivory; what his lilies and roses, compared with the image raised by that incomparable passage of your letter, of one ofthe Graces, in the form of her whom you have dared to call my Augusta, diffusing her blush on the neck of a Love ? I think I see her nestling her lips on the soft and hollowed shoulder of her laughing little cousin. Alas! alas! what am I about ? And what is it you mean to make of me, Vernon? It is as you say; I never was in love before.
How justly do you distinguish between that pleasant kind of feeling which so generally passes for love, and that pas¬ sion, approved by the judgment, which fills and expands the heart! Yes, you have opened my eyes to the state of mine, and I thank you;—it puts me the more completely on my guard, and determines me never, never to deceive her, who so fills and expands it. She shall know me, Vernon—-know how unworthy lam of her; and I will only beg her not to abhor me. But I will not be precipitate — I wili pursue my task. The progress I have made in it, though little, is of unspeak¬ able comfort to me, and I will not resign it. — There is a God, and there ought lo be an immortality* The Being I yet very imperfectly figure to myself by that name must be omniscient, must consequently know the sincerity with which I am now applying myself to obtain a just idea of Him, and of his will respecting man. This thought is pregnant with a hope I never'had before;—• he will not desert his creature who does not desert him; and though, when I left him in my youth f 6
he left me too, he will listen now to my entreaty, for he knows I have no thought to mock his throne with prayer Wrung from the coward crouching of despair, but offered with a sincerity that dares challenge even his eye. You say, Vernon, that it is not time for you to think. I am no preacher, my friend ; I have no intention of becoming one; but if by experience of any manly gratification I can recommend it to you, I will not be afraid or ashamed of doing it. If thought were an enemy to youth¬ ful happiness,! would not have you think; — it is not to happiness that it is an enemy. We are nearly ofthe same age; wehave been companions in thoughtless- ness —I use too lenient a word, but I wiil not bore you. — You are, compared to me, Hyperion to a Satyr; you have no livid stains upon your breast. — But you are losing your advantage; —you are on a precipice. If you will not yet think on the serious subjects which occupy me — think, I beseech you, think on your own danger of planting stings like mine
in your bosom. You tell me I am in love — so I fear are you. Oh! how gladly and gratefully would I encourage in you a love like mine! I cannot encou¬ rage yours. Once more I will mention Mrs. God¬ frey to you. You now seldom speak of her to me, and never as freely as you did last year. Circumstances have given a serious cast to my part in our corre¬ spondence. You must not be afraid of me, Vernon; I wiil spare you — I ought to spare you. It may be true, that it is the part of friendship to show us our faults; but to friendship tenderness is as essential as truth: — a rough, plain dealer is rather a friendly monitor than an admonishing friend, and the manner too frequently counteracts the matter. — Besides, from me asperity would be ab¬ surd. I shall not surprise you with the common-filaces against a pursuit in which you engaged through an idle ambition, and in which I see you now bound by a danger¬ ous fascination. The only argument I wili iise is this; you are possessed of a bless¬ ing of the highest nature in the friend¬ ship of the Manor-House family, now '
including Saville and his charming daugh¬ ter ; if you do not immediately extinguish the desire you are vainly fostering, I say immediately, you will lose all — you will be banished from that Eden; you will become an outcast from the valuable part of society; you will sink into a Darrell, hating and hated; and, though you can never be as wretched, the worm of lost happiness will gnaw at your heart. You have hitherto escaped, because you have trifled where trifling is only laughed at, that is, with trifling creatures —with your Vortical dames; but you will not escape the rock on which your pas¬ sions are blowing you, unless you put about in time. There is a property in virtue, where it exists — and I begin to believe that there is more of it in the paths unfrequented by us than I supposed —- which attracts and assimilates hearts that have any affinity whatever with it; but it possesses also a benumbing 'pro¬ perty on hearts over which it has no in- v fluence. I am sure that yours is endowed with a sufficient affinity, but it is at present " counteracted by an artificial magnet of
great power. Between these two in¬ fluences much depends upon your own exertion. I have done on this subject. — Be content, Vernon, with friendships and you wiil assimilate daily with this virtuous, happy group; but if you ask for love, you are are benumbed for the rest of your life. I will not finish without thanking you for the lighter, but very pleasant, parts of your letter. Your Vortical observations at Bath;—Beau Nash and Rufus; —^ the warming-pan; — Molly on the stairs j — Rufus at the fireside; — Lady Bab's nightcap; — an evangelical sinner fright¬ ened into Christian forgiveness; — the chariot scene; — the ball j — Mariton's disappointment; —the Nudes and Spar¬ tans; — all exquisite. Thanks! Continue to unite this strain with the more in¬ teresting parts of your letters. With you I will.laugh still. Adieu ! Ever yours,
F. Darrell.
LETTER XLIL ' Mr. Vernon to Sir Francis Darrell. Mount-Vernon, Jan. 15th. MY DEAR DARRELL, Though my pen will now soon give place to a more voluble instrument, it shall perform its duty once more before I quit Mount-Vernon for town. The Manor-House family leave the country some day next week, and purpose to spend a couple of days at Oxford. The family here set out a few days after them. I shall precede both, and have already written to have my apartments in Picca¬ dilly prepared for me. — I shall come to you the very day I arrive. Your letter gives me great pleasure; your language indeed continues positive on the topic of marriage, but then it flows so naturally on that of love, that my 2
hope of you is considerably encreased. You have well described Fancy. She is undoubtedly a gunpowder goddess in modern times, and delights occasionally in blowing up a victim in those regions of II Penseroso, where she has arbitrary power; and if you do not take care, you will be the next. In her pleasant haunts of TJAllegro she is never cruel: her combustibles are all made into Catherine wheels, rockets, Roman candles, Indian cracken, and a variety of other brilliant affairs, but not in the least danger¬ ous. I must persuade you to give up your quarters in the vicinity of her powder-mills, and come and take your abode with us: — Where, I ween, a beauty lies, The cynosure of neighb'ring eyes. What a train had Fancy set to blow you up! I am glad I was in time to save you, and I hope that you will iu future eschew Melancholy,
Of Cerberus and blackest midnight born.
Haste to the nymph with whom we see Jest and youthful jollity j Quips and cranks, and wanton wiles, Nods and becks, and wreathed smiles; Such us hang on Hebe's cheek, . And love to live in dimple sleek: Sport that wrinkled Care derides, And Laughter holding both his sides. Come live with her, and live with me, In unreproved pleasures free. I think your studies proceed well; — already they comfort you. —- This is muU turn in parvo\ but I beseech you mix gaiete" de, cceur with them. You wili find it true wisdom ; it is the alternation that gives relish to both. By-the-bye, I am sorry you have only got to the devil; ~ it is an ominous halt.— I wish you had got past him, or stopped a little to bait on the other side. I beseech you, get beyond him as soon as you can; and if he does not stop you altogether, I'll have a tussle with him myself — by-and-bye. Deceive her! No! I would become her champion myself, aud undeceive her by striking off the mask. Nor is she to be deceived. My advice was to use your reason in what is material, and not to be / fastidious in what is immaterial. I con-
fess that if your union depends upon your becommg a Roman Catholic, I think it will .never take place — but it de¬ pends upon no such thing. I believe, however, that it depends upon your becoming sincerely a-Christian. I have been thinking how you wili manage, if you proceed so slow, to get married be¬ fore you are old people. Why, you have got no farther than the third chapter of Genesis; but let me see if I can't give you a lift here. — Upon reflection, you are in the New Testament already — for is not the coming of Christ the conse¬ quence of Lucifer's manoeuvres in that very third chapter? and thus the Reli¬ gion you are in search of is coeval with the creation of the world. I think you may make something of this hint. It should at least carry you to the typical intended sacrifice of the patriarch's son. Mind you acknowledge your obligation to me as far as a hint goes, no more, for I have not time to go deep into the rea¬ soning upon it; non agilisfio ; —but,
Nunc in Aristippi furtim prascepta relabor, Et mihi res/non me rebus submittere conor.
I am glad my light sketches amuse you — How odd it is that there should be any doubt about a soul, when a little Eau de Cologne can prove it. Where it resides is another question; if that should happen to be among your puzzles, remember where Sir Walter Raleigh found it: Philosophers pretend to tell That, like a hermit in a cell, The soul doth in the body dwell: But I, who am not over-wise, Think it exists in Chloe's eyes; Thence to her lip it frequent stole, For there I kiss'd her very soul. There is, however, some, sophistry in this, for if the soul moves from one part of the body to another according to sen¬ sation, it may be argued that it follows painful as well as pleasurable feeling, in which case it may be found in the toe of a gouty man. — Now though I have no objection to have seen and heard it on Lady Bab's lips when she kissed your Augusta, I must be excused from ever consenting to find it, where it suffered u) grievously in Rufus. By-the-bye, you
don't seem to have been affected at all with the said smack of Lady Bab's, but to be more taken vvith her night-cap. She is a good humoured creature, but a Httle glib with her tongue. You make no enquiry for any lady after the fatigues ofthe ball — but I will - suppose you do,, and tell you the result of mine. I rode over to Manor-House next day. I found both the ladies well, and talking — not ofthe politics or anec¬ dotes of the ball, but — of Sir Francis Darrell. — Mr. Saville was present; God¬ frey was on horseback with his guests, for exercise. " We were talking of your friend Sir Francis," said Saville; " How different do Ifind the man from hischaracter! And it is extraordinary that we can trace nothing against him. As to his personal con¬ duct — his modesty, his reserve, his cau¬ tion, are really even overstrained. Of what does he accuse himself, and why does he act in tliis manner?" What could I possibly say, Darrell? I said that I could ascribe it to nothing but a tincture of melancholy acquired by
habit in avoiding society, to which some early circumstances of your Jife had given- you a disgust. I added, that I was con¬ vinced it was not in your nature, ahd that you only wanted the company of friends whom you could esteem, to re¬ store you to what Nature intended you to be. Mrs. Godfrey spoke of the day you had passed with them at Grove Park, and in terms of you that I was a little jealous of. But was her cousin altogether silent ? No, Darrell, she was not—she had herself given rise to the conversation by refer¬ ring to your note, and hers in reply. •She said, without the least scruple, or blush, or fear of her sentiment being attributed to the passion of love, that, "you had but to give fair play to your understanding to be one of the most ex¬ alted of men." And these are the people you shun. — I cannot bear to think of it— it makes me mad. — Expect to find me so, when I dart in upon you at May Fair; and pre¬ pare for me—not a strait waistcoat, but —
a remedy; and thatyou may, by the charm ofa single sentence—by assuring me that you will cultivate the friendship offered you, even if you reject the love, the exists ence of which I have so clearly indicated to you. If, in addition to this Recipe, you would but consent to court Bab for the winter, the cure would not only be complete, but crowned with inexpressible delight; aud conceive how fully you would convince her that her suspicions respecting Lady Betty were the idle fan¬ cies of her brain. Bab looked very hand¬ some in the cotton night-cap, and, if it would be any argument to you in favour of my proposition, I'll get you a sight of it, and her head in it, either by another application, for salve, or by call¬ ing fire at her door before she gets into bed. I have got rid of Rufus; he left me a few days after the Ball at Manor-House, and sooner than he intended, I know, from an irresistible look of intelligence that met his eyes, wherever he turned them ; but the intelligibility of it was so kept under by the corrected muscles of
the servants' faces, tbat he half persuaded himself it was nothing more than his suspicion., I saw him eyeing them all by turns from the corner ofhis eye; besides which Mount-Vernon and Bab tormented him with civility. " I am sorr} r , Mr. Palmer," says my brother, with a dry look as ifhe had for¬ gotten his disaster, " I am sorry this frost prevents our hunting; -you should have the bay mare; she is not so hard to manage as the horse you rode when you were down here before." " Law ! Mount-Vernon, how can you talk^o?" cries Bab, "don't you see Mr. Palmer's thumb ?" " I beg his pardon, I had quite forgot," replied he : " But why not ? It's the whip thumb, I see. He does not want "his right hand to manage his bridle." , " Truly so, my Lord," said Rufus, who ,thought he must say something, " truly so; and if it was not for the ' frost—" v , . ." How is the barometer, Bab?" cries
Mount-Vernon, with a look of hope, which Rufus accompanied vvith a look that anticipated a meaning in those words wliich to him were rather obscure. Bab, to whom the meaning, both direct and equivocal, was well known, answered that the silver was sinking fast —" " You don't tell it me ?" cried Mount- Vernon, with joy in his countenance. " Then the scent may lie to-morrow — that mare's a gentle creature, Mr. Palmer — I would not put you upon her else." Rufus, comprehending by degrees that the sinking of the silver had something to do with the opening of the weather, stole a look all round to see if any of us suspected the feelings of which he was conscious ; he saw nothing to make him suppose it. Aspell was with us, but Mariton was gone. " Pho !" said his female plague, " why do you offer the mare to Mr. Palmer ? He had better not ride, I'm sure." He looked at me for help — "I said I did not think that there would be an ira- VOL. III. o
mediate change of weather" —■ this waa confirmed by Aspell's saying : " I believe, Lady Barbara, you are mistaken; I rather think the silver has risen within this hour." " May be so," replied she; " I won't be positive." Rufus, set once more at ease, talked big, and was sorry he could not have an¬ other day's hunt with his Lordship and her Ladyship, which so trifling an af¬ fair as his thumb should not have pre¬ vented. During this purgatory of Rufus's, Lady Mount-Vernon said little, in which I followed her example ; for, though I could have taken pleasure in teazing him, I had much more in contemplating her, whose looks in silence spoke her soul; —. they did not say; " don't do this, for it displeases me:" but " I feel uneasy at the uneasiness of another, and pained still more from his being my guest." She has a sweet dispo¬ sition, and I swear to you I believe my heart has been made better since she
became my sister, by tha influence of her manners. There is 1 something very pleasing in the affection I feel for lier; there is in it the softness and the tender¬ ness of the passion of love without its anxiety, its hope, its fear, its restless desire. It is a peculiar affection, differ¬ ing as we.ll from friendship as from love; esteem is its basis, but it is more allied to sensation than friendship is ; it is, perhaps this pure excitement which constitutes that family-love infused by nature in the blood of parents and children, of bro¬ thers and sisters, whom she leads to con¬ template one another with a degree of ardour not essential to friendship. With this warm, but pure, affection, I contem¬ plate this virtuous admirable woman, as much as if she had been born my sister. And here, in gratitude for your con¬ cluding admonition, I will say to you that it has made me wish that this was the affection I felt for your Au¬ gusta's cousin. It is all I can say at present. You shall know more" of the Mount- Vernons ; but we must not let my sister g 2
humanize us so much as to give up Rufus, who deserves a rougher friendship still than mine. I believe he would have staid till now at Mount-Vernon, but for the terror of the bay mare, which my brother took him and Aspell to see. As soon as they returned to the house, Rufus, in going through the hall, visited the barometer, and thrice in less than an hour ejaculated: " 1 wonder if the silver stands." These symptoms suggested a wicked notion to Mount-Vernon: he, unobserved, raised the index, and meant, on Rufus's next ejaculation, to propose his looking; but Lady Bab, happening to come in first, and having taken a look at the glass in the hall, exclaimed, " Law! Mount-Vernon; 1 tell you the silver is sinking — go and see yourself." " Let me," says Rufus. " By all means." " Half an inch at least," roared the as¬ tounded dupe, from the hall. He fidgetted to and from the baro¬ meter the rest of the day, and, sud¬ denly recollecting indispensable business
in town, ordered his man to have a post- chaise at the door by day-light. Adieu! — You will see me in a few days. Ever yours, L. Vernon.
g s
, LETTER XLIII. Augusta to Angelica. •* London, Jan. 27th. MX DEAREST ANGELICA, 1 am in daily expectation of yonr answer to the long letter I wrote to you nearly two months ago at Manor-House: in the mean time 1 will begin another, to be concluded and dispatched on the arrival of yours. I think of you daily, An¬ gelica, and never fail to mention you in my prayers. When shall I be happy enough to embrace you again ? My father has promised me to write soon, and urge our dear Marchese to visit England in the spring; and, if he cannot bring the family at present, at least to allow you to come to me. I intend to add a few lines with so pressing an en¬ treaty, that he will not be able to refuse
me. I know how well he loves me, and he knows how well I love him too, and my dear Marchesa, who, with your kind good aunt will unite their influence in obtaining such happiness for their absent Augusta. Remember, Grove Park is the English home of our Pisani, and the house in which I arri now writing shall be their town-house, for so again and again have said both George and Caro¬ line, who delight me by talking of you often. The more the characters of these affec¬ tionate cousins of mine open iipon me, the more do I love them ; and I long to make them your relations, for you are my sister, and as such they are eager to receive you. We are now in Hanover- square for the winter, but only just ar¬ rived, and I know nothing yet of London, except the incessant rattle of carriage- wheels, and the occasional clatter of knockers — a noise at the door ofa house, the dexterity in making which is one„Of the accomplishments of a London foot¬ man. I meant to have begun my letter at Manor-House, but we were too much g 4
.engaged during the last week of our stay in the country. I will now return to the subjects which have interested me there, and which will, therefore, be inte¬ resting to"my dear Angelica, wherever I am, or wherever she is. You will have seen, my dearest sister, how much Sir Francis Darrell occupies of my last letter, and have observed that he occupied much of my thoughts. New circumstances, far from lessening, have increased the interest I take in this ex¬ traordinary man. You know that, in addition to gratitude, all that I saw,or heard of his actions in Northamptonshire raised my esteem for him to a very high degree, in spite of the awkward appear¬ ances against him at Malvern Wells. Con¬ ceive how delighted I was to learn that they were, indeed, but appearances, and that his meeting there with Lady Betty Bramblebear was, at least on his side, purely accidental. I was assured ofthis by Mr. Vernon, witb whom I have made you acquainted by my letters. This gave me great pleasure; but it would be difficult for me to tell you how much that pleasure
was increased, on his informing me that his friend was seriously applying himself to the study of those truths, which only. are wanting to lead him to as much per¬ fection as human nature can attain in its present state. When he left us at Grove Park, he went to his house in London, where he has since spent his time chiefly in his library. I felt great joy, which I scrupled not to indulge, from the convic¬ tion of its being independent of love; for I thought of him, as of a noble mind exploring and finding the real paths of happiness. As of a lover I could not think of him; for, even allowing that every obstacle were removed, he had never given me the least reason to con¬ sider him in that light; — of course, it could never enter my head. I thought of him, indeed, as my preserver; and that, I own, was a relation sufficiently interesting, to increase the pleasure aris¬ ing from the more general motive. 1 was, however, doomed to have my joy disturbed ; and this was done so sud¬ denly, and in such a manner as really to make me sick at heart. Caroline had a 5
left me to spend an hour with Lady Mount-Vernon ; while with her, Lady Barbara Lewis and Mr. Vernon came in. I have already given you some idea of Lady Barbara. She is good-humoured, but has little command of her tongue. Lady Mount-Vernon had mentioned Sir Francis, of whom I spoke as I usually do. Lady Barbara for a joke, for she is in¬ capable of acting from a bad motive, warned me against him, and introduced the story of his attachment to a married woman. Mr. Vernon comtradicted it, 1 and defended his friend, upon which, tor the jest's sake, she appealed to me as a witness of his improper conduct at Mal¬ vern with Lady Betty Bramblebear. I was a little angry, and protested against such false reports. Lady Mount-Vernon did- the same, when Lady Barbara, in excuse for herself) said it was natural for her to believe what she heard, when con¬ firmed by what she had seen xdth her own eyes. This gave me a pang very different from anger, and I fear it was visible* for she was sorry, and would make friends
with me in her abrupt way. Lady Mouut- Vernon softened the conversation, and I was resuming the coolness which I am fortunate enough seldom to lose, when my mind was again thrown into a degree of irritation, by a circumstance which appeared to me very extraordinary at the time. I must here tell you that, among the acquaintances of the Vernons, tliere is a Lord Mariton, who, by the Way* has offered me his title, a man of few and feeble recommendations. Lady Barbara's reports were scarcely got rid of, when this Lord comes in with a newspaper, containing a paragraph so evidently pointing out Sir Francis Dar- rell and Lady Betty Bramblebear, that there was no mistaking it j stating that they had eloped between Cheltenham and Bath, and were on their way to the con¬ tinent. Bul the names not being inserted in the paragraph, Lord Mariton thought proper to supply them, on .which he Was called upon by Mr. Vernon, who put him in mind that Sir Francis was his friend. This Lord gave as an authority for his mentioning the name, the talk of a house g 6
at Hereford, and undertook to contradict the report upon the request of Mr. Ver- non, who declared that he had just re¬ ceived a letter from Sir Francis Darrell, and knew that he was particularly engaged in London. I soon after left Mount- Vernon with my cousins, who came for me. I confess, Angelica, that I was con¬ scious of a considerable agitation; but, as there was no appearance of its being noticed, 1 trust there was no false infer¬ ence drawn. I fear the feelings, with which my preserver has inspired me, would not be understood by the world, and that my anxiety about him would be attributed, as usual, to the common passion which a woman, solicitous for the welfare of a man, is said to feel! Oh! how little would they know me, who should say so of me. Were h^ at the remotest part of the world, were he already married to some happy woman, my solicitude would still be of the same nature. Still should I pray for his hap. piness in this life, and more anxiously for his conversion, that he might be happy
in that which is to come. This was the- state of my feelings towards Sir Francis Darrell at that time, and yet is, though, from subsequent events, they are" ac¬ companied vvith hope instead of painful apprehension. • These events you shall hear j but I must first lay my mind open to you, under its painful impressions. For many months it had been occu¬ pied with the unfortunate state and cha¬ racter of a man to whom I could not be indifferent, though I could guard my heart from the weakness of passion. - His amiable manners at Grove Park, his un¬ bounded generosity, the love of his te¬ nantry, had wiped from my imagination, if not from my memory, that blot which I had seemingly witnessed when I saw him gallop rudely by our carriage in the vale of Worcester; and the observations of Lady Mount-Vernon, and Mr. Vernon, had convinced me that I was deceived; was it not natural then, my dear Angelica, to feel doubly on hearing that 1 was not deceived, that he was rushing on to ruin, that he was a lost, an abandoned crea¬ ture ? It shocked me in such a manner;
Angelica, that I could not sleep for think¬ ing of it: I lost my appetite; I was at* tacked with head-aches; in short, my health seemed to be threatened; my father and my cousins were alarmed ; I strove against it, but without success, and it was proposed, that we should make an immediate excursion to Bath. The uneasiness I caused roused me. I reflected upon myself as being very weak to suffer my feelings to overcome me in this manner. I became ashamed of it, and this counteracted my disorder. The journey, the change of scenes, the novelty of Bath, and the perpetual flow of the company, aided the struggle I made to conquer myself, and in less than a week I was perfectly recovered. This is a true account, Angelica, of your sister's feelings and their effects. That I am very solicitous for the welfare, and more particularly for the conversion, of my preserver, I do not deny; but surely, my dear sister, I am npt so weak & creature as not to be able to wish a man well, without falling in love with him. Tell me not that I am in love; Angelica-;
— there are such reasons why I should not be so, that, knowing them, you must confess that it is impossible. In the first place, he is an Infidel: — that is, was, for I have yet to learn what progress he has made during the last month. How you will be delighted to hear that he has made any progress in belief! — but I an¬ ticipate, — I was saying that his being an infidel is one reason j then the life he. is said to have led ; then the secret of the urn and its hollow pedestal j and, lastly, the evident indifference of his heart respecting me, — for, were it other¬ wise than indifferent to me, would he avoid me and my friends ? Would he so easily devote himself to study, and not think of me? Weigh all these reasons, and ask yourself my dearest Angelica, if it be possible for me to yield my heart be¬ fore it is sought: — no, my sister knows, me better. You will naturally expect from me some account of Bath, but I must be briefi as I am impatient to take you back; to Manor-House. Indeed you already, fsonx ous books, and from what we heard
together before I left Signa, know enough of it to excuse my brevity. It is a beau¬ tiful, clean, and commodious town, ori¬ ginally the resort of invalids, but now, next to London, the centre of fashion. It seems to be a property of all the invalid , places over the world to attract fashion¬ able and idle people. Bath is recom¬ mended to gouty persons; but for half a dozen pair of crutches, and as many wheeling easy-chairs, you may count hun¬ dreds and thousands of dancing-pumps aiid saddle-horses. In all the public rooms there is great elegance, great taste, displayed. We went to a ball at each ofthe rooms ; the general coup-d*ceil, and the vast assem¬ blage of handsome, well-dressed persons, give a high idea of the beauty and fashion of England; I was charmed, and con¬ tinued so, in spite of considerable disgust, which a minuter inspection of some of the female part of the company created. I really blushed, as I looked at them; but they seemed to have no shame in appearing in public half naked. I have seen no indecency equal to this either in
Italy or in France. In the latter country I have sometimes observed the back ofa woman too much exposed, but they have the modesty to cover their bosoms. This attention to decency shows not only mo¬ desty but true taste ; for it inspires what dress aims at, admiration ; whereas this indecent exposure cannot but raise dis¬ gust ; they who cannot attract by con¬ versation, or the charm of beautiful features, resort to this imaginary expe¬ dient as a subsitute, and foolishly think that impudence can supply at once the place of beauty and of wit. But I must beg you, my dear Ange¬ lica, not to allow your imagination to do injustice to my countrywomen, by taking this account as characteristic of them — no indeed — an English woman, with the greatest personal beauty, unites the great¬ est modesty, and her claim to admiration is supported by good sense. The fact is that the generality of English women have distinguished understandings, and it is principally those who have little or none, or those who are deserters of virtue, that thus defy the opinion of the rational
part of society. Their number is com¬ paratively small, yet some of them are to be seen in almost all companies; but I have been told they do not hold their foot¬ ing there long. — When virtue is once dis¬ mantled ofthe dignity winch fortifies it, it is seldom preserved. Though these observations have occurred to me in speaking of Bath, I have found room for them elsewhere, and they were not inap¬ plicable at our Herefordshire balls and visits. These females form a peculiar clr.ss, mingling every where, and respect¬ ed no where. I was upon the whole much pleased • with Bath, and we purpose paying it an¬ other visit in the spring season. — But what gave me the greatest pleasure there vvas an unexpected meeting, the day be- ibre we left it, with Lady Betty Bramble¬ bear, betvveen whom and her husband, there appeared the greatest harmony. Though Mr. Verson's report of his friend's residence and pursuits in London had had some weight with me, I could not help attributing the part he had taken to the partiality of friendship, —It was no
dependence on his report that had de¬ termined me to struggle with my feel¬ ings, but the first of all motives, to act right, and to consider tlie feelings of my father and of my cousins. Our stay at Bath was necessarily limit¬ ed to a short time. Christmas is the chief festive season in England, and the usual time of the year for the more pub¬ lic manifestation of charity to the poor, as well as of hospitality and gaietj' among the rich. It is in fact the Carnival of England. The time is generally spent by those who have landed property on their estates, and at the neighbouring chief towns, where their presence produces spirit and a bustle that is very advanta¬ geous to the country. To encourage this laudable habit the government has for some years past fixed the assembling ofthe parliament at the distance of some weeks after Christmas, as the meeting draws all the rich and fashionable families to town. Before our excursion to Bath, we vvere engaged in those neighbourly festivities, and a large party had heen invited to a
ball at Manor-House, on Christmas-eve. We were therefore obliged to be back in time, but we got home only the day be¬ fore. The weather was very cold, but my dear affectionate Caroline took care to prevent my suffering much from it, by wrapping me up in furs. You will imagine that my feelings on my journey back were very different from those I had when we left Manor-House. I was not only well in person; my mind had received a conviction that restored it to its former ease, and the effect was a How of spirits, which was not decreased by a circumstance that took place next morning *— a circumstance you will per¬ haps think extraordinary, but with which I am sure you will be pleased. I must tell it you as it happened, for it was at¬ tended vvith an emotion, for whicn I was angry with myself, and of whicli you must give me your opinion. I was sitting in my cousin's room, playing on the sofa with my beautiful little Caroline, when Mr. Vernon came in. — He told me he had rode over from Mount-Vernon, to bring me a letter
himself. I naturally imagined it was from Lady Mount-Vernon, and asked if it was not.—■ He suddenly said, and I thought with a particular look; » From Darrell." The abrupt mention of the name, in connection with a letter to me, certainly created a very unacccuu^able feeling— • my blood seemed to forsake my heart, and rushed with violence into my face. Fortunately I was still fondling Caroline, which gave me an opportunity of hiding my face on her neck, till the colour was gone. I would not have had Mr. Vernon perceive it for the world ; and I afterwards saw by his manner that he had not, which also convinced me that he had no meaning in what I thought a particular look, when he mentioned the name of Darrell. Did I not know my heart; had I not thoroughly examined it, my dear Angelica, I would, without hesitation own to you, that there was something suspicious in this violent blush¬ ing, and I would immediately have re¬ course to some penance to chastise the secret it>clinatioii-of my heart. But such
an inclination could not be secret to myself, Angelica — I could not love and not know it—^no, it is not love — I never think, I never could think, of be- ing united with Sir Francis Darrell; — and with this proof of the freecbm of my heart, I would not banish from; it my better feelings, nor woufd my dear sister advise it. She wili rejoice, as I do, at the hope raised hy the note, for it cannot be called a letter, with which Sir Francis has honoured me. ¥oir will find a copy of it, with my answer, at the end of this letter. And now, my dearest Angelica, 1ft me ask you, if any thing can be more delightful than the contemplation of s being, good by nature, but perverted by evil communication and habit, ex¬ ploring truth, and finding the paths of everlasting life and happiness ? I know you will feel it as I do — as my father, aa my cousins do — they were as much de¬ lighted with my note, as I was myself. It gave occasion to a conversation some days after I received it, in which the Bishop of — took a part. Ho & 0
friend of George's, who loves and ad¬ mires him. George spoke of Sir Francis, and in confidence mentioned the cir- cumsUnce. He was greatly pleased, and said that much might be hoped from such a disposition, with such an under¬ standing. My father related the restor¬ ation of Grove Park ; and at the Bishop's request, I gave a short account of hi* preserving me in France. " Providence wi!L interpose its influ¬ ence in his favour," said he ; " depend upon it, he will finish by becoming a complete Christian.'* The word complete, Angelica, convey¬ ed more to my mind than the speaker intended, and I put up a secret prayer in my heart that it might be complete — complete to salvation. But I must not omit the good man's observations which followed,—they are so admirable, and were so impressive, that I wrote them when he left us, and I think I can give them to you word for word. " If a man good by nature," con¬ tinued he, "sits down to examine the Gospel, is. there the least shadow of rea-
son why he should reject it ? He finds in it a religion, pure, holy, and bene¬ volent, as the God that gave it. He finds not only its moral precepts, but even its sublimest mysteries calculated to promote internal sanctity, vital piety, unbounded philanthropy. He finds it throughout so great and noble, so con¬ genial to the finest feelings and most generous -sentiments of his soul, that he cannot but wish it may be true ; and never yet, I believe, did any good man wish it to be true, but he actually found it so. He sees in it every expectation of nature answered, every infirmity sup¬ ported, every want supplied, every terror dissipated, every hope confirmed; nay, he sees that God has done abundantly above all that he could either ask or think ; that he has given him eternal happiness in t a life to come. Will this man love darkness rather than light? Will he choose to pursue even vii tue with much pains, little success, and no other wages but death ? or will he be ied to her through a safe and easy path by an
infallible guide, who does not desire him to serve God for nought ? r " How admirable and how just are these remarks! They are such as our dear Abate Cevello himself would have ut« tered—^ I could not but look at this admirable man with veneration and af¬ fection. I wished my catechumen, as he calls himself had heard him, and I think my recollection in writing what he spoke was assisted by an idea of sending it to him, if ever he should write me another note. He has not, nor do I now expect one as we are come to town. My father and George talk of calling upon him, as well on the final settlement ofthe papers relative to Grove Park, as hy way of pay- \ ing him a visit; and Mr.-Vernon declares he will force him into company. — I' doubt his success. I have been out with Caroline, return¬ ing some calls. — What beautiful streets! what animated countenances everywhere! what rattling of coaches! whatthuncler-, VOL. III. H
ing of knockers! — But I must conclude my country life before I begin my town one. I made an en passant mention of Lord Mariton to you, which you will think too slight, considering the importance of the subject. I told you he was an acquaint¬ ance of the Vernons, though I might have said of George's; but I met him first at Mount-Vernon. He is a man that says what he hears others say, and repeats newspapers: — I have shown you how disagreeable he can make himself, and the offer he made me did not render him more agreeable in my eyes. The very day after the unpleasant hour I spent, where I expected a delightful one, he came lo Manor-House, and begged Caroline to give him an opportunity of speaking to me alone. — I meant to have avoided him that morning, but, thus called for, 1 made no hesitation in receiving him. I was conscious of some little prejudiced feelings before he made his appearance, but recollected that the occasion demand¬ ed civility; and I declined his proposal with great politeness, the misfortune of
- which was, that he thought himself en¬ couraged to repeat it, which he did oh the evening of the ball, at Manor-House, when I felt it necessary to mark my re- sol ution more pointedly. I avoided him, and contrived not to dance with him. He was convinced; I have seen nothing of him since — and I believe his proposal is known only to our own family, So mach for my first and only lover in England ; though I think I am mis¬ taken r — I believe I have another, as to my soul at least. Among George's acquaintance at Woodlee, there is a good kind ,of a good-looking, soft-faced, red-haired, half* witted young man, whom he thinks well ofi and whom Caroline and I pity for mistaken zeal, and foolish well-meaning. I wish our pity may not some day see occasion to give way to a less agreeable passion; but I begin to suspect that his zeal has more of earth than heaven in it, and that his folly is less connected with well-meaning than with evil-doing. I will not go into his history or charac¬ ter at present; I only mention him as h 2
my lover, or intending-to-be lover. He began his courtship at Bath, and how think you ? By assuring me that I was in danger of losing my way, for, from what he had heard, I was in the v/rong path, one, that if I would allow him, he •would prove to me did lead to —that Is, did not lead to — heaven. His first thought was to place me among the damned,j but excluding me from the state of the blessed, he recol¬ lected, was a politer way of • expressing the same thing. As I thought him sincere, and Ireally do not know even now but that he is, I determined not to take offence, but to hear what he would say: »we happened to be sitting together on a bench in one of the rooms, while George and Caroline were talking with some of their acquaintance at a little distance. " Mr. Palmer,*" said I, " you would 'alarm me, if i had not taken some pains to convince myself that I was in tlie -right road." • • <lf You are -as wide of it," said he, a* as Mecca from Jerusalem. I protest
it is a pity that so sweet a young lady, for you are a very sweet young lady, should not be led where the true light shineth, and by the illumination of which she might perceive the tinsel and mock jewels, the paste diamonds, and wax pearls, which from dark corners dazzle the eyes of her otherwise excellent un¬ derstanding." "What dark corners do you mean, Mr. Palmer," said I. «« Those," said he, " of a certain Bel¬ dam mentioned in the Revelations." " I am still at a loss/' replied I. " Very likely*" said he; " for they keep these things from your knowledge." " Who keep ?" cried I — " and what things ?" He gazed in a very odd way at me, as if he meant more than he could speak ;. then said; " Truly it is a difficult thing for a young man like me, and not having those privileges a happy state might afford him, to expound with delicate propriety to a delicate young lady those , H 3
— matters — but if—it were' my happy lot" — I looked at him as if I anticipated a proposal; but that idea, which I am sure was in his mind, received such a check by my look, that he was puzzled how to make a conclusion to the happy lot, which, however, he turned ofTwith more address than I thought him master of. — " If," stammered he, " it were my happy lot to — to — to — I beg your pardon, I was going to say — rival the Pope : — but that is not my meaning -— rivalry is out of the question. — I mean if it were my happy lot to render you spiritual service, I should think myself the most fortunate of men." I should have shown some displeasure, but that Pity still held its power over me, and I only said, with a smile, " that I begged he would not trouble himself to think of my spiritual state," He seem¬ ed pleased at getting off so well; and far from being repressed, he paid me the more attention from what had passed between us. When I repeated this little religious*
lesson to Caroline, and the tendency which 1 thought it had of an offer of her neighbour's heart, she laughed, and said she began to fear that all was not gold that glittered, nor all zeal religion, and told me that he had also been talk- . ing some nonsense to her, from which he had extricated himself the same way. We determined, however, not to be hasty in our judgment, and though at times we have not known what to make of hi& looks, he has never ventured upon similar talk. The truth of what our dear Abate used to say to us/ on the separation from the church, is wonderfully exemplified in this country. When once a schism is made, there is no saying into how many other schisms it will break. Eng¬ land is full of sectaries : but I shall take , another opportunity of expressing my sentiments to you on the state of religion here, when I have seen more, and can judge better. I shall at present say no more on *the subject than that I find my dear Caroline's sentiments, though differ¬ ing from mine in some respects, yet often h 4
agreeing, and certainly pleasingly their pureness and sincerity: and there is one delightful thought accompanies all our serious conversations —- she has never shown the least desire to sway my opi¬ nions, or to draw me from the church. On my part I have not been equally passive 5 I have shown a desire to have her one of us, though I have been cau¬ tious of persisting, for it would ill become so feeble an intellect as mine to dictate, or be dogmatic. I remove from the country but slowly, my dear Angelica, and I have a good deal to do there yet, before I can feel myself established in Hanover-Square: *-* I wili try to be more expeditious. I will not give you a particular account of our country balls, till I see something 6f those in town. At that given by my cousins, I found Mr. Palmer again, a little sweetly assiduous, and hinting spi¬ ritual solicitude, but I laughed, and made use of him in my dancing engage¬ ments to prevent my being annoyed by Lord Mariton. Mrs. Dartford was with us: —we.
talked of you and of Clementina Belvoce. She has written very strongly to her son to return immediately, without form¬ ing any contract before he sees her. As he was going to Naples, I am of opinion, that being out of sight of the object by whom his vanity was flattered — for after all, that is the secret of his fickleness — he will not find it difficult to comply with her desire. She sends her kind regards to you, and says that if you will catch him, and chain him, and keep him at your side, and bring him to England, her gratitude would be boundless. I wish Angelica, we could fall upon some means of curing this youth of his folly, for her sake. By all accounts he would be an estimable character if he could be corrected of it. If you cannot turn your thought to the glory of fixing him for life, try I beseech you to do it long enough to bring him to Eng¬ land. I think it very probable that he will hasten from Naples to Florence: — if so, I have promised Mrs. Dartfbrd that you shall do all in your power to take care of him for her. h 5
And now, adieu to Herefordshire for the present; nor will I stop at Oxford longer than to change horses, though, the fact is, we stopped there two days, my cousins having friends at Christ- church, with whom they had engaged to spend a day on their way to London. The celebrity of Oxfoid as a Univer¬ sity you are well acquainted with. It has given many great and learned men to the world. We are to spend some time in that part of the country, when the weather is more favourable for moving out of doors. The cold for some weeks has been intense, and, while we were at Oxford, there was a fall of snow. I am told that the winter is more than usually severe: — you have no idea of it in dear Italy. But in spite of its sharp attack, you would not dislike it: — it is friendly to health, and gives colour to the complexion; — they say mine is improved already. But the horses are changed, — let us run into the coach, and with our pelisses and muffs, and furred feet-baskets keep our¬ selves warm all the way : — we are now
at the door in Hanover-Square — get out and run to the fire, with a good appetite for dinner at six o'clock. Having brought you to London, I shall conclude this letter. If I receive one from you this week, I will acknow¬ ledge it under the same cover; if not, this shall travel alone, and reproach you for your tardiness in writing. My love to the Marchese, and Marchesa, and Signora Bentivole. You know, my dear¬ est Angelica, how you are loved by Your affectionate Augusta.
ii 6
LETTER XLIV. Mr. Saville to the Marchese di Pisani, » London, .Feb. MY DEAR PISANI, Your letter gave me great pleasure : I received it while spending the Christmas in the country at my nephew George * Godfrey's, but I thought it better to delay writing again till we came to town. Your participation of my happi¬ ness in the affection of my nephew and niece, and the gratification you express at my account of our reception at Grove Park by Sir Francis Darrell, and of the time we spent in Northamptonshire, was a renewal to me of the delight I expe¬ rienced in those events, and which I felt as I wrote to you. I had indeed anticipated your feel¬ ings, for I knew your friendship—I knew
what impression it would make on you, the Marchesa, Angelica,- and your sister; and imagination gave actual enjoyment of future pleasure since realized and returned by your letter. How friend¬ ship animates existence ! multiplies joys! assures us of our soul! Tt is the vital principle of happiness; — all other sources produce accidental streams whicli may be cut off) or cease to flow without destroying happiness : — ambi¬ tion, wealth, pursuits and desires of every kind may change or be dropped altogether, and man may stili be happy if friendship continues its course; even that peculiar love, iri its nature so much more ardent, must at last fail or resolve itself into friendship of an exquisite kind. It is the great source of all other enjoyments, for what poor joy must that be which cannot be imparted, which has no echoing hearts to reverberate the emotion: — it is a solitary shriek in a' wilderness, it agitates the air and dies away unheard. I speak of men — for he must be more than man, who in this world can
be happy alone:' he must have a full belief of his own immortality; his ima¬ gination must already enter him into the communion of higher beings: — to such a man, if ever there was such, earth is at an end, and heaven begun: — but he, who talks of lonely bliss without that supernatural impression, deceives himself. If he contemplates the scenes of nature as effects of chance, of any, cause but those appointed by a God to whom he is known, and by whom he is regarded, his bliss is the wonder of a boy of inexperience, and after a few gazings at the show the excitement fails, the bliss is gone, and if he is as deficient in virtue as in piety, he will be more miserable among hills and cataracts, . than fit a carnival, to which he will soon resort as to the better lot of a being who merits happiness nowhere. These reflections, my dear Pisani, have presented themselves to my mind, in consequence of thinking, as I do, of our friendship, and comparing the result with the sentiments and extraordinary con¬ duct of Sir Francis Darrell, on the same
subject. , I told you how both Godfrey and I had courted his friendship; and how we had resolved not to be guided by the opinions of others respecting him. We have persisted in our determination, but all in vain; he will hot have our friendship, he will not give us his; he rails at society, immures himself in his library in town before the usual season, and now talks of going into the country when others come to town. We have been at his house twice: —the first time we were not admitted; he returned this call by merely leaving his card at our door, with a letter, appointing, a day for us to meet, and sign the papers relative to Grove Park, which were ready to be executed. We accordingly waited upon him. I found a very marked alteration in his countenance, — it had none of that underlook, those varied contortions of the brows, that satirical smile which I observed in our meetings at Paris. On the other hand, it wanted that cheerful. ness, that appearance of a mind content w r th itself, which it wore on the pleasant day he made us pass at Grove Park, He
smiled, but his smile was that* of a kind reception—it was not that proceeding from a heart at ease, and, after he shook hands with us, he smiled no more. He is grown paler than he was. Though his look bespoke no happiness, his conversation differed from it. He said, he had not been so tranquil or happy in his life, as since he left us at Grove Park; that he was aware that we knew him better than we did then; \but t(iat he was by no means in a state of mind to enjoy society, which still appeared to hitfji an heterogeneous and malignant assem^ blage; that he felt himself extremely honoured by the note Augusta had written; that he was sensible of inde¬ lible obligations to her, which were daily increasing, and that with my per¬ mission, he would take the libeity of thanking her himself in a letter from Belmont, whither he was going shortly, as circumstances compelled him to post¬ pone his intention of travelling till the summer. - We persuaded him, without being too urgent, to join a party at God¬ frey's, but in vain; he excused himself,
saying, however, that he would pay his respects to the* ladies before he left London. His mildness and his manners were, if possible, more amiable than on the day af Grove Park; and I incline to ascribe this v to his pursuits, which'are nothing less than a revision of his understand¬ ing, and an investigation of the truths c " religion; the study of which he attribute? to a wish expressed by Augusta, on his taking leave at Grove Park. The note to which he alluded was but a few lines, merely saying that he had met some success in the tash she had set him. Snch is the state of a young man in whom nature and fortune seemed to have combined their stores to produce happi¬ ness : the first has endowed him with genius and fine feelings, the latter, With immense wealth and accomplishments, mental and personal, rarely matched : — together they have made him extremely amiable; —- and all this is spoiled by, the want of a guide in childhood, by some miserable boyish imprudence, folly, crime, whatever it may be, his sensibility to the
reproach of which drove him into ex¬ cesses, and connected him fatally with those profligate worshippers of Reason, who acknowledge no other deity. I mean not the scum of those worshippers, who, during the Revolution, erected images "of Reason in the churches of France and Italy; but the educated phi¬ losophers, who, in the very bosom of truth and religion, pride themselves on ah intellect that can falsify fact, and on a heart that can defy God. They were not able to eradicate his virtues; but they eradicated all that might have assisted to restore peace to his mind, Without even supplying him with that limited antidote, which removes the pangs of reflection for a short time. It was not his wisdom to laugh in the midst of destruction; he joined to rail at his nature, and at the supposed Author of it, but he could not be happy; and thus was a being whom every thing marked out for earthly bliss thrown into an abyss of doubt, despair, and misery. And now, my dear Pisani, I will pro* ceed to the chief object of this letter, and
then I have & request to make which I hope will not be displeasing to you. ' You remember that the natural desire I sometimes expressed to see my relations and my country, and the urgent invi¬ tations of my nephew did not rapidly in¬ duce a resolution to leave Italy till aided hy the Count Olivastro's violent pre¬ tensions to Augusta. I little imagined then that a much more serious anxiety respecting her would produce in me a wish to leave England before I had been in it six months. I am going to open my mind to, you, Pisani, but the confi¬ dence is of a very delicate nature, and which I should probably not resort to just now, but for its connection with the favour I have to beg. You may judge when I tell you that I have not disclosed my feelings, even to George Godfrey. I have hardly dared to trust myself with the knowledge of them. It is, however, in vain for me to deceive myself. I have traced a dangerous partiality in the heart of my child, of the nature of which she is not aware, and -it increases daily. Neither Godfrey nor Caroline has no-
ticed it to ine, and perhaps they have no suspicion of it, as they think so highly of the understanding of their cousiu, that they can have no idea of any danger from susceptibility. This too was my opinion, but it is changed. Darrell occupies her mind. She ascribes all her feelings to gratitude, and to a wish that he should be convinced of the truths of religion. Of these feelings she makes no secret j she expressed them to himself at Grove Park, since which she has not seen him; but I perceive that the thought of him influences her conduct to others. She will hear no one speak ill of him without defending him; she, in one instance, felt so much that her health was affected, on which account we made an excursion to Bath ; she will not listen to George or Caroline on the subject ofa lover, though they know more than one vvho, on the least encouragement, would declare themselves. In short, my dear Pisani, it strikes me, that she is cherishing feel¬ ings whicli may have a fatal influence upon the happiness of her life, ancl some¬ thing must be done to counteract their
effect. I am lofh to raise the idea in Godfrey's mind, and I mean to continue my own observations a little longer; and jfi in the gay circles of London, I find her continue reserved to all the young men introduced to her, I will open my mind to George, and consult with him. With respect to Darrell himself <— he admires her certainly, and respects her, but that is all; he avoids her, as he does the rest of us, though not more pointedly; and it is very evident, that she has not made au equal impression upon his heart* If she had, I confess to you that, so far from seeing an objection, I should be ready to promote a union, which would completely restore him to society and to happiness, and would settle my dear Au¬ gusta most desirably in my view, and as I have said, I believe according to the feelings of hei* own heart. But I have no expectation of it, and I must take the other course; that is, to take care that my child's hopes of happiness in this life may not be blasted. When I tell you, my dear friend, that it is on this account that I am going to
make my request to you, I trust you wiil not find the granting of it too difficult an exertion. As the spring advances, I shall turn my thoughts to Grove Park ; now, George and Caroline cannot always be with me there. You already understand me, Pisani. You know how our girls love each other. You know they were brought up as sisters. I shall be obliged to stay in England, at least all this year. Augusta is my comfort, — is my life. Can you come to us this spring ? If you cannot, will you send Angelica to Au¬ gusta ? I will myself bring them both tc Signa next year, when we will settle cur future plans. There is a family of the name of Dorrington, now passing the winter at Naples, who are coming to England in April next, perhaps sooner; they are friends of Godfrey's, who says, they would be happy to take care of An¬ gelica, and he will write to them on the subject. This difficulty being cleared, I hope there will be no other in the way. Tell my dear Angelica in confidence, that it is to her care I wish to trust the heart of her own beloved sister and friend* 1
We have been in London a little more than a week. It is quite new to me. I have not time just now to give you any account of it, or to tell you how I feel in it. The parliament is met. I have been several times down to the house of commons with George j I could not but think of former times, when Pitt and Fox, Burke, Sheridan, and Wind¬ ham, drew the attention of the house, I might say of the kingdom,— ofthe world. I remember that when we lost those bril¬ liant stars the nation felt a kind of va¬ cuum. Admiration had been wound up for years to its highest pitch — no wonder it should fall for a time. At present the house has recovered its brilliancy; it possesses first-rate talents, and, I believe, first-rate virtues. I have great pleasure in attending the debates. I wili say more of the speakers in both houses, when I have more leisure. I must also defer other subjects, though I know them to be interesting to you. Before I conclude, I must tell you that I have r?ceived another letter from Count Olivastro j who, in spite ofa very
positive answer to bis last, continues to solicit my interference. He is coming to England. From his letter I should not be surprised at seeing him in the course of this month. It is absolutely madness, and makes me very uneasy. He talks of appointments, and 1 know not what, For heaven's sake, keep him at Florence, if you can and he should be still there when you receive this. Augusta has a letter for Angelica ready. Adieu, my dear Pisani; give our most affection¬ ate remembrances to the Marchesa and your sister, and believe me ever Your sincere friend
Gilbert Saville.
LETTER XLV. Angelica to Augusta. Signa. MY DEAREST AUGUSTA, x our dear interesting letters, dated both at Manor-House, arrived, I know not by what chance, together. — And it is for¬ tunate for me that they did, as several things * in the first would have left me in painful suspense, which the other pre¬ vented. Your cousins are delightful be¬ ings : — I envy and love them—tell them . so for me ; — say I feel the affection they bestow on you as bestowed on myself, and that I hope some day, not very distant, to embrace them and tell them so myself. — Kiss your little Caroline for me again and again, and do this every morning, and call it Angelica's kiss, that it may be impressed on her mjnd as well as on her lips. VAT. TTT T ■
With what pleasure have I again been reading your letters ! I will not connect the idea of any pain with them, though the character of that paradoxical creature, so good and so bad, making his depend¬ ents so - happy and himself so miserable, avoiding the world because he thinks them malignant, and the Manor-House circle because he finds them benignant, so agreeable to company, so disagree¬ able to himself, does unavoidably create some,,and.to say the truth, my dear Au¬ gusta, not a little. From all you have said of him, I believe him incapable ofa bad action; and the impression left upon me by his conduct in France is confirm¬ ed and improved by the light- in which your letters place him. It is not the sus¬ picious, appearances- at Malvern Wells, that are the grounds of the pain he creates. — I think you are in too much haste to take as proof what may be acci¬ dent : Lagree with that amiable woman, Lady Mount-Vernon, that he is slander¬ ed ; and I am ,sure that he has ten thou¬ sand times more virtue than his slander¬ ers. What gives pain, though this may be called paradoxical on my side, is
4 his making himself agreeable/and mani-" testing the most virtuous and engaging dispositions without supporting his pre¬ tensions to the character they merit, with¬ out confronting detraction and brushing off from him the dirt with which it has spattered him. — And whatever has been really wrong should be repented and ab¬ solved : — nothing base could have ever proceeded from such a man ; and what' fault would not be eclipsed by such vir¬ tues ? You see, Augusta, I am almost, if not altogether, as great an enthusiast in the cause of Sir Francis Darrell, as you are, and judging of you by myself, and by my knowledge of you, I think, with all your enthusiasm, there is no dinger of your becoming a love-sick maiden, though I own I am very much surprised at not meeting, in any page of these letters, a single lover. Where are the eyes, and the ears, and the hearts, of'all your "country¬ men ? Can what we have heard of them be true, that love in England is the off-' spring of calculation, and that arithmetic' is the primer of courtship ? Or have you i Q
lost your beauty and sense, and become reserved and repulsive ? Why does not this preserver of yours, this Sir Francis Darrell, rouse himself, and by proving that he has a heart worthy of you, tempt you, not to be a love-sick damsel, but to trust your happiness in his hands? Though I know you are no falling-in-love Miss, I am not so certain as you seem to be, that he is all esteem and respect, without a grain of love. Pardon me, my dearest sister, for talking thus ; I would not for my life sport with your feelings:— I seriously begin to think, by meditating on the letters before me, that I was mis¬ taken in concluding formerly, that Sir Francis was not likely to be a visitor at Grove Park. I am of opinion, in spite of his reserve and seclusion, that his present conduct indicates more than you suspect. / suspect that you have made a very strong impression on his heart, and that a consciousness of being unworthy of you has raised in him the ambition of merit¬ ing a heart, which he must have seen is not to be gained without peculiar merit. I would fain think well of this man,
and encourage this thought. — Think what a double victory it would be, if the result of his study should be the recovery of his soul, and the conquest of his heart! Without the former, I am sure you never will value the latter ; — but, if he is in earnest, he will find the one as he loses the other. With a candid and sincere desire to know God, no man will fail: If he proceed so far, he will find the rest easy: then let him come and reason with our dear Abate Cevello, who will con-. vince him of the truths of our religion, and completely render him worthy of my dear Augusta. Am I not suffering my first feelings to run away with my reason and my recol¬ lection ? Augusta wili forgive me: — let my thoughts run how they will, she knows their source, and that my love can cor¬ rect without concealing them. — Yes, they are hasty thoughts — I must correct them. His appearance in the bower at Grove Park, his mysterious cup, his agitation, his abrupt flight, betoken madness, or unexpiated guilt. — No, no; my dear Augusta must not think i 8
of him; — yet she may rejoice, as I shall, if the exertions ofthis unhappy man should be attended with conviction and comfort; and none that sincerely seek it } by expiation will be denied it. My heart tells me that, however justly I have writ¬ ten this last sentence, it was dictated by a degree of harshness: — the truth is, I am inclined to love the man for what he has done, and what I know of him ; but the something ,behind the veil produces an occasional shudder. The generous manner of his putting my dear Mr, Saville m possession of Grove Park is beyond all praise, and, with the event in France, renders it but natural, nay a duty, that you should be anxious for his welfare, both here and hereafter. The account t of your arrival and of your reception brought tears into iny eyes : — your father's feelings, your own, the sympathy of your cousins, Sir Francis's whole conduct, would find-their way to a heart much less attached to you than Angelica's. All, ali at Grove Park and the country in which it is, is charm¬ ing, with one exception:—the bower, the
urn, the secret box -in the pedestal, —- all this I could wish obliterated from the picture. A bower and an urn are not displeasing objects, but of the uses of them you should have been kept completely ignorant. I do not think, my dear Augusta, that you or Mr. Saville, circumstanced as you were, could have done otherwise than you did; but it would have been better, could it have been avoided, for these emblems and memorials of crime or mystery will occasionally disturb your fancy. Had the communication been premeditated I should have reprobated the conduct of Sir Francis ; — but of any such intention he was completely innocent, anil his ac¬ tions, when accident led you to the spot, were the effects of passion amounting to madness. The secret that preys upon his mind is evidently of a dreadful na¬ ture ; and I wish to Heaven it was in your power to banish from yours all the circumstances which have unfortunately come to your knowledge. Before I quit this subject I will make I 4 ^
one observation respecting the state of SirFrancisDarrell'sirreligiousopinions:-*- he must have entered uppn the study of religion, with a wish not to find it true: — immortality must be a terror to bad men, and he, who has no interest in finding that he has a soul, will be ready to receive .arguments why there should be no God. It is sad to think how successful the wish was — it is clear he has not been the less miserable for it. Now, my dear Augusta, ,if he has renewed his religious study, with a wish. to find religion true, we may confidently hope that the reverse of this will follow: the repentance that secures .pardon will remove terror from immor¬ tality; the divinity will be rendered mani¬ fest by redemption ; and in looking to a glorious existence in another life he will ,be happy in this. 1 fervently pray that he may be successful; and if he is sincere he will be, for sincerity is the essence of all religion. Let us now turn to a different subject -— to a man not unacquainted with religion, but unacquainted with himself—your amiable Mrs. Dartford's son. You judged
Tightly in supposing me apprised sooner than you of my swain's desertion, and of Clementina Belvoce's triumph; but what will you say when I tell you that she is zmseraphised, and that her votary is kneel¬ ing at the shrine of a certain French beauty, Mademoiselle Cornelie le Grand, one ofthe best dancers and tallest women of her country ? There is a report that he is actually married to hei\ I hope it is not true for Mrs. Dartford's sake, and you must keep this from her'at present. I hope so too for his own sake, for he cer¬ tainly is amiable, and has virtues which in time would conquer his vanity and fickleness. She is the daughter of the French resident at Naples; and the en¬ chantment it seems springs from her toe. Oh ! what a source of love ! I know he admires good dancing, and is a fine dancer himself— so together they have kicked poor Clementina out of her seraphic pro¬ motion. - I know nothing ofthe present angel :— she is remarkably tall, but well propor¬ tioned, inclining to embonpoint; her coun¬ tenance is singular, and very unlike the i 5
lournure of the French; her complexion may be rather called white than fair; arid, her cheeks being regularly supplied with toilet bloom, her face is compared to an alabaster doll; her eye-brows are light, yet her eye is of a sparkling black like jet; tp finish the picture her hair sur¬ rounds her face in flaxen curls. Do not suppose Augusta that I am humourously collecting traits from my own imagin¬ ation, or that I believe the picture to be very like the original. I give you the copy from a prejudiced painter : — it is the description sent to my mother by Sig¬ nora Belvoce; — you may therefore sus¬ pect it put together for the occasion. From what you have said of Mrs. Dart¬ ford, and indeed from what I myself know of her son, I really take an interest v in his fate ; and it would give me great pleasure to send him back unmarried to his mother; of whom you give so pleas¬ ing an idea, that I should be happy to know her, and who knows how soon I may pay her a visit at the Priory, though not'as a daughter. ^Pj^esenfcMmy respects to «£r. I am quite pleased with Mr.
Vernon's courting by proxy for her, and I smiled at his own gallant compliment. How well you have grouped the Mount- Vernon family! But I am frightened when I look at Lady "Barbara, and her horse in the air, over a gate, till I see her explaining the mystery of it by the same means as the church-going of Mrs. Godfrey, your mass-going, Mr. Vernon's jesting, and Mr. Dartford's " offering him¬ self to every pretty girl he meets, — all habit, my dear." Mr.' Vernon must be an agreeable man. — 1 do not dislike his brother ; but Lady Mount-Vernon is in¬ deed a character to study, and to emu¬ late, and I think the Marchioness of N** entitled to the highest respect and admir¬ ation. Lady Mount-Vernon is a para¬ gon : — her virtue and good sense have in a great degree assimilated her husband's character with her own. If she had shown disgust at the sports to which he is devoted, he would have sunk into the mere huntsman, and she would have been lost among the dregs of fashion : — the virtue she displays he sees, and seeing must love, and loving must share, and so T 6
SIR FRANCIS DARRELLr , becomes congenial in essentials with her — so that your principle is still without ~* exception, — " congeniality is necessary to a- happy marriage." Ber manner, of thinking respecting Sir Francis Darrell charms me, and I have adopted it. Her thoughts of Lady Betty Bramblebear are charitable, and do her honour. — I would not be in haste to credit the reports you have heard. You have made me love Lady Mount-Vernon, and I could dwell upon her character much longer, but I must think of drawing my letter to a con¬ clusion. I wish, my dear Augusta, that I could repay the interest of your letters by send¬ ing you equally interesting accounts from .the banks of the Arno — but there is little novelty in Florence, and my do¬ mestic life flows on just as when you were here, except that I want my dear sister, whose place I have found no Caroline to supply. Olivastro is heie:—wehave seen him but seldom:—he is nowgoingagain toVienna. I wish he 'would recover himself for his family's sake : the violence of his .dispo-
sition is turned into a gloomy sullenness. What folly, what madness, is it for any man to persevere in a passion whicli he is convinced is not reciprocal! And as to the hope of overcoming a resolution de¬ cidedly taken, it is not only an insult, but barbarity.— I would not see him if he comes to England, if I were you. I have reserved a piece of intelligence to give a relish to the conclusion of my letter. My father has gained his law-suit at last; and, although it has cost him a great deal, the difference to his fortune is greater even than we supposed before you left Signa. This has put him into spirits, and he talks of visiting Grove- Park with delight, when all his affairs are arranged; — but it is long to look forward to another year at the be¬ ginning of a new one. I wish our bodies could be as expeditious as our souls — how I would embrace you and your dear Caroline in the twinkling of an eye! But, as it is, we must as you say, manage to twirl the one after the other over the sur¬ face of the earth between Grove-Park and Signa: exercise and change of air
are the best prescriptions for health, and what is an Alp or two in the way! I long' for your next letter; to hear more of your progress in English society, and to be again in thought with you, your cousins, and the friends whom you love. -— I want to hear more of Sir Francis . Darrell, of Lady Mount-Vernon, Mrs. Dartford : — make me known to them, and keep me up in their minds. Should Sir Francis adhere to his resolution of travelling, and come to Florence, I will do every thing in my power to show him how much I feel myself indebted to him in the person of my dear Augusta, and 1 would all but tell him that I love him, in spite ofhis making himself hateful. I have just seen a gentleman attached to the British" embassy at Florence, who is returned from Naples ---- By him I find that Mr. Dartford is not married to Ma¬ demoiselle Cornelie, but that there is a talk of a marriage, which he did not deny- Nor is the lady what Signora Belvoce describes her. She is not so white; her hair is not flaxen ; her eye¬ brows not light; and her eyes not black;
but she is very, very tall, and well made for dancing. The disappointed Signora of Rome has been indulging a humourous vein, that's all. A thousand, loves from the Marchese, my mother, and my aunt. May heaven shower blessings on my dear, dear Au¬ gusta, prays her Most affectionate sister,
Angelica.
LETTER XLVL Augusta to Angelica. Hanovtr Square, Feb. MX DEAR ANGELICA, You shall again rec %;f? e two letters to¬ gether, but this must be a short one, and shall go under the same cover with that which I wrote last week. You will perceive by this, that the letter I was expecting from you is arrived. It has in most respects given me very great plea¬ sure, but certainly much pain on the sub¬ ject of the two young men whose cha¬ racters are so strikingly and painfully opposite. The one immoveably fixed to an unattainable object, the other perpetually changing his object, attainable or not; Olivastro becoming morose from disap¬ pointment; Mr. Dartford, more airy, gay, arid volatile at every change. I hope 1
that something has happened to prevent the foolish step the latter was about to take, and the suspense on account of Mrs. Dartford will make me look the more anxiously for your next letter. Were it not for her, I should not be able to treat the subject seriously; and, even as it is, I cannot help laughing at the humourous spite of Clementina's mother. I trust that Mademoiselle Cornelie is now dancing to the same tune she made Signora Belvoce sing; and glad should I be to hear that our Amante inconstante was safe back at Florence, and under your care. If he is so fortunate as to escape this time, tie him, or cage him, I again beseech you, in Mrs. Dartford's name, till you have a good opportu¬ nity of sending him home, unless my dear Marchese will be prevailed upon either to come to England in the spring or send you to us, as I find my father has written to request, and then I com¬ mission you to bring him ; in which case you may either prepare yourself with the Marchese's and Marchesa's consent to
make him their son, or neglect that cau¬ tion, as seems best to you. To be serious, my dear Angelica — let me congratulate you and my dear friends at Signa on .the successful issue of their contest for the property of the Mar- ( chesa's uncle, and let me hope that the business which is likely to engage your father and mother for some time will induce them to comply with my father's request and my anxious desire, to let you come to me wrth the family whom he has mentioned to the Marchese. Before he wrote we thought of the difficulty which would arise from want of a proper op¬ portunity, and my cousin George fortu¬ nately knew that Mr. and Mrs. Dorring- ton were to return early this year. I know my dear kind friends will comply: I feel as if I should have my Angelica in my arms before the month of May. It shall from this time be one of my plea¬ sures to anticipate our meeting, and all the dear and agreeable consequences of it. 1 will briefly notice the points of your
letter before I attend to other circum¬ stances which interest me more, I fear you will think, than they should. You are certainly right in "your opinion that Sir Francis Darrell should confront detrac¬ tion, and that whatever he has done wrong should ,be repented and absolved, for he could never have done a base action, and he has virtues that should place him high, very high, among men. Butyou are as,certainly wrong, Angelica, when you .surmise that he considers me in any wa^ but with .esteem and re¬ spect. It is clear that I have made no other impression on his mind ; and^ though I may have given the first im¬ pulse to his reflection, it is his own understanding and the importance ofthe stake that actuate his perseverance. No, my love, he will never offer himself to me, and you do me justice, Angelica, in believing that I never will unite myself to a body without a soul. The events of - that morning were accidental: neither he nor I was to blame, but I will con¬ sult with my father about removing the
monument, if it can be done without hurting the feelings of Sir Francis. You say I must not think of him: — indeed I do not at all, as you mean — I do much in other respects. He is not mad, Angelica — I hope he is not cri¬ minal.—I see he is unhappy j —let us not be severe, my sister. — He does, he does wish to find religion true, and you are right, as you always are, in saying that he will find it so. I knew you would agree in Lady Mount-Vernon's opinion of him; I knew you would be delighted with that most amiable, that first of female characters j and as for Sir Francis, they may call him what they will, but he is not hateful. Having replied to your letter, my dear Angelica, I will now add a few lines on the progress of my London life. We have been here upwards of a fortnight. Unused to racket,—the bustle, the noise, the perpetual motion of a town life, abso¬ lutely make me giddy. I have never expe¬ rienced any thing like it before. At Paris, the hotels are more retired and quiet.
and besides I was there but a short time, and much of that time was occupied with extraordinary circumstances. With re¬ spect to London, I cannot take this opportunity of giving you a particular account of it: I have hardly time to say what I wish respecting myself, and I shall presently be obliged to put down my pen to dress for dinner. And who, Angelica, do you think is to dine with us ? I know you have guessed. I know you will tell me that I should not have put the question for any body else. — You are right, then, in your guess. Sir Francis Darrell is to dine with George to-day. When I wrote the letter which this will accompany I did not know that I should see him all the winter. When my father .and George saw him on busi¬ ness, he said he would have the honour of paying his respects to the ladies, and these respects were paid by his leaving a double set of cards at the door. After this, George sent him a pressing invita¬ tion, and engaged Mr. Vernon to endea¬ vour to bring him. — He succeeded, and
the invitation was accepted, so that he will be here this evening, between six and seven o'clock, for in London they call their suppers dinners. I shall not close my letter to-night, and shall add the occurrences of the evening. We expect no other company; — I believe Mr. Vernon stipulated with George and Caroline for a strictly family dinner. • Lady Mount-Vernon is in town; I have seen her twice, and with encreasing affection. Never was there a being of more real merit, with less assuming man¬ ners. A natural dignity precludes all appearance of diffidence, without mark¬ ing the slightest confidence or self-will; her sentiment seems reason without the necessity of argument to support it; her conversation is full of pleasantry and light turns of wit, but she listens more than the speaks. Her town-house is in Park-Lane; Lady Barbara Lewis is stay¬ ing with her; she gives a ball next week, to which we are going. I must lay down my pen —-1 am writing in a convenient
dressing-room near a good fire, adjoining my bed-room, whither I retire when I would avoid company. 11 o'clock* A slight head-ach, which was more noticed by Caroline than felt by myself has served me as a reason for retiring early — but I cannot go to bed till I have unburdened my mind to my dear sister. I have passed an agitated day, Angelica. I am agitated still, but I charge you by our dear friendship, not to mistake my feelings, not to suspect that I can admit into my heart sentiments and an affection for a man in whose heart there is evidently nothing of that nature towards me. — But the agitation is of a pleasing kind. I more and more admire and esteem him, and so will you too, though his success has not been proportionate to the eager- ness of our wishes, to the fervency of our prayers. Far, however, from seeing cause to despair, I think I see Providence,
gracious to his sincerity, working gra¬ dually on his understanding. When I laid down my pen to dress, I little suspected what was to befall me. —- At the usual time I went to the drawing- room, expecting to find Caroline there, but,-to my astonishment, I found only Sir Francis Darrell, who was standing near the fire with a newspaper in his hand. As I opened the door he looked towards me, and recognized me with a bow,, but without advancing. The sudden meeting, and his being entirely alone, gave me a slight shock; but the distance and reserved salutation dispelled it even before I reached the fire-place. It is the first time I have seen him since he left me in the bower at Grove Park alone. His countenance wore a very different appearance — it was calm, his brow was smooth, and there was a smile on his lips. — He looked pale. I spoke fir expressing a hope that I saw him wen. After the usual words, I asked him if my cousin or my father knew he was come. , " Yes," said he, " we came in toge-
ther just now, and they are only gone up to their dressing-rooms—they will be here presently." Why did I feel any awkwardness afr being alone with him ? I certainly did; and, in consequence, I said that I would go and bring Mrs. Godfrey. He bowed, as if he understood my motive, and at first said nothing to detain me — but as I turned to go, < • " Let me," said he, " take this oppor¬ tunity, Miss Saville, of saying what I cannot so well say before others; I shall perhaps not have another —" I stood motionless, and looked at him in expectation of what he was going to say, the introduction to which was rather extraordinary to my ears. " Whatever others may think of me," said he, " pray do you believe me when I say, that in the little experience I have' had in life of what some call pleasure, others happiness, I have found nothing equal to the sensation which some tran¬ sient consciousness of a virtue of some ! kind gives to the heart, and that sensa¬ tion I owe to you at this moment. Gra* i VOL. III. k
titucje I consider as a virtue as well as an emotion; it is a virtue, for it is not in general agreeable to the malignant nature of our species, and men do not like to feeh it, f asiis apparent by daily experience. Ithas>not, in general, found admission in my own heart, and,so far. 1 confess it has been, bad, but it shall, be so no longer in this respect — * I think I may say it is sc no longer. I feel my heart full of it to your father and to your cousins, for their tolerating such a spirit as mine, but it is to you that,I feel most grateful." " How to<me?" said I. " Have you not brought me to my senses ?" he replied. «« Have you not taught me to think that ihere is such a thing as happiness, to wish for it for ever, and more than half to hope it ?" " Oh! hope it altogether," cried I, « and it will be yours; and, though I cannot take this merit to myself, the re- flection^ will he to me a source of great delight. If gratitude is,so sweet, think what pleasure I owe to you." "But how far does your action sur¬ pass mine! I accidentally rescued a
body'; you, with anxious premeditation, which' does you honour,' have perhaps rescued a soul." " Sir Francis," cried T,> with- delight, " this charms me." " Soffcly," said he; "I said perhaps, and I will not have' you* think me more advanced in my task than I am; the Jull wish and' fhe partial hope have not suffi¬ ciently influenced my understanding, my stubborn understanding, which no'prize on*earth or in Heaven can tempt or bend. Look 1 at the mass-of mankind; have they souls? And' if they had,, what sort of spirit would it be ?' Is it! such j as would deserve happiness even in this life ? And if not, how can an eternity of bliss be prepared for it ?" Hesaid this with a mild,seriousness'of countenance; then, throwing a very pleasing smile into it, he added, " I am indeed but too much' inclined todraw my reasonings from the'being I look at, whose' every feature and every sentiment bespeak a soul, and whose vir¬ tues deserveai heaven." I felt a 1 colour come:into my face; — -Jt 2 ,
he had never before paid me a compli¬ ment, and it was so unlike him, that I was greatly surprised. ~ *« Nay,", cried I, ."do not turn so im¬ portant an observation into the language of common compliment." - He exclaimed— " Common compli¬ ment !"—r paused a moment, then said-^ c * True, these are words of course, and should never have been used to : Miss Saville^- Pardon." :; '",/ v' : .-..':," , ;I wished to carry ■ him back to the subject.. However feeble my power of reasoning, I - was desirous, of suggest¬ ing my own thoughts, which, if not convincing, might have raised new ideas, and his own strength of understanding. might have pursed them with success —- but,'at the mdment he asked my par¬ don, Caroline came in. '.. I would have ; continued the conversation before, hei*, and with her assistance, had he not clearly avoided the renewal of it, by going for- > ward to meet her, and afterwards by per¬ severing in general topics. He seemed pleased with the manner in which Caro-: 1 ine received him, and Mr; Vernon soon ■■'. 4" ' •■.- ;
after coming in, followed by my father and George, we were immediately sum*. moned to dinner, and sat down a party of six. It was not the less agreeable for being small, and had the premeditated object been a conciliation of mutual re¬ gard, nothing could have been better calculated. The pleasing attentions, of Caroline, the friendly manner of- my father and George, the peculiar turns of the conversation, were all adapted to gain his confidence ahd regard; and his friend Mr. Vernon was congenially active- in promoting the ease and openness of friendship through the day. In the evening we met in the drawing-room — he seemed quite at home.— there was not the slightest appearance of constraint — he chatted with ease and on every sub¬ ject ; during the serving of coffee he went of his own accord to the piano, and touched and varied all the chords with an accurate and delicate finger. Caroline requested him to play. He assured her that he could not, and that he had dis¬ played the whole of his accomplishment K 3
in,showing,that,he w;as not unacquainted with the principles of-harmony. " Alas!" added Jie, ," ,1 [have never knpwn how to,make s use ( of them." T^his^pointedf allusion brought tears to my eyes, ,-a.nd my,heart,was .so full at the thought, and the manner in which it t was expressed, .that ,1 .would have indulged the flow of them, ,but -for the conscious¬ ness rtbat jtfwonld ihave made ra sqene* I,$awjth^t iCar,ohne partook-.my fueling. I jbeljeve ^we a}1 ,were rStrnc|c wjth tlie words. vlje>was ,stil| sitting jbejfore the piano, y when Lord gnd Juq&y Mount-Vernon wer,e announced. St is impossible fpr me to <paint to you the sudden, the im¬ mediate change that took place in his countenance and deportment. His smile and his _ease forsook him,;,— something like his Paris knitted [brow appeared, and he looked as if he meditated an escape from torture — he rather,eyed than look¬ ed at ihem as they came forward. Thejr visit was .unexpected, but proved to be a design of Mr. Vernon's, to entrap his friend into a ball. He knew that a card
would be a snare easily avoided, and he knew also that if the invitation was made personally, in Lady Mount-Vernon's manner, the charm would be irresistible. Certain that she,'did not think ill of Sir Francis, and that she was ' disposed to givediim a relish for sopiety, he had led her and his brother into this little con¬ spiracy against the misanthropy hy which his friend was unhappily ruled. He was silent, till Lord Mount-Vernon, address¬ ing him, regretted nov. seeing him lately" in .Herefordshire, and hoped that he was not .going to desert them altogether. He evidently did not give this speech any credit for cordiality': he barely said, " Your Lordship's very good." " I shall judge whether you really think so, Sir Francis," said Lady Mount- Vernon, " if you will,give me reason to call you very good, by complying with a request! shall take this opportunity of making." Looking at her with a mild but serious countenance, he said he was afraid that he tcould never convince her that he had any title to that epithet, yet there k 4
were few whom he more wished ta think that he had. e ' That is a very agreeable compliment to me, Sir Francis; and I say this per¬ haps more sincerely than you do, as I am not apt to compliment." " Believe me, it is no compliment, Madam," said he. • " Then you will comply with my re¬ quest?" - . " If in my power." ' *' I give a ball this day week"— i " I assure your Ladyship," cried he, interrupting her, and supposing the in¬ vitation given, " And I am sure," cried Mr. Vernon, interrupting him, and supposing the ex¬ cuse he Was about-to make, " that you are not engaged." " My dear Vernon," said he, " you know I am no dancer." " You need not' dance," said Lady Mount-Vernon, "unless you like, I see you would rather not come, as to any pleasure that is to he derived from a ball — comply as a gratification to me, to say nothing of our friends here."
- " Lady Mount-Vernon, Mrs. Godfrey, this is really too good, too flattering; — my eyes are opened — I am not to be deceived — it is not to a ball that 1 am invited — it is to society —- what shall I say ? It is not easy, to alter the disposi- v tion ; I have some ungracious habits 5 to conquer, and many enemies to meet;.— but I must be worse than I am tobe in¬ sensible of such exertions in favour of an unhappy mind. — I will 'endeavour*' to ' deserve the friendship ofthis circle." f This - unexpected > openness ' affected every one present.« There was a short silence, as -if no one knew what to say, till that angel of .a woman, Lady Mount- Vernon, with a look expressive of the feeling he had raised, said, " Sir Francis, you have rendered it impossible to speak otherwise than in a serious tone. — I shall be happy, to see you at my. ball; but it is, as you have rightly judged — the invitation given in this manner is to prove to you that your friends are very anxious to see you filling the station your birth, your fortune, and K 5
your acquirements have marked you for. You will not, I trust, refuse us." He was overpowered by the emotion caused by this speech — the tears rushed to his eyes — he wiped them away with his handkerchief: — .." This is foo much for me," cried he; " I cannot bear it; — this, Vernon, is your doing.". There was now a tear in every eye. My father, George, Mr. Vernon, and his brother, all spoke their feelings. Can feelings be painful and yet sweet ? Yes, Angelica, mine were. Sir Francis had risen, and Mr". Vernon was speaking, when Lady Mount-Vernon, who knows so well how to time and qua¬ lify circumstances, whispered me to go to the piano-forte — but perceiving what a task she hadigiven me, and which in¬ deed I should have declined* without noticing my inability -to comply* she went herself, and during her execution ofa sonata, the conversation was turned. — *■ Towards the conclusion ofthe piece, she requested her carriage might be ordered- On rising she said, " she could not stay
to hear me sing to-night," and giving no time for tthe return of ^painful feelings, she took leave, saying to Sir Francis, as she -went away — " Well, I shall expect you." When she was gone, we all s,poke of her with rapture. As for Mr. Vernon, he declares he is .absolutely in love with his sister. Sir Francis regretted that he had not cultivated her friendship more. He staid bnt a short time after .she went— he did not recover the easehe had acquired before her visit—he was thoughtful, and once I heard him in ,a whisper, ejaculate to himself— " Good God!" In wishing us good night, he said that he should certainly go to Lady Mount-Vernon's ball. Mr. Vernon went away with him — we afterwards, alone, had a short con¬ versation on the day. My father and George resolved to do every thing in their power to give him a relish for so¬ ciety, and to <check the malevolence of his enemies, and the ^equally injurious folly of no-meaning repeaters of ma¬ lice. Kb' ,
Upon the whole, my dear Angelica, you see that it was not without reason I said, that though I had been agitated, my agitation was of a pleasing kind. The man to whom I am so much indebted, has thrown himself into the hands of Pro¬ vidence ; he is entering society with bet¬ ter feelings; and, — Oh! with what plea¬ sure do I say it!—he seems, in spite of whatever may have passed, to merit the esteem and happiness now breaking like a new day upon him. It is late, and I will go to bed — in the morning I will write, good-morrow, and seal my packet to be dispatched with my father's letter to the Marchese. 1 I have woke to horror, Angelica — the - celestial vision is vanished— -It was all a dream. — I* dreamt he was an angel, I wake to find him a*^-^~ Oh! Heaven rei. strain my pen! restrain my thoughts! I know not what to write, or what to think - — read the enclosed, which I have had
strength enough to copy; read, my dear sister,and you will see that truth and false¬ hood, beauty and defbrmity, virtue and vice, are undistinguishable. Oh ! that you were here! — I have not yet seen Caro¬ line this morning — I am but just risen — I found the horrid note upon my table as I drew it to the fire which Madelena had been lighting — she it was who put it there — she received it this morning at the door, from a boy, who asked to speak particularly with my maid. She never saw him before, and knows no¬ thing of him. — What shall I think ? Can it be malice ? Is he all deceit ? All art ? One part of the note bears too evident a mark of something wrong. He has spoken with levity of the effect of my gratitude. Gracious Heaven! Did I kiss his hand, without washing away the kiss with tears ? Oh! Angelica, my dear Angelica, my horror is unsupportable — Has he dared to speak lightly of me ? It cannot be — he cannot be such a hy¬ pocrite — No, I am led by excessive pain to wrong him. I must send for Caroline
— but I will first put up my letter, for it must go to-day. For Heaven's sake, come tome Angelica.— Come to Yoin unhappy, affectionate AUXSUS'IVA.
A NOTE, Addressed to Miss Saville. .Beware, young lady—unperceived dan¬ ger is the worst danger—you neither know yourselfi nor your bretrayer. Your romantic preservation has already cost you your heart; take care, or it will cost you more. Your preserver is born to be your destroyer — he is the most artful of men. He knows, and he says, that the kiss you gave his hand, came from your heart. The woj'ld are talking of it. He is well aware that you cau only be won under the disguise of vir¬ tue and religion. Do not trust your ears; he has hot an atom of either — he has at this very time v an engage¬ ment of the heart. His design with respect to you is not yet ripe — Make
a proper use of this friendly commu¬ nication, and then will the writer of it be entitled to the name of Your Preserver.
LETTER XLVIL Augusta to Angelica. Hanover Square, Feb. I wish, my dearest Angelica, that I had not been in such haste to dispatch my last letter : — my father had desired to have it at breakfast to forward with his; and, with the feelings I had on that morning, I did not foresee any circumstance that was likely to induce me to delay it. But I am notwithstanding angry with myself, for you will probably think I ex¬ pressed the shock caused by the anony¬ mous note in terms too strong ; and you will condemn me for being so easily agitated, and so ready to credit the malicious communication of a concealed informant. ,At the same time, my dear sister, you will allow that the thoughts raised by that note were sufficient to agi-
tate me, independent of all considcuition respecting any engagement Sir Francis Darrell might have — his engagements concern not me, farther than as I take a sincere interest in the happy progress of his mind to all that is good. Even in that respect, I confess that the note shocked me extremely, but the idea that he could possibly be practising upon my heart — to be told that I had already lost it — to be warned against him as the most artful of villains — Oh ! my dear Ange¬ lica ! was> not all this enough to raise feel¬ ings pf the most painful kind, in the breast of your sister ? If then I have ex¬ pressed myself with unusual violence, you will not, I am sure, draw conclusions un¬ favourable to the slate of your Augusta's heart; — you will not, like this vile anonymous scribbler, say that I have lost it. Lost it! does a woman lose her heart ? What is meant by losing the heart ? Is it to love first, witnout a certainty of be¬ ing loved ? Can a woman who 1 espects herself do this ? I would you were here, Angelica! Oh! how 1 wished for you on that painful
morning,! After I had sealed my letter to you, I was going to send for Caroline, but having first read the note over again, 1 was struck with t the consequences of her seeing it—I love her, most dearly love her, and Iknow not that I have a thought I would jcon ceal from her — but when I reflected that the ideas which .would .be raised by tfhe contents :of the note,vvould accompany her thoughts in whatever future intercourse the family might have with Sir Francis Darrell, ,and whenever heiShould be the subject of conyersation, I hesitated: — whatii relief-would it have been .to me had you been here 1 JL did not, however, hesitate long upon the part I was to take — Caroline doves me, and although it was a degrading charge, she could not but know that it was a ma¬ licious unfounded on%,— : The conscious¬ ness of its having beeri made by a stranger might create some awkwardness in me, but never would she encrease it by her knowledge of it — she would rather help to take it off. Besides, even were we not upon these terms, it was incumbent upon me to make the circumstance known. In
making these reflections, however, I re¬ covered coolness enough not to treat it with the importance my first impulse would have given it, by sending in a hurry for my cousin, and I determined to produce the note at breakfast with great composure. While I was dressing, my father sent for the letter that I had written fo you, and it was dispatched that morning. Ih spite of my resolution, I could not help being considerably aflected in giving the note to Caroline, whom I found alone in the breakfast-room : — I said that I had received a letter which had shocked me very much, and that I could not account for being made the subject of such unjust and injurious observations.- " My dear Augusta," said Caroline, when she had read it, " it is not only a very foolish, but a very wicked contri¬ vance, intended to injure Sir Francis, as well as to insult you, — 1 would treat it with contempt." <e As far as I can," said I, — " but it is evident, that not only he is at*
tacked, but that I am talked of. If he is the man the note represents him, we ought never to see him again; and if he is slandered, which I believe, how shall I feel myself in company with him, with the consciousness of being said to be, as the note says ?" " It will be a painful feeling, I allow," replied Caroline, te but you must en¬ deavour to overcome it by reflecting that he in not aware of it. We will con¬ sult my uncle and George." " Who can the writer be," cried I, " and why pitch upon me for his malice, who have never injured him?" --7 " Injured whom?" cried George, who came in at that moment. On hearing the circumstance, he at first looked serious, but soon resuming his cheerful countenance: " Aha! Mia Signorina" said he, jest¬ ingly, " you must take your share of the fruits of beauty and goodness : — this is a grand compliment to you ; had you been ugly and vile, no envious minx would have treated you with this distinc¬ tion."
" Envious minx !" cried I — " Do you then imagine it to- be'written by a woman ?" — ce It was my first thought," said George, " for what but envy can be the cause of it?" " Don't you think," said Caroline, " that thWe may be jealous men .as well as envious women ?" — ce I am 'sure there'are," replied George, " butthe fact is, thaf Lady Betty Bram¬ blebear first came into my head." < " My J dear George," exclaimed I', " do you imagine' her* capable of such' an action ? She • must be 1 lost to all sense of virtue, all delicacy, if she' can 4 be the author of such a note." " It is not the first anonymous note she has been accused of," replied' he': "it is pretty well known that her ac¬ quaintance with Darrell had its' com¬ mencement" that way." "Oh!" cried I, "what* must he think of our sex'!' 1 '' , " My dear Augusta/' said George, " men will form their-opinions according to their experience, and I fear that Sir'
Francis's hitherto has not been very favourable to the ladies; but his fine understanding and goodiheart— and I am now perfectly convinced he possesses both — will rescue him from this error, if they have not already : — he is very young, only turned of five-and-twenty, and we must manage to give a new co¬ lour to tbe experience that is to come: — he has captivated me, and 1 have no doubt of his proving one of, the first characters of his country. Lady Mount- Vernon will open his eyes; you and Caroline shall have a share in his convic¬ tion. Your father and I,.with Vernon, and other friends* will endeavour to make him feel, that society is not the odious thing he may have had too good reason to believe it." How nobly was this said of George! It gave me great pleasure. Dear Caro¬ line said it was evident his nature was good, which I cordially echoed; but I could not help adding that it made me the more uneasy, to reflect that the person who could write me such a note, would not scruple to impress upon him'
that I was the weak creature it repre¬ sented. " I do not think it likely," replied George, " for if it is, as I suspect, it would be against her own schemes." " I confess," continued he, " that that lady is so sunk in my opinion, that, although I agree with Lady Mount- Vernon, that one should not hastily shut the door against those with whom we are in social communication, I am persuaded it is already time to break ofi* all intercourse with her: — vice and vir¬ tue cannot mix." " Can it be," said I, " an attachment to Sir Francis Darrell, and the fear of losing his attentions that can have re¬ duced her to such a contrivance as this?" " Lose his attentions!" exclaimed he, " I will not answer for Iter attachment, but I am certain that he pays her no attentions ; I know too, that the appear¬ ances at Malvern last autumn cost him infinite pain." This opinion of George's corroborated Mr, Vernon's observations at the time;
but though I was pleased at it, I could not help regarding that it was clear the world thought there was some truth in it, or at least talked of it, or it would never haye been the subject of the paragraph read at Mount-Vernon by Lord Mariton, though that had proved false. " The world" replied George, " is a word of multifarious meaning, ac¬ cording to the persons using it: — in politics it means all who concern them¬ selves with the affairs of government and connection of nations: —in divinity, it means polemical writers and readers : — in taste, it means those who discern, * or pretend to discern, the sublime and beautiful in all their varieties, from the snow-capped summits of the Alps, to the bow-knot on your shoe, including all the regions of Fancy, the poet and the player, the musician and the dancer: — • in love, it means the crowd who are vigilantly watching for faux-pas, and elopements; and it sometimes means a single person, which I believe to be the case, my dear Augusta, with your pre- VOL. III. L
sent world, for I suspect that that para¬ graph was written and inserted by Lord Mariton. It was read and forgotten, with other paragraphs, except by himself, and we know his motive for talking of it at Mount-Vernon." ^ " It vvas of him, I thought," said Caro¬ line, " when I alluded to jealous men in answer to your envious women, and it ,is as likely that the note should be his invention as the paragraph." " It may be his," replied George, * 4 for he is weak; and disappointment may have prompted tliis petty revenge : but of the two, I am more inclined to think it Lady Betty's." <s You surprise me," said I : "is it possible that, in a country like England, slander and falsehood are allowed such open and public means of injury ? 1 can more easily account for the baseness of the note; — the secrecy of it is more natural, if any thing bad can be natural; the other seems to me a national .in¬ sult" " In England," said George, " no one is restrained from doing or saying
whatever he pleases. The only legal restriction that exists, consists in the fear of punishment: — punishments enough ^ we have, perhaps too many, and too se¬ vere." " I have always thought that it was better, when possible, to prevent than punish crimes." " No doubt; but the licentiousness of the ill-disposed and thoughtless finds means to vent itself in the jealousy for liberty of the well-disposed; and in gene* ral the nation is not the worse for trust¬ ing the prevention of crimes to the in¬ fluences of their moral and religious systems:—preventive laws there are, but of these there must first be a breach, before determined bad spirits can be got ^ rid oC" " But what punishment," said I, " is there for the paragraph containing so vile a slander ?" " For slander," replied George, "there is a very severe one according to the circumstances of it; but in this paragraph there is no direct slander: it is an in¬ sinuation so couched as not to be laid
l 2
hold of. But it is not only in cases Where suspicion affords some ground for such annoyances, that the writers of the day give a loose to their pens; some of the most virtuous and honourable cha¬ racters are attacked with false insinu¬ ations, merely for entertaining a differ¬ ence of opinion in politics." " What is done," said I, "on such occasions ?" " It is become a principle," replied he, " among men of honour, not to suffer themselves to be annoyed by such low, wanton attacks, when they consist of insinuations which contain no direct ap¬ plication. They leave no stain or blem¬ ish." " How comes it then," said I, " that Sir Francis Darrell has suffered so much from the world?" " It is from himself," cried George, " that he has suffered. It was he that quarrelled with the world ; and the world will not be quarrelled with, without hitting some hard blows. The fact I take to be, that there is some real cause for;self-reproach, which his sensibility
has nourished from an early period of his life, and cannot throw offi He en¬ tered the world, as it is called, telling it that he despised, hated, and defied it; — that men were monsters, and he one of them. The world took him at his word as to the last assertion, and did its ut¬ most to give him a hideous shape, which amused the light and alarmed the good. This is the mystery of Darrell's situ¬ ation ; and from the stories which were told, whether well-founded or not, I was induced like many others to shut my door against him. What he, may have to reproach himself with, I know not; I believe, whatever it may be, that there are few men who would not have dis¬ charged it from their minds long ago; and if ever there was a generous, hu¬ mane, noble-minded, amiable fellow,, it is Darrell." I cannot express to you my delight at this speech of George's, which he ' concluded with great warmth. I felt the truth of it; and the images ,of the/ event in France, of the day at Grove Park, and of the.evening on which Lady l 3
Mount-Vernon called, passed rapidly through my mind. —" Yes, George," thought I, for I did not express it, our attention being called to my father, " he is what you say/' Here my father came in, and of course the subject was renewed. On reading the anonymous note, he* was almost as much shocked as I had been. He said it was monstrous that the pri¬ vate feelings of individuals should be tortured by strangers and unthinking creatures, merely for the purpose of car¬ rying their own disgraceful plans into execution. He was inclined to concur in George's suspicion, from what he had seen and heard of Lady Betty. He ob¬ served, that such an infamous note as that, could not but thrqw me into a very awkward situation, whether the contents had been made known to Sir Francis or not; yet he trusted, he said, to the strength of my mind to defeat its malice, by erasing it, if possible, from my me¬ mory, and conducting myself as if I had never received it; and he concluded with an eulogium on Sir Francis Darrell
in the same strain, and as warmly as George's. I owned the pain I felt, but promised to do my best in acting as he advised, so that the mean, unworthy stratagem was foiled, At least I hope so, for I have not since seen Sir Francis, and what I have now to relate to you makes it more a hope than a certainty, for, though but a short conversation, it has made a very great impression on my mind. I will give it you as it took place. After breakfast, my father and George left the room, while Caroline and I were standing by the fire, admiring two hand- screens which a friend of George's had just brought from Paris. As soon as we were alone, she looked at me with a smile, and, putting the screen she held in her hand over my face, she said: " Those eyes of yours, Augusta, ex¬ press more than you feel." — " How do you mean ?" cried I, a littie surprised at the remark. " I will tell you," replied slie, " but first let me ask you, and I am sure you l 4
wiliiell me sincerely, have you any idea of the passion of love ?" , " What a question, Caroline ?"— " I mean," said she, " whether you have ever met in Italy, or England, with any man for whom you felt such a pre¬ ference as might induce you to think of marriage ?" "This is a question I understand," said I, «* and I will answer it very sin¬ cerely : — I never have." " I am not sorry to hear it," said she, " for it is exactly the answer I wished. And now I will tell you what I mean by your eyes expressing more than you feel. i When George spoke in such warm terms of Sir Francis, I am snre your emotion was gratitude, but your countenance expressed something more; — nay, don't shrink, my dear Augusta," continued she, taking my hand, " 1 do not mean the passion of love — but your eyes certainly glistened uncommonly. Now I wish what I am going to say may>be agreeable to you; but, if not, I am sure you love me too well to be offended with me. You acknowledge
your heart to be completely free and disengaged." " What are you about, Caroline ?" " To tell you what has come into my mind, and what would make me very happy." As she said this, I looked very earnestly at her; I feared what was to follow, but there was such an affectionate smile upon her face, that all apprehen¬ sion gave way to the love and confi¬ dence she inspired, and 1 felt prepared to talk to her upon the subject I antici¬ pated. " Will you, my dear coz," continued she, " allow me to go on ?" " My dear Caroline," cried I, " arc you not my second self? — my other Angelica ?" " But the subject is very delicate," said she, " and one I know you would hardly think of considering yourself; —, I will however go on. I believe you, when you say, you have no preference for any man that would induce you to think of marriage; but are you not sen-, l 5
sibie ofa preference that places one man above all others in your estimation and regard ?" I returned her dear affectionate smile, and I surprised her with my reply, though she expected the utmost candour from me. " I am, my dear Caroline," said I, " and that man is Sir Francis Darrell, and my eyes did not belie me when they told you so, on George's praises of him ; but, do not, my dear cousin, mor¬ tify me so much as to suspect me of being in love; leave that fte;-.Lady Betty." " It would mortify me as well as you," said my dear Caroline," if your disposition were that of a falling-in-love young lady; but you may without that go as far as I do, and in the same sense allow yourself to love and be captivated. Now I de¬ clare to you that both George and I are captivated with him and love him; and I wili treat you with such unbounded candour as to tell you, that I have brought on this conversation from George's
having said to me, after my uncle left us last night, " I would give the world if Augusta were his wife i" Heavens, Angelica! what words! Your Augusta the wife of Sir Francis Darrell J and from the mouths of Caroline Godfrey and George! " I see your surprise," continued she; " but I also see with pleasure, that it is not accompanied with any sign of dis¬ satisfaction." Indeed, my surprise was so great that I could make no immediate answer, and she went on speaking. " I participate George's feelings," said she ; " I would give the world you were his wife. To make use of an expression too often used improperly, — < You seem to me formed for each other:'' you, to recover for him happiness, by unit¬ ing with love those principles of reli¬ gion, which alone can restore peace to a wounded spirit j he, to appre¬ ciate the double prize he would obtain • in you." However unmerited this praise, my l 6
dear Angelica, it was no compliment of Caroline to me. She loves me with a partiality that gave her expression all the value of sincerity. She continued: " My dear Augusta,' I do not mean to advise you to lay yourself out to cap¬ tivate him ; it is beneath you j nor-is it necessary. I think you have already done that without any premeditated ef¬ fort : what I could wish, what I do wish you to do, is to admit the thought into your mind with,, a sufficiently favourable bias to give me the pleasure of hoping that, if circumstances led to a declaration on his part —■"" I here shook my head. " Why do you shake your head?" cried she: " as f you have no previous prepossession, would not you make us happy, supposing my uncle of our opi¬ nion?" , I own I felt a pleasure in listening to Caroline, and therefore did not in¬ terrupt her; but when she put the question in this manner I could not help saying: -
" Has my father joined in your wish ?" " I have not seen him since, but in company with you," replied she; " but I have no doubt he will." " Oh ! I hope not," cried I; " I hope not. Indeed he will not, for he knows it is not in my power." " Not in your power ?" " You see, Caroline," said I, " that I have listened to you, not only without dissatisfaction, but with an attention from which you may suppose, if you please, that your wish would not meet much opposition from me. You know, that I agree with you in opinion respecting the merit, and amiable manners of Sir Francis Darrell, but you forget, my dear cousin, the insuperable bar betvveen us. I can never be his wife. He does not even suffer the character of Christian to be given to him. 1 think not of marriage ; but if ever I am induced to do so, I will have no husband who*is not a complete Christian." " But that," cried Caroline," is my hope." >
" I fear," said I, " that your hope would stop short of mine." " I understand you," said she; " but, my dear Augusta, we know that mar¬ riages frequently take place between persons of your church and ours; and, indeed, I understand very happy ones." " I could not be happy," replied I; " and if it affects my happiness in some degree now, what would it do in the relation you wish ! Indeed, Caroline, it must not be." " 1 wili not say you are too rigid," said she, «« but time and reflec¬ tion—" I again shook my head. " Well!" cried she, " we will drop the conversation at present, resolving, at least, to do what we can to restore him to a state of comfort, and to make him a complete Christian." " What would I not give to do that ?" cried I. We then resolved to act, in respect to Lady Betty, as if the note had never
been received; and we persuaded our¬ selves that Sir Francis had no suspicion of its contents. Good night to my dear Angelica.
Augusta.
LETTER XLVIII. Sir Francis Darrell to Mr. Godfrey. * May Fair.*** MY DEAR SIR, Never, I believe, was man more pe¬ culiarly circumstanced than I am, though it is not difficult for me to trace the causes of my peculiar situation. They are, indeed, evident enough; but the situation itself is most singular. Is it credible that the man who last year was execrated, who was talked of as a fiend, and shunned as a corrupter, should now be absolutely courted into friendship by two such families as yours and Lord Mount-Vernon's ? should, at this mo¬ ment, be an object of interest in the mind of one of the purest and most sensible of women ? It is, however, the fact; I
am proud of it, and could I be happy/1 could find on earth no greater cause of happiness. I fear, my dear Mr. Godfrey, that you, and your worthy uncle and cousin,ascribe. more merit to certain actions of mine, than is their due; and I am sensible that it is those actions that have produced such feelings towards me, which I con¬ fess have had a very extraordinary effect upon my mind. What I have done, and what I do, ofthe nature which has gained your kindness, have their source in selfish feelings; and 1 know myself too well to. ascribe them to genuine generosity. Wealth is nothing to a % man without peace of mind ; I have it, and it is nothing to me, except as I make it a small weight in the scale, against a heavy balance of misery. Had I been happy, I might have squandered it like many others; — wretched, J have turned it to uses which afford me the only satisfaction I have in life. Among those are what you attri¬ bute to me as generosity and noble- mindedness, whereas they are peculiarly selfish* Let their estimate, however, be
what it may, I have never felt so much comfort in their effects, as in reflecting on the interest they have raised for me in your family, as in contemplating the change that has been wrought upon my mind by events apparently casual, which have given me such a friend as Miss Saville, whose name I am almost afraid to mention, and to whom I owe more than to any other being upon the face of the earth. She has, indeed, been a tutelary angel to me, and 1 feel an inex¬ pressible desire to continue, under her auspices, the pursuit to which she gave a spring — but there are two great diffi¬ culties in my wayj the appearance of hypocritical sentimentality that attends the professed study of religion, which I could surmount, as the profession is ac¬ companied with a candid avowal that I make little or no progress; the other, and far less removable difficulty arises from my apprehension of an impropriety, involving an injury, in my attempting to be considered in any peculiar way by a lady to whom I have not, and ne'ver can have any other pretension than that of a
friend. Will you make it one of the first proofs of the friendship you have deter¬ mined to honour me with, to give me your counsel on these points? 1 onoe took the liberty of writing a short note on the subject of my studies to your cousin. I am not sure that I v/as right in doing it then. I am quite sure that I should be wrong now, if I were to per¬ sist without taking your opinion, or Mr. Saville's, on the propriety of it. The reason I have preferred addressing myself to you is, that there would be a kind of formality in writing to him, which might have borne a construction not intended, and placed him in an unpleasant situation; whereas you will be able to speak your mind without any such awkward feeling; for, however I may hope a favourable opinion, I expect a candid one. When Miss Saville, in a moment of charity and pity, set me a lesson of reli¬ gion, she did not mean to have a trouble¬ some pupil; but, if you think it proper to give her the inclosed, I hope she will not be displeased at my desire of proving how seriously I have attended to my task,
and of assuring her of my gratitude as long as I live. I take it'for granted that you will consult Mr. Saville. Should I be'right in. my suspicion of an impro¬ priety, have the goodness to return the inclosed in your answer. Believe me, My dear Sir, Faithfully and gratefully yours, F. Darrell.
LETTER XLIX. Sir Francis Darrell to Miss Saville. (Inclosed in the foregoing Letter.) My reflections arid feelings, since the day I spent at your cousin's, impel me to address another note to you. I have not spent such a day since I left school. I am very grateful for it — grateful to your cousins, to Mr. Saville, to Lady Mount- Vernon, to Vernon and his brother, and to you, my good and amiable tutoress; allow me to call you so, who have roused me to reflection, and put my books into my hands. I have been, perhaps, the most unhappy of men, but my feelings that day convinced me that Nature meant to do better for me than I have done for myself: — they convince me too that they who have excited them mean, now, better for me than that self is equal to. I unhappily thwarted Nature — I will endeavour not to thwart friendship, —>yet
1 cannot suddenly throw off repulsive ha¬ bits, nor bring my imagination under that dominion, which is necessary to the ac¬ complishment of their kind intention — but they will bear with me — I see that they are determined to bear with me. You will perhaps have to bear with me the most, if you continue as interested on the subject of my task as you .were when you did me the honour to set if. I have made very little progress in my Bible ; I have made some by reflection ; but even this is clouded — it has hardly opened upon me, and that since I saw you. If you recollect what passed during the few minutes I had the pleasure of con¬ versing with you before dinner, you will find that I expressed my embarrassment on the subject of immortality. I parti¬ cularly stated how little the mass of man¬ kind were entitled to it. I am by no means entirely clear of that difficulty; but I am nevertheless at present con¬ vinced ofthe necessity of a state of immor¬ tality after this life ; and my conviction arises from reflecting on the nature of God: — that nature must include the idea of 6
goodness. I find myself compelled to believe him good, or not to believe in him at all. But if he is good, there must be a state of future existence after this life: I am therefore convinced that there is. This being impressed upon my mind, I have read all the other arguments for it with satisfaction ; — that is, my doubts are cleared away, but I am still at a loss on some points, and particularly how to dispose ofthe mass of mankind. When I confess to you the progress I have made, you cannot but see the un¬ speakable obligation I am under to you. You cannot wonder that I am anxious to assure you of my gratitude. By pur¬ suing the enquiries you persuaded me to enter upon, I have acquired an astonish¬ ing privilege, the use of which has given more relief to my woe-worn spirit than I ever hoped it would experience.—I mean the privilege of holding mental commu¬ nication with the Deity. — Oh ! it is inestimable! More than I can make you sensible of. With all this advantage I am obliged to own, that I am still groping in the dark..
There is another character of Deity I cannot trace — Love. I can understand how chastening the guilty may be a proof of Love; biit when virtue itself is forsaken — when the simple-minded, single-hearted, meek, resigned, unof¬ fending, are visited with horrors of every kind, Avhere is the love of an Omniscient •Being? Is it to be shown in another life ? — Oh ! but the sufferings of some in this! I could tell you such sufferings. In that case too it would be more like justice than love. Justice is a harsh attribute in some respects:— I am inclined to think it more connected^with human than Divine nature. I perhaps do not express myself properly. — I cannot mean that I think justice is or ought to be out of the nature ofthe Deity; —but I conceive his good¬ ness better than I do his justice. Shak- speare expresses my meaning when he makes Hamlet say to Polonius — "Use every man after his desert, and who shall 'scape whipping!" " Use them after your own honour and dignity " The actual state' of mankind is so full of misery — where is Love? Yet it is an essential part of the
nature ofthe Deity.— Help me, help me, " I beseech you, my amiable tutoress: — You have done much for me; do more. You will here perhaps again refer, me to my books: — I must therefore candidly tell you how little way I have made. , I have read the greater part of the Bible since I left Grove Park, and I have found some' admirable things in it. I entered upon the perusal with a resolution to be convinced, if possible, of its being the word of God; and as a necessary pre¬ paration I admitted, and found no great difficulty in admitting, the use of miracles in a divine dispensation; He that,made nature can suspend it. The belief of a ■ God removes that difficulty. Another preparation I made was not to be kept back by obscurities attending the account of the creation. Time may obscure truth. Many of the objections too, which I had supported, such as the inconsistency of a curse, which was but the previous nature ofthe animal cursed, the'serpent having being created a rep¬ tile ; such as the account of the creation being inconsistent with the facts of astro- WVT TTT w
nomy, and other similar things, I threw aside as imputable to the imperfection of language as well as the influence of time. I opened the book to find fhe nature of ,God, the nature of man, and the nature of redemption; and I wished, sincerely wished, to find the religion it is said to contain true—that religion being, accord¬ ing to my conception, briefly this—that in consequence of the imperfection of created beings, and the freedom of will bestowed upon some of them by their Creator, cer¬ tain orders of creatures mistook real hap¬ piness, and by opposing the will of God lost their station; that they involved man, whowascreated good, in their destruction, by corrupting his nature; that man, so corrupted, was lost to all hope of life and happiness; thathe led a miserable, irra* tional existence, full of horrors, on the globe where he was first placed; and that after a few years he died and was re* duced to dust; that though God fore¬ saw those evil effects of creation and freedom of action, he did not abstain from giving existence, the good and glory of that immense act of power being cer- 7
tain, infinitely beyond the evil that was to ensue, and to have prevented which would have decreased, would have foiled that good and that glory that were to be the consequence of freedom of action; — that ,as corruption cannot tye blended with purity mankind must have been cut off from every hope of happinpss, had not God in his foresight provided a remedy for this corruption, and for re¬ deeming them from it; and that the Christian dispensation is that remedy. This I believe to be fairly the sum and substance of the religion you think neces¬ sary to salvation, I have no hesitation in saying I wish to find this system true. It is impossible to open,one's eyes, and not see that mankind are in a state pf misery and corruption, and who wpu)4 not wish a remedy found for it ? ( My-investigation so stated, I tliinfr, will give you pleasure — why must I dash away the little that I am able Xo give ? But it .would be an ill compliment to you; it would be a mockery of th£ Deity, if I were to pretend to conviction merely on a wish. That there is a God, m 2
a state of corruption, and a remedy, is a doctrine that I am ready to receive; I wili receive it from your mouth, from that of any friend; and I confess my blindness, or rather my perversion of mind, in having been so long a deter¬ mined opposer of it: — but if there is something like it in the Bible, there is also so much to subvert it, and to de¬ stroy conviction, that it has retarded rather than advanced the progress of my studies. The Jehovah of the Jews, Hke the Jupiter of the heathen, is an ima¬ ginary deity made up of human passions, irascible, vindictive, unjust, partial, and any thing but the God of Love. It is not necessary to point out the passages where this description of his nature is to be found, or where he appears harden¬ ing the heart for the purpose of punish¬ ing : — he is made sufficiently to declare himself: " I am a jealous God," — " I wili avenge," we meet with every-where in the Old Testament. No; He is not to be seen, or rather, he is sadly disfigured and calumniated in it. The nature of
man, indeed, appears there, as in all other histories, bad, bad. With respect to redemption, allowing the miracles, for I cannot think miracles ought to be a stumbling-block in the way of a man who admits a God, I con¬ fess I have met with some ofthe most de¬ lightful and soothing assurances and pre¬ cepts that were ever given to man, and which place the giver of them far above the vindictive Jehovah of the Jews. If this letter were not already too long, I could quote to you some passages in the New Testament that have charmed me beyond every thing I ever read, far even beyond my admired Plato, whom his cotemporaries called the Divine. But in writing this' I fear I am only preparing my kind tutoress for a grievous disap¬ pointment. I can 'imagine the creation of a man without a father or mother by the grand " Let it be" which so sub¬ limely marks the power of God in the Old Testament. — It is a miracle.— The doctrine so far is not my difficulty, which arises, not from a miracle, but an impossibility, an incongruity,—remen- m 3
her I write with reverence. The sacri¬ fice of God, to appease God, for the cor¬ ruption of man, is not a miracle: it ap¬ pears to me a shocking combination of words that no ideas can be affixed to. This, too, looks something like the vin¬ dictiveness of the Jehovah of the Jews, and to carry it so far as to satisfy the passion even by self-sacrifice. Nay, this vindictive spirit is absolutely declared by the chief of the Apostles, who, even in the inculcating of forgiveness, tells us to use it from a motive of revenge, for by so doing we shall heap coals of fire on the head of the person we forgive. A more horrid torture, one that not only sets the head but the heart on fire, and gives even to thought the torment of in¬ extinguishable flames, could not have been invented by the most ingenious in¬ quisitor. Besides this, the superlative denunciations of eternal pain of the most excruciating kind far, far exceed the retribution of human crime. I am now giving you pain. — I will cease —> I know you will forgive me when I tell you that I feel much consolation in
opening the state of my mind to one who has been of such service to me, and to consider whom as my friend is the proudest feeling of my life. I do sin¬ cerely wish 1 could overcome my objec¬ tions to the religion delivered in the Bible as a revelation from the Almighty himself, for the truth is, that, like Agrippa, I am 'I almost persuaded to be a Christian." And if I could fall upon any candid mode of becoming one, I would adopt it. I have thought some¬ times, that if my understanding were satisfied in part— but then it must be in the essential part — can that be ? I will conclude my letter with three questions, which are riddles to me, and I will put them as such to you. If you will solve them, or procure me a solution of them, I will deal differently with my understanding than I have done. It shall not deter me in other points — but, alas ! I know it is impossible. — Can human passions; and particularly vindictiveness, be attributed to God? and are they not so in the Bible ? Is not St. Paul's motive for forgiving M 4
« - » an enemy, that is, to heap coals of fire on his head, worse than an open denial of forgiveness? Can God be a victim ? - You s see, my amiable tutoress, what you have brought upon yourself j but you are fully at liberty to take the assist¬ ance of Mrs. Godfrey^ and also of Mr. Godfrey and Mr. Saville. I have already, through your means, recovered a portion of comfort, if not of happiness; and to be a Christian, sincerely so, that is — to believe that the sin of man has been re¬ moved, and that he has been redeemed from perdition, would, I think, add so much more comfort to my littie stock, as to deserve the name of happiness. May God bless you all! I am Your very sincere and grateful friend, F, Darrell.
LETTER L. Mr. Godfrey to Sir Francis Darrell. MY DEAR SIR FRANCIS, Neither my uncle nor I had the slight* est hesitation in delivering your letter to - my cousin, who has given me the enclosed for you. She tells me that she has explained to you the liberty I took with your letter, which I know you will for¬ give in consideration of the result of it. Your letters have given us all very great pleasure. I think ali your misfortune arises from too great susceptibility, but you must and shall be happy in future. We cannot be persuaded that we attri¬ bute more to you than you merit— but I will not talk to you of merit or obliga¬ tion j I will only say that your friendship is a source of great pleasure to us all, and I trust it will be as lasting as life. m 5
Will you dine with me to-morrow ? Remember we meet the day after at Lady Mount-Vernon's ball. Yours most faithfully,
George Godfrey.
LETTER LI. Miss Saville to Sir Francis Darrell. Hanover-Square. MY DEAR SIR, 1 he peculiar circumstances of my life would render it extreme ingratitude in me, if 1 could fail feeling a sincere inte¬ rest in your welfare; but, independent of those, I feel it an honour to have had the slightest share in drawing your atten¬ tion to considerations which have been followed by comfort to you. I pray that it maybe encreased in every respect, and I beg you to accept my thanks for the letter I received from you by my cousin Godfrey. Notwithstanding the pain which some parts of it could not but give, I read it with the greatest pleasure, for I saw throughout that Providence was graciously leading you to the knowledge m 6
of those truths which cannot fail to re¬ store you to happiness. That those are contained in the Bible I firmly believe ; but I am by no means well read in it, and I believe,that it requires more learn¬ ing and more acuteness of intellect to be well understood, than fall to the lot of - most of those who are directed by the religion and the precepts it contains. I have no pretensions to those myself; but that there is much comfort to be derived from the perusal of it by persons of every degree of understanding I am convinced. You will not, I hope, think the worse of me if I own to you that I was guided. into the faith I profess, and that in read¬ ing the Ih'ble I have met with the sub¬ jects of it as things known, not as things to be.studied. They seem to me to be so calculated for the advantage of man¬ kind, that they cannot but be true; — but the arguments, which are required by those who think it proper to examine every point minutely, are far out of my reach; and, if it were not too bold in writing to you, I would say, I think them
unnecessary where the essential truths are so plan. You do but justice in thinking that my father and cousins feel great interest in your welfare and happiness; and I made use of the liberty you allowed me to consult them on the subjects of your let¬ ter, which I left in the hands of my cousin Godfrey for a few days. He has taken a greater liberty with it than was per¬ mitted to me, but I beg and trust you will pardon it, in consideration of the enclosed which he has just sent to me with your letter. It is one to him from his friend the Bishop of * *, to whom he communicated yours; and, though / should probably have chosen another person to advise with, had I had your sane'ion, I see such goodness and wis¬ dom in his answer to my cousin, that I cannot hesitate a moment to send it to you, with the greatest hope that you wili find in it all that is wanted to give your own excellent understanding fair play; and then you will need no other aid to make you altogether a Christian. I will not detain you from it, but conclude,
with the united best wishes of your friends here for its. proving a new cordial to you. I am, my dear Sir, Your very grateful friend, Augusta Saville.
LETTER LII. Tlie Bishop qf * • to Mr. Godfrey. MY DEAR GEORGE, I am rather busy at present, but I will make time to throw ^a few observations upon paper in compliance with your re¬ quest ; —indeed, the subject demands it of me: and I am also induced by the great pleasure I felt in the perusal of Sir Francis Darrell's letter. Your excellent father was a good Christian, yet he some¬ times made himself unhappy in doubting it, and would confess himself to me with as much solicitude as ever Catholic did to his confessor, in order to get my eluci¬ dation. It seems to be the nature of some men to choose difficult paths in preference to plain ones, perhaps because they are common. It is like climbing over a steep rock to get into a garden, in preference to raising the easy latch ofthe gate. There is no accounting for this
.DARRELL. disposition. I believe Messrs. Gall and Spurzheim would find it out in some of the protuberances of the skull. I rather think it is owing to a faulty imagination, which disdains an easy prize. YoivHriend has been labouring at rocks and moun¬ tains on the outside of our garden, the summits of which are ascended by gentle and pleasant passages from the inside. The enquirer after Christianity, who begins by asking " Can God be a victim ?" has to grapple with an obstacle that he will never surmount in the position he has taken. To chauge the allegory: the Christian religion should be studied syn¬ thetically, not analytically; — the a, b, c, should be acquired, like that of other leaining, in the early stages of life; we get the knowledge we know not how, and we examine our knowledge at leisure and to advantage as we grow up. If we stay till wc are adults before we learn to read, we may learn, but with great diffi¬ culty, for we acquire habits and prejudices •from those around us that impede us. I do not wonder at your friend's em¬ barrassment on his reading the Bible —
the wonder would have been if he had not been embarrassed. But the manner in which he prepared himself to enter upon the reading of it is highly creditable to him, and shows that he is not one of those unhappy persons who attack the tenets and history of our religion in the vanity of displaying talent and philoso¬ phical acuteness. He wishes to be a Christian ; he therefore deserves to be a Christian, and I really think I may say, he is a Christian, though he will be more fully so. There are many more difficulties in the Bible than those Sir Francis Darrell has stated, but at present I can only take. notice of those. The apparent attribu¬ tion of passions to the Almighty, and that vindictiveness we read ofi are cer¬ tainly enough to confound the acuteness of the philosopher, and to make him cry out against the dominion and existence of such a Being. In this respect men of talents take the book up to great disad¬ vantage ; they take it up, not to be satis¬ fied with what they find, but to detect its incongruities and expose its deformities. Men of humble and common capacities,
which is the general lot, take what they comprehend, and do not trouble them¬ selves about the rest. To these the Bible may be trusted; it is a treasure to the poor and the meek ; it is peculiarly their treasure, and they ought not to be robbed of it. But the ingenious and the proud, ancl of all pride that ofthe under¬ standing is the most dangerous, should never enter upon the study till they can prevail upon themselves to suspect the fallibility of their own powers, and to take assistance from others, with a deter¬ mination to rely not altogether, but con¬ siderably, on the powers of those they may consult. I could tell Sir Francis that a very great man of our own times, now no more, a very successful, if not the most successful, advocate of Chris¬ tianity, laid it down as a principle, that the difficulties ofthe Old Testament did not affect the Christian religion, but this would not be obviating his difficulty, and I fear would look like telling him to put the Old Testament on the shelf with Herodotus, which is not my intention, for in the Mosaic history lie the found-
ations of Christianity — but he will do well to study that writer. The difficult)'' in this instance may be got over in the same way that the astro • nomical inconsistences are reconciled, which is, that in that early state of the world the information that was neces¬ sary and proper* for man was conveyed in language agreeing with his ordinary notions derived from his own senses and feelings. The vengeance ofthe Almighty has, in fact, as little reference to passion as the common notion of the rising and the setting of the sun to the facts of the solar system; and yet to this day the vulgar believe that the sun moves over the earth from east to west; so they be¬ lieve^ that crime provokes anger:—the denunciations of God have that appear¬ ance ; but what is the fact ? The natu¬ ral world is not more regulated on cause and effect, than the moral world. Free¬ dom of action is given, but each action will have its appointed result here and here¬ after — and this is the vengeance of God; this his vindictiveness. Does any man of reflection, when he reads in the se-
cond commandment, "I am a jealous God," image to himself the sensation and the marks of the passion of jealousy ? What is the real sense of that passage ? From the corruption which the evil spirit has introduced among you, some of you will be led to, the egregious folly of worshipping false gods and idols. The consequences of denying the true God, and following^ the temptations of the devil, will involve you and your child¬ ren in the miseries that evil produces. This denunciation, which has been one of the balls kept up by the sceptics, is evidently the effect of a cause in the ge¬ neral system of moral nature, in which, as w T eli as in the physical system, the dignity of the Deity appears in acting generally by secondary causes. — I say generally, because in departing occasion¬ ally from them he peculiarly manifests his providence and his love. But yet rather than depart from them he adopts warnings and expiations. And what a proof of love was the grand, the sublime expiation ofthe cross! We might suppose him altering his systems both natural and
moral, and system after system, annihila¬ ting man and his corrupter, and raising a mechanical creation; but would he, even in our comprehension, have been ex¬ alted by such unstable acts ? No ; fi om the first he foresaw the evil of freedom, and his love provided the remedy; and your uiend, as he proceeds, will find that our God is a God of iove. J hope what I have said will be a satisfactory solution ofhis first question:— I coulddwell much longer upon it, but this will give him ground; and his own understanding, and I will say happy disposition, will do the rest for him. His second question, I think, is the re¬ sult of a hasty reading. St. Paul could not propose forgiveness, as a designing mode of encreasing the gratification of revenge; — nor are the words originally * his : — " The consequence of your for¬ giving an enemy," says he, « is good to yourself, it is acting on the principles of your master, and you will find the com¬ fort of it in your own breast: — as for your enemy, if he has any 'eeling, it will make him sorry." He quotes the
passage from Solomon; — it is in the 25th chapter of his Proverbs. Sir Francis's language is very strong on this point; and most certainly, in a feeling breast, forgive¬ ness must create remorse ; but so much tlie better, for remorse leads to repent¬ ance ; and sincere repentance, since the death of Christ, washes away guilt. The third question is not fairlyput: -*- Christians'do not say that " God is a victim," but that there is a mysterious union of so intimate a nature between God and the Spirit of Christ, that they consider themselves warranted, both from the perception of his character, and the text ofthe Gospel, to call him God. This is not a miracle, but a mystery, and in mysteries the understanding must give way. It is remarkable, that some of the mysteries have striking analogies, as if these were intended to assist us in our ef¬ forts to conceive them. That death should lead to life, is a mystery, but it is beauti¬ fully typified in the transformation of grubs to winged creatures after deposing their remains in a chrysalis. The union, of three inoneis dearly typified in man,whoiscpn>
posed of three distinct natures, Intellect, Passion, and Appetite : — and man is said to be formed in the image of his Maker. But, after all, we can have but faint glimp¬ ses of the nature of God, and it is of no great importance to us in this life, to know more than we do. I cannot, how¬ ever think the difficulty of this union of Christ with - God so great as to be re¬ jected, even by the understanding. In common phraseology we should call such a character divine, and when we Christians consider the unspeakable benefits we de¬ rive from him, I do not see that we are to blame or to be ridiculed for believing him when he informs us ofhis being so closely allied to the Deity. Yet let not Sir Francis disturb himself with this at present—let him observe the less mysterious tenets and the grand object of the Gospel, and, my word for it, he will, before he ,has done, feel that it is in a manner necessary to the perfection of God's will. Before I conclude, I will add a few words on some other parts of his letter. I hope I have already convinced him, that God is a God of love; — but he puts
the question in another sense, when re¬ flecting on the miseries of life. Indis¬ criminate misery is the consequence of the corruption of nature, and the redemp¬ tion is not from the lot into which it threw mankind in this world. We are particularly, directed to consider this world as a vale of tears, wherein we may work out for ourselves a state of immor¬ tal happiness; and it is probable that earthly misery will have some good effect either in preparing for it, or enhancing the bliss. But indeed I think even the lot of men on earth is much softened, and that they enjoy a good deal of hap¬ piness. The generality of our kind are clearly undergoing the penalty of original sin; they work for their bread : they gain it by the sweat of their brow. I am old, and 1 have witnessed some misery, but I have also witnessed a great deal of con¬ tentment and joy, in the inferior classes of society, among whom family love and a .self-approving conscience, constitute an-enviable happiness. Here then are goodness and love manifested, even in this stage ,of probation ; and as to the
exceptions, it is more probable that some concealed benefit is the cause, than that they are owing to desertion. , These observations may also serve as an answer for the state of the mass of men—because those I have alluded to form the mass. Sir Francis by that word meant the vile and the wicked. It must be confessed, they are but too numer¬ ous ; — but even for these, hope is not extinct while they live, and after death their spirits will undergo the appointed effects of impenitence. What" those effects may be leads to the only remaining point of the letter.— I cannot enter upon it at large. The church has adopted the doctrine of an endless duration of woe, upon some texts in Scripture ; — and in reason one cannot see how it is to be avoided, as the effects of expiation terminate with this life. What can wash away a crime ? Repent¬ ance. — The time of repentance is gone. If it cannot be recalled — Alas ! it is a sad thought — Let not your friend dwell upon the subject — let him turn his thoughts to those delightful passages with VrtT.. ITT. N
which he has been charmed, and in spite of ail difficulties he wil] be a confirmed Christian. Pray make my best compliments to him. — You should bring us acquainted. — I should esteem the friendship of such a proselyte a great honour. I am, Your affectionate friend, W. * #
LETTER LIIL Augusta to Angelica. MY DEAREST ANGELICA, 1 would not detain my last letter, as I thought it would be interesting to you; but I did not then foresee how soon I should have subjects still more important to v communicate to my dear sister. How fully has that foolish, wicked, anonymous note been proved unworthy of attention! Congratulate me, Angelica, on the com¬ pletion of my wishes — my preserver is become a Christian. It was all I desired respecting him; it was my fervent prayer;' and it has been granted. He is become a Christian ; and his good sense will, I have no doubt, in time lead him to em¬ brace the true communion. The day after I dispatched my last, my cousin George surprised me with a letter from Sir Francis Darrell. Yon will ''N 2
remember the note he sent me by Mr. Vernon. I little thought he continued to consider me as the prompter of his studies; but he has paid me that compli¬ ment in a letter that affected me ex¬ tremely ; and I felt at the same time that it did me great honour. The great happi¬ ness of my life, Angelica, is participating it with you — is opening my heart to you — is telling you all that occurs to me, and all that I think. I should lose half of my pleasure if you did not know — if you did not share, these grateful events of my life: I shall therefore send you a copy of the correspondence that has taken place. t Sir Francis candidly stated his diffi¬ culties and objections to some of the tenets of religion. Alas! my dear sister, though myself convinced of their truth, I am more convinced by my heart than able to convince others by reasoning. His letter gave me a mixture of pleasure and pain: I gave it to George, who, after keeping it three days, returned it to me with a letter to himself from his friend ithe Bisfion of * *, vyhoin I once before
mentioned to you in a letter relative to 1 the occurrences at Manor-House. You will see what a delightful letter it is: —-1 enclosed it in one from myself to Sir Francis. The pleasure J had in doing this was great: imagine then, Angelica, what it was, what it is, when I tell you that the impression it made upon him, was similar to that it made upon me. I cannot express to you how happy this has made me — but you will imagine it from knowing the interest I take in this extraordinary man, to whom I am so much indebted. George sent the letters to him yester¬ day, and invited him to dine with us to¬ day. — He accepted the invitation. My cousin, knowing that he would prefer a family party, asked no one else except his friend, Mr. Vernon, who unfortunate. ly happened to be engaged to dinner, but promised to join us- in the evening. How will you be surprised, Angelica, to hear that Caroline and I passed almost, the whole day alone with Sir Francis Darrell! To make you understand this, I must tell you that there are frequently n 3
debates of such importance in the House of Commons, that the members cannot leave it till a very late hour, sometimes not till the next morning. I believe you know that my cousin is a Member. My father, though none, takes great interest in the debates, and generally accom¬ panies George to the House. To-day the debate proved to be one that required attendance. Sir Francis came at the usual time, and had sat nearly an hour with us, when Caroline received a note, begging that she would apologize to him, and go to dinner. Imagine my situa¬ tion, Angelica, after what had passed between Caroline and me the other day, after our conversation on the vile anony¬ mous note: — but in spite of my thoughts I preserved my presence of mind; and, his conversation and manner convincing me that he' was completely ignorant of the circumstances about which consciousness gave me an awkward feeling, I recovered my ease, and spent one ofthe most agree¬ able days of my life, Caroline had not only expressed her Wish that morning of our conversation,
but she had gone so far as to say, that * she thought I had made an impression of a peculiar kind on his heart. Recollect¬ ing this, I naturally, endeavoured to dis¬ cover on what grounds she entertained that opinion, and I declare to you I could find none. He was as attentive to her as to me ; nay, I thought much more so, and it made me easy and happy on that score. It would indeed be a source of sorrow to me to think that he should form so fruitless an attachment. I believe my conviction of Caroline's error helped to make me pass the day the more pleasant¬ ly. He mentioned the receipt of the letters before dinner, but without dwell¬ ing on the subject. He said to Caroline : " Can you help me to words to express my thanks to your excellent husband, and to this task-setting cousin of yours, for the service they have rendered me ? No; no language affords them, and I must be content to depend upon their imagination for credit to feelings of the most grateful nature. My difficulties are solved, and your good Bishop shall have N 4> ■
a share of my prayers — but we will not talk upon it now." This was all that passed on that sub¬ ject. He started others of a pleasant nature throughout the day—several re- 1 specting Italy; and we talked of you. After dinner I sang for him ; and when I was in the middle of a song, Caroline — I thought it unkind — left the room. Her motive was clear to me, and I own, after what had passed, I felt unpleasantly at the moment. — However, I am now glad of it, for nothing could have so clearly proved her mistake as his behaviour while she was absent. Had I made that im¬ pression upon him that she supposed, and still supposes, would he not have taken the opportunity to avow it, or to show it " in some way ? On the contrary, his at- tention seemed to cease, and he was far more engaged with one of the music- books than in noticing me. It is true, he talked to me, but it was about the composers whose names he met with, their different style, and the music be¬ fore- him, from which he scarcely ever
raised his eyes till Caroline returned. He resumed his attentions to her, and not a, word or a look passed the whole day that confirmed her opinion. In the evening Mr. Vernon l came in, bnt nothing particular occurred, though I could not help remarking some looks which Sir Francis gave him several times while he was playing the guitar, and sing¬ ing a song which he had himself written for Caroline. I cannot call them frowns, but they brought his Paris brows to my mind. Once, while I was at the piano, and Caroline close to me, they were at a little distance, and I observed him speak¬ ing in a low voice, but with an energy of action which, though he endeavoured to suppress it, betokened something that caused in him more than a common feel¬ ing. It was evidently not the music. — Why should I at the moment suspect I might have been the subject ? I am not liable to such suspicions ; but, certainly, it was not so, as you will find. Some company came in, and Sir Francis soon after went away, promising Caroline to be at Lady Mount-Vernon's to-morrow n 5
night, Mr. Vernon remained, and even outstaid the company. I thought by his manner he had something -particular to say to Caroline, to whom he had occa¬ sionally spoken in a low voice during the evening. I took a moment to whisper xny idea to her, and an intention to leave the room, as I believed he had some communication to make. She pointedly forbade me to quit her — and We spent full half an hour with him alone before he went away. I have told you that Mr. Vernon is an agreeable man — I do not remember ever to have wished him away before, but he did not appear to me the same person. He suffered the convers¬ ation to flag, looked serious, and for mi¬ nutes gazed thoughtfully at the fire.— He recovered himself, however, and took his leave gaily. The House of Commons was still sit¬ ting, and we received a message from George, that it would probably be late in the morning before it broke up, upon Which Caroline proposed going to bed. We had, however, a short conversation,
that I think will interest you ; and as I am not sleepy I will add it here. " Well! Augusta," cried Caroline, as we drew to the fire, " what think you of our day ?" " It has altogether," said 1, " been a very pleasant one, and rendered doubly so by the happy impression which has been made on the mind of Sir Francis Darrell." " And do you continue," said she, smiling, " to think that there is no other happy impression made upon him?" " You mean by me, Caroline, and I am more and more convinced there is not." - " And why," replied she, continuing her smile, " are you more and more convieced ?" I here made the observations that I have already stated to you, and conclud¬ ed by saying — " Not only this, but his letter, his whole conduct, prove that the full extent of his attachment to me is a friendship which has been brought on by peculiar n 6
circumstances, and that his thoughts are in no other respect occupied by me." " My love," cried she, " I give you great credit for your penetration, in all cases except your own — but I find it wanting here. If ever there was a man in love, he is; and I am the mere con¬ vinced of it by all that convinces you to the contrary." " Caroline, you surprise and hurt me." " I may surprise, but I wili not hurt you. — Shall we not continue to talk freely to each other ?" " O! yes, yes: say what you please, and I will listen." " Well then," re'piied slie, " as you will not be hurt, I will repeat to you my firm opinion, that Sir Francis's attach¬ ment to you is Love. He is evidently acting with restraint on that point, though on no other. I see, too, that he is not a mari to make love in the ordinary way, with squeezes of the hand and gazes of the eye; but the turns of his convers¬ ation, his over-abundant caution in paying me the greater share of his attention, the very circumstance of his playing with the
music-books and composers' names when yo;i were alone — all in jny mind strongly confirm my opinion." " You do not hurt me, Caroline, but you make me uneasy. If you are right, I shall be very unhappy." " My dear Augusta, I know the ob¬ stacle on your part, and I confess it is a very delicate subject for me to touch upon ; but your own good sense, your gratitude, the greatness of restoring this deserving young man to society and to happiness, will have due weight with you. I think I trace the hand of Providence in every thing tliat has occurred respect¬ ing you both. I almost see the conclusion of his will. I will not teaze you, if it is teazing, for his will will be done without it. Out let us talk openly. You do not commit yourself by opening ail your thoughts to me." " My dear Caroline, will you persuade me to be in love, to own myself in love, before I am addressed upon the subject, and even while my own conviction is in opposition to yours? for I declare, it still appears to me, in spite of your observ-
ations, that the proofs are on the side of my opinion, —and I hope they are." " You shall not hope so." " I must, I must." s * I neither persuade you to be in love, my dear girl, nor, if you were, to own it hastily, even to yourself; but I would have you consider the subject in the light in which I place it to you, — that Sir Francis Darrell is in love, and reason with yourself upon it as if it were the fact, and endeavour to prepare yourself not to counteract the good that would result from a—" " My dear Caroline!" exclaimed I, before she finished her sentence. " Well!" said she, " -I won't vex you by repeating the impossible word. I will only add, that I have now more reason than when we first conversed on the sub¬ ject to know that it would not be very disagreeable to my uncle." * " And you have been talking to my father, Caroline ? and my father ,to you, and not to me ?" " He will talk with you — he meant it this day, but circumstances have pre-
vented him, and I could not postpone this conversation titer the day we have spent; and, to use you with all the openness with which I wish you to use me, it has not been so spent without some little premeditation ; for though George could not leave the house, my uncle could, and, in strictness, ought to have joined us at dinner." " Gracious Heaven! Caroline, are you all then united in a plan against me ?" " Quite the reverse. You are the sole directress in all that concerns you. Nor have my thoughts been kept from you a moment" ' " If it is my father's wish, I am, in¬ deed, unfortunate; for he wishes what, I am conscious, ought not to be." " He certainly wishes it, Augusta; but it will not break his heart if it should never take place." " It must not take place, Caroline." " We wili leave it then to Providence ; and now I am going to mention another subject which will show' you how fully open my heart is to you. I am going to talk to you about my own feelings.
You see with what affection I love your cousin. What is your opinion ? Should a woman ever keep a secret from her husband ?" " Surely not, Caroline." " If the knowledge of that secret will make him unhappy ?" " I should think hardly any unhappi¬ ness can be equal to that which would arise from the suspension of confi¬ dence." " I think so too; but it is a most painful circumstance I have to commu¬ nicate to him. It will give you a great deal of pain." " Good Heavens! what can you mean?" " I wili tell you; and you shall say, whether I had not better defer mention¬ ing it to George for the present; for, after ali, my suspicion may have magnified the fact. Mr. Vernon -r-" The moment she mentioned his name, her secret flashed upon me. . I had noticed his particular attentions in the country, and his whole behaviour this evening convinced me, that he had offered an insult io Caroline. L now perceived 7
the object of Sir Francis Darrell's frowns, and of the warmth with which he spoke apart to Mr. Vernon; that it was Caro-. line, and not I, vvho engaged his thoughts at that time; and that his emotion was anger. . " Mr. Vernon," continued she, " has been a friend from infancy: he went abroad'early, but renewed, I*ought to say increased, his intimacy with George as soon as he returned from the army. George is extremely attached to him. He is, as you know, an agreeable man, clever, and I really believe, in the main, good ; but I fear that he has imbibed maxims among free-thinking companions, which have given an injurious latitude to his principles. In religion he is more care¬ less than impious, and, though he does nob openly say it, he shows that he. piques himself upon the favours of wo¬ men. I am confident, Augusta, that our sex is in general virtuous; but the power of flattery and gaiety over weak minds lead too many to imprudencies and to vice. Mr. Vernon, I fear, has seen something in me which induces him
to think me of that class, who hold pru¬ dent secrecy to be all the virtue necessary in life. To tell you how I am mortified is utterly out of my power. It is now a considerable- time since I have observed his attentions exceeding the bounds of propriety. I have shut my eyes rather than believe it, so anxious have I been to prevent a breach of friendship ; but I cannot persuade myself to be blind any longer. He has this evening looked at me improperly; he has pressed my hand; he has even dared to say, « What a happy man is Godfrey !' Is it not hard," con¬ tinued she, " to be placed in such a situation ? I ought to be angry, but I am more hurt, more grieved, than angry. I think of Lady Mount-Vernon, of George, of Sir Francis, of Mr. Vernon himself; of the consequences ofthe dis¬ closure of my feelings. Tell me, Au¬ gusta, how shall I act ?" ■ Such was the unfortunate dilemma, such the sentiments of my dear, my amiable Caroline. Displeased as we both were, and richly as Mr. Vernon deserves punishment, we agreed in thinking that
SIR FRANCIS DARRELL. the step she ought to take required con¬ sideration, that a short" delay was no breach of confidence, and that we would again consult upon it before she spoke of it to George. After this conversation we separated for the night; and I have been writing so long, that I hear my father and George coming in — it is near two o'clock. I cannot help adding, how¬ ever, before I put down my pen, that, upon repeated reflection, I am unable to ascribe any part of Sir Francis Darrell's conduct to ,the • cause which Caroline traces. I feel myself painfully situated with such an idea, and it will require more than a common effort to maintain' my presence of mind, throughout the evening we are to pass to-morrow at Lady Mount-Vernon's. Thursday morning. Prepare, my dearest sister, for a sur¬ prise. —« Will you hear it ? Will you believe it? You may; for though I know nothing of it myself) I haye such author-
ity.for it, that I must believe it, whether I will or not. It seems an undoubted fact, Angelica, that I am in love — in love with Sir Francis Darrell, and don't know it. . George insinuates it, Caroline dis¬ cerns it, and lastly, my father knows it. I have just had a very affectionate con¬ versation with the last, for which I was prepared by what I heard last night from Caroline. - " Well, Gusta," said he, " I am going to talk to you upon that old, stale, good- for-nothing topic, Love." " Oh! my dear father," said I, " I know what you are going to say; and I would rather hear you talk upon any other subject, for I know nothing of love." " If that's the case, Gusta! talking of it will give you no pain, and, therefore, why should it not be as indifferent as any other topic ?" " Well! my dear father, it is your pleasure, and I will listen to you." << My dear Augusta," replied he, " you know that all authority is out ofthe question with me; you know that affection
is the only spring of your conduct to¬ wards me that I wish. I shall not begin now to talk of duty for a motive, after so many years actuated by love. I know you do not think of marriage; — to blunge headlong into it is a folly, of which you are incapable; but, without hastiness; it is far from being unbecoming of you to take the thought of it into consideration. Nothing is wanting to complete my happi¬ ness, but seeing you united to a man worthy of you : —- and he must be no common man whom I shall think so. Caroline, I find, hns opened to you the state of my mind on the subject, and I must say that, if I had the whole kingdom to choose out of, I should name Sir Francis Darrell." In spite of my being prepared as I was, when the name came from my father's lips my blood ran into my face. He looked seriously, but affectionately, at me. " Instead of recommending the passion of love to you, my dear Augusta, I warn you against it. I know your strength of mind, but I know also that love often
insinuates itself unconsciously; and, should there be any occasion to combat him, it requires spme hard fighting to gain a victory." " Surely, my dear father, you do not think you have occasion to give this ad¬ vice to me." " I do not think the worse of you," replied he, " when I say I think I have. I am sure in your situation I should love Darrell; all I wish you to do is, to ma¬ nage so well, that there shall be no un¬ happiness in any case; but, which I imagine very possible, that there shall be a great deal of happiness on all sides. You know I always speak openly to you, Augusta, and it is on this occasion more incumbent upon me to do so than on any which has occurred in your life, If I have any judgment in these matters, — that young man's heart is yours ; on the other hand, though I will not say your heart is his, I may at least say, that I think it would be, if there were not some impediments, unnecessary impediments, in the way. I love, I esteem, I admire this young man. I trust you will not
allow the difference in your modes of religious faith to foil such happiness as may be produced by an union with him — I hope you love me too well. But this is not the only ^impediment; —there is a something, a smothered fire of some kind at his heart, which should be altogether extinguished. It is in the way between you. Now, my child, I think it is in your power, and yours only, to extinguish it. I think you owe it to him ; and, if it is really as I suspect, that he is in love with you, I- know not any thing that would give me so much pleasure as your accepting him. But when 1 say this, God forbid you should be swayed by it against your inclination; that would end in misery. One thing more; though I am confident he loves you, I am not equally sure that he will ever propose himself to you : there may be something at his heart that may prevent it; there¬ fore watch your own, and.keep it so much your own, that it may be at your disposal. Lovers you will have a choice of, though, in my opinion, none in anv respect like Darrell. His natural
disposition, however clouded for a time, his acquirements, his understanding, his desire for truth, his generosity, his man¬ ners, all mark him as one of the first of men, and when this secret fever is got over, and got over it will be, I hope he wili be one of the happiest. Think of what I have said, Augusta, and act according to your judgment." . I was quite overpowered with my father's kindness, and had scarcely cou¬ rage enough to say, that I was very sure my heart was at my own disposal, but that I did not think liim right in respect" to Sir Francis's, and that, even if it was* the causes which would arise against his wish would, on both sides, be insur¬ mountable. " No, no," said he, " weigh what I have said, and I am sure all will go well." He embraced me, and left me. Weil! my dear Angelica! What say you ? Do you believe it ? Is your Au¬ gusta in love? Let your opinion be what it may, I beg you to be assured that I do not, and cannot, think of a union with any man with whom it wiil be
my duty to differ in opinion : — again I .say it must not be.. But my situation is critical: he has gained the hearts of my father and cousins, and I have no one to help me in the contest. Pray come to me: pray to my dear Marchese and Marchesa to send you to preserve your Augusta. I must now think about the ball. — When last 1 wrote to you I thought of much pleasure in it: — now I look for¬ ward to the evening with dread. How am I to summon courage and calmness for the night, with the consciousness of what has passed in conversation with Caroline, and also with my father ? I will do my best — oh that you were with me! Augusta.
vol. III.
o
LETTER LIV. . Augusta to Angelica. / ^ '■-.• - i (In Continuation.) How time flies! The ball is over; another day is past; a*thousand things have hap¬ pened ; and I am again at my table writ- ingto my dear Angelica. It will notbe easy to throw into method what ITiave to say, but I will try. ^1 confess Tshall write with pain, for I cannot divest my¬ self Of those feelings.whichT have never scrupled to own towards Sir Francis Dar¬ rell; and they could not have been more Wrung, even had the suspicions enter¬ tained of my heart by my father arid cousins been true. Whatever grounds I may unconsciously have given forthose suspicions respecting rae, ( I wonder how they could possibly imagine him attached to me beyond the common friendship he professes. I have very strong proofs,
Angelica, to give you, that there is no foundation for such a surmise — and you will see that I have good reason to sup¬ pose that, however slanderous that vile anonymous note was as to me, there was some truth as to an engagement of the heart; — but I am anticipating — niy intention was to give you an account of the night in order, .and to let you.know .all my feelings, ihe .agreeable ones, as well as the painful, and I will still en¬ deavour to do it. We were early ;in the >room, 'yet Sir Francis was ihere before us. .He was in conversation with Lady JMount-Vernon when we went in. It.appears ihat she had, by Mr. Vernon, requested his early attendance; and, when IJearned-the rea¬ son of it, it encreasedihe admiration and affection which she already possessed ,in my mind. Delightful woman! She does all she undertakes > so completely and withisuch grace ihat she .doubly charms. After what she had heard respecting jSir Francis irorn Jiis friend, and ^what .she had:herself witnessed, >she resolved i,thai her reception of:him .should .be marted o 2
with every honour she could bestow up¬ on him— and she had engaged him to come thus early that she might appoint him to open the ball with her. She had settled the weighty business, she said, but not without much difficulty, as he protested he was no dancer. * " Miss Saville," said she, " I engage you for him for the next two dances. Sir Francis,- permit me to present you to your partner for the next two dances." He v bowed, saying to me : " Really it is long since I danced — and I cer¬ tainly did not mean to be showing niy blundering steps to-night: my partner will have to tutor me in this also, if she consent to be troubled with me." I answered that I did not.think he would want tutoring. I felt as if the eyes of every one were upon me: — mine met Caroline's, but she was too kind to distress me by her looks, yet the recollec¬ tion of our conversation shook my nerves a little. ' - As the company came in, I heard the name of Darrell echoing from mouth to mouth, and observed much surpriseshown
at the sight of him. He was introduced to some of Lady Mount-Vernon's friends: groups literally collected about him, and great was the astonishment of ali when she called upon him to lead down the first dance. It was now my turn to be pointed out. — Mr. Vernon had engaged me; and, as I went to my place, my ears were assailed with " that's she, that's she! Where ? where ? There, there ! Yes ! in France! Sir Francis Darrell! They are both here!" Imagine my feelings, my dear Angelica, as well as you can, for I cannot pretend to describe them to you: there certainly was a great confusion in niy head, and my heart was not sufficient¬ ly light to enjoy the dance. Some ofthe company I knew before, but these were but a small portion of the number. Mr. Vernon, who was ali life and spirits, in¬ troduced me to my neighbours in the dance, and pointed out other characters in the room. — By his assiduity, he called off my attention from myself; and, when the first dance finished, I felt sufficiently at ease to take some pleasure in going down the second. At the conclusion I o a
was hastening to join Caroline, without attending to the company about me, when I heard myself addressed by a female voice — " I am glad to see Miss Saville so well." I looked and found that, in endeavour¬ ing to open a passage through the lookers- on, I was passing Lady Betty Bramble¬ bear. — ~ I was not a little discomposed at the sight of her. I returned her notice' by hoping she was well. " I have been admiring your dancing these ten minutes," said she : — " give ine-leave to introduce Miss Craven to you; she is a neighbour of yours in North¬ amptonshire, and is at present' staying with me in town." " I interchanged court'sies with the lady. " I see Mrs. Godfrey," said Lady Betty, " dancing with Lord Mount-Ver¬ non : — she has not got the best partner in the room." *" He rides better than he dances, my dear, but never mind that," cried Lady
Bab, who, unobserved, was standing at her shoulder. "Hah! Lady Barbara, how do you do ? I have not seen you for an age." " No," replied Lady Bab, " not since I was at Bramblebear-Hall." " I hope," said Lady Betty, 6 « you en¬ joyed the season in Herefordshire, and had no falls?" " Thank you, my dear, the same to you," retorted the huntress, "I have never had a fall, and I wish you never may." " May what ?" «« Ask Miss Saville," said she, laugh¬ ing and hastening ofL* " What can Lady Barbara mean?" said Lady Betty: " How do you do, Mr. Vernon ?" " What !'■' said he, " have you been piquing my cousin upon her riding ?" " Not I," cried she. " So I see Darrell is here : — wonders will never cease ; — and to lead off too: — I was not in the room, but every body is talking of it: — do you know whom he dances with next ? o 4
Perhaps he is not engaged —go and bring him to me." " He is engaged," replied Mr. Ver¬ non, " but I will obey your Ladyship. Wili you allow us to pass ? we are going to join Mrs. Godfrey." " By all means," said she, staring at me, as she made way. Sir Francis was at the head of the room with his paitner, and, on seeing me approach, stepped forward to daim me. " I can promise you," said Lady Mount-Vernon, " that he will not put you out." He now paid me a pleasing but not a particular attention, not nearly so much so as Mr. Vernon did. — He dances with remarkable ease, but with more grace than vivacity, as if he felt a conscious¬ ness that he had no right to'be dancing. Indeed he once said so* " Oh ! Miss Saville," said he, " I have no right to fhe spirits requisite to danc¬ ing." - Though not particular, he made himself agreeable, indeed more so than ifhe had been particular, and I should have spent a
happy half-hour, had I not observed the company on both sides looking at us," and whispering in crowds, as they fol¬ lowed us through the dance. Some of their whispers reached my ear, and of course must have reached Sir Francis's. " Her first winter." — " Brought up.in Italy." " Godfrey's cousin." , ** Found her in a wood," " Oh! that's she who was found in a wood." " Where does he keep himself?" " Odd stories." - You will i believe, Angelica, that the pleasure I" should have taken in the dance was completely destroyed; and that I would have gladly resigned my partner to any other lady in the room, to have escaped the painful notice which my dancing with him produced. , Among others who crowded after us I perceived Lord Mariton) on whose coun¬ tenance there was a malicious smile. — He had not recognized me" at all: —- when\wegot to the bottom ofthe dance, he came up and asked me for the next o 5
two. At the conclusion .of my dance, with Mr. Vernon, I had entered into several engagements:-— I told him this*— on which "lie asked if he might hope to be placed on my list:—-1 said the last gentleman to whom I was engaged, was Mr. Aspell, and I should afterwards hold myself engaged to him. He continued talking and standing between Sir Francis and me, upon which the latter said, " My Lord, I am still Miss Saville's partner." The other witha frown, said, "Well! what then, Sir ?" " Only, I'll thank you to stand from between us," said Sir Francis, and with his arm he gently put him aside. He resumed his ground — Sir Francis looked seriously but calmly at him, and desisted. We were very soon after engaged in going up the dance. — "I hope," said he, "you place my submission to its proper account." " I do, indeed," replied I, c « and I . thank you." - «I should never forgive myself," said he, "were Ito occasion your p^ms to be
implicated in a foolish quarrel, and I know you approve forbearance, which is indeed sometimes a very difficult virtue to practise." fl How amiable is this! and what a pity is it that a man who thinks so well, and possesses such powers of mind, should suffer himself to be the dupe of any wo¬ man ! I say the dupe, for I cannot be¬ lieve that he is playing the hypocrite with us all, even if wicked enough to in¬ tend practising upon my heart, as said in the anonymous note. He is no hypo¬ crite, but he appears unaccountably shackled by the arts of one, of the na¬ ture of whose attachment to him it is im¬ possible to doubt. It gives me a pang, but, in spite of the opinion of my family, it is such a pang as I should feel were I his sister. Having led me to my seat, he left me with Caroline, and I missed him for Some time. At first I thought he avoid¬ ed Lady Betty, but I afterwards per¬ ceived him in close conversation with her, at a distance, in another room. Oh! how painful the sight was to me! It was when I took my place for a
dance — I stood directly opposite the arch between the rooms. Before I ad¬ vanced high enough in the dance to lose sight of them, he left her and came towards the ball-room, but I did not ob¬ serve to what point he went. In danc¬ ing down, as I approached the bottom, I again saw him, and also her: — she was laughing, and I saw her strike him very familiarly with her fan. They were at a short distance from the dance; his back was towards me. There stood near them an extraordinary looking creature, a young man, who every now and then seemed to jerk the tip of a sharp nose downwards towards his mouth, accom¬ panied with a wink of his left eye, and an arch grin. He was evidently making his grimaces to another person, as indi¬ cations of what was passing in his mind about Sir Francis and Lady Betty, the latter of whom caught a sight of me, and I imagined redoubled her familiarities in consequence. She laughed, she flirted her handkerchief in his face — called him familiarly Darrell j and said, " you shall dance." The odd man seemed un-
able to contain himself, and, having winked again and again at his friend, turned his face directly towards me, and winked his eye at me. I was shocked, and, I believe, blushed extremely. Lady Betty, perceiving that Sir Francis was turning, nodded her head at me, and cried, " mayn't he, Miss Saville ?" She took his arm at the same time, as if to bring him foi'ward — but, without look¬ ing, probably, or hearing my name, he disappeared — and so did she, some of the company coming between us; and when they passed they were both gone. I would have given the world to have been at home. " How do you, Miss ?" said the wink¬ ing man to me. " I have not the pleasure of knowing you." " I know you, though," said he i "I saw you at Peterborough, at the Cathe¬ dral, and often in your barouche, and this very night, since you came to the ball, Betsy was introduced to you. I am very often at Bramblebear-hall —- Betsy is staying with Lady Betty Bramblebear 5
she is my sister; her name is Craven, and so is mine." Here I was turned by the dancer of the next couple, and could only bow my acknowledgment of acquaintance to Mr. Craven. He was, however, immedi¬ ately at my elbow again. (( Did you observe those two ?" said he, winking his eye, " too bad! was'nt it?" I knew not how to treat him, but was fortunately relieved by my partner, who, not brooking the intrusion, called, " Order." " By all means," cried Mr. Craven, and desisted from his pursuit. It was but too clear, Angelica, that the anonymous note was not false in every particular 5 and, in spite of the delight I had lately experienced in the company and correspondence of Sir Francis Dar¬ rell, I was convinced that perfection was not to be expected in human nature. I had suffered myself to be persuaded by his friend and my own mind, that there existed no attachment between nim and Lady Betty — but am I perpetually to
deny the evidence of my senses and believe only according to my wishes? And this is not all — but I will proceed regularly. —■ I made every effort not to excite any notice of my appearance, and particularly as it might be attributed to the departure of Sir Francis, who had gone away before the dance I allude to was finished. He commissioned Mr. Vernon to make his apology to Lady Mount-Vernon for going away so early. I ought to give you a description of the rooms and dresses of the night, but you can imagine all this from others which have been described to you, and you know that the hostess has great taste. The company formed an elegant assem¬ bly of gay, lively, handsome, and sen¬ sible people of distinction. Some few of the ladies, I was sorry to see, appeared as if they did not estimate modesty among the virtues of women. It is said that all these mistaken persons cannot be shut out from society; but, in truth, I do not see why. They cannot blush themselves, and are they to make others blush for them ?
1 The evening seemed to pass most agreeably with all the company. — As forme, I confess I wished myself at home before it was half over. With the sup¬ per and the dancing after supper, it was between four and five o'clock be¬ fore we broke up — Lady Mount-Ver¬ non would keep us to the very last. Here, Angelica, comes the most pain¬ ful occurrence of the evening. On my shawl's being presented to me by Mr. Vernon, I found a note pinned to it, without any address: —it vvas in pencil and contained these words: " If you are not convinced now, take your fate." I immediately gave it to Caroline, who stood by me. She thought it most pru¬ dent to say nothing and slipped it into her glove. It was read by our party be¬ fore we went to bed, and we agreed that there could be no doubt now of its being¬ the artifice of Lady Betty Bramblebear, inspired by a spirit of jealousy. George thought it might be fully detected by en¬ quiring at Lord Mount-Vernon's, to know who had been meddling with the shawls, but we concluded that it was not
worth the while. I could not help ex¬ pressing my doubt of Sir Francis's weak¬ ness from what I had myself observed. Neither my father, nor George, nor Caroline would hear of it. They declared that it was some farther artifice of the same lady. George saicl he had observed her conduct, and Sir Francis's also: — it was folly on her side, and suffering on his; and his early departure was a proof of it. I can only hope, my dearest Angelica, that it may prove so, but what I saw is so impressed on my mind ; and that Mr. Craven's wink, with his " Did you observe them ? too bad!" perpetu¬ ally haunts me. I will not conclude without saying that Mr. Vernon has since behaved himself so well, and so much to Caroline's satisfac¬ tion, that I hope those weak indications of an improper attachment were the result of a momentary folly, and that they will never appear again. I shall now dispatch my packet, though I am expec¬ ting one from you daily. I hope soon to hear that your coming to me is fixed. — I trust by your next to hear that
_Mr. Dartford is at Florence : — - his mo¬ ther is in town, but was not at the ball. Alas! my father has had another letter from Count Olivastro: — he is com¬ ing to England — Adieu! my dearest Angelica. Ever love Your most affectionate sister, Augusta.
END OF THE THIRD VOLVME.
Trinted by A. and: R. Spottiswoode/ Printers-Street, London*
