Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Italian vengeance: and, English forbearance: a romance
ENGLISH FORBEARANCE AND ITALIAN VENGEANCE.
CHAP. I. J. PE wife of Dennis was now the os¬ tensible attendant on Marian Gorden. It is true that she was sometimes awkward in her new situation, and her ringers ra¬ ther clumsy in attiring the lovely form of her indulgent mistress ; but Marian wo' 41 not listen to her removal, when advised by lady Evelina to procure a more suit¬ able person ; neither would she allow .Mary to make any useless apologies for her ignorance, good-naturedly observing, that unless Mary was discontented with her office, she was perfectly satisfied with her attentions. VOL. III. в
Marian was too happy in the possession of the heart of Arlingford, to conceal it long from tlie wife oť Dennis; and Mary became the еч .ìfidant of their mutual pas¬ sion. Again the eyes of Mary suddenly became weak, and she had recourse to her apron; yet her honest feelings could not wholly be restrained ; her joy was too great not to have veni, and falling on her knees, she prayed to Ilca\ en that she might live to witness tlieir union ; for notwith¬ standing the inequality of their rank, poor Mary hoped no offence in saying, that she loved ihem as dearly as if they were her own flesh and blood, and she was sure Dennis did the same. *' Then you shall never leave me," said Marian, delighted with the frank and sin¬ cere expressions of her attachment : " you and the worthy Dennis must make up your minds to become a part of my future family." " Ah, Miss Marian ! dearly as we love you, our promise is already given. We
still hope to live and die in the service of our dear captain." "Of who, Mary?" The wife of Dennis turned her keen grey eyes upon the varying countenance of Marian Gorden ; then smiling, said— " I think, Miss Marian, I may trust you now r with my secret." ťť I think you may, Mary : but suppose I am already informed upon the subject —and can tell you who this dear captain is. Does not his name begin wdth an A, and end with a D ?" Mar} paused to spell the name ; then clapping her nands together—" Gracious goodness! so it docs. Ah, Miss Marian ! I see how it is ; you are more wise and learned than I am ; but I can see, for all that, as well as my betters." " Well, Mary, and what can you see now ?" u What I have long wished to be as¬ sured of," cried Mary ; " but I never durst mention it before. Ah, Miss Marian, I в 2
think I may promise to live and die with you, and yet keep my word with cap¬ tain Arlingford." Marian threw her arms round Mary's neck, to hide her blushes. A mutual ex¬ planation soon took pbee between them ; and Marian enjoyed, what she had long sighed for—-the opportunity of conversing with the wife of Dennis concerning the misfortunes of Henry; while the latter was equally delighted at the removal of a re¬ striction, which had been painful to her grateful and affectionate heart. She could now give way to her long-restrained feel¬ ings; she could now expatiate upon the never wearying theme of Arlingford's praise, his military exploits, his bravery, his humanity, his gentleness, and, last of all, his love for Miss Marian, which the penetration of Mary had discovered long ago. Mary might have talked for ever, and Marian would have continued an attentive listener. Again the tears of genuine pity fell from both their eyes, over the untimely
fate of the young and lovely Isabella. Mary was, however, ignorant of the name of her betrayer, and this, for the sake of lady Evelina, Marian concealed from her knowledge. The improvement in tiie health of that dear-loved friend, enabled her now to undertake the journey to the Abbey, and an early day was again fixed for their departure. As this removal was a matter of necessity, not of choice, on the part of colonel Belgrave, he wished to have the solitude of his paternal mansion enlivened by the presence of some friends, whose mirthful spirits would keep alive his natural hilarity ; yet for the sake of appearances, it would be right to study a little the taste of lady Evelina., in the as¬ sortment of her guests. Her confinement was expected to take place in less than two months, during which time she ex¬ pressed a wish to have no other society tiian that of Marian and Rose, as she should frequently enjoy that of theyoung bride, who, with her husband, Henry For¬ tescue, had retired for the honeymoon to
a hunting-lodge of sir William Arling- ford's, which was not far distant from Bel- grave Abbey. The wish to remain tran¬ quil, and free from the fatigue of com pany, in her present delicate situation, did not give offence to the colonel, who looked forward to the birth of an heir, as to an event which w r ouid make him amends for every other deprivation ; and he resolved to content himself with the society of his bosom friend, Dashwood. Major Campbell had haughtily declined his invitation; but the good-natured lord Rochdale promised to assist in enlivening the ladies with his vast store of anecdotes, and to divide his time between the family at the Abbey, and his daughter at the Lodge. He still expected his eldest ward, lord Fortescue, and hoped that he w r ould make one of the party. The absence of the young bride did not interfere with the preparations for lord Rochdale's grand fete ; and, to the delight of Marian and Rose, lady Evelina declared her intention of accompanying them.
Nothing could exceed the brilliancy of the entertainment, at which Marian, after the repeated entreaties of lord Rochdale, consented to preside in the place of Olivia. It was a display of wealth and English magnificence, which Rose had never be¬ fore witnessed ; and she shrunk behind lady Evelina, as she perceived the atten¬ tion of several of the company directed towards herself. For that evening, Rose had laid aside her mourning, and in compliment to the occasion, as being one of Olivia's bride's- maids, she had put on a rich dress of white satin, trimmed full with the finest lace ; the dress was a present from Marian, and the same as her own. From the same kind hand she received a set of pearl or¬ naments, which she now wore on her neck and arms. The lace of her robe concealed the locket, given her by the generous friend of her girlhood, and to whieh she had ventured to affix the gold chain, which her lamented father had deemed too costly, while she resided at the cot-
tage. The jet black tresses of her luxuri¬ ant hair were free and unconfined, save by a single flower, composed of large pearls ; and the matchless symmetry of her form was unrivalled, even by that of the presiding mistress of the revels. The appearance of Rose, sanctioned by the protection of lady Evelina, and the kind attentions of lord Rochdale, drew upon her tbe rude gaze of impertinent, though high-born curiosity ; and Marian was almost tired of replying to the nu¬ merous questions concerning Rose, her family, and her expectations, when she was agreeably relieved by the approach of lord Rochdale, and with him a very ele gant young man, whom he introduced to her as lord Fortescue. Marian instantly perceived a strong re¬ semblance in features to those of his bro¬ ther Henry—but the expression was dif¬ ferent ; a shade of melancholy, of deep thought, rendered the cast of his counten¬ ance still more like that of Arlingford; and
Marian thought that his smile was almost as sweet as her own dear Henry's. Rose had caught the sound which ran through the company of lord Fortescue's arrival, as she sat on the same couch with lady Evelina ; and her eyes instinctively turned towards the place where he stood, in conversation with Marian Gorden. With breathless agitation she glanced over his face and form ; the quick throbbings of her heart informed her that she could not be mistaken. He smiled, and she felt convinced that he was indeed the same Edward that she had known and loved in childhood. Nearly six years had elapsed since they had met ; all the graces of his boyhood were now ripened into manly beauty; and Rose now saw him advance with his guar¬ dian, with a sickening fear, which nearly rendered her insensible to where she was ; she heard lord Rochdale introduce him to lady Evelina—her own name was then pronounced—a hand touched hers—it в 3
trembled also ; the dread of becoming the subject of ill-natured conjecture alone pre¬ vented her from fainting ; and she felt re¬ lieved when lord Rochdale conducted him to another part of the chamber. " Who is Miss Aylmer?" inquired lord Fortescue, the first moment he could speak unobserved to his guardian. " An orphan, I believe," said his lord¬ ship, " and the friend of lady Evelina Bel- grave, with whom she resides. Do you not think that she would well become a coronet ?—- hey, Ned ! what if I make an offer of mine ?" 4< You, my lord !" " Yes, me, my lord. I am eight-and- forty, and Rose Aylmer, I suppose, is turned of eighteen ; that will do very well —will it not ?" " Rose Aylmer !" repeated the young lord, starting at the sound of a name that filled his mind with tender recollections of years gone past. " Have you any dislib г to the name of Rose ?" said lord Rochdale.
" Not any—on the contrary, I think it a most pleasing name." ** And the owner a lovely woman ?" " Who could think otherwise, my¬ lord ?" " No one, who is possessed of a spark of feeling, or a grain of taste. I hope you approve my choice. Go and solicit the honour of her hand for the dance, Ed¬ ward ; but remember, she is to be lady Rochdale» Apropos, Ned—I can recom¬ mend you to a \\ife ; Harry has got one before you ; but never mind that ; you and I will soon follow his good example. Turn your attention to Marian Gorden; she has beauty sufficient to thaw the frozen bosom of an anchorite, innocence enough to pass for a being of another world, and more wealth than is necessary for half-a- dozen such sober domestic fellows as your¬ self." He staid not for a reply, secretly r con¬ vinced that the heart of his ward would never be guided in its affections by interest. The eyes of lord Fortescue insensibly
turned to seek the fair subject of their con¬ versation ; and eager to claim the privi¬ lege of the evening's amusement, he with an embarrassed air requested the ho¬ nour of becoming her partner. Rose, though greatly agitated, imme¬ diately consented. She remembered his former anxiety to have her perfect in every graceful accomplishment ; and as she had been told that she excelled in dancing, she availed herself of the present opportunity of calling forth his approbation. Notwithstanding the grave caution of his guardian, lord Fortescue took every opportunity of being near, and of speak¬ ing to Rose, who, partly recovered from the surprise and pleasure of the meeting, felt both her pride and her tenderness gra¬ tified by his marked attentions, which could only proceed from his awakened re¬ collection of Rose Delaval. This was the fact: the moment that the eyes of lord Fortescue beheld the strikingly beautiful form of Miss Aylmer, it recalled to his mind that of the little girl of the cottage*
which six years absence had not effaced from his heart. He gazed with astonish¬ ment, at what he considered as a strong resemblance to Miss Delaval ; the same cast of countenance-—the same expression of features—the black eye, alternately dazzling, then melting with softness—and the jetty ringlets falling in wild profusion over the snowy neck and polished brow. The voice too of siren sweetness, how did its tones steal into his soul, like those of his fascinating little friend, in whose fate he had taken so warm an interest ! With difficulty he restrained his conversation to the rules of politeness ; every moment that she spoke or moved, he was on the point of addressing her as Rose Delaval, which occasioned an embarrassment in his man¬ ner, that he felt it was necessary to account for, lest it should offend. Rose listened with a transport she could ill conceal, as lord Fortescue apologized for the seeming familiarity of his looks and manner, towards one who bore so strong a resemblance to a young lady he
had known in his boyish days, that he could scarcely believe but it was herself he now addressed. The pardon of Rose was easily granted, and Love and Hope once more shed their blissful influence over her. Lady Evelina's health required that she should retire earty from the noise and heat of tbe apartments : with kind consideration she requested Rose to remain with Miss Gorden ; but gratitude triumphed over the secret pleadings of affection ; and Rose, withdrawing her hand from the gentle pressure of lord Fortescue, wdio saw them to the carriage, retired to dream of Ed¬ ward, and of future happiness, which in the fervour of her imagination, only await¬ ed the discovery of who she was.
CHAP. II. The certainty of being beloved by Ar¬ lingford, operated like a charm upon the harassed feelings of Marian Gorden, and she quickly recovered both her wonted spirits, and the bloom on her cheek. The ball of lord Rochdale was her last public engagement : all now was bustling pre¬ paration for their journey. They had only three days more to remain in town, and Marian had promised to spend the last at Tyrconnel House. Unwilling to trouble daily the r servants of colonel Belgrave, Marian had ordered a neat travelling cha¬ riot for herself; and Dennis recommended a coachman and footman, upon w r hose so¬ briety and fidelity he could rely. It was her intention to call on Judith before she left town, and Marian determined that the first visit she paid in her own carriage,
should be to the affectionate nurse of her beloved Henry. Alary was ordered to be in readiness to attend her ; and they ac¬ cordingly proceeded to the cottage in the lane, having first well stored the carriage with a variety of presents for Judith, many of which the generous Marian trust« ed would alike be serviceable to the high- minded Arlingford; for him she had a more valuable gift, in case they now met» and one which she felt convinced he would not reject. It was now the latter end o p May, yet Judith was seated by the fiie in her high- backed chair, her dog Carlo by her side, when Marian Gorden, followed by the wife of Dennis, entered the cottage.-—" I have brought my lady to see you," cried Mary, exultingly, at the same time pla¬ cing a chair by the side of the astonished and embarrassed old woman, who laid down her knitting, and would have risen from her seat, had not Marian, gently placing her hand on her shoulder, restrain¬ ed her.—" I will not sit down myself, un-
less y r ou remain where you are," said Ma¬ rian, with one of her fascinating smiles. " We must not be strangers any longer," she continued, seeing the old woman's eyes glance quickly around, to observe if every thing was in its place. " I have heard so much of Judith's good qualities, of her kindness of heart, and her doting affection for her adopted son, that I re¬ solved to call before I left town, and beg her acceptance of a few trifles, which I hope will add to ihe comforts of her cot¬ tage." Mary was now dispatched, to order the servants to bring in a quantity of wine, and other articles; among them were two new gowns for Judith, wdio, astonished and delighted by the liberality and sweet affability of Marian, began to make use of her tongue; first, however, conducting her into the parlour, where every thing bespoke the cleanliness and regularity of the owner. The heart of Marian thrilled with plea¬ sure, as sbe seated herself in the little
apartment occupied by Henry, who, un¬ conscious of the happiness that awaited him, was strolling, with his book in his hand, in the meadow behind the garden of the cottage. The room was ornamen c- ed with his drawings, some of which he had shewn Marian at the chapel ruins : a few shelves on one side the room were filled with books, some music, and his flute, upon which instrument he excelled. The chimney-piece was tastefully deco¬ rated with spring flowers, placed in little worsted baskets, which Judith informed her were made by Susan. " Have you a daughter living ?" " Oh, no, my lady," said Judith ; ** Pro¬ vidence thought fit to bereave me of all my children in their youth ; but I never fretted for them much ; for when my old master, sir William, sent me his youngest son, my heart took to him instantly; 1 loved him as dearly as if he had been my own/' ** Ah, and dearly hc loves you too," cried Marian, pressing the old woman's
hand in her own, " for you have been a fond and tender parent to him, and the blessings of Heaven will attend you." ** He is the darling of my age," said Judith, ** and to his kindness I am in¬ debted for this cottage and for my sup¬ port. Oh, may I but live to see him once more restored to his birthright, his ene¬ mies humbled, and himself the master of the noble seat of his cruel father, from which he was banished when a helpless infant, and poor old Judith will die happy!" " Live happy you mean, my clear and excellent Judith; I must not have you talk of dying yet. I am come to ask you for a small share of that affection which you bestow on your darling, and which I hope you will not refuse to Marian Gorden." A ray of light now broke in upon Ju¬ dith's mind. She was unacquainted with the change of Mary's situation—ignorant of her having become the attendant of Miss Gorden ; she was uncertain that her lady was the identical Marian, whom,
within the last week, her darling had named to her in terms of the fondest af¬ fection. Convinced now of lier presence, Judith could not contain her delight; and Marian, throwing her arms round her neck, was pressed to the bosom of the affectionate creature, who, with tears of joy, now blessed the lovely girl, then prayed that Heaven would speedily unite her to the darling of her heart. " As the first proof of your love for me," said Marian, ** accept, dear Judith, of this purse; make use of it, during my absence from town, to procure you any little comfort that your age may require: do not pain me by a refusal, but rely upon the same sum half yearly." Marian now forced into her lap a purse with tw r enty sovereigns, telling her that she should often write to inquire after her health. Judith wiped and re-wiped her specta¬ cles, still she could not see clear ; her voice too was affected ; but she pressed the soft white hand of Marian to her lips, who could just distinguish the pleasing sounds
of " benevolent angel î worthy to become the wife of the darling of my souk" Marian heard enough, and felt more than repaid. She now requested Judith to get some person to assist in the little domestic concerns, and was informed that her darling had insisted upon her retaining Susan, who had been so good and atten¬ tive during her illness. Susan was now summoned, and Marian beheld, with some degree of surprise, a creature so young and lovely, whose ap¬ pearance seemed but ill calculated to en¬ dure the hardships of servitude. The blushing modesty of Susan, the softness of her voice, and her apparent devotion to the old woman, immediately interested Marian in her favour ; and she took an opportunity of slipping some gold into her hand, as a reward for her good con¬ duct Susan was now commissioned to shew Miss Gorden the garden, and to pluck for her some of its best flowers : Carlo, grateful for the lavished kindness of Marian, quitted the side of his loved
mistress, to accompany her new friend and Susan. Henry from the meadow could distin¬ guish the objects in the cottage garden. Scarce daring to trust the evidence of his senses, he sprang over the low^ fence which separated it from the field, and pressing the hand of the blushing Marian to his lips, expressed his rapture at this unex¬ pected visit. " Your vanity will be mortified I know," said she, smiling sweetly on her delighted lover, " but I cannot help it : the truth is, this visit was intended to that best of creatures, Judith, whom with difficulty I have persuaded to accept of a few trifles, as the pledges of my esteem and admira¬ tion of her character." " My best beloved Marian !" cried Henry, affectionately, " have I not cause to become one of the vainest of my sex, since you have promised to bestow on me this dear hand? Yes, I am vain—but it is of thee, dearest Marian—not of my¬ self."
He now conducted her into his little parlour, where Judith had placed some of the rich cakes and wine, the gifts of Ma¬ rian, and with them a small one of her own making, and a bottle of her own gooseberry wine. Henry thanked her with one of his encouraging smiles ; and Marian made the old woman's heart dance again with joy, when she gave the plain cake, and the home-made wine of Judith, the preference. The wife of Dennis now brought in some cold tongue and chicken, which she said was more substantial food, and more wholesome than sweet cakes ; and then retired to pledge their health in some good old port, with Judith and Susan in the kitchen. The moments were precious, and the lovers had much to say with respect to their future plans. The mention of the journey to the Abbey cast a gloom over the features of Henry, as it must neces¬ sarily separate him from the woman he adored for some months. Marian however promised to write ; and drawing from her
pocket a small morocco case, she pre¬ sented it to him, saying that she flattered herself he would not refuse the present she now offered. Henry coloured as he took the case; but his fine countenance instantaneously brightened with the sunny expression of happiness, as he beheld the beautifully executed miniature of Marian, richly set round with diamonds.—-" This is indeed a treasure/ 5 he exclaimed, "which I would not resign but with life. How, beloved Marian, can 1 ever sufficiently repay you for this act of considerate kindness? This dear resemblance of features, indelibly impressed upon my heart, shall now be my inseparable companion till we meet again, which I trust will not be long." Marian echoed back the sigh of Henry, at the painful thought of separation, and secretly prayed that Providence would shorten their absence.—" I would follow you, dearest Marian," said he, " and re¬ sume my silciit character once again; but the chance is, that Belgrave and I might
meet. He has recent reasons for wishing to avoid me; and these have made him now hurry from town earlier than he had in¬ tended ; while, on my part, I should feel loth to appear as if I pursued him." Marian looked inquiringly in his face. " I think," he continued, " that I should be to blame, not to communicate to you a piece of intelligence, which I am convin¬ ced will afford you real pleasure. Lady Susan Dashwood is restored to her pa¬ rents, who have very prudently with¬ drawn her from England, that she might not be exposed to the malevolent remarks of that portion of her own sex, who, un¬ like my Marian, rejoice instead of weep¬ ing over the failings of a fellow-creature." Marian was indeed delighted to learn that the unfortunate lady Susan was again under the protection of her parents ; but her curiosity was raised, to hear where she had been secluded, and with whom. Henry felt some degree of embarrass¬ ment, while relating the share he had in vol. ш. с
withdrawing her from the arms of her se¬ ducer. He passed over the circumstances as lightly as possible; and Marian, judg¬ ing that delicacy^ prevented him from dwelling on his own good actions, merely asked if she was acquainted with the per¬ son who had caused her to violate her duties. " I grieve to say you are," replied Hen¬ ry ; " but I had the solemn promise of lady Susan, never to divulge his name, not even to her venerable parents, and I feel that she will keep this promise. The villa, whose white chimneys you behold rising above the* trees, was the retreat se¬ lected by her cowardly betrayer, for her temporary prison." " Unfortunate lady Susan !" cried the compassionate Marian, wiping away the tear of heavenly pity from her eyes : " how truly have I lamented thy ill-starred mar¬ riage, and consequent imprudence, while I felt that the man who could take advan¬ tage of thy weak mind, and unprotc :*ed state, must doubly be a villain. Oh,
Henry! if I know him, tell me who he is, that I may avoid the sight of so much baseness !" €i Sweetest Marian !" replied Henry, gently drawing her towards his faithful bosom, " to comply with your request, would only be to wound your feelings un¬ necessarily. What I have mentioned to you now is in confidence : let not the name of the poor injured girl escape your lips." " But my dear Evelina would rejoice with me in her restoration," said Marian, earnestly ; " and I really believe also, that the colonel would feel glad to learn, that she was once more under the protection of her fond parents." A smile of bitter meaning passed over the features of Henry.—" From the gay character of the colonel, that is doubtful," he cried; " therefore trust not, dearest, to the generous feelings of your own heart. Let me beg that what ΐ have now com¬ municated may remain a secret/ 5 с 2
There was a serious earnestness in the voice and manner of Henry, that instantly determined Marian to yield to his better judgment, and to remain silent upon the subject. Ever mindful of the comforts of others, she now remarked to Arlingford, that Judith's pretty little helpmate did not appear suited to any laborious employ¬ ment.—" There is a something in the air and manner of the girl that pleases me," said she; " I should like to take her, and bring her up for some light business, if Judith will seek for a more robust and older maid." Henry thought with Marian, that the slim anel delicate form of Susan was not fitted to encounter bodily hardships ; but hc knew also, that it would be certain ruin to place her within the reach of colo¬ nel Belgrave. He therefore advised Ma¬ rian to let her remain with the considerate Judith, until the blissful period of their union, when the good old nurse, and her affectionate attendant, could be happily disposed of under their own roof. Ma-
nan blushed assent; and was at length compelled, though unwillingly, to remind him, that the painful hour of parting was arrived, and that another visit must be paid before she returned to dress for din¬ ner. Arlingford endeavoured to rally his spi¬ rits, as he folded his beloved Marian to his heart ; he called her by the tender ap¬ pellation of his betrothed wife—conjured her to write often, and to omit nothing that occurred at the Abbey.-—" I cannot explain to you my reasons," said he, " for being thus particular, in requesting that you will transmit to me an account of whatever passes at the Abbey. What may seem trivial to you, my love, may be of importance to me. I trust," continued he, smiling on her affectionately, " that I shall soon be enabled to claim this beloved hand, and assert my own right to protect you, from ail mysterious strangers —all treacherous friends /' " The best of friends must part, to be gure," cried Mary, as she seated herself
beside her lady in the carriage; " but I am downright certain, Miss Marian, that , if I were in your place, I could never think of leaving the captain to sigh and fret himself to death, when a special li¬ cence would make you both happy for life, in the twinkling of an eye." " All in good time, my dear Mary," said Marian, trying to force her drooping spirits : " our present separation will in¬ crease the happiness of our next meeting.'* Mary did not relish these self-inflicted mortifications ; but she was silent, as was her custom, whenever her opinion was contrary to that of her mistress. The carriage now stopped at the door of the florist's. Mary was ordered to proceed, and make some purchases, and then return for Marian, who hastened through the well-known passage, to the residence of madame. Rosalie, notwithstanding the great sa¬ crifice she had made for the future benefit of her infant, was recovering fast from the effects of her severe trial: she received
Marian Gorden with a smile of heartfelt gratitude, and pressing her hand, with en¬ thusiasm, to her lips, exclaimed-*-" Lady, to your kindness and humanity, as well as to the skill of doctor Belville, I owe my life. You shall not find me ungrate¬ ful, though neither words nor gifts can convey to you the warmth or the strength of my affection. It will gratify me, lady, if you will accept of this trifling proof of Rosalie's gratitude : you may wear these jewels, lady ; they will not stain the pu¬ rity of thy snowy bosom, for they have never been used by me, since I left the palace of my brother." Kosalie now placed a small ivory casket in the lap of Marian, which contained a set of ornaments for the neck and arms, of large and valuable diamonds, even sur¬ passing in richness those which she her¬ self possessed, and which had belonged to her mother, the late lady Gorden. Sur¬ prised by the value of the gift, Marian would have declined it ; but the gathering ^cloud on the brow of the foreigner taught
her to beware of exciting her displeasured " Life is at best uncertain," said Rosa- He, " and mine may be nearer its close than you imagine. Take then these baubles, lady ; they will serve to remind you of her, who, when last she wore them, was pure and innocent as yourself: they were the birthday present of a nobleman, who lived not to witness the disgrace and infamy of his child. The powerful in¬ fluence of manly beauty, grace, elegance, and English eloquence, all united to awa¬ ken every feeling to love. But think not, lady, that these jewels have clasped a wanton's arm, or sparkled on a bosom that throbbed with unhallowed love. No, lady, Ώ0 —I fell a victim to the honied tongue of a systematic seducer, who, calling his Maker to attest the truth oï his vow 9 swore to unite his fate with mine, as soon as we arrived in England. Thus deluded by the semblance of honourable love, I became the victim of a too credulous, too tender heart. Doting on him to madness, I nevertheless tore him from that heart,
the moment T was assured that he could no longer be legally mine. Yes, lady, Rosalie had still sufficient virtue left to quit her souľs idol, when informed that his promise to her was never to be rea¬ lized—that another was to fill her place, if not in his traitor heart, yet in his home. î have sinned, and I have suffered, lady." " Heaven pardon and restore you to tranquillity !" said Marian, fervently. " Yes, madame, I will accept your present, as a mark of your affection, not οι gratitude, for I have only done my duty as a Chris¬ tian." " Oh that I were like you !" exclaimed Rosalie, with energy; " for you, lady, were created to shew how good, how per¬ fect human nature may be." Marian shook her head.—" Nay, say not so; as yet I have had no temptation to err : had I been placed in your situa¬ tion, I might have been equally credulous, equally confiding." This proof of self-humility had a visible с 3
effect upon Rosalie's changeful counted nance; although from the character and principles of the lovely English girl, she felt assured in her own mind, that in a similar situation she would have resisted, and not yielded to that excess of tender¬ ness, so fatai in its consequences. Yet Rosalie's pride was gratified by the mo¬ dest and delicate manner in which Marian Gorden declined the high praise which gratitude awarded her. Notwithstanding this gratitude, and sincere affection on the part of madame, Marian could not help thinking it rather singular, that she testified so little regret at her leaving town, since it would necessarily separate them for some months; and though Rosalie was now in a state of con¬ valescence, yet she was not sufficiently recovered to share the tender attentions of an only friend, without feeling a serious loss from her absence. Yet Rosalie ut¬ tered no expressions of sorrow at her de¬ parture, neither did she request her to correspond during her residence at the
Abbey· This appeared singular, and al¬ most unkind, in a person in whose fate Marian had taken so warm an interest ; but wishing to give up gradually a con¬ nection, offensive to Arlingford, and dan¬ gerous to herself, she forbore to notice the seeming indifference of madame. Rising to depart, she embraced the beautiful Italian, who held her for some minutes close pressed to her heart, in vi¬ sible emotion.—** When next we meet/' said she, in a voice which betrayed the struggle of contending feelings, " f shall claim, lady, your promise." " What promise?" hastily inquired Ma¬ rian. " That you will neither betray nor abandon me in the hour of trial," replied Rosalie ; '* nor breathe to any living soul a knowledge of my existence." " So far you may rely on me/' said Ma¬ rian Gorden. ** When next we meet," continued Ro¬ salie, " I shall put your friendship to a stronger test; till then, lady, farewell:
enjoy the luxury, the bliss of being be¬ loved, hy him whom you adore ; but let not a fancied security lull to rest your fears. Once more, beware of the tartan ; a discarded lover may become a dangerous enemy." Marian thought not of Campbell, ex¬ cept to regret that his unfortunate attach¬ ment had deprived her of an amiable and intelligent friend. The last mysterious words of madame sunk deep in her mind» When next they met—when and where would that be ?—and what further claim could that singular being have upon her friendship? She shuddered, as she recol¬ lected the strange hints which she had dropped on the day of their first interview —hints, which while they terrified, were calculated to excite the highest curiosity in Marian. Trusting, as usual, to Provi¬ dence, she flattered herself that her depar¬ ture from London would frustrate, as far as she was concerned, the plans of ma- dame; and that as her return to town was uncertain, she should escape the pain and
terror of being called upon to assist her, in her scheme of long-meditated ven¬ geance.
CHAP. III. It was at the close of a bright and beau¬ tiful day, that the family of colonel Bel- grave reached the Abbey. Again the bells rang merrily, and again lady Evelina received every demonstration of respectful attachment, from the tenants and domes¬ tics. Not as before, did the tear dim her eyes; a smile of gratified pleasure now dimpled her cheeks, and she returned their honest welcome with feelings of gratified affection. The countenance of the colonel resumed its wonted cheerfulness, as he assisted her ladyship to alight, and con¬ ducted her to the drawing-room, followed by Marian Gorden and Rose, old Benson and Alice bringing up the rear, who, with unfeigned delight, expressed their happi-
ness at the шЫгп of a maşter and mistres» they so highly valued. The proud expectation of becoming a father, and the hope of having an heir to his estates and those of lady Evelina, once more restored the colonel to his accustomed flow of spirits, which contributed to raise those of his amiable wife, who felt not the fatigue of travelling, while contemplating the happy countenances around her. Marian was awake at sunrise ; she could not resist the earnest desire she felt to re¬ visit the ruins, and hastily putting on bm things, she proceeded to gratify her ineli« nations. How varied were her feelings, aß she retraced the path trod by herself and Henry, the last evening she liad seen him in the ruins, which she now entaed! The bright beaiaas of the sun streamed through the broken windows, vhich yet contained many panes of coloured glass, enriched with the armorial bearings of the family of Belgrave. The robin had built his nest in the high arched roof, and poured forili the matin aoiag of grateful
praise to mV Creator. Marian listened with delight, resolving at her next vMt to scatter crumbs on the tombs for the infant brood. Not a spot escaped the ob* servation of Marian, that had been hal¬ lowed by the presence of her beloved Ar* lingford ; but as most of our pleasures are mingled with pain, that which Marian now felt, on contrasting her present pro*> spects with the past, received alloy from the recollection of the scene she had last witnessed in the ruins, between colonel Belgrave and his mysterious companion. As the views through the broken walls of the building gave ample scope to the eye of an artist, Marian had her drawing materials removed thither, that she might amuse herself, when she felt inclined for lonely meditation. Here she had no fear of interruption from any of the family : lady Evelina was now too timid to cross the water, and Rose, though pleased with the beauty of the scenery, expressed no relish for revisiting the crumbling monuments of departed greatness; of союпе! Bei·
grave's absence, Marian felt perfectly assu¬ red; and lord Rochdale's time was too much occupied in paying visits to his daughter, and in amusing the ladies at the Abbey, to waste moments so precious among the gloom of the chapel ruins; Marian had therefore no intruders but the robins, who, naturally confiding, flew round her, and picked from her hand their daily food. The society of Henry Fortescue and his young bride, was a pleasing addition to the party at the Abbey. The Lodge of sir William Arlingford was only two miles from the family mansion of the colonel, which enabled the inmates of both houses to keep up a daily intercourse with each other. Scarce an evening elapsed without the high enjoyment of music: all the ladies were admirable performers, vocal and in¬ strumental; colonel Belgrave and Dash¬ wood accompanied them with their fine manly voices; while Henry Fortescue on the violin contributed to the general har¬ mony; not however without always first
assuring them, that whatever might be their prejudice in favour of his brother, they would find, on his arrival, that he greatly excelled his lordship, particularly in singing; this was always said with so grave an air, that his hearers concluded it to be true. Lord Rochdale smiled at the innocent falsehood of his favourite, who meant just the reverse of what he said; while Rose, who had heard, and who still remembered the peculiarly rich voice of lord Fortescue, thought it next to impos¬ sible for those sweet tones to have lost their power: she was well aware of his lordship's fondness for music ; and as he was hourly expected to join his brother at the Lodge, she devoted every leisure mo¬ ment to the recovery of the time she had lost during the fatal illness of her lamented father. The sensibility of Rose had been pain¬ fully excited during her journey to the Abbey, and her situation was rendered more trying, as she wished to conceal it from the notice of her fellow-travellers.
Two years back, she had passed through the same roads with her deceased parent; and since then their necessities had obliged him to dispose of their delightful cottage, which was within a mile of the hunting lodge of sir William Arlingford. The noble man«* sion which was to be seen in the distance, crowned with lofty woods, coeval with its wall of dark grey stone, was Belgrave Abbey, and its long absent master the present colonel. How anxiously did Rose await the op* portunity of gaining a sight of the dear loved cottage, which had sheltered her during the latter years of her childhood, and in which her generous young friend had passed so many happy hours! she longed also to inquire after the welfare of the good and worthy fisherman, Rogers» and to embrace her old playmate, Phœbe Lucas. At length the moment so ardently sought for arrived. At the request of Mrs. Fortescue, Rose was to spend a day at the Lodge, that she might practise with Olivia a new duet on the harp. Rose felt that
this was the long wished for opportunity of beholding once again her dear lovect home. Alighting at the well-known en·* trance of the park, she dismissed the car¬ riage; it was early, and she might enjoy the luxury of two hours freedom, before she visited the Lodge. Passing rapidly through the park, she entered the path which led direct to the cottage ; a few paces more, and part of its white walls met her anxious gaze; and now the whole of the building became visible. She paused to take breath·—the sunbeams danced on the broad expanse of ocean, while the breakers dashed their white foam upon the rocky coast, neac her late habitation. Every thing around it bore marks of the highest cultivation; the rose-trees which her father had planted, were trained with the nicest care, and had already reached the window of her bed·» room, mingling their pink heads with the green leaves of the fragrant woodbine and sweet-scented clematis; underneath the veranda she discovered a range of plants,
which something whispered to her were hers; and the next moment, the kind girl in whose care she had left them, appeared from the house with a cage, which con¬ tained her favourite bullfinches. Rose advanced to meet her, and throwing up her veil, discovered to Phoebe the face she so dearly loved : uttering a cry of joy¬ ful surprise, she threw her arms round Miss Delaval, whose heart throbbed with tenderness, at thus beholding the compa¬ nion of her youth as friendly and as af¬ fectionate as ever, " It is my dear, dear Miss Delaval 1" exclaimed Fhœbe ; then glancing her eye at her sable garments, she burst into tears: for a few moments the friends wept on each others bosoms. " Alas !" cried Phœbe, a there is no pleasure without pain, but Goďs will be done. The loss you have sustained is indeed a heavy one; but now that you are come back to us, and that I have a house of my own, I hope you will never leave us, dear Rose, until you are as happily married as I am."
. ** You married, Phcebe !" " Yes," said the blushing girl, as she led her exultingly into the cottage ; " I have been married to young farmer Bris¬ coe these six months, and am the happiest woman living." " Long may you continue so, dearest Phoebe." " When your orders came down to sell the cottage," continued Phcebe, ** I cried myself ill, at the thoughts of it belonging to a stranger; and father was grieved also; so he bought it himself, and all the furni¬ ture, only we wished to conceal it from you, that in case you returned, we might surprise you, by restoring it to you again, if such was your wish." ** I am indeed highly gratified," replied Rose, as she cast her tearful eyes around the parlour, where every thing still retain¬ ed its old position, " that this dear loved habitation should belong to my faithful Phcebe, whose affection is manifested in the care she has bestowed on what once belonged to her childhood's friend."
An unreserved communication of tir- cumstances now took place between them ; and Rose confided to the affectionate bo¬ som of Phcebe, eveiy circumstance that; had transpired since they parted ; not for¬ getting to mention her reasons for having assumed the name of Aylmer, on entering the family of lady Evelina Belgrave. The affection of Phœbe was urgent for her to return to the cottage; but Rose reminded her of the kindness df lady Evelina towards her, when she was in deep distress, and that to leave her now, when her presence* was most wanted. would be to repay her friendship with in¬ gratitude. This silenced the entreaties of Phcebe, who now inquired if she had ever seen the young lord, who used to visit at the cot¬ tage, when the Lodge was formerly inha¬ bited. " I don't think that I should know him again," said Phœbe, ** for it is six years since sir William was at the Lodge,
and he must Ъе greatly improved by this time." ** I have seen him once during my stay with lady Evelina," replied Rose, " and I recollected him immediately; but my change of name prevented his renewing our friendship, had he been so disposed." ** Time makes sad changes in some people," said Phcebe, thoughtlessly ; " and as he is a great man by this time, he may have forgotten the friends he loved so dear¬ ly when a boy." Rose with difficulty repressed the start¬ ing tear, at so mortifying a supposition ; but wishing to change tbe subject, she in¬ quired after the honest Rogers and his fa- mily r . They were well and happy. Rose could not resist the desire of once more embracing the preserver of her life ; and Phcebe, unwilling to lose a moment of her company, proceeded with her to the fisher¬ man's habitation. Rogers was busy mending his nets, at the door of his cottage, While his old dame was employed in getting ready his din-
ner ; and Peggy, who had been the faith¬ ful domestic of Mr. Delaval, was engaged at her wheel. The air of elegance and fashion which the figure of Rose displayed, made these good people imagine that it was some lady of rank from the Lodge, whom Phœbe Briscoe was bringing to their humble dwelling. Drawing aside the crape which had con¬ cealed her features, she asked if they had so soon forgotten her ? but the joyful ex¬ clamations, and the fond caresses, of this honest family, soon convinced her that she was remembered with as much affection as ever. " Ah !" exclaimed Rogers, when inform¬ ed of the present situation of Rose, and her change of name, " I always told my mistress that I was sure you belonged to some great person, by the jewels which sparkled on your neck on the night of the shipwreck." " Yes, and your frock was the finest In-
dia muslin, trimmed with such beautiful lace !" said his wife. " Any body might tell that my master was a person of quality," cried Peggy, *' and not one of your upstart gentry. He was so affable, so kind, that I shall never be able to bear the ways of any one else." " God grant that I may be enabled to reward your attachment, and to render your remaining years comfortable !" said Rose ; " I feel an inspiring hope within me, that seems to say—I shall rise above my present fortunes." " Heaven grant it, for your own sake f " ejaculated the worthy fisherman ; u we shall be sufficiently rewarded in seeing you happy." Peggy now informed Rose that she was the fortunate possessor of her lamb ; that it was the pet of the whole family, whom it followed about like a great dog ; and that it was now in the field with her bro¬ ther, who loved it like a child. VOL. III. d
While she was speaking, the young man entered the cottage with his fleecy companion, whose neck he had adorned with the pink convolvulus which grew wild in the hedges. Rose felt a mingled sensation of pain and rapture, at beholding her dumb fa¬ vourite thus kindly noticed by her hum¬ ble friends. With fondness she loaded it with caresses, patting its snowy sides ; then turned towards young Rogers^ who, with his hat in his hand, stood at a respectful distance, gazing on the elegant young woman, whom he had known from child¬ hood, as she extended towards him her fair hand. He sprang forward, and with an air above his station, respectfully pressed it to his lips; then suddenly dropping it, re¬ tired a few paces. His countenance, which was open and manly, glowed with grati¬ fied pride and affection, as Rose warmly expressed her gratitude for his goodness to her favourite lamb. ** I hope you will permit us, Miss, t<
keep the poor thing," said young Rogers, ** for it has become as natural to us as a child, and I should not like to part with it to any one but yourself. Indeed, sister Peggy talks to it as if it were a child ; it sleeps in her room, and feeds out of her bowl ; and I think it would go nigh to break her heart, if it was taken from her." " J^eep it, for my sake, my worthy friends," replied Miss Delaval ; " for who has so strong a claim to it as yourselves, who have so generously fed anŕ sheltered it during my long absenca It is yours— I cannot leave it in kinder hands; neither would I wholly resign my poor pet into any other persons care." It was with some difficulty that Rose prevailed on these worthy people to let her depart; and she was obliged to assure them, that she would see them again very shortly. Phcebe would have gathered all the flowers in her garden for a nosegay for her beloved Rose, had she not reminded her that they would fade before she could D 2
convey them to the Abbey, as she was engaged to spend the day at the Lodge. " The young lord is not there now, I suppose," said Phcebe, archly. " He is daily expected to visit his bro¬ ther," replied Rose; " and should curi¬ osity lead him here, remember, dear Phœbe, not to betray my secret. 7 have reasons for wishing him not to discover who I am, until we have seen more of each other." Phcebe promised to be on her guard. She had been anxiously wishing for the return of her husband, that she might present him to her dear Rose; and she now heard the well-known tune which he usually whistled as he came within sight of his own happy dwelling. The appearance of the young farmer was highly γ repossessing ; his countenance, glowing with health, was indicative of good humour and affection ; and the ge¬ nerous heart of Rose felt gratified by the prospect of Phœbe's domestic happiness being secure in his hands.
Thoughtfully she retraced the path which led to the park; and though she had overstaid her allotted time, she could not help pausing under the shelter of the spreading oak, at whose root she had been seated, when the cruel Hannah urged on her furious dog to destroy her innocent lamb. Rose, in imagination, beheld all that at that moment had passed—the snowy wool of the bleating sufferer—the hellish laugh of Hannah—her own well- aimed blow, and the intended attack of the enraged dog upon herself—the sudden appearance of her generous friend, which saved her from the incensed animal—his sympathy for her little pet, and his kind attention to its wounds, were still fresh in her memory. Once more she flung her¬ self beneath the sheltering foliage—the locket, his treasured gift, which contained the hair of Edward and of her father, was drawn from her throbbing bosom—she pressed it to her lips, with all the fervency of revived affection. " Oh, my father !" she exclaimed, " par-
don this weakness in your child, if indeed thou art conscious of what is passing in this lower world." Her eyes were sud¬ denly raised to Heaven—she sprang from her grassy seat in blushing confusion—the locket was hastily concealed in her bosom, and she leaned against the tree for sup¬ port, while lord Fortescue, who from a little distance had beheld her emotion, and who from the same cause was equally agi¬ tated, now came forward, and in a hurried voice, expressed his pleasure at seeing her. " I arrived late last night," said he, " or I should have paid my respects at the Abbey; and this morning my sister in¬ formed me, that she expected to enjoy the happiness of your society, as you had pro¬ mised to spend the day with her/' ** I must apologize for not being with her now/' replied Rose, endeavouring to regain lier composure, ** but the fineness of tbe morning tempted me to take a view of the beautiful scenery round the Lodge : it has recalled to my mind the recollections of home, and of friends now lost to me for ever,"
The last words were scarcely audible, yet they did not escape the quick ear of lord Fortescue.—** And I," said he, taking her hand, " am equally affected, dear Miss Aylmer, from the recollection of cir¬ cumstances, which my present visit to the Lodge have brought to my mind, as fresh as if they were the events of yesterday. It is now six years ago, that on this very spot, I had the good fortune to preserve the life of a pet lamb, from the furious attack of an angry dog : I killed the vici¬ ous animal with my gun, just as it was on the point of springing at the throat of a lovely girl, who was the mistress of the lamb I had preserved. The ardent ex¬ pressions of her gratitude, the polite atten¬ tions of her father, were gratifying to my young heart. They resided in a delightful cottage, but a short distance from the Lodge; thither I daily repaired ; the con¬ versation—the manners—the habits of life, all told me that Mr. Delaval had once as¬ sociated with the most polished society. All my leisure hours were spent at the
cottage—they were the happiest I had ever known—But I am intruding, dear Miss Aylmer." " Oh, no, no !" said Rose, '* pray proceed." " I was then a boy of sixteen, and your namesake, Rose, little more than twelve —tall, graceful, and innocent as lovely : I felt for this sweet 'bud of the wilder¬ ness ' all the fond solicitude of a brother, and for her parent, all that respect and ve¬ neration which his virtues inspired." Rose trembled, lest the falling tears should at¬ tract his notice ; but he was too wrapt up in his own thoughts at that moment, to see even her. " Oh that I could but re¬ call some of those blissful hours," exclaimed the young lord, " that I could but live over again the days of my boyhood, when all my hopes, all my affections were con¬ fined within the peaceful cottage ! Short lived w ? as my happiness ; my guardian, sir William Arlingford, jealous of my inti¬ macy with Mr. Delaval, resolved to shorten his visit the succeeding autumn, to which I had fondly looked forward as the revival
of my happiness. Dear Miss Aylmer, you cannot imagine how severe was my disappointment, when on my return the next autumn to the Lodge, I found that our stay was restricted to a fortnight." " I can well believe it, my lord," said Rose, " for in youth we are ill calculated to sustain a disappointment of the heart." * c And mine was of that nature," re¬ plied lord Fortescue ; " for though a boy of seventeen, my heart was more tenderly devoted to the welfare and happiness of my adopted sister, than it can ever feel again. There was a purity of mind, a confiding frankness, that was associated with her affection for me, which never, never will be obliterated from my re¬ membrance." " And yet, my lord, you have allowed five years, you say, to elapse, without in¬ quiring after her welfare," said Rose, while her heart throbbed with secret rapture to find herself thus remembered. u Not so, dear Miss Aylmer ; I corres¬ ponded frequently with her esteemed fa* d 3
ther, until I went abroad, when front some mistake or other* of my address I conjecture, it ceased. As soon as I arrived in England, I wrote to the cottage, but received no answer. Late as it was bet night, I slept not until I had inquired who now resided at the cottage, as I feared my beloved friend had been absent from it for the last two years ; and I am igno¬ rant of any clue that will enable me to discover their present abode. I feel thai I am guilty of great rudeness, dear Miss Aylmer; but I must entreat your pardon, if my attention should offend : your figure is so exactly what I should suppose would be that of Rose Delaval, and your features also so strongly resemble hers, that I can scarce persuade myself that it is not her¬ self I am now addressing/' " You pay ще a compliment, my lord," said Hose, blushing, and agitated at his earnestness of manner. " Ί rue, Miss Aylmer, but you deserve it," replied his lordship. " I have been led to open to you the secrets of my hearts
and I have experienced a pleasure, a gra¬ tification, I little expected, from the silent and kind attention with which you have so patiently listened to my feelings, and for which I sincerely thank you." " Your confidence will be sacred, my lord, to me," said Rose. " I shall not yet relinquish the hope of finding my sweet sister, as I used then to call her," continued his lordship ; " I trust that some of the neighbouring farmers may be able to give me some information respecting her/' " Would it not be more prudent, my lord, to give up altogether a connection, whieh, from the inequality of your births, can never meet the sanction of your friends?** inquired Rose, in a tremulous voice. " Oh ! counsel not so base an action," exclaimed lord Fortescue, warmly. ** Rose Delaval was the first object that awakeu- ed in my young heart a sense of the va¬ lue of existence. To her I am indebted for the knowledge of that powerful charm,
which is to be found in home, in domes¬ tic endearments. Shall I ever forget the thrill of rapture, which ran through my frame on the last night of our meeting ? All had retired to rest at the Lodge, but myself; unable to sleep, I once more re¬ traced the path whieh led to the abode of Mr. Delaval. The bright beams of the moon played upon the tranquil bosom of the ocean, while the nightingale, perched on the tall branches of a distant elm, poured forth his song of love to attract his mate. My sweet Rose was restless as myself; from her window she beheld me ; she came down ; I reentered the hospitable mansion of her father, who slumbered peacefully above us. The night, though bright, was cold ; I folded my young love within my cloak, and pressed her close to my heart, as pure, as guileless as her own. And can I forget those moments of inno¬ cent delight ? Oh, never—never will the remembrance be effaced from my mind of that night's delicious meeting· The kiss of fond affection seems yet to tremble
on my lips, and I still seem to hear the low sweet voice, which promised all I wished, and more than I had dared to ask. Yes, dearest Rose, if thou art still in ex¬ istence, and thy heart beats true to its first impulse of affection, I will still claim thy promise to be mine." Lord Fortes¬ cue paused—his countenance glowed with rapture, which was quickly succeeded by melancholy.—." I am too sanguine, I feel that I am, dear Miss Aylmer ; Rose may still exist, but not fjr me. Faint must have been the impression I then made on her affectionate and grateful heart—that heart may now be devoted to another, and I may be wholly forgotten." - " That is improbable," said Rose, faint¬ ly ; " a heart that is truly grateful, will always remember with tenderness its ear¬ ly friendships." They now approached the Lodge, when Olivia received, with open arms, her bride's-maid. Young and ardent in her attachments, Mrs. Fortescue felt a sincere regard for Rose Delaval, which was
strengthened by the high opinion enter¬ tained of her by lord Rochdale, who was constantly expatiating upon her merits.-*· " Indeed, my dear girl," said Mrs. Fortes¬ cue, " if I did not love you very dearly, I should be half inclined to be jealous ; for when my father comes to see us, he sel¬ dom talks of any one else but Miss Ayl¬ mer ; you are an example to me for every thing. It b— * Who can dance like Miss Aylmer ? where will you find a voice so powerful, and yet so sweet in all its tones, as Miss Aylmeťs ? then for gentleness of temper, and all the endearing little atten¬ tions which render home so delightful, no one can bestow them like Rose Aylmer/ In short, my dear, î verily believe my fa¬ ther has it in contemplation to make you an offer of his hand, for I am certain you already possess his heart." " He hinted as much to me," cried lord Fortescue, glancing an inquiring look to¬ wards Rose. " I confess my guardian has an excellent taste." " His lordship, if you remember," said
Rose, with embarrassment, as she appealed to Mrs. Fortescue, " informed us of his partiality for the sister of the late lord Fortescue, who married and went abroad." " True," exclaimed Henry ; " you are right, my fair friend; and I really believe, that my guardian was seriously attached to my aunt. He stu! possesses her mini¬ ature, which my father presented to him in his dying moments, and which he still preserves with religious care, for the sake of the original and the donor. I have seen the picture. My poor aunt must have been very beautiful; and I have often wished to learn what became of her." ** Do you perceive the likeness, Henry, to my friend ?" inquired his young wife. ** I have never been favoured with a sight of İt. My father's peculiar notions of educating daughters excluded me from his confidence." " There is certainly a resemblance," re¬ plied Henry, ** particularly about the eyes and mouth ; but my guardian per¬ sists that every feature is strikingly like
those of Miss Aylmer ; and as he is the best judge, I did not think proper to con¬ tradict him." " I sliould like to see the picture," said Olivia ; " and if I did but know in what secure place my father keeps it, I think I should be tempted- -----" " Like Eve, to gratify your cu r "y, my love," said her husband, smiL jn her affectionately. " Now, as I should not exactly like ray wife to be accused of picking locks or breaking open cabinets, I will endeavour to get you a sight of this valuable picture, without your run¬ ning such a risk." How swiftly pass the hours in the society of those we love ! It is then that we are unconscious of the length of time : a day seems but as an hour—so rapid fly the moments in the presence of a beloved object. Rose thought only of the tenderness with which lord Fortescue had men¬ tioned his cottage friends. It was con¬ soling—-it was delightful to be thus re-
membered, after the lapse of several years. Rose recollected the packet, and the dying injunction of her father. She was anxious to learn the contents, yet she felt timid in presenting it herself to her noble friend; it would seem like obtruding herself on his notice ; and would it not be indelicate, after the conversation of the morning?—" I will not hurrv the disco- very," thought Rose : ** the twelvemonth is not yet expired, which my dear father named for the opening of the packet; and ere then, chance may effect what I hesi¬ tate to perform."
CHAP. IV. Although lord Rochdale's system of education was a bad one, it had not in¬ jured either the temper or the heart of his daughter, who was a general favourite at the Abbey. The ride from thence to
the Lodge was beautifully diversified by hill and dale, high towering woods, and a broad expanse of ocean, on whose bosom the bulwarks of England triumphantly rode secure. The health of lady Evelina appeared to improve ; her countenance wore an air of cheerful tranquillity ; and though she would not accompany her be¬ loved Marian to the ruins, yet she wil¬ lingly consented to take a seat in the po¬ ney-chaise, which her friend used to drive through the Abbey park, to that of the Lodge, and from thence sometimes along the coast, followed by some of the gentle¬ men on horseback. Dashwood, though constant in his at¬ tentions to the wife of bis friend, was too great an adept in hypocrisy, to betray his feelings before any of the party. From the habit of being so constantly her com¬ panion, he soon found that he was seriously attached to her ladyship ; and he at length became surprised at the nature and strength of his own feelings. He had heard, for what can remain a secret in the great
world, that the earl and countess of Dun¬ bar had privately quitted England, and that lady Susan had accompanied them; but this intelligence not coming direct from the parents of his unfortunate wife, captain Dashwood did not feel himself called upon to notice. All the emotion which this intelligence occasioned, was a desire to learn the name of the man who had done him the favour to release him from the presence of a woman he despis¬ ed. Feeling for lady Susan no other sen¬ timent than contempt, captain Dashwood could not, however, repress his anxious curiosity to discover the partner of heir flight ; and knowing the weakness of her mind, it seemed strange, that the name of her seducer should have been so long con¬ cealed. There were moments when this curiosity became painful : a seeming mys¬ tery hung over her return to the parental roof : the secrecy preserved as to tbe per¬ son who had deluded her from the path of virtue, and the privacy also of the fa- mily's departure to a foreign country,
were circumstances that would occasion¬ ally obtrude on his mind. From these harassing reflections, he would fly to the society of lady Evelina : her innocent smile, her gentle friendship, soothed the disorder of his feelings; and as he really loved her with an energy wdiich he had never felt before, he looked forward to the possession of her person and her af¬ fection, as the summit of all earthly happi¬ ness. The attachment which captain Dash¬ wood, villain as he was, continued to che¬ rish secretly for lady Evelina, made him anxiously careful of her health and tran¬ quillity. He kept a constant guard over his looks and words, lest they should prematurely betray to her the nature of his regard. He had already, as he fondly hoped, effected his purpose of weakening her confidence and esteem for the colonel ; and he only awaited her recovery from her confinement, to strike the final blow which would for ever separate her from her husband ; and this husband was the
friend of his bosom! the man who, though void of principle himself, had nevertheless some apparent claim upon his honour, and whose house and person were ever open to him. Friendship! thou plant of celestial growth, how often, in our passage through the garden of this world, do we stay to pluck a bright, but poison¬ ous weed, and call it by thy sacred name ! A month had already elapsed, during which time Marian had frequently the consolation of hearing from Arlingford, under cover to Mary Dennis. He was still at Judith's comfortable little cottage, whose affectionate zeal continued to an¬ ticipate his wants ; but his sole happiness was derived from the contemplation of Marian's dear-loved miniature; it was his companion day and night, the only solace of his solitary hours.—" Yet to be more actively employed would now be fruitless/' said he ; " my brother is much worse, and confined wholly to his cham¬ ber. I will not be the hypocrite to affect a sorrow I cannot feel. In truth, my
adored Marian ! the death of this unkind, and unjustly-prejudiced relation, will not grieve me half as much as would that of Judith's Carlo, The one is a grateful and affectionate friend, though a mute one; the other, a proud and illiberal fellow-crea*. ture, whose malice will extend beyond the grave; for he has taken care that not a shilling more than what he cannot help, shall devolve to me with the title." This intelligence was of lHtle import to Marian, who loved the unjustly persecuted Henry for himself alone. Her own forn tune was entirely at her own disposal ; and she generously determined, that Arling¬ ford, when her husband, should never feel the loss of his uncle's promised wealth. In obedience to the wish of him, whom she fondly regarded as her future partner, Marian had accustomed herself to trans¬ mit to him constantly the usual occur¬ rences of each day, well knowing that to a lover, circumstances of the most trifling nature are regarded as important. One thing however she had felt a reluctance
to communicate, lest it should occasion Henry uneasiness; yet true to her pro¬ mise, she just carelessly r noticed, as a post¬ script to her letter, that major Campbell had paid a visit to the Abbey, of business she imagined, for he saw no one but colo¬ nel Belgrave, with whom he remained about two hours, and then departed, as Dennis conjectured, in anger. Marian made no comment upon the singularity of his visit being confined to the colonel, though from his former habits of intimacy with the family, lady Evelina could not help remarking, that his conduct was unkind. " He is hard pressed for money at this moment," said the colonel, ** and as I am somewhat his debtor, the purport of his hasty visit was on that business ; he did not however forget to leave his compli¬ ments to all the ladies," glancing his eyes towards Marian. " We are obliged to him for his polite remembrance," cried lady Evelina. " You forget, my dear," replied the colonel, " that the situation of a discarded
lover is not the most enviable ; and unless he can temper down his feelings to the tranquillity of friendship, I think he is prudent to abstain from the sight of what causes his misery." Marian blushed at feeling that this was intended.for herself. Not wishing to en¬ ter on the subject, which always gave her pain, she retired to her chamber, with the intention of finishing a letter she had begun to Henry. A few days after the visit of major Campbell, Marian, accompanied by the faithful Mary, walked through the Abbey park to the cottage of a poor widow wo¬ man, whose eldest boy had fallen from the branch of a tree, and broke his leg. The industry of the mother supported an in¬ fant family of five children ; but now all her attention was devoted to her poor boy, whose sufferings had brought on a raging fever, which threatened to termi¬ nate his existence. Marian was particularly fond of chil¬ dren, and the rosy cheeks, and clean
healthy looks of the widow's family, had attracted her notice; she had frequently strolled from the ruins through the home park to the cottage, which was not far dis-» tant from the porters lodge; and as she never went empty handed, the little ur* chins hailed her as their " good lady," and ran, with shoeless feet, along the path, all eager to drop the first curtsey, and receive their pence, which they regularly took back to their "mammy." The frock of many patches, the clean round face, and smooth combed hair, prepossessed Marian highly in favour of the mother ; and one morning, after bestowing her usual gift of a penny to each, she desired them to shew her to their mother's dwelling. The inte¬ rior of this humble tenement was so per¬ fectly clean and tidy, that Marian seated herself on one of the wooden chairs by the side of the widow, whom she insisted upon remaining at her wheel, saying, with her accustomed sweetness, ** I must not make you idle, for I intend to look in yol. m. E
upon you frequently, if I find that I do not disturb you from your work." The smile that accompanied these words, spoke comfort to the mother, and gave promise of a friend. Marian repeated her visits at different hours, tliat she might see her when not expected; and as she always found her hard at work, and always clean, she con¬ sidered her a fit object of her benevolence. Mary Dennis was accordingly summoned, whose heart never failed to beat in unison with the charitable feelings of her mis¬ tress ; and she was now commissioned to go to the cottage, and take an accurate sur¬ vey of its contents, that she might pro¬ cure from the neighbouring town what¬ ever article was wanting to contribute to its comforts.—" And, my dear Mary," said Marian Gorden, " let me have the delightful satisfaction of seeing all my lit¬ tle rosy laughing friends entirely new clad, not forgetting shoes, by next week; 1 am impatient to hear their simple, but natural, expressions of gratitude, joined to their
admiration of what they will consider their finery." Mary was impatient also to begin and to finish the work of benevolence, for Marian was to abstain from her visits, un¬ til every thing was properly arranged in the cottage; but her little pensioners were still to receive their accustomed bounty. At length Sunday came, and Marian's generous heart throbbed with pleasure, on entering the sacred edifice of public wor¬ ship, to behold the poor widow, and her five children, clad in their new apparel, now making as respectable an appearance as those of their richer neighbours. They curtsied repeatedly, as she was passing to her seat with blushing haste, for Marian's charity was not that of ostentatious shew ; she wished to do good in secret, but in this instance it was impossible. The tearful eyes of the widow, the delighted counte¬ nances of the children, their half sup¬ pressed low murmuring whispers, betrayed the fair object of their gratitude, who with e 2
bended knee and upraised hands, poured forth her thanks to him, who had blessed her with the ample means of distributing to the unfortunate the comforts of life. On the Monday, Marian allowed her¬ self the luxury of beholding the improved state of the cottage. As soon as she was perceived by the children, they all flew, with breathless haste, to thank the " good lady" for her presents; wbo, with the youngest in her arms, a pretty little girl, about a year and a half old, and one on each side, followed the footsteps of the two elder children to their home. The chair was instantly uncovered, and placed ready for the " good lady ;" for none of the family either made use of it themselves, or allowed any other person to have the high honour of sitting in her seat. The eldest, and the only boy, who was not more than seven years old, went into their little garden, to gather the t( good lady" a posy, the rest following-—all eager to bring back some token of their gratitude, which was more readily expressed than
that of their poor mother, who vainly at¬ tempted to describe the feelings of her overcharged heart. " My good woman," said Marian, still holding the smiling baby in her lap, ** do not distress yourself and me ; I know all that you would say: tell me therefore, with truth, are all your little wants sup¬ plied?—have you every thing requisite for your use, and that of your children ? —is there any thing you wish for more ?" " Nothing, dear lady," replied the grate¬ ful cottager: " your benevolence has sup¬ plied me with every thing that money could purchase ; and I should be quite happy, if I could but hear that poor James was still alive, and that he forgave me." " And who is poor James?" ss Ah, madam ! I should like to tell you, if you would not think me trouble¬ some. I feel that I could say any thing to your ladyship, and perhaps you might put me in the way of hearing some ti¬ dings of James/' " Speak freely, Sara," said Marian Gor-
den, " and be assured of my inclination to serve you, if in my power." " I know you are all goodness," replied the widow, " and since you bid me, I will speak freely. This day, ten years ago— ah ! I shall never forget it—I was just eighteen, and the week following I was to have been married to the son of an ho¬ nest farmer, who had courted me for nearly three years. My parents were not so well off in the world as his, and so we used to meet by stealth ; for his mother was a proud woman, and wanted James to marry a cousin of his, who had money. I, alas ! had none ; but I loved James, and I would have worked hard to have made up for the want of gold. " So, as I -was saying, my lady, we were to have been married privately the week after my birthday. Every thing was agreed on between us, and even the ring was bought and given to me. But we were not to come together : his mother found out his intention, and James was told never to see me again, unless he
wished to bring down upon his head his mother's curse. He wrote, and told me what had passed, promised to love me for ever, and advised that our marriage should be delayed, as his mother might be brought to hear reason in a little time. " My poor father, God rest his soul ! never liked the match ; and he now swore that I should never enter his doors, unless I gave up all thoughts of James Harlow. Ah, my lady ! what was I to do ? I thought my heart would break, when I found that I must either give up my pa¬ rents, or my James. I lay all night think¬ ing what I should do, and I prayed to God to direct me for the best. I remem¬ bered how good and kind my father and mother had always been, and I said to myself—* Can I ever dare ask the blessing of Heaven, if I go leave them in their old age, and for the love of a stranger ?' So, my lady, I rose next morning, and I wrote just two lines—for I dared not trust myself to say more—to James, and I bade Ьщ obey his mother, as I should my fa-
ther ; and I told him we must part for ever, and to think no more about me. ** So the next day, my lady, which is this day ten years ago, I got up with a heavy heart, for I had cried all night, and mother said— ť Sara, thou looks t very bad, my girl ; if thou takes on so, thou wilt break my heart/ Just then I heard the beat of a drum, and the sound of music. Mother went to the door to look ; but I sat down, for my eyes were full of tears. I heard mother scream, and then I looked up; two men came into the room, with the colours in their hats; the first was James Harlow." The sobs of the widow proved the fide¬ lity of her attachment. At length she cleared her voice.—" I beg pardon, my lady, but I think I see him now—so pale, so deathly.—* Sara/ said he, and he took my hand—·* Sara, this is your w T ork ; but I will not reproach you : may you be happy, though we never meet again ! God bless you, Sara!—God bless you!' He rushed out of the house, and I fell in poor
mother's arms, who for a long while thought I was dead. " More wretched than ever, I yet kept on working for father and mother, but nothing seemed to prosper after poor James was gone. A year passed away, and we got poorer and poorer, and father talked of applying to the parish. This I knew would be his death ; so r as I cared not what became of myself, I agreed to marry Ralph Gay ton, the miller; for he was worth money, and he promised that my parents should live with us at the mill. * I can never be happy again/ thought I, * but I can make them happy ;' so, my lady, I became the wife of Gay ton." " You did your duty as a daughter, Sara," said Miss Gorden, " and Heaven will reward you." " Alas ! my lady, I fear I have been sadly wicked ; for though I strove ha»- л + o forget poor James, yet he would co..ie across my mind, in spite of myself. Father and mother soon died ; things went cross, E 3
and Ralph took to drinking, which made him neglect his business; yet he never spoke an angry word to me, but always said I was a good wife and mother ; and that, my lady r , is a consolation to me, now that he is dead and gone/' " How long have you been a widow, Sara?" inquired Marian Gorden. " Fourteen months come midsummer," replied the poor woman, wiping the tears from off her cheek. " Äly little Sophy was about four months old when her fa¬ ther died. I was left with five of them, my lady ; and when all was sold, and the debts paid, I had but two pounds to begin the world again with, as I may say. How¬ ever, I found a friend in Air. Benson, the colonel's steward; he let me have the cot¬ tage rent free for the first half year, and he assisted me with a trifle towards get¬ ting the bits of things about me, which you saw when you first came to the cot¬ tage. Thank God, I have, by spinning late and early, managed to pay back some of the money, and I know he will not be
very hard upon пае for the rest. He is a good gentleman, my lady, and Heaven will bless him fcr his kindness to the wi¬ dow and the fatherless." * I will settle with Mr. Benson for the year's rent, and for what you still owe Juin. —No thanks, Sara." But Sara could not be restrained from giving vent to her feelings ; she sunk on her knees before Marian, and bathing her hand with tears of grateful rapture, ex¬ claimed—" Sure thou art some angel sent by Providence, to save me and my babes from want and misery. Oh, my lady ! may God bless and reward you, and all those you love, with blessings here and hereafter !" Marian was affected by the artless gra¬ titude of the poor widow. She begged { her to rise, and to moderate her joy, as¬ suring her, that if she continued to be in¬ dustrious, and keep her children as she had hitherto done, she should never want α friend to assist her exertions in bringing up her family to be good Christians, and
useful members of society. Marian now gave the slumbering infant to its mother, and then taking out her pocketbook, made a memorandum of the year in which James Harlow enlisted, and of his regi¬ ment. " I think I shall be able to find out if he still lives," said Marian, " and where he now is. That is what you wish to learn— is it not, Sara ?" " That is all, my lady," replied the wi¬ dow, modestly; 4i I think I should be quite happy now, if I could but hear that James was well, and that he forgave me." Marian thought it possible, but not very probable, that this was all that Sara wish¬ ed to know respecting the object of her first and dearest affection. It was not un¬ natural in a woman of eight-and-twenty, although burthened with five children to maintain, if her heart still clung to the re¬ membrance of him who was the object of its free choice ; and Marian enjoyed in imagination the intelligence that Harlow
still existed, and that he was free to ac¬ cept the hand of his Sara. " I will purchase his discharge," said Marian Gorden, as. she walked thought¬ fully through the Abbey park ; " he shall return to his native village, and to his pa¬ ternal farm. I will bestow on the indus¬ trious Sara a marriage portion, worthy his acceptance ; and her children shall be pro¬ vided for, as soon as they are able to work for themselves. How exquisite will be my feelings, in reuniting these faithful and affectionate lovers, after ten years painful separation ! Ob, thou blest Father of the Universe!" continued Marian, with holy fervour, ** may I never forget that it is to thee alone, I am indebted for the posses¬ sion of that wealth which enables me to dispense happiness to others." On her return to the Abbey, Marian applied to colonel Belgrave, who wrote off immediately to his agent in London, who, by inquiring at the War-Office, could as¬ certain if Harlow still lived ; and in case of his being single, he was requested to
procure his discharge, and to furnish him with the means of returning respectably to the place of his birth ; requesting bina to jrøke Belgrave Abbey his first place of «all How anxiously did the benevolent Ma- W await the wished-for communication ! how fervently did she pray that it migbjt be favourable to her intended plan ! while Mary Dennis, the humble but dear loved Mary, felt nearly as much impatience as her lady for the arrival of the letter. During this interval of time, major Campbell unexpectedly made his appear¬ ance at the Abbey, and demanded of the colonel the payment of his bond. Belgrave was wholly unprepared for this event ; concealing his chagrin, he re¬ proached the major for his readiness in re¬ linquishing so great a prize as Marian Gorden.-^-" There was a time, major," said he, gaily, " when a first repulse would have had no other effect upon us soldiers, than ίο increase our ardour for another aad more decisive attack. I still believe,
that the heart of Marian is disengaged««*. in time it might surrender, had you but patience to persevere." " I have neither time nor inclination to continue the slave of a woman's caprices," replied Campbell, haughtily ; " though I confess that my love for Marian Gorden is as strong as ever." " Opportunity is a soldier's motto," cried Belgrave, * ч and it is the business of a skilful general, never to let one escape him." " I think I understand you, colonel," said the major; " willyou assist me?" " Gratitude will prevent my assisting you," said Belgrave; " but I will 1акэ care you shall not meet with any obstruc¬ tion." Campbell proudly withdrew, muttering as he passed to his carriage—" Gratitude ! the gratitude of a gamester and a liber¬ tine!" Martin, the confidential servant of the colonel, met him in the hall·-«- " Your master," said he, with a sneer, " lias been studying, I suppose, in the school of
reform, and his first lesson has been on gratitude/' Martin smiled ; and the major drove from the door, too much offended to seek an interview with the ladies of the family, or to encounter another meeting with a man, whom in his heart he now secretly despised.
After the departure of major Campbell from the Abbey, Marian Gorden, as we have before noticed, summoned Mary to accompany her to the cottage, and to take with her some little delicacies, which she knew would be serviceable to the poor child, in the high state of his fever. The sultriness of the day made Marian prefer crossing the lake, and passing through her favourite ruins, as it considerably shorten-
ed the distance, which was an object to Mary with her basket. They stopped for a iew T minutes to rest, within the shelter of the ruin, and to de¬ posit fresh food for the robins. Mary re¬ plenished their saucers with clean water, and then seated herself by the side of her mistress, to watch their descent from the high arched roof, and to listen to their melodious song of thanks. While Mary was descanting on the beauty and magnificence of the chapels in all the Catholic countries she had seen, the number of their statues, and the rich¬ ness of their ornaments, her mistress was attentively gazing on a distant monument near the door of the building, which led into that part of the park they were to cross, in their way to Sara's dwelling. She felt convinced that she had seen the tall shadow of a man against the wall, and as her eyes continued fixed, she saw some one dart from behind the monument to¬ wards the door, with an evident wish not to be observed.
As Mary had imbibed many of the su¬ perstitious prejudices of the unenlighten¬ ed Catholics, Marian forbore to alarm her, by noticing what she had seen ; but rising hastily, she, with a curiosity awakened by the strangeness of the circumstance, hur¬ ried Mary to proceed on their w T alk. When they were outside the ruin, Ma¬ rian naturally expected to catch a glimpse of the intruder ; but she was disappointed ; and, lost in fruitless conjecture, she pro¬ ceeded in sibnce to the cottage. For a week, the life of Sara's only boy was doubtful ; during which time Marian was her daily visitor, sometimes reading, sometimes repeating' amusing stories, to sooth the pains of the patient sufferer, who never refused to take his médecine from the hand of the ** good lady ;" she was his benefactress, his guardian angel, and if he lived to grow a man, he was to be her head gardener. " And why a gardener, Billy ?" inquired Mary Dennis. " Because then I shall have lots of such
beautiful flowers to make a posy of every morning ; and I will give them to my dear, dear good lady myself." This was the summit of poor Billy's am¬ bition ; and as he was as fond of flowers as herselft Marian took care that the next morning he should have some greenhouse plants to ornament his chamber, which he was told he was to take care of for his dear good lady. Although JMarian Gorden had been in the habit of strolling alone to Sara's cot¬ tage, yet, since the illness of the child, she had always been attended by Mary ; and, thus protected, she had frequently staid with the invalid, until the moonbeams lit them home. Once or twice she had start¬ ed, on passing near the ruins, from ■$ sup¬ position that she beheld the same figure as before ; but, ashamed of such childish fears, she tried to overcome them, without awakening those of her companion. One evening, in particular, Marian felt convinced that her movements were watched. It was later than usual wben
they quitted her little charge, who had sat up for the first time since his accident. The poor boy appeared so happy, and felt so grateful for the kindness he had receiv¬ ed, that Marian had lengthened her visit, until it was dusk; and half afraid, but un¬ willing to confess it, she hurried through the park, casting an anxious look occa¬ sionally on the path they left behind. A- gain Marian beheld the same tall figure gliding through the trees, and then dis¬ appear within the ruins. Mary beheld it also ; and though she would fearlessly have faced a robber, yet, at the idea of a ghost, Mary's teeth began to chatter, and Marian, as she held her arm, felt it tremble. ** Do you believe in spirits, Miss Ma¬ rian ?" whispered the wife of Dennis. " Why, dear Mary ?" " As sure as I live, I saw one just now rise out of the ground, and make for the ruins. Lord keep us ! I should not wonder if it was the ghost of some great lord, who was murdered, and pei haps buried secretly
under one of the trees that grow near the ruins. Are you afraid, Miss Marian ?" " Not of the dead, Mary. But why do you walk so slow ?" " Do you call it slow, Miss ? I should be sorry to keep up this pace for another half-mile. Why, there is the Abbey." " Thank Heaven !" cried Marian, al¬ most breathless with apprehension. " Thank Heaven, we are safe !" said Mary; " if I was put on my oath, I am sure we have seen the ghost of some poor murdered creature. I hope this will be the last time, Miss Marian, you will stay out so late." Marian resolved that it should be the last time she would ever expose herself to such alarms, and was proceeding to her chamber, when colonel Belgrave met her. The paleness of her looks seemed to awaken his kindness; taking her hand, he inquired if she had seen any one to alarm her. " Wiio should I see ?" replied Marian, with quickness.
u I know not," said he ; " but ladies are subject to imaginary fears ; however, î would not advise you to remain so late another evening. Where there is game, there will always be poachers." Marian would have taken but little no¬ tice of this speech, had not Mary remark¬ ed, that the colonel had been as great a poacher as anybody in his time ; and ifall was true that was said of him, he was so still. <É What do you think, Mary, was the colonel's meaning ? what game did he allude to ?" " Why, to my way of thinking," said Mary, with additional self-importance, from the question of her lady, " to my way of thinking, Miss Marian, the colonel meant that you might be run away witb, for I am sure you are the finest game up¬ on his manor." Marian forced a smile at this observa¬ tion of Mary's, yet she could not help feeling uncomfortable, as tlie idea of the figure in the ruins returned to her memo-
ry. She now recollected the warning of madame —** Beware of the tartan ;" and she resolved to act with more caution for the future, restricting her visits to the morning part of the day. In order to di¬ vert her thoughts from unpleasant sub¬ jects, ISlarian, on retiring for the night, sat down to reperuse the last letter of Henry Arlingford. The tenderness of his expressions, and his fond anticipations of future happiness, soothed her spirits to repose; when a gontle tap at her chamber door again awakened her fears. She lis¬ tened—it w r as repeated—perhaps it was Rose come to chat with her, after reading lady Evelina to sleep. She was on tlie point of opening the door, when she per¬ ceived a paper pushed underneath it, which contained these lines— *' A friend to the most amiable of her sex, now cautions her to be on her guard. Avoid the chapel ruins, and abstain from evening walks. Go not alone, for danger is near. Where there is game, there will be poachers. Be prudent, and fear not.
a friend is at hand, who, at the hazard of life, will protect you." " There must be danger hovering over me," thought Marian, *' else why this friendly warning?" The hand writing was that of a man in humble life, and wholly unknown to her ; yet she determined to abide by the caution his note contained. After perplexing herself with various con¬ jectures, Marian at length yielded with reluctance to the supposition, that if any actual danger menaced her peace, it must proceed from her discarded lover and countryman. Bitterly did it pain her to suppose, tbat treachery and deceit could find a place in the breast of major Camp¬ bell ; yet he was the only one of her ad« mirers, to whom the caution of madame was applicable ; and his recent visit to the Abbey, without seeing any one but colo¬ nel Belgrave, seemed to imply that his re¬ sentful feelings towards herself were still alive. " Merciful Providence, protect me !" cried Marian, recollecting now for the
first time, the unpaid bond of the colonel, and his unprincipled character, " merciful Providence ! protect and save me from the power of these bad men, who would not scruple perhaps to sacrifice me to their sordid interest." After imploring fervent¬ ly the divine protection, Marian felt more composed, and tinowing herself on her bed, enjoyed the comfort of refreshing sleep. The next morning, after breakfast, Ma¬ ry Dennis was dispatched to inquire after the health of little Billy. Rose Delaval was engaged to pass the day at the Lodge; and Marian felt pleased to supply her place with her beloved Evelina. A letter had arrived from the colonel's agent in London, a few days before, with the gra¬ tifying intelligence that James Harlow was living, and then with his regiment in town. Some difficulty had attended the procuring of his discharge ; but he was at iength free, and would reach the Abbey r that week. The latter part of this infor- VOL. III. f
mation Marian had not communicated to the widow; she merely told her that James was living, and unmarried ; reserv¬ ing for his arrival, the most delightful part of the news. It was a day of happiness to Marian Gorden, for she had passed it with her childhood's friend, and both had enjoyed the luxury of talking over the scenes of their youth, unrestrained by the presence of others, as all the gentlemen were dining at the Lodge, to celebrate the natal day of lord Rochdale. The evening was un¬ commonly beautiful, and the friends were watching the alternate changes of the many-coloured clouds, as the sun slowly descended in the western sky, tinging the broad expanse of the distant lake with his golden rays, which, illuminating the win¬ dows of the chapel ruins, gave a grand ap¬ pearance to the landscape. The entrance of a servant called off their attention : a man, who had the ap¬ pearance of a soldier, wasin the hall, in-
quiring for Miss Gorden. —" It is James Harlow !" cried Marian. Lady Evelina, who was acquainted with the story, desired the servant to con¬ duct him to the drawing-room. James now made his appearance ; he was a tall, handsome-looking man, about thirty years of age ; and though dressed in a good plain suit of clothes, yet his air and countenance bespoke the brave sol¬ dier, who had seen and had fought many a battle. Respectfully advancing towards Marian Gorden, he expressed his grateful acknowledgments for her goodness; and hoped he should not offend, if he asked the reason of her selecting him as the ob¬ ject of her bounty ? " My friend," replied Marian, with an eiieoiiraging look and voice, (6 1 am my¬ self a soldier's daughter, and consequently feel an interest in the welfare and happi¬ ness of every brave man, who is the de¬ fender of his king and country. Since I have resided near your native village, I F 2
have heard the story of your early dis¬ appointment. I know, and have be¬ friended, the object of your youthful at¬ tachment,"—the countenance of the sol¬ dier became agitated—'* she was worthy your affection ; and the sacrifice she made of her own happiness, to procure the com¬ forts of life for her aged parents, ought to inspire you with respect, not resentment, for her conduct." Harlow tried to speak, but in vain ; he passed his hand across his sun-burnt face, to conceal the starting tear of unsubdued affection. " From herself I learnt the story of your mutual sufferings. She is now a widow, with five helpless infants." 6í í will work to maintain the children of Sara!" exclaimed the soldier: then suddenly checking himself, he said, in a mournful voice^—" but perhaps she has forgotten James." " No, my honest friend," cried Marian, eagerly, " Sara has not, nor ever will for¬ get the object of her first affections. Con-
vinced of this, from her anxiety to learn if you yet lived, I determined, unknown to her, to procure your discharge, that, if you were single, and still loved her, I might have the happiness of re-uniting you." The soldier looked at her for a mo¬ ment, and then, unable to command his feelings, dropped on one knee, and, taking her hand, pressed it respectfully to his hps. Marian felt it moistened by his tears, and affected herself by his emotion, she suffered him to retain it, saying, with a voice of heavenly sweetness—** Constancy like yours deserves to be rewarded ; and the worthy, industrious Sara will recom¬ pense you for all your past toils and vexa¬ tions. Her little family shall not be a burthen to you ; I will provide for them ; and Sara shall bring with her, what will set poverty at defiance/' " Heaven bless and reward you, ma¬ dam !" exclaimed the soldier, in an agi- tated voice ; " I little thought, as I was
journeying homeward, and wondering aH the while upon the reason of your goon* ness towards a stranger, that I should be made so happy as I now am." Then looking first at lady Evelina, and then at Marian Gorden, he added—** Will you not condescend to go with me to Sara's dwelling, that you may behold our mu¬ tual happiness, and receive our mutual thanks, for being the means of once more re-uniting two faithful hearts? for though Sara married another, yet I know that her heart was mine all the while." Marian sprang from her seat, equally anxious to be the first to break the news of his arrival to Sara. *' Will you not take a servant with you ?" said lady Evelina. " No, my dear friend," replied Miss Gorden ; " my stay will be very short ; and this worthy man will be sufficient protection." " Fear nothing, Miss," cried the sol¬ dier ; " while I am with you, James Har-
low will lose his life, but what he will guide you in safety to those you love." He cast a look, full of meaning, to« wards Marian, as he uttered these words ; but she, supposing they alluded to lady Evelina, turned, and embraced her friend ; then proceeded to the habitation of Sara. An absence of ten years had not effaced from the mind of the soldier the most trifling spot of ground in his native vil¬ lage. The park, the ruined chapel, had all been frequented by him and Sara, in the days of their youthful courtship; and as he passed onward, his awakened recol¬ lections rekindled in his breast all his for¬ mer passion, which he, with difficulty, repressed in the presence of his superior. At length nature overcame respect; and stopping opposite a little dell, near the park gate, which was crowned with honey¬ suckle and wild roses, he gazed on it with tearful eyes.—** It was here," said he, ** that Sara and I seated ourselves, the evening before my mother discovered our intended marriage. We had been walk-
ing through the park, up to the abbey, and Sara was tired. Ah, it was just on that little mound that I spread my ker¬ chief for her to sit on, while I gathered the blossoms of the woodbine, and placed them round her straw hat ; the moon shone bright upon her smiling face, and I thought she never looked so handsome. I pressed her to my heart, little thinking it was for the last time, or that before that day twelvemonth, she would be the wife of another." " Think not of the past, my worthy fellow," said Marian, " but think only of the future. Sara is again free to receive your hand; and she will not make the worse wife, for being so long separated from the object of her affections/' " I beg pardon, madam ; but I had al¬ most forgotten, when I saw that dell, that you were near." '* I can excuse you," replied Marian, smiling sweetly on the confused soldier. " I thought your ladyship would for¬ give me/' said Harlow : " the mistakes
óf a lover are easily excused by those who love dearly and truly themselves." . Marian looked surprised ; yet this was uttered in a tone so full of respect, that she could not feel offended. He was a soldier, and had served in the same regi¬ ment with Henry Arlingford ; yet how could he know any thing of their attach¬ ment? The white cottage of Sara was now in sight ; she pointed it out to James, and then entered first, to apprize her of his return. Sara was sitting at her wheel, with all her children around her; and little Billy was placed on two chairs, supported by pillows, while his eldest sister was reading one of the volumes of Miss Edge- worth's Tales for Youth, which Marian Gorden had given to him.—"-Well, Sara," exclaimed our amiable heroine, " I have heard fresh news of James Harlow,"— [Sara stopped her wheel]—** He has got his discharge, and is returning to his na¬ tive village."—[Sara's cheek became alter¬ nate red and pale.]—" Nay, I sliould not F 3
be surprised if he was here this evening. 5 * Sara rose—came forward a few steps; then retreated to her seat, and hiding her face with her apron, sobbed aloud. ** Why, Sara, what is tbe matter with you, my good woman ? I thought to give you pleasure, instead of pain. Are you not glad to hear that James Harlow is well, and single, and on the point of re* turning to his native place ?" " Oh yes, yes, my dear lady, I am glad —I am happy, indeed I am, to hear of his welfare ! but 1 shall never be able to look him in the face. He can never forgive me-—no, never." 44 Yes, but he can though, Sara," cried James, rushing into the cottage, and catching her in his arms : ** James Наь low can both forgive and love you as dearly as ever." Poor Sara hid her face in his bosom, while James fondly kissed off her tears, and telling her to be comforted, for that he would never reproach her, swore that nothing but death should now divide
them ; then snatching up the children, he embraced them alternately.—" They are your children, Sara, and I will be a father to them : we will both work to support them, and we shall be as happy as the days are long." Again he kissed the moist cheek of Sara.—" Thou art not quite so blooming, nor so plump, ray poor girl, as when we parted ; but never mind ; thou shalt not work quite so hard now I'm come back; and the sooner that I've a right to a seat in thy fireside corner th^ better. What say you, Sara, shall we be married to-morrow ?" Sara looked at Marian Gorden, who, with a child on each knee, and one mount¬ ed on tlie back of her chair, was dividing her attention between them and little Billy ; while the elder girls were wonder¬ ing who the handsome-looking stranger man could be, who seemed so fond of their mother, and who had promised to be their father. Marian caught the eye of Sara; it seem¬ ed to say, that she had no objection, if the
" good lady" approved ; and James under¬ stood its eloquent meaning. Taking Sara by the hand, he led her to where Miss Gorden was engaged with the children.— " To you, madam," said the soldier, ** I owe my present happiness." tť And I," exclaimed Sara, " am indebt¬ ed to you for all the comforts of life, and above all, for the restoration of my dear, my faithful------" " Husband," said Marian, interrupting her; and taking a hand of each, she joined them together.—*· Take him, Sara ; a brave soldier, and a constant lover, will not fail to make you a good husband." " May Heaven's choicest blessings at¬ tend you, madam, wherever you go," cried the grateful James ; ** and may you shortly be as happy with those you love, as you have made me and Sara." Again Marian looked surprised; she felt the colour deepen on her cheeks, and to conceal it, she hastily took from her pocketbook a note for ten pounds, which she gave to Sara, saying—" I have the
same present for James, when he returns with me to the Abbey. This will buy the wedding dinner. If you ñx on to¬ morrow for your union, let me know in time, as I will get your friend, Mr. Benson, to give you away ; and Miss Aylmer and myself will accompany you to church- Not a word, if you love me, my good friends. Now, James, you shall be my escort back ; and you, Sara, come up to the Abbey in the course of the evening : my faithful Dennis may find something amongst my wardrobe which will be use¬ ful to you/' Before Sara could speak, Marian had quitted the cottage, and James only staid to take another kiss, and then ran to over¬ take their generous benefactress, who, happy in having bestowed happiness on others, scarce heard the tread of his foot¬ steps, till he was close at her side. As they approached the Abbey park, Marian perceived a postchaise waiting at a little distance from the gate.—" I dare say that
chaise belongs to the gentleman/ 1 cried James, " What gentleman ?" inquired Marian, eagerly. ** The gentleman I met on the road, Miss, about six miles from the Abbey. I stopped to get half-a-pint of ale, for I was both warm and thirsty : hc asked me if I did not belong to the guards. I told him I once had that honour, but that now I was on my return home, and tliat I was going first to the Abbey, to pay my duty to Miss Gorden, to whom I was indebted for my discharge. He very generously gave me a sovereign, to drink your health, Miss, saying, that you were the best and loveliest of your sex; that he liad long loved you, and was now come down from London expressly to see you ; but that he could not have that happiness, unless he saw you in the ruins, or in the park.— * Why, your honour/ said I, * if you loves the lady> and she loves you, give me a letter, and I'll engage to deliver it safely/ —That might create suspicion in the fa-
mily, he said, and that he would trust to the chance of meeting you. I should not wonder, Miss, if he is not somewhere near us now ; I should know him again, for he is very handsome." Marian thought instantly of Arlingford ; it could only be him, who would dislike calling on her at the Abbey ; and she now looked anxiously round the park, in the hope of discovering her beloved Henry. As they approached the chapel ruins, the moon suddenly became obscured, just as Marian thought she perceived the figure of some one advance from the ruin. She listened in breathless expectation to the quick tread of feet : the person approach¬ ed, and clasped her in his arms ; at that moment, the moon emerging from the dark cloud, discovered to her the features, not of her beloved Arlingford, but of ma¬ jor Campbell. Uttering a faint scream, Marian endea¬ voured to free herself from his hold.— " Nay, dearest Miss Gorden," cried the major, " feeble is your strength, in com-
parison with mine. I have long and faith¬ fully loved you : once you condescended to receive my attentions, with a sweetness which increased my passion. Why, oh why, have you urged me to a measure like this, when I would fain have been indebted to you for the voluntary posses¬ sion of your hand ?" " I thought I had explained to you the nature of my sentiments," replied Marian ; " and in assuring you that I had only grateful friendship to bestow, I had hoped that your generosity would have saved me the pain of repeating, that my senti¬ ments are still the same. I entreat, there¬ fore, that you will let me pass." " You shall be free instantly, if you will only promise to receive me as a lover; if you will assure me that you will never bestow this treasured hand upon another." " I will do neither," said Marian, haugh¬ tily, " for I will not deceive you by a promise, which I never mean to ratify." " Then take the consequence of your own rashness/' cried the major : " I love
you with sincerity ; you are now within my power; a carriage waits to convey you far from hence; and I should indeed be de¬ serving your contempt, were I to suffer the present, perhaps the only opportunity to escape, of making myself master of your hand." Marian now for the first time perceived the absence of James, and feeling the un- protectedness of her situation, she gave a piercing scream, on finding herself raised from the ground, and borne along in the strong arms of Campbell. A violent blow from some person be¬ hind, made the major relax his hold, and before he could recover from its effect, it was followed by another. Marian sprang from his grasp, as he staggered against a tree ; but she had not power to fly. Pity for Campbell, who appeared nearly insen¬ sible, and surprise at beholding in her preserver the mysterious companion of colonel Belgrave in the ruins, took from her all voluntary motion. " Coward !" exclaimed the stranger, in
a voice of rich and powerful tone ; " and is this the way that the defenders of England woo their brides ? Shame on the dastard heart, that would call a tear in beauty's eye, or force a kiss from the unwillingly lips of lovely, trembling woman. But ye are all alike—slaves as lovers—tyrants as husbands. Hence, coward, hence ! and learn from me, that the duty of a soldier is to protect, not to ensnare the innocence of woman." Like lightning, the mysterious stran¬ ger now caught the hand of the astonish* ed and terrified Marian, and without speaking, hurried her to the borders of the lake. Unmooring the little vessel, he lifted her into it : another person sat at the helm, but he was so closely enveloped like the stranger in a large cloak, and hat pulled over his eyes, that Marian could not discern his features. He now took the oars, and quickly rowed the boat to the Abbey gardens. The stranger care* fully assisted Marian on shore, wdio now for the first time essayed to speak her
thanks, for the essential service done to her.—" I am safe now," said she ; " but will you not accompany me to the Ab¬ bey? or at least permit me to know to know to whom I am indebted, for pre¬ serving me from what is more horrible than death, a union with a man I could r *>t love." " We shall meet again," replied the stranger. c * Had you attended to the caution in the note, you would not to* night have been thus terrified. I must away, and learn the fate of your country. man. You now know by experience, that where there is game there are poach¬ ers. Adieu !" The stranger now leapt back into the boat, and Marian, still trembling, and more astonished than ever, hastened to the house. Lady Evelina was alone, a- musing herself with her harp, when Maa¬ rian entered the drawing-room. The paleness of her looks, and the disorder of her dress, alarmed her friend, who listened with terror to the relation of her perilous
adventure. That major Campbell should be guilty of such unmanly conduct, vexed and surprised them both ; and her ladyship instantly dispatched two of the servants to the spot described by Marian, to dis¬ cover whether he was still there. They returned, however, without seeing either him or the chaise, followed by James Harlow r , whom they had met, and who now first learnt the extreme danger his benefactress had been placed in, by his quitting her so suddenly. Fearing lest she might suspect that he had betrayed, and then deserted her, the poor fellow rushed into the drawing-room, and throw¬ ing himself at her feet, asserted his inno¬ cence, in terms which carried conviction with them.-—" Indeed ! indeed !" said he, with an air of innocent frankness, " I would never have left you, madam, if I had not believed that it was a case in which a third person was always consider¬ ed as an incumbrance ; so I flew back to Sara, wiio I knew would not think me one. Had I known what was going for-
ward, I would have died, my lady, before I would have left you." " I am quite satisfied with your inte¬ grity," replied Marian ; " and as a proof of it, you shall not return without your present. Retire to the servants' hall, and tell Mrs. Dennis to follow me to my chamber." As soon as Mary appeared, her sobs and tears proclaimed that she had heard something of her lady's danger.—" I only wish that I had been there—that's all !" said Mary ; ** I would have shot him dead upon the spot." " My dear Mary, you forget," replied Marian, affectionately, ** that you are not now in an enemy's country. In England, you know, it would be rather an awk¬ ward thing if you were to shoot a man." " I should not stand for that, Miss Ma¬ rian. If I were to see any body attempt¬ ing to do you any barm, I know I should shoot them, if I was to be killed the next minute." " I trust in God, that your affection for
me will never be put to so dreadful a test/' said Miss Gorden : " I have escaped, through the interference of Providence, who sent a stranger to my rescue ; and I must be on my guard in future, though I do not think it likely that the major will renew his attack ; his present exposure will be sufficient disgrace." " May the first bullet make him a head shorter, the next engagement he is in," cried the wife of Dennis. '* What will my dear captain say to this ? I think, the best thing he can do, will be to come down and run away with you himself, and so put an end to the hopes of every body else." " I trust that he will not hear of it," said Marian, fervently—" not, at least, until the major is far removed from his vengeance. But now, dear Mary, let us forget this disagreeable accident, and think of poor Sara, who is to be married to¬ morrow, to her first and only love." Miss Gorden now requested Mary to furnish her with an entire suit of clothes,
out of her wardrobe, for the occasion, and to speak to Benson, to be in readiness to giVe her aw 7 ay—" While you, my dear Mary, can go early to the cottage, to as¬ sist Sara, and mind the children, while we are gone to church. I have already gained lady Evelina's consent for your worthy husband to follow you: let no¬ thing be wanting to make you all as happy as the reunion of two faithful hearts can make vou. Give this note to James, and tell him, that if I learn that he is a good husband, and a kind father to Sara's family, he shall find that I will not fail to reward him for his fidelity and constancy." It was late before the party returned from the Lodge, but lady Evelina would not quit her friend, who waited their ar¬ rival, that she might arrange with Rose Delaval for the wedding next day, to which lady Evelina had most handsomely contributed. Nothing could exceed the surprise and horror of Rose and lord Rochdale, on learning the escape and danger of Marian Gorden ; while captain
Dashwood and his friend, the colonel, were obliged to assume a virtue, if they had it not ; and therefore were louder than the rest in their execrations on the baseness of major Campbell. Marian watched nar¬ rowly the countenance of colonel Bel- grave : he caught her eye, but could not stand its scrutiny ; and Marian felt the painful conviction, that all was not right within the breast of a man, who shrunk from the glance of her eyes. The bond, thought Marian, that fatal bond—it was to cancel a debt of honour, that my future happiness, and all that was dear to me, was to be sacrificed by one gamester to another. Marian now recollected the figure she had seen in the ruins, and w r hich had evi¬ dently watched her and Mary, when re¬ turning from the cottage of Sara; and she no longer doubted of its being major Campbell. Colonel Belgrave was very inquisitive to discover Marian's preserver: all expressed a wish to know him, that they might unite in thanking him for the
very essential service he had rendered their amiable friend : but the colonel's de¬ sire appeared to flow from something else than gratitude ; and Marian saw him turn pale, on the first mention of the voice, manner, and attire of her preserver ; but this was unnoticed by the company, for Marian was the only one present, except himself, that was acquainted with the very just reasons which the colonel had to change countenance, at the mention of a stranger, whose singular knowledge of his most secret affairs, gave him a dangerous, as well as powerful influence over his destiny.
CHAP. VI. In bestowing happiness on others, we re¬ ceive ourselves the most refined of all human enjoyments, a* well as the most VOL. III. G
lasting; and this pleasure was experienced by Marian in the highest degree, as she witnessed the delight which sparkled in the eyes of James and of Sara, after the sa¬ cred ceremony was performed which made them man and wife. " These now are my children," cried James, on returning to the cottage, where Mary had got ready the bridal cake and wine ; then kissing* each rosy smiling face, hc said, " Henceforward you must call me father, for I will love and cherish you, as dearly as if you were indeed my own babes." The children were all dressed in their best attire, which they took especial care to repeat several times over, was the giù of the (i good lady;" while thtir mother, clothed in her wedding garments, looked the picture of grateful happy love. Marian had spoken to Benson about the paternal farm of Harlow ; his parents were dead, and the tenant had promised to remove into another, in the course of a week, when James could take possession
of it The worthy Benson, who was truly the poor man's friend, promised to see it comfortably furnished for their reception, and to provide James with every requisite for farming.—" I intend," said the amiable ISlarian, " to set you. up in the world, and your own industry and gcod management will secure your future success. Billy, you know, is to be a gardener, and as soon as he is old enough, I shall find him employ¬ ment ; those of the girls who wish to learn a business, I will put apprentice; therefore, my good friends, î would have you look forward to begin the world with every prospect of success and happiness." Not waiting for a reply, Marian left the cottage, followed by Rose, and by the prayers and the blessings of those whom her benevolence had reunited. In passing by the ruins, Marian gave an involuntary shudder, as she recollected the narrow es¬ cape she had the preceding evening; and in describing each circumstance minutely to the attentive Rose, she failed not *o G 2
express her gratitude to the Almighty, who had snatched her from the power of a villain. " It is very strange," said Rose Delaval, " but I cannot account for the dislike I always felt towards the major; and I am equally averse to his friend, captain Dash¬ wood, though I try to conceal it, out of respect to lad) Evelina." " My friend regards him as a brother," replied Marian ; " and I own that I myself have insensibly brought my mind to think of him more favourably, since the elope¬ ment of his wife. It is true, that he was a neglectful, inattentive husband; yet it is equally true, that poor lady Susan was a weak and childish beauty, and not a fit companion for a man of sense and rational conversation : he is not a favourite with me, yet I am sorry for his painful situation." 6i I only wish that he may not be found a snake in the grass," said Rose Delaval. Marian was on the point of inquiring if she had any reason for suspecting him,
when they perceived lord Fortescue hast¬ ening towards them. The report of Ma¬ rian's danger, and fortunate escape, had reached the Lodge, where she was too much beloved, not to occasion its inmates the greatest aîarm on her account, Henry and Olivia, accompanied by lord Fortes¬ cue, immediately rode to the Abbey, and were rejoiced to learn from lady Evelina, that she was sufficiently recovered from her terror, to attend the rustic wedding of James and Sara. Lord Fortescue strolled into the park, in the hope of meeting them on their return ; indeed it was very evi¬ dent that he was never happy but in the society of Rose; and this discovery was pleasing to his brother and sister, who loved the orphan friend of lady Evelina most sincerely; and secretly hoped that the virtues and elegant accomplishments of Miss Aylmer, wouid efface from his mind the romantic remembrance of the young girl whom he had loved in his boyhood. But the attachment of lord Fortescue to his cottage favourite, was
not of that transient nature : with her image, and that of her father, w r ere asso¬ ciated ideas of pure and genuine nature— of disinterested friendship and hospitality —of love in its blissful state—of confiding innocence; and while the parting kiss of Rose was remembered with rapture, while her parting promise yet thrilled through his veins, was it likely that he could trans¬ fer his affections to another Rose, though equally sweet and interesting ? Lord Fortescue had made every in¬ quiry concerning Mr. Delaval and his lovely daughter; but the replies of Phcebe and the fisherman's family were guarded and unsatisfactory. He heard that Mr. Delaval had died in London ; but they seemed ignorant as to the fate of his daughter. His first impulse was to set off for the metropolis; yet ardently as he longed to gain intelligence respecting Miss Delaval, he could not bring himself to leave immediately the society of his new married brother, and his affectionate little wife; and though his lordship was not
willing to acknowledge it, even to him¬ self, yet there was an attraction in the person of 3IİSS Aylmer which he could not withstand, and which made him delay, from day to day, his intended journey. The evident partiality of lord Rochdale for Miss Aylmer made him feel restless and uneasy ; and yet he could not help acknowledging, that she was possessed of every requisite for a woman of rank, and that consequently his guardian would not disgrace his family by his choice; still the idea of such a marriage gave him pain ; and lord Fortescue, anxious to find an excuse for his feelings, at length attri¬ buted them to the fear of the union not being a happy one, from the inequality of age on the part of his guardian, who was turned of forty, and Miss Aylmer only nineteen. On returning to the Abbey, Marian proceeded to the drawing-room ; while Rose, at the request of lord Fortescue, ex¬ tended her walk towards the sea coast. Bright and beautiful was the view of the
ocean, while the white sails of the distant vessels glittered in the sunbeams. Yet the glory of the prospect lost part of its splendour in the eyes of Rose; and a kind of involuntary shudder came over her, as often as she called to mind that it was the grave of her mother. Lord Fortescue stopped, delighted with the magnificence of the view, and felt dis¬ appointed that she did not appear to share in his pleasure. Turning suddenly round, he beheld her tearful eyes fixed pensively on the foaming billows. He took her hand ; she started, and smiling sweetly as she dashed away her tears, apologized for her want of thought. Lord Fortescue gently passed her arm through his.—" It is evident," said he, íť dear Miss Aylmer, that we view this scene with different feelings. Let us re¬ turn to one more congenial to your taste/' He then led her back to the beautiful green lane leading to the Lodge. Rose felt the necessity of accounting for
her emotion ; she therefore said, in a trem¬ bling voice, that the sight of the sea had the general effect of making her melan¬ choly, since it was the tomb of a beloved friend. " Not, I trust, of a lover?" inquired his lordship, with anxiety. *' Oh, no ; but of a tender mother." " Gracious Heaven ! how singular !" exclaimed lord Fortescue. ** My own Rose was equally unfortunate ; and I have lately heard from a friend of hers in the village, that, like yourself, she has be¬ come an orphan. Pardon, dear Miss Ayl¬ mer, my touching upon so painful a sub¬ ject, but I have somehow accustomed my¬ self to speak to you in confidence, and you only are acquainted with the state of my heart." " You cannot give offence, my lord," said Rose, ** where it is so evident you mean not to offend. Be assured, that I feel honoured by your confidence." " Will you bestow yours in return ?" G S
" I think, my lord, that I may promise that I will." " And yet you will certainly think me very impertinent," said lord Fortescue; " indeed I feel that I am so—and yet I would fain learn from yourself, whether you would accept the hand of my guar¬ dian ?" " Would you give your consent, my lord, were I to ask it?" inquired Rose, with recovered spirits. Lord Fortescue hesitated.-—** My con¬ sent cannot be necessary to the marriage of my guardian." " And yet I could not marry him with¬ out it," replied Miss Delaval. " You cannot be serious, dear Miss Ayl¬ mer." ťŕ Perfectly so, my lord ; I have resolved to obtain your consent·—will you not give it ?" continued she, looking archly in his face. " You pay me a very high compliment, my dear friend," said his lordship ; " and if my consent is necessary to the disposal
of this little white hand, I must look well into the merits of the man who aspires to the happiness of possessing it." <ť But should you not also inquire a little into my merits, my lord? as yet you are unacquainted with my family con¬ nections^—tbey may be such as would dis¬ grace your lordship's flattering notice." " Impossible !" exclaimed he, with warmth ; " and were I free myself, could I banish from my heart the image of her whom you so strongly resemble, I would this moment throw myself at your feet, and implore you to accept the hand and fortune of a man, who would prefer you to all the world." " My lord," replied Rose, with trembling pleasure, " what wouid your own Rose say to this proof of wavering love?—I doubt the constancy of a heart that could so easily transfer its affections." u Blame not my constancy," said his lordship, " but blame yourself, who, in so strongly resembling Rose Delaval, has awakened all my slumbering feelings. In
loving you, I only seem to be renewing my vow to her," ** If indeed she is so dear to you, whom you only knew in childhood," replied Rose, with seriousness, " ought you not to prove it now, my lord, when the death of her father may have left ber desolate and unprotected?" " I thank you, dearest Miss Aylmer," cried lord Fortescue ; ** you have recalled me to reason, and saved me from the bit¬ terness of self-reproach. Deluded by the striking similarity of your form, expres¬ sion, and feature, to my own sweet Rose, I have neglected to perform my duty : but I will quickly repair my fault. To¬ morrow I will set off for London ; I will not rest till I discover her abode; yet, should I find her changed—should the woman of nineteen have forgotten the pro¬ mise given in her childhood—should she love another, and decline my hand, will you, dear Miss Aylmer, generously accept a rejected lover ?" ** You must first promise, my lord/'
said Rose, with emotion, " to read, before you depart for London, a packet which was entrusted to my care, and which I sa¬ credly assured the giver, to deliver into your hands, should I prove so fortunate as to see you/' " Thou dear, mysterious girl !" cried his lordship, pressing her hand to his lips ; " I will read it this very day. But who that knows me could possibly commit to your care, papers which chance alone has en¬ abled you to deliver?" " I pledge my word that I am as igno¬ rant of their contents as your lordship," replied Miss Delaval; " but I will consign them to your care, on our return to the Abbey/' " But you have not promised." " My heart resembles that of Rose De¬ laval, as much as my features, my lord ; therefore you have no cause to dread the effect of absence—she has not forgotten the friend of her childhood." In saying this, she broke from him, as they had gained the Abbey ; and repair-
ing to her own chamber, she hastily ob¬ tained the little packet, entrusted to her care by her dying father, and then joined the company in the drawing-room. An opportunity soon occurred, which enabled her to give lord Fortescue the packet, who soon after took his leave of the party, and returned to the Lodge, leaving his brother anoi Olivia to spend the day at the Abbey. That lord Fortescue should have de¬ clined remaining at the Abbey with his brother and sister, was a matter of sur¬ prise to all but Rose. It was known that she and his lordship had walked out alone, and the conclusion was, that they had quarrelled ; this, however, she assured them was not ihe case» The curiosity of lord Rochdale, however, would not be sa¬ tisfied even by her assurance; and he therefore ordered his horse, and, followed by his groom, proceeded to the Lodge. Lord Fortescue had retired to hisr own apartment, where, hastily breaking open the seals of the packet, he beheld, to his
astonishment, a letter addressed to him¬ self) in the hand-writing of Mr. Delaval : he pressed it to his lips ; he felt that it was his parting bequest ; and in the ro¬ mantic warmth of his feelings, he swore to fulfil his wishes, whatever they might be. Tears rushed to his eyes, for he ioved and revered the writer : at length he read as follows : " To Edward Lord Fortescue. " MY DEAR AND BELOVED YOUNG FRIEND, " Although I am denied the pleasure of embracing you, before I leave this world, which I feel I must ere long, yet my heart, relying upon the nobleness of yours, feels lighter of its cares, from the blest assurance that I may fearlessly con¬ fide in the friendship of the heir of the house of Fortescue. Oh, name beloved, adored ! whose very sound was a passport to my affections—how willingly did I open my doors, and press to my boson, a nephew oi Rosina Fortescue ! Yes, thou
dear-loved youth, thou art the son of that best of men, who was brother to the mo¬ ther of my Rose. The tender ties of re¬ lationship, which, unknown to each other, was so mutually felt, in thy young days, will explain, my dear Edward, to thee now, my reasons for accepting thy prof¬ fered friendship ; and thy generous soul wall receive its own reward, when it be¬ holds a cousin, who will not disgrace the ¿ioble family of her mother, or the friend of her childhood. Oh, Edward ! my be¬ loved, ny adopted son, it is in thy power to make good the claim of the only child of thy adored aunt. My dreadful ship¬ wreck, which entombed my beloved wife, and all my property, has rendered her child dependant on the generosity of her mother's family. Her sex, her innocence, her unprotected state, will plead for her, more than all the rhetoric of her doting father. The will of the Almighty calls me hence ; but my heart assures me, that in you, my daughter will have a powerful advocate. I enclose the certificate of my
marriage with Rosina Fortescue, the only surviving daughter of your grandfather, lord Fortescue ; and the register of the birth ofour dear daughter, Rose Delaval. " Farewell, my boy, my beloved Ed¬ ward ! I die in peace ; for I cannot leave my child in dearer hands. " Robert Delaval."
The feelings of the young lord were most pov/erfully affected by this appeal, from a man whom he not only loved, but venerated as a father ; and his heart in¬ stantly acknowledged the tender claim, which his orphan cousin had upon bis protecting love. But where was he to seek the daughter of Mr. Delaval ? what obscure retreat concealed his cottage love, now his equal in rank and birth ? A thought darted across his mind ; he could not be deceived ; his heart, true to its first affections, had already recognised her, though under an assumed name. Hastily snatching up his hat, he was
rushing out of the chamber, when lord Rochdale appeared. " What, my dear Edward, can occasion your absence from the Abbey ?" said his guardian ; " it is so unusual a circum¬ stance,, that it has alarmed me, lest you should be indisposed. You look agitated; what has disturbed you ?" " I will tell you," replied lord Fortes¬ cue, reseating himself; " for I am well assured, that your lordship will not only sympathize in my feelings, but that you will render me every assistance towards fulfilling the request which this paper con¬ tains/' He then handed the letter, and the certificates, to his guardian, who per¬ used them, with an emotion wdiich be¬ spoke the interest he yet took in all that concerned Rosina Fortescue. Shocked at her untimely fate, he could not restrain the tributary tear to her memory ; while the moistened eyes of lord Fortescue en¬ couraged him to give vent to his feelings. At length he said—** By what chance, my dear Edward, did you become ac-
quainted with Mr. Delaval ? I once re¬ garded him as the happiest of mortals; since then, he nlust have been the most miserable." ** Not wholly so, my dear guardian, since Providence, in pity to the distrac¬ tion of a husband, allowed him still to re¬ main a father. It was on this fatal coast, that the vessel was wrecked, on their ren¬ turn to England, and Mr. Delaval and his little girl, who was five years old, were the only persons saved. In a small, but delightful cottage, only a short distance from the Lodge, lie devoted himself to the education of his only child ; and dur¬ ing one of my visits to sir William, I had the happiness of becoming acquainted with Miss Delaval, and her inestimable father. My name and relationship to his wife gave me a claim upon his affection, which bestowed on me the privilege of access at all times to his house." « But his daughter ?" cried lord Roch- *Ые, impatiently. " You cannot have forgotten, my dear
sir," replied his lordship, " the offence which this intimacy gave to sir William ; his worldly prudence took alarm ; and the severest pang I ever experienced, was oc¬ casioned by my being compelled to relin¬ quish the society of my cottage friends," " But where can we find the daughter of Rosina Fortescue?" exclaimed lord Rochdale, anxiously ; " my heart longs to embrace her, and to adopt her for my own." " It has done that already, or I am mis¬ taken, my dear guardian." " What mean you ?" inquired hb lord¬ ship, with haste. " That your heart, like mine, my dear sir, instinctively discovered Rose Delavaî, tliough, from a cause I know not, she has assumed a different name." is It must be so," exclaimed lord Roch¬ dale, starting from his seat; "the resem¬ blance is so striking, I could not be de¬ ceived. Miss Aylmer is the loved child of my once idolized Rosina." With palpitating hearts, the two no-
blemen now proceeded to the Abbey.— " Where is Miss Aylmer ?" inquired lord Rochdale. " With the ladies in the drawing-room, I believe, my lord," said the servant. His lordship hastily ascended the grand stair¬ case, while his ward turned his steps to the music-chamber, for his quick ear had caught the sound of her voice; and he rejoiced that their first interview, after so long an absence, would be alone. Softly opening the door, he advanced to where Miss Delaval was playing on the harp ; at another time, he would have paused to admire the exquisite symmetry of her form, which her graceful attitude shewed to advantage ; but now his heart was too full of love, rapture, and hope. " My own dear Rose !" he exclaimed, as he pressed her passionately to his bo¬ som, ** my sweet cousin ! and my betroth¬ ed wife ! why have you concealed your¬ self thus long from my fond affection ?" " You called me your cousin," said
Rose, in a tremulous voice i " am I in¬ deed related to your lordship ?" " Yes," replied he hastily ; ** you are cousin to that Edward, whom, when a girl, you innocently promised to marry, before you knew the sacredness of the en¬ gagement ; aud Edward is now come to claim that promise, unless you wish it broken. Speak, dearest Rose—my feel¬ ings cannot brook delay." " What can I say ?" replied Rose Dela¬ val ; " surely I ought first to learn the con¬ tents of my dear father's packet ; and yet my heart tells me, that were he now living, he would not disapprove of my bestowing my hand on his own dear adopted son. Take it, therefore, my lord, for my affec¬ tions have been yours from childhood, and sorely have they been tasked, to resist the wished-for discovery, while tempted so strongly by the tenderness of your ex¬ pressions, to confess myself your own Rose Delaval." Lord Fortescue, enraptured by the as¬ surance of her attachment, ventured to
press his lips to hers ; again he asked, ana again he heard the blissful promise of be¬ ing his, and his only. The packet was now produced, and read with strong emo¬ tion by Miss Delaval; a secret glow of satisfied pride thrilled through her veins, on finding herself related to the family of her lover.—." Though fortuneless," thought Rose, " yet I shall not disgrace my Ed¬ ward's choice/' The voice of lord Rochdale gave no¬ tice of his approach ; but his ward would not withdraw his arm from the slender waist of his affianced bride; neither would he relinquish the soft hand which was locked in his. Lord Rochdale had disco¬ vered to the party in the drawing-room, the near relationship of Miss Aylmer to his ward; and they all rejoiced to learn, that the truly amiable, and highly accom¬ plished friend of lady Evelina, was the daughter of Rosina Fortescue, the beau¬ tiful, but unfortunate favourite of lord Rochdale·, who, as he embraced her only child, and gazed upon her dear remem-
bered features, so like to those of her sainted mother, felt all his former tender¬ ness revive. Smiling through the tear¬ drops which fell on the forehead of the orphan, his lordship exclaimed, good-na¬ turedly—" I have been dealt unfairly with, dear Rose, for my heart adopted you, as soon as seen, and I might have been tempted to offer you rank and inde¬ pendence, with a faithful and attached heart, but that I see, my sly rogue of a ward has been beforehand with me, and has gained the prize." " We have loved each other from our early youth," said lord Fortescue ; " when a boy of sixteen, my affections, unknown to myself, became fixed on my sweet Rose of the cottage. You will pardon then, my lord, my presumption, if I claim a prior right to the daughter of Rosina Delaval." ** And I claim her as my sister," cried Olivia, springing forward, and throwing her arms around the neck of the now happy Rose : " but come, dearest girl, let
røe lead you to lady Evelina, who, with Marian Gorden, are anxious to congratu¬ late you upon this pleasing discovery." Rose, surrounded by her friends, and placed next to her generous lover, ex¬ plained her reasons for assuming the name of Aylmer, This explanation was neces¬ sary, to satisfy the curiosity of her lover and his guardian, and having made it, her own heart was also lightened of the disa¬ greeable consciousness of disguise; and she gladly resumed that of Delaval, which, though not as noble as that of her mo¬ ther, was equally dear to her. Mrs. Fortescue was urgent to have Rose with her at the Lodge, but grati¬ tude and affection bound her to continue with lady Evelina, until after her couine¬ ment, which was daily expected. This proof of considerate kindness sunk deep into the heart of her ladyship ; she pres- sed her hand affectionately, as she whis¬ pering, said—" I feel that I must soon lose you, my sweet friend ; the tell-tale VOL. in. H
eyes of lord Fortescue betray an impa¬ tience to rob me of your highly-valued society ; but do not let me resign you, un¬ less to a husband's dearer claim." " Be assured that I will not leave your ladyship," replied Miss Delaval, ** until the restoration of your health will enable you to allow of my absence ; and even then, I shall never fail to remember, with the liveliest emotions of gratitude and affection, tlie protection and assistance you afforded me, when I was desolate and unhappy." Sweet were the sensations of Rose De¬ laval, on retiring to her chamber for the night. She pressed the ring and the locket to her lips with renewed tender¬ ness, increased by the rapturous assurance of her noble lover's fidelity. The pleas¬ ing words of ^larian Gorden —** Let me, dear Rose, be bridemaid/' still sounded in her ear ; and she placed her head upon her pillow, after first invoking the protec¬ tion of Heaven, to dream of happiness and wedded love.
CHAP. VÍL It vvas late before Mary Dennis returned from the bridal party at the cottage. Her husband and James Harlow were brother soldiers, though they had served in differ¬ ent regiments ; and as the sparkling glass went round to the health of their generous benefactress, they next toasted that of their favourite officers. Dennis swallowed a bumper to the welfare and happiness of captain Arlingford; and Mary, in the warmth of her feelings, made all the chil¬ dren drink his health. Marian was still reading, when Mary entered her apartment, and apologized fot not having returned sooner. " I doubt not but that your time has passed hap¬ pily," said Marian ; " therefore, my good Mary, I am satisfied. Retire to your rest, η 2
for I mean to finish my book before í sleep ; and to-morrow you shall amuse me by a description of how you have passed your time." Mary's head was a little wandering, from the effects of so many toasts ; she was therefore not sorry to be relieved that night, from any further exercise of her tongue. Calling dowrn a blessing upon the head of her lady, she withdrew, say¬ ing, as she went to her room, that never woman was so fortunate as herself, in hav¬ ing one of the most considerate mistresses in the whole world. Left once more to herself, Marian con¬ tinued to peruse with avidity, the tale of fictitious sorrow, until the striking of the clock gave notice that it was long past her usual hour for repose. The book was closed, and she was preparing to undress, when a slight noise in a distant part of the chamber, made her turn her eyes to¬ wards the spot. The noise in^_ ased ; it was like the gentle withdrawing of a bolt, and though naturally courageous, yet the
heart of Marian now trembled with ap¬ prehension, rendered timid by her recent danger, and by the loneliness of her situ¬ ation ; for her sleeping-room was at the extremity of a long gallery, far away from the bed-rooms of the family, and commu¬ nicating to a suit of apartments, seldom opened and never used, as they contained all the magnificent, but old-fashioned state furniture of the Abbey, for which the colonel, strange as it may seem, had a great veneration. The high and lofty walls of Marian Gor- den's sleeping-room was hung with tapes¬ try, in high preservation ; this concealed the door, which communicated with what had formerly been the splendid state apart¬ ments of the Belgrave family. The light of two wax candles only partially illumi¬ nated the walls ; yet Marian felt convinced that she saw that part of the tapestry move, which covered the secret door; and before she had power to fly, she heard her own name repeated. The voice was not that of major Campbell; she breathed
more freely, for she had no idea of d$ngei unconnected with his image ; and she ad¬ vanced a few paces forward, when the ta¬ pestry was suddenly raised, and the mys¬ terious stranger of the ruins stood before . her.—** My preserver !" exclaimed Marian, and ьЬе sprang forward to meet him ; when suddenly recollecting the hour, and the place, she retreated а íbw steps, baying ·—·** But what can have occasioned this unseasonable visit, ¡>o late and beeret?" The stranger threw off his cloak and hat, when from beneath the İnli er, fell a profusion of jet black ringlets, shading the crimson cheek and polished brow.— ťí Lady," said the stranger, ** is this my welcome—this my kindly greeting?" Marian started « the eye oï soul-dissolv¬ ing tenderness—the fornì of perfect sym¬ metry—the voice of dangerous softness, could only belong to one; she i'aught the snowy hand, and pressing it to her lips, exclaimed—** 'Tis Rosalie !—my friend ! —;ny preserver !" *' Hush! lad}', huih í —breathe not my
name in Belgrave Abbey. I told you we should meet again, and I am come, true to my promise. Through the means of my faithful agent, Σ was apprized of your dan¬ ger : I lost not a momentin flying to yom assistance, and, I thank Heaven, arrived in time to snatch you from the arms of your treacherous countryman. Did I not teli you, lady, to * beware of the tartan ?" " You did indeed," replied Mariai, " and never can I repay the gratitude 1 owe you, for preserving me from falling a prey to his hateful passion." " Yes, lady, you can more than repay me ; for you, and you only, can assist me in my work of long-meditated vengeance." " Merciful Providence !" cried Marian Gorden, " have you only preserved me from one state of horror, to plunge me into another?" " Be composed, lady," said Rosalie, ** and listen to what I have to propose. When I confided to you the story of my wrongs, I concealed, out of kindness to your fc .ugs, the name of my betrayer.
The time is now fast approaching, when it is necessary that you should know the cruel destroyer of my peace, the triun> phant and exulting murderer of my fame, and the ruin of my soul ; for such he will eventually prove. Lady," continued Ro¬ salie, casting a wild and hurried look around the apartment, " I am now within his walls : we breathe the same air ; a few chambers only divide us now: another, instead of Rosalie, fills his guilty arms— another possesses his perjured heart, and bears his name. What now restrains my just revenge ?—what hinders me from seek¬ ing my seducer, and plunging my dagger in his poisonous bosom ?" Desperate, from the recollection of her injuries, Rosalie, half frantic, rose from her seat ; her look and manner recalled the wandering senses of Marian, who flung herself before her.—" First through my heart must you plunge that dreadful wea¬ pon," cried Marian Gorden, " ere you reach the chamber of my innocent, my unhappy Evelina."
" Thy heart, sweet girl !" said Rosalie, replacing her dagger, and bursting into tears, she flung herself on the neck of Miss Gorden, and sobbed aloud. " Pity and pray for me, thou angel of light and hea¬ venly goodness!—pity an unfortunate, whose injuries revive with double force, from the circumstance oľ her being within the mansion of her destroyer." ** I do pity you from my soul," sobbed forth the compassionate Marian ; " and I will pray for you, Rosalie; but let me conjure you, never again to enter these walls, since they have given birth to frenzy like yours. Gracious Heaven! and is colonel Belgrave the author of all thy misery ?" ** Oh that he were not !" replied Rosa¬ lie ; ** for so dearly do î love thee, Ma¬ rian Gorden, that had I not bound myself by a dreadful oath, to avenge my shame and dishonour upon the head of my se¬ ducer, thy sweet counsel, and angel look, would disarm my revenge. But I have h 3
sworn, lady, that no son of his shall inhe¬ rit his name and fortune, and I must abide by my oath," Marian groaned^—" You do not mean to commit murder?" said she, with a con¬ vulsive shudder. " It was my first intention," replied Rosalie, in a low voice ; ** but my affec¬ tion for you has preserved its life, upon one condition only—that you will deliver the child of lady Evelina into my hands, should it be a son." " Never, never !" exclaimed Marian : 44 sooner would I die a thousand deaths, than tear from the loved bosom of my Evelina, her heart's dearest treasure, and her only consolation." " ƒ was obliged to relinquish my only hope of comfort," said Rosalie, in a mourn¬ ful voice, " Great was the sacrifice, as great must be my revenge. Lady, I pledge myself for the safety of the infant ; it shall pass for mine; you shall see it daily ; but you must enable me to possess it"
" Sooneť will I part with my existence," cried Marian, w than be made an accom¬ plice in a deed which would destroy the happiness of Evelina, and rob me of my future peace." " Rash girl !" exclaimed the incensed foreigner ; " dearly as I love you, yet be¬ ware my resentment. For your sake alone have I brought myself to spare the life of Belgrave's heir. I will even con¬ fide in your honour, and you shall have the keeping of the child ; but no mortal power shall withhold me from the enjoy¬ ment of beholding the agonies of the fa¬ ther, for the loss of his expected son." " What if I betray thy purposed crime, and guard, for the mother's sake, the fa¬ ther from thy snares ?" " Thou durst not," replied Rosalie, with a look and tone which made Marian trem¬ ble. ťe Thou hast sworn, lady, neither to betray, nor to desert me, in the hour of trial ; and well I know, that to thee an oath is sacred. The life of lady Evelina's child is in thy keeping : breathe but the
remotest hint of danger—give but the slightest glance to awaken caution—utter but a sound to dispossess me of my prize —and my dagger------" " Oh, horrible ! horrible !" cried Marian, covering her eyes, as if to shut out from her sight the form of the vindictive Italian. ** If I have no claim upon thy love, I have some little upon thy gratitude," said Rosalie, in a tender voice. ** í know thee, Marian Gorden, too well to dread any thing from thy tortured feelings, that can injure me. For thy dear sake, I trust that the expected infant may prove a daughter ; but if otherwise, let the fond mother believe it dead : its guilty father will writhe with the agonized conviction, that he owes the loss of his child to Ita¬ lian VENGEANCE." " I will neither assist nor thwart you in your dreadful purpose," said Miss Gor¬ den ; " more I will not—dare not pro¬ mise." S( Beware, lady—beware! and remem-
ber your oath. On your fidelity and sè- cresy depends the existence of the child." " You promise also, that I shall know its place of residence," hastily exclaimed Marian Gorden, " and that I shall see or hear of its welfare daily ?" " My promise I hold as sacred as yours," said Rosalie : " and now, lady, farewell ! I fear that I have broken your rest for to¬ night ; to-morrow, I trust, you will sleep soundly; while / shall never taste the sleep of innocence again." She now press¬ ed her lips to the aching brow of Marian, who half recoiled from the touch ; then, with noiseless footsteps, she quitted the apartment, leaving the object of her visit, almost insensible to every things but the terror of her dreadful purpose. Most fervently did Marian now offer up her prayers, that the devoted infant of her unfortunate friend might prove a girl : in that case, what misery, what remorse, would its parents escape ! Too well did she now comprehend the cause of Henry's anxious solicitude, for her to break off a
connection with a woman, capable indeed of forming and of executing the boldest scheme of vengeance. Bold and resolute must be that heart, which could steal into the private apartments of an English castte —that could learn the secret move¬ ments of its master, and plan the destruc¬ tion of his fondest, proudest hopes, by be¬ reaving him of his son—that could do this, without the fear of exposure, or the dread of consequences. Such was the heutc of Rosalie. At one moment Marian resolved upon breaking all faith with- this vindictive woman, and by confessing her cruel design, enable co¬ lonel Belgrave to guard against her ma¬ lignant intentions. But more mature re¬ flection convinced her, that this conduct would only draw down her keenest resent¬ ment on herself, and perhaps disable her from befriending the child of Evelina; for Marian was too well convinced that Ro¬ salie would never abandon her long-medi¬ tated hope of retaliation upon her seducer. —** If she is to be believed," said Marian,
mentally, "her affection for me has already softened her sanguinary feelings. My ft> deiity to herself may increase my influ¬ ence over her, and my tears and prayers may soften her heart, at least towards the unhappy mother; and finally, Providence may enable me to become the means of restoring the infant heir to its rightful home." The morning after this fearful interview, Marian felt indisposed ; and Mary, think¬ ing to amuse her, repeated the account of Sara's rustic wedding, blending with the pleasantries of the day, so many of her own opinions and remarks, that she at length succeeded in calling forth the smiles of her mistress. A gentle tap at the door announced Rose Delaval. " Not yet risen, dear Miss Gorden ?" cried the now happy girl ; ** I had antici¬ pated the pleasure of your company this fine morning, in a walk to the Lodge. Lord Rochdale is to be our escort, and lady Evelina has consented that captain
DashwOod should drive her in the pony- chaise." " Where is the colonel ?" inquired Ma¬ rian. " He says he has business to transact with Mr. Benson. Bút if you will ac¬ company us, 1 will wait for you, dear Marian ; for your absence will cast a gloom over this beautiful day." " Lord Fortescue shall supply my place, dearest Rose," replied Marian, affection¬ ately returning her embrace. " My slum¬ bers last night were disturbed by terrific visions, and my head still aches from their effect ; while you, my sweet friend, were enjoying, I hope, dreams of bliss, soon to be realized." Rose blushed assent. " That you will soon be united to the object of your choice, is my fervent wish," continued Marian, with a sigh which she could not repress ; " and so highly do I esteem lord Fortescue, that I feel assured that your happiness is secure, as far as it depends upon his protecting love."
" I think I have no cause to tremble for the future," replied Miss Delaval : " in many instances, I have experienced the merciful care of Providence, and more es¬ pecially in the gift of such a heart, as that of my dear Edward. I am happy beyond my deserts ; and yet that happiness would be increased, were I assured that my dear Marian Gorden would meet with such another noble, generous lover as myself." " My kind-hearted friend," said Marian, smiling on her affectionately, " if that as¬ surance will contribute to the felicity of your present feelings, I will not withhold a confidence you are so justly entitled to receive. Rest satisfied, that I am not the insensible the world believes. The object who has long possessed my tenderest af¬ fection, is unknown to you, and unsus¬ pected by the family: his misfortunes have endeared him to me ; and when cir¬ cumstances shall allow him to claim my promised hand, you will acknowledge, dear Rose, that he is worthy, even to be compared with thy Edward. You look
surprised, my friend ; but I hope to have the pleasure, ere long, of introducing you to my affianced husband." ** I am surprised, but I am nevertheless delighted, at what you tell me," cried Rose ; " but I will not even breathe a hint of it to lord Fortescue. I wish now that I was not going to the Lodge ; for then perhaps you would extend your-con- fidence, which shall never be misplaced." Marian promised not to withhold, at another opportunity, whatever she might wish to learn ; and Miss Delaval, quitting her with reluctance, was obliged to hasten down to lord Rochdale, who was waiting to accompany her in her walk. The truly estimable guardian of the young Fortescues, had, in the strictest sense of the word, discharged the duties of his guardianship to the sons of his lamented friend, the late lord ; and the attachment which he unfortunately had cherished for his sister, and which had terminated in the disappointment of his dearest hopes, seemed now to have rendered the claim
of her offspring more powerful and more sacred. Nothing, after the marriage of his own Olivia with his favourite ward, could possibly afford lord Rochdale such sincere, such heartfelt delight, as that he now felt in the prospect of uniting Rose Delaval with her cousin, lord Fortescue. In look¬ ing forward to this union, he recollected the orphan state of his fair friend, and her want of that fortune, which was her mo¬ ther's right ; and claiming, from his near connection with her family, a father's in¬ terest in her concerns, he took the oppor¬ tunity which their walk afforded him, to request that she would accept from him a draft on his banker, for a thousand pounds, until he could procure for her the fortune to which she was legally entitled, as the daughter of Rosina Fortescue. This delicate attention to her comfort, and to the necessary wants which her ap¬ proaching change of situation required, overcame the buoyant spirits of Rose De¬ laval : she essayed to thank him, but she could not ; yet the tears which fell on his
hand, as she raised it to her lips, betrayed the feelings of a grateful heart, oppressed by the sense of obligation which the flu¬ ency of words would not repay r . The smile of pleasure however again illumined her countenance, as she saw lord Fortescue approach to meet them; and she joyfully assented to his half-whis¬ pered proposal of extending her walk, to visit Phcebe, the good and kind compa¬ nion of many a youthful pleasure. How sweet, how entrancing were the sensations of Rose, on now beholding once again the cottage which had sheltered her jn early life, and which had received the beloved Edward, on whose arm she now leaned with joyful pride and grateful tenderness! Phcebe and her husband had not yet returned from the neighbouring town; but their little maid, remembering the de¬ light expressed by her mistress at the sight of Rose, welcomed them into the parlour, and with good-humoured smiles, placed on the table some nice home-made cake and fresh-gathered fruit, Her good na-
ture received its reward from the liberality of lord Fortescue; but the fruit and cake remained untouched—both their minds were fully occupied by the idea of past and present happiness. '* It was in this dear-remembered room," said lord Fortescue, " that my Rose, in the guileless innocency of her heart, pro¬ mised, with all the fascinating sweetness of youth, never to love another better than myself, and to marry me, if it would make me happy. Beloved Rose! you were then too young to know the value of that assurance, or the sacred ness of that promise ; what then must be my felicity, after a six years' tedious absence, to find you still the same, as unchanged in heart as in mind." " And it was in this dear-loved room also," replied Rose, modestly, " that my generous friend, to whose kindness I am indebted for the cultivation of whatever talent I possess, placed round my neck his first gift of boyish love, which has been my companion ever since; and it
was here likewise that he drew from his finger this pledge of dear domestic hap¬ piness, to tìx on mine until he should return—" " And claim thee for his own," cried the enraptured lover, as he tenderly em¬ braced his blushing Rosina.—" Oh, my soul's dearest treasure !" he exclaimed, " this little dwelling, so sacredly regarded by us both, as being the scene of our earliest affections, must not be profaned by vulgar minds. I will purchase it from the husband of Phœbe, as well as the land wdiich surrounds it; the situation is unri¬ valled in beauty; and close to our dear little cottage, which shall remain un¬ touched, we will erect a handsome family mansion, to which we can occasionally re¬ tire from ihe bustle and noise of the world, to enjoy over again the blissful scenes of early years." This was a proposal so congenial to the taste and inclination of Rose Delaval, that her lover resolved not to lose a day in the execution of his project. The return
of Phœbe and her husband, enabled him to make the latter an offer too advantage¬ ous to be refused. The cottage was im¬ mediately purchased ; but the present in¬ mates were requested to remain, rent free, until the intended mansion was completed. " I see that you have forgotten your young companion, Edward," cried he, as he shook her hand good naturedly ; " but he has not, nor ever will, forget the kind- hearted friend of Miss Delaval " "Gracious goodness!" exclaimed Phœbe, tť if it is not the young lord who used to visit at the cottage !" then casting a sly look towards Rose, she added, as she drop¬ ped a respectful curtsey, " I hope your lordship will excuse my not remembering you at first, but indeed I am truly happy to see you here once again." " And let me promise for my beloved Rosina,'* said his lordship, " that you will always be as welcome to the house of lady Fortescue, as you were to that of Miss Délavai" Upon inquiry, lord Fortescue learnt
that the land which he wished to pur¬ chase, belonged to his other guardian, sir William Arlingford ; and he therefore dis¬ patched a letter to his steward in London, requesting an immediate answer. He had fixed his heart upon the land, and upon erecting an elegant house, which was to be called Delaval Hall, in compliment to the memory of a man whom he venerated with filial affection. Lord Rochdale, who was consulted in every thing, made no objection to any proposal of his ward, who, impatient to call his long-loved Ro¬ sina legally his own, at length won her consent to become his bride, as soon as lady Evelina was sufficiently recovered from her confinement to assist at her nup¬ tials, which were to be celebrated in the village church, a small gothic edifice, about two miles fiom the Abbey, beautifully situated on a little eminence, and half covered with ivy. It was here that Rose Delaval and Marian Gorden had witnessed the union of James and Sara ; and it was here that, with one accord, they had both
expressed, at the same moment, a wish to have their own nuptials performed. The third day's post brought to lord Fortescue an answer to his letter. The steward of sir William respectfully in¬ formed him, that his guardian was then in a state of insensibility, and that his physician had confidently affirmed, that he could not live the night. The Lodge, with the rest of the estates, would then be¬ come the property of his brother, captain Arlingford, with whom it would be neces¬ sary for him to have a personal interview, when he would not fail to make known the wishes of his lordship, and send an immediate reply. So little was sir William beloved by his wards, that the intelligence of his near dissolution did not occasion any interrup¬ tion to their domestic tranquillity ; yet there were those who heard it with change- ful countenances and altered feelings. To Marian this important information af¬ forded a prospect of blissful happiness, VOL. III. ι
while to colonel Belgrave it seemed to threaten shame and disgrace. The noble forbearance of Henry still held out the hope of silence on his part ; but the death of sir William would once more recall his amiable brother to the society of his equals in rank and fortune. His reappearance in the fashionable world would revive the story of his disinheritance; and though colonel Belgrave felt no alarm from any disclosure that could injure his character, on the part of Henry, yet he well knew how ready the world was to raise the voice of scandal, and to point the finger of scorn : it was this that he dreaded, and which made him more than ever deter¬ mined upon going abroad, as soon as lady Evelina was restored to perfect health. The impatience of lord Fortescue could ill brook the delay and suspense which the state of sir William must necessarily occasion, and he could not refrain from expressing his vexation, as he tore the letter of the steward into a hundred pieces. — « I could better endure шу disappoint-
ment,* said his lordship, throwing the bits of the letter about in all directions, " were I but acquainted with sir Wil¬ liam's brother; but my guardian took especial care to prevent our being known to each other; and captain Arlingford may refuse, out of pique, the land to a cousin, who has never acknowledged the relationship." ** Captain Arlingford is incapable of acting unjustly to any one," said Marian, warmly, " much less toward a kinsman, whose friendship I am certain he will be proud to claim, as soon as he is restored to the privileges of his birthright." Every eye was now turned, with a look of astonishment, on Marian Gorden, who still continued employed at her work.—- " Do you know captain Arlingford ?" was the universal exclamation of all but lady Evelina, who was not present. Ä Time will prove the extent of my knowledge," replied Miss Gorden, smi¬ lingly, " while you, ray dear lord, may ι 2
rest contented. The land is yours. I have not promised more than he will perform." * e Ah," thought Rose Delaval, " I have now discovered the fortunate possessor of Marian Gorden's heart." The countenance of colonel Belgrave w r as gloomy and suspicious. With an air of carelessness, he said—" I w T as not then deceived in my conjecture, as to the per¬ son of the minstrel with whom 1 saw you converse at the fancy ball. Yet surely, Marian Gorden, the heiress of forty thou¬ sand pounds might have looked high- er —— íe How!" cried Marian, interrupting him indignantly ; " and do you join with an unnatural brother in calumniating Henry Arlingford ?" Belgrave, for once in his life, felt inti¬ midated by the glance of a woman's eye ; but it was necessary to conceal his disor¬ der from the observation of those present. —" You mistake my meaning," said he, affecting to smile; "my regard for you has led me to wish that you might form
some high alliance, worthy your splendid fortune." Marian could have told him that he had changed his opinion, since he was the ad¬ vocate for major Campbell; but she mere¬ ly replied, that in taking the part of a man so truly estimable as captain Arling¬ ford, she had only acted from the dictates of conscience; and that, by so doing, no one present had a right to impute to her any other feeling, than that of admiration at his noble forbearance towards those who had injured him. Again colonel Belgrave felt that he looked abashed; and changing the subject of conversation, he quickly withdrew, to ruminate on the singular circumstance of Marian Gordon's concealed intimacy, with the last man in the world that he should have washed her to become acquainted with. When and how this intimacy commenced, he dared not venture to in¬ quire; but that she loved the injured Hen¬ ry, he was convinced ; and that she would bestow on him her hand and fortune, was
more than probable. Every thing seemed to conspire against his peace, and to force him into temporary exile; and the only hope which now cheered his tortured mind, was the prospect of the birth of a son and heir. Should this take place, his absence from England would give him no uneasiness; while to remain, and behold the man he had so treacherously injured, not only restored to his birthright, but blessed with the hand and fortune of an heiress, like Marian Gorden, would be only dragging out a miserable existence, with the hourly dread lest some unfore¬ seen circumstance should discover the perfidy oï his conduct towards the gene¬ rous and noble-minded Henry. Henry Arlingford, meanwhile, required no other reward for his forbearance, than the approval of his own conscience, and the assurance that his Marian's peace of mind was undisturbed by any fear for that of her friend, lady Evelina. In daily expectation that his presence would be called for in town, he continued to reside
at Judith's cottage, enjoying the luxury of frequent correspondence with his be¬ loved Marian, and of contemplating the sweet resemblance of features long and deservedly dear to him. As he felt him¬ self obliged occasionally to call on madame Du Chatillon, he was aware of her de¬ parture from her retreat; but it was from Marian Gorden that he received the un¬ welcome intelligence of her secret resi¬ dence near the Abbey ; and the still more alarming assurance of wbat he had some¬ times suspected, that colonel Belgrave was her betrayer. So far had Marian ventured to commu¬ nicate; but not a hint of the promised vengeance of the Italian escaped her. She was equally silent respecting the base at¬ tack of major Campbell ; and Henry, who knew that Rosalie was sincerely attached to his beloved, felt no fears that she would sustain any personal injury from the un¬ fortunate foreigner; he only dreaded lest her intended plan of retaliation should af¬ fect the peace of her, who was so deser-
vedly dear to his Marian. The dagger which had fallen from the upraised hand of Rosalie, when they first met at the ca¬ bin of Judith, in Ireland, bore the arms aììd crest of colonel Belgrave. How it came into the possession of his beautiful mistress, was now too well explained; and H enn , alarmed lest it should have been retained for ilie purpose of executing some terrible revenge, felt doubly anxious to be near his beloved Marian, that, in the event of any desperate deed, his presence might afford her protection and consola¬ tion. There was a minor luxury also, which Henry permitted himself to enjoy, the perusing of a daily paper during his break¬ fast. Secluded as he now was, it gave him an insight into what was passing in the world, of which he would otherwise have been ignorant ; and by this means lie first learnt the intelligence of his brother's death, which was publicly announced. fcť Then he is gone at last," cried Judith ; " and without leaving behind him the re-
membrance of one gcod action, to render his memory sacred. No tear will be shed over his remains—no heart feel a pang of sorrow, when he is placed by the side of his father, as heartless and as unnatural as himself." " He was my mother's son," said Hen¬ ry, pensively ; " and you have often told me, how dearly she loved him." * ť He was also your father's son," cried Judith, warmly ; " and as like him in every thing, as you, my darling, are like your beautiful mother." " For her sake, who died in giving me life, we must pay the customary marks of respect to sir William's memory," said Henry. ec Never, my darling, never !" exclaim¬ ed Judith, in an elevated tone of voice. " I am no hypocrite—I hate and abhor the name of sir William ; I rejoice in his death, for it gives to the child of my bo¬ som what is his lawful right ; it restores him to all the enjoyments of his birth- i a
right, in spite of the malice of his ene¬ mies ; and it opens once again the doors of his paternal mansion, from which the barbarity of a father, and the unnatural prejudice of a brother, had banished him. I go into mourning! ISo, no; old Ju¬ dith will put on her best gown—the gown given her by the best of ladies—by her dear Miss Marian. Susan too shall re¬ joice !—we will have cake and wine, sing and be merry, for my souľs darling is now sir Henry Arlingford, of Arlingford Castle !" Henry returned the embrace of his af¬ fectionate nurse, and wiped the tear of pleasure off her cheek.—" My best friend, my more than mother," said he, ** we will go together to the old castle. Together we were expelled from its walls, and toge¬ ther we will reenter them ; and my faith¬ ful Judith shall have supreme dominion over every thing, and be subject only to the gentle sway of the tenderest of mistresses. Susan too shall go with us, and continue her attentions to you, as usual ; and Carlo
shall have a warm rug to lie on, by the side οζ his mistress : nor shall the birds be forgotten ; they shall go with us, Judith, for they are yours, and have often enli¬ vened, by their song, my melancholy hours," Henry's impatience to visit the spot which contained his beloved Marian, did not make him unmindful of otiier duties. His first step, after the funeral of his bro¬ ther, was to write to lord Fortescue, and to request that his lordship would make choice of whatever portion of land was most agreeable to his taste ; at the same time, expressing a hope that his lordship and Henry Fortescue would continue to reside at the Lodge, for the summer sea¬ son, wbich he should consider as a proof of their friendly sentiments towards him¬ self. Before Henry quitted town, he recol* Jected, that the handsome conduct of the marquis of Tyrcoimel, while under that nobleman's roof, demanded his grateful
acknowledgements ; and he therefore call¬ ed one morning at Tyrconnel House. The marquis w^a*s alone, when the ser¬ vant announced sir Henry Arlingford. Springing from his seat, the marquis has¬ tily advanced, stopped for a moment, then exclaimed—" Howard ! my dear Howard !" " Either as Howard or as Arlingford," replied Henry, grasping his hand affec- tionatc-ly, " I shall be proud to claim the proffered friendship of the noble Tyrcon¬ nel." A mutual explanation now ensued ; and the marquis, who was sincerely attached to Henry, under the name of Howard, congratulated him warmly upon his ac¬ cession to his title and estates. Henry felt that a man like the marquis of Tyrconnel was not an every-day cha¬ racter ; h с therefore scrupled not to con¬ fide t j him every circumstance of his life, dwelling, with the minuteness of love, upon the generous attachment of Marian GordeA ; and paying him the high compli¬ ment of saying, that it would add to his
happiness, to receive her from the hands of his noble-minded friend, Tyrconnel Henry now learnt tliat the marchioness and lady Julia were on a visit to the Douglas family; and that it was the in¬ tention of the marquis to pass a few weeks with the Fortescues, at the Lodge, before he joined them.—" They are worthy to be your kinsmen, my dear Arlingford," said the marquis ; " and as vou are impa¬ tient to behold your lovely Marian, let it be reserved for me to have the happiness of introducing you to your cousins, to whom you ought never to have been a stranger." " I feel a delicacy in going to the Lodge," replied Henry, " unless they will first promise to receive me as a guest" " I understand you, my friend,'' said the marquis, " and will manage your in¬ troduction, so as to spare your delicacy and their pride—we will travel together. To-day let us enjoy ourselves without in¬ terruption—to-morrow I am ready to at¬ tend you."
CHAP. VIII. The death of sir William Arlingford, though long expected, occasioned many conjectures, both at the Abbey and the Lodge, as to the effect it would have upon the conduct of his successor. Lady Eve¬ lina was silent before her husband, yet she secretly rejoiced at an event which would restore an amiable and deserving man to society, and to those enjoyments of which the injustice of his uncle had deprived him. What afforded her the purest de¬ light, was a source of corroding anguish to oíonel Belgrave; yet as he could no longer avoid him, he resolved to wear the mask of hypocrisy, face him with match¬ less impudence, and be one of the first to congratulate him upon his accession to his title, not for a moment suspecting that Henry had in his possession the doeu-
ment of his treachery, which, if shewn, would prove to the world the extent of that artifice which had occasioned his dis* inheritance. With feelings of envy, he listened to Martin's account of the general joy which his own household expressed at the de*- cease of sir William. He now, for the first time, heard of the deep veneration with which Henry Arlingford was regard* ed by Dennis and his wife, who had spread among his domestics the tale of Henry's unnatural treatment from his fa¬ ther and brother; and Dennis gave a grand treat in the servants-hall, upon the occasion of the captain's coming into the possession of the Arlingford estates. Colonel Belgrave bit his lip with vexa¬ tion and anger; but policy taught him the prudence of not seeming to know, ín this instance, the proceedings of his servants. Unable to control his mortified feelings, colonel Belgrave strolled out unobserved, and beîıt his steps towards the solitude of
the ruins. Throwing himself upon a frag¬ ment of one of the tombs, he gave way to the crowd of reflections which pressed upon his brain. In imagination he be¬ held the noble form of the injured Arling¬ ford before him ; his fine features were ir¬ radiated with the blissful expression of love and hope, unclouded by the feeling of gratified revenge, or the stings of an accusing conscience. In fancy's eye he beheld the beautiful heiress of sir James Gorden bestow on him her hand and for¬ tune, the rich reward of past sufferings, the bright promise of future bliss. Purity of heart, congeniality of taste and senti¬ ment, mutual confidence, and mutual love, ensured their happiness in this world, and their virtues that of the next. A groan of anguish burst from the bo¬ som of colonel Belgrave, at the striking contrast of his own nuptials ; and yet he might have redeemed his name and ho¬ nour—might have recovered his faded peace ; had he b:it kept firm to his plan of intended, reformation, upon his mar-
riage with lady Evelina, had he relin¬ quished the property so justly due to Henry, had he resisted the dreadful infa¬ tuation of gambling, had he become do¬ mestic, and true to his marriage vow, what shame, what guilt, what agony of self-re¬ proach should he have avoided ! The scalding tears of heartfelt misery rolled down his cheeks; his misspent Ume, his shattered fortune, his ruined happi¬ ness and fame, all rushed with aggravated force across his mind, and covering his face, he gave way to the momentary de¬ spondency of a w'eak and guilty heart. " And art thou humbled at last !" ex¬ claimed a voice, whose high and lofty tone sounded like the knell of departed happi¬ ness on the ear of colonel Belgrave. He started, for he beheld before him the mys¬ terious unknown, in the same disguise as when he had last seen him. " I am myself again," said colonel Bel- grave ; " and ready to give a patient hear¬ ing to the cause of this intrusion. Thy air and manners are foreign ; art thou not
from the warm and sunny climate of Ita¬ ly?" ** That is my native land—the birth¬ place also of the marchesa di Rosarno." " Merciful Providence !" exclaimed the astonished colonel, " are you acquainted with the marchesa? Stranger, if you have ever loved, and lost the idol of your affections, oh, compassionate my suffer¬ ings, and tell me, I beseech, I conjure you, tell me what you know of my Hippolita ?" ** Thine !—thy Hippolita !" repeated the stranger, with stifled indignation ; then suddenly recollecting himself, he said, in an assumed voice—V й Listen, and I will tell thee all I know. I also have loved the marchesa from her infancy—my rank is equal to hers, and in childhood we were inseparable. I knew of your pre¬ tended passion-—I heard her rash promise to unite her fate to yours. I followed her to England—to Ireland ; and I wit¬ nessed the utter distraction of her mind, when the baseness of the heart she ido¬ lized so long and so sincerely was deve·
loped in your parting letter. I have been her companion ever since." " Then you know where she is con¬ cealed—you can lead me to her—you can reunite us—then fate may do its u orst !" A terrific laugh from Rosalie, for it was herself thus disguised, appalled colonel Belgrave. —" I see," said she, recovering herself, " that you have yet to learn the heart of Hippolita di Rosarno. The vast hoard of love which once she felt is now turned into deadly hate ; and were you to discover her abode, were you to add insult to injury, and proffer her your hoe, while anotheť possesses your name, the keenness of her resentment would nerve her arm to plunge her poignard in your perfidious bo¬ som !" " It is you then who have robbed me of her love !" cried Belgrave, fiercely ; " it is you who have counselled her to abandon a man who adores her, and who never can love another with the same fervency of affection. But you shall not live to tri¬ umph over my afflictions !"
" Moderate thy ungovernable passions," calmly replied his companion ; " to their influence you owe all the miseries of your life. My love for the marchesa is not of a nature that would interfere with yours. I wished to have been her friend, not her lover. Yet İt is to my suggestions that she listened, when she fled for ever from the perfidious arms of her betrayer., I saw her disgraced—dishonoured ! l· saw her exiled for ever from her family, and abandoned to madness and desolation— and by whom ?—by him for whose love she had sacrificed too rn&hly her innocence, her honour !" Colonel Belgrave hid his face, as a groan of bitterest anguish escaped him. Rosalie continued—" I saw all this, and counselled her to fly from still deeper guilt. I have witnessed the agonies of her soul—-the deep and never-to-be-forgotten despondency of feeling with which she re¬ signed her infant-------" Colonel Belgrave started. ** Her son ! yes, thy son —whom a sense
of justice should have made legitimate; his father had abandoned him to shame- but his mother sacrificed herself, to procure for him the patronage and protection of her family." The feelings of colonel Belgrave were now wholly subdued; he essayed to speak, but sobs choked his voice, and Rosalie again resumed. " Vain are these emotions ; they cannot restore the lost fame, the ruined happi¬ ness of Hippolita ; they cannot bring back her child, or legalize his claim to the name mid fortune of his father." She paused for a moment, to repress the weakness of a mother's feelings. Again she spoke— ** The fate of the marchesa is decided— yours is undetermined ;" then raising her voice to its powerful tone—** Awaken !" she cried, " awaken from this temporary burst of penitence!—return tc the arms of wedded lov?, and count the moments as they pass, till thine ear shall be gladdened with the blest tidings, that a son and heir is born to inherit the name and estates of
Belgrave. When thy soul fills with ten* derness—a parent's tenderness, at behold¬ ing thy young heir, then think on Hip* polita's last dread sacrifice—" *' Hold ! in mercy hold !" exclaimed the colonel, striking his forehead with violence. "Farewell, till we meet again!"-said Rosalie. " Hippolita, though lost to thee for ever, will not fail to congratulate thee on the birth of thy legitimate successor." The voice ceased—slowly and sadly did colonel Belgrave raise his eyes from the ground—the mysterious intruder had va¬ nished. It may be necessary to account for the manner in which the unfortunate Italian had made herself mistress of all that was passing within the residence of her sedu¬ cer. It may be recollected that Martin, who was the confidential attendant on co¬ lonel Belgrave, resided with him abroad» and knew all the circumstances of his con¬ duct towards the beautiful marchesa di Rosarno. Martin was as fond of women as his master, with this difference, that he
never won their affection by false pro¬ mises, nor ever abandoned them, except by mutual consent. Martin's amours were of a humbler kind than his master, yet his conscience was not burthened by the heavy crime of seduction ; and he was too much the friend of the sex, not to pity their misfortunes, and relieve them to the utmost of his power. On Rosalie's arrival in England, after her sudden disappearance from Ireland, she appointed an interview with Martin, who was quickly won over to the inte¬ rest of a young and beautiful woman, who had been deluded from her family by the false oaths of his master, and when he considered that she had sacrificed all the enjoyments of exalted birth and for¬ tune, all the endearments of kindred and of home, to unite her fate to a perfidious stranger, his heart melted for her dis¬ tresses, and he voluntarily swore to per¬ form whatever she might require. AH that the high soul of Hippolita demanded ňom the compassionate Martin, was to be
informed of whatever was passing in his master's family. From him therefore she acquired a knowledge of events, which enabled her to warn Marian Gorden of the designs of Campbell, and to regulate her own movements, towards the accom¬ plishment of her meditated plan of ven¬ geance. With the assistance of Martin, she was enabled to enter at all hours the apartments of the Abbey : from him she learnt the hurried visit of major Campbell, and judging that İt boded no good to her friend, she hastened down to afford her secret protection. The note passed under Marian's chamber door, was written and conveyed by Martin, who, being apprised of the major's remaining in the neighbour¬ ing village, communicated this knowledge to Rosalie; and thus became the fortunate instrument of Marian's preservation. In assuming the name of madame du Cha- tillon, Hippolita assumed also her first christian one of Rosalie, which w r as,less remarkable than the name by which she had been known to colonel Belgrave; and
though she had frequent interviews with Martin, who failed not to inform her of all she felt anxious to know, yet she jud¬ ged it prudent to conceal from him her own secret intention of retaliating on his master, for the perfidy and baseness of his conduct towards herself; not that she sus¬ pected the fidelity of Martin, but she knew that he was too much a woman's friend, to be accessary, if he was aware of it, to the accomplishment of any purpose that would inflict pain and misery on lady Evelina. The recent rencounter with colonel Bel- grave in the ruins was merely accidental ; it was a place seldom frequented by any of the family, except Marian Gorden; and Rosalie had gone to indulge in her own reflections, and with the hope of meeting with Miss Gorden, when she discovered, stretched on one of the tombs, her de* stroyer. Not doubting but that his emo¬ tions proceeded partly from his vexation, at learning the restoration of Henry Ar- VOL. III. к
lingford to rank and fortune, Rosalie's revengeful feelings revived; and she deter¬ mined to apply a caustic to his wounds, instead of the balsam of ease. On colonel Belgrave's return to the Abbey, he found that the indisposition of lady Evelina had considerably increased; Rose Delaval and Marian Gorden were with her; and the medical attendant gave him the pleasing information, that before long he expected to greet him with the delightful name of father. Long and anxiously had the colonel looked forward to this event ; yet now that it had arrived, a chill came over his heart, and a presen¬ timent of ill pressed heavy on his mind. The injuries of his beautiful Italian—the sacrifice she had made of their child—that child indeed the pledge of mutual love, now crowded on his recollection :—*' I shall not be happy—I shall not be fortu¬ nate," said he, " in this my legitimate off¬ spring—Heaven caimot smile upon a wretch like me—I shall either lose my wife, my child—perhaps both/'
With sleepless eye, and a heart tor¬ tured by fears for the future, Marian Gor¬ den watched over her patient suffering Mend. That day passed by, and part of the next, in agony by lady Evelina, in prayer by Marian, praying that Provi¬ dence would bless her beloved friend with a little daughter, Alas! the petition of Marian was unavailing; and she could not help uttering a cry of horror, when the nurse announced that the infant was a boy. The exhausted mother, unconscious of every thing, sank into a slumber, from whieh the doctor gave strict orders she might not be disturbed. Marian pressed the hapless infant to her bosom, and burst into a flood of tears ; while Rose flew with the joyful tidings of the birth of a son and heir to colonel Belgrave, who had been impatiently counting the hours, and who now retired, in the hope of courting that sleep which the agitated state of his mind rendered necessary. All in the Abbev was silent аз death. К 2
Miss Delaval, at the urgent request of Marian, had gone to her chamber; the weary nurse sat by the side of her lady ; and Marian Gorden, fearful of losing sight of the infant until day, hung over him as he slumbered in his cot, which was placed in the anti-room, leading to the bed-cham¬ ber of his mother. The least movement of the wind alarmed her; and yet, thought she, Rosalie will not surely take him while the life of his mother appears to hang by a thread. Long did Marian combat with the drowsiness, which, in spite of all her efforts to shake rff, at last overpowered her: her closed -"^elids refused to open, and for a few moments she was uncon¬ scious of the precious treasure which she had resolved to guard. A movement in the chamber aroused her—she started, and opening her heavy eyes, beheld the rece¬ ding figure of the Italian, bearing in her arms the sleeping heir of colonel Belgrave. Marian darted forward—Rosalie put her finger to her lip in silence, and glided out of the chamber; while Marian, horror-
Istruck, and with out-stretched hands, sunk lifeless on the floor. Recalled to life by the attentions of the nurse, Marian recollected that perhaps the existence of lady Evelina depended upon her prudence. Looking steadfastly in the face of the nurse, she thought that she remembered her features. At length it flashed upon her mind—she was the per¬ son who had attended madame, and it was most likely that she was aware of what had happened. Almost fainting with terror, Marian pointed to the empty cot, and shuddering, said—** The child is gone—it has been stolen from us. How can we best preserve the fatal secret from its parents ?" " Leave that to me," replied the wo¬ man, who had been bribed too highly to betray her employer : " the infant has died in the night I will faithfully watch over the recovery of its mother, during whose exhausted state we can exclude all visitors from the apartments, and arrange
the supposed funeral of the child. The secret is safe in our keeping." A cold perspiration stood on the brow of Marian Gorden. Should Rosalie have de¬ ceived her—should her revengeful feelings towards the father, tempt her to destroy his innocent boy, how would she answer to her own conscience, for keeping faith with such a character? Hope whispered to the heart of Marian, that Providence would watch over and protect the unof¬ fending babe, and soften the vindictive spirit of the unfortunate Rosalie in its favour. The woman who had attended madame during her confinement, was of a mild and pleasing exterior. She had suffered every degree of domestic misery herself; and when she saw the agonies of Kosalie, on parting with her child—when she listened to as much of her story as Rosalie deemed sufficient to excite her commiseration, and win her to her interest, lier heart bled at the recital of her sufferings ; and she willingly entered into the proposal of of-
fering herself as a candidate for a similar situation to lady Evelina Belgrave. Her appearance and gentleness of manners ob¬ tained her the place ; and the solemn as¬ surance of Rosalie, that the child should be safe, and one day returned to its mo¬ ther, made her an unwilling accomplice in so base an action. The dangerous state of lady Evelina made it necessary for those around her to preserve the utmost tranquillity in her apartments ; and when she w r as gradually recovering, and permitted to speak a few words, her first inquiry was for her child. " It had died a few minutes after its birth," was the reply of the nurse. The amiable young mother raised her eyes to heaven : they seemed to say—** Thy will, oh Lord, be done!" Then pressing the hand of Marian Gorden to her lips, she faintly said—** It is a hard trial, but I submit. How does Belgrave bear his loss ?" Colonel Belgrave, unassisted by the aid of religion, could ill support this disap¬ pointment of his dearest hopes. Tortured
by remorse, and by the stings of con¬ science, he felt that this heavy calamity was a just penance for his manifold of¬ fences.—" The curse of the injured Hip¬ polita bangs over me !" he exclaimed, in the bitterness of his soul : " her maledic¬ tion is in force, and her cries have reached the Throne of Mercy. My perfidy be¬ reaved her of her son ; / am punished in the loss of my young heir, to whose birth 1 have looked forward with so much an¬ ticipated joy. He is gone, and with him my last hope of comfort here." This event cast a damp on the inmates of the Abbey : all felt sorry, when inform¬ ed of the death of the infant heir—all except Dashwood ; and though he felt compelled to assume an air of regret, yet his heart secretly rejoiced, that the death of the child would weaken, as he imagin¬ ed, the claim of the father upon the affec¬ tion of its mother. The situation of Marian Gorden was truly pitiable, compelled to witness the patient resignation of lady Evelina, while
the starting tear too often proclaimed the disappointed feelings of the mother. It was in her power, by a few words, to con¬ vert this silent grief to rapture ; yet she dared not ; and with this dreadful secret preying on her mind, Marian was seri¬ ously unhappy. She had retired one evening from the chamber of lady Evelina, with her spirits more than usually depressed, and had dis¬ missed the faithful Mary, that she might give free scope to her feelings. Tears w r ere streaming rapidly down her face, when she heard the movement of the hea¬ vy tapestry, and Rosalie came forward. Marian caught her hands imploringly. —** Does it live ?" was her hasty inquiry ; then, as if dreading her reply, she sunk back in her seat, gazing with fearful ear¬ nestness on her visitor. Every angry passion at that moment was lulled to rest in the bosom of Rosa¬ lie, on witnessing the visible sufferings of Marian, and her beautiful features only к S
expressed the love and tenderness she now felt. Throwing her arms around the half4ifeless girl, she whispered into her ear the blissful tidings, that the boy was alive and well. " Thank Heaven !" cried Marian, falling on her knees ; " thank Heaven ! I am not then accessary to his murder." A momentary frown shaded the match¬ less countenance of Rosalie, but it quickly vanished, and with it every feeling but that of gratitude and affection.—** Dry your tears, and cast aside your apprehen¬ sions," said she, in a voice of honied sweetness, " for my love for you, lady, will guarantee the life of the child, as far as regards my power over it. My oath required, that the hope of its father should be annihilated, by its abduction. Soon « shall he learn that it lives, and that it is in my hands, else should i lose my promised vengeance. But you, dearest lady, you have nothing to dread ; Rosalie would die herself, before she would inflict a useless pain on thy dear breast."
" You have restored me to comparative ease," said Marian, gratefully returning her embrace ; " I will endeavour even to be happy, since assured that you will pro¬ tect the infant of my beloved Evelina." " Have you then doubted me, lady ?" said Rosalie. ** I scarce know the extent of my fears," replied Marian, guardedly. " I know that in your cooler moments he would be safe; but if passion, kindled by a sense of inju¬ ries, took possession of your soul, it might tempt you to the commission of a crime, which would embitter both our lives." " I confess/' said the beautiful Italian, ** that the temptation to guilt was strong. I bore in my arms the long-expected heir of my treacherous lover. Its birth had been looked for with rapture—it was to have been hailed with rejoicing—with the merry peal of bells—with every demon¬ stration of joy, for he was the legitimate heir of Belgrave ; while my poor infant, born amidst the sighs and tears of a de¬ luded mother, could neither claim the
name nor the inheritance of his father. I looked on the slumbering boy : its fea¬ tures bore no likeness to those of its per¬ fidious father; they were the same as its mother. I thought of her —I thought of you, lady, and my soul became calm. — f Thou shalt not only live/ I cried, * but I will watch over and protect thee from every ill of helpless infancy, and Heaven will do the rest." " And Heaven pardon and bless thee also !" said Marian Gorden. " Remember you promised that I might see him—that I might know where he is placed." " And remember, likewise, dearest la¬ dy, that caution is required. His life is safe, as long as he remains concealed from the knowledge of his parents. No son of Belgrave's shall ever inherit his name and fortune, or triumph over mine upon the plea of his legitimacy." Marian shuddered. " But you shall see him, lady ; and should circumstances permit, or should any thing endanger my life, you shall have the care
of him, upon your solemn oath not to be¬ tray his birth." Marian felt satisfied with the assurances of Rosalie, that the child was safe at pre¬ sent. She had no means of protecting him herself, and it would therefore be highly impolitic in her, to evince any dis¬ trust in die words of the person in whose hands his existence was placed. ** If you have courage to travel six miles at midnight," said Rosalie, " I will convey you to wiiere I have placed, in se¬ curity and comfort, the object of your so¬ licitude." " I have courage to encounter any thing," replied Marian, " which will ena¬ ble me to behold the child of Evelina." , ** To-morrow then, I will be here at midnight. We must pass through the park, of which I have die key ; a convey¬ ance shall be ready for our purposed visit : but lest you should be known, and the preservation of my secret endangered, I will bring with me a disguise, wdiich will set detection at defiance."
Rosalie was faithful to her promise; the next night she once more softly en¬ tered the apartment of Marian, who was anxiously awaiting her arrival. Fearless of danger, with a mind occupied by one object, Marian hastily assumed the male attire ; and throwing over her a cloak, si¬ milar to that which enveloped the grace¬ ful figure of Rosalie, she, with noiseless feet, passed through the vacant apart¬ ments of the Abbey into the park, at the extremity of which, a carriage waited to conduct them to the place of destination. The lightness of the night enabled Ma¬ rian, unobserved by her companion, to no¬ tice the different objects which they pas¬ sed on tfie road. The carriage travelled with rapidity ; and Marian felt conscious, though she chose not to remark it, that they were journeying much further than six miles. At length they passed over a dreary heath, and stopped at the door of a solitary cottage. <e Is this," thought Marian, " the place whieh shelters the son of Evelina ?"
They alighted, and Rosalie taking a lamp from the hand of a venerable-look¬ ing old man, motioned to her companion to follow her up a narrow staircase, which led into a small chamber, plain, but com¬ fortablv furnished, in which stood a bed with white hangings; and by its side sat a respectable-looking young woman, who was evidently expecting them ; for turn¬ ing down the clothes, she softly took from beneath them the sleeping infant, whom Marian's heart instantly recognised to be that of her friend. She took him ten¬ derly from his nurse ; her eyes filled with fears as she ran over his features ; she im¬ printed on his velvet cheek the kiss of fond affection ; then silently replaced him in the arms of the young woman, who, regarding him with evident kindness, res¬ tored him to his resting-place, and cover¬ ed him with great care, that he might not be disturbed. Marian attentively examined the coun¬ tenance of his nurse, but no trait of fea¬ ture appeared to indicate a harsh ox un-
feeling nature ; it was good humoured and kind, stamped in one of nature's com» mon moulds, yet bespeaking a tender heart ; and she thought she could rely on her care to the beloved infant. Not a word was spoken, but Marian pressed the hand of the young woman on leaving the room, and contrived to slip into it, an earnest of her interest in the baby's fate ; then following the hasty steps of Rosalie, they re-entered the carriage. Rosalie first broke silence.— ťť You see," said she, iť to what an extent my affection for you has led me, and judge from that, how great my confidence in your honour. I know that I must have tortured your feelings—have agonized your heart. Your fidelity to your promise, lady, and your disinterested goodness towards myself, de¬ mands from me all the atonement I can make. Life is uncertain" added Rosalie, with a deep sigh ; " and my foreboding spirit tells me, that Belgrave's will not be a long one. His crimes will draw down the angry wrath of Heaven, and
his bright locks will never be silvered with age. For your sake, lady, and your sake only, do I exonerate you from your promise of secrecy, should any thing hap¬ pen to the life of colonel Belgrave. When his heart can no longer exult in the rap¬ turous feelings of a father, when it has ceased to beat with passion's wildest throb, and has become cold and insensible, then Rosalie consents that her friend, her inva¬ luable friend, should restore to lady Eve¬ lina her infant heir." Marian pressed the hand of Rosalie to her lips.·—" Oh ! how I thank you for this permission," said she, gratefully, ** which holds out a prospect of doing jus¬ tice to the innocent, though the time may be far distant ! this proof of your affection for myself, I receive with the warmest feelings of gratitude. My heart feels lighter now, that I have seen the son of my dear Evelina ; and now also that 1 eau rely with greater confidence upon your having promised to preserve him for my sake."
" You may rely upon the word of the marchesa di Rosarno, lady ; never yet has she violated her promise. You shall have notice before I leave this place ; but cir¬ cumstances will detain me for a while near the Abbey. Sir Henry Arlingford will soon be at the Lodge ; I wish to observe the effect his presence will produce on his treacherous enemy : but Belgrave's is not the only perfidious heart within the АЫ bey walls ; let him beware of his bo¬ som friend, his ready counseller, Dash- wood !" Marian turned pale. " Thou art safe from his machinations, lady ; villain as he is, it is not interest that he adores ; the sole object of his visit here, of his ceaseless assiduities, is to win the sympathy, and then the love of his friend's wife" ** Gracious Providence ! protect my be¬ loved Evelina," exclaimed Marian, " from the snares of such deep-laid villany." ** Heaven will protect her," replied Ro¬ salie, " and not her husband ; for how can
he reproach his friend, should he attempt the virtue of his wife, when it was him¬ self that seduced lady Susan P' 1 Marian utter a cry of horror.·—" Oh, my poor friend !" she exclaimed, " well might thy young heart feel a sad presentiment of evil on thy wedding day, whicli united thee to such a monster of depravity." Rosalie soothed and composed the agi¬ tated mind of Marian, by assuring her that she would herself watch over, unseen, the actions of captain Dashwood ; yet she did not apprehend any personal danger to lady Evelina, as his plan was to lure her to his arms, not to terrify her from them. They now came to one of the private entrances of the Abbey.—" Are you not afraid to return alone?" said Marian. " What have I to fear ?" replied Rosa¬ lie ; " not the appearance of any superna¬ tural form, for my soul is above such childish weakness ; and I am armed with that which will protect me from mortal violence."
She now flung her arms round Marian's neck, and held her for a few minutes to her breast.— " I see thee now, I feel thy warm breath upon my cheek," said Rosa¬ lie, in a voice of melting tenderness ; " are we to meet again, or is this our last in¬ terview ?" Marian beheld her with strange emo¬ tion, as she returned her embrace.—" We will hope to meet again," said she, affec¬ tionately pressing her cheek ; " for should sudden illness overtake you, you know where to find a faithful friend." " And should we be fated to meet no more," replied Rosalie, " let the remem¬ brance of my injuries bury in oblivion those of my errors ; and let my memory at least be sacred to thee, and to thy Henry." Again Rosalie embraced the generous- hearted Marian, who was affected by this unusual depression of her spirits, and would fain have persuaded her to return with her to her chamber, until sunrise ; but Rosalie, rousing her drooping spirits
to exertion, bade her farewell ; and Ma¬ rian softly stole back to her apartments, satisfied with the result of her nocturnal visit.
CHAP. IX. The arrival of the marquis of Tyrconnel and sir Henry Arlingford, at the Lodge, gave the most lively pleasure to lord For¬ tescue and his brother ; and Henry's af¬ fectionate nature found ample room for enjoyment, in returning the many little acts of kindness and of friendship, which he received from the brothers, and from Olivia. Without casting any reflection on the conduct of colonel Belgrave, Henry frankly owned, that his poverty had been the cause of his seclusion from the world, and his pride the bar to his accepting any pecuniary favours from his acquaintance. —" I now perceive," said he, with one of
his fascinating smiles, " bow much I have been the loser by this conduct ; but I flat¬ ter myself, my dear cousins, that our friendship will not be the less firm, from its being so long protracted. As the first proof of yours, let me request, as a favour, that you will consider yourselves as mas¬ ters here r as long as your inclination leads you to remain ; and if my fair cousin," turning towards Olivia, " will receive me as her guest for a short time, I shall con¬ sider myself obliged to her." This proposal was highly agreeable to the Fortescues, particularly to the eldest, as his lordship had no wish to leave a place rendered dear to him by the recollection of his early ìove. A few hours explained every thing between lord Fortescue and sir Henry Arlingford. Both were lovers —both frank-hearted, generous, and affec¬ tionate ; an/ the first night of their meet¬ ing was passed together, in repeating the story of their loves, in expatiating on the beauties and virtues of their fair mistresses,
and in pledging their health in bumpers of the best wine. When the morning sun broke in upon them, through the branches of the clus- terinir vine, which overshadowed the win- dows of tlie supper-room, the two cousins had become as firm friends as if they had known each other for years. They had arranged, tbat both their nuptials should take place on the same day, without any parade or splendour, vhich was neither consistent with the outward shew of mourning, which decency and respect to the customs of society had induced Henry to put on, nor was it requisite to the hap¬ piness of either party. Sir Henry was to convey his bride, after staying a fortnight at the Lodge, to Arlingford Castle ; and lord Fortescue was to remain, and super¬ intend the erection of his intended man¬ sion. In November he was to bring lady Fortescue to pass her Christmas at Ar¬ lingford Castle, where his brother Henry, and Mrs. Fortescue, with the marquis of Tyrconnel, would be invited to meet them.
Having thus planned things to their mu¬ tual satisfaction, with hearts full of rap¬ ture, and heads full of wine, they recol¬ lected that a few hours rest wouid be verv acceptable, before they appeared before ladies. They still slumbered; when the mar¬ quis, who partly guessed the cause of their absence from the breakfast-table, handed Mrs. Fortescue to his carriage, and drove to the Abbey, His noble heart recoiled, as politeness obliged him to take the prof¬ fered hand of colonel Belgrave, whom he now viewed as the seducer of the unfor- nate lady Susan, the systematic libertine, and the professed gambler; and the com¬ passionate marquis felt no pity, except for lady Evelina, when the colonel, in terms of bitter mortification, informed him of the death of his son and heir. Lady Evelina had not yet quitted her apartments; but the, improved state of her health and spirits, enabled the two friends to accept the invitation of Mrs. Fortescue, to pass the day at the Lodge.
" Although you have not invited me/ said the good-natured lord Rochdale, ** yet I shall make one at the dinner-table- î have a woman's curiosity^ to be introduced to sir Henry Arlingford; for I suspect that my two little girls here are not in such haste to accompany you back, but for that reason." ** Indeed, my dear father/' cried Olivia, " he will win your heart, as he has done ours, almost as soon as you see him ' Colonel Belgrave with difficulty forced a smile, as he said-—" Captain Arlingford was always a favourite with the ladies.^ " And justly so," replied the marquis; " for I am confident that sir Henry is in¬ clined to protect and defend the whole sex/' Marian gave the marquis a look of grateful acknowledgment, while the colo¬ nel carelessly said·—" It is some time since we have met—I wonder where the deuce he has been rusticating all this while. However I must take an opportunity of VOL. III. L
congratulating him, upon his accession to the title and estates of his brother." Marian involuntarily turned a glance, expressive of astonishment, on the colonel, at what seemed to her, and to Tyrconnel, unparalleled effrontery ; but no one seem¬ ed inclined to notice it ; and she joyfully took the arm of Rose Delaval, to follow Olivia and the marquis to the carriage, which in a short time conveyed them to the Lodge. Lord Fortescue and Arlingford were in the breakfast-parlour: the night's conver¬ sation w r as renewed, and they were enjoy¬ ing imaginary rapture, when the marquis broke in upon them.—** Tyrconnel has had the start of us!" exclaimed lord For¬ tescue—" sluggards that we are I I see, by the mischievous smile on his face, that he has paid a morning's visit to the Ab¬ bey/' " I have," replied the marquis; " and my early rising," looking significantly at them both, " has been, rewarded : I have had a most delightful ride back."
"Arlingford, follow me!" cried lord Fortescue. Henry waited not for a second bidding, while the amiable Tyrconnel flung him¬ self on one of their vacant chairs, unwil¬ ling to disturb by his presence the meet¬ ing of the lovers.—** How exquisite must be their feelings !" said he, mentally— ** how enviable their situations !—while I, unfortunate that I am, must ever be ex¬ cluded from the enjoyment of being be¬ loved. And yet there are hearts pure and good, with whom I might taste the com¬ forts of wedded life, could I but forget the mild, angelic form of her, whose snowy finger was once encircled by this ring. Oh, had we earlier met, or not met at all, I might, ere this, have gratified the wish of my dear mother, and have become a happy husband." Tyrconnel paused; he looked round him ; he was alone—his companions were too happily engaged to interrupt him ; and he therefore fearlessly drew from his bo- L2
som a miniature, on which he gazed with melancholy thoughtfulness.—" That a wo¬ man like this," sighed he, ** should be linked in the galling fetters of sordid in¬ terest, for Love never lit his hallowed torch, to throw a ray of bliss on this ill- fated marriage ! Oh, Providence ! how mysterious are thy ways—how incompre¬ hensible some of thy decrees ! that it should be thy divine will to unite a creature, rich in every worldly excellence, with a man, whose vices render him a deformity to human nature í Return, thou heavenly image of angelic purity, return to my bo¬ som ; never shalt thou know the fervour ofthat devotion with which I cherish thy resemblance. Pure and sacred are my feelings towards thee; for were I base enough to taint thine ear with the sound of unhallowed passion, and wert thou base enough to listen, thou wouldst no longer be the idol to which my heart now pays its secret homage." The marquis enclosed the miniature in a silken case, and replaced it in his bosom ;
then gazing on the emerald ring, which bore the motto—" We part to meet again," he sighed deeply, and, taking up his hat, strolled into the gardens of the Lodge, that he might recover his composure, be¬ fore he appeared before his friends. It is most probable that the marquis of Tyrconnel would quickly have forgotten the impression which his first interview with lady Evelina had made on his mind, when she was presented to him by lady Warren, had he known that she was af¬ terwards united to a man of honour and probity—had he seen her happy—had he felt that she was loved and cherished as her virtues deserved; but unfortunately for the marquis, he too soon became ac¬ quainted with the libertine character of the colonel ; and he could not forbear re¬ gretting, that a \voman so truly estimable, was thrown away upon a heartless profli¬ gate. The miniature of lady Evelina was a copy of one belonging to his sister ; she had requested a picture of her ladyship
before she returned to the Abbey; and this the marquis had got Henry Arlingford to copy, unknown to lady Julia, not sup¬ posing that he would know for whom the likeness had been taken. Henry's copy was equal to the original ; and the mar¬ quis, though scrupulously guarded, both in his looks and words, in the presence of lady Evelina, now indulged in private, in the dangerous luxury of contemplating her mild and heavenly features ; while Arlingford imagined that his performance had passed into far different hands. In following the rapid strides of lord Fortescue, Henrv soon found himself in the drawing-room, with Rose Delaval and his beloved Marian Gorden, who proudly presented to her friend, the long- cherished object of her secret affection. It was a scene of mutual congratulation and mutual happiness; for never were four beings more fondly devoted, more ten¬ derly attached. It was a relief however to the feelings of Henry, when lord For¬ tescue and Rose left the chamber; he
could then fold his generous, his disinte¬ rested Marian tó his heart, and fondly, proudly claim her promised hand—that hand which she would cheerfully have bestowed on him, when poor and exiled from the world. " Take it, dear Henry," said the blush¬ ing maid, w r ith that charming frankness which marked her character— ct take it, for my heart has long acknowledged no other master." Henry, enraptured, pressed his lips to hers—" To-morrow, dearest," said he, " meet me in the ruins. It was there mv first dawn of happiness began—it is there that we will renew our vow of fidelity, and arrange our plans of future happi¬ ness." It was the prospect of this happiness that corroded the mind of colonel Bel- grave. There seemed to be something more than chance in his multiplied vexa¬ tions.—" It must be the hand of Him who created me," said he, " and who, justly incensed by my crimes, scatters over my
path the mildew blight of disappointment. Every hope is nipped in the bud; the man whose ruin I so unjustly planned, will soon become my superior in fortune, by his alliance with Marian Gorden ; the perfidy of my conduct will not always be concealed; my complicated vices must one day come to light, and then------" He paused, and, striking his forehead with his clenched hand, paced the cham¬ ber, with the hurried tread of mental an¬ guish.—" Yes, then" he exclaimed, " there will be but one course for me to pursue. I cannot live to brave the reproaches of the world—to endure the scoff of my com panions in guilt—and to be abandoned by my innocent and gentle Evelina, who would recoil with horror from the sight of a man so loaded with infamy. De¬ serted and disgraced, I should perish by my own hand, and leave no child to bear my name, and to redeem the honour of my family, which 1 have so basely tar¬ nished." The entrance of Martin, with a letter,
recalled the wandering senses of colonel Belgrave. A stranger, who appeared anxious to escape notice, had left it, he said, and then retired in haste. Colonel Belgrave slowly broke the seal; his eyes ran over the contents ; his cheek became pale ; he breathed with difficulty ; and his whole frame became convulsed. Again he looked at the letter, which con¬ tained these lines, in a foreign hand :—
** The marchesa di Rosarno con¬ gratulates colonel Belgrave on the birth of his legitimate heir, which has enabled her to repay the debt she owed him. The colonel generously gave her a specimen of English honour ; she has now bestowed on him a proof of Italian vengeance ! " Sleeper, awake ! no longer dream that thy lost infant was torn from thee by the hand of death, for know it was I, the ruined, the disgraced, the sacrificed Hip¬ polita, who bereaved thee of thy child! L 3
My revenge is now complete—my oath fulfilled. Farewell. * R. H. di Rosarno." It would be vain to attempt a delinea« tion of the feelings of colonel Belgrave, on discovering that his child, to whose birth he had looked forward with pride and txultation. had fallen a sacrifice to the \ indien** с spirit of liis injured mistress. Dark and dreadful was her hint; yet how had her purpose been accomplished?— w ho was her assistant in this barbarous deed ? Lost in endless conjectures, he resolved to question the nurse, who yet remained at the Abbey, for she must have known of the circumstance, if not privy to the desd. The woman, who had received her in¬ structions from her employer, and who believed that the infant was to be resto¬ red to its mother at a future day, con¬ fessed that it had been stolen from the chamber, during the few moments that
she had slept ; and that to save the life of lady Evelina, which might have been en¬ dangered by a knowledge of tlie truth, she had raised the report, of the baby having died a few hours after its birth. Though distracted for the fate of his boy, colonel Belgrave had presence of mind to approve of the conduct of the nurse, for the sake of his wife, and to re¬ quest that she would preserve the secret inviolate. Dreadful were the sensations of colonel Belgrave, as he reflected upon this proof of Hippolita's hatred towards himself; and he shuddered to think, that his helpless infant was exposed to malice like hers. Even should its life be safe within her power, to what hardships, what indigni¬ ties, might it be consigned, to gratify the vengeance of Italian hate ! The tortures of his mind, aggravated by the stings of conscience, which too forci¬ bly reminded him, that his own crimes had occasioned this dreadful sacrifice of his child, visibly affected his health ; his
spirits were sunk beyond the power of wine or mirth to raise them ; and his looks, wan and haggard, from the loss of hk nightly rest, at length attracted the no¬ tice of his friends, and alarmed the ten¬ derness of lady Evelina, which was in¬ creased by his obstinate refusal of all me¬ dical advice. The dreadful despondency under which he laboured, was attributed by all but Marian Gorden to the loss of his little son, whose birth he had anticipated with so much rapture ; but Marian felt convinced that it must proceed from the true cause, his secret knowledge of its fate ; and she would have pitied the feelings of the fa¬ ther, had not that pity been checked by the remembrance of those unfortunates, whom his vices had sacrificed and destroy¬ ed. It was the innocent and self-devoted Evelina, whom most she compassionated, and whose fate, involved with that of a ì villain, cast a damp upon the happiness which Marian would otherwise have en¬ joyed without alloy.
She had gratified the wish of Henry, and had met him in the Abbev ruins. Here, seated on the broken marble, they recalled to each others recollection their first interview ; and Marian owned, that notwithstanding his imaginary deprivation of speech, she felt that his misfortunes had endeared him to her heart, even more per¬ haps than had they met with all the ad¬ vantages of unchecked spirits, unbroken fortunes. With one arm round her waist, and her hand locked in his, Arlingford repeated the arrangements which he had ventured to make, and which he trusted she would approve. But Marian could no longer bestow on him the means of independence ; he now possessed it himself; and therefore she felt more inclined to delay their nuptials, un¬ til the arrival of lord Macdonald, who had promised to spend the autumn with his daughter, and whose presence would sup¬ ply the loss of her own to her unfortunate friend.
u No, dearest," cried Henry, t( I cannot listen to any excuses. You have already sacrificed your health and repose for her sake. When I was poor and friendless, you would not have hesitated to unite your fate with mine ; and now that f can proudly claim this dear and treasured hand, you unkindly wish m^ to delay the blissful hour, which will enable me to call you mine-—mine by the rites of our holy church." " I feel that some evil is hanging ovei the head of my poor friend," said Marian, mournfully ; " and bitterly should I ac¬ cuse myself, of selfishly considering my own happiness, while hers perhaps was on thj point of being wrecked for ever." " You forget, my beloved," replied Henry, ** that lady Evelina will not be left friendless, while she has the society of Miss Delaval and Mrs. Fortescue. Lord Fortescue will continue at the Lodge, un¬ til he joins us at Arlingford Castle. I long to see once again the venerable old building, and to witness the triumph of
my faithful Judith, upon our return to my r birth-place, from which we were both so unjustly expelled. The thought of it has made her }'oung again ; and her kind little nurse is to share in her transports, and to accompany us, as weil as honest Dennis and his excellent Mary. Surely my adored 3 larian will not suffer me to travel to the Castle, without her whose dear loved presence is now become neces- sary r to my existence/' Henry gently drew her to his bosom, and tenderly pressing his lips to her blush¬ ing cheek, conjured her not to delay their intended nuptials, which he wished to take place on the same day as lord For¬ tescue and Rose Delaval. Marian at length consented ; and Hen¬ ry's fine countenance expressed his grate¬ ful thanks for her yielding to his wishes. Marian led him to the neat farm-house of James Harlow, who instantly remem¬ bered the brave officer whom he had fought under, and whom, not only him¬ self, but all his brother soldiers, respect-
ed. Sara and her little family crowded round their benefactress, all eager to pay their respects to the " good lady," whose benevolent smile diffused light and hap¬ piness around her ; while the heart of sir Henry Arlingford, kind and compassion¬ ate as her own, enjoyed the scene before him, and kissing each clean rosy face, left with them a token to ensure their remem¬ brance. It was now for the first time that Ma¬ rian acquainted him with the base attack of major Campbell, upon hh first assuring her, that he would not seek any explana¬ tion or satisfaction from the major, as he was wholly ignorant that any existed who had a greater claim than himself to her affection. Henry wnth difficulty restrained his in¬ dignation at the improper and unfeeling conduct of major Campbell ; neither could he sufficiently express the gratitude he felt towards the unfortunate Rosalie, for her timely preservation of all his soul held dear.—*' How little did I imagine," said
he, " when I secretly rejoiced at your re¬ turn to the Abbey, the dreadful danger to which you, my beloved, would be ex¬ posed! I had long trembled at the in¬ fluence I knew this strange and singular being had over you ; and I looked for¬ ward to your leaving town, as to an event which would break offso dangerous an in¬ timacy. How little did I then foresee the invaluable service she would render to us both ! and yet this being, to whom ï am so deeply indebted, and whom my grate¬ ful heart would fain receive, and acknow¬ ledge as one of its dearest friends, is not, I grieve to say, a fit companion for my be¬ loved Marian." " Oh, do not rank my preserver among the list of those whom natural depravity renders a willing victim to the profligate seducer ! Too easily coniiding in the faith of him she loved, and lured from her home by the solemn promise of an English mar¬ riage, the unhappy Rosalie, forgetting her noble birth, her kindred, and her brilliant prospects, fearlessly forsook all, to become
the wife of a man, inferior to her *n birth and in fortune. Alas, dear Henry, can you not divine the name of him. who has outraged humanity, and disgraced his sex and family^' ** ï suspect, though í leaven grant I пглу he wrong in nn suspicions," said he. si that colonel Belgrave is the betrayer oi" the beautFul Italian. On the e\ ening oi our ñrst interview in Judith's Irish cabin, she dropped from her hand a dagger, whieh bore the arms and crest of Bel- grave/'* u It is too true that he was the cruel and perfidious destroyer of Rosalie," exclaimed Marian Gorden : " not content with delu¬ ding her from her native country and her family, by his false professions of honour¬ able love, he added insult to injury; and while he confessed the necessity of mend¬ ing his ruined fortunes by a marriage vvith my dear Evelina, he held out a hope of providing amply for her who would ever possess his heart. The high-souled Italian, no longer blinded by the hope of an ho-
nourable marriage, disdained to hold any further converse with a wretch like him; she left hirn ; and in proportion to the ex¬ cess of hev love, she now hated her cow¬ ardly seducer. In flying for ever from the presence of him she once so fondly idolized, she gave proof of possessing a virtue, which ought to entitle her to our respect, as well as our pity and tenderest sympathy/' * ť True," replied Henry ; " I admit, that in withdrawing from the society of a man, for whose sake she had relinquished all that was valuable in life, she is entitled to our sincere commiseration. I pity her from my soul ; but there is a spirit of re¬ venge, a deep and deadly feeling of pre¬ meditated vengeance, that suits not with my ideas of christian forbearance, and for¬ giveness of injuries. Am I not in the daily, nay hourly, commission of sin my¬ self, and how can I ask pardon of my Creator, if I refuse to extend mine to a fellow-creature, weak, erring, and faulty as myself? Yet think not, dearest, that I would press too hard upon the failings
of thy preserver: pity and compassion first bound me to her interest, We dif¬ fered in opinion and in principle, yet I have never deserted her ; and now she has bound me to her by an obligation I can never repay. At first, when I heard her darkly hint at vengeance, I trembled lest she should implicate you in her revengeful project ; her visit here increased my alarm —I feared I knew not what, and expected to learn some soul-harrowing tale, fatal either to the colonel or to the amiable E \ elina." Marian turned pale—he felt her hand tremble within his.—" Shall I confess to you, that from some expressions wmVIi Rosalie let fall when I last saw her I dreaded lest the innocent child of her se¬ ducer was her intended victim ; if so, I rejoice that death has robbed her of her prey." The agitation of Marian became too visible to escape his notice.—** What have I said, dearest Marian," inquired Arling¬ ton, " to cause this emotion?—Tell me,
my adored, my betrothed wife, what thus affects you?—I feel that it proceeds from my r mention of lady Evelina's infant.— Marian, by the love we cherish for each other, I beseech you hide not from me the truth relative to this object of Rosalie's hatred.—Did it not die a few minutes after its birth ?" Marian shook her head.—** Gracious Heaven ! what then has become of it?— Surely the angry feelings of Rosalie wouid never prompt her to take away its life ?" Marian felt herself compelled to rescue her preserver from so foul an odium, by confessing that her oath had bound her to bereave her seducer of his legitimate off¬ spring, but that her humanity had pre¬ served its life.—" I have seen it—I have pressed it to my bosom—and I will pledge myself for its safety," said Marian Gorden. " And have I not good reason to fear this fatal intimacy," exclaimed Henry, in a voice of deep regret, " since it has influ¬ enced you, my beloved Marian, to be¬ come an accomplice in so foui a deed?
Already have you silently assented to a crime, which has bereaved the friend you have loved from your childhood, of her dearest, fondest hope, her infant son. What next wilt you be required to perform ?— What greater sacrifice will Rosalie de¬ mand, as a proof of friendship and of gratitude?" Marian, struck by the solemn tone of his voice, and by the alteration of his countenance, burst into tears.— 6 < Con¬ demn me not, I beseech you," said she im¬ ploringly ; " my own conscience is a suffi¬ cient reproach ; yet I yielded, in order to preserve the life of the child, which affec¬ tion for me has alone induced her to spare. I know that it is safe—that I may claim it whenever I think proper—and that should any thing happen to the life of its father, I may restore it to its mothers arms—the resentment of Rosalie extends only to her unprincipled destroyer." " Heaven preserve me from the know¬ ledge of that pleasure, which is to be dep¬ rived from the misery of a fellow-crea-
ture!" replied Henry : " I feel for the deso¬ late condition of Rosalie, but I must ever condemn her method of retaliation, as barbarous and unfeminine." " Think not, dearest Henry," said Ma¬ rian, ** that I vindicate the conduct of the unfortunate foreigner, or that I easily con¬ sented to be silent on a subject so fatal to the repose of Evelina. Nothing but the conviction that its life would be endan¬ gered by my opposition, and the hope of prevailing on her to relinquish the child at a future period, could have tempted me to preserve her secret." " And now then, my beloved," exclaimed Arlingford, in a solemn voice, "let me con¬ jure you, by the love with which you have so generously honoured your Henry, and by your respect for your own future peace, to relinquish all further intimacy with the marchesa. My gratitude for her timely preservation of all I love, will continue with my life; but now, my Marian, that you have entrusted your happiness to my keeping, I will guard it sacredly from the
approach of every thing likely to endan¬ ger its continuance. Once mine, and re¬ moved from the society of the object of her hate, to the domestic enjoyments of our own fire-side, Rosalie will have no excuse to break in upon our comforts ; we may hear from, but we must no longer have personal intercourse with her." Marian felt the propriety of Henry's sentiments too forcibly, to raise any fur¬ ther obstacle to their immediate union. Far from regretting the privacy with which it would be celebrated, she rejoiced that she should be spared the bustle and confusion of a public wedding; yet she felt a pang, amidst her anticipated felicity, at quitting lady Evelina, with whom she had resided ever since the death of lady Gorden ; and this unwillingness to leave her, was increased by the strange beha¬ viour and altered manner of colonel Bel- grave, and the dark hint thrown out by the marchesa, of the base intentions of captain Dashwood. Marian, as was her usual custom, sought and found consola-
tion in her perfect reliance on Providence, to whose merciful protection she confided the safety of her beloved friend.
CHAP. X. The impatience of lord Fortescue to pos¬ sess a legal claim to the hand of Rose Delava!, could ill brook the necessary de¬ lay of forms and settlements. With a liberality as unbounded as his love, he made over to her an estate of a thousand а -year, for her own private use; while Henry Arlingford, equally disinterested, insisted upon the whole of Marian's pro¬ perty being settled upon herself and her heirs. Colonel Belgrave heard of this generous arrangement with surprise, and considered it a proof of weakness in sir Henry, to allow so much wealth to remain at a wo- VOL. III. m
man's disposal. He knew that Arlingford was neither a libertine nor a gambler, and that his own fortune was sufficiënt for all his sober plans of rational amusement; yet still he deemed it impolitic to allow so much powerful influence to continue in female hands. Unwilling to appear backward in con¬ gratulating sir Henry upon his accession to his title and estates, colonel Belgrave had forced himself to call at the Lodge, in company with lady Evelina, who, perfectly recovered from her indisposition, looked more fair and lovely than before her ill¬ ness. The air of frank sincerity, and the smile of pleasure, with which she address¬ ed Henry, stole into his heart ; and he no longer wondered at the affection with which his Marian regarded her; for every word and look betrayed the sweetness of her disposition, and the kindness of her feelings. A polite bow was all the reply which Henry made to the courteous civilities of colonel Belgrave, or to his apparent de-
sire of renewing their acquaintance ; and the colonel felt a conviction that Henry suspected his sincerity, if nothing more, from the cold, constrained manner with which he received his congratulation. Shortening, therefore, his visit, he declined passing the day at the Lodge, and resolv¬ ed for the future to avoid the sight of a man, who evidently wished to repel all overtures towards an intimacy. Could the colonel have known that Arlingford possessed the document of his perfidy, in a letter which he had addressed to general Beresford, and which Judith had preserv¬ ed for her darling, how would he have shrunk within himself—how dared to en¬ ter the presence of a man, whose generous silence, and Christian forbearance towards himself, ought to have called forth his re¬ spect and gratitude ! But colonel Bel- grave had injured him, and therefore he became the object of his dislike. Gloomy and distrustful since the receipt of the marchesa's note, colonel Belgrave bi 2
was no longer the life and spirits of the company; he frequently sat absorbed in thought, or lost in painful reflection upon the fate of his child ; while to its innocent mother he behaved with an asperity, which frequently called the tear into her eye, though she strove to conceal it from those around her, attributing the change in the manners of her husband, to his dis¬ appointment in the loss of his heir. With this conviction, lady Evelina redoubled her attentions; but they seemed to op¬ press, instead of pleasing him. It was true, that the loss of his child had completely soured the temper of co¬ lonel Belgrave, and altered his nature ; for he now regarded his amiable wife as the cause of all his misfortunes. But for her, he should have performed his promise to Hippolita; he should now have been blessed in the possession of the only wo¬ man he ever seriously loved, and should have been the happy and acknowledged father of her boy. On the contrary, he was now the parent of two sons, both of
whom would have cause to regret the hour they were born : both were deprived of maternal tenderness, and both would be strangers to the caresses of their father, to his name, and to his protection. A prey to remorse, and to the bitter reproaches of his own conscience, colonel Belgrave spent the chief part of his time alone, sometimes wandering through the ruins, as ifin hopes of again beholding his mysterious visitor, from whom he still hoped to learn some tidings of his stolen infant. At other times he w ľ ould shut himself up for the day in bis own room, giving orders to Martin, that he might not be disturbed, and excusing himself to his guests, upon the plea of illness—a plea which his looks and manner but too well attested. Forbidden to disturb his hours of retire¬ ment, lady Evelina yielded to the solici¬ tations of her friends, and accompanied them in their visits to the Lodge, where preparations were making for the double wedding. The tenantry of sir Henry were
to have free access to the servants' hall for a week, and to enjoy the amusements of a dance on the lawn. Prizes were to be given to the most industrious of the young men, and marriage portions to the most deserving of the young maidens, who were to be selected by Sara Harlow and Phcebe Briscoe, the mistresses of the rus¬ tic revels; while Mary Dennis and her husband presided at the hospitable board within doors. Out of delicacy to the feelings of lady Evelina, Marian Gorden included colonel Belgrave in her card of invitation to dine at the Lodge, which, as she had expected, he declined, on account of indisposition, wishing her, however, every possible hap¬ piness in the conjugal state. Lady Eve¬ lina and Mrs. Fortescue were to attend Marian and Rose to the little Gothic church, in which the two latter had wit¬ nessed the happy union of Sara and James. Lord Rochdale was to have the felicity of bestowing on lord Fortescue the daughter of Mr. Delaval ; and the marquis of Tyr-
connel, the affectionate friend of Arling¬ ford, was to present him with the hand of his beloved Marian Gorden. On the night previous to her nuptials, Marian, after dismissing the overjoyed Mary, devoted a longer time than usual to her devotions ; then commending her¬ self and her beloved Henry to the protect¬ ing care of Providence, she retired to bed, with a conscience void of offence towards God or man. Sleep had scarcely closed her eyes, when she w r as roused by the warm breath of some one near her. Start¬ ing from her pillow, she beheld the beau¬ tiful features of Rosalie, who was hanging over her in mournful tenderness.—** I am come/' said she, in a voice of musical soft¬ ness, " to bid you adieu for ever. Happy girl ! whose pure mind, and light heart, can so soon enjoy the sleep of hmoce* To-morrow you become the bride of lingford, and well does he deserve even thy hand, beloved Marian Gorden. I could not repress my ardent wish to con¬ gratulate you on your near approach to
the summit of earthly happiness, for such I consider the union of two faithful hearts," " My preserver !" exclaimed Marian, throwing herself on her bosom ; ( it is to you my gratitude is due, next to Hea¬ ven ; but for your timely aid.» I should not now have been free to pledge my faith to my adored Henry." " ï know thy grateful nature," replied the beautiful Italian, " but ï will no longer tax thy affection. To-morrow's sacred ceremony will make thee accountable for thy actions to thy husband, and Rosalie will no longer intrude upon thy privacy. I know thou wilt not forget me—I know I shall be remembered in thy prayers."— Rosalie pressed her to her throbbing bo¬ som, and the tear of holy friendship, of pure affection, fell on Marian's cheek. " I must hear from you sometimes," said the grateful girl, returning the fond embrace of Rosalie ; " it will be necessary to my happiness to hear from you, to be
assured of your welfare, though it will be best for us not to meet again." " I feel that it will, and I therefore re¬ sign thee, thou best and dearest of friends, to that uninterrupted and blissful tranquil¬ lity which thy virtues merit. I no longer possess a tie to bind me to existence, and in giving you up, I give up the world." Rosalie paused—her heart seemed la¬ bouring to repress the intensity of its feel¬ ing. Marian flung aside the dark ringlets that clustered round her white and po¬ lished brow, and kissing it with tender¬ ness, gently ventured to remind her of the unfortunate infant of Evelina. For a moment, the gloom of remembered ven¬ geance clouded the matchless beauty of her face, but soon it disappeared. " I know that thou art worthy to be trusted," said Rosalie ; ** and that if I in¬ trust thee with the heir of Belgrave, thou wilt solemnly preserve thy promise, never to betray his name or origin during the life of his father." M S
" I renew that promise," cried Marian joyfully; " only permit me to have him on my removal to Arlingford Castle, and I will have him reared as an orphan of hum¬ ble birth; nor will I ever breathe the most distant hint, that can falsify my w r ord of secrecy to you." " Enough, lady, enough !" exclaimed Rosalie. " You know of his retreat ; a fortnight hence, you may remove him and his trusty nurse, who fondly loves the boy r , and is wholly ignorant from whence he came, or to whom he belongs. And now farewell, farewell, lady! and may Provi¬ dence preserve thee, as he has done hitherto, pure and unsullied as thou now art, from even the shadow of a crime !" " Farewell, dear and unfortunate Ro¬ salie!" said Marian, affected by the idea of never more beholding her ; " let me hear from you soon after my arrival at Arlingford Castle ; it will afford pleasure to us both, to be assured that you are well, and influenced by those christian
feelings which will restore you to ease and tranquillity." Rosalie shook her head ; then suddenly withdrawing her arms from the neck of Marian, she glided through the chamber, with the noiseless step and manner of a being scarcely human, leaving the com¬ passionate Marian to lament the fatal ruin of a soul, which might have been as bright and faultless as the beauteous body which it enshrined. The sun had scarcely risen, before Mary Dennis and her husband were up and at the Lodge, to greet the master they so faith¬ fully loved on his nuptial morn. Henry met them with the encouraging smile of gratified pride.—** My friends," said he, " we have endured together many a bitter privation, which is the soldier's lot; we have fought and bled in the same field, and now we will enjoy the blessings of peace and domestic happiness, under the same roof.—Dennis, you must go with me to Arlingford Castle—·! cannot hear of your staying behind/'
" Heaven bless your honour !" exclaimed Dennis ; íť you will not find me lag behind in the enemy's quarters, when my noble commander has issued the orders to march. Long life to your honour, and to my ex¬ cellent lady that soon will be, and may the happiness of this day last for ever !" " And may we live and die in your honour's family, " cried Mary, " for that is all that we now care for !" Henry assured them that such was also his wish. Mary respectfully kissed his hand 5 then hastened back to dress her mistress. Colonel Belgrave and his friend, cap¬ tain Dashwood, passed the day together, alone and discontented with each other's society, and envying the light and joyous hearts of their humble domestics. The Abbey upon this occasion was quite de¬ serted ; all flocked to catch a glimpse of the lovely brides and their happy bride¬ grooms, as they returned from the church, and then hurried to the Lodge, to partake of the hospitality it afforded, and to join in the rural sports of the day.
It was indeed a day of happiness to all —-of bliss, of rapture to those whose con¬ stant hearts were now united in the indis¬ soluble bonds of marriage, with every pro¬ spect of durable felicity. Plain, yet ele¬ gant in their attire, Marian Gorden and Rose Delaval had proceeded in the car¬ riage of the former to the village church, followed by the rest of the bridal party. The sun shone brightly through the little gothic windows of the sacred edifice, half mantled with ivy; and tho village girls, with the three eldest of Sara's children at their head, attired in new white dresses, with large white satin favours in their bosoms, strewed the path with the finest flowers leading to the church-porch. Here, in the presence of their Creator, sir Henry Arlingford and lord Fortescue joyfully renewed their vows of fidelity and of love ; and here also, their lovely brides willingly promised that obedience, constancy, and truth, which the tenderness of their hearts made it an easy task to perform. The merry bells proclaimed that the ceremony
was concluded, and the nuptial benedic¬ tion bestowed by the worthy curate of the village. Henry and lord Fortescue con¬ ducted their beloved brides each to an elegant new equipage, which was waiting to receive them; and followed by the prayers and blessings of their humble friends, they returned to the Lodge, grate¬ ful to Providence, who, in the plenitude of his mercy, had thus rewarded them for past sufferings, in the possession of all they fondly and dearly loved. None more truly rejoiced at the hap¬ piness of Henry and Marian, than lady Evelina, who, though sensible of the ir¬ reparable loss she should sustain by the absence of her beloved friend, felt a gene¬ rous pleasure in the conviction that her happiness was secure in the hands of Ar¬ lingford. She dared not contrast her own lot with that of Marian, for hers had been an union of interest on the part of colonel Belgrave, while her own unengaged heart regarded him as a dear relative, to whom she had been betrothed in her childhood.
She had once thought, and only once, that she should have been far happier, had it been her fate to have married a man of taste and domestic habits, like the mar¬ quis of Tyrconnel ; for it was in the en¬ dearments of home, that his virtues shone most resplendent. But this idea was mo¬ mentary ; and if lady Evelina was not happy, yet she was contented with her si¬ tuation. The absence of lady Arlingford and lady Fortescue, and the gloomy retired habits of the colonel, threw her more than ever into the power of captain Dashwood. Lord Rochdale spent most of his time at the Lodge; the colonel was principally in his chamber; and Dashwood now saw him¬ self possessed of opportunities sufficiënt to effect his plan, His attentions had been of that delicate nature, and proceeding apparently from his friendship towards the colonel, and his brotherly kindness to herself, that lady Evelina regarded him as a being domesti¬ cated in her family, and having its inter-
est warmly at heart. As such, she allow¬ ed herself to converse with him, upon the singular change in the manners of the co¬ lonel, and to express her sentiments, with a freedom which she would not have done to any other person. Martin, who was the repository of all his master's secrets, was a keen and pene¬ trating observer of captain Dash wood's conduct. Aware of his real depravity of character, Martin suspected that his pro¬ fessed friendship towards his lady was not quite as pure and as disinterested as the guileless innocency of her heart believed. He therefore resolved upon an expedient to put his real intentions to the test, per¬ haps also to preserve the innocence of lady Evelina. It might endanger the life of his master, it was true ; but Martin nei¬ ther loved nor respected the colonel, and he therefore left that event to chance. A few lines, in a feigned hand, inform¬ ing captain Dashwood who was the real seducer of lady Susan, he placed on the captain's dressing-table, the last thing at
night, awaiting with curiosity to see the result of his communication which he thought the next day would produce. The note caught the eye of Dashwood —he opened it in haste, and read and re¬ read its contents, before he could credit that it was not a dream.
" A friend takes this secret method of informing captain Dashwood of his personal obligation to the man whom he considers as his bosom friend. The se¬ ducer of lady Susan is no other than colo¬ nel Belgrave." In the first impulse of his resentment, captain Dashwood resolved next morning to call him out, and to make him atone for his treachery by the forfeit of his life ; but conscience whispered in his ear—" Are you not equally base ?—have you not the same design against his honour ?" Dashwood smothered the angry feel-
ings of the husband in those of the lover. This additional proof of Belgrave's perfidy and conjugal infidelity might serve his purpose, and he resolved to use it to his own advantage, and return the colonel the same favour, could he but persuade Eve¬ lina to unite her fate with his. Colonel Belgrave's engagement to dine the next day with the clergyman of the village, afforded to captain Dashwood a prospect of trying the virtuous principles of his wife. Lord Rochdale was at the Lodge—they would be free from inter¬ ruption ; and the information he had so lately received rendered him more keen for revenge. Dashwood insensibly turned the conver¬ sation on his first acquaintance with colo¬ nel Belgrave, artfully managing to drop, as if by accident, hints respecting his at¬ tachment with the marchesa ; then, as if angry with himself for having said too much, he would be suddenly silent, cast¬ ing on her ladyship looks of pity and com¬ passion.
Lady Evelina had long felt a woman's curiosity to learn some account of the fo¬ reign lady, who had been the subject of the advertisement ; and by persuasion and entreaty, at length conquered the seeming reluctance of Dashwood, who gave her all the information he knew concerning the beautiful Italian, whom he avowed to be the sole object of Belgrave's affections, al¬ though he could агаше himself with other objects of his temporary amours.—" And yet," said he, taking her hand in his, " this wandering, changeful being, has been blest with the possession of a wo¬ man, who would ñx the roving heart of any other man for ever to herself. Oh, pardon," he continued, " if, in the warmth of my esteem, and love for yourself, I ex> press my utter abhorrence of the selfish, heartless wretch to whom you are united/-' " This is not the language of & friend? said lady Evelina, mildly ; ** and I have ever considered you as the steady one of my husband/' « Friend ŕ repeated Dashwood, with
emphasis. " Oh, lady Evelina^ if you knew all, you would no longer wonder at the term I unguardedly made use of be¬ fore you. I have repressed my feelings of just resentment for your sake, dearest and loveliest of w r omen ! I have sacrificed my own feelings, to spare yours; but I can no longer conceal my acute distress, at beholding the colonel's altered manner and looks in your presence. His unkind¬ ness to the best of human beings, will draw down that vengeance which I have so long withheld." " You alarm me beyond every thing» What can you mean ? How can the co¬ lonel have injured you ?" " Lady Susan !" he exclaimed, with well-dissembled emotion, and covered his face. " Gracious Heaven ! What of lady Su¬ san? Speak, I conjure you—speak to me,'* said lady Evelina, with trembling earnestness. Dashwood sunk on his knees before her, and hiding his face in her robe, said,
in a low voice—** Think of my feelings, of my shame, of my disgrace, on finding that Belgrave was the seducer of my giddy wife." Lady Evelina uttered a cry of horror— the room seemed to whirl rapidly round ; she saw not Dashwood—she felt not the support of his encircling arms—for a time she breathed not. At length he recalled her to life, and to a sense of the wretch¬ edness of her condition. Gratitude filled her heart towards Dashwood, who had thus generously concealed, until now, his deep sense of injuries never to be forgot¬ ten or repaired ; and as she shuddered at the heartless depravity of the colonel, his bosom friend, taking advantage of what he considered the fortunate moment, threw off the mask of friendship, and pleaded, with almost resistless eloquence, his passion, painting in vivid colours the hopelessness of her condition, the impossi¬ bility of reclaiming so professed a liber- tine ? and picturing the contrast of his
own unbounded love, respect, and admi¬ ration. Lady Evelina looked at him for an in¬ stant; tears of agony gushed into her eyes, and the just indignation of her heart was softened, by the recollection of her husband's baseness, which had thus laid her open to the pity, and then the love, of another.—** Leave me, I conjure you, leave me," at length she said, " nor in¬ crease my misery, by supposing, that in your cooler moments, you could thus cruelly insult a woman, wdio has a double claim to your friendship and protection." " I swear tc devote my life to your service," exclaimed Dashwood, warmly ; " but quit, oh quit, the polluted arms of a man, whose countless vices ought to ex¬ cite your abhorrence. It shall be my study to efface from your mind all traces of this unhappy marriage. Once let us be united, and the tenderness of a heart that lives but to anticipate and to gratify your wishes, shall atone for the misery of your present condition."
Dashwood would have clasped her in his arms, but she shrunk from them, and rising, with a dignity and firmness which awed him from his purpose, she said— " Unhappy man, you know not wbat you promise ! Could I be tempted to listen to your unhallowed passion, I should be as guilty as yourself. The infidelity of my husband, though it may break my heart, shall never tempt me to forget the respect I owe to myself, and to my fami¬ ly. I may be wretched, but I will not be guilty. Farewell—I forgive you, but we must meet no more !" She now quitted the chamber, leaving captain Dashwood without power to fol¬ low her, and convinced, by^ the cool de¬ termined look and air which accompanied her words, that all hope was vain of ob¬ taining her to his wishes. Disappointed in his love, h с now rashly resolved to gratify his revenge. To see lady Evelina again, he felt was impossible, after what had just passed between them. Careless, therefore, of consequences, he hastily pro-
cured his pistols, and took the road through the park, towards the ruins, there to remain until the colonel passed. Martin, whose suspicions were already raised, had stationed himself, after the dinner had been removed, in a situation which enabled him to hear the conversa¬ tion of captain Dashwood and lady Eve¬ lina. It was such as he had imagined and expected ; and the sudden departure of the enraged lover excited an immediate idea of his design. Martin lost not a mo¬ ment, but mounting his horse, hastened to give the information he had promised. The moon had just risen, when the colonel, who had felt an unusual depres¬ sion of spirits all the day, took an early- leave of his venerable host, and slowly proceeded on his way to the Abbey. A secret presentiment made him pause at the gate of the park : he felt more than half inclined to go round by the road, till ashamed of such unusual feelings, he bold¬ ly advanced towards the place of Dash- wood's concealment. The ruins, now partially illumined by
the faint rays of the moon, reminded the colonel of his first interview with the mys¬ terious stranger. Again the warning voice seemed to sound in his ear—" Attend to my admonition, or you will rush on sure destruction." Conscious of having braved his fate, he looked instinctively around him. He heard the tread of hurried steps, and felt relieved at seeing Dashwood ap¬ proach.—" My friend, thou art welcome !" cried the colonel. " Thy friend no longer, but thy direst foe, n exclaimed tl mcensed Dashwood, rejecting the prolix ¿d hand ; '* my busi¬ ness here was to seek the treacherous se¬ ducer·—the base betrayer of the injured lady Susan. I find him in the man whom my infatuated senses have so long regard¬ ed aá'my bosom friend." Astonishment at this unexpected accu¬ sation, for a moment held the colonel si¬ lent.—" Coward !" cried his accuser, scorn¬ fully, " do you shrink from my just re¬ venge?" VOL. III. N
" Coward !" reiterated the colonel, seiz¬ ing the offered weapon of destruction from his hand : " I have indeed shed my blood in vain fo v my country's glory, if a brother soldier dares accuse me of cow¬ ardice. I am ready% sir, to atone for the injury I have done you," Dashwood, in sullen silence, measured the ground, then, turning round, the pis¬ tol was suddenly snatched from his grasp, and the mysterious stranger rushed be¬ tween them." " Forbear!" exclaimed a voice of deep and powerful interest, " Brothers in ini¬ quity, forbear ! Ye are alike guilty^ You have seduced the wife of your friend, 'tis true, while he has long planned the ruin of yours, which even now he would have accomplished, but for the virtue of lady Evelina." Dashwood turned pale with conscious guilt, while a pang shot through the heart of Belgrave, at the mention of his inestimable Evelina. ** Back, monster, back into thy hiding-
place," said the indignant Italian. " It is I alone am fit to cope with the destroyer of Hippolita. From my hand must he receive the reward of all his perfidy, or by my death must he add to the list of his crimes." Then turning to colonel Bel- grave, he said—" Choose your distance ; we will fire at the same time." " I must first know who is my antago¬ nist," said the colonel, haughtily. " That will be known too soon," was the reply. " Let it suffice thee, that I am the avenger of her whom thy treache¬ ry betrayed, cf her whose fatal passion for a villain has plunged into endless guilt and misery." " Villain !" hastily repeated colonel Bel- grave ; " let us not waste time in idle words ; nothing but thy life can atone for the disgrace of such an epithet !" They now walked back some paces, and turning round, both fired—colonel Belgrave in the air, at the moment that his adversary's ball entered his breast. N9
He fell, and Dashwood ran to obtain as¬ sistance. " You sought my life and it is yours," said the colonel : " perhaps you will no longer refuse to tell me wdio you are. You have my forgiveness." The person whom he addressed now started as if from a dream, and darting forward, bent on one knee before the wounded man.—" You have my forgive¬ ness also," said a voice of trembling sweet¬ ness. " The injuries of Hippolita are now too fatally avenged." Then throwing off the large hat which concealed her features, she bent over the dying sinner, who, fix¬ ing his eyes on hers, exclaimed^—" 'Tis she ! 'tis my injured, my ever-adored Hip¬ polita! My fate is just—I am content to die by the hand of her I love." Rosalie supported him in her arms—all resentful feelings were over. She had avenged the dishonour of her family, and her own disgrace, and she now only re¬ garded him as the father of her child, and the once-idolized lover of her choice.
The colonel had fainted from loss of blood, but Rosalie thought that he was dead.— " Thou art gone," said she, in a tone of unutterable tenderness, " and by my hand. I had once fondly hoped, that we should have lived and died together; thy perfidy prevented the former, my courage shall effect the latter." She hastily drew from her bosom the dagger which had formerly belonged to her betrayer, and plunging it into her heart, sunk lifeless by the side of her seducer, a dreadful proof of Italian love and Italian vengeance. Dashwood, in flying from the ruins, encountered the marquis of Tyrconnel and sir Henry Arlingford, who immediate¬ ly hastened to the spot described by Dashwood, first requesting him to send instantly for meplical advice. Henry no sooner beheld the lifeless form of the beau¬ tiful Italian, than he comprehended the extent of her desperate courage, and fatal revenge. Kneeling by the side of the co¬ lonel, he vainly endeavoured to stop the
effusion of blood, while Tyrconnel assist¬ ed in supporting him. He turned his languid eyes first on them, and then on the beauteous corpse before him. Press¬ ing the hand of Arlingford to his lips, he expressed his gratitude for his noble for¬ bearance, and requested, that should his child be found, and restored to its mo¬ ther, he and the marquis would become its guardians.—** Let me be buried by the side of that dear unfortunate," said he, with difficulty, " and may our untimely deaths atone for the errors of our lives ! Tell my excellent Evelina, that I bless her with my parting breath, and that it is my wish, that she should enjoy that happiness in domestic life, which she is so well qualified to bestow." He attempted to pray, but his upraised hands fell on his bosom—he gave a convulsive shudder, and expired. THE END.
Printed by J. Darling, Leadenhall-Street, London,
