Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Italian vengeance: and, English forbearance: a romance
ENGLISH FORBEARANCE AND ITALIAN YENGEANIB.
X HE last rays of an autumnal sun illu¬ minated the Gothic windows of Belgrave Abbey, whose dark grey walls, half man¬ tled with ivy, now became visible to the eager gaze of its master. Pressing to his bosom the fair companion of his journey, he directed her attention to the noble edi¬ fice of which she was now to become the mistress. " My Evelina," said he, kissing off the trickling tears which she had vainly tried to repress, " my Evelina must not damp the joy of the present hour, by unwel- roL. L ?
come regrets for those she hus left behind.'* " Pardon my weakness*" faintly replied his young bride, " and excuse the feelings ofa daughter, who now, for the fiut time in her life, is separated from the most in¬ dulgent of fathers,—-I will try to be all y on wish." M Be then yourself again, my love; iet my people behold their mistress .shine in the bright blaze of matchless beauty, un¬ clouded by a care, and I am ra tisfied.* Vain, however, were the efforts of lady Evelina to force the smile of happiness. She heard the distant bells ring merrily to welcome her arrival ; she saw a train of tenants and domestics press eagerly forward to greet their master and his bride ; every countenance seemed to glow with pleasure—every voice was raised to express ifc; while lier face was pale, her voice was mute, and her heart oppressed by feelings strange, and even to herself unaccountable. Pleading the length of the journey as an excuse for the depression of her spirits, she retired early to her
chamber, followed by a ) oung friend, who had accompanied her from the dear loved home of her childhood. Alone, and unrestrained by the presence of her husband, lady E\ clina gave vent to her tears on the affectionate bosom of Marian Gorden, who innocently wondered at their violence, helieving, as she did, that however strong the filial affection of a daughter, that of the wife wouid pre¬ dominate. *' I am fatigued with the journey* dear Marian," said lady Evelina, " and the gloomy grandeur of this mansion, while it reminds me of home, only increases my weariness of spirit. I sigh for the bene¬ volent—the encouraging smile of my be¬ loved father, and pine for the loved voice which, for seventeen years of my exist¬ ence, has been the charm and solace of my life. Absent from him, and the sacred scenes of dear remembered infancy, I feel as if exiled from every thing which could endear me to the world " ? 2
Marian, in the mildest accents of ??- terly regard, besought her fnend to banibh such unpleasant reflections* reminding her that she had now other duties to per¬ form than those of a daughter; and that colonel Belgrave, however he might res¬ pect the feelings of a child, must necessa¬ rily lament his own inability to supply the piace of tlie parent thus tenderly re¬ gretted. Lady Evelina felt the force, and ac¬ knowledged the truth of this observation, A transient blush passed over her fair cheek, and a sigh from the heart escaped her, as she said in a low voice—" I would imitate my dear mother in every thing, were it possible ; but I fear I know not what. I used not to be thus backward in returning kindness for kindness bestowed on me ; but now I hourly reproach myself for the lukewarm affection with whicb I return the ardent passion of the colonel." -—She paused, and taking the hand of her young friend, pressed it within her own.— <t Marian, dear Marian ! by the influence
* '- stronger mind has ever held over ^ine, let me conjure you to reuse me from this dreadful state of languid indifference. —Talk to me of home—of the domestic happiness enjoyed with my parents—re¬ mind me of the love my mother cherished for the colonel from his boyhood—impress upon my recollection his own merits, his bravery, his undaunted courage in the field, and, above all, his constancy and steady attachment to myself." Marian embraced her, and forcing a «mile of gaiety, she said^—" You could not have enjoined me to a more pleasing task, my dear Evelina t than that of re¬ counting the praise of colonel Belgrave. His love for you ensured him mine. I felt satisfied that he must be all that he seemed to be, before your amiable mother could think him worthy to become your husband ; and though his professional du¬ ties gave him few opportunities of passing any time with my guardian, yet the little we saw of him pleased me, and in his absence, his military glory, his active be·
neu jenre, ana the generous lenity he was kvn»v,ii to b!ic*w io tbe unfortunate, were tue ak ? mate tremes of iad v Macdonalds (?;>ο»·ι:γμ , I imbibed a part c: her cnthu- -ii* ? ί·τ ?? ? praeter; ard viten I. ìbis íh.y türet wicks accompanied my dearest ? 'i vlìiì t to the al ta r, an cl sa w he r ra ti fy fb j romite given to a dying mother-— saw her b***tow her hand on ihe ??? ve man to w ham she bad been trom childhood be¬ trothed, I thought her happine>s com¬ pleted—he r>c-l f tbe happiest of women. Why then, dearest friend, this groundless melancholy—this painful anticipation of impending ili?'* <ft l ? iu w not," replied lady Evelina, sighing deeply as ??? spoke, " neitlier can I account for tiie reluctance with which I fulfilled the last request of my sainted mother. From my earliest years, I had been accustomed to consider my cousin Belgrave as my future husband. He, like myself, was an only child, and the favourite nephew of my mother: her wishes were laws to my beloved father*
2nd I was betrothed to my cousin, long before I knew or thought of the sacred- ness of my engagement My heart seemed fully occupied by my parents, my Marian, and my adored home, which contained all the objects of my love—yes, Marian, ail------" " Why then did you become the wife of colonel Belgrave ?" inquired Miss Gor¬ den, hastily interrupting her ladyship. " How could I do otherwise," mourn¬ fully replied lady Evelina; ** had I not promised my dying mother to become the wife of Belgrave, as soon as he returned to England ? How could I do otherwise, Marian, when pressed by my dear father, and hy Belgrave himself, to ratify my vow ? Could I, for the first time, own a secret reluctance to an union which both my parents sanctioned, and yet have no reason to offer them for that reluctance, but my having accidentally overheard a part of a conversation, which I certainly had no just right to conclude related to my cousin, yet from some unaccountable
feeling. í allowed the idea to take pos¬ session of my in ind ; but ashamed of my weakness, and knowing your high opinion of the colonel, I forbore to name thb in¬ ri dent even to you, and now it is too late——" " Yet let me hear it, v Faid Miss Gorden; 5Í it may give me a clue to the dangerous melancholy which unnerves you. My cooler judgment may enable me to prove the fallacy of your fears, and to convince you, 1 trust, that every thing prejudicial to the colonel ought to be dismissed from your mind, as you value your own repose and happiness." " You must remember, Marian," said lady Evelina, " that a few days before the arrival of colonel Belgrave at my father's seat in Northumberland, we were enga¬ ged to celebrate the birthday of Emily Warren." " I recollect it perfectly well," replied Miss Gorden ; " indisposition confined me at home, and it was with difficulty I could persuade you to leave me, although a ball
in the evening was to terminate the amuse¬ ments." u I should have been happier had I re~ mained behind," continued lady Evelina; u but your persuasions, joined to those ot my dear father, induced me to fulfil my engagement with lady Warren, On my ar¬ rival I found the house full of company— all was bustling preparation. Emily iiad that day attained her nineteenth year, and her fond parents vied with each other in testimonials of their affection. She also was on the point of marriage; her be¬ trothed husband made one of the party, and we stole as early as possible from the gay group in the drawing-room, to enjoy a tête-à-tête in the garden. The heat of the weather, and our own inclination to be alone, made us retire to the shelter of a root-house, at the extremity of a path, little frequented by the family, and neariy covered by the branches of the surround¬ ing shrubs. Here, while listening to the blushing recitals of happy mutual love, ? 3
we ivere interrupted by the mvmd of voi* €í% tv hich approached our retreat. The intruders paused near the entrance; the hand of the younger gentleman was ex¬ tended, as if to remove the luxuriant foli¬ age which concealed us ; but the e^der one prevented Iiim, by observing that it would îie cooler in the open air; then throwing himself under the shade of an adjoining acacia, liis companion followed lus exam¬ ple. Vexed at this circumstance, and un¬ able to continue our conversation, as wefl as unwilling to listen to theirs, we were on the point of making ourselves known, when an observation of the elder gentle¬ man, whom Emily recognised to be lord Stewart, made us withdraw from their notice. * My plain language has disconcerted you, Henry/ said his lordship, f but could I do otherwise than warn you against an intimacy with a man, whose character is well known to me?' fc But, my dear uncle, may you not be misinformed?' replied his companion; 'the
world is bat too apt to judge harshly, even of our test actions; and the thoughtless gaiety of my friend lays him open, I con¬ fess, to the shafts of calumny.' * Thoughtless gaiety Γ exclaimed his lordship ; * that is oniy assumed, to hide the profligacy of his heart. Yet this pro¬ fessed gambler—this systematic libertine —this treacherous usurper of another's rights, is now, I am told, on the point of marrying his cousin, a young and lovely girl, and heiress to a large estate, which will soon be lost at the gaming-house.' * We will hope not,' rejoined his ne¬ phew. * If indeed my poor friend is tra¬ duced, which I trust is the case, or if he has been betrayed into the commission of those vices you mention, his union with an amiable woman may reclaim him, and his future conduct atone for the past. The hard-bought laurels which he gained on the Peninsala, may recover their freshness, if watered by the tear of penitence.' *** And I would be the last man in the world to close the gate of mercy at the
approach of a repentant sinner,* replied his lordship; * therefore I will hope, fop the sake of the sweet girl, thus early des« tined to sorrow, that he may reclaim the evil propensities of his nature, and that his first act of contrition may be the res¬ toration of that property which, if any yet remains, he ought to feel belongs in justice to the lawful heir, and which a man of strict honour, justice, and huma¬ nity, would only have received in trust for the right owner. 9 * I have never heard the particulars of that bequest,' said his nephew ; c but I understood, that the old gentleman's per- fert conviction of the profligacy and in¬ gratitude of his nephew, was the cause of his disinheriting him/ 4 Another time I will undeceive you,' replied lord Stewart ; ' but let us now re¬ turn to the house, or you will not find time to examine the gallery of pictures, which are worthy your attention.' " Their departure released us from our awkward situation» and we returned hy
another path to the house, each wondering, with woman's curiosity, who could be the object of lord Stewarts severe animadver¬ sions. In the drawing-room I was intro¬ duced by lady Warren to his lordship, and his nephew, the marquis of Tyrconnel It might be imagination, but I thought that each regarded me with particular at¬ tention—lord Stewart with compassion— and so strongly was I afflicted by this strange belief, that I actually found it dif¬ ficult to support the faint sickness which came over me. In the evening I danced with the marquis : I had observed the playful gallantry of his conduct towards his fair partners, and felt a little cha¬ grined that he was no longer lively and entertaining when he became mine. More than once I raet his eyes; there was a melancholy sadness in their expression, which chilled my spirits : I fancied that I was in some way connected with the dis¬ course of the morning, else why had í become the object of his sympathy, when
my prospects, so bright and happy, had placed me above it ? ** At his request, ï drew from my finger an emerald ring, of curious workmanship, that he might inspect it more closely. Called to join the set which was forming in the ball-room, I hastily replaced the ring; and it was not until the next morn¬ ing I perceived, that in mistake, he had given me an emerald, but not my own. The rings were so much alike, that I might not have discovered the exchange, but for a motto on the inside, which İ knew my own did not possess. My in¬ tention was to return the ring immedi¬ ately, but the marquis had left the house before ï had risen. My disappointment was sincere; trusting, however, to the motto, " We part to meet again," I still hope to be allowed an opportunity of re¬ storing to the marquis the ring, which in the hurry of the moment he mistook for mine." " And upon what grounds, dear Eve-
lina, do you conclude that the being to whom lord Stewart alluded is colonel Bel¬ grave?" inquired Miss Gorden. "lam ashamed to own that I have no Just grounds for my suspicion," replied her ladyship, " yet tbe conversation ofhis lord¬ ship sunk deep into my mind. I returned home next day, more than usually thought¬ ful ; and though I refrained from noticing to you the cause, yet I could not entirely dismiss it from my remembrance. The arrival of my cousin hastened my destiny; my beloved father was anxious to fulfil the last request of my dear mother, and I was led a victim to the altar." " Oh, say not so, dearest Evelina," ex¬ claimed Marian Gorden ; " if your heart was free from any other attachment, what could prevent your returning that of colo¬ nel Belgrave? His person ss unquestion¬ ably fine, his manners highly pleasing, and his disposition a happy mixture of gaiety and feeling united. He is, in my opinion, a man that every woman must admire, and his well known affection for
you, my friend, calls for something more than tacit obedience." Lady Evelina sighed bitterly.—" The coldness of my feelings," she replied, " is a constant source of self-accusation. Be¬ trothed to my cousin în early childhood, my marriage with him was a thing of course. I felt for him the regard of a re¬ lation, and the interest of a friend in his welfare. It was the chief wish of my mother to unite us, and her wish was a law. I might have pleaded that the cease¬ less gaiety of the colonel, and his love of pleasure, were ill suited to a disposition calm and domesticated like mine. But my fate is no longer in my own hands ; I am what my parents designed me to be— the wife of my cousin ; and whatever my private feelings may be, I trust never to forget the duties of my station." " And I trust, my dear friend," said Miss Gorden, " that your private feelings will always be such as may stand tiie pub¬ lic scrutiny. As a daughter, your con¬ duct has been exemplary, and I have no
doubt but that as a wife it will be equally praise-worthy." " I would give half my existence," re¬ piied lady Evelina thoughtfully, * s to be assured that the conversation of lord Stew¬ art did not relate to the colonel." "And I am surprised, that for an in¬ stant you should allow yourself to think it did. AVas colonel Belgrave the only man who was on the point of marrying an heiress, and that heiress his cousin? Dear Evelina, dismiss for ever a suspicion unworthy of yourself, and injurious to the honour of your husband." Her ladyship's woman now entered, and Miss Gorden, embracing her affection¬ ately, retired to ber own chamber, which was at the extremity of the same gallery. To one accustomed, like Marian, to the Gothic gloom of Macdonald Castle, the sombre appearance of her apartment, only partially seen by the light of two wax candles placed on her dressing-table, occa¬ sioned no sensations of terror : not so her attendant,asimple country girl,sister to lady
Evelina's woman, who had been engaged as maid to Miss Gorden on the nuptials of her ladyship, and whose timidity made her start at the reflection of her own sha¬ dow, Pale and trembling, she had wait¬ ed the entrance of her young lady, who, seeing her distress, inquired, with encou¬ raging kindness, into its origin, and sooth¬ ed her timid spirits, by assuring her that she would soon grow accustomed to that kind of building, and be able to laugh at the fears which now possessed her.—" Until then, Charlotte," said Miss Gorden, " you shall sleep on the couch in my dressing- room." Grateful for this indulgence, Charlotte's countenance assumed its wonted cheerful* ness, and she now declared that she thought she should be able to keep up her spirits for the short time they should remain, " And how, Charlotte, are you acquain¬ ted with the length of our stay ?" inquk red Miss Gorden, with seeming carelessness The girl had gained her information
from the housekeeper's room. Naturally timid, her spirits had yielded to the fa¬ tigue of travelling, the parting from her friends, and the solemn gloom ofthe build¬ ing. To restore them, and to dry her tears, Martin, the favourite and confiden¬ tial servant of the colonel, assured her, that their stay would be very short, as his master had a rooted dislike to all such dreary mansions, and would soon hasten to London, unless some of his gay com¬ panions came down, as was expected, to pass a week or two at the abbey. Marian made no comment on this in¬ formation ; but dismissing Charlotte to that repose of which she seemed so much in need, she silently offered up her pure and innocent devotions to that Supreme Disposer of events, to whose paternal çare she fearlessly confided tha happiness of her beloved Evelina, imploring the divine as¬ sistance, to eradicate the unfortunate pre¬ judice which she had so unhappily con¬ ceived towards the colonel, and which her¬ self believed to be wholly unfounded.
CHAR II. When lady Evelina and her friend had -tired for the night, colonel Belgrave re¬ collected that it would be proper to have some prívate conversation with his steward ; and hoping that this would be the only evening he should have leisure, he rang, to order his attendance. Grown grey in the service of the family, and strongly attached to his young master, Benson quickly obeyed the summons. He had seen lady Evelina ; her gracious smile gave promise of a kind and gentle nature ; and with a full heart he now entered the presence of the colonel. Unable to re¬ strain his feelings within the pale of re¬ spectful distance, Benson warmly express¬ ed his joy at again beholding him, after an absence of eight years—beholding him
weil, happy, and the husband of so sweet a creature as lady Evelina. The colonel, in whom the sight of the old man had awakened the remembrance of early years, motioned for him to be sealed.—" Come, Benson," said he, with one of his encouraging smiles, * t let us drink the health of lady Evelina in some of the finest Burgundy. She is by far too good for such a wild fellow as I am." " She looks an angel," said the old man ; " and if your heart, my dear master, is the same as it was when ? boy, you will de¬ serve her. Ah, how I have longed to see her, because I knew she was inten¬ ded for your wife ! How fervently have I prayed for your return from the war î and when ugly reports reached my ears, about this thing and the other, I al¬ ways cried, 'tis false ; I have known his honour from a baby, and I'll stake my life that he would not hurt a worm. Don't tell me, said I, any of your Lon¬ don stories ; my master may be gay, and may spend his money like a prince, but
his heart is in the right place, and it would not let him do so base an action." A deep red overspread the face of colo¬ nel Belgrave ; he hastily swallowed a bum¬ per of Burgundy. Benson did the same. —" Of what do they accuse me?" said he, trying to steady his voice. " You know I was always a gay fellow, Benson. I am no saint. I love women, love wine, and prefer company to solitude. I am per¬ haps too careless of my money, and have lost more at the gaming-table than pru¬ dence would sanction.*' At the name of the gaming-table, Ben¬ son turned pale*—" They told me," said he, " that your honour was a great gam¬ bler, but I stoutly denied it; sorry am I to hear from your own lips, that any part of the tale is true." " My good fellow," cried the colonel, " you have spent all your life in the coun¬ try, and can have no idea of the thousand temptations which beset a young man of good family and fortune in London. Had I never entered the army, I should have
avoided many wiles, and perhaps have realized the pleasing character you have given me in my boyhood's days: but thrown early into dissipated society, I was compelled to do as my companions did. My principles were not fixed, and my dispo¬ sition unfortunately too pliant to resist the seductions around rae. Had I not done as they did, I should have been laughed at fo£ a country milksop. My brother officers played high—I did the same*: but, my good Benson, do not look so pale; I lost more than I won ; and now I am mar¬ ried, I mean to reform, and lead a new life." " God be praised ! And you will live among us, røy dear master, and gladden the hearts of your servants and tenants by your presence. You will not leave us again for some time to come." Colonel Belgrave was partial to the old man, and the Burgundy had found its way to both their hearts. He promised him, that though this visit to the abbey must, from circumstances, be a short one,
his return would be early in spring ; and then he should reside there for the re¬ mainder of the year. Delighted with this intelligence, and growing more and more communicative as the wine took effect, Benson soon made his master acquainted with all the particulars of the ugly reports which had reached his ears during his absence ; and it was well for the feelings of the grey-haired narrator, that he was not sufficiently himself, to observe the changeful countenance of the colonel during his recital. He was by this saved the pain of beholding the alternate ex¬ pressions of shame, guilt, and indignation, which clouded his features; and when he quitted the master he so dearly loved, he still thought him as free from every vi¬ cious inclination, as when he used to se¬ cond all his boyish sports, and conceal their mischievous effects from the know¬ ledge of his mother or his tutor. Left to himself, colonel Belgrave cast a glance of awakened recollection round the lofty apartment in which he sat. It re-
minded him of days—of ye^rs long past. His father he had never known ; but it recalled to his memory the form of a too indulgent mother, who, for bis sake, had passed the prime of her life in solitary wi¬ dowhood. That mother was now no more ; she died before his return to England— died before the rumours of his extrava¬ gance and irregularities had reached his na¬ tive land. Eight years had elapsed since he had received her last adieu. In this very cham¬ ber she had called down blessings on his head—she had implored Heaven to restore him to her arms, pure and uncontamina¬ ted from the vices of the world—restore him safe from the carnage of war, en- wreathed with laurels, to place at the feet of his betrothed wife. He had returned, and the laurel wreath had adorned his brow ; he had married the chosen favou¬ rite of his mother ; so far was that mo¬ ther's wish fulfilled : but had he escaped the vices of the world ?—had he been vol. i. ?
proof to its contamination ? The increa¬ sed pulsation of the heart, the stings of conscience, answered—no. Colonel Belgrave had the misfortune to be an only child ; his father's death, which happened when he was in his second year, left him to thc care ofa young and tender mother, whose excessive fondness for her son, blinded her to those failings which, in infancy, tnight have been eradicated. The constitutional gaiety of his nature, and the pliancy of his disposition, ren¬ dered him a general favourite : he did as he pleased, said what he liked, and never felt even the silk t n fetters of restraint. Inheriting a considerable fortune, and pos¬ sessing a handsome person, with fascina¬ ting manners, he became an equal favou¬ rite with his aunt and mother. The for¬ mer was lady Macdonald, the sister of his only surviving parent, and the mother of Evelina. The tenderness whieh the sisters had ever felt for each other, made them desi¬ rous of uniting their offspring; and as
Evelina was heiress to large estates on the death of her mother, lady Macdonaid's first and fondest wish was to bestow them on her nephew, whose manners, and tem¬ per, and kindness of heart, seemed to give promise of a happy manhood. The distance between the estates of the sisters, and their almost total seclusion from London, gave the young people few opportunities of associating together. When they did, they were mutually pleased with each other, as cousins and as friends; and when the wishes of their parents were made known, they felt no warmer sentiment, neither did they expe¬ rience any particular reluctance to fulfil their united hopes. Indeed, Evelina was too young when her cousin went abroad, to feel the sacredness of the engagement made by her parents. She wept at his departure, because she knew that he was fated to encounter dangers, the bare men¬ tion of which appalled thc heart of his doting mother. She wept—but she would ? 2
have done the same for any other friend or relation under similar circumstances. Though but a child, her beauty was highly attractive, and the docile sweetness of her disposition still more so : her cousin had therefore no cause to lamen t his en gagement; her education, her habits of life, her tender¬ ness of heart, and innate purity of mind, would have increased the affection of a be¬ ing more solid and reflective than himself; bat the gaiety of his nature, and the weak¬ ness of his principles, made him overlook every thing but her personal charms and her personal estates : not that Belgrave was a miser ; he cared as little for money as any man ; but he had already yielded to the seductive love of play—already had he lost some thousands at the gaming¬ table, and his cousin's large possessions were now regarded by him as a corps de reserve against his future necessities. The frequent excesses into which he was led by the dissipated companions of his pleasures, were fortunately concealed
from his too indulgent mother. He quit¬ ted England deeply involved in debt, which debts he had honourably paid on his coming of age : but though for a while he resolved to abstain from his favourite vice, yet the weakness of his character was not proof to the allurements of the designing villains, by whom he was still surrounded. Amidst the bustle and hor¬ rors of war, there was yet leisure to give way to vicious inclinations; and those hours which ought to have been devoted to the necessary repose of the body, after the toils of the day, were either wasted over the excesses of the table, or sacrificed to the thoughtless dissipation of that for¬ tune, which, in the hands of a more ra¬ tional creature, might have dispensed bles¬ sings to hundreds. Constitutionally brave, Belgrave was ever foremost in danger ; promotion sue* ceeded promotion ; and the dying moments of his fond mother were made happy by the account of his gallant achievements, their reward, and his safety. She lived
not to witness his return to his native soil, nor to feel the bitter pang which a knowledge of his vices would have occa¬ sioned. On his arrival once more in England, he paid a visit of necessity to the castle of his uncle, Evelina was in deep mourn¬ ing for her mother, and the melancholy of the iamily, and the sombre aspect of the building, were so little congenial to his feelings, that after renewing his vow of fidelity, he quitted it with thc deter¬ mination of making a tour of pleasure, until he should be recalled, by lord Mac¬ donald, to consummate his nuptials with his cousin. Feeling no inclination to visit alone the home ofhis ancestors, the colonel con¬ tented himself with writing his orders io Benson, who was to prepare the abbey for the reception of its new mistress. The necessary arrangements being made, colonel Belgrave, with a party as gay and thoughtless as himself, then hastened tothe land of Erin, to experience the genuine
hospitality of the Irish gentry, and the proverbial chastity of its females. The colonel was an universal favourite with both sexes. His handsome person, his pleasing address, and his military re¬ nown, made him the theme of woman's praise; and he might have married into one of the first families in the kingdom, had not hîs engagement to his cousin pre¬ vented him. Yet this engagement had no power to restrain his libertine inclina¬ tions. A profligate from habit, he had carried over with him to the Continent the daughter of a celebrated actress, who had left him in disgust, upon the discovery ofa new attachment, which was as quickly succeeded by another, anil another. A beautiful Italian was thc last, and she ac¬ companied him back to England. Tlie affection of signora Hippolita was ardent in the extreme, and worthy of a nobler object Charmed by the graces of his person, and deceived by his repeated as¬ surances of marriage, she at length con¬ sented to leave her home, her family, and
her native land, to unite her fate with the captivating Englishman. Too fearlessly did she confide in the promises of a professed libertine. Loving with all the energy of Italian passion, and trusting implicitly to English honour, the signora unhappily yielded up her own, thus giving him a pretext to falsify his oath, when circumstances made it neces¬ sary. Disguised in male attire, the sig¬ nora fled with her seducer to England. It was there that she hoped to receive a legal claim to his protection ; but upon this subject her lover found continually fresh excuses for delay. Hippolita had gained the key to his heart; he actually preferred her to every woman he had yet met with ; and felt alarmed, as the idea of losing her occasionally crossed his mind. At length her suspicions were roused, by his repeated evasions, and she threatened to leave him, if he longer delayed the ful¬ filment ofhis promise. Wholly unprepared for this attack, the colonel was at length compelled to confess
his unfortunate engagement, and to own that this alone was the bar to their union. The engagement, he said, was made by their parents; and it was probable that his cousin had as little inclination for the match as himself, which he trusted would yet be broken off, by some lucky, though unexpected, incident. Of this she might rest assured, that nothing on his part should be . anting to set it aside, as no woman but herself had ever possessed tiie same power over his affections, which belonged exclusively to her. Hippolita heard him, with a calmness which surprised him, and which lulled his fears.—" You have cruelly deceived me," said she, proudly restraining the starting tears ; " yet I will believe that this engagement is a forced one, and that if in your povver, you will yet do me jus¬ tice. I will not leave you, while a possi¬ bility remains that you may yet be mine." —She paused, and her lover, too conscious of his baseness, endeavoured, by his ca- c 3
resses, and the tenderest assurances of in¬ violable love, to renew her confidence. The colonel's visit to lord Macdonald was compulsory, and as if to make amends for past treachery, he did not conceal it from tbe knowledge of the signora, who, smiling bitterly, advised him to be candid with her, for the sake of all parties. The shortness of his stay at his uncle's was flattering to Hippolita, and she heard of his intended tour with evident satisfac¬ tion, resolving to accompany him. Once more assuming the male attire, the signora became the companion of his travels, under the name of the signor Di Charini ; and though her presence restrained him from forming any other connexion, yet it had no power to save him from the de¬ structive love of gambling. Night after night, large sums were lost: inevitable ruin appeared the consequence, and no¬ thing but his marriage with his cousin, tlie lady Evelina, could now stay its for¬ midable approach. Desperate from the nature of his cir-
cumstances, colonel Belgrave at length resolved to throw himself upon the gene¬ rosity of Hippolita, and to lay open to her the real state of his affairs, stating the only means by which they could be re¬ trieved. This communication was made by letter; the colonel had not courage to meet the reproaches his conscience told him were his due. He therefore took the opportunity of the signora's indispo¬ sition to leave home for a few days, on a party of pleasure, and left orders with his confidential valet, Martin, to deliver to her his letter during his absence. Tortured by the intensity of his feel¬ ings, colonel Belgrave, who was in reality sincerely attached to Hippolita, felt his incapacity to enjoy as usual the hilarity around him. He accordingly quitted his companions, and hurried back to his own residence on the evening of the third day, resolved to brave every thing, rather than relinquish his beautiful Italian, should she still determine to share his destiny. Fate had otherwise decreed, and the
honourable reparation he meditated was* no longer within his power to bestow. His temporary absence from Hippolita had only increased his passion, and as he hastened towards her residence, he anti¬ cipated their reunion with emotions of extravagant delight. Rushing past the domestic who opened the door, he flew to her apartments—they were vacant. Dis¬ appointed, he turned his steps towards the common sitting-room. Here he was met by Martin, whom the servant had inform¬ ed of his master's arrival, and who, fear¬ ful of consequences, dreaded to reply to his quickly-awakened suspicions. At length, however, he was compelled to acknowledge, that the signora had sud¬ denly disappeared, on the evening of the day on which he had presented to her the letter of colonel Belgrave, and had left on the table of his dressing-room, a packet directed to her seducer. Frantic with grief, the colonel motioned to be left alone; then hoping that this might only be a woman's artifice to try
the strength of his attachment, he hastily broke the seals. His own letters to the beautiful Italian, full of professions of an honourable passion, met his eager gaze. They were now returned to him, and with them, every costly present of unhal¬ lowed love. Among these was his mini¬ ature, broken and disfigured, and on the paper which enclosed it were these lines : — ei All search after Hippolita is vain. In tearing from her bosom the image of her betrayer, she tramples on it, as she would the original, were he now present: no trace of features, once idolized, remain— they are obliterated—so is every feeling of her heart, save tbat of deep and deadly hatred. When next they meet------" The unfinished line spoke daggers to the agitated soul of Belgrave. " When next they meet——;" it was a threat of deadly import, and his conscience told him that he deserved to feel the full ex¬ tent of Italian vengeance. Distracted in mind, harassed in body, he, nevertheless, made every effort to procure tidings of
his beloved Hippolita; but fruitless was his search ; and unable to continue where every object reminded him of his loss, he quitted Ireland abruptly, and returned to England. Here a faint hope arose that he might gain some clue to the retreat of the signora; but in this he was again disap¬ pointed ; and he flew with increased avi¬ dity to his favourite amusements, until the repeated applications ot his numerous creditors, and a letter from his uncle, re¬ called him to a sense of his desperate situ¬ ation. The letter of lord Macdonald was an¬ swered in person by colonel Belgrave, whose wounded mind and lacerated heart felt consolation unexpected, and ill de¬ served, in the gentle kindness of Evelina, and the paternal affection of her father. The loveliness of the former was as un¬ obtrusive as her virtues ; they were felt and acknowledged by colonel Belgrave. He esteemed and loved his cousin for her superior excellencies, and he resolved to promote her happiness by every attention
to her wishes. Yet the heart that had once throbbed to ecstasy at the magic sound of Hippolita's voice, or the bril¬ liant glance of her dark expressive eye, could not regulate its wandering move¬ ments, and obey the present wish of its master, by now yielding itself a captive to the charms of one so opposite in every thing to its last inhabitant. Colonel Belgrave, however, became the husband of lady Evelina Macdonald ; and after three weeks of the honeymoon had elapsed, he carried her to the estate of his ancestors, followed by the prayers and blessings of a doting father, and numerous dependants, whose tears and sobs evinced the consciousness of the loss they sustain¬ ed by the departure ofthe youthful bride.
CHAP. III. Contrary to the belief of colonel Bel- grave, a week passed away in the society of his wife and her friend, without his experiencing what he termed the blue devils. The scenery around the abbey was beautifully picturesque ; and as lady Evelina was an enthusiastic lover of the beauties of nature, he found pleasure and amusement himself, in directing her at¬ tention to those objects worthy her admi¬ ration, and felt a new feeling arise in his bosom, as he strolled over the grounds, sacred to his ancestors, accompanied by two lovely women, whose chastity of manners, and purity of ideas, called forth the involuntary blush at the recollection of his former companions and their vicious propensities. Lady Evelina was also comparatively
happy ; her husband appeared contented with every thing around him ; and as she listened to his recitals of a soldier's life, its toils and its rewards, delivered with a modesty inseparable from true courage, she thought it impossible that Belgrave could be the man alluded to by lord Stew¬ art. In proportion as tbis idea gained strength in her mind, her spirits revived ; the natural tenderness of her heart dis¬ played itself in various nameless atten¬ tions ; and at the expiration of a fortnight, colonel Belgrave confessed to his old and faithful Benson, that he had experienced, for the first time since his boyhood, the sweets of true pleasure, unalloyed by the stings of repentance. It was not, however, to be supposed that the calm of domestic love would long delight a mind, accustomed to the de¬ praved enjoyments of human nature ; and colonel Belgrave was on the point of an¬ nouncing his intention of leaving the ab¬ bey, when the arrival of visitors delayed his journey, and restored him to his wont-
ed hilarity. The party consisted of lord and lady Melrose, sir George Tenant, her ladyship's brot lier, major Campbell, and captain Dashwood, the latter of whom had recently married the daughter of a peer, a beau tiful girl, whose large fortune had been to him the magnet of attraction, and who now accompanied him in his vi¬ sit to the abbey. A few hours passed in the society of her guests, convinced lady Evelina that their company would afford her no plea¬ sure. The gentlemen were noisy, gay, and satirical, fond of drinking, gaming, and of every thing but rational conversa¬ tion. The ladies were equally unconge¬ nial to the taste of lady Evelina and Ma¬ rian. Lady Melrose was the daughter of a Scotch duke, a une woman, free in dress, equally free in conversation, fond of gam¬ bling, and dissipated to excess. She had seen Evelina before her marriage, and cu¬ riosity now brought her to the abbey, to pass a week or two before she went to her country seat for the Christmas month.
Lady Susan Dashwood was one of the prettiest creatures imaginable : her skin was transparently fair, her eyes a light blue, and her hair, a pale yellow, was suf¬ fered to stray over her face and neck in wild profusion. Her figure was equally pretty, and her cheeks as yet were only tinged with nature's roses. Lovely as she was, there was a want of mind, of intel¬ lect, which rendered her beauty tame and insipid. She laughed, talked, and romped like a child—as free from vice, as void of principle and understanding. Deficient in education, as in the talent which would receive and profit by one, she was a beau¬ tiful doll, with just sufficient good nature and innocency of heart to make her so¬ ciety tolerated. Lady Evelina pitied her for the want of those qualifications which would have rendered her an ornament to her sex ; she pitied her also for being uni¬ ted to a man, whose manners to her were particularly repulsive; they were those of the professed libertine, bold and pre¬ suming ; and as she shrunk from his gaze,
her heart felt a pang at the idea, that this man was the friend and companion of her Belgrave. In truth, he was more so than she ima¬ gined; for Dashwood was one of those young men who had, as well as major Campbell, served with the colonel abroad, and were among the number of those who had won his money, and who had assisted him in his libertine pleasures. Dashwood was then only an ensign, with little else to support him than his commission. He was keen and shrewd, and quickly disco¬ vered the weak parts of Belgrave's cha¬ racter. He consequently ingratiated him¬ self into his favour, won his confidence, and his money at the same time, and be¬ came, in a great degree, the repository of his secrets. The distraction of the colonel on the loss of Hippolita, first betrayed to captain Dashwood the nature of his attachment to the signor Di Charini ; and he there¬ fore concluded, that his sole motive in marrying his cousin, was to retrieve his
broken fortune with her large estates. A bankrupt himself, he no sooner beheld lady Susan, than he resolved*to do the same : it was easy to gain the consent of a weak, simple girl ? who now, for the first time in her life, was addressed in the per¬ suasive language of dissembled love. She consented to elope with him ; they soon found an opportunity ; and as she was the darling of her parents, they forgave her indiscretion, and received her, and the husband of her choice, with open arms. No longer the needy adventurer, but the afiluent husband ofa woman of rank, Dashwood accepted the invitation of co¬ lonel Belgrave with pleasure ; and in pre¬ senting to him his pretty little bride, felt the proud consciousness that now he was upon an equality with his friend. As mere personal beauty was the sole charm in lady Susan, except her fortune, she had no chance of reclaiming the bad habits and bad inclinations of her husband. Libertine as he was, he, nevertheless, felt and acknowledged the vast superiority
which the wife of his friend possessed over his own, and which made him at times believe that had such been his fate, he could have relinquished all his former pursuits, and have even cheerfully become a domesticated rational being. Such was, however, impossible; the silly, childish chit-chat of lady Susan, could only be tolerated when relieved by the presence of other persons ; and as hn could not be domestic himself, he resolved that his friend should not be domestic either. Colonel Belgrave required little or no persuasion to return to his former habits of life; he therefore seized with avidity the hint thrown out by his friend Dash¬ wood, of conveying lady Evelina to Lon¬ don, to pass her Christmas, when the two young brides coukl be introduced at court on the same day, and npon the same occasion. This arrangement was far from being desirable to lady Evelina : she had already become attached to the gloomy grandeur of the abbey, its venerable domestics, and
magnificent scenery, the beauty of which could not be excelled in any other part of England, and which strongly reminded her of that belonging to Macdonald Cas¬ tle. One view in particular had become lier favourite, as bearing a more striking resemblance to that of home; and thither Marian Gorden and herself would retire, as often as tiiey could snatch a few mo¬ ments of privacy from tlie noisy mirth which now reigned in the abbev. The path which led to it was screened from the rays of tbe sun by tbe thick foliage of the trees, in whose branches innumerable birds poured forth their melodious notes, while from beneath, the clustering shrubs scented the air with their grateful per¬ ni mes. At the extremity of this delight¬ ful walk, the eye was suddenly enchanted by the unexpected appearance of a noble lake, whieh divided the extensive grounds of the abbey, On the opposite side, and half embosomed in a thick wood, above whose head stretched a bold range of mountains, stood the Gothic chapel, which
had formerly belonged to the abbey, now crumbling in ruin, presenting to the re¬ flective mind a sad memento of human greatness. This was tbe favourite retreat of lady Evelina and her friend. A couple of pleasure-boats were always stationed on the abbey side of the lake, and Marian, more courageous than her ladyship, would steer the little bark in safety to the ruin, at those hours when they felt secure from interruption. In one of these excursions, the friends met with an incident which awakened their curiosity, and which made them refrain for some days from paying a visit to their favourite haunt. It was their usual practice, in strolling over the ivy-mantled ruin, to amuse themselves by reciting, or reading, some admired passa¬ ges from the finest poets of the age; or, seated on the fallen stones of the building, Marian Gorden would strike the chords of her lute with a master's touch, until the sound gradually softened down to the magical sweetness of her own voice; then
suddenly beginning one of her native melodies, she -would enchant the senses of her attentive companion, while the min¬ gled tear of pleasure and of pain stood trembling in her eyes. Marian had finished the first verse of a beautiful Scotch ballad, when the soft tones of a flute stole upon her ear ; and the next minute the words of the remain¬ ing stanza were sung, in a rich manly voice, which displayed taste, science, and feeling. With one accord, the friends flew to the spot from whence the sounds had proceeded ; but not a vestige of a human form could they discover. In vain they explored the ruins, in hopes of disco¬ vering the concealed musician, then hur¬ ried to the place where they had fastened the boat; it was safe, but no trace of another could be seen on the lake ; and they were constrained to return to the abbey, with curiosity increased and unsa¬ tisfied. Who could it be? None ofthe gen- VOL. I. D
tiemen at the abbey had a voice which could be compared, in tone and richness, with that they had just heard among the ruins—none, except colonel Belgrave; but it could not be him ; he was gone with the gentlemen on a shooting party, and had not returned when they entered the abbey : it could not be any of the domes¬ tics, for they would not have ventured to take such a liberty with their mistress ; neither could they have evinced the same scientific knowledge. Unable to fathom the mystery, lady Evelina's spirits gave way to a superstitious dread of some hovering evil ; a,nd as the idea of her be¬ loved father's probable illness gained pos¬ session of her mind, she would have im¬ mediately sent off a messenger to Mac- donald Castle, had she not been restrained by the persuasions of Miss Gorden, who, laughing, told her, that she would soon discover who was their unknown musi¬ cian.— iS Ten to one," said she gaily, " but I shali find him to be one of my devoted admirers, who has foUowed me thus far,
and who, knowing my attachment to music, has had recourse to it to awaken my sympathy." " I pray Heaven such may be tbe case," replied her ladyship, sighing, " and that the sounds we heard may betoken no greater evil than a faithful lover for my dear Marian. I confess I shall be afraid to revisit the ruin, until the intruder is discovered." " So shall not I," said Miss Gorden, " for I am determined to ir every means myself to discover him." " But you would not cross the lake alone—you would not venture unattended to the ruin ?" " Why not, dearest Evelina, what can harm me? Shall I not be as safe, pro¬ tected by Providence, within the solitude of the ruin, as within the crowded apart¬ ments of the abbey ? The sounds we heard must have proceeded from an earthly be¬ ing like myself, and I am resolved to find him out—the sooner the better, that you D 2
may not be withheld from the enjoyment of your favourite retreat. 1 ' Marian was as good as her word. She first commenced her operations on Char¬ lotte, by inquiring if there had been any visitors in the housekeeper's room lately—- yesterday for instance? Charlotte paused to recollect, then suddenly exclaimed, that farmer Gibson and his daughters had drank tea with them yesterday evening, and that a young man had accompanied them, who boarded with the farmer. " What kind of young man, Charlotte?" " A very fine young man, Miss, only, poor gentleman—" " Can he sing, Charlotte ?" " Law bless you, Miss, why he is both deaf and dumb." " Then he cannot sing," cried Marian, turning half pettishly away from her maid. " Sing! gracious me, I would give all I possess only to hear him speak," said Charlotte, in a piteous tone of voice; " to my way of thinking, there is not one of the gentlemen now at the abbey, who is
fit to compare with Mr. Howard. Then he was so kind, Miss, seeing that I was distressed to make him understand me, as to show me how to talk with my fingers ; and in an hour's time we chatted together as freely as if we had known each other for months." " I thought he was dumb, Charlotte." " Yes, Miss—the more the pity; but I mean wc chatted by help of our fingers." " Then you can teach me, if I should wish to learn, Charlotte ; but now I want you, so follow me into the garden," It was near the hour that, on the pre¬ ceding day r Marian and lady Evelina had been surprised by the voice in the ruins ; and she now, accompanied by Charlotte, crossed the lake, and fastening the boat to a tree, desired her to remain in it until she had fetched her lute. The girl felt no inclination to follow her mistress among the gloom of broken down and crumbling ruins; but taking from her pocket a volume of Humphrey Clinker, which Martin had lent her, soon forgot
every thing but the subject of her me¬ ditation. With a light step and beating heart, Marian hastened to that part of the ruin, from whence the voice had proceeded the day before, and casting her eyes half fear¬ fully around her, touched, with a tremu¬ lous hand, the strings of her lute—no answering sound met her ear. She ven¬ tured to sing a stanza of the ballad—all was silent. Vexed and disappointed, she Uiil lingered amidst the ruins, and anxi¬ ous to know if any one visited them after her departure, she let drop, as if by acci¬ dent, her bracelet ; then with a mortified air returned to the boat, where she found Charlotte busily engaged with her book, and unconscious of the time which had passed, with her so cheerfully, while with her mistress it had crept most heavily.
CHAP. IV. The next day Marian endeavoured to persuade her friend to accompany her as usual to the ruin ; but lady Evelina de¬ clined it, from a secret dread of she scarce knew what ; and to avoid the importu¬ nities of Miss Gorden, she joined lady Melrose and lady Susan Dashwood, in a drive through the park and to the neigh¬ bouring village. Marian was not to be moved from her determination of discovering the invisible musician. Charlotte was again summon¬ ed—the lake was again crossed—the bark safely moored, and Charlotte left to finish her book, while her mistress, with her drawing utensils, hastened to the interior ofthe ruin. So light was her step, that it was not heard by a person, who, re¬ clining on a broken part of the ruin,
seemed engaged in sketching some object, that evidently engrossed his whole atten¬ tion. Marian paused in breathless surprise; was this the invisible musician ? who else could it be ? He was young and hand¬ some, an air of deep melancholy gave an interest to features cast in one of nature's finest moulds; his dark hair waved in careless negligence over his high and po¬ lished brow, and the paleness of his cheek bespoke an early intimacy with misfor¬ tune. Pausing for a moment from his occupation, the stranger took something from his bosom, and pressing it to his lips, cast up his eyes to heaven, as if in the act of invoking a blessing. Marian bent forward, anxious to catch a glimpse of what appeared to him so valuable—but in vain—it was returned to his bosom ; and suddenly starting from his seat, and look¬ ing at his watch, he turned and discovered Marian, before she could make her retreat behind a pillar of the ruin. Both looked, both felt embarrassed—but
the stranger recovered first, and advancing , towards the trembling blushing girl, grace¬ fully bowed, as he presented to her the bracelet which she had dropped on the preceding day, and which he again drew from his bosom. Their eyes met—each felt confused—yet Marian suffered him to clasp it on her fair and beautiful arm. Wondering at his silence, she in a low voice thanked him for its restoration, and inquired to whom she was indebted. A deep sigh escaped him—-stiil he was silent; and Marian turned pale and sick, as the conviction crossed her mind, that this in¬ teresting stranger was the deaf and dumb young man mentioned by Charlotte. In an instant she remembered her pen¬ cil, and hastily wrote down her thanks, which she, blushing, presented to him. A melancholy smile irradiated his fea¬ tures ; he respectfully kissed her hand ; then quickly availing himself of the same means of communication, he wrote as fol¬ lows :—* f Pardon, fair excellence, this in- D 3
trusión. I am a stranger here, a friend¬ less wanderer, who, tempted by the beau¬ ty of the scenery, has dared to enter this sacred abode, that he might indulge in one of his favourite amusements. The subject of his study is nearly finished; may he venture to ask permission to visit the ruin once again, that he may complete his task, and then bid adieu to happiness for ever ?" Marian retook the pencil, pity and com¬ passion struggling within her bosom.-— " Stranger, I am not mistress here ; but in the name of that dear friend who is, I will venture to grant your request. Fi¬ nish your task, and may peace and happi¬ ness attend your steps!" Fearful that she had expressed more than maiden delicacy warranted, she would have fled; but gently detaining her, he motioned with his fingers his re¬ ply. Marian shook her head, expressive of her ignorance. Again the pencil was of service, and each letter explained. Ma« rian attempted, blundered, and blushed at
her own stupidity. The stranger smil¬ ingly encouraged her to proceed, and shewed her again the meaning of each combined movement of the fingers. Again Marian tried, and was successful. The stranger's handsome countenance beamed with pleasure. Marian had unconsciously seated herself on the fallen ruins ; he was by her side. She rose to depart, and the sunshine of pleasure gave place to cheer¬ less melancholy. He opened his port¬ folio, and exhibited some of his drawings; they were too beautiful to be viewed with indifference. Marian reseated herself, and with the artless frankness of an innocent and guileless heart, gave way to her ad¬ miration. One view in particular claimed her attention ; it was unfinished; and the stranger ventured to express a hope that she would decide on its merits, when it was filled up.—" I will not encroach upon your goodness ; but allow me to cherish the delightful hope of once more behold¬ ing you. Oh, do not hesitate ! what is it you fear ? Innocence and purity like
yours, must ever be sacred in the eyes of God and man." " I fear nothing; but the customs of the world have marked out a line of deco¬ rum, which it is dangerous to overstep, lest we incur its censure." " Not for a wretched outcast like my¬ self, sliall you, sweet girl, brave its male¬ volence. I have not always been what I now seem to be. My opening prospects were bright and sunny ; a serpent crossed my path—a serpent stung me ; the venom cannot be extracted—the wound cannot heal ; the perfidy of man has doomed me to wander over the face of nature, an exile from home, a friendless, miserable outcast from society." The stranger struck his forehead with his clenched hand : the terrible gloom x>f contending emotions darkened his features ; but in a moment all was calm again, and turning to the terrified Marian, he, by signs, entreated her forgiveness.—" Since the hour of my dreadful desolation, no gleam of comfort has broken in upon my
soul, until I beheld you. Unseen I have hovered round your steps ; I have derived consolation from your looks, which to me gave promise ofa kind and feeling heart, a tender gentle nature, which would sym¬ pathize in my woes, and pitying, listen to my distress. I am not deceived ; the ge¬ nerous tear which trickles down that angel face, confirms my hopes. You do fçel — you do pity—and you wrill suffer me again to enjoy this unlooked-for rapture, of com¬ municating to you my thoughts." Marian tremblingly turned aside her head, to conceal her emotion ; but again he recalled her attention—-" To you, and you alone, is given the power to charm me from my dark despair ; a look of thine will, and has already disarmed my soul of its purposed vengeance. Oh, be then my guardian angel, and save me from myself Withdraw not wholly from my sight ; as yet my hands are pure as thine own, un¬ stained by the blood of him whose trea¬ chery has robbed me of all worldly possessions. Meet me, I conjure you, to-
morrow, if only for a minute ; when I have seen—when I have addressed you, my mind will discard all base and selfish feelings; and he who now triumphs in my fall, may sleep securely from my en¬ mity." Confused, surprised, and half- terri fled, Marian yet wanted courage to deny the stranger's request; he still held her passive band in his, while his eyes were fixed en¬ treat! ngly on hers. At length she mo¬ tioned her assent. Like lightning he an¬ swered—" Heaven bear witness to the sin¬ cerity of my gratitude ; and may I perish, the moment I give you cause to lament this generous confidence in my truth and honour! ît shall not be long del give you a proof of mine in return. Until then, conceal from your lovely friend the subject of my conversation. It is for her sake alone 1 make this request." Once more pressing her hand to bis lips, he suflered her to depart; yet his eyes followed where his steps dared not, until she was out of sight.
Not as before had the time appeared short to Charlotte ; her book was ended, and she sat watching the return of her mistress, and wondering what pleasure she could find among a heap of crumbling stones, and ivy-mantled walls, whose very gloom was an antidote to mirth and joy. But Marian had found pleasure in those dim and crumbling ruins—pleasure which even Charlotte would have acknowledged a sufficient reward for encountering their melancholy gloom. Yet this pleasure was not without its alloy ; and Marian, for the first time in her life, felt a sentiment bordering on shame, as she met the inqui¬ ring glance of her friend, or directed to another subject her naturally-awakened curiosity. Half repenting of the promise she had given to the stranger among the ruins, Marian, uneasy and self-accused, retired early to her chamber, but not to sleep. Her wandering mind recalled each look and gesture of the unfortunate, in whose fate she felt so deep an interest. How
did she regret that he was deprived of the usual mode of communicating to her his ideas—-that a being, whose exterior was so prepossessing, should be deaf and dumb ! —a chill of horror came over her. Asha¬ med of the intensity of her feelings, Ma¬ rian blushed at the conviction of her own danger, and resolved to withdraw from the precipice on which she now stood, before her retreat was rendered imprac¬ ticable. "As yet," sighed she, " my feelings are only those of pity and humanity»—to¬ morrow shall be my last visit to the ruins. He may explain to me the nature of his injuries, and the reason why our inter¬ views should be unknown to my beloved Evelina. He has promised me his confi¬ dence; perhaps it may, in some degree, be connected with the peace of that dear loved friend. Yes, I will venture once, and only once more, to the ruins; and may that power supreme, who knows the purity of my intentions, shield me from impending evil !" Æ
With this determination Marian com¬ posed her fluttering spirit ; but her slum¬ bers were short, and broken by confused images of distress and danger : at one mo¬ ment she fancied herself alone in the little boat which was to convey her to the ru¬ ined chapel ; the weather was stormy, the water rough, and with difficulty she suc¬ ceeded in steering the vessel to the oppo¬ site shore :■ —again she imagined herself amidst the ruins—the interesting stranger had began his narrative—he was on the point of entrusting her with his secret, when suddenly two persons rushed from behind a pillar, and she beheld colonel Belgrave and his friend Dashwood—a pistol fired by the former pierced the heart of the stranger, who fell at her feet •—she screamed and awoke.
CHAP. V. The day was dark and gloomy, and the gathering clouds seemed to forebode a storm. Marian, restless and indisposed, watched with anxiety tbeir progress through the air ; at length a gleam of sun¬ shine enlivened the prospect; and, unwil¬ ling to break her word with the unknown, she stole forth unobserved by the noisy inmates ofthe drawing-room. Trembling with fear, and sickening from the recol¬ lection of her dream, she, nevertheless, resolved to brave the danger alone, if in¬ deed any danger threatened her; and hurrying to the lake, she flung herself into the vessel, which, tossed to and fro on its surface, with difficulty reached the place of its destination. Alarmed at the peril of her situation, she leaned, half fainting, on the arm of the stranger, who
was anxiously watching the approach ? the pleasure-boat, as it slowly advanced with its precious burthen, whose pale, but lovely, countenance betrayed the timi¬ dity of woman's heart. Gratitude and admiration filled that of the stranger : he flew to receive the scarce-expected, there* fore doubly welcome, visitor ; he pressed her hand respectfully to his lips, and bore her to the most sheltered part of the ruin. In a moment he had recourse to his fin¬ gers; and the eyes of Marian, with equal rapidity, combined their movements into the following sentences :— " It was the purpose of my soul to pre¬ serve inviolate my secret, until I had obtained justice from the hands of my oppressor; but your generous disregard of personal danger, that you might affotd consolation to a wounded mind, calls forth the warm gratitude of a heart, that can no longer confine itself to the limits of our present tardy and uncomfortable me¬ thod of commuiiication." Marian instinctively raised her inqui«.
ring eyes to his face, which now beamed with pleasure, while the hope of commu¬ nicating a portion of what he felt, to his humane and tender little friend, gave to his countenance that happy expression of delight, which Marian felt but could not comprehend. He saw that as yet she was ignorant of his meaning, and again he motioned with his fingers. ' " Can you not guess, dearest of friends, at what I mean hy a quicker way of dis¬ covering our thoughts?"—Marian shook her head.— (S Does not the present method involve you in that restraint which I have imposed upon myself?"—Marian's sudden start betrayed her immediate knowledge of his meaning. " Then you are not dumb," said she, clasping her hands together in joyful sur¬ prise, " thank Heaven í thank Heaven !" *' I am no longer dumb to you, sweetest and best of friends," exclaimed the stran¬ ger, in a voice of soft and tremulous emo¬ tion, which stole into the heart of the amazed and delighted Marian, like sounds
of no mortal breathing. The stranger continued—" This voluntary proof of my confidence will enable me to enjoy the luxury of hearing you, fair excellence— of listening to tbe tones of that angel voice, which first recalled me to a sense of what I was, and what I might be. How shall I express to you my gratitude for tbis evening's visit ! for my sake you have generously exposed yourself to the perils of the wind and water, therefore I gave liberty once again to my faltering tongue ; I thought how fluently it would express its master's feelings, but, alas ! ν words are now wanting to convey to you my respectful admiration—my hearts boundless gratitude," " I do not feel that I merit either the one or the other," replied Marian, " since I will candidly acknowledge, that my pre¬ sence here this evening, is occasioned by my desire to learn your reason for wishing me to conceal from lady Evelina my im¬ prudent visits to the ruin." The stranger's countenance became
elouded by sorrow ; the joyous expression of momentary happiness disappeared-—" I have been to blame," said he, " for allow¬ ing myself to cherish a hope, that an angel of purity, like Miss Gorden, could waste a thought upon a wretched wan¬ derer such as I am—" " You do yourself injustice by this t sty conclusion," cried Marian, inf errupt- ing him : ** my education and habits of life have been such, that I am little ac¬ quainted with the world ; but my own sense of propriety teaches me that I have done wrong, in yielding to the solicitation of an entire stranger, whose apparent misfortunes and severe deprivation of speech, created in my heart that natural sympathy, which has tempted me to de¬ viate from that line of conduct prudence would otherwise have suggested; but I came this evening—" ** To annihilate the only hope which has beamed on this desolate heart, since villany bereaved me of every thing but honour."
Tears gushed into the eyes of the stran¬ ger, and every feature was clouded by the deepest dejection. Marian could not restrain her feelings —" I know not the cause of your sorrow," she exclaimed, in a voice of sweetness; " but I feel that it must be severe. You mention the loss of every thing : if in that general wreck, the restoration of property would afford relief, or be the means of al¬ leviating your situation, oh, suffer me to be the humble instrument; my fortune is large, and at my own disposal—draw on me for whatever sum your necessities may require." Marian paused ; a deep crimson suffu¬ sed her face ; the warmth of her feelings had led her to propose what she now feared had given offence to the sensitive mind of the stranger ; and anxious to do away any unfavourable impression, she besought hjs forgiveness, if, in using the privilege of friendship, she had uncon¬ sciously offended. " Best and dearest of women," exclaim-
ed the stranger, pressing her hand to his lips, " could I feel offended at an offer like thine, made in the generous warmth of innocent and sympathizing kindness, I should be unworthy of that friendship which I prize more than my existence. Never will this moment be obliterated from my mind : I feel all the disadvan¬ tages under which our acquaintance com¬ menced—feel them most sensibly: yet conscious that I am now addressing one superior to the generality of her sex—one whom my bleeding heart acknowledged He checked the involuntary confession ofa passion, which had nearly escaped his lips, but which pride and delicacy taught him to conceal, until happier circum¬ stances authorized the avowal. " I must leave you," said Marian, rising in somt confusion ; " I have already ha¬ zarded a discovery, which might, and would naturally occasion my friends much uneasiness. If ever Marian Gorden can be of service to the Unknown of the Ruins, you may rely upon her friendship—her as-
sistance—to the utmost of her power.— Farewell !" t( Oh, yet a moment stay !" exclaimed the stranger, " while I warn you of im¬ pending danger." Marian unconsciously cast a look of fearful recollection around the chapel, and, for the first time, became aware of the length of her visit, by the increased gloom of the evening. The stranger understood her fears.—" I will not detain you now," said he, in a melancholy tone of voice; " neither will I selfishly petition for another interview iu the ruins. I have a friend, on whose fide¬ lity I can rely, and through whose liands I can convey to you the intimation ofthe danger to which I have alluded." At this moment the sound of approach¬ ing footsteps was heard, proceeding from that part of the building which opened into the home park. Marian instinctively clung to the arm of the stranger. The dream of the preceding night arose to her imagination, and she trembled as she lean- VOL. I. E
ed on the stranger for support, who, whis¬ pering, said—" Fear not to trust yourself with me, dear Miss Gorden, until those intruders are withdrawn ; they may be some of the abbey guests, and your pre¬ sence here may give occasion to insolent remarks." The stranger respectfully passed his arms around the graceful form of the af¬ frighted girl, and raising her from the ground, conveyed her, with noiseless feet, to a recess, behind one of the magnificent tombs which had formerly adorned the chapel. Here, secure from observation, Marian ventured to turn her eyes towards the spot where the advancing footsteps came. The faint rays of light which streamed through the high-arched win¬ dows of the ruin, enabled her to distin¬ guish two figures, as they turned the cor¬ ner ofthe aisle, the tallest of whom Ma¬ rian immediately recognised to be colonel Belgrave. —" Thus far have I followed you," said he, pausing near the opposite monument to that which concealed the,
wondering maid ; tí it now rests with you to explain the purport of that mysterious note which I received this morning, and which has occasioned this singular visit." The person thus addressed was enve¬ loped ia an ample cloak, which wholly concealed their figure ; a hat of large di¬ mensions shaded their features ; and not even the scrutinizing glance of colonel Belgrave could catch a glimpse of the countenance of his companion, who at length, in a tone of deep and intense feel¬ ing, said—" And had you no fear in com¬ plying with the request of a stranger, who, in demanding an interview, made choice of this spot, so lone and desolate, that had you an enemy------" " I know not what it is to fear," replied colonel Belgrave. " True," said his companion, interrupt¬ ing bim ; '« you neither fear God nor man. Traitor alike in friendship and in love, you act without principle—without honour—without humanity ; and yet you have no fear. Cold, systematic murderer e 2
ENGLISH FORBEARANCE ofthe happiness of others, how long wilt thou enjoy thy boasted apathy—how long wilt thou triumph over the confiding tenderness of woman—how long wilt thou withhold from its rightful owner the for¬ tune which thy villany obtained from the credulity of age—how long wilt thou do this, and yet be fearless of impending vengeance?" Marian, faint and sick with apprehen¬ sion, would have fallen to the ground, but for the timely support of the stranger. She thought she felt him tremble, as his encircling arms drew her still closer to his bosom ; and venturing to raise her eyes to his, she beheld his countenance dark and gloomy, as she had once before seen it, when the subject of his wrongs had shook his frame to agony. The voice of the colonel again arretted the attention of Marian. Trembling with passion, he seized the arm of his accuser, and fiercely demanded who he was, who thus dared to accuse him of crimes, with¬ out the power to substantiate his charge?
ff I possess a power thou little dreamest of," was the reply ; " a power which, if exerted, would crush thee to earth. But I came here to warn thee of danger from which thou canst not escape—of danger which threatens thy life. Nay, start not ; ere this it would have paid the forfeit of thy treachery, had not compassion to the feelings of thy amiable wife restrained the impending blow. But not even her vir¬ tues can fix thy wavering heart : another victim must be sacrificed to thy ungovern¬ able passions, the rights of hospitality violated, and thy soul plunged deeper still in guilt. Belgrave, beware; pause yet awhile, before you add another name to the list of your seductions. My visit here is to save, if possible, a young and inexpe¬ rienced creature from the destruction you meditate." " Mysterious being !" exclaimed the co¬ lonel, interrupting him. *· Say from what cause do you affect an interest in my welfare ? of what moment is it to thee, my weal or woe ?"
" No matter," repiied his companion ; 4t of this, rest satisfied— I know thee well; thy very thoughts are scarcely concealed from me. Could any thing have reclaim¬ ed thee, it would have been thy marriage with the gentle Evelina; but thou art alike incapable of love as of friendship ; one ruling passion sways thy soul, and to gratify this destructive vice, thou wilt not serupie to sacrifice her, as tliou hast done the signora, and the too credulous Arling« ford." " By Heavens this is too much !" ex- claimed the agitated colonel, drawing forth a pistol ; " prepare to give me im¬ mediate satisfaction for the insults I have received. You see I am armed ; defend yourself, lest my just resentment should urge me to------" r * Become a murderer," replied his com¬ panion, with coolness. Colonel Belgrave instantly restored the pistol to its original place of concealment. The fearless man¬ ner, and determined coolness of the un¬ known, recalled his enraged adversary to
iS .jS
recollecdoii ; and the alteration in the voice in which the last words were spo¬ ken, operated like a charm upon the frame and mind of the incensed soldier. In vain he strove to shake off the weakness which stole over him ; the alteration of voice reminded him of one, which was the sole and only one that had ever found its way to his heart. Softened by the re¬ membrance, he was on the point of speak¬ ing, but the unknown waved his hand. " I know what is now passing in your mind," said he, " and I rejoice that you are still capable of feeling as a man. You wish to know who I am ; it would not add to your comfort. I have mentioned names, which must convince you that I am no stranger, either to your past or pre¬ sent movements. My errand here, is to admonish you to give up your unjust de¬ signs against the peace and welfare of those, whom the laws of hospitality have bound you to protect. Attend to my warning, or you rush on sure destruction." Then changing his voice to that which
had so sensibly affected the colonel, he pronounced—" Farewell," and glided a- way behind the ruins of the altar. For a moment, as if spell-bound, colonel Bel- grave remained fixed to the spot ; then, as if suddenly recollecting himself, he darted forward, and quitted the ruins in pursuit of the mysterious visitor. Freed from the restraint which his pre¬ sence occasioned, Marian burst into a flood of tears, which her supporter wisely al¬ lowed to flow.—" Chance has discovered to you, dearest of friends," said he, " even more than I wished you to know. It has laid open to you the dangerous character of the man under whose roof you reside, in fearless, but false security." " Oh ! it is not for myself I fear," ex¬ claimed the trembling girl; " it is for my beloved, my self-devoted Evelina. Gra¬ cious Providence ! can it be possible, that colonel Belgrave is the monster I have heard described !" " I fear he is, all and even more than you have heard him represented," replied
the stranger ; " but compose yourself, I beseech you. I tremble for the conse¬ quences of the shock you have received, and feel alarmed lest your health should be the sufferer." Marian would have assured him that she felt no apprehensions of illness, but that her tottering limbs and trembling frame belied her tongue. Again she was compelled to receive the support of his encircling arm, as he conducted her to where the pleasure-boat was moored. By the help of a glass, he was enabled to dis¬ cern any object on the opposite side of the lake; and Marian, trusting to his assur¬ ance that ail was clear, at length consented to his guiding the vessel to a part of the abbey garden, nearer the house than her accustomed place of landing. The heart of Marian beat with terror, lest her pro¬ tector should be seen by any of the in¬ mates of the abbey; fortunately, how¬ ever, they reached the shore without be¬ ing observed, and striking into an unfre- e 3
quented path, was quickly in view of the mansion. ** Farewell, dear Miss Gorden," said the stranger, respectfully kissing her hand ; " I must now resume my silent character, and pay a visit to my kind old friend, the housekeeper. Should your absence have been noticed, I may chance to hear any comment that has been made. Farewell, and for the sake of those friends, to whom you arc dearer than life, let not the events of this evening prey upon your mind, but trust to a merciful Providence, who never fails to watch over, and to protect the innocent." *' Farewell," repeated Marian, in a low voice ; " and should we not meet again ..... " her sinking spirits prevented the conclu¬ sion of her speech ; she broke from the hold of tiic stranger, and hurried by a back way to her apartments, fearing lest her tongue should give utterance to her feel¬ ings. All ί?) the chamber was the same as when she had quitted it ; and she there¬ fore hoped, that this, her last visit to the
f uins, would pass unnoticed by every one. Scarcely had she thrown aside her cloak, when she heard a gentle tap at the door, and the next instant lady Evelina entered. Alarmed by the paleness of her looks, her ladyship readily assented to Marian's request, that she might be allowed to re¬ main for the rest of the evening in her own room, pleading, as a reason, the com¬ mon excuse of a sick headache. " Would that I could stay with you, dearest friend !" said lady Evelina ; ** but my noisy and unpleasant guests must not be slighted. It appears strange to me, that a man of Belgrave's good sense, can tolerate the society of such triflers ; and it pains me to see, that the person whom I most dislike, is the favourite companion of my husband." " You mean captain Dashwood," faintly replied her friend. " The same," resumed her ladyship : " every day increases my aversion to him, and my pity for his neglected wife. I reaily think, that blind as Belgrave is to
the faults of captain Dashwood, he is alive to the indifference with which he treats poor lady Susan, and is therefore doubly attentive to her himself: about halfan hour ago, he returned, as he said, from in¬ specting some alterations in the cottages near the park ; but he looked so fatigued, and so wan, that I should have thought he had been riding fifty miles. Lady Su¬ san seemed to think the same, and in her pretty childish way, began to sing, * lve been roaming, I've been roaming/ Bel- grave smiled, but it was evidently forced ; a look from her husband silenced the good- natured lady Susan, who retired, like a spoilt child, to a corner of the room, and every now and then cast a look towards her husband and the colonel, who seemed engaged in earnest conversation. I am almost certain that I heard Belgrave say he should set off for London as soon as lady Melrose left us, and that will be in less than a week." Marian was surprised at this sudden in¬ telligence, yet dared not to discover her
real sentiments to her unsuspicious friend. In her own mind she felt assured, that this hasty journey was in consequence of what had passed between colonel Belgrave and the mysterious unknown in the ruins, and she trembled at the terrible certainly of her beloved Evelina's future fate depend¬ ing on the will, the caprice, of such a doubtful character as the colonels now seemed to be. She recollected the con¬ versation which that dear friend had over¬ heard, between tbe marquis of Tyrconnel and his uncle, and which had made so painful an impression on her ladyship, though uncertain that Belgrave was the person to whom they alluded. Marian now recalled their words to her mind, and combining them with recent events, yield¬ ed unwillingly to the dreaded assurance, that the person thus injured by tbe hus¬ band of her Evelina, was the stranger of tbe ruins, in whose fate she had insensibly shewn so generous, so tender an interest.
CHAP. VI. ?? breakfast next morning, colonel Bel- grave intimated his intention of removing t4~> London, earlier than he had at first in¬ tended ; and as lord and lady Melrose and her brother would leave the abbey that week, he proposed to lady Evelina, that their journey should take place early in the next : the Dash woods and major Camp¬ bell were to accompany the colonel and his family to town for the Christmas holi¬ days. This arrangement was by no means agreeable either to Evelina or her friend, yet both strove to conceal from the notice of those present, their regret and mortifi¬ cation at this sudden resolution of the co¬ lonel. Restless and dissatisfied, colonel Bel- grave, in order to free himself from the company of his two bosom companions,
pleaded that he had letters of business to write. His excuse was accepted; the gentlemen retired to the billiard-room, and the colonel sauntered out, to make inquiry amongst his tenantry, whether any stranger had lately taken up his abode within their peaceful homes. No infor¬ mation, however, could he obtain that was satisfactory; all that he could learn in reply to his guarded questions, con¬ cerning the object of his solicitude, was, that a young man, deaf and dumb, had been for some weeks a resident with far¬ mer Gibson. Thither the colonel repaired ; but the replies of the farmer crushed every newly-a waken ed hope ; and a glimpse he caught of the figure of Mr. Howard, who was slowly pacing up and down the far¬ mer's garden, convinced him that he was not the person he had met the preceding evening in the ruins. At any other time, the colonel's curiosity would have been excited, by the circumstance of a man of Howard's gentlemanly and elegant ap¬ pearance, living amongst persons so wholly
unlike himself, and in a situation retired, and to him apparently void of amuse¬ ment ; but his mind was at that time too much occupied by his mysterious visitor to dwell upon minor considerations ; and he returned to the abbey, out of humour and out of spirits. The society of his former associates had rekindled in the mind of the colonel, a love for all his former dissipations, and with tbem, the infatuated love of gaming returned. In the course of a month, he had lost several thousands; and Benson was ordered to fell the timber in the parks, as soon as he had left the abbey, an order which tbe venerable old man received in silence and in sorrow. The presence of Dashwood and major Campbell brought to his recollection that of another being, whose image he had vainly endeavoured to tear from his heart, but who now reigned there with greater power than ever. Insensible to the blessings around him, and lost to the happiness which arises from virtuous love, the colonel scrupled
not to avow to these twin friends of his bosom, the sole motive which induced him to marry his cousin—not to respect, not to esteem her, was impossible, but his heart still continued devoted to his Italian love. This avowal, which ought to have called forth the affectionate admonitions of friendship, was heard with exultation, by Dashwood in particular. He no sooner beheld the wife of colonel Belgrave, than his guilty heart acknowledged a passion he had never felt before ; and he thought that had his fate united him to a woman of her superior understanding, yet mild and unobtrusive manners, he could have forsaken all his old habits and old compa¬ nions, and have devoted himself entirely to her welfare. As the wife of colonel Belgrave, he considered her as not only lost to the world, but to every comfort of life. The thoughtless extravagance of her husband would soon render him a beggar. The loveliness of Evelina's person, the tenderness of her nature, were incapable of fixing the wandering inclinations of the
colonel ; she would shortly be left a prey to her own melancholy reflections, aban¬ doned for some fresh face, and probably die of a broken heart. Dashwood shud¬ dered as the last idea crossed his brain, and he resolved, if possible, to snatch her from the arms of one insensible to her value. The childish form of lady Susan arose as a bar to his new-raised hopes. When a man has once r ¿solved to become a finished villain, it is not the sacredness of the marriage bond v/hich will restrain him; and Dashwood checked the rising qualm of conscience, by recalling the nu¬ merous instances of infidelity which daily occurred in high life. Lady Susan had neither heart nor mind, therefore he con¬ cluded that his abandonment would occa^ sion no otner sorrow, than what her fond parents and a new lover could speedily remove. His keenness of discernment had led him to discover that he was not a favou* rite, either of lady Evelina or Marian Gorden; and having studied their diffe-
rent characters, he as quickly found out the cause, and resolved to new model himself. Too sudden a change would lead them to suspect the sincerity of his conversion ; his reformation must seem to be gradual, and his faults to be those of habit and bad example, not the force of nature. His next step must be to interest lady Evelina in his fate ; to call forth her pity at being united to a being so void of intellect as lady Susan; and, as pity is the sister of love, he then concluded that his triumph would be more than half ac¬ complished. Accustomed to associate chiefly with the most worthless of the sex, captain Dashwood's experience had taught him to believe, that the generality of women were to be won by perseverance, tender¬ ness, and delicate flattery. He there¬ fore allowed himself to calculate upon the possession of lady Evelina, if time and opportunity were given to him. He did not take into consideration tbe force of good example and precepts, and the
power of a religious education, on a mind naturally virtuous, and a heart naturally guileless. He did not imagine that such a woman might be insensibly led to com¬ passionate, nay, even to sympathize, in the miseries of a lover, and yet possess sufficient firmness, and sufficient virtue, to resist his pleadings and to check his presumption. As far as regarded the feelings of co¬ lonel Belgrave upon the success of his plan, captain Dashwood's accommodating conscience acquitted him. No reai friend¬ ship can exist between the unprincipled and the profligate. He knew tbat his marriage with his cousin was one of ne¬ cessity, not of free choice ; he knew also that his Italian mistress still possessed his entire affection. Could Hippolita be found, and once more restored to his arms, he would doubtless feel grateful to the man who was bold enough to rid him of his lawful incumbrance, and thus free him from chains which sordid interest, and not love, had forged.
On the night previous to Marian's last visit to the ruins, colonel Belgrave and captain Dashwood remained behind in the supper-room, after the guests had re¬ tired to their chambers.—" Come, Frank," cried the colonel, " let us have another bottle of Madeira before we part.—What the deuce has become of Campbell, that he is not with us ?" " He has gone to bed, to dream of her he loves, I suppose," was the reply of Dashwood. "Ay! and who is that?—this is the first intelligence I have received of Camp¬ bell's being in love. Prithee, Frank, are you his father confessor ?" " Were I in his confidence, I would not betray him," said the captain ; " but I suspect, from certain signs, that are known only, like free masonry, to those who are enlisted in the service, that Camp¬ bell is the devoted admirer of his fair countrywoman, Marian Gorden." " Indeed!" said the colonel, thought¬ fully ; then resuming his natural levity of
manner, he filled their glasses to the suc¬ cess of his friend's passion, if such were the case; "but what made you a judge, Frank, who were never yet a suitor at love's altar?" " Never until now, I grant you." « W r hy, the devil, Frank! you are not sureiy in love with your wife?" <€ No more than you are with yours." Colonel Belgrave hastily swallowed ano¬ ther bumper of Madeira.—" You are right, Frank," he replied; " neither of m would have been fools enough to exchange the freedom of a single life for the shackles of matrimony, had not the desperate state of our finances compelled us to retrieve them by a rich alliance." " No, on my soul," cried Dashwood, " nothing but necessity would have in¬ duced me to become a married man. But 3'ou, Belgrave, liave no cause to lament your fate, which has united you to beauty, grace, and intellectual accomplishments, while mine has chained me to folly, ig¬ norance, and stupidity."
" Would that such had been my lot !" said the colonel ; " I should not then, as now, have to reproach myself with want of affec¬ tion towards a deserving woman. But come, Frank, let us drown our cares in wine—here's to the health of your fair enslaver, and may she prove as tender and as faithful as you can wish her !" " Here's to the health of her whom I adore!" exclaimed Dashwocd, in a tone of feigned solemnity, " and may she be as happy as she deserves to be !—more I dare not add, since she can never be mine." " Pshaw, nonsense !" cried the colonel, more than half intoxicated by the effect of the bumpers he had swallowed; *' what can prevent her becoming yours, if you once resolve to possess her? Women are but the playthings of an idle hour—the necessary evils of our existence—we can¬ not do without each other. Ply her well with flattery, Frank, and assume your most fascinating looks and voice to win her love, and trust me she will not long hold out, let her be maid, wife, or widow."
" And is this your opinion of all wo¬ men ?" inquired Dashwood. " Ay, Frank, and yours too, or I am much mistaken. But come, who is this divine creature, for such she must be, who could make any serious impression on your inconstant heart?" " This is the only secret I must hide from you, and all the world," said Dash¬ wood gravely. " Until lately, I thought it impossible that any woman could have sufficient power to attach me solely to her¬ self; but I have seen one, for whom I could gladly sacrifice my life—one for whose sake I could give up all my present enjoyments, friends, country, every thing that has hitherto constituted my happiness —her society, her affection, would repay me for all that I might relinquish to ob¬ tain her. You look incredulous, Bel- grave—have you never met with a woman, for whose sake you would do thus much?" " Yes, yes, 1 have," replied the colonel, passing his hand hastily across his fore¬ head ; * s I have met with one whom I
have loved—whom still I love—and could I but discover her retreat—could I but once more fold her to my heart, no human power should separate us. Wife, friends, and country, would be lost to me for ever, but the smile of Hippolita would repay me for my voluntary exile." He paused —the blush of guilt mantled on his cheek, and a momentary feelmg of shame for what he had uttered, held hirn silent. " We will drink the health of the beau¬ tiful Italian,"cried Dashwood, gaily, "and may constancy like yours be rewarded by a speedy reunion !" Belgrave pressed the hand of his asso¬ ciate in guilt, swallowed the wine, and then staggered towards his dressing-room. The fever of his blood induced him to throw open the window, which looked into the home park. The night was dark and gloomy, and the cold fresh air, as it blew upon the hot forehead of the colonel, restored him in some degree to his sober senses. He was on the point of closing the window, when an arrow, shot by a VOL. I. F
skilful hand beneath it, fell at a little dis¬ tance from whence he stood. His first impulse was to seek the person who had thus boldly intruded on his privacy ; but recollecting that they must be far away before he could reach the park, he closed the window, and concluded it to be the frolic of some of his guests. His foot struck against the arrow, and a piece of paper attached to it caught his eye. Open¬ ing it hastily, he read the following lines, evidently written in a feigned hand. " If the weight of an accusing con¬ science has not damped thy natural cou¬ rage, meet me to-morrow evening at the chapel ruins after sunset. I would com¬ municate with thee alone, and unseen by mortal eye. To avoid suspicion or idle conjecture, I shall watch my opportunity of giving you this. Fail not to be there. <e ONE WHO WOULD, IF POSSIBLE, SAVE THEE FROM PERDITION."
Astonished and confounded by this sin¬ gular request, colonel Belgrave neverthe¬ less resolved to prove that his courage was undiminished ; and he accordingly pro¬ ceeded the next evening to the ruins, not, however, without taking the precaution to arm himself, in case he should be com¬ pelled to act upon self-defence. In order to render his visit less liable to discoveiy, he avoided crossing the lake, and walked through the park to the western entrance of the ruins. The stranger was waiting his arrival; they saluted each other in silence, and passed into the ruins, where the conversation took place as related iii the last chapter. Naturally warm and irritable, it was with difficulty that the colonel could com¬ mand his temper, at the bold and galling language of the unknown, who seemed to be perfectly aware of every thing relating to himself and family. Astonished by this knowledge, which even included his future plans, and goaded on to despera- f 2
tion by the daring freedom of his myste¬ rious visitor, colonel Belgrave nevertheless found his arm withheld, by some strange and undefinable spell, which dwelt in the low imder-tones of his voice. Neither form nor features were discernible to the scrutinizing eyes of the colonel ; but the voice at times reminded him of one whose power over his heart absence had increased rather than diminished. In vain did he draw forth the instrument of destruction, to chastise the insolence of his accuser ; at the sound of that charmed voice, his arm fell powerless by his side; and, as if spell¬ bound, he suffered the being who had thus powerfully affected him to disappear ; nor could he immediately recover the freedom of his limbs, to follow in pursuit the object who had thus suddenly rekindled in his bosom the remembrance of unholy love. Harassed and tortured by a variety of newly-awakened feelings, the colonel retraced his steps back again to his home, which, but for himself, would have been the scene of every domestic comfort. Anx-
ious to escape another interview with his mysterious accuser, he resolved upon quit¬ ting the abbey immediately, upon the de¬ parture of lord and lady Melrose, trusting that by so doing he should avoid all further communication with one, who by some singular means had acquired the know¬ ledge of his most private transactions, and at the same time, an ascendancy over him¬ self, dangerous to his future repose. An involuntary shudder came over him as he entered the abbey, and in order to recover his agitated spirits before he join¬ ed the party in the drawing-room, he en¬ tered the library. The first object which met his view was the picture of his mo¬ ther, which hung over the mantel-piece. In the sickliness of his imagination, it seemed to regard him with a melancholy earnestness, that reproached him for his dereliction from the paths of rectitude. All his past actions rose at once before his sight ; in vain he tried to compromise with his conscience, to palliate his offences. What excuse could he make for his con-
duct since his union with his cousin ? had he not wantonly broke through all his good resolutions? had he not lost, amongst Ins false friends, nearly the whole of the ready money given to him by her father on his wedding day ? What now was the alternative? the debt which lie owed to major Campbell before his marriage, and which his folly had lately increased, might, it is true, be cancelled, provided that he would assist the major in a plan which he had in agitation, and in which he affirmed his happiness to be materially concerned. Report had carried to the ear of the major the intelligence of M ; ss Gorden's fortune being at her own disposal, and colonel Belgrave had confirmed the tale. She was young and handsome ; but she was rich, and Campbell was comparatively poor, and deeply involved. He possessed more honour than Dashwood, and was less profligate. In fact, his errors arose more from bad example than from bad principles. He was free in liis opinions of women, but he was not a professed libertine ; and he
actually felt attached to the person of Ma¬ rian, independent of tbe attraction of her fortune. It was evident, however, that his attentions were not agreeable, and that she avoided them as much as possible : this put a check upon bis hopes, which were only revived by the raillery of the colonel, who, laughing, told him to remember, that difficulties only enhanced the glory of a soldier's conquest. u Make me but master of Miss Gor¬ den's hand," said Campbell, " and I will exonerate you from your bond, on the day of our nuptials." This was a temptation which the colo¬ nel could not withstand, and he there¬ fore resolved to bring about the accom¬ plishment of Campbell's wishes, by every means which circumstances and opportu¬ nity might offer.
CHAP. VII. The shock which the mind of Miss Gor¬ don had received, from a conviction of colonel Belgrave's baseness, although she strove to conquer its effects on her bodily strength, yet, nevertheless, overcame all her efforts ; and she found herself unwil¬ lingly compelled to receive the aid of me¬ dical advice, to allay tbe violence of her fever ; and she was ordered to keep her chamber until it had abated. So generally was she beloved by the domestics, that a gloom sat on every face, as the news of her indisposition spead through the house¬ hold ; and the good old housekeeper took her station every night in the easy-chair, by the bedside of Marian, regardless of her entreaties not to rob herself of those hours of repose her age demanded, Alice would not move, not even for her lady,
to whom she now rendered herself doubly a favourite, from her attentions towards a beloved friend. Major Campbell was sincere in his grief at the illness of Marian ; and with the ex¬ ception of lady Evelina, who seldom quit¬ ted her, was the foremost in his constant inquiries after her health. At length the fever abated; and al¬ though the mind and heart of Marian bled in silence at the impending misery of lady Evelina, yet the goodness of her consti¬ tution soon overcame the effects of her ill¬ ness, and she was able to leave her room for a few hours at the expiration of a week. The undissembled joy her pre¬ sence gave to major Campbell, his delicate attention to promote her comfort, and to amuse the weariness of languid, yet re¬ covering health, insensibly lessened the dislike which Miss Gorden had hitherto felt towards him. Gratitude made her attentive to his various little schemes of beguiling the time ; and this feeling gave F 3
a softness of expression to her voice and manner, which deceived him into a hope that her lieart would in time acknowledge him as a favoured lover. The indisposition of Marian had de¬ layed the intended journey of the family to London a week beyond the appointed time ; but so great was the repugnance felt by colonel Belgrave to again encounter hh mysterious adviser, that framing some plausible excuse to lady Evelina, he set forward with eager haste for the metropo¬ lis, with bis friend Dashwood, leaving the care ofthe ladies to major Campbell, who was to escort them to town, as soon as Miss Gorden's physician had pronounced her capable of encountering the fatigue of tni veiling. Lady Susan, with childish curiosity, was all impatience to enter into the gaie¬ ties of London; she could talk, nay, dream of nothing else ; and she pestered major Campbell with ceaseless inquiries concerning its pleasures and amusements. To her vacant mind and childish fancy, it
held forth the allurements of inexhaustible amusement; and in proportion as her spi¬ rits rose at the idea of its enjoyments, those of lady Evelina and her friend seemed to yield to the conviction, that to them the journey would only be produc¬ tive of loss 0; health and loss of happiness. It was, however, unavoidable ; and as the physician no longer withheld his con¬ sent, lady Evelina reluctantly gave orders to the housekeeper to prepare for their departure. The boisterous joy of lady Susan was a striking contrast to the de¬ jection of Marian, who hastily retired to her chamber, unwilling that major Camp¬ bell should observe the starting tear of silent, but heart-felt vexation. Throvving herself on the bed, Marian gave a loose to her grief: her recent illness had left her weak, and the natural firmness of her mind now yielded to the enfeebled state of her body, The image of him in whose desolate fate she had felt so warm an in¬ terest, now pressed upon her fancy. What had become of him, or, if still near her, if
acquainted with her illness, how had it affected him? In the midst of these reflections, she was roused by the voice of Alice, who, in sorrow and in tears, lamented the ne¬ cessity which bad occasioned the orders for the family's departure.—" Alas ! alas !" cried the good old woman, " you are go¬ ing, Miss, to that great town I have heard so much of, where some rich lord or other will carry you off, and I shall never see vou more." " Yes, dear Alice, but you will," said Marian, flinging her arms round her neck. " In spring I shall return with lady Eve¬ lina—that is, if I live so long." " God grant that you may !" replied the old woman, mournfully, " But in the mean time, who will console poor Alice, when half wild with the rheumatism ? or who will speak comfort to Mr. Howard, when you are gone?" " M r. Howard !" exclaimed Marian, in a tone of surprise. " Ay, Miss, the poor young man was
half beside himself, when I told him of your illness ; and I don't think a bit or a sup entered his lips, until he heard you were better : he came to me twice a-day, to know how you was ; and he looked so pitiful, and so haggard, that I verily think he must have died soon, had you not got the better of the fever." " How much I thank him !" said Ma¬ rian, after a pause, in which her heart throbbed with pleasure ; then added, blush¬ ing at the falsehood, " yes, I thank him, though a stranger to me. But how is it, Alice, you never mentioned him before ?" " Nay, in truth I was afraid you might be angry," said Alice ; " though, poor soul, he cannot help his misfortunes, and some¬ how I think I like him better for being deaf and dumb ; but that was no reason that you should, Miss ; so I thought per¬ haps 'twas best to hold my tongue about him." " And why have you mentioned him now, Alice ?" " Because—because—but you wont be
angry with a poor old woman that loves you dearly^ will you ?" " Do I look angry ?" said Marian, smil¬ ing sweetly, as she kissed the withered cheek of Alice. " God bless thee, my darling !" exclaim¬ ed the old woman, fondly ; " and may nei¬ ther care nor disappointment rob that sweet cheek of its returning bloom ! I will tell thee all, and nothing but the truth. Just now, as my lady's maid was giving me some orders about packing up the things for London, in comes poor Mr. Howard ; so as soon as she was gone, I up and told him (for I can talk to him with my fingers)—well, I up and told him the news I had just heard, of the family going to town in three days. '. Says I/ * they be going away, Mr. Howard, and you know I am old and infirm, so, maybe, I shall never see the sweet faces of my lady and Miss Marian again.' He sat himself down in a chair, and he turned so pale, that I thought perhaps he might faint; so I went to my closet, and I got him a glass
of my best wine ; but he could not drink it, so I was forced to take it myself, that it might not be wasted ; well, it did me good, and I sat down beside him, and we talked about you for near an hour ; and he gave me this packet, which I was to give to you when you were alone: I dare say, poor soul, he wants you fo give it to some¬ body belonging to him in London." Age had dimmed the eyes of Alice, and she therefore saw not the quick mantling blood which rushed into the face of Ma¬ rian, as sbe received from her the packet of tbe stranger. It was directed to her¬ self, and with trembling hands she con¬ signed it to her cabinet, until she had an opportunity of perusing its contents. " I have mislaid my spectacles," said Alice, " so I could not see the name ; but you will take care of it, Miss Marian, un¬ til you can find out the owner ; for Mr. Howard gave me many cautions concern¬ ing it, and I was to be sure to give it to you when no one was by." " I will take care of it, Alice, be assured,"
replied Marian ; " and you may tell Mr. Howard-^ -----" " What, Miss Marian?" " Nothing, Alice, nothing—only that I thank him for his obliging inquiries after my health." " And that you will take care of his parcel, and give it to the right owner," said Alice, rising to go. " Yes, you may tell him, if you please, that I will be answerable for its safe con¬ veyance to the person to whom it is ad¬ dressed." Alice now recollected that she had much to perform, and in a little time; she there¬ fore hurried out of the room, as fast as Jier age and infirmities would permit, leaving Miss Gorden at liberty to examine the packet of the stranger. Prudence how¬ ever taught her to check the natural curi¬ osity of her sex, until the family had re¬ tired to rest, when she would be free from the fear of intrusion. At length the hour arrived, when the inmates of the abbey withdrew to their
several chambers, and Marian, with a beating heart and glowing face, proceeded to inspect the packet which Alice had given to her charge. It was addressed to herself, and with eager haste she broke the seals, and read as follows :— THE STRANGER'S NARRATIVE. " It is but just, dearest Miss Gorden, that you should be made acquainted with the life of a man for whom you have ma¬ nifested so kind, so benevolent an interest : whatever may be his faults, that of ingra¬ titude is not amongst them; and while Providence ordains him to continue in this world of trial, the remembrance of your purity and innocence, and of your tender friendship, will be engraven on his heart, in characters which the hand of death alone can efface. It was my misfortune never to know the bliss of maternal love. Marked from my infancy to be the child of sorrow, my mother died a few hours after she had
given me birth ; and my rather, inconso¬ lable for her loss, banished me from his presence, as the cause of it. I resided in the cottage of a worthy woman, to whose care I had been committed, until I attained my sixth year. Her humble dwelling was only distant four miles from the estate of my father, the late sir Wil¬ liam Arlingford; his carriage frequently drove past our door, with my brother and his tutor; but they condescended not to notice me, who had thus innocent¬ ly become an exile from my paternal home. My father, unable to remain in a place where every object reminded him of my mother, quitted it, and went to re* side at another estate of his in Scotland, the air of which being deemed too keen for the delicate health of my brother, who was four years older than myself, he and his tutor were sent to the residence of a clergyman in Devonshire ; and thus was all communication cut off between us. My kind-hearted nurse, in the warmth
of her indignation at my father's unnatu¬ ral desertion of me, was not very sparing of her reflections on his conduct; these, and thc good-natured frankness of my dis¬ position, soon gained me the love and the commiseration of her neighbours, and the respect as well as affection of their chil¬ dren. I was the little king of the ham¬ let ; and never were subjects more docile and obedient than mine. Over-indul¬ gence had neither made me capricious nor tyrannical ; I loved my nurse dearer than my life; and I loved my humble play¬ mates, because they loved me. I was aware of my superiority in rank, for my nurse early instilled into my mind that I was the son of sir William Arlingford, and that the great house which we some¬ times passed was my rightful home : but no entreaty could induce her to suffer me to enter it, though repeatedly invited by those who had the care of the Hall in my father's absence.«—*' No," said Judith, with firmness, " never shall the dear child en¬ ter by stealth those doors, which have
been closed against him by the orders of an unnatural father." The riches of the East would not, I be¬ lieve, have tempted her to swerve from this resolution, and I insensibly imbibed the same prejudice. Too young to know the value attached to rank and fortune, I nevertheless felt that there existed a difference, though unconscious in what it consisted, between myself and those a- round me. This feeling, however, did not awaken the pride of my nature, for of what had I to be proud—banished from the presence of my father, and the home of my birthright—an alien to the endear¬ ments of brotherly love, and the ties of consanguinity ! all that vast hoard of af¬ fection which belonged to those near and dear relations, in the overflowing gratitude of my young heart, I bestowed on Judith, and a few of my chosen playmates. The return of a maternal uncle from India restored me to that rank in life to which my birth entitled me. Shocked at the unjust prejudice of my father, he re-
solved to make amends for his neglect, by adopting me as his heir. A trusty ser¬ vant was dispatched to convey me and my faithful Judith to town ; and every being from whom I had experienced any mark of kindness, received from m) 7- ge¬ nerous uncle a proof of his liberality. Bright and dazzling were now the pro¬ spects which opened to my view ; the ac¬ knowledged heir of general Beresford, and the darling of his leisure hours, I became the idol of his friends, and the favourite of his domestics. Every wish of my young heart was gratified as soon as known, and the bounty of my uncle kept pace with his affection. With his appro¬ bation, I made choice of a military life : the regimen, in which I had entered was ordered for foreign service ; and the seve¬ rest pang 1 then had ever felt, was occa¬ sioned by my separation from this dear and invaluable relation. My father was dead, and my brother and myself almost strangers to each other: we had met in society, but the apathy of his feelings
chilled the ardour of mine; no kindred emotion beamed in his eye—no corre¬ sponding tenderness returned my friendly pressure of the hand ; and we parted as we had met—strangers to each other. The grief of Judith was extravagant at my departure ; that of my beloved uncle, though not less sincere, was less violent in its effects. He pressed me repeatedly to his venerable bosom ; and, as if pro¬ phetic of our final separation, bade me re¬ member, through all the vicissitudes of war, that there was " another and a better world." Yes, dear and still-loved uncle ! although the severity of thy decree has blighted all my opening prospects, yet, Heaven be my judge, it is not so much the loss of fortune, as the loss of thy esteem, that I deplore! But to my story. — Amongst the young men whom I occasionally met at the table of our commanding officer, was one whose gay good humour, lively wit, and frank deportment, claimed my regard. We were mutually pleased with each other ; and as our intimacy increased,
he informed me that his mother and my uncle were acquainted in their early days, which had produced a tender attachment on the side of my uncle. She however preferred and married another. This pre¬ ference induced her to decline all over¬ tures to a second marriage after she be¬ came a widow ; and my uncle, respecting the constancy of her affection, forbore to urge her, on a subject painful to them both, but kept up an occasional corre¬ spondence with the object of his first love. — (t To the blind partiality of my mo¬ ther," said he, (i am I indebted for the high opinion your uncle has formed of my prudence and sobriety; he has re¬ quested my friendship for his nephew, and has promised not to forget me in his will. You will not be displeased, my friend, if the old gentleman should keep his word, for the sake of ' auld lang syne." A short time however convinced mc that no true friendship could ever subsist between us. In the unreserved commu¬ nication of our ideas, I found him to be
heartless and unprincipled in his opinions of women ; thoughtless and extravagant to an excess, and linked in the closest bonds with a set of men, whose profligacy and love of gambling made them shunned by the reflecting part of their brother officers. Ignorant at first of their cha¬ racter, I became an easy prey to their de¬ signs upon my purse. I lost several large sums of money, and was compelled to write home for fresh supplies : they came, and with them an admonitory letter from my uncle, who appeared to be well ac¬ quainted with my proceedings. I shewed his letter to my supposed friend —the con¬ scious blush of guilt flushed his cheek,— " You have a secret enemy, I fear," said he ; " can you not guess who it is ?" "No," I repHed thoughtfully, " I feel so conscious that I do not deserve the enmity of any man, that if I have indeed a secret foe, which this letter leads me to suspect, I do not envy him his feelings, nor the success of his plans, though it vvere to rob me of all the wealth I have been led to expect."
Our intimacy from that time became less frequent, and our conversations more and more reserved. The circumstances of war soon terminated our acquaintance. Part of tlie regiment to which I belonged was ordered, with other detachments, to march immediately to join another divi¬ sion of the armv, and a battle was ex- pelted. A few hours previous to our de¬ parture were spent by me in serious reflec¬ tions ; I had just heard from, my uncle, and I fancied that his style was less affectionate than usual; he hinted that he was aware of my irregularities, and cautioned me to reclaim. Of what was I accused, and who could be my accuser ? Lost in fruit¬ less conjecture, I was at length roused by the opening of my room-door : a youth entered, and flinging himself at ray feet, bathed my hand with his tears. I en¬ treated him to rise, and inquired in what manner I could serve him. " Here will I remain for ever," said he frantically, " unless you promise to grant my request." vol. L G
Alarmed at the violence of his agita¬ tion, I hastily gave my promise, without reflecting on the consequences.—" Heaven reward you !" said he, rising as he spoke ; " you have saved me from self-destruc¬ tion : grant me but your protection until I can reach some place of safety, and the grateful blessings of a hroken heart shall follow you through hfe." <s Alas!" I replied, "how can I promise protection to another, who am myself on the eve of setting out on an expedition, fraught with danger and with death?" " Suffer me but to accompany you, 1 * he cried; " allow me but to share in the dan¬ gers whieh surround you; my youth, and the seeming delicacy of my frame, will not yield to imaginary horrors. I fear no danger, dread no peril, if I can but escape from the perfidy of one who swore to pro¬ tect me from every ill, every worldly mis¬ fortune. The villany of him who ought to have been my natural protector, has compelled me to fly to strangers for refuge. Abandoned to despair, and made despe-
rate by my wrongs, I meditated on self- destruction : my guardian angel stepped in between me and tlie grave—I thought of you—my beart grew lighter—my spi¬ rits once more revived—he will save me, I cried ; he will stretch forth his protect¬ ing hand ; he will restore the wandering penitent again to his native land, his kin¬ dred, and his home." Affected by the energy of his manner, and tbe soft melody of his voice, but still more so by the beseeching expression of bis large tearful eyes, I besought him to moderate his grief, and pressing him to my breast, swore to be unto him as a brother, as long as it was permitted that we should be together. The cool hour of midnight was chosen for our departure ; a long cloak enveloped the person of my youthful companion; and, anxious for his personal safety as well as comfort, I gave him in charge to tbe wife of my servant, who, with her infant son, was comfortably placed on one G 2
of the baggage-waggons ; thus situated, he was less exposed to pursuit, had his enemy been inclined to search after him, and less subject to the scrutiny of my brother officers. We reached in safety the place of our destination, and my young friend expe¬ rienced but little bodily inconvenience from the effects of our rapid journey. A deep and settled melancholy, however, seemed to have taken possession of his mind, and the approaching battle filled him with alarms for my safety. In vain I represented to him that my life, if Pro¬ vidence so ordered it, was as secure in the midst of thundering artillery, as in the peaceful tranquillity of home—" Neither do I feel that attachment to life," said I, " which would render death formidable. I am a being almost alone in the world. In my childhood I was exiled from the endear¬ ments of home, and my generous uncle, who first taught me how to value exist¬ ence, now seems, from some strange un-
accountable cause, to think that existence valueless himself." " I think that I can in part explain to you that mystery," said he.—" You !" I exclaimed, in a tone of astonishment.— " Yes," he replied, while a melancholy smile for a moment illumined features, soft and pleasing as woman's loveliness. " Among the few with whom I was per¬ mitted to converse," said he, in a falter¬ ing voice, " while under the guardianship of my unkind protector, was colonel Bel- grave—" [An involuntary start of horror made the paper fall from the liand of Ma¬ rian ; she felt as if a serpent had stung her, and some mor' 's elapsed before she could gain courage to proceed in the narrative.] " The colonel had at tliat time a lady under his protection : 1 knew her —she was young and credulous, innocent and confiding : he promised her marriage, and thus beguiled her from her home and from her country. Τ loved, pitied, and condemned her."—Here his voice was scarcely audible. Poor youth, thougiit I,
thy simple heart has yielded to the fasci¬ nation of female beauty, and that perhaps has been the origin of all thy woe. He continued—" My intimacy with her gave me an insight into the character of her betrayer, and a knowledge of many of his movements. I was informed of his correspondence with general Beresford ; I saw the copies of his letters, and the general's answers; and I discovered that his aim was to supplant you in the affec¬ tion of your uncle, ruin your character, blight your prospects, and enjoy your fortune." " Merciful Providence !" I exclaimed, " can human nature be so black ! and was Miss Maynard an accomplice in this vil¬ lany ?" " Oh no,' 5 said he, hastily ; " this fresh instance of baseness, in the man for whom she had sacrificed all that rendered life va¬ luable, tore from her eyes the bandage with wiiich love had blinded her. She strove to turn him from his purposed vil¬ lany; but neither threats nor reproaches
had any effect, save that of increasing his anger, and her own disgust. They quar¬ relled and separated with mutual dislike." I was on the point of replying to the communication of my young friend, when a message from the general called for my immediate presence. I found him sur¬ rounded bv his staff; advices had been re- ceived that the enemy were approaching, and a decisive battle was expected to take place. All now was bustling preparation, each face wore an expression of anxious thought, occasioned perhaps by the re¬ membrance of those far-distant friends or dear-loved relatives, whom they might be fated never to embrace again. The eve of battle must be appalling to the stoutest heart, and I returned slowly to my tent—it might be the last time that I should enter it. The prospect of death had no terrors for me ; I should die brave¬ ly in the field of glory ; but who would clear my tarnished name to my beloved uncle ? who would convince him of the treachery of Belgrave, and my innocence?
I had been accused of profligacy, intem¬ perance, and extravagancy, and by the man who professed to be my friend, and whom my uncle thought a bright exam¬ ple for myself; yet this man was himself the cold and heartless betrayer of confid¬ ing tenderness, the base destroyer of mai¬ den honour, and the professed gambler. Specious and fascinating in his exterior, he had the art to hide, but too effectually, thc real depravity of his nature ; and this was the man, whose friendship my kind uncle had been solicitous to secure for me. With footsteps far lighter than my heart, I entered my tent. My young companion was sleeping tranquilly on the ground—my cloak was his bed ; to-night he might rest securely—what might be his fate before to-morrow's setting sun ? Deeply interested in his welfare, I pen¬ ned a few hasty lines to the surgeon of the regiment, a worthy and excellent young man, recommending the boy to his protection, should he be deprived of my
own; and then tried to court myself a few short-lived moments of repose. The clattering din of arms, and the tread of hurried steps, soon roused me from my uneasy slumber. My young friend was kneeling a short distance from me, his hands were raised in the attitude of devotion ; I placed myself gently by his side, and poured forth, in silent prayer, my humble petitions to my Creator, not forgetting to include in them the safety of this lovely youth. We rose at the same moment ; I pressed him with frater¬ nal fondness to my bosom, and giving him the letter of recommendation to my medical friend, endeavoured to chase away the heavy melancholy of his brow, by affecting a confidence that we should meet again. I knew not at that moment, that it was his determination to follow me into the field, though I afterwards learnt from Mary, the wife of my servant, that they had agreed to be spectators of the battle, G 8
from a small eminence, near the spot on which it was expected to be fought. In witnessing, therefore, his emotions, I felt no surprise, but attributed it to the pecu¬ liarity of his situation, and a grateful feel¬ ing towards myself. " It is improbable, but it is also possi¬ ble," said he, as he dashed oif the trick¬ ling tears that fell fast on his blooming cheek, '* that something may prevent our again meeting in this world, although you, with the blessing of Heaven, may escape the dangers of this eventful morning. If such should be the case, Mary will give you a letter, which I have entrusted to her care, should my presentiment of ill be verified." I had no time to demand from him an explanation of the evil he seemed to nti- cipate, but taking a hasty, though affec¬ tionate leave of him, I mounted my horse, and proceeded to the field." Here Miss Gorden was compelled to
pause, from bodily weakness. Her spirits had been unusually excited, by the peru¬ sal of the stranger's narrative, and by the conviction that colonel Belgrave was in¬ deed the villain he had been represented ; and she now found herself obliged to de¬ fer the conclusion of the manuscript, until rest had refreshed her exhausted frame.
CHAP. VIII. Ί11Ε NARRATIVE CONTINUED. The hour of midnight once more gave to the anxious Marian an opportunity of finishing the narrative of the stranger. Seated in her easy chair, by the side of a cheerful fire, with a couple of wax tapers on the little table before her, she eagerly unfolded the manuscript, and read as follows :— " I will not shock your gentle nature,
beloved Miss Gorden, by a description of the horrors which must ever be attendant on the field of battle. My part was one of danger throughout the engagement ; it exposed me to the repeated fire of the enemy, and to the pain of seeing my gallant countrymen fall dead around me. Their places were filled up by others, who met with lhe same fate. At length, vic¬ tory decided in our favour, and the flying enemy loudly cried for quarter, which was immediately given ; and our troops, harassed by tbe scorching heat of the day, and many of them faint from wounds, returned to their tents, leaving behind some of the stoutest of their comrades, to discover if life yet lingered amongst the bleeding bodies. At the close of the engagement my horse had been slightly wounded; í there¬ fore dismounted, that he might be relieved from my weight, and gave him to my servant to lead back to our encampment. It was then that I first perceived that I was wounded in the thigh ; the action of
dismounting renewed the effusion of blood, and, faint and sick, I staggering fell into the arms of my faithful Dennis, who, with the assistance of his fello w -soldiers, gently conveyed me to my tent, then hastened to procure for ?? surgical advice. A faint scream recalled my wandering senses; I opened my languid eyes, and beheld my young companion leaning over me in tearful anguish, supported by Mary. The death-like paleness ofhis countenance, the alteration of his dress since we had parted, for he had now one of my loose morning gowns thrown over him, alarmed me be) r ond expression. I raised myself on my elbow—I took his hand—a cold chili was on it—I felt the feeble returning pressure against my own. More and more alarmed, I earnestly besought him to tell me the cause of this sudden change in his appearance. Mary, sobbing bitterly, would have removed him from my couch, but he sunk into a chair by my side, and, grasping my hand in his, said, in a low tremulous voice—" Heaven has lieard my
prayers—we meet again, though but to part for ever. Gratitude for the kind protection you so nobly afforded to an un¬ fortunate like myself, impelled me to fol¬ low at a distance the route of the army. I thought that your life might be endan¬ gered ; that if wounded, I might assist — might serve you. The same feeling to¬ wards her husband induced Mary to ac¬ company me. We chose, as we thought, a spot secure from the reach of the enemy, to watch the progress of the battle. With sickening terror we strained our aching sight, to dist a if possible the distant objects, and to ascertain the safety of the friends in whose fate we were so strongly interested. A wounded oflicer was borne from the ranks—my imagination conjured up $ ??* image ; I rushed from our place of security, and flying forward to meet, as I thought, my protector, received—" He sunk exhausted on the bosom of Mary, who with difficulty finished the sad tale. A musket-ball had lodged in his right shoulder, and hitherto all persuasion had
been fruitless to induce bim to allow the surgeon to examine the wound. Mary, the kind and feeling wife of Dennis, had alone been permitted to staunch the blood, and to change his apparel. Shocked beyond measure, 1 ordered his bed to be placed near my own. He re¬ vived, and 1 conjured him to allow my medical attendant to examine the wound. " To-morrow," said he, pressing my hand to his clammy lips. I felt the terrible conviction that to-morrow would be too late, and sunk back insensible on my couch. My friend to whom I had written, and whose protection I had claimed for my young favourite, now came to my assist¬ ance. 1 pointed to where the boy lay, apparently asleep ; he felt his pulse—how anxiously did I wait his reply!—" It is use¬ less to torment him," said he ; " all will soon be over ;" then turning towards my¬ self, he proceeded to view the extent of the injury I had received. My wound was not mortal ; it only required care and
rest. I heard him not—I felt him not— my whole soul was absorbed in the fate of him, the unknown, the unfortunate, who had thus rushed upon death. My exhausted nature sunk beneath the trial 5 and against my wish I slumbered, until morning brought with it the con¬ sciousness of my situation. I hastily looked to see if my poor boy yet lived : Mary was bathing his temples—he turned his heavy eyes on me, and tried to smile; he motioned for my hand, which he pressed with all the strength he had to his lips ; he motioned also to speak. I raised myself, and bent towards him. With great difficulty he said—* e Mary will give you the letter—bless you—bless you, my generous protector—I know that you will fulfil my last request—let me be buried in the clothes I have on—Mary, the kind Mary, has promised not to quit me—to you and her my secret will be sacred— when I am gone, my letter will reveal what delicacy alone has prompted me to conceal from you. Farewell, friend— ines-
timable friend—we shall meet again in a better world."—I felt his last sigh against my cheek, his hand relaxed its grasp, the spirit had for ever quitted its frail but lovely tenement, and the loud sobs of Mary seemed alone to recall my fleeting soul back again to earth. With religious care the wife of Dennis watched by the corpse of thc departed boy, which I would not suffer to be re¬ moved from my tent. No personal fear of consequences, or of bodily pain, could deter me from following his remains to the grave. Borne by my soldiers, and accompanied by Dennis and his wife, I saw the last sad duties performed, and felt that the glory of a soldier could not be tarnished, by his shedding the tear of genuine humanity. The mystery which hung over this dear unfortunate, only served to render him more peculiarly the object of my care. His extreme youth, his gentleness, and his gratitude for my protection, all com¬ bined to endear him to my heart ; and I
felt that it would be long, long before the remembrance of his untimely fate could be dwelt on by me with composure. I had sufficient prudence, however, to delay the opening of his letter, until my re¬ turning health gave me firmness to en¬ counter vvhat, perhaps, would only increase my sorrow for his loss. The letter, and a lock of his hair, were therefore carefully put by, until I could peruse it with manly fortitude. Circumstances, however, and my own ill health, delayed the examination of the letter, until the blessings of peace brought us back to our native land. The difficulty of receiving letters from England, when we were continually marching from place to place, made me less uneasy at the silence of my uncle, I knew that he had been residing for some time past on his Irish estate, and thither 1 hastened, my heart full of affectionate feelings towards him, and my buoyant spirits exhilarated, by the fond hope of being able to prove myself innocent of all that malevolence
had urged against me. Judge then, dearest Miss Gorden, of the horrible des¬ pondency which took possession of my mind, when informed that this beloved, this revered relation, was no more ! that he had died in the belief of my unwor¬ thiness, and that his large estates were divided between my brother, sir William Arlingford, and colonel Belgrave ! The loss of fortune I could have borne with calmness, but the loss of his confidence, his affection, deeply wounded me. I rushed frantically out of the house, where not a face remained to recognise the once idolized nephew of the general. Strange servants had taken possession of the man¬ sion in the name of my brother, who with his lady was daily expected to arrive. Maddened by this intelligence, which too plainly convinced me of the entire estrangement of my uncle's affection, I wandered for several days, until my fa¬ mished nature demanded refreshment. With difficulty I crawled towards the door of a cabin, whose clean exterior and
lonely situation made me give it the pre¬ ference. I had not power to entreat ad¬ mittance; my strength was exhausted, and my tottering limbs refused to support me—I sunk down at the entrance of the cabin—I felt as if abandoned by God and man. I shall soon be no more, said I mentally ; a few more struggles, and this heart will cease to beat : my end will be similar to that of the dear boy, whose bones now whiten on a foreign soil. By stranger hands shall this care-worn frame be laid in the grave; but not like his shall mine be moistened by the tears of tender friendship, or of female pity. I had scarcely finished a short and broken prayer to heaven, when a voice from within the cabin arrested my attention; it seemed to be addressing some dumb favourite in the language of kindness—its tones recalled me to life, and to the remembrance of kindred and of home. By an effort, al¬ most supernatural, I rose and lifted up the latch ; a scream directed my half-closed eyes t to where a female sat, caressing a
large dog, whose head rested on her lap. She rushed forward with an exclamation of joyful surprise, and received me on her maternal bosom. It was Judith." [The gushing tears fell fast from the eyes ofthe beautiful Marian, who, at that moment, would gladly have exchanged situations with the grey-haired Judith. To comfort, to console, to pour the balm of tenderness into the lacerated heart of the injured stranger — what a luxury, to behold hirn gradually recover both strength of mind and body ! oh, it was a thought fraught with ecstacy. Again Marian resumed the manuscript.] " Weeks passed away, and I was un¬ conscious of the presence of my beloved nurse ; and when reason returned, the knowledge of my desolate situation re¬ turned also, but not with its former bit¬ terness. I felt, in its full force, the pro¬ tecting hand of Providence, who had thus led me to the cabin of Judith, at a mo¬ ment wdien 1 thought myself abandoned by my Maker, and under the influence of
a raging fever, which required all the care and attention of one devoted to me like Judith. Slowly I gathered strength, and by degrees acquired sufficient fortitude and self-command, to inquire of her the events which had transpired since I had left England. I heard that frequent let¬ ters used to arrive from abroad, which al¬ ways affected the spirits and temper of my uncle; and as Judith was, on account of her kindness to me, a great favourite of his, he often confided to her the un¬ easiness which the news of my extrava¬ gance and irregularities gave him. Some¬ times he would read to her the passages which alluded to my conduct ; and Judith, who was keen and penetrating, discovered that the seeming unwillingness of the writer to betray my faults, was only as¬ sumed, to hide some sinister design. In vain she ventured to plead for her absent child, as she called me ; in vain she ven¬ tured to hint to my incensed uncle, that it could be no real friend to me, that could thus in secret injure me with so
dear a relation. In proportion as the old man had loved me for my virtues, he now disliked me for my supposed vices and hypocrisy ; and at length, wearied by the ceaseless pleadings of poor Judith, dis¬ missed her from his presence, and from the home wdiich had so long afforded her every comfort, not, however, without sett¬ ling on her for life, this cabin and a com¬ fortable maintenance. For this act of considerate humanity, I blessed his me¬ mory. When Judith retired to her cabin, she took with her the dog, which I had, at her request, left behind, and who' was now become the object of her peculiar care. She took with her also, what she considered as a document of importance, which she trusted one day to present to me. This was a letter dropped by my uncle, and retained by Judith, under the idea that it might be serviceable to me, should I live to establish my innocence with the general ; for nothing short of an¬ gelic authority would have weakened the
firm reliance that Judith had in my ho¬ nour and integrity. I asked for the letter ; it bore the arms and name of Belgrave. This then was proof, self-evident proof of his treachery ; and I returned it to Ju¬ dith, with a strict injunction to take care of it, until I should require it from her hands. My recruited strength now made me think of England ; it was there I expect¬ ed to find my successful adversary; and though I concealed from Judith my in¬ tention of seeking him, yet this intention was fixed, irrevocably fixed, beyond the power of mortal to divert me from my purpose. Judith, to my surprise, did not attempt to dissuade me from my intended journey ; and I attributed this seeming carelessness to my departure to her fear, lest chance should occasion my brother to cross my path, for he was now with his family in Ireland. I had promised her also to write to her frequently ; and it was agreed that I should return and fetch her, as soon as I had fixed upon some cheap
spot to reside, for my half-pay was all I now had to procure thc necessaries of life. Preparatory to my quitting the humble roof of this more than mother, I commis¬ sioned her to provide for me some articles, which could only be obtained at the neigh¬ bouring town. She set out early in the morning, accompanied by her faithful dog, and bade me not expect her until even¬ ing. Dearly as I loved this good crea¬ ture, yet to be alone, to meditate on the past, and to form plans for the future, was an absolute luxury, of which I now gladly availed myself; and the day passed rapidly away, before I had finally determined upon any thing but my departure, and my pursuit of Belgrave. The sun had set in crimson splendour, and the full-orbed moon now brightly shone through the window of the cabin, when, of a sudden, I recollected the letter of my lamented boy : it was safe in my pocket-book, and with it, the glossy ring¬ let of his light brown hair : a tear, which vol. i. H
would not be repressed, fell to his memo¬ ry. I broke the seals, and by the light of the moon, read as follows." Here Marian was unwillingly compel¬ led to lay aside the manuscript ; her can¬ dles were nearly exhausted, and her heavy eyelids gave warning, as truly as lier re¬ peater, of the lateness of the hour. Pure and innocent was the tender heart, that now offered up its nightly prayers to the merciful Disposer of events ; and if a ihought of him, over whose sufferings she had been weeping, obtruded on her orisons, it was only to petition Provi¬ dence to enable him to bear, with Chris¬ tian resignation, its wise decrees.
CHAR IX. TUE NARRATIVE CONCLUDED. As the family of colonel Belgrave were to rise early in the morning, to proceed, by easy stages, on their way to London, Miss Gorden retired earlier than usual to her chamber. Charlotte was quickly dis¬ missed, and Marian once more sat down to finish her manuscript, Slie opened at the letter of the deceased bov, for whose untimely fate she truly lamented. The letter was as follows ;— " MY DEAR AND GENEROUS PROTECTOR, " As the faithful Mary has pro¬ mised not to deliver this into your hands, until the cold earth conceals me from your view, I hasten to confide to your h 2
honour, the secret of my name and of my woes—both will be held sacred by my preserver. The delicacy of my situation, while under your care, and my fear, lest you should be included in my disgrace, was the sole cause which prevented my revealing to you who I was. My silence, while living, will exonerated you from blame ; Mary alone was entrusted with the circumstances of my disguise. The sympathy you expressed for the misfor¬ tunes of Isabella Maynard, will not, I trust, be lessened, when you learn that it was to her you extended your benevolent protection, under the garb ofa boy, and the feigned name of Louis. So carefully liave I guarded my secret, that I console myself with the hope, that I shall be car¬ ried to my grave, without even a suspi¬ cion Iiaving been raised, that ? am other¬ wise than my dress proclaimed. " The gaiety of my parents rendered our house easy of access. My step-mo¬ ther was an actress of great celebrity—a fine woman—and generally admired. I
was never her favourite ; and the sudden death of my father gave her unlimited control over me. I was little more than sixteen, when colonel Belgrave, in secret, professed himself my honourable admirer, and urged me to escape from the tyranny of my mother, and accompany him abroad, assuring me, that he would sacredly fulfil his promise, and make me his wife. Ig¬ norant of the duplicity of man, and fasci¬ nated by his manners, far more than by his rank, I fearlessly consented to confide 'm his honour. Let me hasten over the detail of my own shame and disgrace. Lulled into security by the delicacy of his behaviour, and the seeming tenderness of his feelings towards me, I neverthe¬ less, as soon as possible, urged that our marriage might take place. His excuses were accepted, because I believed him sincere in his attachment ; and in a foreign land, without a friend to advise, or to share my grief, what would avail my re¬ proaches? Circumstances, however, gra¬ dually displayed to me his real character,
and depravity of his heart. I was ac¬ quainted with all his English correspond dence ; and the deep-laid plan to ruin you in the estimation of your uncle, filled me with horror. He laughed at my scruples, ridiculed my ideas of prudence and ho¬ nour, flew to the gaming-table, and from thence, to the arms of one, whose nicety of feeling had long been stifled by a life of vice and infamy. " I turned with disgust from tbe idea of again meeting with the man, with whom I bad fondly hoped to end my days, stript of those qualities with whieh I bad weakly adorned him ; he became the object of my abhorrence : and hastily procuring the disguise ofa boy, I resolved to quit for ever this monster of ingrati¬ tude and wickedness. My first idea was to end at once my life and miseries ; but a merciful Providence stayed my steps, and directed them to your habitation. The protection and concealment that I craved, you generously bestowed ; and should Heaven think fit to restore me, through
your means, to my native land, I trust, that a life of sincere penitence and prayer, will atone for the errors of confiding and inexperienced youth. The approaching battle will expose the life of my generous friend, or should you be wounded, my presence may afford you some slight con¬ solation. The prospect of being service¬ able to one, who has so disinterestedly afforded me relief and comfort, when I was on the point of falling a sacrifice to the excess of my grief, will give me cou¬ rage to encounter all the horrors of the field. The wife of Dennis will bear me company ; her heroism will call forth mine. " Should we meet no more, or meet in death, as my prophetic soul foretells, give to my memory the tear of brotherly af¬ fection ; remember me in your prayers^ as one ' more sinned against than sinning;' and should you, which Heaven grant, live to return to your native country, and to re-establish yourself in the affections of your uncle, let not my name escape your iips, but let my secret be buried, with
me. The depravity of Belgrave and of his associates, would only attach more shame to the unfortunate Isabella." st You may conceive my astonishment, dear Miss Gorden, on reading this melan¬ choly epistle. A hundred little trifles now rushed in quick succession through my mind, which gave the stamp of truth to its contents ; and in proportion as my admiration increased at thc delicacy of her feelings, so did my sorrow for her un¬ timely fate, and my indignation at the heartless conduct of her betrayer. " Yes, dear, and unfortunate Isabella," I exclaimed, as I paced with rapid strides the narrow limits of the cabin, " most sa¬ cred to me shall be the confession of thy sex's wrongs ; as a brother, will I cherish thy memory ; and when I meet thy cow¬ ardly seducer, thy image, sweet girl, will give new vigour to my arm, and steel my bosom against the weakness of humanity." My own injuries seemed light, in com-
parison to those of this youthful victim, yet the same hand had blasted the happi¬ ness of each. One of his victims was al¬ ready cold beneath the turf—the gentle heart, which had beat responsive to all the tender sympathies of nature, now ceased to throb ; and how soon might mine be¬ come like hers, alike insensible to the ap¬ plause or censure of the world ! I saw, in imagination, the form of my young companion, as in the last moments of expiring nature ; I felt the convulsive pressure of his soft hand in mine ; again I seemed to witness the expression, the never-to-be-forgotten expression, of tender gratitude, which gave a momentary lustre to his dying eyes ; and his last sigh ivas again breathed upon my cheek. It was more than manhood could dwell upon with firmness ; I was alone, no eye, save that of Heaven, to look upon rny weakness ; in the fulness of my heart, I burst into an agony of tears, and flung myself on the floor of the cabin. h 3
The sudden opening of the cabin door recalled me to a sense of necessary exer¬ tion. I was on the point of rising from the dark corner in which I lay, when my attention was fully engrossed by the object who now entered, and who, after casting a look of scrutiny round the interior of the cabin, sunk with evident exhaustion on one of its humble seats. Throwing partially aside a large mantle, which had concealed the elegance of her form, and at the same time removing, for the benefit of air, a thick veil from her head, I be¬ held a female, young and dazzlingly beau¬ tiful. To my wondering eyes she appeared the lovelier creature I had then ever seen, although this beauty was in some measure diminished by the expression of her fea¬ tures, which were haughty, and inflamed by passion : she was, nevertheless, a fe¬ male, and evidently labouring under some severe mental anguish ; and my heart warmed towards her, in proportion as I allowed myself to think she stood in need of my assistance.
I rose softly, but not without her ob¬ serving me : she started from her seat, and drawing from her bosom a dagger, raised her arm for my destruction—I arrested its progress.—" Stay thy rash purpose," said I, with a calmness which seemed to surprise her, w nor stain those lovely hands with tlie blood of an unfortunate, whose misfortunes have taught him to respect and pity those of others." My voice and manner disarmed her resentment—the dagger dropped from her hand—I stooped to restore it—my eyes rested on the curi¬ ous workmanship of the handle, on which was emblazoned a coat of arms. I felt that I looked pale ; but she neither noticed that, nor the sudden start which I gave involuntarily. " I must apologize," said she, in a tone of sullen haughtiness, " for my intrusion here, and still more for my rash attempt. Cir¬ cumstances have driven me from my home -^-1 am a stranger here, but not to the lawless character of some few of its op¬ pressed and vagrant inhabitants—this
dagger was intended for self-preservation. Fatigue, and the fear of pursuit, made me enter this lonely cabin ; but what cause, young man, can have made you become its inmate ?" A sigh of bitterness escaped me as I replied—" The ruin of all my worldly prospects, and the perfidy of man. Bob¬ bed by him of all that had hitherto made life valuable, exhausted in mind and in body, I have found in this cabin solace and comfort for both. The same kind Jieart and hand will gladly administer to your wants, if you will condescend, lady, to accept her services." The countenance of the beautiful stran¬ ger now lost a portion of its asperity, though some of its haughtiness remained. —" I thank you," said she with dignity, " and will trust to your honour, though all my miseries have proceeded from my yielding to a first impression—you are also an Englishman—but no matter ; all that J request is shelter for a few hours, until I can proceed on my journey." I assured
her that here she was safe ; that humble as was the roof that sheltered her, it yet contained hearts willing to serve, and hands able to protect her. I now earnestly besought her to taste of some refreshment which I placed before her, and then left her to meet and explain her arrival to Judith, whose voice I now heard, talking as usual to her dog. Judith was the most compassionate of human beings : she no sooner heard from me what little I knew of her guest, than she expressed her anxiety to do all in her power to alleviate her situation ; and when I presented my benevolent nurse to our fair visitor, her features sofiened into an expression of grateful confidence. Judith's clean and comfortable little chamber was given up to the stranger : a night of repose had lulled the angry pas¬ sions of her soul to peace; and when we met next morning, not a vestige of those vindictive feelings remained, which had obscured the beauty of her countenance; yet there was a bitterness in her smile,
and an air of deep-toned thought in her full dark eye, which bespoke a mind cap¬ able of planning, and a soul of executing the boldest scheme. Judith mentioned my approaching de¬ parture for England:—"That is the place of my destination also," said she ; " per¬ haps it may not be unpleasant, if we jour¬ ney so far together." I replied, that I should be too happy if she would suffer me to protect her to her friends. She shook her head, and I thought I per¬ ceived a tear on the bright carmine of her cheek; but she dashed it proudly off. " I have no friends, no relations," said she, " in England ; mine are in a far-distant land ; but I have business there—business which will occupy the whole of my time and thoughts, and whieh may render my stay in that country indefinite; your journey, I trust, is impelled by happier prospects." The utter despondency of heart, which was but too visible in my looks, called forth her sympathy—" Pardon," said she, in a tone of commiseration, " if I have
unintentionally touched upon a painful subject ; but should love be the source of your grief—of your despair—banish so dangerous an inmate from your bosom, before peace and reason are fbr ever lost." w Alas," I exclaimed, " my wretchedness proceeds from a far different cause. Born to enjoy all the advantages of birth and fortune, I suddenly behold myself stripped of both, by the villany of pretended friend¬ ship. The poverty to which I am thus reduced, will for ever render me an alien to connubial happiness. How can I meanly solicit the hand of an amiable woman, when I have nothing but a state of dependance to offer for her love? No, no, far other thoughts must now occupy my mind. Thank Heaven, my heart is free, and vengeance, not love, must now be the soldier's motto." « Vengeance !" she repeated, and the same dark feeling I had before observed now flashed from her eyes—" vengeance is mine also. The same spirit, the same object, impels our steps towards England's happy
shore. Animated by the same motive, we may be serviceable to each other : my confidence shall call forth yours, but it must not be given here." f * Be it so," I replied ; " and if the wrongs you have sustained require an advocate oí¬ an avenger, behold in me one ready to devote himself to your cause," " Accept my thanks, young man," said she gratefully, " but I must be my own avenger. The injuries I have sustained admit of no redress ; and the pride of my nature will not allow me to receive of per¬ sonal assistance, even from you, while I possess the power and the will myself, to inflict the blow I meditate." The hour of parting from Judith at length came, and I felt as if torn from the only being in the world, who loved and who felt interested in my fate. Again I was to become a wanderer, and again the same desolating feeling pervaded my heart as before; yet to remain where I was, to lead a life of inglorious idleness, was impossible: justice to myself demanded
that I should <,??? and confront the base usurper of my property, and demand an explanation of the letter given me by Judith. Launched on the bosom of the ocean, I experienced from my fair companion every friendly attention to revive my sinking spirits. To divert my thoughts from my own torturing situation, she en¬ trusted me with the story of her life : it was calculated to increase my disgust of the world, and my pity for herself. In return, I gave her my confidence. A si¬ milarity of injuries, and of feelings, bound us insensibly to each other: one thing alone we mutually withheld—the name of the person who had so deeply ruined our peace. On our arrival in England, I had the good fortune to procure for her a safe asy¬ lum, in the house of a respectable woman, to whom I introduced her as a widow lady, who had recently lost her husband. Here I left her to arrange her future plans, and to make her peace with her family,
who were people of rank and fortune abroad. We were to correspond regularly, and without reserve, with the exception of names ; and feeling conscious that she was in friendly bands, I directed my at¬ tention towards the grand object which occupied my soul. My inquiries concern¬ ing colonel Belgrave gave me ample in¬ formation respecting him ; and, to my sur¬ prise, I now learnt that he must have been in Ireland during my residence there; that he had returned nearly about the same time as myself; and that he was gone down to his uncle's seat in the north, to marry his cousin, lady Evelina Macdonald. My informer added, that he was shortly expected at Belgrave Abbey, where pre¬ parations were making to receive his bride. Full of indignation at this intelli¬ gence, which sealed the fate of another lovely victim, I hastened towards the spot which contained his paternal man¬ sion. Prudence suggested some plan to avoid suspicious curiosity, and yet to ex¬ cite that confidence which would enable me
to learn all his movements, while I re¬ solved to watch my opportunity of pro¬ mised vengeance. My person was con¬ siderably altered by illness and by sorrow since we had last parted, and I resolved to feign myself deaf and dumb, until the hour should arrive to proclaim him villain. My supposed deprivation of speech ex¬ cited, as I had suspected, a general interest in my behalf; and under the name of Howard, I became an inmate in the fbmiiy of farmer Gibson, whose daughter took me occasionally to tbe abbey, tbe seat of my enemy, as often as they paid a visit to Alice, the friendly housekeeper. -The bane of my existence at length arrived—-I watched him at a distance, as he proudly smiled, and led his young bride to her destined home. Innocence and goodness of heart were legible in her pen¬ sive countenance ; but there was an air of melancholy thought, which but ill ac¬ corded with thc joyous feelings of a happy bride. You followed, dearest Miss Gor¬ den, and all else faded from my sight ; in
meditating upon you, in listening to your praise, in watching unseen your move¬ ments, I half forgot my promised ven¬ geance. To my romantic imagination, you seemed, whenever you appeared, to be the spirit of light and life that warmed my chilled and desolate he<4rt. Your frequent visits to the ruined chapel, gave me op¬ portunities of hearing and of seeing you, in the sweet and unreserved intercourse of friendship; and while I listened to the tones of your voice, all my angry feelings subsided; and I felt how impossible it would be to avenge my own wrongs, since I must, by so doing, inflict a wound on the bosom of her you so tenderly loved. Once I ventured to reply to the first stanza of a ballad which you were singing to your lute; but instantly repenting of my rashness, I fled, leaving you and your friend in doubt and perplexity, as to the person from whence those sounds had pro¬ ceeded, When next I saw you, you were alone: prudence suggested, that to pre¬ serve my secret, I must appear under the
disadvantage of being dumb : with ange¬ lic sweetness, you listened to the tedious explanation of what I feared to utter; Heaven softened your heart towards my misery, and gave to you that boundless power over my soul, which has hitherto preserved the character, perhaps the life, of colonel Belgrave. At length my grateful heart broke through the restraint imposed upon my tongue. The disinterested sympathy you evinced for my sufferings, and the ge¬ nerous disregard of your own personal safety, made me break the resolution I had formed, and I discovered to you my secret. To you, dearest Miss Gorden, and to the singular being whom I first met in the cabin of Judith, I allow my¬ self the delightful privilege of speech— to all others I am dumb. I have already found that this deception has screened me from curiosity and suspicion, since neither colonel Belgrave nor his loose associates, have condescended to notice the deaf and dumb lodger of farmer Gibson. Once or
twice he has crossed my path, and alone —the alteration in my appearance made røe pass unrecognised ; and though my heart swelled, and my cheeks flushed at the sight of him, some secret charm pre¬ served him from my fury. He was in my power—I possessed the document of his villany, which, if seen, must shew him to the world in his true colours—I should be amply revenged ; but who would restore confidence and peace to the bosom of his lov* Jy wife, or dry the tender tears of her amiable and beloved friend ? He passed onward, and I gloried in the victory I had obtained over myself. It may seem strange to you, my guar¬ dian angel, that I have passed over the communication of the lady whom I met in Ireland, but I am not at liberty to dis¬ close it. Her story was wild and singular as herself; she neither disclosed her own name, nor that of the person who has drawn down her deadliest hate. It ap¬ pears now to be the business of her life, to watch the movements of this person,
to thwart his plans, and avenge her own wrongs, though at the hazard of her life. By some secret channel she has made her* self acquainted with my situation here, and appears to know, as if through some supernatural agency, the characters and designs of the inmates of the abbey. Con¬ cealment on my part is no ionger neces¬ sary to her ; she has told rae all that I had thought prudent to withhold from her knowledge, in our mutual confidence. I know not why, but I sometimes feel as if this singular woman had power to influ¬ ence my future destiny. It was from her I learnt that danger threatened your peace. The largeness of your fortune renders you an object of importance to the needy adventurer, or the profligate gamester; and many such there are among the associates of colonel Belgrave. Be on your guard then, my lovely friend ; let neither threats, persua¬ sions, nor tiie crocodile tears of pretended affection, induce you to bestow your hand, unless your heart can accompany the sa-
cred gift—no, dearest Miss Gorden, not even to save from disgrace and ruin the husband of your friend. You have already hazarded too much, for the sake of speaking peace and comfort to an unfortunate like myself: I will not, dare not request another interview : your absence will render this place a desert, wdiich I can now no longer inhabit. We shall meet again—my watchful eye, unseen, shall mark the motions of the wicked— my vigilance shall counteract their designs. Yes, dearest Miss Gorden, I will now be¬ come thy guardian angel ; for thy sake I will smother, for a time, my own deep sense of injury ; yet we shall meet again —-that thought alone has power to ani¬ mate my sinking spirits, to cheer my drooping heart, and to give me strength of mind to say adieu, best and dearest of friends. May every wish of thy heart be gratified, is the fervent prayer of him, whose gratitude for thy goodness can end but with life. Henry Arlingford."
CHAP. X. Marian sat for some moments, with the manuscript in her hand, while her burning cheek and tearful eye proclaimed the interest she felt in the fate of the narrator. " I trust that we shall meet again," sighed Marian, " for I feel that my happiness is connected with thy welfare, thou dear and amiable unfortunate." His admonitions sunk deep into her mind ; yet she could not comprehend what probable danger hung over her, or from what quarter she was to expect it. Colonel Belgrave behaved to her with general kindness, and major Campbell's altered deportment left her no room to suspect that he had any design against her peace, which he appeared so anxious to preserve ; yet she determined to be on her guard, and watch narrowly VOL. ι. ι
the looks and actions of the colonel and his associates ; for thus warned, to be too confident of security, might be to invite the coming ill. The morning was already advanced, and Marian had retired to rest, when a faint noise in the chamber compelled her to open her heavy eyelids. Again she closed them, for all was silent and dark ; yet she fancied that she couid almost hear the light sound of footsteps in her cham¬ ber: this, however, must be impossible; her door was fastened, and those which the tapestry concealed, and which led into the other apartments, were never opened, except indeed that any of the servants, in the bustle of packing up, had made the communication of the rooms useful to them, and had forgotten to rebolt the doors. This Marian thought improbable, and too weary even to be alarmed, she sunk into a sound sleep, from which she wag only awakened by Charlotte, to pre¬ pare for her journey. Unseen by her maid, but not by the
quick glance of Marian, lay a sealed note on the toilette. What unknown hfend could have placed it there?—the sounds which she had heard the preceding night now rushed on her mind ; she examined the tapestry, which covered an entrance into the next suite of apartments, and found it open—some one had then entered her room, and placed the note on her table. With trembling hands she broke the seal, and read as follows;—-
" Fear not, lady, for it is one of thine own sex who feas trespassed on thy privacy, but with no evil design against thy peace. Thou art young and innocent —so once was I ; my inexperience was abused—my confidence betrayed ; I would save thee from a fate like mine, because I believe thou art worthy of my care. Trust to my warning voice; it shall only be heard when danger is near. Lady, be¬ ware of the tartan ; it covers many a brave ι 2
bosom, but it may also conceal a treache¬ rous heart. w A Friend."
The circumstance of this note appeared like some dream of romance to Marian. In vain she racked her imagination, to find a clue to the writer. What female was there among her acquaintance, who was likely to feel sufficient interest in her welfare, to produce this mysterious warn¬ ing? Who could have access to her chamber? unless indeed İt was some mis¬ chievous trick of lady Susan Dashwood. The note was again perused; the hand¬ writing was not that of her ladyship, whose timidity would also be a bar to her quitting her apartments at midnight. Who then could have access to the abbey ? Charlotte was questioned: no stranger had been there, only Mr. Howard had called in the evening, to take leave of Alice, the housekeeper.
" Did he say where he was going?" en¬ quired Miss Gorden, carelessly. " I'll be bound to say, Miss, that Alice knows," replied Charlotte ; " for she seems to be quite in his confidence of late, though I'm sure it must cost him a deal of time and pains to make her understand his meaning. Now if he had chosen to make me his confidant, he would have had no trouble at all, for I can talk as fast with my fingers, as he can himself. But you know, Miss, as the major says—* There's ro accounting for taste." " And pray, Charlotte, how came you to be acquainted with the sayings of the major?" " I meant no harm, Miss, I'm certain," said Charlotte, colouring deeply; " but I have never spoken to the major, except when you were so bad ; and then he used to watch for my coming out of your room, as a cat watches for a mouse; and he used to ask me a hundred questions about yon and I could not but answer him with ci-
vility, when I saw that he was as much distressed as I was myself." " Certainly not, Charlotte ; but I would caution you against conversing with any of the gentlemen who visit colonel Bel- grave, and who are too much your supe¬ riors, not to endanger your character, should you be seen speaking to them by your equaR" The truth was, that major Campbells anxiety to learn the hourly progress of Marian's disease, had made him apply more frequently to Charlotte than to any other person, as her good nature and her affection for her mistress, induced her to reply to his numerous inquiries, with a pa¬ tient gentleness which he did not always receive from others of the domestics. These constant inquiries sometimes ended in a little harmless chit-chat; and once, in speaking of lady Evelina and Miss Gor¬ den, the major had expressed his surprise, that a man like the colonel should not have given the preference to the animated beauty of his fair countrywoman, instead
Qf the mild and dove-like loveliness of his cousin. It was then that the major had remarked to Charlotte, that " there was no accounting for taste." Miss Gorden bad inquired no further, and Charlotte, fearful of offending, had deemed it pru¬ dent u) be silent as to the cause of the major's remark. Sincerely attached to her mistress, Char¬ lotte nevertheless possessed the weakness mherent to the weak part of her sex. She was ery pretty, and loved to be told so ; $he was very innocent, and in some re- pects, very ignorant ; but Charlotte thought herself very wise, and a " match for the finest gentleman that wore a head." The major's penetration easily di. co¬ vered the vulnerable part of Charlotte's character : he flattered her person—prais¬ ed her for her attachment to iie best of ladies—-made her several handsome pre¬ sents, as rewards for her attention during the illness of her mistress ; and fairly won over Charlotte to his interest, by making the kind-hearted girl believe, that his
happiness, nay his life, depended upon his gaining the heart of her lady. Fortunately for Marian, she had pre¬ served an inviolable silence, with respect to her interviews with the stranger in the ruins. The artless attachment of Char¬ lotte for herself, made her look upon the girl more in the light of an humble friend than a servant, and this frequently pro¬ duced a familiarity in conversation, which might have led to confidence, as far as re¬ garded her own concerns ; but Marian felt that those of the stranger were too sacred to be communicated to a third person, and that person an ignorant country girl, whose credulity might be imposed on, and whose very simplicity might incautiously lead her to disclose what she knew of her lady's visits to the ruined chapel. Luckily, how¬ ever, Charlotte had only accompanied her mistress twice, and she had each time re¬ mained in the boat, occupied with her book, which afforded her far more amuse¬ ment than she supposed was to be found in a scene so desolate and gloomy.
Charlotte's heart was among the num¬ ber that was rendered lighter by this journey to London : even Marian looked forward to it now with pleasure, for it was there she hoped and believed that she would meet again with Henry Arlingford, though under what disguise, or by what name, she scarce ventured to conjecture. Lady Susan Dashwood was all childish joy, as they approached the metropolis; and lady Evelina was more gay than usual, for she was on the point of rejoining her husband, for whom she now felt all that affection and confidence which she had cherished towards him, ever since she had banished froi her mind the fatal idea that he was the person alluded to by lord Ste¬ wart, at lady Warren's. The belief that she had wronged him, by allowing her¬ self for a moment to harbour a thought derogatory to his honour, made her doubly attentive to all that she knew would give him pleasure ; and she counted, with im¬ patience, every succeeding milestone 13
which they passed on the roaci, and which told the distance which still intervened be¬ tween her and the lord of her affections. Far different were the sensations which filled the bosom of colonel Belgrave. Ea¬ ger to leave a place, which the visit of the unknown had rendered doubly an¬ noying to him, he, with little ceremony, quitted it on the illness of Marian, and accompanied by captain Dashwood, hur¬ ried to London. It was to the interest of the latter, to revive occasionally, in the mind of the colonel, his remembrance of the beautiful Italian, and to work upon his feelings, by suggesting the idea, that in a fit of desperation, she might have shortened that existence which his perfidy had rendered valueless. At other times he would hint at the probability of her being at that moment a prey to all the agonies of despair and ill-requited love, heightened by the stings of poverty. Driven almost to desperation, by these suggestions of captain Dashw r ood, the co¬ lonel caused the following advertisement
to be published in every newspaper of the -united kingdom ;— " If the foreign lady, who some months ago left the protection of an English offi¬ cer, during his temporary absence from home, is still a resident in either England or Ireland, he implores her, by every feel¬ ing of humanity, to give him some inti¬ mation of her existence—some token of her pardon." Trusting that this advertisement might meet the eye of Hippolita, yet scarcely daring to hope that her proud spirit would condescend to notice it, the colonel, day after day, carefully examined the various papers which were sent him. Disappoint¬ ment was the result of his search ; and again he plunged deeper and deeper into dissipation, to drown the torments of re¬ flection. The presence, the tender en¬ dearments of his wife, only added to the self-upbraidings of colonel Belgrave. Con¬ scious that his present mode of life not only endangered the salvation of his soul, ^ut that his health and fortune were going
rapidly to decay, he, nevertheless, wanted firmness to resist the allurements of plea¬ sure, and the dangerous temptations of the gaming-table* Night after night he saw his fortune diminish, and his debts, in¬ crease. One hour he resolved upon a new course of life, and imagined that he could give up the fascinations of play ; the next hf yielded to the invitations of Dashwood, or of Campbell, and thus became a prey to their mutual designs. Lost to himself, a prey to the most tor¬ menting reflections, and dead to the pure and innocent endearments of conjugal af¬ fection, colonel Belgrave nevertheless con¬ trived to assume an air of gaiety before company, which passed for lightness of heart ; and in the very few moments in which he was alone with lady Evelina, he so disguised his real feelings, that she suspected not the incurable depravity of his mind, nor the ruinous state of his fU nances. Her study was, how best to mould herself to his ever-lively disposition ; and this desire to please, led her, contrary
to what otherwise would have been her wish, into a constant round of company, either at home or abroad. Lovely and unassuming in her person, and gentle in her manners, she even min¬ gled amongst the proud and envious of her own sex, without exciting their ma¬ levolence, or calling forth their ill-natured remarks. A friend to all, lady Evelina was seen and admired, without having created for herself an enemy, although there were many of the other sex, who ventured to express their sentiments, in a language calculated to call down the envy of her own. The beloved friend of lady Evelina was not equally fortunate as her ladyship. Marian Gorden was no sooner presented to the notice of royalty, than the buz of inquiry ran, hke electricity, through the apartment.—" Who is that beautiful Scotch girl, whom the marchioness of Douglas has just presented?" was the universal question. " The only daughter and heiress of sir
ibones Gorden, w was the reply of the mar¬ quis, to the numerous applicants. Marian was indeed calculated to #Wja- ken the cariosity of the dj?awing-room vi¬ sitors, ¿She w;as mw m her eighteenth year, above ¿the middle size, and grace¬ fully proportioued. Every movement was fa^cinatiög and elegant, yet perfectly unstudied : he? countenance, the index of her mind, was regularly beautiful, yet possessing that softness and sweetness of «expression which seldom accompanies re¬ gularity of feature : her eyes, a dark hazel, were equally capable of dazzling by their brilliancy, or of stealing into the soul by the melting tenderness of their expression : her mouth was faultless, and her smile irresistibly sweet ; her voice was melody itself, and at times its tones were so touch¬ ingly tender, that they seemed given for the purpose of disarming the fierce and baser passions of mankind, and of restoring peace and harmony to the agitated bosom of the unfortunate. A profusion of rich brown hair fell in natural ringlets over her,
White and polished forehead. Sometimes they were suffered to stray, in wild luxu¬ riance, down her ivory neck, and graceful shoulders ; but they were now confined, according to the fashion of the times, by some large and valuable diamonds, which Marian had put on, in compliment to the presentation, and which had once belong¬ ed to her mother, who was neariy related to the Douglas family. The splendour of Marian's appearance, and the general admiration whicli she un¬ consciously excited among the men, was noticed with vexatious envy, by the fe¬ male part of the audience, who instantly began to take to pieces every separate fea¬ ture of Marian's lovely countenance. She was young, rich, handsoüne, and an heiress, more than suflicient to raise at once a host of enemies amongst her own sex, and a crowd of selfish admirers amongst the other. Unconscious of the feelings to which she had innocently given birth, Marian Gorden in vain sought, amidst the crowd, for a face and form which her cooler
reason reminded her, was not to be found within the precincts of a palace. Once indeed she thought she discovered a figure whose graceful movements resembled those of the person whom she vainly sought ; he had a lady leaning upon his arm, who was addressing him, in terms of seeming fami¬ liarity; they turned round, and Marian could not wholly check the involuntary start of surprise, as the marquis of Doug¬ las presented to her sir William and lady Arlingford. The resemblance was only in figure ; it vanished as soon as she beheld the pale, sickly, and unprepossessing countenance of sir William, who appeared to be in a consumption, while his lady looked the picture of health and good-humour—a striking contrast to the unnatural brother of the unfortunate Henry. Marian turn¬ ed with disgust from the emaciated being before her ; and moving forward, directed her attention towards a gentleman, who, with every demonstration of friendly re¬ gard, now stopped and greeted colonel
Belgrave. —" It is the marquis of Tyr¬ connel," said lady Evelina, in a low voice to her friend. The marquis now came up to them, and Marian was introduced by colonel Belgrave, who next presented him to lady Evelina. A blush overspread the fair face of her ladyship, as he respectfully touched her hand, and they proceeded to their carriage, at the door of which the marquis took leave; not, however, without having first promised to make one at the dinner- table of the colonel, as soon as he had changed his dress. Fatigued with the bustle and exertion of the day, both lady Evelina and her friend gladly exchanged their glittering robes, for those more simple and unob¬ trusive ; nor did their own natural beauty lose any of its attraction, by the alteration in their attire. There were some present at the dining-table, who thought, with the poet, "that beauty, when unadorned, is adorned the most ; ? and certain it was, that neither of the friends looked less
lovely, for having laid aside their costly ornaments. Lady Evelina was mora cheerful than usual ; she had met at the drawing-room with her old friend, Emily Warren, now Mrs. Bathurst, and she pro¬ mised to herself much gratification in the renewal of their friendship ; perhaps also she wished to appear to advantage in the eyes of her husband's guests, to some of whom she was related ; she was like¬ wise solicitous to pay every polite atten¬ tion to the marquis of Tyrconnel, whom she secretly wished might now become the associate of her husband. His cha¬ racter was so truly estimable, both in pri¬ vate and public life, that she considered the society of such a man to be of the utmost value to the colonel, and looked forward, with tender confidence, to the hour, when his better judgment would emancipate him from the dangerous con» nections which he had formed in his idle moments. Anxious to please, she was successful ? her endeavours. The marquis saw*
fend felt gratified by the delicacy of her attentions ; nor was he less pleased by the hospitable and friendly welcome of the colonel. They had known each other when boys, had studied at the same col¬ lege, and enjoyed many a schoolboy's frolic together. The heart of the colonel was then warm and affectionate; he was a stranger to vice, except by name ; and the Same weakness of character, which made him a prey to the wicked and designing, ín his maturer years, then served to mould him to the wishes of the wise and good. Separate pursuits had for some time es¬ tranged the college friends from each other; but colonel Belgrave always thought and spoke of the marquis of Tyrconnel with respect and esteem ; and the marquis,. remembering only what he was when a boy, never would allow him to possess any failings, that did not proceed from the head, instead of the heart. } With this opinion undiminished by the lapse of years, and the rumours of the world, the marquis had warmly 'espoused
the cause of the colonel, when his charac¬ ter was attacked by his uncle, lord Stew¬ art. Eager to vindicate him from so foul an aspersion on his honour, the marquis sought and obtained the promised expla¬ nation from his lordship ; unwilling, how¬ ever, to give full credit to the tale, which, if true, must prove the blackness of a heart he had hitherto believed incapable of perfidy or dishonour, the marquis de¬ termined to find out, if possible, the resi¬ dence of captain Arlingford, to assure himself of the real state of his affairs, and at least, to serve him to the utmost of his power, should he, which he feared to be the case, stand in need of his assistance. Yet this was an affair which required delicacy and circumspection for it involved the honour of a man, whose public character at least was unsullied, and with it the peace and happiness of an amiable and lovely woman, who was now become his wife, and who would therefore partake of his disgrace, were any to attach itself to his name.
The winter season had brought the marquis and his family to London, where he hoped to gain intelligence respecting the fate of the disinherited nephew of ge¬ neral Beresford. A stranger to his per¬ son, he nevertheless felt a strong interest in his fortunes, and a desire to become acquainted with him ; still, however, be¬ lieving that the property left by the gene¬ ral to colonel Belgrave, was not obtained by any unjust means on the part of the colonel. His inquiries, however, as yet had proved fruitless, nor could he obtain any clue to his residence. The last ac¬ counts received by his agent in London, were from Ireland ; and thither the mar¬ quis resolved to apply, by means of his steward, who resided there on his estate. The meeting with colonel Belgrave at the drawing-room, and the consequent re¬ newal of their former intimacy^ was a cir¬ cumstance which afforded the marquiâ sincere pleasure. He now saw him again, after the lapse of some years ; and he ap¬ peared the same careless, high-spirited,
warm-hearted being, as in early life he had found him : possessed himself of every rare and valuable quality, that can exalt and adorn human nature, the marquis seldom gave credit to the evil which he heard attached to the charaetfrs of those with whom he occasionally associated, while he lent a ready ear to the praise which was seldom and sparingly bestowed. Ever willing to find excuses for the failings of mankind, the marquis, never¬ theless, on this occasion, regarded the company now assembled at the table of colonel Belgrave with anxious attention, for amongst the number were major Campbell and captain Dashwood, names which he had heard mentioned by his uncle, with no very great marks of res¬ pect. He now saw them evidently on terms of the closest intimacy with the co¬ lonel, while, from the conduct of the ma¬ jor, hc was induced to regard him as the professed admirer of Miss Gorden, a be¬ lief which was strengthened by the looks and half whispers of colonel Belgrave*
while those of the lovely Marian gave no countenance to the soldier's hopes. Notwithstanding thè marquis's dislike to think ill of any man, yet there was a something in the manners and cast of fea¬ ture belonging to both these officers, that made him repel their advances towards an intimacy; and he could not but regret to see them upon such close terms with the colonel, whose constitutional weakness of character laid him open to the designs of the bold and selfish of both sexes. He thought also, thai he could discover, under their marked polki,ness to himself, a secret dread of his scrutiny, and an unwilling¬ ness to meet his eye; yet this might be prejudice on his part, arising from what had fallen from lord Stewart, to their dis¬ advantage; and the marquis resolved therefore to combat with his reelings, and to know more of their general conduct, before he rashly condemned them. The family of the marquis consisted of his mother, the dowager marchioness of Tyrconnel, his sister, a young girl about
sixteen years of age, and a brother, still younger than lady Julia. These near and dear relations were the objects most sa¬ credly beloved by the marquis, and he longed to introduce them to lady Evelina and Marian Gorden ; for he felt, with all a brother's pride of heart, that his Julia, young as she was, would be found worthy of their love. He saw, with a mixed feel¬ ing of pity and regret, that a being like lady Susan Dashwood, without mind or talent, or indeed any recommendation, ex¬ cept childish beauty, was upon those terms of friendly familiarity in the family, that almost bordered on relationship. This could notarise from any similarity oftaste, principle, or feeling, between lady Susan and the wife of colonel Belgrave ; it must have proceeded from the close intimacy between the gentlemen, and that compas¬ sionate good nature on the part of lady Evelina, which led her to pity and to to¬ lerate the uninteresting and tiresome con¬ versation of her simple guest. Simple as she was in point of understanding, yet the
marquis perceived a levity of manners in lady Susan, that made him resolve to keep his sister as much as possible from the knowledge of its contaminating in¬ fluence. There was a familiarity in her look and conduct towards colonel Bel- grave, that, to the pure and well-regulated mind of the marquis, bordered on impro¬ priety. He saw that both the colonel and her husband treated her as a spoiled child; and that the latter, instead of exerting with gentleness that influence which a husband ought to possess over the actions of his wife, carelessly allowed her to do and say just what her fancy prompted__ " Without a friend, a guide, a protector," thought the marquis, " what will be the fate of so young, so weak, and so pretty a creature ?" His thoughts naturally turned towards his own innocent and beautiful Julia. He imagined for a moment that he beheld her united to one of the young men of rank of the present day, whose pursuits and vol. i. ?
pleasures might render him as careless of her honour and happiness as was the hus¬ band of lady Susan Dashwood. He thought he saw the rose on her cheek grow pale— the lustre of her bright blue eye grow dim ; but the purity of mind and man¬ ners remained unchanged by the polluted breath of fashionable flatterers, or the chil¬ ling indifference of conjugal love. A sigh which escaped him at the bare supposition ofa sister's misery, caught the ear of lady Evelina*—their eyes met.—" I ought to apologize," said the marquis, in a low voice, to her ladyship, " for allowing my thoughts to wander from the present com¬ pany back to my home; but I have a young sister, who perhaps engrosses too much of my time and attention: I am anxious to bespeak for her your friendship, dear lady Evelina, and that ofyour charm¬ ing friend : she is but a novice as yet, in the ways of life; the chief of her days have passed in the romantic solitude of Tyrconnel ; you will find her a child of nature ; but yet I flatter myself you will
also find her far, very far superior to many who are her seniors in age and experience." " You have a sister then," replied lady Evelina, with evident delight ; " and one brought up, like myself, in the dear loved scenes of domestic tranquillity. Oh, my lord, pray introduce us to each other, with¬ out loss of time ; for except in the society of my dear Marian, I have found no being with whom I could associate with any degree of satisfaction, since I left my be¬ loved father's castle in the north ; and I feel, though I know not why, as if I should meet with, in your sister, a second Marian." " I will not exactly promise so much for Julia," said the marquis ; " but this I will venture to affirm, that your lady¬ ship will meet with kindred purity of mind and manners, and a heart full of guileless tenderness, which is already dis¬ posed to love you." Lady Evelina looked surprised. " Pardon me," he continued ; " I am ? 2
perhaps on one subject over scrupulous in my ideas—I mean with respect to female decorum. Once I had the pleasure of passing a day iii your society, at lady War¬ ren's, and my ideas of feminine propriety were then so fully realized, that I could not avoid frequently naming you to my sister, as an example for her imitation. She is tlierefore already prepared to love and esteem you ; nor is my dear mother without her share of impatience to see your ladyship. In early youth, colonel Belgrave and myself were college friends ; our intimacy is now hrppily renewed, and I trust that the friendship which we ex¬ pressed for each other in boyhood, will now be firmly cemented; and that our families in future may he as one." Lady Evelina warmly expressed ber hopes to be the same as the marquis ; then blushingly reminded him of the mis¬ take whieh he made in exchanging rings, at lady Warren's ball.—" Aline," said she, ít was the gift of my deceased mother ; as such, I value it above its intrinsic worth."
The marquis, with evident reluctance? drew it from his finger, and placed it once more on the fair hand of her ladyship. This simple action was observed by cap¬ tain Dashwood, who, surprised and igno¬ rant of the cause which occasioned it, re¬ solved, nevertheless, if necessary, to turn the circumstance to his own advantage, when an opportunity arrived for that pur¬ pose. Not that he believed the exchange of the rings to proceed from any guilty feeling in either breast ; there was an open nobleness of soul in the deportment of the marquis^ which forbade suspicion ; yet the action was strange, considering the unspotted character of the parties, and might be made of consequence in the eyes of a jealous husband. Such, how¬ ever, was not colonel Belgrave, though it might be convenient under circum¬ stances, to make him one. Captain Dash¬ wood was fit for any undertaking but an honourable one; and he therefore imme¬ diately concluded, from this trifling occur¬ rence, that the parties had met before,
and that it was now become his business to watch them ; but time and opportunity might give the marquis that influence over lady Evelina, wiiich would render his meditated plan unavailing. For his own silly and uninteresting wife, he felt no other sentiment than indifference ; and he heartily wished that some charitable, good-natured fellow would take her off his hands. The disgrace he had firmness of nerve to sustain, and impudence enough to court. Under the pretext of humour¬ ing lady Susan, as a spoiled child, he al¬ lowed her to act just as she pleased, with¬ out reason, ivithout discretion, or judg¬ ment to guide her in her perilous path through the world. Her beauty caught the eye, but her insipid nonsense wearied even the ear of the libertine ; and thus her folly promised to be the guardian of her honour, while her husband's whole soul was devoted to the ruin of the man he called his friend, and to the seduction, if possible, ofhis lovely and innocent wife.
CHAP. XI. When the family of colonel Belgrave quitted the abbey for the metropolis, they were quickly followed by captain Arlingford, who, unseen by tí urn, was their escort for nearly the whole of the journey. Arrived in London, he took up his abode in one of the retired streets, as the state of his finances would not allow of expensive lodgings, nor his spirits, broken as they were by the loss of his uncle's affection and fortune, admit of his associating with those who had gladly courted the sunshine of his prosperity. Peace, the blessings of which were felt and acknowledged by thousands, afforded him no relaxation from mortal sufferings ; and he almost regretted the life of inac¬ tivity which it necessarily brought with it, since to him, under the present state
of his feelings, idleness was the worst of evils, and poverty the next. His recent interviews with Marian Gorden had taught him, that his soul was susceptible of another passion save that of glory, and that love, the most tender, the most ar¬ dent, now filled every avenue of that chilled and desolate heart. To love was only to feel more keenly the bitterness of his fate. Reduced to comparative beg¬ gary, calumniated arid disinherited, how could he have the presumption to raise his hopes towards thc attainment of so much goodness, so much perfection, as was to be found in her whom his soul idolized ? With prospects blighted, hopes withered, and spirits subdued by illness and misfortune, he nevertheless remem¬ bered his promise to Judith. He at least possessed the power to cheer her declining years, and he resolved to give up at once the profession of arms, for his pride would not submit to his exposing himself to the coolness of his brother officers, many of whom he well knew would regard him
now in a far less favourable light, than when he was the acknowledged heir of general Beresford. To avoid this dreaded humiliation, young Arlingford resolved to sell his commission, purchase a cottage for Judith with a part of the money, in some village near to the metropolis, and then look for his own future support, from the exertion of those talents with which nature and education had so liberally en¬ dowed him. The plan was no sooner formed than executed ; and in searching for a residence suitable to the taste and comfort of Ju¬ dith, he found some relief from his own heart-corroding sorrows, ?1? mind and body derived temporary ease, while su¬ perintending the fitting-up of Judith's cottage. The furniture was plain and neat, and useful like herself: the little garden he had cultivated, and stocked with all those fruits and flowers which he knew to be her favourites. With se¬ cret satisfaction he viewed the completion ? 3
of his orders, and then wrote to his faith¬ ful nurse, to hasten her departure. With feverish impatience he waited for !.er ar¬ rival. She came, and Henry once more felt the powerful influence of affection upon his depressed heart. Exultingly he conducted Judith and her aog to the ha¬ bitation which he had provided for them. The smile and the tear of grateful love rewarded his labours. All was right— all was beautiful in the eyes of Judith, for all was the gift of him she idolized ; but that which most enhanced the value of the cottage, was a promise of her adopted son, to have the spare bedroom set apart for his own use; and that she might not feel dreary in her new abode, Henry, with prompt kindness, assured her that he would not leave her, until she was com¬ fortably settled and felt herself at home. " And where will be thy home, my darling?" said Judith, anxiously. " Thou hast brought me to one far above my de¬ serts. Oh, may the Father above, who has enabled thee to provide for all my
wants, pour down upon thy head a per¬ petual blessing ! and may the prayers of Judith be heard! May she live to see the child of her affections restored to that property, which villany has defrauded him of!'' Judith's dog had placed himself by the side of Arlingford ; the creature's head rested on his knee, and he was looking anxiously in his face. He now rose, and putting his large paws on the breast of his master, affectionately licked his hand, on which his cheek rested in melancholy reflection.—" And should that day ever arrive," said Henry, patting the dog's head with one hand, while he extended the other towards his nurse, " should that day ever arrive, you, Carlo, and your mistress, shali partake in my change of fortune, be it ever so brilliant." A momentary expression of joyful hope illumined the fine countenance of Arling¬ ford, as a sweet and tender form flitted before his eyes, and seemed to speak of peace and promised happiness to his sor·*
rowing heart. Short lived was tlie illu¬ sion ; for of what avail was the sunny smile of tenderness to him, whose blank and dreary prospects forbade a return of generous disinterested affection. He cast his eyes around the narrow limits of his little bedroom : even the humble comforts ît afforded were denied to him, whose circumstances imperiously called for the active employment of his talents. He must now abandon the deaf and dumb character he had assumed, and seek a situ¬ ation which would enable him to provide for thc necessary wants of human nature. Averse to mixing with the world, since he could no longer claim that rank in it which was his birthright, Henry Arling¬ ford resolved to apply for the situation of tutor, as being one of study and retire¬ ment, and least calculated to expose him to notice or to insult An obstacle now arose to frustrate his plan. In the capacity of tutor, he might be destined to reside many miles from the place of Miss Gorden's abode. How theu
could he watch over her welfare? how warn her of any premeditated danger, should any lurk around her? Chance, however, threw r in his way an able and faithful auxiliary, in the person of Dennis, the soldier who had served him in the capacity of servant, during his residence abroad. The joy of this man, upon again beholding his master, could only be ex¬ ceeded by that of his wife, who, in the extravagance of her feeHngs, forgot the disparity of their situations, and clasping his knees, while tears streamed down her cheeks, she exclaimed there was no longer any need for them to seek a new master, since they could now live and die with their old one. " Alas ! my good creature," replied Henry, sensibly affected by her attach¬ ment, " I no longer possess the means of retaining you about my person. I am become poor like yourselves, and, like you, must now trust to my own exertions for support." The joy of these worthy beings was
now changed to surprise and grief. Henry, well convinced of their fidelity to him¬ self, therefore entrusted them with the sad reverse of fortune he had so lately experienced, and with the sale of his com¬ mission, and the consequent necessity of his obtaining for himself the means of support. Their silence he could rely on, for he had proved the faithfulness of their attachment to his person ; and it was not the least among the subjects of his regret, that he was unable to reward them as they deserved. He now learnt from Mary, that her little boy, which was born to her in Spain, had died since their return to Eng¬ land, and this determined them upon once more going to service. Unable to leam any tidings of captain Arlingford, they had obtained situations in the family of colonel Belgrave, and were on the eve of going there, when Dennis had once more the happiness of meeting with his beloved master. This intelligence opened at once a pro¬ spect to Henry, of gaining the wished-for
information respecting the welfare of Miss Gorden. As butler, Dennis would know something of the movements of the fa¬ mily; he therefore hinted to this affec¬ tionate creature, that he would have the power of being useful to him, by trans* mitting to him, through the hands of Judith, every intelligence he might ob¬ tain, with respect to the conduct of colonel Belgrave towards Marian. With respect to his own injuries, Henry was silent, only cautioning both Dennis and his wife, not to mention his name in the family. This was a painful prohibition to those, who not only loved to name, but to expat¬ riate upon the goodness, affability, and kindness, of him to whom that name be¬ longed. It was, however, the wish of one whose will was a law to Dennis and his wife, and as such, they resolved to obey him. It has been said, that a wo* man cannot keep a secret—-Mary was a living proof, that there is no rule without an exception. The unfortunate Isabella Maynard had confided to Mary, on the
eve of the battle, the secret of her sex ; and Mary had faithfully preserved it, even from her husband. She had accompanied that ill-fated girl to the field, had assisted in bearing her when wounded back to the tent, and had, with maternal tenderness, watched over her to the last moment of expiring nature. Nor did her care cease with the life of the unfortunate : sacredly did Mary perform her promise; nor did she suffer any hand but hers to perform the last sad duties of humanity. Care¬ fully enwrapping the body of Isabella in the regimental cloak of captain Arling¬ ford, she consigned it to the soldiers, who bore it to the grave, herself following closely by its side; nor did she quit it until it was completely hid from all mortal view. Her duty thus performed, Mary turned all her attention towards Henry, whose lingering recovery was greatly alle¬ viated by her affectionate nursing. Mary's penetration quickly discovered, in the manner of captain Arlingford, when mentioning Miss Gorden, a certain some-
thing, which led her to conclude, that he felt a warmer interest than that of friend¬ ship in her welfare. This idea predisposed Mary in her favour ; and she no sooner beheld Miss Gorden, than she felt an in¬ stantaneous hope that she might be des¬ tined to become the wife of her beloved master. A soldier's wife was not an object to be seen with indifference, either by lady Eve¬ lina or her fair friend ; and Mary was ho¬ noured by their particular notice. They often questioned her as to the dangers she had experienced, and loved to hear her own simple, but affecting detail of the hardships she had undergone, the hazards she had run. Marian, in particular, loved to call forth the loquacity of Mary, by getting her to recount to her, the never- failing source of amusement to be derived from Mary's description of the campaign. How often has the heart of Marian throb¬ bed with expectation and with hope, that the name of Arlingford would be among those of the officers mentioned by the wife
of Dennis í How often has that name been oii the point of escaping from the lips of Marian, while the blush of virgin modesty tinged her cheeks, and withheld the wished-for inquiry î Never was the self-command of Marian more severely taxed, than when she dis¬ covered that Mary was the wife of that Dennis mentioned in the narrative of Henry Arlingford: surprise had nearly overcome her. Fortunately she was alone with Mary, when a few words which fell from the latter, betrayed to Miss Gorden who she was. If Marian was, before this discovery, pleased with the soldier's wife, this circumstance doubly endeared her to one who placed so high a value upon every thing, in any way connected with the fate of the unfortunate Henry. She wished, yet dared not lead to the subject of the supposed boy, who had thrown himself on the protection of young Ar¬ lingford, whose modesty would naturally lead him to pass lightly over those parts of the narrative which were most nobie to
himself. But Mary had been an eye-wit¬ ness of his valour, his glory, and his sufferings : Mary had been his attendant, his nurse, in sickness and in sorrow : but for the tender care of Mary, he might not have lived to awaken in her heart sö great an interest. How dearly did that heart now pant to throw aside all restraint of rank and secrecy, to unbosom itself to the faithful Mary, and to talk with her of Arlingford !—to weep with her whose attachment was so disinterested, and to find out, perhaps, through her means, the spot he had now chosen for his retire¬ ment 1 Neither the amusements of the metro¬ polis, nor the constant round of company that daily met at colonel Belgrave's, could banish from the mind of Marian the re¬ membrance of him whom she had first seen among the ruins at Belgrave Abbey : every luxury by which she was sur¬ rounded, only served to remind her of what he was compelled to relinquish. Fqr the sake of lady Evelina, she endeavoured
to behave as usual to her husband ; but it was with extreme difliculty that she could command her feelings, so as to repress the repugnance she now felt towards him. Nothing but affection for her friend would have induced Marian to remain under his roof, after the conviction of his being so totally devoid of honour and justice; but so tenderly did she love lady Evelina, that great as was her abhorrence of the colonel, she could not resolve to abandon her en¬ tirely to his mercy. His neglect she had already witnessed since their arrival in London: he was now seldom at home, except when company demanded his pre¬ sence: night after night was passed at the gaming-table, and, though cautioned to the contrary, Marian had nevertheless wanted courage to deny him the loan of several hundreds, which he had borrowed from her, unknown to lady Evelina. Great was the surprise of Marian at re¬ ceiving the following intimation of what she supposed to be only known to the colonel and herself; an unexpected note,
enclosed in a small parcei was delivered to ber by Charlotte. " You have neglected my cau¬ tion, and despised my counsel ; I pardon your temerity, since I am unknown to you. We must no longer be strangers, since both possess the power of being ser¬ viceable to each other. I am aware that you rank amongst the order of superior souls—that you are capable of great and heroic deeds—and that, if necessary, you would think no sacrifice too much to en¬ sure the happiness of those you love. I would fain be placed among the few, the very few, whom you call friends. " Born to enjoy all the luxuries which belong to high birth and an ample fortune^ the latter of which I however forfeited, by an act of youthful imprudence, I am now an alien to my country and my home, and destitute of the tender sooth- ings of female friendship, at a time when it is most valuable. That you possess
courage to encounter both peril and dan¬ ger, to afford consolation io the afflicted, I am well aware. Will you hazard a little inconvenience, for one of your own sex, whose proud and lofty soul wouid disdain to ask a favour of any other than yourself? " As you are in the habit of making morning visits alone, we can the more readily procure an interview. Fear no¬ thing from my proffered friendship—it is warm and fervent as your own ; my re¬ sentment only is to be dreaded. To¬ morrow, at twelve, if you will call on Williams, the florist, King's-road, Chelsea, and inquire for madame Du Chatillon, a person will be in waiting to conduct you to my apartments. Upon your honour I rely for secrecy—upon your humanity and benevolence, for comfort and assistance. " Rosalie De M —~."
Astonished and perplexed by this sin¬ gular request, of one who was an entire
stranger to her, Marian Gorden, after a Httle reflection, determined to go to the appointed place, since it was not likely that the person who had warned her of danger, should intend to betray her into any. Besides, what had she to fear—un¬ less it was the loss of fortune, from her yielding to the entreaties of colonel Bel- grave, for a fresh supply to liquidate some new debt, as he falsely termed it, of ho¬ nour ? It is true, that she felt pained by the marked attentions of major Campbell; pained for himself, for so delicate were those attentions, that she could no longer doubt the sincerity of his attachment. She felt it to be hopeless ; and in pitying the distress which she could not alleviate, her manners unconsciously betrayed a grateful sympathy of feeling, which led him to hope, that perseverance and con¬ stancy might ultimately succeed, as long as no rival appeared to claim her tenderer affections. The curiosity of Miss Gorden was pain¬ fully excited by the contents of the letter
from Rosalie. It hinted that the writer was, by some mysterious means or other» acquainted with the hazard she had run, to sooth the agitated heart of Henry, in her visits to the chapel ruins. Yet how could this information have been obtained, unless some one had seen, and been privy to her interviews with Arlingford ? It was strange also, that she had received no in¬ telligence from him, as he had half pro¬ mised, since her arrival in town. Several weeks had now elapsed, and she was still ignorant of his fate. "Ah !" thought Marian, " if, as I had hoped, I had made some impression on his heart, he would ere now have quickly found a method of communicating to me his sentiments. But I have failed to win his affections—I am not destined to re¬ store peace and happiness to that dear un¬ fortunate. He even refuses me the pri- vilege of friendship—he conceals from me his abode—he robs me of the exquisite pleasure of serving him, unknown and tm-
seen ! Oh that I dared venture to con¬ fide in Mary—«-" The meditations of Marian were now suddenly interrupted by the entrance of colonel Belgrave, who, catching her by the hand, inquired, in an agitated voice, if she had considered his request ? " I have," replied Miss Gorden, coldly withdrawing her hand ; " and I feel it a duty which I owe to myself, and to the many unfortunate beings who are now pining in wretchedness, not to wantonly throw away a sum of money which would gladden the heart of many an honest man." " Then you refuse me the loan of what I asked you ?" said the colonel, angrily : " I did not imagine, Marian, that you were so selfish—that you could prefer the possession of ? few paltry hundreds, to the peace and happiness of those whom you call your friends." " You have no reason to accuse me of selfishness," said Aliss Gorden, mildly, "ikice you are well convinced, that to VOL, i* L
preserve the peace of my dear Evelina, I would part with treble the sum you de¬ mand." " Then you will lend mc the five hun¬ dred pounds," cried the colonel, interrupt-' ing her hastily—" that is a dear good girl." " Indeed I cannot," was' the answer of Miss Gorden. " The peace of Evelina is already wrecked, since it depends upon my secretly enabling her husband to pay his debts of honour. I neither can nor will be accessary, colonel, to your continu¬ ing s© ruinous a course of life." " Pshaw í nonsense, you silly girl !" ex¬ claimed the colonel; " I only do what every other man does, in røy station of life. This very five hundred pounds, which you make so much of, is to pay what I lost last night to the marquis of Tyrconnel. You look incredulous—I dare say now that both you and Evelina thought liim too much of a saint to touch a card ; or, If he did, to play higher than your¬ selves : but you see this paragon of per¬ fection is mortal like myself."
** Heaven forbid !" inadvertently ex¬ claimed Marian Gorden. Colonel Belgrave looked surprised ; but not choosing to notice the exclamation, he continued—" If you will only stand my friend this once, I will not ask you again, Marian ; but unless you do, I have no alternative but to borrow the money on Evelina's jewels, and then I must tell her what it is for. I am heartily sick of play myself, and would almost forswear ever touching another card, for I have a constant run of ill luck. But, come, will you, or will you not ?" Marian paused for a moment. If a man like the marquis of Tyrconnel could be seduced into error, surely some excuse might be made for one whose whole life appeared to be a continued scene of thoughtless dissipation. The money would also preserve to Evelina the posses¬ sion of her jewels ; it would not therefore be wholly thrown away. Marian there¬ fore wrote an order upon her banker for L 2
the sum required, and giving it to the de¬ lighted colonel, said—** You will remem¬ ber your promise, colonel. The trifle you have received from me, accept as a proof of my love for Evelina ; but it must be the last—after this, I cannot allow my guardians to suppose that any extrava¬ gance of mine would call for such large and repeated supplies, I will not obtrude upon you my advice, because I feel too confident of its inefficacy to conquer the force of habit. Yet remember," and she tried to force a smile, " remember, colonel, that all things must have an end, and that your resources are not boundless." " No, no, my love," cried the colonel, with thoughtless good nature ; " my re¬ sources, Marian, are nearly all exhausted ; I am sick of London—sick of myself, and for half a pin, would go abroad for a few years, and retrench. But I must away, and settle my accounts with Tyrconnel." Colonel Belgrave had only spoken the truth, when hc affirmed that the money was wanted to pay what he had lost the
preceding night to the marquis of Tyr¬ connel. Both met at a large party, and the marquis, who never touched a card if he could any way avoid it, found himself placed, by the owner of the mansion, at the same table with colonel Belgrave. Fortune favoured the marquis, and he left off the winner, not of five but of three hundred pounds, which colonel Belgrave, with his usual run of ill luck, had lost to him, and which he promised to pay to him the next day. Fortunately for his word, the generosity of Marian enabled him to keep it He paid the marquis the three hundred pounds, reserving the other two for the prosecution of a crime still more destructive to the salvation of his soul. The money thus destined for the pur¬ poses of guilty pleasure, had been drawn from the reluctant hands of Marian Gor¬ den, in the hope of warding off the blow which she knew must fall cn the unsus¬ pecting lady Evelina. Convinced that nothing but actual inability to game would
ever prevent the colonel from following this dangerous vice, Marian looked for¬ ward to the time, as not far distant, when her friend would probably be be* reaved of every thing, and compelled either to return to her father, or to brave, witb a faithless and unprincipled husband» all the sad reverses of comparative pover¬ ty. Unable to save her beloved friend from the ruin which hung over her, Ma¬ rian firmly resolved to be proof against all further importunities of the colonel ; since the money he now so wantonly flung away, might be of essential service to him and his amiable wife, in the hour of ad¬ versity, which she believed to be fast ap¬ proaching. Nothing could palliate the conduct of the colonel, since the situation of lady Evelina gave promise of an heir to that estate which he was so shamefully laying waste.-—" Surely," thought Ma* rian, " the heart of this man is alike in* capable of paternal as of conjugal affection. Oh, how mysterious are the ways of Pro* vidence, thus to unite the gentlest and
best of human beings, with one who is a disgrace to human nature, and who is in* capable of appreciating the blessings be¬ stowed cn him by his Creator !" Many were the calls which Marian Gorden had upon her benevolence, to al¬ lay which she lent a willing ear. Beauti¬ ful in person, delicate in mind and habits of life, she nevertheless visited in secret many an abode of wretchedness, and en¬ countered scenes, from which the genera¬ lity of her fashionable associates would have shrunk back with disgust and hor¬ ror. But Marian, disregardless of perso¬ nal inconvenience, enhanced the value of her benefactions by her presence, cheer¬ ing with her sweet and heavenly voice the desolated heart, and directing the thanks of the grateful sufferers, to that Supreme Being from whom all blessings flow, and through whose means she was enabled to dispense comfort and happiness to others. In the hope of being serviceable to Ro¬ salie de M ------ , Marian Gorden, not how-
ever without some little trepidation, pro¬ ceeded to make the appointed call. As she was in the habit of going out in the carriage unattended, lady Evelina saw her depart, without its exciting any curio¬ sity ; and Marian, after first passing half an hour with one of the objects of her be¬ nevolence, drove to the florist's, in the King's Road. A respectable female was in attendance, who, upon her inquiring for madame du Chatillon, conducted her, by means of a secret passage under the road, which communicated with the gar¬ dens of the opposite house, into a beauti¬ ful conservatory, filled with the choicest flowers, whose mingled fragrance threw a delightful perfume into the adjoining apartments. The room was hung with rose-coloured silk, and on a couch of the same materials reclined a lady, who rose as Marian entered. The female attendant immediately re¬ tired, and the lady, coming forward, took the hand of Miss Gorden, and led her to the couch from which she had just risen.
*-**" I expected you," said she, with a gracious smile, w and thank you for not mortifying me by a disappointment. Ac¬ cept of some refreshment, and I will then gratify your reasonable curiosity." Marian gazed in silence on the exqui¬ sitely beautiful countenance of Rosalie ; it was one of those which she had seen among the finished specimens of the best Italian masters. Simple and unadorned was her head, except by the luxuriant and glossy ringlets of her jet black hair, which fell over her snowy bosom. The graceful symmetry of her form might be guessed at, though now partly obscured by her situation, for she was evidently near her confinement. She spoke Eng¬ lish with tolerable fluency; and Marian listened, with breathless attention, to the words which fell from lips, lovely as her own. " I feel gratified by this visit," said the fascinating Rosalie ; " for it assures me that in you, at least, I have not been mis- L 3
taken. My situation, and the oath I have taken, requires the assistance of a mind endowed with firmness such as youre, which will not timidly shrink back from the calls of friendship, at any trifling show of personal inconvenience or personal dan¬ ger. The noble disregard you manifested, of all selfish consideration, in your tran¬ sient visits to the ruins of the abbey cha¬ pel, gave me an insight into your charac* ter. Nay, start not, lady ; I speak from observation—not from any confidence I have received. Your secret is safe within the breast of Rosalie, who now swears to become your devoted friend, if such you will have her." Fale and trembling—then blushing to be thus discovered, by one who perhaps was no stranger to him, whose mental an¬ guish had induced her to violate the nice rules of female restraint, Marian could only press in silence the soft white hand of Rosalie to her throbbing heart, in token of assent. " I understand you, lady," said Rosalie*
* c and will trust that tender heart with my life and future destiny. Perhaps I may have power to calm its throbbings, when agitated by suspense and uncertainty as to the fate ofa highly-valued friend." The face of Marian now crimsoned with blushes, which heightened the loveliness of her appearance.-—" I see," said she, " tbat by some means you are acquainted with the cause of my visits to the ruins of the abbey chapel ; and though I blush at my imprudence, yet to afford consolation and comfort to the afflicted in mind and in spirit, I would again run the same risk of discovery, though prudence must con¬ demn my rashness." Rosalie pressed her hand with energy— " Sister of my soul !" she cried, " I honour you for the generous feelmg, which spurn¬ ing the colder dictates of prudence, nobly administers to the unfortunate, nor stays to reflect on consequences, when the mi¬ sery or the welfare of a fellow-creature is in view. Promise to hold sacred the con¬ fidence which I shali repose in you, and
that neither time nor circumstance shall induce you to betray a knowledge of my existence, unless with my consent." Marian motioned in the affirmative. " Should your cooler judgment disap¬ prove of my warmer feelings—should I be compelled to appear before you in a less amiable light than you could wish, swear, that whatever may be the result of our intimacy, or of my claims to your friendship, you will neither betray, nor abandon me, in the hour of trial and of woe." " I know not to what extent you may require my friendship to assist you," re¬ plied Marian Gorden, half intimidated by the solemn and mvsterious air of Rosalie ; ** but I will not shrink from rendering you every service which honour and good faith may require. Sacredly will I pre¬ serve whatever you may wish to commu¬ nicate ; therefore speak freely, and without reserve. Tell me in what way I can best serve you."
" Listen, lady, listen ; but do not shrink from your promise." '" I will not," said Marian Gorden, firmly. " You will pardon me, lady, if I con¬ ceal from you the name of the family to which I belong ; it is noble and wealthy ; and I was the youngest of five, and the first whose conduct ever brought a stain upon the honour of our house. Nursed in the lap of luxurious tenderness, and idolized by my kindred, I enjoyed more freedom than is generally allowed to my countrywomen. I seemed boi ? only to love and be beloved. When little more than sixteen, I unfortunately met at a ball an English officer of family and fortune : charmed by the fascination of his manners, and captivated with his person, I gave him my heart; it was innocent, tender, and confiding : our stolen interviews in¬ creased our mutual passion. The day of his departure was fixed. We met by moonlight in the gardens of my uncle's palace. Unaccustomed to meet with dis-
appointment, I could not disguise the agony of my soul ; I sunk fainting on hiâ bosom, to which he pressed me with pas¬ sionate fondness, calling Heaven to wit» ness the fervour and constancy of his at¬ tachment Drawing from his finger a ring, he placed it on mine, and then for the first time his lips touched mine. I heard him call me by the endearing ap¬ pellation of wife, as he conjured me not to break asunder those bonds of love, by which fate had united us. I heard him vow eternal fideHty, while, clasped to his throbbing heart, he entreated me to share his destiny, to accompany him to England, and to become his wife. " Bom under the influence of a coldeï sun," continued Rosalie, " you, lady, can* not form any idea of the immensity of my love; it filled my heart—it overflowed my eyes; and let in the delirium of rap¬ ture at finding myself thus beloved in re¬ turn, I sighed out the fatal assent to his proposal Disguised, I fled the palace of my ancestors; I gave up the world, its
poffi^ its splendours, and all the endear· ments of family and of home. Pressed to the loved bosom of my intended husband, I felt that his presence made amends for all that I had left behind. " In England, I reminded him of his promise, and demanded its fulfilment Time after time he evaded my request ; yet his love continued unabated, and as tender as when we first met. At length I drew from him the fatal secret which prevented our union. A prior engage¬ ment, contracted by his family in his boy¬ hood, was the bar to our nuptials. My fortune I had forfeited, by my rashness in flying from my family with a heretic ; his was nearly ruined by his prodigal extra¬ vagance. Loving him to madness, I still hoped that chance might set aside a con¬ tract, in which the heart had no interest ; convinced of his affection, unworthy as he was, I still continued under his roof, lured by the hope of yet becoming his wife, and well assured that I possessed a power
over his heart, which belonged exclusively to myself. " Living only for him, I suffered my fatal passion to supersede every other claim. Aware of the many failings which daily became more visible in his character, yet my love found excuses for them ^ ; even the treachery of his conduct, in se¬ ducing me by false promises, from my country and my home, all, all, I attri¬ buted to the excess of his attachment. " At length, the hour of my punish¬ ment arrived ; unwiiling to leave him, while yet a possibility existed of our be- mg united, I had accompanied him upon a visit of pleasure to Ireland ; and it was here, that I for the first time perceived a change, not in his affection, but in the joyous flow of spirits, which neither sick¬ ness nor sorrow had before impaired ; ray redoubled tenderness seemed to increase, rather than to diminish the weight on his mind. A short excursion of pleasure was proposed by some of his friends, and ac¬ cepted ; but indisposition prevented my
being of the party. He appeared unwil¬ ling to leave me, but I urged his depar¬ ture ; he pressed me repeatedly to his bo¬ som ; I returned his embrace, nor thought that it would be my last." Rosalie's voice was scarcely audible, and the tear trembled in her jet-black eye. Proudly she dashed away the proof offe- male weakness, hoping that it might have escaped the notice of her attentive com¬ panion. She continued—** With diffi¬ culty he tore himself from my arms, while I, unconscious of the cause of his emotions, pleased myself with picturing the delight he would feel on his return, when I imparted to him the joyful intel¬ ligence, which he had long been anxious to hear, that I was in a situation to crown his wish of becoming a father. In ima¬ gination, I beheld every feature of his loved countenance glowing with rapture, such as filled my breast, while hope fondly dwelt on this circumstance, as calculated to unite us more firmly together. Short were røy visions of bliss—a servant brought
me a letter, which his master ordered him to deliver to me, during his absence. My prophetic soul now conjured up a thou¬ sand ills, to rack my tortured fancy. For some minutes, I held the fatal paper in my trembling hands, anxious, yet dread¬ ing to be made acquainted with the ex* tent of my woe. " At length I broke the seal ; weli did it betray the agitation of the writer, for the characters were scarcely legible* All that affection could dictate f was urged to c nvince me of the agony he felt, while compelled to inform me, that he could no longer resist the marriage he so dreaded. The ruinous state of his affairs called for immediate assistance, and this wealthy alliance, which he could no longer retard, would at once liquidate his debts, and enable him to provide, in a suitable man¬ ner, for the woman he adored. " I read no more—pride, indignation, and insulted love, by turns took posses* sion of my heart, and kept me from sink¬ ing beneath the blow. My family, my
home, my ruined fame, all rushed across røy bewildered brain. The greatness of the sacrifice I had made to love, now, for the first time, appeared to me ; I felt the full extent of my injuries, and tbe base¬ ness of bim who had betrayed me—bim for whose sake I had voluntarily encoun-* tered peril and disgrace, and for whose love I should have deemed the sacrifice of an empire but as light and trifling* My brain was on fire, while my heart seemed pressed by the icy hand of death. In the first impulse of outraged affection, I tore from my bosom, tbe picture which' I had prized dearer than my life, I struck it to the ground, and trampled on the re¬ semblance, as I would have done on the original. " Betrayed and insulted, by the object of my blind idolatry, my lacerated heart no longer throbbed with guilty passion. Vengeance possessed my soul, and kneel¬ ing by the side of his disfigured minia¬ ture, I swore to avenge my wrongs, and those of my disgraced family. I swom
that no son of his should ever inherit his paternal estate, or enjoy the tenderness of his father's love, since that father had re¬ fused to legalize my claim, and for the sake of that wealth, which I, in the pleni¬ tude of my affection for him, had aban¬ doned, had consigned me and my offspring to disgrace and to dishonour." " Merciful Providence !" exclaimed the shuddering Marian, " what is it you mean by this rash vow ?" " Mean," repeated Rosalie, while her features expressed the dark purpose of her soul ; " that you shall know in time. Re¬ member, Marian Gorden, your promise, and hold it sacred, as you value not only your own peace, but that of Henry Ar¬ lingford." Marian gave a start of surprise, as the blood rushed into her cheeks at that dear loved name. Rosalie continued—" The hour is fast approaching, which will hail me with the name of mother. I have written to my brother, concealing from h?m the person who has thus basely be-
trayed me ; I have represented him as dead, for he is dead indeed to me. My family have pardoned me; they have agreed to remit me annually, more than suflicient for my support ; but they have banished me from the home of my child¬ hood, from my dear-loved native Italy, while my child, if it prove to be a son, is to be immediately entrusted to their care." " And can you consent to such a sacri¬ fice ?" inquired Marian, faintly. " I can do this and more," replied Ro¬ salie, with firmness, " when circumstances require it. But to my story :—my vow of promised vengeance, and the hope of its fulfilment, in some degree lightened my bursting heart. I fled the scene of my guilty passion, leaving behind me all the presents of my seducer, and with them, a few lines, expressive of my altered feel¬ ings. To England I returned, to that happy land, from whence all my promised happiness was to have been derived; in England, I was to have been made the wife of him my soul once idolized, with
a fervour which now I tremble to reflect on ; in England I heard of his marriage, heard it, and continued to live, though my agonized heart, for some minutes, ceased to beat ; its pulsation returned, and with it, my desire for vengeance. " My insatiable curiosity led me to be¬ hold the woman, who innocently usurped my rights. Disguised, I gratified my desire ; I saw her lovely and amiable, but she had not the light and happy air of a cheerful bride. I heard a voice repeat her name, a voice, on whose tones I used to dwell with rapture ; its power was lessen¬ ed, but not wholly gone ; I felt in my bo¬ som, for rny weapon of defence ; the voice came nearer, and I rushed from the des« troyer's presence, while I had power over my feelings. " Like the ghost of some departed spi« rit, I wandered round his habitation. I saw, I heard enough to convince me, that under his usual levity of manner, he concealed his natural profligacy of heart. He was miserable, and I gloried in the
certainty that I yet had power over one who had been the bane of my existence. With light and noiseless steps, I have stole through the magnificent apartments of his ancestors. I have listened with at¬ tentive ear, to plans proposed by men worthless as himself. I have heard my own name breathed, in tones of still- cherished tenderness, while I knew that the profligacy of his character was even then seeking for amusement, in the ruin of another victim to his passions. This fresh proof of the incurable depravity of his nature, increased ìuy deadly hate. Since his arrival in town, I have heard that he looks forward with pride to the birth of an heir. Let him, while he can, anticipate a joy he shall never taste—let him revel in imagination, on the endearing prattle and the sweet caresses of his le¬ gitimate offspring ; mine be the task, to destroy, as he has done, the air-built hopes of parental affection î mine be the joy to blast, to wither, the fond hopes of his perfidious heart ! to see it torn and ago-
nized by doubt and fear ! to listen to his groans ! to behold his tears ! Then, then shall I whisper in his ear—* This is the work of Rosalie !" " Gracious Heaven !" cried Marian, starting from the couch, " I can listen no more. Why, oh, why have you called upon me for aid, when your thoughts are bent upon some cruel purpose, which I, alas ! may not have power to prevent ?" Rosalie gave a terrific smile.—" Not to prevent, lady, but to assist, if necessary, my just revenge, have ï required your presence. I must see you occasionally. Perchance we may meet in public: be guarded, lady ; express no surprise ; be« tray no anxiety at what you may see or hear. Remember your promise ; and when I give notice of my wish to hold commu¬ nication with you, let no idle fear, no silly scruples, delay your visit. Your happi¬ ness is in my keeping." "In your keeping!" repeated Marian Gorden, in a low tone of horror. The countenance of Rosalie no longer
evinced the gloomy and terrific feelings of revengeful malice. A soft and sweet expression of encouraging tenderness il¬ lumined her beautiful features. She pressed the hand of Marian to her heart. —" Lady," said she, in a voice of honied sweetness, " fear me not : if at times you see me agitated by the remembrance of injuries that can never be effaced from my heart, still trust to the softer emotions of tbat afflicted heart. Its friendship is as w r arm as its resentments. I feel that you will become dear to me : there is a charm in your voice, a magic in your eye, which has already made me feel tbe value of your presence. I am not used to solicit, but now I do entreat that you will spare to mc some of your leisure moments, I had intended to have beea more communicative, but lest I should ter¬ rify you from a renewal ofyour visir, I will withhold all converse that can give you pain. Let us meet as if my secret was as yet untold. The time is still distant, vol. i. M
when it wdll be necessary for you to know the service which I shall require you to perform. Lady, you will not refuse to sooth and to console the melancholy hours of my solitude—you will not deny the request of Rosalie ?" Marian felt subdued by the persuasive tenderness of tbis singular and beautiful woman, A hope darted across her mind, that she, perhaps, might be destine ? divert her from her purposed vengc , and thus become the means of saving her from still deeper guilt and aggravated crime. Under this impression, Marian readily consented to see the fascinating Rosalie, as frequent as her engagements would permit. " In the meanwhile," said Rosalie, " I will not be unmindful ofyour welfare. I possess the means, strange as it may seem to you, of knowing all that passes in your house. I know also the characters of many of its intimate visitors, and can, from trifles, discover their more serious inten¬ tions. Should any thing occur to alarm
me on your account, you shall not fail to receive my warning." ** Then it was you who entered my chamber at the abbey," cried Marian, hastily interrupting her, " and who placed the letter on my toilet the night before our journey ?" " It was," said Rosalie ; " but have you, lady, attended to the caution 1 there gave you ?" Marian coloured deeply. " I will not press you on the subject," con¬ tinued Rosalie ; " be firm—be resolute ier the future. The money your gene¬ rosity bestowed on a heartless gambler, was only in part to pay a debt due to one of the best of his sex. The rest------but I will not pam your pure and gentle na ture, lady, by a premature disclosure of what must too soon be known. Impo¬ verish not yourself, to contribute to the criminal pleasures of vice and sensuality." Fain would Marian Gorden have in¬ quired after the health and safety of Ar¬ lingford, had not maiden modesty with- M2
held her tongue. It was evident this ex¬ traordinary being was by some means acquainted with his movements. She appeared to possess the singular faculty of diving into the thoughts of others, and of making herseif master of their most secret intentions. Was it probable that she was the person alluded to by Henry in his narrative, whom he had seen in the cabin of Judith, and who had accompa¬ nied him to England ? Marian now called to her remembrance the coinciding cir¬ cumstances of the two narrations, and they contributed to strengthen her in the belief that Rosalie was the beautiful fe¬ male who had so suddenly aroused him in Judith's cabin. She recollected also, these words of Arlingford—" I know not why, but I sometimes feel as if this singular woman had power to influence my future destiny." Marian's heart beat quicker at the suggestion of Henry. Strange as it might seem, the self-same object now claimed a right over her, which she could not resist.—** She may
possess the power to render me unhappy," sighed Marian Gorden, " but never to make me guilty. Circumstances, over which I have no control, may place me within her power; but she cannot take from me my firm and unshaken reliance on the goodness of Providence, nor weak¬ en my belief in the justice of his de¬ crees."
CHAP. XIL Amongst the crowd of fashionables who flocked to the residence of colonel Belgrave, none were more frequent in their visits than the marquis of Tyrcon¬ nel. He saw much to disapprove of in the conduct of the colonel ; he saw him associated with men of doubtful character, at the head of whom was captain Dash¬ wood; and while he beheld the compa¬ nion of his boyhood the ready prey of
sharpers, he felt all the regret that a good and generous mind is capable of feeling upon such an occasion. For lady Eve¬ lina, and her lovely iriend, the marquis felt the purest regard, which increased as his habits of intimacy with them, gave him opportunities of witnessing their su¬ perior excellencies ; and he was not a little proud of knowing, that his young sister ranked high in their estimation. Of late* the visits of lady Susan Dashwood were few and short, and seemed to proceed from necessity, not from inclination, as they formerly did. Attributing this alte¬ ration to some caprice or whim of her silly little ladyship, the marquis looked upon her absence as most fortunate ; it enabled his sister to pass more of her time with lady Evelina and Marian Gorden than she could otherwise have done, had lady Su¬ san continued her daily visits to the fa¬ mily. The kind heart of the marquis pi¬ tied the situation of so young and pretty a woman, neglected as she was by her husband ; yet in her conduct he saw so
much to disapprove, that he determined not to expose his sister to the contagious influence of female levity. He felt also, that the absence of this weak and thought¬ less young woman, must be a great relief to the sensible and well-regulated minds of lady Evelina and her friend, whose compassionate sympathy had alone en¬ abled them to tolerate her society. Left to follow the bent of her own in¬ clinations, and totally neglected by her husband, lady Susan solaced herself for his indifference, by listening to the flat¬ tering nonsense of the weak and idle like herself. The world already began to cen¬ sure her conduct—report accused her of encouraging the attentions of a young nobleman, who was heir to a dukedom ; but this was policy in lady Susan* and enabled her to conceal her real sentiments in favour of another person, to whom she was seriously attached, and who had gain¬ ed such complete ascendancy over her mind, that he had actually taught her to believe, that in violating her marriage
vow, she only broke asunder a tie insti¬ tuted by man, and for which she was only accountable to the laws of her country. The marquis of Tyrconnel had heard the name of lady Susan coupled with that of lord Tewksbury, in terms which con¬ vinced him that she was by no means a proper associate for women who were te¬ nacious of their character ; and be there¬ fore noticed with pleasure, that her lady¬ ship was no longer a constant visitor of lady Evelina.; while, on the contrary, her husband appeared to pass more of his time with the colonel than at his own home. Major Campbell was also seldom absent; his attentions to Miss Gorden were visible to every one; yet the marquis, who watched with a brother's eye the looks and manners of Marian, could not disco¬ ver any thing in her conduct to authorize that of the major. Highly as the marquis regarded Ma¬ rian, yet his affection was not that of a lover. He felt happy in her presence, but her absence did not make him either
lestless or uneasy; and had he believed the major to be worthy of her hand, he could have assisted at the ceremony, and have rejoiced at an event which would contribute to her happiness—a sure proof that he was not himself in love with the amiable Marian. Had lady Evelina been single, or at least, had she been free to re¬ ceive his addresses, when they first met at lady Warren's, it is most probable that the marquis would have preferred her to every other woman. He now looked upon her as the wife of his friend ; and in that light she was sacred in his eyes : he could not however repress the wish, that he might be so fortunate as to meet with one who resembled her as much in the pecu¬ liar graces of the mind, as in the soft and feminine loveliness of her person. Until the marquis had seen lady Eve¬ lina, his own Julia had been his standard of perfection ; but now this darling girl, all bright and beautiful as she was, must yield to another, whose mild and dove- m 3
like sweetness of deportment better suited with the feelings of the marquis than thè buoyant spirits of his sister, as yet un¬ clouded by a care, or unchecked by re* strain t and disappointment. It wa& this light and blissful temperament of lady Julia, which led her to give the prefe¬ rence, if indeed she had any, to Marian Gorden. Lady Evelina was always gentles always good and amiable; but Marian's changeful spirits could ín a moment trans¬ form her into the lively, animated girl', or soften down into the persuasive tender·» ness of more reflective woman. It was this that made Marian the favourite with lady Julia : with her she had no reserves; every thought, every feeling was made known, with the guileless confidence of happy, trusting youth ; and Marian was the confidant of all that occupied the heart and mind of Julia. A masked ball was to be given by the marchioness of Douglas, and lady Julia applied to Miss Gorden, to intercede for her that she might be allowed to accom*
pawy her brother and colonel Belgrave's party to the festive scene. ???? was successful in her applica^ tio«, and the joy of her young friend was unbounded. Marian smiled affectionately upon her pet; once she would have felt the same, but now the approaching festi¬ vity promised her but little amusement Major Campbell was her shadow; he haunted her wherever she went ; in public and at home, he was ever by her side. Grateful to him for his attentions during her illness, and pitying him for what she felt to be a hopeless attachment, she wafíted courage to tell him how much his present conduct distressed her. To lady Evelina she confessed the painfulness of her situation, who besought the colonel to delicately hint to his friend, that his marked assiduities were unpleasing to Marian. The colonel, laughing, told her, that unless the heart of Marian was prepos¬ sessed in favour of another, she could not possibly object to the attentions of such a
man as his friend Campbell.—" You would do well, Evelina," said he, u were you to persuade Miss Gorden to look upon him in a more favourable point of view. He is her countryman, and of a noble family ; his person is sufficiently attractive to please any woman, and the largeness of her fortune will make up for the smallness of his. See, Evelina, what you can do to bring about this union. I have weighty reasons to wish for its consummation." Lady Evelina replied, that on any other subject she would cheerfully obey him ; but that on an affair of so much im¬ portance as the one in question, which would decide for ever the happiness or misery of her friend, she could not, in conscience, attempt to influence her judg¬ ment. " Nonsense," replied the colonel ; " I only wish you to persuade Marian that Campbeil will make her an excellent hus* band, and that the sooner she puts an end to the vain hopes of others, the better. Nay, do not look so serious, Evelina ; were
not you and I persuaded into marrying each other? and if we look among our acquaintance, we shall not find ourselves the most miserable of married couples." " I trust that neither of us will ever have cause to regret our obedience to the wishes of those who gave us birth," said lady Evelina. " It shall be my study to render you as happy, my dear Belgrave, as if I had been the object of your own free choice." The colonel for a moment felt abashed ; but soon his gaiety returned.—" You are a good girl, Evelina," said he, " and merit more than a thoughtless fellow, like my¬ self, can bestow." " Let me possess your undivided affec¬ tion," replied his wife, " and I shall have no cause to complain of my lot " The colonel was too great an admirer of women, and too gallant, to pass over this compliment unnoticed. He flung his arms round the waist of Evelina, and pressed his lips to hers, when the door suddenly opened, and captain Dashwood
entered. Not Satan's self could feel more malignity, on witnessing the endearments of our first parents, than he did on view¬ ing this appearance of affection in the co¬ ionel towards his wife ; while the colonel, ashamed of feelings, which, had they been permanent, would have done honour to his heart, caught up his hat, and hastily excusing his absence, left lady Evelina alone with his pretended friend. The dislike she had once felt towards this man, was in a great degree removed, by the alteration in his own conduct when in her presence. He had, for some time, so completely mastered his natural depra¬ vity of character before lady Evelina, that she now viewed him in the light of a friend, sincerely attached to the family— one who, had be been happily united to a woman of sense, and of domestic habits, would have been an amiable and indulgent husband; So effectually had captain Dash¬ wood ingratiated himself into the favour of her ladyship, that she actually believed that his unhappy marriage was the sole
cause of whatever irregularities he might be guilty of. Under this fatal mistake, she behaved to him with a kindness which might almost be termed sisterly. She listened to his pretended regrets> at his inability to control the frivolous levity of lady Susan ; and so plausible was this bad man in all that he affirmed, that her lady* ship often listened to him with tearful eyes, accepting his confidence, from a be¬ lief that her friendly consolations allevi¬ ated his situation. Seeing him therefore apparently in deep thought, after the departure of colonel Belgrave, lady Evelina kindly inquired if any thing new had occurred to occasion his chagrin ? " Nothing, my dear friend," he replied ; " but I could not help contrasting my lot with that of the colonel, who, in the pos¬ session of every earthly felicity, seems scarcely conscious that he ought to be the happiest of his sex." ** Indeed, I know not that," said her ladyship,» modestly blushing at her own
praise ; " but I trust that he will never have cause to complain of his domestic comforts. He was a spoiled child, you know, and from his infancy has never been accustomed to contradiction." " True," replied Dashwood; " but highly as I prize my friend, I cannot but lament that he possesses so pliant a dispo¬ sition ; his very excess of good nature only renders him a more easy prey to the de¬ signs of the needy adventurer ; and believe me, there are many in this town who make it their business to live by the wan¬ ton prodigality of others." (t It is the duty of a friend, like your¬ self, to warn him, should he ever be placed in so dangerous a situation." " Alas ! I have too often counselled him in vain: I have even accompanied him to the houses which I knew he oc¬ casionally frequented, thinking that by my presence I should restrain his inordi¬ nate love of gambling. But what have I said ? You look pale, my dear lady Eve¬ lina. Trust me, that I will do all that
friendship can invent, to wean him from this unfortunate prepossession. I thought you were acquainted with his weakness, or never should it have escaped my lips." " I have long suspected that his nights were devoted to this destructive /ice," said lady Evelina, mournfully ; " and now you have convinced me that I was right. Oh, my friend !" she continued, " let me conjure you, by the interest you take in our welfare, by the affection you manifest for my husband, suffer him not to go alone to those scenes of ruinous tempta¬ tion, 1 have heard of men so dreadfully infatuând, that they have lost the whole of their estates, and brought poverty and distress upon themselves and their family. Oh, save him, I beseech you, from the grasp of these monsters, for 1 dare not advise upon so delicate a subject !" This was what the captain wanted ; he wisned lady Evelina to suppose that friendship for her husband was his induce¬ ment in frequenting the gaming-table, should it reach her ears tbat he was oue
of its visitors. He now calmed the agi¬ tation he had caused, by assuring her that he would sacredly watch over the welfare of her husband, and seize upon every op¬ portunity to warn him ofthe fatal conse¬ quences resulting from his inordinate love of play. It was in conversations such as these that Dashwood contrived to gain the entire confidence of lady Evelina, who regarded him as a man truly devoted to her inte¬ rest ; while he artfully increased it, by speaking of the colonel in terms of affec¬ tionate regret, hinting, as he saw conve¬ nient, the injury he feared he had already sustained in his affairs, by the heavy losses he knew he had experienced.—" When a single man," said he, " I found some ex¬ cuse for his waste of time and fortune; but now, when united to a woman, whose virtues would render any place a paradise, I grieve to see him still the same. Had he a wife, a home, like mine, there would be some little excuse for his flying from both ; but he is doubly blest."
" Alas !" exclaimed her ladyship, " there may be excuses for Belgrave, of which you are ignorant. Our parents betrothed us to each other, before we knew or thought on the sacredness of the engage¬ ment. I was brought up in retirement, and in a manner secluded from society ; while my cousin, mixing with the world, had opportunities of seeing, perhaps, others with whom he might have passed his life more happily, at least more congenial to his taste." " I have heard as much," said Dash¬ wood, then checking himself, as if he had gone too far. Lady Evelina looked inquiringly at him, and sighed deeply.—** I will not ask you to betray the confidence of your friends," said she ; " nor will I seek to know what may render me miserable. If I am not the object of my husband's free choice—if his heart would have preferred another, my duty teaches me to be ^ bly attentive to his wishes, doubly assumons to promote and to secure his comforts.
My silent devotion may at length establish my claim to his affection, which is all the happiness I covet." Dashwood looked and felt surprised at this unexpected and unlooked-for turn in her feelings ; but he wisely deemed it prudent not to hazard too much at once. With sentiments such as tjiese, he had no chance of success ; he must therefore try the effect of arousing her jealousy, by con* vincing her, that a being in reality exist¬ ed, for whom the colonel would not scru¬ ple to sacrifice her happiness, at the very moment when she was anxiously studying how best she could promote and secure his own. If he failed to awaken her jea¬ lousy, he resolved to try what effect the exciting her disgust and abhorrence would have. He was acquainted with the story of young Arlingford's disinheritance, and of the treacherous means which had been used to obtain it, by working upon the old man's credulity. Could he but once succeed in rendering the colonel an object pf horror to his wife, captain Dashwood
weakly imagined that she would fall an easy prey to his designs, and that he should finally be rewarded for his villany, by the possession of the only woman who had ever made any serious impression upon his heart. Deeply engaged in bringing about the accomplishment of his own guilty plans, captain Dashwood had no time to notice the conduct of his wife. Occupied in schemes of anticipated pleasure, and looking forward to the hour when lady Evelina, sickening at the sight of him, whose secret vices a perfidious friend had brought to light, would turn to himself for relief and consolation, he saw not the disgrace and the dishonour which was hanging over him¬ self, by his criminal neglect of lady Susan. He saw not, that while plotting the ruin of lady Evelina, another was equally busy, in deluding the weak and silly heart of lady Susan. Left to herself, angry and piqued by the indifference of her hus¬ band, she thoughtlessly listened to the flattering voice of the seducer, until her
ruin was effected. Conscious of her crime, yet loving the cause, she was no longer able to endure the glance of the man she had injured. No longer inno¬ cent, lady Susan felt as if every eye could penetrate into her secret Self-condemn¬ ed, yet deficient in intellectual reasoning, she wanted the grace, as well as the sense, to see through the sophistry of her sedu¬ cer. Deluded and betrayed by the per- suasive eloquence of his tongue, she lis¬ tened and believed; and in proportion as his power over her increased, so did her love, until she became the victim of liber¬ tinism, and of her own want of principle and religion. To remain under the same roof with her husband, cold and indifferent as w r as his conduct towards her, lady Susan now felt to be impossible; and she besought her seducer to iind out some retreat to which she could retire, and enjoy, undisturbed, all that portion of his time which he could devote to her. It was in vain that he ad¬ vised her to continue under the protection
of her husband ; in vain that he hinted, that, for her sake, it would be prudent to act with caution, and, if possible, turn his suspicions towards another party. ei Do not fear my imprudence," replied the infatuated and guilty girl : '* your life is dearer to me than my own. Tewks- bury has paid me great attention : he is on the point of leaving England for the continent; I will so contrive, that my elopement shall give rise to the suspicion that we are gone off together. Meanwhile you provide me some secure abode, where I can remain concealed. I shall count the minutes, until the promised hour ar¬ rives whicli will bring you to my arms." Lost in the delirium of passion, this un¬ fortunate young woman now looked for¬ ward to the evening which was to liberate her from the restraint of her husband's presence, with joyful exultation. She had not yet attained her eighteenth year. Ruined by over indulgence, her mind was stored with a heap of romantic non¬ sense, and love-verses in abundance, which
had been the occupation of her idle mo¬ ments. Without sense or judgment to discriminate, she greedily perused all the trash which her maid procured for her from the Hbrary ; and while feasting on the amatory verses of Little, or learning by heart the poem of Abelard and Eloisa, her weak and heated imagination almost led her to believe, that no tie was sacred but those made alone by love. In one of those moods she was address¬ ed by captain Dashwood. He spoke of love and Gretna Green, and lady Susan became liis wife, in the little space of a week's courtship. But it was stolen, and therefore became the sweeter. Possessed of her fortune, which had been the attrac¬ tion in his eyes, he soon forgot to admini¬ ster that flattery so necessary to her ex¬ istence. He became cold and negligent -—she was too pretty and too young not to attract the attention of the libertine. Unfortunately for lady Susan, her per¬ sonal charms rendered her an object of desire, to one who possessed the art of
making the worse appear the better part. The subtlety of his reasoning was too deep for her understanding to refute, and she became an easy prey to the profligate voluptuary. •Thoughtless of consequences, lady Su¬ san heard, with guilty rapture, that her seducer had taken a beautiful little cot¬ tage, situated in the midst of a large gar¬ den, and only a short distance from town. Here with prudence she might remain concealed, until the first surprise of her flight had died away ; and here also he could see her daily, as the road to the cot¬ tage was down a lane but little frequent¬ ed. Not a thought was wasted upon captain Dashwood. Even the probable consequences of her crime, which might end fatally, either to her husband or her seducer, had no power to deter her from her elopement. She had been told that lord Tewksbury's travelling carriage would call for him at the house of the marchio¬ ness of Douglas, on the night of her vol, L N
masked ball, from whence he was to set off for the continent. Her own maid was to be at hand at the same hour with a hackney coach, which was to convey her guilty ladyship to the retreat provided for her by her betrayer, who it was agreed was to take but little notice of her during that evening. Lady Susan, however, made him promise to call on her the next day, after he had vvitnessed what effect her elopement would have on her husband. No qualms of conscience assailed lady Susan, as she mingled amongst the motley crowd at the marchioness of Douglas's. She quickly discovered lord Tewksbury, as a Highland chief, and willingly allowed him to attach himseif to her for the night. Once or twice she thought that her con¬ duct was watched by a gentleman in the habit of Kolla, who came with colonel Belgrave's party ; and her childish impa¬ tience to learn his name, made her break through her determination of not speak¬ ing to them. Quittmg therefore the arm of lord Tewksbury, she approached the
amiable Cora, who, with her Alonzo, was busily engaged in guessing at the various characters as they passed. The childish voice and silly laugh immediately be¬ trayed to lady Evelina, that the highly- scented flower-girl was lady Susan Dash¬ wood, who, after asking twenty questions in a breath, and learning that Rolla was the marquis of Tyrconnel, ran satisfied away, and rejoined her companion, lord Tewksbury. In the course of the evening, the at¬ tention of the company was frequently attracted, by the voice and skill of a couple of wandering minstrels, who sang some beautiful airs, with great taste and feeling. A youth bore their harp, on which they occasionally played in a masterly style. Every one was anxious to discover who they were; but their replies were short and unsatisfactory; and it was evident their intention was to remain unknown. The entrance of new guests drew off the company from where the tallest of the ï N 2 I
minstrels was standing, leaning on his harp. Detained by some strange feeling, Ma¬ rian Gorden loitered behind her party* The minstrel again struck the chords, but with a trembling hand, and in a low sweet voice, sung the following stanzas :— " I've fed the altar in my bower, With droppings from tbe inceme tree ; Pve shelter'«! it from wind ani) shower. But dira it burns tiie livelong hour, As if, like me, it had no power Of life or lustre without thee. " A boat, at midnight, bent alone, To drift upon the moonless sea ; A late, whose leading chord is gone— A wounded bird, that hath but one Imperfect wing to soar upon, Are like what I am without thee." Marian Gorden started, as the well-re¬ membered tones stole into her heart, for the voice was that of Henry Arlingford— the allusion was to herself Surprise and tenderness nearly overcame her, and she was compelled to sit down upon a couch for support.
The minstrel gave his harp to the at¬ tendant youth, and, bending forward, whispering* said—" Dearest Miss Gor¬ den, suffer me tó hope, that the unfortu¬ nate Henry is not wholly forgotten, by thé otìly being in the world whose friend¬ ship he is anxious to possess. Never will the remembrance of your goodness be ef¬ faced from his desolate heart." * " I am rejoiced to see you once again," said Marian, looking anxiously round her, " but I fear the eyes—" *' I understand you," he replied, mourn¬ fully, tí and will retire. Yet I could have wished a few minutes converation. I have much to say—much to inquire." ' 6 1 also could wish to know how you have been since I last saw you," said Ma¬ rian ; ** the interest I then felt in your misfortunes is as lively as ever. I hope circumstances are novt more favourable to yoüt wishes—I hope that your prospects áre brighter—<-happier." She paused, fear¬ ful of saying too much, yet anxious not tô say too little. N3
The minstrel sighed deeply.—" Happi¬ ness is not for me in this world," he re¬ piied : '* and yet I have experienced a re¬ cent joy, in the anticipation of this even¬ ing's arrival, since it would once more bless me with the sight of my invaluable young friend. The moments are precious ; let me therefore conjure you to beware," and he lowered his voice—" to beware of that singular being whom you so recently visited, and who expresses for you so much attachment." " You know her then !" exclaimed Ma¬ rian Gorden, in a tone of surprise. *' I do," said he, emphatically ; " and grieve to find that you are under the in¬ fluence of so resolute—so determined a character. For Heaven's sake ! let no in¬ ducement, no threat, work upon your nature, to bind you to the interest of this mysterious, this fascinating woman. It is through her means that I am enabled to enjoy this interview. I understand not her motive in coming here ; but from the trembling of her form, and her difficulty
of breathing, I judge that she has seen some one, who has revived ideas of no very pleasing nature " " Tell me, I entreat," said Marian, blushing at her own curiosity, ** is not this lady, and the stranger whom you met with in the cabin*-—" At this moment they were interrupted by the sudden appearance of the younger minstrel, who, without noticing Marian, said, in a hurried voice—" My desire is gratified ; I have seen those I wished to see, and shall return. Remain, and en¬ joy, while you can, the happiness you covet." Arlingford whispered something, in so low a tone, that it escaped the ear of Ma¬ rian. She saw him quit the apartment with his companion, and a sickening fear of she knew not what, came over her* Major Campbell, and some more of the party, now joined her, and she followed them into one of the refreshment-rooms, not, however, without first having noticed the reappearance of Henry Arlingford»
who returned as soon as he had conducted his friend and her attendant to the car¬ riage. Never before had the presence of major Campbell been so irksome to Marian Gor¬ den as she now felt it. Her eyes were fixed on the watchful minstrel, and she heeded not the conversation of the major, who, noticing her absence of mind, was at a loss for the cause. Lady Evelina was fatigued, and Marian, unable to shake off the major, who kept close to her side for the rest of the evening, heard, with pleasure, their proposed return home. At the request of lady Evelina, the ma¬ jor went to give orders for her carriage, at the same instant the crowd separated her from her married friend, and she found herself once more close to the arm of the minstrel. Aware of the shortness of her stay, Hen¬ ry pressed her unreluctant hand in his. —" You are going, beloved friend," said he; "and when shall we meet again? Ah! wretch that I am, how dare I aspire
so high, as to hold this precious trembling hand in mine ? Forgetful of the vast dis¬ tance which Fate has now placed between us, my aspiring soul must relinquish so great a treasure to the happy Campbell, whom report affirms will shortly claim it for his own. But I have dared to disbe¬ lieve-—" " You have done right," said Marian, hastily interrupting him. " The person you mentioned can never be more to me than a friend." " You may be mistaken, fair lady," cried a voice, close to the ear of Marian, who, starting at the sound, turned and beheld a group of characters unknown to her ; yet the voice resembled that of co¬ lonel Belgrave. (t We are observed," said Marian Gor¬ den, withdrawing her hand gently from the clasp of Henry's. " Farewell! you carry with you my prayers for your hap¬ piness." She now darted from him, and taking the arm of lady Evelina, was quickly joined by major Campbell and
captain Dashwood, who escorted them to their carriage, at the door of which cap¬ tain Dashwood left them, saying, that he must return and seek lady Susan, whom he supposed was not yet tired of the night's amusement. Colonel Belgrave took his extended hand, and giving it a friendly shake, bade him remember, that they were engaged for the next day at sir WilHam Arling- ford's, and then parted for the night.
END OP VOL. I.
Printtd by İ. Darling, Leadenhall-Street, Lomkm.
