Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The highest castle and the lowest cave: or, Events of the days which are gone: Rebecca Edridge
CHAPTER I.
How much the world hath reason to lament That glory's dazzling name leadeth so oft To slaughter : that nought but war inviteth The hero to exertion : while each act Of gentler impulse, is deem'd below the brave.
While these events were passing in Devonshire, prince Edward and the army under him were gathering laurels in Palestine. The prince re¬ vived the glory of the English name, and signa¬ lized himself as a valiant leader, and a brave soldier ; and those who followed him, stimulated by his example, acted nobly. The zeal which induced so many to take the cross, made them deem the holy wars the highest objeci: of ambi¬ tion. To these wars they were not only insti¬ gated by hope of the worldly reward of renown, but they were also pushed on by the certainty of the future reward of paradise. That promise made by his holiness the pope, very powerfully, now as heretofore, urged the warrior to destroy vol. πι. ?
2
the infidels, and to risk his own life : and, unfor¬ tunately, in blind credulity, to rely so implicitly on the reward promised him, that like his pre¬ decessors, he sought no other means to deserve its fulfilment. For that reason the same un¬ curbed gratification of every passion ivas enjoyed by the croisses in this last crusade, as by those who had attended Richard, or had accompanied Peter. Reports of the courageous bearing of Edward, antl the gallant conduct of his army, frequently reached England, and hope beat high in every breast, that the object most dear to its love was among the distinguished brave : and tenderness oft feared to hear the detail, lest the friend she cherished should be among the slain : but the fame of the prince was the theme of every pen, antl of every tongue ; and the chieftains, the knights, and the esquires, whose dauntless valour gained the victories he planned, vrere lost in the blaze of his individual glory. Though his va¬ rious battles and conquests ?\???? made knoivn ; who perished or who survived was long in doubt, and expectation ??'?? kept constantly on the watch, and anxiety constantly in alarm. All ex¬ presses went in the first instance to the king ; and the sW communication between the distant parts d the kingdom, often prevented the few par-
3
tieulars, that were intended for private informa¬ tion, from being received for many weeks after they arrived. Alas ί how many who eagerly looked forward for intelligence, received at length, the dreadful certainty of woe. How many, when they met the messenger, who brought the news for which they anxiously awaited, heard the sad story of the fate of those they loved ! How many wives, when they inquired for their husbands, found that they were mournful widows ! How many mothers, whose bosoms glowed with pride when they beheld their sons depart, heard that their boys had helped to glut the maw of death î The old lost the prop of their age, the young the joy of their youth. The tales which were brought over renewed the tales of the days which were gone ; and every one either recounted the victories and glories and escapes of former wars, or saddened the hearts of their listeners by relating all the horrors ivhich they remem¬ bered, or had heard their fathers tell. The re¬ bellion of Leicester was so recent, that there were few among those who remained at home, who had not themselves experienced the terrors of the field of war, and the havoc of contending armies. Among the noblemen who had sailed to Pales¬ tine was Henry de Nartonville, He was accom« ? *3
4
panied by all his vassals, who were also accom¬ panied by their under vassals, and many depen¬ dents of various stations and degrees, who all proudly rallied round the azure banner, and gardant lion of their chief, Milward de Rosten¬ dale, his most esteemed friend, had taken with hhn his eldest son Edred. It happened that in one of the prince's signal victories, when the infidels wdio became prisoners to the English chiefs, were consigned to bon¬ dage, that Milward de Rostendale took a Sara¬ cen commander, named Mahmorad, wdio fiad with him in his tent his wife Selima, and his daughter Fatima. According to the custom of war at that time, when Mahmorad was taken, his tent was plundered, and the two females, with all the treasure, became the spoil of Milward. He had, like many other English knights, taken Ids wife to the Ea?t, and in the pride of victory he had reduced the mother and her daughter Fatima to the servile station of attendants on Oswina. The exceeding beauty cf Fatima in- ppired Edred with the fondest love, and he re¬ solved to remove her from her degraded situa¬ tion. He proposed to her to leave the land of war, and to escape together to some place of quietness and peace : to live secluded from all the tumult» of the world, and be unto each
5 other a compensation for all they left behind. " I shall quit without regret," he said, " all that is dear to a soldier and a knight : his reputation, and his fame ir. ????: his fortunes and his honours in his native land. Canst not thou, Fatima, with me, whose love can thus renounce the world and all its grandeurs, seekmg no pos¬ session and no joy but thee, find pleasure ivhich may be a full amends for all that thou shalt quit ?" " If thou dost love me," answered Fati¬ ma, " with that fondness thou dost say, thou wilt understand my heart, and leave me to my sor¬ rows. Know, I love another. A Saracen. A countryman. A believer in the prophet. The brave, the noble Adulid. He Ioveth me as I love him, and I have no heart to give thee." " Give me thyself," said Edred, *' and my love and ten¬ der assiduity shall gain thy heart hereafter," The more Fatima declared the love she had for Adulid, the more enamoured Edred became of her perfections; for he loved the constancy which he was aiming to destroy. At length the perse¬ vering urgency of his suit awakened a return of love in Fatima : and forgetting Adulid, whom she might never more behold, she consented to flee away with Edred. It was agreed between them that they would assume new names, and leave the camp when the next full moon shone l3
6
bright to guide them on their way. He got ready his black war horse, which, at a certain distance from the camp, he tied fast to the body of a tree. He robbed his father of all the money he could find, and his mother of all the jewels she had with her. All things being ready, while the moon shone in full splendour, 'mid the clear sky, he led her away. The joy- was so great with which he sallied forth with his love, that he could not restrain the fond expres¬ sions of his delight ; and as he passed on he gave way to rapture, and said too loudly, ** O, Fati¬ ma ! how sweet it is to walk with thee beneath the silver moon's mild ray ; how exquisite to feel thy gentle weight thus softly press my arm ! When we reach France, enjoying thee, the world will be as nothmg. All our days shall pass like one continued bpring." As he thus uttered the feelings of his heart to Fatima, he was passing the tent of Philip de Valonnes, to whom, among other captives, Adulid had fallen. Adulid, in the duty which was re¬ quired by his captor, was at that time employed in the degrading office of cleaning his masters arms. To enable him to do ivhich, the manacles \iith which he had been shackled were taken off. When he heard the name of Fatima uttered so fondi) , he rushed from the tent, and beheld her
7 leaning on the arm of Edred. He could not mistake her lovely form and graceful movement : they were engraven on his heart. He returned within the tent, and seizing a heavy broad sword, followed the fugitives. Edred, however, knew the watch-word, and passed unmolested. The first centinél stopped Adulid, but he sprang from his grasp, and continued his pursuit. The alarm which was given roused the whole camp, and in the general bustle, Adulid, the cause of the commotion, passed all the posts unnoticed. He overtook the faithless Fatima just as Edred had placed her on his steed, and while he had his foot in the stirrup, ready to vault into his seat, he seized hiin. " Stop, traitor," he ex¬ claimed ; " thou hast borne away by force my love. Fatima would not forsake her Adulid, nor be another's willingly." ** Base slave," cried Edred, " begone ! Fatima is a captive, like as thou art : I bear her hence to freedom. Thinkest thou that she could cherish bondage for the sake of thee, when I can give her liberty ?" " Thou shalt not triumph over me," said Adulid ; and he raised the sword to strike. " Stay thy hand !" said Fatima, " strike not the generous Edred !" « Dost thou plead for him ?" said Adulid, tí that seals his doom." So saying, he again raised the sword, and Edred parried the blow, and drew ? 4·
δ
the sword which hung at his side. They fought ; the sharp broad sword of Adulid struck violently on the swonl arm of Edred, and he dropped his weapon. " Now, haughty Christian," said the Saracen, " thou art in my power." He instantly threw him, and striking a second mighty blow, he seized the rein of the horse on which Fatima was seated, and placing himself before her he gallopped away. He was still in sight when a detachment from the camp reached the spot where Edred lay. " Who lieth here ?" asked the foremost. Edred, ashamed to be thus dis¬ covered, made no reply. " Canst thou not speak ?" said the same man. u Search him," he said to his companions. c ' None must leave the camp, and fight in private broils, without a strict enquiry. Bear him away. Though he be dead he will be known." " Leave me to my fate," said Edred. " I am not worth detection!" a Not so," replied the spokesman. " All who belong to prince Edward's camp, must have some value. We shall make thee tell us all when we convey thee there." " I have not much to tell," said Edred, " and I am too well known, to dare return among my comrades." u Who art thou? — speak—Who art thou?" (( Urge me not," said Edred. " Well, well ; thou wilt be made to speak anon, so come along. Lifi him on
9
your shoulders, comrades, and bear him hence." " Leave me, leave me. I am Edred de Rosten¬ dale ; son to the gallant Milward. But what of that ! The Saracen hath wounded me, and I can die here. Pursue the man who fled, an infidel ! a slave ! who hath stolen the lovely Fati¬ ma, and in triumph borne her hence. Follow him, and rescue her. Bring her back in safety, and convey her to my father." t( We shall not leave thee here," said Nigel, the leader. " Do thou, Martin, with the assistance of Darwin, carry this wounded youth back to his friends. I, with AN ban and Turpin will pursue the Saracen." To pursue a horseman who had the start of them near an hour, was a hopeless chace. Ne¬ vertheless, Nigel and his two companions set forward. To overtake Adulid was impossible ; but after they had gone on some time they de¬ scried him on the plain,. His horse was going at full speed, anon he stopped, and then spurred on again. The halt he made enabled them so far to advance upon him, that they could observe his behaviour. After goihg on for a few minutes, he stopped again and dismounted ; he made fast his horse, and then took Fatima from her seat, and raising her in his arms, he continued his way on foot, Nigel and his companions redoubled their speed, and they saw him advance far into ? 5
10
the stream : when he returned he no longer bore Fatima. Again Nigel and his companions pushed on, and ere Adulid reached the spot where the horse awaited him, they met him. " Seize him/' said Nigel. Alban and Turpin each took him by the arm, and with the assist¬ ance of Nigel they bound him. Nigel then mounted the war horse of Edred, and Adulid was placed behind him, back to back ; and they tied his feet under the horse. At a very slow pace Nigel retraced the way to the camp, and Alban and Turpin followed. They asked him many questions, but he spoke not a word. When they reached the camp they instantly carried him to the tent of Milward de Rosten¬ dale, whither Martin and Darwin had already conveyed Edred. When they introduced Adu¬ lid, whom they had bound, Milward said, " This man is not my captive. To whom dost thou be¬ long ?" " I am a captive taken in battle, fight¬ ing honourably for my country and my faith : now hound and brought into thy presence by these men, whom three days ago I would have scattered like chaff before the wind. Victory hath not given me to thee. I was led with others to the tent of him whose slave I am become, but I cannot tell thee who it is that lords it over me. Sufficient is it that he is a Christian, To be
11 thus fallen is the chance of war. Had the case been otherwise, had I conquered him, I should have had a slave. No more. My private wrong is also from a Christian ; and I have revenged myself in private chastisement. I left my enemy upon the plain, whom I know not, nor I care not. Christians are hereditary foes, and I hate them all. Would I could punish all ! Now thou hast heard me, do thy pleasure. He who dares risk his life in combat, feareth not what may be done unto him." <c het it be inquired throughout the camp," said Milward, " who hath lost a slave ; that the master of this man may be cailed in con¬ sultation on his fate. As far as thy behaviour toucheth me, thou hast stolen a female captive from my wife, and thou must answer to me for thy theft, and for the injury thou hast done to me, and to my son, in raising a sword against his life." " Thou dost belie me," answered Adulid. " I did not steal a female captive from thy wife. If the youth whom I have slain be thy son, thou dost know the man who stole thy captive, my love ! my Fatima ! I heard him speak with fondness to her as they passed the tent where I was employed in the base drudgery of a slave. Make the case thine ; and let thy feelings speak for me. Wouldest not thou have followed him who bore thy love away? Wouldest not thou ? 6
12
have executed vengeance on him who had se¬ duced her ?" Philip de Valonnes now entered, and looking sternly at Adulid he said, "So, runa¬ gate! have I found thee? 1 ' All the circum¬ stances, as far as Nigel knew them, were recapi¬ tulated, and when he had made an end of his statement, Milward de Rostendale said, " Where hast thou left Fatima ?" " There where thou canst never find her. Thinkest thou a Saracen, when wronged, contenteth his revenge by the angry utterance of a few vain words ? No— she who was dear to me as the breath I drew proved false. I caught her with the caitiff Christian who seduced her from her faith. I had full vengeance on them both. I made him bite the earth upon the plain where I overtook them. For her, I bore her to the stream, and with a heavy weight to keep her where I cast her, I consigned her to the waters which flow over her loveliness and her shame." " Half thy malevo¬ lence is disappointed," said Milward, " my son surviveth thine intent to kill. Go, some one ; tell him how he is accused ; ask him if this slave doth speak the truth." " Speak he the truth or not," said Philip de Valonnes, " the wretch must suffer for the death of Fatima." The messenger who had been sent to Edred, returned and said, (i It is with grief and shame,
is
thy son, most valiant Milward, confesseth that the tale told by the Saracen is true." The coun¬ tenance of Milward de Rostendale changed when he received his son's acknowledgment of what Adulid had spoken. After a pause, he said, " Let the fate of this man be remitted, till we have taken counsel from other officers who are not so deeply interested in the facts as we are." " Be it so," said Philip de Valonnes. A council met next day, wherein it w r as resol¬ ved, that Adulid should suffer for having mur¬ dered Fatima. The sentence was accordingly put in force. When Edred recovered from his wounds, he was sent back to England ; for there was a stigma on his name and reputation which he could not meet. His flight with Fatima was not the cause of his disgrace ; but the robbery he had committed on his parents. The money and jewels which were found on him by his attendants, declared how he had acted ; and the contempt of every knight in the army followed his detection. The mortification it was to know that he should be shunned, induced Edred to remain within his tent till a proper means of returning home occurred. When he left Palestine, his mo¬ ther, who had not found all the pleasure and comfort in a camp whicii she anticipated, set for¬ ward with him. She brought away with her
14
Selima the mother of Fatima, but Mahmorad remained in attendance upon Milward. In the terrible condition to which captivity re¬ duced every one taken in war during the thir¬ teenth century, Selima could not have fallen to a milder mistress ; for Oswina strove by gentleness and kindness to soothe her grief for the sad loss of her cliild : and Edred, who had been the cause of her unhappy fate, beheld the mother of Fatima with the affection of a son. Thus she was treated with a degree of respect rarely shown to captives. Yet Selima, who had had servants to attend on her, who had enjoyed every luxury which eastern maners allowed to women, felt how hard it was to be commanded, and to serve the will of others. ? ! how many wretches, like Selima, deprived of all, fell to the share of those who trod upon them with severity, and made the broken heart and the indignant mind feel pangs far keener than those inflicted on the body.
CHAPTER H.
Who can speak of war and not speak of woe Ì Ev'ry battle leaveth the wife to weep Her hubhand'i loss ; and children to deplore That ere the sound of trumpet calld the brave To rush into the field. The aged sire, The tender mother, oft are left; to grieve Their sons ; and oft'ner doth the funeral dirge With melancholy moan disturb the air, Than the song of gladness soundeth in the ? eeze.
The bosom of Henry de Nartonville, to whom Milward de Rostendale was vassal, glowed with tenderness and love. The dear objects of his affection, whom he had left in Devon, became dearer to him when he ivas away, t.ian when he shared with them in all the joys of home : and while the zeal ivhich instigated every one who took th ) cross, deadened all remorse for those he slew or dragged to slavery, he heaved a sigh to
16
think what Almadore must feel while he was absent. He sent the fondest remembrances by Oswina ; and he charged her to tell his wife, that he had escaped unhurt. He sent her many rich gifts which he had gained as spoil, and many relics which he valued highly. " Bid her rejoice," he said, " and bid my child rejoice. Tell them prince Edward is victorious, and equalleth his uncle Cœur de Lion. Say he reigneth in the hearts of all his troops, and that every heart beats high with hope of future victory and triumph. Say we hope to raise for ever in Jerusalem the standard of the cross." St, Evremond and John also sent tokens of remembrance, of love and of respect to Matilda, and to the baron de Montgomery. Philip de Valonnes forgot not Eleanor; nor Brian de Rosenne the fondly cherished partner of his heart. Thus Oswina departed the messenger of joy to all whom she should greet : and Edred, forgiven by his father, left the camp with more serenity than he had experienced since the night he fied with Fatima; but the sad remembrance of the fate which he had brought upon her, cast a gloom over every object that surrounded him, and peace and nappiness were for ever banished from his breast.
17
A few days after the departure of Edred and his mother, prince Edward again gave the infi¬ dels battle. It was a hard fought field, and the victory was long doubtful. The army on both sides gave proofs of desperate and undaunted valour. The sun rose to see the onset, and poured his ardent blaze on the obstinate contention. They fought through the long day : and it was not till the close of evening darkened the plain that Edward remained victor. The slaughter of the infidels w r as great, and in the English army, many were those who fell. It might sadden the stoutest heart to behold the number that lay around. Friend and foe indiscriminately mixed, and stretched side by side in death. The cata¬ logue of destruction was a long list. Philip de Valonnes fell long ere the sun shone in full glare. Milward de Rostendale fell close beside him : and just as the last effort of the Saracens gave way before Edward, Henry de Nartonville received a wound; a mortal wound; and he breathed his last ere the shout of victory declared the triumph of the prince. Many a gallant heart whicii felt the flame that zeal enkindled for the welfare of Jerusalem, ceased ti) beat upon the ensanguined plain wliere the king's son strode conqueror, and where the fame of English prowess terrified the Saracens, Such are the consequences ? 'iät
IB
day which is deemed most glorious, and the lau¬ rel which crowns the brow of the victor is ever sprinkled with blood. In these holy wars the pope, the universal father of Christendom, stirred up the nations to fury, and devoted his children to death ; wdiile he, without emulation, without en¬ thusiasm, in luxury and ease enjoyed the pomp of his exaltation, and enriched himself by the weak credulity of those he led astray. The souls lost in the crusades, are numerated by millions ; and the purposes for ivhich they were undertaken, remain to this day unaccomplished. The Saracens defeated and dismayed, were afraid again to meet their valiant foe in the open field of defiance. They therefore had recourse to one of the vilest stratagems that ever disgraced a soldier. The governor of Joppa feigned a wil¬ lingness to become a Christian,. For that purpose he opened a correspondence with prince Edward, which was carried on by means of a messenger, who was introduced to receive such information and instruction, as might tend to the furtherance and the confirmation of his conversion. Edward, as a soldier of the cross, rejoiced that he could reclaim even one from the errors in whicii he had been bred. The royal tent was never closed against the man ivho came on such a pious errand. He was, at any hour he might arrive, received
19
cordially, and his welcome was always that of a friend. Every other occupation, every other business gave way to the visit of Axalla. He contmued thus to pass without controul and with* out caution for several clays, and the wily tongue of the Asiatic gained implicit belief. With the command of countenance which belongs to a sup¬ ple slave he had concealed his malignity, and at every interview, he made the ardent and credu¬ lous prince imagine, that he was more and more convinced by his arguments ; and that the gover¬ nor was more and more impatient to be baptized » After these meetings had been frequently re¬ newed, Axalla entered the royal apartment with an emotion, and a degree of eagerness which drew more than customary attention from the prince. He observed the fiery glance of his eye, and he noticed the unusual perturbation of his conversation. Not knowing if it were conviction of the holy truths he had inculcated, or refutation of the tenets he had declared, that thus agitated Axalla, he fixed his eyes on him with a stedfast* ness that increased his embarrassment, Suddenly, when they were warmly debating the subject on ivhich Edward always supposed they met, the traitorous Axalla started from his seat, and has¬ tily snatching a dagger which he had concealed beneath his vest, he rushed on the prince ; but
20
that watchfulness which his previous manner had awakened, so far put the prince on his guard, that unexpected as was the attack, he was enabled to parry the stroke. The noise of the scuffle, and the prince's exclamation, " Perfidious wretch," reached Edwin, who was in the outer chamber of the pavilion. He rushed in, wrested the dagger from the hand of the assassin, threw him, and stabbed him to the heart with the weapon he had raised agamst the unsuspecting Edward. The consternation occasioned by such a sudden attack, and such an instantaneous rescue, kept the prince silent ; and the astonishment of Edwin made him stand like one aghast. In the impulse of his joy, his alarm, his fear, and his hope, when his momentary amazement vanished, he caught Edward in his arms, exclaiming with rapture, " ? ! my dear prince ! have I preserved thee ?" Then recollecting the liberty he had taken, he said, " Forgive my transport ; but the danger and the preservation of our beloved chief hath over¬ powered me," " Edwin," said the prince, " my preserver need not make excuses for the strong emotions of his attachment. This is the se¬ cond time I owe my life to thee. Assure thyself such services have not been rendered to an un¬ thankful heart,"
21
Such an attempt on the life of their valiant and beloved commander, spread universal horror throughout the camp. All crowded to his pavil¬ lion to inquire into the circumstances which had occurred. There they found the prostrate assas¬ sin weltering in gore. " Behold," said Edward, as he took Edwin by the hand, " the generous man who hath preserved me to my troops. Let him be ever honoured as the protector of his prince, whose life he hath twice saved." The modest Edwin was abashed. "Every one would have done tlie same," he said, as he bowed to his royal master. " We trust thou hast escaped un¬ hurt," said every voice. " In the scuffle between Axalla and myself, previous to the entrance of Edwin, 1 have been slightly wounded in the shoulder: it is however but a scratch, and scarcely worth the naming." " Call in advice, and let it be examined." The surgeon who ac¬ companied the army soon appeared, he examined the wound, and declared that though it were shallow, it was dangerous, for it had been inflic¬ ted by a poisoned dagger, and ivas already in¬ fected by the venom. When intelligence of the fatal consequences which were dreaded from the poison in his wound was carried to tlie princess Eleanor his wife, she entered his apartment in excessive anxiety and t
22
alarm, she took the prince by the hand, and was unable to give vent to the violent fears which agitated her bosom. Edward observing her grief, said to her, " My beloved, in this trying moment, I will not attempt to raise false hopes, which must so shortly be destroyed by my death. The Saracen who raised his arm against me, hath assured his stroke, for the weapon that hath wounded me was poisoned. The venom cannot be extracted and I must die. Though I shall leave thee a widowed mourner for thy husband's loss, î do not leave thee unprotected. The gal¬ lant officers and soldiers who have served me faithfully, will keep thee from harm, and bear thee in safety back to England. To their loyalty and care I trust thee. Let me also be borne thi¬ ther, and find a grave in my native land. The army I have led, and the cause for which I have fought, will find new commanders, and new de¬ fenders ; none more ardent, or more zealous than Ihave ever been. I trust that future warriors will complete the conquests which have been in progress nearly two hundred years ; and establish the peace of Jerusalem. Grieve not my loss, my friends, nor waste time in fruitless lamenta¬ tion, Philip of France will send supplies sufficient to conclude the present enterprise with honour, and Christendom will never want champions to
23
defend her faith, and rescue the Holy-land from infidels." " Such a life as thine," said Eleanor, " must not be resigned so calmly. Trust me thou shalt recover. Let all retire, and let me be left, as best befits a wife to attend upon my husband. By the advice, and under the guidance of the surgeon, I feel inspired with confidence that thou shalt be restored to England, to the holy cause, and to thy family."
CHAPTER III.
What love is equal to the love of woman ? No risk, no danger, no alarm, no fear, Can ever check her steady tenderness. If aught she can perform, may soothe the grief, Or mitigate the suff'rings ofher husband. 'Tis then that fortitude strengthens her weakness, And she can act as greatly and as nobly As the armed hero.
When all but Eleanor and the surgeon had quitted the tent of the prince, Eleanor asked, if there were no way by which the venom might be drawn from the infected wound Axalla had in¬ flicted. tt There is but one," replied Bowden, " and that is one so difficult to be procured, that it is as none." " Name it, y1 said Eleanor. i( If any one can be found who doth so love the prince as to give his own life for his, or so truly patriotic as to save him for his country's sake, perchance, and but perchance, he might be saved." " Canst thou think," asked Eleanor, " that the prince can
25 find no friend to whom he is thus dear?" " As dear as ever prince was is the noble Edward, and as well beloved by all who are about him ; but life is dearer to us than all the world beside, and none will die to save another." " Thou hast not tried," said Eleanor, " name the means." ts if any one will venture to draw forth the poison by sucking the infected wound," said Bowden, " it might haply be accomplished: but the experi* ment is almost certain to destroy the kindness which attempts it, and the effect but doubtful on the prince." " Such a means," replied the prin¬ cess, " appeared to me most likely to eflect the cure, and save his precious life ; but I feared to name it, lest I shouid be scorned. Now sanc¬ tioned by thee, good Bowden, ï will perform what thou didst think none would." " Never," said Edward, "shalt thou submit to such a hazard. Rather than risk thy life, I will endure all the keen agony which the venom may inflict upon me, and die a lingering death of ages, ere thou should- est die a moment sooner than the time heaven hath appointed thee." " Heaven hath appointed me to be thy wife, and in that appointment hath prepared my heart to look on thee as its best earthly joy. In saving thee, I save thee to the world, and to thy country, and to myself; for I yol. uu ?
26
shall not take the poison unprepared ; no 4 1 am cautioned. I well know what I am about to do, and there are preventives, though there are not antidotes. The danger we foreknow we may avoid ; it is surprise that slayeth/' " Urge not such fatal tenderness," said Edward, " how could I joy in a life purchased by the loss of thine. Bowden said, the death of him who made the kind experiment was certains to me, recovery doubtful." " So please my prince," said Bowden» " I did not say his death was certain. Thy re· covery, or the loss of both, cannot be assured. If the princess will submit to give so great, so rare a proof of love, caution, as she hath well observed, may prevent the fatal consequences of what may chance." " Let the experiment be tried," said Eleanor. " Never/' said prince Ed¬ ward. " Sweet love," said Eleanor, " pardon me for speaking thus, it shall be. Wilt thou not yield to my request, thou must be compelled. Thou shalt be bound, thou shalt indeed, my best beloved, and reduced by swathings to the inac¬ tion of an infant." The contest of tenterness and love between the prince and princess continued a long time, when Bowden said with much earnestness, " So please my prmce, if it be done, it must be done sooty the
27
venom spreadeth." " It shall be done this mo¬ ment," said Eleanor» " I had rather die in an ineffectual trial, than survive his loss." The prince yielded. A proof of love almost beyond imagination was given by Eleanor. She drew from the wound of the fond object ofher tenderest affection the venom which the dagger of Axalla left behind its stroke, with as much delight as the nursling babe sucketh nutrition from his mother's breast. The alarm of every one concerning the fate of the prince was great, and though all had been commanded to leave the chamber, they lingered anxiously abound the tent, waiting impatiently for intelligence. When the unexampled fondness of Eleanor was made known, the loud shouts and joyful acclamations rent the air. Feelings which none knew how to evince agitated every bosom # They uttered words they hardly understood, they made use of expressions they did not compre¬ hend ; for their emotions were unspeakable, and their amazement beyond vent. ' 3 Let the trum¬ pets sound—let the priests chaunt their thanks¬ givings—let the bards chaunt her praise—let the news be sent to the king—let it be ir^de known to the parliament—let her be brought forth, that we may worship her.'* There was a buz ; there was a tumult; there was an overpowering exulta-
28
tion ; an overwhelming happiness. In vain Bow¬ den waved his hand to make them silent ; in vain Edwin bowed and pressed his heart as if he had more to communicate : they could not be hushed ; they would not listen. It spread ; it reached the camp of the enemy. The Saracens were so astonished, that in their wonder of such an ac¬ tion they blessed their prophet, and for a moment forgot that their great foe was saved. After the miraculous cleansing of his wound by his wife, prince Edward was long in the care of Bowden, and the princess, more from anxiety and eagerness, than from the effects of what she had performed, was long confined within the pavilion. During the time that they were thus secluded fiom the military bustle of the cam¬ paign, a negotiation was set on foot for a truce, which, after some debate, was agreed upon for ten years, ten months, and ten days, both parties being to keep what they possessed. Hostilities being thus ended, the discipline of military service was relaxed, and the duties of the field were exchanged for the private busi¬ ness of individuals. Every one attended to his own affairs, and pursued his own plans ; and a general licence ensued. Among those who found that restraint had slackened her curb, was Mah- morad, the husband of Selima, and the father of
29 Fatima. After the death of Milward de Ros* tendale, he had remained a captive in the hands of his vassals, to whom the charge of protecting his property and effects had been committed by the prince. He had not seen the females, who had been taken in his tent, since the day of their captivity : he heard however, occasionally, by ru¬ mour, what was going forward. He knew that Selima had been taken from the camp, and that she had been carried to England ; he knew that some misfortune had befallen Fatima, and that Adulid had suffered for some crime; but the flight of Fatima, and her subsequent death, the victim of Adulids anger, he had not heard. When the soldiers were no longer closely watched by their superiors, when the captives were some¬ times visited by those who had reduced them to slavery, when they could inquire for their con¬ nections, and the fate of those they loved, Mah¬ morad inquired concerning Selima, and asked what had been the fate of Fatima. He lamented his separation from Selima, because lie had loved her fondly, but as it had been the fate of battle that she should be reduced to servitude, his hor¬ rors of her degradation were lessened when he understood that her mistress would be kind ; but the sad fate of Fatima startled and shocked the ? 3
30
tenderness he had ever felt for his child, and he determined on revenge. Revenge is a passion not very easily subdued. So many otlier passióm subordinately inflame it, that it rages fiercer than any other. It is not satisfied by accomplishment ; though glutted, it is never cloyed. Something more to do always seems to grow from the thing done. While in meditation it absorbs all other feelings, and the longer it is ruminated the more insatiate it be¬ comes. It is the inmate of every breast, and the secret instigator of half the transactions of life ; for every petty retaliation is an embryo of re¬ venge. When great injuries urge it on, it is like tlie hurricane of the desart, which rendeth the rock of adamant. Such an injury was the loss of Fatima to Mah* morad. He sought those from whom he traced his wrongs. They had escaped him. Milward de Rostendale, the father of his wronger, was no more : he had been slain in the last battle. Edred, the seducer of his child, was gone.—*Gone where he should never follow. Why not?— "Can I not follow him ? Can I not go to En¬ gland?" He inquired further—"Is there no one left on whom revenge may fall ?" No—not one. Not one who belonged to Milward—not one who had aided Edred.
31
How quickly is the gap closed when we ex¬ pire ! How soon is our place supplied ! How soon are we forgotten ï Milward was dead. His dependants had been scattered, for no one in Palestine raised the standard of Rostendale. Even his tent had been removed. Mahmorad, therefore, pent within his breast the vengeance he had resolved, and determined to sail to the cold climate of England ivith any master who wonld receive his services. He found that he had no choice. His fate, as a captive, was in the power of those who had him in charge ; and should he or should he not be brought to En¬ gland was at their option not his. He was a very handsome man. A man of elegant deportment ; of native nobleness ; a fine animated countenance; and an eye which glis¬ tened like a flash of lightning. Such a man in all processions, where greatness displayed its pomp, would grace the train. His eastern speech and dress would be a memorial of English triumph ; he would be a trophy of victory in the funeral obsequies whicii would be performed for those who died for Jerusalem, though their bodies were left to moulder on the fields of their prowess. Thus the purposes of Mahmorad were forwarded by those who meant to gratify their ? 4
32
own pride, and his wishes were accomplished by what tended to his own disgrace« Among those who were in prince Edward s army none had behaved with more bravery than St. Evremond and his son, and they had both been distinguished by the approbation of their royal chief, and during the long confinement, oc¬ casioned by the effects of his wound, there were none who had more frequent access to the royal pavilion, the melancholy of which was often cheered by the song of the bards, who, according to custom, were among his numerous attendants. When his health and that of the princess were re-established, he ordered that all who had fallen for Jerusalem, and whose honoured remains would be left in the plains for which they had fought, should have due obsequies publicly per¬ formed, and that all the army should attend. Though the relatives were not collected round the bier, and the household and dependents fol¬ lowed not to mark the families whose requiems were chaunted, the solemnity was impressive. All the officers and soldiers in military array pro¬ ceeded in slow march to the spot, where in si¬ lence they reposed, and all the priests of the camp were there. The ground was consecrated with every ceremony of religious rite, and the funeral
33
service performed for so many collected in one general interment, had such an awful effect on those who were assembled, that the utterance of 1 the priest was checked by sighs, and the re¬ sponse of the soldiery was made only by gesture-. As they turned from the last mournful duty per¬ formed to the children of mortality, they smote their breasts, and the day was kept as a day of fasting and humiliation. When that last respect which could be shew n the brave was ended, and the minds of the sur¬ vivors began to resume the cheerfulness which the cessation of hostilities enabled them to in¬ dulge, prince Edward proclaimed a general fee* í, to which every officer was invited. The feast of a camp, at the end of a campaign, notwithstand* ing that it exhibited all the magnificence that tiie circumstances and the situation would admit, was melancholy even at its highest revel ; for, though the number assembled was great, yet those wbo no longer attended the call of conviviality, hft so many voids, that every heart sunk when it ob¬ served the deficiency ; and the recovery of the royal pair, which had been the joyous cause of calling them together, could not dispel the gloora which their diminished muster cast over the meeting, and the minstrels were commanded to ? 5
34
sound high the strain, that the rapture of music might cheer the despondency. The symphony of many harps vibrated in the air, and the chorus of many voices filled the pavilion. Rais« high the voice to chaunt fair England's praise, Ever for valour and for beauty fam'd ; By ev'ry bard in loud and noble lays, Let each brave hero's glorious deeds be nain'd. Duke Robert, who, when holy wars began, And -fighting for Jerusalem wae new, Stood forward like a bold and valiant man, And the profaning infidels o'erthrew, Of bolder daring still was Richard brave, Whose battle-axe huge struck a deadly blow ; From the stroke it dold there was nought could save : O i how many mere did he overthrow. And now noble Edward the sword doth wield, Which oft dealeth death on the eastern plain ; And many are his deeds in the martial field, Which have high rais'd the English name again. When the minstrels had, in grand accord, struck the loud strings of their harps, and chaunted in full choir the deeds of war and death, Edwin advanced from among his brethren, and with soft touch pulled the strings in gentle modulation, and touched the chords to bve and
%
35
tenderness. His prelude stole ön the ear like the gurgling of a rill in summer, and the song he indited soothed the heart like the nightingale in spring. No longer raise thè song of war, Nor chaunt the tale of death ; ¡Let Love's soft notes awake the string, And warble in the breath« Sing Eleanor, with ev'ry grace That woman can adorn ; Bright aft the glowing mid-day sun, Yet mild as early morn. She, whose fond tenderness did more Than hero bold might dare ; To save hie life she held most dear, Thought her's beneath her care. But Love, who o'er the world presides With universal stvay, Left in the unction ail the balm, And drew the bane away. Edwin, beyond all others, struck tht harp with pathos. He drew forth a sound so exquisitely adapted to the subject, that he seemed to pour into the chords the feelings of the heart, which guided his hand through their compass ; and he varied his voice with such expressive intonation, and modulated his close with such pathetic ca* ??
36
dence, that he drew his hearers from every recol¬ lection, and fascinated their attention by his song. He bow r ed gracefully while the sound of the last note floated in the air, and the spontaneous applause of all who had listened to his lay was expressed by that lively shout of approbation which cannot be checked. Very shortly after the celebration of the feast of the recovery of Edward, he prepared to sail away from Palestine. He left the Holy Land with a diminished army, and like his predeces¬ sors without having effected the purposes of the expedition. It is the last time that the nations of western Europe, as soldiers of the cross, carried their a?ms eastward. Crusades have been published and preached up by succeeding popes, and most infamous indulgences and licen¬ ces promised to all who would rertew the holy hostilities ; but they never have been renewed. All contests with Saracens, and Turks, and infi¬ dels of every description, since that time, have been political. To remove a power in the way of political plans, has been the only inducement that Christians have had to attempt the destruc¬ tion of infidels r but even politically they have not succeeded. The infidels not only keep their former possessions, but have extended themsebee
37
în Europe : and notwithstanding the mighty powers who have striven to drive them thence, in spite of their numerous and well-disciplined armies, and their superior advancement in know¬ ledge and learning of every kind, they still make a stand, antl cannot be repelled.
CHAPTER IV.
Prepare the feast, aud let the hall he gay ; Let all the vassals share tlie holiday : Let joy extend itselt throughout the land, And all ohey their absent chief's command.
When Oswina de Rostendale returned into De¬ vonshire, her arrival occasioned a sort of jubilee. Her husband being a vassal of Nartonville, she went, in the first instance, to pay those attentions to Emma and Almadore, which the unpolished civility of the times, as compared with what is now termed politeness and etiquette, seemed to demand. Slie spoke of prince Edward in terms of enthusiastic praise. She recounted the bravery of Nartonville, and she delivered his injunctions that they should all rejoice, and gave the rich presents of jewels and relics with which she had been entrusted. The praises bestowed on Nar¬ tonville were heard with rapture, and the gifts
39
received with delight. *' I hope," said Alma* dore> ** these terrible cembats, which I ean scarcely term holy, will soon cease*, for while many «re spared, many are laid low. Though we are told by our dear Henry to rejoice, by the same ships that we receive glad tidings, others hear of their disastrous losses ; even the foes we overcome must sure be pitied. The fond father of an unbeliever lamenteth equally his sons as doth a Christian, and the wife feeleth when her husband faileth, even as we should do." w The horrors of war, even of victorious war, are dread¬ ful," said Emma ; " yet amid the devastations of the battle, those whose friends are spared, ever must rejoice, and we will obey the kind commands of Henry. We will rejoice. We will celebrate a holiday. We will have sports and pastimes, that all the dependents of our family may partake our joy. Tilts and tournaments, and ail that mimick- eth the field of war shall be excluded, they be¬ come not women : but the hospitable feast of the hall, and the rejoicings ofthe lowly in the renown of their chief, it shall well become the mistress of the castle to proclaim. Thou, Oswina, with thy family wilt attend the summons, and the grandam, the wife, and the child of Nartonville, shall extend the command ofthe baron to the humblest ofthe domain."
40
Accordingly, preparations were made for re¬ joicings. The aged heart of Emma glowed with long forgotten ardour, and the castle for the first time since the departure of her grandson, exhi¬ bited the cheer of mirth. The venerable baroness, who had never pre¬ pared a feast for her husband or her son, now for her grandson, got ready every thing she could remember of the days of her youth ; and saw that all was magnificent. Almadore, under her gui¬ dance, exerted herself as was most fit ; she obey¬ ed the directions she received, but her heart was in the camp of Edward ; and her smile was al¬ most lost in the tear of anxiety. Isabella, to whom such things were new, entered into all their glee with the full hilarity of a young Iieart that had never yet known sorrow. The festive day arrived. Ail met ín the hall of Nartonville. Anselm was there in the stateliness of his abbacy ; and Oswina de Rostendale. She was accompanied by her son Edred, and her second son, who bore his father's name, Milward ; a gallant youth as yet too young for war ; she was also accompanied by her lovely daughters. When all the guests were assembled, it might be deemed an uncommon meeting. A feast pre¬ pared by three females, in a baronial castle. The
41
absence of the baron was not the only peculi¬ arity. The guests who sat elevated on the dais were almost all women, for the call of war had taken so many to Palestine, that the domain was deprived of half its numbers. At the lower table they mustered stronger, and for them principally was the feast intended. After the repast, the abbot and the baroness Emma remained in the hall ; the sanctity of the abbot's station, and the age of both, prevented them from partaking of the sports. All the other guests assembled in the large plain, where feats of joy and merriment were exhibited. The young, who beheld such a scene for the first time, did indeed rejoice while the sports went forward. Such holidays, in which all ranks shared, had been seldom celebrated of latter years. The commotions of the times had kept the barons so much in the field, and prince Edward's departure took place so soon after tranquillity was restored, that all joyous doings had been banished from every castle, and many among the guests had been born since last such disports had been proclaimed. Fathers had however talked of such things to their sons, and the humble pastimes of lowly mer¬ riment had in some degree taught the youths
42
what it was to contend ; and they all entered the plain prepared to exhibit their activity and strength. None who had exerted themselves in former games came forward now among the com¬ petitors, but they stood around to witness the behaviour of their boys, and encourage them by shouts and outcries. No quinten was set up ; all who were of sufficiënt importance to have horses were gone to Palestine: but runners appeared, and archers, and wrestlers» Edred and his brother Milward were appointed to distribute the prizes. The first who came forward, ran for a prize which Isabella had de¬ vised. It was a bonnet, which she had ornamen¬ ted with many bows and strings, which she had so intertwisted, that it was no easy matter to untie all the knots she had tied. The winner was to wear the bonnet and walk away with it, as soon as he had made room for his head within the crown. With all the childishness which a young lady not half her age would be ashamed to testify now, she entered into the success of the rival racers ; she watched them with eagerness, she rose from her seat to look after them, she laughed, she shouted, she clapped her hands, and encouraged them by the cry of " well done—well run—make
43
haste ;"— nor could her mother check her by all her little reproofs : such as, " sit down, Isabella ï do not speak so bud, my dear child." At length the happy active winner was brought before the baroness. It was Odo's eldest son, to whom, in honour of his beloved chief, he had given the name of Henry. Milward presented him with the bonnet, saying, *' Here, Henry, put it on thy head, my man." Henry took it, and raised it to do as he was ordered, but he could not adorn himself with the silken crown of victory. As soon as he took away his hand, down went the prize of his glory. He took it from the ground and examined it ; a::d being to!d that the lady Isabella had directed that he should make way for his head by the dextr^ity of his fingers, he began his intricate task, and being desirous to please his young mistress, he pulled and tried, and put it inefiectually on his bead several times, to the great amusement ofthe assembly. When the knots were all untied, and the numerous strings hung round in gay pen- dence, he tossed his head about like a capari¬ soned steed, and renewed the laughter of the spectators by his gestures. When he had tired himself, and the less loud bursts of laughter warned him that he had done enough, he bowed to the lady Isabella, saying, (i Heaven preserve
44
our noble chieftain, and bless the fair daughter of the castle." Two sons of Toston appeared next, challenging all who would wrestle with them. Toston led them forward, holding a hand of each. " Now, my boys," he said, " remember before whom ye contend, wrestle well for the pleasure of this noble assembly, and for the honour of thy old father/' He shook the eldest heartily by the hand when he quitted him, saying, "now, Henry/ 5 for he also had given that name to his first-born, Ci shew thy skill ; and do tliou, Toston," said he to the other ; " contend boldly, for the glory of the name of Toston, which is also the name of thy father." They both contended with many competitors, and were always conquerors. When none would try again, they wrestled together. Not in com¬ bat, but in something like dancing. It was a flourish of activity, something like a modern allemande, and something like tumbling. It was infinitely more pleasing than wrestling, for it shewed equal activity without the danger of hurt, and the disgrace of defeat. The delighted Isa¬ bella said, " this is the best of all ; this is the best of all." The two brothers had each a prize, a vest and girdle, for they had both conquered all who contended with them, and they had both
45
shewn the activity and the strength of youth in the united exertions, which had exhibited what might almost be called grace, and which was a mode of displaying their skill of their own inven¬ tion, and was a matter of surprise to all who be¬ held them. When they made their concluding bow, old Toston again stepped forward, and ta¬ king them again by the hand, " May your boys please you twenty years hence as much as ye have now pleased me ; and may a child of the house of Nartonville sit here to behold them." The old man then bowed, and cried out most cordially, " Happiness to the family of my dear master, and peace to merry England." The archers next advanced, and drew bow after bow for a long time without deserving a prize. At length a youth came forward, and to the ad¬ miration of every body, first shot an arrow into the very middle of the target, and then another into that. " He has ivon the prize," said Isabella, " give it to him." " Heaven make me thankful," said an old woman among the attendants, " this is the son of Robert." " What thy grandson, Alice ?" said Almadore. " Aye, blessed be hea¬ ven, so please my lady ; and as good a shot as his father, who is among the archers ; gone to shew his skill by killing every infidel against whom he
46
taketh aim. I warrant me, my lord the baron, when he comes home, will tell us what a good marksman our Robert hath proved himself." tí Give him the prize," repeated Isabella. It was a very strong bow. (i Wlien thou canst pull that, my lad," said Edred, " thou wilt be fit to follow thy father." " I will keep this for my son, and he shall keep it for my grandson, and then I, and the lady Isabella's greatness, and her father's fame, will all be remembered together." " Well said, Henry," cried Alice, tf we gave thee the name of our benefactor, that thou mightest feel thou wert honoured, and look forward to glory." The pastimes ceased, the guests returned to the hall, the garrulity was cheerful, the feast of the castle, which was all the lowly knew of hilarity, continued through another meal, and at sunset all departed. The castle gates were clo¬ sed, and when next they were opened, the mes¬ senger of woe entered. On the very next morn¬ ing, ere the sun appeared above the mountans, the sounding bugle roused the slumbering inmates, and the woful countenance of Robert Fribourde announced, before he spoke, the disastrous tale he had to tell,—the death of Henry de Narton¬ ville. " He fell Uke a hero," said Robert, " in the udd I but he fell ere he knew that he had
47
overcome." The sorrowing domestics were over¬ powered by their grief, and could ask no ques¬ tions. After a long mournful pause, they cried out, " Who shall tell the ancient baroness ? Who can speak to the gentle Almadore ? Who must check the gaiety of Isabella, who but yesterday was all joy, on account of the glad tidings from Palestine Γ
CHAPTER V.
Mourn, mourn, for he is gone î Gone ï — ? gone for ever ! Weep, weep, his loss is great ! He hath not ¡eft on earth His fellow. What words can tell the grief within the castle of Nartonville? What a dreadful transition! Ere the sun which set while feast and joy were high, shone again upon the grey turrets ; the master, by whose command the sports and pas¬ times were exhibited was announced, dead ! Can the glory of the prince's renown, can the praise of surviving victors, or the consternation of defeated foes, assuage the sorrow of the disconsolate family of Nartonville ? The aged matron who reared him when his mother died : the wife whose fondness twined her life with his : and the young daughter who had been taught to think her fatlier was the prime on earth : wdio looked for his return to guide her future iife ; to plan and fix the future
49
happiness of all the days she hoped to live. He was torn from them all. Taken from them, when by his command they were rejoicing. When their cause of joy w T as his safety ! Long was it before any would undertake to tell the family that their chief was gone. Robert sought out his mother Alice. He told the fatal news to her. tC Tell it to the lady Isa¬ bella," said he."0 ! I canne t. "I shall not live to utter it—she will not live to hear it." " It is a cruel task, I know," said Robert, " but the sad fate of our master must not be kept From his family." It was not necessary to speak. The counte¬ nance of Alice betrayed her, though she had endeavoured to compose herself, and had wiped away her tears : and she did her very best to binile. " What is the matter, Alice?" said Isa¬ bella, on whom Alice was still an attendant. " Nothing, my dear young lady. What should be the matter ? Sure nothing can be the matter ivith me now Robert is corno home." " Robert come home !" said Isabella : " Robert come from Palestine ! *' He arrived this morning before the *un was up. Did not the baroness hear the bugle early ?" " 1 have not, as thou knowest, Alice, yet seen my mother. What is the news from Pales¬ tine Γ " I do not exactly know," said Alice. >+ Not know : is not Robert *>ent home by my VOL, Uî. D
50
father ?" " I did not ask him by whom he was bent." (i Nay, Alice, thou needest not thus avoid answering me. I see by thy countenance some mibfortune hath befallen my father, or the prince ; and I beg that thou wilt tell it to me," " Some misfortune or. other is sure to happen where there is i\ arfare; I never.knew, nor I never heard ot war without misfortune. It is a misfor¬ tune in itself: and ????? body is unfortunate one \\d} or other that meddleth therewith. I wish ???? kind good soul would contrive to put ? stop tb it ihv eier: that so nobody might be slain in battle." " W ho hath been slain İii battle, Alice?" "More ihan a hundred souls, 1 dare warrant," replied Alice. " Who that thou knowest ?" (i Ah ! well-a-day, many a one no doubt, if one could but see the libt." ' t Hath Robert men¬ tioned no one ? "Where is my father ?" "Thy hither i& in Palestine." The reply that her fathei iWb in Palestine, seemed to satisfy Isabella as to hi, safety. When the was attired, she went to her mothor'h chamher, and there she heard the die d ful truth. The woman who attended Alma- dure, had been more dbtupt ihan Alici, and when ?1?' entert d her apartment í-he said, " ?, my dear mistres! heie is -^ad uens from Palestine. Ro¬ bert ihibour Ie is returntd to the cattle; and all In lias io sa) ? nodiing but one long tale of
δί
woe." " How is the baron?" asked Almadore. " Well," said the woman : "quiet and peaceable." n Is he on his way home ?" said Almadore, " No, no, my dear mistress, no such good luck for us. He will never see his castle, nor his na¬ tive land again." (i Then he is dead," said Alma¬ dore. " Bear up agamst adversity with fortitude, my dear, dear mistress. Set a good example to thy daughter, and hear the truth with composure. Henry de Nartonville, our heloved master, fell like a hero on the day prince Edward fought his last battle," Almadore made no reply : she stood motionless. She became pale as death, and cold as marble. She gazed upon the woman with a \ac.nt stare, and then sunk on the coueh she had just quitted, The woman uttered a loud shriek as her mistress fell, and at that moment Isabella entered. She threw herself on the bosom ofher mother, wildly shrieking and calling upon her to ?????. " She cannot speak, my sweet lady, she is in a swoon ; the news I had to tell her was more than she could bear to hear. The moment ï told her that thy noble father was slain iu the field of battle, the sad tale seized on her as she listened, and she dropped thus, justas thou didst enter." isabella threw herself on her mother, and called loudly on her. tf ? speak to me : ? «•peak to me ; ?? dear mother, peak to me." d Ü
5 e
The fatal tidings were also carried to the aged Emma, She came to Almadore's apartment, and when she beheld the helpless state in which she lay, and witnessed the agony of Isabella, and the alarm of Ada, she did violence to her own feelings, and exerted herself to recover them. " Ada, my good woman," she said, *' stand not thus. Remove Isabella from this sad scene." «* Do not take me from my mother/' said Isabella. » f My child," said the baroness, "thou must not remain here—thy mother shall soon recover, she will quickly be restored. It is the sudden shock that hath overpowered her. Go with Ada to my chamber, and I will soon join thee." Isahella was not very willing to obey. " My dearest Isabella," said the baroness, " I am not often peremptory, but when I am, I must be obeyed. Go." Isa¬ bella knew the baroness spoke truly: and she quitted the apartment. " Go with her, Ada ; my love, in my apartment I left my faithful old attendant Madeline. She will soothe thy sorrow till I can come to thee. Thou, Ada, wilt return to thy mistress." Almadore lay so long in the swoon into which she had fallen when Ada men¬ tioned the death of Nartonville, tliat Emma be¬ came greatly alarmed. She and Ada had re¬ course to ail the little experiments which are resorted to on such occasions ; they burnt feathers
53 and held them to her nostrils, and used many other such Uke simple means of recovery ; and at length they succeeded in their exertions. Alma¬ dore looked up. tt ? my dear mother," she said, if I wish I had died ere the intelligence of Henry's fate reached England. I shall never taste of joy again." " I know what thou dost suffer. I lost a husband, and became as thou art now, a widow. Thou canst not love Henry with more tenderness than I loved his grandfather. Wlien he died he left a son, for whose sake I roused myself, and led him on to manhood. Thou hast a daughter; for her sake thou must also rouse. We are not made merely for ourselves. Many have a claim upon us, and we must forego our own indulgence, if it interfereth with our duty." " Thou art in the right now, as thou art always," said Almadore, (t yet to act according to such a duty is a hard task, For the present, allow me to remain within my chamber. To resume my occupations in the castle shall be my endeavour, but I must first reflect on the sad loss which hath befallen us, that I may be empowered to exert myself." " Let it be so," said the aged Emma. i{ Madeline shall stay with Isabella and Alice for the present ; while I, like thee, remain within my own apartment. Reflection will calm the mind more than conversation. After to-mor- i>3
54
row, I trust thou wilt be able to comult with me about the holy ceremony of the obsequies to be performed for liim wlio was so dear to both." Robert had also been charged to carry the sad news of the death of Milward de Rostendale. To carry it to Öswina who had accompanied him to w r ar ; and had returned from Palestine the mes¬ senger of that command to rejoice, which had wakened the voice of mirth in the castle of Nar¬ tonville. She knew Robert well, and had often heard her husband and Nartonville commend his archery and his bravery. When he was intro¬ duced to her, she said, " How fareth all in the camp, Kobert? How didst thou leave my gallant knight, and thy noble master the baron de Nar¬ tom ille, and our brave prince Edward?" When Robert was about to answer her, Os¬ wina observed the melancholy air he put on. " Thy news is bad !'* she said, " It is indeed," said Robert. " ïn the last battle eve I came away, in which prince Edward was victorious, the slaughter of the troops was terrible on both sides ; and the loss of officer* almost too numerous to be counted. My dear master fell by the very last blow a Saracen struck," " And my husband !" asked Oswina. " Most honoured Lidy," replied Robert, ** thy husband, who was as brave a war¬ rior as ever strode a horse in battle, and who
tä
fought as gallantly as any man that ever raised a sword, fell also on that fatal day," Oswina rose, " Edred!" she exclaimed. Edred heard the wild accent with which his mother called him. The moment he entered, she clasped hím în her arms. " ? ! Edred !" she said, " ? ! Ed¬ red !" Edred turned toward Robert, i( What is it, Robert Fribourde ?" u Alas !" wf\d Robert, " on the last fatal day of battle, when ?? many died, thy valiant father fell, fighting for Jerusa¬ lem, like a hero." Edred pressed his mother lo his bosom, hut he could not speak. " Many fell with thv father," said Robert. u To this castle, and to the castle ofmy master, the baron de Nar¬ tonville, I have been sent, the sad messenger of the direful tidings of that battle, which ail hope will be the last. To other castles, other messen - gers hai e been deputed." ki Who else hath fallen Γ a&ked Edred. " Ι waá so ???? dispatch¬ ed, I had not heard the Ibt of ???, but one whom thou wilt much lament, 1 saw close beside tb^ valiant Milward de Rosendale; as they had fought, *o they fell, together. Philip do Valomies did not «un iie his friend. Ere this his wife knoweth that she i^ a widow," " Iiath the baron de St. Evremond escaped?" " He hath; so hath his son, young John, Never did son and father „ enter on a war so lovely in their friendship. Each
06
seemed to raise his buckler to protect the other, forgetful of his own safety. They have sent dis¬ patches to the baroness, and to her father the baron de Montgomery." " Doth thy mistress the aged baroness know her sad loss ?" said Edred. " It was but yesterday we feasted at her castle." '* She doth." " Speak to her of our woe," said Oswina. The death of Nartonville, and the death of Rostendale, mutually increased the grief of both their families ; and though they could not, under such melancholy circumstances, see each other, by many messages, of which Robert was the bearer, they arranged to celebrate the funeral obsequies on the same day, and to join their trains within the church, and let the priests and the choirs unite to celebrate with all due honours, the obse¬ quies of both.
CHAPTER VI.
The solemn requiem chaunted for the dead, Sootheth the woe of tlie surviving friends : But never can the mass that's sung, procure Rest for a soul departed, which hath not, Ere it quit the prison ofa body, Purchased its own peace. When this life hath clo 4 - d Farewell to all endeavours after bliss ; For then our own performances are o'er, And vain is ev'ry pray'r which may be utter'd By another.
Although Henry de Nartonville and Milward de Rostendale, who were slain in the last battle which prince Edward fought with the infidels, were buried in Palestine, yet their two sorrowing families performed every rite of funeral obsequies here at home. Splendid coffins were prepared, round which, though empty, the priests knelt and prayed; and they were borne to the church under stately palls, and followed with as much pomp and grief, as if the remains of those who were thus honoured and deplored were within the void. »5
58
The aged baroness, the venerable Emma, could not follow as chief mourner in the melancholy train, Almadore took that awful place ; and the ancient matron heard the prayers for the dead in her own apartment, at the time when with more pomp, though not with more devotion, mass was sung within the holy wails ofthe church. Almadore leaned on the arm of Ada and oi Alice, and Isabella followed her mother. The valsais and household followed duly two and two : and the priests went forward singing hjmtis and psalms. In like manner Oswina de Rostendale followed the coffin, representing that in which her hus¬ band had been buried. She was supported by her two feoiiN, and followed by her daughters. The i.^ als who held under Milward, and all hL· household followed. The priests chaunted a*» the} proceeded, till they saw the procession of Î4 artimi ille advance ¡doni). They halted, and w hei t ah the sorrowing followers of Almadore had emei^d die fam·, Oswina's» mournful train pro¬ ci ed, tl v uhin the waîK. 1? ihe middle oí tin t huroh u ?? erected a high (,,'ίί/,ί'ί,/ιί, ? ici ed with black clo tli, on ever} fctep ol which weie placed large ?,? tapers. 'jhe btareift of the -coffins in measured pace mounted two of its bide*, and placed ihem by each
59
other on the top. The whole full ceremony of the funeral service was said and sung, amid the waving banners of ihe two families which hung in often repeated blazonmgs from the wa)lb. Hel¬ mets, and shields, and »words, and lances, and other warlike trophies were placed o*i the steps of the catafalque, and on the coffins, which were sprinkled with holy water as though the bodies were therein. A holemn dirge was sung, antl the loud organ sounded its grave tones, while the voices raised their mournful notes; and when alf within the decorated church was ended, the col¬ lins were taken from iho place where they had ???? elevated, and laid in the tombs among the ancestors» of the families, and every praier and every blessing given to tim empty cherts, which the priest and the choir could accomplish. When all the followers saw the door of the tombs closed on the coílhi* which had been depo¬ sited within their consecrated chamber*, they returned to the cables of tlio.be for whom they had performed such huly ami such pompous rites. The cattle» were truly become the houses ot mourning. The willows were indeed sorrowful. The preparations of the vain ceremonies of no¬ thingness, iiad kept the mind from tise pensive n 0
60
feelings of privation ; but the return to the home where the master's voice would never again bc heard, was a sadness whicii none know but the widow ivho is left to loneliness and grief. In the same sad manner, the amiable Eleanor de Valonnes performed the funeral obsequies of her beloved husband Philip. His empty coffin was raised with equal pomp upon the catafalque. She followed in sadness to the tomb, and saw the door closed when the solemnity was over. She felt the dreariness of wicowed solitude when she returned to the casde, and *he smote her breast when she entered the silent hall. How many more equally brave fell ! IIow many widows equally amiable were left to mourn ! It is impossible to think of war without horror. The pride of glory makes the heart sick; and the remembrance of a hero, brings forward the recollection of the slain. The gallant behaviour, and victories of tbe prince, were sounded in the joyless ear of the king. The cares of government, for which he had nei er been fit, added to tbe infirmities of his atte, møde the burthen of public business a fatigue bo was unable to bear. The licentiousness of lawless power among the nobles, was more than bis authorit) could restrain, r»:id though comma-
61
tions which endangered the throne were not re¬ newed, yet many outrages were committed in the country, and the people were riotous and ready for revolt. He called aloud for his son. He sought to rest on the prop of his popularity. He wished to see his dutiful child, and his noble heir. He was desirous to put the sceptre into his hands, and to expire in his arms. His health however declined daily, he grew weaker and weaker, and while he was preparing for his remo¬ val from St. Edmondsbury, he breathed his last, after a long reign of fifty-five years. The prince was at that time on his return from Palestine, and a renewal of the horrors of civil war was dreaded by all those who ivished well to their country : but Edward had so firmly esta¬ blished his reputation in England by his conduct in opposition to the Earl of Leicester, and by his subsequent bravery in the crusade, that when he was proclaimed, all readily swore allegiance to him, and the three noblemen, who ivere appointed guardians of the realm during bis absence, pro¬ ceeded quietly and peaceably in the exercise of the authority with which they were invested. Those persons wdio had been sent to England, by St. Evremond, ivith fond remembrances and rich gifts to Matilda, did not reach his castle till after her departure to attend her father. As
62
they had travelled with extreme haste, they were too much fatigued to proceed without halting by the way ; they were therefore pressed by the do¬ mestics to remain and refresh themselves. They readily complied. Indeed they could not refuse, rest was so absolutely necessary to them. Every one ran to look at them, and to hear what they had to say. " Do tell us all about the holy war," said one. " How did the prince look the day he went out to fight ?" said another. " And how did he look when he returned to his tent, after he had been fighting all day ?" said a third, " I should not tell you all about the holy wars if I were to talk to you a whole year. People who stay at home know nothing of the world, nor of the strange things to be found in it. In such šar-away countries as I have been to see, men are quite other guise from what they are here in England. Though let me say the truth, they are very brave, and fight quite as well as we do. That is, however, the more honour for prince Edward ; for the harder they are to be con¬ quered, the greater man is he who conquercth them : and several very tight battles we had, I can assure you : and though we took many, and slew more, yet we lost many also, and many dreadful things happened on both sides. Be¬ side what chanced in the field, when we were at
63
it hand to hand, sad things came about quietly irt the tents. There was one man named Musta¬ pha, who came forward at the head of a party of horse, and dealt his sword about like a dæmon* ? î it gleamed in the sun like a flame of fire as he turned it here and there, cutting and slashing like a true hero. There was also in our army a man, who was called Stephen de Beckintone, as brave a man as ever wore a helmet, and he took Mustapha. Now this Mustapha was determined to do Stephen dc Beckintone au injury, because, as he said afterward, he owed it to him, for as much as he struck him one day, and called him infidel dog. It does not, however, often happen that a slave can do his master an injury, but Mustapha looked ahout him, and at last found that Beckintone ioved his wife Marinella more than he loved any thing in all the world beside, and then he set about hiy wicked work. Inthe friendliness of a soldier's leisure, between one battle and another, the oflicers often went from tent to tent to see how each other were going on, and to talk over what they had been doing, and what they had yet to do. if Among those who often came to the tent of Stephen de Beckintone, was Arnold de War¬ tinne. A fine handsome fellow as may be found among a thousand. He was a man that any S
64
woman might have loved. And when Mustapha saw how Beckintone's very heart seemed to doat on Marinella, he determined tò ruin him there. To that end, he bowed lowly before his master, and said, ' Pardon the man who is become thy slave, but who, tliough degraded, hath a heart still noble. I cannot see even thee, my captor, wronged, and not warn thee of thy wronger. Behold Arnold de Wartinne, how oft he cometh here ! Doth he come here for nought ? No. Watch him, thou shalt soon find what it is that draweth him to thy tent.* * What dost thou mean, Mustapha V said Stephen de Beckintone, * What dost thou insinuate V * Thou hast a wife, watch her. Thou hast a friend, watch him. I know what it is to love. I had once a wife, but I thank the prophet for her loss, she died before I took the field. My Zanthia never dwelt among the licentious soldiery of a camp. I have done my duty, I have put my master on his guard.' * Say on, Mustapha/ ' I can say no more ; per¬ chance I have already said too much. Marinella may not be what I have thought her ; yet Ar¬ nold is often here. The eye of a Saracen is quick, the feeling of a Saracen is lively. An Englishman partaketh of his climate, he cometh from the north !* u From that very hour Beckintone set about
er,
the watching that Mustapha had recommended. He fancied that Arnold came oftener to his tent than any otber officer in the whole camp. He set Mustapha to observe when any duty called him away ; and he often said, e Arnold hath been here/ when it was untrue. When Arnold spoke to Marinella, Stephen imagined a tender tone in his expression. If he did not address his con¬ versation to her, he surmised that he was on his guard for fear of observation. He misconstrued every word, he misinterpreted every action, and gave to every circumstance a meaning no one discovered but himself. He ceased to behave kindly to Marinella ; and at last was worked up to that pitch of suspicion and rage which Musta¬ pha wished to produce. When he was quite prepared to believe every thing, and to commit any act of desperation and outrage, Mustapha watched with minute observation, and after being on the scout for several days, he at length found that Arnold was in the tent with Marinella. He had been sent on military business to Beckin¬ tone, whom Mustapha had prevailed on to keep away to give an opportunity for detection. The slave instantly sought him, and said to him, s Now thou shalt behold/ Stephen de Beckintone in¬ flamed by jealousy and rage, rushed into his tent; where sat Arnold awaiting his return.
OB
* What dost thou here, when I am absent?' he asked wildly. Arnold was so surprised at the manner of the question, that he made no reply. Marinella answered, * He came on business from thy chief.' * Our commander sent me with or¬ ders to thee,' said Arnold. ' Ö thou hast taken the hint from Marinella, thou canst now speak/ Arnold and Marinella both stood aghast, when they heard the words of Beckintone, who, inter¬ preting their surprise, to their alarm at being thus detected, said, f Now, traitors, ye shall know how terrible it is to injure me thus vilely. Mustapha hath reproached me, that I am cold like my northern climate, but he shall see that in revenge of wrongs, I feel as warmly as the swarthy Saracens who bask beneath an ardent sun. Approach, Mustapha, approach/ he ex¬ claimed. Mustapha entered. r Do my bid¬ ding l said Stephen de Beckintone. Mustapha instantly seized Marinella, and throwing a silken cord round her throat, said, with a loud laugh, * This bow-string hath shewn thee how terrible it is to injure a noble warrior by a blow, and to call a true believer in the prophet, infidel dog. I have paid thee for thy blow, and thy contemp¬ tuous appellation. There lieth Marinella, thy chaste wife. Couldest thou deem a slave cared for thy shame ? Had she been common to the
61
camp I should not have felt for thee ; thy shame, Christian, wouid not have troubled me : but thy credulity delighteth me. It haih given me my revenge.' When Stephen de Beckintone heard the ivords of Mustapha, he dropped like a leaf. Mustapha was quitting the tent, when Arnold rushing forward, seized him* ' Wretch l he cried, * thou shalt dearly pay for this thy most unheard-of perfidy.' t I shall pay it ivith my life: but, Christian, thou shalt see that I can suffer as boldly as I can inflict, Prepare thy torments, linger out my death, the breathlesa corse of Marinella shall cheer all I may endure ; for the haughty master who insulted the skive whom he had conquered, hath died to happiness to appease me.' Mustapha made gootl his bold vaunt. He suüered the death to which he was condemned as gaily as if it were pastime. But I shall never forget the dreadful sight it was when the virtuous Marinella ivas shewn as she lay in the tent. She, ivho was more lovely and more beautiful than the flowers which grow in that fine country, was extended, cold as a block of marble, distorted and disfigured by the command of her husband, and by the wicked machinations of a traitor." " What became of Stephen de Beckintone ?" asked many voices. " He lost Iiis spirits, he lost his health, he lost lus renown*
68
He neglected his duty, he neglected himself. He shunned every body, hung his head if any one spoke to him, turned out of his path if he saw any one advancing, and wandered and roam¬ ed about alone, chiefly in the night ; and, after some time, during the whole of which he became sadder and sadder, he was found stretched at his length under a palm-tree, as if he were asleep. He was stiff* and cold. Some of the soldiers brought him into the camp, and he was buried in the grave where he had deposited his murdered wife." " Canst thou not tell us something that is not quite so sad ?" " Things which are sad, and are marked by circumstances of horror, are always known and always talked about," said Anestie, who told the last woful tale, " but those things which go on quietly, go on without rumour : just as w r e hear a raging storm, and behold the havoc which it maketh. Then it is that we recount how the trees are torn up by the roots, how the castles are dismantled, and humbler buildings over¬ thrown : but no one goeth about to tell how the leaves put forth in spring, or the flowers glow in summer. We say nothing of the streamlet but we talk of the boisterous sea. So it is in a camp. The friendships and the loves which soothe and soften the ills which we all deplore,
69
are to be sure enjoyed ; but they are the peace¬ ful delights of the heart, and the heart keepeth them to itself." " Thou speakest," said old Alton, " like a wise man. The heart, it is true, knoweth its own delights : the heart also know¬ eth its own sorrows. And let me tell thee, Anes¬ tie, that in the course of my long life, there is nothmg among all the goings on I have beheld, that hath so much surprised me, as that persons having hearts, which all folks, as thou knowest, have ; and feeling wdiat it is to delight and to grieve, should seldom recollect the delights and the griefs of others. Almost every man seemeth to me to think that all the world was made for him. Tliough I have not been, as thou bast, to far away countries beyond sea, I have been much about my own country ; and thou mayest beiieve me, it is every wliere the same. Every one endeavoureth to overstep his fellow ; and if he cannot do so by fair means, he often re- sortcth to foul. For awhile he singeth loud ; but look at him all the way through. Doth he not often find, that the heart wbose grief he hath caused, inventeth some way to pay him in kind, and many times to double the dole. Mustapha received a blow : he was a slave. Stephen de Beckintone struck a blow : he was a knight. Nevertheless the slave reached the kniglit ; and
70
the vengeance outdid the injury a hundred fold. Now, Anestie, when retaliation executeth not its vengeance, it is not because the remembrance of the injury hath died away. No, no: it is like unto the seed in die ground ; if it springeth ??? up a strong plant, it grovveth up weakly ; but there it is: and when seasons smile, it putteth forth blossoms, and produceth fruit. So, when opportunity occurreth. vengeance putteth forth exertion, and produceth completion. Therefore if the pleasure of pleasing, and of seeing those around hini happy, induce not a man to be the source of delight, let him bc careful hoiv he be¬ cometh the cause of r'orroiv. Every man is, more or le.^, like Mustapha, ?*?1 if lie cannot de¬ stroy, he ΛνίΙΙ wound. 1 remember when I was a lad, that a powerful baron in Cornwall, had a domestic, ivho was no more than his swineherd, vvho had a very pretty daughter. It so hap¬ pened that one day, during a chace, he passed the hut where ûie dwell, and became quite ena¬ moured of her sweet beauty, and often went to her dwelling. The swineherd, with ail humble¬ ness, tt Id ??? hu w he loved his child, and huw much í, he was below his notice, und there¬ fore intreated him not to frctpient hi*- hut. The baron, not aware that a lowly swineherd coidd love his child as fondly as a »reat baron Ioveth
71
his, continued to visit Avice, and at length bore her to his castle. When Guram missed his child, he had no doub. ,ιοιν he had been robbed of the simple girl, who had cheered his poverty, and made his heart 4ess heaven for its gift:. To re¬ proach his master vvould have been a fruitless vent of his rage. IL waited seven years ere the moment of vengeance arrived. He then found an opportunity to seize one of the baron's daugh¬ ters. He conveyed her to the wretched hut whence Avice had been stolen ; tbe lowliness of which prevented search, and after detaining her some time, he sent her home marked with the shame she had undergone. To the heart of each father, the injury was equal ; but the haron, who had for seven years kept Avice from Guram, her humble father, glutted his vengeance when the same injury was ofiered to himself. Baronial power was to the full stretch exercised against Guram, who was executed for his behaviour to Almira de Weville. Thus thou seest, in another instance, the lowly found the great, and punished him." " Yea/' said Anestie, " but he was punished too. Now thou shah understand, that if all that the priests tell unto us about heaven and hell, and punishment* after death, be true; and no one can doubt their truth ; tbc baron, who ■-tole Alice, shall net e^cj po, tnoughhe were not
72
punished here like as Guram was punished. I am inclined to think, that by-and-bye, a hun¬ dred years hence, mayhap* it will be found out that a wicked man is no more than a wicked man, for all his strutting about here. Therefore, as I wish no harm to any body, I should be glad if some one or other would make them comprehend how it may hereafter chance with them ; to the end that they may mend their manners, and go on as they ought to do, and then we shall all meet and all be happy together. And thou mayest ivell imagine that will be greater happiness than to miss some of those whom we have known here : because if we do not find them in heaven, where else will they be ? answer me that, old man." " Anestie, that is a mighty fearful question. I nc\ er thought about that be¬ fore. If they never find their way to heaven, toG s»re ihey will not he in happiness/' {i If they be not in happi nc-s" replied Anestie, <l they will be in misery.'* · rt That is a sorrowful thought,' 1 sai<l old Alton. u It never struck me hefore. í woidd §ome one could be found to talk about it to eveiy bodv.*' " It is a thing,'' said Anestie, u which is so sure, that no one needeth ι ? be told abolit it : and though some people go «m and make -ham that thev do not believe it, vet 1 baie sten msumees myself, and abo 1 have
73
heard many old people tell of what they have seen, and all, when they come to die, feel some¬ thing which they cannot check, and then they pro\e what tlieir real thoughts lune always been." " Then th^y proie, Anestie,'' said Alton, il that they have always« acted hke fools."
10L. I'.l.
ì
CHAPTER VII.
Some folks there aie, who never understand What others feel ; and yet, know to claim Ali deference and attention to themselves; As if they were alone pre-eminent, And all b' j iide «ere bound to do them homage
The travellers rose early the next morning, ? order to continue their journey, and follow Ma¬ tilda to her father's castle ; but they were again kept by the servants of St. Evremond, who said to them, " What though our mistress he impatient and anxious to hear of her husband and her son, yet as e knoweth not of your arrival, and as what ye have to tell is all good news, delay im¬ porteth not much, for the joyful tidings ye con¬ vey, will be amends for the stay ye shall make here. A day or two; nay, a week will be no great matter." t( Let not the delay be so far
75
extended," said Alton, " she wanteth consolation, and let her have it ; for there is nothing else left for her ; all beside is now cut off. Young Jos¬ celyn hath put her by. Thou, Anestie, and thy companions, though ye be the bearers of news to make her happy, must not hope to find cor· diality in your reception. The baroness de St. Evremond doth ill supply the place of those who are gone. She knoweth not how to speak any one fair, nor how to treat any one courteously." The messengers divided the time of their stay between the advice of Alton, and the wishes of hii fellows, and only continued one day more amongst them. They then set forward for the high castle of Montgomery. They beheld it aloft on the i ock of its solid foundation long ere they arrived at the hill on which it stood. When they reached the summit, they blew the bugle lustily, and de¬ clared to the warden, that they brought news from Palestine. They were instantly introduced to Montgomery in his great hall, where with Ma¬ tilda and Austin, he was seated in melancholy state among the useless arms which hung around. " Come ye from Palestine?" said the baron. " Yea," answered Anestie. " How fareth the prince ?" resumed Montgomery, " and how goeth on the holy war ?" " The holy war hath ended with the victory of prince Edward, and a truce ? 2
76
with the infidels." " A truce !" exclaimed Ma¬ tilda. " Yea, lady ; a long truce. So long, that those who command now will yield their stations to their sons, if ever the war be renewed. They have agreed to be quiet on both sides for ten years and many months to boot."' " Should the zeal of the crusaders ever be rekindled," said Matilda, " my son may then command." <( Liveth he?" asked Montgomery, " He liveth, and hath escaped without a wound." " And his father l' said Montgomery, " how is it with him?" " He liveth too, unhurt by foreign sword." " Both unhurt !" said Matilda, ít have they not done their duty ?" " Nobly. None in the camp have done more honour to the English name than they haie done. They have never flinched, lady. They have been, as it were, the lion and the lion's whelp; and prince Edward hath done justice to their valour. None are in more esteem than they are with the*, royal chief. Indeed I can spatie of none without naming a hero. All have done their duty : though, alas ! too many have died in doing it." '* Have there been many slain ?" asked Montgomery. (i More than 1 can number," re¬ plietl Anestie, " The slaughter hath been great on both sides." " Have any of our vassals fallen Γ inquired Matilda. i( That noble knight of fame, Philip de Valonnes, fell early in the on-
77
$et: and the valiant Milward de Rostendale, the beloved vassal of Henry baron de Nartonville, rìso fell early: and he, the bravest and the kindest among all the chiefs who were in the English camp, fell at the very moment when the infidels yielded to the prince« He was more re¬ gretted than any one man ivho was slain ; antl the prince said, that even victory was too dearly bought, when such a champion died to pur¬ chase it," When Anestie mentioned Henry de Narton¬ ville among the slain, Austin started from bis seat and clapping his hands, said, " is Henry de Nar¬ tonville dead!" " It is with more grief that I name his loss, than that of all beside who fell ; for 1 can tell thee, holy father, he hath not left tó& {¿'Mane so¡S^r¿nd-Í\MtbyyaWr r ?? dore his wife, and his daughter Isabella have sad cause for grief ; and the aged Emma, who hath so oft deplored the heroes of her family, hath redou¬ bled <cause for lamentation. The names of Kar- tonville and Neville shall now be lost to her posterity : Isabella shall sink them both in her alliance with another house.*' The ettect the death of Nartomiile had on Austin was not unmarked by Matilda ; and though he instantly checked the emotion which he had e3
78
been unable to resist, she observed his silent agitation. She perceived his cheek alternately flushed and pale ; and when his eye met hers, she noticed the fiery glance which renewed its lustre. His quick sense of suspicion made him readily dread the scrutiny of his conduct, and he rose to depart. " Thou wilt return, father/' said Ma¬ tilda. " I am always at the call of the baroness de St. Evremond," answered Austin. ** To thee, holy father, I have ahvays much to communicate. It is thou who must calm my heart, and teach me how I must demean myself." In pronouncing these few words to Austin, she spoke in a tone of humiliation very unusual to her haughtiness. iC The baroness de St. Evremond knoweth/' said Austin, " that I am ahvays blest, if in the per- and happiness of my penitents/' So f-aying, he quitted the hall ; and Montgomery renewed the subject of the holy war. " I should like to know- some of the particulars of the crusade/' he said, ■^bi Jt delighteth the heart of an old soldier, whose days of strengtii are past, to hear the deeds of those whose arms still wield the spear and draw the sword in battle. The time hath been when I could have fought through the long day as doughtily as any one ; but now, instead of fixing my lance in the rest, I rest my weakness on a
79
staftl' " Tell us, good man/' said Matilda, " how the baron de St. Evremond, and John de St. Evremond his son, behaved themselves." il I can tell the progress of the battles and victories, all in order, one after another from first to last, just as they came forward," replied Anestie, " but how this man or the other man did, is more than I can take upon me exactly to say, for thou dost know, most noble Montgomery, that when a man is called upon to do his best, he has something else to attend to than to watch those round about him, who arc all doing their best as well as him¬ self. Therefore, passing by every one in par¬ ticular, I will go back to the beginning of all : and I can tell you both, that when we landed on the coast of Africa, and found that tîie pious king Lewis of France was dead, and all his troops sickening and dying as fiist as tbey could fall «v W( vy, ^ ven p r ince Edward his ownself, was at first a little, as I may say, disheartened ; but he soon brushed up his spirits, and thinking that the good dead king could be of no farther use in the business, he sailed away for Palestine, and soon began tliose feats of bravery, which will make him be talked about as long as England standeth where she doth in the sea. Princess Eleanor too, his wife, shall be praised and held up as a pattern to all wivee in the world, as long as the world lasteth e 4
80'
fo live and fight upon ; but I shall come to thai anon. I must begin at the beginning, or I shall never be able to go straight forward : so I shall go back to his departure from where we first set foot on shore, and carry him on to Asia. Our voyage thither w r as very like our voyage from Sicily, when we were near enough to the coast we saw land, and when we were too far out to see land, then we saw nothing but water, I wish I could say Iiow I felt when we were in the middle of the sea. We seemed to he cut off', as it were, from the rest of the world. I never found any beauty in what I looked at but in the night, and then it was very charming. If thou, lady, hast never been out at sea when the moon shineth full, thou hast never seen it in perfection. When she mo vet h along in a clear unclouded sky, amid the stars, and sheweth herself again ?? her shadow moveth in the calm waters, and all is btill and all ? h««^- od, something which I can fmd no words to tell, passetti here in the bosom, hO solemn, so peaceful, that ï defy any man to look up, or to look down, or to look round, and not call his thoughts about him, and recollect wdiat sort ofa man he is. With feelings like mine all pursued their way, and at last we found ourselves all encamped in a strange country. And then we fought and ive conquered, but 1 cannot describe how, by shear fighting I
81
believe, for the prince fought well, and the knights and the esquires fought well, and I fought welk Thus we went on fighting and conquering, till the Saracens had enough of it, and then we made a truce ; and now all that are not left behind, dead on the plain, are on their way home* Many have been sent away at sundry times with accounts of gbry, and with accounts of death, and we are now sent to thee and to thy noble daughter with the gladsome account that those of your family have done well, and been fortunate, for they are free from wound. They have charged us, be¬ side what I have said about them, with many kind -and dutiful remembrances, and assurances of love and respect, and with many rich gifts and holy relics. What they are I know* not. It is not my part to know ; but as they have been given to our charge, so w*e deliver them. They are contained in two caskets. One hath been left at the castle of the baron de St. Evremond, ancl one we have brought hither. At your best leisure ye will in¬ spect them ; and ere long, the senders will follow their gifts. They will tell many a tale of slaugh¬ ter which saddened the hearts of the brave ; and many an escape from peril when men stood on the brink of destruction : and when the m mber of those who have been lost cometh to be misled here at home, I believe that as many will weep as e 5
82
will rejoice." "Are they men of note who are left among the slain ?" asked Matilda. " Many of them are of the first degree," replied Anestie. " For them many will grieve. The others are not worth recording," said Matilda. " So please my lady," said Anestie, " if the lowest failed in bravery, the highest would never conquer, lt is the conduct of the soldiery that gaineth the vic¬ tory for the general." " Thou art right," said Montgomery, " my daughter knoweth not the duties of the field. She thinketh only of com¬ mand." " He who commandeth," replied Ma¬ tilda, " by his command is made pre-eminent." " And those who obey," quickly answered Anes¬ tie, " gain the victory." " Speak of the great¬ est," said Matilda. " The greatest is the prince," obser vr d Anestie. " Are none great but the prince ?" said Matilda. " He is supreme," an¬ swered Anestie. The manner in which Anestie answered Matilda, w r as in con-sequence of the character he had heard of her at the castle. Had she not accustomed herself to behave arrogantly to every one, she would have been treated .with respect ; hut the haughtiness of her demeanour to those she deemed below her, destroyed what she demanded; and whenever the less exalted could shew her any slight, they never let the opportunity slip.
83
She paused after the ksfc reply, and Anestie, turning to Montgomery, said, " when I name the prince, I cannot pass on without makuig mention of Eleanor his princess, whose love for her hus¬ band hath been proved by an action, whicii hath endeared her to the whole army, and will hand her down for ever and ever as a good wife, and an heroic woman." He then recounted the assassina¬ tion of Edward by Axalla, his rescue, and the de¬ struction of the assassin by Edwin, and the devo· tion the princess made of her own life to save her husband ; " but she has been preserved," he con¬ tinued, " and as the guardian angel of the English glory, she is almost adored by all around her." When Anestie had made an end of his story, Matilda, to whom the praise of one not connected with St. Evremond or herself was always irksome, rose and quitted the hall. u A soldier," said Montgomery, " hardiy knoweth what to admire, what to rej oke in, or what to lament. In these holy wars, he is impelled by motives so much stronger and so much more noble than what be¬ long to common causes of contention, that his ambition is beyond military fame, and mingleth with the best hopes of a Christian man. Yet, the destruction of so many, even though they be infidels, and the loss of the prime of the English nobles, together with the numerous vassals and £ 6
84
dependents who followed their banners, rend the heart in the hour of reflection ; and chiefly the heart of him to whom nought but reflection remaineth. The long truce now made by Ed¬ ward, will give the Saracens full time to recruit their strength and their numbers, and to re¬ cover the possessions they have lost ; and the hlood which hath been spilled, and the trea¬ sures which have been squandered in the east hy successive warriors for nearly two hundred years, will assuredly increase their power, and promote their extension; as rain whicii faileth into the stream addeth to the waters, and increas- cth the force of the torrent," " Perchance it may he so," said Anestie, " thou lookest far ; I only see what is ; and I can tell thee that things are in a bad train just now in Palestine, for all prince Edward's victories. The king of France faileth his supplies ; and troops from England do not replace those who have fallen; and if the infidels had known how the matter stood with us, they would not have been so ready to come to terms with the prince. They are at home, as I may say, though they he in camp, and a fresh Army, wiiich they might soon have raised, would have driven him away without flying colours." 4t 1 trust," said Montgomery, * g that go where he may, his colours will ever fly ; for the proofs of
85
his valour which he hath given as prince, will lead him gloriously to the throne, which the re¬ cent death of king Henry his father now calleth him to fill. I look up to him with enthusiasm, Anestie, 1 hail him as the strong bulwark of his native land. May he live long to honour antl renown, and may his posterity rule over us to the end of time." i( And may they ever find subject as warmly attached to them as we are to him," said Anestie, rí If they deserve it as he doth, no doubt they will," replied Montgomery,
CHAPTER VIH.
? ! there are some injuriou ?? keen, That the indignant heart canuot iorghe, But broodeth over them, «airing the timi» When retaliation may inflict In sharp revenge, a Mtound a& terrible As that receiv'd; and yet there art· ¡»ome ttteù. So efficacious anger to remove, That the malignant spirit ¡& subdu'd» And vengeance, overcome bv kuully ads, Oives place to + endemebb o.nd love.
Though those who went to Palestine formed oír large collective body of soldiers, who all followed their royal and valiant leader in one vast arm) ; yet, after the truce, they returned home, eaeh pursuing the route, and travelling in the manner which best suited his own inclination. Edward, and those immediately attached to his person, htayed in Sicily ; and the possessions of the king of England in France caused many to remain on the continent; while others returned to their native land, and the quiet enjoyment of domestic peace. Yet, many came in grief. They left itt
87
Palestine the son who should bear their name to future times, or the friend whom the heart had chosen. The mournful train who liad scen Philip de Valonnes interred with many more in the hot clime of Asia, confirmed the melancholy tidings to Eleanor his weeping wife, and attended her as in sorrowful duty she performed his obsequies. She raised the catafalque, and placed the empty coffin on its summit ; and the priests and the choir performed with due solemnity the office for the dead, and chaunted the holy requiem ; and every rite the church ordains was with pompou*» ceremony fulfilled. The vessel in which the dependents of Milward de Rostendale embarked, was later in its arrival, and in tbe English Chánmi was overtaken by a terrible storm. The thunders roiled in loud peak through the sky, and the lightning gleamed at intervals amid the dark clouds, and bv its mo» mentái*} flashes, shewed the wretched crew the* horrors by which they were surrounded. The roaring and mounting waves in rapid succession overleaped each other, and broke on the vessel, drenching the sailors, and threatening to ingulf the reeling bark. She was long tossed by the turbulent sea, alternately mounted and sunk ; and ail the exertions of all on board wm insufH-
88
cient to keep her clear of water. Exhausted by their efforts, and often driven from their .stations, the terrified mariners were unable to manage the ropes and shrouds, and were entirely at the mercy of the boisterous wind whicii roughly urged them on. It blew almost constantly toward the port they wished to make, and they already saw the lights glimmer through the gloom ; and as the blaze of the lightning ran from cloud to cloud, they beheld the spire of the church at Biddcford, and anon the monastery. Yet the shifting from point to point often disappointed them, for when they thought that they were driving direct to shore, ever as one gust pushed them on, another forced them back, and the accumulation of water, ivhich was rapidly filling the ship, made her so heavy, that at length the only hope they had was to leap into the sea, and trust to their skill as swimmers. Desperate alternative ! To remain, would be to sink with the vessel, and perish in the roaring deep ; and to leap into its foaming surge, seemed to hasten, not retard destruction. As they stood on the unsteady deck, many were washed over ere they could resolve to phmge. Every one was dismaved. All ceased their endeavours to steer or to work the vessel, against which the waves beat vvith increasing fury. Thty looked at each other, took each other by the hand in silence ;
89
advanced toward the side of the ship ; turned from the dreadful daring, and stood aghast. O í wdiat a pause ! At length, one man coming has« tily forward, and saying, " G iie me way," leaped into the raging main, lie disappeared. iC O! he han rushed on death," said every spectator. lie rose, and as the waves lifted him and let him fall, he buffeted them wdth a strong arm, and at every stroke seemed to approach nearer to the shore. His frequent re-appearance when they thought him lost, encouraged others to follow his example ; and many leaped hom the deck. Thus, one by one in succession left the ship. When he who tiiought himself the last remaining man on hoard, was collecting and drawing up his breath to leap and follow his companions, he espied Mahmorad, who in gloomy pensiveness, clung to the onlv mast which was not washed away. t( Why dost thou Btaiuwi icr(4 ???????? ?" *?-<?\ Ambrose. " That importeth not to thee/' was the surly reply. " Marry, but it doth," said Am¬ brose. ''" Thou must not be left to perish here alone. Why dost not lea}) t Others have leaped, and do well. See ! how they brave the »torni. Lo! how they stem the waves. Come ; jump with me/' " To leap into the turbulenco of the raging sea," replied Mahmorad, " would be to make that certain ivhich is now in doubt« The
90
storm may cease ; the ship may right ; and then I shall be saved. To leap into the angry surge would be to find a watery grave, for I cannot swim." " Ö ! Ö !" said Ambrose, c< is it thus with thee l Come; get on my back." "My weight will sink us both," said Mahmorad. '* Tut, man, I can swim like a fish. I could bear thee back to Asia, an that be all." " Art thou a Christian, and wilt risk thy life to save the life of a believer in the prophet l' " Aye, aye my boy. Thou shalt now see what a proper Christian is. Wert thou the prophet himself, I would carry thee safe to shore." ff Thou dost astonish me/' said Mahmorad. " Surely/' said Ambrose, " thou dost not think that to be a Christian is to be inhuman ; Thinkest thou, a Christian will leaie another man to perish when he hath means to saie mm ? Why man, we did not fight for the sake of killing «« «*·»η, Γ ?? ? ri» f*2iuW8 as are left on the field of battle. No, no. If ye wouid have left us quietly in possession oï Jerusalem, }e might have had all the world be&ide without interrup¬ tion. I dare say, however, it was not thy fault that we had it not: or if it were, ive need not quarrel about Jerusalem here, so near merry England : so come, cling fast as tbou wouldest cling on thy horse. Put thy arms round my neck, and thy legs round my body. Leave my
91
arms and legs free, and then away we go." Mah¬ morad stood amazed. " Come, come," said Am¬ brose, stooping, " let us not lose time. Mount! Mount on my shoulders/' Mahmorad sprang on the back of Ambrose, who crying, " Hold fast/* instantly leaped down. They soon rose. The other swimmers for a moment stopped their strokes to gaze in wonder as they advanced. Ambrose almost verified his vaunt, that he could swim like a fish. As the waves rolled and tossed about, he ever pushed on, and at every interval when he had a little breath to spare, his cry was, " Hold fast, Mahmorad." He continued thus nearly two hours, yet he advanced, though it was thus slowly, and when after his long struggle he was almost close to shore, the admiring spectators, «»hn cfrmrl nnviouslv observing his powerful ef¬ forts, threw out with a violent throw a long rope which he caught, and with shouts and accla¬ mations they pulled him forward, and might be said to tow him to safety. When landed, he dis¬ engaged himself from his load, saying, " There, my boy, I have kept my word with thee." He then sat him down, and to the crowd which ga¬ thered round to question him, as if he alone were to be noticed, he said, ír Patience, patience, my good friends, give me time to breathe ; and throw out your ropes, and help others whom 1 have
92
passed by, and pull them along a bit as ye have pulled me." When he was somewhat recovered, he said to Mahmorad, who lay at length beside him, " How art tliou ?" " I am giddy," replied Mahmorad. "The tossing of the waves hath overpowered me, and I cannot rise." " Well, well," said Ambrose, " lie still, and take a nap if thou canst, I will watch thee : no one shall do thee harm." Mahmorad pressed the hand of Ambrose, but he made no reply. When none were seen floating among the bil¬ lows, the commander of the vessel looked round, and said, " Alas ! I miss many of my crew and passengers. All have not been able to contend with the tempest." The inhabitants of Biddeford, with charitable hospitality, assisted all who had been »aved, led them to their houses, and admi- uiaitieu every renti* au ^??? *jí »-»..ωι «-"v-j* stood in need. When they would have helped Mahmorad to rise, they found that he had fainted. " What aileth this outlandish man?" said one who stooped over him. " He is not used to paddle in salt water," said Ambrose. " And the brine 1 suppose hath made him drunk," observed the inquirer. " Take him up carefully," said Am¬ brose, " it would break my heart if after all our struggles, I have only brought him here to die." He was conveyed to the house of themost opulent
93
inhabitant of the place, and laid on a bed, and me¬ dicines were fetched from the monastery, A holy monk soon followed. " Who have we here?" said the holy man, when he beheld the countenance, and the foreign garments of Mahmorad. " He is," said Ambrose, " an unfortunate Saracen captive," " A Saracen!" exclaimed the monk, crossing himself. " What can we do for a Saracen?" i( Save his life, holy father," replied Ambrose. " Give him the medicines," said the monk, " and keep him quiet." The holy man instantly quitted the chamber. Mahmorad lay a long time in a state of stupor, and after he recovered his recollection, he was long confined to his bed. He complied with every thing that was thought proper for his reco¬ very, but he said very little to any of the persons who came occasionally to attend him. As he gained strength he talked more, and one day he said to Ambrose, who had been a kind and atten¬ tive overlooker of all ,that went on, " I have not said mueh while I have lain here, because I did not know what I might venture to say in a strange land, among strange people, in whose power I am completely thrown; but I have watched every one who hath entered the apartment, and I ac¬ knowledge tbat I am greatly astonished at the exceeding kindness with which I have been treated
94
by all. I do not think that a Christian slave left with us would have found the same tenderness. " The meditations of my mind as I lay in silence, have wrought a change which I did not think could have taken place in my heart. I left my native country burning with a sense of injury, and wishing for life only that I might satisfy re¬ venge. I wished to reach England, that I might have vengeance on the youth who stole my Fa¬ tima, and on the family to which he belonged ; but the more I have contemplated the kindness I have experienced, the less inclined I am to injure one of a race which is so merciful. The impulse of war is what I will now debate, for never again shall I mingle with the noble brave. The anger, which I thought implacable, thy kind exertions for my safety have subdued. Were Edred here, I think I could forgive him ; and for thy sake, I could drink with the Christian. Thou hast saved my life even at the risk of thine own, and I must not slay one of thy faith. Yet, though I thirst no more for vengeance, the loss of Fatima will, spite of all my efforts, ever rankle in my bosom, and my separation from Selima, my most beloved wife, will ever sadden my days." " The loss of Fatima," said Ambrose, " is one of those dreadful events which 1 know not how to soften. The fond feelings of a father cannot be talked away.
95
Recollect, however, that it was Adulid who de¬ stroyed her. For thy other woes, mayhap some alleviation may be found. The first thing to be done is to get thee well ; and then we will strive to find thee a happy establishment in this thy new country. To thy own country thou must not hope ever to return, but I will do my best to make an Englishman of thee, and Devonshire may serve thy turn as well as Palestine." When Ambrose quitted the Saracen, he marched away for the castle of Rostendale. He found all the family in extreme grief. The loss of Milward, the brave knight who died for Jeru¬ salem, had saddened every heart. Ambrose de Klutsforde, was an under vassal of the do¬ maine, and when he was announced, his name awakened many painful recollections. He had escorted Oswina to the vessel when si. quitted Palestine ; and he had left the ship in close con¬ verse with her husband. She asked many ques¬ tions, and drew the story of all that had occurred after she sailed away, with such minute inquiry from him, that he was detained till it was dark. u Having now satisfied thee in the many particu¬ lars thou didst wish to know, allow me in my turn/' said Ambrose, " to ask thee one question." lf Say it," said Oswina. " When I went with tbee to the ship, among the various attendants
96
who then followed thee was Selima, the mother of Fatima. Liveth she ?" « She doth." " With thy permission, lady, 1 will return to-morrow ; on the subject of Selima, I have much to say ; now it is too late for further explanation." He then left the castle and hastened back to Mahmorad. Mahmorad having opened his mind and ex¬ plained his feelings to Ambrose, from that time they conversed together ivith a degree of friendly familiarity, very rare between two men in such va¬ ried circumstances. Mahmorad frequently named Fatima ; ever with a degree of grief which almost renewed anger ; but Ambrose always let the sub¬ ject drop without a comment. When he spoke of Selima, Ambrose said, " Selima, as thou know¬ est, came to England ; if we should chance to find her, shouldest thou be glad to take her again to thy h Kom r" " If she hath remained unpollu¬ ted," said Mahmorad, ír 1 would receive her as a gift, wherewith the prophet had interfered to keep sacred for mc."' Ambrose said no more. Ambrose, according to appointment, returned next day to the castle of Rostendale. Edred, who had taken on himself the dignity of chief of his family, received him cordially, and with all the hos¬ pitality ever found in an ancient castle. He held forth his right har*.! to welcome him, and press¬ ing the other on his heart, he said, tí The death
97
of Fatima, lieth heavy here, and the days of my joy are gone for ever. Grief weigheth mc down, and my years will be few. My brother, who beareth the name of my father, shall soon stand where I stand now, and the honour of Rostendale shall revive." " Banish such dismal thoughts," said Ambrose. " Thy days shall be bright antl many. Their brightness shali begin to day. I come to tell thee that which shall cheer thy heart." He then recounted all that had befallen the vessel and crew, and the conversations he had at sundry times had with Mahmorad. il I should like to conduct Selima to the apartment, where her husband is still confined, and introduce her without notice." " I will attend tbee," said Ed¬ red. '* No, no," said Ambrose, " let him over¬ come one surprise, before we disturb him with a second. May I speak to Selima?" " Let her be brought into the hall," said Oswina. Wlien Selima appeared, the exceeding woe of her coun¬ tenance checked Ambrose as he advanced to¬ ward her. She hung her head as he gazed upon her. Edred observed her, and said, " This friend of ours, is lately come from Palestine." <k O! say— telime!" exclaimed Selima, "What of Mahmorad ?" Ambrose again recounted the perils of the storm, and his escape." " Where is he 'i" she cried with vehemence, " Wilt thou vol. ?. r
98
go to him, Selima ?" asked Ambrose. ( ' O yes ! O yes ! let me go to Mahmorad." She was placed on Oswina's palfry, and one ofher women accom¬ panied her. Ambrose attended them. When they reached Biddeford, Selima's eastern dress attrac¬ ted universal gaze, but Ambrose conducted her safely to the dwelling, where Mahmorad was still an inmate. Ambrose first entered his apartment. " I have brought a friend to thee," he said. " I have no friend but thee," said Mahmorad. fi Trust me," said Ambrose, " thou hast many." Mahmorad shook his head, and sighed. " Not here," he said. After raising something like hope, in the bosom of the Saracen, he stepped back, and led in Selima, followed by Giltra, the woman whom Oswina had sent with her. The moment Mahmorad beheld Selima, he started up. He clasped her in his arms. He pressed her to his heart. " Prophet, I thank thee !" he exclaimed with vehemence. He again pressed Selima to his breast, while she wept tears of joy in his bosom. Mahmorad asked many questions, and Selima asked many questions. It appeared that, as captives, they had hoth been s fortunate as captivity could he deemed by those who had once been free. The death of Fatima was all, beside captivity, whicii they could lament. After a short stay with Mahmorad, Ambrose said, " We must
99
now return to the castle." Mahmorad again clasped Selima, and they both felt that they were slaves. A few days after the interview of Mahmorad and his wife, Ambrose proposed that he should go to the castle of Rostendale, where Selima already resided. They took a grateful fare¬ well of their kind host; and set forth for the castle. * Edred met them at the gate, where Selima was also placed to receive him, Edred was greatly agitated. He cailed for a cup of water, of ivhich he drank, and passed it to Mahmorad. He also drank, and they entered the hall together. To raise a slave taken in battle to the honour of the dais, w T as impossible ; to place the father of Fatima at the lower table, was impossible also. It had therefore been arranged with Ambrose de Kdotsforde, that he and Selima should dwell apart from the family, in a small building which stood not far from the castle. There they were immediately settled, and two lads from among the serfs of the domain were appomted to attend on them. Edred was their frequent visiter. He was perpetually contriving some new comfort to add to their happiness, and always treated them with the respect he thought due to the parents f2
100
of Fatima. He gave Mahmorad a horse and dogs, and bows and arrows : and he chased the >tag, and pursued the hare in the domain which surrounded the castle of Rostendale ; while Se¬ lima angled in the stream, which wound its gentle course through the plains.
CHAPTER IX.
What mean these various tumults raging wild Within the breast of man ? Wherefore this strong This pow'rful conflict of the passions ? The mildest among which, scarcely İs deem'd Delightful. While those of fiercer nature Tear the bosom, and quite destroy its peace.
All persons are so very apt to consider them¬ selves and their own concerns independent of tbe world at large, that each seeks his own gratifica¬ tion, careless of what may be the consequence to others. I want ; I wish ; I command ; I forbid : seem to be expressions which every one, in hi^ own opinion, has a right to use, and he also seems to expect, that all others sliould aid in their ac¬ complishment. The various wants, wishes, com¬ mands, and forbiddances of individuals, cla-di, however, so frequently and so violently, that in¬ stead of mutual happmess between man and man, r 3
102
contentions and animosities arise \ and what one will not yield, another seizes by force. Hence war, the malignity of whose source, and the horrors of whose consequences, are lost in the dazzle of renown, and the fame of heroism. Hence also the jars, the quarrels, the thefts, the murders, which daily destroy the comfort of fa« milies, and disturb the peace of society. Matilda, beyond all others, demanded submis¬ sion and obedience; and therefore she was be¬ yond all others sensible of neglect or slight. The birth of her young brother, who would be the heir of Montgomery, had so lowered her conse¬ quence in the estimation of the dependents, who had been accustomed for many years to look up to her as the future mistress of the domain, that the child was hateful to her sight. Every little charm so lovely in an infant, and the growth and improvement so delightful to the eye of affection, were odious to her; and all the caresses he re¬ ceived stung her to the heart. Some words which had fallen from Austin, led her to believe, that every thing she felt toward Joscelyn, he felt toward Isabella, now become heiress to Henry de Nartonville. Some vague fancies that she could not define, floated in her imagination, and she was desirous to talk with him on their existence. To that end, she had
103
expressed her wish that he should return. To that end, she had affected something like humility in her speech. The communication of every thing was always supposed to be made to a con¬ fessor ; yet, even in confession, there was a mode of communication by which the penitent might draw from the holy man, to whom all sins were exposed, such observations as might either induce expansion or contraction, and penances were often mitigated, and actions commended, not on account of intrinsic merit or demerit, but by the gloss with which they were displayed. Matilda was a curious diver into character. Perhaps, at that period, when what is now termed education, was very sparingly dealt to every body ; and when women were not taught so much as the letters of the alphabet, the impossibility of reading books might make them read men, and give them an insight into the heart by observation, which the affectation of learning has greatly dimmed : and five or six centuries ago, when the face was the only thing they had to study, it may be that they understood countenances better than they now understand any of those things, which have led their study into a new channel. Austin was not behindhand in the study of physiognomy. He had observed pride, haughti¬ ness, and the love of rule in Matilda ; and he had F 4
304
marked her mortification at being now set aside hy the intrusion of her brother on the family of Montgomery ; and he had discovered that his removal would be a great gratification to her : but he was yet to learn what she would do to remove him. In order to gain that knowledge, be very quickly availed himself of her wish for his return. The next day saw him again at the castle. He looked stedfastly at Matilda as he entered, and he saw her eyes sparkle when he appeared in the hall. lie immediately began his scrutiny by in¬ quiries concerning Joscelyn. Though his words were addressed to Montgomery, his attention was riveted on his daughter. The blush which instantly overspread her face and neck, had the heightened tint of scarlet; and as the baron ^poke with delight of his ??}% he observed how iter lips quivered, and how the tear started to her eye. To try her further, he said he was not sur¬ prised to hear a fond father speak so rapturously, for assuredly, he was the loveliest child he had ever beheld. " Every one," he said, still gazing on Matilda, " speaks of him with fondness, and as I wander about, meditating as I go on, I hear every person who mentions him, conclude is hat is .-aid, by a hearty prayer for his life and prospe¬ rity." Matilda became pale as death as he finish-
105
ed his eulogy : and when the baron said, " May heaven bless him, and lengthen his days when I shall sleep in the tomb," he saw her bite her lip* for very rage. Determined to try her to the quick, he said, " When I was last at the abbey, where the excel¬ lent Bertha de Clifford now presides, she expres¬ sed a strong wish, that her beloved nephew might he brought to the grate." Then, without giving Montgomery time to reply, he instantly addressed himself to Matilda, and said, (i How greatly it must have gratified thee, when the dear friend of thy early days was elevated to the dignity whicii thy aged aunt so long enjoyed with honour." I Ie observed the exceeding emotion of Matilda, and unwilling to draw the attention of her father to her agitation, he changed the discourse. " I marvel," he said, " that our new king delayeth to return to England. He trusteth too much, methinks, to those who are here in power. It is a dangerous risk." " Our valiant Edward," replied Mont¬ gomery, " is too well heloved to he endangered by any trust he may repose in his subjects." The very short respite these few words gave to Matilda, enabled her to calm her feelings and to rally her thoughts ; and as she hud smarted be¬ neath the acrimony of what Austin had said about Joscelyn, she resolved to make him w 'nee in ?? r 5
106
turn ; and she said, " Our king wanteth not friends nor supporters, though many valiant men have fallen in Palestine. My husband and my son, heaven be praised, ever will maintain his rights; and so will many more whom I could name, if the list were needed : and many who have found an honourable grave in Asia, would, had they been spared to him and to their country, have done honour to both. Greatly are such men to be lamented: and none more lamented has expired, and left a gap in hardihood, than the baron de Nartonville. Brave man ! the only re¬ presentative of two ancient families. The family of Neville, and the family of Nartonville, will now both lose their name ; but the lovely Isabella will convey, though to a strange family, the vast ex¬ tensive property, and the descendants of Narton¬ ville will range in the domain which he transmits to his posterity." Her scrutinizing eye watched Austin as she proceeded, and though he had armed himself with caution^ he could not so far command his perturbation as not to betray to her, who only spoke to rouse his feelings, what tliose feelings were. The flushing of his cheek, and its return to paleness, were beyond his power to controul ; and all Matilda said of Isabella, pierced him as keenly, as what he had said of Joscelyn had
107 wounded her: and they had both discovered what each would gladly have concealed. The discovery was likely to be more serviceable to Austin than to Matilda. She, as penitent, had to betray herself to him, who, as confessor, woukl know her thoughts, her meditations, her hopes, and her fears, on which he could play by his pious frauds, by gracious indulgences, and by holy threats : and keep her in hand till he had wrought upon her feelings, so as to lead her on to his own purposes. She was herself aware of the different position in which they stood in regard to each other, and though she thoroughly knew Austin, that knowledge was so far from inducing her to say all she wished to say to him, that it created a dread of telling him too much, und when she knelt to confess herself to his private ear, she confined her confession to such petty follies, that Austin was well aware, that tliough such trifles were truths, Matilda's mind was superior to the idea, that they were crimes worthy of penitential communication : and though he knew the power which as priest he had over her, he also knew that to such offences, priesthood could enjoin no penance at which she would not scoff. At tlie same time, the tone and manner in which those insignificant errors were told, convinced him that she had more on her heart than her tongue de-
108
t laved : therefore, to give her confidence to speak to him in full, he let her understand how ivell pleased he was to find she had so little on her conscience ; and he was so lenient in what he enjoined her, that it could scarcely be deemed penance. He was carefid, however, at every opportunity ivhich seemed to grow out of the conversation in the hall, to lead the discourse to Joscelyn, and to make some observation which might keep alive in its full force, the unkindness with which she beheld him, and the resentment die felt against her father's marriage. By these methods, he prevented her from losing sight for ? < ingle moment ofher exclusion from inheritance, aiul widened the breach between her and Mont¬ gomery ; and he led her to behave in such a petulant manner, that the baron was almost tempted to tell her, that her iiut had been long enough. When Matilda found that she had lost the influence she had once had over her father, and that he was careless of the little regard with which bhe was treated by his dependents, her haughty mind became so indignant, that she poured forth to Austin the violent wrath which was enkindled within her bosom ; and he, insteatl of checking her, according to his duty, fanned the ilame by pitying her degradation : and thus 1
109
heightened her indignation while he feigned to soften her rancour. When her mind was thus heated, and she had begun to expatiate on her mortification, he ivent less frequently to the castle, by which means, she was always impatient to see hini, and eager to unfold her griefs. What she had to say, was always the recapitulation of what she had said. She inveighed against all whom she supposed had done her wrong. She cried out loudly against Bertha de Clifford, her long-loved friend. ít ? holy father!" she said, "her perfidiousness and deceit cut like a two-edged sword !" She spoke bitterly of Catherine, whose affected simplicity, she said, was a covering with which she had veiled her craft and cunning. Against the baron her father, she spoke with such extreme vehe¬ mence and anger, that Austin, for appearance sake, felt bound to reprove her. " The baroness de St. Evremond," he said, is forgetteth that she speaketh of her father." " ? !" replied Matilda, *' that he is my father, causeth me thus to speak. To trace our wrongs to such a source, doubleth tlte injuries received. Thou knowest it, holy man. Thou knowest, and thou feelest how Randolph de Neville hath injured thee." The sudden rever¬ sion to the state of his own mind, stopped him from proceeding with what he intended to have
??
said to Matilda; and the beginning of h'« reproof checked her, and she did not go forward with her complaints. While Matilda continued to tell her griefs and mortifications to her father confessor, she con¬ firmed more strongly what he knew before, but she made no discovery of what steps she would pursue to gratify the vindictive anger, which rankled like the envenomed bite of an adder. He could not, unholy as he was, instigate, though he was ready to assist. He feared to venture before he knew his ground. He feared to tread before he knew his footing. There was a mutual suspicion between liim and his penitent; and they both stopped at a Hne, which they were both afraid to overstep. How unlike the confidence of friend¬ ship! It was not for consolation that Matilda told her griefs to Austin. It was not for absolu¬ tion that she sought the confessional. She open¬ ed not her malignant mind to him, as to the good shepherd, who would guide her ii she went astray. It was to the man whom she deemed bad enough to have a fellow-feeling in the malice of her heart ; and likely to become a coadjutor, if she shouid ever dare to put in act the impulse, which often prompted her to think that nothing would be wrong, if redress should be in her power.
CHAPTER Χ.
ín ev'ry clime on earth, an aged man Draweth from aU attention and respect; And th» tale hs telleth of the olden time Charmeth the ear ofthe young listener.
While these strange animosities raged in the bosom of Matilda, the baron de St. Evremond, her husband, and John their son, with many other nobles and knights, were indulging in all the gay luxuries of Sicily. That delightful climate charmed with such powerful fascmation, tbat it lulled every unquiet thought, and calmed every turbulent passion. The wonderful abundance of its productions ; its corn, its fruits, its flowers, whose variety beautified the paths, while their wild fragrance perfumed the air, were all so dînèr¬ ent from England, that the call of patriotism, and the ties of love and friendship had no power
112
to draw them home. And the stupendous Etna was an object of such awful contemplation, that th^y viewed it as the beginning of that consu¬ ming conflagration wdiich would destroy the earth. The flames, which were ever bursting from its summit, and often flowing in liquid fire down its si(h*s, and the solid substance into ivhich it cool¬ ed, were such astonishing spectacles, that every foreigner w r as unwilling to quit a country produc¬ tive of such wonders. They wandered at its base, they seated themselves on the grass beneath the trees now in luxuriant foliage, and they climbed to the freezing top, whose snows the constant burning was unable to thaw. They stood on the giddy height, and looked around, and seemed to ken the far extending surface of the wliole world. One day, when St. Evremond and his son were straying in one of the shady glens of that part of the mountain, now called the woody region, they were met by an old man, who with some difficulty walked on by the help of a strong staff; near to him ran a little girl, to whom he called by the name of Matilda, The name of Matilda drew their attention, and they approached the person who had mentioned it. St. Evremond, with the urbanity of manners which was remarkably con¬ spicuous in ?? behaiiour, approached him vvith
113
that greeting which bespeaketh friendliness, and the old man, saying that he could proceed no far¬ ther, seated himself upon the trunk of a fallen tree, and the little girl sat herself on the grass beside him» St. Evremond, after making an ob¬ servation on the delightful shade of their retreat, a mode of introducing a conversation, which, with a few other old customs has descended to us from the days of yore, seated himself by the side of the child. " Aye," said the old man, " it is a pleasant retreat from the heat of the lower part of the mountain. I dwell at tho uppermost extre~ mity of a few cottages which are scattered up the sides, and I often walk to this spot, and seat my¬ self on this old tree, and meditate on the days which are gone. I mostly bring this child with me. Her lively frolics as she sporteth about, and her innocent prattle as she sitteth beside me ; and above all, the interest with which she Hsten¬ eth to the sad story that I often repeat, soothe the reflections of my sorrowful mind, and cheer the scene which is the subject of my melancholy tale. The child now drew nearer to the old man, and putting her little hands on his knee, looked up in his face, as if in expectation of what he was going to say. The good man put his hand on her head and said, ** Not now, Matilda, what entertained! thee, must not be forced on stran»
114
gers." " We shall not think it forced on us," said St. Evremond. " Know then," said the old man, " that many years ago, when I was a young man, nay, I may say when I was still a boy, I was in England. I was one among the number who formed the pompous train of Pandulph the pope's legate, wher he received the crown in base sub¬ mission from king John. Had I been king of England, the legate should have had my head ere he should have had my crown. King John had not my heart : but tbat importeth not. While I was there I married, and t brought my wife, who was named Matilda, into Italy. Many wars, many tumults, and many troubles drove us from place to place, till at length, we retired to this fruitful island, and fixed our abode in a small village hiúit on the declivity of this mighty moun¬ tain. We had many sons, and one dear daughter, whom we had called Matilda. She was the dar¬ ling of our hearts, and the delight ofthe village. While lovely in innocence and beauty, and beam¬ ing with youthful goodness, àie married the son of a neighbouring peasant. She too had a daugh¬ ter who was also named Matilda. For the name she bore was dear to my wife, as being all that reminded for of her native land, and of the day when she left her home, and her father for the last time pressed her to his bosom, and called her
115
his dear Matilda. How fondly I look back to the happy hours when we used to walk to this spot. I and my wife, and our boys, and Matilda, and all their children. It was happiness almost as sweet as the joy which we hope to find in paradise. My wife and I used to sit and watch our children as they danced here after the toil of the day was over. We used to sing by turns, and our dear grandchildren used to gambol and sport about, and try to do as their fathers did. ? ! how de¬ lightful it was to watch them as every year they grew stronger and more active. Thus we went on. Ever happy. Ever gay. When lo ! in one terrible moment all vanished. A sudden eruption from the vast abyss beneath us burst forth, and the fiery deluge burnt all as its rolling flames de¬ scended. It reached our peaceful village. We fled. But the devastating fire pursued faster than we could flee. * Save my child l said my daugh¬ ter. I caught her up ; I clasped to my bosom the third Matilda, who was the charm of my life, \ ran on ; my family followed me. Alas ! wretched, wretched fate! The increasing tor¬ rent overwhelmed them î I and the little one I carried in my arms were all of the family who escaped. ? ! heaven and earth I What were my agonies, when I turned and .aw the fiery waves devour them I I stopped and felt the heat. I
116
stood aghast, and beheld the flow cease just as the last expiring flame suffocated my own Matil¬ da. I was riveted to the spot. A few wretched fugitives, who like me were spared, stood like me astounded—I weep : forgive me !—Beneath the hardened lava lay the cottages, the families, the cattle, and the growth of our land. When we approached to gaze upon the dreadful devastation, there lay my virtuous wife, scorched but not con« sumed. I bore her to this spot, to which we used to shay accompanied by our children, and digging a deep hole, I laid her in the unconsecratcd earth, for the little church and holy cemetery were lost beneath the havoc ofthe fire. There she sleep- eth in death. The little hands of my grand¬ child helped me to plant the cypress tree which groweth over her grave. I reared the only mem¬ ber of my family which had been spared to my grief, and often brought her here to weep as I recounted the fate of her parents, and of the many who perished with them. She was the solace of my languishing days, and the prop of my decli¬ ning years—but she is gone ! She died in giving birth to this dear child, who beareth once again the fondly cherished name of my most excellent dear wife. Her father did not long survive the fatal day when her mother died. In a little month he followed his wife to heaven, and their babe
117
became an orphan. Forgive an old mans tears ! Each day I live I tliink shall be my last ; and each time I w r alk to view the spot where moulder- eth the cold remains of her whom most I loved on earth, I think I gaze my last; for my years have been many, and my days draw to a close. Upward of fourscore years have blanched my beard, and my head is bald with age. Yet, though I know nought but sorrow, I cling to life for this dear child." He then patted her cheek, and said, i( Sweet Matilda, who shall train thee in the path thy parents trod ?" tí Wouldest thou part from her ?" said St. Evremond. " I must be separated from her soon/' he repHed, " death will tear us asunder : but to part from her while I live, would break my heart." The child clasped his knee. " Do not take me from him," she said. " No, pretty cherub/' said St. Evremond, " not for all the world." When the old man rose, and began to totter down the hill, " Lean on me," said John. The old man leaned on his arm, and they walked on slowly. They wound out of the direction by which St. Evremond and John had ascended, and emerging from the shade, they came to the black rock, which in its fiery state had rolled over the village and its simple inhabi¬ tants. The old man struck his staff on the earth, and said, {i Here, just here, lay my dead wife ! I
118
have planted a rosemary, the funeral tree, which spreadeth its branches and flourisheth, scenting the air with the scent of the grave. Within view of this memorial of death, my hut is erected. Behold it—-one chamber serveth for our eating room, and the other containeth our two couches. Ye shall enter with us. A neighbour cometh daily to attend upon us, for I am past my labour, and my darling is too young to work." As they approached, the kind neighbour met them. " Hah ! Paulo," she said, " I was coming to seek thee. Thou art late/' " I have been prating," he replied. " These kind strangers have deigned to listen to the sorrows of old Paulo Vassoni/* When they entered the dwelling, " I have not much to ofíer," he said, " here are some straw¬ berries, and here is a bowl of milk. Partake, and be ye welcome/' They did so : and when they departed, St. Evremond put a piece of money into the hand of the child. The old man would have returned it to him, but he said, i( When thou shalt look on it, thou wilt remember the baron de St. Evremond, and his son, who are the country¬ men of thy lamented wife. Take my gift for her sake, and let it he used for the child." So say¬ ing, they quitted the hu^ and as they beheld the dismal train of solid black, once a liquid glowing fire, the contemplation of the vast lengtli of its
119
course prevented utterance, and St. Evremond pressed the hand of his son with an energetic grasp. They often visited the spot where the cypress tree spread over the grave of Matilda, and often led the old man to his humble home. They went however several days without meeting Paulo, and being much disappointed at seeing the fallen tree without its venerable load, they went to his cottage. They found him stretched on his pallet. When he saw them enter, he said to them, " Ye are come to behold me close my eyes on every thing that belongeth to earth ; and to witness my de¬ parture to a world where all my sorrows will be ended. The only thing which grieveth me, which cbudeth the bright prospect of my hopes, is the fate of this dear child. I shall leave her, I may say, a second time an orphan, I have nothmg to bequeath but this poor dwelling, and the little furniture, which scarcely supplieth the very few indulgences our lowliness requireth. I leave her at an age when she is too young to make amends to tliose who may take charge of her ; for she is yet too feeble for labour. I shall leave thee, my only joy amid my woes, without a heart on which thou hast a claim, without a guardian to protect thee !" The tears streamed down the furrows of his aged cheek ; and he bent his head over the head of Matilda. " Let thy
120
unclogged spirit," said St. Evremond, " take its flight in peace. I will protect thy little one. Matilda is a name as dear to me as it can be to thee. Matilda is the name of my loved wife, and I will place her little namesake beneath her care." Paulo took the hand of his great-grandchild, and putting it into the hand of St. Evremond, he pressed them together between his, and said, " Providence is kind at my last hour, and strengtheneth my trust in his mercy." A mournful silence ensued. Paulo lay quiet. Matilda climbed the pallet and kissed his wrinkled visage. He put his hand toward her, and opened his eyes for a moment. u Lay me by my wife," he said, and again closing his eyes, without a struggle drew the last breath whose exhalation sped his soul to bliss. The day after he expired, his body was borne according to his desire, and laid by the side of his lamented wife under the cypress tree. The cu¬ rate of the village sprinkled the sod with holy water and strove to make it sacred, but the mitred prelate blessed it not, and the ceremonies of con¬ secration could not be performed. Nevertheless, peace was piously wished to the silent tenants, and Valerio the curate ventured to pray that they might rise joyfully. Branches of rosemary from the tree he bad planted were thrown into his
121
grave, St. Evremond and John each took a hand of the child as she looked into the deep pit, and when the earth was thrown upon him, and she was told that he was covered for ever, she could not restrain the expression of her childish, though real grief, and begged to be buried with hira. St.. Evremond bore the great-grand-daughter of the aged man from the grave and from the village : and related the melancholy story of the family of Paulo Vassoni : and the lady of one of the knights who had accompanied him to Pales¬ tine, undertook to protect her journey to En¬ gland, and then to resign her to the barones«.
vol, ? ?
CHAPTER XI.
Was it to .slaughter man, that mati tvas rais'tJ From tlie dull earth ? Or to awaken woe The lovely form of woman was produced ? Ah, no!—Perverted both from heaven's intent, Instead of mutual happiness enjoy'd: Man upon man inflicts the awful doom ; And woman, who bhould calm buch turbulence, Too oft inflames the diead turmoil.
M l an while, the daily sight of Joscelyn, the caresses bestowed on him by Montgomery, the delight he seemed to be to every one in the cas¬ tle, and the increasing disrespect with which she was treated by all her father's dependents, exas¬ perated more and more *he haughty Matilda, who till now had ruled all beneath her, and belonging to her, with sway as despotic as had ever been assumed. The disrespect spread even to her own domestics, ivho imbibed the feelings of the in¬ mates of the castle. She began to be afraid of
123
those around her : and she wished for the return of St. Evremond and John as if their influence were omnipotent. Austin beheld her conflict with the turbulence of her passions. He saw her colour change, and her bosom heave as she beheld her little brother. He saw her eye sparkle. He saw her limbs tot¬ ter. He perceived her breath fail, and her voice falter. He alternately reproved her and pitied her. He sometimes soothed her ; and sometimes he enraged her ; and wrought upon her by the varying manner in whieh he heard what she communicated, till she was on the very verge of desperation. She sometimes spoke to him as if her rage couhl vent its w r rath in any act he might suggest. At other times she ïvept as if she were subdued by sorrow. Yet to no one but to Austin did she dare say aught upon the hateful subject of her constant contemplation. Thus the perni¬ cious carmélite became her only confident. While she was thus, in vain regret and boisterous rage, pouring her acrimonious anger into the ear of Austin, messengers arrived to say, that the baron tie St. Evremond and his son were on their way to England. " How shall I receive my hus¬ band ? How shail I welcome John? The heiress of Montgomery, whom they left boastful of the wealth she should bestow; they will find degra*
124
ded and discarded. Scorned in her father's cas¬ tle ; and set at nought by all his menials. The greeting I shall give St. Evremond will be that I am set aside ; the welcome I shall salute my son withal, will be the intelligence that he is disin¬ herited. I cannot endure it. I must not bear it. ? ! if Joscelyn were removed !" " If he were removed !" said Austin. t( Removed !" he re¬ peated. Matilda gazed wildly on him. " Remo¬ ved !" he reiterated. Matilda shrunk. " Wilt thou remove him?" "Will I!" said Matilda. "Say! wilt thou?" "Can I?" asked Matilda. ςί The baroness de St. Evremond," said Austin, (t the wife of a valiant husband, the mother of a brave son, once the heiress of a princely castle and domain, knoweth her own feelings, know¬ eth her own powers, knoweth her own wishes, knoweth her own disappointments. I am an humble monk, a powerless carmélite. Re¬ ceived for my holy function: spoken to as to a confessor. I am never called upon to aid in action; I am only sought for consolation. What thou dost now insinuate ; what thou mean¬ est when thou sayest removed, must be more fully understood ere I can minister unto thee. When next we meet, perchance thou wilt be less ambi¬ guous, and I shall comprehend thee. Till then, my daughter, ponder on thy own suggestions, and remember, that vague fancies, the chimæra ofthe
125
imagination, need not be told to a confessor. The full determined plan, the unalterable fixed pur¬ pose, or some deed performed, are for his ear. He then knoweth what to say, he then knoweth what to counsel, he then knoweth what he must enjoin. He paused. Matilda spoke not» He rose to depart. She caught his robe. " When next we meet, holy father," she said, " thou shalt not say I am ambiguous." Matilda had viewed Joscelyn with anger and rancour ever since she had been at her father's castle j and had always felt a wish that some of the many risks which children always run at that tender stage of life, when even the breeze of spring seeras too powerful for their weak breath, might snatch liim from the world ; and daily had that wish increased, and daily had her hatred grown. Now John was likely to return, now John would know how he was despoiled, she could not bear to look upon her young brother. Every feeling of consanguinity, every tie of affinity, every obligation of duty, was absorbed by the mortified pride of her own lessened importance, and the lessened dignity of her son. She secluded herself in the apartment which she had occupied, when hope danced gaily in her path ; when every echo resounded with the boast of her greatness ; when the bards sang her praises, and the vassals G 3
126
did her homage. She looked back to the days which were gone ; to the honours ivhich had pas¬ sed away ; and to the wealth which had slipped from her grasp. She imagined Joscelyn in pos¬ session. She imagined Joscelyn dead. She saw John degraded ; and she saw him proud in the high cattle of his ancestors. She paced the room. She threw herself on the bed. She wrung her hands. She wished she had never seen the light. She deprecated Bertha, and she execrated Ca¬ therine. She invoked the name of her mother. Siie repeated the question of Austin. Wilt ilmu remove hhn? She started. "IIow cani remove him?" she exclaimed. The agitation of a mind working itself to mis¬ chief is horrible. The suggestions as they follow one another are intolerable. The terror of an action enormous in guilt harrows the soul. The struggle of still lingering rectitude, the waverings of resolution, the dr^ad of shame, and the sense of fear, the hope ivhich dares not look forward to fruition, alternately possess the bosom, and the heart sickencth in the breast. Between determi¬ nation and performance the wretched space is agony. What is it then to put in act the crimi¬ nal decision ? The haggard countenance of Matilda betrayed to Austin when he returned to Montgomery's
127 castle, the conflict of her bosom ; and the manner in which she placed her hand upon his arm con¬ vinced him that she was resolved. She fixed her eyes upon him with a wild stare, and said, " John shall be the heir. For him I sacrifice the infant Joscelyn. For him I sacrifice the feelings of my father. For him I sacrifice my¬ self—my peace. Perhaps my soul ! ? ! holy father!" " What meanest thou, my daughter ?" said the carmélite. " Ask me not what I mean. I cannot name it. How shall I remove the child ? Shall I throw him down the rock ? Shall I drug his drink?" "Daughter," said Austin, " thou art too violent." tf Holy father, check me not. Aid me. We can do penance." " That is well bethought. We can—we will." " First we must perform the deed we after mean to expiate," said Matilda. " Bear him away," said Austin. "How can I get him in my power?" " Stay in his chamber. When nurse and babe are both asleep, take him from the cradle." " It cannot bc. Ever too watchful is a nurse." " Then drug her drink," said Austin, " Prepare the soporific poppy. I can teach thee how." " Say I have him, holy father. What escape ?" " Thou art so well acquainted with the castle," replied Aus¬ tin, (< thou hast so often ranged among the many chambers of its extent, that thou must know some g 4
128
portal, or some low window whence thou couldest bsue forth." " ? ! I know many," replied Matil¬ da, " oft in the gaiety of childhood have I leaped in sport, and often crawled in playfulness from some small opening, low as the grass which grew around it." i( Därest thou," asked Austin, i( in the dead of night, meet me at one on which thou shalt determine, and with the infant trust thyself to my guidance?" i( Father," said Ma¬ tilda, <( I am resolved. I dare do any thing." *' When next the moon shall be at full," said Aubtin, " when uniiersal nature resteth, meet me ere the first cock croweth. Array thyself in white, that if, perchance, some restless, or some watchful hind should see us glide along, we may be taken for the airy phantoms which credulity supposeth tripping on some behest evil or good to man. He will then avoid us, and leave us a clear path to where I shali conduct thee. To a safe place where thou shalt leave the child ; where detection never can follow to confound thee." " Rely on me," said Matilda.
CHAPTER XII.
■ For ever, Ever curst, be pityless ambition ! ït urgeth on to deeds, which, but to think, Would rend a tender heart; and which to act, Would make ihe stoutest tremble.
Matilha had reviewed all the circumstances which led her to the commission of the crime she meditated against Joscelyn, until she lost sight of its guilt, and considered it as a meritorious daring in behalf of her son. The manner in which pow¬ erful barons seized on the lands of others less powerful than themselves : and the little remorse they felt when they slew their opponents, with ?? tlieir vassals and dependents ; the pride with which they stalked abroad when they possessed what they had seized ; the court which was paid them ; the homage they received ; and the satis¬ faction with which they enjoyed their greatness ; made her at last imagine, that to destroy one o5
130
babe unconscious of its wrongs, unknowing of the hopes with which it was beheld, and ignorant of its privations, was not so culpable as to slay mul¬ titudes. Therefore, her mischievous resolution once fixed, she began to search about for the windows and low arches where her childhood had played : and as she looked from one, and peeped from beneath the other, she reverted to the feel¬ ings with which she used to sport among them, and could not help comparing them with those which actuated her present examination. Being conscious that mauy years had passed away, since with youthful activity she had jumped from the window sills, and fearful that when en¬ cumbered with Joscelyn, she might not light with safety on the grass beneath, she determined to stoop under one of tîie arches, and thus make her way with the child. She observed ivith more attention than she had ever done before, the exact spot where she emerged, that she might know by what road she should descend the hill on which the castle stood, if the place to which Austin led iier should be in tîie vale below. She traced the path for Austin that he might not fail her, and she watched the moon, and thought she wandered »«doive r through the heavens than she was wont. She fr^ju* ntïy went to het· brother's chamber, accustom~u the nurse to her long stay
131
therein; she fondled the infant more than she had ever done till now, she often took him in her arms that he might not be alarmed, and by his crying awaken the nurse when she bore him away; and she hardened her heart against the endearing caresses of the child, who was pleased to be noticed. She took him two or three times m her arms when she walked beyond the castle walls, and he laid his head quietly on the bosom which panted for his destruction. The moon, nightly by her increase, raised her mind to exultation, and when the full approached, her spirits rose so high, that Montgomery was inclined to hope that kinder emotions had taken place, and that her ungentle manners would be softened. His fond heart gladdened, and when he saw the little boy hold out his hands to his sister, and beheld her take him in her arms, he pressed them together to his bosom, and wept over them. A few days before the full, Austin made his appearance at the castle. After the customary salutation with which he always entered, he began ίο talk about the moon. He knew that Matilda would understand him, and that it ivas a subject which would not surprise her father. " As I sat watching last night, according to my custom " he said, " at the small casement ofmy cell, I obser* g G
132
ved a circle round the moon, which is a certain sign of some great changes in the weather and the air. A brother in my convent, who is more observant of such presages than I am, tells me it is the sure forerunner of a tempest. If it be so, 1 trust that it will be confined to land, and not extend itself to the expanse of waters, on which the baron de St. Evremond and his son are sail¬ ing. We who are on land, can stay within our dwellings and be sheltered. The winds which blow, and the hails which beat upon our roofs, harm us not. There, while the storm continueth we are in safety. There we remain in peace, nor venture forth until the turmoil ceaseth ι but at sea, the reeling vessel threateneth each moment to go down ; and perpetual dread scareth the mariners ; who often, maugre their exertions, are lost beneath the waves." " I have," said Mont¬ gomery, " often crossed the sea, but never in a storm," r * A storm at sea," said Matilda, " must be endured : there is no retreat ; and endurance there often endeth in death; but to endure on land, is what none need fear : some inconvenience may be suffered, but weak must be the mind which will forego a purpose for fear of being drenched in a shower," Austin knew what she insinuated. " There are few purposes so mo¬ mentous as to require us to suffer even income-
133
nience for their accomplishment," said he. Ma¬ tilda looked at him. " Thinkest thou so ?" she said. " I do," replied Austin. " Nothing could induce me to leave the sacred shelter ofmy con¬ vent, and expose myself to the outrageous havoc of the conflicting elements." The monk, who had said that the circle round the moon presaged a tempest, augured rightly ; for ere Austin could reach the shelter which he said he would not quit, the gathering clouds pour¬ ed their deluge ; the thunder rattled ; and the lightning flashed. Every peal which rattled over the castle roused the indignation of Matilda ; not against the storm, that were silly rage, but against Austin, She waked through the long night, often rising from her couch to trace the progress of the clouds. Through the long night the tempest raged, and though at dawn the thunder hushed its roaring, and the lightning ceased to gleam, yet the rait continued its torrents, and she despaired of seeing the carmélite. For many days it con¬ tinued, and on the day of the full moon the rattling tempest again scared the earth. When the sky was once more hushed in peace, Austin put oft* the horrid purpose of their meeting till the next moon should be at full. Almost a month ! During tliat time, the angry Matilda kept alive her hatred and her malice, by viewing the in-
134
creasing loveliness of Joscelyn. ? that a female heart could so belie the softness nature there em- planteth, as to instigate the destruction of an infant ! and that infant her father's child, in whose veins the blood which circulated, flowed from the same source as her own. While she fostered the mischievous scheme of bearing him away, she contmued the fallacious notice which induced the babe to spring toward her ; and when she saw the innocent smile ivhich greeted her approach, and the faint emotion of joy which animated his mild countenance, her envious dis¬ satisfaction made her shudder as she touched him. J n hypocritical playfulness she chirruped to him as though she loved him : and sometimes she im¬ printed a deceitful kiss on his soft cheek. Yet. hypoerhy was not the character of Matilda. She had been accustomed to declare her mind without disguise. She never had masked her thonghts. What her feelings had suggested, her tongue had hitherto declared ; and her commands had been obeyed as mandates which coukl not be resisted : but now she had a part to play which admitted of no participation but with Austin. She «hired not ? ill assistance. She dared not demand perform¬ ance. She was her own agent. What was to be done, she herself was to perform. For another month she continued to ponder on
135
what she meant io do. For another month her meditations dwelt on the same dreadful resolve. No remorse ever found a place among the various suggestions which in turn occupied her mind. The more she dwelt on the subject, the more determined she became : and the more she attempted to smother her envy of Joscelyn's rank and station in the family, the more rancorous her envy grew. From the moment when her father married, her pride and haughtiness were humiliated. From the moment when Joscelyn was born, ever-malig¬ nant passion gained a stronger and stronger hold in her bosom : and from the moment when she entered her father's castle after the death of Catherine, to remove Joscelyn had been the wish of her heart. That wish, since her residence beneath the paternal roof of Montgomery, had increased to a determination to effect his remo¬ val ; and the full orb of the planet of the night now called that determination into action. Austin had been duly informed of the place wdiere he ivas to await her, aad told to expect her when the castle clock struck ten. He had also been instructed in the windings of the path which would lead from the arch, whence she pur¬ posed to emerge into the more frequented path by which they were to descend the steep.
136
Punctual to the hour appointed, Austin took his post, and while the clock was striking, clad in white, according to the instructions she had re¬ ceived, Matilda stood before him. In addition to her white robe, she had thrown a long white veil over her head and shoulders. Her majestic figure appeared like the guardian angel of the night, come to protect the tenants of the edifice from harm. Sleeping on her arm in innocent and peaceful slumber, lay the infant heir, whom she had stolen from the stupified nurse. *' Haste ! Let us on," she said. When Austin witnessed the firm tread with which she advanced, and heard the steady voice with which she spoke, even he was astounded. She quitted the castle walls with alacrity, and often outstepped the pace of her aged associate. " Haste, haste!" she often said, " I shall not return to the castle ere the family beginneth to stir," Austin, who had for many years meditated the death of Henry de Nartonville, and had plunged a dagger ¡nto the breast of Gaston de Prestone, could not contemplate Matilda as she walked on before him, without emotions bordering on dis¬ gust. The name of woman, generally implies tenderness and love. The natural character of the sex is softness. Cruelty and harshness are so contrary to the sentiments which man cherisheth
137
toward her, that even in conjunction with himself, he deprecates the malice he assists, and detests the coadjutor with whom he acts. When they reached the bottom of the steep hill on which Montgomery's castle stood, Matilda, was compelled to slacken the speed of her march, and to continue her progress in the unquickened pace of Austin, for she knew not whither she was going, nor the path she was to follow. They crossed the bridge and entered the wood. ít Where art thou leading me?" said Matilda, somewhat mistrusting her guide. " Thou art near the place," he replied, " where thou shalt leave thy slumbering load. Thou shalt hide him where he never can be found : where the search of man never will pursue." They went forward till they came to the blasted tree, whose withered branches pointed to the deep cave beneath the ruins, wherein he had mur¬ dered Gaston de Prestone, and which since that hour he had never entered. He disentangled the shrubs which grew around the mouth, and then taking Matilda by the hand, he said, " We must descend these stairs, and at the bottom we shall find a place where Joscelyn may be left, and where his mouldering corse never will emit a scent to taint the pure air above him," He told her to be very careful how she ven-
138
tured on, for many of the steps were broken, and the footing fearful and dangerous, moist and slippery. He struck a light and kindled a torch, and bore it in one hand, while he assisted Matihla with the other. When they were half-way down, he said, " The lower steps are not broken, there¬ fore take thou this torch, and I will light another." in spite ofher wish to destroy Joscelyn, she instinc¬ tively hugged him close, as if afraid to drop him : so prone to the love of infancy is the female heart. The chill air, and the damp vapour of the cave, met them as they drew near the bottom; and wdien they sat their feet on the slimy ground, Austin brandished the torch in the gloom they had entered, and shewed her all the horrors of the lowest cave of the ruins of St. Victor. She saw the skull and hones of Gaston. She started and shrieked aloud. " What is here?" she said, and shuddered. " Nought but what may well be found in such a place as this. The murdered fragment ? of some wretch ivho here hath been destroyed. Thou seest that he hath not been disturbed. Tlms undisturbed, Joscelyn shall here remain. Behold! here is a stone bench. Lay the child thereon," The cold struck to the infant, and he awoke and uttered a faint ery. "Hark! we shall be discovei ed," said Matilda. Austin made no reply, bttt he pressed the hand
139
of Matilda, which he had laid on the breast of the babe, with the force of all the strength he could exert. With a faint gurgle, with a feeble gasp, his weak breath rattled in his throat, and without a bodily struggle, his innocent pure spirit flew to the Father of souls. The two wicked perpetrators of a deed so foul, stood a few moments in silent gaze staring on each other. Austin was the first to break the pause. He grasped the hand of Matilda, and throwing it indignantly from him, he said, " Noiv, haughty Matilda ! thou art in my poiver. There layeth thy brother. John is now the heir. As Joscelyn stood barring the way of thy son to the honours of Montgomery, so standeth Isabella de Nartonville barring my way to the honours of Neville. As I have assisted thee, so must thou aid me. Else, dread my dis¬ covery of this deed. In this cave we have no more to do. Follow me up." He hegan to climb, and without taking the hand of Matilda he made his way to the top, leaving her to ascend as bhe could feel her way. fi Ere we regain the entrance," he said to her without turning round, i( we must extinguish the torches, they may betray us." He instantly trod on the one he carried, and Matilda did the same. He made his way among the brambles, and left Matilda to make
140
her way without offering to assist her. He walk¬ ed on in silence till they came to the bridge. He then turned. " Thou seest," he said, " the high castle of thy father. Thou knowest how to reach it. Thou dost not need an escort. The road which leadeth to the convent where I dwell is in the contrary direction» I must follow that." So saying he walked away, and left Matilda alone in the plain, ere the first tints ofthe morning began to streak the sky. Behold her ! she stands dismayed ! ? ! such is guilt ! The conscious conviction of a wicked heart, humbles the wicked even in their own eyes. The haughty mien, the proud vaunt, the daring hope, are all checked by the sorrowful remem» brance of a foul deed. The arrogant, ambitious Matilda, already felt what it was to be scorned. She ascended with fear the steep she had so often mounted with exultation, and she crept beneath a low archway into her father's castle, where she had formerly been received with shouts of joy, She stole to her chamber, and went to her melan¬ choly couch, whence sleep was banished : and her unsuspecting womau came to awaken her, about two hours after she had laid herself on her unquiet pillow.
CHAPTER XIII.
Are w** aw ike ? ho *?\ that he i> gone J SiiA'n (??? 1?? iT.«lte bt »he ????? side ' ? . It uinnui ? Î— Jkirnr front h> ihamber ! 'Tit iiîijHitMbk· !— ?«'? t Ί*.* rííitínp: df Who cunifth i>tl biijejth the lull orb'tl uhh>ii In ipørtivt« ga»tboi, tt> ahn>e ???????!. Ta'en him hy a tricking speli away ? Or, Wuh nuhce fraught, haih ???? witth, malignant Iti her purposes dragg'd him to her d^n * t>r. from the realms» abovr» hath a cherub Desctudtd to our earth, ami lifted lum On lus angelic »ing direct to heaven? Aii-»! Majhap the fier) abj*s Where curwd nends their im^rhîefs hourly pi m Hath op*d itü fearful gate*, and sent to prowl From the damned tre» there ptnt, s-oñie dataion. И ho, nhemiujtever to dbturb the v*i>r{d. Hath fromoor »dtchfui carecott^e\'d him
L \NGi*\ciK is too wak Ut >peak the consternation, the alarm, the agony of Montgomery, when the luir&e, wakeil from her drenched »leep. started uild, and told him that the child was gone.
142
" Gone !" he exclaimed, " whither ?" " I laid him in his cradle," said the nurse, " watched hhn to sleep, and then retired to my couch beside him. During my sjumber, s^me night tripping fairy, or some witch ; some goblin, or some fiend entered and stole him, for the opened bed was cold and empty when I sought him." " Hath any one informed my daughter?" *" So please my master, when Goda went to the baroness, the dreadful discovery had not been made/* " Call her forth !" said Montgomery. When Matilda met her father, she -could not trust herself to speak, but she acted the needful part ofa hypocrite in gesture. Yet her behaviour scarcely can be deemed hypocrisy. The emotion of her bosom, the dismay depicted in her coun¬ tenance, and the trepidation of her wliole frame, were not counterfeited. They arose from a cause her father suspected not, and in the horror of his sufíeríngs, in the terror of what miglit have chanced to Joscelyn, he imputed her agitation to tenderness and gnef ; and while inthe bitterness of his sufferings he sobbed aloud, he threw his arms round her neck, and dropping his head on her shoulder, he exclaimed, <t O í Matilda! The child—* he could say no more. Whence felt 1? tears bedew her, as he stooped over her, tlie agony she endured overcame her ; and she sunk
143
on a seat. The dreadful deed she had committed tore her heartstrings, and her sufferings were almost more tlian she could hear. The more her sufferance increased, the more her father's fondness for her returned ; and she seemed to be the only one on earth to whom his life could cling, and his sorrows be poured forth. None but Matilda, none hut his daughter, could, he felt, alleviate the poignant sorrow, the keen misery of his afflicted heart. He told the sad tale again. Again burst into tears ; and again embraced her. Her silence dis¬ pleased him not ; for he imputed it to a gentle cause. At length he put a question to her. " What must we do ?" " Let, search he made/* she replied. The tremulous accent with which she spoke delighted him. He called his many servants. " My daughter adviseth search/' he said tp them. " Therefore, let diligent search be made around the castle, and throughout the whole domain; and inquire far and near. Come, Matilda, let u& search the castle." The nurse accompanied them. , The guileful Matilda with much care, drew them as they went about, from the low arch by which she had made her way ; but the nurse, as if designedly, though it was chance, as she ran ahout frantic with despair, started from them and sought the very place* 9
144
i( Mercy defend me!" she exclaimed, as she f eeped about, " the grass is laid here as if some one had been crawling on it. Just without this low archway, under which I cannot stand upright, the stalks of the weeds are broken." " Where ?" cried Matilda, with a shriek that burst from con¬ science, " Where !" " Here! Come here ! Yet ihou canst not stoop, as I have done, beneath the pass. The dear babe for certain hath been taken througii this \ ery opening. Some fairy must have done if." Montgomery approached. " See!" said Mabel, u how they hang their heads." " Let the search begin at this place," said Mont¬ gomery. He returned tlirough the chambers he had passed, and when he reached the hail, he looked at the waving banner which Catherine had embroidered. " The fair white hand of mercy!"' he said wdth a sigh. " What ofthe fair mhite hand Γ exclaimed Matilda. " Dost thou not iemember," asked Montgomery, "the song ofthe maniac Adela? She sang it mournfully and sweetly. It hath often vibrated in my heart as í haie looked round. Dost thou remember it, Matilda ?" " ï marvel thou canst dwell on any thing which madness uttereth," said Matilda. 11 The fair white hand ???! th) litn displace." " U runneth thus, doth it not, Matilda ?" " J do
145
not remember the folly ofa lunatic," she replied. Let the dreadful ¡state be contemplated to w hich by one foul act Matilda was reduced. Let any one whose wicked mind ere meditates a crime so horrid, ponder on her fate. She wdio might be blessed ! Loved by her father, loved by her hus¬ band, loved and honoured by her son. She wdio walked about a beauteous wonder to he gazed at, now shrinking from the eye of every one, Aioid- ing every one! O! bhe cannot find a hidiim place to conceal her from herself ! When she first saw Austin, after their join 1 crime, the ¡stare he fixed on her, and his arin while he heard the story from Montgomery, quite overawed her : and when he turned to her, and. said, " What doth the baroness de St. Evremond think of such a strange circumstance t Whom doth bhe .suspect of having perpetrated such a foul deed?" the micci with which he a^ked the question oierpowered her, and uttering a &hriek, bhe fell hielen from her &eat. Her terrified father started. " Must 1 lo*e them both ? he exclaimed, " Be not thou affrighted," said Aus¬ tin, r ' thy daughter shall recoi ei." The shrill ciriek of Matilda, and the wild lomi exclamation of Montgomery when .she fell, alarm¬ ed the servants, who all rushed in. When the} beheld Matdda where she lai, they knew noi if VOL. ?. H
146
they might dare come forward. Goda a'one drew near her. u It will be well," said Austin. fe to convey her to her chamber/' Coda and her other women bore her awny. They laid her on lier bed, Oo that bed whence peace and rest and sleep were banished. Never, never more did tlie bosom of Matilda know a moment's joy. She ceased to desire the return of St. Evremond. She ? ? longer wished for John ; her dear, her beloved, lier almost idolized son. At the very hour when ihey were expscted home, bright in glory, re¬ nowned in fame, revered by their vassals, honour¬ ed by their king ; she fearetl to tarnish their fair name by the contamination of her guilt. She dared not hope for their esteem, and she dreaded to meet their scorn. ? ! wretched woman ! Beyond all others wretched. lier crime could not be atoned. lier &in could not be absolved, Iiow could Austin absolve the sin iii whkh he had participated ? and tu whom ebe dared bhe betray herself? ? I there h no peace for the wicked î
CHAPTER XIV.
Hours, days, months, years, pass uriperoeiv'd away ; And Time with steady pace goes on, wliile we Without attention as he glideth by, Raise hope after hope, and without fulfilment End mir short livcb, and drop into tlie grase Ere fully conbcious that we ha\a left the cradle. While this dreadful tragedy was going on in England, St. Evremond and John were enjoying the progress of their delightful jcurney home. After the funeral of Paulo Vassoni, and when Matilda. Bortila had been consigned to the care of Marian the wife of Josias de Mitcham, they sailed to the south of France, and proceeded through Guienne, northward to Britany. They did not go by the direct road, but went to man) places, and sojourned with the various French connections they had formed in Palestine, all of whom they invited to their castle in Devonshin 1 . The last place where they halted was at Brieux, where they visaed the father and mother of Al¬ ii »
148
madore, now very far advanced in years. They had retired from the noise and bustle of life, and had left their ancient habitation to their eldest son Arnaud, who had married an amiable wife, with whom he was living in domestic quietness and peace. To him the baron and his son were strangers, but his venerable parents rejoiced greatly, when they received the best friend of their son-in-law, Henry de Nartonville. When they saw John, on whose birth-day, when he was seven years of age, they had been guests at the festive hoard, the old man said, " Year after year rolleth on as we pass from our cradle to our grave, and the change of all around us is so gradual, that we are almost unconscious that any change takes place : but when those from whom we have been long separated unexpectedly appear before us, the great change which we behold startleth the moment, for it is as a mirror in which we trace the progress of ourselves. Thou, young man, dost shew me the long lapse since last we met. The little silken vest in which thou wast attired to sit among us, thy little bonnet waved in fare¬ well, and all thy little childish doings, so delight¬ ful to behold, pass ín review before me, and it seemeth but yesterday. Yet, I see thee now a complete knight, a warrior returning from Pales¬ tine. Thus, days and years passion. The chro-
149
nicies shall say little more of us, than that we have taken our short turn on earth, and dieth Wc perish, and our deeds are forgotten· Of the millions who have died to-day, to-morrow shall know nothing. Even their names shall perish. The few vvhom fame shall mention to posterity, have half of them become conspicuous by their crimes : and though they shall be held in remem¬ brance for ever, they will be remembered only to be abhorred. €f Thou hast done thy duty, no doubt, for thy father acknowledgeth thee with pride, but thy son's son shall seldom name thee, and the next generation shall merely mention thee as a proge¬ nitor, who serveth to fill up the list of ancestry. Of the many warriors, who like thee have risked their lives, or like Ergaud lost thera, in fighting for Jerusalem, how few are known I Their ríame« have been written ia sand, and the foot of the passenger hath obliterated them. But I beg par¬ don ; I am pouring the serious melancholy reflec¬ tions of one who hath nearly accomplished the time allotted for man's pilgrimage on earth, into the ear of youth, of that warm season of existence when hope is gay, and the prospect of being remembered for ever, brightens the length of distance. I was once a warrior, and I never could imagine the feelings of this hour. I did ??
150
not think, that all the pomp of battle, all the ehouts of victory, and all the longings after fame, would soften down in universal good will to man." " I have waited for thee to stop, Alfonse, that I might speak to tliese good friends, and make inquiry concerning Henry de Nartonville» the husband of our beloved Almadore." " My dear beloved," said Alfonse to his wife, " I have prattled with unchecked garrulity, to prevent the baron de St. Evremond from speaking on the subject of our son-in-law. Had he survived, as these have done, he would have been here, as these are ; his absence is a full assurance that he is no more." Though he forbore all questions, his inquiring eye met the baron's softened look, w Too true it is, that the valiant bones of Nartonville lie among the slaughtered multi¬ tude, which fell on the day of victory," said St· Evremond. " Almadore ia now a widow ; and her only child, the lovely Isabella de Narton¬ ville, is become the heiress of her father. Sor¬ rowful is her inheritance ! The lovely girl, un¬ conscious of the loss she had incurred, feasted in youthful sport, and the next day brought the sad news to England, that he, among the brave, the bravest, died for the holy cause—died fighting for Jerusalem. Many more of those, who feasted iii my hall on that day, to which thou hast recur-
151
red, perished with him. Many are the widows who grieve ! Many are the orphans who weep 1" '*' As we proceed through life," resumed Alfonso, " the comfort of all our sorrows, the halm of all our wounds, is a friend. The voice of a friend, cheereth ; the arm of a friend, aideth ; and the loss of a friend, is among the griefs to which hu¬ manity is unavoidably subjected. It is not only in the field of battle that the scythe of death cutteth away. It sweepeth wide in the peaceful retirement of towns and villages, and layeth many low. The catalogue of friends who have walked with me in my long course and have fallen by the way, cannot be counted. The loss of friends, is the heaviest tax we pay for living. I will not say, that the friends of our youth are ill supplied by those we find in age, for they never are supplied. Wé see new people, and we converse with new people, but the friend of the heart, the associate in grief and joy, the soother of the one, and the heightener of the other, is gone. There is a gap, there is a void, there ls> a deficiency! I have fclt what I deplore. The only friend of my youth now remaining tô my age, is my wife—one, the dearest among thousands ! and while I thus lament, let me be still thankful. When thou, young man, shalt lament as I do, that the friends of thy youth arò gone, mayest thou like me, stop h 4
152
short in lamentation to acknowledge the mercy which spareth one so prized : and mayest thou," he said, turning to St· Evremond, " live long to rejoice with Matilda, thy baroness." " She hath hitherto," replied St. Evremond, u been the joy of my Ufe, and I cherish the fond hope that she will be spared to brighten the down hill path of my remaining days. I am hastening with my son to greet her. When I quit the shores of France, and return to my native land, my home will be the port which I shall never quit more. The wide range of glory I shall leave to my son, and in a few short years he will retire also» May he leave his honours and his name to a son he so much Ioveth and approveth, and he may then trust, that neither his honours nor his name will be tarnished." " If my son," said John, " should live to hear me speak of him, as thou now dost speak of me, he will have attained the best reward of his conduct." While Alfonse and his guests were engaged in that quiet friendly conversation, which ρ asset h beneath the peaceful roof of retirement, shut out from all the business and the turmoil of the world, a loud outcry disturbed them. They went to the gate of the dwelling, and saw a youth stretched on the ground, while the blood gushed from ä wound in his breast« u Bear him in/*
153
said Alfonse, " he must not lay here,the gaze of idle curiosity." Two men bore him in, and the hospitable master ofthe house said to them. "Not far away, dwelleth that famous surgeon, Pierre d'Abbertille: fetch him with all speed·" The youth lay motionless, but he breathed. When Pierre d'Abbertille arrived, and approached the wounded youth, " Heaven be merciful unto me," he exclaimed, " it is my son. Who hath done this deed ?" The youth could not resolve him ; he was speechless. When he was somewhat recovered, he said, " I require from thee, my father, a solemn promise, a sacred oath, that he who wounded me shall not be betrayed, nor his name be traduced, nor exposed to shame : and from you wdio stand around, I must exact the same. Without such assurance, what hath occurred never shall be known. Nay, it is better hidden. I will say no more." " Speak," said Pierre d'Abbertille, " sus¬ picion, else, may fall on the guiltless. I will make the promise thou dost require, in the solemn way thou wishest. So will these around thee." AH did as they were requested, and Clement d'Ab¬ bertille then said, " I cannot at this moment tell the fetal tale, I have not strength : but tomor¬ row, when thou, my father, shalt return, I will reveal all the sad circumstances. 0 The afflicted father dressed his son's wound, h5
154
The kind Alfonse had him conveyed to an upper chamber, and all the family attended on him. The anxious father could not wait till the morrow, ere be revisited his son. He came again at night; and he remained all night watching by his couch. The youth was very ill: nevertheless, the next day he exerted himself to speak, and said, " Thou knowest, my father, Guy de Brotte ; and thou knowest, Cincia de Torre. The beautiful Cincia! I beheld her with the fondest love that youth could gaze on beauty. Guy de Brotte, my dear companion Guy, with equal rapture doated on her loveliness. The eye of love is quick in jea¬ lousy. We each perceived the passion of the other. We each perceived the other court, and strive to gain the sweet beauty of our admiration: and yet in tenderness to the other, each forbore communication. She, meanwhile, unconscious ofthe power ofher attractions, received us both, for familiarly we often went to her father's house, as intimate associates with her brother. At length we named to her the love she had inspired, and begged her to decide between us. ' I did not think/ she said, * your visits at this house were meant to me« I know not which to say that I prefer, I have not asked my heart. I never dreamed of love when I conversed with you« Ye «re both so equally deserving, that X know not
155
which I can select. Ye must wait until some act performed by either, shall render him pre-eminent/ What could ive do? War hath ceased. The contests of the field are done. We agreed to fight together till one should fall, and that the survivor should possess Cincia. We met—We met yesterday. We met alone. No eye beheld the deadly meeting of two such dear friends. We embraced ere we drew our swords. We for¬ gave each other : and though we washed to con¬ quer, yet we almost wished to fall. Our fight was desperate. We fought an hour. I pierced the breast of my friend, almost at the moment when he pierced míne. Within the wood he lieth m death. I walked away to claim Cincia, but my loss of blood arrested me. I fell here, and here I shall expire. Never shall either of us see again the· innocent cause of our mutual destruction. Let her not know it was to gain her love we sacrificed each other. Imbitfer not her life by an unavail¬ ing disclosure of what now availeth nought. Seek Guy* Reveal to father Simon the story I have told, and let it be taken as my confession. I cannot recapitulate the sad events. I have little else upon my conscience. Wlien he shall be acquainted with what I have revealed, let him approach my bed of death.'* His father took his hand, and was about to speak, but the young maa ?6
156
stopped him. " Speak not to me now," he said, M 1 cannot bear reproof The reproof of my own bre.-t^t chabtiseth me sufficienti} . Leave me to mv meditation^» till father Simon cometh/' All quitted the apartment. When ihey re¬ ttimi d ? tbe chamber they had quitted, they ^nt f^r father Simon. When he arrived, they mounted to him lhe calamitous death of Guj de Bi otte, and the di ?? state of Clement d Abber- ttile , aiid after ¿ome observation-^ on the eienN rei «.died, the hoh father was conducted to the couch of the wounded youth» He approached, ã4iá uttered tbe customary salutation. He then stooped over him a> he lav. ** He .^leepeth," be >aid, u let u-> not dbturb him." Pierre d'Abber¬ tille advanced, and taking the hand of hi* ^on, he .>aid, while the tears trickled down his aged cheek. " He »leepeth tbe long bleep of death/ 1 Tiie body of Guy de Brotte was brought from tlie wood where he had fallen, and on tlie da\ he was carried to tbe grave, the body of Clement d'Abbertille was interred. The two friends were placed side by »ide within th^ church, while the service was performed, and then carried in the same train, and laid side by side in the grave. * f There are some events so lamentable ; some actions so wicked, and yet so liable to palliation," said St. Evremond, " that the inind dareth not
Î57
contemplate them, and the tongue dareth not discourse upon them : such is this intricate dou¬ ble murder of two friends who allowed their pas- biom mo to get the better of their reason, that they slew each other, while they fancied they were still in friendsJiip." ** I differ from thee« -* ud Alfonse y '* a crâne i^ not liable to palliation. because it v^as committed with serious recollec¬ tion of the deed intended to be performed. That -ober, that long reflection, ouglit to prevent an art of sin, A crime committed in the phrenfy of tìse passions cannot be excused : a crime com¬ mitted with predetermination, cannot be softened. Say whatever raay be said, thf^e youths are mur¬ derers, fyr they met to slay. There is nothing wiiich -¿o "*tronidy inciteth to guilt, as an attempt to soften down the heinou^ess of crime; fi-r every man will then endeavour to find a softening circumstance in what he doth himself, until eierv wicked action \*ill lose its black hue, and vice will appear lovely. Young man," he continued, turning to John, " e\er remember, that goodness is heightened by excess, but that nothing can justify or ¡»often guilt. It is criminal in each degree," Though the sad fate of Clement d'Abbertille, and of Guy de Brotte, increased the seriousness of the conversation, yet the courtesy of hospita-
158
lity was no*, kid a-**de. All the attentions due to respected goest?, were remembered by Alfonse ??? hk ag«d wife, and Arnaud, with hi< family, came to his father'? house to do honour to St. Evremond. u It is painful to us»'* said the ancient hoa, " to forbear the festivity which should accom¬ pany the meetipîr of friends ; but it hath been our lou always to receive our English visiters at ??????? of grief. Wlien first Henry de Narton¬ ville came to ns, he brought the mournful infor¬ mation of the death of Ergaud, whose losa our ??? bosoms still deplore. The death of Nar¬ tonville, siam in th*» same holy cause, saddeneth now the reception which we gire to thee and to thy son. Thou knowest, however, the feelings of our hearts, and wilt find excuses for the melan¬ choly which is diffused around. We feasted gaily in thy castle upon a joyful day ; but the feasts of my hall arc sad, and can never again be joyous. Yet it sootheth us to converse with those who loved Henry, and can convey our sym¬ pathies and all our fond remembrances to Alma¬ dore. We trust in thee as the esteemed friend of Nartonville. We recommend his child, our dear grand-daughter to thy protection, and we are firm in hope, that thou wilt guard her with a falhei care." " The child of Nartonville," re-
im
plied St. Evrerøoad, " will ever be dear to me and to my baroness ; and our king, the valiant Edward, will protect her." It must not be said, that while St Evremond and John remained at Brieux, their time passed happily on. The aged pair with m hom they so¬ journed, were too much worn dovn by grief to exert themselves as hosts are wont to do. St. Ev¬ remond nevertheless quitted them with regret. *' í cannot hope," he said, %f that at the advanced age to which thou and thy excellent lady are arrived, ye will again visit England ; for I intend not ever again to quit the castle of my ancestors. I leave the field of glory and renown, and the wish to roam and visit foreign climes, to my son. He, perhaps, may sail to Brieux, and bring thee ti¬ dings of Isabella. We left her a sweet girl, and no doubt the training of thy daughter the widowed Almadore, and the sage converse of the virtuous, the distinguished Emma, will have formed a lovely woman." " If our daughter and Isabella can be induced to leave Devonshire and visit us, tell them, they will cheer the evening of our day." " Tell, tlien," said Arnaud, " that I shall rejoice to see them. They will be more welcome to me than the flowers in April, The fond place my sister holdeth in my heart need not be told her :
160
ihe remembereth the days when we dwelt oge- ther. ? ! if I loved her vshen hope smiled gay be¬ fore her : how doubly dear she now must be, when hope hath disappeared. When the worid frown- eth; when misfortunes press; or when disap¬ pointments overpower ; then ? the moment when the love of kmdred is the sweetest. Then is the moment when the kindness of a brother îs like tbe healing balsam, which allay eth the angubh of a wound. Take charge to her from me of a small token of that affection w Inch is warm to¬ ward her. Give her this veil : and say, as this shall guard her head, so shall my loie for ever guard her virtuous self. Tell her, in all danger, in all difficulty, in all alarm, to ilee to me : and that while the blood warmeth my heart, it will ever beat brotherly for her. Give her. too, this little cross of ebon}. Eugene hath sent it for her. It was given to liim bv a dying friend, whom he attended at the last hour ; who bade him bestow it on whom he loved best on earth. He therefore Svetli it ta Almadore/' Other gifts were sent to her by her fond parents ; and Alfonse sent a string of pearls to Isabella ; and her grandfather sent her a golden ring in which was set a ruby. Their kind ex¬ pressions of love, and their tender remembrance»
161
of affection were often repeated, and all the family accompanied their departing friends to the coast. To the last moment they could be heard, they contmued their fond messages, and when the vessel sailed away, they turned sorrow¬ fully from the strand.
CHAPTER XV.
it dwtrteetb oñ, tha f atthe veiy hour W heti tkt sinking heait de^pairtib, when iupt !«. lost t aiid nought but dreary son ? w han,»* In the gloomy prosperi, that the fa «.·>! Brnghtr'.i 1?;??? of halcyon ??.\? appear And ht «¡ho ; limit« all that ???????? »ryr, Acfenowíedgctö ^itii thankfainc^^ ?? tov. So 'twd thu dai feerici tky the *-?? breaks for?? And tbc gladden'íi landscape «miîe''
With a fair wind, St. Evremond and ?? -ïon quitted the shores of Britani, and sailed aw α? for England : but they had not been long out to *ea before the wind changed, and blew them back toward the French coast. The sea ran so high, and danced tliem about so alarmingly among the waves, that they were in much dread of going down. They were tossed about for more than half the day, all the while in sight of kind, yet they were unable to make any port. The master of the vessel thought they were in such danger, that he threw part of the luggage overboard, to
163
lighten the ship, and said, that all would be thrown over, if the wind did not chop about again. " Nay, I know not," he sakl, " if I shall not be obliged to throw some of the crew after it. Come ! Work away. He that cannot work, wii! be the first I shall get rid of, sf i should be driven to extremities.** St. Evremond knew, by the fe¬ rocious manner in which he spoke, that he would not hesitate to act according to his threat, if need should be, and conscious that whatever might be hb importance in Devonshire, it was of no avail on the wide ocean ; he called John to Ins assist¬ ance, and they helped to spread the sails, and furl the sails, and handle the ropes, so willingly;, and so stoutly, that the surly master said, " Well done, my boys, ye two are worth four." After they had worked a long time, the wind abated, and at length ceased, and they were becalmed. ** This is worse than the other," said the master, " in the first case we knew what w T e worked for, but now we work for nothing." While they were in that state night came on. They kept watch while they lay on the smooth sea, and toward dawn, a brisk gale arose. " Now for it," said the master, " we shall scud before the wind like a lapwing." He was, however, a little out in his reckoning. The wind veered about and about, and always to
Î64
the wrong point ; so that in spite of all his ord ¿rs, and all his calls, they were two days more ere they saw the wished for coast. " I ??? England/ cried John de St. Evremond. The sailors shout¬ ed aloud. They spread more sail, and after being often near and often driven back, they put in, and the passengers went on shore. Notwithstanding the impatience of St. Evre¬ mond to reach his castle, and to see his beloved Matilda, he halted at the castle of Josias de Mitcham, to make inquiry about the little Sici¬ lian, whose name had attracted his notice. " The little namesake of thy mother," he said, " will be the best present we shall be able to make to her, though we have rich gifts to offer." The exertions of working in tbe ship had ex¬ hausted them both very much, and they were compelled to stop before they could proceed, and now they were so near home, they thought the delay worse to bear, than when they were far away. They sent messengers to inform de Mitcham of their arrival, and then set forward to follow them. ik There is a charm in our own country," said St. Evremond, " which the delights of warmer cli¬ mates, and the luxuriance of greater abundance, and the beauty and fragrance of lovelier flowers, never yield. Our own land and our own home,
165
are more pleasing to the heart than all the world beside. We may enjoy them for a time, but here joy is perpetual/' " I would not change my country, nor live in another land/' said John, *' no, not even in Jerusalem, to be made the lung of ît.' 5 When they reached the dweUing of Josias de Mitcham, they found the master and Marian his wife without the castle gates, looking out for their arrival. The little girl who had been entrusted to their care was with them. The child knew them the moment she saw them ; and with child¬ ish glee, she said, " I see you, here I am. I am here first : but poor old Paulo was left behind/' '* We have heard much about Paulo Vassoni, ???? our return to England. Thou wilt find that little Matilda belongeth to us," said Josias. *' Ofthat, hereafter. At present, ye are welcome to our castle. Enter and make free." St. Evremond and John entered the hall. They partook of the ample meal. " It is «o long," said St. Evremond, " since I have feasted in an English castle, that I fear I shall exceed. The habits in which I have been bred, are more congenial to my heart than any thing I have found away, and I pant for my own home, as eagerly as I did for fame when I quitted it." " Our absence, however," said Josias, " hath
166
taught us to feel that home is home ; and I think the child we have brought from Sicily, hath found her home in quitting her country. After thy de¬ parture, we frequently went, accompanied by the little prattler, to the village where Paulo died ; and to the tree whereon he used to sit. We made inquiry, if among the inhabitants of the ■scattered houses up the steep, there remained any who remembered the calamitous day, when the rolling fire destroyed the village. There was one old man who had escaped the desolating flames which overwhelmed so many. From him we learned, that Paulo and his wife had often talked of England : and all he saw when he at¬ tended Pandulph, and all she remembered of her father's home. He knew that Paulo's wife Ma¬ tilda, was the daughter of a man named Budleigh. Judge our surprise, when we reached our domain, to find, that among the domestics who have been in our family for three generations, is the brother of Matilda Budleigh : old Juxton, who hath so often carried me about when I was a boy, and used to tell me curious stories of the days which are gone. He was so delighted, when he heard the little girl was the great grandchild of his sis¬ ter, that he said it made him young again. ' She is as like her as my two hands/ he said. f I remember her just such another/ He told us 2
167
the long hisíory of king Johns resignation of his crown. How Pandulph spurned it as it lay at hb feet: and he expressed the same indignation Paulo had expressed. To-morrow, thou shalt see the good old man, and hear what he can say- about his sister. The child was introduced, and played about the hall as if she felt herself at home and unrestrained ; but whenever the name of Paulo was mentioned, siie ran to the person who spoke of him, and said, * Tell me something about Paulo. I love to talk about him, all the people in our village loved him ; and nobody had such nice strawberries as those in our garden.' " When the morrow arrived, Juxton Budleigh was called upon, to tell St, Evremond the history of the simple genealogy of the little Sicilian, the great grand-child of his sister. " I must begin by telling thee," said Juxton, " that many years ago, I cannot say how many ; long before the present worthy knight was born, when his father was a little boy, I was a soldier, and I followed the ban¬ ner of my master's grandfather, good old Adrian fle Mitcham ; and he went about sometimes at Westminster, sometimes at Windsor, and some¬ times here and there and everywhere. At length, where should we be but at Dover. I shall never forget it. The king laid his crown and his sceptre at the foot of the legate. O' if
168
thou hadst seen how degraded and mortified the king looked, after he had so humbled himself and his country ; thou wouldest have pitied him, although thou must have despised him at the same time. I know not how it was, but when my father took me to Dover, following Adrian de Mitcham, he took my sister Matilda there also ; she went somehow or other, in some way to at¬ tend on that good old dame Madela, the wife of Adrian ; and what should happen, but among the foreign folks in the legate s train was Paulo Vas¬ soni. Our Matilda was then a lovely wench,* and Paulo he fell in love with her; and hi no time, as í may say, he married her, and took her to Rome. We had another legate from the pope after that, and Paulo contrived to come again to England in that grand parade; and he brought us word how all went on in Italy, and told father that he had a little grandson. After that we saw no more of Paulo; but we heard of him some¬ times, by the foreigners who used to come over here for ever and a day with fresh legates ; for thou dost know, better mayhap than I can tell thee, we have been desperately hampered with
169
legates. For many, many years we never heard more ; and when the lady Marian brought this child, from the dying couch of Paulo Vassoni, who said he had married an English wife named Matilda, then I knew that I beheld my own sis¬ ter's descendant. Then I rejoiced that I had been left here on earth, to drag a wearisome life without comfort or ease. Then I found out why I remained, while so many dropped into the grave stouter and younger than myself. Thou mayest depend on it, all those things are ordered by one who knoweth how to direct. The name of Ma¬ tilda was handed down from child to child so frequently, to be the lure which called thee to the orphan : and Paulo lived till he had no more du¬ ties to perform, and then died in peace, comforžed by thee. I have been kept alive to receive her and make her known. Leave then the pretty one with me, for I shall soon be called away ; and she will cheer my last hours, as she cheered those of Paulo. He talked to her of his wife, her great grandmother. I will go a generation farther back and talk to her of old Stephen Budleigh, her great grandmother's father. Let the world scoff as it may ; but I tell thee, that the heart which Ioveth not the stock which gaie it life, beateth not in a good man's bosom." " I must join in the same suit, wjth Juxton," said Marian de Mitcham, " the vol, in. ι
170
little Sicilian hath won upon nr, love, and 1 cannot part from her." " I promised Paulo on his death¬ bed, that I would give Matilda Bertila to the «are of her namesake, my wife," feaid St. Evie- mond. tí A knight never forfeiteth his word. 1 w ìli consent that ¡die bhall remain here to cheer tbe latter end of tbe life of Juxton, her uncle *o main deííreeh removed; but nhen he .shall have i lo-^ed liis ???? on the world, thou must resign the charge with which í have encumbered thee, and die ?) all be consigned to that care which 1 haie promised to procure her/' Little Matilda Bertila was again brought into the hall. " Thou shalt remain here/' said St. ?? iemand, * while Juxton Budleigh shall remain uu earth, and ??? tliou shalt go to mv castle." <4 Juxton hath told me," replied tlte child, " that l ??? tlo all that thou bhalt command, but I * hould like to go to tiie ci press tree, and hear Paalo talk of the hre from the top ofthe moun¬ tain, and of allibo sad things that happened before 1 was born." " If ¡-ad things be what thou dost like iu bear/' >aid Juxton, " I can aluai* find plenty of ihem to talk about. No one can îeach ni) age without seeing and knowing .»ad things l,·.«« to talk of, eien if he were Ut talk for a ivlioie u v <a.' "But thou habt no burning mouiitain/' 'ib.-cncd little Bertila. tk Our mountains, it is
171
true," said Juxton, " do not burn : but to burn, is not the only sad thing that occurreth in moun¬ tains. Woful and sad it is to tell all I can tell of the horrors of mountains here, I dare say, Vir knight," said he to his master, i( that thou hast not forgotten the fate of Julian de Bices¬ trene, here in the mountain close at hand. To be sure thou hast not. Whatever is sad maketh an impression on the mind : fortunate events pass from the memory. Thou knowest that he was set upon by thieves, and mui dered ; and that his son, a httle boy then only ten years of age, in tlie scuffle got away and hid himself, and returned to the castle of his ancestors, where he grew up to be a man. He never forgot what had happened ; for more than a dozen years after, as he wa -? hunting with all his bonny men about him, he met a f|àìow in the forest, and he said to his atten- dahts, seize that man, for it was he who first sei¬ zed ^my father when he was murdered. They did so, and what should he have about him, but the very girdle buckle that Julian de Bicestrene had worn. * This betrayeth thee,' said the son ; 4 and thou shalt yield thy life, for the life of my father/ So he did ; he was executed for the Name : and in revenge for that, the gang met Hugh the son, and slew him once when they him alone. I can tell thee, my little admirer of
iii
172
burning mountains, that the iire which cometh from them, is not so dreadful as the mischiefs done by man. The terrible gangs of robbers with which our mountains and forests are infested are more hurtful than flames of fire. They are not so mischievous at the first blush, but when the fire ceaseth, it is known what hath been done, and the mischief is ascertained : but for ever and for ever extendeth the mischief of man. It proceedeth from colleague to colleague, from father to son, from generation to generation. Then, beside the affair of Julian de Bicestrene, there was Hargrave de Sorvine, and Hildred de Cleville, and many more. I will not however talk of all those things now, I will keep them for the ear of my little Sicilian niece : but I can tell thee what, my child s I shall not live long enough to tell thee half I have seen, and have locked up in my memory ready for use when time and op¬ portunity shall need." So saying, he took his young relative by the hand, and with the rough civility of those ancient days, he made his obeis¬ ance to the assembly and led her away. Notwithstanding the great wish of St. Evre¬ mond to reach his castle, he was compelled in courtesy to remain with de Mitcham ; who, to do honour to his paramount, had prepared a feast, and ordered sports.
173
The duties of hospitality seem to be inherent in the heart of man. The most remote periods to which history goes back, always represent the host feasting his guests according to the manners ofthe times. The most savage tribes, it is well known, always exert their best energies for that purpose when they are surrounded by their friends. It may be observed also, that with no variation but the degree of polish and refinement which pervades the general mode of Ufe through¬ out, as civilization increases, the same things are deemed pleasureable. The same superabundant provision of food: music : dancing:—though the cookery and the harmony differ, still it is feasting, and choral symphony : and the Indian dance and the modern ball differ but in the style of their performance. Indeed every thing which beareth upen, or proceedeth from the heart, and which may be termed nature, is the same every ivhere, and in all ages. In the pomp and parade of state- liness, greatness ever exhibits its pride. Anger ever acts its revenge. Love ever breathes its ten¬ derness. Mirth ever delights in pastimes. Eiery passion in its excess, leads to the same enormities in every clime and in every state of society ; from the ferocity of savage barbarism, to the smoothness of the polished court of an European monarch. Therefore, while we affect to despise the untaught
174
Indian in his wilds and desarts, let us recollects that though we look like the innocent flower, we are very frequently the snake beneath : and that being better informed than the Indian, we are for that very reason, much more guilty and despica¬ ble when w 7 e do wrong.
CHAPTER XVL
How readily an honoui thic nund r fives nedit to appearand·* of g)od' Haw ???? deceived die t ha-e, v\ ho thmk VU men die wh tt they ¡»eero ' and therelore deem That the fui iate ne'er veileth the toul heart How doubly wietched must the wicked be, Who, toiibcioiboi th' offences they have done, Feroen e that the suspiciou of then crimes Falls on the innocent; arid tlwt vvhïle they Without rtpioach pui sue theu course, many Hemo\ 'd fiom evil lai as they fiom good, Suffer ? th* estimation of the woi id. Shall not the hour anne, when they will find, I hat though then evil deeds remam unknown, I hen evil shall fmd them'
The distress of Montgomery when messenoer after messenger returned, saying that all search for Joscelyn was vain, and that no appearance of llight nor tidings of escape were discovered, ??? beyond what any words can express. Hih mind was almost deranged; lib old heart was almost broken. He suspected eiery hod}. He accused every body. He thought every body had ? ι 4
176
guilty countenance. Every body except the wicked perpetrator of the horrid deed. The agonies she suffered, and the alarm she testified, were imputed to wrong feelings, and the more her terrors, which arose from her fears of detec¬ tion, increased, the more she was endeared to her distracted father. She ran, gasping ivith anxiety > to meet every person who entered the hall, and asked with dread, " Is he found ?" No door was unexpectedly found open : no bolt unexpectedly drawn back. Not the least indication of passing from the castle appeared, excepting the broken weeds, and the trampled grass near the low archway. To that spot every one went daily, and from that spot search was made in every direction. The lowest cave, deep under ground, beneath the ruins which Austin had found in the wood, w r as only known to himself: and had Matilda been tempted to betray her guilt, she could not have led to the place among the brambles where the stairs were to be found by which she had descended : for the purpose on whicii she was bent had taken such possession of her mind, that she had been unable to observe any thing as she passed on : and her feelings as she returned had been so keen, that she had followed the silent Austin, unconscious of all around her, till her companion turned, and
177
pointing out her father's high castle, said, Thou knowest how to reach it. Thou dost not want an escort. The change in Austin's behaviour the instant the deed was dons, had stricken her to the heart; and, " What a wretch am I become," was the first conviction that roused her to the agonizing sense of her guilt. ? ! what feelings were hers ! Austin understood them as they were depicted on her changed countenance, but her father imputed her altered mien and her constant uneasiness to the horror she felt in kindness for the loss of Joscelyn, not at all suspecting the tortures she endured as his murderer. Would it were possible, that the mind of him who has committed such a dreadful deed as Ma¬ tilda had perpetrated, could be displayed as openly as the visage ! Would it were possible that any words could express fully what are the sufferings which arise from a consciousness of crime ! The gush of the torrent, the fall of the cataract, the roaring of the storm, the loud peal of the rattling thunder, vhe flowing of the liquid flames from the bursting volcano, are faint images of the turbulence of a guilty conscience. The envenomed bite of the adder produceth not such anguish as the sting of sin. Be it to gain a crow n we slay; be it to gain the wealth of noble«!: though the brow may wear the diadem ; thougli } 5
178
the bags may burst with their full hoards, yet all the gain is joyless. Peace flies the breast. Rest flies the pilloiv. Fear takes possession of the mind. The dread of detection, retribution, and punishment is perpetual. Every day of his life is a day of alarm ; and when the last day of his life approaches, what is before him ? What has he to expect? The anguish he has felt, doubled and ten times redoubled, and the duration of punishment through all eternity. Matilda, whose every passion was vehement, who enjoyed with rapture, who suffered with acuteness, felt to the extremity of endurance the full force of conviction, the full dread of retribu¬ tion. To keep up the appearance of anxiety which was so gratifying to her father, she was compelled to feign to search with those who sought; but she always avoided the arch by wdiich she had escaped with the child. The agonies, however, which she endured increased so violently, that she was at last unable to keep away from it ; and she went so frequently there, that it attracted notice. Sbe was observed to stoop and leave the castle at that low place, and always to follow one course till she wound into the path, which was the cus¬ tomary road down the steep. She was repeatedly watched to the bridge, on which she often stop-
179
ped and gazed around ; and she was sometime .- seen to pass to the other side of the stream, and always to walk on to a certain spot, ivhere she wrung her hands, and wept bitterly. To that spot many went, and searched diligently around, but all in vain. The cave was not discovered. The blasted tree was full in view ; but even Ma¬ tilda was ignorant that it guided to the descent by ivhich she had entered the dreary vauh, wherein the murdered infant had been left. Though she had been watched and followed, and though her agitation after she had passed the bridge was much wondered at ; yet, no sus¬ picion that she had been concerned in the dread¬ ful transaction, ever found a place in the imagi¬ nation of any one. It was, nevertheless, all reported to Montgomery; and the observations he was thereby led to make, and the questions he was induced to ask, were so distressing and pain¬ ful to Matilda, that unable to endure them, or to witness the desponding grief of her father, ?\? began her preparations for quitting his castle. Evidently, Montgomery did not find that com¬ fort in his daughter whicii his sad heart had sought. The unkindness of her manner at her first arrival had very greatly displeased him : and notwithstanding that he imputed the present tes¬ timonies of her anguish to tender motives, the i G
180
exceeding vehemence of her gestures, and the incoherent expressions of her sorrow greatly alarmed him : yet, although her presence caused him no joy, he felt that her departure would reduce him to that loneliness which leaves the heart solitary. He, for that reason, requested her to prolong her stay. " Wilt thou forsake me," he said, " 'm the bitter moment of my deep afflic¬ tion? At the moment when, by the loss of Joscelyn, thou art become my only child ?" When Matilda perceived that her father clung to her as his child ; when she heard him call her his only child, become ¡?uch by the loss of Josce¬ lyn ; and when she beheld the tears chase each other down his aged cheeks, she sprang from him, and striking her forehead, exclaimed, " 0 1 I cannot bear it !" Afraid to trust herself to see or hear more, she ran from the hall to her cham¬ ber. Her agonies, the agonies of remorse, were frantic ; her exclamations were wild ; and her movements herce. Get the palfry ready. I will not stay another hour beneath this roof. Where can I seek peace but in the castle of my husband ? From whom can I expect happiness but from my son ?—Hap¬ piness! Happiness is not for me !—Is Joscelyn found ?—Ts the place discovered where he hath been concealed. Ask Austin.—Fetch the car- 7
181
melítc. —No.—I never will behold him more.— Yet, he knoweth that he should be here.— Wherefore is he not ? All words are weak, ail words must fail, ivhich attempt to describe the sufferings of the wretched Matilda. The acute pangs of guilt, the terrible dread of the murderer, are unspeakable. ? ! to hill by her oivn wickedness from the exaltation of her high dignity, to the degraded lowness of a culprit, amenable to trial, and obnoxious to pu¬ nishment ! The proud, the haughty, the ambi¬ tious Matilda ! She would change her situation ΛνΗΙι the lowest hind who toiled in servile drudgery. Alas ! Guilt, even at the moment of its act, wounds the perpetrator ; and its after-sting goads the very soul. But virtue in the midst of tears it hallowed ; and the dart which pierces it never ? envenomed. Montgomery entreated in vain. Every motive he suggested as an inducement for her continu¬ ance at his castle, stung her more and more, and increased the poignancy of her reflections ; and she hastenetl her departure, lest the feelings ivhich she could not command, should betray her to his watchful observation, or to the scrutinizing examination of every one who approached her. She departed ?\ ? ?1? her fatlier wept. Sho departed without again conversing with Austin,
1S2
who, though he had once ventured to enter the hall of Montgomery since Joscelyn had been sto¬ len, now r stayed away, lest Matilda, to revenge the scoffing question he had asked her, sliould betray herself to punish him. All the household went to the gate to ??? her mount the palfry, ivhich was, as heretofore, be¬ decked with all the gaudy trappings belonging to hei baronial rank. She came from the hall with such a tottering step, that she leaned on Goda. Her father followed her, and just as she ivas going to mount, he took her hand. " I think, Matilda," he said, " that we now part for the last time. Age wouli. soon have laid me in the grave, had I remained in peace : but the sorrow, the horror of this last dreadful stroke, will hasten the hour, when all which pertaineth to my lot on earth shall cease. W T hat shall be to either of us when the eye closeih on the world, is for our serious consideration. The virtues which have not been duly appreciated here shali meet their full reward ; and those secret sins, impenetrable to the ken of man shall find their condemation. I leave tl ee to the justice which knoweth what we are ; and I hope and trust that thou därest meet thine audit. Farewell ! my prayers are for thy happiness." He pressed her hand as he spoke. lie raised it and would have kissed it, but she
1S3
prevented him; and drawing him toward hei, she put hib hand to her h-part, and looking up tu heaven, >he uttered a shriek, which startled all uho were assembled around her. She sprang on the palfry, and instantly departed on full speed, leaving the spectators staring after her in 4irprhe and consternation.
CHAPTER XVII.
1 hough frora tlie ????? of guilt the wret 'h may fiee, And think by change of place to ease tin' mind Of its sad load of woe : yet, ev'ry change Is \iiin. He bears about the conscioiihiiess Of hib foul deedi» ; and from himself nevo- Can he flee away.
Matilda kept up the speed with whicii she set forth from her father's castle, till she reached the bottom of the high hill on which it stood ; and all those who had assembled to see her depart, gazed in terror as she went along ; for she seemed to give the horse his head, and to trust to his know¬ ledge of the road without attempting ίο guide hie rein. The sudden stop he made nearly threw her from her seat ; and an universal shriek was uttered by those who beheld her. " Let some of my people follow r her," said her father. " She seem¬ eth not to have a proper care of her own safety." ' ( So pleure my master," observed one of the
185
attendants, ít her own train soon will overtake her, for her speed is slackened." Montgomery stood on the verge of the hill, and watched her till she was hidden by the thick foliage of the wood into which she entered. He smote his aged bosom, and said, " Surely I gaze my last," He hung his head and dropped his arms, and stood like one entranced. As the different domestics ap¬ proached him he sighed, but he did not notice them. They spoke, but he answered them not. Alwin, the aged minstrel, brought his harp. He knew the powers of harmony. He knew to strike the chords which reach the soul. He called his honoured and beloved master back to feelmg and to thought by sounds so soft, so sweet, that they stole into the melancholy recesses of his heart, and soothed him into tears. He then en¬ livened his air, and gradually proceeded, till by change of style he led to the lofty sounds which animate the warrior. Montgomery started. Again the minstrel changed the strain, and calmed him with gentler sounds. He watched the changes in the reverend countenance of the baron ; and as he wound in mystic maze to the skilfully modula¬ ted close, he let the notes die on the ear, till the last chord was scarcely heard in the mild breeze. When the almost inaudible last sound ceased to
180
vibrate in the air, he advanced, and bowing (? the kind patron of his minstrelsy, he respectfully took his hand, and drawing it under his arm, supported with his feeble help the tottering steps of the baroli, and led him within the castle. Meanwhile, Matilda continued her journey. She was lost to all propriety of conduct. She stopped and seated herself on the grass in the wide plain, and exposed herself unsheltered to the ardent rays of the mid-day sun. She went out of the track in the ivoods, and was benighted anrl forced to pass the hours of darkness in the open air ; wandering she knew not whither, as the un- guided palfry turned this way and that unheeded. If any one, even Goda, ventured to point out her deviation from the right road, she allowed the violence of her passions, which neither grief nor remorse could subdue, to vent itself in expressions of anger ; and, maugre all remonstrances and instructions, she pursued the wrong path because she would not condescend to be directed. By the wilful folly of her procedure, the mo¬ nastery where Eltrude presided, wdiich she should have reached on the first evening of her journey, was pasfc-d at noon on the second day. if Shall we not halt here ?" said Goda. " Halt !" said Matilda. " Halt !—Halt while the sun is up ! I
187
shall go on." To go on was not in her power, The horses were unable to obey her. They stopped and panted, and a little urged, pushed on a little farther, and then stopped again. In that manner they rode on, till her own palfry, unable to proceed, lay down while she was seated on his back. There was no remedy. No means of assistance near. To put her on another hor^e would have been useless trouble, for they were all so fatigued, that it was more likely they would also lay by the road side, than continue their far¬ ther way. " Some of us must pursue our way on foot," said the principal domestic in her retinue, iC while others remain with the horses. They cannot go on. Perhaps we can. There is a mo¬ nastery not far from where we are, and if my lady can climb the next steep, she may then refresh herself until the overtired beasts are rested." " It will be as well to walk as to ride," replied Matilda. " Come." So saying, she went for¬ ward. To accomplish what she undertook, was what Matilda never failed to do. She knew how to ac¬ commodate her pace to her road, and she went on slowly. She persevered and gained the summit. " I do not see the horses following us," she said» as she turned, and looked back on the path up the hill she had climbed. " So please my lady,
188
they must rest in the valley below, they cannot as yet attempt the hill" " If I wait here for them, I shall reach my home to night," said Matilda. " My lady must understand," said the domestic, " that they will not be able to go on till to-mor¬ row. Yonder is the monastery. If my lady will go thither, she will be accommodated for the night." Matilda made no reply, but looking where the man pointed, she stood considering some time, as if measuring the distance with her eye, and then walked on. While thus enduring a degree of fatigue, greater than bhe was willing to acknowledge, she did not forget the pride of her station. When she had almost reached the end of her long march, she sent two domestics forward to an¬ nounce to the abbess, that the baroness de St. Evremond and her women were advancing, in order to pass the night under the sacred roof of her convent. When she arrived, the nun who acted as porter, bade her walk on and she would be received. She passed the court, accompanied by Goda and two other women. They were re¬ ceived at the entrance of the cloisters by another nun, who, with no salutation but " follow me," led the w r ay to a door which opened into a room, where sat the lady abbess, Giltra de Bradleigh. She received Matilda with the haughtiness of a
189
baron's daughter, and the austere pride of an abbess. She eyed her visiter with stern exami¬ nation, and then said, " Be seated." Matilda did as she was told to do. The abbess then resumed her occupation, and left hjsr guest to her own meditations. A solemn bell now tolled at a distance. A nun entered and said, " They are going to put the man into the holy earth, who was found under our walls, and carried to the monastery where the aged father Gaspard de Bolange presides. The toll of his funeral bell soundeth heavily." " Ring our bell," said Giltra. *' The melancholy funeral of the unknown pilgrim, found in the agonies of death beneath our walls, must be attended to by us. When the bell of the monastery to which he was conveyed shall cease to toll, we will begin our prayers. Unfortunate man. Murdered none know by whom ! found by those who know him not! buried without a name. Thou wilt join us, daughter ; thou and thy women. Our joint pray¬ ers shall help to ïvaft him to heaven. But what will become of his destroyer ! He shall not es¬ cape. Detection awaiteth him. The murderer shall not escape. The rock shall not cover him. The cave shall not conceal him." Let any one imagine the dreadful horror with whicii Matilda heard the words of the abbess.
190
The terror of her countenance was observed, and Giltra resumed. " Be not thou thus shocked, my daughter ; grievous as may be the fate of him who hath done this deed, we must also pray for him. May his heart be turned ; and may we be preserved from tbe like sin!" As she finished, she looked at Matilda. " Look not at me !" she said, " I am innocent of his death !" " I know thou art, my daughter ; and of all such crimes, í trust." tf I am too ill to pray with thee, ? holy mother. Let me retire to my couch. If I can, I will pray alone." " Convey her to the cell, •where Wilda breathed her last," said the ab¬ bess ; " this stranger is too deeply shocked by this event. Some such sad thing must have hap¬ pened in her family. Lead her away." She was left alone. Her women attended the prayers in the chapel. " ? ! I shall live expo¬ sed," she said, as she lay on her low bed, " to the tongue of every one, whose guiltless heart knows how to honour goodness, and to detest sin. I shall he a laughing-stock. A bye-word. O! £uilt ! guilt ! how dost thou debase the lofty !" Sleepless, alternately praying and exclaiming, she passed the dreary hours on her pallet. When Goda entered in the morning, t{ Are the horses come?" she said, " I must off tbis instant." ' r May it please my lady," answered Goda, " let
191
me say it seemeth unto me, that it is fortunate the horses are not yet arrived ; rest seemeth needful to us all." " Thou must not tire, Goda," said Matilda. iC ? ! I must on. I cannot here re¬ main. To hear of nought but murder ! I cannot bear it." " That need not hurt my lady. She hath not done it." Matilda started and gazed wildly. Where is the pen that can describe the suffer¬ ings of a mind disturbed by such reflections as Matilda's ? Can he who speaketh of the sun, display his brightness ; or infuse his heat into his lines ? Can he who speaketh of the boisterous sea, exhibit its huge waves and sparkling foam ; or sound its turbulent loud roar ? No—nor can any voice, nor any pen tell what the wicked suffer. A sword piercing perpetually ; a wound for ever festering ; are used as similes : but they are faint comparisons; they appertain unto the body: but unceasing fear, and loss of hope, belong unto the soul. Death stilleth bodily pain : but say ; shall death still the agonies of the soul ?
CHAPTER XVIII.
Her castle, formerly so gay p No more was cheerful found ; Hence joy for aye had flown away, The echoes with grief resound. Grandeur in vain its pomp display'd, The song was rais'd in rain, Far from the hall had pleasure stray'd, Ne'er to return again.
Matilda was compelled to remain another day in the convent, notwithstanding her eagerness to go on. The horses and the attendants were too much fatigued to proceed. It was her wish to remain in the loneliness of the cell w T hich had been assigned her, that she might hide herself, and ponder on her crimes in secret, for she dreaded every eye : but her behaviour on the preceding- evening, and the loquacity of her women, who had told all they knew of the greatness of her
193
husband and her father, and had mentioned, with aï! the aggravations of surmise and fear, the un¬ accountable disappearance of Joscelyn ; had made her an object of curiosity ; and in order to look at her, and observe her, and converse with her, the nuns went one after another, with officious attentions, and offers of services, and proffered consolations, into her chamber, and invited her so pressingly to come among them, that she com¬ plied to get rid of their importunities. When she appeared among them, every one instantly turned toward her, and every eye was fixed upon her. She blushed deeply. It was the blush of anger, as much as shame ; but she dared not express her displeasure. " Take thy seat, my daughter," said Giltra, " we are not to learn whom thou art, thou hast been announced : nor are we ignorant of the mysterious disappearance of thy little brother, the young heir of the baron de Montgomery. But my daughter, though thou mayest grieve at such a circumstance, yet take it not thus to heart. Mayhap he may be found. Mayhap he may be restored to his aged father, and to thee his sorrowing sister. I have known such sad events ere now. When year after year hath rolled away, and every search hath been in vain ; yet at length discovery hath taken place, and the long lost restored. So shall it be with vol. in. ?
194
thy brother, for the wicked ever are found out, and punishment awaiteth their crimes." " Jos¬ celyn never can be found," said Matilda. " Un¬ less thou knowest his hiding place, my daughter," ¿aid Giltra, " that is more than thou canst assure. Dost thou not remember, Mencia," she said, ad¬ dressing herself to one of the nuns, " the story of Hengo de Canterville? He was older than thy brother," she continued, again turning to Matilda. " He was six years old. Memory could faintly trace the mode of his conveyance from his father's castle. Twenty years after he was stolen away, one of those strange occurrences which no human foresight can prevent, brought him to his own home, and into the presence of bis father. It was at the time of the rebellion of the earl of Leicester, when from every comer of the kingdom troops collected to form one great army of offence, and another, more noble, of allegiance, that Hengo came to Evesham. He was among the followers of prince Edward. When all was over, and the armies were disband¬ ed, and each was left to seek his home in his own way, Hengo wandered about the country, at¬ tracted by many monasteries and castles, of whose hospitality he frequently partook. Gomg thus from place to place, he came at length to the castle of Hengo de Canterville, not many mile?
195 from Worcester. The baron was returning in all the pomp of battle, surrounded by his vassals j and Hengo stopped to see I1İ211 pass. He heard some one call him Hengo. The sound of his own name attracted him, and he pushed forward. The moment he saw his countenance, his beaver being up, he exclaimed, * ? ! I know that face ; I recollect that armour, it hung in my father's hall.' 'Who was thy father?' asked the baron de Canterville. ? I cannot say,' replied Hengo, ' I was taken from him when I was too young to recollect his name. 1 i Follow me in,' said the baron. On entering the hall, he exclaimed, { This is my father's hall. I remember the shield of my grandfather, which hangeth over the mantle. My mother used to call it the bittern of the sedgy stream. O, let me stray about! Ho left the hall, and every one followed where he led. He went up stairs and along a gallery, at the end of which he opened a door. Here I used to la>, here is the little bed which was put by the side of my nurse. I remembev the golden eagle on the pillar. The window looketh to the drawbridge/ he said, advancing to look out. Aye, there it is over the moat. ? this is my own home. Hence I was taken away. Knowest thou this £* he said, opening his vest, ' knowest thou this ivory cross?' The baron ran eagerly to look upon sci?
196
it. * I know it well,* he said, ' it was given thee by him who answered for thee at the font. He hung it to thy neck by a blue silken string. How wert thou taken hence ?' ( I was taken from my little bed when the moon shone as bright as day ; and though I called Rhoda my nurse, she did not wake to save me. I was carried, I know not by what road, and left beneath a tree by him who stole me. He said to me, ( het us go to sleep.' When I awoke, I was alone. I 'rose, I ran in every direction, and called about me ; I was found hy a peasant, who took me to his home, and reared me with his own children. I remem¬ bered my name, Hengo, ivhich I retained. The good man often said, t Constantly shalt thou wear thy little cross hanging from thy neck, it may make thee known.' ' Ii confirmeth thy tale, 1 said the baron. ( Liveth my mother V ( She doth,' t ? ! lead me to her.' ' Not too suddenly. Who took thee away V ' I should know him among a thousand. He had a large scar on his cheek.' " He was introduced to his mother, who em¬ braced him with transport. He sat on the dais, at the feast in the hall, made for the baron's return. Where he sat, he saw every one as he entered, and he was more attentive to observe them, than to feed on the many viands. The repast was nearly ended, when a domestic, for
197
whom a plaee had been reserved at the lower table, came in abruptly, and was about to take his seat. Hengo started from where he sat, and run¬ ning quickly forward, he seized the late comer. ' Many years ago,' he said, t thou didst bear away Hengo, the baron*s son.' ' Young man/ replied the fellow he had seized, ' take thy hand from my collar, I know not what thou meanest.' Hengo held him fast, and said, turning toward the dais, ' I accuse this man.' Turning again to the man, he said, ' Thou didst take him from a low archway,"'—" A low archway !' said Matilda, starting, and clapping her hands. *' Be not thus astonished, my daughter," said Giltra, " the wicked ever find some unfrequented and forgot¬ ten door or window whence they can issue forth. No doubt from some such opening thy brother hath been taken." " But he cannot speak," said Matilda ; " he cannot tell who bore him off. He hath no cross by which he may be known." Giltra thought that it was the grief of Matilda, that caused her to make such observations ; for who could suspect the baroness ? and therefore, intending to soothe her, she said, " It importeth not what may be wanting, or what may be re¬ dundant, all will be discovered, No wood so dark, no cave so low, that detection shall not penetrate." " What !" said Matilda, " penetrate ??
198
a low cave !" " Aye," replied the abbess, " though it were three stories deep beneath the surface of the earth, and forgotten and unknown for ages." Matilda was almost convulsed with agitation, which the abbess observing, she said, u My child, what knowest thou of caves, that thou art so greatly moved at hearing me speak of them ?" c * ? there are many near my father's castle ! but what of that ? Who shall seek them out ? Wlio shall find Joscelyn, though he be in one of them ?" " Take comfort to thy heart, my daughter. Thou mayest assure thyself, that he who hath taken thy brother from his father s cas¬ tle shall be discovered : and when discovered ^hall be punished, even as he who carried ofi* )oung Hengo, for though he long continued to deny the deed, yet when Hengo said, ' Behold me! I am Hengo, Look on this cross. Didst thou not, when thou didst lay me to sleep beneath •ι tree, put it in my hand, and say, * Hold this, my child, a cross is a good thing to hold by Í' Thou didst speak the truth, it hath made me known ; it hath been the means of thy detection, I repeat my accusation. Thou art the man who took me from my chamber while my nurse slept/ The man was so astonished that he sunk on hh knees, and exclaimed, * ? ! my fate is just. I am, I am the guilty wretch who took thee hence at
199
midnight.* * Wherefore?* said the enraged ba¬ ron. * At the instigation of thy brother, who paid me well. He would be the heir ; but he liath perished. He joined the party of the trai¬ tor Leicester, and was slain at Lewes.' ' Bear him to the dungeon/ said the baron. They bore him away. Thou mayest believe me," said Giltra, " he met the punishment he merited. Hengo now dwelleth with his father, and bath placed the cross on his shield. He is a proof among a hun¬ dred more, tliat however long delayed, punish¬ ment at last overtaketh the guilty." The longer Giltra spoke, and the nearer she drew to the sad catastrophe of the fate of the guilty man, the more violent Matilda became. She exclaimed in often repeated ejaculations, she wrung her hands, sbe beat her f lead, and seemed by her gestures to be almost distraeteli. Every one became afraid of her. Goda was called. tt What aileth thy mistress ?" said Giltra. " I know not, so please thee/' replied Goda. 41 She hath been thus more orless, ever since her father's marriage. I would my lord the baron were returned from Palestine, lie is now ex¬ pected home, and we are on our way to meet him. We shall have no peace till he arriveth. I would the horses were rested that we might pursue our way. I am tired of the journey; my mistress ? 4
200
wandereth from the right road as if she were cra¬ zed, and she will allow no one to guide her. I am sure I did not think she would have grieved in this way for the loss of the child. I should as soon have thought that she would have helped to carry him off, as that she would take on so." Ma¬ tilda, who wan walking up and down the room with rapid steps, stopped short, and said, " Who bade thee think about my conduct ?" " This is the absolute beginning of madness," said Giltra, " let her be watched." " Watched ! who shall dare to watch the baroness de St, Evremond ?" said Matilda. The abbess said no more on the sub¬ ject, she nodded to Goda, wdio said, " Will my lady be pleased to go to her chamber ?" " Come," she replied, and quitted the room. " I shall be glad when she is gone," said one of the nuns. " We shall all be glad," replied the abbess. When the horses arrived, Matilda mounted, and merely saying, " Farewell," to the abbess and sisters, who came as far as the gates to wit¬ ness her departure, she again set forward at full speed, and continued as rapidly as the palfry would go, till she came within view of the walls of her castle. She then checked the rein and stopped. " Shall I enter thee ?" she said. With the accustomed pomp of her reception, the domestics had assembled in the outer court to
201
await her. The gates were thrown wide, and the minstrels were placed around to chaunt the song of gladness. She advanced slowly. She dismounted, and proceeded with her eyes fixed on the ground to the hall. " Bid the minstrels cease," she said. "The song of gladness is not for me." She became melancholy. She moped about like one stupified. She spoke to no one. She noticed no one. She wandered from room to room in never ceasing roaming. She loathed all food. The colour of her cheek was faded ; and the lustre of her eye was dimmed. Her days were sad, and sleepless were her nights. Guilt haunted her j and happiness and peace were gone for ever.
k5
CHAPTER XIX.
Lead on ; O, lead on to my native liome, To the seat of delight and joy ; Thence never again shall my foobtepa roam, That alone bhall my thoughts employ. ? ! home is the place where sweet eomfoib dwell, Where all that we value ¡? found ; The woodland, the plain, the hill, and the delt, With pleasure and raptme abound. O í there, ivhere my innocent childhood btrayM, And gambold in frolkbome play ; Ma> my grey-headed age, beneath the sameshadt. Wile the laat days of life away. Home is that place on earth which affords the greatest happiness to the heart of man. The labourer who drudges beneath the inclement ??? of every season, cheers his toil by thinking on itn delights. He enters it, and when the door is closed, secure from all intrusion, he indulges in the pleasures of his station ; and enjoys his scanty meal and his coarse fare with rapture. His own hands have earned it. His own wife
203
has cooked it. His own children share it. He looks round and all he sees belongs to him. He possesses in full right. The noble loves his ow r n castle, his own hall, his own domain. The decorations aie his own taste, the conveniencies are his own plans. The fish are from his own ponds, the venison from hL· own park. He inherited from his own father. He will be succeeded by his own son. Even among savages home is dear and sacred. Every one loves his own hut. He returns from the chase to his own dwelling, and, according to the wildness of his uncultivated and unpolished condition, he enjoys home with a feeling of pro¬ prietorship. The soldier, the sailor, the merchant, ever looks to his native land, and iu his native land to his own home, as his place of rest after all ?? struggles. As the port, where, after the rough ν oyage of life, he may cast anchor in peace. if there be a man who does not loie his home, he does not deserve to have one : and not to have one, is the greatest punishment tbat can be wished him. St. Evremond loved home with enthusiastic ardour, and he had taught his son to do the same. They were now both hastening thither wheie they expected all joy, all happiness, all peace. Their ? G
204
progress was nevertheless often impeded, and with the superstitious credulity which was the weakness of former times, they were inclined to thmk that some il! omen, to which thdy had not duly attended, was taking effect upon them. u Ever since the absolute end of our journey," said St. Evremond, " hath been to reach our castle, something or another hath perpetually oc¬ curred to check us. How long we were upon the sea contending with the winds and waves, before we reached an English port. How nearly we were lost. How tediously we were becalmed. All the elements seemed in combination to retard us, as if they were unwilling we should go on," " I have been fearful," replied John, " to put melan¬ choly thoughts into thy mind, but many prognos¬ tics which I have observed have produced such a sinking, such a dread of some event disastrous to us, that I shall have no peace till I reach home. Though the good knight de Mitcham detained us to do us honour, yet my heart was not in his feasts and sports. I regret that we shali be obliged to halt again, and be again compelled to take up our abode within a monastery." " I long for home as much as thou dost," said St. Evremond, " and I trust that we shall be greeted with a glad wel¬ come, and find thy mother well. If so, it seemeth impossible another sorrow can befal us; yet, even 3
205
at thy age thou must have perceived, that so very various are the ways by which we are afflicted, that, often from the very source where we expect most joy, the most calamitous of all our woes arise. Yet, my son, however great, however severe may be our sorrows, from whatever source they flow, so our own misdeeds do not draw them on, we shall find consolation in our clear bosoms, and may ever hope they will be softened." When they reached the monastery where they meant to pass the night, they found the fathers in great consternation. Two of the monks while walking in the garden had suddenly quarrelled, and the quarrel had ended in the seizure of one by the other. The scuffle had attracted the no¬ tice of their brethren, and they were just brought in to account for the disturbance they had caused when the travellers entered. When the baron de St. Evremond and his son were announced, one of the monks met them. " The arrival of the baron de St. Evremond within these walls," he said, " is the first pleasure I have known since my seclu¬ sion from the world. It bringeth back to me¬ mory those early days of life, when the unconta¬ minated heart saw all things in their brightest hue, and thought that all was good. It bringeth back to memory the time when Richard de St.Evremond
206
and Philip de Valonnes, and his young brother William sported in the woods and plains with the sprightliness of boyish glee ; ere the pursuits of manhood, or the mandates of our fa¬ thers tore us from real joy, and sent us forth to struggle with the storms of life. To Philip, who was the heir, the lance was given, and to me his brother this robe. Here secluded from the bustle of the world I have remained, while thou and Philip have mingled with its turbulence. The intelligence of his departure for the holy war, and his death in Palestine, have reached me and embittered my retreat. I know his bosom was the seat of honour, therefore thou wilt report him nobly." " The unexpected meeting with a friend known in our days of youth," replied St. Evremond, " gladdeneth the heart. The recollections thus awakened, are like gleams of sunshine which cheer with transient brightness the gloomy days of winter. They are intense, but evanescent. With thy brother I have walked through life in that dear bond of friendship which commenced in childhood, and increased as we grew to manhood. He lived the life of the gêne¬ rons, and died the death of the brave. The many years which have elapsed since thou wert taken from us, seem as nothing when I look back upon them, and I can almost fancy that I saw thee
207
yesterday. My castle, as thou knowest, is but a short day's journey from thy monastery, and therefore, we may often meet again. Surely, thou mayest have permission to revisit the haunts of the days which are gone, and wander in the woods where our childhood strayed. My wife, my beloved Matilda will welcome thee gladly, for she knew and honoured thy brother ; and my son, whom I now introduce to thee with proud boast, will reverence the friend of his father's youtli." William de Valonnes pressed the hand of John, and said, ít I shall love him for his fa¬ ther's sake. This our first meeting is a solemn one. He is come at one of those sad moments, which I much lament to say occur too frequently. These holy places, these sanctuaries, as they are called, screen the very refuse of the earth. All who have committed crimes, and are become the outcasts of society, flee hither, and being here beyond pursuit, defy justice, and live secure. Unexpected circumstances occasionally discover them, but if they continue undetected and un¬ known, at that late hour, the hour of death, when atonement is impossible, the compunctions of a guilty conscience force them to disclose their wick¬ edness, and to make knoivn what they ever have concealed at the confessional. The sins which 1 have heard revealed, the terrors which I have witnessed, and the dreadful despair which I have
208
beheld, make humanity shudder. The variety of crimes, the various modes of sin, the unsuspected nets of vice to entangle the unwary, are so nume¬ rous, so intricate, so deeply laid, that among the beasts of prey which roam abroad, none is so hurtful as man. Momentary impulse propelleth the wildest beast of the desart ; but man reason- eth himself into wickedness, and doeth his foui deeds with premeditated malice. Ye who live in the world see the effect of crime upon the suffer¬ ers ; we who are secluded see the effects upon the perpetrators. Better is it to be spoiled of all, better is it to be slain, than like the thief and the murderer to live the life of fear, and die the death of despair.'* " Is it not strange," said John, " that in every place we have visited, all the circumstances which we have witnessed have been calamitous ; and that in every society with which we have mingled, the tales we have heard recounted have been wofuh" " Young man," replied William de Valonnes, " the longer thou shalt live, tbe oftener thou wilt make the observation. The wickedness of man destroyeth like the storm which uprooteth the forest, and spreadeth far its devastation, and all cry out, 4 Alas ! alas ! behold !' but the calm events of life charm like the clear blue sky of spring, lulling the heart to peace. They pass away, and leave no marks behind them."
209
While St. Evremond and his friend William de Valonnes were in conversation, the monk was summoned to attend in the refectory to hear the accusation of father Mertoph against Hildebrand, whom he had seized in the garden, " Thou mayest not enter," said he to the baron. " It is somewhat an unusual thing. Two brethren in a monastery rarely quarrel. A brother seldom accuseth another." He then called to a young novice, and bade him conduct the strangers to a cell until the business should be ended. " When I shall be dismissed from the council to which I am now summoned," he said, " I will attend to thee and thy son. Much it grieveth me that I am called away." So saying, he followed his sum¬ moner, and the two travellers retired. Father William was detained a long time. When he returned to his friends, he said, f ' If ye will retire with me to my little chamber, I will relate to you the circumstances whicii I have heard detailed. A table, a chair, a pallet and a crucifix, consti¬ tute the furniture of a friar's cell. The baron was honoured with the chair, John and the holy father seated themselves on the pallet. " When I reached the refectory, to which I was called when I quitted you," said William de Valonnes, " Mertoph began his accusation thus, ' While I and my companion
210
were in conversation in the garden, various things that were mentioned led Hildebrand to say, t that in thedays of his youth he had dwelt in his fa¬ ther's castle in Suffolk/ < What part of Sulfolk V I asked. ' Near to St. Edmondsbury,' he replied. * Thy youth is long ago,' I observed. * Aye/ he said, * it is now about five and thirty years ago since ï left Suffolk. Thou didst quit it,' I obser¬ ved, * about the time wdien a disastrous event occurred in the castle of Sibbart de Burdoc/ ' What ofthat?' he replied. I observed his coun¬ tenance change as he spoke. f Dost thou/ I said, ' remember Afwald de Mertone V * Wherefore dost thou ask me V he said, hastily, and became pale as death. * What have I to do with Afwald de Mertone V I was so surprised at his angry 1 tone, that I involuntarily fixed my eyes upon his coun¬ tenance. ' Why dost thou stare at me ? Wbat are tbe deeds of Afwald de Mertone to me ?' he asked. t I never heard of Afwald nor his deeds. ??1? spoke to thee of the deeds of Afwald de Mertone V I said to him. * Thou didst/ he re¬ plied. t How därest thou to fix suspicions upon me V he said, and struck me. I instantly seized him. * Thy name is not Hildebrand/ I exclaimed, ' thou art Afwald : tbou dost betray thyself. It i> thy guilty conscience that speaketh to thee of the deeds of Afwald, it is not I/ The scuffle which
211
ensued brought our brethren around us, and we now stand here to explain before you all our conduct. In presence of our reverend and holy superior and before all my assembled brethren, I tell this man, that the name of Hildebrand, by which he is known here, doth not belong to him, I say that he'is Afwald de Mertone : and I accuse him of having murdered my brother Senfrid de Burdoc. It was about the time this man, who calleth himself Hildebrand, sayeth he quitted Suffolk, when I was ten years old, that my eldest sister, Bemora de Burdoc, married Humphrey, the son ofthe baron de Trobarde, In celebration of the nuptials, the ancient baron proclaimed a tournament. It was most magnificent. In many counties was the proclamation known, and from many distant counties many knights assem¬ bled and contended for the prize, which was a milk white charger fully caparisoned for battle. Afwald, at that time was famous in the lists, he was a combatant whom few could throw. On that grand day many strove with him, among whom my brother Senfrid. Senfrid was a young lance. Afwald almost despised the contest. They fought long and stoutly, and in the end Senfrid threw him : and I will identify this man to be the same by a large scar he beareth near his breast, caused by the wound my brother gave him when he fell ;
212
and of which he lingered long. Open his robe. * Thou shalt not touch me/ said the accused Hil¬ debrand. * Open his robe/ said the superior, t and lay his bosom bare/ With much difficulty it was done. When lo ! on his left breast near to his arm was a frightful scar. t Behold, behold Γ said Mertoph, ( there is the proof: the convincing proof that what I say is true.' f Thou dost be¬ lie me/ said Hildebrand. ( I got this scar once when I fell.' * Aye, when my brother threw thee/ replied Mertoph. * Thou wert confined three months ere thou wast cured. Thy suffer¬ ings were reported in the country round, and spread far my brother's fame. Thou couldest not bear the shame of being thus defeated by a youth, but thou didst not shew thy malice openly. Thou earnest as usual, apparently in friendship ίο our castle, and in friendship thou wast there received. Thou didst, however, find an oppor¬ tunity to wreak thy vengeance on his youthful glory. Like a sneaking caitiff thou didst slay him in cold blood within a wood. O, holy fathers! shall it be believed ? he asked him forth, as one friend asketh another, and when he had ticed him far, he stabbed him, and left him to die there where he fell: but he was found and brought home to his aged father ere he expired. Thou wast so sure thy blow had well accomplished the
213
wicked deed thou didst intend, that thou didst venture to return even to our castle, and to in¬ quire for Senfrid ; and when told he ivas not yet returned, thou didst affect surprise, saying, he had outstepped thee, for thou hadst hurt thy foot, and couldest not keep up vvith him ; and thou didst limp as if it pained thee to go on. Thou wert in the hall when one entered, and said my brother had been found wounded and expiring. In the confusion and alarm of that sad hour thou didst disappear unnoticed. Thou wert not mis¬ sed until the dying Senfrid accused thee of having slain him ; and when thou wert sought thou wert not to be found. How thou wast con¬ cealed I know not. Search ivas made for thee in vain.' * All thou hast said is false/ said Hilde¬ brand, ' and I will prove it on thee if thou därest, hand to hand.' f I cannot wield a sword nor raise a lance,' replied Mertoph de Burdoc. f Thou knowest my breeding was for the holy life which I have followed. Soon after the death of Senfrid, I was consigned to the care of a holy monk named Sitwelle, who for his great sanctity, which was known to all, ivas made superior of this distant monastery. When he left the convent near St. Edmondsbury, ivhere he long had dwelt, he brought me with him across the country hither. lie was the predecessor ofthe holy father who pre-
214
sideth now. * ? ! he was a saint on earth/ said Es- tibert the superior, t and now he is a blessed saint in heaven, I remember his arrival here. I remem¬ ber the mournful day he died. I remember also, that he brought thee here, where thou hast grown in virtue, and imitated as far as may be, for few can go so far, the bright example he hath set us all. I hardly dare suspect a man, who hath been trained by Sitwelle of speaking fahely ; but the tale told by Hildebrand when he was admitted here, is very different from thine. Therefore, in justice to you both, ye must both submit to the same rigour. Ye must be both confined within your cells, and feed on bread and water; that solitude and contemplation may work on you, and the truth appear.' ? St. Evremond," said William de Valonnes, u the horror of what followed, is almost more than I can tell thee. Hildebrand rushed forward, and with a knife he carried in his pouch, he did away all doubt that he had mur¬ dered Senfrid, by stabbing Mertoph ; at the same time saying, i Go, tell thy brother that he was a liar.' Mertoph fell, but he liveth still, and hath been carried to his pallet. Hildebrand was instantly seized, and searched. f Thou wilt find no more/ he said. t That knife was all I had, and it hath silenced the audacious tongue of a most daring liar.' He also hath been conveyed
215
to his cell. O î how 1 lament, that this our first meeting since I took my vows, is thus embittered by this ferocious deed. The innocent soul of Mertoph, should he die, we may hope will take its flight to those blessed regions, where the pure in heart seek everlasting happiness ! but Hilde¬ brand! — ?! St. Evremond, what must be the sufferings, the pangs of such a wretch as Hilde¬ brand! To conceal one crime of which he is accused ; to skreen one crime from detection, he hath in presence of the whole society of which he is a member, committed another equally wicked and atrocious. ? ! that man, who may aspire to be an angel, should thus destroy his glorious hopes, and in the phrensy of demoniac rage, con¬ sign himself to the sad fate denounced against the sinner ! ? thou seest it is not the holy garb of sanctity, nor the daily acts of formal ceremony that purify the heart, for the sacred priests, the votaries of religion, in the very sanctuary pollute themselves by crime ; and thus, as hypocrites, be¬ come double traitors to goodness and to religion." " What will be done with him?" asked John. ( ' The deed he hath performed in sight of all his brethren," replied the monk, " cannot be denied. We beheld it. With horror we beheld it. He will for that, ever be excluded from our society, and kept perpetually confined. He will be taken
216
from his usual cell and put in a dark room, reser¬ ved for punishment. There in loneliness, and shut out from day, we trust that the anguish of his mind will operate to penitence. He will, at stated times, be visited by some among our pious brethren who will admonish him, and aid the workings of his conscience, and bring him to the confession of the crime of which he is accused, or any other which layeth heavy on his heart. If not, the dreadful day when he hath no longer any hope on earth, will be more torturing to his mind than any corporal sufferings can be painful to his body. ? ! to see, as I have seen, the agonies of a sinful man upon his bed of death, is a sight more terrible than the uncontaminated heart ever can conceive. I have seen him writhe more tortuously than the winding snake. I have heard him scream more hideously than the screech-owl. I have known him draw his last breath with such acute despair as cannot be imagined nor described. There is not in the world a thing with which comparison can be made. The fiery torrent which floweth from the burning mountain is cool to the fever of the brain. The boisterous roaring ofthe sea is calm to the raging of his bosom : and the storm of the wild heath is peace to the warfare within his breast. O! pray for the conversion of this wretch. O! pray, that he may be saved from
217
such a torturing hour! O! pray that he may escape that dreadful condemnation promised to the unrepenting !" " Such a sight," said John " would be an awful lesson. Methinks I should be well pleased to witness it." " I trust, my son," said St. Evremond, " thou wilt never stand in need of such a dreadful monitor : and as a matter of curiosity, it is a sight from which every one would turn with horror." " Believe me, my young friend," said William de Valonnes, " the conclusion of a life whicii endeth in despair, is as likely to affect the brain as it is to touch the heart. I trust thou never wilt behold it." The bell now rang to prayers. " We must attend the holy call," said William. " In our orisons, let us remember the unhappy Hilde¬ brand, and the wounded Mertoph."
vot. ?.
L
CHAPTER XX.
The hours are past which kept ?? from my home, And my fond eyes shall once again behold The ancient turrets of my fether'a cattle, And tiie lov'd partner of my faithful heart
When s friends met hi the cell of William de Vaiomw , they had to tell each other that the sad event of the preceding evening had kept them waking through the night, " If but to hear of such calamities," said the monk, " be found suffi¬ cient to disturb your slumbers, O, my friends ! what would it be to witness them ?" " It would be terrible," said St. Evremond, perhaps too ter¬ rible to bear." " Hath any one seen Hildebrand?" inquired John. " Perhaps he already hath re¬ pented." " My son," said Father William, " re¬ pentance is not so sudden. The rage of passion is like a flash of lightning ; but penitence cometh to the heart like the advance of day, we see the dawn long ere we behold the glorious brightness of the meridian sun."
219
St. Evremond and his son attended matins and partook of the mormng meal, and then rose to depart for the castle î the home where every man expects to find happiness, peaee, and joy. Fa* ther William saw their horses brought to tl» gates of the convent, and became sorrowful* " Since I have inhabited this convent," he said, " I have never slept one mght from under its sacred roof. I have lived totally secluded from the world. The joy it was to see thee yesterday, hath awakened many feelings which I hoped I had overcome. Thy arrival was a pleasure j and pleasure is a thing which rarely findvth its way into a monastery. I said it was the first that I had known since I eame here. I did not do my bro¬ ther justice when I said so. He came once to visit me. It was before he married. Since then, the many tumults of King Henry*s reign have occupied his time, and military duties have kept him far away from me. His death hath quite estranged me from his family. I do not know his children. They will never seek me here. When a monk retireth from the social joys of life, he renoanceth ail which ca^ make life sweet. He loseth the comforts of kindred. He loseth the friends of his youth. He regretteth what he hath quitted, and he hath nothing to expect. He is an useless drone in the hive, who liveth unknown, 12
220
and when he dieth he is forgotten." " From my own home," said St. Evremond, " it is probable I never shall roam more. There, with Matilda, I shall <ïlose my life in quietness and peace. Mý son, perchance, may visit thee again ; and thou, mayhap, wilt come to where I dwell. Thou need- eat not fear a journey of one day, maugre the hills between us. Thou art younger much than I am, for I was older than thy brother. Thy father's castle is not far beyond the castle of St. Evre*- mond, and thou mayest stray again within thy native groves. Eleanor, thy brother's widow, is ä sister of whom thou mayest be proud. There are not many such. Her family is one which hath been duly trained, and I dare answer for them all, they will rejoice to see thee." " I know not if my introduction would be pleasant," said the monk. (( To see for one short day the castle wherein ï was born, wherein I was reared ; where my happy youth was trained, and know Γ am excluded from it by the vows which I have taken, would make me sad. To find my nephews only to be sepa¬ rated from them would awaken new regrets ; and the cloister to which I am consigned for ever, would be more dreary and more gloomy than it is at present. I have renounced the world, I have renounced my kindred, I have renounced society, I have renounced those joys which constitute our
221
happiness below, and I have no hope but in my happiness above. Happiness hath eluded my grasp on earth, I trust that I shall find her when I attain the skies. If ever thou shouldest have children/* he said, turning to John, " send none of them to wear a cowl. Man was not intended for retirement. It is among his fellows he must seek for comfort, though he may chance to find his bane. The wickedness of man is great, but yet his virtues are great also : and though we may be occasionally deceived and disappomted, the per¬ fidy of one associate is soothed by the fidelity of another." " I am unchanged," said St. Evre¬ mond, " since our separation I have meddled much in the affairs and bustle of the busy world ; and I have travelled far, and mixed with many nations : but I have found no place so delightful as my own home, nor no companion so dear as that of early life. The renewal of old friend¬ ships, almost reviveth youth. Thou wilt find, that when thou returnest to thy former haunts, thou wilt range among them as cheerly as when thy chin was smooth." While thus talking they had crossed the court, and reached the gates. The horses were wait¬ ing, and the travellers mounted. " If I do not soon see thee on the other side of this high hill," said St, Evremond, " I ehall reproach thee with ??
222
the odd saying, out of sights out vf mind." " I piay thee, come to us," said John, « I shall be impatient to know the issue of the sad event of yesterday*" " To quit this house, and slfeep from under this roof, which hath sheltered me so long," said father William, " is an arduous ttndfertakifcg. I must weigh it well, ere I dare venture on it»" " We will send messengers to fetch thee," said John, " and horses and mules for thy accommo¬ dation. " " I will ponder on what thou sayest," replied the monk, " till Isee you both again I take my leave of you, and bestow on you my benedic¬ tion—farewefi." " Farewell," replied the travel* lers. They instantly set off. John frequently turned to wave his hat at the good man, who re¬ mained at the gate as long as they were in sight, and when the turning road hid them frora his observation, John said to his father, *' It seemeth to me that those men, who are really good in their own intentions and their own actions, think too badly of the general world. There are, no doubt, some acts so very wicked, so very heinous, that at the moment when they are committed, the heart absolutely revolteth against the fellows of its kind, and man appeareth a thing to* be abhorred : but that antipathy, that disgust, that horror, prove how repugnant they are to the righ¬ teousness Which is inherent in us. The delight we
223
feel when we give pleasure, the gratitude we féeï when we receive kindness, the wish we have for the society of those who have done well, all prove that goodness is congenial with the human mind. Even in battle we admire more the hero who spareth the captive, than he who slaughtered the vanquished. The excessive compunction of the vicious at theit last hour, their extreme dread of retribution, and tbeir terror of future punishment, are unequivocal proofs that the heart is convinced it hath deviated from the virtue which it thus emphatically acknowledgeth to be the latent prin¬ ciple of its nature." ** Thy observations are'just," replied St. Evremond, " the wicked themselves, even when they are the farthest removed from goodness, bear ample testimony that it is an in¬ tegral part of human nature, for they despise their companions in crime, though they associate with them for the furtherance of their guiity pur¬ poses, and at the very moment when their iniquity is at the height they venerate virtue : and thou mayest rest assured, John, that in the practice of virtue we shall always find our greatest happi¬ ness/ 1 The authority of the parent and the duty of the child were softened between St, Evremond and his son into such cordial friendship and such rau- l4
224
tual confidence, that they communicated to each other all their feelings and wishes without consi¬ deration of the disparity of age. St. Evremond, having often expressed the pleasure it would give him to behold Matilda, from whom he had been separated so long, John said, " As we draw near our castle, and all the recollections of home and neighbourhood crowd to the heart, I feel an anti¬ cipation of pleasure in the idea of talking to Isa¬ bella de Nartonville, so as to soothe her grief for the loss of her father. I shall like to hear all her tender inquiries, and I shall be delighted to ad- ministf-Y comfort to her while I praise him. I am anxiously desirous to see if the unassuming sim¬ plicity of the girl has produced the sweet mildness of the lady Almadore her mother. If she should be grown up like her father, I shall love her for his sake." iS And if she be not like her father, perhaps, John, thou wilt love her for her own sake." John was somewhat startled by his fa¬ ther's observation. He hesitated a little, and then said, " I am taken by surprise, I know not how to reply to thee. I have not yet examined my heart on the subject." " Thou wilt discover it without examination in the first interview," said St. Evremond. " It will not, I trust, be a dis- pleasing discovery to thee," said John. "No, no, no, no," replied his father, clapping him on
225 the back, " on the contrary I shall rejoice. I have not yet forgotten the days when I courted thy mother; no, nor the fascinating charm of her smile when I declared my love ; nor yet the joy¬ ful day when I led her to the altar : neither have I forgotten the delight thy birth was to my heart. Mayest thou be as prosperous in thy suit, and as happy in thy union as I have been." " Let us pursue this topic no farther/' said John. " I know not what I shall begin to fancy, if we say more." " It will not be quite a beginning, I believe," said his father. John thought himself happy that the sight of the ocean, which was now in full view from the summit of the hill, which they had just reached, gave him an opportunity of changing the subject ; and he made an obser¬ vation, which had been many times made before. " How beautifully the dazzling waves of the sea dance beneath the sun beams," he said. " Not so beautiful as the sparkling eye of Isabella," said St. Evremond. " Spare me, spare me," said John. " Spare me for the present. When I shall have assured my own heart what it is that makes me wish to see and talk with Isabella, thou shalt know all my thoughts, all my wishes, all my hopes. My wish at this moment İs for home, and my hope that we may reach it in safety. We have, as yet, hardly performed half our journey, L 5
226
and unless we quicken our speed when we get into the plain, we shall not see our castle to night." " Every part of this hill, ivhich seems to shut us? in, is a toilsome ride, and surmounting it is a fatiguing effort," said St. Evremond. " The horses must rest before we descend from this high eminence, for the sun is more than usually scorching, and the air uncommonly oppressive. Here are a few trees, the only shelter we shall find for many miles : here we will alight. What, hoa ! Mansel," he said to one of the attendants, " open thy wallet here, place thy cold meats be¬ fore us, and bring us a ñagon of wine," They dismounted, and seated themselves on the grass beneath the few trees, which grew in one small cluster; and while they regaled, St. Evremond said, " I perceived, while we stood gazing on that vast expanse of waters, that when we descend the hill, we shall soon wind into that long remem¬ bered path on the margin, which leadeth direct to the castle de St. Evremond, where my father and my grandfather, and his father and grandfather have dwelt for many years, and where I hope thy posterity will dwell for many ages yet to come." When the repast was ended, John, as he gazed around, said, " How wonderfully different are the prospects from this high summit. We look back on the steep shrubby acclivity we have climbed
227
with difficulty, beyond which is a dark wood, bounding the view with its deep gloom, and we look forward to a wide plain, and the mighty sea stretching, as it should seem, to the utmost limits of the world. The eye aches as it looketh toward the line where the water and the sky meet toge¬ ther." " Though we often sail upon that vast watery surface, and escape from all its perils," said St. Evremond, *' how many sink beneath it and are lost ! How many tales the shipwrecked mariner recounteth of storms, when all mayhap, but only he, went down in sight of shore ; while, without an eflbrt he was drifted by the tide, or thrown by some rude wave upon the rock ! How many travellers relate the dangerous passage of the woods and forests, and the desperate murders of banditti. I do not like, while we are riding mid their dusky growth, to talk of all the stories I have heard ; but I never am within the dismal shade of their interwoven branches, hut they recur to recollection. I remember one most sad event which my father often told as we sat in winter round the blaze ofour cheerful hearth. It occurred when he was a boy. More than half England was at that time covered with forests ; and every forest afforded shelter to robbe rs» who were formed into regular associations, and pillaged and murdered for a joint company, in L 6
228
which all partook of the fruits of their depreda¬ tions ; and great bodies of men submitted to one who was made their chief, with infinite more loy¬ alty than any submit to the established laws and regulations of the kingdom. It happened then s that Hilliard de Rosenne, the grandfather of our present vassal Brian de Rosenne, was travelling with his wife and eldest son, and a young girl his daughter, named Robina. They were beset in a fo¬ rest near Exeter, by a large party belonging to one of those associations of depredators. They were later within the dark confines than could be jus¬ tified by prudence, and they had fewer attendants than such a man should have in his train when he departeth for a far journey. They heard a shrill distant whistle, and they kept close to each other. They rode on, for halting would not have been safety. Again the whistle sounded, and again and again, in different parts of the forest answer¬ ing one to the other. After a long pause the whistle again was heard, and again was answered, and the sound was nearer. After another pause it sounded another call, and was answered so very near to them, that they were convinced the rob¬ bers ivere drawing together in a band, and that they were approaching toward them. * We must defend ourselves stoutly,' said Hilliard, ' for no doubt we shall be assailed : let us, however, be
¿¡¿Λ)
silent, that our voices may not discover us.' r Their silence availed them not, the trampling of their horses betrayed them, and one of the gang called loudly, * Now, my boys, now for it ; come on, booty is near.' They rushed forward, and Hil¬ liard and his men prepared to defend themselves > but when they were attacked, the party of ban¬ ditti was so numerous, and so well armed, that Hilliard and his attendants were overpowered and seized. They had defended themselves with much bravery, two of their retinue were slain, and the other two were close beside their master, helping him to defend himself. The young man perceiving that they were all eager to seize hie father, took hold of the rein of his mother's horse, and setting spurs to his own steed, he went off at full speed, dragging his mother along by the rein he had seized. When the thieves saw the youth set forward so unexpectedly, they drew their bows, and their arrows flew after him ; but they were lost in the trees, and not one among them all reached him. To follow would have been in vain, therefore they all rallied round Hilliard, and seized him and his daughter, and the two remain¬ ing attendants, and dragged them to a place where the trees had been cleared away, and seve¬ ral rude huts had been erected. The two dead men were left where they fell. Those who had
230
fallen into their power had their hands tied be¬ hind them, and afterward were each tied to a post within one of the huts. ' We shall know what to do with you all when Arnold our chief returneth,' said one among them. Judge of Hilliard's an¬ guish, when next day he saw the man who bound them enter, and taking Robina from the post to which she had been bound, and loosening the cord which tied her hands, he said, ( Come, my pretty girl, I will lead thee to our commander.' The moment she was at liberty she ran to her father, and clinging to him, she said, ' I will not go with thee, I will not leave my father.' ' We will soon see that, my girl/ said the man, and he instantly seized her. The indignant father raised his foot, and spurned the wretch who attempted to foree away his child, so violently, that he reeled backward and fell. When he had recovered his surprise he rose, and drawing a dagger from his bosom, he plunged it in the breast of the girl, and she dropped at her father's feet. The violent scream of Hilliard when his daughter fell, brought in Arnold ; who, when he saw the lovely girl wel¬ tering in her blood, who had thus by death esca¬ ped him, he looked sternly at her father, and said, * thou shalt pay for this.' In the mean time, his son, who was also named Hilliard, by a path which he followed at random, made his wsy eut
231
of the forest. He rode on, leading hh mother, and wandering as chance directed him. After riding for many hours, he espied a distant hght, and making toward it, he found himself near a convent. He beat loudly against the outer gate for a long time before he was attended to. At length a female voice inquired who thus disturbed the sisterhood. Hilliard told his tale, whicii was warranted by his mother, who was instantly ad¬ mitted, and he was directed to a neighbouring mo¬ nastery of holy Benedictine monks, who received him when he had there, as he had done to the nun, told the sad tale of his flight. He was conducted to a cell, and next day directed homeward. When he arrived, my father said, he came like one quite crazed. He told his tale, and my grandfather summoned all his vassals with their vassals, and so on from one under vassal to another, and they set forward in coat of mail, armed as for battle. Young Hilliard knew exactly how to retrace the road he had followed with his father, and the hor¬ rid sight of his two dead attendants too plainly marked the spot of the aftray. What course to follow ne« t they knew not. It was impossible to chuse the way by which to find the place whereto his father had been conveyed. They however heard tlie sound of a distant carousal, and they followed it by their ear. They had not 9
232
gone far, before they reached the cleared spot wdiere the huts were erected. The men, amount¬ ing to nearly fifty in number, were seated on the ground merrily feasting and drinking. When they saw so many armed men advance upon them, they surmised that the fugitive young man was come to redeem his father. Fired by every passion which disgraces human kind, they rose to defend themselves. Arnold their chief entered a hut, from which, dragging Hilliard with his hands still bound, he said to him, * I told thee thou shouldest pay me for defrauding me of thy daugh¬ ter.' So saying, he plunged a dagger in his breast, and throwing him forward, he said, ' If any one among you belongeth to this man take liim, I give him up.' Young Hilliard instantly dismounted, and attempted to raise his father. t Leave me, my son. I may as well die here as be an incumbrance to the party. Where is thy mother V ' My mother is in safety/ replied the youth. ' Then I die in peace. Heaven bless her! and bless thee!' The party of warriors surrounded the banditti, who being all thus found unarmed, could not defend themselves. They were all made prisoners and consigned to differ¬ ent punishments, some to death, some to imprison¬ ment. Young Hilliard's mother, when she heard the sad tale which the two liberated attendants
233
told of the murder of Robina, and her second dreadful affliction in the murder of her husband, refused to quit the convent wherein she had taken refuge, and became a nun. The youth, who thus unhappily became the head of his family, was long before he recovered from the effects of his great grief for fhe calamitous fate of his father and his sister. They were both brought from the place where they had been thus inhumanly murdered, and buried among their ancestors with all funeral pomp. Hilliard did not marry till he was far advanced in life. I remember him well, he was always pensive and grave, I may almost say always melancholy. He died about two years before my marriage, and his son Brian succeeded to the inheritance on which he has lived so honourably." St. Evremond had just concluded the melan¬ choly story of the death of Hilliard de Ro¬ senne, when the attendants brought the horses, and he and John mounted and began to descend the hill. It was with extreme difficulty that the horse¬ men descended from the summit where they had halted. The hill was so very steep it made them giddy to look down. It was a road so little fre¬ quented that there was scarcely a path to follow, and they often came to such unexpected deep dells, that they were compelled to wind about to
234
the right and to the left in such extensive cir¬ cuitous directions, that they were almost two hours in reaching the level ground below. Had they not been good and daring riders they would not have ventured such a precipice. When they found themselves safe at the bottom they stopped. The horses stood and panted, and the riders breathed short and quick. When they attempted tó proceed, the poor animals were quite sluggish ; and notwithstanding the patting and encourage¬ ment of their masters, whose voices they knew, they long refused to stir. " We shall do well," said St. Evremond, " to let them recover them¬ selves, they will obey the spur when they are able." They pricked their sides many times be¬ fore they did more than paw the ground. " het us dismount," said John, " and ease them of our weight." They did so : and taking the reins, they drew them gently, and the beasts began to follow slowly. They let them nibble the grass, which was moistened by a little rill which trick¬ led down the steep, and after they had cooled their mouths, they neighed, and grew brisker, and looked about them. Their masters walked on, still leading them, and when they had gone on thus for about half an hour, they remounted, and the animals proceeded with spirit and willing¬ ness. The sun was high and shone full upon them. " This scorching heat and this wide plain,"
235
said John, " are as overpowering as the unshel¬ tered plains and ardent suns of Asia." " Yea," replied St. Evremond, " but we are riding peace¬ ably to our home, where joy and happiness await us. That is a delightful certainty which smooth- eth all our wearied steps. Though in the east fame and glory were attained, with pain we must confess, that to slay was our intention and our errand ; and to be slain, perchance I speak the truth in saying, was our dread: for to die and mingle with the clod in a strange land, far from our friends ; without our wives, without our rela¬ tives ; perhaps to rot upon the field of battle, or to be buried in one great congregation of dead men all thrown promiscuously together, without confession, without unction, are thoughts which oft appal the warrior. The animation of the cause for which we arm, and chiefly of the holy cause which called us to Palestine, with martial transports checks for a while such contemplation, but when we compare such rough transports with the calm delights of our domestic castle, it is astonishing, even to ourselves, that the enthu¬ siasm of fame and glory should be found sufficient to lure us from our enjoyments : from those dear home-felt enjoyments whicii we ever seek wdien all the dazzle of the field of arms h#th vanished,
236
even as the sun vanisheth behind the hills, and leaveth the world in darkness." It is a common observation, that the value of things is more known by loss than by enjoyment ; and every man who examines his own feelings, will find that the observation is a just one. No¬ thing so incontrovertibly proves its justness as the longing desire every body has for his own home after an absence from it. However a man may repine because his house is not so large, so lofty, or so magnificent as the house of his neigh¬ bour ; or that his gardens are not so extensive ; or whatever defects he may find which he fancies authorise his laments ; still wandering in large grounds, not his own} staring about in large mansions, not his own; soon weary him, and please but for a short time : and his own home, and every thing appertaining to his own home, become objects of desire. They please for ever, with pleasure ever reviving ; and the anxiety with which he returns to it proves that his own home is the only seat of real delight. St. Evremond and his son felt the value of home to its full height. More beautiful skies, »more luxuriant soils, more fruitful countries, sunk in estimation when compared with the charms of Devon. There was no verdure, there was no
237
hill, there was no rock, like the verdure, the hill, and the rock of Devon. There was no castle like the castle of St. Evremond : and in the esti¬ mation of the baron, there was no woman like Matilda. To all these domestic pleasures, of which they had been so long deprived, they were returning. The windings of the coast, the asperity of the rocks, and the intricacies of the woods, had dri¬ ven them out of the course of the direct line homeward, and it was not till they had passed the plain, that thoy entered the long known path which led to their own domains. How delightful to them was every glen and glade, and every din¬ gle. They pointed out to each other certain trees, which by circumstance were become the records of events they loved to remember. Here so and so happened : here so and so. At length the turrets of the castle were seen in the dis¬ tance; and by degress the massy walls, the windows, the gates. " Go," said, St. Evremond, t( ride on, Mansel, and tell the baroness how near we are." Mansel spurred his horse and gallopped forward. " How glad my mother will be to see us," observed John. " Aye," said St. Evremond, " and after our long absence, what ecstacy shall we prove in being met by her." They rode on, and the nearer they drew to
238
the end of their journey, the more they quick¬ ened tlieir speed. " Look here/* said John, " Look there," said St. Evremond, at every recognition. At length they reached the rising ground on wdiicli the castle stood. They were overjoyed. They were silent.
CHAPTER XXI.
There are things which drive vs from our nature ; Which sad eñects produce upon the mind, And give a new direction to each pow'r, Each faculty, each sense—Which oftentimes Unman us, and benumb the very soul, Which sometimes raise us to a pitch so high, That uncontroul'd is all we say and do. ? ! then the true discretion we forget That ought to curb our actions and our speech : And then, with bitter railing, we insult The nearest and the dearest to our heart ; Or else, with wild confession, we betray Our guile, our wickedness, to all around, And startle those who hear us.
Mansel, by the use of his spur, had so quickeuctl his speed, that he reached the castle full half an hour before the baron and his son arrived. He blew the bugle loudly when he reached the gate. All the domestics ran in a body to open it. "Hali! Mansel! Well, Mansel? How goeth
240
it ? How fareth our old master ? how fareth our young master ? where are they ?" and a number of other little anxious questions, which proved love for the baron, and for his son, and eager wishes for their return, burst from every voice. " Both well—both safe—both near. They will be here in a few moments. They are close behind me." They all crowded round him. " Well,—and how ?" " Do not stop me, do not stop me," said Mansel. " I must to the baroness : the baron sent me on to announce him. Where is she ? conduct me to her." There was an instantaneous silence. Mansel looked around. Every coun¬ tenance dropped. " Why ! how now ? What aileth you all ? All your clacks are stopped in an instant !" No one spoke. if By the mass," said Mansel, " the name of the baroness hath bewitch¬ ed you every one. Come, come ; conduct me to her, I say. Come, lead the way, old Alton." Alton shook his head. " What ! wilt thou not ? Well ! well ; I must find her. I am sure to be welcome. I am sent by the baron." " Be sure of nothing," said Alton. " The baroness is in her moods ; I may say, in her lunes. None of us know what to make of her. She jumpeth here, and she runneth there. She risetli in the night ; she goeth to bed by day. She singeth, she laugheth, she crieth, none know wherefore. She
241
feasteth when it is no festival. She abstaineth when it is no fast. She rateth us, she cajoleth us, and all in the twinkling of an eye, as may be said. We know not where to catch her. What pleaseth to-day, displeaseth to-morrow; and what she calleth for, is, for the most part, the first thing she rejecteth." " Moods and lunes indeed," quoth Mansel. " Can none of you guess the cause of all this foolery ?" " There is the very rub," said Alton. " We cannot guess the cause, for the meaning of what she sayeth cannot be got at. She speaketh in out of the way phrases, and muttereth as if she were conjuring a spell.— Stand away I stand away—here she cometh—here she cometh." " Mercy on us," said Mansel, " what a change !" With her eyes bent on the ground, and her arms folded on her bosom, Matilda advanced slowly into the hall. " Who blew the bugle?" she asked. " So please my lady," answered Man¬ sel, " it was I." "Thou! Mansel! Whence comest thou? What news from Palestine?" ' { He doth not come from Palestine," said Al¬ ton. " Who bade thee speak ? Whence com¬ est thou ?" " I come from my master, from the baron de St. Evremond," " From the baron de St. Evremond ! well ! and what of him ? Hath he found Joscelyn?" Mansel could make no vol. m. m
242
reply, he knew nought of Joscelyn. " What hast thou to say to «i©, from the baron de St. Evremond?" asked Matilda, staring at him. *' My lord, the baron $t. Evremond, eent me to say he will be with thee on the instant." " And my son, mayhap ?" tí Both," answered Mansel Matilda stood some time motionless, and then laughed. " Aye," she then said, " it is well. Let them come ! Let them approach ! I dare meet them." " No doubt my lady dare do any thing," replied Mansel. Far was it from Mansel to in¬ tend to gall Matilda, but as, according to the old saying, a guilty conscience Js & own accuser, she imagined he meant reproof in what he mid» ihe reddened deeply. « Who bade thee reprove me ?" she asked angrily, " Reprove, my lady !" exclaimed Mansel. " Aye, man ; such was my question. I say unto thee, what knowest thou of my transactions ?" " My lady misapprehended* what I spoke/' said the astonished Mansel. " W r ell, well ; well, well," said Matilda, *' speak of thy master. Where is St. Evremond ?" " He followeth me close at heels," said Mansel. " How shall I receive him! How near is he? I must mount .he tower and watch for his approach." So saying she quitted the hall. " She is craved," said Mansel. i( She is as mad as a March hare*"
243
*" It will be a sad reception for the baron," ob¬ served Alton. " Aye," said Mansel, " he looketh quite with rapture to meeting with this fantastic woman. Why, man, he doateth on her as he did the day he married her. Such tricks and pranks will cut him to the heart. I am glad she is no wife of mine. She would soon make me as mad as herself." . While the servants were thus commenting on her behaviour, Matilda went to the roof of the eastle. She stood on the highest tower, and gazed along the path, eagerly expecting to see St. Evremond and John emerge from out the wood. She beheld them among the trees : she lost sight of them as the foliage thickened : she discovered them again: she saw the feathers waving in their bonnets. She saw her husband and her son, and she observed how they spurred on, quicker and quicker as they drew near. With feelings she could not controul, and passion she could not command, she shouted as she gazed : but the sound of her voice died in the air, and reached not the anxious horsemen. When they attained the rising ground whicii gradually as¬ cended to the castle gate she turned from where she stood, and hastily descended. When she heard the bugle, her heart palpitated with pain¬ ful violence ; and when she eaw them enter, she m2
244
ran toward them· Suddenly she checked her¬ self and stopped. St. Evremond sprang to meet her, and she shrunk back. " Matilda ! my be¬ loved Matilda ! why this ?" He caught her hand and raised it to his lips. " I kiss this fair white hand," he said, " this fair white hand of my desti¬ ny." She snatched her hand from his grasp. " This fair white hand ! aye. It is a fair white hand/' she said as she viewed it. ** It is not spotted. No, no ; here are no spots upon it." " My best beloved," said St. Evremond, " doth thy joy for our return thus overpower thee ? O í thou know¬ est not how to welcome us." "Yea, yea, St. Evremond, I know how to welcome thee ; thou art my husband. I also know how to welcome thee, my son. I tell thee that thou art the heir. The heir of Montgomery thy grandfather." <c What dost thou mean ?" said John, as he looked with terror on her. " What I say, I mean," re¬ plied Matilda. " Thou art the heir. Joscelyn is dead. Yet there are no spots upon this hand. It is a fair white hand. It doth not smell of blood. No, there was no blood spilled. Ask Austin how it was. Austin the carmélite. Austin the son of Blanch. Austin who would be the heir of Neville. He can tell thee how it was. He pressed with all his strength : but we spilled no blood. No—this is a fair white hand." St,
245
Evremond and John stood blanched with horror at her sayin&d. " Aye, ye may well turn pale," she said, " but ye are not so pale as Joscelyn." They roused as she spoke; they advanced to¬ ward her. " Come not near me, ? ! my most excellent husband, come not near me ! I shall contaminate thee ; nor thou my son, for I shall blast thee : but thou art the heir." ■*' Gracious powers !" said St. Evremond, " what doth all this mean ?" " May it please, my lord/' said Alton, " my lady hath been long ill ; and she groweth worse and worse." " Never can I grow worse," said Matilda, '* the deed is done. It is not to be done again. Austin will tell all. He knoweth the archway. He knoweth the cave." " Where is Goda?" asked St. Evremond. "Here, so please my lord," answered Goda. '* Is thy mis¬ tress often thus ?" " So please my lord, she has been thus ever since the child was lost." " What child ?" said St. Evremond. " What child Ì" exclaimed Matilda. " My fathets child—Josce¬ lyn—my brother. ? he would have excluded John : but thou art the heir, my son. The heir of old Montgomery/' *■* She raveth," said St. Evremond. " I do—I do—" said Matilda, " O, my brain will crack !" she cried, striking her fore¬ head. (i My heart will burst !" she exclaimed, and she beat her breast. " I cannot bear it !" m 3
246
she said and started. t( het us lead thee gently to thy chamber," said St. Evremond. " Come, John, take thy mother's arm." " ? ! I can go alone. I can walk without a prop," said Matilda. " See ! I can go forward," she said, and walked away. " ? ! miserable, wretched day !" exclaim¬ ed St. Evremond, " ? ! John, John Í" he said, and dropped into the arms of his son. The servants, who when they heard the bugle sounded, had almost flown to meet their master, whom they loved with fond fidelity, had remained in the hall during the sad interview between him and Matilda. They partly understood her rav¬ ings, for they had heard the story of the disap¬ pearance of the child, from Godaj but they never had imputed the guilty theft to their mis* tress. With the ignorance, the simplicity, and the credulity of the thirteenth century, they had accused the elves and fairies: but now, Matilda had betrayed herself, and they were afraid to follow her. They were afraid of her because of her wicked deeds, for all dread a murderer. They ran to the baron, and helped the ter* rifled John to support him. " het us convey liim to a couch," they said. " Bear him gently ; be careful how ye carry him," said John. " We would rather die than hurt him," said every one
247
unanimously. " Lay him in the open air," said Alton. They bore him out, and laid him on the soft grass, where his son knelt in watchfulness beside him.
m 4
CHAPTER XXII.
Man for all the woes which he endureth Biameth his destiny ; forgetting still That the destiny of all his suff'rings Is himself; for his malignant actions By th' effects they cause, draw down upon him That fate which he denounceth. Of all the various sufferings which oppress the heart, there are none so dreadful as the sufferings which arise from conscious guilt. Even the fulfilment of the purpose for which bad acts are perpetrated, cannot quiet the grieved mind, for the fulfilment is a memento perpetually recur¬ ring and perpetually upbraiding. It is strange that seeing, as we see daily, that detection awaiteth crime, and punishment detection, that if no sense of goodness be within us, we are not deterred by fear. It is stranger, that
249
often witnessing the remorse, the anguish of the wicked, we should ever venture on an act of sin, and risk the horror which they endure, and the retribution which they dread. The terror of the wicked is not a story raised. It is not a fan¬ tastical invention ; a bugbear to affright the timid. It is a reality ; a visible fact. How violently the wicked mind is tortured is well known. It is recorded. Ancient times declare it. Modem times proclaim it. The physician who attends the dying wicked man is terrifíed at the fear ivhich he beholds. The priest is shocked to hear the deeds which he is called to soften. Matilda was not the first who by the violence of her own upbraidings was impelled to speak her crimes. Matilda has not been the last whose vio¬ lent emotions, whose convicted heart, and whose overcharged conscience, have deprived of reason. Her deed of death, the moment it was performed, produced remorse which grew to agony ; and the sight of John, for whom she had been guilty, brought in review before her the foulness of the crime of murder. Nature sprang within lier when she saw her son, and for a moment all pow¬ erfully operated, and she forgot all but a mother's joy when she beheld him : but the joy died ere well awakened. She could not behold her son without reverting to her brother whom she liad m 5
250
slain* When joy ceased, reason gave way ; and madness usurped her mind. The air revived St, Evremond. Wlien John saw his father awake as it were from a trance, he took his hand. " How is it with thee ?" he said gently. " I know thy voice, John, and I feel the pressure of thy hand, or I should thmk I dream. Surely I have been drunk. Some potent mixture hath been infused into my wine, and I have seen a vision of what never was reality» Are we at the castle of St. Evremond ?" « We are," said John, " we arrived here high in hope, about an hour since." " Where is our hope now ?" said St. Evremond. " ? ! it is flown," replied John, " in one short moment flown swifter and farther than ever arrow sped from the best drawn bow." "Then all the sad calamity, which I hoped was only visionary, is cruel fixed reality !" " ? ! I am so lost," said John, " so bewildered in the mysterious sayings of my mother, that what is real I cannot divide from shadowy imagi¬ nation." " Will my lord be pleased," said Alton, " to return into the hall ? The orders of the baroness are often varied in contradiction one to the other; but her last orders were hv a feast. To hail the wished return of their dear master, the glad do¬ mestics have obeyed her : and all the serfs and
251
hinds, in holiday attire, are assembled to cheer thee to the dais." " I thank their love," replied the baron, " but how can I be cheered by any voice of gratulation, when my wife wildly hath withdrawn herself from the honourable seat of hostess at my board ?" " My mother is ill," said John, " and sayeth she knoweth not what : but she will return to us and joy. Thi» fever ofthe mind shall pass away like the sudden storm of summer. Meanwhile, receive the testimonies of attachment which the lowly offer thee ; and let not her momentary absence destroy the festivity of the lower table. At the next feast she will preside again." " Be it so. Come ï I will not let my loss of happiness disturb the happiness of others." So saying, he leaned on the arm of his son, and entered the hall, and advanced to the dais. The moment he appeared, all cried out, " Welcome, welcome—welcome to thy castle and to us." When the buz ceased, the minstrels struck their harps, but they knew too well the feelings of their master's mind to interrupt his pensiveness by light and sprightly airs, They played those solemn grave pathetic strains which calm the mind, and soothe the breast ; and they raised no song but such as long tradition had brought down from times remote ; and always had m 6
552
been used in moments of affliction, to raise the mind from earth to heavenly contemplations. They stole placidly to the heart of St. Evremond, and his attention was beguiled, and for a season all his sorrows hushed. ? ! there is ......... -Nought so stockish, hard and full of rage, But mušiek for the time doth change its nature.* ' Shikspmre. As far as feasting went, it was confined to the lower table; the bountiful hospitality of a baron s board was there displayed, and all partook plen¬ tifully, and the flowing can passed round ; but it passed round in silence. The hush of the dais kept all quiet. At the upper table scarcely was a morsel tasted : scarcely was the lip moistened. St. Evremond sat in the seat of the foist, but the chair of the hostess was empty ; and John, by his father's side, watched him, and forgot to feed· When the repast was ended, St. Evremond waved his hand in token of farewell, and every one left the hall without a word. Is this the castle where pomp was wont to spread its lustre, and to shine in full magnificence ? Is this the hall where all that grandeur could dis¬ play of costliness once glittered around ? where
253
the cup of fellowship passed in friendly pledge, where mirth diffused her cheerfulness, and joy reigned triumphant ? Was it here Matilda came in pride, and like the queen of love and beauty bore universal sway? Was it here the nobles feasted with her, and the vassals did her homage ? Yea, it was here. Here she came with lofty mien and haughty step, and all bow r ed at her footstool. O! now she hides! Guilt hath debased her ! Shame hath driven her away ! The skilful far and near were called to her assistance ; but no physician could be found who was able to "------------------Minister to a mind diseas'd, Pluck from the memory a rooted sorrow, Raze out the written troubles ofthe brain ; And, with some sweet oblivious antidote, Cleanse the full bosom of that perilous stuff, Which weighs upon the heart." Shakspeare. The thick-coming fancies which troubled her 3 and kept her from her rest, were beyond the reach of medicine, and she could not minister unto herself* Unconscious of all around her; sensible to nought but retrospection; her vio¬ lence was incessant ; she never had a lucid inter¬ val. Dreadful, dreadful state of diminished, lost humanity ! Though pricked and stung with
254
points that pierced her heart ; though lacerated by a blade sharper tban a two-edged sword; though the mind rubbed and galled its own wound; all arose from the dir- acuteness of despair. Repentance, on the balmy whig of hope, came not to soften and to calm.
CHAPTER XXIII.
There is a time when battles please no more, And heroes, once aspiring, cease to soar ; When greaves, and casque, and cuirass are thrown by, And swords, and spears, and shields all useless lie : When glory, palld, retireth from alarm, From noise and tumult, and from risk and harm ; When fields, and groves, and calm retreats, invite To social converse, and to home delight ; When ev'ry hope, and ev'ry wish, is found Within the circle of domestic bound. ? ! then how sad, if disappointment fell Meet the fond heart, and with a dismal yell Crieth, avaunt!—Here no enjoyments dwell. Here ne'er again Bhall love, with tender care, And gayly deckr'd in smiles, salute thee—Ne'e r Shall peace again within thy walls appear ï Here guilt ί( ? rage for ever are ally'd, Here grief «aall everlastingly abide í
When die ardour of youth is past, and the love of glory and the thirst of fame cease to rouse to deeds of hi*§h exploit ; when the lance is laid
20β
aside, the sword sheathed, and the buckler hung up in the hall ; when the tranquillity of retirement draws the tempered bosom to the conviviality of the domestic board, then is the moment when the heart looks forward with delight to those enjoy¬ ments which are congenial with the very best affections of our nature. The fidelity of depen¬ dants, the society of friends, the attachment of kindred, the reciprocalness of love, then appear with the glowing tints of rapture, softened by the mild shadowings of tenderness. The repose of the warrior who seeks comfoift there where only it can be found, in the bosom of his family, is like the brightness of the calm sweetbeamed sun of autumn. No soldier had ever been braver, no nobleman had ever been more honourable, no individual had ever been more urbane than St. Evremond. His valour arose from patriotism, his honour from virtue, his urbanity from benevolence. He doat¬ ed upon his wife, he almost idolized his son. He ivas revered by his vassals, and beloved by his domestics ; and after a career, glorious accordmg to the sentiments of the times, aftel enduring many hardships, after being exposed to many risks, and escaping from many dangers, it was with his long loved Matilda that he sought happiness ;
257
the dear true happiness of the heart. ? when such a man is thus severely disappointed in her whom hitherto he had deemed perfection, it may be compared to the blight which withereth the blossom, and the canker which destroyeth the root : and John, the pride, the boast of his fa¬ mily, shrunk like the noblest flower in the garden beneath an untimely frost. Matilda, in the vio¬ lence of her ravings, thought not on their suffer¬ ings. She knew them not when she beheld them: yet she often spoke as though she talked with them. So difficult, so slow, so rare, was distant inter¬ course sík hundred years ago, that the intelli¬ gence of the baron de Montgomery's marriage with Catherine de Clifford, had not reached Asia. The baron and his son heard it on their return home for the first time, with all its details ; and its fatal dissolution by the death of Catherine. They heard, too, the loss of Joscelyn, with all the mystery that attended his disappearance. No one dared say, t the baroness stole away her bro¬ ther.' No one dared surmise that the baroness had been his murderer. She betrayed herself. When most she raved, then loudest did she accuse herself and Austin. ' It was Austin who led me to the cave—Austin pressed my hand, this
258
fair white hand, upon his breast—when his špirit fied, it was with a faint cry. Since then I have heard him cry perpetually; but now he crieth loudly. The sound of his cry reacheth from the deep cave beyond the bridge, even to this distant castle—Hark—dost tliou hear hira V How many times a day St. Evremond entered her chamber and strove to calm her phrensy! How frequently he introduced their son, to draw her back to reason by ^internal love. Vain, vain assiduity! How many times, when they heard her yells in the night, they rose to watch her outrage. They strove to soothe her, but she could not be softened ; they strove to intimidate her, but she could not be checked. Her wailing» were loud exclamations, her agonies were excessive distortions, and her terrors absolute convulsions. She imagined every thing that was wild and su¬ pernatural. She fancied that her life was ended, and that she was in a world of spirits. She called every one by some new name, characteristic of what she feared. '* Thou art Vengeance ;" she said to one, " thou hast a rod in thine hand. Thou art Murder," she said toanother,"thou car- riest a dagger ;" and in the height of fury she struck her son. "How därest thou," she said
259
to him, " in this place of torture, to assume the form of John?" St, Evremond would willingly have concealed from every one the sad state of his bereft Matilda ; but it was impossible. The servants spoke of it; tlie physicians buzszed it abroad; and the priests reported it. The vassals heard it, and they would sometimes come to visit and to comfort the sorrowful husband, and the un¬ happy son ; but where misfortune was sc keen, even the voice of friendship sounded an unplea¬ sant tale. These dreadful ravings continued many months, every day more violent than the day gone by. " Is Joscelyn found ? Ah î he layeth in the cave ; Austin knoweth where l ? ! he pressed my hand with vehemence, and the child died. Hah ! hah ! the child died! far below the surface of the earth, in a deep cave : the lowest cave in the wood. Who shall search so low ? But John is become the heir ! Aye, aye—John is the heir. John is the heir. John is the heir !" She repeated that cry over and over again, each time with a louder shout of exultation ; increasing the violence of her gestures as she increased the sound of her voice. No one could stop her. The more en¬ deavours were made to prevent her vehemence,
260
the more she raved, till at length her voice and her agitation were beyond endurance ; and screaming, " He is, he is, he is, the heir," as if her loud ravings enforced the assertion, and ela¬ ted her ; and whirling round and round as she spoke : over-exhausted nature sunk beneath the boisterous exertions, and she dropped. A violent shriek from the attending women, surprised St. Evremond and John as they sat in melancholy silence. They rose, they ran to the apartment ; Matilda was a corse. Her countenance exhibited the terrifying spec¬ tacle of the enraged maniac. Her eyes were fixed in a wild stare : her nostrils were distended, her mouth wide open, and her jaw dropped. Her two hands were fast clenched: and her knees bent. Her death seemed to have been momen¬ tary, as if her heart had burst. 0,for a muse of fire! that might to the full express the bitterness of sin! No mortal hand can guide the pen, that can describe the state of that man's mind who hath thrown off the radiant hue of goodness, and is besotted with foul thoughts which lead to deeds of darkness and of death. O, for an angels voice ! to warn the world
261
agamst the vile incitements of those who call the innocent astray, '' With visor'd falsehood, and base forgery," and betray them with those many snares they have, those s «< ., ...... . Many baita, and guileful spells, T' inveigle and invite the unwary.'' Behold! behold Matilda! behold her, fallen by guilt from every thing which earthly good con¬ tributes to make life delightful. Behold, how she hath dashed her cup of joy on the ground î Behold how she hath grieved her husband! How she hath disgraced her son ! It is not only the events of the days whicii are gone that record the misery of the wicked ; and the woful consequences of guilt ; modern times proclaim and manifest the same. Follow him who seems to be most callous, who seems to brave the laws of earthly power, and the threat- enings of a future judgment : follow him to that secret chamber ivhere the eye of his companion in crime watcheth not his boasted hardness, and behold the anguish of his fear. Behold how he smites his breast! Hark! how he cries out, * 4 fíe merciful unto me f
262
? ! if you would be happy here and hereafter, " Love Virtue, she alone is free, She can teach you how to clime Higher than the sphery chime ; Or if Virtue feeble were, Heav'n itsself would stoop to her.'* Milion,
CHAPTER XXIV.
Often in madness dreadful íàcts are told Which startle those who hear; deeds are made known Which, but for that wild outcry, would have slept For ever in oblivrø. Many times The tide deliver'd by the maniac, Though in disjointed sentences rehears'd, Bringeth the wretch to justice, who had thought Ev'ry precaution 'gainst discovery Was safe, and he himself might rest secure; And while he hugs his mischief, he faileth In the pit whicii he had dug for others.
The exceeding consternation caused by the death of Matilda was appalling. St. Evremond and John stood motionless. They gazed in silence on the distorted features of a countenance once so lovely : and the women stood aghast. Their feelings were too terrible for tears. The afflicted baron could give no orders for her funeral, he had been unable even to order her to be raised from the ground on which she had fallen. Without orders from their master
264
the servants sent to the priests, who arranged every thing according to the ceremonies of the church ; and all was made ready for her convey¬ ance to the grave, while St. Evremond was ab¬ sorbed hi grief. The prayers were all duly said by the side of her coffin; and when she was en¬ closed in her narrow chest, the confessor said; " To-morrow we shall convey the remains of the baroness to the tomb." That information was the first thmg which rouoed St. Evremond from the stupor in which he had sunk after he had quitted the chamber, whereto he had been called by the shrieks of the women when his wife expired. Mingled with the impression made by her ghastly appearance as she lay quelled by death, he bad fondly reverted to the grace, the dignity with which she had thrown the scarf over his shoulder at the tournament, as she rose glowing in loveliness and beauty. He remembered the rapture with which he had received her hand at the altar ; and the eagerness with which he had returned from Palestine to elose his life in happi¬ ness with his beloved. Miserable disappoint¬ ment ! he found a maniac, who only spoke to him to check his fond embrace, and never knew him more. Alas ! to follow her to the grave at the very
265
moment when from her he sought all his joy : at the moment, when quitting the bustling scenes of active life, his wife, his home, made up his sum of bliss. The funeral exhibited every thing that was most solemn and most sad. Mourning in her gloomiest garb w r as present. Leaning on the arm of his son, the baron followed her to her last man¬ sion, attended by his domestics ; but the vassals had been forbidden to assist at the rites, for he could not bear to meet them. The funeral dirge, chaunted by the priests who preceded the coffin, on which the unheld pall hung loosely, floating in swelling blackness in the breeze, was nought but lamentaties-, The pro¬ cession proceeded to the church with as little pomp as could possibly depart from a nobleman's castle. The gaudy trappings wont to be exhi¬ bited at the interment of the great were all omit¬ ted. No banners proudly waving, flapped the air. No cognizance of family or rank. The towering eagle of St. Evremond graced not the decorations. The fair white hand of Montgo¬ mery was not raised. The abashed awe with which the lowly, who collected to see them pass, stood in silence, added to the mournfulness of the march. The quiet manner in which they enter¬ ed the unadorned holy fane, and saw her placed VOL. iii. N
266
among the dead, belonging to the family of St. Evremond, chilled the heart of the widower, and of his son. They returned to the castle, formerly the mansion of delight, now the abode of sorrow, and the disconsolate St. Evremond became the prey of a deep melancholy which he could not overcome. The amiable, the excellent, the dutiful John de St. Evremond his son, attended to him with unremitted care and tenderness; and while he assumed the superintendance and direction of all baronial dignities, and domestic arrangements, he was sedulous that his father s station, as head of the house and family, should be perfectly under¬ stood and f^t by every body. Thus, all tliose who came to the castle and partook of the hos¬ pitality, which was kept up with the munificent bountifulness of those ancient times, behaved to the father with the marked respect which was due, not only to his exalted rank, but to his honourable chai acter; and which was the only passport to the friendship of the son. The incoherent ravings of Matilda, had so strongly accused Austin of participation in her own guilt, which had been the perpetual theme of her exclamations, that John deter¬ mined to accuse him to the superior of his monastery, but being unwilling to leave his
267
father, he deputed Brian de Rosenne to that painful task. To that end, he requested his attendance at the castle. When the vassal, the long esteemed old friend of his father arrived, John was greatly agitated by his reception. He hesitated, and often began his discourse, and often stopped, unable to give utterance to what he wished to say on a matter whicii involved the guilt of his mother; but her strange self- accusing discoveries had made her such a subject of general talk, and such an object of universal reprehension, that his silence could not pre¬ serve her fair name, nor his discourse increase the obloquy which was cast upon her. Brian de Rosenne entered into all the feelings which thus distressed him. " We will not, my young friend," he said to him, " speak on the painful circumstan¬ ces of the death of thy lamented mother. With too minute detail they are blazed abroad. If aught I can perform may serve my highly honour¬ ed and esteemed St. Evremond, 1 trust thou knowest that my services are at thy command.' 5 " Austin ; the monk Austin should be punished," said John, " he should not boldly walk at large, destructive in his guile. Go thou to his monas¬ tery, and denounce him to the superior." Brian de Rosenne went : but the secular arm and the civil power could not reach the monk í u XT ? i> 'V
268
the security of the cloister. Yet, though the priesthood might not be exposed, nor the priest be made a public spectacle; within the walls which screened him, he was confined strictly; excluded from the society of his brethren, and enjoined such a rigid abstinence, that he might be said to waste away for want of nourishment. The neglected chud of Randolph de Neville, the forsaken infant of Blanch de Montravers ; he who should have handed down the name and lionours of his fatlier; yet, by the guilt of his parents, thrown an outcast on the world, and by anger, acrimony, and mortification, induced to harbour wishes, and hopes of aggrandisement which never could be realized; and to commit crimes, which must have hurled him from the elevation he so fondly coveted, even had he at¬ tained it, now feels more keenly than the loss of greatness and of riches, the loss of goodness. The guilt of his parents reduced him to penury, but he found an asylum : his own guilt has redu¬ ced him to shame, and brought responsibility on liimself, His person the cloister hides, his suffer¬ ings the cloister conceals, and the consecrated ground of his monastery entombs his mortal re¬ mains: but—let the pen stop—let us hope he lived to penitence—let us not
" Appoint heavenly dbpoNitiuu."
CHAPTER XXV.
Though the guilt of others often extends To those who are ally'd by kindred ties, And we are clogg'd by crimes in which we ne'er Have been participant ; yet the clear breast Miuisters comfort to itself, and brings, Maugre th' ungentle judgment of the world, To contemplation peace.
It is true, beyond all contradiction true, that let the world frown how it may, let it impute to us the crimes of others, or misjudge our individual actions, yet, we have hope, nay beyond hope, we have certainty, that our deeds are truly regis¬ tered there, where no foul blot shall darken with false blackness the little lustre which belongeth to the performances of man. Though the sensitive mind must ever feel un¬ kindness ; though conscious integrity must ever
270
be mortified when it is not understood, and though the upright heart must ever shrink abash¬ ed when dear and near friends degrade them¬ selves by wickedness, yet still the pillow of the virtuous is without a thorn. Though all grieve when the thief robbeth them of their possessions, and when the far more dread¬ ful theft of the liar robbeth them of their good name, yet the light of the clear breast of the guiltless cheers the gloom of misfortune, cala¬ mity, and disappointment ; and though insulted, despised, and rejected, the innocent never live in despair, and always die in trust. Though St. Evremond felt with all the acute¬ ness which honour, virtue, probity, and justice ever view crime, the exceeding falling oft 1 from goodness of his wife; though he grieved her death and her guilt ; though he drooped under the mortification of his severe disappointment; though he never coujd again raise his spirit tti joy ; yet his lamentation was without murmur. Though he could not look back with pleasure, he looked forward with hope: and his melancholy gradually softened into retired calm resignation : and John,* who had been the pride of his youtb, became the solace of his age. More deep was the grief of Montgomery for the loss of Joscelyn. The mystery which enwrapt
271
his disappearance, was a circumstance which kept sorrow perpetually alive, by keeping it constantly on the watch for explanation and discovery : but the dreadful circumstances which had attended his fate, were never made known to the venerable baron of the high castle. The death of Matilda was told to hiin with tender alleviation, and his honourable heart never knew the depravity of his child. His grandson John remained as the prop of his age, and the inheritor of his lands and possessions; but the name of Montgomery pe¬ rished in Devon, as the name of his remote ances¬ tor, who came to England with the conqueror, had perished in Shropshire, It sunk beneath that of St. Evremond, The honours and dig¬ nities of Nartonville, w r ere also transferred to the name of St. Evremond, by the marriage of John de St. Evremond ivith Isabella, the only daughter of Henry de Nartonville. Time has swept even the name of St. Evremond away, and all remaining is here and there a fragment of decay, mouldering without an index.
FINIS.
LONDON', PRI K TED BY R. GILBERT, st. John's square.
