Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Santa-Maria: or, The mysterious pregnancy: a romance
???????? /??????
S ANTA-MARIA. *· CHAPTER I. Like an oíd tale ftul, which ihall have Matters to rehearfe, tho' credit be afleep, aad not Λη ear open, SHAKSPEARE. ???? X HE Count and Countefs had fearcç time to form their obfervations, on the affeâing ftory related hy ßianca, when a violent* rapping afi%uJted the cottage door. Thoniraafo immediately attended Voi. И. ? this
( ? ) this unexpected fummons, and demand¬ ed « Who was without?"—" It's me— hie—Thorn—ma—hie— it's me/'—Then ftraight went the intruder's head full up againft the door. Rodolph and Ifabeila immediately rofe, and Carlo as inftantly recolleÔing the voice without, anxioufly exclaimed—«* It is my uncle, Drofi."— « Y-e-s—hic^—hie—up—yes—it's Drofi," was the disjointed reply.—The door thereupon was unfaftened, and in came Drofi, ftaggering, quite overcome with the charms of his favourite miftrefs— Iachryma-chrifti. " How now (faid the Count, fternly)—-why, this intrufion?— You are drunk, firrah/'—" Be fi-lent, my Lord—be fi-lent—I—I—hie—I—know— I-am—But if I—have not had—hie— O Jeíu —-hicc-up— í-rèafon-enough —to ma-ma-make me fo-bér— -The devil a —take
( 3 ) —take me—that s aU—ex-cufc me — fwearing-my-my Lofd—But- I-4-4ebow —I am— dni-dru-drirøk- w ·* Theø ???? fliame for ?<?, be ? fpoken uock," obferved Carlo- " Hotó your—your prate, thoa fenny knave (returned Drofi, placing his hand on the hUt of his fword) or I will car— ba -??- do—hie—you well—for though— I may be— dru— drunk—I can fig—fight as well—as the beft—aye—dolt—as—as- well as my Lord there.—And by Jefu— that- that—is-faying-»a good deal*** At this iaft expreffion, Drofi ftaggered againft the wall, oppofite to the one which fupported Rinaldo's picture. His eyes were inftantly fixed thereon—-he fiaçed wildly, and for fome moments ftopt the incoherency of his fpeech,— His voice«, however, foon found re-uttc- ? 2 lance,
( 4 ) ranCe, and' his fenfes fome recovery at the fight of the young prince. The Count and the whole cottage; were fur¬ prized and perplexed at this ftrange con¬ duft, whilft their anxieties predifted fome frefh myftery at hand. Drofi, how¬ ever, after as much refleftion, as he could fummons to his affiftance, propped his tottering carcafe againft the wall, aftd with a recovering degree of fobrkty, ex¬ claimed—*' There he is—by St. Marco— there he is, fure as im .ame is honeft, fober, Signior Drofi." " Who ? (moft fiercely returned the Count) Who, firrah?" " Who ?—Why, my Lord, have you loft your fight r" " Scoundrel, you have loft your fenfes —anfwer me ftraight—quick (roared the Count, drawing his fword, and fix* ing
( 5 ) ing its point to Drofi's bread) anfwer, I fay ! and inform me what brought you hither in this intoxicated flate, and what fudden caufe thus baniflied you fo unex¬ pectedly from the inn ?" Ifabeila, Carlo, Sylvia, and the hofpi¬ table cottagers, perceiving the violent emotions of Rodolph, and the confequent â2Lng&r of druuken Drofi, unammouily ruflied between, and interfered in his pre¬ fent behalf,—The old foldier having re¬ covered himfelf a little, however,· by tbis time, and touched by the applica¬ tion made by all around, for his pro**- teftion—with great good-humour, and fome compofure ,exclai med — u Ha ve done, have done, my Lord is too generous ts take an advantage of his ancient veteran, and faithful follower."— Rodolph, foftened by this condefcen- - • ß 3 fion,
( ? ) our heels, or rather all reeled round on our heels—I like to be fair and open, my Lord—I therefore fay, reeled—be¬ caufe I am apt to think that we were all drunk—I, however, being the fobereft of any, demanded who the ftrangers were, and what they wanted?—Upon which a fturdy fellow approached me, with a good-natured look, and faid— * ** that he was the hoft of the inn, in which we had been caroufing, and hoped, withal, that we fliould pay for the good cheer we feemed to have met with, as hc was returned from the wars, poorer than when he went." " Good lack-a-day ! (exclaimed Bian¬ ca) it muft be our hoft Hurtado, that you fpeak of."— 4i Right (returned Drofi) that is his name, for he told me fo himfelf, and as I was
( 9 ) I was not prefent at his chriftening, I cannot difpute it, my old damfel/'— At this latter expreffion, Lady Ifabeila, with her ufual miidnefs and good-nature, obferved—*' Drofi, this kind old woman, you know, has been our hoftefs ; for my fake, therefore, anfwer her lefs abrupt- Iy."— Thefe few words from the Countefs, had as much efFe£t on Drofi, as almoft fix hours found repofe.—The fufceptible fel¬ low, therefore, begged poor Bianca's par¬ don, and promifed his Lady not to offend again.— " When our hoft, therefore, my Lord, (continued Drofi, with more gravity than before) made this requeft, ï afked him what was his demand.—The captain of the party (who, I am fure, by his armour, is one of the Viceroy's body-guard) on ? 5 this,
( îo ) this, approached Hurtado, and whifper¬ ed fomething in his ear—upon which mine hoft direcìly faid to me, in reply, that he fliould not accept of left than ten pieces of gold.—My comrades thunder¬ ftruck at this exorbitant demand, colleci- ed themfelves together at one end of the room, whilft the ftrange foldiers (accom¬ panied with a-Joud Jaugh) began-to re¬ gale themfelves wdth the remnants of our wine ; not having ten pieces of gold, my Lord, or near the value of it, among us all, we ftood fooliih and filent for fome minutes. During this painful interval of fufpence to us, I perceived that the cap¬ tain was much diverted with our embar¬ raffment, and whifpering our hoft again : Hurtado immediately advanced towards us, and faid—" That for our farther de¬ lay, he muft have uve pieces more/'— Our amazement ililj farther encreafing, _22j¡|¿y¿tarKr
( ii ) particularly when this ear-monger (for I cannot at prefent call liim by any other name) perceiving us put our hands to tbe hilts of our fvvords, beckoned his men to unílieathe their fcymitars, and proteo tbc entrances. Difcovering me to be the chief of our little party, he then advanc¬ ed himfelf, and aiked me, under whofe command I ferved?— t My Lord Ro¬ dolph's/ I replied. On this he turned his heel upon mc, and eared mine boil again. — Hurtado then, addrefled himfelf to me again, and ) farther added, * that as wc were the retinue of Count Rodolph, he muít have fif lem pieces of¿ gold, or wc ihould not flir from thence/—Excufe me, my Lord, but at this Jail, requifidon, \ could not refrain froni laughing, heart jjy myfelf, and a moil happy laugh d t was.; for had I been boifterous or, morofe, »we ? 6 íliould
( 12 ) íjould, perhaps, have bad treble that to pay. The captain, on this effufion of good-natured forbearance (as he termed it) told me, that I might go on to you, and if in cafe I brought back the fifteen pieces of gold, for his active and valiant friend Hurtado, my companions fliould be all fet free j and if not, that he would put every man under an arreft, in the Viceroy's name, for having trefpaffed up¬ on property that wc were not legally entitled to. Then difcovering that my legs were not quite fo fteady as they fhould have been, and my fpeech a little inarticulate, I fuppofe, or fo,· when I lifp- «d out your Lordfliip's «wpe, he ordered one of his party to conduft me íafe to tbe road-fide ;—and as I departed, the military wag laughed moft heartily. " Anxioue to learn the caufe of their fudden
( iS ) fudden and abrupt arrival at the inn, I enquired of my companion, drunk as I then was, who, without the leaft hefita¬ tion, informed me—that they had been difpatched to feize an alarming banditti, who had infefted thefe parts, for four years and moré. * The chief motive, however (faid he) of our being fent hither, was at the iniligation of Philip Count Contarmi, who was attacked but two days ago, by thefe dangerous ruf¬ fians, between the Vale of Diana and the Appenine mountains, and there dan¬ geroufly wounded by one of their chiefs." " Wounded or ¡tilled, did he fay ?"—ex¬ claimed Rodolph, with a favage exulta¬ tion fparkling in his eyes. « Wounded, my Lord/' « Said
f 14 ) * c Said he, what brought Contarini fo far fouthward ■*" " He afterwards faid, that the Count was on his way to Bellito." Rodolph paufed on this reply for fome time, and then, with much perturbation, directed Drofi to proceed. " Hurtado (continued the ftranger) who h now one of the Viceroy's body-guard, and who was known to be well ac¬ quainted with the receffes along this part of the country, was deputed to be our guide in this expedition. His pene¬ tration was as rapid as it was fortunate, for he condufted us to a fecret recefs at the foot of the Appenines, where we furprized the robbers caroufing. Find¬ ing themfelves thus fuddenly furprized, and feeing ît impoflible to extricate themfelves, they fought with incredible fury.
( »5 ) fury. -----Many fell in the conflict— fome made their efcapes through fub¬ terraneous paffages. The two chiefs, however, were taken alive, and fome few of their banditti. They have been fince conducted, under a ftrong efeort, to the Caftle at Salerno, and will be fent for¬ ward in the morning to Naples -Ί " I then, my Lord (continued Drofi) particularly and pointedly aiked my com¬ panion, how they came to faften on us at the inn, fo fuddenly and unexpe&edly." " Hurtado (he. anfwered) expreffed a wifli to pay a vifit to, his. old abode, as it was but a few paces out of their way. He alfo informed our commander (whopi you may perceive-is inclined to,be merjy and facetious) that he *ha<l left İçme choice flagons of wine behind'him, when he had; left jt, which was a very pcrfua-
í »8 ) dolph. As fôr poor Bianca and her fon, they wem much diftreffed at the caufe of thek guefts' departure, and ftill more en¬ raged againft thofe who had been tbe occafion of it* The former, indeed, be¬ ftowed a hearty curfe on Hurtado, whom fiie wat determined never to call» honeft Hurtmdo, any more. Drofi returned in a ihort time aftes* ward·, wkh his ranibmed comrades. He then mformed Rodolph, that he had given tbe fifteen pieces of gold to cap tain Montano, who immediately tranf- ferred ? over to Hurtado. Mine hoft as inftantly offered ?? a couple of pieces, but I politely refufed tbem; obferving with all the gravity I poflibly could— ** That the whofe was little enough, for the quantity of his wine we had drank, and the excellent accomodations we had met
( ? ) met mth at his houfe." Captain Mon¬ tano perceiving the conftraint I put oa my mufclcs, and the forced conceit I Iikewife put on my words, burft mto m loud fit of laughter. Hurtado, m our de¬ parture, however, ihook me heartily by the hand, and affured me, wkhml, that I fliould henceforth be a free aad welcome gueft mt hi* houfe. In ? apparent cour¬ tefy, my Lori, I thanked him» though ? Ì in my heart I inwardly curfed their ill· timed merriment and extortion. The Count and Countefs having each made a handfome prefent to the poor cot¬ tagers î and Sylvia» Drofi, and ?? Uh hair¬ ing alfo contributed to increafe their purfe» they purfued their journey* leaving Bian¬ ca and Thommafo gazing after them* till their tears finally clouded them from their farther view.
CHAP;
CHAP, IL If ancient forrow be moft reverent, Give mine the benefit oí (igniory ; Aad let my griefc frown on the upper'hand, If forrow can admit fociét v, TeU o'er your woes agam,by view ing mine. Wnen forrows come, they come not fl ??1? fpies, Bat in Imitations, Í^AkSPLAH.. XT would b* too tedions to relate eveiy particular Kttle incident, that*he Count and hisi^tmuç met witb,on their journey 1?9?^??1И? in the hither Calabria : the leading features of them greatly fimilar to the former adventure * for feldom did they halt at any inn, or accidental houfe of accommodation,
( « ) accommodation, but what Ibey few Ibe piâure dí Rraaldo figured or Íketcbe4 in the pf incipal apartments. One, mdeed» of a fuperior natufe was fecn and ad¬ mired by Rodolph, at Lauria, and which« for its beautiful colouring* clofe fimtli- tude, and noble effect, afterwards found its way to the Viceroy's Picture Gallery, at Naples. Though theie exhibitions were difagreeable to the fight and feel¬ ings of the Count, they afforded hb ami¬ able wife the pkafing confobttioa that Santa-Maria was ftill exifting, and that flie ihould fee her once again, before ei¬ ther had journeyed on to that ** bourne from whence, no traveller returns." Abolit, eleven leagues diftant from BeJ- lito, the Counted finórng herfelf. much fatigued,.'and percerviög a neat fmall houfe
( « ) h&fffe at hand, requefted her Lord to halt *4he*eibt an hour or two. Rodolph rea¬ dily aflented to this propofal, as he knew they could find no convenient accommo- * dations at Caftro-Villari, a poor town about a mile onward. Perceiving, there- rore, a man difconfolately leaning over a gate, which led to the houfe, he requeft¬ ed an hour's admiflion for himfelf and his retinue to reft and refrefli themfelves. The fellow, on this, replied in the rnoft churliih tone, that the houfe behind be¬ longed to him, and that having already fo feverely fuffered from wanderers and ftrangers, he was determined to adroit no more. Therefore (concluded he) 'hafte thee on to Caftro-Villari; you will find fomething good enough for you there ; at all events, you ihall have, nothing ?????~ : Rodolph, exafperated at the peafants un¬ couth
• ( ? ) couth denial, was on the point of dif¬ mounting his horfe, to infift on his admif- fion, when the Countefs, reclining her head on the window of the calaih, requeft¬ ed them in heaven's name, to fuffer her and another fatigued female to halt at his houfe, for a fliort hour or fo. The man, more moved by Ifabella's foothing and modeft requeft, than the Counts menac¬ ing looks and commanding tones, made anfwer, u that the women might enter with welcome, but as for the men, there was not room to accommodate them ;" therefore advifed them again to go on to Caftro-Villari. Rodolph's pride, more than his inclination, perfuaded him to ac¬ cept the fellow's council, and promifing to difpatch Drofi and Carlo back, in a couple of hours,, for the Countefs and Sylvia/
( fc4 ) Sylvia, they aH rode forward to the neigh¬ bouring town» The peafant feeing their backs fafely turned, he entered the houfe, and ftraight a female of the moft comely *■ » k ^arance iffued f»om the door, to welcome the Countefs and her fatigued companion. They followed her in, and foon found themfelves comfortably houfed, with a good and homely repaft prepared for them already by their hoft. When they - had received a fecond blunt welcome from the peafant, he roughly obferved, " You are both fatigued, I fee—hungry too, per¬ haps—there, fet too^—there is fomething that will do you good—I hate ceremony, and I hate ftrangers much more fo—make hafte, therefore, and be gone-—my daugh· ter here will attend you-----J fliall go hence." On this, he turned round to the 5 ?° 1? £
( ? ) voung woman, and faid, " Rachel, treat the women well. In the mean time, I fliall go to my neighbour, Martin, and aflift him in his vineyard.-Your fervant—I.hate ftrangers, therefore avoid them.^—A good repaft to you both." On this, he fallied out of the houfe. ■ The Countefs and Sylvia, though much aftoniflied at their abrupt reception, fat down to their pottagio with a keen ap¬ petite. Having fufficiently refreihed them¬ felves with this difli and a glafs of wine, the former requefted Rachel to be feated ; and ever anxious to enquire after Santa- Maria's fate (as fo many precious unex¬ pected circumftances had occurred to warrant every enquiry) Ifabeila aiked her young hoftefs the caufe of her father's mo¬ rofe and abrupt behaviour ? The girl hefi¬ tated fonie time to reply. cf Pardon the Vol. IL ? indelicacv,
( 2? ) indelicacy, my dear (continued the Coun¬ tefs) of fuch a queftion, and be not afraid to open your heart to me—I am a mother, and an unhappy one withal—I feel for your father as a parent—I feel for you as a child alfo, and to all forlorn children, I am happy ever to be a mother." On this, Ifabeila could not refrain from fliedding tears, which being piteoufly obferved by Rachel, ihe caught the fympathifing af¬ fection ; and thus briefly opened her heart to the Countefs : " As you appear fo anxious, Madam, tor our concerns, and fo defirous (faid Ra¬ chel) to know the caufe of my father's haríh difpofition— harfli, indeed, it has only lately been, for, till of late, he was the forteft and the kindeft of parents—I have not much time to fpare, to narrate my
( *7 ) my fliort tale ; for in an hour or lefs he will moft probably return.*-* * c About two years ago, a young pea- came to our houfe, and begged fome em¬ ploy. He was an extraordinary hand¬ fome boy, and much refembled you, my Lady, in all his features. In very trutb, when I firft beheld your face, I could al¬ moft have fworn that he had been your fon ------But I wander, Madam-----My fa¬ ther was falconer to the Lord Angelo, and took a mighty fancy to this ftrange youth. Finding him diligent and acute, he taught him all the arts of his profef- fion~no hawker, in a fliort time, could be more expert than his engaging pupil-*- Alasi engßginglmna call him, indeedjjbr in a ihort time after his abode in our houfe, my fifter, Rofaline fell defperately in love with him. He, notwithftanding, ? a returned
( aS ) returned her paffion with the greateft coolnefs ; whilft flie, poor maid ! pining with extreme fondnefs, took moil griev- oufly to heart. At length, her fondnefs for him -obliged her to tell our father, that without her dear Claudio (for fo was he called) flie muft foon wafte away with grief, and ibon expire. Our good-natured parent, on this difcovery, blamed her for the filence flie had hitherto maintained ; and with a fmile of parental fondnefs, told her—that flie ihould foon be happy with her beloved Claudio; for, next toher and myfelf, he valued him above all the world; and ihould be as overjoyed to call him his fon, as flie would be to call him huiband. Happy were thefe glad affurances to the love- fick Rofaline. Ardently did flie pant for the hour that was to make the beautiful Claudio— her's. «Qn
( 29 ) " On the following morning, therefore, my father propofed the match to our young Falconer. He ftammered and he¬ fitated for fome time. In reply, however, Claudio faintly faid, that he muft have fome fliort period to confider on the fub' jeft. Aiy father, at fn ft, was angry at this return, but good naturedly laid it all to his modefty and diffidence; of which the youth poffeffed an uncommon fliare. From that day, Claudio loft all Ids wont¬ ed cheerfulnefs, and frequently, with the deep figlj of anguifli, would grafp hold of Rofaline's hand,, and weep moft bitterly over it.— My father and fifler, growing at laft impatient for the nuptial ceremony, fixed upon the wedding-day. It was fix¬ ed, alas! but, ah! never to take place; tor------ two da} s before the marriage was fixed upou to be folemnized at Cofenza, ? 3 dio
( 3* ) Claudio had clandeftineJy departed from- our hoipitable roof—never to return—Oh î never, never, my fweeteft Lady ; for fince that time we have had no tidings of his fate and fortunes.—Ah ! rnoft ungrateful youth—rnoft ungenerous Claudio !—my fifter, on this, funk into a ftate of deep de¬ fpondency, which has increafed upon her by degrees, and is novir hourly expefted to terminate in her diffolution. For this, Madam, my father has fworn to íhut his former hofpitable door to all ftrangers, thinking, perhaps, that fome ferpent,like the former, may be nouriflied in the bo¬ fom of his family; and then, like Clau¬ dio, fting the tendereft, deareft part of it, to death."------At this latter expreffion, Rachel leaned her head upon her knees, and throwing her hands acrofs her eyes- wept bitterly .— The
í 31 ) The Countefs, touched with the dif¬ trefs of Rachel, and too fenfibly convinc¬ ed from former circumftances, that fome myftery relating to Santa-Maria was con¬ tained therein, requefted to be ihown in¬ to the chamber of Rofaline. The fifter immediately affentcd. They accordingly afcended a narrow winding ftair-cafe, accompanied by Sylvia, into the fick maiden's apartment. On approaching her bed-fide, the Countefs too fatally per¬ ceived, that poor Rofaline—the fair and innocent martyr tQ love—was indeed in a deep decline. Her eyes and cheeks were funk. Her face was as the lilly, wan $ and death feemed quick approaching to releafe her from the vaft load of grief and lamentation that flie had fo long ftruggled under:
? 4 I>eatl>
( S 2 ) Death lay on her, like an untimely froft Upon the fweeteft now"r of all the field : SHAKSPEAR-E. Ifabeila foftly approached the bed— Rofaline, however, remained infenfible ot her kind approach. In the very twink¬ ling of an eye, an object ftruck the Coun¬ tefs's view, that'filled her vvith aftonifli¬ ment, anguifh, and pity.—This object was the ------........... bracelet encircled round Rofaline's arm, which ilie had given to Santa-Maria, on ber fiight from the palace of Rodolph. Every collateral circum¬ ftance flaflied acrofs her imagination in a moment. On this difcovery, Ifabeila yielding to the happy influx ofa mother's joy, clafped her hands, and lifting them with her eyes to heaven, exclaimed, " God's will be done!—my child may yet be living !" Rachel, aftoniflied at the fudden fer-
( 33 ) vour of this exclamation, and yielding to the influx of a filler's feehngs t with fome indignation exclaimed, Iikewife, " And is the ungrateful—the ungenerous—the inhofpitable, cruel Claudio then, indeed, vour fon ?"— ' ' Delay your impatience for a while, my young friend (replied the Countefs) let us. leturn below, and I will fully and inge¬ nuoufly fatisfy your curiofity/' After they had defcended, and in fome degree recovered from their mutual fur¬ prife, Ifabeila informed her fair hoftefs, that the caufe of her fudden tranfports was owing to the bracelet that flie had feen encircled round her fifter's arm. That fame bracelet, my dear gijrh wa,s once mine, and transferred by me to one whom from her birth I ever valued; and from 4 her lofs ftill value more than I do tny ? 5 owu
( 34 ) own happinefs and exiftence. Alas! I never knew I loved her half fo much till our cruel feparation made me confeious of it.·— t perceive your furprize, my dear girl, and eafily divine the caufe—know, then, that the boy whom you fuppofed to be Claudio ------is my daughter—at leaft— ihe was my daughter.—Haplefs Santa - Maria!— 111 fated Rofaline !-........But hark—I hear the trampling of horfes,---- therefore let me be brief.—Here, child, take thjs ring—wear it for my fake ;—it fliall always be your paffport to me.-----1 am the Countefs Ifabeila, wife to the Lord Rodolph. We are now on our way tò the Count's Caftle, which ftands only twelve leagues from this fpot, fouth of Klartorano.—Difclofe the cruel adven¬ ture -of Claudio's being my daughter, as early às yoü with fafety can, to your fifter/ < Rofaline.
( 35 ) Rofaline __My prayers for her recovery ihall be offered up morning, noon, and night When Rofaline, however, under- ftands her dear Claudio was one of her own fex, difguifed only to buffet the ma¬ lice of the world, and to proteft her from danger and infolence, ihe will, I hope, en¬ deavour to conquer her malady—for the difeafe ihe labours under now is a fever of the mind, and not the body. The former can raife itfelf fuperior to all hu¬ man confiderations, let the other be funk never fo deep into decay. Break this: untoward myftery to your father alfo. —It may foften his feelings; blunt the keen edge of anger he bears to all his fellow creatures; difperfe the clouds of melan¬ choly that hang over his parental anxious brow ; and what is ftill more grateful to my hopes, may ftimulate him to admini- ?? ften
( ?? ) . fter the balfam of confolation with more *** affurance than heretofore to his haplefs cjiild. To conclude, whether you fuc¬ ceed or no (and heaven forefend that it ihould be otherwife than what I wifli) in your tender endeavours to reftore fo lovely a plant into the blooming bofom of day, let me fpeedily know the refult—Reftore but your fifter, and I ihall be happy. For, oh ! believe me, my amiable girl, I w T ould not have it chance, for thoufands of gold, that my daughter had been—even the in¬ nocent caufe of any creature's defpair and diffolution^ moft fpecialJy, of the fair Rofa- line's—whofe exquifite fenfibility, not on-, ly merits a world of future joys and tran¬ fports, but entitles her to the admiration and proteöion of every one who is bleffed with that firft of focial virtues— a feeling · heart? The
( 37 ) The Countefs had fcarce concluded her maternal admonitions, when Drofi and Carlo returned to efeort her forward to Caftro Villari-—It was fortunate that the falconer did not find his way heme before them, as Rachel's eyes were fo fwoln, and her bofom was fo convulfed with fobs, that would have excited his curiofitv,and led him to infift on a farther explana¬ tion, which -aj: this critical juncture would have been both unpleafant and diftrefling to Ifabeila. She left the whole, however, deeply recorded on the fuffering Rachel's heart—of whom, both her and Sylvia now took a moft tender and affeftionate fare¬ well—
CHAP.
f 38 )
CHAP. III. G hoftá fly on clouds, and ride on winds* They reft together in their caves, and taik of mortal men.. OSSIAN. They feemed almoft, with ftaring on one another, to tear the cafes of their eyes.—There was fpeech in their dumbnefs, language in their very gef- ture. SHAKSPEARE. \Jl7R travellers now continued their journey, till they reached Cofenza, where they halted.—Here Rodolph difpatched a meffenger forward to his kinfman, D'Ar¬ cos, to fignify his near approach towards Bellito.—In two hours afterwards, they found themfelves at the gate of the Che¬ valier's
( 39 ) valier's Caftella, and the good Knight, with his niece, Lauria, and all his houfe¬ hold, prepared, in the court yard, to re¬ ceive them.—As Lauria, however, was affifting the Countefs to alight from the calaih, the latter, ftruck with her beauty, and the fimilarity of years, ihape, and manners, between her and Santa-Maria, grafped tenderly hold of her hand, and turned on one fide to give a fecret free¬ dom to her tears.—Lauria, notwithftand¬ ing, perceived her emotions, and partici¬ pated in them.—Thefe effufions, how¬ ever, of mutual fympathy, fprung from different fources. One—thought and felt for a dear^—dear child.—The other, know¬ ing the difmal and hateful abode that was about to be the future refidence of the Countefs, and judging, alfo, that ihe was confeious of the fame, innocently imagined
( 4-? ) imagined, that flie grieved merely from that idea alone, and, being a former fuf¬ ferer there herfelf, the fweet impulfe of fympathy taught her to feel for the ap¬ proaching fufferings of others. The good Chevalier entertained his guefts that night with all the honours and hofpitality due to their rank and affi¬ nity. D'Arcos perceived the Count au- xious to have the paquet he had formerly fent him explained—Seeing the Coun¬ tefs, however, fatigued and depreffed by her long journey, he t recommended to them an early repofe, and then, taking an opportunity of drawing his kinfman afide, D'Arcos informed him, that as he had fome matters of importance to com¬ municate, and alone, he would defer re¬ lating them till the morning.— At an early hour, therefore, the Count and
( 41 ) and Countefs retired—the one anxious to hear the morning wónders of D'Arcos* tale ; and ihe other equally fo, to form an early and more familiar correfpondence with Lauria,—Rodolph conjefturing that fome new marvellous hiftory wás about to be brought forth, from the miraculous brain of his kinfman ; and Ifabeila fup¬ pofing that flie might' gather fome far¬ ther intelligence of Santa-Maria, that would form a connection with what Die had already collected. Whilft every attention was paid to the guefts above, the retinue of Rudolph did not fail of meeting with the utmoft good cheer below—Francolifle, firft and moit favoured domeftic of the Chevalier and his niece, took fpecial care of Sy!· via, Carlo, and Droii, whom he had been previouily given to underftand were alfo the
( 42 ) the favourite attendants of the Count and Countefs.—He, therefore, condufted them to a neat, fnug, little anti-cham¬ ber, exaftly formed for a comfortable party of four, whilft a larger room was allotted for their companions.—In good fare, however, there was no diftinftion, and in neither party was there any envy. * Fh&coíiffe hád juft counted manhood, though be had been many years in the fervice of his good krtight, and for his unihaken fidelity, and extreme good¬ nature, was efteemed above all the other domeftics.—He was ftout and blimt, and, what rendered him a greater favourite with Lauria, he was well converfed, and would, withal, fpeak moft copioufly. — When his guefts, therefore^ had finiihed their antipafto, he requefted permiflion to pledge them all in a glafs of wine—* c I have
( 43 ) * have fome flagons of the choiceft Iachry¬ ma-chrifti in yonder clofet (faid the youth) that will cheer your fpirits, if none of you have any objeftion to tafte it." " There is one in company (obferved Carlo, dryly, and giving his uncle an arch look)—that I am fure will have rio objection to tafte of it, as long as there is a flagon Uft? — # ** Right, boy ; and, though nö conju¬ ror, like thy mother, thou canft prophecy well and truly at times.—Come, my brave lad, hawl out your Iachryma-chrifti, and, for thy pains (faid Drofi, with a view of having a little innocent revenge on his nephew) thou ihalt have thy ftool ■to next this pretty damfel here,—Eh I Syl¬ via ? what fay you, lafs ?" Francoliffe took Drofi at his word, and
( 44 ) and having placed a large flagon of wine on the table, he fixed a ftool for Sylvia near the fire-fide, and feated himfelf di- reftly clofe to her.—This was, at firft, unpleafant to the fufceptible feelings of Carlo ; for Francoliffe, like himfelf, was a comely youth.—The former's good-na¬ ture, however (equalled only by that of the other's, foon overlooked this mif¬ chievous trick of his uncle's) who, now wiíhing to enjoy himfeif comfortably and plentifully over a flagon of his favourite beverage, prefaced his fecond draught with thanking Heaven, that their jour ney was nearly over, and that they novv might think themfelves happy dogs in having found, at laft, a refting place for life. On this, Francoliffe ihook his head, with much importance, and replied— *' Heaven
( 4Í ) - * ( Heaven truly grant that you all may find it fo?" - . <c Pifli—I know it—I know it (return¬ ed Drofi) and if I know it, that's enough. —Come Sylvia, my girl, take a hearty draught—the wine is excellent.—No fqucamiihnefs, no fliaking of your head. —We fliall all be happy, I fay, again.— No more fquabbling and fightings nothing now but harmony, good feafting, good eating, and good drinking." Francolifle on this, filled the goblets round, and again fliaking his head, as he puflied them about, he faid, " I fear, my brave veteran, you will find no great har¬ mony where you are fliortly going to." u And marry, >vhy not (replied Drofi)" explain boy—I fear nought, no not L"— " Aye, uncle (obferved Carlo) I know you fear no man—no, nor any. human - dangers.
( 4? ) t dangers.—But in good faith, my heart forebodes Tome ill, in going to this fame Caftle/' " Alack-a-day I and fo doth mine/' re¬ turned Sylvia, with a heavy figh. ** And in plain truth, fo ye may (ex¬ claimed Francpiiíle) Ah ! I fliall never forget the times when I was there ; after my mafteVhad taken poffeflion of the Caftle. When t-iOrd Rodolph, configned it over to , the protection of my mafter, the Chevalier, we were all haftened thither, and not a night afterwards did we enjoy the leaft repofe. Such continued knockings, fuch hammerings, as though all the mafons in Naples were at work within the Caftle. —Such frightful warnings and lamenta¬ tions.—The chapel tapers extinguiihed at one moment, and then illumined on the next ; and heaven only know» by whom. The ? *.
I 47 ì The black banners hoifted on one night, at top of one tower, and on the next fixr ed on another—Oh I Lord have mercy upon ye all, and grant ye patience and fortitude to fupport thefe trying, melan¬ choly feenes/' The pencil and not the pen, could beft defcribe the alternate emotions of fear, furprize, and horror, that ran through the features of Carlo and Sylvia, at this terrible defcription given of the Caftle. —Neither could fpeak—they fat ftaring and gaping in each othets faces, as though they had been petrified. Drofi, however, wai not fo foon alarmed, but putting down the flagon on the table, which had been fufpended between his breaft and his mouth, for the laft minute or two j he exclaimed— " Hold, bold, my lad—come» come, this is going a little
( 48 ) little too far. —You are a good hand, I find, at romancing—where did you pick upall this—did you find it in Merlin's Cavelor did your grandam teach you, to get it by heart > — Its a rare invention, in faith, and almoft makes me laugh. I like your ingenuity, my lad—but fee, how you have feared that chicken-hearted mon- gril there.—His dam, I remember, was alfo a rare one at thefe rhodomontade ftories. She prophefied once, that a goofe would fly away with the Monte di Sommá·— Hoifting black banners, indeed I —you better had told us, whilft you were about it, that they had hoifted black devils round all the turrets and towers in the Caftle. " For holy St. Mark's fake, uncle (tremblingly exclaimed Carlo) dont befo prophane— dont talk of devils, I ι cenjure
ν *ty / conjure you s but fuffer Francoliffe to proceed in his ftory about the Caftle, that we may be put on our guard againft all evil fpirits and dæmons/' This requeft *being ftrongly feconded by the trembling Sylvia alfo, Drofi, con¬ fented to hear out the rhodomontade tale of the Caftle (as he called it.)—Though on condition that he might afterwards tell the ftory of the »devil having once flown away wdth the Pope's night-cap,,as he lay fnoring in the Vatican. " That old witch, Carlo's dam (faid he) told me all about it, and I have never forgot it fmce."
Vol. II. D CHAP,
( So )
? Η ΑΡ. IV, No nattal exhalation in the iky, ??? 'fcape of nature, no diílemper'd day, No common wind, no cuftomed event, But they will pluck away its natural caufe, And calí them meteors, prodigies, and figns Abortive, prefaces, and tongues of Heaven· shakifsaks. « ? | '? X HE Count and Countefs (con¬ tinued Francoliffe) I well know from my young miftrefs, Lauria, are to hear what I am now about to relate ¿ otherwife, if filence had been enjoined, not a word of the matter íhould have efcaped from my lips. Our filence, notwithftanding, would .fhortly have availed little, as it will ar¬ rive but too fbon to your own know¬ ledge í
( 5* » ledge ;—therefore, as I faid before, when we were all ordered into the caftle, no¬ thing but thefe difmal noifes could be diftinguiflied—-They began'about mid¬ night, and nearly ended by fun-rife. I was greatly alarmed, and was on the point of quitting the good knight's fer- * >*» vice." " Lack a-day ! Lack-a-day ! (exclaim¬ ed Carlo and Sylvia, in one breath)—and well you might." " I befeech ye, friends ^obferved Fran¬ coliffe) do not interrupt me, or you will break the thread of my ftory/' " Right, right, boy (exclaimed Drofi, emptying off a whole goblet of wdne, and laughing all the time in the fleeve ofhis doublet);—you muft not be interrupted, as it may difturb your ftory, ' —And if that fcare-crow in the corner D % there,
( 5* ) -tliere, offers to do fo again, í will expofe him, by telling the ftory of his mother's enticing a young man to go and gather her fome enchanting herbs, that ibe faid grew upon Mount St. Goddard. * But when he got about two miles high, he was affaulted with a great heap of fnow and ftones, which with the violence of the wind, whirled him headlong to the -very bottom of The Bridge of Hell. —And for what vve all know, the poor young fellow may be there ftill." Thus Drofi mended the bufinefs, by throwing three ftores for one. Franco¬ liffe, however, finding all filent again, thus refumed his ftory : ------ *« Well, I was greatly alarmed, and, as I faid before, was frequently on the point óf quitting the good knight's fer¬ vice. He laughed, however, at my fears, a when
( 53 ) when i mentioned tlic doleful noifes that 1 had heard. My young Lady,'Lauria, who, though flie llept above, near the weftern tower, was alarmed alfo at the nîiihtîy difiurbanccs that came acrofs her repofe. She firft mentioned it to her uncle, and then to me. Ile Iikewife ridi¬ culed the idlenefs of her. fancy, thougli, as I have often obferved, he himfelf ùe? quently appeared gloomy and difconcert¬ ed when he arofe. Well, when my Lady Lauria fpoke to me on the fubjeft, ihe; entered upon it with all that great learn¬ ing which flic is poflefled of. c Francoliffe (faid my Lady) nothing difturbs me fo much, as thofe mighty ringing .of bells. When thefe fame bells ring (continued flie) it is a certain demonflration, that fome one or another is about lo expire. My uncle, you well know, has fearched D 3 over
( 54 ) over the moft fecret parts of the Caftle, and he can difcover no human being, nor the caufe of thefe nocturnal foundings* When this doleful bell, therefore, rings thus nightly, it muft proceed from fuper¬ natural effects.—It muft either denote that fome Chriftian foul is juft departing, to befpeak the prayers of his brethren and fifterhood ; or, on the other hand, to drive away the evil fpirits that ftand about the bed's foot, and about the houfe, ready¡to feize their prey, orat leaft to terrify and moleft the foul in its paf¬ fage. But, Francoliffe (again obferved my learned young. Lady) there may have been fome murder committed in this Caftle.—In that cafe, the ringing of bells will keep the fpirits away,—For fpirits, particularly evil ones, are much afraid of bells.—Ever fince we have refided " J . here,
( ss ) here, the hammerings arid the founds of the bell have increafed ; for the louder the found—mark me 9 Francoliß*~ thelouder the found, the fpirit or fpîrits muft go farther off to be clear of the noife ; befides, be¬ ing heard farther off, it will Iikewife pro- , cure the poor departed foul a greater number of prayers. This diflike of fpi¬ rits to bells is, as (according to what I have heard my good oíd gran dame fay) the evii fpirits that be in the region of the air,' do mock when they hear the bells ringing, and that is The caufe why the bells be rung when it thunders, and when great tempefts and outrages of weather happen; to the end that the fiends and wicked fpirits fliould be abaflb, ed and fly, and ceafe the moving of the tempeft/ α In this manner (continued Franco- D 4 . lifle,
( ár ) lifle, though not without being 'fre¬ quently interrupted by the bubbling of the iachryma-chrifti, as it defcended in torrents down Drofts throat, and fome half intelligible curfes muttered by him againft all witches, old dams, and gran- dams) did ??? young Lady learnedly expref*» herfelf to me. —When, at the conclufion of her ftory, the alarum bell rang two hour» before its ufual time. It never ftruck be* fore till midnight, and at tliis time, it wanted full two hours of ils former found¬ ing. It ftruck, moreover, louder to my Lady's years than it ever did before.—She flarud fron» her feat, unufually alarmed und ;:imucd.—-The bell continued ringing flill m L aider und louder, wben flie departed in hallo to her own apartment; faying*, as fi.e went—' Frcne^iffCy í wiii not, I can- ,iot Hay longer in tliis dcte-ited Caftle; for
( 57 ) for it is, no doubt, haunted by fome mur¬ derers or evil fpirits. On this flie haf¬ tened to the chamber where her wo¬ men were 5 and I immediately repaired to the refectory, and repeated to my brother domeftics, what had juft paffed between me and my Lady/' <€ And now (faid Drofi, interrupting Francolifle) as you bave told us I fup¬ pofe, all that paifed between you and your Lady—wbat fay ye all—and you too, my little Sylvia, to drink her Ladyihip's health Γ To this thcv all.readilv confented— though Carlo could not drink off his wine, before he had paid many high- flown complimenta to the great learning of Lady Lauria ; and the fublime ideas flie poffeffed in regard to fiends, evil fpirits, and fupernatural agency.— <f Her wonder- D S ful J
( 5* ) fiil arguments (he faid) refpefting the ne¬ ceflity of ringing the bells to keep off thofe fiends and difturbed fpirits, dwelt ftrongly or, his mind, and which would be treafured up in his memory as long as he lived." Profi could not refrain from laughing at the fimplicity in which he uttered thefe laft words. Then, after exprefling a hearty wiih that the fiends, or fpirits, or whatever they were, would give them a hearty peal, when they marched into the Caftle ; he told Francoliffe, he might proceed if he chofe, and that after he had done, he would give them the ftory of Carlo's mother—about the devil and the pope.
CHAP.
f 59 )
CHAP. XXVI. ***** A thoufand fantafies Begin to throng into my memory, Of calling fliapes, and beckoning fliadows dirr, And airy tongues, that fyllable men's names On fands, and fhores, and defert wilderneffes. MILTOX» JOROSI being once more filent, Fran¬ coliffe thus proceeded in his ftçry, with¬ out any farther interruption : *' Well, when I joined the company of my fellow fervants in the refectory, the tolling of the alarum bell had ceafed. It was near midnight when I had con¬ cluded my ftory.—The very—very mo¬ ment, however, that I had finiihed the fame, a louder ringing was heard than D ? before
( ?? ) before—It was the loudeft we had heard fmce our refidence in the Caftle.—We all flarted up, feared almoft out of our fenfes—never did I hear any thing fo ex¬ traordinarily marvellous.—The Chevalier, during our fright, entered the refectory, alarmed at the noife himfelf, with his fword drawn. fc It is wonderful (ex¬ claimed the knight, as the bell continued to toll, and, at the fame time, impre fli ve¬ ty grafpïng the hilt of his fword be¬ tween his two hands)—this is wonder¬ ful, indeed !"—The Chevalier fpoke thefe few words with uncommon energy—the bell ftill continued to found, and now, as loud as its clapper would admit.— This laft peal brought Signiora Lauria down again, who exclaimed, as flie de¬ fcended into the refectory—" Oh ! ?? ? dear uncle, I cannot, nay, will not, abide longer
( 6i ) longer in this horrid Caftle."—This deter¬ mined avowal, produced a general effeft ; for we, one and all, declared our refold tion thereon, either to quit the Caftle, or yield up our fervices.—The Knight, on this, took hold of his niece's hand, and affectionately affured her, that early in the morning, we fliould all leave the Caftle, for our former tranquil abode. This, you may be fure, was a more welcome found to us than any we had hitherto heard ; and fuch was our joy, that we all fct up a general fliout on the occafion. Our joy, however, was fliortly changed to freíh terror and amazement, more fo than we had ever experienced before ; for the troubled fpirit of the Caftle, or what¬ ever it might be, in order to ftrengthen us ftill farther in our fixed refolution, tolled the bell exactly three times, in flow and folemr* , changes,
( 6? ) changes.— During this interval of awful * filence, we heard, with horror inexpref¬ fible, a diftant and feeble voice flowly exclaim -------------------------- c Hafte — be- gone — intrude yourfelves no longer in a place tbat belongs to virtue—forrow — and devotion- y —for here none but tbe noble and true poffeffor ßall ever find repofe.' ------------------Thefe words were alfo repeated three times— Heaven knows, we heard them diftinCUy enough the firft, without the invifible agent repeating them again.—My Lady Lauria, when flie had recovered alitile from this laft ihockj faintly obferved, that her fears and weaknefs would not fuffer her to part from her uncle that night.— My Lord, though ftruck with unufual aftonifliment,, fummoned his wonted for¬ titude and prefence of mind together, then addreifing himfelf to us all, he aik- { eds.
( 6? ) ed, who dared to venture, once morev with him, to explore the Caftle over and over again ?— ζ For, that there is fome hu¬ man agent concealed therein (faid he) I have not the ihadow of a doubt.— Τα fuppofe, for a moment* alfo, that the voice we juft heard> was any thing of a fupernatural nature, would be the height of folly, ignorance, credulity, and fuper¬ ftition.—Or, to imagine, Iikewife, that the ringing of the alarum bell, was the effect of the winds, would be equally fo*. ------Who, then (concluded the knight) will follow and aflift me, in endeavour¬ ing, for the laft time, to unravel this ftrange myftery V — " Perceiving our Lord determined, we all readily confented to follow him«— Signiora Lauria, however, on feeing this, caught hold of my cloak and exclaimed— 3 * Fmncoltffit
( ? 4 ) * Francclife, you muft continue here with me and the females, for here with them alone, I-cannot remain/—The Chevalier hearing this, ordererf me to remain with his niece, though I hardly knew at the time, whether to prefer going with my fello w-fervants, or ftaying where I was, To make fliort, however, of this event¬ ful tale (faid Francolille, obferving Droii getting drowfy, and in dar ger every mo¬ ment of tumbling from his ftool) my Lord D'Arcos, in an hour or more, returned, without being able to fatisfy himfelf a jot farther than he had ever done before. —On this, we fat all together in the re¬ fectory for that night, and, early in the morning, after faftening all the gates, and fecuringíthe keys, we, with overjoyed hearts, retired to our old peaceful man- • fion here."— The
( ¿5 ) The effeft that Francoliffe's ftory of the Caftle had upon Carlo and: Sylvia* correfponded with all the horrors they would have experienced had they been aftuai auditors of the terrors that he had only related.—The greateft effeft it had upon Drofi, was nearly fetting him into a found fleep, which would certainly have been the cafe, had he not politely determined within himfelf to fee his old friend, Iachryma-chrifti, fafe out, before he went to bed. Had that, however, not been the cafe, Drofi would have paid as much attention as he poflibly could have 'done to Francoliffe*s ftorv, had it been ten times more marvellous ; for civility and good-nature were the predominant fea¬ tures of his character—particularly to the friendly ftranger—whilft gratitude and attention were ever uppermoft in his breaft,
( 66 J breaft, when hofpitality ftretched forth her generous hand to afford him comfort and good cheer. As for Carlo und Sylvia, they continued fome time fpeechlefs. The former, how¬ ever, having recovered his tongue, firft ex¬ claimed, € ' That he would not go on to the Caftle/' " Nor I, either, Carlo," returned Syl¬ via. u Then marry, coward (faid Drofi, after his old friend had' revived and warmed him a little," whither will you goi" " I am no coward, uncle, but I will go wander in the forefts firft. ,ï (C And l alfa (replied the fimple Syl¬ via. " What (returned Drofi) to ftarve, and afterwards afford delicate food to hawks and
( 6 7 ) and carrions? Or, to put your courage really to the proof, to meet with defpe¬ rate robbers and hungry wolves ?—Can you fight with them, think ye, chicken ? Or which prefer ye—which would you choofe,hen-hearted poltroon, tobe minced in pieces by a banditti, or nibbled to atoms by a horde of wild beafts?—Quotha! what have either of you to fear now? Spi¬ rits will not devour ye.----- Oons ----- Spi¬ rits, I hear, have no bodies, nor blood, nor guts, to ftomach fuch a brace pf deli¬ cate mortals as ye are ! Are thy con¬ fciences good ? if they are, why then be afraid of fpirits ? My honeft friend here has told a marvellous good round tale, and excellently well withal. It fuits your nature and complexion well, thou half- bearded fool—what, thou haft not forgot the notions of that prepofterous old witch, your mother. I thought I had beat them
( 68 ) all out of thy credulous ikuil; or am I to begin my labour over again ?" Thefe fevere retorts of Drofi not only altered, the firft refolutrons of Carlo and Sylvia, but occafioned much chagrin in the countenance of Francoliffe. The lat¬ ter obferved, that he talked it well, " But marry, my friend (faid he) if the Caftle is troubled with fuch guefts as were there about four years ago, you will not long abide there ; no, notwithftanding all your mighty boaftings." "Be not heated, my good young friend (exclaimed .Carlo, perceiving his uncle nettled, being called a boafter ; for touch but on Drofi's courage with any kind of contempt, all friendfliip with him at once was at an end) be not heated, I fay. My uncle is fomewhat choleric, and rather fe¬ vere withal. I will not fay churliih—no no—
( «9 ) mo*— {perceiving Drofi looking him full in the face) no—no— notatalîchürîifli — not in the leaft, I affure you; a little plea¬ fant or fo ; that's all. But in anfwer (con¬ tinued Carlo with much gravity) to what you both haVe faid, I can only add, that I believe your ftory of the Caftle, Signior Francoliffe, to be probable and true ; but then whatever fpirit, or fiend, or devil, might have haunted it four years ago, might have been calmed by this time. " The ringing of the bell (as Signiora Lauria fo learnedly obferved on the occa¬ fion) at that diftant period, might be ow- ing to fome Chriftian foul juft departing, to befp ie prayers of his brethren and fifterhood; or, on the other hand, to drive away the evil fpirits that ft a n J about the bed's foot, and about ihe houfe, ready to feize their prey; or at leaft to ter¬ rify
( Ίο ) , rify and moleft the foul on its paffage. Thefe obftacles, after fo long a courfe of time, therefore, may have been removed, and the bells, of courfe, have ceafed to ring. At leaft, it is to be fuppofed that the one will die away with the other— But if, again, as Signiora Lauria obferv¬ ed (continued Carlo, with great critical dignity) there has been any murder committed in -the Caftle ; in that cafe, the tinging of £eik Will keep the fpirits away,_fpr ipirits (particularly evil ones, as <he faid) are much afraid of bells—now, ^bferve me, is it not very probable, that fome perfon in this old Caftle has been murdered at one time or another (whe¬ ther formerly or not h ií, that has really been the cafe, is it not more preferable tobe continually,dinned with the ringing of bells, as it keeps the fpirits away, ra¬ ther
(, 7* ) ther than by the difcontinuing of tliis ringing, have the fpirits perpetually ftalk- ing all night long about the Caftle, and fitting themfelves down at our bed*s feet, when we all want to go quietly and foberiy to our pillows ? What think ye¿ uncle, is this reafon, or is it not?" Dxofi could not help enjoying the, fimplicity of his nephew ; though there was a particular part in his laß argu¬ ment that had foræd itfelf upon his atten¬ tion. " And then, again (continued Carlo, pleafed with the fuppofed attention his uncle paid to his great power of reafon¬ ing) what faid Signiora Lauria's learned grandame, on the fulleo ?—why—That the bells ring when it thuflders,and when great
( 7V ) great tempefts and outrages of weather happen, ' to the end that the fiends and wicked fpirits ihould beabaflied, and fly, and ceafe the moving of the tempeft.—If fo, íhould we not confider the ringing of the bells as a happy ómen to forewarn us of our approaching danger, to prepare ourfeives for hurricanes, eruptions, and earthquakes, fo common among us—for what are they but * great tempefts and outrages of weather?' Under all thefe favourable influences, I would therefore prefer going thither, than being minc¬ ed by'a*banditti, or nibbled to pieces by wolves (for this remark of DrofiV had at the time a wonderful effect both on Carlo ' and Sylvia ; it had alfo led him into the above learned diflertation—though, like him, we all endeavour to reconcile our¬ feives
( 73 ) felvés to a^comparative ill when we can avoid a fuperlative one)—and, as for what you faid, uncle (continued he) about that prepofterous old witch, my mother—. vou wrong her—for flie was alike good and devout, and not at ail uníkilful in pro¬ phecy ; for I do not know whether it may turn out true or not, but I recollect ihe told me, that I ihould fee and hear flrange things about my twenty-third year; and that all this fliould take place in a ftrange Caftle." " By St. Marco (exclaimed Drofi, per¬ ceiving there would be no end to his ne¬ phew's ftories, if he was fuffered to go pn at his own will) no more of your folly, -firrah, or I will hurl this flagon at your fliallow pate ! All angry words, how¬ ever, were now put an end to by the Vol II. E watch-
( 74 ) lyatch-portets entering and announcing the hour of feparation. On this, they all drank good repofe to each other, and parted as they had met, contented, convi¬ vial, and friendly.
CHAP.
( 75 )
?? a f: vi. The courfe of true love never did run fmooth, Or, if there were a fympathy in choice, War, death, or ficknefs did lay fiege to it, Making it momentary as a found, Swift as a ihadow, Ihort as any dream. - ■■ Like the lily That once was miftrefs of the field, and flouriih *d, I'll hang my head and penili. SHAKSPEARE. VV HEN the matin-bell had rung for breakfaft, an unexpected confufion en¬ fued throughout the whole manfion. The minftrel, Florizel, and deareft companion of Lauria was miffing, and no where to be found. He had not been feen, in faci, E 2 at
( 76 ) at his hofpitable abode rnoft part of the preceding day, nor during the whole night. Fear, diftraction, and confufion, predomi¬ nated alternately in every quarter; for Florizel had not only been the deareft fa¬ vourite of his young miftrefs, but alfo the choiceft of the Chevalier's, and, indeed, with every domeftic in the Caftella ; a partiality he had fuccefsfully and deferv¬ edly obtained, not only by his exquifite İkili on the lute, but alfo by his good nature, modefty, foftnefs, and beauty. Ί he good old knight, terrified Jeft Flo¬ rizel fliould be furprifed in his excurfions about the foreft, or on the banks of the river Crati (both of which were fome¬ times vifited by robbers, and the Corfairs of Barbary) immediately difpatched Fran¬ coliffe, and all his domeftics, by different ways, in fearch of him. Lauria,
f 77 ) Lauria, in the mean time, accompanied by the Lady Ifabeila, difconfolately re¬ tired to her apartment, to ruminate on lhe lofs and uncertain fate of Florizel-— no one (íís we have already frequently obferved) was more capable of applying ihe healing balfam of confolation to the »vounded mind, than the amiable Coun¬ tefs of Rodolph. Her tender applications lhoiily probed the wound, and afforded vent to the fevefe anguiih it contained ;· ? ·** for, Lauria, entirely forgetting the taik al¬ lotted to her by the Chevalier, of private¬ ly difclofing the myfteries of the Caftle to her noble gueft; and contemplating alone on the fudden abfence of her dear Flo¬ rizel—flie tremblingly clafped bold of the Countefs's hand, and hedewing it wdth her tears------ Lauria —the agonized Lau¬ ria —wdth irrefiftible tendernefs, exclaim- E 3 cd ------
( 7« ) cd ------ « Qh í ? ¿ear Lady Ifabeila— fuffer me—Oli î fuffer me to Jay my whole heart open to you.—You have been a wife—a mother—all—all that is dear and kind have you been—Forgive me, Lady, I have heard all from my rnoft affeftionate father.—Father, I always call the good Chevalier D'Arcos, for fuch he has ever been to rae. Pardon me,—But—he has. told me all concerning-----your daughter, Santa-Maria. Nay, do not weep—this only have I mentioned as a prelude to my fed hiftory.·—Each of us, thus confcious çf our mutual misfortunes, may be more fully enabled to adminifter unto each other the leffons of comfort, refignation, and fortitude. Alas ! (faid Lauria, her tears and fighs almoft choakmg her utte¬ rance) I need thofe leflbns much. Oh ! my my Lady, look upon me now as your daugh¬ ter—
( 79 ) fer·— feel for me as fuch, and guide my wandering fenfes how to fteer through the vortex of mifery and difappoint¬ ment, in which they are now enlaby- rinthed. " It is nearly bordering on two years (continued Lauria, ftrengthened and con¬ foled by Lady Ifabella's tendernefs, and her kind affurances of an unabated mo¬ ther's friendfliip and affection) when Flo¬ rizel, the minftrel, who has fo unexpected¬ ly caufed the alarm you have heard, came firft into the fervice of my uncle—I heard him playing on his lute in the foreft hard bye, and touched with the fweetnefs of his melody, invited him to our manfion. - He accompanied me and my female at¬ tendant (though not till after a great many perfuafions) direcìly homewards. The Chevalier, like me, was as much £ 4 pleafed
1 »? } pieafed with the innocence and modefty of his looks and demeanour, as he was at , the exquifite ikill with which he touched his lute. Upon this, he invited him to accept of an afy lum in his manfion. Flo¬ rizel confented \% ith pleafure and grati¬ tude ; and the firft taik, or rather recreation, that he undertook, was teaching meto play upon his lute, binding me an apt fcholar; he requefted my uncle to provide another infiniment, that we might alternately en¬ tertain him with our harmony. He of courfe cheerfully aflented, and many and oft's the time, that I have .heard the good knight declare, that thofe have been the happieft hours of his life when we played to him on our lutes. Not to trefpafs te- dioufly, my Lady, on your patience, by dwelling too long on the many, many happy days that we thus innocently en- io\ed
( δτ ) joyed together, I became fo fondly ena¬ moured of the youth, that nought but the nuptial ceremony could relieve my love- fick heart. Often would I exclaim to Florizel—Oh I that thou hadft been* nobler born ; for, in mind, thou xouldft not be nobler engifted. To this only would Florizel reply with a deep figlb— Finding my paflion, however, for him: daily increafe, I worked up my mind to the determined refolution of difdofin£ the fecret workings of my foul to the Cheva¬ lier. This I conceived firft to be my ftricteft duty. Compliance I did not, in¬ deed, expeci. My duty, however, being thus far difcharged, I was determined, i£ my fond applications were repulfed, to confult my future happinefs without con¬ troul. I faid nothing to my adored Flo¬ rizel, refpecìing my intention. It is now, E 5 my
C s* ) my Lady, only four days fince, when with trembling fteps, I entered my uncle's clo¬ fet; with a voice equally agitated I briefly difelofed my paifion—The dear—the good «••»»the tender knight heard me out with patience; and then—-Oh! what fudden joy and furprize I experienced, when, in¬ ftead of an expefted refufal, he cheered my fpirits with the fmile of compliance ; and affectionately laying hold of my hand; thus kindly made me anfwer— c Lauria, my moft amiable Lauria—you have now only repeated, what I have difcovered long before. I perceived your paífion for young Florizel, and only attended with anxiety to fee, whether you preferred joining your hand and heart with wealth, title, and dignity, or to merit, modefty, and virtue. Lauria, well am I acquaint¬ ed
( 83 ) ed with your heart and difpofition. Well alfo have I fearched into the nature of your adored Florizel, and have found it equally virtuous, pure, and meretorious. Therefore, take your Florizel. He will make you happy ; aye, my adopted girl, happier than could a diadem perhaps. I hate diftinctions when virtue interferes, much more fo, when with virtue comes fmiling inclination —I am* not, my deareft Laur' a, without fame and honour. My own actions have ranked me high^upon our Neapolitan lifts j and though the ycitKgeß brother of your deceafed father, my wealth will make ye happy and independent.— But the creft I wiíh you to wear, is virtue leagued with modefty and merit. In you and Florizel, they are alt combined.— Therefore, my child (concluded the Che- E 6 valier,
( 8 4 ) Vâlier, folding me tenderly in his arms) receive the bleffings of your affectionate uncle, arid do you, yourfelf, difclofe tc Florizel the extreme happinefs and excel- lent tranfports, he is about to enjoy with you." At this part of Lauria's narrative, the recollection of her uncle's fondnefs, and the cruel abfence of Florizel, fixed her in a ftate of filent defpondency for fome mi¬ nutes. In thefe moments Ifabella's - prompting angel whifpered in her ear, that the minftrel, Florizel, was no other than her daughter, Santa-Ma¬ ria. His beauty, modefty, and moft particularly his exquifite ikill upon the lute, almoft confirmed him to be fo. The Countefs took this paufe of Lauria for farther reflection. u If thus it proves (thought Ifabeila) that this fame minftrel is truly Santa-Maria ; I am firft completely
( *5 ì m bleíled, in the fond idea that ihe is ftill* alive; and next, that I may ihortly fee her once again. Still (conceived the prudent - matron) ftill, it will be dangerous to ma¬ nifeft the feelings that I have already done, on my happy journey hither, and on fimilar occafions. My filence may keep the beautiful Lauria from defpair, for whilft hope exifts, expeftation will be indulged; and, The miferable have no other medicine But only hope. SHAKSPIAKE. At the fame time, it was doubtful to her, that when the Count became inform¬ ed that flie had been fo near at hand, and could not as yet be probably removed to any great diftance oif, that his refentment. and head-ftrong temper might revive his turbulent
? 86 ) turbulent and unrelenting foul once more to perfecute and harrafs his wandering child, for lhe empty vanity ofhis honour and his houfe--** A'as ! alas (concluded Ifa¬ beila in her own mind) would to God, that my loft koy T Ferdinand, the beautiful counter¬ part of his unfortunate filler, was but now alive, to render the hve-diftrafied Lauria happy in all her fitideß female tranfports and expeci ations !" Signiora Lauria, after apologizing for her fudden abfence of mmd, thus conti¬ nued—« Notwithftanding the tender en¬ couragement, my Lady, that I had receiv¬ ed from my uncle, 1 had not courage enough to difclofe it to the young and beautiful Florizel. My modefty refufed. me that gratification; and l·requeued the Chevalier to relate the fiibjeft of our in¬ terview himfelf. He confented to this d as
( 8 7 ) as readily as he had done hefore to ther other. " The time appointed by my uncle, for this purpofe, was the following even¬ ing. At that time I ufually took ray rambles in the neighbouring foreft. On the morning, however, preceding this, I met Florizel in the hall, and he then ap¬ peared to my fond imagination, more cheerful and beautiful than I had ever obferved him to be before. Being en¬ chanted, as it were, with his vivacity and the tranfcendant luftre that beamed un¬ confeious from his fparkling eyes*, I an¬ ticipated my good uncle's defign, and 1 may ingenuoufly add, with the moft de¬ licious fatisfaftion.-—Florizel received the intelligence with tears of joy, and ten¬ derly preffing his, downy lips; to mine, exclaimed—* Then I íhall be—happy, in¬ deed.
? 8* } deed.——·*The—happieft of ------ ' and here his tranfports interrupted his articulation. —This mutual, though filent declaration of reciprocal love, fwam like a new, a heaven-gifted birth into my foul—It raifed my fpirits to the utmoft zenith of exultation, delight, and joy ; for never till then did I experience fenfations fo exquifitely fublime. To conclude, there¬ fore, my Lady, after we had given and received the fondeft congratulations on our approaching happinefs; , Florizel, drew a diamond crofs from his neck, and putting it round mine, exclaimed-Accept this, my deareft Signiora, as a pledge of the everlafting affection I ihall continue tø bear you;—It was beftowed on me, by the deareft and moft amiable of friends ; fince that period of its gift, I have found none fo deferving of wearing it as your¬ felf.
( »9 ) felf. Tranfported with this frefli and precious emblem of mutual tendernefs, L eagerly fnatched the ring from off my finger, that had been given to me by my dying aunt, and nearly repeating my beft love's words (for I had the very fame oc¬ cafion for them) I placed it on his.—Flo¬ rizel, accepted the boon with rapture r though as he kiffed it, I could perceive the tear gliding down his beauteous cheek. Thefe love ceremonies being performed, we parted with repeated vows of conftancy and affecUon* —But alas ! fince that hour—ah ! woe is me— that very hour—my darling mioftrel has not been feên or beard of (as it is re¬ ported) in or near our manfion."---------» Here the poor agonized Lauria, fighed heavily and paufed;—her fair counte¬ nance, for fome moments was fo ftrongly and
( ^ 1 and wildly agitated, with love and dif¬ appointment, as to ftrike the tender bo¬ fom of Ifabeila with the rnoft poignant anguiih. A flood of tears, however, hap¬ pily found their paffage from her fwolen eyes, and afforded a temporary relief to the oppreflion of her mind- On this, Lauria had recourfe to the only pleafing confolation, that was at prefent left her— tbe gift of her beloved Florizel—She drew it, therefore, from the foft and fe¬ cret avenues of her throbbing bofom— kiffed it with ecftafy indefcribable, whilft the fcalding tear of anguiih, fell uncon¬ feious on the holy relic ;—then keeping it fixed before her eye, ihe offered up a brief, a fervent prayer, tø the immacu¬ late being, whofe facred antitype it was —to watch, over and proteft the pious and virtuous Florizel—to reftore him in fafety
( 9* ) fafety to her arms ; and when fanctioned by his divine rites, to crown their mutual loves, with his propitious fmiles. But here, oh ! how can I defcribe the emotions of the Lady Ifabeila, when flie beheld the fame crofs prefented by her to Santa-Maria, held forth direftly to her view. All her former furmifes of the minftrel, were now eftabliflied, without leaving the fhadow of a doubt behind» Had Lauria been ever fo deeply ab¬ forbed in reflection, the fudden altera¬ tion of Lady Ifabella's countenance and manner, and the vifible pertutbation of her fpirits, could not well have efcaped her. Perceiving her eyes, however, fted¬ faftly fixed upon the crucifix flie held in her hand, Lauria, with an equal degree of furprize and agitation, queftioned her ?? the caufe thereof.—The Countefs on th¡&
( 9* ) this quick appeal to her feelings, inftant¬ ly recollected herfelf, and with a reco¬ vered air and tone, calmly replied.— " That ihe had been contemplating with fome degree of aftonifliment, how the minftrel could have obtained a jewel of fuch confiderable value, to beftow i" This replication carried along its in¬ tended effect; the unfufpecting, unhappy Lauria, immediately obferved thereon— 41 That flie had often feen the crofs, be¬ fore it came into her poffeflion, and a$ often difcovered Florizel on his knees, in fervent prayer before it, I wondered alfo, my deareft Lady, how he came by fo valuable a jewel, but as I had often- queftioned him before, relating his birth, and the other circumftances of his for¬ tunes; and always finding the fubjefts irritable to his feelings, my delicacy and fondnefs.
í 93 ) , fondnefs for Florizel, would never after* wards fuffer me to interrogate him far¬ ther on them, or any other." Juft as Lauria had fmiflied this obfer¬ vation, flie difcovered Francoliffe enter¬ ing the court-yard j and, followed by the Countefs, precipitately defcended to¬ wards the hall. Here flie was met by her uncle, who with tears burfting from his liged eyes, informed his diftracted niece, that Florizel, notwithftanding the moft diligent fearch and enquiry, could no where be found. On thefe mournful heart-breaking tidings, Lauria turned from her adopted parent, and without uttering a fingle word, afcended once more toher chamber; there to yield her¬ felf up to all thofe bitter, galling, hell- created agonies of defpair, that accom* pany difappointed love. Lady Ifabclla 5 would
( 94 ) , would have followed, but Lauria refufed. Solitude was more welcome by far.—The frantic maiden foon hurried into her a-. partment, and faftening the door, to guard offany officious intrufion, fhe threw herfelf defpondently on the bed—rent her fine hair—called upon her loft love —her beloved Florizel ; and at each fond remembrance of paft endearments, the guftiing tears burft from her blood-ihot eyes— Lik«: dew-drops from the lion's mane. SHAKSPEARE. The Countefs, in the mean time, though urged by the good Chevalier, very prudently refufed to perfevere in accompanying his niece to her chamber. —Grief fo bitter, fo piercing as her's, was beft allayed by folitude; all confola¬ tion,
? 95 ) tion, ihe knew, would at firft rather ag¬ gravate, then alleviate the violence of her forrows.—Ifabeila, alas ' had well learned that fad leffon, by woeful experience,— She had her forrows too (as we have al¬ ready feen) and bitter ones withah— The Countefs having retired Iikewife to her own chamber, ihe began to purfue the fame train of reflections as had lately occurred, in regard to the haplefs Rofa¬ line.—That her wandering child had been the caufe, though innocently fo, of both her's and Lauria's defpair, gave her the moft poignant anguiih. Her oath, how¬ ever, fo folemnly given to her Almighty Creator, at Bianca's cottage, and at a pe - riod, when the fucceeding fatal adventures reached beyond the bounds of her mind's probability, accounted for the duplicity (if we can call it by fo hariha name) that ihe
( 96 ) ïhe had exercifed both towards Rofaline and Lauria. The Countefs, however, was refolved to obtain permiflion of Lord Rodolph, for herfelf and Sylvia, to re¬ main behind, for a time, at the Cheva¬ lier's Caftella ; to watch over and admi¬ nifter every maternal confolation to the love-enthufiaft Lauria ; and that then, if, after a reafonable period had elapfed, her grief did not take a more favourable turn, Ifabeila ultimately determined within her¬ felf, to difclofe the fecret of Santa-Ma¬ ria's fex and birth, as flie before had done to the amiable fifler of Rofaline.
CHAP*
( 97 )
CHAP. VII. Strange things I have in head, that will to hanti, Which muft be acted, ere they may be fcannM. Didft thou but know the inly touch of love* Thou would'ft as foon go kindle fire with fnow, As feek to quench the fire of love with words. SHAKSrKARE. jL HE fudden alarm of Florizel's long abfence, and the fucceeding intelligence that Francoliffe gave, of his ill fuceefs in his 'enquiries after the haplefs fugitive» retarded the appointed interview be¬ tween the Chevalier and his noble gueft. It \yas not till the evening* therefore, be¬ fore Rodolph was conduft ed into the private clofet of D' Arcos. The Count -•Vox,. IL F feated
( 9» ) feated himfelf in an attitude of reflection, but turning his eye unconfeioufly about the chamber, the firft objects that came acrofe him- ---- were the very pictures of Rinaldo and Santa-Maria, that he had formerly difcovered, concealed within the defpoiled trunks at the Caftle. He made no particular obfervation on this hateful difcovery, but uttered within himfelf.—" For. ever and ever, are thefe portraits reprefented to my view." D'Arcos perceived the difcompofure of his gueft, and lamented both the caufe, and his forgetfulnefs to have removed the pictures previous to their conference. He had preferved them thus, in his pri¬ vate clofet, in fweet remembrance of the once happy beings they fo exaftly repre¬ fented. The good knight, however, did not give the Lord Rodolph much time for
( 99 ) for reflection, but being feated, He relat¬ ed the whole hiftory of------the conti¬ nual knockings—fuch hammerings, as though all the mafons in Naples were at work within the Caftle.—Such frightful warnings and lamentations.—The chapel tapers extinguiíhed at one moment, and then illumined on -tue next, and heaven only know r s by whom.—The black ban¬ ners hoifted on one night, at top of one tower, and on the next fixed upon an¬ other.—-The ringing of bells, with the diftant and feeble voice, that invifibly ex¬ claimed—" Hafte ----- begone ------ intrude not yourfelves no longer in a place that belongs to virtue, forrow r , and devotion ! —For here none but the nobîe and true poffeffor fliall ever find repofe/' ------- —In fliort, the Chevalier difelofed the whole of what Francoliffe had related before
( IOC ) (though in language more refined, and void of all fuperftitious commentaries) concerning his tale of the Caftle. Rodolph liftened with as much credit and attention to the Chevalier's ftrange hiftory, as Drofi had done before to that of Francolifle's. His ftubborn fpirit, like the other's, was not to be awed or fubdued by tales of ghofts, fpirits, and fupernatural agencies.—No, he was de¬ termined to pufli boldly forward, refolv¬ ed not only to take immediate poffeflion of his domains, but firmly to defend them, againft all thofe who prefumed to challenge liis right of tenure. Notwithftanding, however, that the Chevalier's difcourfe on this fubjeft was more delicate and "refined than that of Francoliffe, ftill the Commentator, Carlo, was wanting.—"Had he been prefent at
( ΙΟΙ ) this conference, and obferved firft (with the learned figniora Lauria, as he called her)—That if there has been any mur¬ der committed at the Caftle, in that cafe, the ringing of bells will keep the fpirits away, &c. and then (as Carlo himfelf had afterwards obferved, with fuch critical difcrimination)—is it not very probable, that fome perfon in, this old Çaftle has been murdered at one time or another?— and fo on. Thefe nice diftinctions, pro¬ ceeding ??? the very learned quarter they did, might probably have faftened themfelves on Rodolph.—But whether through guilt, conviction, or what not, time can only afcertain. The Count's reflections, how^ever, on this myfterious tale, differed widely from thofe of our fagacious commentators. That the ringing of bells, at fuch and F ? fuch
( ï°a ) fuch particular hours—the founds of a diftant and feeble voice, and other appa¬ rent ftrange events, might be eafily ac¬ counted for, and as eafily difcovered. In the firft place, he had all along fuf pefted the treachery of poddard and Bernardine· He now conceived that they had, by fome clandeftine means, obtained a footing in the Caftle; but how, tr could ïîot poflibly account for ? In the fecond place—Rodolph reduc¬ ed it to a certainty in his own mind, that they were the fecret inhabitants of the fortrefs, and had been the joint au¬ thors of all thefe myfterious tranfactions, in order tp alarm others from fixing their abode therein, and thereby to fecure Prince Rinaldo's immenfe wealth, which he was certain they had embezzled for their own ufes and defigns.—And, laftly, Tha^
( i°3 ) That they had difcoverçd fome fecret channel that led to the North-tower, by which they contrived to ring the bell un- difcovered.—That they had, alfo, found fome unknown paffage tbat led into the chapel, by which they managed to re-il* lumine the tapers, whenever extinguiíh¬ ed. —In ihort—Rodolph had no doubt, within himfelf, but that thefe fellows were inclofed in fome fecret or fubterra¬ neous part of the Caftle, as be put all fu¬ pernatural agency eRtirely out of the queftion. Bernardine and Goddard, he knew, were poffeffed of natural courage and fortitude, and' would retain their hold as long as they poflibly could. He placed great hopes, however, on their extreme ignorance, which rendered them incapable of long carrying on a myfteri¬ ous plot like this (that required a fpirit F 4 morc
( 1? 4· ) » more fubtle and ingenious than their's) with 'much farther fuceefs.—They poffef¬ fed, indeed, fome little cunning, but of that low nature, as is continually betraying itfelf, and running into the very fame trap that it had laid*for others.—To conclude, Rodolph already began to fee thofe re¬ bels in chains' before him, and the prodi- gious* ftores of Prince Rinaldo difelofed tö his eager view. The Countefs, on the other hand, was as much confoled with the'cherifliing idea that Santa-Maria muft be ftiil in ex¬ iftence.—One reflexion, however, would forcibly ftrike her,—that if her daughter was indeed alive, why had ihe not fent her fome tidings of her being fo ? Again, flie contemplated, with rapture, that the gift flie had beftowed on the much to be regretted Lauria, was an in-
( I0 5 ) tended token of her exiftence.—Given to her with the probability that it might, by fome means, come acrofs her obferva¬ tion ; or—why have referved this relic of her affection fo long, and then dif¬ pofe of it, at the critical juncture of her arrival ?—it muft be fo (conceived the Lady Ifabeila) and though I deeply feel the affliction that her abfence muft af* ford hereafter Signiora Lauria, ftili I can¬ not refrain from indulging the fond idea of once more feeing my dearly beloved child again. As for D'Arcos, he had been invited to attend Rodolph to his Caftle.—Thi» ofler he now pofitively declined, fixed on iharing the forrows of his beloved niece.-— To his great grief, however-, hc foon be¬ gan to perceive, that the forrows of Lauria did not burft forth in torrents of
( «?? ) difuaftion, but that a fettled melancholy had taken poffeflion of her heart.—From fun-rife to fun-fet, did the anxious Fran¬ coliffe fearch after the fugitive minftrel, but all in vain.—The Chevalier fought every means to foothe this melancholy of Lauria, but in vain alfo. —On per¬ ceiving this, he afterwards fought to in¬ dulge it, and would fondly attend his niece to the fpot where ihe firft difco¬ vered Valentine; for grief often finds more confolation by others participating in her woes, than fruitiefs exhortations to expel the canker that fwells her con- * vulfive bofom» The more thou damntft it up, the more it burns. The current, that with gentle murmur glides, Thou know'it, being ftopt, impatiently doth rage. llAKSrEAXl.
Lauria,
( ï°7 ) Lauria, indeed, would frequently ob¬ ferve, when her fwolen eye caught a momentary glance of Hope ' the lover's ftaff,'—" Oh I who can divine, thou beft of men, and beft of fathers, but my Va¬ lentine's paft affection may, by chance, induce him to ftray once*> more towards the fpot where he firft beheld thy moft haplefs child f "
F ? CHAP.
( ïö8 )
CHAP. Vili. Lonely, fad alcng the heath he flowly moved with filent fteps—*-his arms hang difordered on his fide— his hair flies loofe—The tear is in his downcaft eyes, and the figh half filent in his breaft. OSSIAN. Thou feeft we are not all alone unhappy : T <is wide and univerfal theatre Prefents more woeful pageants, than the fcene Wherein we play* SHAKSPEARE. JlN OW to proceed with Santa-Maria, in a long journey of frefli fortunes----- re¬ luctantly, indeed, have we been obliged, ever and anon, to hurry on, and leave her lagging behind, though flill, our eyes, with pleafure,*have been reverted, to gaze upon the flruggling—haplefs traveller.— ? The
( *°9 ) The minftrel, Valentine (for fuch was the new-adopted name that he now^ gave himfeif—himfelf we fay, ftill keep¬ ing the difguife, and not the fex, in view)—after the interview he had obtain¬ ed with Lauria, provided himfelf with his lute, and fome food, and then preci¬ pitately deferted from the hofpitable man¬ fion of the Chevalier D'Arcos. Uncertain, however, which road to purfue, and ignorant whither they led to, he wandered through the adjacent heaths and forefts, atid when night came on, laid himfelf down, beneath the fliehe* in£ branches of a wide-fpreading oak.— Here Valentine enjoyed his repofe undif- turbed.—In the morninsr he continued his journey onward, and, towards the clofe of noon, perceived a deep valley, into which he immediately defcended—
( ??) for, here, no doubt (bethought the poor fugitive) I can refrefli myfelf without be¬ ing feen or annoyed—But, alas ! his cup of mifery was not yet filled ; for, fcarce had he feated himfelf upon the grafs, when his ears w r ere affailed with a long and mournful groan, that could not, from its original faintnefs, iffue from any great diftance.—The youth ftarted up, and, clafping his forehead between his hands, he bitterly exclaimed—" Oh! God, when, and where will my misfor¬ tunes have an end ?"—His heart, how¬ ever, touched by the voice of diftrefs, made him fearch about to difcover from whence the found had found its melan¬ choly-way.—He followed it clofe as his ear could direct, which foon led him to the mouth of a fmall cave, apparently formed by art, at the bottom of a fteep hill—
( ni ) —With trembling fteps, Valentine en¬ tered the gloomy abode—he had not far to proceed, for he foon difcovered a wan and withered object ftretched upon the cold ground.—For fome time he ftood enrapt in filent agony.—The expiring wretch, however, perceiving a ftranger enter—again faintly exclaimed—■** Alas ! ' I die for want of food."—The minftrel, on hearing this, ran back for his baiket of provifion, which, in his difmay, he had left behind, together with his lute. He foon brought them both into the cave, and then adminiftered to the poor reclufe, every nouriihment that his meat and wine could afford.—This feafonable relief ihortly relieved the gafping—w^- rable wretch ; and, with the afliftance of Valentine, he raifed himfelf from his proftrate fituation. In
( ?? ) In the mean time, the minftrel had an opportunity of infpefting this ftrange re¬ cefs, and its baniflied—wretched inha¬ bitant.—At the further end of the cave, he difcovered a broad and fmooth plank of wood, raifed upon four large ftones, about three feet from the ground. In the centre, the earth had been ihaped into a kind of dome, and ftrengthened by fquare pieces of rock, in the middle of which, hung an iron lamp. Near the plank, were a ftool and table, covered with a coarfe, black cloth ; and, clofe at hand, were fome books, and feveral loofe pa¬ pers, together with a ftandiih and pens, fcattered upon an adjacent ihelf—As for the expiring wretch before him, he dic^ not appear to be more than fifty, notwithftanding that difeafe and defpair had made the rnoft woeful ravages on his
bis miferable carcafe. —His face bore the decayed figns of a once manly beauty, and his eyes had ftill fomething com¬ manding in their glimmering fliootings, whilft his outward garb carried wdth it the habit of a— Monk. This deferted being, perceiving the natural aftonifliment of his benevolent vifitor, with vifible anguiih, exclaimed—- * % Alas! my young friend, had it not been for your timely aid, I fliould have left this world without any other expec¬ tation, but future—endlefs mifery.—Op¬ preffed with defpair and ficknefs, I have for a long—long week been ftretched upon my pallet, without being able to feek my daily nourifliment. Overcome, at laft, by the cravings ornature, 1 attempted to go in fearch of food, when, in the feeble attempt, I fell upon the grounds where my groans
( IH i groans muft have reached your ears, and happily brought you to my affiftance." Tlie minftrel, fenfibly moved with the extreme wretchednefs of this unhappy man, caught hold of his arm, and Jed him to the ftool.—Tlien feeing his eyes flow with tears of gratitude ; and per¬ ceiving that he was about attempting to exprefs his acknowledgments—he haf¬ tily obferved—" Peace, peace—have a little patience and comfort—do not de¬ fpair—I vvill remain here in the valley, for a ihort time, till, by my ilender aflift¬ ance, I may reftore you to health, and to the world, I hope, alfo. —I have only this one favour, in return, to aik—and this muft be regarded—(continued Va¬ lentine, in a tone of the utmoft folem¬ nity) in the ftriftcft and moft religious fenfe— Queftion me not about tkeßory of my W."~,
( "5 ) Ufe? —On this, the mmftrel feated himfelf on the edge of the pallet, and leaning hit arms upon his knees, gave vent to the anguifli which thefe laft words had re¬ vived, in a flood of tears. Valentine (as it has been juft obferv¬ ed) when he firft attentively furveyed the ftranger* gueffed him, by his habit, to have been a monk.—Confeious, there¬ fore, of the arbitrary fway that rnoft of thefe orders affumed over the confciences of their fellow-creatures, and ever mind¬ ful of his bath at Bianca's cottage, ** never; to make known his fex, till time had un¬ ravelled the myftery that had firft ba¬ niihed him from his native home and friends"—he had taken the above early precaution, to forewarn the wretched re¬ clufe from attempting to pry into the fe- crets of his foul. Father
( "? ) Father Conrad (for a monk he really had been, and fuch was he named) per¬ ceiving the minftrel fo difconfolate, fo young, and fo beautiful withal, feated himfelf befide him on the pallet, and tak¬ ing him tenderly by the hand, he now be¬ came the phyfician inftead of the patient, and endeavoured to calm tlie anguiih of his preferver's mind, in expreifiens fo en¬ dearing» and fo attempered .with philofo¬ phy and religion, that Valentine, ftruck with his fuperior fenfe, piety^nd enga¬ ging converfation, roufed himfelf from the lethargy of defpair and lamentation that had fo fuddenly overwhelmned him. The Monk, difcovering, with fecret joy, that his exhortations had their defired ef¬ fect, he arofe (confiderably ftrengthened) from his pallet, and ftill continuing the Minftrels hand in his, he condufted him to
( 117 ) to a door that led to an inner apartment, fitted out in a mannet that ftill farther added to the furprife of Valentine. Our poor wanderer, who had no olhcr roof to flielter his unpotefted head, looked round him in filent meditation. He re¬ viewed both the flranger and the place, over and over again, with themoft delibe¬ rate circumfpeftion. From the Monk', he conceived no violence or cruel treat- ment could be expefted ; and, as to the recefs, from its conveniency and fe¬ crecy, he began ferioufly to think, îhat ït might afford him a temporary andTecurfe abode. * r * Father Conrad, reading his young friend's thoughts in his countenance (fár well'could he feañ the 'mind of rrian) : and eager to give the earlieft demoiiftfatidn ¿f his gratitude, he immediately offered Va¬ lentine
( u» ) lentine the apartment which he feemed to furvey with fo much attention and fatif- faftion, as a comfortable afylum for him, till time fliould alter the complexion of his fortunes. " Regard this chamber, therefore, my generous preferver (conti¬ nued the Monk, feeing that Valentine's looks fpoke a thankful acquiefcence) as the refting place of your prefent toils and misfortunes. No intruder can moleft you here—and even myfelf fliall not attempt to difturb your privacy, without a paff¬ port previoufly given from under your own lips. What you have already com¬ manded refpefting the ftory of your life, ihall not only be rigidly adhered to on my part, but any other injunctions alfo, that l you may hereafter think prudél^^l^v upon me. ------ In tbe mean time»* I muft befeech you (for debility and ficknefs pre¬ vent
( 1*9 ) vent me from accomplilhmg my daily wonted taik, and which reduced me to the abject ftate you found me in) to go into the meadow, that lies on the eaft fide of this recefs, and there you will foon per¬ ceive a net, where, no doubt, fome birds have been entangled. A practice I have' long made ufe of to fupply me with my daily fuftenance. The Minftrel, imme¬ diately confented to go, and fprung out with a fudden flow of cheerfulnefs, as gave him a kind of flattering prefentment, that in his chance friend and abode he ihould find that content and peace of mind, to which he had been almoft a ftranger for thefe four yeai s paft.
CHAP.
í "o )
CHAP. IX. 'Né is there hawk, which mantlethher on pearei», Whether high to wring or accoufting low : But 1 tlte mcrtfure ofhis flight do fearch, And all her prey, and all her diet know. SPENCER.' '..........--------- — m hls forehead fits Ä bire uibb'd death. SHjVKSPLARK. V ALENTtNÉ hid'not proceeded far, erved the nét. It was about twelve yards and a lVarf long, and two yards or fo wide. He for fome time fur¬ veyed the ingenuity of this piece of work- maníhip with pleafure and furprife. (( This ftranger (conceived he) muft be
( 121 ) a man of great genius and wifdom— ï * fliould now wifli to hear the ftory of his misfortunes; but as I have enjoined fo ri¬ gid a filence myfelf on that fubjeft, I can¬ not think of aiking him. Let me, how¬ ever, confider myfelf for the prefent, fo far fortunate as to have met with aii abode where fecreff precludes curiofity; and where love can no longer intrude it* Telf on indifference/* On this reflection, which cheered and encouraged his heart, Valentine proceed¬ ed to examine the net. He found there¬ in feveral birds, fome dead, others alive. The fiur-birds were all dead, with their braces curioufly turned round their bo¬ dies. The long ftring, however, bein«· faftened tightly to a tree, had entrapped the others by the violence of their jerks. Our young Falconer, perceiving the flur- Vpfc.II. l _G birds
( iaz ) birds to have been larks and pippets, ex¬ pefted that thofe inclofed in the net were * of the fame kind. In this, he vvas not difappointed, for they were nearly all larks, though but few pippets. What moft of all, however, afforded him the greateft pleafure was the fight of a hawk, which, in attempting (as he fuppofed) to devour the larks, had been alfo entangled in the fnare. On this difcovery, he feifed the bird by his Wings, and faftened them underneath, with a kerchief that he had in his doublet, and which happily on that occafion, anfwered every purpofe of a brace. Whilft Valentine had gone in fearch of his game, Father Conrad, who found him¬ felf confiderably relieved by the provi- 1 fions he had been affifted to by his young tenant, kindled a fire in his new apart¬ ment,
( i*3 ) ment, not at aji doubting but that he would return with abundance of birds. In this he was not difappointed, for our Falconer, with the utmoft cheerfulnefs pictured on his blooming countenance, entered foon after with his prey. Va¬ lentine placed them all on the table, and exhibiting his hawk, with a fmile of the moft fenfible fatisfaftion, exclaimed—*- " Now, father, you fliall no longer be in requeft of food, whilft I have this hawk in my poffeflion, with powers and health alfo to manage him. Inftead of larks, and other fmall birds, we will now ihortly pro¬ cure a fufficiency of wild fowl to foften and indulge the cravings of nature. If the Monk was pleafed at this ex¬ preflive cheerfulnefs of his young inmate, he was alfo equally overjoyed with the-va- luable acquifition of his new friend. At G 2 the
í **4 ) the thoughts of his recreative companion, Valentine, for the prefent, not only forgot all his paft forrows and misfortunes, but thofe alfo that the abandoned Lauria muft experience at thefe very moments for his cruel and myfterious abfence. Without taking farther notice, however, of any other immediate fubjeft but his hawk, he laid hold of a leathern thong that lay upon the table (part of the Monk's paraphar- nalia ofhis order) and taking a knife from his doublet, cut a leafe for his favourite bird. He then formed the jeffes to his legs, and alfo cutting 4 a thin ftripe of lea¬ ther, he faftened it to the leafe, which formed his difciplinary creance. Our Fal¬ coner having proceeded thus far (to the furprize and pleafure of Father Conrad) he begged to have a part ? of the coarfe black cloth that ferved as a covering to hii
( ^5 ) his ftool; which being cheerfully aflented to, he immediately brought it forth, and ftraight cut a rufter-hood for his hawk.— He then cut another thin ftripe from the leathern thong, and fliaped the ftring to unftrike the hood. Valentine, on this, difcovering the bird begin to bate, ob¬ ferved, u that it might now go to jouk, for I cannot (faid he) in tenderne fs' fake, feal the poor creature. 1 * Our eager fportfman having difpofed of the hawk in one corner of his own apartment, fat down with great cheerful- v nefs to fupper, whilft the Monk, equally gratified by the good humour and good fenfe of his companion, experienced a re¬ novating pleafure fwell throughout his whole frame as he had not felt for fome time before. To their game was added a flagon of frefli wine, which the Father
had brought from a clofet in the next room. Their repaft being concluded, Conrad began to interrogate Valentine refpefting his firft knowledge of falconry ; when the latter immediately filenced his curiofity, by reminding the other of the folemn injunctions he had laid on this fubjeft at their firft interview. He, how- ever, took this opportunity of delicately hinting, that no fuch particular ftrefs had been lain upon himfelf. " In conformity, my amiable inmate (replied the Monk) to this your firft fa¬ cred requeft, my lips hereafter ihall never be opened to trefpafs again. A mutual confidence might be as diftrefling to you, as it would be horribly fo to me. Indeed, youth, if I was inclined to tell the fad ftory that firft brought me to this place, my confumptive powers vvould not fuffer ??
( 127 ) me to do fo, without haftening the diffo¬ lution which I feel creeping through my chilly veins. It is already infcribed on the fable book of fate for the view and ex¬ ample of pofterity j if chance fuffers it to burft forth like a peftilénce upon the world—no more, however, of thisr—I have faid enough. As I perceive, neverthelefs (continued the Father) that your curio¬ fity has been excited about this folitary recefs, I can with propriety, and far more fatisfaction, give you a brief'iketch of its prefent modelled appearance. A trifling iketch,, indeed—but one that will en* leffon the induftry and İkili of degenerate man, when drove to the extreme bounds of neceflity and defpair. ** ·) G 4 CHAP.
( WS ) CHAP. Χ. ã Oh ! I have done thoie things That now give evidence againft my foul. SKAK1PEARI. " Τ X T is now above three years (fatd Tather Conrad) fince I firft came to this folitary vale—a villain in my own mind, and an outcaft of mankind/'------ Perceiv- ing Valentine change countenance, at this unfavourable confeffion—the Monk paufed a few moments, and then recol- Je$ing himfelf, thus proceeded :— ** Hither then, furhce it to fay, I ftray- cd, and defcending into this reclufe glen/ difcovered a flielter, which I have every : reafo η
( !*9 ) reafon to believe, had been formerly the abode of wolves, as I found feveral bones of fome fuch animala fcattered about the ground.—Fearful left any mote ihould return, I contmually kept up a large fire, and in a few days afterwards, obferving that the earth was of a clayey fubftance, and that the heat had confi¬ derably hardened it, 1 inftantly formed the idea of making this fecret fpot the future place of my retirement. The more completely to effect my pur¬ pofe, I ieft it for a few days, and-repair¬ ing to the village of St. Biagio, which lies fouthward of the glen j I purchafed the implements and conveniencies necef¬ fary for my undertaking. On my return, I began by unwearied application to ac¬ compliih the defign, and found every thing agree with my utmoft wiihes* Af· G 5 ter
( ?° ) ter fome weeks of inceffant labour, I at length completed the outer room as it now ftands.—The adjacent forefts fur- nifhing plenty of wood, I had every means aMb of makmg the tables, ftools, and other neceffaries, that the recefs is at prefent fo comfortably provided with. After concluding my firft attempt, I found my mmd and body grow relaxed, for want of that ufual employ and exer¬ cife which had for fome time fo happily relieved me from the anxiety of reflec- tioö.-~Thinkíng on this feme occafion, that fome unfortunate ftranger, or bewil¬ dered traveller, might one day ftray to¬ wards -my recefs ; I foon after began to found the apartment you now are to pof¬ fefs. Having learnt a great deal from my fortfter experience, I improved upon my former plan, and rendered this cham¬ ber
( w ) ber more compact and regular than thè other. The fucceifive works of labour were not completed, till a year and more after my firft fojourning on this fpot; Having thus inured my body by induftry, I then refolved to fet me down in reft, and ftrengthen my mind for a fu¬ ture ftate.—In fliort, fmce that, I have arranged every worldly concern (fave one) and endeavoured by failing, prayer, and repentance, to prepare my foul for a favourable reception in the other world —a worid, awful indeed for me ta think upon, and which I ihould htve entered before now, whither forgiven í or con¬ demned, bad it not been for your Unex¬ pected and charitable affiftance/' Father Conrad, perceiving the night fteal on apace, rofe, and prepared to bid Valentine a-good repofe.-—But on a fiid- >>.' * *~ G d den.
( 13* ) dei** a ;ftartof recolleftknv delayed him a few moments longers -?? now re-ap¬ proached our minftrel, and thus addrefled liim in the moft folemn grid moft ener¬ getic manner, both of countenance and voice ; cc Before I depart, allow, me to lay this inhibition on you—You have al¬ ready enjoined me, my rnoft amiable youth, not to interrogate you concerning the hiftory of your life.—Let me, there¬ fore, enjoin you, during your abode in Ibiš inner recefs—never—never, to draw afide— —tjiofe black hangings you may »fee there, at the eaftern part of the chamber. Your curiofity would then prove as hurtful to your feelings, as it has always been to me ? when I have dared toigratify my own.—I am not long fôr § thfe world—a few—very few days in¬ deed*
( *3$ ) deed, will cut the thread of øxiftence— I feel that this laft íhock will ioon crum¬ ble me into my native duft.*-My< vital powers are almoft exháiíftedj·**— I pray efore,!that you may remain Here, un¬ tu the expefted awful. period has taken place.—Then/and then only, you have my free grant to withdraw thefe fable hangings**—And then, oh ! youth, ybu will difcover a treafure, that may hereafter (together with the invaluable jewel of an untainted cpnfcience) render you fuperior to the taunts of profpe- rityj and the. gloomy (corns of adverfity. —Youth, good-night—have prefent re^ folution to repel curiofity, and all ftill may be happy with you." On this the Father jctired tp hi$ own hard pallet* and left his inmate ta efcj öy the comforts * ^f ? tøft and pleafant mattrefs. ι ι The
( Î34 ï The monk* being gotte, Valentine ftiM kept his feat before the fire, to indulge a few moments* reflection on one day's mòre adventures· His ideas foon began to float about in varied channels.—He looked toward the black*hangings, and wonder¬ ed deeply what they could conceal.— They appeared both of a coarfe fub¬ ftance, fimilar to the habit the reclufe himfelf had on.—He ruminated on the expreflions that prefaced his ftory of the recefs*—A villain in my own mind» and an outcaft of human nature.------ Surely (conceived Valentine) I can have no*- thing to apprehend ?—His manners, fenfe, ingenuity* and complacency of countenance, do not convey the appear¬ ance of danger in them ;—his humanity, moreover, and benevolent forefight, in providing this fecret and convenient ihek
( 45 ) ter for the unhappy ßranger or bewildered traveller, denote a charitable beneficence of mind, that could not harbour danger alfo i —I fee no inftruments of lurking mifchief any w T here about.—What, how¬ ever, can the myftery attached to thofe coarfe fable hangings, difclofe ?— A trea· fure (fays the father)—his meaning can¬ not furely be othewife fairly conftrued into any other words, than what he him¬ felf exprefled.*==*Bui if it is a treafure, why then give it fuch a melancholy and forbidding ihelter?—Is it not, however, prudent, and conducive for my iafety, to break through this monks beheft's, and will not my prefent precarious fituation excufe my curiofity ì —But then again will not this fame breach of faith, betray a meannefs, and an abufe alfo of his con fidence and hofpitality ?—molt certainly a it
( 136 ) it will. Then I will alfo ref refs my anx¬ ieties, and not attempt to violate the fo¬ lemn injunctions he has laid upon me." Valentine thus refolved, and feeing his lute at hand, which the monk had care¬ fully placed there, he took it up, and accompanying the inftrument with his » voice> chaunted in doleful ftrains, the unhappy loves of the fair Rofaline, and, the beauteous Lauria. The folemnity of the hour, and the expreffive melancholy of the lute, had fuch an effect upon the poor Father, in the adjoining chamber, that Valentine heard him diftinftly exclaim—** Such are the founds that fuit * the gloomy horrors of my foul/* The minftrel on difcovering this, imme¬ diately ceafed playing, and putting down his lute in the Tame corner of the recefs, where
{ 137 ) where he had perched his hawk, he lay^ down upon his mattrefs -, when ——" Sleep that fometimes ihuts up forrow's eye," foon overpowered, and locked him in the arms of fweet oblivion.
CHAP.
( »38 )
CHAP. XI. -—- * ■ " * - ■ — ■ -**■——'Tremble, thou wretch, That haft within thee undi ν ulged crimes Unwhipt of jyftice.-^Hide thee, thou bloody lund» Thou perjure, «nd thou iimularof virtue t That art ?????? caitiff, ihake to piece*. IHAK5PEAHB. Valentine rofe with the fun, and looking after his hawk, gave him a lark- gorge, and fetting out to the meadow that was the leaft encumbered with trees or wood, commenced his firft morn¬ ing's training. The minftrel was a moft excellent falconer, he therefore fet about manning and reclaiming his bird, in the peculiar manner he had been taught by th«
( J 39 ) the Iove-fick Rofaline's father. His prac¬ tices and obfervanccs had foon their de¬ fired effeÔ. The hawk every morning, became more than extraordinarily ear¬ ly attached to his young tutor ; and Valentine finding him to be a ftately high-flyer, brought him up to the river. —A manner of training that not only fuited beft to the fituation of the country but to the ihort periods of the morning, that he could ftray from the glen, and prudently appropriate to his favourite re¬ creation. The game, however, that Valentine ac¬ quired through the aciivity of his bird, had no other effect on father Conrad, than what arofe from gratitude»—He had found himfelf decaying day after day, from the minftrels firft arrival. The melody, indeed, of his. lute, which he never
( ?? ) never failed to indulge him with, cheer¬ ed his drooping fpirits, and elevated his meditations, with encreafed awe, to ap¬ proaching feenes of an awful eternity. Nature at length, after a month's fevere ftruggle-—^wearied and decayed------the monk gave up the ghoft.------And Va¬ lentine found himfelf alone, in a dreary recefs, which nothing but a fecond being could enliven—affociated alfo with a mi¬ ferable corpfe ;—interefted Iikewife in a fecret, which his honour and faith, at firft denied him to feek into, and which his fears now diffuaded him from at¬ tempting to difcover—a fecret, fnat had been particularly enjoined by the monk, in his laft moments, immediately to fa¬ tisfy himfeif with ; as on that, and that alone, his own future happinefs and prof- 4 perity depended.
( Hi )n Great were the ftruggles of Valentine's mind on this mournful occafion. He wiflied, indeed, that both his own inno¬ cent curiofity, and the laft dying bequefts of Father Conrad fliould be fatisfied and performed. On the eve, therefore, of his deceafe, the folitary exile took the lamp from the dead man's room ; and with all the refolution he could collect, entered the inner recefs ·, for, in the other, he could not abide the pafling of a fecond. Several times was Valentine determined to fly from the fpot, and abandon the fecret to fòme future ftranger. Then, on the other hand, to difobey the laft folemn prayers of a poor departed being, compelled him to refift the uncharitable idea.—Thus waver ing, he tremblingly approached the hang¬ ing neareft the door. He hefitated, and ihook with horror—At laft, he ventured to
f 14í ) to draw it one fide, and difcovered ----------- —a coifin, ftanding upright, co¬ vered with the fame coarfe black ftuff that compofed the hanging under which it lay concealed. For four years (as it has already appeared) Valentine had been nurfed in the lap of mifery and forrow. _* ** This was a fpeftacle, therefore, that did not fo much difturb his fortitude. It was a mere and neceffary apparatus of death ; and, as fuch, he foon reconciled the fight of it to his feelings. On the lining was faftened a paper. This, however, he was determined at all events not to remove, without fearching for fome witnefs. He was alfo refolved not to draw afide the other hanging, which ran parallel with the firft; for. the words, "lam a villain in my own mind, and the outcaft of human na¬ ture," came frefli acrofs his memory—Be¬ hind
( 143 ) hind the other, as he conceived, might re- maîn^-not a coffin—but fome mouldering —murdered corpfe. This fuppofition he was led into by an offenfive fmell that had often iffued from that quarter, as he paffed by it.—Poffeffed, therefore, of fuffi¬ cient fortitude, to abandon the recefs, he took his lute, and haftily quitting the dreary abode of death, flew tQ the fide of an adjacent hill, that he knew led to¬ wards the great road to Meflina; notwith the intent, however, of wholly abandon¬ ing the recefs, but to endeavour by his melody, to attraft fome wandering ftran¬ ger, or chance traveller, who not only could be a joint teftimony of this myfte- rious hiftory, but who could, with more refolution, perform thofe ceremonies to the dead, which he knew himfelf inca¬ pable of going fingly through. Here
( ?4 ) Here Valentine afted equally with great prudence and circumfpeftion ; for he well knew that if the fevere and fcru- tinizing eye of the -Neapolitan law íhould ever by chance, or what not, gain an in* fight ifíta this dark bufinefs, that a court of înquifition might arraign his conduct, and himfelf be ultimately perfecuted for what he was innocent of—being reíb- lutely determined (as he was) even if death fliould be the confequence, never to violate the folemn oath herbad made at Bianca's cottage,« —viz.—to reveal the fe¬ cret of his fex or birth, till themyftery of the pregnancy ihould be elucidated— Ana ** Hîs words were'bonds, his oaths were oracles," 't 1 ■' * * λ CHAP.
( '45 )
CHAP. XII. How fweet the moon-light fleeps upon this bank ! Here will we lit, and let the found of mufic Creep in our ears ; foft ftillnefs and the night Become the touches of fwect harmony. SHAKSPEARE. XT wanted two hours to midnight, when Valentine ventured from the recefs. The moon ihone in all her fplendour. Her filver rays, that darted through the fpread· ing oak and the tall pine, ^ afforded a ftrong ray of light on that fide of the hill which the minftrel thought beft fituated for his purpofe. Having feated himfelf on its Hoping banks, and attuned his İpte to the foft vibrating chords of melan- Vob.IL H cht|p
( 14« ) choly, he began to play the dirge fung at the funeral of Lucy Mirando, the proud beauty of the celebrated Fano. Valentine had fcarcely finiihed this fo¬ lemn piece of mufic, when, aflifted by the fweet echo that reverberated through the glen, he thought that fome perfons were fpeaking over his head. He ftopped and * liftened,'with all the agitation that his pre¬ fent forlorn and diftreffed fituation could poflibly give birth to—he arofe and lif¬ tened again. Shortly, his ears were hap¬ pily faluted from above, with the moft welcome founds; founds that denoted command, and fomething of a fuperior quality. " I will difmount (faid the fame voice again) for fure fome angel or fairy muft inhabit this vale. Do you all, there¬ fore remain above, until I reafcend." When Valentine, however, diftinguifli¬ ed
( 147 ) ed the words—" Do you all remai» above," his fears began to tax ? difcre¬ tion. His fituation, neverthelefs, was too diftrefling then to admit of fancied appre¬ henfions, when fuch real and horrible ones withal were fo near at hand. Being, therefore, aiked from above, whence fuch celeftial founds proceeded ? our minftrel played them over again, in order that the ftranger might purfue the notes by his ear. This had the defired effea. Valentine plainly diftinguühed the approaching foot¬ ftep. He looked toward tbe place from whence it reverberated, and could plainly perceive by the bright rays of the moon, a Cavalier approach, arrayed in a fuit of fables. He had no time fbr farther con¬ templation, as the ftranger now floods clofe befide him. Difcovering the min¬ ftrel to be confiderably depreffed with
( И? ) fear, the Cavalier foon relieved his anxie¬ ty j and^ddreffmg him in the moft cour¬ teous manner, enquired the fubject of thofe mournful ftrains, which had fo for¬ cibly ftruck him, as he was flowly riding by the glen? « When I firft diftinguiihed the plain¬ tive founds (continued the ftranger) of your dulcive lute, it brought back to my recollection fuch notes that I have often liftened with rapture to before. In days, alas ! far more tranquil, and happier than the prefent.—Methought aifo the voice had been once familiar to my ear.—But fay, youth—-from what caufe proceed thefe melancholy founds, that denote fo ftrongly, all is not well within ?—Or, are , you fome en-ikied being, dropped from the heavens, to teach us the harmony of « the
( ι« ) the fpheres ? or, if you are mortal------ (which by your looks I fcarce believe you are) what makes your refidence here in this folitary glen? Say—is fome favourite fair one kept captive hereabout—the un¬ willing facrifice of age or lechery ? Has treachery been at work to empoifon the foul of innocence and beauty? Ooes any haplefs virgin groan under the manacles of a brutal father's rage, for giving vows of love, where he would wiih to crufli them ?—Has fome falfe friend taken re¬ fuge in this folitude, to avoid the daihing glance and honeft face he once has injur ed, and now he could not dare to look upon ?—Or (oh ! anfwer me)------Have you a mother—here—performing penance for violating of her marriage faith ; or a fifter—youth— for breaking of her virgin* H 3 knot,
( *ί° ) knot, " before the facred laws of holy church allowed it?" At this, the Cavalier, perceiving that Valentine's hand (which he had clafped in his at the firft, with the moft foothing tendernefs) grow rather chilled, he en¬ couraged him to be of good heart, and cheered him with inftant promifes of af¬ fiftance, if he would confide in him fo far as to acquaint him with the occafion of his diftrefs and melancholy—" Had I not been fo much moved as I was (continued the ftranger) at the delicious effufions of your lute ; and now, at your modeft, youthful, and beautiful countenance, it had been my duty as a foldier and a Chrif¬ tian, to afford you all the help my fword and counfel could beftow."— Whilft the Cavalier was uttering this laft
( ? 1 ) laft profeffion of his fervices, the moon darted full upon their fide of the hill, and flione with uncommon fplendour on both their faces. Valentine, with ftrong emotions of pre-fen tim ental curiofity, took this fair opportunity of furveying the ftranger's countenance. He trem¬ bled, but knew not for why—his hand became chilled again, and a faintnefs crept over his whole frame----------for, now our minftrel conceited, that in the features of the Cavalier, he could recog*· nize an ancient and beloved - - ^ friend, one that he had known in happier days. -------Again and again did he furvey the countenance with frefli attention.—Then his memory, he thought, belied him.— Alas !—he was deceived.....- -no—he was not that fame friend his conceit had H 4 fondly
( iS* ) fondly led him to fuppofe.—Still—re¬ membrance fliot with renovated vigour o'er his mind, and though the features that flood fo confpicuoufly before him (pale, broken, and emaciated as they appeared to be) were not exactly thofe of him that his imagination had, at firft, conceived .....yet there was ftill fome¬ thing in the nature and complexion of them, that he faintly recollected, when erft, tranquillity had cheered* his youthful heart, Whilft Valentine was thus giving way to his filent and wandering conjectures, the Cavalier having enjoyed the fame op¬ portunity that the moon's broad phafes had mutually afforded, gazed attentively alfo on the minftrels countenance, and, after uttering a deep figh—ftill retaining the
( '53 ) the youth's hand entwined in his^—he poignantly exclaimed— " Oh ! beauteous boy ! how much does that lute—that voice—that face, remind. me of— — —." " Of who ?"—quickly returned the minftrel,— c< Of a—forgive me, boy—a w ------a wretch—One that I loved more tenderly than mine eye-balls—but at whofe re¬ membrance my blood now recoils.—Oh! may mifery and perdition....... but— I am wandering from the purpofe that firft led me hither.-~Come, youth, then (continued the Cavalier, collecting him- N felf in an inftant) hafte, and acquaint me with the caufe of your diftrefs (if there is any fuch exifting) and I will quickly en¬ deavour to fet ali things right, before I proceed on my journey/' II ? " « But
"But oh! Sir Cavalier, telime firft, who you can thus praife and curfe at once—I, perchance, may foothe your an¬ guiih." <c You cannot, youth ; the difeafe i¿ paft all remedy—therefore, hafte and tell, if iris in my power to foothe and affift you. My fquire and followers attend me on the brow of this deep glen, I have bufinefs of wondrous imports that calls me hence, and that right fpeedily, withal.— If fo filent, then (concluded the Cava¬ lier, and rifing to depart) I am gone- Youth, farewell, and happier times attend you !" " Delay here, then, but for a ihort while longer (exclaimed the diftreffed Valentine, in the rnoft piteous accent, now calling to mind the mournful caufe that
( »55 ■ ) that had baniflied him from the dreary avenues of the recefs) have but a little patience, noble Cavalier, and I will tell you all—the ftory is brief, and the pur¬ port of it can foon be related.
( 15*5 )
CHAP. ??. My life upon't, young tho' thou art, thine eye Hath ftaid fome favour that it loves ; Hath it not, boy ? SHAKSPEARE. V ALENTINE having prefaced his ftory, by obferving—" That as he was a wandering and forlorn minftrel, who ac- quirec| a lodging and fubfiftence by his lute—Chance, after an unfuccefsful day's excurfion, had led him into that glen, to feek a nights repofe."—He then precipitately journeyed through his tale, by clofely following up the circumftances of his adventure with Father Conrad— the 'relief he had fo fortunately afforded
( »57 ) him—his gratitude for the tranfitory pre¬ fervation he had met with from his hands —his defpair—his recent death—with the difcoveiy of the coifin, and the fcroll, be¬ hind the black arras—and, in ihort, all the other events that had taken place be- twixt himfelf and the monk, from his firft abode in the recefs, to the .Father's diffolution. " This (concluded Valentine) is my fliort tale ·> and the reluctance I felt— (for oh ! Sir Cavalier, I have never been, like you, bred up to arms) to proceed farther in what ftill remains concealed, compelled me to feek the downy coat of 4 this hill, that, by the perfuafive force of my lute, I might, perhaps, attraft fome pafling ftranger, or chance traveller, to be a co-equal witnçfs pf what now con¬ tinues unrevealed $ and alfo, to aflift me
in performing thofe Iaft ceremonies to the dead, which mý too fearful heart could never be encouraged fingly to go through. Fortunately, you were the firft who defcended, and the firft, I am well convinced, who would aid me in my* purpofe. If willing, therefore, to re¬ lieve an haplefs—poor—defencelefs boy, attend me to this fame recefs, and then you ihall learn farther/' The ftranger liftened with filence and furprife to the minftrels artlefs tale.— When it was concluded, however, he did not hefitate a moment, in aílenting to ¿comply with his requeft.--From what he had juft beard, there was no doubt, but what guilt and anguiih had long refided where he was proceeding to.—Myftery had been the peculiar province of his own life and fortunes—at firft, dark and
{ 49 ) impenetrable.—But as myfteries, toward* the laft conclufion of the eventful fcene, of a foul and a blackene&nature, feldom, or ever, fail of being dragged into the broad glare of day—fo had it fell out, in part, with him—now the ftirring aftor of a moft bloody tragedy.—One tragedy* however, done, another might fucceed* The enveloped fcene of myftery, though vaniihed from his own perfon, might ftill hang hovering over other heads—aye, and over the heads, perhaps, of thofe who have commenced the aft with him, but not con¬ cluded it fo foon.^—Like his own ftirring part at firft—perplexed—apparently un¬ fathomable—till chance, with uncertain flight, dropped on the theatre of life's extended action, and publiihes to the world's ear what was once fuppofed to % be
( »?? ) be locked up for ever in the womb of oblivion. As-Valentine was leading", the cour¬ teous ftranger towards his recefs, he dif¬ tinguiihed his followers, by the rays of the moon, on the brow of the hill.— On this, he drew his fword, and waved it loftily in the air, äs a token that they ihould defcend. Our Minftrel, on difcovering the naked fword of his warlike comrade, expreffed an alarm, that was immediately perceived by the ftranger. He, inftantly, however, removed his apprehenfions, by obferving, that it was only a promifed fignal to his attendants : " For, previous to my defcent, (faid he) I ordered thera particularly to watch the token, left any unforefeen ac¬ cident might happen.—But, youth (conti- nued the Cavalier, with a fmile of retort, as
( ibi ) as they journeyed towards the recefs) why fo fufceptible of fear ? It does not become a man to be fo daunted on everv occafion—thefe apprehenfions more be come a woman's nature." " Alas ! Sir Knight (replied the Min¬ ftrel, with a deep figh) I am no foldier." " I warrant that (returned the (Iran- ger) no doubt, but what you have fed more on the fmiles of yielding beauty, than you ever tafted the frowns of hoftile danger. When I regard thofe expreflive eyes—thofe animated features, and that prepoffefling form, 1 cannot but credit you have pofleffed the heart of many a beauteous damfel. Women cannot well refift fuch qualities and temptations as you inherit. The delicious harmony of your voice, and the ikilful difpofitions of your lute, muft have enfured you more conquefts^
( i6a ) conquefts than could a whole life devoted to war and danger.—A foldier's chiefeft— nobleft recompence—do you enjoy."— Valentine^ on hearing this—reclined his head, and bluíhed — ** What İ blufliing too withall ?—Now believe me, moft gallants would be happy to recount—-aye, and redouble the conquefts you muft have obtained ;—be¬ fides, your occupation fuits you for a lady's bed-chamber. There you can lull them into fondnefs—delight their enrap¬ tured fenfes to the higheft zenith of irre¬ fiftible defire, and enchant them to com¬ mit, fond, dying, mutual deeds of exqui¬ fite Jove and tendernefs,—The unguard¬ ed huiband, the too credulous parent, and the unfufpecting brother, do not confider on the dangers their wives, their daughters, and their fillers experience, when
( »?? ) when fuch handfome, modeft-feêming, i» beardlefs youths as you, intrude upon their too pliable, fufceptible natures.— No, perdition feize me if they do —(raif¬ ing his voice, here with uncommon warmth, and which betrayed that what he had hitherto uttered, arofe more from fpleen and fatire, than any pleafure he could receive from the rehearfed ecftacies of love)—No—no—fame, honour, grati¬ tude, and affection, are foon overwhelm¬ ed in the amorous dalliance of mutual— love—I would have laid—let me how¬ ever change it—to mutual luft ;—for love can never take a lafting refidence, where honour does not abide alfo." " That laft expreflìon, Sir Knight (ob¬ ferved Valentine) iâ virtuous, nobly fpo¬ ken, and well becomes you.—The former part of your difcourfe, however, ilMuits with
( i6 4 ) with the melancholy errand we are now upon." *' Come—come (replied the ftranger, with an affumed tone of merriment) be not afraid of the confequences hanging on our errand.—Neither dead men, or coffins, or any myfterious fcrolls, can dif¬ turb the mind, where guilt does not in¬ habit.—I am young like unto yourfelf;— fond alfo of attending to the tales of love.—Come then, and cheer me on¬ ward, with the hiftories of thofe who have fliared your favours.—I have heard of many a dame, and damfel too, who have become the happieft facrifices to a voice, a ikill, and a perfon like your's ; all as delicioufly happy in your embrace, as you have been in their's." Valentine, who from fome experience, had become in a rneafure acquainted with
·( 16S ) with the duplicity and yielding nature or his fex (or, rather, more clofely fpeaking, her fex) foon difcerned, that the Cava¬ lier's mirth, was not only affumed, but eftranged from his real nature ; one ex¬ preffion alone, convinced him that his genuine thoughts on real kve y were pure and noble. The flattery he had beftowed on his voice, ikill, and perfon, appeared to him to be a well directed feint, to dif¬ cover fome myftery, which at prefent was impenetrable. Curiofity, therefore, and not inclination to converfe on thefe tender, or rather lafcivious topics, was his fole intent. Valentine, however, find- ing himfelf hardly preffed upon the fub¬ jeft, and knowing he had fome farther way to proceed, before they reached the recefs, thus pathetically replied to his amorous yitcrrogatories : "Sir
( l66 ) ct Sit Knight (faid the minftrel) if you will thus perfift in learning the progrefs of my attributed conquefts, and the real fituation of my heart, fo far ihall you be acquainted,—For thefe fome years, have I purfued the occupation of a minftrel ; feveral noble houfes have received me under their hofpitable roofs, from the ikill in mufic, you are pleafed to fay, that I inherit.—Several ladies too, and fair ones withál, have beftowed their deareft affections upon me. I might, indeed (had it ίο in my nature been) have enjoy¬ ed all the tranfports that mutual love could beftow. Two cogent reafons, how¬ ever, forbade me to indulge an unwar¬ rantable difpofition. ------Firft, Sir Cava¬ lier, I would not for the treafures of the Indus, have fo heinoufly violated the laws of hofpitality, and wounded the peace ι of
( 1*57 ) of my proteftor, as either to debauch his wife, child, or fifter,—In the next place (excufe me for being fo brief, as I per¬ ceive we are nearly approaching the re¬ cefs)—I have a paflion fo deeply rooted in my heart for one perfon, and one per¬ fon only,that neither beauty,fuperior asit may be, or affection ever fo greater, can ever wean my imagination from him." " From him, youth, did you fay?" €( From bim, Sir Knight—Alack-a-day! you do miftake—From her, I faid.—Alas 1 what hold doth abfence take upon the grief-wor n mind." " It is even thus—fuch alfo has it been with me.—But to continue (faid the ftranger) with our love hiftories,-—Say then, youth—Did the fair one return your kindnefs ?" * c She did—we loved, and were belov¬ ed
( i68 ) ed of aH ; till the íhafts of adverfity and flander interfered between our mutual happinefs, and marred all our future prof· peòts óf approaching blifs." The ftranger would have queftioned farther, and more definitive explanations might probably have taken place, had they not been critically interrupted by the trampling and neighing of horfes that fol¬ lowed behind. The Cavalier on diftin¬ guifliing this, turned round, and thus fa¬ miliarly addreifing himfelf to the fore¬ moft.—" In good faith, Sebaftian, you have purfued us clofe." ** My Lord (replied the other) we foon perceived your fignal, and diftin¬ guifliing your voice, as you paffed on¬ ward, we followed you at fome hu hie diftance. Aldobrand, alfo (pointL ¿ to a beautiful black charger, which he was leading
( ·■% ) leading by the rein) recognized.'it alfo, and fenfible of the found, began neigh¬ ing on the inftant.—But I hope, my Lord, no particular accident has cabed us here?" ; " None, Sebaftian, of any ferious im¬ port,—Nothing, indeed, that will long delay us from purfuing the remainder of our journey to the Caftle/' Valentine, had fcarce time to contem¬ plate the comely and martial appearance of Sebaftian—the noble and ftately ani¬ mal, Aldobrand —or the words, my Lord, —and journey to the Caftle, before they reached the mouth of the recefs. " This, my Lord (faid the minftrel then, with a peculiar ftrong emphafis)— this is the fpot, where Father Conrad lies a corpfe, and where the myfteries I told you of remain concealed. On this the Vol. IL I noble
( *7 ? ) noble unknown deputed the veteran Launcelot (and father of Sebaftian) to watch carefully without, whilft his fon and himfelf : ihould attend the young ftranger into the recefs.
CHAP.
{ ι?« )
CHAR XIV. öh í when the laft account 'twixt heav*n and ????? Is to be made, tHen ÍhaU this hand and feal Witnefs againft thee to damnation. SHAKSPEAXE. J\ S Valentine was leading the way v through the narrow embowered avenue that pointed to the recefs, he ftopped all ofa fudden—:beingovercome (as he faid) with a faintnefs that ftruck chilly to his very foul. The granger attributing his ficknefs to his'fears, gently forced him to recline on his arm; and tlten .turning round to his 'fquire, he obferved, " Ah ! *■ 't %* ? 'i 4 , Sebaflian, this tender-bofomed youth has I a not
í 172 ) not been cafed, like us, in the tough armour of danger and adverfity ! But, come— - courage, boy (continued the Cavalier, ad¬ dreifing himfelf to Valentine) pluck up thy mettle for thy miftrefs' fake. She will Hot love thee elfe ; nor pain herfelf to lull and nurfe thee in the foft cradle of fond dalliance. He trembles, Sebaftian. Af¬ fift him with your arm—Come, let us en¬ ter in abreaft—Cheerly—Cheeriy, youth, and be not thus depreffed. Let not ap¬ prehenfion thus overpower you." They now entered into the chamber of death—Valentine turned away his head from the corpfe—His companions, how¬ ever, regarded it with an air of the utmoft ihdifferende^—" This arched door (faid the ftf anget) I fuppofe, youth, leads into the apartmentyou told me of?" " The fame, my Lord." ' f Tliey
( 173 ) They then entered the fecond recefs— Sebaftian leading the way, as the paffage would not admit of three abreaft. " There alfo is the coifin, Ifee, that you alluded to." Then addreifing himfelf to Sebaflian, the ftranger obferved with a fmile, " Something ftrikes me, my friend, that we fliall meet with another adventure here." Whilft the utmoft calmnefs and com¬ pofure reigned in the hearts of Sebaftian and his Lord, it was far otherwife with the agitated Minftrel—A fickiy faintnefs ftill continued hanging over him, whilft his throbbing heart beat to and fro, as though it would burft from the precincts of its corporeal prifon—The violence ofhis womanly apprehenfions, however, fub¬ fided, when he confidered and regarded I3 the
( . «74 ) * the prefence, coolnefs, and intrepidity, of his two companions. The ftranger having taken the feroii from the coffin, and firft perufing it tò himfelf, he afterward difelofed the con¬ tents, as thus, to Valentine and Sebaftian; f * Whenever chance may lead fon\c " Chriftian ftep into this dreary re- " cefs of death, .let thefe Iaft wiihes ** of an unhappy finner be complied " with ; Firfl, to depofit vlhatever *' fcattered remains that he mav dif- " cover hereabout within the coffin * c that ftands concealed behind the <fi black hanging in the adjoining " chamber.—In the next place, this " firft Chriftian .aft performed, let " him fee the remains conveyed for <ç interment, to the great convent of
( 'TS ) ** the Carthufians, on St. Martin's « Hill, near the Caftle of St. Elma— t< For thefe labours, he will find a " noble recompence. Beneath the " adjoining hanging, alfo, lie conceal- " ed two fmall iron chefts—one con- " tains—the aforefaid recompence— ** the other holds a parchment fcroH— ? facred to the eye of one alone. Let " it be delivered, therefore as the " outward covering dì reft s ------To a " ftrange and unconcerned infpeft- " ing eye, it matters not ; though to u the right owner it will convey " moft damnable truths;—And, ref- cf cue—(Oh I God forgive me) inno- " cence, honour, and beauty from u the fliaft of obloquy and perfecu- t< tion. According, therefore (whoever, u thou mayeft be) asyou aft honour-
( i 7 6 ) " ably, and up to the tenor of this " paper, fo may your recompence " prove a comfort and a blefling. (Signed) « Conrad. " [Late a Father of the convent of the Carthufians.]" The ftranger having thus far examin¬ ed into the myfteries attached to the firft hanging, they proceeded to the fecond coarfe arras. This being drawn afide, they difcovered two (helves. On the up- pcrmoft ihelf were the two fmall iron chefts, and on the nethermoft were a (kull and fome transfixed human bones ------ " Thefe remnants of our body's diffolu¬ tion (faid the Cavalier to Valentine) muft have been the caufe, no doubt, of the of¬ fenfive fmell that you mentioned on the Hill
( 177 ) Hill. Tbis famé Father Conrad (conti- nued he, addreffing himfelf next to Sebaf¬ tian) has been guilty, I forefee, of fome damnable crime as this fcroll I hold has already implied.—And---------like thofe guilty wretches refemrjling unto himfelf that have been handed down from me¬ mory to memory : —wretches, who either expefted for fome blafted violations of their facred jaws and funftions ; or by the fecret—ftill more horrible punctures of a ftirring confcience, have been forced to fly from the ibothing bonds of focial in¬ tercourfe, to the clandeftine folitary haunts of woods and caves. And here it is that Hope fometimes faintly foftens their de- 4 fpair wtth a wild, confufed expectation— that by.a fevere abftinence—failings— feff^nflifted corpora} puniibraents, and continuai prayers» they offer up anatone- _^L·^ --■■?? -L*-****·-·-··»
( 178 ) ment . to the bleffed minifters above for crimes as black as is the Ethiop's ikin— aud though rt Unfit to live, or dia¬ stili will they keep up this ftale fuperfti¬ tious farce of mortification—Still will tliey preferve our mortal relics to gape—to ftare upon, and to pray to withal, though thefe fame mufty bones muft bitterly re¬ mind them of that awful felf-diffolution vvhich they are themfelves fo unprepared to meet, and which, if once re-animated, might publiih to the world fuch confef- fionary horrid truths, as would make the hair even of murder, blafphemy, and incefly ftand an end.—" The ftranger now drew forth the iron chefts :—they were, however, both lock¬ ed—But, Valentine foon removed the ob¬ ftacle
( 179 ) ftacle that prefented itfelf on opening tha feme, by pointing out another paper to* his companions, which he perceived, had. been fixed between the two crofs bones·* —On this freih.difcovery, the Cavalier^ immediately opened the paper, and as he had done before with the firft—read it fi-. ? Ientlyto himfelf.—Having fully examined its contents, he turned round with a fmile of joy and uncommon fatisfaftion. Then- fliaking Valentine heartily by the hand, he exultingly congratulated him on his approaching good fortune—" I wifli thee, merry, my boy (faid hel with all this wealth—The Monk, in good faith, has, however, performed one good and generous deed—whatever his darker ones may prove to have been.—Thy lute, youth, fliall henceforward found cheerily ; no mournful dirges now, but .fprightly I 6 ditties.
{ i8o ì ditties. » I will have love-fòtóetà tìóW, and amoréiis ones vvithal;—^fuch a r s will give frefh vigour to old threefeore and more.— And when inclined to martial ftrains, thou flialt give me the fong of war." 4 Upon this, the ftraiiger, in the livelieflr effufions óf joy and congratulation, arifing folely from the ? pure, though fudden friendihip he began to feel for the Min¬ ftrel, thus read aloud the contents of this fecòiid fcroll: 1 "The keys that can only open thefe " t^ro chefts are pending within the ** coffin. To whatever ftranger/s " fortune it may arrive to open the ** fame, his gratitude alfo will in- * dube him to comply fpeedily with 94 every particular of my laft dying « wiihes/*— After
( iii ) After having read thus far, the ffrahger ordered Sebaftian to open the lid, and ob¬ tain thefe fame keys. He then continued the ícroll r ** The filver key opens the cheft* that " contains my treaiures. The iron α one alfo opens the fecond, that c< contains the myfterious maiio- 1 « fcrìpt." ■*"·■ To this was annexed the following co¬ dicil, which apeared tohave been recently added tothe letter ; ? " This my treafure coniîfts of ten thou* ** fand crowns.—The whole amount " of which I folemnly bequeath to * the Minftrel Valéritme* on whofe * dear charity—facet humanity, and -4, « ^^
( ib ì - 5 ctleftfal t^encfvölençe, I aliò c^m- S.mit the difpofal of my departed. « body. ------ Jefu& Clirift once morr * t have mercy on my poor troubled " foul. (Signed) "Conrad*." ' Marry, ,my well-favoured boy (now ob¬ ferved the ftmnger^ what think ye of this fudden and happy change of fortune ? u Indeed, I think, my good Lord (re¬ plied* Valentine) that this^ unexpected treafure may much more worthily, and, with my free confent, be refted in your poflfeflion than in mine.—You, I am well aflured,, have ability to preferve or dif¬ pofe of it, as hereafter circumftances may think fit." - If the granger had/beeri before fo in¬ terefted by.the ì manners,;difcourfe, and· ; beauty,
( i*3 ? beauty, of the minftrel, he now became more fo, from this laft inftance of can¬ dour and generofity. " Mý noble fpirit (faid he, with an emphatic ardor, that was akin to paternal love) I perceive you now merit this, unexpected boon of good-fortune, even if it was ten times more than its prefent value.—It is fuch as you who deferve her favours mofi »"for by defpifing them, your heart Ts alone fufceptible of iharing them with the unfortunate and forlorn.—But come, we will talk more of this anon.------ Sc^af: tian, give me thofe keys." · ì ? J
, L>
I»
CHAP:
:í "-':*> ?
f- + {.
Ι, cou Ul a tale unfold, whofe lightcft word Would harrow up thy foul. '-' ·■■ «' '----------- Wcre*t my fitnefs To let ttieie bands ob*y my boiling bloods They're apt enough to diÜocate and tear HÍs -??? and bones. SHAKSPEARE. X HE keys being prefented to the ftran¬ ger, he firft took the filver one, and open¬ ed the nearer cheft ·, it was full to the very top, and feemed to contain the whole treafure that had been particu¬ larly deicribed in the Father's codicil.— " And now (obferved the Cavalier) we ■"■^■^.■■■' ;■■■■;;■■'.; : : wiii
( i*5 ) wil! proceed to open the other cheft, which is fuppofed to contain fuch damn¬ able truths.—But firft, youth, fuffer me to poffefs you with this your indefeafible right, of which myfelf and Sebaftian are fuificient teftimonials, and which væ will proteft you m, to the extremity of our lives and fortunes." On this, he proceeded to open the cheft with the iron key, and ftrâît-forth took out a cumbrout parchment roll j— cafting bis eye on the fuperfcription, he ftarted fome paces backward.-——Then after a paufe, that denoted great agony and aftoniihment, he precipitately broke open the large feal, with which it was faftened. Valentine inftantly perceiving his purpofe, exclaimed with uncommon fpirit and refolution—* My Lord—my Lord, proceed no farther—-refleft, you are
í ìW ) are about to tranfgrefs the laft wiíhes of a dying man." " Peace, boy—if aught you value my future friendfliip and protection.—This parchment concerns me equally with the perfon to whom it is addrefled.—Difturb mc not, for Vìi go through with it, though each word ihould prove a bafiliik to mine eye." Upon this determiatioiv he began to unfold the parchment, and to look upon its damnable contents. v The onfet of this fetal feroll had been fcarce furveyed by the noble incognito, \vhen he began to throw his, cloak back¬ wards over his flioulders, and his hat,. with its fable plumage, was alfo removed from- his head to the earth, whilft big drops of fweat diftilled themfelves in, torrents from his .agonized face. ? Yalen-«. tine^ at this diftreifing and. fudden change^
( I&7 > change, was agitated beyond conception* He regarded the manly, though palid countenance of the ftranger, with a rif¬ ing emotion of tendernefs and fufcepti- biJity, that he had not felt for hirri half fo powerfully, as, at this prefent critical juncture. The more he reviewed his fea¬ tures, his perfon, his manner, the more he was perplexed and uncertain* Both his ftrength of mind and body, hqweyer, began to forfa,ke him, and Valentine, overcome wifh ? ????; faintnefs, funk liftlefs Jntp Sebaftian's arras. * Herwas immediately·, carried by the other ;to a featj which being fixend cfefe to a table, the poor ftruggling minftrel immediately thre^v ?$??? ^thfieQri, anjl recusing his head betvveen : h|s tiands,, ^??????,|??|: ? few moments the viftimof,infe^ûbility.^ , The aftounded Cavalier,, ï ? the meaji time A
f îSS ) tíme, continued reading on, whilft every íme produced afever inhis mind, almoft too hot forînflfferance. His foul too, was fo ftir- red by the ftrong tempeft of boiling wiath, which agitated his whole frame, that ft felt as though well nigh burfting from its corporeal element. As for Sebaftian, he ftood a filent fpeftàtor of the different feenes of Mferj/thatfurrounded him ; and thbugh hisdufy (ias taught him by cuf¬ tom, oftfbme former unknown occafions) forbade him to interrupt his young Lord, ftill he felt fecretly,' and that rnoft poig¬ nantly #ithal, at the fi£htif fuch ftröng and uncommon agonies^ that Were depic¬ tured in the marking countenance df his mafter.—To ?? 1>rief, ft wás fome time before the ftranger had concluded thé perufai of this damnable ferbli.·—. When he had made a finiih, however, his mindi
( i89 ) ■mind, after experiencing aU the convul- fions of a rnoft dreadful furious ftorm* abated by degrees into a «ftate of calm¬ nefs ; whilft tefleâion came floating oa the furface of reafon, and t foon 4Üfpelled the tempeft that had juft been raging with fuch uncommon fury. Having therefore, depofited the parchment in the cheft again, and fafteped it .with the '???* key i he very deliberately arranged his mantle, and perceiving, as he turned round, that Valentine continued leaning defpondently on the table, he tenderly raifed his recumbenthead, and c]a4jpbg him affectionately by both his ha«d% he thus endeavoured to confole aiid ; blu^t the anguiih of. his top fufcejptxbl^/ejeil- w Youïh (faid the gallant ftranger) be not thus fpirit-broken qn& f tifityiSP·-"? m
( *9° ) Did you but experience what run fo lately through my foul ; horrors inexpref¬ fible would almoft have irrecoverably funk you.—Oh ! my friend—my deareft friend*—fuch, indeed, I fliall ever caïTyou (even if a former fecret inclination had not prompted me to háve done that al¬ ready)—for firft leading me into this dreary—and, 1 would have faid—damn¬ able—-but now, as it proves, moft propi¬ tious tecefs.—In me regard a future brother, a kind proteftor—fo look upon rne, for fuch will you ever find me " w But ohi my Lord—what of that parchment—fome horrid myftery remain« concealed therein." ** No more, youth, of that at prefent ; —the myftery concerns you not.—When it is read, however, again, you fliall be the foremòft auditor of its contents.— J ^ * * And
( φ ) And here! I declare, in prefence of Se¬ baftian, and upon the honour of a baron, that, Teveri days from hence, you fliall be principally made acquainted with the whole.~-Tili then, I earneftly conjure you not to entreat, nor queftion me far¬ ther on the fubject ; as fuch befeeching would wound both my feelings, and lef¬ len the gratitude and friendihip I fö de¬ voutly bear you. In the mean tirne, fa¬ tisfy me fo far as to give your free con¬ fent unto my future purpofes.—The re¬ ftraint (if fuch it can be called) that I wiih to attach to your perfon, will t>e of ihort durance^—Let not your tender and fufceptible nature, therefore, throw a cloud over your mind, tö darken arid per¬ plex it.-r—To conclude^ my* amiable young iriend, it b my wifli 1 to remove youltraight from this tecekof infamy and * death,
( 19* / death, and dwell you for a while, where virtue, fafbty, and tranquillity conjointly abide. Launcelot (my Sebaftian's father here) inherits a neat cottage, in a fmall village, fouth ward of this fpot. His wife, moreover, is a difcreet, good-natured merry dame. There intend I, then, to refide you for a ihort day or fo 5 ahd to convince you, youth, how much I rely on your integrity and honour ; and to prove alfo, how diftantly you are concerned ín the myftery of that damnable fcrolî, I have fo fortunately difcovered in this howling Monk's recefs, I will depute you the guardian of the one cheft, as much and as truly, as you are in your own right fole protector of the other $ or as fafely, ? fliort, as I would entruft my own life and fcrøe in your poffeflion/' " My Lord, I ???? you for your fair opinion
( 193 ) opinion of me, and ihall be content to aft as you think fit.—But fay (added Valentine )—what is to be done with the melancholy remains of rather Conrad ?" " Leave that talk to me (replied the ftranger, with a rifing emotion in his voice and looks); his remains, ÍhaU quick¬ ly have greater honour paid them than they deferve. Believe, me, youth (con¬ tinued he, with a foftened accent, fear¬ ful that hé ihould wound the minftrels fufceptible nature) I bear no enmity to the dead, though I may look back on their living deeds with horror and detef¬ tation.—Oh! my friencj, that one*cheft contains a catalogue of fuch black enor¬ mities, perpetrated by that damned Monk, as would harrow up thy tender foul.—But no more of that, at prefent;— let it fuflke, that he íhall be buried in Voi.. II. ? the
I *94 ) the mouth of this recefs ; an abode too good for his impious remains." "Oh ! good my Lord (exclaimed the tender-bofomed minftrel) let them be de¬ pofited in his coifin, and interred in the convent of the Carthufians, as the Fa¬ ther has requefted in his laft will—let them, I dò moft fervently befeech of you, be difpofed of as he has expreffed in his dying teftament. It would be mon¬ ftrous ingratitude in me, after the wealth he has fo liberally configned over to my poffeffion, for that purpofe chiefly, not to fee this laft ceremony performed." " Alas I youth (replied the ftranger J what avails it where his body refts ? Whe¬ ther in this fpot, or in the remoteft re¬ gions of the earth. The worm exifts within monaftic ground, the fame as un¬ derneath this mo dd. Befides all this,
( *95 ) my friend, if the Father's remains were immediately forwarded to the monaftery or convent of the Carthufians—it would not only be unprofitable trouble, but ex¬ pofe his memory to increafed horror and infamy j for the moment this fame con- feffionary fcroll gets report among the brethren of his order, his relics will be difembowelled from their mother Earth, and left to moulder in the common flews." " But ftill, my Lord (thus tenderly urged the minftrel) there is an infinite gratification in conforming to the laft wiihes of thofe whom we have either known or conyerfed with in their dying moments, let their guilt or trangreflions be ever fo glaringly infamous—Repen¬ tance is reconcilcable to the Almighty- then why not with us ?—-Father Conrad ? ? appeared
( *9? ) appeared to me a finner on his own ac¬ count—but ftiil, my Lord, he feemed a repentant one, alfo,— I am unconfeious of his fins, but ftill I have been an eye-wit¬ nefs of his repentance, and repentance » the moft fmcere and poignant, withal.— Death furely cancels all worldy animofi- ties;—and—though we condemn the wretched malefaftor's crimes, when ftretched upon the excruciating wheel, ftill we cannot refrain from commiferat¬ ing his agonies, and feeling for his in¬ tenfe fufferings. It is not our province to examine farther than death. The un¬ happy victim paffes on to another tribu¬ nal, and which we cannot fearch into, or arraign. It is there alone, they will be adjudged fufliciently, without the pofli¬ bility of our carrying farther credence, or balancing the merciful fcales held forth_
í 197 ) 1 for í h by the juft minifters-of heaven— Befides, good my Lord—religion and habit alfo teach us, to view the laft cere¬ mony of the dead performed with pro¬ per catholic rites· The ground, here, is not confecrated for your prefent defign; therefore, delay your purpofe till the morning—let the Father, if lie may not be conveyed tothe convent of the Car¬ thufians, have fome ihow of Chriftian bu rial.—No doubt but fome church or mo¬ naftery is near at hand, where he may, at leaft, be decently interred, and where a prieft can be procured to perform the fu¬ neral ceremony.—Gratitude, on my part, (concluded Valentine) requefts this hum¬ ble boon, and which your honour, your apparent gentlenefs, iny Lord, I am well aflured, will not deny.'* " Kvery fentence that you utter, youth, ? i^ (replied
( «9» ) (replied the noble flranger) endears me to you, more and more.—Your gratitude o'er-tops the rneafure of your tendernefs and generofity. . Βμί was I perfuaded to comply with your requeft, I could not ; for in an hour or fo, I muft depart hence. For the whole world (fo dearly and fondly do I grow attached towards you) I would not leave you in this gloomy recefs of death and guilt—I will firft fee the remains of this inceftuous, impious, and moft damnable monk (for damned he moft affuredly is) depofited here; and then convoy you to Launcelot's cottage, where I ihall not only find you fecure and happy, butalfo, hereafter adduce you, moft haply, a principal witnefs of this night's marvel¬ lous difcovery.—As for Chriftian rites, or the offices of a prieft, his remains de¬ ferve them not. Believe me, youth, I am
( 199 ) am as companionate, have as much of the milk of human kindnefs in me—even as yourfelf. —When you but know what now thrills with horror (when I think of it) through my brain, you will find, I afted rightly, nay, leniently withal. An aft of ceremonial mercy, that, for your fake only, ihould not eife have taken ac¬ complifliment.—For -------------------,·.· ........if it was agreeable to my own will, and according to the deferts of this execrable monfter—this moft impious Fa- ther, I would have his mildewed— hor- rid remains hung up on the firft neigh¬ bouring tree, as fit provifion for vagrant carrion."
? 4 CHAP.
( 200 )
CHAP. XVI. But I will keep her igttrant of her good, To make her heav'nly comforts, of defpair, When İt is leaft expected. SH ? ?? ?? ARC. Far from his friends, they placed him in the horrid circle of Brumo, where often, they faid, the ghofts of the dead howled round the ftone of their fear. OSSIAN. Beneath is all the fiends, there*» hell, there's darknefs, There is the fuîphureous pit,buraing, fcafding,ilench, Confumption.—r- SHAKSPEARE. Valentine perceiving after this that al İfa rther perfuafions to gain his point would be ineffeftual, continued fi- lent.—Sebaftian was then juft ordered to go forth, to fummon as many domeftics in,
( îoî ) in, that could be fpared from the horfes. " The^e, my good fellows (faid the ftranger, in a gentle accent, void of all mafterly authority, and point¬ ing to the fire) go trim and light your torches, and then I will direft you farther. My friend, here (next addrefllng himfelf to Valentine, for nei¬ ther yet had bethought themfelves of en¬ quiring each othets name) you can, İn the mean time, inform me where the Monk's implements lie concealed, where¬ with he formed this recefs, as reported in your ftory." The Minftrel, on this, accompanied by the ftranger and Sebaftian, proceeded to the outermoft chamber, and there in¬ formed his companions, that he believed ? 5 they
( ??? ) they were depofited nigh hand the de- ceafeds pallet. Sebaflian, forthwith, perceived a fpade and pick-axe, the principal tools wanting for their prefent purpofe. On this, the ftranger re-entered the inner recefs, and, taking a torch in his hand, ordered his fervants to bring the coifin where the çorpfe lay ftretched. The fable inclofure of death then being laid on the ground, clofe to the fide of the pallet, the body, garment, and all, were rolled oif, and crammed in together.—Juft, however* as they were on the point of fafl ening the lid, the flranger recol lefted the hu¬ man fcull, and crofs bones, that they had feen behind one of the hangings.— α Hold (faid he, as the humane thought came acrofs him) and, before we faften up-the coffin, let us inter with the corpfe, all
( 203 ) all thofe miferable emblems of mortal decay, and rotten infignias of defpair and guilt that lie fcattered about the recefs. —Some benighted traveller, or wander¬ ing innocent, may, one day or another, ftray towards this ingenious flielter, and thofe trappings of woe, will, no doubt, on thefe accidental occafions, render it as horribly difagreeable, as it is now con¬ veniently formed for protection and re¬ pofe.—On this, our Cavalier, attended by Sebaftian, brought forth the human relics, together with the fable hangings, that had caufed fo much offence and anxiety to the minftrel.—Thefe were alto¬ gether, though with much difficulty, like- wife crammed into the coffin. This un¬ ceremonious taik being performed, the ftranger addrefled himfelf again to Va¬ lentine, and requefted him to retire for a ? ?? JVÎVÎÏA
( 204 ) ivhile, into the interior recefs, whilft they went through their final purpofe.— The Minftrel, however, overwhelmed with all the anxiety, fear, and horror, that fuch a ihocking fcene muft infpire in a bo¬ fom fo timid as his own, and dreading folitude ftill more than any frefli horrors could afford—requefted to continue where- ever he ihould chance to be : " For, in your prefence, my Lord (faid Valentine) I have nothing, I am fure, farther to ap¬ prehend."—On this, he faftened himfelf on the Knight's arm, and clafping it with with an hitherto unufual degree of fer¬ vour and afleotion ; accompanied him to the mouth of the recefs. Two of the men, being provided with the pick-axe and fpade, began the fune¬ ral taik. The ground, which was of a clayey nature, and had been hardened (as be-
( 205 ) fore obferved) by the fires which had been kindled thereon, they found to be very obdurate both againft their tools and their ftrength. The ftranger perceiving this, ordered them to penetrate no lower than what would juft fuflke for the depth and breadth of the coffin, and as fliallow a furface as poflible to be laid there¬ on. Poor Valentine could not be a fpefta- tor of this awful ceremony, without ex- periencing the moft painful emotions. His arm trembled beneath that of his prefent—and, as he fondly hoped—bis 4 future proteftor. The compofure and unconcern that the latter had hitherto manifefted, ononis gloomy occafion, was attributed, by the minftrel—partly, to the myftery of the fcroll, and partly to his gallant profeffion of arms, which had
( ??? ) rendered him familiar to the fight of death ; for he was well convinced, it could not be charged to his lack of hu¬ manity. ' When the ilender pit was dug, the Cavalier ordered the corpfe to be en¬ clofed, and the head of it to be turned to¬ wards the northern point ; for this fite (faid he) will beft agree with the tem¬ peftuous difcord of its howling fpirit. Scarce, however, had thefe words efcap¬ ed his lips, when they were alarmed by a violent ruftiing noife in one of the adjoin¬ ing chambers.^—The men were fomewhat ftartled, and betrayed a kind of unufual apprehenfion, which could arife only from the difmal office they had been engaged in; for otherwife, and till now, their brave natures had never known the idle qualms of fear. It
( 207 ) i It happened ftill worfe, hovvever, with Valentine, for when he had at firft diftin¬ guiflied the ruftiing founds within, his knees fmote againft each other—his teeth chattered—and he would have dropped fenfelefs on the ground, had he not been held up by his dauntlefs companion. " Cheerily—cheerily, my boy (gently exclaimed the latter, feeling for the agony Valentine fo perceptibly laboured under) What art afraid of?—Why, thou chic¬ ken-hearted youth (continued he with a fmile) I will have thee pinned up in fome nurfery, among little children, and wan¬ ton hand-maids. There, indeed, thou mayeft prove of valiant fervice, and, the damfels willing, improve their hot-beds— with a fecond ftock."——Then, turning to his two grave-diggers, who had let the coffin fall obliquely on the margin of its burial-
( 208 ) burial-place, he gave them both an auf¬ tere look, and then with his former ftrain of irony (obferved) "What! art thou both panic-ftruck Iikewife ? Marry, and on my very troth, I ftiall couple thee with this milkfop, to truckle with the maids alfo, and jerk them underneath their downy chins." The Cavalier, on this, accompanied by Sebaftian, with each a torch in their hand, would have proceeded with him alone in¬ to, the recefs; but, Valentine, notwith¬ ftanding the feverity of his fears, ftuck clofely on his arm, inwardly defying every dreadful circumftance that might at pre¬ fent or hereafter occur, when under the protection of liis guardian wing.------ The two men, on the other hand, ftung with the reproach of their Lord, and thinking, perhaps, that fome ambufcade
( 209 ) had been laid by a neighbouring banditti, or fome Corfairs of Barbary, that infefted rnoft of thefe fouthern parts of Italy, might have occafioned this loud and ruft¬ iing noife (particularly, as what their Cap¬ tain had uttered in regard to the Monk, gave them no favourable prefentiment of the place they were in) they both drew their fwords, and immediately followed him into the recefs. The noife ftill continued, though appa¬ rently retreating at every forward ftep they took. The farther they advanced, fo by degrees it fubfided, and at laft died en¬ tirely away. The Cavalier examined every part of the anterior chamber with the utmoft de¬ liberation and circumfpeftion, but could difcover nothing-^—" V-Zhat (exclaimed hc, with a fmile, on thus being difappoint-
( aio ) ed) have we nothing here.—Marry then, whatever you may be, let-me caution you to lie ftifl, till we have performed our ce¬ remony, and fuffer us quietly to be gone. Or elfe, beware of trifling Ì" They then proceeded to the inner re¬ cefs, and finding every thing vacant there alfo, the ftranger, with freih jocularity again obferved: " Why,"furely, Father Conradi has not already difpatched his ghoft hither, to alarm, us alh before his body has been interred ! The devil, his old mafter, will furely torment him a little for the black deeds he inftigated him to commit in this world, before he gives his fpirit an infernal paffport to return among us once again.—Or,---------perhaps this mildewed lump of infamy purpofes to take the fame advantage of the living when dead, as he did of the dead when living*
( "i ) living. ------ Though, on recollection (con¬ cluded the ftranger, with a figh, that hc endeavoured to fupprefs, but which,how¬ ever, came from his very heart).this fame pupil of darknefs has done enough al¬ ready here, without attempting to tor¬ ment us any more." Whilft the Cavalier was converfing thus, Valentine attentively *obferved his countenance, and could perceive a degree of anguiih thereon, that did not altoge¬ ther correfpond with the levity of his dit courfe. He, perhaps, thought (a thought arifing from the anxiety he had all along obferved in the ftranger to allay and fof¬ ten his own diftrafted fears) that his pe¬ culiar compofure, on an occafion which would have alarmed the many, was only generoufly affumed to quiet the terrors it was but too fufceptible that he himfelf had
( 212 ) had fo ftrongly and repeatedly laboured under. One obfervation, indeed, that he had, both ftruck and perplexed Valentine to fift the difpofition of:--—"Perhaps, this mildewed lump of infamy purpofes / to take the fame advantage of the living when dead) as he did of the dead when living? -------"What advantage the Father could have taken of the dead when liv¬ ing, the Minftrel could by no means what¬ ever account for ? It was fome myftery (he concluded) attached to the fcroll ; and he therefore forbore to rack his in- ventioni with endeavouring to interpret its ^obfcurity, as-his curiofity wouid be fully gratified with a knowledge of the whole in the ihort fpace of a day or fo. The flranger*s converfation, hovvever, had a more particular effect on his two domeftics \ for though they feared no be¬ ing
( *? ? ) ing exifting, ftill they began to be greatly alarmed, when their Lord talked of the Monk's ghoft ; and <when he alfo could not difcover, or account for, the ftrange noife they had juft fo diftinctly heard.— Whatever were their fears and dread, however, of immaterial beings, they, ne¬ verthelefs, filently followed their mafter again to the mouth of the recefs—w r here they concluded their talk with vifible agi¬ tation, and buried the corpfe in the flial- low hole they had dug for it.
P ? CHAP.
( ¡"4 /
CHAP. XVII. —How fits expectation İn the air. Dear lad, believe ìt f For they íhall yet belie thy happier years, That fay thou art a man ; Diana's lip Is not more fmooth and rubious; thy fmall pipe Is as the maiden's organ, ihrill and found, And ail is femblative a woman's part. SlUKSFJEAtg. ? ? ARCE however, had the two men (ftranger ftill than before !) fcattered the earth over the Monk's remains, when they diftinguiihed the noife, with more violence than ever. On this, they mo¬ mentarily let their pick-axe and fpade fall upon the ground. Their fears now doubly
( «í ) doubly debilitated their powers, for they could fcarce faften their hands on the handles of their fwords. The ftranger, neverthelefs. (whofe furprize and rage, fortunately for them, now expelled all traces of his former levity) did not ob¬ ferve their apprehenfions, but with his wonted courage and fortitude, drew forth his good fword, the moment he heard 4he internal noife repeated, and holding the torch in his left hand, inftantly ruih¬ ed into the firft recefs, exclaiming with much vehemence, as he went—" By my foul and my honour, I will not thus be farther tampered witb I—Follow me, Se¬ baftian—we will difcover the key to this myftery, or perifli in the attempt , —my curiofity ÍhaU be fatisfied at all events/' The undaunted Cavalier thus ruihing impetuoufly forward, he, unwittingly left Valentine
( 216 ) Valentine behind, petrified with.horror, and motionlefs as a ftatue. As for the two men, they were equally overcome with their own fears, and the apprehenfions they entertained for their young Lord ; but flood ftaring at each other, incapable of fpeaking, and uncertain whether to follow, or remain, where they were. Each alike feemed ready to advance, but neither was willing to take the lead.* At length they diftinguiihed a faint daih¬ ing of fwords, which like an electric ihriek, gave inftant re-animation to both, and ftraight they ruflied forward abreaft, to afflft their mafter. Valentine, the moment he heard,this fame claih, fcreamed aloud, and then as loudly exclaimed— u Oh í fpare the gal¬ lant youth—fpare the nobl e " Na¬ ture then yielded to this uncommon ex¬ ertion
( **7 ) ertion of power, and he ftaggered againft the clayey wall, unable to move or fpeak farther. His remaining fenfes, however, were as almoft inftantly ftruck with a loud laughter, which feemed to proceed from the innermoft chamber ;—this found denoted the triumph of a conquer¬ ing party. On this, he drooped almoft lifeiefs on the piece of earth where the Monk.had been juft interred ;*his fpirits, JE neverthelefs, were as almoft inftantly cheered, by hearing the Cavalier, in ap¬ proaching accents, exclaim—" By Saint .Mark, we vvill facrifice this fellow, as a victim to our fears ! "—Valentine, on hear¬ ing this immediately fprung from his proftrate ftate, and fcarce had he trem¬ blingly hurried towards the firft entrance ------when his poor hawk fiew towards him, and perching directly on his fift, Vol. II. L looked
í 2i8 ) ibóked ïip tö him in apparent folicitation for ihelter and protection. Our falconer (for falconer or minftrel we may call him, according to the èhange of circumftaiices) tenderly rhoved by the bird's attachment, and now clear- iy perceiving the innocent object of their purfuit, to have been the harmlefs caufe of all their late fears—he held forth the affeftionafe and favourite companion of his folitude, and with an accent of fond¬ nefs, altogether irrefiftible, exclaimed-— ** Oh í Sir Cavalier, do not deftroy my , very beft òf friends, my faithful falcon, and my mofl active caterer." The Knight, ftruck alike with the cor- fident perch of the hawk, who now feemed to bid him defiance, for under the prpteftion of his mailer, he was ready/ with hi$ pointed beak, fixed talons, and ;■■/:.'':■■■■' -wide
( 21? ) wide expanded wing, to meet a fair com¬ bat, and moved alfo with the expreflive' tendernefs of Valentine, whofe flill palid countenance fully explained what he had felt and undergone in their abfence ; but he elapfed him like a tender beloved brother to his generous breaft. This en¬ dearing token of his future friendfliip, was repeated thrice—thrice with all that affectionate ardor which accompanies the leal exiftence of that great and noble focial paflion ; and then, looking ftedfaftly on the falconer, he fmilingly and archly obferved—" Why, boy, this bofom is as foft and yielding, as that of the ripening virgin," Valentine bluíhed, and held down his head, and in order alfo to conceal his emotions, he ftroked his hawk, who in-. Ketum would readily have perched for^ L 2, that
( zio ) that night on the tender fpot that had been "fo lately embraced by his rival and perfecutor. After the Cavalier had (as a matter of fume compenfation) admired and encou·*· raged the poor hawk, whom he had fo much alarmed and endangered ; he turn¬ ed round to his fervants, and feeing their fvvords ftill uniheathed, and themfelves afliamed of their idle fears—he ordered them to be covered, and laying afide his former irony, on fuch like occafions, he obferved— tc Indeed, my good fellows, I have known men brave as yourfelves, terrified at the flitting of a bat around their dark nightly tent, as much as wc have all been at the fluttering of this poor harmlefs hawk.—But marry, boy, aid thou, my faithful Sebaflian, ihall be cheerful now, for in fearching after the poor
( 221 ) poor father's fuppofed fp-rit, we found fomething more fubftantial—plenty of game, friends, and fome dozen flaiks of wine !" " And this very bird (replied Valen¬ tine, pointing to the hawk, who hung clofe to liia mailer's fift, and at the fame keeping a fteady and penetrating eye on the ftranger, whofe familiar ftrokings* could not entirely diveft him of the ap¬ prehenfions he had fo lately experienced) —This very bird, caught this fame game., —The poor fellow (continued he with a¿ fmile) has not met with much reeom— pence and gratitude, for the fupper he is^ about to provide you with/' After the ftranger had allowed the* propriety of this gentle rebuke, he told his men to go out and fee whether the horfes without were fafe, and* td*relieve;
( Ä22 ) their companions from their watch. Launcelot, on this, foon after made his firft apearance in the recefs, and as quickly reported, that the animals had been all carefully faftened round the body of a tree, whofe nethern branches feem¬ ed at the firft moment to yield them fome acceptable provender, as they had taken to it immediately. Upon which the ftranger led Valentine into the farther chamber, preceded by Launcelot and Se¬ baftian, with torches. After having re-illumined the tripod lamp that was fufpended from the ceil¬ ing, and which has been extinguiihed by the hawk in his flight—and thrown freih fuel on the fire, they all fat indiftinftively round the ftirring blaze, and with a de¬ gree of cheerfulnefs that infufed fuch fa- tisfaftiûip £nd pleafure in our Falconer's
( 223 ) mind, that he had not experienced for fome time before. ------The Cavalier ob¬ ferving this, began to laugh over the fur¬ prize and alarm that the hawk had occa¬ fioned them.—" But where was the fly rogue concealed (continued he) that we did not difcover him on our firft fearch r" " In yonder hole, no doubt (replied Valentine in the wall. The vacuity made purpofely for him by the deceafed Monk, in gratitude for the food he has for this month paft afforded us. Therein ftands his nocturnal perch, and, alarmed, I fup¬ pofe, by the difturbed founds he heard without—the glimmering of the torches, or, perhaps, by my well known voice, he fprung from his ihelter, and occafioned the noife by his flight about the chamber that has created fo much confufion amontr us alJ.-r-When he diftinguiflied the light,
( 2*4 ) however, approach (as has ever been his cuftom) he muft have taken to his neft again, by which he avoided your firft pur- t fuit, —But in return, Sir Cavalier (conclud¬ ed Valentine) what caufed thofe clafli- ing of fwords, that we diftinguiihed with¬ out; and which not only almoft overcame me in fad apprehenfion, left fome danger -might have furrounded you y but which,. like lightning, fpurred your fervants from their inanimate ftate to fly onward, with the moft determined fortitude, to parti¬ cipate in your fuppofed impending dan- ger?" " In good faith (replied the Cavalier) it was even thus :"— " When we had fearched about both the chambers, and perceived nothing, as before (though the founds were ftill ftrong in our cars) we began to grope about with
( m ) our fwords (for the lauip that lighted us at firft, was now, to our frefli furprife, ex* tinguiihed) and in that aft, we aroufed the hawk, for he almoft immediately after¬ wards flapped direftly betwixt us both, and juft ftruck each of us with the dimen- fions of his wings; and on railing our wea¬ pons to bring him down, weclafhed them againft each other in the attempt."— , " Poor felloiv (faid Valentine, tenderly flroking his hawk, that full continued perching on his fift) thou haft then nar¬ rowly efcaped, indeed !—This had been an ungracious return for all thy diligence and labour.—But come (taking up a lark that lay with the wild fowl upon the table) thou flialt once more go quietly to rooft, and have this gorge—aye—and if thou likeft it, fweet bird, another too, for the fatigue
( 22Ó ) ? fatigue and apprehenfions you muitjiave experienced l — « Why% I ibouîd imagine (faid the ftranger, with a fignificant look) that thou hadft been born of one of our firft nobles, by the love and knowledge you entertain and poffefs of falconry.—Though, in good faith, you look more like fome Count's fair daughier than* his fon. Valentine, on this, took the opportu¬ nity of concealing a certain fuffufion that had fpread itfelf over his face, by putting the hawk to rooft, and then returned com- pofedly to his feat. u One thing, my boy (faid the Cava¬ lier) have I neglected to aik of you—pri¬ thee, inform me of your name/*— " Valentine, my Lord/' «* Valentinei —marry—the firft namein love's
{ 2*7 ) loveVcalendaxi-^-Nowiyouth, I pray ???, anfwer me this again ^From whence ?"— " Pardon me, my Lord.—But I befeech thee, firft grant me reply for reply.—May I therefore ¿now your name aifoî" ------ -" Not now/ youth—for certain reafons I would delay this anfwer. In a few fliort days, however, you fliall know all that you wifli to know.—Thereiore, I prithee, anfwer me—from whence ? ? —- " Once more, pardon me, my dear Lord.—To my name, I have frankly an¬ fwered—to aught more, I cannot— røo — not fbr life's value. And what to me is in my mind more eftimable—the lofs of your proffered friendfliip and protec¬ tion." The entrance of the two fervants (who having gained a fcent of the game which the receif was provided with, and having 5 a very
( »28 ) a very violent inclination to be made par¬ takers of the fame) terminated a difcourfe wliich might have probably untwifted the knot of friendfliip that had juft been cemented betwixt the Minftrel and the ftranger. ------ " The horfes, my Lord (faid. the fore¬ moft) are all fecure, and flill broufing on the leaves of the tree, as though they had had no provender for a week," " If it is even fo (faid the Cavalier jocofely, for perceiving that his interro¬ gatories were not perfectly confonant to the feelings of Valentine, he wiflied to give another turn to the fubjeft)—lf it is even fo, we will have a good feed like- wife;—therefore, take ihefe birds, fpit them with your fwords.—No bad—no diflionourable employ, my boys, to fol/ diers, who eat where they can, and fight when
{ ζζ* ) when" they can t' and quickly ??? tha»- before that cheering fire. Thé cofiàr marid was no foòìier given, than obí^ed r and the wild fowls were inftantly ipied, ahd very foon afterwards devoured. The Cavalier during this ceremony*, feateá himfelf with Valentine and Sebaftian at one table, whilft Launcelot and the others did the fame rbund another.—The minftrel, however, declined his lhaié of the repaft, for the edge bf his appetiti had been blunted by the viciflitudes of the day. Hei neverthefcfs/ gave/à good account to his furrounding friends in an- other way y for taking up his lute,he fuitg, accompanied by, the moft exquifite. har· mony of bis celeftial-attuned infttument,. the S)^pufian war fojig, as chaunted in the days of yore, l . Our ftranger was fo enraptured with tke excellencies of Valentine, that he^
í ?° ) w-oujd? not, haye perceived the dawn of day» creeping through the avenues of tln> uøhajlpwed recefs, if Sebaftian had npt reminded him of-^- <c Meet me on tbe fivfli evening in tke ; nwnth of Aprils at Mef fitâspm? T\i% knight ?? this, ftarted from his enchantment, and after charging Sebaf¬ tian with the care of the chefts, and Launcelot ajfo with the care of the lute and the hawk, he polled with all fpeed out of the cave - 9 and after firft vaulting with fuch eafe and dignity, on his fteed ; As if an angel dropt down.from the clouds, To tun» and witid a fiery Pegafus^ And 'witcli the world with noble horfemanfhip ; and then ordering Sebaftian to aflift Va¬ lentine behind him, he afcended like an arrow up the fteep fides of the glen, and foon found himfelf at the cottage-door of old Launcelot, where Mopfa was
( ?? 1 ) anxioufly attending him, he having fo far outgone his appointed time ot reaching there, by the delay occafioned in the Monk's recefs. Such was the rapidity with which the ftranger had hurried therefrom, that Va¬ lentine had no opportunity left to make the leaft mournful reflection upon the difmal fate of the wretched Monk, as he trod over his miferable remains.—Tor¬ ture fuperfiuous !—For, alas I poor wan¬ derer, thou hadft reflections mournful enough of thine own, without agnoniz- ing thy diftrafted bofom with the mi¬ feries and deflinies of others ; and now— Sweeteft Santa-Maria—faireft rofe in all Italia's flowery plains—for awhile- Farewell.
END OF THE SECOND VOtVMB.
