Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Fleetwood: or, The new man of feeling
FLEETWOOD.
CHAPTER I Afti-r havingicsidedat Mitloek some¬ what more tl an α month, we set out for Men ) lethslinc Mary h id never betöre ι nti red my paternii minsion, she had never been in W ales, and she express¬ ed herself exti emel) pleased with all she saw I he vast and uneoutli foims of the ncio-libouiin 0 mount uns were ex- cie linejy sinking The mansion itself w ıs built m a style of antique magnifi¬ cence, it had been ei ceted by one of lhe leaders m lhe commonwealth of (lomvvcl, and, to an tdimier of what- 'OL in в cier
cier ıs venerable forage, the shining and pohshed floors, the huge and mis¬ shapen tapestry figures in some of the apartments, and the dark coloured wain¬ scot with its diminutive pannels which adorned the rest, were infinitely more gratifying, than all the sumptuousness of modern prodigality The windows, as well as the halls and galleries, vvere large, and almost collegiate The day on which we entered the house in Merionethshire may be consi dered in боте sense as the first of our marriage Here we were to make our establishment, and set up our tabernacle, <.t Matlock and other places wp shifted as we could Here then was α rock upon which we were in danger to be destroyed They were no trifling and fugitive discussions we had to adjust, I on my part had formed habits, of which it would be difficult for me to divest my¬ self б We
We arrived in the evening, and were in want of repose We sat dowq to the fire side where I had sat with my father a thousand times we ate a delicious meal, while Mary listened with attention to many little anecdotes I related of the deceased, and stories of my boy ish ex- ploits and sorrows The next morning we walked round the apartments Theie was a hand¬ some, retired closet, opening into the principal drawing-room and at a short distance from my bed chamber, the win¬ dow of which commanded the most ad¬ mirable prospect we h id The steeple and roofs of a beautiful village were di¬ stinctly visible, the river, beset with willows, meandered below, a venerable wood of everlasting oaks grew on one side, beyond which was discoveied the silver m un , while the other side was kirted by the crags of the gigantic mountain, that from my infancy Ι αϊ в 2 most
most adored This closet ivas my fa vounte,ietreat. Ilcie I hid beni pei- imttcd to con my lessons vvln'e I was jet of school boy age, anil here it had ever since been my custom toictirc with some favourite author, when I wished to feel my mind in its most happj st ile. In this closet I medititeli, I composed, I wrote If I wmted an amplei space to move in, I bad but to open the clom , and the laigest diawing-ioom in tbe house ofieied itoclf for my promcii ide By the side of the closet was α pm ite stair¬ case, which led me by a short cut to the nvci, the wood, and the mountain I preferred this sequestered nook to all the rest of the mansion taken togethci. I entered it now, after а tivelvcmonth's absence, with a full recollection of all the castles which I had sat there and budded in the air, the ode , the ti age- dies and heroic poems vv hiciv, in the days of visionary childhood, upon that spot I
Inti sketched and imagined I tin ned to Miry, with the puiposc of telling hu the in my lavishing isociitions whith tins closet picsentcil to my mind This is an enchanting closet ' s ml she It is —My heart knoei e 1 it my bo¬ som, rnv veiy s nil wis lull ot its litilc Instoi), is I spoke Do you know, I led wood, I shall take this Host t (οι mini ? I will have ill my diiivmgs bought hue, and arrange my favourite flowers in the window. Will you give it me ' Suiely, my love ' I am glad it pleases jou so much M) sen« ltions at this moment were of a sitigli! ir and complu ileti natine I li iti been on the point of employing all my eloquence to describe to Muy how I loved this closet, how unalterably it bad fixed ita hold upon me as my fivoiinte ictrcit. lor this purpose I had recol¬ lected
Iccted in rapid succession all the cndeai- ments that made it mine, all the delights which, almost from prattling infancj, it had afforded me. In an unlucky mo¬ ment my wife pronounced the decree, It shall never be jours again I The de¬ cision was unexpected, and my animal spirits were suddenly driven back upon my heart Yet I call heaven to witness, it was only the suddenness of the blow, and not any intimation of selfishness, that produced this effect On the contrary, the moment I had had time to ïecover myself, my sentiment was, Mary, it is for ever yours 1 Dear, angelic sweetness, I shall be too happy, to witness your gratification ' Shall I think this too great a saenfice, who would offer up my life for you ? It is no sacrifice ι I have more joy in considering the things I love as yours, than in regarding them as my own Presently
Presently the bell was rung, and the flower-stage, the port folios, and the drawiugs, one after another made their apoenrance In 'he midst of the con¬ fusion, I withdrew to have some neces¬ sary consultations with my steward After an absence of three hours, I re¬ turned, and visited Mary in her retreat. By this time all I er little sources of oc¬ cupation and amusement were in order. I observed with delight the arrangements she had made I gazed on the features of her charming face, she never looked more beautiful, thin thus surrounded With the emblems of the innocence of her mmd and the elegance of her taste. My heart exulted m beholding these human graces, associated and set off with a back-ground of my favourite steeple, mountain and prospect to the neighbouring main I fed my eyes with the pleasing scene I sat down by her side, viewed her drawings, and admued the
the delicate forms and brilliant colour¬ ing of the flowera she loved I turnctl to the prospect from the window, with the purpose of pointing out to her in de¬ tail the objects of which it consisted. What а fool is man I My own folly, however much I may feel ashamed of it, I have "t d u wn with the purpose to re¬ late. The next morning, and the morn¬ ing after, I missed my favourite, my old, my long-accustomed retreat, and sought in vain for a substitute for it. My li¬ brary was in the other wing of the 1 ouse, and answered to the draivmg-room I have mentioned. It had a closet in it, built in the fashion of that which had caught Mary's fancy, wilh no other dif¬ ference than that the prospect from the window, though foi the most part the same, was m two or tin ее points essen¬ tially inferior. I repaired to this closet ; I took two or three books from the li¬ bran, one after anothei, I tried to coin-
compose mj self It would not do This, m the d lys of my boyhood, had been my father s privacy and, when by bis death the use of the whole mansion devolved to me, I felt the closet which Mary had chosen as airead) mine, the scene of а thousand remembered pleasuics, the ob¬ ject of my love Discontented here, I lesolvcd to seek the garden I nmediately I missed mj privdte stair case I h ul no resource, but in the pvbhc stair cascrflhc whole house. I could not get to that pai t of the g ir¬ den which lcd to the nvci and the moun¬ tain, but by a fonniddble cncuit If I might not ics ut to my favourite haunts at perfect liberty, if I could not reach them unseen by any human e)c, they were nothing to mc My domestics knew my customary seasons of taking the an , they watched the variations of my temper, and, when I was pensive and melancholy, were careful that the в j shadow
shadow of no one of them should obtrude ш my path. I will go, and tell Mary what she has done I will confess to her all my weak¬ ness. Nothing could Le further from her thought than to occasion me this disturbance, and il will afford he- the purest pleasure to lepair it May I pensh, if ever I bieathe a sel¬ lable on the subject ! What, shall I paint me thus pitiful and despicable in her eyes î Shall I tell her, that I love nobody but myself, and regard her gra¬ tifications with indifference ? I will not tell her so I I w 11 act so, that, if any one else should affirm it, he shall affirm the most impudent falshood. She will never know that I have made this sacrifice at the shrine of love. So much the better. I shall know it It shall be to mj own heart a testimony of my affection. I do love her heaven only knows how much. I love her for her
her misfortunes and her desolate eondi- tion ; I love her for the charms of her person, a d her unrivalled virtues. The smallest indulgence to her, is dearer to me than ten thousand gratifications to myself The generous exultation with which I surrendered my own accommodation in silence was temporary, the want of that accommodation which I had so long en¬ joyed, daily and hourly recurred. There is something wonderfully subtle in the operations of the human mind. Do I differ with another, in project for lhe future, or judgment on oui past conduct î I immediately begin to find a hundred arguments to prove, how absurd and un¬ reasonable he is, how just am I No mancan completely put himself in the place of another, and conceive how he would fee!, were tbe ciicumstances of that other his own few can do it even in a superficial degree. We яге so fi- miltar
miliar with our own trains of thinking we revolve them with such complacency · it appears to us, that there is so astonish¬ ing a perverseness in not seeing things as we see them I The step is short and inevitable from complacency m our own views, to disapprobation and distaste to¬ ward the views of him by whom we are thwarted. Mary, Mary, said I sometimes to my¬ self as I recurred to the circumstance, I am afraid you are selfish ' and what cha¬ racter can be less promising in social life, than hers who thinks of no one s gratification but her own' It was true, I could not tell her, This, which you so inconsiderately desire me to give up, is my favourite apartment. But she should have enquired of my servants The housekeeper or the steward could have informed her. She should have consi¬ dered, that a man, at my time of life, roust have l.'len upon many methods of proceed-
proceeding from which he cannot easily be weaned. The thing of which I could reason¬ ably accuse her, was, at worst, a rapidity of decision incident to her early years. Could she suspect that my practice was, to leave the closet adjoining to the li¬ brary, and carry my books to the other end of the house î —I was incapable however of passing a just judgment in the case, and the transaction had an un¬ favourable effect upon my mind.
CHAP-
CHAPTER II. Ouch was the incident of the first moi n- mg of our arrival in Menonethshire Another question arose Mary had heard of several respectable families in our neighbourhood, particularly the Phi¬ lipses and the Morgans, the female mem. bers of which she understood to be agree. able and entertaining, and she was de¬ sirous to hive intercourse with them For this purpose it was necessary to go in form to our village-church, and to have it given out that there were certain days, on which mrs Fleetwood would sit to receive company In the evening of our first day m Merionethshire my wife entered on tie subject To a person of habits different from mme this circumstance would have been trivial
trivial To me the idea came with many a painful twinge I had all my life shrunk from 'his mummery, this un¬ meaning intercourse I had travelled from one side of Europe to tho other, m search of persons whose conversation should be tolerable to me Mary saw with how ill a grace I received the pro¬ position Mv love, said she, act in this matter as) ou please Whatever shall be your determination, I piomise to be satished. I will just mention what occurs to mo concerning it, and will then be silent for evci We are sitting down in Merio¬ nethshire, perhaps for life Woatever we decide, cannot be reversed, we can¬ not repel our neighbours in the present instance, and call them about us again hereafter Recollect then, my dear Fleet¬ wood, the disajvantages under which I have hitherto laboured My dear mo¬ ther, the best of mothers, and most ad¬ mirable
mirable of women —And at this recol lection she burst into an agony of tears My dearest creature, ïntei posed I, do not distress yourself with the melan¬ choly recollection I Mary, I love you There is no honest gratification, no gra tification which you can desire,that I will not be zealous to procure you Hear me, FleeHvood' said she Con suit the merits of the case, and not the ardour of your kindness —We had no lady visitors I have had no fe¬ male acquaintance Shall it be always thus î The manners of my sex are dif ferent from yours, what is graceful in a man would be shocking in a woman, and what would be becoming in a wo man, is effeminate and reproachful in the stronger sex I am afraid I can nc ver learn, and improve mjself in, the genuine female character, without the observation of my own sex " The eye sees not itself, but by reflection from some
•rame other thing" Let mesa) too, tint the society of her own sex is one of the nituial consolations of a woman I can icel а strong and entire affection for a man ¡ I acknowledge it for you But there is a certain repose and iiiioencling in the occasional familuriti of woman with woman, of the softer and more fia- gite nature with its ¡ike, that powerfully conduces to the healthful and contented condition of the mind —Fleetwood, I have the greatest reluctance to thwart jou m any thing Choose for me. Be¬ tei m e as you will, I swear yon shall never find in me, either by word or look, the hint ofa reproach Our discussion terminated in the Tor¬ ri al churching, and the commencement ofa tiemtndous sei ics of wedding-visits. A Iful hus-y ι m the way she put it to mc could I refuse î Could I refuse a thing upon which, m this mild and spe¬ cious emper of mind, her heait ap¬ peared
p aredtobescť ----- 1 wrong her There wis no art in what she did, it was all the most adorable ingenuousness and sincerity Or, if I may venture by a bold allowance of speech, to call it irt, it was that art, with which natine adorns her lovely sex more richly than with all the mines of Golconda, the art of persuasion, compelling us to feel the impossibility of resisting their ho¬ nourable desires, and cheerfully to re¬ sign the compass of domestic affairs ш о their hands, to set us to what point they please On the two first mornings of our resi¬ dence m Wales, I made a pleasant excui- sion, by л ay o c exhibiting to Muy the beauties of the country In the former I showed my wife the precipice from which, at the age of fourteen, I had fallen into the bason, then swelled by continual rains into a lake, which foims the source of the Desunny She would climb
rlimb the acch /ity along with me She made mc point out to her the inequalities of the almost perpendicular rock along which the lamb had fi isked, while Wil¬ liam pur ued She particularly noted the place from which the peasant and tl e Iamb ha ι been precipitated together. We fancied, as we ν ewed it, that we could see the marl among the tuffs of grass, where my fo t hod slipped thirty )ears before Aftei having remained a long time on the spot, we took occa¬ sion, by Mary's desire, to make our way home by the cottage of William, and the heroic girl, who had come in her boat to save him The father had long since been dead William and his wifa had the appearance, by means of perpe¬ tual labour and frequent exposition to the air in all weathers, of an old man and woman They had had a large family of children but these were all grown up, the girls gone to service, and the
the boys to sea , only their youngest child, a robust lad of fifteen, was at home with them In oui mountainous country the u a of a carriage is exceedingly limited, and thrt-e-fourths of the mo^t exquis ie points of view in my neighbourhood would have been lost to my wife, it she had not been an excellent walker It waswith pleasure that I perceived, I could take her a walk of ten or twelve mill» in extent, or invite her to eli nb the highest precipices, without her sustain¬ ing the smallest injury. When a woman is so unfortunately delicate, or has been so injudicious brought up, as to be un¬ able tO walk more than a mile at α time, this effects a sort of divorce, deciding at once that, in many of the pleasures most gratify ng to her husband s feelings and. taste, she can be no pai taker. Our excursion of the second day was less adv enturous than that of the first, and
and wc were able to make more use of the carriage After dinner I proposed reading with M iry a play of my favourite 1 letchcr The piece vv is that admira¬ ble one of ι Wife for α Month Mary seemed to entei stiongly into the feel¬ ings of the poet, we admired equally the high mil generous sentiments of the tiagedy, and the glorious imag'iy with which those sentiments ai" adorned. The character of \ aleno pat ìculaily ri¬ veted her attention She agiced with me tint no poet of ancient ormodéin times, as fai as her icqiumtance with them extended, w ıs able, like the writer bcfoie us, to p unt with all that hotly ind ictinuc of circumstarccs which give life to ι pictuie, а fice, heıoıc md gal¬ lant spuit Wecspeciiliy commended his style, antl comi idetl in opinion with Dry- den, who confesses himself "apt to be¬ lieve, that the English language in 'his author
author arrived to its highest perfection , what words have since been taken in be¬ ing rathe'superfluous than órname tal ' Mary was roused in an extraordinary degree with the exhortations addressed by the queen to the heroine in the se¬ cond act, stimulating her to the con¬ tempt of tyranny and death, and pei- suadmg her that bv snrh eontempt, she will even subdue the tyrant, and com¬ pel him to repent his ungenerous pur¬ pose I lead the sentiments of the royal speaker as they occurred, in the animated eye and glowing check of the charmer who sat beside me She could scarcely help starting from her chair I was delighted with the effect of my experiment How exquisite a pleasure may thus be derived from reading with a woman of refined understanding so noble а composition is that which en¬ gaged
gaged us' It is a pleasure tint should be husbanded I have demonstrated to mc, ot once t'ie acutcness of her laste, and her aptness to conceiv a and participate the most virtuous sentiments I almost adniehei foi these high and excellent qua. lities At the same tune we are like in· s'un uits tuned to a correspondent pitch, and the accord that is produced is of the most delightful nature I We communi¬ cate with instantaneon fl ishes, in one ¿lance of the eje, and have no need of words When we have recourse to their aid I instruct at once and am instructed. I see how my companion feels the pas¬ sages as they succeed I learn new de¬ crees of taste, and am confirmed in the old Male and female taste are in some respects of different natures, and no decision upon a work of art can be con¬ summate, till it bas been pronounced on by both Besides, that in such discus- cussions we intermix Grateful
Grateful digressioi t, and solve lugli dispute IVitli conjugal caresses from mj lîjıs Not words filone please her We proceeded, and came to the scene so wonderfully imagined, in which v a- lcno is seen dressing on the morning for church, and scorning with inimitable giandeur and ease the sentence of the tyrant, who had pronounced, that, at the expiration of the first month of his mar¬ ried life, he should lose his head. I had just read those words of his, Tliou that bast been α sold er Menalo, Λ noble soldter, ani 1 defied all danger— Woulds! thou hve so long, till Ûly strength forsook thee, Till thou gtevv st only a long, tedious sto y Of what thou iiadsl been, till tit) sw ord hung up, And lazy spidere nil d tbe hilt with cobwebs Ì when the door opened, and the servant announced a visitor to my wife It was the boy of fifteen, the son of William the
the peasant, whom we had seen in the cottage of his father the day before. I asked the servant somewhat angrily, w hy he entered, disturbing our after- noon's tranquillity, to announce a visitou of this class ! The boy bad come down, he replied, by the appointment of his .ad), who had fixed that hour for his attendance. Bless me ' replied Mary, and so {did · I had entirely forgotten it. Do jou know, my dear, in our stroll along the •adeof Idns yesterday, I observed two or three plants ofa veiy rare species, and I thought I would return to them to day, and take this boy for my guide } I would not trouble you yesterday to collect them, for I know )ou do not like such interruptions. It vv is true, I had re» ceived with pleasure the early lessons of Mary in botany, aided by the beautifni drawings with wl ich she hai. 'lustrated them, and relieved with all the piquancy vol. т. с of
of courtship, but, by some fatality, I could never shape my mind to the office of herborisation it api cared too pinch¬ ed and minute an object for the tastes I Jiad formed I must go I cannot send the boy avva) we will finish with your beloved 1 letchcr after supper —And away she tripped Good bye ' Au revoir, Fleetwood ' you shall see me again by dusk All this passed in a minute Valerio and Evanthe, their pci ilous situation, and the deep interest mj « ite seemed to take in their adven j es, were instanta¬ neously banished, as if by the touch of a magic wand I w as too proud to strug¬ gle with this unsteadiness, even if there had been ι probability th it my struggle would have been successful, that is, that my wife would have sat dowu again to our reading with an unconstrained and genuine preference. Before
Before I had time for recollection I found mysc'f alone, with no object to ι emmd me of what had ρ issed, except the volume of Fletcbci which lay open upon tbe table The reader must recol¬ lect my character, as an old bachelor, as a man endowed with the most irri¬ table structure of nerves, and w ho from infancy hid always felt contradiction with inexpressible bitterness, to con¬ ceive how much I was disturbed with this pelting and pitiful incident Is this the nomili, said I, whom I h ive taken as the partner of my life, who is moie intci ested ш two or three blades of giass, οι ι wretched specimen of mosses, than in the most pathetic tale or the noblest sentiments ? If she has no respect for the illustrious dead, who cinnot feel her contempt, methinks she might have had some for me, w hose heart still beats, and whose blood con¬ tinues to flow Oh, it is plain she cares с a only
only for herself, and is prepared to tread, «S on an insect, upon every one who Stand» m the way of her present caprice I A curse on all mosses and botanical spe· eimens ' 1 his was the first sentiment I con. ceiicd Piesently however, love, al¬ mighty love, returned, and I said, God bless you, dear empress of my bosom i Can any taste be more pure than that wbieb delights in the beauties of natuie ? How have I sat by her a thousand times, and admired, even in picture, the flow¬ ing and graceful forms, the soft and deli¬ cate surfaces, and lhe brilliant tints, ot the vegetable tribe ■ What an honest and sincere mind is hers, tbat soars to admire the tremendous precipice and the gathering tempest, and can then descend to the frailest and minutest herb which clothes the face of our mother earth > They are all alike the productions of that mysterious power, which is everv where
where at work, and everv where engen¬ ders the patterns of grandeur, of majesty, and of grace Would I destroy in Mary this noble relish, this generous affection, that en braces all the creatuics of Gud ?^ God bless her, even in her caprices ! They prove the youth and el isticity of her mind, they mark the morning of life they are symbols of that truly fe¬ minine character, which so delightfully contrasts with my own sex, and consti lutes the crown and essence of lhe life of matı I will turn botanist myself · While these reflections passed in roy «und, I was almost lempted to pursue Мигу, and joi» her m her herborising excursion —I know the place to which they are gene ; I shall easily find them. How beautiful will tbe carnation of her cheeks, and the lilies of her soft fingers, the fairest blossoms creation ever eaw ( ap¬ pear amidst the parterre of wild flowers that skirts the ndge of mount Idns ' I think,
thmk, I see her now, as she stoops to cull them I will tell her that I will never have a taste, a pursuit, a gratifica¬ tion, but whit is hers —Saying this, I f put on my hat, I walked out at the hall- door, and burned along the avenue. No, I w ill not go to her > She has used mc ill. She has wounded me in a point, where I am most alive Fletchei, my old friend, friend of my boyish ıhı s, whose flights I have taught the echoes of the mountains to repeat, whose pages I have meditated m my favourite clo¬ set, —she has affronted me in thee, Fletcher, and for thee, if not for myself, I will resent it. No, this will not do. I will not be an nxonous, tame, wife ridden husband. Has she shown any disposition to comply with me ? If I begin, I can never continue to sustain this part. In all my life I have been
been unused to brook control. The sen- sitivcncss ot iny temper, will never allow me to bear to be thwarted, crossed, the chain of my sensations snapped and crumbled to pieces at every moment, with impunity. There is no reciprocity in this commerce. I could be content to y iclil much to her.-------Aye, again I say, God bless her in her caprices '-------But I cannot be content to be reduced to no¬ thing, I must bai can existence, a pur¬ suit, α sy stem oi my own ; and not be a .nere puppy, dangling at her heels, and taught to fetch and carry, as she gives the v ord. As tune glided on, these meditations became less pleasant : they burned at my heart, and w ere bitta m my mouth, Uediously and hcav ily dragged along the two hotus of her absence. I could fix on no plan, I could foi in no conjecture tor the future, 1 could sit down to no occupation or pursuit. I paced the hall _. and
and tbc avenue with impatient strides Tired with this exertion, I threw myself indolently m a chair, and reclined my head on my hands upon the table At the end of two hours, Mary trip¬ ped with light and elastic step into the parlour. I have had a delightful walk, cried ■he Have you ? answered I, with a droop¬ ing and heavy voice, my powers blunted by the exhausting effects of all I had done and thought. Bless me, Fleetwood I you are not ill r —j And, saying this, she kissed my hand, drew a chair by my side, and soothed me with irresistible blandishments What в state и as mine I If she kad not been thus consummately lovely, if she had not mollified me with so divine a giace, I should have known how to have determined The reader who has had experience of
of the married life, will »iisily feel how? mam vexation» β man stored up for him- self, who felt so acutely these trivial thwartmgs and disappointments. Hu¬ man beings, who enter into the engage. ntonts of domestic life, should remember that, however «en and wife may in in» tereste and affections be one, yet no in¬ terests and affections cart prevent there from being in many respects chstmcf. No creature that lives can be always the" same. Accident» of body or mmd Wilr frequently subvert the ecţitrfibrlutrl of the sjstem. Domestic avocations and cares Will often Call away the mrfid; and m/ wife wdl be thinking of the fa¬ mily linen or plate, when I want her te be thinking of the caverns of Pandemo¬ nium, or the retreats of the blessed. Even those observances of ceremonious life, which induce us to listen to the story of a stranger with appearances of interest greater than the reality, or с 5 which
which stimulate us to actual attention, cannot always he preserved between per¬ sons who live together in a style of equa¬ lity. He who flies from all contradic¬ tion, must dwell alone, or dwell with tírase to whom he never opens his soul. He who would reap the unspeakable joys of a social existence, must set his account with a life of accommodation, in which both parties will have many things to sacrifice, many things to for¬ give, many things that will be sure to keep their equanimity and good temper in exercise.—I can reason well upon these things now ; but I bought my power of doing so at a very high price.
CHAP.
CHAPTER III. Ат the close of a visiting day, when we had had ι full circle of the ne gbbouring gentry, Mary informed me, that she had been invited by the miss Philipses to join them to а dance, which w as to take place at Barmouth the day after to- mon ow And jou hive accepted the invita¬ tion ? Lamtia offered me tickets, and I have taken two. You will go with me, will not you ? What time do jou suppose yon shall return home ? About three or four in the morning. The moon v. ill serve, and it will be a pleasant ride Mary, did I never tell you my age ? And
And what of that î You are not too old, I hope, for amusement, or for hap¬ piness í My dear love, I have formed invete¬ rate habits, and outlived the age of ex¬ periments. I can neither figure in a country assembly, nor sit up with impu¬ nity till four in the morning. Then, Fleetwood, if you will not go, neither will I. I desire no pleasures of which you are not a partaker. I will send John to-morrow morning, to carry back the tickets. Oh, Mary, cried I, I see more and more that our tastes are different. It is very natural ; you are young ; you ought to have married a man nearer your own age. Do not Ict me stand in the way of your amusements I 1 had suffered much during the visit which was just concluded. My patience hai been played upon beyond the exte;.t •f ,
of my beanng. I was impressed with a sentiment approaching to despair.—- Mary did not at this moment com¬ prehend the feelings which agitated) me. If it will be more pleasing to yon, re¬ tained she, I will go by myself And who do yoa expect will be your partner in the dance ŕ Lætitiahas promised to get me a part¬ ner There в the handsome mr. Mat¬ thews, As a new-comer, she told me, she dared say I might have bun. Very weil f very well 1 My dear love, what is it you would laver I wish ymi were married to юг, Mat¬ thews İ Good God, Fleetwood, what have 1 dene to deserve this onkradues. ί— And she burst into tears. I took her hae*— Db not wesp, M*ry t I leg your pardon. 1 am. to klame. л Kry
I try every way to please you, but in vain I ask you for your company, you refuse it I offer to stay at home, you reproach me with my jouth In the j inocencc of my heart I name to you a gentleman as my partner, and you insult me My dear parentel Is my happiness for ever sunk with jou in the caverns of the ocean ' As she spoke thus, I felt the bitterest self reproach for what I had done let she bad touched me in a very tender point Loving her as I did, I felt that she must be every thing, or nothing, to me I could not bear that my wife should have amusements for which I felt no partiality, least of all, amusements of dissipati эп I particularly felt an anti¬ pathy to this of dancing I had not joined in recreation of that kind since my juvenile residence m France And there, at least in the instances of which I had been a sharer it seemed to me incom
incompatible with decoium or modesty. The eyes sparkled, the performers han¬ dled each other in a way that fired the blood, the vvholsome icstraints of so¬ briety were banished, ι species of elec¬ tricity flowed from thejoining fingers and meeting frames, and every thing seemed to beat an alarm to the i uder passions I found in Mary a considerable de¬ gree of resentment, or, to speak more properly, a strong impression of sadness, ensuing on this little conversation. The next morning at breakfast she rung the bell, and ordered that John should get ready to go with a message to mr Phi¬ lips s The moment the servant had left the room, I went up to her, and said, My love, I cannot bear to see you sad. Pray, oblige me, and go with the ladies to their assembly Fleetwood, said she, do you think I re¬ gret the assembly ? What have you ever seen
seen in mc so frivolous, in to justify (he imputation ? No; it 19 not the trip to Barmouth, it is the unkind way nt which yon eipreescd yourself no mc, that I re¬ gret. I chose you from all the wirid If yon prove austere and unkind, whit will become of me r You said, you wish¬ ed me married to another how many harsh and unfriendly thoughts are 1111 plier) ш that wish I f am basry, I am irritable you knew Щ foifcles My dear girl will have man)« thing» to forgive m me, but 1 Вере my errors, thus acknowledged, will only draw n» together lhe closer "í hen «to not, Fleetwood, let many of «bernibe of tb« kind t Have pity on the poor orphan, who has no shelter but ю yen' 1 will be Careful. But do not, Mary, by any stress on such speeches as that of *hiel> yon eortpiam i The thought of net bemg your» nevei iet ietnly entered) my
my mint) You an" every thing tome. For your sake I am reconciled to the world In jou for the first time I feel thit I belong to the great family of man, and experience those delicious sensations which grow out of the charities we forni for ourselves Thank jou, Fleetwood' And now »ho shall siy, we are not hippy ? But, Mary,—but—there is one favour you must giant me Name it ' What can I refuse you î You must go to the assembly. Never. I see you have a strong ob¬ jection to it, and that is enough. I won¬ der what possessed me, to think of it. It well sutts a poor orphan as I am, to make one in a dance Fie, Mary ' I shall never think ypt» regard me as your whole family m one, if you always refuse to be gay. I am very angry with what Г said to you about it last night. It was harsh, it was cruel i it
it was wicked. I shall not believe that you have forgiven me, unless you exe¬ cute your original intention. We argued the point for some time ; hut at length I triumphed. In a high spirit of romance I determined to go with her, and even insisted that she should dance with the young and hand¬ some mr. Matthews, as miss Philips had proposed. Yet my objection to the recreation of dancing remained 'as strong in my breast as before. I thought that no modest single woman should dance with any partner but her brother, or matron but with her husband. To witness this petty prostitution of my wife, was a penance I enjoined myself, for having so undeservedly mortified and insulted her. , One thought which occurred to my mind between the arrangement of this plan and its execution, 1 will mention, to
to show how unreasonable and unjust I was prepái cd to be —How came it, said I to myself, that Mary rung the bell m the breakfasting room, to give her or- deis for John to carry back the tickets ? Might she not have done this in some way when I was not present ? Does it not look, as if she designed that the giving these orders should produce a scene î If there was art in this, how deep and odious must be her art, and how egregiously am I her dupe 1 We went to Barmouth. It was im¬ possible fbr man to entertain a greater detestation for the mummeries of a country-assembly than I did How much had I already suffered from the youthful and heedless disposition of iny wife ' I had lost the use of my own house, in the way I liked I had attempted to call her attention to the noblest objects of li¬ terature and refinement, and the attempt bad only ended in my mortification I was
was involved m an endless series of visits «ith fox-hunting squires, and fat justices of the peace, their wives and daughters Though I abhorred this sort of com¬ pany, I had not equanimity to re¬ tire to some obscure corner of the house, and purine my own occupations, while they acted over their etiquettes and decorums nor indeed was tnit compatible with »I e compia sance I wish¬ ed to show for my beloved —But the worst n as to come. I soon distinguished among the beaux of Merionethshire the handsome mr, Matthews. He waa a man of family, bad be«n well educated, and possess id an advantageous air He displayed, like tome young noblemen I have seen, art easy assurance, which seems designed toput every one, less eminent in rank, or less captivating than themselves out of Countenance He was soon introduced to my wife, according to the arrange* mcnt
ment which had been settled. I stood at a little distance, and observed his debut Miry was lhe most beautiful woman in the assembly, and accordingly mr. Matthews appeared highly satisfied with his fortune As they passed me, my wife slightly named me to her part¬ ner, who bowed, but I thought I could discover a smothered contempt in his air. When they had gjne a little way, he looked back at me, I persuaded myself that he was saying to her, Is it possible such an old fellow as that, should be hus¬ band to so fine a young creature as you are' I eould not avoid watching Mary and her partner during the dance. ï ob» served that he was infinitely gallant and attentive to her. To my thought his countenance proved that he was exceed¬ ingly struck with her figure and beauty, He omitted no exertion to appear amiable in ber eyes·, 'lhey were the , ι most
most graceful dancers, as well as the handsomest couple, in the room; and both entered with nolittle spirit into the amusement. I never saw Mary so con¬ spicuously alive ; Matthews's demea¬ nour, I believe, never absolutely over¬ stepped the bounds of propriety ; he was certainly exceedingly well-bred ι yet many of his actions were strikingly free. They escaped being vulgar or offensive, by the airy and flyin« manner in which they were performed ; so that, ¡fa woman, situated as Mary was, might in some instances have been startled, and felt prompted to complain, she would probably have been convinced by the little stress which was laid on such advances, that all was meant in inno¬ cence. Matthews talked to her in¬ cessantly in every interval of the dance, and Mary seemed sufficiently ready to sustain het part in the conversation. I was consummately miserable. When- j ever
ever they talked with more than usual earnestness, I could not help believing that Matthews was exciting her to la¬ ment hei condition, in being married to a man of more than twice her own age. Every free and familiar action, every at¬ tention that this coxcomb paid to my wife, was a dagger to my heart How beautiful, exclaimed I to myself, were the mannrrs, in this particular, of the ancient Greeks and Romans ! How charming does Lucretia appear, spinning at midnight in the midst of her maids, and Cornelia, surrounded with her chil¬ dren ' Surely no w ife ought to endea¬ vour to make herself amiable and en¬ gaging in the e)cs of any other man than her husband ! When a marriageable girl allows herself, without fixed pur¬ pose, in sportive intercoiiise with a youth of her own age, we call her a coquette, what epithet does the mistress of a family deserve, who acts in asimilar manner ? I felt
I felt all the torments of jealousy. How new to me were the sensations I experienced I I was in this sense a happy fellow, when I had no one's conduct to attend to but my own, and, being a ba¬ chelor, was not called upon to be mi¬ nutely scrupulous in that Now my re¬ putation—no, that was not the first ob¬ ject of my care, reputation was not lhe bread of my life,—my peace of mind— depended on the conduct of another. How wretchcil is the staic of that man who is deceived in so material & point, who presses to his heart the wanton partner of his bed, and believes her inno¬ cent, nay, who perhaps is habitually engaged in acts of civility to the cox¬ comb serpent that stings him in the ten¬ derest point ' But, short of this, I could not bear that Mary should be weaned from me in any respect, or find arause- uient m the conversation of any nan but myself. Perhaps this might lead her by
by no slow progress to regret that v. e л\ ere ever united I depended now for all that was dear to me upon the disposi¬ tion of one «ho »is joung, gay, versa¬ tile, anil τ woiTiin I watched over her, with the same sleepless anxiety with which τ miser watohes over his treasure less hippy m this, (hit his vigilance may be expected to be effectual to his pur¬ poses, while the vigilance of a suspicious husband is esscntully powcilcss, and often contributes to gi\e existence to the evil, alienation of mmd or pcrpe (rated infidclitj, which he fe irs I hid prided myself in thi ireneiosity ot m) conduct ill having insisted, that Mar) should go to the i^imbl}, that she should dance, that I would mvsclt be her eseoit, an I th it Matthews should lehei putnti II I had \ tolde d one ot tliLie pjiiib, it ft as b) no means reces sirv that I Should tonade then all Ihcie was he oism m my ťtltrin na ΐΟΙ m d tun,
tion; but it was а heroism beyond the mettle of my sp nt, and I ought not to have attempted it At length this clernal evening drew to a conclusion. Ггот the da) of my birth to the present mo nent, I had never Buffered so many hours of si li et) When we got into the carnage to eturn, I felt irresistibly prompted to avenge m) soi- rows by inveighing against the neigh¬ bourhood, the evening, and the gay and elegant dancer who had almost uninter¬ ruptedly engaged the attention of my wife Poor Mary was in I igh spirits, and pleaded the cause adverse to mine in each of these point«, I must confess that I to a certain degree inveigled her into this hostility I a*ktd her opinion of every thing th it had ρ issed, and w i_s tardy in giving my own She theiefore frankly declared, that she was encli int¬ ed with our neighbours, v, ho she thought were most amiable people, that Bar¬ mouth-
mouth-assembly was a ravishing scene, and that she had never met a more agree¬ able and well behaved young man than mr Matthew» When she had finished her panegyric, I echoed it with a deep gioan Mary started My spirits had too long been pent up, and 1 now gave a loose to my speech I raised the neighbourhood, anil declared that conntry assemblies w cie α device of 1he devil I said that such joung men as mr Matthews, an¬ swered no η ortul | m] ose but to disturb 1 he j с ire off imilies The conversation they held was seduction, ti cır attentions were lime twgs to entrap the unwary, and their touch was contamination Oh, Mdry, cued I, in a tone of heart felt anguish, did I cvei th nk it would come lo this? Ought you not well to have reflected, before you accepted the hand of Fleetwood, whether jour taste led you, in preference to tl e sobııety of oa α domes
a domestic fire side to dances and as sembhes, the society of giggling girls, and the gallantries of a coxcomb ' What prospect can wc have of piace and feli city, when you have now declared jour partiality for those things, which are equally abhorrent to my personal 1 abits, and wreconcileable to my period of life í Marv burst into tears My dear love, said she, jou in this in stance, and not mr Matthews, are my seducer Did not I at the fiist word give up my engagement, and did not jou insist that I should adhere to it at all points î When you obliged me to go to this assembly, and to dance with lhe young gentleman who has been my partner, you, in all reason, engaged that jou would not put yourself in ill hu mour with that which your own decree imposed upon me This is evasion Mary When I in sisted that you should go, I di I not in elude
elude in my demar.J, that your partner should be so insidious and persevering in his siege, that you should encourage him to still greater boldness, or that )ou should afterward becomo his advocate and eulogist. If your sentiments had been pure, instead of the delight you .take in the bare recollection of Mat¬ thews, you would not endure ю much as to hear him named.
CHAP.
CHAPTER IV Conversation like this occiipndns dining a part of Oui rido home, which afterward subsided into ι bomevvh it sul¬ len silence. The next morning nt break¬ fast, I revived the subject. Mary, said I, have you thought of the incidents of yester-evening ? My heart bleeds, while I recollect it. It has been the incessant occupation of my thoughts. Fleetwood, we might be happy, if you were consistent. Tell me the habits of life you wish me to pursue, and I will exert my utmost efforts to conform to your will. Mary, we might be happy, if jou were consistent, I do not desire you to conform to any system of my pre- ' scubing.
scribing I want the heart, and not n ester 11 phablencss Alis ι rny lou let me assure jou that you do not know what you want I am joung Fleetwood, jou tn ght have rmr- r cd nn old woman, if you had pleased. I have somewhat, j ct I think no inordi¬ nate share, of the gaiety and spirits inci¬ dent to youth. Yet I am very aure that my sallies are perfectly innocent Oh, vos, madam, exceedingly inno. cent, tu encourage such an enterprising young fellow as Matthews, and to find an extacy of delight in that scene which was tearing jour poor husband'» heart into a thousand pieces I Fleetwood, you oblige me to tell yon that I have very little encouragement to become а dutiful and attentive wife, when, with the unreserved conformity I use I find it ι npjssible to please you. Veiy well, madam 1 very well'-—And I left the room My
My character by this tune is suffi denti) manifest, I was to the last de¬ gree impatient of contiadietion Mary hod shown herself an cxempliry wife if there was any sharpness m what she said, it was no more than is inseparable from the clear and open tempei of an honourable mind She was conscious of the entireness of hci duty, and the disinterested sentiment whit h animated her, and it is no won Jer, that she felt some indignation at the ungracious way in which all this was received 1 bei с ıs not a word that she uttered, which now, as I write it down, I do not ap¬ prove. She might have courted me more, and have abstained from eiery tiling tbat could increase the exacerba¬ tion of my spirit. But, if she had, she would not have been more success¬ ful. Every thing I saw and felt at this time was so new to me ' I bad scueely ever been
been checked by my tutor or by my fa¬ ther. Since I grew up to man's estate, the s)stcm of rn) domestic life had been with servants only, where every thing was done in uncontending obedience. Ί he acuteness of m) feelings had pre¬ vented mc from being tyrannical and se¬ vere to my dependents, but, if my go¬ vernment was mild, it was not the less absolute Now I lived for the first time familiarly, every da), and all day long, with a person claiming to have а will of her own, with one, who in every thing she was expected to do, had a right to hive her feelings consulted, and was surrounded with privileges of a very d fièrent stamp fiom those of a ser- int, and, which is perhaps of more importance, with one, whose feelings made the principal part of the question, and respecting whom it was of less mo¬ ment what she did, than with what tem- D $ per
per every thing she did or suffered, was sustained. Unused, as I have said, to encounfer the smallest obstacle to my will, or fo have any of my decisions replied to, I felt the utmost Impatience at those gentle manifestations of independence, which, fo a man inured to better habits, would have made the person in whom they ap¬ peared a thousand times moie lovely. The irritation I expressed was softness and conciliation to what I felt. The wordsl uttered vvcicnerveless, compared with the toneSn which they were spoken, and the gestures that accompanied them. My eyes flashed fire ; my teeih ground against each other. When I burst out of the room thus abruptly, chains of steel and rocks ofrolamant could scarcely have withheld me. The scene I hare retateti was hardly over, when mr. Matthews rode up to my door,
door, to pay his respects to bis partner of the preceding evening This circum¬ stance bad not been c\| ectcd , and, in the remote situation in which we lived, stuet regni Hmns are not inforceil, as in tin metropolis, respecting what visitors arc to be let in, mil what lo be excluded. Mr Mitthevvs wis shown into a par¬ lour, tbc servant went to seek my wile. It so happened that Maiy, who had been in the gardın to visit the fivountes of bei ore, entered the pai lour by another tloo , before she was lnfoimed that mr Mutlu ws wis there otherwise, after whit liitljibt passed between us, she would n ost assuredly h ive excused her¬ self fi )in seeing him She was going to ictne, but she felt that that was impos¬ sible, ami tbeicfoie, with much uneasi- iic s anıl perplexity, entered into conver¬ sation with him When I had left my wife, I strayed into a well-known path, which led to¬ ward
ward the sea-side. At first I felt in the highest degree irritated against her be haviour. What chance, said I, have wc for happiness, if, supposing me to be in the wrong,—it is impossible I should be wrong I—she, instead of soothing my weukness, thus answers me with taunt¬ ing and retort ' boon however I came to see the suh leet in a different light Mcctwood' Fleetwood ' said I, striking my fore¬ head with my hand, what is it )0u aie doing ? I have entered upon a serious and weighty task, the guardianship ot the felicity of α young woman, who, without reserve, or defence, orrttiige against me, has thrown ' rsclf into my power. What engagements did I form to her father, with how solemn protes¬ tations did I undertake to remove all uncertainty from his mind ' Macneil ' death has given to thc«e engagements au added, sacrcdncss thy gho a t shall be appeased '
appeased I—Look upon this young crea¬ ture ι Soft, and tender, and winning as she is, shall I be her destroyer ? Do I doubt her innocence ? Truth and honour are written in her front, in characters which folly itself cannot mistake. Was ever conduct more exemplary ? Was ever temper more generous and obliging î Wint a brute then am I, to misuse, and ¿\\l uneasiness to so much excellence 1 I will throw myself at her feet, and with tears of anguish confess to her my fault Full of these sentiments of remorse, I hastened back by the way I carne, dud entered the hou«t Аь I approach¬ ed the parlour, and had my hand on the lock ot the door, suddenly my ears were saluted from within with а burst of idle and obstreperous laughter. I was in the highest degree jstonished. I in¬ stantly tinned back, and enquired of the servants into the cause of this phenome¬ non. I no sooner heard fiom whom it 4 pro-
proceeded, than all my good resolutions vaniehed in a moment. In the disturbed Stitteof my thoughts, it seemed to me that the visit of Matthews was an express de¬ claration of war against me, and, unac¬ quainted as I »as with the circumstances which hid betrayed Mary into the ad¬ mission of his visit, I regarded the scene now going on, aft r what hailju«t passed, as the most atrocu us ot crimes. I wish. ed that my wife had embarked w ith the rest of her family, and were sunk m the caverns of the ocean. I wished th it her name might never again be pronounced tn my ears. I ot tiered my horse to be instantly prepáiul Wlnthci was I going' 1 could not tell For how long a time did I pur¬ pose to be absent î I knew not. I only knew that all places were paiadisc com¬ pared with that in which I was, and all tnodes of thinking heaven compared with the reflection that Matthews was
Was at this moment alone with my wife Before my horse was brought to the dooi, I began however to ask myself, whether it became me thus to go away, and leive my wife m undisturbed con¬ versation vv ılı hei paiainonr Incensed with this ulen, I suddenly altered my plan, and burst into the pailour Both my step md my countenance were ex¬ tremely discomposed My wife, con cious hnw strange an appcaiauic th s visit woull luve, was greitly einbirrisset! Millhevvs renaik etl the fierceness of my ileitieanoin, anil distincţi ι cid whit wis pass ng in my mind, but, like a mm who knew the world, he issunied ι more courtly ind ingenuous in, in piopurtmn as be sivv I wis ennged igamst him He was aw are that, if he gave the least encou¬ ragement to my passions, they would produce а scene But this neithei suited him,
hım, as a gentleman, nor as a man of the world His character for insinuation and good-breeding was at stake, that he should appease the vehemence of my feelings, w'thout seeming to notice them. He played his part in a master!) manner. At first my answers were short, and sul¬ len, and in a style approaching to defi¬ ance. He was upon the alert to avoid eiery topic, which could, by any chance- direction, strike a spark into the tram that was ready laid in my bosom. He praised my house, and the prospect it commanded. Heobsened, that he had heard I was a great traveller, he had himself lately returned from Pans, and he described the barriers which had been erected, with some other alterations which had recently been made there By degrees I recovered my self-posses¬ sion. Mr. Matthews delivered about a dozen remarks of ne«rly the same de¬ gree of importance, but uttered with sprite-
spritcliness and grace, and then took his leave As soon as he ivas gone, Mary in¬ formed me in the simplest and most in¬ genuous terms, how sh had been bc¬ trajed into the receiving his visit The story was so natural, her countenance, as ihe spoke, was so sweet and engaging ι she was evidently so much distressed at the eftcct she feaicd this malencontii would produco upon mel I could not altogether resist the force of these de* monstrations I said little, but I with¬ drew, that I might seriously take myself to task for the weakness, into which I saw 1 was falling Fleetwood, said I, is it possiblo thou shouldst commit such egregious folly î What ground bast thou for this outra¬ geous and frantic jealousj f What has passed, и hit can have passed, between Matthews and thy wife > Is she not the most innocent and affectionate of her se.?
sex >—I am myself the most fortunate of men After h ıvıng trifled away tl e flower of my age, and conceived so strong an antipathy to the sex, have I not met with the best of ıvııcs, a cica- turc who, for beauty, for accomplish¬ ments, for gentleness and tendernes*, has not her equal on the face of the earth i I am old what matters that í 6he dots not sec it, she does not impute tornean imperfection. Flouer of crei- tion, most angelic, noblest of mortals, thou ehalt be rewarded 1 Yes, if it is in my power, thou shalt be rewarded 1 Would to God, I had always conti. mied in this temper ! But I was subject to perpetual relapses Lvery thing th it thwarted and crossed mc, still produced in mc new displeasure against this charming ivoman She was like the angel, appointed by he iven to defend my steps, and, whatever cncumstance of a painful natu e occurred to me, still seemed
seemed to be chargeable upon some neglect of hers I suffered fiorti visits and visitors, I felt mystlf restrained in going out and coming in, the liveliness of Mary s temper, and the quit kness of her perceptions, made her, m spite of her gentleness, unfit for the cuib, а thou¬ sand time«, when I wished to fix her at¬ tention to а particular point, and when Ihiil worked up ihy whole soul with the rmigitiairan of it, she was dramı aside by some new fintasy, and left abruptly the pursuit, the lecture, and the profes¬ sor all these evils came to me from my wife It is human nature, that a man should retim ¡ome lesentment against the mi strument that aos often wounded hitnv howevei ν il ublc the instrument may be, and h iwevcr mnoi cnt of any purpose tó harm lhe man who has repeatedly crossed mem my tle«ites, and has con- stanllv steppetl before me ш the objects ι of
of life, it ib morally impossible I should not come to consider as a bad man. It was thus witb Mary. Every time she did ail) thing that Jarred with my pro¬ pensities, and by some accident oi other no da) passed without something, greatei or smaller, of this kind, my favourite theory about the female sex revived j I recurred to the bitter experience of my youth ; 'tnd swore that, however it might in certain instances be glossed over, all women were in the main alike, selfish, frivolous, inconstant and deceit¬ ful. It was a strange war that was conti¬ nually going on in my bosom. I doted on my wife to distraction , I felt that I could not exist without her ; I saw that the was every thing that was lovely ; her tones penetrated my soul» her smiles drew me from my most stetlfast pur¬ poses, and made me as ductile as w ax to the aims she proposed. Yet I taught myself
myself gndiially to curse thi» asweik- ness, antl to regard it as a slavery which sonic devilish witchcraft had fastened on my heart I murmured at my way of lift , I roared like а lion in the toils. My whole existence was tempestuous. At certam moments, when Mary direct. ctl against me all her powers of fascina¬ tion, I ft It the joys of heaven , at other times, and these were of longer duration, I suffered the torments of the damned
CHAP-
ClIAPTI R V. J. he month of biptembcr came, and with September that van ible weather, which ordinarii) marks the period of the equinox At this time α sensible eli inge decolored itself in the he lib of my v/ife Her appetite left her, licrnghls vvcteslecplcss , she became 1 intti d, and meagre I was dcc| lv llcctcd with the altera ion I percened I was be et with the İcar tl it tny unkindniss was the oc casion of what I saw Alas, Mir), sa il I, )ou wanted a very different tre ılnıcnt fiom that vvlueli von have icceived from me ' All tender and gentle )0U are in your own natuie, ill tenderness and gentleness ought to have been the behaviour lint was addressed to )0ii With mildness and benignit) weie
we e )οιι ln ought up by the best of fa- thers and ot molheis, I in)self have witnessed their affection often have I heard you describe it It wis not fit )ou should fill from the hands of these kind guardians, into those ofa husband, huşii, severe and capricious as I have been She has suffered the most terrible ofall looses, she thought to find a ic- fuge from calamity and ι compensation for her suflenngs in mc, w ts it rillit tint I should have been the person to age/mli her woes' She eheirlully rc- s gned the preiog itive and the prcfeicnce ot her se\ tnd age, the m rrjiiig a young man in the bloom ol life with the wholsomc hue of youth in his cheeks, with α smooth and unfurrovved brow, not )ct enslaved to peculiar and unac¬ commodating habiis, with a warm ima¬ gination, and a fresh and unsated relish of the lanous pleasures of existence Ought I not to have done eveiy thing that
that my mature period of life would ad¬ mit, to lessen to her the sacrifice she had made ' Mary saw the anxiety and remorse under which I laboured. She exerted herself, to the utmost of her power, to relieve them. She dressed her pallid countenance in smiles, they were the smiles of a winter's day, when the sun sends forth a sickly beam amidst watery and congregated clouds. She protested, she was happy, she solemnly assured me that she thought my conduct toward her immaculate. I caught her repeatedly in tears I endcavouicd lo tempt her with parties of pleasure With very different feelings from those 1 have for¬ merly described, I called the Philipses and the Morgans around me She re¬ fused these avocations as often as she could When compelled to accept them, she sat passive and jo)less amidst the youthful circle, except at n. omenti when she
she perceived my cj e turned inquisitively upon her, and then she forced in artifi¬ cial ommition, which quick!) ignn sub sided into cm eless dejection. I enquired ifter another countr) assembly, I wished for Mr Matthews again to waken her in¬ to enjojment When I proposed ticl ets to her, she smiled significantly in my fice, but added, tint it would not do What α life is this> sudl Wint ι life foi me, who hive ever led iny d ys fice fiom dependence οι resti unt ? Am 1 converted into α gardı я aladi, having foi my constant occupation to vv atcb the vmptoms of anothei ? Aie my sensi tıons, to which I have so long bien ι live, to piss unheeded and as nothing ŕ 1= ill mv h i] p ness, mv pt arc of mmd ilnoughevcij lcccssiv с moment, to tie ji ml, not uiciclj on the good pic sure md complacence of another, but on tl ι st ile of ih it persons pulse, or the t burls vor m π win li
which may accidentally hover over her diseased fancy ? Yet I call heaven to witness that, however I occasionally murmured under a system of life so opposite to that to which I had been accustomed, my love fcr my wife was no wise diminished. The more she wanted my aid, the more eager I was to afford it. '1 he more she fell away from the healthful sleekness of a beautiful woman, the more she appeared to me like an angel. If it was but sel- dom that she could rouse herself to an entire interchange of affectionate thoughts, these intervals became as trans¬ porting as they were rare. I could pa¬ tiently watch through a month of cchpae, to be rewarded at last with a sight of the God of my idolatry. The mother who rears a sickly and perishing child, is al¬ ways found to love that child better than her íobust and comely one; her own labour
labour h is become kneaded up in the little being before her, he seems the creation of her hanas, continually de¬ pendent for his existence on her breath It was thus I felt toward Mary She in retuin became more affectionate than ever, she was sensible of my cares, and eagcf to acknowledge them I firmly believe that I am the most ca¬ pricious and wayward bcingthatever exist ed I never remained permanently in one stiteofmmd After fits of fondness,anxi- ety and disinterestedness inexpressible, my mind, exhausted with cares, would sometimes recoil on itself, and I pre¬ tended, inthc bitterness of my heart, to cast up my g uns It ıs true, said I, I love Maij , I cannot help it, this love is the star of my ascendant for the rest of my days But what am I the better for it' What aie her merits ? What have I ever cxpenenced fiom her but thwarting and disappointment ' I feel í 2, that
that I have lost the freedom winch was •nee my portion ; and without freedom what is life î Mary, as I have said, was exceedingly anxious to conceal from mc the unea¬ siness under which she laboured. Sym¬ ptoms occasionally appeared in her which alarmed me, and which seemed to partake of an alienation of the under¬ standing. Thpugh generally comfortless and sad, she would now and then break into an opposite tone of mind, and be seized with fits of merriment and laughter. I can conceive nothing more horrible than this laughter; it expressed misery more strik'.rgly, than all the sighs and tears and groans in the world could have done. My wife slept little; and her short and unfrequent slumbers were exceed¬ ingly disturbed. She talked in her sleep ; her words were murmuring, in¬ distinct and incoherent; but they ιο¬ ί fened
ferrod to her family, particulari) to her mother. Mar), said I, ) ou vv ill u-eak my heart What cm I do to comfott)Oiir Youi mother I cannot restoic to you , I can¬ not compel the occ in to g ι e back her dnd But all tht f I can, I will do I will m all things stud) )Out inclina¬ tions , I will never thwart and oppose )ou, as I have done , I will bestow all my thoughts in the effort to relieve you ; I will seek for still new pleasur s, till I find some that shall be cordial to your bosom. My dear Fleetwood, she replied, never mmd mc Do not give yourself this unea¬ siness about me All will be well I feel α weight just here (clapping her hand to her head), but it is only а cloud, that will blow awa), and the sun will shine again. I will talk to in) self, and bring my temper into better order. I am ashamed, that I should thus torment )OU,
jou, who ought to be your comfort and jour helper It shall not be thus long At other tunes I talked to her in a style, partaking of repro ich —Would to God, Maiy, jou loved me, as I love you ' lourthoughts would not then be all upon the things j ou have lost and can¬ not regain You w ould sometimes think of me, and be happy To me j ou aie every thing, I think of jou as an ingcl, and think of nothing else, having jou, I want nothing, friends, fortune, coun- try, all the gratifications of life, I should jiever regret, if b'essed with jour affec¬ tion Hard is the fate of him, whose passion is unreturned bj the object of his love, or who, wlvni his bosom burns with all the ardour ofattaciiment, obtains nothing but a moderate and glimmering kindness, insufficient to awake content¬ ment in the mistress of his heart ' There were occasions, when Γ talked to her in a stronger style I told her, that
that the weakness she indulged was- un¬ worthy of her education and her powers I described it as the characteristic of a feeble mino and a vacant undei standing, to dwell thus obstinately upon what was now placed be) ond the reach of fate I exhorted her peremptor ly to oppose the foe that had invaded her peace I told her, that human creatures had a being and duties of their own, and that it be¬ came every one who would escape the coniempt of his fellow men, to rouse himself to tbe consideration of them One further circumstance occurred in the progress of Mary s distemper She would steal from her bed in the middle of the night when no one perceived it, and make her escape out of the house The first time this accident occurred, I was exceedingly alarmed I awoke, and found that the beloved of my soul »as gone I sought her in her closet, in the parlour, and in the libiary I then called
called up the servants. The night was dark and tempestuous ; the wind blew a hollow blast ; and the surges roared and stormed as they buffeted against the hur¬ ricane. A sort of sleet blew shai ρ in our faces when we opened the door of the house. I went myself in one direction, and dispatched the servants in others, to eall and search for their mistress. After two hours she was brought back by one of my people, who, baying sought in vain at a distance, had discovered her on his return, not far from the house. Her hair -was dishevelled ; her counte¬ nance as white as death ¡ her limbs cold ; she was languid and speechless. We got her, as quickly as we could, to bed. This ihappened a second time. At length I extorted her Secret from her. She had been to the beach of the sea to seek the bodies of her parents. On the sea-shore she seemed to converse wifh their spirits. She owned, she had been tempted
tempted to plunge lierself into the waves to meet them. She heard their voices speaking to her in the hollow wind, and saw their faces riding on the top of the waves, by the light of the moon as it peeped precariously through the storm. They called to her, and bid her come along, and chid her for lier delay. The words at first sounded softly, so that il seemed difficult to hear them, but after¬ ward changed to the most dolorous and piercing shrieks. In the last instance a figure had approached her, and, seizing her garment, detained hel, just as she was going to launch (lerself into the element.—The sei t ants talked some¬ thing of a gentleman, who had quitted Mar), preci-ely as they came up to con¬ duct her home. She confessed that, whenever the equinoctial wind sounded in her ears, it gave a sudden turn to her bloud and spirits. As she lisicneel alone to the г 5 ι oaring
rosring of the ocean, ber parents and her sisters immediately stood be¬ fore her. More than once she had been awaked at midnight by the well- known sounds and, looking out of bed, she saw their bodies strewed on the floor, distended with the element tbat filled tbem, and their features distorted with death. This speetacle she could not endure ι she had crept silently out of bed, and, drawing a few clothes about her, had found her way jnto the air· She felt nothing of the storm ; and, led on by an impulse she could not resist, had turned her steps toward the sea. This was a terrible story. I saw that some immediate and decisive remedy was indispensable. I saw that the state of mind she was in, if not effectually changed, led in direct course to one of two issues, derangement of intellect, or suicide. Poor Mary I Ho* deep an impres-
impression (he fatal catastrophe of her family had made про» her mind! I was of all men most inexcusable in having forgotten this. I had seen the whole progress of the impression, and with what difficulty she had been recalled to the world at first. If, in the warm af¬ fection she had conceived for me, in her marriage and subsequent prospects with the man of her choice, she had in some degree risen from the tomb, and come away from the recent graves of those she loved, did that form an excuse for me ? On the contrary, it laid me un¬ der the highest and most indelible obli¬ gation. What a proof of love ! Did' ever wife give to her husband, or mistress· to the most devoted of her admirers, a more incontrovertible evidence of attach¬ ment ? And I, in my ingratitude and in- sensibilify,hadshut my eyes upon the true merit of this conduct, and treated with rudeness and asperity theamiabledevotee! CHAP-
CHAPTER VI. t/HÅ*OE of scene was a medicine which the case obviously requiied. She must not he within reach of the sea. She must be, where it was impossible for the cfcr to catch the roaring of the waters. I further conceived that it was desirable tb'coiiVey her to some place, where va¬ riety of amusement should draw off her attention, from the horrible imaginings with which she had lately been haunted. Mary was young ; and there is some¬ thing in the spring and first unfolding of life, which seems particularly lodemand the interposition of diversified objects and vivacious entertainment. In the present case nature hérself appeared to point out the remedy. Mary had shown » decisis partiality for visits and assem-' blies
blies and crowds. I now believed, that it was an indistinct consciousness that she could not support herself without these aids, that had directed her choice. I fixed upon a removal to Bath. Mj wife derived great and evident be¬ nefit from this transplanting. Some languor remained for a few daj ь , but it speedily disappe ired. It is impossible to conceive with what joy I hailed her return to health. I had had the most horrible prospect before me I had seen the wife of my boSom given up to the agonies Of a distractfed spirit. I had felt a remorse and oppreá- sion of mind, to which till that hoitr I had been a stranger. I hefctiScd mjáèlf as the author bf her eálârnity. The tett- derest flower In rlature's garderi had been committed to tny care, and I was deeply responsible for the manner in which I Had treated it. IF ehe seemed to Have forgotten the premature destruc¬ tion
f ion of'her family, Γ ought not to have forgotten it. I ought to have considered her as a convalescent, that required every art to defend from a relapse, and to luri; away from lhe action of those causes which bad produced her disease. For many days I fed upon the plea¬ sure which her recovery afforded me. 1 saw, with extaoies of delight, the roses once more uiifulding then bloom upon those cheeks, late so livid and so pale. For several weeks befoie wc left Mc- rionelhsnire, Mar) had gradually become more and more dejected ; and, it at any time she smiled, her smiles, as I have said, had in them something mmc sad and terrible to my heart, than tears in any other case would have suggested. Now I saw in them, once again, the ho¬ nest expression of a mind accessible to amusement and pleasure. I saw those gathering clouds, which had been felt by me like the end of the world, di¬ spersed
spersed and clearing away, as if they had never been I thanked her a thousand times, I kissed the new blown roses; I clasped her m my transported arms Mary, said I, y ou have brought me back from the very dens of despair Oh, Ma,y, what alarms have I felt < It is in¬ deed an awful thing, to be in love I— Poor creature, how much must you have suffered 1 Do you remember, when you sallied forth on that terrible night I Do jou remember, when, as you said, some friendly, unknown hand snatched you back, just as you were goipg tabe swallowed up by the billows' ----- No, I will mention the subject no more I will be the most cautious and attentive of husbands Brute that I was, I had not considered how much delicacy and forbearance your sweet frame demanded You are an angel, and I treated you like a mortal Will jou forgive me? I wish this recovery had taken place less
less rapidly. Mary passed from one ex. treme to the other, without almost an interval between. She made acquaint¬ ances, she resorted to all public places ; she was involved in a perpetual round of engagements ; she laughed, and talked, and danced, and sung, for ever ; at least so it appeared to my sickly apprehension. Yet I was upon my guard, not to check, or seem to disapprove, as I had formerly done, the avocations she chose. Some¬ times indeed, with ever-subtle anxiety, I was alarmed-for the sanity of her intel¬ lect 1 , önce or twice I hinted to my charmer in árt obscure and distant way, that she was oier-actmg her part. O» these occasions she looked at me with a wistful and vViritry smile, that brought back to my recollection all the horrible apprebenáions I had lately entertained. I kissed her, ami told her, I saw she was right. Here then I was, toin, not now fiom my
ni) closet and my priv ate stair-case, but from my paternal mansion, and the haunts, where once my careless child¬ hood stia)cd Lately the most indepen¬ dent man alive, I was become а mere ap¬ pendage to that tender and charming trifle, a pretty woman I adored my wife, but I had cultivated high ideas of the prerogatives of my sex, and I did not altogethei relish the being thus reduced to a ciphei My geographical situation was now the offspring of necessity, not of choice I felt like the persons I have somewhere re id of, acted upon by a mÄg- netic influence, who wore no chains or fetters, and )et were pnsoneis, strug¬ gling perhaps to advance in an opposite direction, but always compelled to follow the steps of him who exerted this aseen. dancy over them. Bath, ofall places on earth, I detest¬ ed I had some unpleasing associations respecting it, arising from certain trivial adven-
adventures, which I bave not thought it necessary to record in this history But, independently of these, I had been, through life, with very few interruptions, a lover of nature, of her romantic and magnificent scenery, of her simple and unvitiated manneis Bath appealed to me the very focus of artificial society, of every th ng tint was frivolous, affect¬ ed, impertinent, overreaching and licen¬ tious Deeply in love as I was, I could not help speculating, with no agreeable re¬ flections, from the new lights I had de rived on the character of my wife. Fickle and capricious I judged her, and, thus judging, I could not avoid sometimes viewing her under the notion of a beautiful toy, a plume of costly fea¬ thers, or a copious tram of thinnest gauze, which nods gracefully, or flo its m а thousand pleasing folds, but which is destitute ot substance, firmness or utility
utility. There must be something, I thought, ladically defective, in so fluc¬ tuating a character. She acted (thus I eonstrued her demeanour) inconside- ratel) and idly, she could be induced to no fixed spiut of attention , she was at one moment sunk in the lowest depths of misery, and at another wild with ex¬ travagant gaiety, with no interval to qua¬ lify the transition, with no self-govern¬ ment to give propiietj or moderation to either, A being acting thus, was it en¬ titled to be ranked in the scale of moral existences ' What dependence could be placed upon the consistency of any thing so versatilei What piinciplescould dwell in the bosom of so mere a woman ?— All these reasonings Ы ought back to my mind mis Comonn, the marchioness de b and the countess of В , and I re¬ verted to my long established senti¬ ment, that the sex w ere all alike. What a fool
a fool was I, ever to have doubted it! Indulging this ill-humoured and in¬ equitable estimate of my wife, it was natural that I should be displeased with the figure I made on the present occa¬ sion. Once, said I to myself, I was a man I Ambition had its dwelling-place in this bosom. How many thoughts and projects and inventions, for fame and for usefulness, have passed through my mind î In reality, it was this ardent desire to be something, to record myself on the rolls of my species for some praise¬ worthy deed, that had haunted me for ever, and poisoned my tranquillity in every stage. My father and my grand¬ father were admirable men. What mat- ters it, that they were merely opulent English merchants? Not to introduce here many other anecdotes scarcely less Honourable to their characters, the se¬ nior
nior who took up the little vagrant Ruf- figny and made him his son, and the juuior who willingly yielded that this vagrant should enter into the joint pos¬ session of his inheritance, vvere no ordi¬ nary men Ruffigny himself and Mac¬ neil, the two most distinguished of my friends, were of that stamp, who did no¬ thing for fame, but every thing for uti lify, for venerable simplicity, and for virtue It was not the loud blast of ap¬ pi nise tint I demanded, it was, th it I might look on mjself with a satisfied mind, and that those who knew mc most, might love mc, and who could judge me best, might saj , He has not lived in vain 1 And were all my projects, and was the never resting anxiety of my bosom, re lueed to fins > Iormeily I said, lam ík thing because no achievement I ever [eiformed came up to my own ideas of what boe ime mc Now I might say, I am
am nothing! because, with regard to any such ideas, I was literally palsied. I was a lover. Alas, I was past the ago, when a man can rest satisfied with this one frivolous passion, and see in the world only his Julia ! Love, is a passion in which soul and body hold divided em¬ pire. The meaner half of our nature is essential to its support. It is sex, it is " a set of features and complexion, the tincture of a skin," that constitutes its origin and principle. Considered in this light, it is, all through, a selfish senti¬ ment, the pampering of a weakness, a delicious scheme for beguiling the hours and weeks of our existence. Certainly man, particularly the man whom heaven has endowed with inventive faculties and a comprehensive intellect, was made for something better than this. I was now engrossed by a single individual ; I was playing a subservient and humble part in her train ; and even the character and 4 attributes
attributes of this individual did not at all tunes command my approbation. Assuredly I did not always look back upon this, with complacence, or with pa¬ tience.
CHAP-
CIIAPTrR VII It was at Bath tint I filet rediccd fo practice the othci part of the adv ice of my deceased Mentor, the calling about nie my distant relations, young men who, fiOm the regulations of socictv, bod the best cl urn upon my assistance I had bad a kinswoman, dest ended from а sifter of my grindfathcr, with whom wc hid preserved little intci course, because wc had always cotiaidct id her chiuder asby no means c ílcu lated to do ciedit, to any one who should be connected with her Ine woman was now di id, but, while hi ng lie had iun a singular caiecr She hid been given in first mintage to awe illby esquir of Wales, of tbc n ime of Gil fold This man she had led for scvcnl vear»
years a weary life. She was of exquisite beauty, tall, giaceful and captivating. Her tastes were expensive, and hot man¬ ners gay. Her demeanour was spn iteti and impicssive, her passions volatile, and her temper violent. With all this, she was by no means destitute of capa- i ity. She was eloquent, witty and sar¬ castic; exhibiting, when she pleased, the highest breeding, and delivering her remarks with inexpressible vivacity and grace Thus endowed, she was sui- rounded, wherever she npjrcared, with a little army of suitors. Ever) jouth of fashion, who bad the cour ige to lookup to her, became her professed admirer; and, among these admirers, it was pretty vimversally believed that all had not offered up their incense m vain. At length, impunity made her heedless, she was caught in a situation with a young officer, a Cicole by birth, which admitted of no ambiguity; her husband vol. m. ι could
could no longer overlook herofkncc, and a divorce was the result Her cha racter being thus blasted, she gave full scope to her appetite for pleasure, she retreated to London, and occupied a very elegant mansion, which was for some time a favourite haunt for the most dissipated of our young nobility While the divorce was depending, she was al¬ lowed, by the ecclesiastical court, a to¬ lerably handsome income out of her hus band s estates and, when this ceased, the defect was understood to be supplied by the moie opulent of her guests Uhis picperity however did not last lor cvei Mrs Gifford s charms, by the effect of late hours and incessant lissi pation, rapidly subsided She wis no longer а novelty She had hail many fortunate lovera , but she bail not been lucky enough to secure one, who, by the entanglement of habit or otherwise, should be inclined to presene the au tumn
tumn of her days from indigence. She retired, with a dejected heart, and an empty purse, into Wales, and took up hei residence in a market- town, in the very next county to that where my father lived. But, though mrs GifFoid was no longer handsome enough for Rotten-Row or Pall-Mali, she made a great figure in the remote quarter of the woi Id which now leceivcd ber Iler recommendations, as I have already said, vv ere not merely those of pci sou, she possessed understanding, mini ition and taste She had seen mu h of tlu 1 igh vvoil I, and she had cmuicii 1) the t lient of giving poignancy to I n amidi с» and leinaiks In the to m v I не she dwelt, lived lo ι in Κι imi к, ι sıııgcoıı, of great bi.1 1 a id b lit) in h s profes ion lins n hi vv ıs bı luv cd bv ill lhe roiintiy π und ι it υι 1) un ι ι lunt uf Ins irt an I lhe Ι ι ..... e anıl hbci.il sty L m r - which
which he dispensed its benefits, but for his manneis, which were in the most striking form of artlessness and simpli¬ city. With an uncommon fund of good sense and profound sag icity, he «as, as to all the affairs of the living world, a child. He was imposed upon by every artful story, and his puise was open alike to relieve distress and gratify imposture. He could not find in his heart to be se¬ vere to any one, and the wretch who had ten times deceived htm, was sure, if detected, to be dismissed at worst with nothing harder than a patriarchal rebuke* Add to this, he was subject to the strangest fits of absence, which often involved him in incredible mistakes and absurdities, though, as if by the inter¬ position ofa good genius for ever watch¬ ful over the steps of this admirable crea¬ ture, his distractions had never been known to produce a pernicious effect in the exercise of his profession. 3 My
My worthy kinswoman saw at once into the ν due ot this memorable person She thought him as exactly fitted to be come her second husband as if he had been made for the purpose Poor fel¬ low he had perhaps never m his life be¬ stowed a single thought upon love and marriage But mrs Gifford knew, that the man who cannot be brought to enact the personage of α suitor, may, by a dextrous change of the character of the sexes, be an admirable subject for a clever woman, who should think proper to pay her addresses to him The ladies of Llanvellmg refused to admit the visits of this interesting Magdalene, and there¬ fore she had no chance to meet the doc¬ tor at a third place but that obstacle was immediately removed, when mrs Giftord opportunely fell ill of a languish mg diatemper She had great address in conducting the symptoms of her in disposition, as she had address in -every thing
thing she seriously undertook, poor Kenrick could not tell what to make of it. One thing however he belter under¬ stood, the charms of her com erstit'ion : she exerted all her talents to fix herself in his good opinion ; and never jieihaps in her life had she failed in an attempt of that sort. She did not chuse to have a tedious illness ; for it was not to her pur¬ pose that lie should regard her as a de¬ cided invalid. She was ill long enough, however, to secure poor Kenrii-k's pur- tiallty. He had never before experienced in any eminent degree flie pleasures of female society ; the Welch ladies «ere not éafeuľiitcd to afford tbem to a man of sciente'. Mrs. Giflbf d's fire-side was a most delightful retreat to the rural Burgeon, after the labours of the day ; if he was not there every evening, lie every evening Wished to be there. The lady, On ihe other hand, took every precaution to renfove his diffidence; she showed - ■ hirn,
hım, not so much by words, as by affec¬ tion ite expressions, and a seaming over¬ flow ing of the soul in his com) any, that he could no* visit her too often Ken« nek had been a total stringer to Uns species of flattery, not because his neigh¬ bours did not honoui his ment, Lut lie- eau e the/ wanted the skill to honoui it in Ilus way, aiidliewassomttilitheinnie pissive and defenceless to its operations All this coquetry terminated in mar¬ riage , but the man of medicine found inrs Kenrick a very different sort of wo¬ man from what mrs Gifford had ap¬ peared. I he bent of his mind rendered him incapable of the h ibits of accumula. tion , but the income of his professional labours was far from despicable When nu s Gifford had come down into Wales, fifty pounds constituted the whole for¬ tune, principal and interest, that she pos. scs»eíl So circumstanced, it was im¬ possible for any woman to have more uncxpensive tastes, or a more decisive telali
relish for rural retirement. No sooner however had fortune changed, than she resumed her former propensities. She began with adding an elegant saloon to her husband's house, and decorating his little grounds in a sort of Versailles st) le. It was in vain for Kcnrick to remon¬ strate ; she was dashing and peremptory ; hegentle, forbearing, and unqualified to contend. She soon grew tired of the delights of Montgomeryshire. One morning she read in the papers of the death ofa surgeon of the first eminence at Bath; she found that this afforded an opening of the most auspicious nature for her husband, and insisted upon his removing thither. Kennek's talents and knowledge of his profession would have made their way any where ; but his wife was a clog hung about his neck, that made it impossible for him to rise She filled his house with assemblies of demt- reps and debauchees; desperate as to the recovery of any character in the world,
world, she resolved to make that figure by dissoluteness and effrontery, which, if she had set out right in life, she might have made by elegance, accom¬ plishments and virtue. Kenrick lost his courage, his activity, and his employers. Death came at a convenient moment, and, by means of the disease, usually styled a broken heart, rescued him from the horrors of poverty. His wife had taken no care in the seasons of her pro¬ sperity, to provide for an evil day. She sunk into obscurity, by all neglected and by all despised ; and, after several years of wretchedness, terminated her exis¬ tence in a parish-workhouse. This woman had two sons. The fate of both was singular. Born, the eldest under the roofs of magnificence, and the second in the mansion of competence and plenty, they were reduced at an early age to absolute want. The former bore the name of Gifford. After several years t 5 «of
of marriage without the least promise of offspring, his mother had at length pre¬ sented this son to her first husband But, in the ecclesiastical proceedings which took place soon after his birth, it was proved to the satisfaction of the court that he was illegitimate, and he was cut off by act of parliament from the large inheritance to which he seemed to have been born Her second son was the offspring of the excellent and guile¬ less Kenrick , and he was ruined, equally with his elder brother, by the unhappy issue of his father s professional life Between these two youths there had been an antipathy from the earliest pe¬ riod of the existence of the 'atter, at least Й was deeply felt by Gifford for his un¬ welcome cadet Gifford was a youth of я dark complexion, and elegant figure, sagacious, shrewd, supple ¿nd insinua¬ ting He had been only seven years of age at the period of his mother s second 1 * mar-
marriage She had never lov ed her son , for she beheld him as the mnoi ent in¬ strument of her disgi ace He harbour¬ ed in his childish bosom a secret abhor¬ rence of his mother The extraordinary change which had taken place m his for tunes in infancy, had probably, when he came to know it, served m a wonder¬ ful degree to sharpen his faculties His nurses and attendants did not fail to tell him, that he had, during the early months of his existence, been looked upon as the hen to twenty thousand а year The eternal recollection that the oien misconduct of his mother had been the cause of his losing this made him look upon her with the sentiments of a demon Extraordinary as it may seem, long before he was sev en vcarsofage, he undei stood all be had suffered, or at least fe't it as deeply, as a man of forty might have done This boyish impres¬ jon of dislike to her on whom he solely depend'
depended, taught hım early habits of hy¬ pocrisy Two or three times, in the be¬ ginning, his feelings of antipathy had broken out, but the haughty and impe¬ rious temper of his mother had crushed them, with such terrors as no school boy courage could withstand From this time he learned the tones of submission, and even of reverence, and, being of a remarkably quick capacity, no Roscms or Richard could have played the cha¬ racter he assumed more consummately Even the penetrating observation of mrs Gıffoıd was deceived, and she was per¬ suaded that this viper doted on her to distraction Love, in an infinite ı.ıajo- nty of cases, begets love Perceiving how much Ibe boy seemed attached to her, and remorseful perhaps for the great injury he had suffered from uer been tiousness, she became tolerant and even Itind to him His figure was graceful and prepossessing, his capacity was every
every where remarked with sentiments of astonishment, the mother gradually became proud of her son She introduced him into the family of the mild Kenrick, and caused him to be treated as the proper heir of all he saw The age at which mrs Gıffoıd had ar¬ rived, rendered it somewhat improbable that she should have any child by her se¬ cond marriage the habits of her past life seemed to have tnci eased this imprw. babilitj rheboj, of course, did not exactly undei stand the state of his step». father s fortune He saw every thing in plenty about him, and meditated in his jouthful heart to give himself full scope in cnjojing all at prescpt, and to possess the same means, sole and uncontroled, vv hen the present proprietors were gone off the stage It was therefore with а sort of despair, that he found that his mother became pregnant in the second year of her marriage A thousand plans for
for removing this infant rival, whom he- regarded as destined by 1 ivv the proprie¬ tor of those funds which he had so lately counted for his own, suggested them eel ι äs to his «orking brain Again and again be had had thoughts of removing him by poison Gifford was а coward, but he was also too good a calculatoi not to give due weight to the chances t h it this action might conJuct him to the gallows While these sentiments were ever uppermost m his mind, he cai ned every thing with an external smooth¬ ness, and often nursed, and seemed to fondle the child, whom he wished to strangle The mother of these vouths was five summers the wife of Kenrick when the honest surgeon died, the dreams of wealth immediately vanished, » hich had for years occasioned the little Giftord so many heart burnings He saw that his poor half-brother was no better oft than himself
himself: there was no dispute about the succession, for there was nothing to in¬ herit. Young Kenrick however waa taken home by his father's relations it» the neighbourhood of Llanvellmg; they were in narrow circumstances, but ex¬ ceedingly honest. Gifford was owned by nobody ; unhappy in the incident of his birth, he was akin to no living crea' »ure, but his profligate mother. Once, in the decline of her life, I made en¬ quiry into her situation, and sent her a handsome present · afterward I lost sight of her. It has been seen how wander¬ ing and uncertain a life I led ; add to which, she had relations by the father's side, nearer to her than myself, and fully, or nearly, equal to me m point of fortune. They neglected her ; they pre¬ tended to feel paroxysms of wrath at the very mention of her name ; they would extend no indulgence or assistance to the progeny of her adulterous amours* When
When this wretched woman was taken to the parish-workhouse, it was proposed by the churchwardens, to bind her son apprentice, as it was called, to a neigh¬ bouring farmer, that is, to sell him for a term of) cars to perform the most op¬ pressive and brutish offices of rural drud¬ gery. A neighbouring clergyman, of considerable learning and а liberal mind, had seen the boy occasionally, and ob¬ served in him the tokens of a supei lor understanding He took him from the situation to which he was condemned, received him into his house, and deter¬ mined by his own exertions to cultivate and improve the faculties he discerned. The mind of Gifford had been dei ply affected by every successive revolution in his circumstances. He had written, with his mother's connivance, divers very supple and insinuating letters to her relations by the father's side with¬ out her consent, and m defiance of her prohibi-
prohibition (for in her deepest disti ess, she still felt an ingenuous pride, which forbad her offering any supplications in this quaiter), he wrote to his nominal f >- ther In all things the boy discovered a sagacity beyond his years As long as there was a hope of obtaining any thing from his mother s relations, he was in appearance filial and dutiful to her. When every prospect of that kind was at an end, and he seemed condemned to obscurity and misery for ever, the bit¬ terness of his nature broke out. He re- viled her in language so harsh and hor· nble, that it appeared wonderful where he had acquired his fecundity of invec¬ tive In cursing to her face the mother who bore him, he seemed to find ease for the disappointments and adversity he endured A part of every day he de¬ voted to this gratification, and the once proud and haughty mrs Giftord, now re¬ duced
duccd by misery and hunger, had nut spirits to stand up against this unnatural usage It was universally believed oy tho«e who witnessed the scenes, lint the son had thus succeeded to shorten the life of Ins parent When young Giftoid was ad rutted under the roof of the benevolent clergy, man who seemed to intend to adopt him for his own, he may be cuinmlcicil as already consummate in every vicious disposition He hod not however lost Ins talcni for hypocrisy, and, as the world sow began again to smile upon bun, he oecame more smooth and insi¬ nuating than ever During his resi¬ dence in tbi» bouse, his patron was seized with a dangerous fit of sickness, and with great difficulty recovei ed A short time after, the clergyman disco. vered, by an extraordinary train of acin- ¿entSflhat little Gifford had enteied into
ι plot with α knavish attornej, if he had il cd when it was expected lie would to lob the wife and only daughter of his patron ofall they should possess This d scovery curi d mr Piikhurst of his fmdncss for this extraorduniy inmate He sent him to sea, wheic Giftord 4 eidily acquued lhe favour of his supe nor, and at the age of twenty eight, at which I invited him to my house in lì ith, lie had passed through a series of iidv«ntuics, scarcely less diversified than those of Gilbhs or Gusman d'Alfarache His evil genius niifiilwu 'c »¡iíi p |Ш< ч1 hım , and.liowever deep were the schemes he ha 1 1 ud, he had not made that pro¬ gress in life, which assuredly his talents would have obtained, could he have con¬ fined himself to the character of an honest man One however of the cır- cumstances, not the least extraordinary, tint »tended him was that he was still full vied 1 j the good word of at least halt
half the persons with whom he connect¬ ed himself. It was not till a conside¬ rable time after, that I learned the parti¬ culars concerning him which I have heru related.
CHAP-
CHAPTER VIII. i\Fi,urNcrD, as I have said, by what I may call the testamentary advice of the generous Macneil, and desirous of calling about me my nearest existing relations, my mind immediately recurredto the two sons of my frail kinsw oman. Previously to this time I had not been wholly inat¬ tentive to their mterests. Gifford, whose life was wandering and unsettled, I had never seen ; but the little Kenrick, who dwelt with his relatives not more than twenty miles from my residence, had often drawn from me the marks of my personal attention. He was а florid and beautiful boy, alert and nimble in his motions, and singularly open and in¬ genuous in hi» demeanour. A school¬ fellow of his, a favourite companion, had been
been destined by his pai cuts for the army; in their youthful holies they had played at soldiers, and little Kennek had often, in his artless prattle, and look mg at mc with one of lus innocent looks, intreated me to let him be a general 1 indulged hisyouthful prcfeicnce, and at the propel period bought him α pair of colours A moie gallant and kind- heirtcd soldier the woi Id never saw There vvasa brilliancy in his eje, α mo¬ dest blush in his check, and a sensibility in hi» accent, tint, all togethci, consti¬ tuted one of the most liiteicstmg objects thofcan be imagined These two young men I, at one and the same time invited to come to me t Bath Giftord was at present out ofem- ploymcnt, and to be piovided for lhe profession in which he was most exer¬ cised, though he had left it foi conside¬ rable periods and returned to it ag in, was that of the sea, and, if I thought pi o[ er
proper to push him forward in the path of independence, I might in no long time be able to make bun а captam in the mv) Kcnrick was engaged, he »as recently entered in the arm) , and, at my invitation, obt lined а leave of ab¬ sence for tw о months, to visit his wealthy kinsman 1 hough born of the same mother, it was impossible for two human beings to exhibit α stronger contrast to each other- When Kennek appeared bcfoie me foi the first tune at Bath, drcssei' in the uniform of bis v cgimcnt, and glowing with all the bloom of eighteen, I thought I had never beheld so prepossessing а ereatuie His ade' ess was irresistible, his words seemed the image of his heart, and the tone of his voice, when he ac¬ costed me, implicitly told the love, gra¬ titude and respect he entertained for me The entrance of Giflord, whom I ■now saw for the first time, by no means 4 impressed
impressed me m the same way His dark complexion, approaching to the mulatto, was no agreeable portent There was a roving in his eje, which seemed to warn me to put mjself upon my guard against him His gcneial physiognomy conveyed the idei of something obscure and problematical, which I was at a loss to expound He was ten years older than Kenrick, and, if his understanding even m infancy had been premature, it may well be supposed that he had by this time lost all vestige of juvenile simplicity I did not like him I said to mysell, "Gilford, jou shall not stay a week under the roof of your patron " These were first impressions As I observed more of these young men, my feelings toward them became essentially altered. Kenrick was full of gay and volatile spirits, which, though qualified with the best heart in the world, rather shocked
shocked with the gravity of my ege, and the saturnine turn of my disposition. As a boy, I felt kindly toward him ; hut I soon found that he was by no means fitted to be my companion. Gifford on the contrary was serious and of wide information! had read much,and thought more ί his researches, especially into the human heart, were profound. He talk¬ ed like an oracle ; and I soon learned to place a great dependence upon his judg¬ ment. His sentiments in many respects nad a striking-similarity to my own. But what was most material, he flattered me in my notions and weaknesses, with the greatest imaginable address. It bad so happened, that I hitherto had little ex¬ perience of this sort of flattery. I had been too singular and solitary in my ha¬ bits, and too frequent in my changes of abode, to have been exposed to this kind of attack so much as men of my fortune usually are. -Before many days had vol. in. β elapsed,
elapsed, my two kinsmen fell naturally into their places. Kcnrick, who had no secret ends in pursuit, desired nothing on b,vţ part but to picserve a complying a,neV.reepcctfuI carriage toward me. Gif- ford i purposcd, from the moment he en¬ tered my house, to possess mc entirely tOfhimself, and proceeded accordingly That insinuating voice and dextrous ar¬ tifice I have before descnbed in him, he now employed with unwearied diligence. It is surprising how soon I lost sight of those prepossessions against him, whteh his first appearance had inspired I no lenger peiccived the portentous roving of hi» eye, 01 the mysterious significa¬ tions of his brow and the graces of his figure, and the admuable subtlety of In» understanding, pleaded strongly vnlh me in his favour He no sooner crossed my threshold, than, agreeably to the uniform tenourof his hfe,be looked round upon ill theindi- 4 vidual s
viduals who dwelt thcte, for the purpose of discovering where, and toward whom, the craftiness of his nature might be di¬ rected to the greatest advantage. A visit paid to a man so rich as I was, and vvhe had no nearei relation than himself, ex¬ cept so fir as depended upon my recent marriage, was an epoch in his life The fust question he asked himself, as he sot his foot beneath my roof, was, How can I make m)self, by succession or other¬ wise, the possessor of the estate of my kinsman > flic persons principall) entitled to his attmtis u when lie s it down to the solu¬ tion oi this question, weie myself, my wife, tnd the thoughtless, but ami ible. Kei nek The 1 ttei he seircelv deign¬ ed to think of as ant tl, but nthcr as an instrument by w h eh h s plots might be foiw irdcd líe felt Ins цепша soar iboicthb. opposilun of such a iinnoi. M ir) w ıs it this time w ılı ehil 1 SI e с г w ıs
was liftte advanced in her pregnancy; and I can scarcely think that Gifford, when he first entered my house, was aware of her condition. As soon as he was so, his machinations became princi¬ pally directed against his unborn adver¬ sary." He felt, I believe, an unreal and anticipated resemblance between the cir¬ cumstances of this creature beginning fo exist, and those under which he had himself been born : and he resolved that, as he, in the early months of his infancy, had been cut off from an inhe¬ ritance of twenty thousand a year, so should this child be disinherited and abandoned to the world, before it be¬ came acquainted with the first elements of speech or of reason. One of the main artifices of Gifford through' life was, if he felt animosity to¬ ward any one, to personate a more than usual affection and kindness to that in¬ dividual. By this method he gained ι posses-
possession of that person s secrets, and insinuated himself into his confidence, while at the sune time this ostenta¬ tious show of regard gave treble weight to the tales, which the hypocrite seemed reluctantly to utter against his ally I have already said, that Gifford nourished an inextinguishable antipathy to Ken¬ rick For this very reason, he assumed the appearance, from the hour tbey met, of att aching himself to his interests, and the demonstrations of that attachment were constantly accompanied with noto¬ riety and eclat Kenrick had a certain air of levity and giddiness about him, though the goodness of his heart pre¬ vented him from falling into the excesses to which such dispositions too frequently lead, and Gifford, who was ten years Ins senior, voluntarii) undertook to be his monitor The ingenuous and up¬ right charaetei of Kenrick made him re¬ ceive these offices with the utmost gra¬ titude ,
titude j while I myself' could not help being edified with this disinleicslcd con¬ duct in the elder brother, where an un¬ generous mind would rather haie felt envy and a sentiment of competition. Gifford early remarked the grave turn of my disposition, as well as the volatility of that of his ; brother ; and he resolved to improve and heighten these hints of contrast. He accordingly insinuated such remarks as the following into the ear of Kenrick. " Do not think, be¬ cause vou obserye our cousin to be of a scriops temper, fbat it is necessary you should suppress before him the gay impulses of your own mind. If )Oii do, instead of gaining, you will ruin youiself in his esteem. He told me the other day, as we we ; walking together, that he had alwii)S been accustomed to prognosticate ill, of a solemn,sober-sided boy. Youth, saiil he, is the season of cheerfulness ; and it is in this way that the
the faculties and force of the mind, if any exist, display themselves in early- life. Besides, mr. Fleetwood has the moat ungovernable dislike to what he calls hypocrisy ; and lie onirics this prin¬ ciple so far, that whoever in his sight. puts any constraint upon his natural. bent, he sets down for a hypocntc. Re·* member too, that a grave man is a mani devoured with «win', and however con« triny to his temper it may seem, that hot feels toward no person so sincere u gra. titude, as toward him. who Convulses] him with laughter, and'distracts his,me., lancholy with sallies of extravagance. 1 know, my dear Kenrick, that ypu.are; too high-souled a lad, fo do any tliingfor. (lie express purpose of insinuating yĎur- 1 self into an old man's testament. 'But that same temper ofyouiS. aught to pre-i vent you, from mortifying yonreelf, ,«ud. giving pain to your protcçtoıi to no man¬ ner of purpose. Shovy yourself to him · nakedly
n lkcdly as you are he will honour jon the more, and like jou the better fir it Kern ick, you are a spirited ft How, but jou have not the b llessi c s and ob stHiacy, which make» many joung men of your stamp disdun advice Yours is the season to lay hold of fortune s plough, and turn up her treasures, it would not be amiss, as graver years advance, to find that you had α comfortable annuity on mr Fleetwood s estate He must be an ass, and not a man of spirit, who never thini» before hand of α гашу day F or ray part, 1 should have no enjoyment off any legacy our cousin bequeathed to me, if ray dear brother, my brother, whom I received in these arms almost on the day of his birth, whom I have dandled on my kneel, and toward whom my affection has grown with added years, were not at least equally a gainer with myself The consequence of all this sage and generous advrce was, that I w и
I was pcipctiiall/ tormented with the buffooneries, the boy's tricks, and the unlucky scrapes, of the handsome young sold cr To many men no doubt they would have been exquisitely delightful, the cheerful and light hearted tone of voice with which they were accompanied, often spoke to the soul, and the honest hihrity of countenance that adorned them, ι painter would gladly have stolen, when he was delineating the figure of a youthful Apollo Still they were too much for the habits of my mind, and the restless anxieties that b uinled mc Marj, all lovely and be¬ witching as she was, frequently vexed me with her over-much liveliness and gaiety , and I could ill brook to bave this stimulated tnd doubled upon me, by the presence ot a young man of her own temper and age Gifford speedily discerned the feelings I nourished toward my wife, and planned о 5 his.
his operations accordingly " Allow me, ' said he to the young ensign, " to explain to you another featuie of oui pa¬ tron s charaetei He has passed all the better d i)s of his life а bachelor Just at the period of existence, when the most uxorious man alive begins to detach Inmself from the vehemence of passion, he mai ned You may easily conceive what a ridiculous blunder he committed lie was not long bcfoie he detectei Ins folly This is the veiy icason that Ins led bun to call his relations about him, ond endeavour to relieve his domestic scene by the pi esence of strangers He wishes to lead a creditable life with his wife, but he finds himself d squililied to become her esquile and as«ocn(c He is desirous of lesuming as fu as pos- мЬ1е tl e independence of а single si He, ud of having is little familnnty with Ins *ife as decorum will allow of It is 111 joui powti to amuse him , it is m mine to
to beguile his hours with serious dis¬ ellili se ¡ tin sc benefits he expects from us But the man who would do bun the mosi piecious se vice, is he who would lebcvc him from tbcdufi of constant at¬ tendance tir on the skittish, capricious, k ud hcirtctl,excellent ci calure, to whom he finds himself unfortunately linked * It is no wonder that Kcnrick became the dupe of these ι epresentations I was tbc furthest in the world from а hy- pocnte, antl it w as easy to ste, ten times ι day, how much I vesed myself at the s ght of tbeetoiiráeties of Mary Thus ill il с wciknesses ot the cn^ign s charac¬ ter were cai efully fed anil expandid by his tre chcrous itlvisei He was lively, rest, liss ami turbulent, G flori! stimul licei him to bt come more so At his age, and in lhe very dawn of puberty, h ¡, eye was piompt to the notice of female attraction , there was nothing to whiclj 'he was moie pione, than to those little fiolics
frolic» and sports in which the young of either sen indulge themselves recipro¬ cally with the utmost innocence of thought and intention Giftord prompt¬ ed him to turn this foible upon my wife, and to ascribe to himself a merit while he obeyed the impulses of his nature I have already said, that I h id no sooner removed my wife to Bath, than she emerged from the melancholy and dejection which bad overwhelmed her at the equinox, and rose to an extravagant degree of vivacity and spirits She made acquaintances, site resorted to public places, she laughed, and talked, and danced, and sung, for ever It will easily .be imagined, how this disoider was heightened, now that I had an in¬ mate under my roof, no less wild, re¬ miss and rambling than herself I did not know my own house A hurricane would have been a mansion of peace to that m which I lived Consider then the
the grave cast of mj spirits, the trem¬ bling sensibility of my nerves, and ima¬ gine what I must have suffered in a scene so new, where my nerves were not only shaken, but my ears sometimes deafened, by the obstreperous mirth of Mary, Kenrick, and their tram of vi¬ sitors \el I saw occasionally m the countenance of my beloved wife some of those wild and terrible expressions which had driven us from Merionethshire, and I dared not remonstiatc Frequently I took refuge fiom the tumult in the se¬ parate society and conveisation of Gif¬ ford this was what the villain intended , he was secure that he should gain more perfect possession of me, in proportion as our conferences became more repeat¬ ed. Sometimes I desned him to speak to Kcnrick about the excess of his riots : he did speak to him, and the style in which he spoke has already been de¬ tailed. Thus
Thus becoming daily more confiden¬ tial with the eldec of my two kinsmen, I Could not reľra n from sometimes open¬ ing my soul to linn, on the most sacred of all subjects, my sentiments respecting my wife This I did without premedi- tition or design it was the genuine overflow of а muid, sometimes irrititeli Sometimes stung, sometimes svvcllc 1 al¬ most to bursting Giftoid was the only persan on thefaccoftheeartli,vvitliwhom I nowdiscouised familiarly who, in my pi ice, could have been uniformly silent upon tbe subjects always uppermost in his thoughts ? No man at least no imn subjed to be so deeply miprisscd and agitated as I was None but the worst of villains could have made an ill use of such disclosures He s"vv liotv my bo¬ som was wrung, how my heart was to n in a thousand peces Was I a husband, indifferent to the affections of his wife? Was 1 а man, to whom tbe iim/est set-
mee would be lo relieve bun from tbe uni¬ formity of attendance upon the partnei of his bosom ' Did I desiie, to llaves hale Jamiharily of mteicouise ivitb ber, as tbe laws of demi um would allo ι ? —No, no, no ' Tortured is I was with hei instabi¬ lity, I loied in beyond ill names of love to see lier h ippy, was the utmost aim of my ..ambition to be gratifieel with her compliances the indirect silent evidences of her regard, elevated me to an enjojment that kings m glit envy — But I eonpUraed—fool tint I was, I complained, and dreamed that I received the retribution of sympathy I—this was enough foi Giftord , this he accepted as llicfulciumofhis engines Enamoured of Mary, I ako affected, with a loie equally sinceie, though not equally irdent, the cngigmg Kenrick His countenance nas so honest, his manneis so affectionate ' Ί hough occa sion illy boisterous m his demeanoui, be woidd
would not intentionally have hurt а fly Like the elephant, he might have trod down armies in his mood, but, if ι blind puppy lay m his path, and he was aware of it, lie would carefully have removed it from harm His manly heart was sub- dued, and his eyes suftused with the pre¬ cious diops of pity, if he heard a tale of woe He was unvveiried md uncon¬ querable in his efforts to relieve distress nor merely that, but every opportumtj, however trivial in name, to do an act ol kindness, and give vent to the goodness of heart with which h s bosom liboured, was sure to be embraced by him The accents of generosity which this temper supplied to him, thrilled through the frame of every hearei He wis active, impetuous and ungovernable but how unlike was the impetuosity of his charac¬ ter, to that of Morrison, Frewen, and the other untamed barbarians, with whom it had been my unhappy lot to be associated at
at the university ' —One strange thought I could not sometimes delend invselt fiom, when Kenrick and Mary chinead to sit next each other, at the bieakfast- tabie, or on other occasions they were the loveliest couple that Europe peihape could have supplied, both so animated and so accomplished ; both having that uncommon class of countenance, in which, as it appears, the thoughts may be read. A painter, who wished to re¬ present Romeo and Juliet, as they of¬ fered themselves before Friar Lawrenee to be joined in bands of holy wedlock, would have been too happy if he could have obtained Kenrick and Mary for Ыч models.
CHAP-
CHAPTER IX. JL не young ensign, governed, ¡is I have s. id, by the admonitions of his elder bro¬ ther, was eager in Ins attentions an 1 ser¬ vices to my wife. His hortest beurt, that witnessed the rcotitiule of bis views, prevented him from suspecting that any one could'put'a wrong construction on his conduct. One evening, as I return¬ ed home at about eleven o'clock from α partyin which I hail boon engaged by the importunities of Gifford, who seemed al¬ ways anxious to invent means for divert¬ ing my melancholy, I was accosted by a woman, well dressed, and, as far as I could distinguish, of a noble air, in the streets. The night was exceedingly dark; but the air was balmy anil re¬ freshing. The incident occurred near ·... the
the tloor of the Upper Rooms, anıl took place just at the time the assembly was breaking up. GifFoid bad left me for an instant, to speak to .an acquaintance who passed us. Several of the lathes went home in chaiis; othcis, invitad perhaps by the softness ot" the air, tinti considering the small distance they had tu go, preferred walking. The woman- I have mentioned was arm in arm with another lady ; but she let go lier hold as, I appioached, and addı esscd ще. Her·. face was covered with ц veil ; m thtitŕ particularly in the glimmerend obscurity, of the night, I could make no judgfnent of her features. Your name, I believe, şir, is Fleet¬ wood. It is. Excuse my speaking to you in this stiange manner. I cannot stay a mo¬ ment. Perhaps I ought not to say a word. But meeting you thus in the in- , s stant.
«tenf, my feelings will not be suppressed. Do npt meke yourself uneasy ; I dare say, there is no cause ; I only wish to warnj ou. For God's sake, what do you mean î What is it has happened ? Only, sir, I do not like the behaviour of mrs. Fleetwood and the young en¬ sign, her kinsman, to each other. They were at the Rooms to-night. Keally, sir, their manner of proceeding is quite (boeking, I cannot tell you the parti¬ eulan. I know that the ensign is wholly dependent on your bounty. Upon my «ord, their indecorums will become the talk of every mouth. I cannot bear to веем good a man as, I am told, you are, ao grossly abused. Look to ) ourself 1 And with tbese words the unknow n broke from mej joined her companion, and in' a moment was lost in the train of persons (hat poured out of the Rooms. I was tod much taken by surprise, to have? the
the thought of following her. Besides, of what use was it that I should know my informer î She was acquainted with nothing but circumstances that might furnish ground for suspicion, not that af¬ forded foundation for certainty I might have asked of other persons who were present the same evening. I had no familiar acquaintance there. I could not endure to address such a ques¬ tion to any living creature. What hus¬ band, not lost to feeling as well as de¬ cency, could frame his lips to ask, Did you observe any undue levity ш tbe car¬ nage of my wife î Did you see any thing that might lead you to suppose she was unfaithful, dishonest to my bed ' I ought to have despised the tale of this anonymous informer. I could not drive it from my mind. Kcnrick and my wife, thought I, must have gone far indeed, if the) no longer scruple to ex¬ pose their familiarities before the whole Clt).
city I ìecollected the scene at Bar mouth, and how much I had been tor¬ tured by the gallantries ot the fluttenng' Matthews The idea pursued me to my pillow all night in my slumbers I ima gined myself in the Rooms, and saw the indecorums and guilty intelligence ol Kcnrick and M in 1 he pulses of my head beat violentlv ¡ my whole frame was m the paroxysm of a fever I exclaim¬ ed, Shall all Bath see these things, and I alone be ignoi ant and secure ? As the dawn idvanced, my disordci in a great decree subsided At break fast I saw the pai ties against whom these suspicions lud been insinuated I search ed for guilt in then faces I nevei saw a more charming and heart felt seleniti The brightness of heaven was m then features I looked round the room I mvoliintanly sud to mjself fit ins the contrast only that struck me, I was far from entei taming a suspicion agunst my con-
confidentul fitend], Under the olive tinctured skin of Giftoid, beneath his scowling brow, and among the lines which tune and chin ite have indented there, lnpoensy mtiţht hide herself, but, in the other two, there is no opa- citj or disci loi ation to intercept the pas¬ sage of а thought, there is not a furrow in t heir cheeks foi ticachery to link in Mit), heaven Ins moulded its own image m thy features if thou art filse, oh, then heaven mocks itself' Io the mmd ihendy indisposed to а liberal consti net ion every indifferent cn- cmmtince is f( о 1 loi jealous.-------Hart Mat) left my tntng behind, in icinoving fiom one room to another? Kcnrick wis sine to be on the alcı t to present it to her Did Mary prépaie for α walk in tl с Circus, or the adjoining fields s Keni ek s gloves and li it weie immedi¬ ately foith loming Kenrick had α fino voce and an ailmiiablc tiste in singing, M У
Mary had never, till now, discovered any vehement propensity that way ; but now sue was for ever requesting him to teach her his songs, and practising them with him without end. They danced toge¬ ther at every interval of leisure ; or ra¬ ther rehearsed particular movements, in which one or the other did not think they had arrived at sufiicient ease or grace; while either, as chance-directed, hummed the tune to the other's steps. In this system of conduct Gifford was for ever urging them to persevere. If at any time they observed the deep melan¬ choly that seemed to come over me, he assured them that nothing could operate upon me as a restorative, more than the appearance of gaiety and good spirits in my wife. If I left the apartment in displea¬ sure, he warned them against taking the least notice, or suffering the smallest change in what they did. On the other hand, he was so frequently alone with me,
me, that they placed the most implicit confidence in his information as to the state of my thoughts and my wishes In short he appeared to each party the good genius of the houshold, so benevo¬ lent, so attentive, so perpetually on the watch to prevent mistakes, and to pro¬ vide for the tranquillity and advantage of all I had already, previously to the hor¬ rible idea wbich had now been intruded upon mc, and which perpetually disturb¬ ed my mind, been incautious and wicked enough to complain to Gifford of the fickle temper of my wife It is the first word, in cases of this sort, that rends ш pieces the veil, as sacred as that which modesty draws over the female form, by the intervention of which slight misap^ prehensions are enabled to digest and disperse themselves m silence Having proceeded thus far, I could not help naming to him the thoughts that beset vol hi H me
me about Kennek Giflord appeared to be astonished at the bare suggestion He would stake his life upon the in¬ tegrity of the ensign Honesty flowed in the very blood of the Kenricks Could I be so inattentive as not to see, haw а self-acquitting conscience bright eued in the countenance of his brother and gave liberty to all his motions ? He must be free enoagh to put mc upon mj guard against the vice of ягу disposi¬ tion, and to warn me n Jt, by ill consti uc- tion, to poison what in itself was as guile¬ less as infancy Poor Kenrick' was he to be the victim of my groundless guesses? He was gladi had named the matter to him, as it was of infinite consc quence to check a habit of this sort in the beginning I had married a bcauti nil and excellent wife, through whose means he doubted not I should be hlcss ed with a numerous progeny What infinite gratifications were in stoie for 5 trL '
mc ! But all these would be forfeited, if Ï did not repose in her the confidence she so justly demanded. The plagues that haunted a suspicious husband, were not less numerous than the joys which waited upon a generous one ; he saw in his wife the instrument of his dishonour, his bosom-serpeňt. Ле could not toy with, and 0|)cn tire flood-gates of affec¬ tion to, his children, without fearing that a b) stander who saw what passed behind the curtain, should deride him as tin- most miseiable of gulU. i named to him the vvomnii, who had given me the mysterious hint at the donr of the Upper Rooms. On this intelli¬ gence he appeared to ruminate. Did I know her ? No. Had I the smallest guess who she ronltl be ? None upon earth. it was stiange ! very sti ange I It was τι ι not
not easy to imagine what end she could have in view. An unknown could not have planned to begin with a step of this sort, to alienate my affections from my wife, that she might afterward fix them upon herself? What enemies could mrs. Fleetwood, or could Kenrick have at Bath, where nobody knew them, and where in every respect tbeir appearance was such as to engage all hearts in their favour ? Be silent, Gifford ! interposed I. I cannot bear this methodical and cold¬ blooded reasoning ! I am sure my wife is innocent ! Are you going to turn the enemy of her good name, and of my peace, at once î You are right, sir, quite right, in the confidence you thus generously repose. It does my heart good to see you take the thing so wisely ! Who was this woman ? Her warning voice pursues me for ever. Never
Never mind who she was. There are people in the world, whose grand plea¬ sure is malignity, whose delight it is to disturb the peace of families, who never witness a scene of happiness, without a wish to crush it f his anonymous ac¬ cuser is one of them Let not your noble mind be disturbed by such hateful trash 1 Oh, Gifford, what a life is mine I Why did I marry ? I know—I think, I ought to mistrust nothing between your bro¬ ther and mrs Fleetwood. Yet my sick imagination is for ever busy, shaping the attitudes and gestures which this moni¬ tor of ininesaw, or pretends to have seen. Was it with hands, with eyes, or with lips, that they communicated their souls ? Was the fire of lust in their glances, or did their smiles betray a conscious guilt í Did he thrust his arm about her waist, or with sacrilegious fingers invade the trans-
transparency of her bosom !—Pity me, Gifford I pity me ! It is not enough that the act of lewdness has not been perpetrated; if Maiy has for one in¬ stant wished, that the tie which makes her mine had never been, the wai rant of our divorce is gone forth in the tribunal of souls. Why arc she and tbc ensign so continually together, why so familiar, so mutually pleased witheachother? It is the proof of their innocence ! Guilt is ever on the alarm ! Is there uo such thing as brazen, un¬ feeling guilt ì Be traaqui), sir 1 I will speak to my hrother. You »ball not hereafter be of¬ fended in live same way, 1 Whet will you say to him ? Will yoa bid him pursue a guilty purpose with more; prudence and caution ì No ; let me at least see their proceedings genuine and unforced l Otherwise I shall never be
be able to form a just conclusion, and shall be scuctly moie tormented than ever What GmW ilici in thcafl iir Uuovv not, but the evil grew WOI4C is I now perceive was alvvavs the case, when this pernicious confident undertook lor the cure I must however be ingenuous enough to confess, that vt would not have been easy for the young p«oplc 40 to h ive acted, is to have given ine tran¬ quilli!) If they »ere familiar and spur- live, I »as distracted. Did they at any time appear more grave and less- confi¬ dential ' It was still «orse. I believed, they discerned 1 he state of ray mind, and were only playing а more treacherous game About a week after, the question again a r ose of their going to the Kooms. As soon as I was aware pf this, my rnind was distracted by a variety of plan* Should
Should I forbid the scheme > Should I go mjself, and watch their behaviour ' How should I act ' I had recoui se to my oracle Gifford said, By all means give way to their purpose If jou interpose, jou will occasion much disturbance, and a discovery of your jealous thoughts. It you cannot yet dismiss these thoughts, go yourself, and watch their actions. If on the other hand you can adopt the generous confidence you so lately pro¬ fessed, this is the favourable moment to resume yourself, and discard such perni¬ cious cares. I will go myself! There is however a difficulty in that. How can ybu be sure that their conduct will not be quite diffèrent, when they see that your eye is upon them ? Gifford, you are my friend. Under¬ take this office for me. You may evert witness
witness Iheir behaviour, at the same time that they shall not be aware of your presence. I, sir ! I be a spy upon them ! I play the eaves-dropper, and watch for intelli¬ gence from eyes ! I enter into a plot against my brother! Where did you ever perceive in me the qualifications, fitting me fbr so base a part ? I thank you, Giftord I You have now told nie all. I perceive plain enough 1 that yoa know a great deal more than you have confessed.—It is very well ! I have no friend I I am the veriest Wretch on earth !------If you did not believe them guilty, would you not eagerly cm- brace this opportunity for their vindica¬ tion, winch would afford you a prospect,' if your opinion conesponded with your professions, of becoming tbe ambassador' of peace to all ? By my soul, I believe them innocent ! —I never will harbour a thought to the и 5 con-
contrary.—And, to convince you of my sincerity, I will undertake tbe office you propose ! The party took place in the manner which was thus previously settled. I waited with impatience for the breaking up of the assembly. When they came home, I hurried Gifford to my private apartment. This was a thing that hap¬ pened so frequently, as to have no ten¬ dency to excite notice. , We drew near to the table, and I looked in bis face. I never saw dejec¬ tion so powerfully expressed. His vi¬ sage was- colourless ; his eyes averted with a mournful air; his hands hung down, as languid and incapable of mo¬ tion. What have you seen ? What have you. observed ? He spoke not. J need not ask you; I read it all in yoiy,countenance. No,
No, nothing Let us talk of it to¬ morrow morning This bour ! this instant ! This is the moment of my fate Gifford, by your eternal salvation I adjure you do not trifle with mel He then piocceded to relate a most artful tale It contained most of those particulars, which my diseased imagina tion bad before presented to my thoughts It contained every th ng of impropriety that could be su| posed to pass before ι public assembly When Kennek and Mary caught his eye, and perceived for the first time that he was in the Rooms, he owned that then faces were immedi ately overspread with the deepest enm son Y et eveiy circuinslam e seemed to comefiom the relater with unwilling ness, and to be softened and qualified by the guardedness of. his manner Гюга time to time he interposed, that this was nothing, that it was mere g ddmess and want
want of reflection, that all was meant in innocence. He concluded m a more earnest and impassioned tone And now I have discharged the most painful office of my life Your charac¬ ter, my dear sir, engages all my partiali¬ ties ; I feel the warmest gratitude to you as my benefactor But never, never will I be put upon such a task agam What bad I to do, to turn spy and accuser upon my brother ? For God β sake, sir, let my name never be mentioned in this business' I shall never forgive myself for this act of undue complaisance By all these expressions he contrived to fix upon my mind the serious nature of the discoveries he had made He proceeded Porget for ever the conversation of this evening ' It ought never to have existed You have obliged me to re¬ peat trifles the most frivolous and con¬ temptible I have sacrificed every thing ι to
to the faithful performance of my task Yet, m spite of all the pains I have taken to bring these trifles down to their true level, I can sec that you misconstme every thing Things make so difterent a figure, when brought regularly toge ther in a narr itive, from what they made as they actually passed If you had j ourself been present, you would have thought nothing of them —You are greatly moved Do nothing rashly I Give the whole a dispassionate examina¬ tion ' If you make any conclusions to the disadvantage of my brother or mrs bleetwood, it is )Our own fault ! Stich conclusions have no support from me · I will stake my soul on their inno¬ cence ' Ten limes during the narrative of Gifford, I felt impelled to seek the cn- minals believing that such impudent neglect ofall decorum, could lead to no¬ thing less than the immediate perpetra^ tion
tion of guilt Once he withheld me by force, and succeeded in soothing my tumultuous passions A second time, when I had almost reached the parlour- door, I was called back by my own re¬ flections, and said to m) self, Whatever ■s done in a ca>c of this sort, must be done with deliberation and solemnity. Afterward, I met mrs Fleetwood s wo¬ man in the gallery, who appeased my passions, by informing me, in answer to my enquiries, that her lady was gone up to her chamber, and that the ensign was alone in the supper room I saw Mary no more that night When I came to the chamber in which we rpsted, she was already asleep I went soffly, and drew back ber cui tains There was a sweet tranquillity in her countenance „ her head reposed grace¬ fully upon her snow white arm She looked, as one might conceive the arche¬ type of her sex to have looked, before guilt
guilt or fear found entrance into the world I threw myself into an easy chair, and sat for some time in horrible musings. My mind vibrated between discordant and opposite judgments Sometimes I said, No, Mar), thou canst not be guilty I Guilt cannot incorporate with a demea¬ nour like thine Was ever any thing so artless, so simple, so heart felt, as all thy accents ? The very playfulness of thy temper is the pledge of thy integrity Can guilt be so sweetly frolic Ì Can guilt smile so like an angel ì Again, my ideas took an opposite bent Yes, said I, this is the very cha¬ racter of the world in which I live. Storms, and tempests, and volcanoes are all beautiful or majestic Destruction smiles on us from eveiy side. Nature herself is the great parent hypocrite, de¬ luding us onward from the cradle to the grave. Her daughters do but inherit the
the same treacherous smiles, and tempt us to damnation 1—Furious with these imaginations, I burst away from the bed¬ chamber, and returned to the apartment where I had listened to the conversation of Gifford. I will not injure, thought I, the ill- starred daughter of Macneil, 'lnless I had proofs tbat rose to demonstration.— Why do I inherit the guardianship of this desolate orphan ? —Yes, Mary, I feel that my fate is for ever involved with thine I The sacred rite that joined us at the altar, was a decree upon my life. Without thee, without thy affection, I must cease to be.—Then I am de ail al¬ ready I One thing however I can do. I can Separate thee, and this youth, the dis¬ turber of my peace. It is madness to keep bim here. As long as he remains, his most innocent actions—God grant ♦hey indeed be innocent 1—will fill my brain
brain with images of frenzy. Would he were removed to the furthest island of the Indian sea I Would he vvere merged in the caverns of the ocean !— When he is gone, my respiration will no longer be choakcd. My judgment will be sound and free ; and I will make a true estimate of the past.
CHAP-
CHAPTER Χ. I inven irti ла eriaiid for the en»!gn to the estate of Mjeneil in Westmoilaiid. I had leeened proposals for tbc purcliass of it; and, not being mj self inelntcd to the joui nej, I requested Kennek to take the bnsmc4son himself. I further staled it as mj pleasure, that he should set out by one or two o'clock of this very daj. I communicated my plan to the en¬ sign, as soon as be rose. He listened to it with tbat deference and desire to oblige, which characterised all his ac¬ tions î but I could see that he was not delighted with the expedition. And shall I return to Bath, my dear sir, when I have finished the business in Westmorland ? No: after that, I have some employ¬ ment
ment foi you m Menonetlishiic. By that time your leave of absence will have expired. 1 watched tbe countenances of Mary and Kennek at the bieakfost-table. I could see that he had infoi ned lier of my plan. All parties weie unusually blank. And so, my love, said she, after some minutes' general silence, wc are going to lose my cousin ï It /s песЫ iry, roy dear. А Ьютяеэч lus occurred in which he can be of great use to me. I am sorry, methinks, resumed Mary, that it is So sudden. I had counted upon a visit of two months. Edward, (thit was his name) I hope you will not forget us 1 Never will I forget thepleasure I have experienced at Bath, or this dear fire¬ side, while I have life ' Jn conversation like this, frankly de¬ monstrating
monstrating the sincere regard they en¬ tertained for each other, passed the time of breakfast I withdrew early, and de¬ sired Kennek to hold himself in reih ness When 1 called him in, and had given him the necessary directions, I held out my band to him (though with an ill grace) because nothing had passed let» een us that entitled mc to part with him in anger. He took it with both bis My dear uncle,—thus he delighted to call me. in his playful and familiar mo¬ ments he gave my wife the appellation of aunt, a circumstance, trifling in it- [ self, yet strongly indicative of the inno¬ cence of his thoughts,—· My dear uncle, it breaks my heart to leave you thus I can see I have of fended you, all your motions prove it What л foolish, hair brained fellow am 11 I wonder when I shall grow discreet and sober like my brother I have done «ome-
something heedless and disrespectful, or I have said something that I ought to cut out my tongue for. I am always getting into scrapes, and displeasing my best friends. If } ou could sec my heart, I am sure you would not be angry with me. That has always acknowledged you for the best of men , nothing disobe¬ dient or unfaithful has ever harboured there —Dear uncle, forgive me I Now I am going awa), I cannot offend you. I only wi«h to carry your love with me. I only wish you to say one word, to caíble me to forgive myself. My heart melted over the boy. My bosom swelled, as ,f it could no longer contain its fraught I looked at him with eyes of affection. I sobbed out, God bless you' God bless joui God bless jou ι —and burst out of the room. The moment I was alone, I cried, This is the triumph of innocence' No; it
it ıs impossible such expressions, sucb accents, could be forced froirt a guilty bosom '—I was beside myself w uh joi, —Happy, hdppy ricctwoodl «aid Ι ï will make ample amends to both the^ injured angels, for my misconstruction ' —I wished to revoke the orders I bad given for the journey of the ensign But, no, part of the amends I ой e 1, was to bury for ever so dishonourable α suspicion m my own breast I returned to Kenrick I poured out to him the torrent of my feelings Go, my sweet lad, said I object of my dearest love' Wherever you arc, my heart goes with yon You are the ho nestcst fellow that ever wore the human form Iheie is no resisting the clo quenco of your emotions Depend ur on it, from me you never shall experience any thing but kindness ' 1 hank jou, thank you uncle ' Ion have
have taken a thousand weight from my breast —But, unde, y ou were angry with me î Do not talk of it ' It is all a mistake God bless you I Fare« el '- Wc parted Kenrick took a most affectionate leave of his biother This is the first time, said he, we Inve ever been together, since! was quite a child Do not think however I have forgotten your kindness to me then ' You have borne me in joui arms a thousand times You brought me apples and dainties, and de¬ fended me against plaj mates who » ished to injure me. But now, Gifford, we know each other 1 do not now like you, because you have procured me plea- sine, but because I read jour ibrotherly heart I shall never, î am afraid, be so sagacious and clear-sighted as you are, but I shall always remcmber.how anxious you have been to employ those talents for my benefit Let us now exchnnge the
the engagements of an everlasting friend- ship 1 I can never be of the use to you, that jou always have been, and ever will be, to me. Nevermind that I My heart will beat as warmly to yon, as heart of brother ever did; and I know your good nature will accept that as franki), as if it brought the Indies along with it. My interests will be safe in your protec¬ tion , and you will never allow me fo lose ground in the affections of my kind uncle m absence Giftord was not behind his brother ш protestations of attachment, and so¬ lemnly prayed that be might so prosper m the journey of life, as he should prove, on every momentous occasion, the vin¬ dicator and advocate of his friend Tears embellished the instant of their se¬ paration. Kennek had but one spare hour That hour Mary and he spent in a sociable walk I felt no displeasure that they did so
so No I had sworn that suspicion should never again pollute my bosom I however thought it somewhat remark- tble, and with an unspotted curiosity determined to watch their steps 1 hey went toward the Abbe) churchyard There a plain slab was afhxed against the vv 11, to maik the place where the ashes of the elder Kennek repbsed They ap preached it together Satisfied as I w as, that theic could be nothing very pi ivate in sueh а conference, I made a small t circuit and joined tbem as if by acei di nt Unele, said Kennek, I un glad you ire come Many a pilgi image havel made to this unomamented spot and my aunt insisted that, before I left Bath, I Should lead her to my fathei s grave Look at that stone ι lhe name aud suı- name inscribed there, and the register of b ι th and death, are to mc the most elo¬ quent epiccdiuin tint ι v ei was penned vor ш i Ido
I åo not know whether I at all remem¬ ber my father ¡ the images I have of him are mixed up with tbe descriptions I bave beard from his kindred ; I was only three years eld when he died. Nobody speaks of him in Montgomeryshire with¬ out enthusiasm ¡ the moment they men¬ tion his name, the guardian genius of the departed eecms to descend upon them, and to utter the words of saint¬ like praise by their humble organs. They never speak ot' him, but their eyes emit sparkles of fire. Never man, according to them, was so consummate in a know¬ ledge and skill, almost supernatural. His flesh was macerated, and his complexion blanched, with indefatigable research ; and he never came forth from his re¬ treat, but to dispense health and scatter benefits all around him. But what they speak of with most admiration, is his temper, so innocent, so sweet, so affec¬ tionate ; his mild eye, beaming with good-
goodness to the whole world The tongue of my father never held acquaint¬ ance with a falshood , duplicity and ar¬ tifice never coloured an action of Ins life You cannot think, aunt, you cannot think, uncle, what good it does me to remember my father ' I never hear the honest people talk about him, but I feel his blood stirring in my veins Yes, I may do а thousand imprudent and foolish deeds, but the son of Kenrick can never commit an act of lying or treachery The honest eulogium of the poor ensign drew tears from both his auditors I was astonished at myself that I could have distrusted so gallant and single- minded a youth. I resolved that this should be a lesson to me, how I ever again admitted suspicion into my bosom. Yet there lay, in apparent repose, the embers of jealousy, the communications of my unknown infoi mer, and the re- i 2 maiks
marks of Giftord upon what be had scen at the Rooms, liable to be called up into а blaze, whenever new fuel should be brought to the spaik within me The whole family attended Kennek as he mounted his horse in going through the passage, he piessed tbc band of Mary to his lips, and s nil, Remember ' He was out ofs ght in a moment lhe temper by which I wis actuated, and which had niodc me ill my life no less eager and exemplary toiepair wrong, than I was sometimes rash to commit it, directed mc on this occasion I could not bear to think that I bad misconstrued the guile ess and generous heart of my militaty cousin I could not sleep in my bed, till I had atoned to the extent of my power for the mjuiy I had done him I procured for him an exchange of his colours for a lieutenancy, and added to it tbe lucrative appointment of pay master to hio legiment I inclosed this double
double commission m the following leltet f DFAR ĽDVV Λ111), " You thought Ι ρ tried from you in onge You must not think so I'ei- Fnps vou ate too flighty md full of spinfs for such a graie (ellow ıslımı But, it I ever felt that, it was my uifiimttj, and notyouis, that I accused of unreason¬ ableness I know jour heart, and I would trust my life and all t') it is dear to mc, to its integrít) Go on as)ou hive done you cannot alter, but for the worse Your light and lively car¬ riage adorns the rectitude of jour senti ments, often makes )ou amusing, and never lead» vou to an) thing viciou-- I inclose you a little Christinas remem¬ brance Be assured of the unalterable affection of your faithful friend, " CASIMIR FLbETWOOU " To this letter I received an answer, full
full of gratitude and the ingenuous phrases of regard. The same turn of thought which ren¬ dered me tiras friendly to Kenrick, in¬ spired me witlia more than usual degree of kindness to my wife. Though she was unacquainted with the wrong I had done her, it did not the less haunt my remembrance : and, as is perhaps always the case with a generous spirit, the in¬ nocent person whom I had injuriously treated, appeared more lovely, and worthy of esteem in my eyes, than ever. The departure of Kenrick gave a little more sedateness to our domestic eco¬ nomy. Mary seemed to have got the better, both of the alarming depression she had suffered at the equinox, and the hardly less alarming levity which had succeeded. She appeared to me scarcely to have a fault. We had never been so happy. I was all solicitude for the gra¬ tification
tifica) ion of her desires and inclinations. I anticipated her wishes 1 1 attended her, wherever she went. But, what was most pleasing to her, I s} mpathised in all ber feelings, and was cheerful or serious, as her countenance gave me the signal to be one or the other While I procured the advancement of Ken- rick, I was also employed in negotiat¬ ing an appointment for Gifford. At no time of my life had I been so per¬ fectly in good humour with my own thoughts. I could at least congratulate myself on being instrumental to the ad¬ vantage and happiness of every member of my family. I said, Macneil, you were in the right, you are no less in¬ fallible than the oracles uf antiquity were fabled to be , your advices deserve to be -«ritten in letters of gold, and placed on the front ot the Pantheon of the hu¬ man race ι Gifford congntulatcd me upon tho satisfaction
satisfaction I bad obtained to all my doubts He reminded me, how con¬ stantly he bid been on the sade ivhiih I bad now happilv embi iced, how, under every unfavourable appearance, he h id pledged himself for the innocence ot both the suspected | ait cs In reality, be vvitne sed the trmmp'i of truth on this occ ision, with th scntn ments of а demon Deep as lie thought himself m plotting and consummate m the arts of hypocrisy, he saw all his webs swept away in a moment, merely through the frank and ingenuous earn ige of h з destined prey The innuendoes and sub¬ ornation of a whole month were de¬ stroy ed His ou n practices w ere turned against hım Kennek stood hıgheı in my favour than ever, my wife was re stored to my confidence, and, for aught that appeared, my unborn heir might make h s entrance into the world, with¬ out h ıvıng the circumstances of his b ith tarnished
tarnished with the blasts of suspicion and calumny Shortly after the time when the honest ensign took Ins leave of us, I hired for myself a convenient residence, near the ton η of Nenbuiy in Berkshire I have already mentioned that I had a particular antipithy to the city of В ith 1 thought mjself fortunate, in being able to impute the iineasine ч and ill humour I hid sometimes bctrajed while I softere I under the piactiees of Gıffoıd, to tins antipathy Maiy was now become the pattern ot reason and accommodation , our lm mony ivas unmmgled and entile, she elieoilully concurred in, and even promoted, mj rcmov il though it was jet the depth of wintci, being desirous, as Mie said, to moke soine compensation for the repeated causes of uneasiness s.he h id idministered to me One other cır cumstance made tins change of scene net ui giatifjmg to her. Mr Scarborough, J 5 the
the father of a young lady for whom my wife had conceived a strong affection M Bath, had a seat within two short miles of the bouse I had fixed upon , and he, about this time, summoned his daugh¬ ter to quit Bath, and return home Mr Scarborough himself was disliked by his neighbours, and many ciUimnions stories were propagated to his disadvantage, but his daughter was ever) where re¬ garded with affection Poets have been most ambitious to describe the beauties of nature, as they are seen in the freshness of spring, or the luxuriance of autumn 1 know not whether it was any depravity of taste in me, that I viewed her with almost equal pleasure in the desolation of winter Strange sensations of grandeur are always produced m my heart, when I behold the leafless trees, and hear the bluster¬ ing of the north-wind At times when the whole world, both land and water, ι is
is bound up in iron, and every branch and shoot are fringed with the congealed moisture which the frost expels from them, I am filled with admiration at the extraordinary scene, so unlike that uni¬ versal pregnancy and growth which form our most familiar idea of the globe »e inhabit What can be more mag¬ nifici nt than a snow storm, when ten thou and flikes are whirled in circling eddies, ani ılı ıfls ai e formed, that might almost bury an army in their capacious bosom ? The sad moving cat¬ tle which just serve to spot the un¬ ii 1 inded scene, m ike me feel that the vv jrld is not yet robbed of all living in¬ li bitants, and remind me that theie is still a povvei w Inch cares for the crea¬ tures it has made When the whole heavens are blackened with congregated clouds, I have the sublime sensations of 1 friendless and deserted adventurer cast
cast alone upon an unknown shore, .without the terrible anticipations which ill his heart with anguish. and if at any Jime, in the midst of this ungenial sea¬ son, the sun bursts forth with ten-fold glory, and seems to diffuse л more re¬ splendent beam than autumn ever knew, I feel that the human species has one friend left, a friend that may gladden the heai t, and animate the countenance, pf all sadness but despair.
CHAP.
CHAPTER XI. VY e had not been long in Beikshire, before Gifford set Ins machinations fresh at woi к Ignorant as I was of my true interest, of who loved and who hated me, I could not ea ily command the resolution to pai t with his society I carried on certain negoci ltions for ob¬ taining him an advantageous situation in the navy In this pursuit repeated difficulties startedup, that pi oci astmated our success To say truth, Gifford him¬ self did not appear anxious about the piospcnty of my applicai in He had projects, m the event of which bis guije- tul heart was more interested, that re¬ quired his presence at home It was on the day preceding the fes- tival of Christmas, that I happened to j pass
pass through my wife s dressing-room, about half an hour after she had set out in the carriage upon a morning-visit to the friend and neighbour I have men¬ tioned By seeming accident, the corner ofa letter caught my eje, which jetted out from one of the toilet boies that formed α poi tion of the furniture of this apartment The fir t undtiigninjr glance I caught of it, sugges ed to me the idea, It is the hand writing of Ken- nek I eould not refrain foin examm mg the superscription Beyond α doubt it was the pen of the ensign thit had written it It vvasduected to my wife I started at the cirrumstanee This is not well, cried I I am satis¬ fied of the innocence of your senti ments j et whj correspond î why с iriyon a clandestine correspondence, of which I have never received the least intimation > Most assurcdlj this discovery would not have made the smallest unfavourable impi ĽSSioji
impression upon me, but for the inci¬ dents and insinuations which had been thrust on my notice at Bath What if my wife corresponded with my kinsman ? What harm was there in that î What if these letters had never been communi- cited to me î Did I demand that Miry should give mc an account of all hei steps ' Ί here was no true generosity in such a demand Thtie on be no genuine Jove, love trut derives its nur¬ ture from the plenteous storehouse of esteem, where a large leliance is not placed on the discretion of the peison lovtd Λ thousand actions, not modelled by the laws ot hoaij headed viylance, here are graceful " Where virtue is, these aie most virtuous How was I to conduct myself î Was I to pass on, and not deign to notice what I saw î Was I to saj, I will give an attentive heed to events as they arise, but I neve will be indebted for know¬ ledge,
ledge, either of a gratifying or distress¬ ing nature, to any indirect proceeding ? This mode of acting was most agreeable to what was moral and decorous, but I had not fortitude enough foi this Should I determine to gratify my curiosity by the most generous means ' Should I avow to Mary the faet, that I had met with the superscription of the letter b) accident, and request her to acquaint me with its contents, and the circumstances that had given birth to it > Neither was my foititude equal to this By appi) mg to Mary in person, I pi t m) self in the power of the offender I should be exciting, almost compeli ng her, if guilt), to invent α plausible stor), by which my undeistanding might be duped All these views ot the subject passed through my mind with the utmost per turbation, and I snatched up the leiter, resolved not to defer a moment lo ger the
the sitislictioii cf my doubts Itoie it open I glanced my ejcsovei the con¬ tents ilio first words thit presented them elves were those of love, " im- p itience of ab ence, lini ι ıı инь com« j I nuts tint the vvntci s' aıüouı bad not oblimeli n lile lcturn ' lhe piper diopped fiom my hand It is nil ovei, 1 said, and I am a wictch forever I i nis was indeed a thunder stroke to me lhe icpoits of what passed at tbe rooms at Bith depended for then mean¬ ing upon the fidelity of the reportei, and at worst wei e ambiguous, admitting of a variety of mteipietations Hete wa tbcbanilwn ing of oneoflhe parties, witnessing to the oftences of both Was it the Iiantl writing ot Kenrick > It would be idiotism to doubt it' Tbe conviction t nt it was, did not rest upon my infirmity of temper I had peiceived it at once, when I was far from being aware
aware of the guilty contents of the writ¬ ing within. No, no, never again will I confide in the integrity of a human creature I Ken- rick,didyour countenance and tones cure me ofall my doubts ? That countenance Was the steadiness of a villain, those tones were the glossiness ofa h) poente How unheard-of a wretch I I threw my¬ self into his arms, that did not move him I wrote him a letter burning with Words of affection , I told him, I would trust my life m his hands He returned ale an answer, echoing and mimicking back to me the emotions of my heart That did not disturb him , he did not suspend for a moment his traitor machi¬ nations. He put the certificate con tainmg my liberal benefactions into his Writing-box , he took out at the same instant the sheet of papei which he has scrabbled over with stimulants of lust and adultery to my wife ' I took
I took it up to examine it more mi¬ nutely Such a paper, 1 said, may be conclusive against the writer, does it with the samo certainty involve the con¬ demnation of the receiver ? Kenrick, thou art a villain ' Thou hast subscribed thyself such ! Half my confidence in the human species is subverted for ever But what mean thy complaints ? What means the expression, of an " ardour that is not returned with a correspondent ardour ? ' Miserable wretch ι what straws are these at which I catch to preserve my¬ self from despair 'The natural sense of the phrase is, You love me little , you burn foi me with a fervour not altogether equ il to that which pervades my bosom Would he have written of love, ν ould he hive avowed a lovers ι npatience of absence, to one who bad never beard and acquiesced in a sumlar language from his lips f Where is the profligate so hardened,
baldened, that would dare to insult a matron's purity with such an address 9 And what did she, when she received the villainous billet í Did she communi¬ cate to mc the insult which had been put upon her, and expose the unnatuial Viper tn the maimer lie deserved f Did slie at least send back the envenomed sctovvl to him from whom it came, and by her noble indignation convince him how much she disdained his criminal suggestions î No, no, none of these. She receives it in all trauqiiilluy, as a matter of course, as a matter well cor¬ responding with the temper of hei mind, and at which she conceives neither sur¬ prise nor resentment She thrusts it çaıclessly into an open casket, so little does her heart regard it as the horrible thing which it is. Gracious God, to what a height of impudence and remorseless crime must this woman have attained ' It is the con¬ cluding
eluding tage of guilt, that takes no pre¬ cautions against discover) She who offends foi the first tune against the law s of chastity and God, with how confused and fearful a mind does she do it ' How does she dread the encounter of every e)c' In what tenfold rnvstcr) docs she envelop this deed of darkness' And Mit) scatters ıboııt her at landom, and without ulvci tence, the cvulences of her guilt ' In this temblé st ite of my thoughts, I sought relief in the conversation of Giftord I put into his hands the letter I had found I fixed my eyes upon 1 is countenance as he read it He betray¬ ed successive tokens of the deepest eon stei nation He folded it up, with a slow ind dejected motion It is all ovei ' said he She shall not sleep another night umici my roof' I cried, with а voice fianlie with rige and despair Giftoid
Gifford started -----What do you mean ? Mean Ì said I Do you think I will bear the presence of an adultress! Do you think I will not make them both an example for terror to all future of¬ fendei s' Take care, sir, take care I This is evi¬ dence only against one of the parlies One' Did she not receive it ' Did she not ι eceive it m silence î Has she not kept it in her possession, instead of returning it to the accursed writer ? It is too true ι I can no longer at¬ tempt to vindícate either How much has jour worthy and noble nature been ahu sed ! Wretched brother ' No, no longer my brother '—Yet still, sir, this is not evidence, either for a court of justice, or for an unmoved ind cold blooded by¬ stander If you proceed against mrs Fleetwood on no stronger grounds, the world will condemn you What
What care I for the world ? Dear sir, in so solemn a transaction, let me intreat jou to go on the surest proofs. You may wish you bad done ao, when it is too late. I would havq evidences, that none could refute or question, that should shut up the mouths of the transgressors themselves, that should entitle you, if you think proper, to strip her of the name she has dis¬ honoured, by due process of law. A letter! a mere love-letter, written at random, that may have been a pure experiment, that may be pretended to have been designed foi another, that was never answered so far as wc can tell, that was never acted upon I Fie, sir, fie ' These are not things, to an¬ nihilate the peace of families, and ta dissolve the most sacred ties religion it¬ self can frame ι What would you have me do ? Return
Return the letter to the very place in which you found it. Weill ' Hold yourself upon the alert ! A short time will no doubt produce further proofs. A short time ! Perhaps not ! Time may weaken, instead of corroborate, the proof in my hand. And what shall I do with this short time ? Unhappily, al.is ! Mary and I have been for some weeks on better and more affectionate terms than ever. Barbarous, remorseless crocodile! —Shall I for this short time personate the fond lovter, the confident, secure, transported husband î Yes ; and, if no new proofs arise, I suppose I am to set all my fears at rest, and confess that this is exemplárny virtuous ! This letter is probably not the on¬ ly one that has passed between them. There may be others in her possession, which
which speak of the sort of answers she has returned to her correspondent That shall be known ! I will break open, and search every repository she has' And suppose you find nothing ï May there not be a quietei and less violent way of proceeding ! I will steal her keys from her to-night, as she sleeps Thus we concerted everv thing with α view to the completely confounding the guilty parties I resolved not to see Mary agam, till I had completed the search I designed. I took horse, and rode over into Hampshire, leaving word at home, that I should not return till 1 ite This was unusual, the dajs were short, Marj was alarmed She and Gıffoıd dined together The reuniks of this conspir ttoi did not tend to cilm her spirits lie told her I had gone out, app tienili in much distur- VOL in. к b uk ι
bance She enquired of the serv ants no letter or message had been brought me, to account for this All this struck her as of evil auguiy She recollected the impatience and unreasonableness of my temper, and was appalled Gıffoıd artfully turned the conversation upon the dark imaginations of jealous hus¬ bands, and the sufferings of the innocent victims of their suspicion He left her early, and left her in teais Gifford took his leave of my wife, under pretence of retiring to his chamber to look ovei some accounts which I had desired him to inspect, but in real ty to meet me according to appointment, at a small inn in the neighbouihood I liad passed a joyless and oppressive day Winter no longer convejed to me, as it did on my first arrival in Beikshire, sen sations of delight The weather was flagging sombrous and melancholy It mutually gave coloui to, and received 3 't
it from, what passed within me I dis¬ missed my seivant, after a few miles riding, and bade him return home I could not beai to be subjected to the observation of ι human creature I did not flatter myself with the hope tbat my wife was innocent I have before this called myself a misanthiope, but I never felt the bitterness of mi3anthropj invade, and lord it triumphant over my beast, till now I sivv kcnrick, as lie stood at the tomb of Ins fitber, and in his parting cinbiace, I recollected his lettci of thinks on his lite piomotion, the devofedncss of heart tint bieathed in every line of it ISo , I defy the whole woi Id to di ivv а ρ duri of hypo crisy, to be compaied with that which my recent discovery had bi ought home to my mind ' When I thought of my wife, the case was still worse Till this hour, I never knew ho ν much I had loved bei The к 2 pission
passion I had felt for the ladies of quality who had been my mistresses in France, young as I then was, and full of the ardour and enthusiasm of beginning life, was nothing I had entertained for her so perfect an esteem ' My passion be ginning in the instinct of the sexes, had been consecrated by sentiments so gene rous, so elevated, so spiritual ! We had lived 10 »ether He that bas never expe nenced, can foim no idea of the effects of sitting together continually at the same hearth on teims of cntue equality and cordiality It had made the partner of my mof flesh of my flesh, and bone of my bone Recent as our union h ul been, I could no more form a distinct idea of living without her, than without any of those vital parts, which were born with me, and which together made me man The very infirmities of hrr delicate frame bad rendered her dearer to me, I was her shelter, her bed-side watch,
watch, tbc ph)siciaii of bei soul I wanted such an object to eng ige niy о ire , she stood in need of such л guar¬ dimi M) ] ist Pu isian mistress haddiiven me out among the wílde of mount J ıra, mue а manne than а man Whit was I now' 1 bad pistols with mel As I slinyul without a path on one oftl e heaths of Hampsline, I grasped them in my hand I applied one of them to my he id I il ished it upon the ground, I whirled the other with the whole foicc ot my arm to a distance from mei Vengeance I vengcaucc ' I cried I will not die like a dog, I will hove ven¬ geance ' I dismounted from my horse ; the biidle diopped from my band The beast stood pensive and faithful beside me I threiv mj self on the ground I wallowed and roared aloud, as I measured iny length on the earth Let mj fellow. being look upon nie in this abject condir tion,
tion, and despise me I He that despises me, is no man ' How ridiculous are all other stories of aduttery compared to mine ' Theadultei er ıs no Kenrick ' The iccursed minion is not the surviving daughter of Macneil ' They are not two persons, selected out of all countries and ages of the earth, to laugh at future professions of smcent/, to make it impossible that the word Honesty should ever again be pronounced among the children of men One sees how thej came together One sees their despicable politics and manœuvres, with what shallow gestuies they pre¬ tended to be sober, with what flimsy outsides they veiled their pollution One of the parties is practised in guilt, the other is of so idiot and imbecile a cha¬ racter, as to seem to have waited only for the occurrence of temptation They are not, like my betraj ers, in the full bloom of innocence, with every virtuous sentiment,
sentiment, and every just principle, beaming from their eyes If ever angels fell fro n the majestic purity of heaven this nl least was the first tune that such α scene had been real seel on earth
CHAP
CHAPTER -\П i KETUEírED toward my own house u, a delightful ftıoûd for tho investigation of matron innocence I mel Giftord. He told me how my wife bad conducted herself, that, on the mere intelligence of my absence, she had been greatly alarmed, that she had passed the evening in tears, and that, fatigued with the anxiety of her thoughts, she had ictircd early to bed I grasped his hand —I cannot bear her tears ! Are they not the witnesses of her guilt f Who told her j ou suspected hei ? What is it that has thus whispered her to anticipate accusation r Gifford, you are my friend ' You do not
not attempt to excuse her. I may pity hei ; mv Tuend cannot. Wc euleied the house with cautious and wary steps. We stole along softly to my apartment. I felt that we trod the galleiics^carcfully, like conspiratois going to commit a murde^ We had come home late I said, I can have patience no longer. No doubt mrs Fleetwood is asleep. Sit you here, while I go and fetch the keys, and make the seaich I have resolved on. I entered the bed-cbamber. I hastily ilicvv back one of the curtains. She was in a sweet sleep, I saw no mark of the gnefand uneasiness she had endured. Theic she lay, all unsuspecting of the mischief that impended over her' In uty agitation I threw down a candlestick. She moved. She murmured something indistinctly with her lips. I stooped' down that I might catch the words. Fleetwood, my love! sbesaid. к 5 Good
Good God ' ıs her hypocrisy perfect even while she sleeps ? She thinks I hear her '- -No, it is impossible t For one moment, perhaps for the last mo¬ ment so long as we both shall live, I will believe her innocent ' I stole a bajiffy kiss from the ripest lips that nature ever formed. She stretched out her arms toward me I kissed her agam I felt one flash ot the joys of heaven, on the verge of the abyss. 1 diank in madness as I stood. I drew back precipitately, I found the keys, and hastened to my wife's dress¬ ing room. A variety of drawers and boxes en¬ gaged my attention. I found no let¬ ter from Kennek, no fiesh evidence of their familiarity, in any one of them At first, this circumstance, which ought to have given me pleasure, was felt by me like a calamity I said, they are eluding my search, their wary guilt will come
come offwith impunity * By degrees my ideas took another turn I forgot the letter which had fiist inflamed mc I said, Here is nothing' Theie is no guilt ' If there w ere, they must have written If there were letters, they could not escape me — ţ ------1 turned to the to let, I looked at the toilet box, which had contained flic first evidence of then perfidy, and to which by the ad¬ vice of Giftord I had carefully restored it the Icttei was no longer there ' Nothi ig remained to be examined, but a small casket, in which Mary kept her most valuable trinkets I no sooner opened th s, than the first thing which met myeye was the miuntureof Кеш ick I looked stedfastly at it I burst into an id ot laugh I examined it again What lovely features, what an air of integi ity ' said I-------No, it is not so ' Do not jou see those lines of dissimula tion and craft ? Now I consider it more attentively,
attentively, I mark the devil peeping out from behind the beauteous mask, and laughing in my face ' I carried the pictuie to Gifford I threw it upon the table before him, and than rushed to а sopha on the further aide of the room. I buried my face in darkness Ha' ha' said Gifford Where did you find this f I answered him with a groan Where are the letters î There are no letters I am sorry for that '—What will ) ou do with the picture î I «as silent Stuke it 1 said Gifford Strike it ' What do you mean î Break the glass ' What then ? Break the glass, and return it to the place in which you found it' Tins will be a means to ascertain the guilt or in¬ nocence
nocence of the possessor If she is in¬ nocent, she will enquire how it came by this accident, she will express her anger against the с irelessness of her moid If she is guilty and retains this porliait to foster her guilt, she will not uttei a word Ibis (ictuic, pursued my adviser, is a circumstance that may well prove di stressing to )Oiir mind But it docs not carry )0u forwaid in the design in which you were engaged It is no evidence A married woman may possess the por- tiait of ha young kinsman, may even in such α place as Bath, have caused it to be punted unknown to her husband, in perfect innocence What shall I do ŕ Advise me to no delay ! Do not bid me wait the progress of events ' I cannot bear it Dispose of the picture as I told }ou If mrs Fleetwood says not a woidon 4he subject, that will be something But,
But, if you are ltnpat ent to bi ing the affair to an immediate conclusion, I could advise a measure------1 do not like the office What have 1 to do, to de¬ stroy mrs Fleetwood and my brother ' Giftord, when you see me in this terrible situation, if jou refuse me your aid, you are not my friend ' I am conquered '------Let Kenrick be invited here into Berkshire When I was a school boy, I had a partiéul ir facility in the imitation of hands I am sure I could imitate mrs Fleetwood s with the utmost nicety If you approve of it, I will write a letter in her name to my brother It shall speak unequivocally « the language ofa mistress to a favoured lover it shall intreat him for private rea sons, to come down incognito into Berk shire, and grant her an interview If he comes, this will be to you the most incomestible evidence of their mutual crime, and the interview, of the very day
day and hour of which jou will be ap¬ prised, and can provide yourself wit- nessi s of it accordingly, will probably produce something, that will at once place the criminals under the lash of the hw I consented to this perfidious measure. My mind was in a state of too violent fei ment, to perceive all the marks of а degraded and dangerous charaetei, which this pioposil beli îycd Gifford artfully led to mother part of the subject------Miry was with child I rom what time did she date the com¬ mencement of her pregnancy ? Fiom October Full three months after your marriage' It was be r ore jou removed to Bath ? It was I do not know whether you recollect, ■------1 am not sure indeed that you ob¬ servei!, —when mrs Fleetwood and Ken¬ rick met at Bath, that they did not meet,
meet, like persons who saw each other for the first time? I did observe it I saw it with sur¬ prise, and, to confess the truth, not with¬ out pertuibation Well ' Did they ever lccount to you for this ? My wife told me she had seen him in Merionethshire bhe leminded me of the person, whom she had spoken of s rescuing her from the waves, whin she laboured undei that terrible al en ition of mind at the period of the equinox From that period their intercom se commenced It was kept α seeiet from you, till you invited Kennek to come and reside under joui roof Perhaps indeed you were never told how fie- quently they met. Thus did this damnable calumniator lead me on, with half woids, with bro¬ ken sentences, and " ambiguous giv- iBgs out," to the most horrible con¬ clusions
elusions All the while, be interspersed his innuendoes, with the remark, that this was nothing, that these were par¬ ticular which had no necessary con¬ nection, and adjuicd me to draw no in¬ ferences which might distuib my future peace, or uige me to any unjust pro¬ ceeding. Iltene cautions of Gifloid persuaded mc, that he was α conscien¬ tious and sirupuloiis observer, that I might trust nil mj interests to his hands, and that lie " saw and knew more, much more, than he unfolded " Only tins aggiavation could have been added to my calamity. With »hat feelings bad I gazed on my wife in a state of pregnancy î I had anticipated a suc¬ cessor to the Macneils and the Fleet¬ woods with emotions of cxtacy If I looked upon my individual existence with little complacency, and regarded myself as a degener ite shoot, I was de¬ termined that my child should not be so. He
He should be a g«nuine representative of the benefactors of the cılızı n of Uı ι The lowest wretch that lives, the offen¬ der who is just going to expiate his crimes at the gallows, yet loves Ins off¬ spring, and rejoices that he shall thus survive himself in an innocent infant To be cheated here, was the cruellest of all impostures To strain to one s bosom the thing that we hold as our own flesh and blood, while thatthıngısınrealıtythe impure hrood of unhallowed lust, the en¬ during monument of the worst of crimes' Already I had begun to conceive that, if Mary proved unworthy, and were cast out, I might find some small refuge from despair in this child, who, in spite of her degeneracy, I judged was truly mine, This I believed would be an nnadulterate Macneil, the substance in which the innocent Mary, the wife I had so fei venti) loved, would survive her fall That last consolation Giftord tore
tore from me I could never again re¬ turn to serenity and fearless confidence I who h id been so wrctctie lly deceived in one point nearest my heart, had ι right to believe all the rest it was the piopei and legitimate second part to the imposition that hid beep acted All was done as Gifford had projected The picture, with its glass broken, was restoied to Mary s casket The letter to mviie Kenrick to a secret intervie ι , was written I never saw so exquisite a forgei y You might have taken a letter of Mary s, and placed it by the side of the counterfeit, without discovering a single character that, by the lmpeitcct- iicss of imitation eould have led to а suspicion This letter was never sent Our consultations and proceedings took up the gre iter part of the night Toward morning I threw myself upon my bed To sleep I had not the small¬ est
est inclination M) eyelids w ere w e ghcd down with the anguish of my tortured heart, but lhey shut out, instead of ι есен ing within their folds, the balm of lepóse Lvery articulation of my frami scene I to beat with a separate pul e I was in η high lever I tossed and turned from Side to side, my eagerness to make an end of the scone which eng.iged my thoughts was inexpressible Mary rose with the dawn of the morn¬ ing She was invigorated with repose, she had an animation and alacrity, the a) mbole of conscious innocence She ipproached m) bed, in the gentlest and sweetest voice th it ever came fro n a human organ, she pronounced my name 1 feigned sleep She stole out of the room, and shut the door softly after her No soonci was she gone, than I stu ted from my bed I paced the room with ¡>ti tiles
studes of ι ige and despair Thebicak fist pailour, to which my nife had bent herstcps, wasin ι distantpartof the house In about an hour Mary came to mo агат I could no longer persuade my¬ self to p'jy the turce of sleep I looked at her with eyes that glaicd She spoke ir the most soothing and affectionate ас -cnts She enquired for my health, whither I had gone yester evemne, and at w hat hou" I had returned She ti ied bj smiles and liti'-» sallies of cheerfulness to excite mc I muttered between m\ teeth, Hypocrite ' monster' devil' wo¬ man ' but I retained sufficient command of my passions not to bre ik out into open extravagance I answeied with coldness and indifférence I regarded what she did as a perfect scene The mannei wis like that which had sub¬ dued me, on the evening of the day when wc read Fletchers Wife for α Month But the picsent case was out 4 of
of the reach of such remedies It was thus that Cleopatra inveigled Mark An¬ tony to his ruin, when she had dctei mined to play him false with his confi¬ dent Dolabella As my wife left the room, I saw ber apply her handkerchief to her eyes, for anguish that she could not please me, and conscious that it was some unjust displeasure against her that wasattbe bottom of myconduct Isteeled my heart against her sorrow, I said, she must perceive that I am animated with some resentment, and weie she not cow ed with guilt, she would certainly de¬ mand an explanation The next time she appioached me, she said, My love, I am sure all tbisdis turbance proceeds from some groundless resentment you have conceived against me Acquaint me with the cause, and I have no doubt I shall be able to satisfy you —This I found I could bear least of all. It seemed to me the most in¬ ci edible
credible degree of cffronteiy, to chal¬ lenge a discussion The proofs of her crime were too certain The very child that existed in her womb witnessed that she was unfaithful In spite however of the tortures I suffered, I constrained myself, and phjed the dissembler I told her, No, it was nothing, I was per¬ fectly satisfied , I had no complaint to make I then kissed her. Oh, such a kiss was transport, was frenzy' My lips seemed to feel again the Mary that I had adored I then recollected, that Kcnrick had planted a thousand miscre¬ ant kisses upon that very spot I wished that щу lips could hai e made α brand upon her cheek, as broad, as deep, as hoindand dis'empered, as her guilt. I added with a sepulchral voice, that she should be informed what it was that had weighed upon my mmd . I waited all the morning fo' the event of Giftords stratagem of the picture Mary
Mary spent a full hour in her dressing- room. This apartment had a glass-door with a curtain Giftord assured me, that, passing accidentally by this door, and the curtain being displaced about a quarter of an inch at the bottom, he h id seen Mary open the casket with some caution, examine the glass of the pic¬ ture with marks of surprise, and then retin n it to its place Certain it is, she made no enquiries or lomarks upon the subject of the accident We made a silent dmnei, and, soon after it was over, I walked into the gar. den The weather was bleak and se¬ vere , but I felt it not A sharp north- wind blew in my face, it only seemed to increase the heat within me By and by I saw Mary come down the avenue The day was so exceedingly disagreeable, that theie could be no question her sole errand was to seek me, I turned into another walk to avoid her I the ght she
she was gone in. Presently, having taken a small circuit, she was close upon me before I was aware. My dear Fleetwood, she said, you are not well. Why do you expose your¬ self to the weather on such a day ? Mary, take care of yourself. You are tender and open to impression. It will do me no harm. She took hold of my hand.—Bless me, how cold you arc ! Come in, my love ι Mary, I cannot go in. Leave mc. You do not love mc ! Love you 1 — Vi hy do you talk thus? ------By God, I love you to madness. Ί hose eyes, those lips, these arms, why weie they formed so beautiful? I feel you through my soul, and your idea 1 ves m every fibie of my beaţt. It you lovctl me, jou would not make ,:ic a stianger to your thoughts. voi in. L I have
I have told you, you shall know them You will know them too soon And in the mean time I see you pale, indisposed, and uneasy in mind I Fleet¬ wood, I am your wife What did you mean when you made me so î I have a right to know your thoughts, and share your sorrows Think how we stand to¬ ward each other, if you deny me this ! You claim then justice and your nghts ? Have a care ! I will claim nothing. I will accept every thing as favour and indulgence Fleetwood, my life, do not distract me With uncertainty and fears ' If you have any compassion for me, tell me what it is that distresses you ' Open your bosom to your faithful wife, and let me soothe your sorrows ! I will smooth your pillow, and cover you with my arms, I will take care, by my assiduities, to deserve your confidence a I turned
I turned upon her, enraged at her duplicity —Be gone I How dare you torment me thus ! I intended to have been gentle and forbearing with you, but ) ou compel me to be sevei с Learn not to intrude upon my pnvac), when I chuse to be alone ' By the eteinal God, you shall repent )cur ofHciousness ' Mary heard me with astonishment, and burst into tears —Fleetwood—is it come to this ?—This is too much—too much ' I listened to her with an unmoved heart I said to myself, These tears are Kenrick s I She took hold of my ai m —If ever you had compassion on the wife of your bosom-------' I shook her from me I said, Will you not leave me ? She trembled, and fell with one 1-nee and one hand upon the ground I hurried to another part of the garden- When I was got to L ζ α di
a distance, I could not help looking back after her I saw her return with stig- genng steps to the house I said to mi- self, I did not wish fur this No, though I will be severely just, I would not be а brute '—I recollected she was with ct ild Demons of hell I why was I reserved to this ? What an insupportable, what a damnable situation '—Wby was she formed so beau Iful ? Why are innocence and truth written on her fiont ? Hoiv like a saint, how like the purest of all mortal creatures, she talked '-------With child'—tbe child is Kenuck's'—Giant, all-merciful heaven, that it may never see tbe light I Would God, it could be Intercepted m its entrance into existen« ' —Why did I marry ? I, that had alieady passed the middle stage of life' I, that knew the sex so well, that had gained my knowledge by such bitter ex pei lence ' —What shall I do ? How shall I signa- 4 lise
lise the icrribleness of тпу justice ? And in what dungeon shall 1 afterward hide myself! Mary did not yet suspect any connec¬ tion between the disorder in which she saw me, and the accident of the picture. Her innocent heart failed to suggest,to her that 1 could be jealous of my kinsman.
CHAP.
CHAPTER XIII. 1 SFENT this night from home, nt an obscure inn, where I was entirely un¬ known, and reterned in the moinmg. About two o'clock I walked out with Gifford. He was my confident, and I consulted him a little respecting the past, and talked somewhat by broken sentences in gloomy anticipations of the futuie. But my heart was too heavy to allow me to say much. My steps were those of despair ; my frame was worn out with watching and perturba¬ tion. Gifford led me unawaies toward a little remote public-house. Come in here, he said. It may be worth yoOr while. I followed mechanically. I paid no heed to what be said ; I scaicely heard it.
it I was totally indifferent whither he led me. He conducted me to a room on the first floor Beneath the window there was a double row of elms with a smooth and regular turf between them lhe afternoon was fine It »asa clear, frosty day, and the sun, as it now approached to the »est, painted the clouds with brilliant colours These things I scarcely perceived at the time, but I have re¬ collected them since Aftei a time I h"ard the sound of voices at a little distance from the win¬ dow. It was not natural that in my state of mind I should have paid attention to this, but, though the voices were low, there was something m the accents, that arrested my soul After a minute's earnest and impatient listening, I rushed to the window I saw the speakers They were Kenrick and my wife ' Astonish¬ ing.
ing, soul-blasting sight I Tbcj appeared to be in the act of parting I rushed down stairs m a state of frenzy Before I could get round to the spot, tbey were at some distance from each other I pursued the villain I called to him to stop He stood still, but did not advance toward me As I came up to him, he teemed to be in great confusion My uncle I Kenrick, how came jou here í I beg your pardon, sir. You shall know all Indeed you shall Know all ?—Am I of so little con¬ sequence to you ? Have not you received the commissions I sent you ' Did not you protest that your life would be too little to show your devotedness? Un¬ grateful villain I I am afraid I have been wrong Do. not be angry with me 1 Be
Be gone, sır '—I shall find я time for you I Only one word, uncle Do not be¬ tray me ' Do not tell any one that you saw me ' It may do me the greatest in¬ jury in tbe world Scornful boy ' insolent wretch ' I command you to leave me I only wanted to be sure it was you Go, I will be obeyed ' Kennek was aghast at the vehe¬ mence of my manner He would have expostulated But I would not hear him I eien raved at so shameless a persistence, till at length he became convinced that this was no time for con¬ ference, and departed. I was alone Gifford presently came and joined me —Ob, God I oh, God I I cried , could I have believed it î It was but jesterda) that I discovered the fast proof of her falshood ' It was but yesterday that I confounded her with the L 5 bitterness
bitterness of my reproaches upon her guilt I And to-day she meets him here ! How came he here í What is the mean¬ ing ------ ì Giflord, leave mc! For a moment, leave me ! I dare not. In the stale of mind in which I see you, I am afraid lest you should do some act of desperation upon yourself'. Upon myself !—Ha ! ha, ha ! I value them not a straw. I have no love for my wife ; I never did love her ! I hold my¬ self at a price greater than ten thousand such strumpets and profligates! They have no power to ruffle my thought». I am calm ! perfectly calm ! They thought to sting me ! I never possessed my soul in more entire tranquillity than at this moment ! ------ Go into the house ; I will join you instantly. ------ Gifford left me. Shall I go to my wife, and confront tier with this new evidence of her guilt ? —No,
—Nu, I will never speak with her, never see her more It is a condescension un¬ worthy of an injured husband, ever to admit his prostituted consort into his presence I It is as if God should go down and visit Satan in his polluted, sulphureous abodes' - How from my inmost soul I abhor her ' How I wiil hold her up to the abhorrence of tbe world' How I shouid like to see her torn with red hot pincers' ----- To what a height I have loved her ' No, no, no, no, no - never' Piesently the words which Kenrick bad uttered came back to my ears What did he mean, by asking me not to betray him, not to let any one know I had seen him î Was he mad > Are these the words ofa dependent, who has wronged his patron in his bed f If they were but innocent '—if they were'—I will go this moment to my wife' Heft
I left Gifford waiting for me in the public-house : I entirely forgot him. As t passed along, I endeavoured te' collect my thoughts. I determined to exercise tho utmost degree of subtlety and craft in exploring the truth. I found Mary iti her dressing-room. I said to her, Have yoif seen my· shirt-pin !— I have lost one of my tan- coloured gloves.—I think it is a long time Since we heard from Kcnrick. The words seemed to stick in my throat, as I endeavoured to speak them. When I uttered the name of my kins¬ man, I fixed my eyes upon her counte¬ nance. I saw she was much disordered. It is a long while. How long ŕ It must be almost a month. You hove not heard from him ? Her lips formed themselves to say the Word No. You have not seen him to-day í To-day ?
To-day ?—How should 1 ?—Is not he at his quarters at Beverley ? I grasped her by the arm.—Did not youv see him to-day, in the elm-walk, behind the alehouse of the Spotted Dog t Unhand me, sir I—Mr. Fleetwood, this is not the tone in which I am to be interrogated ! Cunning witch I artful hypocrite 1— What matters it whether the questions are asked in polished words and a gallant tone ? They must be answered !—How came Kenrick in Berkshire ? That is a question I am not at liberty to resolve. And, whatever may be the consequence to myself, I will not reply to it I Not at liberty to answer ! And all the confusion you betrayed at the mention of his narre, your prevarication, your circumlocution, the guilty stops' in yoar- voice, these you disdain to account for ! Fleetwood, you will repent this vio-l lence!
lence ! Yesterday in the garden, for no cause whatever, you used me like a brute Pooh, pooh I—Answer to the purpose, and leave these subterfuges '—When were you first acquainted with this wretch? How frequent were jour in¬ terviews in Merionethshire î —You are with child ' Mary, fall upon your knees, and answer me, by the great God, who made heaven and earth, whose child is that in your womb ŕ Almighty God I and is it I, of whom such a question is asked ?—Lightnings blast me ' God, in thy mercy strike me dead'—Fleetwood, if I were to live to the ages of eternity, never from this hour would I hold intercourse with you ' I was moved at the earnestness, the dignity, that appeared in her rage — Mary, I intreat you, by every thing sacred, by all the endearments that have passed between us, answer my questions, and
and resolve my doubts' Oh, if jou could but take away the horror th it over¬ whelms my soul, worlds could not buy the happiness ' I thought she hesitated for a moment. —Fleetwood, it is too late ' I have been an excmplaiy wife to you, from the hour of our marriage, I have studied your lnppi less in every thing, my tender¬ ness and foibeaiancc have only served to lender you more unjust I am an altered woman since yesterday And the man who has utle'ed against me such brutal reproaches as you have now done is no husband of mine ' Very well, madam, very well ' I was a fool to ask you a single question I had evidences enough before But the de¬ spicable subterfuges to which you have now resorted, one after another, aie equal to a thousand witnesses. Sh» cast up her eyes wrth wildness, yet with a concentred spirit —My dear father'
father! my angel-mother! yon are my only refuge ! Come, and let your spirits resťupon my bosom! Come, and con¬ sole your brutally-treated, unsheltered daughter ! This was the tenderest argument upon Which she could have touched. It ought to have won my protection and forgive¬ ness, even to an adnlliess. It struck upon a wrong string. Bursting as I was With rage and agony, I could not bear any thing that was calculated to excite an opposite passion. It created confusion in my mind; it made me half fear I was doing wrong : and to conquer this fear, I became ten times more fui ions and peremptory than ever. Be gone from my presence. For the last time, be gone!—Horrible wretch, do yűu think to disarm my justice by naming your parents! Flow dare you take their pure and sacred name into your lips! She
Slie piocceded a few steps, she moved Willi all the pride of innocence—She recollected herself, and turned agun — Hear me, miseiable, deluded Fleetwood, a word ' One expiring sentiment of natuie stirred in my breast In a dead, and scircely audible voice I said, Spcik' I have no wishes for myself I scoi n to defend my actions. You are nothing to me —But Kenrick, poor Kenrick,— it is my last request—do not let him suffer for any misconstruction on my conduct ' You will soon be un- decei------. At the name of Kenrick thus falling from her lips, my heart swelled as if it would have leaped from iny bosom — Impudent harlot ' Do you come back for this ï ------Yes, I will fondle and caress hun'— I wish I had him now writhing at my feet '------Kenrick '^—· Ha, ha, ha I CHAP-
CHAPTKR XIV. I burst out of the room As I went, I met Gifford I caught hold of his arm—Lead me, lead me an) whither from th s bated house '—We passed along We came near the great load A chaise (how it came there I knei not, I did not onee think of so ununpoitant a question, I scarcely considered ni y thing I did) was standing near a stile We got into it It proceeded toward Newbury I will set out for the continent this night I Gifford expostulated with me on this sudden resolution. His objections vvere for the most part trivial and insignificant, when weighed with the tenıblp situation in which Pstood Slight opposition, as he
he well foresaw, only served to make me more determined If he suggested any difficulty which seemed of more serious import, he took care himself to supply me w ith the arguments that might invalidate it We went across the country to Biighihelmstonc, whence I imincdnteiy took pissage for Dieppe From the former of these pi ices, I dispatched a letter to my principal bomme d affali es, acquainting hım with my intention of instantly proceeding for tho continent, where I might perhaps iernam for jears, and directing htm how to conduct him¬ self with regoid to the remittances to be forwarded to mc. But the mam purport of my letter was concei nmg my wife I gave the most peremptory orders, that she should not remun another night under my roof, that she should be suf¬ fered to take away with her nothing but what strictly belonged to her person, and
and that she should, on no pretext whatf ever, receive a farthing out of the pro¬ duce of my estate.—I delighted myself with the hope, that sh¿ would perish in abject misery.—This letter was in the hand writing of Gifford, and I annexed to it my signature.—From Dieppe 1 and my fellow-traveller proceeded to Pans. It is impossible for vvoids to express any thing so wretched, as the state of my mind during the whole of this journey. Sometimes I was turbulent and ungovernable; I was little less than raving mad. At other times I was silent, and seemed wholly bereft of sensation. For daj'S I did not utter a single word ; I could scarcely be prevailed on to take anatom of sustenance. Sleep was wholly a etranger to my eyes ; for fourteen days and nights neither I nor my com¬ panion was aware that I slept for a mo¬ ment. Nothing could be more ex¬ emplary than the attention I received from
fom Giftord dining the whole of this per oil He never left me , be never ccasal from studying the means of ro¬ stomig mc, the meanest oflices were not repulsive to lus kindness and zcal. I am certain that, in this extremity I owed the preservation of my life to his caic Yet I did not thank him for all his assiduities Life was the object of my haired Often did I medit ite the means of self destruction len limes d d be prevent the accomplishment of in) pur¬ pose by the indefatigable «ay in which 1 e witched the turn of my eje, and the moiement of my limbs, and by ton st intly removing from me the nistru ments of death I had fixed upon He talked to me in tones of the sweetest humanít} He contrived a thousand ingenious methods of divei ting me fron the gucf» that absorbed my mind Fre¬ quently I fell into paioxysms of rage igamst
against hım I loaded hım with every opprobrious term that frenzy could in¬ vent. I would not suffer him to sit down at table with me I obliged him to squeeze himself into the remotest corner of our travelling carnage, and raved with resentment and fui), if he happened to touch me He bore all w ith unconquerable patience —At tunes I became sensible of his merit in this I thanked him for his distasteful atten tıons, and begged his pardon foi all my violence and unreasonableness I owned (and then a burst of tears gushed into my eyes) that I had nO friend in the woi Id but hun, and intreated that he would never desert me He readily promised that he would stick to me for life In the bitterness of my soul I impre cated the most horrible cuises that ima¬ gination could devise, upon the me¬ mory of the excellent Macneil But for him I should have exhausted the mise¬ rable
rable dregs of my existence in quiet I had fallen into a sort of lethargy com¬ pared with what I now felt, in which, if I was wretched and forlorn, habit had taught me not to writhe under my misery Lvery one of his advices had Allen out unhappily to me He had re¬ commended to me a wife, the society of my kindred, and that I should chei ish the fond anticipation of offspring bach of these pretended sources of happmess had proved a scorpion, stinging my before palsied senses into a capacity of the acetest torments —Had Mary and Kenrick been really as guilty as I beheiœd them to be, if they had seen the condi¬ tion to which I was reduced, they ,vould have pitied me, and guilt itself would have generously wished to impart its pri¬ vileges to my insuppoitable innocence. Theie was but one man, who, whatever fair appearances he might put on, never fpttted me foi a moment. Every
Every time a packet of letters reached me from England, strange as it may seem, I tore them open wilh furious im. patience, in hope о (finding one line from Kennek 01 Mary. I had built my conclusions upon such strong cir¬ cumstances, that scarcely a husband in existence would have resisted their evi¬ dence. Yet a sentiment still lingered in the corner of my heart, thai whispered me at limes the possibility of their in¬ nocence. I therefore suffered a con¬ tinually renewed anguish in the still re¬ peated disappointments I experienced. Invmy frenzy I had written letteis both to Mary and the adulterer, full of the sharpest -reproaches, curses, expostula¬ tions, stained with blots, and in every other respect expressive of the disordci of my mind These Gifford, with ap» parent propriet), confessed be had ín- tprcepted When I had outlived th« most terrible distempel of my mind, i wrote
wiote to my wife a sedate, heait-break ing letter, in which I rebuked her con duct, described with what vehemence I had loi cd her, and informed her that I had ordered my steward to supply to her one thousand pounds yet annum in quarterly paj ments Could any thing but self convicted guilt have persisted in so ill boding а silence í Giftord hun ied mc fiom place to place, through France, Gei manj, and the noi th of It ilj He had acquued an ascendancy oiei mc riming myfienzy, which after- w ud I co lid not с 1ы1) sh ike oft I did not full) underst ind the icason of thc=e frequent lemoiaN, but I rcgaulcd them with an ijc of ¡и sumt s aud indilli rence G Irai I » gi nei tl pi cti m e и ь the benefit which un bea h would de ufe fiom tnvclling iti I ciunge ol nr At Iciinlh the lune ι une, w h-n it η ıs" n?cessııj tint I slmili think eit lhe Ьот -ipro cedil g , il tl ey were to le Vol hi i tl
entered upon, for a divorce and the il¬ legitimating my unborn child Gifford often reminded me of these things, yet contrived to present the subject under щсЬ faces, as could least suggest tbe idea of his being animated by any views of personal interest I on my part wi! lingly entertained the project It well suited the gloomy conceptions in my mind, of the justice I was bound to exe¬ cute upon my guilty wife í nor could I endure to think that the child of her polluted embraces should inherit any part of ray estate I had also for some time cherished the plan of making my faithful and entire friend heir lo the gross of my fortunes, and this I could not do without thus cutting oft the de «cent of my land When every thing was ready, I reqi tested Gifford to proceed to England for the management of my cause. My presence was judged not to be indispcnsible, and I gladly excused mvself
rovself from the journey We parted at Marseilles There I met with an Eng¬ lish lawyer of some eminence, with whom I advised on the subject, for I was peremptory that I would not sepa¬ rate myself from this onl) friend I pos¬ sessed, till I had executed an instrument, by w hich I should make him, to the ut¬ most of my power, in the event of my decease the successor to all my estates Among other provisions of this my last will and testament, I stated that it was my intention, in case, which I had every reason to expect, the proceedings now depending should terminate m rendering my marriage null, and declaring the child with which my wife was great ι bastaid, that my kinsman and fello v- traveller should be deemed to be as fully and entirely the successor to iny prope-t), as if he had been my only son. Gifford seemed earnestly to oppose the execution of this testament He represented such мг a measure,
a measure, paiticularlj under the picrent uncertainty of m) affairs, as in α high degree indecorous and premature The moie he resisted my pleasure in this article, the more obstinately I became bent upon it The will was drawn out in complete form , I delivered it into Ins hands, and insisted upon it, is he ν iluctl my futuie favour or peace tint he should neier stifter it to go out of his possession The proceedings upon m) com| 1 nnt were complicated and tedious I know not whether my mode of existence dur mg this suspense and desertion, does not deserve to be sty led more deplor ible than under all the agony and dtliuurn of the first detection My mind was then burned with never ceasing vehe¬ mence from thought to thought Fun when I appeared, tc the c)c of the bv stander, bereft of ill sensation, md w ıs wholly without motion or notice to in ι ute
du ite tint there was а soul shut up wnhin τι j coipoial bulk, mv biatn was (bi evei busy, and I might liti) be coro- pired to an immense pile ot meh inism, the furniture ofadcid md window Its/ sti uetu re otisui vej ing the walls of which v u perceive no signs of activity, thontrh nth ι md cogs and ten thousand wheels fu eiei Hoiking within The clis- tcni|cicl activity under wlnrh I then ι иЧ e I, wo now gone 1 ber uno jiuiidieed, body and soul M) blood loilei iiply crept through palsied veins I was like one of the metamorphoses of the Grecian fables, rooted to a spot, and ctnsed with the ineffective wish to move. How slowly did the ncvei-ending days and nights revolve over my head ' How deep was the despair that embraced and sunek its fangs into my soul' Hope, umici no one of the viied foims in which she ever shoucl herself to moital eie, ci "С near mc 1 Mj ¿ι e it onstaiit SCHMtlütl
sensation was a sickness of heart, nau¬ seating existence, and all that existence brings along with it. With vacant eye I observed every thing that moved around me, and said, Would to God it were all still ! What a relief would death, or the resolution to die, have been from this insupportable burthen I
CHAP.
CHAPTER XV. July came, and brought along with it the anniversary of my marriage. It was July too, tbat was to give birth to the child, to whom I had once looked for¬ ward with raptures, on whom I now thought with sensations little less than infernal. I resolved to solemnise a strange and frantic festival on my wed¬ ding-day. 1 wrote to Gifford to procure me by some means a complete suit of my wife's clothes, together with a lieutenant's uniform, made to pattern, according to the mode of the regiment to which Kennek belonged. I assured him that my life depended upon the fulfilling my present demand. Ever faithful to gratify my slightest request, he punctually sent mc the articles I desired. I had in my possession
possession a miniature of my wife. I went to a celebrateli modeller in wax, in the city of Florence where I now was, and caused him to make я likeness, as evact as he could, of the size of life. I was myself" not without some sk'll in modelling, and I directed and assisted him. For the wearer of the regimentais, I fixed upon a terrible and monstiou» figure of a fiend, which I found in the magazine of my artist. I onleicd a barrel-organ to be made for the same oc¬ casion. I recollected the tunes which Mary and Kenrick had sung together when at Bath, and I caused my instru¬ ment to be made to piny those tunes. I bought a cradle, and a chest of child¬ bed linen. It is inconceivable what a tormenting pleasure I took in all these preparations. They employed me day afier day, and week after week. ' When at length the fifteenth of July came, I caused a supper of cold meats 10
to be prepared, and spread in an apart¬ ment of my hotel. All the materials which I hail procured with so much care antl expence, vvere shut up in the closets of this apartment. I locked nrjself in, and drew them forth one after another. At each interval of the ceremony, I seated injs'-h'in a chair, my arms fo tied, my eyes fixed, and gazed on the object befoie me in nil the luxury of despair. When the whole was ananged, I re¬ turned to my seat, and continued there a 'ong time. 1 then had recourse to my organ, antl played the different tunes it was formed to repeat. Never had mad¬ ness in any age or country so voluptu¬ ous a banquet. I hai с a very imperfect recollection of theconclusion ofthisscenc. Foralong time I was slow and deliberate in iny. operations. Suddenly my temper chan¬ ged. While I was playing on my organi one of the tunesof Kcnrickand.Mary—-· M 5 it
it was a duet of love, the mistress, in a languishing and tender style, charged her lover With indifference, the lover threw himself at her feet, and poured out his sotil in terms of adoration— my mind underwent a strange revolution. I no longer distinctly knew where I was, or could distinguish fiction from reality. I looked wildly and with glassy eyes all round the room ; I gazed at th'e figure of Mary ; I thought, it was, and it was not, Mary. With mad and idle action I put some provisions on her plate ; I bowed to her in mockery, and invited her to eat. Then again I grew serious and vehement, I addressed her with in¬ ward and convulsive accents m the language of reproach ; I declaimed with uncommon flow of words upon her abandoned and infernal deceit; all tbe trapes that Imagination ever supplied to the tongue of man Seemed to be at my command. I know not whether this speech
speech was to be considered as earnest, or as the Sardonic ánd bitterjest of a maniac. But, while I was still speaking, I saw her move—if I live, I saw it. She turned her eyes this way and that ; she grinned and chattered at me. I looked fiom her to the other figure ; that grinned and chattered too. Instantly a full and proper madness seized mc·, I grinned and chattered in turn to the ítgures be¬ fore me. It was not words that I heard or uttered ; it was murmurs and hissings and lowlngs and howls. I became furi¬ ous. I dashed the organ into a thousand fragments. 1 rent the childbed linen, and tore it with my teeth. I dragged lhe clothes which Mary had worn, from oft' the figure that represented her, and lent them into long strips and shreds. I struck the figures vehemently with the dbairs and Other furniture of the room, till they were broken to pieces. ' I threw at them in despite, the plates and other
other brittle implements of the supper- table. I raved ai.d roared with all the power of my voice. I must have made a noise like hell broke loose ; but I had given my valet a charge that I should not be intruded upon, and he, who was one of the tallest and strongest of men, and who ever executed his oiders literally, ■ obstinately defended the door of my chamber against all inquisitivcness. At the time this behaviour of his I regarded as fidelity ; it will be accounted for hcie- afler. He was the tool of Giftoi tl ; hi' had orders that I should not be dis¬ turbed ; it was hoped that this scene would be the conclusion of my existence. I am firmly persuaded tbat, in the last hour or two, I suffered tortures, not inferior to those which the North Ameri¬ can savages inflict on their victims ·, and, like those victims, when -the apparatus of torture was suspended, I sunk into immediate insensibility. In this state I
was found, with all the lights of the apartment extinguished, when at last the seemingly stupid exactness of my valet gave way to the impatience of others, and they broke open the door The ceremonies ot this evening had a terrible eftcct upon me Гог fifteen dajs I never left my bed Foi the most part of the time I n ıs really insane, but I was too weak to break out into the paioxjsms of msinity, and those about me weie scarcely awnie ot the degree of my derangement From the moment the physicians weie called in, they pionounced that it was unpossi- «v ble I should recover I gradually wasted away, till I seemed to be arrived at the last gasp They were mistaken how ever, I wis ie=ervcd for moie sufici ıngs, and foi sti anger adventuics A favourable crisis took plate in my disease, and I be¬ came slowly and tediously convalescent. Gifford wrote to me regularly during the whole period of his absence I 4 always
always opened his letters with vehement emotion ; a strange expectation still lin¬ gered about me that I should find the accused parties innocent. Nothing in Gilford's Cbttimunications encouraged this idea ; the delays that the cause suf¬ fered appeared to be no more than ie always incident to such prosecutions. He wrote me word that he had procured witnesses of the criminal conversation of my *ife add her paramour in Merioneth. shire ; be had even been so fortunate as to meet with an evidence, to whom Mary hid expressly confessed, that the child with which she was great, was the child of Kenrick. The lieutenant had quitted England ι heavy damages were awarded against him in the court of King's Bench. A decree of divorce was obtained from the ecclesiastical judges. At length my correspondent informed me, that an act of parliamCrif, «ompfetirrg my objects, had gone through nearly aH the forms, but the last; and he desired me to meet him
hım ОП a certain day at Pans, where he assured me he should arrive, bringing over with him the full and consummate fruit of his labours I had already cross¬ ed the Alps, and come as far as Mont- pel ier for that purpose Gıffoıd had received but an imperfect information of the state of my health during the latter part of July. As soon as I became capable of reflection, I was alarmed lest the accounts he received from my valet should have the effect of making him desert tbe business in which he was engaged, and come Over instantly to Florence to attend me Gifford was in no danger to be misled by any such sentiments as I imputed to him All the world could not have induced him to such an act He had my testament in his possession , and the cause was by this time in such forwardness, that (he news of rny death could not arrive m time to suspend the conclusion. Besides, 2 he
he had given the necessai) dnections foi making my death, if it took place, α secret, till he should give the sľtn il foi its public ition I went at I lorence by a false mme Previous) to his dopai tuie tor England, he h id « itehcil over me with more anxiety, with more dc- monstr ltions of ¿flection ami coni en , than a mollici over ho fiist boi n son Now be did not с rc, if I ded He had punttu ill) sup| lied mcvvit'i ill the particulars I rcquned foi the solemn iy of tbe fifteenth of Jnlj in t] e Ι οι c c t such а consequence a 0 resulted, and th it that consequence would hue lei to a more perfect termmation How penerse was the constitution of my mind' The act of parliament, dis¬ solving roy union with mj wife, and disinheriting my only child, vias an ob¬ ject I had sought for with the greatest ardour When Gıffoıd and I parted at Marseilles, I thought the only chance I had
liad for ever enjoying a peaceful mo¬ ment, rested in the success of his expe¬ dition Whit could be more natural' Who would not wish, to be disjoined tot ever from ι perfidious an 1 abandoned consoif, and to prevent all possibility tint the offspnng of her guilty amollis should succee I to the inherit ince of h s ancestois í Yet, as I have jsatd before, it vv is Gilloul tint kept alive tins oljeet in my mind Win n he had left me, mj contempi ition lookadifteicnt turn If I thought of Mary as guilty, still I ic ncmbcrcd how I had loved her, I icgarded her is a conseciated piece of eaith, never to be violated by any inevc- icncc or levity of mine ι if I beheld hei covered with the deformities and leprosy of hei fall, I did not fail also to recollect how white, and smooth, ind rich m lustie, tbat figtuc had onto appealed tome I never repelled her name in soliloquy in my sobei moments, without that
that awe, and suspension of voice, with which a pious man speaks of his God. But I did not always think of her as guilfy : I had visions of her restoration to character and honour. These senti¬ ments, and the feelings with which I was accustomed to open his letters, sometimes obtruded into my replies to Giftord, and made him comprehend that I was not a man to be depended upon. In my cariiest letters after the event of July, I spoke of my determination to see Mary once again, and to extort from her own lips an explanation of her perfidy. . It was the end of August. I was no longer subject to the transports of pas¬ sion from which I bad already suffered so much. My frame was feeble and languid. I was wasted almost to a ske¬ leton. My face was thin, and wan, and colourless. I seemed to be overtaken with a premature old age. My hair was
was almost changed to grey. Yet, as I have said, I was convalescent My eyes were brighter than they had been, and my countenance, though exceeding¬ ly pale, was of a less leaden and death¬ like hue. It seemed probable that I was reserved for years more of existence. My constitution had been originally ro¬ bust , I had been all mj life accustomed to travelling and exercise, antl these favouiabic circumstances now began to show on which side the victoiy would be, for life, or death.
CHAP-
CHAPTER X\I Ιλι PROACiiruPans Tied y indimi hail li« η fived bet teen G fhiid md n ι , ot which I should arme Abuut s< littles fiom the capital we had to ρι«3 through n voud, eelebiated fir tbe rol · bents and murders that litui been euin- mittcd ι» it, I thqught not of tins, and paid little attention toan) of tbeobjicle in the road As we enteied the wood, ni) mind woe absent and dicaimng, I was like a roan asleep, but my c)es wire open I was in my ti nelh t¿ ehim it, with my valet silling beside me Sud¬ denly I bean! α voice, which called to the cai nage to stop It stopped Thtce men in maks cime up to the door, opened it, and laid ν oletit h inds upon me.
me Mcclnnieall) I b d had iccourse to mv poi ket, and drawn out my purse, wlnelil proffered to the assailants lhtv took no notice of this action, but pro- ccc led to endeavour to force me fio n the chariot Alarmed it tins, I strug¬ gled with the ruffians, and c illed out to nij \alct, and to my servants who were m s ght, to assist me No one assisted mc and, as I was diagged from Ш) seat, I felt my valet give me a push iioin behind Inali tbc confusion ind violence of the scene, this action for eiblv strni к me It gave a sort of con¬ vulsive shock to my mind, and made mcvievail that was passing in a very iMFcicnt 1 ght Is it one of the cfh-ds of wealth, that with it wc enlist men into oui service, to murder us ? The feeling of my situation made tne despe rate, aud I stiugglcd moie violently than my feeble coiidilion could have given reason to expect I wished for
my pistols ; it was too late, they were left in the carnage. I saw that it was impossible to escape, and that I had but a few minutes to live. Two men who bad hold of me, dragged me a considerable way from the chariot; a third staid with the cai- nage, my own servants remained be¬ hind. At tbe fatal moment, four horse¬ men advanced at full speed in the oppo¬ site direction. As they came near, the assassin who bad hold of me on thenght side, presented his pistol at my head It missed fire Goaded with despeiation, he struck me a furious blow with the butt end of it just above the ear, which brought me senseless to the ground Instantly the ruffians left me, and ran aš'ľast as they could. One of the horse¬ men remained with me ; the other three pursued the fugitives. The assassins endeavoured to make their way into the thickets: one of them was shot dead by
by the pursuers, the other two es¬ caped. The horseman who had remained to take care of me, had endeavoured to raise me from the ground ; the others now assisted him, and conveyed me to my chariot. I was stunned with the blow I had received, and continued speechless My conductors therefore did not convey me to the hotel in Paris vvheie I was to have met Giftord, but to another of their own choosing They put me to bed, and sent for an eminent surgeon, who took from me a conside¬ rable quantity of blood, and then left mc, with directions that I should be kept as quiet as possible. In the course of the night I perfectly recovered my recollection I saw my¬ self in a strange chambci, with a taper glimmering m the chimney, and an old woman sitting at some distance from the bed, to watch b) me. I said, Where is my
my fiiend, ni} onl) friend,—where ıs he? Who, eir ' Mr Gifford 1 nevci beard of him Where is my valet ? Ido not li now lou aie a stranger to mc In what place am I î Whose are thes.e apartments' I am ordered not to answer questions You are in very gool hinds Keep youraclt qu ct Suspend )our cunositv till the morning Here oni d alogi e ended After u minutes silence, I htird the door of my chamber softl) open the nurse went toward it, and she and the man who opened it, spoke two or three times alternately Wli it was said was uttered in a whisper yet I thought the voice of ibe un ctn «us like some ν ice wirb which my ear v. as acquainted I could » not
not solve tbc mystery. Thq door waa then shut again will) equal caution'. I o^eyM the injunction of the nurse, and ЩЮ silent. The woman who had watched in my chamber during the night, was French.! In the morning, when the surgeons at¬ tended me, a second female of menial rank entered the apartment. There waf» something about her, that caught my attention, and made me inquisitive. I was sure I had seen her before, and that feelings of warmth and interest had been connected with her person in my mind. This was my first impression. After a few minutes of doubt and per¬ plexity, I perceived who it was. It was Martha, the wife of William, the Merio¬ nethshire peasant, whose life I had con¬ tributed to save, while yet a boy with my father. Bless me, Martha, said I, is it you ? When the surgeons had finished their visit, she was going out vol, in. я of
6f the room with them. I «aid softly, I want to speek with you. She pro¬ mised to return, and was not long in keeping her word. My dear master, said she, the doctors say you are better, and have given me leave to speak to you, so it be only for five minutes. I did not understand their jabber, but my master's gentleman told me that was the meaning of it. • Who is your master ? How came you in France ì Ah, sir! that is a long story. You shall know all by and by. Whose apartments are these í They are not the same I tenanted before. They are mr. Scarborough's. Of Berkshire? Yes, sir. How came I here î Where is mr. Gifford í Martha shook her head.—You will not see him, I believe, of one while. What
What misfortune has happened to my friend ' Is he not in Pans í That he is ' Why is he not with me î Why am I separated from the only man that for a long time, 1 have dared to trust ? I in¬ sist upon his being sent for immediately. Go, Martha, and tell mr S'ahorough I am dying to see him Mr Gifford is in prison, the Bastille, or the Con—concur——, I do not know what name they call it In prison ? my friend in prison î I will rise this moment, and procure his freedom · What is he m prison for î Why, sir, it is a queer kind of a story. I do not exactly understand it It is something about your valet, tbat ran away from you yesterday They are both in prison Captain ------ Lord bless me, I had like to have let it all out '— lhe gentleman, you know, sir, that de¬ li 2 liveied
Kvcred you fiom the robbers yester¬ day,· ----- 1 That gentleman was riot mr. Scar¬ borough ? No, sir, no, but I am bid not tell his name. Well, sir, be went to a place (bey call tbe Police. Those people of Ibe Police are as quick as lightning. The first inkling we had of the matter was from the valet's running away. Captain—— tbe gentleman, I mean— told them no more than that ; and what did they do, hut caught Gifibrd lase night, and this morning early they sent word they had caught the valet too. . Saying this, she left me ; and in about «n hour returned .—Well, sir, said she, it is all out. Gifford is the great rascal of the whole gang, and he will be hahged. Martha, be silent. I always had a respect for your qualities, and I cannot bear
bear to hear from your month, whatever I might from others, these scurrilities against the only honourable mani have lately found in the world:—Where is mr. Gifibrd ì what has happened to him ? Wc all saw from the first, sir, that it could be no common robbery. Why did your valet take to his heels, and leave you ? Martha, I am thoroughly convinced in that point. He was an accomplice with the villains who attacked me. Ah, sir, but that is not ill. If he had been only their accomplice, he would have been only a robber. What have you lost ì You must have been tome time in the bands of the rogues, and yet your watch, your purse, your rings; your pocket-book, eveiy thing is safe. They meant to murder you, sh·,—to murder you, not for what you had about you, but for your estate I Martha,
Martha, leave me ! I shall for ever abhor the sight of you, if you talk thus.' It has been my fault to be too mistrust¬ ful, ------- That it has, sir ! I cling to mr. Gifford as my last hold upon human nature. If I could think him base, I would fly the face of man, 1 and herd with wolves and tigers. Thank God, there is no danger of that I He has done me such services, as scarcely ever one man did for another. He un·· masked all my treacherous friends.------ ' He fut on a mask yesterday. ' When their perfidy had reduced me to tbe brink of the grave, when it had unseated my reason, and made ine a maniac, be only comforted me; he watched by me day and night ; his ser¬ vices and attention were inexhaustible ; he has saved my life over and o' tr. He conspire my death 1—Pooh, pooh, Mar¬ tha, if you would deceive me, let it be » with
with things possible, and not with such absurd romances as children would laugh at. What signifies talking, sir î —They have given the valet the boots, they call it—a contrivance the French have to squeeze the truth out of a man—and he has confessed that Gilford was at the bottom of aH. I am more grieved than I can espres», at what you tell me, Martha. But that accounts for all. Diabolical contri¬ vance !—Ob, England t beloved courir try, that gave me birth I nurse of liberty, virtue, and good sense I never shall thy gallant name be deformed with this sab¬ bath of demons I—Now, Martba, learn from me, and blush for what you have said I Can you, a Briton, believe, that torture,makes a man speak the truth Ì that, when he writhes with agony, and feels himself debased below a brute, his words are to be regarded as oraclejjjf Would
Would not * nano then say any thinjr, km ipat «n end to what he suffers ? I would not hang a dog on smh evidence î What sortiof creature should Γ be, if I Could give up' my ft rend, my tried frieiidj a man unequalled in fidelity of t>pifit and honoui nble sentiment, for the »andern accusations of a thief on the rack í , fitta may be something in that, sir. Bál tO« knew mr. Gifford before. The valet-can'tell nothing of him too bad for what lie has done already.—However they will give bi* the boots, and w* «hill then hear What be will say I • ''«Seif of Heaven I—Gifford I—God, that We were escaped from this den of bsrbarians I — Call mr. Scarborough I Bay 1 ,1 must speak to him immediately ! ■ i t will, sir. All, I see plain, will soon come out. I understand you, Martha. You have Ьщю cheated with the story of those 4 domestic
domestic, pests of mine, whom Gifford'e generous exertions have succeeded to rid me of for ever. Every nniiappy transgressor against virtue and integrity has a plausible «tory of his own to tell, and does not fail to boil with indigna¬ tion against some one of those by whom he is detected and p-inished. 2 did intend to give a fresh hearing to the cause of my unh&ppy, pernicious wife, God bless you ! I am very glad of that! But I have no leisure for this now. Gifford is to me father, brother, wife and children, all in one ! Mr. Scarborough came in. I had seen him Gasually in Berkshire, but I had never carefully observed ■ his figure till now. There was something almost awful in it, and that even to me who.cöuld have no extrinsic occasion to stand in awe of my country-neighbour. He was talli n S md
and of a carriage bold and graceful. His hairs were of a pure brown, ипсоЫ laminated with art. There wa» good* sense and penetration, mixed with an uncommon air of severity, in his coun¬ tenance. He seemed born to command. When he spoke, there was no spark of self-diffidence or embarrassment. He appeared always to see the right method of proceeding, to confide in his own judgment, and to be firm. Had I be¬ held such a figure placed on a bench of justice, I should have said, There sits one of (he judges of the patriarchal world, invested with native rank and conscious discernment, not one of the modern race, who place their hopes to awe us in accoutrements of velvet and ermine ! Mr. Scarborough, said I, I know not exactly how I came here, but I have first to thank you for your hospitality. He bowed. » Having
Having acknowledged this favour, I have another still greater to demand. My friend and kinsman, mr. Gifford, is in prison. Martha, your servant, tells me he is in a very distressing situation. I am not in a fit condition to go and so¬ licit his liberation myself,------ Mr. Gifford is a villain I For God's баке, mr. Scarborough !— This is no time to discuss his merits.— You are, I am sure, too generous and too just to defame the absent. I wish mr. Gifford had been so. My friend, lieutenant Kenrick,------ Kenrick ! Is he in Paris ? He is under this roof. Ob I then I see how it is ! You ate deceived, mr. Scarborough. You are the dupe of unfortunate criminals, that hope, by means of your character and authority, to destroy the honest man whose integrity they fear. Ton
< <35>a are'deceived, mr. Fleetwood. You até lb* dupe of ά criminal, a wretch wUom I audi not condescend to grace aWltb the term unfortunate..—ƒ am not utoft (bhe deluded, sir, nor does this casi-admit of ambiguity.—Mr. Kenrick, the best man on earth, and who loves you the most devdtedly,—(It was he who re- -acliád you last night from the assassins who were on the point to murder youj— Kenrick ' — Went instantly, when he had con- dilcted you hither, to the police. He had no information to give, but that of the disappearance of your valet, and that he saw a figure among tbe ruffians greatly resembling that of Gifford. Accursed calumniator ' On tbese grounds monsieur tbe lieu¬ tenant tramei proceeded He caused iolh the persons informed against to he apprehended. Though the valet had taken 8
taken refuge in a remote part of the city, he easily succeeded lo discover his re¬ treat. Gifford appeared boldly at his own lodgings. When told however that .the valet was in custody, he dropt some¬ thing of his assurance. The wretched hireling, being put to the torture, laid open a long train of villainy, and point« ed out his accomplices; they are all now in custody. Mr. Scarborough, I will not stay å moment longer in this house. Procure me a litter, a fiacre, any thing! I fly to the vindication of my friend. Of the man who way-laid you yester« day ? Who with his own hand presented a p'stol to your head ? It is waste of words for us to talk longer. You lend your ear to the wretched, the unnatural Kenrick, the Cain who is at this moment pursuing the destruction of his virtuous brother. Do
Do you, as you please I I, for my part; listened to ind believed him too long If you wish to see the lieutenant eri' mmeì, he will in two hours transport himself bither to complete his examina¬ tions I cannot consent to your removal, which in your present situation might be fatal If you wish to serve Giftord, you cannot doit more speedily, than by waiting the arrival of the mag strate — In the mean time suffer rhe to instruct you in some particulars It will bring «he matter to a more ready conclusion I wish \o satisfy you of the innocence of Kenrick and your wife Mr Scarborough, it is absurd for us to talk on that head ƒ did not proceed but upon the most demonstrative evi dence The case has been tried by the criminal courts of my country , the wariness of justice has been satisfied, Kcnrick has been declared guilty, my wife
wife an adultress, and her child illegiti¬ mate. Wby should you open afresh wounds in my soul, to which the blow I received yesterday is the stroke of a feather, and which will assuredly bring me to the grave ? Mr. Fleetwood, ask yourself! Would it afford you no pleasure to find, that your wife, is the most innocent of mortals, that Kenrick's heart is as honest and generous as his countenance, and that the lovely boy which mrs. Fleetwood has brought into the world, is your true and proper offspring Ì No pleasure ! It would make me young again ! It would translate me to Elysium I I should feel as the founder of the human race felt, before guilt and treachery got footing in the world! And is not the chance of this worth one hour's enquiry ? The very thought transports me ! Go on! 1 Be
Be patient then, and strict, and im* partially severe! What evidence had you of mrs. Fleetwood's guilt í A love-letter of Kenrick, which I took on her dressing-table. That letter was not written to her. For whom was it intended ì For my daughter.—What else î Tbe miniature of Kenrick, which I found locked up in her casket. That too was for my daughter.—Pro¬ ceed I An interview which I witnessed be¬ tween her and her paramour in the elm- walk, on the right bank of the Kennet. My perfidious kinsman came from Be¬ verley to Berkshire for the express pur¬ pose of this interview. That also had relation to my daugh¬ ter. My wife, when challenged by me re¬ specting this interview, prevaricated, pretended to know nothing of the mat¬ ter,
ter, and asked whether Kenrick was not at his quarters in Yoikshire ? That I can explain fliese »ere the circumstances on which I acted personally But the whole has since been cleat cd up by tbe laws of my country Witnesses have proved the criminal conversation in Merioneth¬ shire, as well as Mary s confession that the child was the child of Kcnrick. These witnesses were suborned They are now under prosecution for perjury. Why did my wife refuse to justify herself, when for tbe last time before I left England, I reproached her with her guilt, and called upon her to answer ? Fleetwood, you then said to her,— you adjured her by the great God-, who made heaven and earth, to tell you, Whose child was that she bore in her womb ?—Could a woman, shocked with such a question, a woman who knew thfc integrity of all her actions, the purity of all
all her thoughts, the devotion with which she had ever watehed and served her lord, answer the deluded insolent that proposed such an interrogatory ? Then may virtue stoop to vice, then may hea¬ ven and hell mix in eternal confusion, and honour and nobleness of soul no longer have a name in the universe t A» you put it, it was an insufferable question, and such as conscious rectitude might well disdain to answer. Yet surety, after the first shock had subsided, the interests of herself and her unborn child, the happiness and reputation of ill the parties, which were so inťimatéfy concerned, might have induced the most innocent and proudest woman on earth to descend to explanation ! It was exactly thus that mrs. Fleet¬ wood conducted herself. She transmit¬ ted jou three days after, when, to my knowledge, you were still at Bright¬ helmstone, a detailed explanation of tbe whole
whole aluir Why did jou tike no no tipe of that lettci » I received no such letter Received — î I am not surprised The master villain, whose task it his been to paint every thing in false co lours, and to obstruct all the glimpses of truth and virtue, has then intercepted it Other letters were written by your kins¬ man, and by me, did you receive none of these? None You express your surprise, mr Scarborough, at my not answering letters I was not less surprised at Mary's returning no answer to the letter, in which I informed her that, notwithstand¬ ing all I had suffered from her perfidy, I had spontaneously settled upon her an annuity of one thousand pounds Guilt itself, I thought, would have expressed some gratitude for my generosity In¬ nocence,—it vias impossible that inno. cence
cence sbollili at such a moment have sat down in silence ! Seeing the case as you saw it, this was a generous determination, mr. Fleet¬ wood, and proves to me that you are the good and honourablcman I ever believed you to be,—No such letter as you de¬ scribe, no letter of any kind, was ever received from you by mrs. Fleetwood. I see plainly that, from the moment you left Berkshire, you have been a close prisoner in the keeping of the villain, who was proceeding with rapid, yet de« liberate step«, to thrust you out from the scene of the world, and to reap the in¬ heritance of your estates. But it is time, my dear sir, that you should be some¬ what acquainted with the affairs of my¬ self and my daughter, which have so in¬ timate a relation to mis. Fleetwood's unfortunate story. Proceed, sir! You have created in mŕ a desire,
a desire, at least to hear what can be suggested, in behalf of my wife, and of tbe man you call your friend. You have made bold assertions ; I do not see how they can be supported. If they can, I have been the most unfortunate,—the most unjust of mankind.
CHAP.
CHAPrER XVII I have been many years a widower, re¬ sumed mr Scarborough When my wife died, she left to me the care of two in¬ fants, a son and a daughter The birth of my daughter, my Louisa, who is now with me, preceded by onl) two years the death of her mother The charge which Ihus devolved upon me, weighed heavy upon my mind, and it is with umnter- mitted anxiety that I have sought to per¬ form it I brought into the world with me the seeds of a stern and severe disposition , this has been the source ofall my misfor tuies My temper is firm, my judgment perhaps is clear, and I have ever been somewhat too peremptory in inforeing it My ordinary speech—whatever (added he,
he, smiling) you may have found it on the presentoccasion — ıs pithy and senten¬ tious I have been prone to lay down the law, and too impatient of the perverse¬ ness, real or imaginary, that demurred to my dictates I have always seen these faults of my character, though never so clearly as now, and have endeavoured to ""· ect them But either they were so twisted with my nature, that they could not be separated and discarded, or I have found myself weak, and insuf- ficient to the office I wished to inspire attachment and confidence into my wife, but I could never succeed She was a gentle and amiable creature, beautiful as the day, and of manners inexpressibly enchant¬ ing She confessed, that she feared, as much as she loved me, I thought that the former was the predominant passion The perception of this, instead of cor¬ recting me, rendered me more "gloomy, and
and increased my original defects I saw tbat I was poisoning the existence of her I loved Ibelievethat,whenshecamctodie, she was the more reconciled to her fate, because, while liviug.shewasa stranger to theenjQyinentsofhfe.Ch,mr Fleetwood, you called yourself the most unfortunate of mankind ' You have never known, like me, tbe misery of not being able to excite love in any of the persons most dear to jou r Men stjle me honest, and honour ible, and worthy, I am alone in the world, surrounded with a mage circle, tbat no man oversteps, and no man is daring enough to touch me ' This is called Respect—its genuine name is Misery ' As mr Scarborough spoke thus, I saw his lips quiiermg, and he wiped the moisture from his ejes, and from his brow After a pause he resumed My son was the lov leiest boy tbat eier was beheld His temper was gentle, his heart
heart was* affectionate, his understand¬ ing was cleai and his views were noble 1 was the fnthei of this boj —it was I that killed him I You will not suppose that I did not love him , I loved hun to the utmost excess of paternal attach¬ ment But this very excess londered me restless impatient and exactins I ivas never satisfied with any thing short of perfection I crossed him in all bis humours I never allowed him a mo. π cnt of fee loin Task still succeeded to task, and in none of them could he obtain my applause He was often veiy carne i in his exertions, but earnest¬ ness giadiially gaie place to despair With what seventy I have rebuked him , with what contumely and contempt I haie treated him ι It is one of the în- fiimities of our nature, that the verv sound of the voice of him who rcpioves warms the speakei into higher passion and moie ternfjing fury The lery vol πι ι ehssa-
dissatisfaction that we feel witb ourselves, the consciousness that all is not right in this mode of proceeding, increases our ill-humour, and impels us to plunge into greater excess, m the hope that so we may drown our remorse The spii it of tny son was broken Finding himself habitually treated with contempt, he be¬ gan also to despise himself He became negligent of his person and his health, and, bereft of hope, he was incapable of exertion As he grew taller, he felt more deeply the misery of his situation, and at the age of thirteen literally fell a victim to my ill placed severity He sunk into a deep decline Too late I became sensible of my injustice How many bitter tears I have shed over him ' They were almost as plentiful, as those whit h my cruelty so often caused to trickle down his innocent, beautiful cheeks Че told me that he pardon¬ ed me with all his heart, that he was conscious
conscious that all I did had been designed for his advantage. I sought to recover him to cheerfulness and health ; I pro¬ mised that I would never again utter л harsh word, or entertain а harsh thought toward him It was too late. With his dying lips he kissed the lips that had sa often reviled, and the hand that had smitten him. You would think, mr. Fleetwood, that two such terrible events as the deaths of my wife and son, would have been suf¬ ficient to correct in me this odious pro¬ pensity. It did for a while I made a thous md good resolutions It was im¬ possible to feel with more horror than I did, thit I was the murderer of my only son, and deserved the gillows more than all the highwaymen and housebreakers that are brought thither. But the habit was rooted within me, and, though le- peatedly pared dway to the quick, it shot up again with as vigorous and rank a ve- 0 1 gctation
getatton as ever You only, by lhe en tanglement of your affairs with mine, have led me to reflect decisively on the enormity of my crime, and inspired me with the resolution to banish it for ever You have seen my daughter Τ nec( ] not tell you that she is beautiful or that she is tbi" most gay and an mated creature in the vybrld These last advantages she has ov/ed to my happy providence, in taking care that sheshould beseldom,and only for short intervals, at home If she had resided with me, I should have ren¬ dered her as gloomy as myself, I should have sown in her infant constitution the seeds of destruction But I determined, that a man, living alone, was by no means the proper person to form the mind and manners of a daughter I resigned the care of her to hei mothei s relations Tbey were of the same soft and gentle mould with my deceased vv ife If I may presume to judge, in а point where I have
have myself so greatly circd, they rather exceeded on the s dc of indulgence She was at Bitli w th one of her aunts, when she f ist formed an ac- quuntancc with mrs 1 leetwood and lieutenant kcnrick W itli the formei she exchanged the vows of an eternal f lendslnp She was delighted with both , and it was pe haps the cncumstance of seeing hei cl osen female friend and the ami ible young soldier continually toge¬ ther, that made hei with girlish heed¬ lessness conceive α passion for the latter The sentiment was mutual, and Ken- rick, infinitely superior to all interested views, became enamouicd unawares of the opulent heiress Ггот the moment they were lovers, they grew sensible of the necessity of seciecy I cultivated with great assiduity imbitious projects for my daughter, and resolved not to marry her below the peerage I also pre scribed
scribed it as an indispcnsible condition, that her husband should laj aside the name of his own firmly, and assume that of mine With both these resolu¬ tions Louisa was acquainted , but, alas ' she did not love me She In cd much with her mothers relations, and lttle with me, the austenty Of my m inners, though I endeavoured to tame and as¬ suage if, repelled her, and she was in¬ fluenced by what had been told her of the unhappy fate of her mother and bro¬ ther. She felt therefore in a very small degree the inclination to oblige me, and perhaps you will think they were no tn- Vial compliances that I required of her. This situation was the first cause of the equivocal appearances you observed nt Bath Kenrick and Louisa contrived to be as much together as possible, but my daughter prescribed it as an îndi- spenstble condition to this, that they should
should avoid all public manifestations of the undei standing which subsisted be tween tbem Mrs Fleetwood was at¬ tached to both, the kindness of her natine rendered the idea of thwarting their desires alien to her thoughts, she lent herself willingly to the prosecution of their plans It was concerted that, whenever they walked together, Ken- nek should give his band to your wife, while my daughter should accept the civilities of any chance comer. They seldom or ever sat together j they scarcely spoke Mrs Fleetwood waa the interpreter of their mutual passion Shereceiied and conveyed from one to the other the protestations of eternal love, she stood the proxy of each, list¬ ening to the effusions of sincere affec¬ tion, till a by stander might have ima¬ gined, that Louisa mistook her for a lover, and tbat Kenrick was employing every detestable art to seduce her from ι her
her wedded faith. This situatioii-uii- doubtedly led to extreme familiarity be¬ tween mrs. Fleetwood and your kins¬ man ; but, if Kennek had not been secured against a guilty flame by his ad¬ mirable principles and the integrity of his nature, he would ot this time have been triply armed by his passion for my daughter, which, the more, it was restrained, the more it grew. Louisa, perpetually terrified with visions of a haughty and inexorable father, was un- intermittcd in her injunctions of ee- crecy, and above all .insisted that you should on no condition be admitted to a knowledge of the affair. ι At length I completed the prelimina¬ ries of the business I had most at heart, the splendid marriage of my daughter. 1-negociated a union for her with the eldest son of lord Lindsey, whose estate was* »in a ruinous situation, and who therefore willingly agreed to all my con- i ditions.
ditrons The affair was already in great forwardness, when I summoned my daughter from Bath, without informing her of the purpose I had in view She came to me with a presentiment of evil, and certainly not with a mind piepaied for compliance I presented the young gentleman I will now con¬ fess, that his most striking chiractens- tics are ugliness, imbecility ind effemi¬ nacy But, infatuated with the gran¬ deur of his alliance, I did not at that time notice these dis idvantages The proposition of marriage had been agi¬ tated between me and lord Lindsey, befoie I saw the young gentleman, and, when he was introduced, I turned my attention to the fathei, who was hand¬ some, sagacious and accomplished, and, in the pleasure of his conversation, found reason to approve my choice Louisa, if she had not been already prepossessed in favour of another, would о 5 most
most likely have shrank from the mar¬ mot I presented to her. Her character on this occasion exhibited a singular mixture of naivete, rashness and fear. 1 could discern a wanton air of contempt and ridicule-in her glance, whenever she looked at her noble admirer, it sometimes expressed itself in little sar¬ castic sallies, and smothered bursts of laughter. When she caught the flash of my eye, her countenance instantly fell. She would often, if I were absent, or if she thought I did not observe her, amuse herself with leading him a fool's dance, and humorously praising his wit, bis accomplishments, or his beauty, till the poor gentleman was completely in a labyrinth, and looked with a whimsical perplexity, not knowing whether to laugh or cry Whenever I remarked these things, I sternly discountenanced them. 1 endeavoured to convince her of the advantages of the proposed mar¬ riage.
nage I talked much of parental au¬ thority and the duty of a child. I even condescended to mtreat her to yield to a plan upon which my heart Was entirely bent. She tried at first to rally me out of my purpose She painted her suitor ш ludicrous colours She re¬ peated his foolish sayings, and mimicked Ins gestures But she soon found that this was а style m which her father would not endure to be treated She then in the l lost pathetic manner besought me, that I would not sacrifice the whole happmess of hei life, and solemnly protested that she should never know a tranquil moment, if united to the son of lord Lindsey But neither of these modes of attack succeeded with me I was unalterably fixed upon my project. Ihus situated, my naüve character came over me I exclaimed that I was the most abused of fathers. I burst into paroxysms of rage Often m her ab¬ sence, sometimes in her presence, I cursed her
hér for her unnatural obstinacy, and swore that I4ould rather follow her to her grave, than not see her united to the husband I had· chosen. \ The· only· confident my daughter and Keñrick had in the whole of tliis business, except mrs. Fleetwood, was Gifford. He was his brother's friend, as your wife was the friend of Louisa. Various advantages seemed to spring to the enamoured pair from this arrangement. Gifford and mrs. Fleetwood consulted together for their be¬ nefit ; and, though nothing could exceed the zeal of your wife, she was by no means a match for Gifford in policy and expe¬ dients. Beside this, I looked upon the friendship Louisa had formed with a jea¬ lous eye ; I naturally judged that woman would be apt to be the abettor of woman in rebellion against the stronger sex. But I had met with, and conceived an imme¬ diate kindness for, Gifford. His serious and contemplative nature seemed easily to a assort
assort with the sternness of mine I had an entire confidence in his prudence I laid before him all the arrangements I had made for the marriage of my daughter, and described its various recommendations As I saw Louisa paid him a particular at¬ tention, I requested him to endeavour to subdue her repugnance, wluch he readily promised to do 1 о the young lovers he appeared as anxious for the accomplishment of their views as in conversation with me he showed himself favourable to mine At first in¬ deed, when Kenrick communicated to him at Bath the seeiet of his passion, he set himself in opposition to it, and urged to his brother the many misfortunes and ad versmes he saw likely to grow upon it But, as he peiceived his remonstrances weie fruitless, he chinged his tone, yield ing rather to the vehemence of Kennek s importunity than to the propriety of the pursuit lie swore he would move hea ven
ven and earth, rather than not conquer every obstacle to his brothers wishes. He encouraged him to go on, and often told him that all difficulties yielded to perse¬ verance. He however recommended, as earnestly as my daughter had done, that you should be kept in entire ignorance of the afiair. He said, that your prudence would make you insist that Kenrick should renounce the pursuit, and that you would consider yourself as for ever disgraced at your unportioned kinsman's clandestinely aspiring to the hand of an heiress. He was consulted in every thing. Not a le ter was written on either side that did not pass through Tiis hands. In short, he appeared so actively engaged in the interests of the lovers, that the further interference of mrs. Fleetwood would have been unne¬ cessary, were it not that she had been ori¬ ginally in the affair, that her attachment for the parties was vehement, and that Louisa, though she felt always respectful and; ι grateful
grateful to mr. Gifford, did not love him If you found a letter of Kenrick thrown carelessly into one of the toilet boxes in mrs. Fleetwood's dressing-room, I now ent-rtain no doubt that it was placed theie by Gifford. Mrs Fleetwood was too care¬ ful of the secret of her friend, ever to have been guilty of such negligence. As to the letter itself, the address was the ad¬ dress of your wife, which for the sake of precauuon it was agreed should always be used, but the person to whose acceptance every line of the contents referred, was my daughter. Gifford knew of the imma¬ ture, which had the same desunation, and could have referred you at once to the very spot where it was found. Ihus, mr. Fleetwood, wen ou, and I, and indeed all the parties m this unhappy business, made the dupes and puppets of a single villain. Louisa, who till now had seen but little of me, though she had al¬ ways
ways heard my name with a certain degree of dread, had by no means at first that terror о my anger and inflexibility which she afte ward conceived She believed that I could not be inexorable to the tears of my only cb Id, and in this van hope had mdulged with less apprehension the passion of her virgin heart the longed to tell me that her affections were engaged, and that, if the son of lord Lindsey had not been in all respects so repulsive as he was, she could never without a certam kind of prostitution have become his wife But the more carefully she watched for an op¬ portunity, the more clearly did she perceive that an opportunity, attended with the smallest degree of auspicious appearance, would never arrive I in the mean time continued to act the part of a despotic fa¬ ther, and pursued my schemes unintermit tingly, m the opimon that the caprices of Louisa would at length yield to my en¬ lightened firmness Driven to extremity, she
she came into the plan of an elopement to the North. Giflord was a party to every thing that vv as settled, but he secretly resolved that the marriage should never take place. It was a part of his project, that Kenrick should be reduced to beggary. Gifford really stood in awe of his honest and sin¬ gle-hearted brother, and never thought he should be entire!) safe, till Kenrick was brought to a state of impotence and deso¬ lation. The first great mortification he suffered from the hour that he became an inmate of your family, was on the day that Kenrick set out for Westmorland from Bath. That day, to his astonishment, a reconciliation took place between you and your younger kinsman. The consequence was, your procuring for Kenrick a lieute¬ nancy and adjutantship, and thus raising him at once into the receipt of a plentiful income. Cifford's measures, for months after,
after, were directed to the repairing this miscarriage, and his inward animosity to his brother was heightened, by the recol- lection that, while he was pursuing his ruin, he had unwittingly rendered him an important service. His present plan was, by infusions of jealousy to ruin Kenrick for ever in your esteem, at the same time that he should give me timely notice of the projected elopement, and, by the repre¬ sentations he should induce me to make to the lieutenant's superiore, deprive him at once of his military appointments. Gifford was acquainted with the day and hour of Kenrick's arrival from York¬ shire, and himself contrived the interview between him and Mrs, Fleetwood in the elm-walk on the right bank of the Kennet. He took care to prepare you with proper views of the affair, and to induce you to believe that the lieutenant came, by mrs. Fleetwood's invitation, for the basest and most
most unnatural purposes. The rest you know. An anonymous letter was brought to me at this time, informing me that my daughter was on the point of eloping to Scotland with lieutenant Kenrick, a kins¬ man and dependent of my nearest neigh¬ bour. This letter was the contrivance of Gifford j it could come from no other quarter. I never felt so terrible an access of rage as at that moment. I sought Louisa, my child, in the spirit of a mui- derer. It was perhaps happy for us both that she had already disappeared. The letter by some accident had been brought too late. I ordered post-horses without a moment's delay, and set off in pursuit of the fugirives. I took the noble youth, my intended son-in-law, in the chaise with me. My daughter being no where to be found, left no doubt on my mind as to the au¬ thenticity of the intelligence I had re¬ ceived ¡
ceived, and, though I could gam no m tclligence of her at Newbury, I easily conceived that the ravisher mi^ht have procured the means of her flight from tome other quarter I pursued the route of Scotland for up waid of one hundred miles But, though I was incessant in my enquiñes, I could learn no tidings of the persons 1 sought, at any one of the stages I then began to believe that it was to no purpose to go in this direction any further With a heavy heart I turned my face toward home By this time w e happened to be near one of lord Lmdsey's country seats, and I gladly dropped my travelling companion I was too disturbed m mind for sonety Now, for the first üme, I felt toward my daughter like a father If I had overtaken her on the road, nothing would have exceeded my fury It would then have been a ques non of rebellion to have been quelled, and
and guilt to have been prevented. I now felt as if I had lost her for ever, and angei died away in my breast. To be thus left totally alone, wife, son and daughter to be successively lost, and all by my own fault,—it was too much !
ΠΙΑΡ-
CHAPTER XVIII When I returned to my own house, I enquired eagerly from eveiy one of Louisa, they had no intelligence to give I had not been at home half an hour, when lieutenant К nnck was announced At ihe mention of that name all my blood boiled up at once, my rage returned in full force, the paternal feelings, which had begun to sway me, instantly vanished He entered His looks were expressive only of the deepest distress and anguish Villain, I cried, wluf have you done with my daughter ? I appear before you, answered the grace ful youth, a cnmmal But I repent of my fault, I will restore to you your daughter, pure and uncontaminated as she came into my hands But, sir, I also come
come as a supplicant. You, and you only, can repair a thousand mischiefs, which I have undesigningly perpetrated He then told me all that had passed at your house, that by equivocal appearances you had been induced to believe the ex¬ istence of a cnmmal familiarity between him and your wife, that you had insulted her in the most opprobrious terras, that even in such a moment she had heroically ıefused to betray the secret of her fiiend, that you bad quitted your house with a determination not to return for уеагз and gone nobody knew whither, and that )ou had since written to your steward, ordeııng that mrs. Fleetwood should in¬ stantly be expelled from your home. Do you thmk, sir, added my visitor, that on such an occasion, when I have been the cause of so vast a series of cala¬ mities, I can aim at any gratification to myself' Do you thmk, that while my patron and his amiable wife are plunged in
ih the depths of distress, I can engage in the festivities of marriage? No; take back your daughter ! I love her with an imperishable affection. But I have no heart, even for Louisa, while I witness this desolation of all that ought to be most dear to me. I never till in this instance engaged in a plan of dissimulation ·, and see to what it has led me I Do you be¬ lieve I will ever repeat it ? No ; I will never wed your daughter, unless it pleases hea¬ ven that I shall wed her in the face of day. My soul yearned toward the boy. There is a contagion in virtue and ingenuousness, that not the hardest heart in nature, not even my heart, can resist. The paternal feelings, which had so auspiciously begun to influence me in my journey home, re¬ vived as he spoke. I said to myself, This is the husband for my daughter !—I was never mercenary. I had always been an admirer of virtue, though, alas ! from a distance.
distance My stubborn nature bowea be fore the mtegnty of Kennek I locked his hand m inme I said, You aie an ho nest fellow ' I forgive you the past, I «ill find а time to settle accounts with you. I wdl be the protector of mis Fleetwood, I will not rest, till I have cleared the misunderstanding between her and her husband Let us then, said Kenrick, set out hand in hand on this pious expedmon ' I have no fears for our success, if I am supported by a man of mr Scarborough's fortune and consequ°ri I took mrs 1 leetwood into my own house ——» I niten upted my neighbour in his narra non —Into your own house ' Oh, if I had known that single circumstance, how much anguish should I have been saved ' I should instantly have commenced a new and temperate investigation of the whole aflur VOL Ш Ρ M
Mr. Scarborough resumed.—That and every other particular were solicitousty concealed from you by the villain who held you his prisoner. It is his charac¬ teristic, wherever he goes, to scatter dark¬ ness around him, and every man who comes within his circle, is smitten with blindness. I left mrs. Fleetwood and Louisa toge¬ ther, and proceeded with Kenrick to Brighthelmstone. You weie gone. We ciossed to Dieppe, and went on to Paris. You were not to be found. I employed my agents in England to discover the place of your abode j but to nopurpose. Sometimes I imagined I had gained a clue ; I puiMied it ; always without suc¬ cess. I have now no doubt that these false iniimations were supplied to my people by Gifford. At length 1 learned, by letters from home, that a prosecution for adultery and divorce was commenced on your part against your wife. When 4 we
we received this information, we were al¬ ready in Poland, lured on by the false in¬ telligence that had been supplied to us. We instantly set out for England, we met with some unavoidable delays, and, when ar ived, we found that the trial had been pushed on with extraordinary exer¬ tions, that a solemn adjudication had been pionounced at midnight, just seven hours befoie we reached I ondon, and a verdict, with ten thousand pounds damages, had been given against your kinsman lor our regale at our fust bieakfast in the metropolis, the newspaper was brought t > us, seven columns of which were filled with the tual for criminal conveisation, bleetwood veistis Kenrick It is impossible to conceive the astonish¬ ment with which we paused it. Fust с une the speech of an eloquent coun- selloi, who detailed the ease with all its aggravations before the court He said, ihat so "trong and complicated a charge p 2 h& I
had never been submitted to that bench lh.at the defendant, a mere pauper, a very distant relation, had been taken up by the plaintiff out of charity Ihat, while he had been receiving hourly be nefits from your hands, he had gone on for month polluting the wife of your bosom under the roof of his benefactor He mentioned the evidences he had of the cnmmal conversation m Merionethshire, who would state such particulars, as would leave no doubt in the minds of any of his hearers He added that he could further establish the charge, by a wit ie s, a dis¬ carded servant, who had heaid the con fession of the illegmmacy of the child just born, from the mouth of the adultrcss 1 he counsellor is mad said I 'W hat does he mean ' 1 hese allegations, he proceeded, are all m my instructions I looked on to the report of the evi dence they stated and swore specifically to
to every thing the pleader had descnbed 1 he paper dropped from my hand Kennek ' The lieutenant fell upon his knees —By the great God that made me, he said, all this is utterly f Use ' 1 or a moment, prepared as I was with a knowledge of the truth, I believed the ex¬ aminations on the trial Kennek at length succeeded——what is impossible to inge¬ nuousness like his ?——in restoring him¬ self to mygood opinion. If you had witnes¬ sed his earnestness, his agitation, his vehe¬ mence, his broken exclamations of sur¬ prise, and his tears, y ou would have been convinced, as rapidly as I was. I sent instantly for the lawyers whom I had retained for the defence, and we set¬ tled measuies for the prosecution of the perjurers Kennek knew them all, and was able to supply such a clue for their detection, as bore with it every promise of success If we had anived in London a week
week sooner, my lawyers assured me the cause would have taken a very different tuin. Having occasion to go out about some business in the evening, I saw from the window of my coach the figure of Gilford gliding along by the light of the lamps. L had now no doubt that he was the se¬ cret spring of all these machinations. I stopped the carriage. 1 was in the street in a moment. 1 no longer saw him. I glanced a figure that seemed to lie his. At the corner of a. street I lost it. Of two directions I did not know which the person had taken. I suppose I took the wrong fir« ; but I saw him no more. The next morning, as Kenrick and I sat at breakfast, to our exceeding surprise fat. Gifibrd was announced. We con. suited for a moment. I said, Kenrick, lie is come with a warrant to arrest you for the damages awarded ; you had better with.
withdraw. —This seemed infinitely impro¬ bable , Kenrick could not resist the de¬ sne he felt to face his brother; he was admitted. This accomplished hypocrite succeeded in convincing us that he had no concini in the plot, which had advanced thus far triumphantly against us. He owned that he had almost constantly attended upon you ¡ but he protested that his motive had been the desire to mitigate your resentment against mrs. Fleetwood and his brother. He said, that after encountering much re¬ sistance and obstinacy, he had in a great degree subdued you, and had come over for the express purpose of postponing the trial. But unfortunately he had come too late ¡ the diligence or the lawyers had out¬ stripped his. He called Ktirick aside ; he enquired particularly into the situa¬ tion of mrs. Fleetwood, and. gave him a draft of two hundred pounds for her use. He
He furnished us with the address of the place wheie he said you at present weie, and advised Kennek by all means to re pair to you, and to improve upon the measures of reconciliation which he had so happily begun At the city m Italy which Giff rd point ed out to us, we learned, that you had lately been there, but were gone and h id left nO clue by which we could puisue you Vie made an appointment on our return, to meet n rs bleetwood and Louisa at Pans, whither a relation of mis Tket. wood's mother, whom I had waited upon when, a few months before, I came to that metropolis, and to whom I had ex¬ plained the unhappy situation of her kins- woman, invited her, to come and he in This seems to be the only circumstance that escaped the vigilance of Gifford. He had improved the per od of our ab. serce, to complete the ecclesiastical pro ceedmgs,
ceedinga, and the act of divorce. He contrived at the same tune to put off the trials for perjur). Reviewing the whole affair, I have now no doubt that he suc¬ ceeded in corrupting our lav/yers, the so¬ licitors, if not the pleadeis, as well as made use of extraordinary applications to accelerate his own. At Pans we received an account of the conclusion of the whole proceedings, anil ceitamly now saw the conduct of Gifioul in а very diffeient light, from that m which he had persuaded us to view it m London It would have been madness any longer to doubt. I he veil which hid from us the truth was demolished, even beyond the skill of that arch de¬ ceiver to repair it. Not the generous confidence and fraternal sentiments of Kennek himself could delude him. Gif¬ ford in the mean time cameover to Pans, pursuant to his appointment with you. г 5 We
We were once more within the walls of the same city Two days since, Kenrick and Gifford met each other ш the Palms Royal They were mutually surprised, neither having the least idea that the other was in Pans The behaviour of Gifford on this occasion, was very different from what it had been a few months before in London Kenrick went up to him with a fixed brow, and said, Whence do you come, sir ? Who is it that has been so diligent in procuring the decree of the ecclesiastical court, and the act of parliament, against my aunt ? Ap pearances are gnevously against you ' Have a care, my friend ' retorted Gif ford I will not be suspected for no thmg' Gifford, Gifford, if m eal ty you have been playing a traitor's part, it is time you should drop the mask ' 'i ou
You discredit then the professions I have made you ? Every thing that I have done to save you from ruin you regard with a malignant eye ? Another time you shall know whether I am your friend ! The next service I render you, be sure of it, shall have your thanks ! Where is my uncle ? Is he in Paris ? Your uncle, and your aunt ! Lay aside these fopperies, which so ill become you' Talk, if you can, like a man !—If mr. Fleetwood persists in believing you perfi¬ dious, am I to blame ? If he is able to prove it to the satisfaction of the whole world, whose fault, pray, is that ? Where is mr. Fleetwood ? He is not in Pai is.—I will answer no more questions.—Kenrick, I do not un- deistand the tone you assume. I have stuck by you too long. Hencefoith be¬ nő biothei of mine! Then as enemies ! Then
Then as enemies ' In that character I shall find a time, and shall call you to account ' When you please I am to be found Gifford, it appears, was now so near the accomplishment of all his objects, that he thought it unnecessary to practise dis guise any further The devil himself sometimes grows tired of the character of a deceivei and appears m his true co lours In imagination airea ly the posses sor of all your estates, Gifford was m haste to shake off his brother as a useless incumbrance He had in reality no time to lose You had expressed repeatedly a desire to elucidate the truth m person, and by a temperate discussion with the parties themselves Gifford found that we were in Fans, and perhaps suspected that mrs Fleetwood might be so too One unlucky hour might overturn the fabric which he ΐ had
had erected at the expence of such a world of guilt. He touched the goal. Kenrick had the next day, yesterday, an engagement with а young French no¬ bleman to proceed to Fontainebleau. They vvere attended each with a servant. They met you on the road. You know the rest.
CHAP-
CHAPTER XIX. I listener to the narrative of mr. Scar¬ borough, with emotions of shame and hor¬ ror against myself. It was a wonderful story ; but I was perfectly convinced. I had scarcely had time to utter a fşw mcoherent exclamations it drew from me r when Kenrick burst into the room. It was he I had heard in the night confer¬ ring with my nurse. He had constantly kept watch at my chamber-door ; but he had not ventured to intrude, till mr. Scar¬ borough had prepared the way by a full explanation. He flew to my knees! Uncle, uncle, said he, will you forgive ? It was all my fault. How could I dare to deceive, to have a secret from, a benefactor I so> loved? This
This is too much ! I exclaimed ; and fell back upon my pillow. I thought that, if Mary and Kenrick were proved innocent, it would be all joy. It is the reverse. It is a feeling without a name. It is worse than remorse ; it is helL Ken¬ rick, I dare not look upon you. Kill me, my friends, in pity kill me ! I am un¬ worthy to live Kenrick exerted himself to soothe me ; and rever did male of the human species enjoy so great powers for the purpose- Martha understood what was going on, and would come in. She had a child in her arms. Oh, sir, you asked me whose servant I was, and I would not tell you. I am my mistress's, your lady's, servant. She brought me over to France. She would have me to- be with-hei in her lying in. And there is her child, the dear boy, that so much harm has heen brewed about. Look at him! He has exactly your mouth ;
mouth; nothing can be more like than his blow; 1 will take my death, that he is as like you, as if you had spit him out of your mouth. Oh, my dear mas. ter, my benefactor, will you acknowledge him î Kiss him ! I die to see you kiss him. 1 1 took the child in my arms. I wil¬ lingly believed all that Martha said of him ; my eyes were too much dimmed with tears to see any thing distinctly. I pressed him to my bosom, I felt that he was the pledge of the most injured of women. I experienced a hundred times the joy that the tenderest-hearted man in the world ever felt, when his first-bora son was presented to him ; because I had believed—what had not infernal villainy induced me to behere i Mary, my wife, the mother of my child, only was absent. I enquired for her with a filtering tongue. Ah, sir ! she lives—said Martha. Do
Do not think I enquire for her, as wish¬ ing to see her! Dear, injured saint! I could not look at her. What had I to do to marry f to choose the most ac¬ complished and admirable of her sex ? I, that had done wrong, and miscarried, in every station and stage of my life ! Would God my eyes were closed for ever ! that recollection were at an end in my mind ! that mountains pressed down in peace this hand that has acted, and these lips that have spoken, so much evil !—Yet tell me, I mtreat you, Martha, how your mistress is ? It will do you little good, sir, to hear of that ! Dear uncle, interrupted Kenrick, com¬ pos : yourself! You appear scarcely glad to have all your saspicions removed. That which should elevate you with the highest pleasure, seems only to torment you. True,true, Kenrick! Can I do otherwise than
than lament, that the woman 1 have lost for, ever, is so excellent,-------would have made me inexpressibly happy, had I not been the wickedest of men ? She can never approach me, neyei ι ndescend to speakto me, moie. Have not you heard, her say so ? They weie silent. The period at which I quitted her, had been to Mary a terrible crisis. What I did appeared to my own mind suÆtiently justified, for I regarded her as guilty of the most enormous of all social crimes, a complicated, a studious, a shameless de¬ lusion put upon the husband of her bosom, an elaborate pretence to the purest faith, when all was false and hollow. But as it appeared to her,— let me speak plainly,— as ¡t was in itself, as it appeared in the eyes of heaven and earth,—my conduct was the roost cruel and atrocious that ever was. perpetrated. Poor Mary! her heart, that h<".rt which had " grown with her growth, and stiengthenut
strengthened with her strength," was bu¬ ried in the caverns of the ocean. Fifteen months before lhe period at which I desert¬ ed her, she no longer held to the great mass of living existences but by a single thread. For my sake, with great difficulty and anguish, she had formed to herself a new scheme of being, and had come back into the world from which she was broken off. And now I, the man for whom she had done this, left her without a home, without reputation, without bread. I had « delighted myself with the hope that she would perish in misery." How had all this happened ? Mary had never, till within a few minutes of our final parting, heard her name coupled dis¬ reputably with that of Kenrick. Kenrick, half an hour before, when I flew toward him, bursdng with abhorrence andrevenge, did not understand me, was unable to con¬ ceive the slightest idea of what it was that had roused me to this tumult. However strong
strong were the grounds that I thought I had for condemning my kinsman and my wife, she could discern none ; to her it must appear the most infamous caprice that the heart of man ever harbouied. Mary was turned out, like Lear in the old chronicles, to the fury of the elements. Had not mr. Scarborough taken the gene¬ rous resolution to shelter her, she must have died. At the time when she found herself treated with this inconceivable bar¬ barity, was that a moment when she could devise schemes to support existence ? She would not have had the spirits to ask one human creature for a morsel of bread. Speechless she would have sunk into the arms of death. And she was several months gone with child ' Louisa did every thing in her power to support her languishing frierfd. Alas, poor Mary abhorred the light of heaven ! She detested the ¡dea of taking nutriment within her lips. Her state of pregnancy co-operated
co-operated with the disorder of her mmd Tor the first two days she was almost con. unually m fainting fits Her life was not expected It 6eemed scarcely less Лап a muacle, that her condition did not at least produce a misca nage Indignation, I believe, m this situation served her foi fer dady bread ihough her ι Mure was gentle, and hermanners bland andunassunung,she hadpnde atthebottom of her heait, a pride that perha is towered the higher, in proportion as it \ as slow to be awaked She remembered the scene m the gaiden when I had so brutally in¬ sulted her, she remembered the dialogue in which I had interrogated hci, vv ho was the father of the child she boi e in her womb ? She sat down under this treatment without any manifestations of violence and rage But she said to herself, I he dauçh ter of Macneil shall never forgive this ' She reflected, as was but natural, upon the desolate condition m which her family misfortunes
•inisforttınes had left her, and she regarded these as so many aggravations of the cruel¬ ty she had experienced.—Fleetwood, if I had had patrons and protectors still liv¬ ing, if I had not come dowerless to yom bed, jou could not have used me thus un- 'generously. No ; I could live at a distance from the abodes of my species on the fruits of the earth ; I could labour among peasants for my bread ; this I should not feel as humiliation ; but I cannot stoop ever again to hold intercom se with the husband that has wronged me. If Mary recollected these aggravations of my offence, they did not present them¬ selves with less bitterness to my mind. I dwelt upon her innocence, her merits, hei defenceless situation, her extinguished race, her embezzled fortune. It seemed as if, now that what the vulgar mind would call the obstacles to our reunion were re¬ moved,we were morecertamly divided than ever. While charges, and accusations, and historical
historical details, vve.-e the mountains that separated us, the case was not altogether hopeless. These might be cleared away and refuted. Now we were separated by sen¬ timents, that must for ever twine them¬ selves with the vitals of every honourable individual, and that can only be extermi¬ nated by the blow which lays the head that has conceived them in the dust. Once, as we have seen, Mary so far mastered her feelings as to write me a let¬ ter. The purport of that letter was to icinstate the injuted Kenrick in my good opinion, and to claim my justice for the child, my own child, which was shortly to be bora : even in that letter she recited the decree that she had herself pionounced between us, that we were never to see, that we weie mutually to be dead to each other. When she saw that letter producing no effect, the honor she had conceived against me changed, from a passion, into a habit
a habit of her soul She never thought of me, but as a man resolutely unjust, to whom the most earnest appeals oi eternal truth might be addressed with as much hope as to the Gieat Wall of China Kennek and Scarborough we»e indefa¬ tigable m their endeavouis to restore me to her good opinion and favour They as sured her that the letter upon which she laid so much s re's had never reached me they described to her the complicated ma¬ chinations of the villain Gifloid, which might have succeeded with the most clear¬ sighted and cold blooded husband in the world She listened to all this with an unattending ear Veiy well ' said she Do not j ou perceive, that one di pas¬ sionate question, one five minutes of tran quii investigation, would have brushed away m а moment the cobweb intrench ments of Giftord ? Did I descivc no more than this ? Kennek
Keni ick was now become my confident. I related to him all that hadhapoened from the evening that I burst away fi om him on the banks of the Kennet 1 hese things he faithfully repeated to my wife He dc scribed to her my suflenngs, my insanity, my despan He spoke of the supper! b 1 1 celebrated on the fifteenth of Jul) On this she seemed to ponder Poor 1 leetwood ' she said My wife and I had now been four weeks m Paus with only the length of a street between us I thought of hei continually, but I knew the mtegnty and elevation of her sentiments, and I felt as if I should die if I met hei even by chance One evening I sit alono m my hotel 1 had hid а long and affecting conveisation with Kenrick I h d settled the an mgc ments of my futuie existence, and had been acquainting him with the particulate 1 was íesolved to reme to a strange, wild, despainng situation, which had foimerly voi ι ι о icft
left a deep impression upon me, in the midst of the Pyrenees. I found that this little estate was to be sold. I reserved to myself an annuity of four hundred pounds a year upon my property in England. The rest of my possessions I made over in full to my wife and child, except one agreeable manor, worth about eighteen thousand pounds, which I eettled on Kenrick ; a tes¬ timony that, of all the men living on the face of the earth, he was the one that most deserved my love. I demanded of him that he should visit me in my retreat once in two years, bringing my child with him, and should remain each time a few weeks under my roof. It was dusk. Miss Scarborough and an¬ other lady entered the room where I sat. The apartment was large J they withdrew to a distant corner of it ·, and, upon the terms on which we lived, it was not ne¬ cessary for me to derange myself. If it were a Frenchwoman of fashion and high 5 spirits,
spirits, she would be told, It was only the melancholy Englishman, and that would be deemed a sufficient apology I was buned m my ovi n thoughts They seated themselves, and continued ш a dead silence I know not how it was, but this silence d «turbed me It v ıs so un like what I had been accustomed to ex pcet I looked tovvaid them lust at this moment lights vvere brought in, and placed silently upon the table I he su ange 1 tıly v. ıs clad in black, and ι ven covered her face It stiuck me that her figure was the most beautiful that was ever seen Her attitude vv as expressiv e of de/« on and melancholy She seemed, so fu- as I could judge, agam and agam to steal a glance at me, and then turn away. I felt my heait thump at mv bosom, and my sight glow diz?) She wiung her hands, and put them to her head She rose as if to go, and leaned on miss Scaiborough Her legs totteied, and she sat down agam upon another chau q 2 Fleetwood'
Fleetwood' said she.—Oh, that voice 1 Contending emotions, hope, fear, trans port and shame, held me motionless. She threw back her veil, and I saw the godlike irradiations of innocence pale she was, and emaciated with all she had suffered She looked the less like an in Iubita it of this terrestn 1 globe fake my hand ' she said, anil stretch¬ ed it out lake my heait She fell into my arms You shall not make your next Wedding supper like the 1аЧ ' It is impossible for an) one to imagine what I telt a' that moment Whenev er I recollect it, I am astonished that I did not expire on the spot Remorse, while the partv agamst whom we have offendati, still retains its resentment, and legards us with disdain, scaicely raises the outermost cuticle of the lica t It is írom th- hour m which we are forgiven, that the true re¬ morse commences lint I could ever llav e acted thus tovvaid the angelic cieature who condescends to pardon me for what I acted,
acted, this is the sensation that is sharper than all the pains of hell ' Another feeling succeeded Mary never looked half so beautiful, half so radiant, as now Innocence is no'lnng, if it is merely innocence It is a gutl less и itin e, when impleaded at a stern and inhuniin bai, when diagged out to contumely and pu nısfı ment, when lifting up its head in con suous honom, when heaven itself seems to interpose to confound the malice of men, and declares, ihis is the virtue that I approve ' there, there is presented to us the most ravishing spectacle that earth can boast I nev er till now was sen¬ sible of half the ments of my wife Giftord died b) the hands of the public executioner 1 he mmistersof law w ho pro¬ nounced upon him, knew little of the series of his cumes , but it was proved that he had ıssaı'ed me on the highway, and pur- pos d to as' is mate me that he mi^ht pos¬ sess my estate, and he w ıs adjudged to die I shed no teai upon the bıeı of Gifford be-
I reviewed the whole series of his life fiom the cradle to the scaffold I have always regarded with hoi ror those sanguinary laws which, under the name of justice, stuke at the life of man. Foi his sake I was willing to admit of one exception His whole existence had been α senes of ih<. most monstrous and unnatural crimes Гог what society, 01 plant mou of men, m the remotest corner of the globe, was he fitted ? What discipline, oi penitentiary confine¬ ment, could lationally be expected to in spire him with one touch of human natuie' Die then, poor wretch, and let the earth, which labouis with thy depravity, be re liei ed ' On the seventh day from that m which Mary and I mot in the manner I have de scnbed, Kenrick and his Iouisa weie united and mr Scarborough, who had shown himself so harsh and austere as. a paient, became the most indulgent of giandsins THE END,
