Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Abbot of Montserrat: or, The pool of blood: a romance
ing chamber, and retiring room, whenever he chose to be private, which had of late been frequently the case; for the fortress above, to which this cavern formed merely a subterraneous entrance, although gene¬ rally supposed to be the habitation of the dreaded Roldan, and as such by historians handed down to the notice of posterity, was in reality at this period too old and too much dilapidated to be a habitable abode for any human being. Into this secure little chamber, therefore, of which the walls were earth, and the floor unpolished marble, ,- did the chieftain, without ceremony, usher his new guest, as a place from which (ow¬ ing to its peculiar construction) it was im¬ possible, or at least highly improbable, that a syllable of their secret intercourse should be overheard. Obando entered without hesitation, at the bidding of his conductor, and suffered him instantly to close the aperture which served as a door, by sliding a huge wooden panel before' it, which it required all bis strength to move, and
and against which he then rolled an enor¬ mous stone, of a stupendous size and weight, as an additional security. The monk, as before observed, surveyed with¬ out emotion these preparations for their privacy ; his mind was bent upon the dis¬ closure he was about to make of his own iniquitous intentions, and the probable re¬ ception his proposals might meet with, from him to whose evidently impatient ear they were speedily to be divulged. The principal furniture of this subter¬ raneous apartment consisted of a couple of seats, placed there, it is probable, tor the accomodation of the chief and his lieute- nant, the valorous Sebastian, to whieh may be added a small stone table (perhaps some relic of Moorish magnificence), elegantly carved, whereon was still burning a massy silver lamp. At one end of this singular bed-chamber (if so it might be called) was kindled a blazing fire, probably the result of Corvetta's affection for its lawless in¬ mate, and the cause of her visit to the ca- b SI vera,
OF MONTSEHRAT.
, while on the a couch, small in
of
Su
infir it
More than
their piiiracy. At length office it was in particular communicate every trivial piece of in- he ear of Boldan, ai
accoutrements, and ^ ve m eknt warning of Ms coming, for the pur¬ pose of summoning his leader to partake
• ♦
a rode
ABBOT OF MONTSEBRAT. 5 a rude and spacious cavern, formed by na¬ ture in the centre of a hollow acclivity, was by this time handsomely enough illu¬ minated with many a sable row of lighted torches, ranged in regular order along the sides of the excavated chamber. This place was now appropriated, by the ruffians, solely to the purposes of revelling, and taking heir meals; the principal whereof, and that at which they all assembled, was usually partaken of at about an hour be¬ fore sunrise; albeit the preparations for it had, on this occasion, been accelerated, <m account of its being the expressed wish of Roldanthat Obando si ion Id witness their hilarity, and partake of their repast, ere his return to the monastery, which he was well aware must be before the hour of morning vespers. Accordingly it was not long before this singular banqueting-hall, and the passages leading thereto, were fit¬ ted up in a style of rugged magnirlcenee, which accorded admirably with the lives and characters of these for whose conveni- b 3 ence
f
OF
In
the
been
centre
rt
of the
hu
wsxt
square
'fflfffrfff
a
%
the
in
sion
m
w.
s
:
h
w
m
ft
*•
a
a
*
Around
t
*
of
arrival
»
in
en
St
JiCiijgD m MM**
of
the
beneath
eye
each
of
The
both respectful and submissive, as the mo¬ ment of carousal and intoxicatbn had not yet ^rivei. Each however seemed a^t- ions for the appearance^ of ttieir leader Roldan, and with it the cc^tneneemeiit of their tumultuous entertaihment: yet several
f
ready, and scene of
had
a passage w own apartment, and was received by bis associates with a loud and universal burst of welcome and applause. The roar continued for some minutes, and then again subsided into an obsequious silence, It Was the first time they had seen their chief for three successive nights, during which period he had secluded himself en* tirely from their society, commanding them, after his usual mode on such oeea- b 4 sions,
s
ly en-
ceeded to his seat, in a naugi vated voice, to the following efi%ct—** I bring you here, my gallant comrades," he exclaimed, thrusting Obando forward to their notice--** I bring you here a mos^ unheard-of prodigy—a monk in whom is .'" : no'
9
%ii;ItCMi
t
is side. But
1 ' 1' 'fa"
t>
exerted themselves to salute their leader
<?
with a loud to hail the stem-lookihg monk with a cor¬ respondent sound of greeting. His very habit condemned him, despite even the praises of their captain, in the opinion of B5 his
Mi prejudiced beholders; they surveyed Mm scrupulously, with a suspicious cold¬ ness—wondered—grumbled in a whisper Id each other their disapproval of such sawR'tified-looking allies, and again were tfient. In a short time their jollity commenced. Sebastia n sat at the lower end of the table, as second in authority; but attempted not to cbeck the riotous mirth, and boisterous conviviality of his companions; for it was a portion of their privileges, at that period, I© indulge in every kind of excess with¬ out restraint Meanwhile the humbled Corvetta waited diligently behind the rugged seat of each coarsely-apparelled ruffian, filling their cups with wine, and performing other menial offices; for the time had long gone by, although Corvetta had not forgotten it, since seated proudly by the side of Roldan, elated with the pleasing consciousness of power and of beauty, her very look had often controlled the fiercest mood of the most sanguinary amongst
amongst them; but the ease was now dif¬ ferent, and affected abhorrence (for the robbers, being sensible of her services, did not in reality dislike Corvetta), or unme¬ rited execration, were too often the only rewards of her assiduity. Obando survey¬ ed during the repast, with new and inde¬ scribable sensations, the lawless band which surrounded him; he remarked their brutal conversation, contemplated their unfeel¬ ing visages, and shuddered at their viva¬ city ; but, in spite of the constant entrea¬ ties of Roldan, ate little, and spoke nothing. At length, towards the conclusion of the entertainment, as the wines (of which the robbers seemed in possession of various and delectable sorts, although their food was but indifferent, and by far the worst part of the fare produced on the present occasion) began to take a peculiar effect on the company, and increase their out¬ rageous hilarity to a degree that was in¬ sufferable, Roldan arose in silence, as if B 6 disgusted
by the vociferous mirth of his and motioned for Obando to fol-
CHAP.
Lmkf brither! look, the night's a' gane; The stats n^e lunger shiag; &**€ now ye*U gae to vere mn grarfe hame, As I sail ga« to mine, Scotch Bui lad.. The monk Otendo readily obeyed the signal of Roldan to retire from a scene of which (however its novelty might at first have amused him) he was now in reality weary; and as they quitted the cavern to¬ gether, through an outlet different from that by which they entered it, he heard the chief whisper to Sebastian, who seem¬ ed to have wholly forgotten his superiority of rank in the freedom with which he mingled among his fellows-—" See that thy cnnpany be in readiness, by two hours after noon, to perform a feat which will put their boldness to tjie test; wait for me an
an hour after sunrise, hi my chamber, and I will there explain to thee the nature of this noontide enterprise. The division to which thou dost belong—the best of our whole troop—have I selected to perform tliis service. Promise them gold, Sebas¬ tian, the robbers' thirst and recompence; as much depends upon success, and a fail- use would be highly dangerous and dis¬ graceful to our band." Sebastian, bowing roughly, now retired to his associates, and the pair proceeded to the mouth of the eave. As soon as they found themselves upon the open heath, and beyond hearing of the banditti, who viewed with a scornful kind of pleasure the departure of Obando, the chief again addressed his companion.—" You see," said Roldan, " that we want nothing here but women to render our felicity complete; andi one at least: of that captivating sex thy scheme promises fair to bring amongst us* But look, Obando,^ the day is break¬ ing yonder—it is time thou shouldst re- seek
seek thy monastery. Let us descend; and mark, m vm proceed, the course thmi goest, that thou again mayst recognise il on thy return to our fastness* and so be enabled to scale the diH with safety." The moon grew paler, and the voices of the b«,dittl now gnKh-fly «p«d i» the distance, as the monk {whom the appear¬ ance of daylight had warned of the neces¬ sity of his speedy return to the am vent) and his conductor descended the steep and rugged eminence. The open tract in the vicinity of the cave was speedily cleared— the dilapidated fortress had cLppeami also, or was but faintly visible—they pass¬ ed the sentinel in silence, and entered to¬ gether the craggy part of the mountains: anon they disappear in the deep busby glens, presently they climb the elevated precipice, and now they sink again amid the thickening brushwood. At length they stood upon a little plain, nearly level with the convent, where they took an af¬ fectionate leave; Roldan having given Obando
i% and repeating the word—** Remeia- berf as he again betook himself to the lofry abode of his companions. The sun was just now peeping over the eastern promontories of the mun tain, as tiie hell for morning vespers saluted sud¬ denly the startled ears of the monk, and induced him to quicken his pace towards the private portal of the monastery. Obando reached his convent just in time to prevent suspicion of his absence* by joining hastily the train of monks who were proceeding to vespers; and in less than §ve minutes he was kneeling with the rest, in outward semblance of holy worship, before the shrine of that all-see¬ ing God whom his conduct had so justly offended. At vespers were present, in ad¬ dition to Ambrose and the brotherhood, the venerable Alfieri de Gracy, and his accomplished daughter Isabel, together with the youthful Fernandez, his intended son-in-law,
son-in-law, and a numerous train of his domestics. The soul of Obando became fixed with admiration as he gazed, from beneath hk dusky hood, askance upon the glowing beauties of his intended victim, and viewed with ecstacy those ripening charms of which the yellow spirit had promised him possession, and of which he meant to deprive her aident lover, in the very moment of his triumph and fancied security. The lovely Isabel was attended as usual by the loquacious but faithful Inez, whose principal grief on the present occasion seemed a slight feeling of regret that she was not so fortunate in the choice of a lover as her mistress. In fact, the imagination of this young lady, we should not forget to mention, had been tortured witb nightly dreams and daily thoughts of the obliging youth who had volunteer¬ ed his services some little time back, so gallantly in their cause; and conducted them, amid darkness, peril, and tempest, to the monastery. Carlossa had swam hourly
hourly m her mind since their parting, \m& it was in vain she strove to banish his image from her recollection: she might never see him more—but the cast of his features, and his obliging conduct, to which even his ludicrous apprehensions gave ad¬ ditional weight and interest, she felt con¬ vinced were fixed upon her memory for ever: and if this was not the cause of the present slight shade of dejection which overspread her features, the writer of these annals, not being able to conjecture any other, must leave the origin thereof to his indulgent reader's penetration and sagacity.
CHAP-
CHAPTER IIL But his gaunt frame was worn with toil, His cheek was sunk, alas! the wh/Je— And when he struggled at a smile, His eye looked haggard wild* Poor wretch! the mother that him bare, If she had been in presence there, In his wan face, and son-burned hair, She had not known her child. Scott. And now the sun had arrived at his me¬ ridian height, and a throng of Alfieri's vassals and dependents were gathered around the portals of the monastery, who were clamouring as loudly as they dared at the non-appearance of their master; as this was the hour appointed for his depar¬ ture to Barcelona, whence several of them had arrived that morning, for the purpose of escorting him home. In the hall stood the abbot, encircled by many of the bro¬ therhood,
therhood, amongst whom Jacopo and the malecontent were conspicuous; the former awaiting with avidity an opportunity of thanking the senors for the largess they had bestowed upon the institution, in the hope of rendering himself also the parti¬ cular object of their charitable propensi¬ ties; and the latter (Obando) lurking at a little distance, as if to catch a parting glance of her whose difficulties he was well aware were not so nearly surmounted as she seemed to anticipate. Ambrose too appeared anxious to ho¬ nour with a personal interview at parting, the guests who had so unprecedentedly dis¬ played their munificence in support of the fraternity: for liberal indeed had been the donations of Alfieri de Gracy and Fer¬ nandez, and handsomely had they contri¬ buted to line the coffers of Ambrose and his delighted brethren. After a delay of some time, Alfieri de Gracy made his appearance, and was speed¬ ily followed by Fernandez, conducting by the
the hand the beauteous Isabel: they were instantly met by the principal domestic of Alfieri, who hastily informed his mas¬ ter, in answer to his inquiring glance to that effect, that mules were in waiting at the foot of the precipice to convey him to his residence near Barcelona. On hear¬ ing this intelligence, Ambrose and the rest of the brotherhood who were present (with the exception only of Obando), advanced to take leave of the benevolent agricultu¬ rist, and his amiable companions. While this was passing near the out¬ ward portal of the edifice, the eyes of the fair Isabel were wandering involuntarily around her, as if taking a last leave of Gothic arches, gloomy pillars, and all the et ccetera of monastic solemnity, until they fell once more upon the pale, lank visage of the retiring Obando, who was slinking behind an adjacent column, as if with a determined intention of watching her de¬ parture from his unenviable abode, al¬ though he dreaded observation while so doing,
doing, and seemed, moreover, particularly solicitors to avoid her scrutiny. The eyes of Inez, who still seemed inseparable fiom Isabel, following those of her mistress, also encountered his forbidding aspect, at the same moment. Oppressed by their united gaze, Obando shrunk into conceal¬ ment as fast as he was able; but as his visage receded behind the marble column, the haggard features became faintly dis- torted into a smile, which circumstance escaped not the notice of Isabel and Inez, although neither knew how to interpret it. Isabel, although she knew not where¬ fore, felt an involuntary sensation of awe at this unwonted and singular occurrence, and notwithstanding she strove to conquer it, a settled aversion to the malecontent; while Inez whispered softly in her ear— '* Well, if there was not another living creature, bearing the shape of man, be. twixt here and the holy Jerusalem—whence father Geronirno says he came some years since—I think I should not wish to look again
again on yonder ill-favoured churl f he terrifies me: who ever saw a smile so full of meaning, and yet so ghastly ?" Ambrose had by this time repeated again and again his wishes for their wel¬ fare, and safe journey to Barcelona* in which he had been constantly reiterated by the whining Jacopo, in conjunction with a few other over-zealous and super¬ latively hypocritical brothers of the order. Alfieri de Gracy and Fernandez returned their compliments as well as they were able, and issuing from the already-extend¬ ed portal, bade what they hoped would be an eternal farewell to the monastery of Montserrat, where they had experienced indeed some kindness, and more good for¬ tune, but where also they had found much canting and hypocrisy to be the or¬ der of the day, with little of real piety, or other Christian attributes, to bias the mir.d of a reflective observer in favour of its inmates. And here it may not be amiss to state more particularly the under¬ standing
standing upon which our two lovers, Fer¬ nandez and Isabel, were permitted to ac¬ company and congratulate each other; which shall therefore with brevity be ex- plained. On account of the dying concessions and earnest entreaties made by Velasquez de Leon, the father of Fernandez (and af¬ terwards reported to Alfieri by that af¬ fectionate youth), joined to a phalanx of other considerations, more than sufficient to overwhelm any previous resolution which an offended father might have form¬ ed, Alfieri de Gracy had consented, with¬ out reluctance, to the speedy union of his daughter with the wealthy son of his de¬ ceased enemy—only stipulating, to which condition, moreover, Fernandez found it impossible to object, that a deeent time should be permitted to elapse ere the con¬ summation of their nuptials, in order that due respect might thus be paid to the me¬ mory of Velasquez de Leon (whom Alfieri de Gracy now professed the sincerest sor¬ row
ABBOT OF MONTSERRAT. 25 row for having driven to such an extre¬ mity as forced him to adopt the popular re¬ medy for disappointment—seclusion from the world), and that Alfieri himself might be better able to judge of the strength of their mutual affection. These prelimina* ries being settled, to which either party cheerfully acceded—much to the gratifica¬ tion of the benevolent and well-meaning abbot Ambrose, in whose deliberative mind they perhaps received their origin— there remained nothing but that they should return speedily, and in amity, to Barcelona; and the present was, as Oban¬ do had been previously aware, the very hour appointed for their setting out.
vol. ii. c CHAP-
CHAPTER IV.
■*s#v#^r*^-*#-4r#****s*^*#*j*
For several virtues,
Have I liked several women; never any With so full soul bat some defect in her Did quarrel with the noblest grace she owed ? And put it to the foil: but thou—oh, thou ! So perfect, and so peerless, art created Of every creature's best. Shakespeabe. Accordingly, Alfieri de Gracy and his companions commenced their journey, walking as far as the bottom of the cliff, where the mules were stationed; to which place they were accompanied by two of the brotherhood, one of whom was no other than the officious and communicative Ge¬ ronirno. As soon as they were mounted, the monks returned to the monastery, af¬ ter bidding their guests farewell with much humility, whom, from pure motives of
yS | of courtesy, it appeared, they had attended 3 to their saddles. Fernandez, liowever, I suffered not Geronirno to depart until he I had taken an opportunity of slipping un- I perceived into the hand of the good old | sacristan (as he was called, although the | distinction, as already observed, was little | more than nominal) a piece of money of I considerable value, which he had reserved | for the express purpose of rewarding l^is | civility. I The party now proceeded at a brisk *( rate towards the base of the mountain, where was situated the village of Montro- 1 sol, having thus taken a last leave of the \ hospitable brethren—for hospitable tlie fraternity of Montserrat most undoubtedly :■ were, although, it is much to be feared, their hospitality proceeded chiefly from selfish, or ostentatious motives; however, i the three days' largess, with other benefits, j universally accorded to travellers of every I description, have been already hinted at; [ this was doing much to be called chari- l c % table,
table, and surely those who have adhered to it deserve to have gained the appellation. The cavalcade, amounting in all to nearly twenty, was attended by three or four stout muleteers, whose voices were of considerable service in accelerating their pace; the mules in Catalonia being accus¬ tomed to pay more obedience to the voice than to the rein, or even to the often furiously raised lash of the driver. Al¬ ready the huge cross of sculls had faded from their view, and in imagination they beheld the rustic habitations of Montrosol peeping from between the foliage which enveloped them: the pool of blood was on the right hand of their uneven course, and on the left an irregular tract of coun¬ try, magnificently desolate, and peculiarly adapted for the ambuscade of an enemy. On arriving at this pass, the muleteers, as if timid from habit, and wary from ex¬ perience, unanimously urged their slug¬ gish beasts to additional speed, and far outstripped the unsuspecting Alfieri, and his
his train of attendants, a circumstance which was far from surprising him, as he knew well the natural timidity and in¬ tolerable superstition . of that class of people; and one which, moreover, gave Fernandez considerable pleasure, inasmuch as it afforded him an opportunity (freed from the shouts of the drivers) of riding at leisure, and conversing unmolested with his beautiful companion; for Alfieri de Gracy had heretofore ridden in the van, and was followed by Fernandez and Isa¬ bel, side by side; while the attendants, out of respect, or a willingness to enjoy their own conversation, rode clustered to¬ gether at some distance in the rear of the procession. And never did Fernandez behold his adored Isabel look half so lovely as on the present occasion. Caparisoned in her riding attire, and mounted on a beautiful brown mule, whose skin was of the most delicate softness, and whose pace was nimble, airy, and graceful (even de¬ spite the dangerous descent in which they c 3 were
Sgiiiii^a^tiffliM^ m.id,, ih.-, .s^**^.^^^ ^..... „._ ...........
80 ABBOT OF MONTSERRAT. were engaged), she might have been deemed by an indifferent observer the fairest of human creation; and in the eyes of her enthusiastic admirer appeared a perfect deity: the waving plume which adorned her habit nodded gracefully over her captivating form, her lovely hair streamed loosely in the wind, or floated in careless ringlets over her neck and shoul¬ ders, while the smile that irradiated her blooming countenance spoke the rapture of her bosom. Fernandez gazed u£on her, as they proceeded, with an excess of tenderness that, while it nearly approxi¬ mated to adoration, softened the remem¬ brance of his late mournful encounter with a desponding parent, and the melancholy scene which followed it: his eyes beamed with enthusiasm, his heart glowed with affection, his bosom heaved and palpi¬ tated at the thought of his approaching happiness, and he shrunk from imparting his sentiments to her whose feelings he well knew were in unison with his own. Meanwhile
Meanwhile, Alfieri de Gracy still rode forward, following the course of the run¬ away muleteers, whom he yet descried in the distance, and whose discordant shouts, as they urged to faster speed the sure¬ footed animals on which they rode, still faintly reached his ears. Presently, how¬ ever, to his no small alarm and mortifica¬ tion, he beheld them disappear suddenly, and shortly afterwards perceived them winding among the crags upon the left, as for the purpose of eluding observation; whereupon he instantly halted, and await¬ ed the arrival of Fernandez, designing to acquaint him with the circumstance, and his own suspicions of their treachery. Scarcely however had Alfieri de Gracy staid his mule, ere a shot, fired from the brushwood near him, whizzed close to his ear, and assured him that his worst fears were but too well grounded; while a voice, proceeding from the spot whence the smoke now issued, exclaimed in a loud, harsh tone^—" I could have taken a surer c 4 aim,
aim, De Gracy, had such been my desire: attempt not therefore to escape, and no harm is intended you." Alfieri de Gracy paused in sudden as¬ tonishment : what course was he to adopt, or how escape the threatened peril ? He' looked anxiously back towards Fernandez, raising his hand to his forehead, as if to assist his deliberations—a confusion of ideas assailed him, and he was motionless.
. - :>
CHAP*
i i
CHAPTER V. In fuller sight, more near and near, The lately ambushed foes appear, And, issuing from the grove, advance. Briton Good masters, harm me not! Shakespeare. Fernandez and Isabel were not far dis¬ tant, and hearing the report of the carbine, instantly rode up to the disconcerted Al¬ fieri. In a few minutes the domestics also were alarmed, and crowded around their master, vowing to defend to the last gasp, should such a display of their courage be found needful. Soon then were these va¬ lorous assertions to be put to the test; for scarcely were they uttered, ere a company consisting of some fifty assailants, whom their weapons, visages, and accoutrements, assured them were banditti, became at c ^ once
once imperfectly visible among the pre¬ cipices to the left, and struck the whole party with horror and dismay. It would be impossible to describe the consterna¬ tion which ensued, among the meaner in¬ dividuals of the cavalcade especially; al¬ though that very admirable description, by a noble bard, of Hassan and his retinue, might serve to convey a tolerably just idea of the confusion that prevailed; while " With steel unsheathed, and carbine bent, Some o'er their coursers' harness leant, Half bheltered by the steed; Some fly behind the nearest rock, And there await the coming shock, Nor tamely stand to bleed Beneath the shafts of foes unseen, Who dare not quit their craggy screen." But what is most remarkable, and cer¬ tainly might be said to demonstrate the superiority of a Mussulman's courage, if not his sagacity, was that the greater part of the retinue of Alfieri de Gracy (in spite of their stout professions when danger was only apprehended) took to their heels and fled,
fled, leaving their master and his beloved chiid, together with the few who chose to remain stanch by his side, entirely to the mercy of those whom they knew to be merciless, or at least believed so. In less than another minute, a robber, ........ . ■. * who appeared to have some command amongst the rest, rushed fearlessly into the terror-stricken circle, and presenting a pistol to the head of Alfieri de Gracy, while with the other hand he levelled a second at the breast of Fernandez, who *' wist not what to do," the occasion was so sudden, exclaimed in a rough, authori¬ tative, and determined manner—" Stand and deliver! by command of him whose name, if spoken near this mountain, would make your very mules champ without grist or bridle, while they shivered with dismay, and your own teeth to chatter, like the visitation of an ague*.—-You, se- c 6 nor
nor Alfieri; and you, whom we know also/* addressing Fernandez, " your arms, and then your purses!" By the time Sebastian (for the speaker was no other than the lieutenant himself) had finished this characteristic salutation, the little group was completely surround¬ ed by the banditti, who pointed their car¬ bines and pistols each upon his chosen an¬ tagonist, and appeared ready to fire, upon the slightest intimation of their chief to that effect; while others, with drawn cut¬ lasses, paraded on every side within their vision, for the purpose of intercepting any straggler who might otherwise be fortu¬ nate enough to overcome, or escape from his antagonist. Among those who were occupied in the latter mode, the keen eye of Fernandez presently discovered the very men who had acted as muleteers a few minutes before, and who had under¬ taken to guide the party in safety to Bar¬ celona. This discovery incensed him be¬ yond measure; but it was too late, and a little
little reflection made him feel how useless it was now to repine at his own want of discernment. Alfieri de Gracy, in the mean while, knew not how to proceed; to oppose the will of these desperate marauders would, he knew, be to little effect, on account of his own inferiority in point of numbers and discipline, the greater part of his attend¬ ants, as already narrated, having deserted him on the appearance of an enemy so formidable; and an encounter moreover with these unthinking wretches would en¬ danger the safety, and might probably cost him the life of his child, who stood trem¬ bling, and watching his countenance, in the midst of the circle. He turned his stern glance for a moment upon her vary¬ ing features, and this latter consideration, more than any deficiency in point of va¬ lour, or skill to use the weapons of de¬ fence with which he was furnished, deter¬ mined him if possible to obtain a parley, and submit to their desires, rather than risk
risk the consequences of an unavailing re¬ sistance. Accordingly the wealthy agri¬ culturist, endeavouring in some degree to abate the sternness of his looks, addressed Sebastian, whom he took to be their leader, ak follPWs.—" If our arms and purses will content you," said he, in a conciliatory tone, M there is the latter," flinging his purse to the lieutenant, " whose contents are at your service; and here," he conti¬ nued, drawing his rapier, " is my weapon, which, as I am an honourable man, shall also be surrendered, as soon as I have re¬ ceived some pledge that thereupon my party shall pass without further molesta¬ tion.—-Fernandez, throw thy purse to yon¬ der rough-headed, and, by the mass, rough- handed fellow," alluding to a ruffian who had rudely seized the bridle of Isabel; v and let us, if it be possible, get on our journey quietly. Dost thou hear my bidding, foolish youth ?—obey me!" ** It is empty!" cried Fernandez, whose purse indeed father Geronirno, and the rest
rest of the good brethren, had lightened of all it contained— w it is empty, on my honour! and even were it otherwise, I would not yield it to so scurvy a sum- moner!" " The yielding should nought have availed thee if thou hadst!" now shouted the lieutenant, scornfully.—" Hold fast the rein, Pedro! hold fast the rein!—Thou hast more wit, after all, than seems to abide in thee, and enough to shame the tardiness of thy superiors.—Fair lady," continued he, advancing with a saucy air to the side of Isabel, " we must trouble you to dismount: the path we have to trace is not easily accessible, and your weight will be sufficient for Sebastian's shoulders, without an added burthen of mule's flesh, to make him sweat the faster. Will it please you to alight therefore without further ceremony, or must my gallant comrades shew their mettle, by decapitating these your pusillanimous pro¬ tectors ?" The
The answer to this question was a blow from Fernandez, which felled the interro¬ gator to the ground, and this became the signal for a general engagement.
CHAP-
CHAPTER VL
But who is she whom Conrad's arms convey From reeking pile and combat's wreck away ? Byeon. The rest of the banditti, perceiving this commencement of hostilities on the part of their prisoners, as they had already im¬ agined the surrounded party, now reduced to the number of eight, by the cowardly flight of Alfieri's domestics, very few of whom had remained to share the destiny of their master, lost no time in avenging the cause of their stunned leader in this shameful enterprise, of which it now ap¬ peared plunder was not the only purpose. Several discharged their pistols, while the greater number rushing towards De Gra¬ cy and Fernandez, bound and beat them severely in the course of a few minutes, after
after disarming them with ease, on ac¬ count of their superiority in number, and their singuiar dexterity, produced no doubt by habit and experience in feats of this na¬ ture. With regard to the domestics, they were easily overpowered; two were wounded mortally in the first onset of the banditti, and the remainder speedily took to flight, in which disgraceful course they were not checked by tbe robbers; for it now appear- ed no part of their scheme to intercept the menials of the party, or in any way molest them, provided the principal personages, Alfieri de Gracy, and Fernandez, toge¬ ther with the two females, fell easily into their hands. These therefore, with the exception of the lovely Isabel, were speed¬ ily secured aiid bound, and the two former treated with the utmost ferocity, for the resistance they had dared to make. And now tlie ruffians who had last officiated in securing Inez advanced boldly towards her mistress, with similar intentions; when just j
just as they were about to put those in¬ tentions into execution, the interference of a tall majestic figure, evidently bearing high command amongst them, from the deference with which he appeared to be treated, and who had been for some mi¬ nutes past steadfastly regarding the trem¬ bling and affrighted damsel, induced them to retire. This was the universally obeyed and dreaded monarch of those dangerous terri¬ tories—this was Roldan ! whose very glance, even in a moment of irritation like the pre¬ sent (for the banditti were highly incensed at the indignity which had befallen their lieutenant), was sufficient to quell the au¬ dacity, and temper the barbarity, of his most hardened followers. He had been in ambush near the summit of a neigh¬ bouring eminence, watching the progress of the party from the monastery, and pur- posed to remain a quiet spectator of their surprisai and capture by the banditti in¬ trusted to the command of Sebastian, on whose
whose bravery and humanity he thought he could rely; but perceiving him fall at the commencement of the contest, and fearing greatly for the safety of the fe¬ males, whom it was a part of his design to preserve uninjured, Roldan had abandon¬ ed his concealment just in time to rescue the fair maiden from the hands of her rude assailants, ere she sank trembling and ex¬ hausted at his feet. For some time the astonished chieftain (to whom perfection such as Isabel's was a sight as new as it was transporting) gazed uppn her in-speechless wonder and admi¬ ration; and then repelling with a haughty look the officiousness of his rough com- rades, who again advanced to bind her, he approached to glut yet nearer his enrap¬ tured vision, with beauty such as he had never before beheld, nor dreamed to be in existence. His band retreated submis¬ sively to a distance, some hurrying to the aid of the poor lieutenant, while others prepared for a precipitate retreat to their fastness
~
ABBOT OF MONTSERRAT. 45 fastness in case of any surprisai, as the chieftain stooped amazedly over the droop¬ ing object of these newly-awakened sen¬ sations ; until at length the distracted Is¬ abel, perceiving the terrible situation in which she was placed, and recollecting the taunts and heavy usage Alfieri de Gracy and Fernandez had already endured, which it wrung her very heart to witness, faintly exclaimed—" Oh! shield my father, spare Fernandez, and pity, pity poor unoffend¬ ing Isabel, who never injured aught to whieh God had given existence!" Involuntarily did Roldan, on hearing this simple appeal to his humanity, utter¬ ed in a voice which seemed in reality to his ravished senses, ** Like unto lovers* ears the wild words sunt: In garden bowers at twilight/' V command his brutal associates to desist from further violence towards their un- happy captives, and again rivet his volup¬ tuous
tuous gaze upon the lovely pleader for the lives of those she loved. Anon a clattering sound was faintly distinguished, proceeding from a distance, and accompanied by the shouts of mule¬ teers, which frequently in those mountain¬ ous regions prove the first indication of the approach of travellers. In a moment the chief caught Isabel in his arms, and bear¬ ing her up the crags with astonishing agi¬ lity, gave the signal as he proceeded for the rest to folloiv him. The horde obey¬ ed with surprising speed and regularity, carrying with them in like manner the two defenceless cavaliers, together with the affrighted but vainly-struggling Inez, and abandoning the wounded domestics to their fate; while Sebastian, whom the exertions of his comrades had by this time sufficiently recovered from his stupor, but who still severely felt the degradation he had: so unexpectedly received, crawled sulkily after them. j*-i i- CHAP-
CHAPTER VII. I am not mad—I would to Heaven I were ; For then 'tis like I should forget mvself. Oh, if I could, what grief should I forget! I am not mad—too well, too well I feel The di (Ferent plague of each calamity. Shakespeare. In vain did the lovely daughter of Al¬ fieri de Gracy (whom the rude motion and novelty of her present situation ap¬ peared perfectly to nave recovered from her amazement) implore the robber chief to inform her of his purpose, and request to be made acquainted with the worst she had to apprehend. The seemingly bewil¬ dered and yet resolute Roldan spoke not a word, in spite of her many earnest sup¬ plications for an explanation of such con¬ duct, as he bore the almost broken-hearted Isabel to his isolated habitation; still fol¬ lowed
lowed in his upward course by the stout¬ est of his associates, carrying, or now ra¬ ther dragging, along with them the bruis¬ ed and bleeding forms of her affectionate father and affianced husband, whom,, even in this wretched and helpless condition, she still deemed it a kind of safety to view, bound and often dangling in the great¬ est peril oyer the edge of some projecting precipice, at the distance of only a few yards beneath her. On arriving at the romantic fastness of the banditti, by the same steep and dan¬ gerous course which Obando had trodden on the night before, and which it seemed was the only path by which this singular abode could be approached, Alfieri de Gracy and Fernandez were unbound, but instantly conveyed to separate dungeons, where they remained, as appeared to have been preconcerted before their capture (as the robbers acted in this instance without any. visible signal from their leader, or audible command being given respecting them),
them), immured in total darkness, and un¬ certain what kind of destiny they were to encounter. For Isabel, moreover, a different sort of apartment had it seemed been prepared, superior in comfort to the gloomy vaults allotted to her protectors, and in which Inez was permitted to attend her. The door however of this ill-furnished chamber, and the aperture which served it for a win¬ dow, were strongly barricaded with iron bars, a circumstance which, added to the mysterious silence of the chief) assured the despairing Isabel and her weeping attend¬ ant that they were considered as prisoners, whose safe detention was a matter of no trivial importance, and considerably aug¬ mented their apprehensions for the issue of this most unexpected and unfortunate adventure. To this solitary chamber therefore, after her separation from the helpless compa¬ nions of her ascent to this fearful spot, from which it seemed probable they never vol. ii. d might
might again descend, was conveyed the frantic and imploring damsel, there to be imprisoned, until the result of the terrific captor's deliberations should be further known respecting her. Here her muscu¬ lar supporter, who had hitherto borne her in his arms with much apparent ease, and whom, by the yellow feather in his cap, she now recognised to be no other than the notorious Roldan himself, left her to the care of her attendant,* preserving to the last an uniform and determined silence with regard to her future destiny; yet Isabel thought that when, having laid his burthen on a couch that stood in one cor¬ ner of the apartment, he turned him to depart, there was an expression of mingled sorrow and pity on his countenance, as if he was unwilling to leave hen She could not be sure of this; the light was hardly strong enough, in that gloomy chamber, to enable her accurately to distinguish his features; but Inez confirmed her in the supposition, that as he closed the dooiyhe turned
turned again towards her with eyes so ex¬ pressive of the tenderest sympathy* as convinced them both that the feelings even of the bandit Roldan were not proof against the piteous pleadings of beauty in distress, and that his sensibility was not unmoved by the tears and lamentations of his fascinating captive, nor his heart wholly unaffected by the power of her charms: and in this conclusion they were not de¬ ceived. The susceptibility of the habitu¬ ally proud-minded Roldan had indeed been unexpectedly awakened at the sight of his beauteous, unoffending victim, who he well knew the achievements of that day had doomed to certain and inevitable de¬ struction ; nor was it in his power to avert the evil destiny which awaited, through his means, the ill-fated possessor of those charms which had at once amazed and in¬ terested him—amazed him beyond expres¬ sion, and interested him more deeply than perhaps, even to himself, he chose yet to acknowledge. d 2 Roldan
Roldan had seen beauty before, had even revelled in all the warmest transports its caresses can bestow, ere his patrimony was spent among the partisans of folly and extravagance, and himself reduced to the necessity of becoming the desperate leader of a desperate horde of freebooters, for the purpose of recruiting his ruined finances; but beauty united to innocence, so attrac¬ tive, so engaging, it had never been his lot to encounter; on the contrary, so oppo¬ site had been those of the sex (with the exception of Corvetta) who had attracted Roldan's early attention, that he hardly imagined such to be in existence. No wonder then if the lawless chieftain felt, in its fullest degree, the influence of that captivating softness to which he was com¬ paratively a stranger; but, as Shakespeare says, " Something too much of this," unless we could divulge, and had moreover leisure to dwell upon the particular nature of the sentiments with which the beauty of Isa¬ bel had inspired him; and this discussion therefore
therefore (inasmuch as Roldan hardly knew yet the nature of those sentiments himself) must form the subject of succeed¬ ing pages. Accordingly, to return to Isabel—her excessive grief at the horrible consciousness of being in the power, and even in the very hold of that ruthless marauder, whose name she had been taught to dread and execrate from her infancy, joined to her anxiety for the fate of those from whom she had been thus inhumanly separated, first vented itself in unavailing sobs and lamentations, until the unwonted exertion of her corporeal faculties, seconded by her incessant mental agony, soon threw her into a state of insensibility. On her re¬ vival, which at length was effected through the kind assiduities of Inez, aided by an elderly female (Corvetta), whose very ap¬ pearance Inez afterwards protested was enough to scare any modern maiden out of her senses, the tender-hearted Isabel be¬ came delirious, and in her desolation would d 3 rave
rave loudly of Fernandez, of Alfieri, and her own hopeless situation. This lasted during the two first days of her confine¬ ment, within which space of time, as Isa¬ bel knew little of what had happened, but little of the occurrences that took place will be here recorded. Meanwhile, the intermediate space (first two days alluded to, which Inez informed her had comprised the whole duration of her malady) ap¬ peared to Isabel to have been passed in a horrid dream, of whose appalling images she still retained a faint and imperfect, but terrifying recollection. With respect to this imagined vision (for it was only imagined—its substance being, as Inez afterwards informed her, no fiction of the brain, but a terrible reality), the principal features that floated in her memory, were the pale, gaunt visage of the monk Obando, whose haggard aspect again wore a ghastly smile as he surveyed her, expressive of the most libidinous de¬ sires. This hateful apparition was suc¬ ceeded
ceeded by a phantom no less singular, nor (in the pure imagination of the unconta- minated, sensitive Isabel) much more pleasing in its appearance, namely, a tall, unprepossessing figure, bearing the resem¬ blance of a now faded, but once beautiful female, who seemed to have forgotten every softer attribute of her sex, and, in their stead, to have assumed the habits and mode of conversation usually witnessed among the most depraved of the other. In addi¬ tion to these appalling and disgusting ob¬ jects, might be mentioned a fierce-looking statue (for he spoke not, nor seemed in any degree moved by her distress), with long dishevelled locks, and a warlike counte¬ nance, whose features, if they partook not of the ghastly expression of Obando's, were indicative of a sort of brutal apathy, which rendered him equally an object of fear and detestation. With these moreover were incessantly mingled the form of the fell bandit who bore her hither, with his ex¬ pressive eyes, and yellow plume, who D 4 seemed
seemed grimly to console her, while his re¬ fusal to acquaint her with the fate of Al¬ fieri and Fernandez served bitterly to aug¬ ment her agonies.
CHAP-
CHAPTER VIII. — ---------- How cam'st thou hither, Where no man ever comes, but that sad dog That brings me food to make misfortune live ? Shakespeare. It was long before Isabel could believe the events she had witnessed, during the period of her delirium, any thing but the mere visionary creations of a disordered mind; but when at length the repeated assurances of Inez succeeded in convincing her, that what she fancied a mere feverish and unimportant dream was a mournful reality—that the pallid monk Obando had indeed stood grinning in horrid self- complacency before her—that Corvetta had indeed been commanded to assist Inez in hastening her recovery—that a savage- looking bandit had really stood beside her d 5 couch,
couch, while he delivered their food to her attendant—and, finally, that Roldan himself had several times been in her pre¬ sence, and even with his own voice es¬ sayed to soften her affliction—her tears flowed faster than Inez ever remembered to have witnessed them fall before. It now appeared plain .that Obando, the dreaded, hated Obando, was the principal cause of all her sufferings: she remembered his grim smile on the morning of her de¬ parture from the convent, previous to the capture and rout of her party by the ban¬ ditti, and shuddered as she remembered it: she doubted not this hypocritical monk was in league with the banditti, and had engaged with them to accomplish her de¬ struction, and the overthrow of her pro¬ tectors, an enterprise in which they had too well succeeded. But to what purpose was she confined here ?*—with what de¬ sign had Roldan, and even the forbidding ecclesiastic, visited her? These were questions she strove vainly to resolve, and of
of which she was at length obliged to abandon the fruitless and unprofitable con¬ templation. In this state of suspense and terror, ren¬ dered doubly wretched by their total ig¬ norance of the doom which Alfieri de Gracy and Fernandez had to endure, they passed the remainder of the third day till sunset. Corvetta was not in their apart¬ ment, having left it on the speedy reco¬ very of Isabel appearing probable, as if previously commanded so to do by her superiors. Obando only visited the cham¬ ber for a few minutes, about the hour of midnight; and Roldan, they both guess¬ ed, would not again disturb them with his presence until the succeeding day. Isabel de Gracy was still in tears—-the wailings of Inez too were loud and fre¬ quent ; but no one regarded them—no one seemed to hear them: all was silence around them, and they rightly conjectured that the robbers (as to sleep throughout the day, and then awake at night-fall, was d 6 customary
customary among persons of that hazard¬ ous profession) had not yet arisen from their repose. Night now gradually began to over¬ spread the mountain, and darkness speedily pervaded their apartment, which they were without the means of dissipating, and therefore necessitated to endure: but, as might have been expected, with the ap¬ proach of * f raven-feathered night"—that season of love and enjoyment, but also of apprehension and iniquity—their terrors increased. Isabel flung herself mournfully upon an elegant sofa, provided by some strange means for her accommodation, again to meditate on the probable issue of this unlucky, and, she feared, fatal catas¬ trophe, of her ill-advised elopement; while Inez, whose slender portion of philosophy was still less conspicuous, clung distract¬ edly around her. At length the latter sorrowfully exclaimed—" Alack! to think the poltroons should so basely have de¬ serted us (meaning the vassals of Alfieri), and
and left us to the mercy of a tribe of plun¬ derers, more savage and ill-looking than themselves! Oh, what a term of tribu¬ lation have I passed since I quitted Bar¬ celona on this foolish errand! what a jaunt of accumulated terrors and misfor¬ tunes has it proved to both of us!—that grim, starved monk too, who frightened us so at the monastery—oh, luckless ex¬ cursion !—-oh, false defenders!—and oh, foolish Inez!" Here the speaker paused, and wept audibly for several minutes; until finding she was not likely to obtain an answer, and as talking is always some relief to an afflicted woman, she hesitatingly resumed —" Think you," said she, in half-deter¬ mined and trembling accents—" think you that our poor guide, Carlossa, as I think he called himself, would have thus forsaken us, had we chanced to require his assistance in a similar affair, on our ap¬ proach to the monastery? I am pretty sure he would not, although I know not what
what induces me to think so. It is true, he looked not over valiant, nor spoke like one whose courage was likely to lead him into danger; but what of that ? do you recollect his willingness to precede on the road ?—and then his subsequent determi¬ nation to return alone, with, above all, his unprecedented benevolence to the brother¬ hood—but I hate the brotherhood now— Heigh ho!'' Their apartment was by this time en¬ veloped in total darkness, save the faint glimmer emitted by a solitary streak of moonshine, which entered with difficulty through the grated lattice, and was insuf¬ ficient to disclose even the extremities of the chamber. Both thought they now distinguished the Sound of footsteps ap¬ proaching the door of their prison: they listened accordingly, and were not de¬ ceived. In a few moments the grating key was turned, the bolts withdrawn, and a man entered, bearing a silver lamp, and a small tray of provisions. His face was concealed
concealed by a huge slouched hat, some¬ what indicative of his profession; but which, however, seemed to sit but awk¬ wardly above the retiring countenance it shadowed. The intruder silently advanced towards a table, and resting the provender and the light thereon, seemed again about to retire. " Stop!" cried Isabel, starting suddenly from her posture of astonishment and de¬ jection ; " I will not taste your food un¬ less you inform me for what infernal pur¬ pose I am detained here!" As she finished this interrogatory, she advanced some paces towards him, with a majestic step and determined countenance, on which the robber (for such she of course conjectured him to be) as he approached the door s with emphasis delivered his la¬ conic message.—" Isabel de Gracy," said he, with a significant gesture, intended to inform them that he was watched, " our captain, the renowned Roldan, desires you to
to refresh yourself fearlessly; and after midnight, expect a visitor." " Wherefore comes he ?" again demand¬ ed Isabel—•' wherefore comes he hither, and with what intent ?" * Ask me not now," replied he who ap¬ peared to be their gaoler, softly; then elevating his voice, and still making, as he spoke, significant gestures, to intimate fo her that he was overheard—" of the secret intentions of the invincible Roldan, his humblest dependent can know nothing." During the latter part of this response, his actions were so expressive of the fear he entertained of being overheard by some of the banditti, who it appeared were watching him, that Inez and her mistress could not avoid observing and understand¬ ing them. They saw, moreover, by his awkwardness under the habit which he wore (or at least fancied they perceived as much), that he was new to the profession which it seemed he had adopted; and al¬ ready began to entertain some secret hopes, from
ABBOT OF MONTSERRAT. 65 from his evidently disguised demeanour, that he might eventually prove a friend; and these conjectures of his amicable dis¬ position towards them, the following inci¬ dent tended to confirm. Just as he was about to close the door of their prison, the robber who had been, as they rightly imagined, appointed to bring them light and food, for the first time raised from his brow the huge-brimmed hat which had heretofore concealed his fea¬ tures, and to their utmost astonishment discovered the dark lineaments of Carlossa, their former guide to the convent, on whose supposed integrity Inez had been expatiating only a few minutes before! The countenance of the poor muleteer was well remembered, even by Isabel, and instantly recognised by her no less amazed attendant, whose heart, in spite of the despicable garb he had now assumed (even more wretched in her eyes than that in which she had first beheld him), under¬ went a considerable degree of palpitation, as
^&&&a**% M »i^
66 ABBOT OF MONTSEEBAT. as she met his keenly-directed and ena^ moured gaze. Carlossa, the honesti industrious Gar- lossa, thus strangely metamorphosed into a lower associate of these unfeeling rufc iians, cast another^compassionating look upon the wandering Isabel as he retired, and an arefe* glance upon Inez, which plainly expressed that he had much to say at a fitter opportunity, although but little now; as with an assumed appearance of harshness, Which also sufficiently demon, strated that his superiors were at hand, he hastily closed the door, and locked it on the outside with an air of petulance and malignity. From this circumstance it ap¬ peared evident that Garlossa was now leagued with fthe banditti of Monftserrat (as the lawless adherents of Roldan were entitled); but it also appeared evident that he had only lately and reluctantly been made a member of their community. It was plain too that he had recognised them, and that he intended hereafter to do
ABBOT OF MONTSERRAT. 67 do something for their benefit, as soon as opportunity, and the perfect recovery of Isabel, concurred to aid him in its execution. Meanwhile his wretched prisoners, thus left once more to bemoan their mutual helplessness, began to conjecture the name of this mysterious visitor, whose inten¬ tions the muleteer had been commissioned to announce, and vainly essayed to guess the purpose of his midnight interview. While they were thus employed, the heavy clanking of iron implements, as the wearer paraded to and fro, communicated the fearful intelligence to their minds, that a sentinel had certainly been stationed at the door of their dungeon, as an additional security, a circumstance which consider¬ ably increased their apprehensions*
CHAP-
CHAPTER IX.
Ob God ! can it be possible I have To die so suddenly ? so young to go Under the obscure, cold, rotten, wormy ground ! To be nailed down into a narrow place; To see no more sweet sunshine; hear no more Blithe voice of living thing; muse not again Upon familiar thoughts, sad, yet thus iost— How fearful! to be nothing! or to he — What?—Oh, where am I? let me not go mad ! Sweet Heaven, forgive weak thoughts ! Shelley. It now becomes necessary to revert, for a short period, to the wretchedly accommo¬ dated Alfieri de Gracy, and his more ju¬ venile companion in adversity, antecedent to devoting our pages more particularly to the elucidation of Obando's mysterious projects, and depraved, but frustrated in¬ tentions. Unhappily for De Gracy and his unfor¬ tunate
tunate fellow-captive, they had been thrown heedlessly into separate dungeons, and were consequently deprived of the little consolation they might otherwise have derived from each other's converse; which, however unavailing such inter¬ course might have been, as far as regarded any plans of escape contrived between them, would certainly have cheered away in some degree the heavy and darksome hours. But this was npt all: the unhappy prisoners were not only thus prevented from holding any communication, but also sternly refused the slightest intelligence of each other, and even rigidly interdicted from mentioning the female partners of their captivity at all; whose very names, and capture altogether, the robbers who brought them food affected at first to have entirely forgotten: and afterwards find¬ ing that Alfieri was still importunate to learn the fate of his beloved child, and Fernandez that of his beautiful, affianced bride, these ruffians (authorized by the brutal
sJfe™^,
70 ■■■&&0W brutal Sebastian, who> still felt keenly the stnart of the ind%riity lie had received) threatened the supplicating captives with instant annihiljation, if they repeated their inquiries respecting hen Such, it is suffi¬ cient to say y was^ the situation of Alfieri de Grriacy: of the cohditibn of the roman- ticall^attached Fernandez, it is necessary to record something more ere we abandon him, to pursue a no less interesting portion of our narrative. It was on the morning of the third day of his imprisonment (although Fernandez knew it not, for with him, as with the in¬ carcerated chief of the iEgean pirates— " -—long—anxious—weary—still—the same Rolled day and night/' his dungeon being perpetually in dark¬ ness), as the youth was stretched despond- ingly upon the hard floor of his cell, la¬ menting in deep groans his piteous des¬ tiny, that he heard the bolts slowly re¬ moved, and the key turn softly in the massy
ABBOT OF MONTSERRAT. 71 massy iron-plated door. The difficulty which seemed to attend the turning of the key, and the time occupied in drawing aside the bolts, bespoke the hand which essayed it but little practised in the re¬ moval of those ponderous bars of metal, or the adroit wielding of that massive key. At length, however, the door burst open, and for the first time since the dawn of his captivity, he beheld a woman enter, clad in a loose tattered garb, which very ill became the majesty of her gait and as¬ pect ; the former being truly noble, and the latter expressive of a spirit depressed, but not subdued, by her outward degra¬ dation. With a firm, cautious step she advanced some paces towards him, leaving the door just sufficiently open to admit a ray of light into the dungeon, and ap¬ peared steadfastly to examine his person and features, as he lay extended on the ground before her. Fernandez encoun¬ tered her scrutinizing glance with an eye of suspicious inquiry, which, if not so eager
eager in its expression, was at least full as penetrating as her own. For some time she gazed on him with a degree of pertur¬ bation of which Fernandez little knew the meaning (conceiving it to be excited by mere compassion for his deplorable state), and then, perceiving him about to speak, significantly exclaimed—" Hush!— peace!" she muttered, softly placing her hand involuntarily upon her heart, as if to bid that sympathy subside which Fer¬ nandez knew not how he had awakened, *' the lamb should not bleat when the wolf is near at hand. Be silent, and ob¬ serve ; and yet," she continued, in a tender strain, " why, why should I check that once dear voice, whose long-forgotten tones I came hither to hear? Thou wouldst tell me the tale of thy sorrows. Proceed, good youth, and I will not interrupt thee. Art thou the stranger who, but two days since* -----My voice is choked. But speak; for I will attend to thee." " I am," now replied Fernandez, with no \
no small degree of astonishment at what he saw and heard, *' I am that unfortu¬ nate stranger to whom doubtless you aU^ lude. I am an orphan, whom a-few more revolving sunis would have seen a happy 1 bridegroom. Yon beauteous maiden, from whom I doubt not you have gathered your intelligence of my wrongs and wretched¬ ness, was my betrothed bride: our hands' were joined—our vows were plighted; she became my affianced bride, and is so still—if she be still in existence. Such was my prospect of happiness; such was the enviable condition of the now undone Isabel. On my way from the monastery of Montserrat, I was beset by a party bf the marauders who infest this mountain : our escort fled, and such as remained were easily overcome. I was taken pri^ soner, and all the hopes of the forlorn Fernandez were by this cursed chance overthrown." •• Fernandez!" here reiterated the fe¬ male, softly, but in a hurried tone, as if vol. ii. e the
the repetition of the name disturbed, and yet was pleasing to ber; " but say; where dwells thy sire ? what is his occupation— his name—his station in society ? Hesi¬ tate not, I pray thee! Quick ! Oh* tell me all!" " Speak with reverence of the dead," returned Fernandez, in a distinct but low and altered tone, which had an instan¬ taneous effect in checking the increasing violence of manner and gesticulation on the part of his strangely-affected auditor. " Dead ! Is he dead then ?" she mourn¬ fully articulated, crossing herself reveren¬ tially—an action which surprised Fer¬ nandez more than any thing he had yet witnessed. " Is Velasquez de Leon de¬ parted ? Was it of hini you spoke ? Is the husbandman gathered into the vine¬ yard of the mighty ? Speak !" " Even so," rejoined Fernandez, with additional amazement at the interest she appeared to take in the fate of his un¬ happy father; and the youth would have proceeded,
1 | proceeded, had he not been prevented by | aloud and involuntary burst of grief from the lips of his singular visitor. She sob- | bed aloud ; she gazed with an expression of wild melancholy upon his youthful countenance, and again veiling her face from observation, by the aid of a tattered portion of her garments, wept audibly for several minutes. During this paroxysm of mingled sor- sow and tenderness, Fernandez stood ir¬ resolutely before her, grasping unconsci¬ ously the heavy chain that fastened his wrists together, and gazing in mute won¬ der, not unmixed with a kind of secret veneration, upon the sibyl-resembling form by his side; until finding that the silence was likely to be still further pro¬ tracted bv her excessive emotion, he ven- 4 tured gently to address her in his turn, desiring to be made acquainted with the j cause of her distress, and sympathy with % his afflicted situation. This question, as the interrogator had 1 e % foreseen,
foreseen, effectually aroused Corvetta (for Corvetta it really was) from the paroxysm of agony, probably mingled with some feelings of remorse, into which she had fallen. She turned her eyes for an in¬ stant, full of inexpressible meaning, upon his anxious countenance, and impressively replied, in an affectionate tone— ^ Not now, not now," said the matron, gravely, "-must'that story be revealed, which it will cost thee many a pang to listen to— the time is too inopportune, and the place too dangerous. Observe me then, my son" she added, with particular emphasis, w and hold not what I say as light or idle, but'regard it as the assurance of one who knows well how to plan and to effect a desperate purpose. It may be long—it must be long (for I must use much cau¬ tion in my stratagem) ere we can meet again; but rest assured, that ere Corvetta twice shall visit thee, she will have pro¬ cured for thee the means of release—a path to liberty; and also for——But enough
enough of this at present; we may per¬ haps be overheard, and a discovery of our intercourse would render escape hopeless; so now farewell! Yet despair not, I en¬ treat thee; for as surely as the sun which sets at eve shall rise to hail the morning, Corvetta comes again to bring thee joyful tidings of thy Isabel—to ope thy prison- door, and bid thee be at liberty. Em¬ brace me once, Fernandez, if thou canst, and then let us part till thou mayest know me better. I am not what I seem, nor what thou thinkest me." As she made this last request, Fernan¬ dez could perceive, by the faint light which glimmered through the dungeon, the big tears streaming down her furrow¬ ed cheeks; and now approaching the youth silently, she flung her arms tender¬ ly around his form, and ere she released him, imprinted a fervent kiss upon his forehead; while as, in the glowing lan¬ guage of the bard—" She pressed his fettered fingers to her heart," her lips e 3 murmured
murmured some inarticulate sounds, which his ear strove vainly to catch; and hurry¬ ing from him, with an expressive gesture, she hastily quitted the dungeon; when, as the door closed heavily after her, and the last ray of light receded from his pri¬ son, Fernandez discovered sparkling on his rusty chain— " Tlie tear most sacred shed for other's pain, That starts at once, bright, pure from pity's mine, Already polished by the hand divine/' Now left again in utter darkness, with leisure to ruminate on his miserable situa¬ tion, Fernandez threw himself once more upon the hard floor of his prison, and be¬ gan to ponder on the scene he had just witnessed; the final result of which, to¬ gether with the youth's decision concern¬ ing it, must be recorded at a fitter op¬ portunity.
CHAP-
CHAPTER X.
And a magic voice and verse Hath baptized thee with a curse; And a spirit of the air Hath begirt thee with a snare : la the wind there is a voice Shall forbid thee to rejoice ; And to thee shall night deny All the quiet of her sky ; And the day shall have a sun Which shall make thee wish it done, Byron. The last peal of the chapel organ had ex¬ pired among the arched cloisters of the monastery of Montserrat, which announ« ced the termination of midnight vespers; the monks had already quitted the chapel, and were now faintly distinguished in their sable habits " The cloister-galleries issuing through,, In long, long order, two and two/' e 4 save
save a few who had not yet risen from their devotion, having slight penances to perform, or probably some trivial boon to solicit of " our lady," and who therefore remained still kneeling towards her image, which is formed of carved wood, resemb¬ ling mahogany, and placed over the altar. Before this glittering idol, which is mag¬ nificently clothed, and adorned with a crown of jewels, is placed, moreover, a heap of holy relics, each supposed to be of peculiar efficacy in the curing of diseases, mental or bodily; and beneath these pre¬ cious symbols of superstition and igno¬ rance were prostrated, as aforesaid, several of the brotherhood, in real or affected hu¬ mility ; but Obando was not amongst them; his tall forbidding form was not bowed with the rest in gracious thanks¬ giving or humble penitence; neither had Jie joined the main body of the monks, who were proceeding in order to their cells; but in the distant shadowy part of the chapel, amid huge columns and hide¬ ously-
oiisly-carved shapes, whose shade served partially to conceal his colossal figure, stalked the despairing malecontent, await¬ ing with anxiety the disappearance of the few pious members of the convent who yet lingered in the chapel, as if for the express purpose of defeating his inten¬ tions. It was a clear and brilliant night—a night which might have vied with that whereon the guilty, perjured Obando first met the yellow spirit in the chancel of the monastery (since Which time, it is ne¬ cessary to inform the reader, a period of several weeks had now elapsed), and in which fatal interview the overthrow of * v* - w, the monk's remaining scruples was com¬ pleted, by the insidious proffers of the de¬ signing fiend. Through the high and partially-painted casements of the chapel, as on the night alluded to, myriads of bright, stars were seen traversing the un¬ clouded firmament; while casting a " dim religious light" around that portion of the e 5 edifice
edifice already described, as being only in¬ differently illumined by the holy tapers, " The moon on the east oriel shone Through slender shafts of shapely stone, By foiiaged tracery combined ; Thou wouldst have thought some fairy's hand, Twixt poplars straight, the ozier wand In many a freakish knot had twined; Then framed a spell, when the work was done, And changed the willow wreaths to stone." The marble pavement too, in those dusky recesses to which Obando had retreated, was checkered, as on that memorable occasion, with the mingling hues of flame and moonshine, which strongly reminded him of that dreadful eve whereon, by previous arrangement, as the reader will recollect, he had summoned the demon to that terrific conference; and now their worship being concluded, such of the fra¬ ternity as had hitherto continued in prayer before the altar, slowly arose, and pre¬ pared to retire to their cells. As each of these, however, passed Obando, on his way to the dormitory of the convent, signs
w\ iff I signs of terror were visible in every ^ wrinkled countenance: all crossed them- \ selves as they hurried by, with more than I customary precision; and all seemed to \ regard him with unqualified contempt and abhorrence. Obando from his dim abiding-place j could not but observe this expression of abhorrence, nor avoid remarking the set¬ tled aversion which sat on every receding countenance; and as they quitted the chapel, he began as usual to murmur at his destiny, in the following strain.—** Ay, scowl and gibber, ye poor stingless worms!" (such was the muttered tenour of his reflec¬ tions) ; " venomless drones, whose poison has been exhausted on yourselves, in the effort by which ye Were excluded from \ society ! Your lot is fixed; and by its contemptibleness, your very malignancy is I rendered harmless. Yes, gaze on me again," he continued, perceiving that fa¬ ther Jacopo, whose prying and avaricious propensities have been already noticed, S ■ E 6 turned
turned as he quitted the chapel to snatch another glance at his livid features—" in ine you behold your superior. .Was it not promised me; in return for aril I sacri¬ ficed, that I should rule abbot over them?: Alas! much else was promised too,, which I should have valued more; but nothing is yet performed. Am I the dupe of some inferior agent, who cannot- fulfil the conditions himself proposed? o r v B ut I am resolved; this night —this very night will I summon hiin, and compel him to answer for his falsehood, exempli*-: fied in the scorn and anguish I still en¬ dure/' The remainder of the fraternity^ with even the curious father Jacopo, whom; it was no rare thing to see last in the chapel, had by this time gained their cellsj which they were not likely to leave, until the bell rang for matins about sunrise. The chapel was totally silent;, and even the abbot Ambrose, 9 whose custom it was to see the monks had all retired to their
their cells, or to grant remittances for such of the brotherhood whose penance might chance at that late hour to remain unfinished, seemed, by the universal still¬ ness which prevailed, to have sought his own apartment for the night. Now, like an adder from its lurking- place—like a wolf from its shadowy den, or a prowling robber from his daily am¬ buscade, stepped forth the monk Obando to the celebration of his nocturnal orgies. He:advanced towards tlie chancel: as he drew near, the red cross glared full in his angry countenance, its hues growing deeper every instant. He passed it, how¬ ever, with a haughty gesture of disdain, and approached the altar. Here pausing, he repeated thrice the talismanic word df " Zatanai!'* and with peevish impatience awaited the appearance of the demon.
CHAP-
1
T
CHAPTER XL *« Hail, Satan!" cried he, « The lord a^bot I'll be; On my bond I demand thy compliance/' English Ballad. SiiOWLY, and as if with a sullen kind of unwillingness, did the yellow^scaled Za¬ tanai appear to the call of his discontented proselyte. At first the burning gleam was alone visible; anon the form of the fiend might have been traced therein, still gathering in intensity and brightness, al¬ though not so fast as it had hitherto ar¬ rived at its completion: at length the hues grew: fiercer—the variable scales be¬ came distinguishable in all their fiery lustre and transparency; the head uprear¬ ed its horrible glowing crest—the visage grew distinct, and the perfect demon ""-■•■' — stood
stood before him. The earth had not yawned; heaven had showered down no lightnings to create this hideous phantom, and Obando wondered how that which seemed to spring from nothing potent— from pure thin element, could possess the power so to control his destiny, benumb his faculties, and appal his soul. For some moments the demon looked steadily at Obando, as expecting the monk to begin their conference, by ex¬ pressing his desire, and the purpose for which he had summoned him; but per¬ ceiving that he spoke not (for Obando was not yet so accustomed to the prac¬ tice of evil, as to be entirely divested of fear when in the presence of a supernatu¬ ral being), Zatanai sternly addressed him. —" Obando," said the spirit, bending on him a severe look of reproval, " why is the worship of Zatanai neglected ? The crucifix is crimson, and yet the hour is past at which thou shouldst have made it pale.
18 a^;^ fie|#v^a^^ ^i^bi^iyw^h^ dreaoS # :^riii^Mei&W| ** spirit^ thou miseries I stiu^altf oo©^ And Ja^;i:!l^ now sum- rtn '^feN' Carrit be possible thon hast s#*^otAi vfor^otten > the eovenarit wherein 0m didstf ettpife to ais^ede f to aU my ^3l^SiJ|^^- not^ to^ thee in parablesV O- batfj^^flel the yellow spirit, with an airif slileh indffierencA "nor in parables will oe f ttswer^a\ - * If there is aught per¬ taining td otir (com]^ which thbu iloulKiyt eom|ilain^ speak it with pdrspi^ CUit^-^ZalShal will attend to thee. w *i"Must 1 tften re^pitutate; niy grievM aiic^^ wiiiiied: to nionfe in a sorrowf^ a^clii^ mWlle^ 1 ^^ -' Then* spirit, hear me, and j udge if I have not cause t ■ ■
ABBOT OF JKONTsSEKBAT. 89 j cause to complain of thee. That damsel, 1 thou deluding counsellor, whom thou didst § promise solemnly should toe mine, yet I holds me at defiance, and spurns my most I alluring pron^ra withr disdain: in vaiii | have I nightly visited heri she holds rne ! in abhorrence, £nd beskates not to insult { m with ^.m, on thy ^ted sa^ty, j and professions of her attachment to an- S '■''.-. ■',-'■■ '■*■■ i ' ■ '■■ *1 other. My brother I liave eticoun^ I it is truer but ^hereagaitt'f^ I short of expectation: hie has hitherto I served me to the full extent of iny wishes, § but threatens opposition to tiiem y if I pro*. j ceed to violence. Thus far, Zatanai, | have I truly related hiy cause of ac«u j tion. But there is yet another subject on | which I would reproach thee. The ^ ! ternity treat me wife scorn: they hate> | despise the malecontent; they stilly I disregarded^ or view^ me as a coiled^ adder in their path-^ar^ | society it Were a crime t6 stoop—a dis^ ! grace to be levelled^ This ^^^ t^ promise
promise should be otherwise. Remem¬ bers not Zatanai the crosiered lure with which he won the foolish duped Obando to his toils? I would be abbot: thou hast said it was in thy power to make me so. J would be abbot — principal—su¬ perior ; Xi would repose on velvet and on down. y%hy slumbers then thy potency ? thou nearest me." t .. As the pallid monk concluded, his form seemed dilated with indignation; and his sharp sunken eyes flashed with a radiance which almost equalled the effulgence of the palest of the fiery scales of Zatanai, as if by gazing on him they had acquired a portion of his lustre. The demon grim¬ ly smiled at the catalogue „of his griev¬ ances, and when he had finished, signifi¬ cantly replied—" I hear thee," he re¬ sponded, "nor needed this recital from thy lips to comprehend thy wretchedness, though bound by holier authorities to de¬ mand it of thee. I have heard thee, Obando, and abbot thou shalt be, pro- . vided -j
vided thou shrinkest not from the achieve¬ ment of the bold deed which alone can make thee so. I am not omnipotent, al¬ though my power is great: thou must open thine own path to preferment, monk; I can only second thee, and render the means effectual. With regard to thine other sources of complaint, I have only this to answer—thou hast at present all I promised thee. If he whom thou stylest thy brother approves not thy foul pur¬ pose, and refuses to lend thee further aid therein, is Zatanai to blame? and over the inclinations of thy beloved Isabel, I have no control. But wherefore, Obando, dost thou gaze thus wildly down yonder vacant avenue ?—Why dost thou shake ? and what imports the angry flashing of thy glaring eyeballs ? Arouse thee, monk, and if thou wouldst ever win supremacy, if power hath charms for thee, exert thy¬ self to obtain it now !" Good cause, however, had the guilty Obando to look wild and tremble-—good reason
reason was there for his - scowling eyes. to flash resentment on the chuckling fiend, who was luring him, by imperceptible de¬ grees, to the vortex of inevitable destruc¬ tion; for ere Jret the yellow demon had finished his reply, h<§;plainly distinguished thu sound of approl^hing footsteps, pro¬ ceeding leisti rely along the adjacent ai$le. tfc a tfew, moments, as Obando had su&- pected, arid < doubtless as the deinoh had contrived should ,fee: the case, appeared the partly 5 form of the abbot Ambrose, who, entering at the western extremity of the chdpel, wfes greeted' ;at once; with a full .sight of this cabalistical communion. Arnbrns^ oii=first beholding this unhal- lowed scene, stopped suddenly opposite to the" arched aisle ? by which he had entered, and appeared transmuted to a statue. Tradition had already made him partially acquainted with the terrific being before him; it having been anciently averred that a spirit of evil origin, and of the same remarkable colour and aspect, had, frbm a remote
remotp period, kifestfd t^eirjholy clois¬ ters *: but tradition also added^ thafe .thfy, aid of the Bfoly Virgin having: beea.in\.; vpked, for the preservation of <her favour¬ ite edifice froth pollution, the' spirit had been expelled, and obliged to practise his cabilistical vocations elsewhere. But, how¬ ever this might be, it is certain the supe¬ rior was rendered motionless for several minutes, by the excess of horror which pervaded his whole frame, on encountering this hideous and unseemly spectacle. Meanwhile, on perceiving this confir¬ mation of his worst fears, the monk Oban¬ do (who, as already hinted, had from the first imagined the intruder could be no other than the abbot Ambrose, taking his nightly round among the cloisters) stood pierced with terror for his own perilous situation, * The modern English reader perhaps may smile at this ridiculous supposition; but the existence of such a belief is notorious enough to curious (not sentimental) travellers, among the peasantry of Montrosol, and even some other less renowned parts of Catalonia.
situation, and indignation at the yellow spirit's duplicity, too strong for utterance; Zatanai at the same time regarding him with a mixture of derision and anxiety, discernible in his fiery countenance.
V-yfcLAl *•
CHAP TEH XII* Manfred. —I say to thee, retire! Abbot. —Aiid I reply— Never till I have battled with this fiend! What doth he here ? Byron.
---------.-----,~---------Oh, horrible ! The pavement sinks under my feet! the wails Spin round ! Shellejt. This pause of mutual agitation and ex* pectancy was protracted to a considerable space of time, and might have lasted longer (Obando still appearing perfectly stupified with rage and shame), had not the righ¬ teous abbot, undepressed by the conscious* ness of unpardonable criminality, first re¬ covered his reasoning faculties. For Za- tanai, potent as he had more than once professed himself, seemed awed like a * " guilty
** guilty thing" in a good man's presence, notwithstanding the sinister expression of his ** fire-seamed" aspect, and the undi* minished radiance of his burning scales. As soon as Ambrose had succeeded in shaking off the transitory stupor which had overwhelmed him, and paralyzed like an ague his robust, though not Herculean form, he strove to cast aside at once all symptoms of the fear he had demonstra¬ ted, and advanced, boldly to the centre of the chapel, as, if to assure himself of the identity of the holy brother whom he be¬ held thus impiously occupied: and then, as if convinced that what he saw was not a mere illusion of the fancy, or, in the words 1 df* that truly pathetic bard, and Worthy gentleman-^* a miscreated mock^ er$ of the ] brairiv^ he^ with a ? steady gait^ and' an aspect serene, yet dignified, strode ~ sldwly towards'the chancel. The form of the^ Jfdllo^r demon seemed insensibly to ! recede, as Ambrose, with <$ churchman's face professional," majestically approached 1 the
the polluted shrine; while Obando shrunk instinctively from the form of the superior, and bowed his head beneath his penetra¬ ting gaze, in secret apprehension, and in¬ voluntary acknowledgment of his own misbecoming practices and disgraceful si* tuation. Ambrose approached the chancel, from which the demon had retired, although without any perceptible motion of his limbs or body; his unison with the ele¬ ments of which he was compounded seem¬ ing to supersede the necessity of corporeal exertion of any kind; and he shrunk from the uplifted cross, sustained by the arm of Ambrose, with the imperceptible velocity of a gliding spirit at the approach of sun¬ rise ; while the superior, conjecturing that his triumph over this infernal agent had already begun, and turning towards Oban¬ do, with an aspect of severity exclaimed —*' Unholy son! (such being the appella¬ tion dictated by monastic etiquette, when reproving a member of inferior rank), vol. ii. f knowest
knowest thou to whom thou ha^t beerr listening ?—knowest thou to whom thou hast this night been bending thy unhal¬ lowed conversation ?—-even unto the evil one^-the fell, destructive serpent, whose voice seduced our earliest parents from the, path of rectitude, into that of sorrow and iniquity. Sinful son ! behold this blessed symbol—embrace it, and avert at least the vengeance of offended Heaven; compared with which, the expiatory death to which the laws of man must doom thee, is but as a grain of dust in the balance" Then addressing the demon, and probably per¬ ceiving that Obando was yet too much agitated to notice his exhortation, he con¬ tinued, in a still more commanding and peremptory strain—-" And thou too, most accursed in thine origin, and detestable in thine aspect-**-thou> who hast too long profaned our holy pile with thy abhorred presence, depart-^for, thou art known to me. Depart thou hence, damned spirit, instantly; or by the hatred which I bear ; to
i i to thee, thou slialt be anon more terrifi- i \ cally exorcised 1 In the name of our im- | maculate saints who layeth in the bosom of the Father, 1 adjure thee to be gone!" I The yellow spirit grew insensibly paler I during the utterance of these solemn ad- ! jiirations by the holy lips of the abbot of Montserrat, but did not entirely disap- I pear. His lustre however continued gra* I dually to abate, even after the holy man I had ceased speaking, until the fiery scales, | which at first reflected a brilliant yellow I hue upon the silver cross uplifted by the 1 abbot, became faded to a shade almost as | livid as that of the precious symbol which j had worked the miraculous alteration. j Whereupon Ambrose, probably conceiv- I ing his triumph to be nearly completed, Ii again turned to the awed and conscience- stricken Obando, to whom he now spoke as follows:—" Thou unhappy victim of depravity," said the abbot—" for such the incontrovertible evidence of this appalling I scene too surely argues thee^—I adjure f2 thee
to repentance. B^ teotis son, will be, I fear, the term allot to inake tby |>eace v^h tiSou ha^ ]i|ipcilc®a^ oefore the holy tnbuhal * as- answer for ihy enormous <pm|: and may He who is all-merciful, ala^for whicli TwiU t#eeision of bur^ ppwerful saint, deeni the suflferings to which thou wilt infidlibly be subjected in this transitory state of exist¬ ence^ by those^severer judges; a sufficieht com- mitted* Accept this holy symbol, for the present," he continued, extending towards Obando his silver crucifix^ let me aqTjure thee to reverence : tht '4r$H 'public^ stake, with tortures sc^bable, will speedily be thy portion; and the hour of ceded by the hour of pious resi
•"' '•• *':•
Take it, my son—-turn not thus disdain¬ fully from the boon I proffer; receive it as the only consolation which can be afford¬ ed thee in thy present unhappy situation —a consolation of which thou knowest the value; for however unexampled may have been thy backslidings (which, alas! I apprehend are of the deadliest kind), the Omnipotent, in his clemency, refuseth none who worship him.'* Here Obando, with a sudden wafture of his hand, and a look of the bitterest contempt, the only exertion he seemed yet capable of making, so completely was he confounded at the probable issue of this fatal interruption, indicated his refusal of the proffered token of salvation, and turn¬ ed towards the supplicating abbot a coun¬ tenance naturally terrific, but now more strongly marked with horror and despera¬ tion than any he had ever beheld; on which Ambrose, probably conjecturing, with some show of reason, that the safest method of proceeding would be to secure f 3 the
1/fe ABBOT OF MONTSSRRAr. the^lKtfeeoittent wi$*out delay in o«ofthe dungeons of tte«iona®tery, icdled d^ud io 4he brotherhoodj who wete* however, ialu*i$K*ring much too soundly on their -separate pallets to attend to therequi^- ti^n of their superiori— w Ho^ there!— Some aid within! Jac ;a! Jerome!— Can good men slumber in an hour like this? Awake * arisen Jacopo! Come hither, I say!" While Ambrose was thus engaged, thoughts 4f a diifferent nature were be¬ ginning to <!>ccupy the mind of Obando. The yellow spirit, Zatanai, it has been already observed, had faded by this time to an almost perfect white—albeit his form still <^ntin«ed visible; «nd now it was that Gbando, as he began to recover his faculties and with them his abhor- *ence of the tibbot (as bad men always hate that whicli is in ^em%lancfe better than themselves), thought fee could dis¬ tinguish *he small shrill volefcof the de- ^^m much ld#et than he had ever heard
it before, addressing him significantly to the following effect. It could hardly be reality, for Zatanai was at a distance, and the abbot stood between them; yet he fancied he heard something rebuke him for his pusillanimity at the present im¬ portant opportunity for courage and exer¬ tion.—" Obando," it whispered, in seem¬ ing remonstrance, rather than reproach, " is a coward ! Will he, for the reverence due to a silver bauble, and the arch prate of a designing priest, forego his promised greatness and felicity? Doth he love Ambrose ?—That can scarcely be; for the lips of Ambrose betrothed the hand of Isabel to his enemy. Doth Ambrose love him ? No; for men give not to the con¬ suming fagot what they love; nor to the rending engine what they desire to preserve unlacerated. Wilt thou burn, Obando? be tortured—massacred ? Shall the fiery particles float crackling around thee, and the scorching flames shoot furi¬ ously beneath thee? Shall a towering f 4 cloud
cloud envelope thy shorn head, impene¬ trable as the dubious future to mortal in¬ vestigation, yet lustrous as the scales of Zatanai? Forbid it* all ye dread attri¬ butes of his proselytes ! Forbid it, the courage and the wisdom of the worship¬ pers of Zatanai! Obando, strike! lay low yon prattling usurper of thy digni¬ ties, and leave the rest to him who has not forsaken thee!" In an instant the whole demeanour and appearance of Obando became changed. His mien before had been rather abstract¬ ed than malignant, and his aspect altoge¬ ther deplorably dejected—at least since Ambrose had endeavoured to awaken in him a sense of remorse and contrition; but now his keen, rolling eyes again flashed fire, and darted, in a threatening glance, defiance on the intruder. He seemed sud¬ denly to have imbibed a new idea—J^e surveyed the comely form of the abbot, as if measuring his strength, and inwardly comparing it with his own muscular power, and i
and adroitness in wrestling; for, as neither of the monks were armed, it depended, in case of a contest, solely upon superior force, or agility, which of them should get the victory. Such were, at the present juncture, the meditations of Obando. Meanwhile, Am¬ brose, on casting his eyes involuntarily around fhe chapel, perhaps anxious to dis¬ cern the approach of the brotherhood, whom he had vainly endeavoured to arouse from the embrace of Morpheus, perceived on the pavement at his feet the impression of a cross, about the size of the crucifix usually worn by the members of the fra¬ ternity, apparently traced there by no earthly hand, and which glowed like crim* son fire: immediately his eyes darted to¬ wards the habit of Obando, and his horror was extreme at finding the crucifix which ought to have depended therefrom was missing; again his form became con¬ vulsed with terror, and he franticly ex¬ claimed, looking alternately at the yet vi- f 5 sible
sit^e form of Zatanai, and on the monk I ^ before him—'*, Oh I what has here been doing, unhappy man ? some fell imposture -—some infernal league, to bind thee ibr aye in the dark trammels of destruction! i Speak, thou! wh© art but human at the worst, and mayest be heard without a prayer for safetyy and a bead Ibr pardon— thy fell companion may not What hath , heen doing here ?-^~why gleams yon ghast¬ ly symbol, which looks not ;as. stamped there with blood shed in penance, nor glows with thef imtesof this middle world ? Oh! why speakest thou not? but thy si¬ lence answers me.. This is no mortal i work; thou art the d upe of some infernal .artifice, and these the signs that speak thee damned—damned to eternity I for ever % cursed !*-4 know k>~I perceive it! Wretch- J ed son, lost as thou art, well mightest thou | spurn yon sacred emblem from thee! to | .thee it offers neither hope nor consolation | ^*<ioojriied to everlasting torment—f— M 1 Obando could bear no more^ the dread- |
rial veracity of what the abbot had uttered, rushed with double force upon his mind, and a paroxysm of despair and desperation succeeded to his former trance of terror md despondency. He gnashed his teeth in unavailing rage—he grinned a terrible avowal of his horrible determination to Zatanai; and springing at once upon the unsuspecting Ambrose, fastened him in his gripe, as a ferocious bear would have hugged the devoted object of his appetite or enmitv. For some time the abbot seemed suc¬ cessfully to struggle with his lusty oppo¬ nent, and neither of the ecclesiastics ap¬ peared to have gained any considerable advantage; but this apparent equality of the wrestlers was only of short duration; the strength of Ambrose was nd match for that of his adversary, and it was presently seen, by his gasping and increasing pale¬ ness, that he was likely to obtain the worst of the struggle; while the fingers of the pale monk Obando were observed at the f 6 throat
throat of his antagonist. A few minutes terminated the contest; Obando was tri¬ umphant; while the imprudent superior was stretched at his feet, writhing, ago¬ nized, and too late repenting ofhis incau¬ tious conduct. The vociferations of the fallen Ambrose tohis brethren for assistance, it was evi¬ dent by this time had not reached their ears, otherwise, although the dormitory was at a considerable distance, some of them would doubtless have arrived ere this; and there appeared no prospect but of the worthy abbot's speedy destruction, beneath the fell gripe ofhis fearful adver¬ sary, as, without an especial summons, none of the brotherhood would, he knew, enter the chapel before morning vespers, and he was now incapable of summoning them thither. With a visage now black as the sable garb of his scowling adversary, with qui¬ vering limbs, and features convulsed with agony, lay the expiring Ambrose at the feet
feet ofhis successful foe, who still quitted not his firm and deadly hold of the throat of his superior. While in this situation, grappling cruelly with his tortured vic¬ tim, the malecontent cast his gloomy and inquiring eyes around the chapel, and per¬ ceived on the terrible visage of Zatanai a grim smile of encouragement; on which he (scarce knowing what he did) tightened his firm grasp of the abbot's windpipe, with the charitable intention of sending his soul to its eternal habitation as speed¬ ily as possible. Meanwhile the starting eyes of the superior grew dim and glazed, as from the effect of strangulation—the blood burst from his nostrils—Ambrose gasped, shivered, and expired! But how looked Obando, when he be¬ held the lifeless body of his first-murdered victim lying in bloody helplessness before him ? No longer, as the incensed gladi¬ ator, did he bend on it a furious and ma¬ lignant glance, but, appalled and shudder¬ ing, shrunk from the contemplation of what
what he had performed, and, striking his ^pale brow with his clenched hand, remain¬ ed over it in an attitude of intense horror aiid stupefaction. .From this appalling spectacle he at length raised his eyes towards Zatanai, and discovered, to his surprise* that the brilliancy of the yellow spirit's scales had increased again to a degree, which render¬ ed it an almost painful task to gaze on him; while perceiving the eyes of Obando di¬ rected towards him, the demon abruptly spoke—" Well hast thou wrought, Oban¬ do i" he exclaimed, exultingly—" well hast thou wrought in the cause of Zata¬ nai this night, and well hast thou merited for it at his hands! Mortal! thou shalt npt lose thy recompence; but the rest of the task is mine, In the interval, Oban¬ do, do my bidding; and as thou lookest &r the future favour of Zatanai, neglect not again to render him at proper season the homage he requires, and is from thee, at least, entitled to receive; Lo! yonder hateful
hateful cross (for I know it is $uch, monk, in thy secret estimation; but Zatanai de¬ sires but outward reverence—to wear the semblance of evil is to be so) is yet as crim¬ son as thy deeds, and morning must not shine ere it become as colourless, and void of bloody tincture, as his whom thou hast slain.—Fall therefore, faM, and worship me!" Obando knelt, as hewas enjoined* be¬ fore the unholy cross, although he knew not what he uttered, for his mind was be¬ wildered, and his conscience, be it recol¬ lected, for the first time, soiled with mur¬ der. The demon however spoke much more at this interview, to repeat which would notwithstanding be blamable pro¬ lixity, as the substance of it must neces¬ sarily appear hereafter. Suffice it there¬ fore to observe, that he gave the monk instructions with regard to the disposal of the corpse of Ambrose, which he com¬ manded should be left in the chapel, until found and removed by the fraternity, and also
also some directions for his future conduct, to all of which his auditor paid, or seemed to pay, the most profound attention. Meanwhile, the wretched Obando still continued prostrate before the long since faded memento of his infamy; his head swam giddily—-the walls of the chapel seeined to reel around him—his thoughts succeeded each other unconnectedly and with wild rapidity—-confusion appeared to assail him in a thousand different shapes, until memory abandoned its office, and reason found it difficult to keep her throne. In the midst of this chaotic delirium, he raised his eyes to the spot occupied a short time since by his terrible accomplice—but Zatanai was gone.
\
CHAP-
CHAPTER XIIL Alas, lost mortal! what with guests like these Hast thou to do ? I tremble for thy sake. Why doth he gaze on thee, and thou on him ? Byron. Now faintly ascended the voices of the community, chanting the holy service to the Virgin, from the chapel of the far- famed monastery of Montserrat, whence, sounding deeply on the " dull, drowsy ears" of its lethargic, tottering inmates, the bell had some time since announced the hour of midnight. The monks were all assembled, and ranged in order around the chapel, as already described on a previous solemn occasion (the demise of Augustine), and the mass was proceeding in the usual manner. The abbot was stalking majes¬ tically in the midst of them, with a proud step
step and an imperious aspect; yet as he paraded haughtily among the surrounding brotherhood, " Though smooth ilis voice, and calm his general mien, Still seemed there something be would not have seen" in the pale, withering glance he often cast around hiin, and from which the boldest of his conventual brethren appeared to shrink dismayed, whenever it chanced to light upon their features. Among the Visages of the fraternity, were discernible those of Jacopo and Ge¬ ronimo ; while in the stem, pale aspect of the abbot, were distinguishable the gloomy eyes and haggard lineaments of the tall monk Obando, the despised, deluded malecontent; with a pensive air, and a for¬ bidding scowl upon his countenance, he was striding to and fro near the ofr-pol- luted chancel, sometimes shuddering in¬ voluntarily," or turning quickly round, as if pursued by some appalling object, which it was evident had no existence, except in his own melancholy imagination. The nob/
holy fathers, it was evident, moreover, still surveyed him with a. mixture of horror and detestation; nor did even the mean¬ est of the religious tribe over whom he presided appear, during the celebration of vespers, to regard his superior with looks of complacency, or any other feelings but those created by mingled aversion and contempt. Meanwhile the abbot Obando (for such he had in reality been created, despite the apparent abhorrence of the brotherhood) continued, wholly disregarding their sen¬ timents, to ruminate, as he Walked, upon his dismal situation, which, as it was con¬ siderably altered since his last introduction to the reader, and as a considerable length of time had elapsed between that and the present period, inust here, with as much conciseness as possible, be further explained. On the morning which succeeded that dreadful night, for ever memorable to the unhappy malecontent, in conjunction with the other inhabitants of Montserratfs gloomy
gloomy edifice~-on which the ill-fated Am¬ brose was cruelly murdered by the hands of him whom destiny had ordained for his successor, the body of the deceased abbot was found lying in the chapel at sunrise; and no means, or at least no human means, appearing whereby he could have received his death, the brethren failed not (as the demon had predicted, or foreseen would be the case) to impute his decease pre¬ sently to some supernatural power, such having been well known, at different times, to have infested the cloisters of the mo¬ nastery. This matter thus disposed of, whereby Obando was freed from all suspi¬ cion of the guilty deed, the next import¬ ant affair to be considered was the elec¬ tion of another superior; and in the ad¬ justment of this second business, as will be speedily seen by their decision, and the grounds on which it was made, they acted with equal wisdom and discernment. But to proceed without further digres¬ sion.—The monks were hereupon obliged to
to elect a new superior, in the selection of whom they had not only themselves to please, as the fortunate candidate accepted (they being all candidates for this post of honour and advantage) must also give sa¬ tisfaction respecting his abstinence, piety, and other qualifications for the office, to a superior agent of the pope himself, then resident in that country. This provision then, exclaims the reader, must operate as a barrier to the unjust preferment of an unqualified ecclesiastic to the crosier, or situation alluded to. Reader, this provi¬ sion, among the sage brotherhood of Mont¬ serrat, was the very insurmountable ob¬ stacle which occasioned an unjust confer¬ ment of that unenviable dignity, which singular reality is accounted for as follows. —In the choice of their abbot, the brethren were obliged to select for that elevated station, one whose perpetual vigils, and known addiction to severe penances, had entitled him to such promotion, and en¬ abled him the better to endure the fatigues of
118 ABBOT OF MONTSERRAT, of office. This point they were strictly enjoined to attend to by the higher autho¬ rities of theife holy faith; for the perfect achievement of which they were advised invariably to select for their abbot the strictest disciplinarian, the most resolute hater of enjoyment, in their whole frater¬ nity ; and the good brotherhood, however indifferently some of them might relish this austere admonition, dared not act in opposition to such disagreeable counsel, nor venture to do otherwise than as the pope had advised them. Now it chanced that the only member of the convent who could with any prospect of success contend with Obando for the merit of superior self- mortification, was the insignificant father Jacopo, whose avarice and known addic¬ tion to cunning practices they even dread¬ ed more than the repulsive and overbear¬ ing spirit of Obando ; in addition to which weighty reason for rejecting him, the palm awarded for austerity must necessarily be given to tbe latter, Obando, inasmuch as several
3
several, of the brethren bore testimony to his having lately passed whole nights away from the dormitory, nor oncerentered his cell, or tasted the repose (necessary, 4n their opinions, only to luxurious andr carnal minds) his pallet proffered him. These were deemed conclusive arguments in his favour; for although Obando had once, been suspected of holding evil commu¬ nion, had not the penance enjoined by a, preceding abbot, in addition to his after nights of vigilance, and days of torture, sufficiently expiated his crime ?—Accord¬ ingly Obando was declared abbot witb little ceremony (the promise of the yellow demon thus being fully accomplished), and speedily invested with authority to sway the crosier over them. Obando now being abbot, pretended with much form to exorcise the terrible spirit from the monastery, by whose ac¬ cursed power, it was supposed in reality, by the foolish fraternity, his predecessor had been deprived of life; during which hypocritical
hypocritical proceedings, however, Obando sustained his part of affected sanctity, and confidence in the heavenly powers he in¬ voked, very indifferently. For even while he sprinkled the holy essence around him, the gloom of his brow contradicted the phrases uttered by his tongue; and while the name of the exorcising saint was on his lips, the anguish of his heart was in¬ cessantly visible on his countenance. About this time, moreover, many masses being said for the purpose of rescuing his im¬ mortal spirit from the supposed gripe of the fiend who had terminated his mortal existence, were committed to their mother earth the remains of the unfortunate Am¬ brose. He was an upright man—and which was more to the brethren of Mont¬ serrat, had proved to them a kind and gracious abbot; yet, his body being given unto the dust, and his soul having sought out its abode elsewhere, he was in a short time almost totally forgotten, and his fate remembered only to be narrated to the credulous
\'4
• 5
"Al
'4 v
a
i:*a
'-■s- ;%
credulous traveller, as a marvel and a mys¬ tery. In this manner passed several months, during which the fate of Alfieri de Gracy and Fernandez being unknown, they were concluded dead; as indeed few were known to escape, having fallen into the hands of the lawless bandit Roldan, and his bloodthirsty associates; which, on the arrival of the flying serfs at Barcelona, was instantly reported to be the unfortu¬ nate lot of Alfieri de Gracy and his lovely daughter. Having thus far premised for the in¬ formation of the reader, we return once more to that important night destined to produce events which materially affected the members of the monastery of Mont¬ serrat. The scowl which sat upon the features of the now richly-habited Obando (for although the garb of the abbot was both cumbrous and inelegant, it was splen¬ did compared with the coarse weeds worn by the brotherhood), had by this time ga- vol. ii. g thered
thered to a most forbidding frown of ran¬ cour, disappointment, and anticipated re¬ venge. The vespers at length concluded; the brotherhood withdrew as usual, leav¬ ing their disconsolate superior to the un¬ molested enjoyment of his disheartening reflections. For a short time Obando re¬ mained motionless in the middle of the chapel, watching, or appearing to watch, the disappearing monks, as they wound slowly towards the dormitory, without seeming in any degree surprised at the visible emotion of their superior, to whose fits of abstraction and melancholy they had become perfectly accustomed; until rousing himself suddenly, he began with furious speed to pace the chancel, often striking his forehead with violence, and sometimes stamping vehemently on the pavement, with all the desperation of mad¬ ness and despair. As the last door closed in the distant dormitory, which secured the latest strag¬ gler in his cell for the remainder of the night,
night, Obando stopped before the alta^ and paused for a single instant in horrid meditation. .Then hastening a few steps forward, as if suddenly fired with a reso¬ lution which nothing could induce him to abandon, he, with a loud and horrid voice, more resembling the yell of a mon¬ ster than any thing human, pronounced again the terrible name of w Zatanai!" with a malignant emphasis which made the very aisles around him echo, as if in mockery of his vehemence, the discordant sound. The monk stood firm, glowing with stifled rage, soon to be wreaked upon the object of his accusation and malignancy. Presently the yellow light shone gradually around—the demon appeared—Zatanai stood before him, for the first time since that fatal night on which the hands of Obando were imbrued in the blood of his predecessor. They regarded each other sternly, and yet differently; in the coun¬ tenance of Obando was depicted choler, o 21 almost
almost amounting to fury; while the eyes of the demon flashed living sparks of fire, as if in defiance of his bursting animosity.
% ^
CHAP-
CHAPTER XIV. And after the league marie with him, he shall work deceit- fully* Daniel, chap* xi. verse 26. The intention of Obando in thus abruptly summoning up the demon, was first bit¬ terly to revile him for the internal and unmitigated anguish he still endured; and finally to break with him for ever, by re¬ nouncing his assistance in whatever future difficulties he might be doomed to en¬ counter. But when he saw that scaled and fiery aspect, glowing with an expres¬ sion of malignancy that far surpassed his own, his resolution failed him for a mo¬ ment, and he shrunk appalled from the superior ferocity of the fiend whose pre¬ sence he had just before required. This pause of irresolution was however only transient; for the demon Zatanai, seem- o 3 ing
ing to enjoy his consternation, appeared determined not to dissipate the silence; and the abbot was therefore at last con¬ strained to speak, rwhich he effected in a somewhat humbler manner than he had purposed, although with much asperity.-— "Zatanai," said he, wrathfully, " thou again hast heard my summons—hear there¬ fore, spirit of darkness, wherefore I have now summoned tlhee. Five moons have waned-^—five dreairy months have passed away, since Obandp became thy willing proselyte; part of thy promises have been indeed fulfilled—but their accomplishment has only tended to cQniplete my wretch¬ edness. I am, alias! so miserable now, that I could madly sue to the meanest of my brethren for that which, unsolicited, I rashly dealt to Ambrose, and fawn upon the hand raised for my destruction. Such are my present feelings, and such is my determination—I am wretched—I am des¬ perate; devise therefore some means for my relief, or in charity destroy me." "Mortal!"
w Mortal P replied the yellow spirit, calmly, "all thou hast hitherto required of me has been accomplished for thy gra¬ tification. Then whence this weariness of existence?—wherefore these unmerited reproaches cast on the obedient Zatanai ? Thou didst demand supremacy—I have made thee principal: thou didst ask a single interview with thy brother—I have facilitated your nightly intercourse: thou hast possession of the beauteous Isabel— what ails thee at thy happiness?—but that thou art too cowardly to seize by force what she hath denied to thy supplications. Yet think not that Zatanai cannot even further assist thee. Obando, name what thou wouldst enjoy!—he who influenced the minds of the brethren to elect thee abbot, hath it still in his power (provided thou shrinkest not to perform his bidding) to render thee additional service—and thou shalt find will do so." " Detested fiend P exclaimed Obando, incensed beyond bearing at this recapitu- g 4 lation
lation of the pretended benefits conferred on him, each : of which had proved in reality an additional curse—"thou hadst deceived,me thrice, ere that last master¬ piece of thy infernal treachery!—thrice haxjst thou lured me to the commission of crime, with promises of enhanced felicity -—kept fatally to the ear, but broken to the hope. 1 was ambitious—I demanded of thee to be made superior, suspecting not the means thou wouldst select to create me so: again, thou bloody monitor! I trusted to thee for the issue of my daring —and again thou hast deceived me. Tor¬ mented with the opposition of'lffoldan, the resolute resistance of the high-spirited Isabel, and the torturing consciousness of secret guilt, my life is but a burthen to me—a load of misery too heavy to be borne. In vain doth the silken couch now court my fevered limbs, and the silver cross hang pendent by my side—in vain doth the crosier glitter in my hand—" " Wouldst thou rather," said the spirit, ,: . here
here haughtily interrupting him," wouldst thou rather that keen scourges were flou¬ rished in the hands of thy tormentors ?— wouldst thou rather the condemned habit adorned, and the flaming pile awaited thee, than the soft couch, and venerated em¬ blem thy predecessors have enjoyed and worn before thee ? These, but for the in¬ terposition of Zatanai, had each of them been thine—the torturing engine, the fiery stake, and the figured garb of inqui¬ sitorial vengeance. But we waste the precious moments that should be more pro¬ fitably employed: I have never told thee false, however subsequent unforeseen cir¬ cumstances may have chagrined or per¬ plexed thee: if there is aught beside, in which, as it may be, thou art fearful of proceeding, I am willing to acquaint thee with the means by which it may be ac¬ complished, as bound by the covenant which hath made thee mine. Speak then, Obando—say wherefore hast thou sum¬ moned me to this conference ? Augustine G 5 is
is in his grave—Ambrose can trouble thee no more—the rest, I repeat, is as thou didst desire: what is it further the obe- dient Zatanai can aid thee to achieve ?" " Oh ! thou art ever ready," cried Oban¬ do, impatiently, " to enumerate thy ser¬ vices, or to counsel the perpetration of additional villany! of which the sple re¬ sult'—too fatally have I proved it—is ad¬ ditional wretchedness. Yes, Zatanai, from implicit dependence upon thee, X find* aris[e only extra repinings and aggravated misery! but yet, attend to me, while I divulge to thee once more (for I cannot restrain the impulse which urges me to do so) the secret wishes of my soul. My brother Marco, whom still it irks me to call Roldan, albeit he answers to no other appellation, has refused to abet my suit with Isabel, and has even dared himself to love the maiden for whom I have im¬ brued my hands in blood, and subjected my eternal soul to brimstone everlasting¬ ly! When I talk to him of compulsion —of
^-of forcing her to become mine, he prates of honour—says that she is his captive, and must not be used with violence: when I propose her secret removal to the monastery, and aver my intentions of mu¬ nificently rewarding him for his services, he says no reward can stifle the accusa¬ tions of his conscience, which would up¬ braid him perpetually for suffering so much innocence to become the prey of ar¬ tifice and pollution. Hence am I baffled in every attempt to secure the beauteous prize; and my final success too rendered more than dubious, by his constant pro¬ testations of a superior, and yet subdued attachment to the object of my desires. Meanwhile, I adore the fascinating Isabel —I doat on her to distraction!—my hours of privacy are imbittered for the want of her society, and my new state is rendered worthless to me by the lack of her ap¬ proving smile. Every hour passed away from her appears a century of torment— every moment passed in her presence is g 6 worth
\Vorth bi\ ageot supretn thei?e|3re^ ^ktanaip do I require of thee: devise Some stratagem, however desperate, bj^ whieh she may; become wholly mine, and Obando will be indeed thy worship* per—^thy worshipper in spirit, if it be pos- sible, as now in outward reverence^ with the mere semblance of what I feel not for thee-—so thou wilt yanquish the obduracy of Marco, and bid Isabel be mine!" ^^^ - ^ feelings of Gbando had hiirried him far beyond what he meant to have saidj which Zataiiai probably per¬ ceiving, took advantage of immediately ; and presuming upon this transient rhap¬ sody, in which the monastic had indulged, instigated thereto by the irresistible charms of Isabel, coolly addressed him in the fol¬ lowing seductive strain:—" Foolish* mis¬ doubting mortal!" said the spirit, " hath npt Zatariai already made thee acquainted with His willirigness to serve thee ? and needst thou doubt the means by which alone thy desires can be accomplished? Roldaa
Roldan has been thy friend, by assisting thee to effect thy purposes; his threatened opposition to thy will makes him thine enemy. He must therefore be removed; a single blow, thou knowest, procured for thee thy supremacy—a single blow may yet perchance procure thee the enjoyment of this stubborn damsel. Is Isabel of less importance to thee ?—are her charms more worthless in thine estimation than the empty rule thou hast obtained thus blood¬ ily ?—or is the arm that bowed the strug¬ gling Ambrose to the pavement, grown too weak for the achievement of a similar enterprise? Briefly, srch ig the only course, by a dauntless pursuance of which thou canst with surety reckon on the sole possession of the obdurate Isabel. Roldan is but mortal—resolution and a poniard may easily effect his overthrow: Isabel will then be defenceless, and ------but thou regardest me not; rouse thee, Obando!— listen to the voice of Zatanai, and doubt not that he will afford thee consolation." The
The yellow spirit here cast a grim, tri* umphant look upon the shrinking visage of his distempered auditor, whom he thus hoped to lure to the contemplation of a yet more horrible crime than any he had heretofore perpetrated; and he saw, by the expression of Obando's lineaments, that he was not Hkely to be disappointed.
CHAP-
CHAP JT ER XV* ******** *y ****»•*.#•*.#■ Cain. lie is a God. Adah. —--------- How knowst thou ? Cain. -------------- ,., „— He speaks like a God* Adah. ..... — So did the serpent—and it lied. Byron. Obando started at this sudden proposi¬ tion, which invited him, for a mere mo¬ mentary gratification, to incur the guilt of fratricide, and appeared for a while com¬ pletely horror-struck. On a sudden his limbs trembled, his features grew con¬ vulsed, and a cold perspiration stood upon his forehead, as at first he recoiled in hor¬ ror from the appalling project: but these signs of repugnance soon became sensibly diminished, as the demon proceeded with his address, and his aspect assumed a sort of horrid satisfaction at the unnatural pro¬ posal,
posal, for which such cogent reasons were in the end administered. This also yield¬ ed presently to the fixed and stupid stare, which caused the fiend abruptly to break off in the middle of his argument; and Obando heard not the promissory words with which Zatanai had concluded. His eyes were bent in a deep reverie upon the marble pavement of the chancel—his frame now shook no longer—his mind appeared abstracted—he ruminated on the opposi¬ tion he had already received from Roldan, and the length to which that personage would probably carry his resistance of any other measures than the conciliatory ones found heretofore unavailing. The result of these reflections was unsatisfactory: again he pondered on the pn^able issue of a desperate contest with his refractory brother, and was again unable to decide to which of the combatants victory was likely to be awarded. From this confused state of mind, not altogether unpropitious to his purposes, the
the demon, Zatanai, found it necessary at length to effectually arouse his proselyte; and bending a stern look on him, he ac¬ cordingly exclaimed— w Obando—-awake! —arouse thee, apostate—murderer! shud- derest thou at last, renegade and assassin as thou art, to shed the blood of one whose accursed existence is the only obstacle be¬ twixt thee and the attainment of thy wishes ? But, be it so; thou art unworthy of the treasure thou hast coveted, who darest not force even a timid maiden to surrender it unto thee. Be it left for a bolder spirit than thine to reap. Roldan, he loves the damsel, and awaits but an opportunity to seize by artifice what has been denied to his supplications, as to thine. Perhaps at this very hour (thou being absent) he puts his design into ex¬ ecution, and wafts her beyond thy reach for ever: this wouldst thou sooner find and know, on thy next visit to the fast¬ ness, than by a single effort level this law¬ less plunderer with the mountain-clod, and
and end at once his hopes with his exist- ence—Obando, answer me!" "Mock me not," now replied the some¬ what shamed Obando, with much agita¬ tion, notwithstanding—" mock me not, Zatanai, with such a question. Isabel must be mine; yet tell me, must my pas¬ sage to her embrace be floated with bro- ther's blood ?—is there no other way ------" " There is none," rejoined the demon, with less acrimony; "Roldan must fall ere Isabel will be relinquished. And now, Obando, mark me," he continued, hastily, having, as he fancied, accomplished his de¬ sign on the infatuated monk—'* for the first glimmer of the morning is at hand, and we may commune together no longer: to-morrow eve, before thy usual hour of departing from the monastery, repair thou to the haunt of the banditti; see thou goest not unarmed; and when, as is thy custom, thou parleyest with thy brother in his private chamber—-enough! be arm¬ ed, lest thou repent thy negligence.— Adieu!—
Adieu .'-^perform thy worship here, ere morning shines upon thee; then hie thee to thy couch. Adieu—adieu!" So say¬ ing, Zatanai, more suddenly than he had ever shrunk from view before, began to fade from the vision of Obando; and slowly motioning, while yet his form was visible, towards the glowing cross upon the pavement, instantly disappeared. The abbot, who perfectly comprehended this departing signal, gazed for a few mo¬ ments in speechless awe upon the portion of space he had so lately occupied; while, as his fear subsided, all his suppressed choler again mounted into his visage; and turning hastily round, for the purpose of prostrating himself as usual before the un¬ holy cross, he exclaimed, as he eyed the deepening symbol—" Accursed emblem!" sakl the malecontent, scowling fiercely while he spoke—" hateful, accursed em¬ blem ! Oh that I had died ere thou hadst arisen before me, the perpetual memento of my shame—my criminality!—oh that I could
&£&a*itoku*^
I could trample thee into nought! Alas! it will never be—thou dost retain, despite niy feeble efforts, all thine accustomed brightness; and, except I worship thee, thou wilt never fade. Come then, since ere the bell toll for matins, thou must be obliterated—even must I yield to thee the choice of the means by which thou wilt be overmastered.—-To stab him secret¬ ly," he continued, his thoughts reverting suddenly to the demon's counsel, " were an accursed deed—I cannot do it; nor I will not: would I had never been born !" Thus muttering, the abbot Obando knelt to perform the requisite ceremony, for changing the crucifix from a deep crimson hue to perfect alabaster. While bowed, however, before the infernal sign, his thoughts still wandered from his pur¬ pose, and he again appeared bewildered in a labyrinth of fictitious horrors, as on the eve of his last fearful interview with his demoniac adviser. Among other absurdi¬ ties, equally terrific, and yet ludicrous in recital,
recital, he fancied the lights placed inces¬ santly before the altar were engaged in the performance of a mystic dance around him; while his right hand, which, in the heat of desperation, had suffocated the good abbot Ambrose, led them adroitly through the mazes of the unholy measure. From delusions such as these, he arose not until the grey dawn began to overpower the sickly streaming of those blessed ta¬ pers, and the ** soft, warm daylight" warn¬ ed him to retire with speed to his apart¬ ment.
■S&Mkx&iui^.^
CHAP-
142 ABBOT OF MONTSERRAT.
CHAPTER XVI,
Lodk where he goes, e'en now, out at the portal! ShaIespeare; : On the evening which succeeded that of the abbots interview with Zatanai, it chanced that ft^her Gerom comfortably in the refectory of the cdii- vent, by the side of Jacopo, with whom he was indulging a little in social converse upon various topics. Before them was placed a table, it is true; but to their cre¬ dit be it spoken, the simple fare spread thereon comprised nothing that was for¬ bidden even by the strict rules of monas¬ tic abstinence, and self-mortification. A little pure water, in a large brown pitcher, with a small loaf of coarse bread (to which a small portion of dried fish would have been
ABBOT OF MONTSERRAT. 143 been an enviable addition), composed the whole of their repast. Over this scanty meal, however^ their conversation had been long and earnest; and even, as ap- ; peared by the low mysterious tone in which it was still carried on, peculiarly in¬ teresting. The rest of the fraternity had successively vanished from the refectory, i for the purpose, very probably, of betaking j themselves to their pallets, until awakened | ■' by the unwelcome sound of the bell tor I midnight vespers; and the two worthy personages already alluded to were left \ to discuss, without molestation, the re- mainder of their subject. As might be [ supposed, in this solitary t£te-a>t$te 9 the I principal speaker was the garrulous Gero- I nimo, who was seldom so happy as when j he could obtain a patient auditor for any j length of time; and who, it might with | verity be averred, had successively poured j his droning narratives into the ears of " ■■ ■ ■" ■- -—every monk who there Boasted of piety, but felt despair; In
In whose dull eyes hope shone not, and whose breath Was one unvarying tale of death and death." It chanced, howeyer, that Jacopo, in the middle of their argument, haying ven¬ tured a surmise of his own, implying in substance, that men may achieve much (meaning men who are desperate and de¬ termined) without the aid of either de¬ mons or familiars, Geronimo was heard to remonstrate with him in rather louder accents than he had heretofore ventured to use; and the following was the strain in which he endeavoured to convince his anta- gonist of the superiority ofhis own opinion: " And if, as ye say," replied the loqua¬ cious monk, in a tone of eager and trium¬ phant remonstrance—*' and if, as ye say, Roldan be not guided in his destructive course by some foul agent of darkness, can ye tell me wherefore his head-gear is per¬ petually surmounted by that same yellow plume ? M (Here his reverend auditor made a sign of inability to answer the proposed question.) " Right well I weened ye could not T
not afore I asked ye," continued Geronirno. w It is doubtless ordered so, in some infer¬ nal compact, by virtue of which (and not, as thou wouldst aver, owing to his merely human prowess, or capability to effect such purposes) this daring man hath intercept¬ ed, and holds in the basest bondage, or slaughters at his pleasure, so many worthy personages who have visited our convent, and among the rest the generous cavaliers who departed hence, accompanied by the comely maiden of whom you were just speaking, but who, as our last information assures us, never arrived at the place of their destination. Nor-is Roldan the only personage within the precincts of this mountain," he added, lowering his voice again to a whisper, " who has dared to practise such unholy doings; for, as sure as there is wrath in store for the unrighte¬ ous man, our most ungracious abbot, Obando- -----" Here the monk was interrupted by an¬ other sign from Jacopo, who expressively vol. xi. h intimated
intimated his deprecation of any mention being made of Obando. The loquacious Geronimo however con¬ tinued, with his accustomed pertinacity in such cases, notwithstanding his auditor s unwillingness to listen to any thing which concerned their superior—" I say our pre¬ sent most ungracious abbot—shake not thy head, man, there are no eavesdroppers here—Heaven hath had little hand in his elevation to that office, which, well thou knowest, good brother, should have been otherwise bestowed (Jacopo nodded a grim assent to this observation) than on such a malignant churl; yet such, I repeat, for a limited season, is the power, and such are the works of the evil one and his emis- saries. Myself am a godly, striving man, and v/hat, to speak the best of him, hath Obando been more ? yet, Heaven preserve us! I say again, Obando is now a crosiered abbot, while I------" and, with a signifi¬ cant shrug, he finished the remainder of his coarse and unsavoury meal. Before
Before the shrewd Jacopo could return any suitable response, his attention was arrested by a tall, dark figure, which glided past the spacious door of the refectory; but in which notwithstanding he had no difii¬ culty in recognising the spare, gaunt form of the abbot Obando, of whom his compa¬ nion had just been holding such impru¬ dent converse. Obando however seemed not to have overheard the subject of their discourse, nor indeed even to have ob¬ served the startled brethren, as he hurried by the incautiously expanded portal. His clouded visage (as was customary with him of late) was bent towards the earth, ap¬ parently in deep meditation, and his pace, though quick, was exceedingly perturbed and agitated. Jacopo looked aghast for a moment on perceiving him, but presently resumed his former composure; while his companion, who caught the infection later, being naturally more dull of the apprehen¬ sion even of danger than the sharp-eyed and ready-witted Jacopo, found it more h 2 difficult
difficult to resume the appearance of his wonted tranquillity. As soon as he had in some degree conquered, his surprise, he arose, and motioning significantly to Jaco¬ po, prepared to retire to his cell; nor did the talkative but now-alarmed Geronimo need any further remonstrances on the part of his more prudent companion, to persuade him of the folly of proceeding with his dangerous subject that night It was rumoured, however, that on the succeeding day, Geronimo was heard by several of the fraternity, industriously cir¬ culating his belief in the surprising ubi¬ quity and other supernatural endowments of the pale abbot Obando; but as this ru¬ mour is not authenticated, we dismiss it as an unfounded calumny, calculated to tra¬ duce the character of the good old monk, scarcely believing ourselves that he was capable of such gross exaggeration and credulity. To return to Obando. He proceeded onwards, until he arrived at the private portal
portal already mentioned, which opened to the burying-ground. Having thus gained, unobserved by any one, as he thought, the outside of the monastery, he began hastily to ascend the mountain, too busily occupied in the contemplation of his own vile purposes, to bestow a single thought upon the probable conjectures or conversation of the malignantly inclined, but powerless inmates of the abode he now saw far beneath him. He had lived of late—to use the words of the poet— " He trod the world, the spectre of himself, Recoiling from the charities of life, As chained invisibly to some secret doom ;" and he now resolved to know at once (like a greater hero in his moment of emergen¬ cy) « by the worst means, the worst." Accordingly, as directed by the yellow spi¬ rit on the night before, he was repairing earlier than usual to the abode of Roldan, not however with the intention of sacri¬ ficing his brother—a proposal from which his heart recoiled with horror and aversion, h 3 in
kj&'k:^.
in proof whereof he resolved to go unarm¬ ed, without a defensive weapon of any kind; therefore he set forth before the hour of vespers, and, although there was no moon at this early hour to guide his ascent as heretofore, soon began to scale the upper promontories of the mountain.
CHAP-
CHAPTER XVII. Uh, nature, nature ! what can check thy force ? But rush not on destruction ; save thyself, And I am safe. To ine thev mean no harm, -a- Thy stay hut risls thy precious life in vain. Home. The moon had not yet risen; the mists were rolling in huge masses, resembling to the eye of the traveller mighty volumes of smoke, among the dusky crags of the mountain of Montserrat; while the sky was of a deep azure, studded with a few pale stars, which, of all the host of heaven, were alone visible. The different passes of the mountain were hushed in profound silence, save where perchance the hoarse song of the robber sentinel (a proper Phi¬ lomel for such a scene) was heard at a dis¬ tance, as he strove to beguile the " tardy- h 4 gaited"
gaited" hours of his watch, by this appro- priate exercise of his rude voice among the ruder scenery which surrounded him, as, hurrying through the constantly impeding brushwood, was observed a tall female form, conducting by the hand a youth of a gentle mien towards the lower part of the mountain. They were near the ban¬ dit's hold, from which indeed tbey appear¬ ed to have escaped, as some remains of fet¬ ters were still visible upon the youth's de* licate and graceful limbs; while the ex¬ treme caution of his conductress, and her evident fear of being intercepted, might well have justified such a supposition. With slow and deliberate pace, looking round them at almost every instant, did the pair descend over many a dangerous, projecting promontory, towards the rug¬ ged post already described, at which was stationed the last sentinel of the banditti. Occasionally, as they clambered down¬ wards, the figures of the fugitives became more perfectly distinguishable, although but
but for a moment; yet even in that single moment the eye of an observer could not have failed to recognise in the female the form of the abused Corvetta, and in the youth that of Fernandez de Leon, the be¬ trothed of Isabel. With more than redoubled caution they now approached the place where Corvetta knew the last sentinel of the horde to be stationed; and as she yet drew nearer, she discovered a dirk firmly clenched in her right hand, which plainly enough bespoke her resolution. But what was her asto¬ nishment on arriving at the dreaded sta¬ tion, to find the pass defenceless, and the sentinel (one of Roldan's most trustworthy guardians, whom she had found it impos¬ sible to corrupt from his duty) lying sense¬ less and bleeding at a little distance t Sur¬ prised, but not displeased, at this most un¬ accountable sight, (for who could have thus secretly disabled the faithful and sturdy Gomez ?) she paused an instant to survey the prostrate robber, and then significantly h 5 smiling,
smiling, hurried Fernandez forward with increased precipitation. At the distance however of only a few yards from this fiital post (for fatal it ap¬ peared to have proved to him who held it) she stopped abruptly, and seizing Fernan¬ dez by the arm, pathetically exclaimed— " There lies the only enemy whom we had m reality to dread!" she cried, pointing back to tlie fallen sentinel; " that gallant man alone, of all whom I have seduced this night to aid in thy release, did I find it impossible to bribe from his fidelity; and he has met with his reward. Poor Go¬ mez ! who would have thought the strength of an unarmed cavalier, and an unprac¬ tised peasant, eould have overthrown thee!" and as she finished, nhe dropped a silent tear for the supposed fate of the robber, in admiration of his fidelity, although he had refused to aid her enterprise.. " It, seems then," now asked Fernan¬ dez, in a hesitating manner***" it seems then,
then, mother, you know who are the per¬ petrators of this act of blood ? w " My, son, begone!" exclaimed Corvet¬ ta, suddenly, without answering his ques¬ tion, as if recalled by the sound of his voice from her trance of pity over the wounded sentinel-—** there lies your path, and you will not long lack a guide, and a companion to render it both pleasant and easy; go then, and the blessing of all holy saints, whom it were sin for an outcast like myself to name, go with thee!" ** And thou," demanded Fernandez, in astonishment," my long-lamented mother, as thou hast partially confessed thyself, and whom the voice of nature, mingled with that of gratitude, now speaking powerfully in my bosom, permits me not fo think otherwise, lies not thy path with mine ? -I—Thou wilt not tarry longer with these ruffians ?—Oh! flee with thy Fernandez, despite what thou hast avowed to be thy purpose, and taste once more the pleasures Qf a tranquil and innocent life! for, beside H 6 that,
SiWMI,,
that; I have further occasion for thee here," pointing to the rugged declivities he had yet to traverse; " it were imprudent now to leave thee in the fangs of those wolves, who tore thee from thy dwelling, for even another hour." " What dost thou say, my son ?" ex¬ claimed Corvetta, in a sorrowful tone, as if moved by his appeal to circumstances, and yet resolving not to yield to it—" what dost thou say, my son ?—Shall I return to a course of life which, sooth to speak, I have almost forgotten how to enjoy ?— Shall Corvetta abandon those scenes which, however strange and appalling they may appear to you, have been endeared to her by a residence of nearly twenty years ?— Shall she abandon Roldan ?—No! though be has proved unkind to her!—Shall she forsake her mountain habitation P-^-No! though its desolate fragments should fall and bury her beneath their ruins!—Shall she return again to a peaceful life—can she do it ?—No—never! for reppse is no .'■ ■ • longer
ABBOT OF MONTSERRAT. 157 longer an inhabitant of her bosom. Thou hast heard my determination—urge me then no further, but be gone!" " I go," replied Fernandez, irresolutely —" I go then, but swear by all those saints thou hast invoked in my behalf, that ere another night shall pass, aided by the all-potent Inquisition ----- -" He would have proceeded; but just then the sound of distant voices, apparent¬ ly in high debate, caught the listening ears of his wary conductress, and even imper¬ fectly assailed his own. Without utter¬ ing a syllable, she again seized his arm, which in the heat of argument she had relinquished, and vainly endeavoured to thrust him forward in silence several times, until finding Fernandez still irresolute, and unwilling to proceed without his se¬ cond new-found parent, she again ex¬ claimed—" Will it not be ?—art thou de¬ termined on thine own destruction?— Shall the blood of our true comrade, Go¬ mez, be spilt in vain ?«—Rash boy! a mo¬ ment
Mttimfcu***^^.,
ment more, and escape may be prevented. But come, myself will lead a little further: thou knowest not who are chagrined at thy evil*timed delay." So saying, Cor¬ vetta once more hurried him forward, pro¬ ceeding cautiously by his side, along the path which she had before informed him led to the base of the mountain, and they entered a close thicket of brambles and underwood together. Leaving them therefore to pursue their downward course, we shall proceed to ac¬ count for the condition in which they had found the wounded Gomez, the real origin of whose disaster Fernandez strove vainly to conjecture, and even Corvetta herself had not conceived.
CHAP-
CHAPTER XVIII.
They found him dead, and cast into the streets, An empty casket, where the jewel, life, By some damned hand was robb'd, and ta'en away. SlIAKEBPBARE. Obando, as before observed, bent his course steadily towards the fastness of the bandit Roldan on his departure from the monastery; and as he had by this time become pretty well practised in the slip¬ pery ascent, made considerable progress in a little time, despite the surrounding dark¬ ness, and other impediments which he had to struggle with, too various to be here enumerated. Meanwhile, as he mounted the now well-known track, he gazed occa¬ sionally upon the dew-besprinkled land¬ scape beneath him, and the dense clouds of mist which gathered perpetually around hittt, with a look of vacancy that still left it
it doubtful whether he saw them at all; and then again, " with leaden eye that seeks the ground," proceeded at a brisker rate towards the haunt of the banditti, ru¬ minating doubtless upon the probable issue of his coming interview with Roldan, which he determined should decide his fate. In this mood he presently arrived at the furthermost outpost of the lawless horde, where, contrary to his expectations, he found he was likely to meet with an ob¬ stacle more insurmountable than any he had heretofore encountered. The senti¬ nel was oh his post, and with levelled car¬ bine, threatened instant destruction if he advanced one step further, without giv¬ ing the customary signal. " Speak the word there, ho !* exclaimed the trusty Gomez, for it was no other; " the word, false monk, or I fire!" " Hold!" cried Obando, advancing reso¬ lutely towards the robber, aware of his having
having, seen him often before—-" hold! it is a friend—look, and remember me." " Whoever thou art," returned the ma¬ rauder, bluntly, " I demand the watch¬ word instantly!" and Gomez again pre¬ sented his piece. " I have it not!" exclaimed the startled Obando, but without flinching a jot from the uplifted carbine. '* Then you pass not hence a living man," said the sentinel, who had his own private reasons for suspecting the treachery of the abbot, whom nevertheless he well remembered, " I had it yesternight P now suddenly exclaimed Obando; " but circumstances prevented me from visiting this spot; to¬ day it was doubtless changed; but here is that shall win me a free entrance, if thou art but as wise as thou art daring." As he spoke, he flung a, purse full of Spa¬ nish coins at the robber's feet; and, for a moment, awaited the result in silence. Qomez glanced his eyes downward upon the
the shining treasure; but instantly raising them, with a smile of ineffable meaning on his countenance,,proceeded a third time to take a deliberate aim at the man who would tempt him from his duty. Obando however, probably guessing his design from the expression of his countenance, now hastily prevented him. —" Slave!" cried the irritated superior, striking aside his carbine just as Gomez drew the trigger, which caused the piece to miss fire, " dost thou thirst for murder ? -*-Wouldst thou destroy, like a deluded churl, the abbot of Montserrat, the bro¬ ther of thy chief ?~~Thy blood be on thy head then^receive thy recompence !*' he continued, fiercely striking the falling Go¬ mez with the heavy part of the carbine, which in the struggle he had wrested from his grasp. Gomez reeled beneath fhe weight of such an unexpected blow from the muscular arm of the abbot—the crim¬ son tide gushed copiously from his fore¬ head,
head, and he fell prostrate and harmless at the feet of his antagonist Obando surveyed him for a few mo¬ ments in silence; and then, with a sudden start of recollection, pensively exclaimed -*•" The yellow spirit warned me," he ar¬ ticulated, flinging the carbine to a consi¬ derable distance as he spoke—" the yel¬ low spirit warned me not to come hither unarmed I well, Zatanai, I have disobeyed thee, and had nearly paid the forfeit Yet think not that Obando will ever carry a poniard to manure these sterile rocks with the bright blood that warms a brother's heart: a fratricide! Saint Mary save me! —pshaw!—saint Devil must be my invo¬ cation now! yet, alas! how ill it sounds to me!" Thus reflecting, the abbot Obando turn¬ ed his back upon the fallen Gomez, and proceeded towards the summit of the mountain; yet turning once again as he ascended, with less alacrity than hereto* fore, he cast a parting glance on the stun¬ ned
ned sentinel, as if commiserating his help¬ less situation. Gomez raised himself fee¬ bly at this moment, and applied his bugle to his lips; but the breath that should have sounded it was exhausted, and he sank senseless on the path he had protected with his blood. Obando saw the movement, and rejoicing that he was unable to exe¬ cute his purpose, which might have caused the monk some difficulty, hastened up the precipice. The trivial occurrences which impeded his further ascent, and the mode by which he obtained instant access to the presence of Roldan, affording nothing singular in their nature, would be uninteresting in detail. Suffice it therefore to say at pre¬ sent, that the voices which disturbed the conference of Corvetta and Fernandez, were those of Roldan and the abbot Oban¬ do ; but the substance, and issue of their meeting, must be narrated at length here¬ after. CHAP-
CHAPTER XIX
All will be well, my Jaqueline— Oh ! tremble not, but trust in me. The good are better made by ill, As odours crushed are sweeter still; And gloomy as thy past has been, Bright shall thy future be. Rogers. Fernandez de Leon now joyfully ac¬ companied Corvetta through several dark and lonely windings of the thicket, until they arrived at an open glade, across which the path they had followed was still visi¬ ble. Here she stopped suddenly, although the impatient stripling would fain have still proceeded, and looked anxiously around the small sloping plain, fenced in on every side with impenetrable brush¬ wood, to which she had conducted him. Fernandez accordingly paused also; and following the direction of her eyes, thought he
he could plainly distinguish several figures standing beside the very path they were to pursue, in order to reach the village of Montrosol. The cheeks of the youth be¬ came blanched at this conviction to a dead¬ ly paleness, for he knew himself unarmed; but the female, with a wild burst of laugh¬ ter at his consternation, again hurried him forward, until they reached the very spot where the forms were stationed—dark, motionless, and as silent as themselves. The foremost of these, a tall, stout figure, in a dark Spanish habit, Fernandez now began to think was not altogether un¬ familiar to his recollection; and in the next instant he recognised Alfieri de Gracy. To cast his eyes eagerly around for Isabel was his next impulse, and the succeeding moment beheld the lovely damsel clasped and almost fainting in his arms. The other two (for the figures were four in number) he presently discovered to be his former guide, Carlossa, now metamor¬ phosed (in outward semblance at least) to a marauder
a marauder of the mountain, and the ti¬ mid attendant of his betrothed bride Inez, to whom the muleteer seemed particularly attentive, and whom all his efforts could hardly prevent from shouting forth her joy at this unexpected liberation. A transient pause ensued, during which Fernandez (so great was his rapture at this unhoped-for meeting) almost forgot even the presence of his newly-discovered pa¬ rent, whom nevertheless, as soon as his amazement had in some degree subsided, he thanked with fervency for her services, and the interest she had taken in his hap¬ piness; concluding with a repetition of his intentions with regard to the prevention of her future residence with the ferocious Roldan and his bloodthirsty associates. To this intimation Corvetta impressive¬ ly replied, while Isabel, with Alfieri de Gracy, and the rest, stood listening in the most profound amazement.—" My son, beware!" she exclaimed, with much so¬ lemnity ; " I have already cautioned thee to
I8S £bBOT OF MONTSERRAT. to undertake no hostile expedition against ihou rejectest a mother's cbunsel---beware, i&r &U art in if thou but medi- tatest evil against the horde M the preci¬ pice of Montserrat! I comiiiand thee-^-I adjure thee, Fernandez, to desist fronl the contemplation of any attack upon our fast¬ ness, which' : could avail thee nothing.—And thou too, stranger," she added, now turn- ing to Alfieri, "for the liberty I gave thee, thou hast requited me by the sacri¬ fice of the most faithful member of our band: or was it thou, base churl," said she, addressing Carlossa-—" %vas it thou, who, to be revenged of thy former gaoler, hast thus ungratefully repaid my services ?" Alfieri de Gracy here strongly protest¬ ed his innocence; while Carlossa, stam¬ mering in his eagerness to clear up the matter, hastily responded--'' Not so, by saint Mary!" cried he, impatiently-—^ not so, on the veracity of an honourable mule- teer—some time an adherent of cut-throats, ' it
ABBOT OF MpNTSERRAT. 169 it is true, but now about to return to his former honest occupation!«-As we, ap r proached the pass, we saw Gomez engaged m an encounter with no mortal enemy-— though his antagonist wore much the re¬ semblance of that incarnate fiend who, they say, is abbot yonder: but this was a devil—a real devil, by his strength and his adroitness! it was none of our duty to interfere, thou knowest; so we followed thy directions, and luckily enough slipped by them both unheeded. Having reached a little distance, I ventured to turn my head, and saw Gomez lying at the cloven foot of his adversary; on which we has¬ tened forward a second time, but halted in this place, according to the tenour of thy instructions, though freedom lay be¬ fore us, and the devil drove us on *!" While yet Garlossa spake, the mind of Corvetta became suddenly smitten with a " Need must when the devil drives," is a proverb much more commonly used in Spain than (by a certain class) in England. vol. ii. i conviction
if© ABBOT Of ^NTSE^RAT* conviction of Jthfe^ trulh, and sWe saiv the necessity of their hastening to sonie place ^safe%^ ^ ti& ji^iiad Iconduded, $he energetically^ ex^ claime^#-!f!The^ao^ cfeSmeianei: tboir^^it isnot yet \mMom : but go^4*egohe, while the path is open to y& fiemember, son !pemaridez, the ad*. iuratidn of her who hasthns a second time bestowed existence on thee; attempt not to scMe tbese iheightSi in the frantic > pur^ suance of any hostile enterprise; for such would most assuredly &e frustrated. Meanv wliile, think qf me as one over whose del voted heaid the tomb hath already closedi; for if the \vily abbot hath indeed ascended the mountain lat this unwonted hour, 3ueh, ere many minutes have flown, mayJbe niy destiny. Speak not agjain|; the time fisr words is pasfc aijd has^avai^ thihgil cannot^; te brace me, and |begone!" A mute embrace followed this decisive speech, and, hastily waving her hand to . '.■/"■■■'■'.the
AtobT OF HONTSERRAT. 171 the rest ^^^tHjy^ she seemed to re^ ^uirethei^^^ path which site pointed out to them. Al^ fieri de Gricy, conducting bis beauteous daughter, led the van-^eariossa and Inez obeyed the signal by following them; and Fernandez was at last obliged to depart in mute affliction, though not without some hope of yet recovering his misguided parent. Having watched them disappear, Cbu vetta now turned slowly back to the aid of the wounded Gomez, who, althoughlie had refused to abet her enterprise, or con¬ nive in any way at the release of the pri* soners, she felt confident had not betrayed her secret to Roldan, if indeed it had reached the ears of the chief at all, as seemed more than probable from the un¬ timely visit of his principal confidant in this affair, the abbot of the monastery. She found the wretched man still lyincr senseless near his station, while the blood flowed copiously from a wound on his 1 s head,
head, inflicted evidently (despite the shrewd insinuation of Carlossa to the contrary) by Some earthly and substantial instrument, such as she well knew the abbot Obandp had both skill to wield, and strength to render fatal. Gently she raised him from his uneasy posture, and began, as well as the darkness would permit her, to separate the clotted tresses which concealed his hurt, and to examine its nature. W 7 hile thus employed, she gradually heard a dis¬ tinct, yet murmuring sound, arise from the pinnacle inhabited by the robbers, which plainly proved that the fugitives had been missed, and that search was now about to be made for them. Above the rest of the " busy hum," and apparently much nearer to her own station, she could easily distinguish the voices of Roldan and Obando, often raised high in the vehe¬ mence of dispute—now uttering mutual threats and imprecations—now sinking again into a lower key, more fit for the expression of irony and reproach. To this
this ominous conference Corvetta listened attentively; but that portion of it which she overheard must be reserved for the succeeding chapter, to be recorded with the rest of the particulars of that eventful interview.
i3 CHAB
*i&*4^>__
CHAPTER XX. There's two of you — the devil make a third ! Shakespeare. From the moment of his entering the presence of Roldan, the abbot Obando had displayed a degree of resolution (we might almost have added, of desperation) to which that renowned chief had hitherto believed him a stranger. He demanded that Isabel (such was summarily the na¬ ture of his principal resolve) should be in¬ stantly delivered to his own private cus¬ tody, to be dealt with as his clemency or his affection might dictate. This demand Roldan as resolutely resisted, on the ground that she was his captive, and not to be parted with so slightly. Hereupon Oban¬ do urged his prior claim to her possession, and
arid even offered to ransom her with half the riches of his convent: hut the bandit was inflexible; te smiled and told him, in answer to this last proposition, that he would, whenever he chose, descend and seize the whole, withput asking permis¬ sion of a defenceless fraternity, or a de- prayed superior. Just at this juncture, before intelligence was brought to the chief of the escape of Isabel, and the whole of her company, which otherwise would have speedily reached his ear, Obando heard the bell of the distant convent announce the hour of midnight vespers: instantly he prepared to depart, requesting Roldan to accom¬ pany him a short distance towards the monastery. The latter consented without difficulty, and they descended the cliffs together, their dispute continuing with unabated violence as they proceeded.__ " Audacious robber!" said the enraged abbot, indignantly. " Presuming monk!" retorted the fero- 14 cious-
^ ^EB B MS fc a i^g^Mtttriaafe^^
cious-looking Roldan, angrily—«« monastic hypocrite! dost thou presume to dictate the terms on which the invincible Roldan sball surrender up his captives ?• Insolent upstart! where is thine authority?—what power hast thou in readiness to enforce mine acquiescence with thy presumptuous wishes? Let me but hurl from yonder promontory the smallest of those terrible fragments on thy devoted edifice beneath, and your own devastated altars (I once again remind you) and symbolled walls, covered with brains and gore, will afford you a wide and universal sepulchre. Be warned, Obando—tempt not Roldan to forget his kindred to the saucy abbot of Montserrat's monastery, I conjure you, as you value your existence!" " Marco," answered Obando, sneeringly, without however noticing the bandit's threat, on which theme he probably con¬ sidered it most prudent to be silent— ** Marco, thou wert ever a breaker of covenants—a betrayer of the confiding— a violator
a violator of the bonds of consanguinity. But, Marco, hear me speak; for it may be, brother, little as thou dreamest it, that Obando is protected by a power not infe¬ rior to thine." Here Roldan interrupted him with a scornful smile; he thought Obando alluded to the power of his patron saint, the holy Virgin; but the abbot, in reality, implied, as the reader must be aware, a power of a very different descrip¬ tion.—" Was it not stipulated in our com¬ pact, that Isabel, the divine Isabel, should be only mine? Answer me, I entreat thee." Even the unblushing, hardened Roldan felt somewhat abashed at this frank but ingenious question, which, nevertheless, he conceived it impossible to evade an¬ swering : he knew full well it had been so stipulated; and he knew equally well that the. conditions ought to have been per¬ formed. While however he was preparing to reply, the attention of both was arrest¬ ed by a spectacle as singular as it was un- 15 expected, *™*™* a ^ aMataaaitrt ^ TtfW-.VWi- I Ml I HII MM........ !
expected. This was the appearance of Corvetta, ascending the eminence, and bearing the apparently lifeless body of the sturdy Gomez in her arms. Surprised and startled at the sight, which, at the best, portended discord among his band, Roldan stopped and interrogated her; while Obando appeared to await the re¬ sult with perfect indifference. " My faithful Gomez!" exclaimed the chieftain, recognising with astonishment the countenance of his fallen comrade, which Corvetta purposely turned towards him—** foul play has been used here: tell me, Corvetta, who hath done this deed ?" Corvetta spoke nothing, but glanced her eyes, with a significant expression, to¬ wards the delinquent Obando. " The deed was mine," said the abbot, calmly, almost at fhe same instant. * e Thine, monk ! M retorted Roldan, fu¬ riously, surveying him with a threatening look; ** and wherefore hast thou slain my trusty comrade ?" "He
" He refused to let me pass without the watchwordy' answered Obando^ carelessly ^.^ he refused to let me pass without the watchword, and thou kppwest; I.had it not. Had Roldan himseif," he added, in a tone of menace,." opppsed my passage to the abode of Isabel, he would. have fallen likewise." " He did his duty," replied Roldan, sternly; " and for thy threat, monk, thou shalt answer this offence with thy life!" So saying, he attempted to seize the mo¬ nastic, who presently, by dint of superior strength alone, succeeded in loosening himself from his gripe. " Let me pass to my convent," said Obando, sullenly thrusting him gently aside as he spoke; " it is the hour of ves¬ pers, and I must not be absent: let me pass!" " Vile hypocrite! thou shalt pass no further!" vociferated the now enraged bandit, springing again with renovated vigour upon the athletic form of the ab- 16 hot*
f 3 i - bot. Obando held him at bay as long as he was able, as a dexterous savage would have avoided the attack of some wild ani- mal; until finding the agility of the rob- her was likely to prove a match for his own superior strength, they closed finally in an arduous and desperate struggle for the advantage.
CHAP
':!.0NO-"H?
I CHAPTER XXI. I « V i i I Now, gallant Saxon ! hold thine own. Scott, T ; Howbeit, thank God 'tis safe. Thank God ! for what? Milman. i Long did these desperadoes continue their equal contest for superiority, with a de¬ gree of zeal which not unfrequently threat¬ ened the dissolution of both, by a sudden precipitation over the ledge of an adjoin¬ ing promontory, to the very brink of which their struggle had conducted them. It was during this trial of strength, which it seemed probable would terminate in the destruction of at least one of the parties, that Gomez gave some feeble signs of re¬ turning life. Accordingly, Corvetta, on perceiving that a faint palpitation yet lin¬ gered in the body of her charge, again addressed
addressed herself to the task of dragging him up the promontories, leaving Roldan to deal with his antagonist; for, as Cor¬ vetta really believed that chief to be in¬ vincible, she had little fear for the result; concluding of course that it would be in his favour. She therefore proceeded up¬ ward with the insensible Gomez, whose quivering lips now uttered a low moan, as if in thankfulness for her attention. No sooner was she out of sight, than the strength of the abbot Obando began gradually to get the better of his adver¬ sary's activity and skill in wrestling. Rol¬ dan, who now felt himself about to be overpowered, searched his belt vainly for his trusty hanger: it had fallen off during the struggle, and was now lying at a con¬ siderable distance. In this dilemma, he suddenly thrust his hand into his bosom, and drawing forth a poniard, would have speedily terminated the career and crimes of his antagonist; but being by the effort thrown off his guard for a moment, Oban¬ do
do took the advantage thus proffered hiin by his adversary's treacheirv; and* iHth'a dexterous movement of bis tody; stretch¬ ed the daring marauder prostrate at his feet. Roldan however fell not so suddenly as to prevent his drawing into view the con¬ cealed poniard, with which it was evident he had meant to " Set abroach the blood that should have flowed In calm and natural current"— his brother's blood—^the blood of the ab¬ bot of Montserrat, whose predecessor that very poniard had assisted to massacre near the bloody pool. Obando accordingly saw the weapon; and as the chieftain was now entirely at his mercy, found little dif¬ ficulty in wresting it from his grasp, thus becoming himself master of the blade bared for his destruction, on which, bran¬ dishing it triumphantly over the body of the fallen leader, he gnashed his teeth fu¬ riously, and exclaimed, with deep but sup¬ pressed emotion—* Curses on thee!" mut¬ tered
tered Obando, shaking his victim violently by the collar of his armour—*' curses on thee! the fate of all who have been Oban¬ do's enemies be thy bitter portion T* Yet he delayed to strike: it was his brother's eye that now looked up to him for cle¬ mency—it was his brother's form that lay prostrate at his feet. Obando was not en¬ tirely abandoned even yet by the finer feelings of his boyhood; and hurling the dagger to a considerable distance, it struck against the edge of a projecting promon- f tory with a force that shivered it to splin¬ ters*—" Rise—for I cannot slay thee!" now shouted the agonized Obando, with some¬ what less vehemence than heretofore; but first acknowledge that Isabel de Gracy is destined for—" * Not for thee!" articulated Roldan, faintly, and yet in a determined tone. The patience of Obando could bear no more; with a single spurn of his foot did r he send the prostrate form of his brother \ rolling over the ledge of the aforesaid pro- montory.
riiontory, whence it bounded apparently, rustling over weeds and brushwood, into the gulf below. The abbot watched it proceed from rise to rise (for luckily the descent was not quite perpendicular) until it had reached a considerable distance, in the attitude of a man transformed to stone. He shuddered at what he had done—his blood retreated to his heart—his forehead, flushed before with exercise, grew paler than the purest marble. Suddenly he seemed to recollect himself: the body had disappeared from his strained vision, and it seemed probable no human eye would ever more encounter it. He tore himself away, and, in a state of mind closely bordering on distraction, sought out the path which would conduct him to his monastery. As Obando descended the mountain hastily towards his convent, the moon rose slowly over a projecting point of the mountain, and her beams burst gradually through the clouds of vapour, which at every angle where water presented itself, still
siiaco^inued tojenveJop^hiBd. TbebsU for v^spws s^U c^otuiued moreover to pealbarsSily infc^ e^rs; for the absence of Ufw ^bbpt tofl samciwhat alarmed tbp Ut V^oipu^^fernity^d $pj, tbpr^forp kept it tolling for ^; lc#^r perjip^ than usual. around him, in the hope, pf discerning some trance of the body of HoMan—but in vain; all was J^ely-^aJl was silent; and Obando ventured not to call; lest his voice being heard by the brotherhood, should heiray the point to which his midnight stroll had been directed. - At length he reached th© level tract of ground on which the convent was situated, and pausing here awhile to recover his breath, he could not avoid taking once more a cursory survey of the rude and magnificent scenery left behind him. The bell had ceased to toll, the moon WHS beginning to spangle: the declivity pf the mountain, and all, except the bosom of the abbot, seemed to partake of the uni* versal
'I
I
versal tranquillity which pervaded the s®me± On a sudden he thought he hea»d a distant murmur, as of several voices loud¬ ly exerted, which appeared tp proceed firom the upper part of the mountain; and accordingly straining his eyes in that di¬ rection, he plainly distinguished several groups of figures carrying lighted torches in their hands (which the faintness of the moonshine yet rendered necessary), de¬ scending towards the spot of his late en¬ counter with the treacherous Roldan. These he doubted not were parties of the banditti in search of their chief, of whose danger the indefatigable Corvetta must already have apprized them; and in this conjecture he was presently confirmed, by the following proof of its being well grounded. While yet the abbot was gazing to¬ wards the gathering swarm of banditti, whose forms at each succeeding instant became more distinctly visible, the mur¬ mur of voices considerably increased; and he
matamt
he; could, as they drew nearer, easily recognise the hoarse voice: of Sebastian, mingled with the rest, calling loudly upon their hapless leader. Obando listened still,; and presently thought he could dis¬ tinguish a faint cry proceeding from a lower part of the eminence they occupied, as if uttered in answer to their clamorous salutations. In a moment all was pro¬ found silence;; and now again the feeble shout distinctly reached his ear, and also the ears of the robbers; for they instantly made, with one accord, towards the spot from whence it issued, which Obando knew to be the very glen into which he had rashly precipitated the form of their chief, and where, had the body as it rolled down¬ ward chanced to take an opposite direction, it would inevitably have been dashed into a thousand atoms. " Praised be Heaven, he lives! he lives!" murmured the abbot, with apparent fer¬ vency; then, as he turned to enter his monasterY—** Praised I heaven ?" he con- tinued,
; •#
*
%
» 5^ SI
-3 i
I I
tinued, gloomily: " what have I to do with heaven?—the heaven for which I bartered my salvation was but a piece of painted frippery, and even of that I have been disappointed!" Thus musing, he proceeded to the pri¬ vate door already so often mentioned in this narrative; and having opened it, turned once again to ascertain the further progress of the horde in the discovery of their leader: an unbroken stillness pre¬ vailed over the late scene of uproar, while a few were observed slowly reascending the mountain, with their torches extin¬ guished, a sufficient proof that they had effected the purpose for which they had been illumined.
CHAP*
CHAPTER XXIL j Deep, from that melancholy pile, I The bells at eve ate swinging; I And tights are seen in the cloistered aisle, I For tbe convent mass is singing* Basil* I Vespers had commenced long ere the abbot Obando entered the chapel appro¬ priated for their celebration ; but when he did so, it was with a steady gait, and an unmoved, though sorrowful aspect, as from the infliction of some secret penance, or self-imposed discipline— such power had habit given this unhappy being of con¬ trolling the violent emotions of his trou¬ bled spirit. Not long, however, did he I r on the present occasion preserve this se¬ date and hypocritical demeanour; for soon, too soon, his features became contracted : into more than their accustomed harsh- i '".'•' ness; \\
ness; while the &nvoliiiitaty seowl ^ipon his haughty brow, and 4\io S-equent flaish- iiig df his/ fidry 'eyes, 'beti^yed the inces* sant workings of his soul. He strode to his Appointed station tiear the ^hancelv on his entrance; andnotwithstahding the evi¬ dent perturbation of his mind, joifted in the holy ceremony, though his *• brain was whirling giddily, and hfe heart was scorched with iire. M It is needless ta observe, that the parti¬ cipation of Obando in the sadred' worship of the brotherhood was only mechanical, therefore a mere outward show of-reve* rence to the Deity which he did not feel. His thoughts were in reality far otherwise employed; he was contemplating the risk he had encountered i\h thus provoking the resentment of the fiery-spirited Roldan, against whose dreaded vengeance he now doubted whether even the power ^of Za¬ tanai could shield him. Isabel tooi he be^- gari ^to be apprehensive, was now lost to him J fdreve¥r fetf how could he attempt to
to recover her ? To venture again among the horde of Roldan, would be to encoun¬ ter certain destruction; for how zealously would those ruffians avenge the quarrel of their leader, especially upon one of Oban¬ do's detested habit and calling! This con¬ sideration induced him speedily to aban¬ don the idea of ascending the mountain, or even quitting the convent again alone. How then was he to obtain possession of the beauteous prize, for whom he had sa¬ crificed his tranquillity in this world—his hope of salvation hereafter? He knew not, nor could conceive any mode of pro¬ cedure which promised the least chance of success to his exertions; and this convic¬ tion added considerably to his natural gloom of aspect, and rendered him an ob¬ ject of terror and detestation. While buried in these despairing rumi¬ nations, yet instinctively, as it were, per¬ forming among the assembled brotherhood the duties of his office, the ears of all pre¬ sent were assailed by a loud rumbling noise,
rioise, as of thunder pealing in the welkin just over their devoted heads. Scarcely had they recovered from the amazement excited by this unlooked-for phenomenon, ere a second crash, more dreadful in its effects than the former, burst furiously over them; that instant the carved and glided ceiling of the chapel was separated, and through the yawning aperture de¬ scended a huge fragment of stone of enor mous magnitude. This appearance at once explained the cause of their terror, but allayed it not: the affrighted brother¬ hood, who, on the first shock, suspected with some reason that the day of doom was arrived, now hurried up and down the chapel, in yet wilder disorder and dis¬ may—so terrible to them in idea was the execution of Roldan's often threatened vengeance. Some flung themselves in humble supplication before the yet-unin¬ jured altar, in the vain hope of averting their doom by prayer; while a few fled, at the first onset, to the solitude and tem- vol. ii. k porary
porary security of their cells. Geronirno dropped on his knees in the place where he was standing, and with hands\ which trembled with age and apprehension, be¬ gan, for the last time, as he feared, to fumble over his rosary—an example in which he was followed by many of his equally timorous brethren, whose dread of Roldan was, like his own, almost equal to the antipathy they professed towards Sa¬ tan himself. It should here be briefly remarked, in common justice to the individual, that he who amid this tumultuous consternation seemed most ably to preserve his self- possession, and power of acting on the defensive, was father Jacopo. He steadily watched the countenance of the abbot, as if expecting him to issue some command respecting the conduct to be adopted in this exigence; and whatever that com¬ mand might be, father Jacopo seemed de¬ termined to fulfil it, if its execution was found practicable. But where was Oban¬ do?—
do ?—how brooked he this disastrous com¬ mencement of the hostilities which he alone knew they had good cause to appre¬ hend? Reader, your curiosity shall be speedily gratified. The abbot was stand¬ ing, pale and motionless, beside the fallen fragment—a spot from which he had ne¬ ver stirred since the first cause of alarm was audible. The brethren had actually mistaken the first assault, which, as al¬ ready narrated, failed to perforate the roof of the edifice, for a loud clap of thunder, the prelude to a sudden tempest; but Obando, who knew the species of thunder they had most to apprehend, was not so easily mistaken: he well knew that the hoarse battering above him could only be occasioned by the dreadful ammunition of those whom he had been imprudent enough to make his enemies; but he also knew that defence would be unavailing, as the descent of the second mass sufficiently proved to the conviction of every quaking inhabitant of that devoted pile. The holy £ 2 service
100 ABBOT bF MOKTSEKRA^i '"■'.;,■'■'■■ ■.'.'.. ..„■>'■'.. :■:■ ■ ^ ; " -.■-,-. flj' service Hvasiiow suspend that infernal ihode of assault be renewed, it seemed more than probable that the; whole monastery would| before the mor^ ing, be a demolishec! heap of ruins. Thus situated, as a last and desperate expedient, the abbot determined to summon Zatanai to his succour and counsel; which resolu¬ tion had no sooner been taken, than he prepared as suddenly to execute it. Ac¬ cordingly, with an imperious wafture of his hand, he commanded the brethren to their cells, bidding them there employ themselves in prayer, as every other species of defence would now avail them nothing. This order, although deemed somew hat injudicious by Jacopo, was readily obeyed, and Obando remained alone in the chapel.
CHAP
ABBOT OF MONTSERRAT. 197
CHAPTER XXIII.
*-^j
Come with a word—I thank thee—Ariel! come. Shakespeare, On finding himself unobserved, the un¬ fortunate abbot strode hastily several times across the chapel, as if considering in what strain he should address the inexplicable being whom he was about to summon. At length rage predominated over every other consideration; and with a visage now rendered frightful indeed by those violent, conflicting emotions which it still essayed to hide, he furiously advanced to¬ wards the chancel. It was now that so¬ lemn hour, aptly defined by the immortal Shakespeare, as—•
u
■-—the very witching time of night,
When churchyards yawn, and hell itself breathes out Contagion to this world ;" k3 and
and who that saw the agonized and in¬ censed Obando at that terrible moment, but would have believed him a " native of another and worse world ?" and, to con¬ clude, who would not have exclaimed with the wondering Caloyer— '* If ever evil angel bore The form of mortal, such he wore: By all mjr hopes Of sins forgiven, Such looks are not of earth nor heaven !" Thus wound trp to the highest pitch of frenzy, by a contemplation of the various circumstances, which seemed to conspire against him as if preordained by that ma¬ lignant'phantom for his destruction, the most unholy abbot Montserrat ever wit¬ nessed within its sanctified precincts, pro¬ ceeded to call up his infernal auxiliary to his assistance in this dilemma— M Zatanai, thou most accursed deceiver! (it was thus he reviled the spirit he was necessitated again to invoke) appear!—arise—appear, false demon as thou art, thou darest not evade
evade the summons of Obando. Appear, I say—appear!" Slowly, and with seeming unwilling¬ ness, but much real gratification, did the yellow fiend appear to the call of the ab¬ bot as heretofore. The conduct of the demon, Obando had before remarked, seemed of late to be entirely changed; since, willing as he was formerly to arise in the presence of Obando, even without any direct solicita' jn, he now came re¬ luctantly to his repeated summons, and was ever foremost to break off the inter¬ view. Howbeit, he at length stood once more beside his proselyte, in all his former imposing, but (to Obando) no longer alarming brilliancy; and the abbot, in spite of the hatred he bore to the object before him, could not avoid inwardly tes¬ tifying his unwilling admiration; for never had he beheld the fiery scales of Zatanai burn so brightly and so beautifully as at that moment. " Zatanai, the Philistines are upon me!" K 4 now
now cried the abbot impatiently, without waiting for the address of the demon, and profaning the language of scripture in his own; " they have broken my stronghold, even as thou seest, and I am in their power. Say, spirit, is this the promised recompence of my sworn fealty to thee ?—this the reward of my misdirected prayers—iny sacrifices of eternal weal, for everlasting misery ? De¬ luding fiend, speak !—wherefore, in mine extremity, hast thou thus deserted me? and why am I delivered into the hands of mine enemies ? for soon will Roldan force our rotten gates, rendered by time too weak to resist his entrance, and soon will the wretched Obando become his victim." The demon scowled yet more terrifi¬ cally as Obando concluded, but returned rio other answer; on which the distressed abbot resumed—" Why, demon, art thou silent?*' he continued, in the same strain of mingled reproach and supplication.— " Isabel too thou didst promise should be mine—yet Isabel will now be another's: couches
couches of down didst promise for my re¬ pose—but, alas! I can rest on them no longer: costlier garments than I was wont to wear hast thou bestowed upon me— but they clothe not the bosom of peace, nor can for a single moment assuage the inexpressible anguish which devours me. Thou didst promise me, moreover, thine assistance in mine hour of peril, or of ad* versity; speak then, for I am in danger ; and when was the betrayer a niggard of his treacherous counsel ? Speak, Zatanai! how shall I avoid the destiny which now threatens me?" " Frail, erring mortal P at length re¬ sponded Zatanai, without softening the stern gaze with which he regarded his devoted proselyte, or betraying any symp¬ tom of commiseration for his plight— " frail, erring mortal! who hast neither the inclination to perform good actions, nor the courage requisite to work evil ones! hadst thou obeyed the dictates of Zatanai, thou hadst not now needed his & 5 advice
Sfiwriiv,-.. ..
advice to extricate thee from the web of inauspicious incidents, thou hast, by ne¬ glecting it, permitted thine enemies to wreath around thee. Thoii art environed on every side, although thou knowest it not, by deadly enemies, who were never yet defeated, or foiled in their infernal machinations. Accuse not me as the au¬ thor of thy calamities; my advice, I re¬ peat, if followed, would probably have prevented their existence. Did I not warn thee, Obando, yesternight, that Rol¬ dan must perish ere thy wishes could be accomplished? Now, answer me—hast thou done thy best endeavour to effect his overthrow ?—hast thou not rather, fickle- minded coward! hast thou not rather ten¬ dered his existence as a thing precious to thee, than attempted to deprive him of it? Answer me faithfully, as thou wouldst obtain my future services. Why dost thou shrink, and turn aside thy visage? Obando,-I command thee, answer me!" " It would be vain to attempt deceiving thee,"
thee,** now sullenly responded Obandp, after an irresolute pause; " I brandished a poniard over his prostrate form—I flung the weapon from me—I could not take his life.** " And in sparing it thou hast endan¬ gered, perhaps sacrificed, thine own," re¬ joined the demon significantly, with a fierce, yet somewhat meliorated glance of displeasure; " he would have deprived thee of existence, wherefore shouldst thou hesitate to requite him with the doom he meant for thee ? To have sheathed that poniard in his body who drew it against thine, would have been only to commit a deed which prudence must have ap¬ plauded, and justice would have sanction¬ ed. Hear me, Obando," he continued— " hear me; for dastardly as thou hast de¬ meaned thyself this night, I will yet be¬ friend thee; since those are still disciples of Zatanai, who, possessing the wish to work evil actions, are yet deficient in the spirit so necessary for their execution' k 6 and
and such a knave art thou, whose heart dares brood over ill deeds thy hand hath shrunk from the perpetration of. Some events have happened yonder with which thou art yet unacquainted; these Zatanai will narrate to thee, and then choose whe¬ ther thou wilt abide their consequence in this place, or away with me to an abode thou wottest not of, there to reiterate thy solemn professions of fealty, and, finally, to abide with Zatanai for ever!" Here the yelkw spirit narrated briefly to the tortured and astonished Obando the escape of Isabel from the power of Roldan, with some subsequent circum¬ stances of an appalling kind, with which the reader also is not yet acquainted: the principal of these was the meeting of Fer¬ nandez and Alfieri de Gracy with a strong party of inquisitors, who were crossing the mountain in search of a sus¬ pected victim of the Holy Tribunal: these lie easily induced to listen to his fervent depositions against the abbot Obando, whom
whom he accused of the practice of almost every enormous crime; for these officers are like bloodhounds, and, in the polished language of the refined Milman, " When the tale is rife With blood ancl desolation, then, oh ! then They listen with a cold, insatiate thirst;" although, to the ** plea of mercy," they are too often stones indeed. Finally, he had succeeded so well, that the officials had resolved to consign the accused Oban¬ do to their dungeons at Barcelona; and, as the yellow spirit asserted, while Roldan was advancing against one side of the mo¬ nastery, resolved on the destruction of its abbot, a power from the terrible Inquisi¬ tion, aided by Fernandez and the peasantry of the neighbourhood, was ready to assail it on the other.
CHAP-
CHAP IER XXIV. Obando chose that course which seemed ro proffer him the greatest advantages. History of Columbus. Obando listened to these tidings with in¬ expressible horror, confusion, and dismay; he dreaded death much, as the terrible hereafter to which he had consigned his immortal soul now rushed upon his me¬ mory; but the Inquisition—that terrible tribunal which tortured its victims into a full confession, and afterwards burnt them for their iniquities, he dreaded still more. In this dilemma, he saw no possible pros¬ pect of escape, except by complying in¬ stantly with the last proposal of the yel¬ low demon; and how was he then to be rescued ?—Which way was he to obtain egress, since both sides of the monastery were
wei*e beSefc with irreconcilable enemies? Might not Zatanai have deceived him ?•«- No, for the assault of Roldan not having been renewed from his impregnable battle¬ ments, he made rio doubt of that chief hav* ing now descended with his comrades, in order to force open and search the con Vent for the fugitive Isabel, for whose sake, it now seemed probable, he had for a while delayed its demolition. Thus circum¬ stanced, he knew not what decision to make; but stood trembling and distracted, his pale lips quivering with rage and ap* prehension, until the demon once more reminded him of the necessity of forming a speedy determination. " Choose !" exclaimed the exulting Za¬ tanai, whose greaved, transparent covering was never so brilliant as now—" choose! Wilt thou begone with Zatanai, far-*—far beyond the reach of thine inveterate ene¬ mies, or wilt thou stay, and perish by the ruthless combination which thou seest is forming against thee ?—Our time is brief —decide,
^-rdecide, or thy decision may yet avail .thee nothing! for however Zatanai may scoff at the hypocritical sanctity of those pretenders to holiness who are approach¬ ing, they bear that with them which I may not look upon; the blazoned symbol of their perverted faith gleams in the van of their array, and ere its entrance here, -must Zatanai perforce forsake thee! Speak then—decide, I say .'—-Which wilt thou do ?" Obando, amid the chaotic recollections and surmises of that horrible moment, was yet unable to make any distinct answer. At length, however, rather speaking what was uppermost in his mind, than making any direct proposition to which he ex¬ pected the demon would agree, he fran¬ ticly exclaimed—" What if I fling myself humbly at the feet of Roldan—entreat him to pardon my precipitance, and sup¬ plicate his protection ?" he articulated, in a tone of self-interrogating perplexity— self-accusing desperation and despair. " And
■" And by an act so rash," returned the yellow spirit, readily replying to the ques¬ tion which was but half intended for his ear, " accelerate thy destruction!—Expect not clemency from the marauder of Mont¬ serrat, Obando; such mercy as the wolf, robbed of his food by stratagem, would yield, even such shalt thou receive at the hands of Roldan. Methinks I already see his poniard hilt deep in thy bosom, thy¬ self unarmed, and powerless at his feet—I behold the laugh of exultation triumph in the features of his brutal followers-—the languor of death succeed the flush created by false expectation on thy countenance— the red stream bubbling down ...... " " Suppose I cast aside this hateful garb, and endeavour to save myself by flight ?" now rejoined the abbot, interrupting him, as if sickened at the picture he was draw¬ ing of the triumph of his lawless assail¬ ants—the despised banditti. " And meet the officials of the Holy Tri¬ bunal," retorted the demon, angrily, with a mixture
a mixture of scorn and derision in his as- pe&> "who know too Well their duty, and are much too deeply skilled in the hellish practices of their cruel occupation, to suffer tMelr prey to escape them so easily. How Wilt thou endure their torments, their racks, their screws, their agonizing cords, aiid crooked engines of torture, when sus- pehded over some accursed machine, thy cramped joints forsake their shuddering sockets, or stretched beneath tlieir burn- t i - " - ■** ing pincers, thy straining eyeballs glare with wild amazement? and then at last the foul close of tyranny—the condemned habit, figured all over with the emblems of thine infamy—-the scorching, fiery pile —the bffght, curled flames around thee, hissing—crackling—mounting ------ w M !Fi&hd, forbear!" how cried the dis¬ tracted abbot, who saw but too much pro¬ bability of this description being realized— " mock not thus the misery thou hast caused 1 How shall I shun—what shall I do to averi this horrible destiny ?" "Be
" Be mine!" rejoined the now victorious demdn*—victoribiis, at least, in his own vile conjectures*--" resign thyself to nie— thy body to my guidance-^—thy soul tb ihy eternal keeping, so shalt thou ne deliver- ed—Zatanai will deliverthee! swifter than thought shalt thou be borne afar froin peril, where neither holy symbols, ridr divine missionaries, shall affright4hjr spirit more!" " Whither wilt thou bear me?" was on the lips of Obando, when a sudden alarm of firearms without the portal of the mo¬ nastery prevented his titterance of the question. This was occasioned by the ar¬ rival of Roldan, and a numerous partjr of the banditti, at the private portal of the convents against which, as an intimation of their intentions, or more probably to assay the strength or thickness thereof a few of them had discharged their arms. In a few moments was heard a loud riim> bling sound, as of something applied to the door in order to force it open, which ope¬ ration, accompanied by a general shout from
from the rude throats of the robbers, min¬ gled, as it died away, with threats and ex¬ ecrations, commenced presently. Furi¬ ously did the clatter now continue at the private, and consequently the weakest, door of the monastery; for Roldan felt assured that Isabel had in reality escaped by some treachery of his brother Obando, and was doubtless concealed in the con¬ vent; a supposition which proved fortunate enough for the inmates of Montserrat, which otherwise the formidable destructive stones of the banditti would have battered without mercy to the ground. Just at this instant too, on the front or larger portal of the monastery, was heard, distinguishable above the adjacent uproar, the solemn knock, thrice repeated, which announced the approach of the officials of the Inquisition. Obando started back in unaffected horror—it was a moment of in¬ tense anxiety. " Dost thou resign thyself to me—thy soul
soul to my eternal keeping ?" again de¬ manded Zatanai, impatiently. * I do! I do!" sobbed forth Obando, wringing his hands in an agony of terror; put ....... The meditated objection of the monas¬ tic, it appeared, came too late; for that in¬ stant Zatanai advancing, laid his hand (or what resembled such) lightly upon his shoulder. Obando felt himself immedi¬ ately uplifted from the ground, and trans¬ ported, with his horrible conductor, through the already-mentioned aperture made by the falling fragment in the ceiling of the monastery. Their motion was not swift —no cessation of the breath accompanied it; but the awe of his situation transfixed Obando in silence, while a sickening sen¬ sation crept over his whole frame, and his looks were as the aspect of one who would never speak again! Just at this moment, the whole body of the brotherhood, who knew the signal, and conceived themselves unquestionably bound
bound to admit thp officers of the Holy Tribunal under, any circumstances, rushed tumultuously intp tlie chapel. To de¬ scribe their astonishment at the spectacle which presented itself would be impos¬ sible ; each was truly in the situation of him in Scripture, who exclaims—" I have heard of [thee by the hearing of the ear; but now mihej eye, seeth thee." Mean¬ while Obaiidp, apcoinpanied by his lu- minous companion, issued majestically through the chasm afpresajd, and appeared to ascend the loftier vaulted firmament
CHAP-
CHAPTER XXV,
Ctii«. I tread on air, and sink not! yet I fear To sink. Lucifer. —----- Have faith in me, and thou shalt be Borne on the air, of which I am the prince. Cain. Can I do so without impiety ? Byron. Buoyed up in middle air by the preter¬ natural agency ofhis conductor, high above its loftiest pinnacle, Obando surveyed with a wild, stupid stare the succession of events which took place in the monastery be¬ neath him. He perceived that the rob¬ bers, finding every other mode of obtain^ ing an entrance ineffectual, had set fire to the convent towards that angle where the private door was situated; and that already the clear flame was ascending to the up¬ per rafters of the edifice, so dexterously used had been their innumerable torches, while
while a huge column of black smoke began to aspire towards his own elevated situ¬ ation, a further proof of the rapid progress making by the destructive element. On the other side, opposite the front gate of the monastery, he could distinctly per¬ ceive the dark forms of the officials, bear¬ ing with them, as Zatanai had predicted, the holy standard of the Inquisition, over which now the ruddy, aspiring flame, that burst forth on the opposite side of the building, began faintly to diffuse a horrible ( and portentous lustre. In a few moments the emissaries of the Holy Tribunal were admitted by the brotherhood; and almost at the same instant (utterly ignorant as yet of the formidable foes they had there to encounter, imagining the monastery to be, as usual, merely the receptacle of un¬ armed monks and pilgrims) did Roldan and his outrageous followers gain entrance by means of the ruin they had effected in another quarter of the edifice. The flame created by these bold incen¬ diaries •
diaries had by this time increased to a spi¬ ral blaze, which peered above the top of the monastery, and illumined the cross of skulls, erected over its site, with a terrible radiance, which, reflected by so ghastly an object, caused an effect completely terrify¬ ing ; while the sable volumes of smoke now rolled heavily around the demon and his proselyte, with a degree of heat and dense- ness, which to any thing human, not ex¬ pressly strengthened and upheld by super¬ natural aid and interference, would cer¬ tainly have threatened suffocation. The moon moreover, whose mellow light might otherwise have served to abate the horror of the scene, had indeed risen high in the silvery horizon; but about this period her mild lustre became obscured by clouds heavily laden, which oniy heightened its tartarean solemnity. With these low gusts of wind (the usual prelude to a shower or tempest) began to arise also, fanning the brightening flames as they swept over the monastery, and augment- vol. ii. l ing
ing their fury, until, growing to a hurri¬ cane, their noise again resembled the bel- lowing of angry bulls, as each succeeding blast howled over the adjacent hollows, and among the rugged promontories of the mountain.* Amid this deafening uproar, and these appalling symptoms of impending destruc¬ tion, the pale abbot Obando, suspended over the burning wreck of his convent, seemed holding close communion again with his demoniacal deliverer; while be¬ neath him the frequent shock of weapons announced the desperate conflict which had taken place between the banditti and the resolute officersof the..-holiest of tribu¬ nals ; and around him roared an elemen¬ tary confusion, of which the most fanciful hypoebpndriac could scarcely form any accurate conception. Meanwhile
Meanwhile the scene below was equally turbulent and novel in its nature to the secluded inhabitants of the monastery of Montserrat. Confusedly hurrying up and down the aisles were seen the timid bro¬ therhood, awaiting with terror and ex¬ pectancy the termination of the contest furiously kept up between their defenders, the holy officials, and the rapacious ma¬ rauders of the mountain on which their abode was situated. A few had joined the inquisitorial party, and were actively opposing the further progress of the ban¬ ditti, not so much from their love of such perilous exercise as fighting appeared to them, as from a desire to evince their zeal, in the presence of its servants, to aid the cause of the blessed tribunal, and demon- strate their readiness to arm in its service, in hopes of receiving, should the event prove fortunate, some suitable recompence • while the rest were endeavouring to ex¬ tinguish the flames, or wandering through the galleries, listening to the unwonted l 2 din fm t ..m ....... .
din of discord, in visible consternation and dismay. " Lord have mercy upon us!" muttered the aged Geronimo, who composed one of the latter number—** saint Mary intercede for us! here is a goodly affray for holy and peaceable men like myself to be en¬ gaged in! Blessed Virgin, end it quickly, to the confusion of thine enemies, I pray P " Fold thy robe closer around thee," here interrupted Jacopo, who happened to be passing hastily, armed with a burning splinter, and bleeding in several places— "„ fold thy robe closer around thee, brother, and furnish thee with something, if it be only a fragment of a stool or platter-stand, of which thou mayst find plenty in the refectory, and aid us to repel these Philis¬ tines in their bold and bloody outrage!" " Under favour, brother," replied the humane Geronimo, startled at this danger¬ ous proposition—" under favour I would rather to the surgery, since some of you, I see, have received hurts which may need mine
mine utmost skill to cure: besides, I re¬ member me at this moment of a vow I have taken, to be patient and pacific under whatever circumstances—" 'Geronirno would fain have finished his sentence; but Jacopo was beyond hearing; so they parted, one to evince his interest in this desperate brawl, and the other to prepare his medicines for those whose mangled bodies might survive its termi¬ nation. The deep bell of the monastery had pealed one over the heads of the comba¬ tants, and still the contest continued with unabated ardour on both sides. The rob¬ bers, little expecting a reception of the re¬ solute kind they experienced, were only rendered more than usually desperate, by the desperation of their enraged leader, and the apparent hopelessness of their cause; while the members of the Holy Tri¬ bunal, accustomed to overcome every ob¬ stacle, preserved their coolness and forti¬ tude even amid the most imminent dan- L 3 ger;
ger; for against the assaults of these ruf¬ fians, their long close garments of sable •cloth, which covered even their visages, and gave them rather the appearance of demons than men, were little or no de¬ fence. With regard to the assistance af¬ forded them by the fraternity, it was very inconsiderable; their total want of defen¬ sive weapons, and utter ignorance of the aj?t of warfare, rendering them rather ridi¬ culous objects of compassion, than an avail¬ able accession of strength to the party they espoused.
CHAF-
CHAPTER XXVI.
Then echoed wildly from within, Of shout and scream the mingled din, And weapon clash, and maddening cry Of those who kill, and those who die ! Scott. W aiLE thus the conflict was raging with¬ in the holy walls of the monastery, from which a broad column of flame and smoke was now ascending, that nearly reached the elevated haunt of the banditti, Cor^ ^ vetta, and a single one of that devoted band (the rest having descended to rein¬ force their leader) were standing on a small projecting fragment of their airy ha* bitation, surveying the progress of the de¬ vastating flames below. Her companion in this melancholy occupation was the wounded and lately-insensible Gomez, whose head was now enveloped in ban- l 4 dages,
dages, and who still seemed excessively faint from the loss of blood he had endured, but who watched with angry impatience the proceedings of his comrades, which he hoped would terminate in the final demo¬ lition of the pile he saw blazing beneath him.—" May curses wither the strong hand," he exclaimed, " which rendered me incapable of assisting in this night's glo¬ rious enterprise! felled to the earth by a lazy, drivelling monk—a lubberly, athle¬ tic mendicant!—-the foul fiend fly away with him!" " Speak softly, Gomez, when we talk v of fiends!" now exclaimed Corvetta, sud¬ denly, who was his sole auditor in that de¬ solate region, " for look—I see a bright form hovering yonder, amid those sul¬ phury wreaths of smoke, which surely bears the shape of nothing earthly!" M Nor heavenly neither," now muttered Gomez, in evident alarm, while his teeth began to chatter, and his knees to tremble; " and
ABBOT OF MONTSERRAT. &£5 ** and see, a monk in his arms, by all that is horrible!— oh, saint Mary save us!" "Ha! ha! ha!" rejoined Corvetta, un¬ able to resist the impulse she felt to laugh at him for his cowardice, though its tone resembled more the cry of terror than the sound of merriment—" thou wilt be a monk one day thyself, good Gomez, or Corvetta is a false—but hist! I think I hear voices!" Corvetta was not deceived, at least in this latter surmise, for now rung feebly every surrounding chasm to the loud deep voice of Obando, who exclaimed, sickened at the dreadful proposals of the demon, and almost suffocated by the sulphureous atmosphere which enveloped him—" Oh that I were again a solitary palmer, pur¬ suing my thorny path barefooted to the shrine of the holy city, for then would there be comfort at the end of my pilgrim¬ age!—^oh that I were again the humble malecontent, droning away a despised life among the inhabitants of yonder burning l 5 fane,
fefte,;for#ien would there he fappe hi the termination of my miseries!" : ; <y- u This is fio answer!" here cried a shril¬ ler voice, which Gorvetta and her shiver- ing companioh rightly judged could only belong to the fiend himself.-™** Oost thou repent thee of thy league with Zatanai, reject his services, and prefer destruction ?" " I do repent!" was heard faintly, but fervently, to proceed from the lips of the monastic; and a moment after, the ascent of a clear shower of sparfcs from the smoul¬ dering ruins beneath, proclaimed the fall of something heavy amongst them. The demon was still seen hovering alone for a transient period, as if glutting his infernal appetite for torture witb the last writhings of his unhappy victim, and then gradually disappeared. ." God have mercy!" exclaimed Corvetta, joining her hands now earnestly together, $ God have mercy—he is gone !* ««. Whom meanest thou is departed ?" de- (nanded Gome*, who bad long since avert
ed his gaze in horror from this strange and appalling scene. " Both! both !** returned Corvetta, un¬ clasping her hands suddenly, and placing them over her forehead, as if to recall in retrospection the hideous sight she had just witnessed, " both! both!" Gomes hereupon ventured to look up, and beheld the truth of what she asserted. A silent glance of terror and astonishment passed even between these hardened par¬ tisans of a no less hardened chief, and they mutually seemed to relinquish the subject. But though Gomez and Corvetta stood long watching the doubtful progress of the strife beneath them, it is extremely dubious whether they at all observed what they appeared to be intently gazing at, so strong was the impression left on them both, by the singular and incredible ap¬ pearance they had witnessed. During this period, the renowned sanc¬ tuary bf Montserrat was the scene of a no less direful tragedy, albeit the principal l 6 events
events therein were of a different descrip¬ tion. The banditti, on their entrance, had been resolutely encountered by the mem¬ bers of the inquisitorial party^ whom the monks had gladly admitted to their assist¬ ance, formed into a compact body, with the holy standard in the midst of them: this sable phalanx, however, the rude as¬ saults of the banditti, with their heavy carbines and keen cutlasses, soon succeeded in dispersing, or, at least, in putting out of order. This once effected, the indivi¬ duals of that holy body fought afterwards at great disadvantage; inasmuch as the robbers were more accustomed to such straggling modes of combat, and possessed greater dexterity of hand and limb than their opponents. From that moment, therefore, while hand to hand the hardy ruffians battled it fiercely with their anta¬ gonists— u The wild confusion, and the swarthy glow Of flames on high, and torches from below, The
The shriek of terror, and the mingling yell— For swords began to clash, and shouts to swell, Flung o'er that spot of earth the air of hell!" and long and desperately did the conflict continue, without the least apparent ad¬ vantage on either side. At last the rofe- bers began to grow weary of such a suc¬ cession of sharp blows, at the hands of ad¬ versaries from whom it was likely, after all, but little plunder would be obtained; which reflection, very probably, subse¬ quently tended to slacken their exertions. As is frequently observable in such cases, the courage of their opposers seem¬ ed to increase with the momentary panic which appeared to spread itself among the marauders, when another event changed suddenly the prospects of the contending parties. Roldan, who, from the moment of his having gained admission to the mo¬ nastery, had been diligently employed in searching for Isabel, attended only by a small party of his bravest followers, the rest being committed to the command of the
the lieutenant, now returned disappointed and distracted, not having been able to discover either Isabel or her supposed pa¬ ramour, Obando, to the aid of his compa¬ nions. Like an infuriated tiger he rushed aniong his enemies, and dealt his blows around with an effect almost inconceiv¬ able, incessantly endeavouring to animate liis associates by his words and his example. About this period, moreover, arrived the whole remnant of the banditti, whom Corvetta had dispatched to the assistance of their leader—an addition of force which made even the inflexible and wary inflic- tors of inquisitorial vengeance retreat to the very centre of the chapel, of which they had heretofore defended the entrance against the main body of the pillaging banditti; but which holy sanctuary, aided as they were by Alfieri and Fernandez, commanding a numerous posse of monks and peasantry, they found it impossible to preserve from profanation. Here, there- fore, stationing themselves, they resolved to
ABliO^ OF &&'&$&$&%£'*. S$t to ^conquer or die" in defence of their position; and many a desperate struggle ensued, the result of which was the loss of many a drop of precious blood to the determined combatants. Roldan, as he prosecuted the work of carnage vigorously around him, often called loudly on the name of the absent superior, and defied him to single combat a second time in vain. Obando was nowhere to be found: then turning to his dauntless followers, he strove, by encouraging words, to inspirit them to even additional intrepidity, by occasionally exclaiming—" Oh! bravely done, Sebastian—Pedro, thy single arm is worth a million of piastres: thou shalt share gold enough for this to-morrow. Pikestaves and trenchers, all are come against us!" he continued, half-ironically, as he lifted again his ponderous hanger to smite one who appeared amongst the fore¬ most of his adversaries. * In the name of our holy church, I excommunicate that hand for ever!" ex¬ claimed
claimed an insignificant, spare-looking fi¬ gure, on whose uncovered head the blow bad descended^—this was father Jacopo. The courageous little monk staggered be¬ neath the heavy fall of the hanger, the edge of which having glanced aside, luck¬ ily entered not the scull so deep as might have been apprehended: he fell, notwith¬ standing, senseless from the wound, and fortunately Roldan did not repeat the stroke. Transient, however, was the triumph of the fierce chieftain who had caused his overthrow; for Alfieri de Gracy and Fer¬ nandez, with a choice few of the stoutest inquisitors, had now succeeded in hem¬ ming him round so completely, that he found it impossible any longer to avoid the doom which he merited. A blow from De Gracy, which struck the yellow feather from his bonnet, and a thrust from Fernandez, which, although it entered not his body, was violent enough to throw him off his guard, became the signal for a general
general attack on him. He soon fell, overwhelmed with numbers, and wearied out with carnage, while instantly " A score of pikes, with each a wound, Bore down, and pinned him to the ground ;" from which he was never again destined to arise. On witnessing the fall of their leader, and perceiving that Sebastian him¬ self was badly wounded, the banditti be¬ gan to view their chance of escape as des¬ perate, and suffered no opportunity for flight to pass unheeded; flight however was now not so easily accomplished, the breach through which they had entered being guarded by a troop of officials and peasantry, stationed for the purpose of in¬ tercepting them. This was done truly in the unrelenting spirit of the Inquisi¬ tion, who never permitted a victim in their power to escape from condign pu¬ nishment, and as victims, it was evident, these hungry bloodhounds now regard¬ ed the remainder of this devoted band. Several
Several of them, nevertheless, on th$ present occasion, paid dearly for their ad¬ diction to extermination and cruelty; for the robbers, finding themselves thus mer¬ cilessly devoted to destruction, resolved not to fall easy sacrifices: none submitted, for none expected clemency; a few maim¬ ed wretches, whose course was betrayed by the blood which marked their foot* steps, effected a retreat, and the rest were eventually hewn in pieces before sunrise.
CHAP-
' ' ' w. T ■ CHAPTER XXVII. *, - / : ; ■ ( But see, his face is black, and full of blood ! His eyeballs farther out than when he lived, Staring full ghastly, like a strangled man ! His hair upreared, his nostrils stretched with struggling i His hands abroad displayed, as one that grasped. And tugged for life, and was by strength subdued. Shakespeare. The tumult had now subsided, and, save where a few forlorn stragglers of the ban¬ ditti yet struggled for their lives, the mo¬ nastery was hushed in comparative tran^ quillity. A heavy shower of rain from the overcharged clouds, aided by the ex¬ ertions of the brotherhood, had partially extinguished the flames which had enve¬ loped one side of the edifice; and the fra? ternity of Montserrat appeared in a fair way of speedily surmounting all their di£ Acuities. Alfieri de Gracy was directing the
the inexperienced monks in the best me¬ thod of preserving their convent from the further ravages of the flames, and aiding in their total extinction; while Fernan¬ dez de Leon had flown on the wings of love to Isabel, who had been previously disposed of in a place of safety, near the foot of the mountain, with permission to reconduct her to the arms of her father, whom a slight wound rendered incapable of much present exertion. Obando was still missing; and, apart in one of the chambers of the monastery, a party of the officials were engaged in ta¬ king the depositions of the brotherhood respecting his extraordinary disappearance. At this juncture was observed, slowly pacing the chapel, and often stooping to discern the plight of such of the unhappy victims of that fray as wore the monastic garb, with whose bodies the floor was li¬ terally strewn, the venerable form of the certainly not over valiant, but benevolent Geronimo. By his side was still standing the
the meagre figure of Jacopo, for whose wound the good old monk Geronirno had found an appropriate plaister, albeit he still exhibited considerable symptoms of pain and lassitude. They were mutually engaged in the laudable design of render¬ ing the last mournful services to their de¬ ceased or dying brethren; for such as had drawn their last earthly breath, they drop¬ ped a pious bead, and perchance a silent tear; and to those who yet possessed the power of " fixing their dull gaze" for a few minutes longer, they presented the crucifix, as the symbol of salvation; while often, as they bent over each succeeding prostrate form, the expression of their countenances, and especially of Geronimo's, demonstrated that the deceased had for¬ merly been an intimate acquaintance, or it might be a zealous and confiding friend. While they were thus busied in per¬ forming the last rites of Christianity to the dying sufferers, a loud and slow-drawn effort at suspiration immediately attracted their
^ieir attention. They turned, and beheld stretched on the gory pavement, at a little distance from them, a tall figure in mo¬ nastic haMrments, Which the imperfect light alone prevented their instantly re¬ cognising* and both accordingly advanced towards it. A convulsed heaving of the drapery around him, as he lay prone on his fece in the centre of the chapel, was the dhly intimation they now received of the sufferer being still in existence; when geiitly raising him betwixt them, the monks discovered, to their utter conster¬ nation and astonishment, the wan com¬ plexion and haggard lineaments of the al¬ ready proscribed abbot—the malecontent, Obando! The first impulse of Jacopo was to de¬ liver him immediately up to the Inquisi¬ tion; but if his companion Geronirno was more cowardly in the fray, he now dared to act with more decided courage and humanity than his associate in the pious task he had undertaken. With many
many significant gestures, he intimated tpi Jacopo his conyi^tipphf^^ ^J 1 ® unihappy* wretch could not survive many nainutes^ togetheir with his own unwillingness ; tOj deliver him to the authority of^ihat dread. ful tribunal, or its emissaries, for even, so short a space of time, when he was so soon to answer for his iniquities at the bar, of the Almighty Judge. With these sentiments Jacopo seemed reluctantly to acquiesce; while Geronirno continued to uplift the unresisting object of their terror and commiseration, who yet seemed con^ scious of their sympathy, although much too deeply absorbed in horrid and bewil¬ dering ruminations toexpress his gratitude. —" Unholy brother! art thou here ?" was the first exclamation of Geronirno, as soon as terror and amazement permitted his utterance.. " Here!—where ?" exclaimed Obando, rolling his hollow eyes frightfully around the blood-polluted chapel, on the figured sides of which the expiring, flames yet flung
flung a red and truly infernal radiance.— * r Oh, true! in the dusky regions of never- ending wretchedness—the dark and gloomy realms of interminable misery, where plea- sure is never tasted, and repose is un- known—where the malevolent gnash their teeth in vain, for their torments are eter- nal'-where my companions are devils (here Geronirno drew back, and Jacopo dropped his compassionating hold of the abbot's garment)-—the ravisher, the man- slayer, and the apostate! No," he conti¬ nued, as if suddenly recollecting himself -—*' nol I have repented—ha! ha!—I have repented! Off then, fiends! ye have no power to harm me now—I have re¬ pented r " Hast thou, poor wretch ?" faintly ar¬ ticulated Jacopo, who still seemed half- inclined to leave the consolation of the guilty abbot to his scarcely less terrified companion: M then may our holy Saint receive thee!" « What voice is that which utters holy sounds ?"
sounds ?" cried Obando, still endeavouring to raise himself higher, and with his dim, sunken eyes, searching the meagre visage of the monk who had spoken-—" what voice is that whieh utters holy sounds? He— he was holy, righteous, bountiful !-— he, who in this very sanctuary, fell a thrice-honoured martyr to the cause be loved-—the cause he was engaged in—the cause of righteousness, whose end is peace! What cause had I to kill him ? Oh! he was holy— he, the abbot Ambrose! who remembers him not?—who mourned not for him ? That did even I who slew him —that did the malecontent who murdered him. I saw the writhing form sink down helpless at my feet—I seized the gasping throat—I strained the quivering nerve— I suffocated him! the red stream gushed from his pale, writhing lips! it hath gush¬ ed ever since—it gushes now: it hath floated the marble with gore," he, wildly continued, gazing on the ensanguined pavement of the chapel, which the red vol. ii. m glare
glare still rendered dimly visitfle-*^" it hath floated the niarble with gore-^it hath clogged up my path to; heaven^-it hath Tendered my soul too heavy to moulit^- it hath rendered my spirit too wretched to supplicate. Still, still it we%hs ^ne .d6wn-^I cannot shake it off me! ivhen I Would soar, blood--blood is in my path, vattd att toy efforts are unavailing. I sink ^-1 sink, bafiled by a load of jMme W darkness gathers around me—the gloom of hell pervades "my do wn ward course, and I strive to ask for clemency in vaiti! -rj&o- spair is mine associate—demons have 'seized me-—guilt drags me down, and to eternal perdition will my deeds consign me !" As he finished, he sunk, totally exhausted, 'into the arms of the horror- stricken Geronimo, whose humanity would not suffer tiie; already-lacerated form, even M the; wretched criminal before him, to heobme a second time dashed on the pave¬ ment, while his own aged arms possessed , sufficient
sufficient strength to sustain his weight from further injury. « Holy Virgin!" now muttered Gero- nimo, while supporting the weak ibrm of Gbando on his bosom, " can this man be¬ long to the blessed ?" " Whom meanest thou ?" again de¬ manded Gbando, rousing himself hastily from the torpor into which he appeared to have fallen. ** I tell thee he is blessed, and thou art not wise to doubt of his fe¬ licity. I watched his dying pallet as he lay stretched before the illumined shrine «I saw the light fade from his altered as¬ pect—I viewed ye all shrink from him— km, Augustine! ye deemed him accursed, because ye beheld him wretched; but none knew the cause of his wretchedness —none, save Obando! I tell thee, he is blessed, since the malady which afflicted him had not its origin in his own evil heart: his heart!—it was not evil, though it yearned for the iniquities of another. But he kept his oath—he died, and kept MS his
his oath! yet, look! he lives—still lives! —see where he mounts amid the burning fragments—amid sparks that scorch him not, and flames that cannot consume him! Even such a look he wore on that dire, fatal night, when discovered in the clois¬ ter, holding forbidden intercourse, I bound him solemnly to secrecy. Now see—he smiles on me, and with a benignant waf¬ ture of his hand, instructs me to look up¬ ward for consolation ! Blessed shade! I obey thy silent dictate: airy phantom ! I soon shall follow thee.** As the abbot uttered these incoherent speeches, Geronimo occasionally looked fearfully around him; and it is averred, that he afterwards confessed he saw a form resembling the deceased father Augus¬ tine, but much superior in magnitude, slowly ascending among the smouldering ruins of the edifice: but whether the good monk was deceived, by a wavering co¬ lumn of smoke, a wreath of morning va¬ pour, or otherwise, I shall leave the saga¬ city
city of the reader to determine; not choos¬ ing to take wholly upon myself the re¬ sponsibility of answering for that of which many in this incredulous age might be apt to question the veracity. On breath¬ ing the last syllable of the preceding pas¬ sionate burst of declamation, Obando ap¬ peared even yet more exhausted than heretofore; and it now became plain that his dissolution was at hand. He sunk again into the arms of him who was yet willing to support him, and, growing fainter and fainter, appeared ready to yield up the ghost. The monks shuddered, turned up their eyes expressively, and hung over him in dreadful and inexpres¬ sible consternation and expectancy. Jacopo, after a transient pause, again displayed the holy cross before him, and, with mute solicitude, by signs exhorted him to repentance; while Geronirno en¬ deavoured to open his cumbrous habit, for the purpose of prolonging his existence for a few wretched moments, by admitting m 3 the
the reviving air. But now it was that the cause ofhis death became visible; on tearing aside his attire, the brothers ob¬ served with horror the ghastly injuries his body had sustained in the stupendous fall he had received, on resolving to forego the protection and support of the yellow spirit of the monastery: his joints were broken, or dislocated-—the ribs appeared to be fractured—the entrails ready to pro¬ trude; in short, the spectacle which Oban¬ do now presented was too horrible to be described. Shocked at such an unexpect¬ ed sight, Geronimo hastily closed the gar¬ ment, and, making a final effort, gently laid the suffering superior upon the ground, rightly conceiving that posture to be best calculated for affording him ease. The abbot Obando turned his dying visage once more towards him; and fixing his glazed eyes upon his countenance, with an expression of thankfulness which could not be mistaken, he murmured with emo¬ tion, while the breath of mortality seemed to
to linger unwillingly upon his Ups*— '■'■ I have little hope in the world to whidi ,.\ am summoned, except—-*-*" and the rest of the sentence was too imperfectly pro¬ nounced to be comprehended by his, au¬ ditors. The brethren looked anxiously upon each other—life seemed hovering, ready to depart, upon the yet quivering lips of Obando.— ' He has little hope, except *—'■* repeated Geronimo, looking steadily in the wrinkled visage of his companion.. " Except our hearts and our voices be employed for his salvation," said Jacopo, suddenly: '* then," added he, turning ab¬ ruptly towards the expiring abbot, t( it shall be so: a hundred masses si?all be duly said for tbe repose of tby sinful souk" Jacopo afterwards became abbot of Mont- serrat's, monastery; and he kept his word. Obandp survived jusfclongenough to hear this assurance repeated to him, and then expired. The myrmidons of thq Inquisi¬ tion, by this time returning from the m 4 slaughter
slaughter of the banditti, rushed to seize their victim; but they received his lifeless body in their arms. Fernandez de Leon, accompanied by his precious charge, returned before dawn to the convent, where, the flames being totally extinguished, and the devastation they had effected found to be inconsider¬ able, comparative tranquillity was again restored. The monks received them with joy; and ere they departed from the mo¬ nastery of Montserrat, he received in due form the hand of his adored Isabel, whose heart he had possessed long before; and there was not long wanting the society of his early-lamented mother (the reported bride of Roldan, Corvetta, who now made no scruple of abandoning his fastness), to render his felicity truly enviable. It now becoming incumbent on the brotherhood to elect a new superior, Ja¬ copo was by universal assent selected to fill that important station: his avarice was acknowledged; but as it was a fault of which
which they were aware, they contrived to guard against it, and he discharged the duties of his office with equal credit to himself, and profit to the fraternity. Go^ rnez, almost the only survivor of the law¬ less horde to which he had belonged, ful¬ filled the prediction of Corvetta, by be¬ coming a monk of the order; while the rest of his former companions paid the forfeit of their iniquities with their lives, several being found, on the morning which succeeded the combat, concealed in glens to which they had escaped, where they had died during the night of their wounds. For Roldan, whose incautious procedure had caused the overthrow of his band, his body being thrown upon the moun¬ tain, as unworthy of burial, was devoured by birds of prey and ravenous animals; while, to manure the adjacent wilderness, " Ilis mouldering bones the winds dispersed, Unwept, uuhououred, spurned, and cursed!" Alfieri de Gracy having bestowed his
blessing on the union of Jsabel with Fer- mmdmM Leon, went shop% afterwards with them to hi3 estate near Barcelona; where, under his auspices, sm& thbse of Fernandez, the union of Gaffess^ with Inez was speedily effected. * This* happy couple,, after continuing several years in Ohi service of their newly-married patrons, were presented by Alfieri with a small farm in the vicinity; whither I shall anon transport the reader j that he may fee ena¬ bled to form an adequate conception of their happiness. Meanwhile Corvetta resided principally, for the remainder of lier life, at the man¬ sion of Fernandez; but was never known to omit visiting once a-year the spot which had formerly been the haunt of the ban¬ ditti at Montserrat. With respect to the sight she had witnessed, together with Gomez, on the night of the combat (viz. the suspension of the malecontent in the air, by infernal agency), having been en¬ joined by her confessor to secrecy, she spoke
^oke bui little: ydr it was: evident that aem ^^had left a strange >M inAiKble im. pression upon her mind, and assisted to work the partial alteration which had ta¬ ken place in her sentiments. The body of the late abbot Obando was honourably interred in the cemetery of the monastery; the testimony of Jacopo and Geronirno, in corroboration of his ha¬ ving died a holy and Christian death, as was exemplified by his having requested that prayers might be repeated for his deliverance from purgatory, being believed in preference to the aspersions of his ene¬ mies, who, since death had removed the object of their dislike and apprehension, had considerably relaxed in their endea¬ vours to defame him. Yet still, to the inquisitive traveller, will the superannua¬ ted tenants of that venerable pile narrate incredible stories of the yellow spirit of the monastery, unconscious perhaps of the after derision they excite, or the emotions of
of compassion, occasionally mixed with scorn, whicii they awaken in his bosom.
Twelve years had passed—twelve roll¬ ing summers had elapsed, since the events we bave narrated, when a solitary pair of travellers, whose habits bespoke them of some monastic order, stopped at a little cottage in one of the most roman¬ tic situations Catalonia afforded. It was near the balmy close of an autumnal even¬ ing, and the setting sun shed his de¬ parting radiance on the most delightful scene imaginable. If any description could do justice to such a combination of beau¬ ties as the eye encountered, that of the noble bard in panegyrizing '* this delicious land/ might be deemed admirable— " The horrid crags, by toppling convent crowned, Thi cork trees hoar that clothe the shaggy steep, The mountain moss, by scorching skies imbrowned, The sunken glen, whose sunless shrubs must weep, The
The tender azure of the unruffled deep, Tlie orange tints that gild the greenest bough, The torrents that from cliff to valley leap, The vine ou high, the willow branch below, Mixed in one mighty scene, with varied beauty glow." At the door of the cottage they were met by its rustic owner, and the smiling partner of all his toils and pleasures, surrounded by a group of rosy children, whose prattle was hushed at the appearance of the reverend strangers. In the visages of the monks were discernible the features of Geronirno and the reformed Gomez, now father Ni¬ cholas, and, in the ruddier aspects of the peasants, those of Carlossa and the faith¬ ful Inez. And now, having entered the cottage, into which they were welcomed by the liveliest demonstrations of joy, Car¬ lossa knelt before the elder of his revered guests, and, while Inez was busy in pre¬ paring their entertainment, humbly re¬ quested his blessing. '* The blessing of saint Mary be upon thee, my son," scdd the holy Geronirno, and a tear trickled down his aged cheek as
as he spoke-w* # the blessing of saint Mary be upon thee, and tarry with thee, for thou hast deserved it i" His companion Nicholas seemed equally affected; but spoke nothing. Carlossa knew not, nor could divine the cause of their emotion; but the profound respect he entertained for the characters of these holy men permitted him not to inquire the origin of that grief which had awaken- ed his sympathy before he knew its ob* je$t. The repast was by this. tir?ie spread (ibr they knew the holy fathers would re¬ turn that night, and the monastery was at some distance), and th& monks partook thereof hi silence, which was only once interrupted by Cadossa venturing to in¬ quire after the welfare of Fernandez and Isabel* The reply was, that both were well* and in the loll enjoyment of as large a portion of this temporal worlds blessings, as was permitted to fall even to the lot of the virtuous. To them therefore Carlossa rightly judged the evident uneasiness of the
\ ABBGlr OF MONTSERRAT; W& the fathers could not possibly appertain, as it was plain! their purpose, at this dis¬ tance from the convent, was to visit the sick couch ofl some expiring penitent, whose soul was about to seek its eternal resting-place. After reposing themselves for a transient interval, and partaking mo¬ derately of such refreshments as were placed before them, the monks arose. " A draught of water, and a little bread," said Geronirno, while preparing to depart, " will suffice the wants of life, and I sor¬ row to have tasted more. Farewell, son ! for the present. I am homeward bound, and must not this day be a loiterer; the moon will be up ere the night be spent, and should we be belated, her beams will light us to the monastery. I have yet to tell my rosary a hundred times, for the safe passage into Paradise of another erring soul—he who was called Alfieri de Gracy is no more!" The mystery was now elucidated. Car- lossa sank on his knees in an ecstacy of sorrow
sorrow and of gratitude (for Alfieri had been his principal benefactor), and the travellers departed on their journey*
FINIS.
i^ w i>,—.qn—i^.^^1 iw tmm
■ jj^ m » ^'ii^n*wtw<iaii ».ini-.rt««M uma r .....------ ------------- --- ■ ,.--- ■ |
frinted by J, Parting, Leadenhall-Street, London,
