Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The algerines: or, The twins of naples
Till'. ALGER INKS.
CHAP. I. Is' t Hit hv b< iicvtd l«r «i .n»inKid lhisik w« lud niylhtrr* . *lu n« t mv*- a«U tiv*co 1 u Mu'>! »rn critics aj t milii it a tn< n.e 1 r ,'< ->'t* 'l <», In -,'nn'* i*i j.< un! - \ I*.\ Ck »s'd - mil lUllrf'i t'.tiiL !ln« «i<»t Crr-Md. LONC* did the astounded don Csesario gaze imploringly, though hopelessly, to- ward the small latticed portal thus reso¬ lutely closed against him, but which once would have opened so readily to the least tone of his voice, or even to the lightest echo of his cautious footstep. In vain did he seek to divine the cause of this sud¬ den, unexpected change—in vain did he vol. in. «
rack memory to recal. if |>ossible, some perhaps yet unforgivcn offence inadver¬ tently comrnttted, but which might have estranged from him the affection of his be¬ loved Victoria, and tbti^ reduced him tu his present state of loneliness and despond¬ ency. He could remember nothing hav¬ ing transpired (with the except ion of his unfortunate wound, and const quent ina¬ bility for a considerable period again to fender his respectful homage) by which he could possibly have incurred her displea¬ sure. While musing in this rnanmr upon his altered situation, his form drooped gra¬ dually, and deep sighs bur^t often from his labouring bosom; and don Ca^ario looked no-\ more despondingly, and mort miserable, than even while languishing solely dependant on the bounty of Abdul¬ lah, a wretched invalid, in the never-to- be-forgotten Strada di Toledo, at Naples. At length, starting from his comfortless reverie, he looked wildly around hi in upon every fragrant and blooming object now
no more to familiar to aching sight (since wherefore again should ihe reject¬ ed, doomed Ca^ario, strive to |»e«etrmte, through hourly thickening perils* to that forbidden spot ?), and exclaimed'—** Fare¬ well, too, ye dew spang let! witnesses, whose drooping heads seem to weep in unison with Ccesario over hi* altered fortunes— thou lovely scene, farewell! Alas! now bitter, indeed, will be the retrospections which arise witu thy remembrance. Fare¬ well, my peace—farewell, all my expected happiness—my anticipated recompence for past suffering in the arms of an affection¬ ate and grateful mistress. Farewell, faith¬ less Victoria ! thou never shalt behold me more. Not even thy added crime of infi- delitv shall induce me to visit thv offend- ing parent with the vengeance he deserves should blast him suddenly, and sweep him from the earth, a just sacrifice to the rou¬ sed indignation of the suffering count Castelli, and his injured offspring. Kut he is still thy sire, though thou art no B 2
the of s sewn and the kuiid* of Ca«siirio ^liaJl not be imbued with bis blood. Yet thou. ialiv ruaiden—cruel Vict*>ria J thou'—-albeit iitv c%nnpa^ioii tnu\ *pare thy parent"^ form ted cxiM«-f.e* — M',^ * too justh 1or- feiteii b\ his reflated trtumph^ '>vcr C a^ teilis ploomier lated line—thou mvei *-hait behold me more. Adieu—aduu tor ever. Thu« mournfully M>hloqui/mp, doi. C^e^rio turned his back npon the stateK palazzo of Vieenza, and with a disturbed and faltering step, once more sought the -pot where his fleet steed was fastened This, it was easy to perceive, %%as no other tlian the bandit Zathelli's former fa¬ vourite, ihe renowned and regretted Ho- >olia, in whose praise the domestics of the fttlazzu di Castelli had lately grown as fluent as was formerly his desperate and daring master. Having mounted, don Gesario turned his coursers head sorrow¬ fully toward his father's mansion, and after
i long glance cast upon ceding palazTO di Vieenza. pursued his may with velocity, that he might arrive before daybreak, and was presently lost among the darkening shrubberies that skirted his road home. In the morning the prince Vicensa met hi* daughter, the disturbed Alphon&ine, with a calm demeanour, and unruffled as¬ pect, which convinced her that all had gone well on the preceding night— L e. that the mysterious stranger had quitted her father's domain as privately m» he en¬ teral it, and without having been disco* vered. This conviction was a great relict to her troubled mind, and she resolved ac¬ cordingly to make no mention to him at present of what she had witnessed; trust¬ ing that such an unaccountable interrup¬ tion to her wonted tranquillity would not occur again. In this calculation* Alpbon- riine (at least for a considerable space of time) found that she was not deceived. The succeeding night passed quietly, and
was mmy ttteceeding nights and day* of imitorm tfmn^uiliity«—of un- disturbed mstk happiness One onh thought now weighed upon the spirits ot Alj hrm&ine, and oeetfionally poisoned with it* ** bubbling venorn** her full cup of felicity. Among' the many novel ^rmtton*, erf delight which h/r heart daily experienced, she pereei%*ed with sorrow that the ijloom. of her father's mind did not diminish, hut on the contrary, seemed rather inereaM^t by the still-secluded and sedentary (though to Alphonsine doubly delicious life they had hitherto led. In spite of her utmost efforts to amuse his mind, and enliven his solitude, she saw with alarm his brow grow daily more contracted, and fancied also that she could perceive his bosom daily lose some portion of his small re¬ maining stock of cheerfulness. Thus cir¬ cumstanced, her own gaiety could not fail to be in some degree affected by her observations, and she finally determined
to assay »ome method of rmising li» apparent lethargic indHerefice to a Me which, though teeming with the p«rest pleasure, she saw tlie broken-liearted Vi- cetma w as no longer able to enjoy. According^ * in pursuance of* tliis lau¬ dable design, s-he one day wisely resolved to sound him respecting his taste or in¬ clination tor the giddier pleasures of a livelier scene, rightly judging such to be better calculated for the dissipation of hb internal chagrin tlian the calmer, and more pensiic, enjoyments of home. Thus did this amiable girl determine, unsolicited, (should the proposal prove agreeable to Vieenza) to sacrifice her own acknow¬ ledged, and newly-obtained happiness, to the bare chance of her sire's being in some degree benefited by his removal to a place where she could Httle hope to enjoy such delightful moments. But, alas! as Ma- zeppa briefly expresses it—
" What mortal his t *« ii«H»ii amy guc»* : '
remit iticiicimislj-den^d removal w&* indeed, the very opposite of whit she U*»» tatidk inticipaud wcrtikl have bt«n its ««k- Il was on a v^nny mofnir.^:, a^ tluv w^ re seated t 'gethcr in a d< hght ful ^ha*l\ Jc \t. that thf ttnder considerate Al- phonsme first \entured to broach tht sub- ject now iK*arest to hvr heart. All natun was smiling cheerfully around th*.m—the riower«s were blooming gailv, and the birds wtre singing joyously over their head-, while the clustering vine, tasteful!} lev. tooned among delicious fruit trees, tempt¬ ed them on every side with its luxuriantly purpled produce, yet seemed Vieenza wretched'—yet was he melancholy. Al¬ phon&ine seized the auspicious moment, and thus began—** My dear, dear father ? 1 rejoice in the remembrance that it is to the spontaneous affection of a tender pa¬ rent, and not to any persistive obstinacy of my own, that I owe my present intro-
•lu^tton to a pleasurable world, of whose delight* I before ha^l liardiy dm^d ta tlreaui. But ray father, permit rue geet- lv to a mind \ou, ttut there are ^>roe por¬ tions <-f \»Hir promise made to Alphon* s.ne, wht*ti \mi n*leaied her from conven¬ tual discipline, as \ et w holly torgotteru or at kast, unfuliilled."' " To what does m> chdd—^my aftec- ti4>iiate Alplumsme. allude ^ inquired \iL\iud. *' Has aught that could con¬ tribute to her honourable happiness been hitherto neglected, or forgotten * % -* Oh' no—l speak not for my own happiness,* answered Alphon&ine, k * I am happy—supremely happy; and if thou, my honoured father, wert happy likewise —but, alas ? the gathering gloom upon thy sunken cheek forbids the desired con¬ clusion. I see, with hourly increasing uneasiness, thy visage grow paler, and thy health decline—I perceive, with alarm now daily augmented, that my dear fa¬ ther is not happy/' B3
** child ! our happinest de- fx-nd* not at all times upon ootm-ard cir- Ciiin>ianet% neither are mere outward ap- waraners at all times expressive of it- abatenteitt, or increa**,*" replied Vieenza. f't*trnngi\% - But at what does my be* )"«vtd Alplionsine aim? We are here *uTvunde<l by e\erj- charm in nature that can p^ihly contribute to man's felicitv , ind if I am here not happy, ufnt can I hop*e would ever dissipate the chagrin that hath preyed upon me long, and must, 1 iv&r, eventually consume mc T % ** Nay, talk not thus despondingly," returned the affectionate AIphonsine, now doubly alarmed at this frank confession of the mental malady which, notwithstand¬ ing, she well knew, afflicted her drooping parent " It is true, that in this spot na¬ ture hath indeed been most prodigal of her choicest blessings; and that little is left for tlie admirer of a rural unvaried existence to desire. Yet I also remember, that, in the little parlour of the convent of St. Ro-
salie, while the holy midnight service re¬ sounded solemnly through the sanctuary, you described to me a world wholly dif¬ ferent from aught with which I have yet mingled, or of which I have yet even witnessed the existence. I remember that you spoke of crowds of heedless revellers —gay butterflies sporting joyously through the bright summer hours, regardless of the perhaps soon coming change—of glit¬ tering pomp, and gilded equipages, and opportunities of mixing with the great and gay—the thoughtless and exalted of this festive and wealthy land. But hitherto with none of these hath Alplionsine been permitted to mingle smiles or glances—to dance, or revel—to carouse, or to converse —to vie, or to be perhaps eclipsed by their superior splendour, Excuse then, the faulty weakness of a female bosom, if I confess an innate longing to behold and to partake of those magnificent and alluring scenes and recreations so fascinating to in¬ experienced girlhood, and so glowingly
to me. me, pant, and ardently, to enter upon a live¬ lier, sfid more splendid course of life, than that which thy paternal care hath hitherto prescribed for the nevertheless-grateful A Iphonsine —especially as I think the ehansre would assuredly prove beneficial to my (h^r father's health, and, it may be, even ai*t as a reviving balm to his blight et! b»ppine«*. * At thiis last vain supposition, Vieenza* features relaxed into a sickly disapproving smile—but it was still the smile of fond¬ est affection, not of cold derision, nor of a tyrannical determination to oppose her thus warmly-expressed desire* The chief aim and intention of the present wished for change, however, appeared clearly re¬ vealed, by her own confession: his own dejection of mind was the principal evil Alplionsine sought to remove; and Vi¬ eenza was already too well acquainted with ber noble and disinterested disposition, not speedily to appreciate justly, and vvith due
reverence, the magnanimity of mo¬ tives. Presently, therefore, parting while be spoke, the graceful locks which cluster¬ ed on her lovely forehead, he tenderly answered her—** My duteous affectionate child! it is impossible tor any change such as thou hast described materially to affect Vieenza, or to restore^—as thou hast truly termed it—his blighted happiness. But since thou appearest anxious to revel, for a transient period—~(I know thou wilt not long enjoy them, but pant to return to the quiet of domestic life)—in the gayer scenes, and, perhaps, in thy present estimation, alluring frivolities of a luxurious capital, thou shalt enjoy thy wish—it shall be so. To-morrow—ay, even to-morrow, we will depart hence for Palermo, the far-renown- ed seat of dissipation and voluptuousness —the golden shell of beauty—the pride and boast of our luxuriant Sicily. There not long wilt thou linger amid scenes of riot and dissipation—too well I compre¬ hend thy delicate and sensitive nature, not
fa> anticipate a speedy return to thy tran¬ quil, and (to thee) happy home. Neither hope, I repeat, that aught of pleasure or variety, which even that sumptuous city may afford, can again cheer the glo*^ of Vieenza's for ever shaded countenance, or enliven his desolate bosom.** 44 Alas ! 1 fear me not," sighed Alpbon- sine; " for since the unhappy misconduct of my lost sister, the devoted Victoria, for whom I no longer even dare to plead— ,f ** Hush P said Vieenza, rising, and tak¬ ing her hand—** you know, this is an in¬ terdicted theme. All that thou canst de¬ sire of me shall be arranged to thy wish— but name not Victoria—I cannot bear to hear her name. To-morrow we shall de¬ part for Palermo." Thus speaking, he conducted her slowly toward her own apartment in the palazzo, and himself retired, as Alplionsine conjec¬ tured, to make arrangements for their sud¬ den removal, but in reality to weep in so¬ litude over the thus inadvertently awaken-
ed recollections of bitter It was true that A Iphonsine had been forbid¬ den, under pain of his severest displeasure, even to mention the name of the disobe¬ dient Victoria^—it was true, likewise, that she had been taught to consider her as a criminal whose offence was of the most odi¬ ous and unpardonable kind, and even ad¬ monished to regard her very memory with abhorrence. Hence, Alpbonsine—'the timid, obedient Alpbonsine—hardly ven¬ turing to think for herself upon a subject evidently of such vital importance to her dear father's tranquillity, submissively re¬ frained from ever mentioning her unhap¬ py sister, and by degrees seldom bestowed even a thought upon her existence. This was not at all to be wondered at, nor was, indeed, the seemingly thoughtless Al¬ pbonsine much to blame; for, let it be remembered, Alphonsine had been tutor¬ ed to regard Victoria as a hardened repro¬ bate, altogether unworthy of a place in her affection, or her memory.
p^fmrations of speedy departure for Palermo were soon completed, and she once more met her darkly desponding parent with a smiling countenance. The remainder of that me- tfiorabte day—the last of their tranquillity —they passed together; Vieenza in pa¬ ternal admonitions respecting her future conduct and Alphonsine in pleasing anti¬ cipations of the pleasure to come. In the evening, she retired early to her chamber. for the succeeding sun was to gild a busy morning, and a fatiguing day. Ere, how¬ ever, she sought her couch, she again re¬ paired to the fragrant balcony—the scene already of so many memorable assigna¬ tions, and so much perplexity, in order to take, it might be, a last farewell leave of the beauties she was about for a time at least to abandon. The impression made upon her mind by don Caesario's late in¬ explicable visit was already considerably weakened, by his never having attempted a renewal of that strange intercourse; and
perfect all molestation since that incomprehensible adventure, had em¬ boldened her thus to pursue her inclina¬ tion, and taught her no longer to antici¬ pate any repetition of those nocturnal an¬ noyances. On the present occasion, however, she had scarcely cast her eyes over the sha¬ dowy landscape, ere she again discerned a solitary and graceful figure, at a little dis¬ tance, apparently endeavouring to attract her attention. Alphonsine would have fled, but her trembling limbs refused to bear her to her apartment; and she was tiierefore constrained to await his ap¬ proach toward the balcony.
\jxJ.J\.JT. ill. Wh.4 man art thou, that thus b«creen\i in night. So stumblest on roj ccwns<;l ? Shakespk^k^. The conviction, which in a moment as¬ sailed the bosom of the startled Alphon¬ sine, that the advancing figure was the same who had once before invaded her privacy, at once determined her how to act toward the intruder, and prevented her from more minutely scrutinizing his person. In this conjecture (though ex¬ tremely natural under the circumstances) she was, however, totally deceived. The form, it is true, was that of a young and handsome cavalier, as in the previous in¬ stance ; but here the similitude ended, al¬ though the darkness long prevented her from discovering her mistake. It was not that of don Cfiesarto, but of the equally elegant, and almost equally enamoured, marquis Lioni.
Condemned, without an apparent cause, to lament in solitude the issue of his ill- fated attachment, not long did the in¬ censed, and spirited Lioni, find it possible to endure the air of Naples. In following them to Sicily, notwithstanding his justly excited feelings of resentment, he how¬ ever sought less to wreak his vengeance upon the haughty Vieenza, than to pro¬ cure, if possible, a peaceable and satisfactory explanation with the dear object of his wishes—his apparently cruel, but still be¬ loved Victoria. Since his arrival (which was strictly private) he had deemed it prudent to refrain from attempting to open any written intercourse with Victo¬ ria—in sooth, Lioni seemed to think with the still more deeply grieved and ena¬ moured don Ca?sario, as the poet has pithily expressed it— " Nor aeed I write—to tell the tate My pen were doubly weak : Oh ! what Cat! idle words avail, Ihiiess the heart could spenk?"
object was expressly obtain terview, during which, unshackled by the presence of Vieenza, or any human being except themselves, he might once more earnestly plead his passion, resolving to enforce (by dint of his persuasive elo¬ quence) from her own lips, a decisive, and he hoped a favourable, answer. Mean¬ time, carefully keeping his proximity from the ears of Vieenza, or any of his house¬ hold, he determined to trust to chance, and his own vigilance, for the obtainment of the desired opportunity. Closely, therefore, did now the young marquis Lioni, himself cautiously con¬ cealed, watch the motions (as he conjectur¬ ed) of his at present unkind mistress, whom he often fancied he saw at a distance, but never unattended. On the night here specified, however, having lingered around the palazzo later than usual, he believed himself more fortunate—he saw alone at her lattice, by the pale starlight of a mid¬ summer sky, bright enough to reveal the
beloved object to his heated sufficient to discover to him his mistake, the graceful figure of Alphonsine taking a silent leave of the beauties that sur¬ rounded her. As already described, he advanced, and approaching her with the most profound respect (his demeanour in this instance forming a perfect contrast to that of the more familiar don Caesario) softly addressed her, commencing with— ** Vouchsafe, sole visible spectatress of this enchanted scene—fair daughter of Vieen¬ za. (if this treacherous light deceives not my longing eyes), to hear me pronounce a few brief words that may concern your happiness—as they deeply affect mine— and pardon me for my midnight intrusion un your privacy." Alphonsine beheld without much sur¬ prise his humble and altered manner, con¬ ceiving it to be the effect of penitence— forjhad he not already solicited pardon for his late vehement interruption of her wonted tranquillity ?—and never once
the present to any other than don Ca?sario, the same who had on a former occasion disturbed her thoughts. Accordingly, she promptly an¬ swered him—** I have already pardoned thee, too daring youth, for thy previous ill-advised intrusion here; nay, warned thee, as thou knowest, many times to avoid repeating this perilous enterprise. How is it thou still wilt peril thy precious existence, by venturing hither at this un¬ seasonable hour?" T* e marquis Lioni started evidently with astonishment at this unexpected dis¬ closure—it was plain, from her words, that he had been forestalled in his present amorous intention, but by whom he could not even guess. " So!" he inwardly ex¬ claimed—'* I have been anticipated here —alas! I have, indeed, a rival. Many times warned by that soft, mellifluous voice, not to peril his precious existence! He must, indeed, be dear to Victoria who could thus awaken her sympathy. Alas!
my than these accents reached not the ears of Al¬ phonsine, who calmly beheld his conster¬ nation, still little suspecting its cause. At length, he reflected that if he had been anticipated, (as was clearly the case), in his present design of obtaining a secret inter¬ view by some more favoured lover, it now became his turn to triumph (being evi¬ dently taken for another), by personating in revenge his happier rival. He accord¬ ingly resolved to answer nothing to this (as it appeared to Lioni) affectionate ques¬ tion ; but, by remaining silent, endeavour to extort from her unsuspecting simplicity the full particulars of this important, and undreamed-of intercourse. Perceiving him thus silent, Alphonsine presently continued—" It was not gene¬ rous of thee so to rouse my tenderest feel¬ ings at our last interview; but, I again repeat, that I have wholly forgiven thy perhaps undesigned offence, though I can¬ not yet divine its motive. Once more,
then, adjure thee to gone and that thou mayest the mere speedily, I feel bound to say—since thou pretend- est to value the approval, or dread the dis¬ pleasure, of Vieenza's artless daughter— that thy compliance in this will more en¬ gage me to regard thee favourably, when¬ ever, under circumstances less objection¬ able, we may happen to meet again, than aught thou couldst at present urge, which I could not but disallow ; and which, final¬ ly, I am determined neither to hearken, nor approve." " Indeed!" thought the wondering Lio¬ ni: " then my course appears plainly marked out—I must pursue it!" but he yet, for a few moments, forbore to answer. In all that she had said, th* re was nothing to gratify his curiosity—no betrayal of the name or lank of his already fiercely- hated rival, which, indeed, Alphonsine knowing neither, could not betray. Yet was Lioni fain to take advantage of her thus thoughtlessly-promised pledge of fa-
vour, and, according to wish thus boldly expressed, withdraw at once from any further continuance of that long-co¬ veted interview. But first, well aware of the fickleness of woman, and her too often acquired habit of merely uttering just what at the present moment may suit her purpose best, he resolved on endeavouring to obtain some more substantial token of having thus once, at least, deserved and won her promised favour, than a mere woman's word. After a little reflection, therefore, he replied, in a seemingly spor¬ tive strain, for Lioni determined for the present to veil his feelings of bitterness— " If, gentle lady, I consent, in accordance with thy cruel desire, and not from any consideration of my own peril, which I weigh lightly, io forego this golden oppor¬ tunity, which might otherwise afford me the explanation I so long have sought in vain, permit me in return to require some trivial token of your favourable regard, that may serve, at least, till our next more VOL. III. c
meeting, as a memento to remind me of your gracious condonation." " Alas! I know not whether I ought to comprehend thy meaning," now sighed Alphonsine, evidently much better pleased with the smooth courtesy now exhibited by her unknown gallant, than with his impassioned vehemence during their pre¬ ceding interview. Lioni saw her hesita¬ tion, and much too well practised in the manners and foibles of the sex not to know that^— " The woman who d"liberatcs h lost," justly calculated upon his present solicited object as already more than half attained. i( Nay, hesitate not, fair enchantress!" he resumed—** at least, I could have wish¬ ed thee not to hesitate, but that thy charm¬ ing perplexity only serves to detain me a few moments longer in thy adorable pre¬ sence. Delay—and I still feel bound to urge incessantly my fond request; but the boon once granted, and in compliance with
thy gentle desire, rather than any regard to my own personal safety, I will instantly retire." " W hat more, rash youth, than her re¬ peated thanks, canst thou, in integrity de¬ mand, or the daughter of Vieenza in ho¬ nour bestow ?" again demanded the irreso¬ lute Alphonsine. " A glove from her fair hand," replied Lioni, " as a token, at least, that she ap¬ proves my newly-imbibed maxim of obe¬ dience." " I suppose I may not deny thee," re¬ turned the timid Alphonsine, " lest thy life should fall the sacrifice of thy foolish persistence. Here then," she continued, dropping him her glove, " look thou de¬ serve it, by forthwith fulfilling the re¬ quired conditions." Lioni received the extorted pledge of her future favour with transport, and pressed it to his lips, though his heart ached as the recollection crossed his mind that it was not in reality for him that c 2
pledge was conceal¬ ing still his disagreeable emotions, he found voice to reply—" Those conditions shall be fulfilled. I abandon, and for ever, the domain of Vieenza. What I have this night witnessed hath afforded me ? alas! a suflicient explanation; and never again need I seek a secret interview with it " Thou art prudent—thou art wise," said Alphonsine, interrupting him ; *' be¬ sides, the attempt—whatever thy motives, youth, for thus courting peril—as well as dangerous, would be surely fruitless, for to-morrow, at sunrise, I depart from hence." " To-morrow — depart from hence !" echoed Lioni, falteringly; "and whither— if thy poor servant may without offence presume to inquire so far—whither to direct thy course?" ** To Palermo," answered the artless Alphonsine, wondering at the stranger's earnestness in merely asking so (to him) unimportant a question.
" Palermo, then, shall contain me wise," now muttered Lioni, in an under tone; then added aloud, in a voice of un¬ abated interest—" Goes Vieenza to Pa¬ lermo also ?" " The prince Vieenza, my thrice noble father," replied Alphonsine, with rising dignity, " whom thou once delightedst to villify, will accompany to Palermo his un¬ worthy child." * k I never villified him P here loudly ex¬ claimed the astonished Lioni; but he was again checked by Alphonsine, whose in¬ dignation at the remembered epithets be¬ stowed (as she supposed) by the youth before her upon her afflicted sire again mounted almost to her curled and quiver¬ ing lips; and she half reproached herself with having, for a single moment, under any pretence, or for any consideration, held friendly intercourse with so bitter a de- famer of her distinguished father's honour¬ ed name. Thus incensed at the bare recollection
of what passed respect¬ ing Vieenza on a previous occasion, Al¬ phonsine, with a haughty gesture, check¬ ed the rest upon his tongue; and after a scarcely articulate —" Stranger, good¬ night!" disappeared into her apartment; while the surprised Lioni, though won¬ dering at this sudden tumult of her exci¬ ted feelings, and inwardly deprecating her inconstancy, still found that in her absence he could not avoid feeling himself " too much alone."
CHAP. III. Still let me hope. Good Francisco, look out Again, scout nrjind the rocks, and bring ray heart Some comfort of my son. Suakespt.a he. Here, taking advantage of the transient stupor into which the conduct of Alphon¬ sine had thrown the young marquis, it is necessary to make a brief digression, for the purpose of explaining the cause of don Caesario's never having again appeared be¬ fore the palazzo di Vieenza; which strange forgetfulness of the perseverance so often necessary to a lover's ultimate prosperity had enabled Lioni thus to personate him, and enjoy, without discovery, one of those stolen interviews it was once his glory and happiness to obtain. First then let us premise, that it was not owing merely to his hastily formed resolution of seeing Victoria no more, that
absence the place of their former meetings was to be mainly attri¬ buted; there were unhappily other cir¬ cumstances, which operated as a far surer, and even still more disagreeable cause, of bis detention thence. Don Cassario, it will be recollected, in his eagerness to ob¬ tain even a momentary glimpse of his adored Victoria, had departed secretly on his perilous excursion, and entirely alone —not even his attached, and deservedly trusted Isidore, bore him company upon that occasion; for having retired to rest, after the long fatigue of his unfortunate journey, Ceesario was loth to disturb the faithful menial Alone, therefore,„he ar¬ rived at the palazzo di Vieenza, and alone departed thence, taking the direction of that peaceful home at which he was (it soon appeared probable) never destined to arrive. What became of him was hither¬ to involved in the most impenetrable mys¬ tery—even his own attendant, the afore¬ said companion of his disastrous travels,
knew nothing of the cause of his noctur¬ nal departure, nor of the course he had taken : morning came, bright and glorious as usual in that delightful land, but Caesa- rio returned no more. It were impossible to describe in ade¬ quate terms the consternation which pre¬ vailed at the palazzo di Castelli, as soon as this mysterious disappearance of don Cae- sario became generally diffused, and cre¬ dited : the rage of the count—the agony of the countess, surpassed all powers of description, and set them at defiance; while the grief and indignation of the do¬ mestics was scarcely less vehement and in¬ tolerable. Just to have embraced him once again—to have just congratulated him on his present safety, and so soon to lose the object of their dearest affections —their proudest hopes! In vain did the count Castelli (as the day advanced, and another night drew near, while still Cassa¬ rio came not) order the neighbourhood to be diligently searched, and the whole of c 3
accustomed to visited fleetly mounted couriers, all anxious for the success of their present painful inves¬ tigation: no traces of the fugitive, or of his having at all visited those favourite spots, could be discovered. Neither did the accompanying search over valley and mountain avail them aught, for—- —--------------------" Not a brake hath borne, Nor gout of blood, nor shred of niantk- torn ; Nor fall nor struggle hath defaced the grass, Which still retains a mark where murder was." With another day succeeded fresh efforts, on the part of his distressed parents, to discover, if possible, the fate of their lost, unhappy son: but they were as fruitless as the former, producing nothing that might lead even to a conjecture of what might have been his destiny. Again " night came, and went, and came," but nothing transpired that could throw any light upon his mysterious and lamented doom. That the absence of don Csesario was
not voluntary, all seemed to concur opinion, failing to discover any cause for such an unaccountable secession from his kind father's home; and in this opinion, it is enough for the reader to be at pre¬ sent informed, they were not mistaken. Meantime, Isidore having failed in his en¬ deavours, though often repeated, to ob¬ tain a secret interview vvith BiondeUa (whom, however, for her double treachery, he now heartily despised, as will be seen hereafter) or Beltramo, the only mode of private or public intercourse possessed by the family of Castelli with that of Vi¬ eenza, even cold suspicion hardly knew where rightly to affix itself. Some be¬ lieved that he had fallen a victim to the ruffianism of the prince Vieenza, or some of his hired partisans, and among this number the count Castelli himself, who well knew (or thought he knew) the san¬ guinary disposition of his inveterate ene my: while others deemed, with at least an equal show of probability, that don
certainly the of the banditti, the long-dreaded, but as long unopposed and unmolested, pest and terror of the whole neighbouring country. The grieved and disappointed marquis Lioni, still, however, preserving carefully the glove given him by Alphonsine, but whom the foregoing train of circumstances bad combined fully to undeceive (as, alas! he now confidently imagined) with re¬ spect to his hopes of a future union with the Vieenza family, soon quitted the spot where those prostrated hopes had received their final condemnation. Yet while, as agreed upon, he retraced his steps from the scene of that long-desired amatory in¬ terview, not a suspicion crossed his mind of the deception under which he was la¬ bouring—Lioni still thought he had been conversing with Victoria. It must be observed, notwithstanding, that though the disappointed marquis looked upon his hopes of a reconciliation, and subsequent alliance, with the Vieenza family as com-
pletely terminated the preceding terview, he yet meant not that his endea¬ vours to penetrate the seeming mystery of that night's adventure should also cease so suddenly. No! his engagement bound him simply to refrain from again courting peril, by trespassing at midnight on the domain of one whom he had every reason to believe was now less his friend than enemy: but here the obligation to avoid seeing and conversing with his mistress was at an end. He therefore determined to repair instantly to Palermo, which he now fortunately knew to be also the des¬ tination of this wayward beauty; and there, at least, strive to discover, by such means as fortune might throw into his power, who was the favoured rival for whom he now (certainly not without some shew of reason) considered his own pre¬ tensions to have been rejected; and to whom, in reality, belonged even the pal¬ try gage of favour he had on that night surreptitiously obtained.
was the resolution of ing marquis Lioni, and such his purpose— a foolish one, it must be acknowledged, under the circumstances, since the dis¬ covery, if effected, could avail him no¬ thing. But noble spirits, owing to their extreme sensibility, often stoop beneath the pressure of a calamity that neither wisdom .nor valour can avert, which men of meaner pretensions might perhaps have regarded as a mere common evil; and hence Lioni, it is more than probable, felt severely his present disappointment. In the mean time, Alphonsine, after a little reflection, found her thoughts much more favourably disposed toward the young graceful stranger than at the termination of their preceding interview; and, her transient indignation having at length wholly subsided, she even dwelt with pleasure upon the recollection of his grace¬ ful form, and honeyed accents. Should she ever behold him again ?—was a ques¬ tion that she more than once asked her-
self during that sleepless night, and which her heart, or perhaps her inclination, failed not invariably to answer in the affirma¬ tive. Upon the whole, she passed a wake¬ ful and uneasy night—a novel occurrence to the wondering Alphonsine—and if per¬ chance she closed her eyes in the attempt to slumber, his engaging image only more strongly presented itself to her imagina¬ tion—his soft voice rang only the more sweetly in her ears, and his mildly beam¬ ing countenance (as her fancy pictured it, for she yet knew not his features) shone more kindly upon her, while she strove to banish the remembrance of his be¬ witching manners in vain. Morning came, and found her little refreshed by slumber, but the voice of her ready • at¬ tendant, BiondeUa, saluted her early as desired, and she was obliged to rise: but daylight brought not with it the required forgetfulness of that fascinating stranger's gentle tone and mien. That same day, Alphonsine, attended by BiondeUa, and
the prince accompanied only Beltramo, as appointed, took their depar¬ ture for Palermo. The glittering ornaments with which the officious Beltramo had decorated Al- phonsine's steed rang merrily as they quit¬ ted the palazzo, and turned into the flow¬ ery bordered road that conducted to Pa¬ lermo—her feathers were floating lightly in the fresh morning breeze, but her heart, wont to be even lighter than these, now sank heavily in her evil-boding bosom. She knew not wherefore—she could not divine the cause of these ominous, despon¬ ding feelings: the excursion was even one of her own proposing, and from which she expected her long-drooping sire to derive much benefit—yet she wished now that it had tiever been mentioned. Leaving them, however, to pursue their journey as chance or fate might determine, we now return to proceed with another portion of our narrative.
CHAP. IV. Ours the wild life In tumult still to range From toil to rest, and joy in every change. No dread of death—if with us die our foes- Save that it seems even duller than repose ; Come when it will, we snatch the life of life— When lost—what recka it—by disease or strife? Byron. Near the base of an inconsiderable moun¬ tain, situated in the wildest and most unfrequented part of Sicily, was a cave, formed by nature during some of those terrible convulsions long acknowledged the scourge of that beautiful country, but which art had not a little contri¬ buted to render alike difficult of access, and of discovery. In this secure and well adapted retreat, bad a much-dreaded band of robbers, almost from time immemorial, held their nocturnal orgies; and although it was known that from this fastness (which,
strong as it was deemed, a few soldiers could at any period have easily destroy¬ ed) they daily issued forth to plunder, and occasionally to slay, the unoffending pas¬ senger; yet they had hitherto been suffer¬ ed unmolested to retain possession of their favourite hold, no one choosing to incur the risk of attempting to dislodge them. The present leader of this thriving and desperate horde, as already known to the reader, was no other than the daring Za- chelli, the remorseless instrument of the almost-equally criminal Vieenza, to whose favour and protection he perhaps in part owed his present, and certainly his past, security from the vengeance of the laws he had so often offended. Zachelli now again too, had nearly joined his rejoicing comrades, arriving cured of his wound by some pretended miraculous agency, from the opposite coast of Naples: but the man¬ ner in which this was effected remains to be more fully explained to the reader. We left Abdallah a captive upon the
elevation of St. praying piteously to be released from the iron grasp of Spa- latro and Dagolino, who, unless he con¬ sented to restore their leader's health, were about to precipitate him from a pinnacle, which must inevitably have broken his own unlucky neck. Thus circumstanced, Abdallah, rather than endure the terrify¬ ing alternative, thought it best to make a Virtue of necesity, and, though not till Zachelli had just finished a terrible enun¬ ciation of his vengeance if he refused, proffered one of his remaining charmed lives without any gratuity to the accept¬ ance of the (by the bare mention of the intended gift) already half-restored Za¬ chelli. Accordingly, the now-reverenced life-giver was immediately released, and the Moor, much too honourable to recede from his extorted promise, proceeded to bestow upon his former enemy the desired boon that was to ensure his convalescence in the accustomed form. The delighted Zachelli, his heart bursting with real
thankfulness, received on anticipated renovation of vigour, and fan¬ cied that already he could even feel the potent voice of the mighty eastern magian w r orking miracles in his limbs. This he declared aloud, to the infinite wonder and gratification of his admiring comrades, and to the eternal honour and renown of the equally-infatuated bestower. Finally Abdallah was permitted to descend, with many protestations of gratitude from the supposed resuscitated bandit, and soon found his way, in no very enviable state of mind, to the Strada di Toledo; there to lament with Ahmed over the loss of an¬ other of his invaluable charmed lives, in return for which he had received nothing, except a small addition to his useless and troublesome popularity; and the bare pos¬ session of which no longer enviable prero¬ gative bad caused him to endure all the anxiety of a narrow escape with his life into the bargain. Now whether, in the language of Scrip-
ture, his " faith had made him whole," or whether in fact the erring blade of the prirw£nVieenza had glanced aside from the vital parts, leaving them wholly un¬ harmed, it is unnecessary for the purposes of our tale to decide; the reader may de¬ termine the point according to his inclina¬ tion. It is sufficient here to record the decision of Zachelli, who felt positively assured that the potent mummery of the cowardly Moor had averted the shaft of death, otherwise inevitable. Either owing to the strength of this conviction, or the weakness of Vieenza's nevertheless prac¬ tised arm, it is certain that the bold rob¬ ber Zachelli, greatly to the joy of himself and comrades, from that hour began swift¬ ly to recover; and so rapid was his con¬ valescence, that only a short time elapsed ere he was again in Sicily, at the head of his band, resuming his former lawless courses, and vowing vengeance against the treacherous Vieenza! The departing sun had now already
sunk the which, with every passing instant, appeared to assume a deeper shade of purple, and the silvery moon rose opposite, brightening gradually as she ascended that pure cloudless con¬ cave, while the surrounding universal tranquillity seemed to declare that every thing in nature (at least, every innocent thing) was about to betake itself to repose, until another rekindling day should once again awaken or dispense, for man's en¬ joyment— " Flowers in the valley, splendour in the beam, Health on the gale, and freshness in the stream.'' It seemed, indeed, as the noble poet just quoted feelingly expresses it, a " moment only for the good"—pity that aught of evil should have been abroad, on that resplendant night, to mar with selfish and abhorred pursuits so soothing and lovely a scene. At the mouth of the gloomy and se¬ questered cave already alluded to, upon a huge fragment of stone which served
partly to conceal its entrance, sat one of the most ruthless and resolute mem¬ bers of Zachelli's pitiless fraternity, regard¬ ing with sullen apathy the beautifully fad¬ ing landscape. Just above the rugged aperture also, stretched on the smooth greensward, was lounging his equally rough and savage comrade, Dagolino, alike with his associate wholly incapable of ap¬ preciating the sensations excited even in his rugged bosom by the tranquil subli¬ mity around him. They had been recently conversing doubtless upon matters of deep import to the safety of their band, and its prosperity; but the subject, whatever it was, appeared to have been completely exhausted, and deep silence had over that lonely sequestered tract of country once more resumed its " solitary reign." Anon, however, though yet hardly distinguish¬ able, was heard faintly from within the cave the confused hum of a number of voices^ mingled occasionally with the harsh clinking of coarse metal platters, and
vessels, which some seemed arranging in readiness for a forth¬ coming festival. In reality, it was the combined din of the just-awakening rob¬ bers, increasing every moment, as each roused his fellow from his drunken slum¬ ber, in order to prepare for a renewal of those excesses (misnamed conviviality by these intemperate ruffians) too commonly practised at their accustomed evening meal In sooth, the feast to which these sturdy knaves were soon to be summoned was ap¬ pointed to celebrate a triumph which pre¬ sented them with no common cause for rejoicing and exultation. The fact was, their bold leader, Zachelli, had been lately more than usually felicitous in the execu¬ tion of his mischievous plans, the nature of which will appear in due season; and had consequently fixed the present eve to be devoted solely to hilarity, or rather to the most heartless debauchery of every kind, in commemoration of the helpless
subjection to which reduced former stanch supporter and friend. Now, therefore, as the twilight totally disappear¬ ed, and the wan moon alone remained to discover their motley apparel and scarred countenances, the banditti flocked to the mouth of the cavern till its entrance be¬ came crowded with noisy stragglers from that boisterous fraternity, there to gaze upon the night, and loiter away the few minutes which yet intervened before the commencement of their nocturnal revelry.
VOL. III.
D
CHAP. V. For us even banquets fond regret supply, Jn the red cup that crowns our memory; And the brief epitaph in danger's day, When those wlio win at length divide the prey, And cry, remembrance saddening o'er each brow, How had the brave who fell exulted now f Bvnos. After a little space, the " note of prepa¬ ration" from within grew louder, and now above the clattering of trenchers, and jin¬ gling of knives, or bottles, was distinctly heard the shrill tones of a woman's voice, calling the robbers by name, or railing at their awkwardness; while the scent of the savoury viands she seemed to be preparing soon perceptibly saluted the olfactory nerves of those who had strayed from the scene of approaching festivity, for a tran¬ sient period, to the entrance of the cavern. Accordingly, these speedily deemed it pru-
dent to re-enter that gloomy to them long-endeared and enviable) abode, to the interior of which they were soon followed by Dagolino and Spalatro, in whose com¬ pany, if the reader chooses, we shall also proceed to take a survey of this den of in¬ temperance and iniquity. Having reached the end of a long nar¬ row passage, a sudden burst of light re¬ vealed a spacious cavern, lofty and sur¬ rounded by innumerable niches, where se¬ veral of the sleepers lay unroused by the surrounding din from their lethargy, while in the middle was erected a capaci¬ ous table, smoking with delicacies such as might tempt the appetite of these hardy mountaineers. At the farthest extremity of the excavation, was kindled a blazing fire, from which, indeed, the light chiefly proceeded, though a small dingy chande¬ lier suspended from the roof (the spoil, it is probable, of some pillaged chapel in the vicinity), and ill supplied with oil, might be said to aid slightly in dissipating the
eternal the of could hardly be supposed ever to pene¬ trate. An aged and wretched-looking fe¬ male, whom yet some costly garments and valuable trinkets hung upon, though they failed to adorn her miserable figure, was still occupied in making the necessary arrangements for their approaching repast; bestowing often, as she passed some un¬ fortunate sleeper, a hearty kick upon him, in the vain attempt to make him sensible that supper-time was arrived. In the pre¬ ceding summary manner had this very unceremonious chamber-maid already treat¬ ed many, some of whom instantly rousing themselves, at once shook off "downy sleep, death's counterfeit," while others be¬ stowing only a hearty curse upon the dis¬ turber, again turned themselves, regardless of the surrounding preparations, to rest. Even these, however, the stentorian voice of their leader soon sufficed to awaken, as presently exerted in a tone of authority it commanded every individual, by pledging
each other on that auspicious eve, to aid in the celebration of his triumph; and brief was the interval that now elapsed, ere all were seated in obedience to his call around the festive board, At the head of this ferocious assembly now sat that leader, the renowned Za¬ chelli, a visible gloom yet lowering upon his scowling countenance, which, however, the wine soon served to dissipate, his re¬ peated draughts declaring that, for one night at least, he had wholly forgotten the wonted circumspection which had so often led his band to victory. Behind his chair —if chair that should be called which more resembled a bench, composed of the rudest materials imaginable — stood the already-mentioned female, in readiness to obey the slightest beck of her brutal and (except on particular occasions like the present) disregarding master. This ne¬ glected and degraded female, the reader can hardly fail to recognise as the long-lost Bianca—the once faithfully-attached at-
tendant of tjie princess and the same who, seventeen years ago, accompanied her to Naples; but who, soon after that period, had mysteriously eloped from the palazzo of Vieenza, who gave himself but little trouble in striving to discover her doom. The reality was this—worked upon by the repeated per¬ suasions of Zachelli, Bianca had been in¬ duced to share for a while his wandering destiny, and eventually to seek refuge for the rest of her truly-wretched existence in her present unhallowed sanctuary. It was true, Zachelli still often loaded her with unsuitable finery plundered from her betters, as he protested, solely for her sake; and it was equally true, that even here, absorbed as he commonly was in se¬ curing the weal of his lawless companions, and devoted as he was to their society, he would still sometimes seem kind to his certainly never-abandoned mistress; but lately such proofs of favour were seldom bestowed, and the hopeless condition of
the " robber's grew every more comfortless—more miserable. Upon, all festive occasions similar to that which it is here attempted to describe, it was Bi- anca's office to replenish the drinking ves¬ sels as soon as emptied, and watch the coarsely - applauding circle devour with avidity the food she had prepared for them; and thus was she at present engaged, hear¬ ing with gloomy indifference the various comments bestowed upon her cookery, but punctually performing her accustomed degrading duty. The right hand supporter of Zachelli, at this uproarious entertainment, was Da¬ golino, while the gloomy visage of Spala¬ tro scowled upon his left; these two ruf¬ fians thus appearing even more than usual¬ ly held in favour at the present juncture. As soon as the eatables were dispatched, or rather, as soon as the appetites (not easily satisfied) of these hungry barbarians began to cloy, their grateful leader accord¬ ingly addressed them as follows—>" My
gallant associates! you, and Dagolino, in particular, to whose timely appearance and aid at Naples, I owe my present prolonged existence, and to the rest of his brave comrades, Zachelli drinks health and prosperity! Restored to my dauntless companions, the very welkin shall soon again ring gloriously with our renewed exploits, and not a wealthy noble in Sicily but shall contribute some portion of the bright lining of his coffers to enrich our horde." The bandit here ceased, for a few minutes, concluding amid the vehe¬ ment acclamations of his followers, and the bright wine-cup flashed close to his sable- bearded lips, which presently having drained, he presented to Bianca immedi¬ ately to fill again, and continued—" The next is a pledge to which, I feel assured, there is not a man of you but will do infinite justice. In our late struggle for the capture of the haughty prince Vi¬ eenza, with his fair daughter, on their way to Palermo, which has so gloriously sue-
ceeded, two of our bravest associates beneath his sinewy and practised arm. Comrades! I give you the memory of each fallen friend for whom your unwil¬ ling weapons scooped a grave this morn¬ ing—a cup to the manes of those gallant fellows who died bravely fighting in their leader's cause." Now again the roof resounded with the vociferated names of their too-justly slain companions, while, indeed, every member of that desperate fraternity dia ample jus¬ tice to their bold leader's pledge. Mean¬ time, imprecations were poured plentifully upon the devoted head of the now captive Vieenza—threats were used, and knives were even beginning to be drawn, when Zachelli judged it necessary to check this somewhat-superfluous torrent of zeal, and therefore once more resumed—" Another bumper, friends," he continued, *• in anti¬ cipation of the golden ransom we may ex¬ pect to receive shortly—not for Vieenza,, since his destiny must depend upon the d3
upcast of a die—but for the hare¬ brained lover, don Csesario, who is also still our captive. He thought to purloin my favourite steed, Kosolia, and for that silly attempt have I stowed him in a dungeon, whence he will find it difficult to escape : did he deem that his baby wit could out¬ manoeuvre Zachelli! His doting father, the rich count Castelli, shall pay us a weighty recompence for his son's release. Here's to its speedy arrival—comrades! I pledge you." The loud burst of exultation which as usual succeeded this speech, proclaimed that their suddenly meditated vengeance was already half forgotten; and the deep draught that followed most effectually confirmed its oblivion. Thus had the po¬ litic leader of this mountain band long contrived to preserve his imperative sway over their minds, by sometimes humour¬ ing them to the " top of their bent;" but when the course they ran was growing averse to his inclination, by changing it,
and divesting them of their ferocity, with petty artifices such as the preceding. Thus had the wily chieftain hitherto main¬ tained his ascendancy over them, only. however, exhibiting by his conduct ano¬ ther living proof that— " Mail may rule the worst, By ever daring to be first:" since no feat was ever attempted—no work of blood or plunder ever performed, but Zachelli was at its head; while, to do him justice, no less than the band who chose him for their leader—in spite of his real, or assumed reverence, for saints and holy symbols—the bloodiest enterprises were generally of his own invention. Satisfied apparently with the turn af¬ fairs at present had taken, and far more substantially gratified by the complete success which had crowned all his recent undertakings, Zachelli now drained his own cup with much self-complacency, and lolling negligently in his ° chair of state,"
appeared resolved to resign himself wholly to the joys of conviviality. With a voice, therefore, as potent as that of Alexander in the height of his glory, when seated to hear the music of Timotheus at the " royal feast for Persia won," he commanded a ruffian opposite to troll him a stave suit¬ able to the occasion. Accordingly, obe¬ dient to his mandate, a hoarse voice pre¬ sently commenced, and sang the follow¬ ing:— " Jovial speeds the robber's jjfe ; None much better—many worse : Rapine, plunder, blood and strife, Fjrm his pastime—fill his purse. * Traveller, stand !' he dauntless cries , All obey the loud command : From the distant vale and rise, Echo answers * Traveller, stand !' Shrinking from his partial view, When the massy coin we hold— ' Stranger, now thy path pursue 1* Thus we rob him of his gold. Then retreating to our horde, Holding fear of chase in scorn, Round the nightly jovial board, Laugh, and drink,, and sing, till morn."
The applause which followed this per¬ fectly characteristic effusion was loud, and long continued; and every individual pre¬ sent, with the exception of Bianca, ap¬ peared to partake of the general exhilara¬ tion. At its termination, Zachelli, who had already too frequently drained his enormous bowl that evening, again sum¬ moned her to supply him with more wine; and remarking her sunken aspect amid the universal hilarity, as the robber's voice ceased, exclaimed—" Thanks, Ste- phano, for a strain so suitable to the bold robber's hour of triumph. Why, this is our millennium—the golden reign, Ste- phano, of thy victorious chief's prosperity —may it last a thousand years!—Bianca," he continued, turning again to his deject¬ ed attendant, " thou also must swallow a cup of wine, at least, in commemoration of my triumph over so powerful an ene¬ my. Come—no denial," he added, prof¬ fering his own cup filled with the spark¬ ling beverage to her reluctant hand—** I must be obeyed,"
" whom, then, tri¬ umphed ?" demanded Bianca, sternly, still refusing to taste the proffered goblet— " over the prince Vieenza, his former il¬ lustrious patron and friend ! Is it a tri¬ umph like this that ye are met thus up¬ roariously to celebrate ? Alas! mistaken men !—-and foolish, deceived Zachelli! the triumph ye thus weakly conceive your¬ selves to have achieved, will, if I mistake not, prove your bitterest bane. Where is now your exalted protector in the hour of adversity ?—and who shall venture to af¬ firm that that hour of vicissitude may not to-morrow arrive? Who now shall mis¬ lead the combined forces of the viceroy from our haunt, when again commission¬ ed to destroy us, or conduct us chained to Palermo ? Where is he, I ask, who once effected this, and might—had due grati¬ tude been shown by our commander- have effected it again ?" A loud and scornful laugh prefaced the answer of Zachelli.—" In the deepest—
darkest, and most our retreat affords," he exclaimed, in a voice of exultation ; " whence, moreover, he shall never issue alive, either to harm or befriend us more." " And on whom, then, are we in future to depend," again asked Bianca, ** for those friendly services the noble Vieenza was wont to perform for us? Take heed—> for the time may not be distant at which ye will assuredly require some potent in¬ tercessor to screen ye from the viceroy's awakened vengeance. The count Cas- telli's favourite, nay, his only son, ye have captured and detained—think ye not that he will search the country for don Cassa¬ rio, until at last he discovers our abode ? Vieenza, too, and his daughter, will be missed—how deem you their absence will be accounted for ? The guess is sure to go heavily against us; and who is there left in Sicily will now give the followers of Zachelli a redeeming word ?" " I know not—I care not," answered
contemptuously. " the release of count Castelli's son, a mo¬ derate ransom may suffice—but the doom of Vieenza is sealed." *' What mean you ?" inquired Bianca, earnestly, and evidently full of apprehen¬ sion for the fate of her former master. ** That don Ceesario again may breathe his native air, and view his native fields," returned Zachelli, with a malignant smile: " but the prince Vieenza—never!" " Holy St. Rosolia!—what, then, do you intend shall be his doom ?" exclaimed Bianca. " Death!—death without mercy—death without repentance — sudden and un¬ dreamed of death !" rejoined Zachelli, sig- nificantry flourishing his keen poniard as he spoke: then lowering his voice, he added—" Death! such as he would fain have awarded me." " Death !—cruel, cold-blooded assassina¬ tion !—impossible! You mean it not— you cannot mean it!" again exclaimed
Bianca, indignantly, and with well-feigned wonder at this, in reality, expected de¬ cision. " You cannot mean to murder one who has so often proved himself your ablest, as he was your earliest, benefactor." '* Shall I not slay the man who twice hath sought to deprive me of existence ?" retorted Zachelli, angrily. " Yes! though every saint in the holy calendar should descend before me, and singly interpose for his preservation." " Hush! drunkard, for now thou rav- est," said Bianca, who, however, seemed to have caught a sudden idea from his words. " And his daughter," she de¬ manded—" his helpless, unoffending child —must she too die to appease thy brutal vengeance ?" " No! it may be that the beautiful Vic¬ toria—whom, since her capture, I have scarcely yet beheld—shall atone by far different means her lost father's ingrati¬ tude," said the inebriated Zachelli, upon whom the effects of the wine he had
swallowed every moment more visible. " Think not that I speak it dis¬ paragingly, Bianca, or to excite thy jea¬ lousy, but Victoria will make a really pretty bride for some juvenile member of our band, who------" " Wretch! it shall never be," exclaimed the shrinking Bianca, half aside: " though my feeble voice alone be raised to prevent it—it shall never be." " But come," resumed Zachelli, again presenting to her the yet untasted goblet, " let Bianca drain this to the downfal of one who is now become our band's, be¬ cause its leader's, enemy." " Away! I drink not to the downfal of one who hath fostered and supported me," cried Bianca, " however some unexpected change of circumstance, in which I have had no share, may have rendered his de¬ struction advisable, or even necessary. Neither will Bianca ever consent to the intended sacrifice of his innocent child, in atonement, as thou pretendest, for the
self-expiated of sire. " Withhold thy disapproval, at least till thy consent be required," returned Za¬ chelli, coolly: " my brave Dagolino and Spalatro here, who shall draw lots for the intended happiness, I guess, will scarcely deem it worth their asking. Come, kiss the brim to the anticipated nuptial felicity of Vieenza's dainty daughter with her rugged bridegroom." " Forbear—I touch it not," again ex¬ claimed Bianca, thrusting aside the prof¬ fered goblet with a vehemence that dash* ed it to the ground. " My lips would blister to taste—my heart would abhor as poison, a draught whose bitter stimulant was the foul wish that would brand me with ingratitude." " Fair St. Rosolia, thou hast spilled the wine!" stammered Zachelli, his intellect, in perfect unison with his muscular facul¬ ties, still growing perceptibly weaker; " and, now that I recollect, it is perhaps
of consequence—the unaccustomed giddiness which I feel assuring me that I have already taken somewhat more than sufficient. Whew! the lights swim be¬ fore me; and my brave comrades here seem dancing a kind of whirling measure around me. But this must not interrupt the business of our meeting, already too long delayed. Comrades! I mean that our captives shall this night become griev¬ ed witnesses of our triumphant jollity; and that each shall receive, during our present festival, an intimation of his own separate impending doom. Enough—I read in your applauding countenances that this proposition of your leader is approved. Spalatro and Dagolino, to your especial custody, as having been chiefly concerned with me in their capture, the two prisoners are entrusted: go—release them from their bonds, and conduct them hither."
CHAP. VI. lie was not one who brook'd delay: Within the chambir of his state, The chief of Este's ancient sway i.'pon his throne of judgment sate. Byron. Judging from the eager shout, and other indications of satisfaction, with which this proposal of Zachelli was received, it ap¬ peared, indeed, a welcome one to his com¬ rades, many of whom were by this time nearly as much inebriated as himself. During this unanimous burst of exulta¬ tion, Dagolino and Spalatro quitted the table, and disappeared into an inner de¬ partment of this gloomy abode to execute their orders. At this critical juncture, Zachelli, although considerably intoxicat¬ ed, not wholly forgetful of his wonted prudence, exerting his hoarse voice, called loudly after them, desiring them to be
wary of their prisoners, and, their ter security, to bring forward only one at a time. The hint was not lost on Spala¬ tro and Dagolino, who, accordingly, pre¬ sently returned, conducting don Caesario, drooping and half manacled, to the pre¬ sence of their chief. His appearance was considerably altered by the lengthened captivity he had under¬ gone, his apparel being wretchedly torn, and his beard long and haggard; but the fire of his eyes was undiminished, and his proud glance bespoke a lofty spirit still unimpaired by misfortune. On his en¬ trance, he boldly surveyed the motley drunken group of revellers there present¬ ed to his vision; but soon sickening at a sight so disgusting, and so unfavourable to his newly-raised hopes of a speedy li¬ beration (hopes which this unexpected summons from the banditti to appear in presence of their leader had not failed to rekindle), he again cast them gloomily downwards, and awaited with resignation
the address of the mimic potentate who had thus suddenly, and at such an unsea¬ sonable hour, required his attendance. Not long was it ere the expected ha¬ rangue commenced: for Zachelli, adjust¬ ing himself in his seat with the air of one fully impressed with the importance of his present communication, presently ad¬ dressed the courageous and unshrinking youth.—" Don Caesario di Castelli," he exclaimed, " you are sent for hither to learn your doom. Practised in thievery, we had hitherto deemed ourselves secure at least from the depredations of others; and had yet to learn that there were those in Sicily more expert than ourselves in the art of making another's goods their own The son of the count Castelli succeeded once in purloining my favourite steed, it is true; but retribution hath speedily over¬ taken him, and he in turn now stands my captive: what doom ought he to expect at the hands of his incensed captors ?^— what destiny should be his, I say, who
not even rob spoiler, and incur his resentment ? How deemest thou, youth, of thy present peril¬ ous situation ?—and what doom dost thou suppose awaits thee at our hands for thy temerity ?" " I know not," replied don Caesario, in an undaunted, though sufficiently melan¬ choly tone: " but whatever my fate, I trust 1 shall meet it with becoming firm¬ ness." *' Indeed—so resigned!" observed Za¬ chelli, sneeringly. " It were useless now to appear other¬ wise," answered Caesario. " Time was that I resisted thee fiercely, as thou know¬ est, because the equality of our contest af¬ forded ground for hope, since I was then at liberty. But I was overpowered by numbers: and now that I am thy captive, my merit shall be to endure my lot with becoming fortitude." " Why didst thou seek to steal my steed?" demanded his drunken interro¬ gator.
w False robber! I stole him not," replied don C*esario, indignantly, " nor knew that I bestrode thy courser until too late to rectify the error which in the darkness I found I had committed, I released thy steed in mistake, thinking I had unfasten¬ ed my own, whom I left browsing beneath the same green cluster; howbeit, both are now in thy stable, and thou at least hast gained a noble horse by my unintentional carelessness. With respect to this affair, then, thou art little the worse, except the loss of a few months' service of thy Roso¬ lia, who during the interval hath fared sleekly, I promise thee. For the rest—I have been pillaged of every coin or valua¬ ble my garb exhibited, or pockets contain¬ ed ; and of what value in your estimation can now be this poor faded form, that you should thus still resolve to detain me lon¬ ger in captivity, I am utterly at a loss to imagine." " I like thy bold bearing, youth," now returned Zachelli, evidently somewhat vol, m. E
softened the portion of speech, '* and must give credence to thy frank t jnfesslon, which, had I not already resolved on thy liberation, would certainly have won my favour. I mean that ere long thou shalt be set at liberty, but only upon the receipt of a stated ransom, the amount of which shall be shortly commu¬ nicated to thy sire, together with the ex¬ pected mode of payment, and the pro¬ gress of thy liberation will thenceforward depend upon his speed. Were Zachelli to act otherwise than thus, it would be to desert the interests of his band; bear, therefore, thy confinement with patience a little longer; perhaps a few days may bring thee liberty. You shall have such food and tendance as the robber's table can supply—the robber's fastness afford; but till the required ransom arrives, our rugged abode must be also that of don Caesario." *' Alas! my unhappy parents!" exclaim¬ ed the unfortunate captive, «' know they
yet of my situation acquaint¬ ed with my sad mischance?" " Not yet," replied Zachelli; " but to¬ morrow shall not pass unemployed for their satisfaction on that point, and I doubt not that the communication will lead to thy release. Meantime, Zachelli would ever have a noble prisoner treated with respect—are all things done for don Caesario's comfort that may be dared con¬ sistent with his safe keeping? If not, Zachelli desires thee to accuse, and he will investigate the grievance—complain, and Zachelli will redress." Don Caesario was now, indeed, some¬ what astonished at this sudden change and excess of urbanity (which neverthe¬ less, he doubted not, proceeded chiefly from the hope of a weighty ransom); but casting his eyes toward Bianca, who was still standing near the chair of Zachelli in an attitude of melancholy rumination, he fervently responded—" Oh yes! by an angel among devils my wants have been E %
supplied, and my misery removed her humanity. Oh! when man is in affliction, of whatever kind Heaven may choose to visit him with (and mine are sorrows, indeed, of a varied description), who like a woman can comprehend his sufferings, and relieve them ?" ** Thy devotion to the sex I have not at this late hour to learn," observed Za¬ chelli, with a significant smile perfectly understood by his enthusiastic auditor; " but I knew not before that Bianca pos¬ sessed the power of so readily charming to rest a captive's sufferings." " My devotion to the lovely daughter of the prince Vieenza," said Caesario, in reply to the former part of this observa¬ tion, " I am aware is not unknown to thee. In the pursuance of that fatal at¬ tachment, however, I was not conscious that I gave umbrage either to thee, or any of thy followers; and if the fact was otherwise—as I now believe, though at a loss to conjecture wherefore—its unhappy
termination might suffice to appease the resentment even of Caesario's bitterest enemies. Her affections wholly alienated by some happier rival, during my recent unavoidable detention at Naples—our mu¬ tual protestations of regard no longer re¬ membered — my remonstrances scorned and ierided—my very name forgotten " Enough!" said Zachelli, interrupting him hastily ; " I compassionate thee; but the present time will hardly suit to listen to the recapitulation of a love-tale. Spa¬ latro, conduct him again—for, I trust, a brief period—to his former place of con¬ finement ; but let him be kindly treated, as one that may yet hereafter rather prove our friend than enemy. Of this let Bianca still take care—and, Dagolino, bring for¬ ward the next captive. For him—the haughty, unbending prince Vieenza, we reserve a different doom." " How! is Vieenza, then, also thy cap¬ tive ?" demanded don Caesario, with asto¬ nishment.
* 4 Even as thou sayest," replied Zachelli, proudly; '*' xllas! he is the cause of all my mi¬ sery/' rejoined the hapless Caesario. " Rest satisfied, youth, he will trouble thee no longer," again returned the seem¬ ingly-resolute Zachelli. " It may be even that the morn which cometh—the sun which in a few hours will be about to rise, shall, at its rising, look for him in vain." Don Caesario shuddered, as he heard these words drop from the no longer heed¬ ful lips of the drunken desperado, and, in spite of his present hatred of Vieenza, be¬ came instantly filled with horror at the bare contemplation of his inveterate ene¬ my's impending doom.—" Murder him in cold blood ! impossible!" he faintly arti¬ culated ; but his emotion choked the ac¬ cents in his gasping throat, and they escaped his parched lips in a tone almost inaudible. " Remove him hence—why am I not obeyed?" now reiterated Zachelli in a
sterner voice, apparently surprised at unwonted delay of his oflicers (for Dago¬ lino and Spalatro were each dignified with the title of lieutenant—a title earned chiefly by their superior atrocity); and the luckless Caesario was again instantly approached by his ferocious gaoler, and reconducted to his dungeon. Now it was that the emotion of Bianca, who during his presence had seemed little to regard what was passing, became so overpower¬ ing as scarcely to be controllable. She knew that the hopeless, foredoomed pri¬ soner, next about to be brought forward— perhaps about to be butchered in her pre¬ sence, was her former abandoned master, the husband of ber early benefactress; and accordingly, for the forthcoming dreaded occasion, she appeared indeed to have hoarded all her sympathy.
CHAP. VII. Tis he indeed—disarm'd, but undeprest. His sole regret the life he still possest. He deeply, darkly felt; but evil pride That led to perpetrate—now serves to hide. A dead silence succeeded the departure of don Caesario, and, even amid that usu¬ ally tumultuous assemblage, flushed as its members were with " wine and wassail," continued unbroken, till the expected re- en tranceof Dagolino, conducting the prince Vieenza as his prisoner. So anxious were all present to observe the event of the coming interview, impressed, perhaps, with the importance of his rank, or remember¬ ed achievements, that each eye was strain¬ ed to obtain a glimpse of him on his en¬ trance; and even their accustomed fre-
quent applications to the wine-kegs were for a brief space forgotten. The office usually performed by Bianca, therefore, (the laborious one of waiting at table, and for such a company !) of course dwindled into a comparative sinecure; and it was well —for the strangely-moved robber's minion, like Sterne's sensitive scullion, affected even to tears, was in reality no longer capable of performing the manifold duties adjudged rightly to pertain to her disagreeable function. In person the prince Vieenza appeared little altered by his close confinement, which, indeed, had been of much shorter duration than that of don Caesario, but he wore the same gloomy aspect—the same forbidding scowl that long had sat upon his sullen features, and most effectually marked him for a misanthrope, if not for something worse. Yet though the same dark frown still overshadowed his counte¬ nance, no symptom of agitation—no sign of fear was visible, to betray that he felt e S
either alarm or grief at present solate, nay, dreadful situation— " Still in his stern and self-collected mien, A conqueror's, more than captive's air is seen f and though he *• looked not lovingly," as may be easily guessed, upon the surround¬ ing throng of grim and threatening faces, it is equally true that his fixed and steady glance revealed neither contrition nor dis¬ may. It was defiance—stern defiance alone, that " knit his gathered brow:" even chained and helpless in the savage hun¬ ter's toils—a hunter whom he knew to be as remorseless as he was daring—the proud spirit of Vieenza was still untamed, and appeared untameable. With a haughty, and perhaps something of a pitying glance, he carelessly surveyed the encircling group, and then, with evident abhorrence, averted his scornful eyes from the baccha¬ nalian scene. Zachelli watched him with a counte¬ nance in which mounting indignation, and
the wish to demean himself calmly his followers, appeared struggling for su¬ periority; although the former was evi¬ dently fast gaining the ascendency over his already rage-swollen features.—" At last the turn is mine," he, after a brief pause, exclaimed, " to triumph over a fallen and treacherous enemy! At last I have thee fettered, and in my power—subdued and helpless, ready to receive my justly-pro¬ voked vengeance ; to endure whicii man¬ fully, as a soldier ought, is the only task of spirit now left thee to perform—the only exertion of fortitude fate requires of thee between thy last desperate effort to destroy thy captors, and the grave. The lives of two of our gallant comrades were, on that occasion, sacrificed to thy fury: their blood is still upon thy hands—it re¬ mains for me to exact such retribution as may pacify their surviving associates, and appease their wandering ghosts. Nor is this all—though sufficient, if it were, to shut thee out from hope. But there yet
remains a charge against thee. Thou hast twice, with thy own treache¬ rous hand—oh, villain! most basely stri¬ ven to deprive me of existence—me, thy faithful ally—me, thy trusted accomplice —thy once grateful familiar, and devoted friend. When last you struck me in Na¬ ples—oh, how the recollection maddens me!—I felt the keen cold steel penetrate suddenly through my vitals—I sunk be¬ neath the curdling sensation, and even had the darkness permitted, could have seen no more. On recovering, I crawled to¬ ward St. Elmo; and happening there to encounter the mighty magian whose voice, when exerted to Stay the approach of death, is justly said to possess more than human potency, I am fortunately here again to front my murderer. Behold the scar made on my bosom by thy false weapon," he continued, tearing open his vestment—" that wound is healed—but the wounds thy foul treachery, and unex¬ ampled ingratitude, have inflicted on my
memory, not even the potent life-restoring charm can cure." Vieenza, who well remembered the depth and danger of the wound he knew his own keen weapon to have inflicted, gazed stedfastly upon the exasperated ban¬ dit, and inwardly asked himself the ques¬ tion—" Can aught like this be possible ? can this Moor, of whom he speaks, really possess the power—a power I have twice seen exercised—of dispensing existence?" but he still preserved his haughty demean¬ our, and spoke nothing. Meantime, perceiving him thus obsti¬ nately silent, the infuriated Zachelli, whose recollected injuries, now magnified in his estimation by the copious draughts of wine he had swallowed, were fast hurrying him into a paroxysm of drunken insanity (for what less than insane is man when wine usurps dominion over his reason?) fiercely resumed—** Such are thy offences, traitor —murder, augmented by treachery and ingratitude-and behold their recompence!
Such are thy crimes, thou whom gratitude could not restrain from smiting even a faithful servant, who sought thy presence only to do thee good. Be¬ hold, and receive their reward!" he conti¬ nued, brandishing aloft his naked dagger, which, having rushed from his seat toward the prince, he presently strove to bury in his unshrinking bosom. Now it happened that Bianca, though wholly unnoticed by the prince Vieenza, had, scarcely knowing what she was about to do, yet resolved to attempt some scheme for his liberation, approached the spot where he was standing, for the purpose of more closely perusing his stem and altered features. Perceiving, therefore, with mingled alarm and horror, the des¬ perate purpose of Zachelli, she, prompted by some sudden inexplicable instinct (since she had little cause to feel compassion for one whom she still regarded as the mur¬ derer of her former indulgent mistress), flung herself rapidly between liim and the
object of his fury, with a shriek that made the inmost recesses of the ca¬ vern echo back the sound. The conse¬ quence of this unexpected manoeuvre was, that instead of the intended victim, the robber's favourite received the poniard in her side; and when Zachelli again looked at his bright blade, he perceived it dim¬ med with blood—not the blood of his enemy, but of his own once-adored Bi¬ anca, " Bianca—foolish woman! idiot!—why came you betwixt us?" stammered the as¬ tonished bandit, now alternately regard¬ ing his crimsoned blade, and the pale be¬ ing who still interposed her almost faint¬ ing form between him and his intended victim. " It is thy blood that now co¬ lours my poniard—thy life that my erring weapon, perhaps, hath drained. Ah! fool¬ ish impetuosity !—why did you come be¬ twixt us ?" " To save one," Bianca faintly articu¬ lated, " who, though he remembers me
not, was anciently my the wrath of a once-dearer benefactor, now equally regardless of my presence, or my prayers." On hearing this response, the prince Vi¬ eenza, whom even the recent attempt upon his existence had scarcely sufficed to arouse from his apathetic sternness, gently stooped his head to discover if possible, by a nearer scrutiny, who it was that thus boldly laid claim to his former intimacy. Nor was the effort made in vain: in an¬ other instant the well-known expression of those now haggard features awakened his recollection—he knew that his life had just been saved by no other than his own fugitive domestic, the lost attendant of his once-so-unjustly persecuted princess. He remembered her visage, much as it was altered by time and circumstances; and with the recollection came tears into his eyes—those eyes to which even his recent eminent peril had failed to impart any other expression than defiance and
contempt. the and inebriated Zachelli—saw the change pro¬ duced in Vieenza by his sudden recogni¬ tion of the wounded Bianca, and, for a time, thought proper to suspend his savage purpose. All eyes present looked with no inconsiderable degree of interest upon the passing scene, for all knew the history of Bianca, and the late remorse of Vieen¬ za after the unfortunate transactions of which she had, in her early youth, been a witness; while, to complete the w f onder, the obstinacy of Vieenza (hitherto deter¬ mined to be silent) was effectually over¬ come by this catastrophe, and, with a bursting heart, he gave vent to the bitter feelings of compunction which this un¬ dreamed-of encounter had rekindled in his bosom. " Alas!" he exclaimed, now wildly wringing his hands, as if wholly uncon¬ scious of the presence of spectators, " my beloved Alphonsine, too, must perish mi¬ serably : already the destroyer has her in
grasp—the ravisher snare. toria also has been justly sacrificed; for her no sun shall ever shine whose be^ms can rekindle the torch of soul-animating hope in her deservedly desolate bosom. Immured for ever within those gloomy w f alls, too late she finds that the crime of disobedience to a fond parent's will de¬ mands, indeed, a terrible atonement. No part of the issue of that fatal marriage is doomed to escape the sweeping visitation destined by an avenging Providence. Yet, oh! I conjure thee," he added, addressing Zachelli, " thou, who art here, as I plainly perceive, omnipotent, and mayest work thy horrible purposes in security, barm not the unoffending offspring of an enemy who acknowledges to have wronged thee, but accept my life as a sufficient penalty for my offence, and spare—oh! spare, I entreat thee, my innocent child." Had Zachelli been sober, and hence in the perfect possession of his senses, it is more than probable, in spite of his ex-
treme irritation at the aggravated conduct of Vieenza, that he would have attended to this earnest appeal. But he was in reality intoxicated even to a degree of bestiality, which rendered him wholly incapable of feeling: the words of the prince Vieenza, therefore, fell upon a heart of stone. He was, by this time, unable in fact any longer to conduct himself even with his wonted display of swaggering dignity ; but reeled and sidled at perfect variance with his usual manner of walk¬ ing. And now, averting from the bleed¬ ing Bianca his unmeaning glance, intended doubtless to convey commiseration, he eyed Vieenza contemptuously, and asked —" From what circumstance in thy ab¬ horred, and treacherous conduct, am I to glean a motive for compassionating a child of thine?" " I have many times sheltered your band," replied Vieenza, thus stooping to parley with the drunken ruffian for the sake of his child's preservation, a degree
of meanness scorned to to for his own. " I have screened them from the search of the viceroy, when I alone could at that dread juncture have effected their security." " It is so long since, I have forgotten it," returned Zachelli, with brutal apathy. " Yet you spoke but now of gratitude," retorted the prince Vieenza, somewhat acrimoniously. " I have paid thee, more¬ over, long and nobly for thy services." " Yes ! death, too, was among your in¬ tended benefits," remarked Zachelli, dart¬ ing another malignant leer upon his au¬ ditor. " My purse, in thy hour of need, has never been closed against thee," observed Vieenza, in continuation. " It is true, however, that in an evil hour, as I frankly acknowledge, I gave too much scope to my passion—" " Ay, and for that thou diest!" exclaim¬ ed once more the infuriated Zachelli, and darting suddenly forward, ere Bianca
close could to prevent the blow, he inflicted what seemed to be a deadly wound upon his chained and helpless victim. Vieenza felt the sudden stroke—but unable either to resist or to resent it, and totally overcome by the violence of his previous feelings, sunk where he stood, uttering a convul¬ sive, deep-drawn sigh, his only attempt at exclamation. After the fall of this, his second victim, the furious Zachelli, as if " unsated with the wounds he had given," continued, crying aloud to his associates— " Where is the minion of this fallen trai¬ tor?—where is the immaculate Victoria? Lead me to her dungeon!—quick, Dago¬ lino; release the beauteous captive, or conduct me to her cell." " Hast thou not yet shed enough of blood?" here demanded the drooping Bianca, rousing herself suddenly, and pre¬ senting her own mangled form again to his roaming and bewildered gaze, " Wish you more slaughter to commemorate the
celebration of this " Plead not for her—himself hath al¬ ready prophesied her doom," cried Za¬ chelli, pointing to the motionless body of Vieenza. " Myself will venture, then, to predict her redemption from a fate so horrible," returned Bianca, boldly. " Take heed— lest the better seer prove to have predict¬ ed in favour of the weaker side. I say," she added, evidently preparing for a strug¬ gle, " that thou positively shalt not injure the guiltless offspring of that noble, mar¬ tyred princess—-I speak not now of thy supposed enemy, Vieenza, but of his in¬ jured bride: she loved me—trusted me, and for her sake thou shalt not harm her offspring." A faint exclamation of joy was heard to proceed from the pale lips of the prostrate Vieenza, at this declaration, which, how¬ ever, appeared wholly to have escaped the ears of the drunken Zachelli, who accord¬ ingly resumed, regardless of the interrup¬ tion.
" Sayest thou, shall not of his captive as may best suit, or please him ?" asked the bandit, half inclined to be angry at the imperative tone she had assumed. " Devote her to ignominy—never!" re¬ joined the resolute Bianca, with unabated firmness. " No ! not while a solitary drop of blood—which yet see I regard not," she continued, again pointing to the crimson streak which trickled from her wounded side, '* flows in this fainting frame, shall you thus dispose of the daughter of one who was in adversity my protectress, and my benefactress in prosperity." " But she is also the daughter of my enemy," growled Zachelli, still reeling to¬ ward the long narrow avenue that con¬ ducted to the unwholesome cell in which she was confined. " It matters not," returned Bianca—" I have said it, and will shield her." Then laying violently hold of his disordered gar¬ ments, as if resolved even by force to re-
tard progress, she chelli to a rude niche on the opposite side of the cavern, and pointing upwards, at the same time sinking devoutly on her knees, exclaimed—" Lo! here I swear, before this reverenced image of our patron saint, who seems to smile upon my virtuous vow, that, dearly as I have loved, I will yet even unto death, resist thee, shouldst thou persist in driving to destruction—for to the truly noble, destruction and disho¬ nour are synonymous terms—the unof¬ fending child of my murdered mistress." Zachelli turned his unsteady gaze in the direction toward which she pointed, and there indeed, suspended in the niche aforesaid, he plainly enough descried a small sculptured likeness of his favourite saint, Rosolia, who seemed in reality (if the aspect of her effigy might be received as indicative of her approval) to smile upon the thus fervently-uttered sentiment of the bleeding Bianca. It was a highly-co¬ loured, and gaudily-dressed figure, most
probably part of pillage of some neigh¬ bouring decayed monastery, and to which the beautiful lines of the poetess might have been not unaptly addressed— " Or, gleaming through a chcsnut wood, Perchance thine island chapel stood, Where from the blue Sicilian sea, The sailor's hymn hath come to thee. And blessed thy power to guide, to save— Madonna! watcher of the wave !" The image itself was highly prized by Za¬ chelli, who (when other business of a wholly different character did not engross too much of his time) was extremely regular in his devotions performed before it; and hence Bianca had some hopes that an appeal made thus solemnly, and accompanied by a vow, in presence of the worshipped sym¬ bol, would not be made in vain. But here, however, she found she had reckon¬ ed too fast, her charitable expectations proving wholly delusive: the fact was, that Zachelli was now too deeply intoxi¬ cated to weigh the rebuke of either saint VOL. III. f
or opposition to own mad scheme of vengeance. Accordingly, after gazing with " lack¬ lustre eye" for a while upon the reverenced image, Zachelli, breaking from her grasp, exclaimed—" Away ! I have already said that even though the saint herself descend¬ ed from her celestial abode to plead for their release, her holy presence should not arrest my vengeance—therefore, away!" " Nay, then, hear me—thrice blessed saint!" exclaimed Bianca, still closely pur¬ suing the bandit's uneven footsteps, now once more directed toward the prison of Alphonsine—" bounteous and powerful Rosolia! it may be even that thou wilt descend—it may be that thou wilt appear in thy own proper honoured likeness, to snatch from impending destruction a vir¬ gin votaress!" By this time, Zachelli had contrived to stagger as far as the entrance of the dark avenue already mentioned, which conduct¬ ed to the dreary abode of his apparently
captive, when suddenly was met by a graceful female figure, wildly arrayed, and with dishevelled hair, who seemed rushing with superhuman velocity to intercept his purpose. This was the form of Alphonsine iierself, whom Dago¬ lino, at the first bidding of his infuriated chief, had hastened, as commanded, to re¬ lease from her captivity; though as may have been anticipated, the superstitious Zachelli failed not to deem otherwise of the miraculous appearance of this unexpected phantom. In fact, this was precisely what Bianca had foreseen (aware, as she was, of her rugged paramour's peculiar weaknesses) and on the success of which plausible stra¬ tagem her only hope of a successful me¬ diation in favour of Alphonsine now ap¬ peared to depend. Meantime, the startled .Zachelli gazed with a stupid stare full upon the wildly-beautiful countenance of the supposed aerial being before him: he knew it was not the aspect of Victoria, having, as the reader knows, possessed fre- f2
quent opportunities of too well acquainted with her livelier features; and of the manner in which Vieenza had transferred his favour and affection from Victoria to her heretofore secluded sister, he was yet wholly ignorant. The object, then, that now issued from darkness, glid¬ ing like a spectre before his view, was evi¬ dently not Victoria: to whom, therefore, could he ascribe those fearfully gleaming eyes—that pale, yet angelic countenance- since no female, except Bianca and Victo¬ ria (as Zachelli then believed) was at that moment an inmate of the cavern ? " Lo!" now exclaimed Bianca, willing to favour the delusion that she saw had already taken the desired possession of his mind—" not vainly have I implored the assistance of the holy and gracious saint! It is—it is the ever-vigilant, merciful Ro¬ solia, who hath justly deemed it far from derogatory to her heavenly state to sue on earth for mercy. In the dust," she con¬ tinued, prostrating herself before the be-
wildered Alphonsine, and feeling indeed, owing to the loss of blood, unable to stand much longer^— c * in the dust, kind saint, thy unworthy servant thanks thee for thy gracious intercession in favour of a spotless maiden, who, through this act of unparal¬ leled condescension, may yet live long in innocence to adore thy hallowed name!" Zachelli heard this fervently-pronoun¬ ced harangue, for Bianca summoned all her remaining strength to give due effect to this last decisive effort of " woman's invention"—he saw the reverential prostra¬ tion of the speaker—witnessed her Vv ell- feigned emotion, and the dagger dropped from his nerveless hand. He then raised his eyes, and once more searched the as- spect of the mysterious intruder whose sudden appearance had thus effectually disconcerted him, and, for the present at least, defeated his intentions. He clasped his whirling forehead, as if striving to col¬ lect his fleeting senses sufficiently to dive into the real merits of the affair, but find-
to the task of vestigating it properly, he gnashed his teeth in unavailing rage. A t length, per¬ ceiving the stony lifelessness of Alphon- sine's now despairing countenance (for she had seen her sire prostrate, and apparently lifeless, upon the blood-stained floor of the robber's hungry den) and observing her mutely-imploring attitude, awe seemed to prevail over every other sensation, and terror gradually dispelled every doubt of her identity with the canonized body of his patron saint. Once convinced of this, his trembling knees sunk under him, and Zachelli crouched humbly before the for¬ lorn being whom, a few minutes before, he had designed to make his victim; while the rest of the band crowded anxi¬ ously around them, some, who had had the grace to continue sober, deprecating the weakness of their leader, and others Wondering at a scene so perfectly novel and incomprehensible.
CHAP. VIII. ------------------- .For now my love is thaw'd ; Which, like a waxen image 'gainst a fire, Bears no impression of the thing it was. This weak impress of love is as a figure Trenched in ice, which with an hour's heat Dissolves to water, and doth lose its form. Shakespeare. We must here request that the reader will accompany us in a flight back to Na¬ ples, for the purpose of beholding how the credulous and castle-building Abdallah— the '* mighty magian," bore up beneath the bitterness of his double disappoint¬ ment, augmented by the loss of his fugi¬ tive mistress. To speak the truth, how¬ ever, Abdallah suffered the latter circum¬ stance to add but little to his present list of grievances; wisely deeming that the loss of a woman who at first had uniform-
preserved a contemptuous silence to¬ wards him, and even latterly had only condescended to treat him with a succes¬ sion of evasive falsehoods at second hand, was little to be regretted. But of the costly presents, well-lined purses, jewels, &c. lavished, by means of Ahmed, upon herself and her attendants, the poor jilted African now unfortunately thought diffe¬ rently ; he found at last that he been sadly gulled throughout the whole business, and began to suspect (not indeed without rea¬ son) that his confidential herald, Ahmed (" love's heralds should be thoughts," says Shakespeaie— " Which ten times faster glide than the sun's beams Driving back shadows over low'ring hilis; Therefore do nimble-pinioned doves draw love; And therefore hath the wind-swift Cupid wings;" but here was a shadowy and dilatory he¬ rald, without wings, as Abdallah had too often experienced, and, what is worse, seeking rather to forward his own suit than his master's)—I say, Abdallah began
to suspect that Ahmed was more skilful in these matters than himself, and had in fact himself suffered a similar loss and disappointment. This conclusion of the sapient Abdallah (a conclusion but too just, as the reader is well aware) was founded chiefly on the altered and discon¬ solate deportment of Ahmed since the sudden departure of the prince Vieenza, and his very limited suite, from Naples; which departure, though strictly private, rumour was not long in communicating to his startled ears; and which, on further investigation, he found to be fatally cor¬ rect. Hence his master, through his fool¬ ish, ill-placed confidence, had thus been tricked at once of his gifts and self-esteem, and his messenger no less artfully bam- boozled^—a most uncomfortable reflection for the one, and withal a most unpromis¬ ing prospect for the other. But it was not the loss of his fancy- adorned European princess—though lost to him, it now seemed probable, for ever F S
—nor of a glittering presents, that weighed most heavily upon the despond¬ ing mind of the grieved and disappointed Abdallah. No—the irrevocable loss of another of his invaluable charmed lives, the last save one it would ever be in his power to bestow—-the forced bestowal of a boon so far " above all price," upon an object so unworthy, was to him an infi¬ nitely greater cause of lamentation, and one which indeed, for some time, render¬ ed him almost inconsolable. It was long, on arriving at his own hotel in the Strada di Toledo, ere he again ventured abroad, lest his troublesome popularity—that very popularity he had, a short moon since, so earnestly courted — should haply again subject him to a similar inconvenience.— " If," said he, " every beggar whom I meet—every ruffian who may chance to get his life periled in some disgraceful scrape, is to look to me for a renewal of the lease, and even villainously force me to a compliance with his unreasonable de-
sire, I had been better without this ed privilege." In reality, Abdallah seem¬ ed to have hitherto considered the desire of a lengthened life to have been coexis¬ tent only with the possession of life's com¬ forts, or even luxuries: he forgot, or had yet to learn, that the poor, as well as the wealthy—the wretched, no less than the prosperous—the prince and the peasant, were likely to prove equally desirous of a protracted existence. Hence arose the in¬ convenience, not unaccompanied by dan¬ ger, from which he had fortunately but just escaped; and to which he now very often piteously complained of feeling him¬ self still most unhappily subjected. One fine morning, however, Abdallah issued forth from his hotel, to inhale the early, healthful breeze, and endeavour, if possible, to digest his confused, and ram¬ bling thoughts, into some practical me¬ thod of escaping altogether from his pre¬ sent tedious way of life, of which he had long since grown completely weary. Ac-
cordingly, solitary ward the beautiful suburbs of Naples, just far enough to be safe from the unwelcome interruption of its ever noisy and bustling inhabitants, he strove to beguile the " fly- slow hours," by revolving in his mind all that had passed so recently, together with the most plausible means of avoiding a re¬ petition of such unpleasant events, and opening to himself a new and more grati¬ fying course of adventure for the future. The mounting sun had already " tipped the trees with gold," and awakened the glad notes of their numerous feathered in¬ habitants, whose combined voices were the only sounds (as Abdallah deemed) here likely to interrupt his reverie ; while the clear speckless sky, and the gradually increasing warmth of the atmosphere, as Phcebus slowly ascended toward his noon¬ tide elevation, gave token of an approach¬ ing sultry day. Resolving, therefore, to enjoy unmo¬ lested the present balmy gale, until the
increasing heat should force ward, he continued to wander long amid those shady environs, in the same musing strain, his eyes resting heedlessly on every passing object, but his mind evidently oc¬ cupied by some far-different theme. At length, an object approached him, which even the contemplative Abdallah, abstract¬ ed as he was, could hardly fail to recog¬ nise. This was no other than his own faithful servant, Ahmed, whom he now suddenly espied advancing towards him, apparently buried, like himself, in the pro¬ foundest meditation. As it was evident that Ahmed neither sought nor saw his master, Abdallah, who appeared unwilling to have his train of thoughts disturbed, slunk cautiously and silently aside, for the purpose of permitting him to pass unper¬ ceived. Now whether Ahmed had caught from his master the dangerous habit of uttering his thoughts aloud, or whether, under peculiar circumstances, all men are not apt to do so, is here of little conse-
quence; certain that, on the present occasion, the domestic was soliloquizing, although even Abdallah himself (that in¬ veterate soliloquist) was silent. The lat¬ ter, therefore, as Ahmed slowly passed him, enjoyed without discovery the full benefit of his attendant's muttered cogi¬ tations. They were (and from their nature serv¬ ed yet more deeply to confirm Abdallah's preconceived suspicions) briefly as follows. " To be thus jilted—duped—fooled by a piece of painted impudence," the dissatis¬ fied Moor was murmuring as he walked, <e and betrayed into a belief that all was going on prosperously, to be presently awakened on finding myself used but as a convenient sponge by an artful and slip¬ pery strumpet—a lying coquette—a dis¬ sembling and treacherous jade! Oh ! I could tear my very eyes out for their blindness ! Gone off!—gone back to Si¬ cily !—with my prized amulet, too—my long-worn preservative against open and
secret enemies—Ah ! parted with too soon. Had Ahmed only still possessed that valuable talisman, he had not thus fallen heedlessly into the snare of an enemy —even though that enemy were gifted with all the deceitful blandishments of a BiondeUa. But, alas! it is useless now, and over late, even to recapitulate its vir¬ tues. There were gems that would for ever have shielded me from the Christian vice of drunkenness——" " Alas ! men may, though sober, I see, be outwitted," thought Abdallah; but he suffered Ahmed to pass on, and said no¬ thing. " The amethyst — the sardonyx — the precious alabandin," continued the grieved Ahmed, thus unconsciously enumerating the whole lustrous string of imaginary va¬ luables which adorned his favourite, re¬ gretted necklace, little suspecting that he was overheard by any one, until the in¬ creasing distance rendered his voice no longer distinguishable.
"Ha! vociferated as soon as he judged Ahmed to be per¬ fectly beyond hearing, thus unable to re¬ frain from ridiculing in another that very infirmity of which himself presented so conspicuous an example.—" Poor Ahmed ! thou art certainly entrapped in the snare likewise: yet a little more prudence du¬ ring thy supposed solitary moments would better stead thee to conceal thy chagrin." So saying, and finding the heat already becoming insupportable, he slowly re¬ traced his way back to the Strada di To¬ ledo, still pursuing his ruminations, and endeavouring, in defiance of past occur¬ rences, to shape out for himself some fu¬ ture course that might promise to be pro¬ ductive of felicity. The result of that morning's delibera¬ tions was, that Abdallah determined on immediately quitting Naples, and having been earnestly solicited to do so by don Caesario, he further resolved first to visit Sicily, not with any view of prosecuting
suit to now entirely relinquished, but solely (as a light-hearted Frenchman would have phrased it) "pour passer le temps" Having thus settled this matter perfectly to his own satisfac¬ tion, he retired to pass the sultry hours of noon in his private apartments, where he soon made the desponding Ahmed ac¬ quainted with his determination, who, equally rejoiced at the prospect of any change, immediately set about preparing for their speedy departure. In an incre¬ dibly short time, all was ready; and Ab¬ dallah, having neither adieus to make, nor friends to expect them, nor " lemans dear" to feign sickening grief at his departure, but accompanied solely by his faithful at¬ tendant, Ahmed, with a fair breeze, set sail for the romantic and luxuriant coast of Sicily, where he felt a perfect assurance that his recently-acquired Christian ac¬ quaintance, don Caesario, would be agree¬ ably surprised by his arrival.
CHAP. IX. - —He was cast away About where Troy stood once, and nothing stands : Became a slave of course, and for his pay Had bread and bastinadoes. By nox. We pass lightly over the feelings of Ab¬ dallah during this agreeable voyage, till, just as they were about to enter the har¬ bour of Messina, an event took place, of sufficient importance wholly to change the aspect of his future fortunes. It was near the port of Messina, and within view of the innumerable minarets, and marble palaces, of that aneiently-renowned city (to which by some strange decree of Pro¬ vidence, Abdallah had been thus miracu¬ lously directed at that auspicious moment) that a boat hove in view, whose wretched inmates, escaped from the horrors of ship¬ wreck, and for many weeks tossed on the
merciless main, with only a planks between them and a watery tomb, had scarcely sufficient strength left to hail their deliverers. They were, of course, immediately taken on board, and their wants administered to with the most hu¬ mane attention; when (strange to relate) in the most abject of these, Abdallah in¬ stantly recognised his former Barbary friend, and favoured associate—the lost, regretted Haly! He was poorly clad, in ragged habili¬ ments of the coarsest and most despicable texture, and seemed to have suffered se¬ verely from the horrors of privation, as well as from some previous severity, for the marks of the lash were still distinctly visible upon his bare and lacerated shoul¬ ders : still it was Haly—that same once- lively Haly, whose features were too deep¬ ly imprinted on Abdallah's memory to be overlooked or forgotten. At present, how¬ ever, he was faint and drooping, and scarcely sensible from long-endured hard*
ships, and the lack of sustenance; nor was able even to perceive the pitying friend now anxiously bent over his swollen and altered countenance. Abdallah, therefore, contented himself at present with ordering him instantly every comfortable restora¬ tive that imagination could suggest, and, without discovering himself, retired to his cabin, there to weep tears of transport at this unexpected meeting; not, however, until he had ordered the almost equally delighted Ahmed to tend carefully the fortunate sufferer, with his own hands, and presently to bring him report of his progress toward recovery. Meantime the vessel entered the har¬ bour of Messina, and soon arrived at its appointed station; where, having anchored close to the quay, it was presently boarded by a whole host of expectant merchants and townspeople. Abdallah, nevertheless, regardless of the unusual bustle over head, continued solitary in his cabin, alternately wiping his eyes and brooding over the
pleasure should shortly experience repairing the wrongs, and healing the wounded spirit, of his former favoured as¬ sociate, Haly; for had not Himmalay himself expressly commanded the conti¬ nuance of their friendship, and even re¬ commended a closer—kinder intimacy, if possible, than that already subsisting be¬ tween them ? While revolving these thoughts in his mind, he was suddenly interrupted by the entrance of Ahmed, who, rushing abruptly into the cabin, ex¬ claimed—" Allah il Allah! God is great! and God hath decreed, through the agency of his blessed prophet, Mahomet, that gold should on earth accomplish great things also! Who knows, it may even yet redeem him from his bonds !" " What means this agitation ?" hastily demanded Abdallah. " Whom wouldst thou redeem ?" (t Haly!" answered the breathless Ah¬ med. " He hath shaken them off already," re¬ turned Abdallah, still unsatisfied.
" they are about to them on again," now exclaimed Ahmed, in a pite¬ ous and hurried tone. He then eagerly proceeded to recount, that among the first persons who boarded the vessel happened to be the former master of the fugitive, Haly^—for he was indeed, as Abdallah had already conjectured from the marks of re¬ cently inflicted punishment visible on his person, a runaway slave—who instantly recognised, and claimed the newly-resus¬ citated Moor as his property. In vain Ahmed protested, and Haly (now able to speak) implored for pardon : the merciless planter ordered him instantly to be bound, and conveyed back to the Morea, whence it seemed he had escaped; and threatened, moreover, on regaining his unpleasant des¬ tination, to repeat, vvith added cruelty, the punishment which, it appeared, had thus prompted him to attempt an unsuc¬ cessful flight. Perceiving how matters went, Ahmed flew to acquaint his master with this unlucky rencounter, and con-
eluded with—"Ah! gold cannot effect his pardon and release, we shall be doom¬ ed (for thy slave knows thou wilt not easily again lose sight of Haly) to see him writhe beneath the torturing lash, suing for mercy, and failing to obtain it," " Never! never—so, Ahmed, follow me!" cried Abdallah with answering eager¬ ness, bending his way upward, followed by the communicator of these disagreeable tidings. Another instant brought them upon deck, where, owing to the preceding fortuitous recognition of a runaway slave by his relentless master, all was bustle and confusion. Abdallah rushed eagerly for¬ ward, regardless of the wondering crowd around, notwithstanding the jostling ne¬ cessary to effect his progress, and presently found himself in the presence of the severe planter, and his intended victim.
CHAP. X. At last they settled Into simple grumbling, And pulling out reluctant purses, and Turning each piece of silver o'er, and tumbling Some down, and weighing others in their hand. And by mistake sequins with paras jumbling, Until the sum was accurately scann'd ; And then the merchant giving change, and signing Receipts in full, began to think of dining. By hon. The dejected and wretchedly-garbed Haly was kneeling still, with his forehead bowed to the dust, before his imperious master, and in consequence observed not the more splendidly-habited Abdallah, with a countenance of pity, now standing by his side. Some one of the bystanders seemed to have been just pleading in his cause to the remorseless owner, for at least a remission of the most cruel part of the sentence to which the shuddering cap¬ tive had been doomed; and Haly was
murmuring enough by the unknown intercessor—" The bless¬ ings of Mahomet light upon that head- may he deign to endow the tongue with resistless eloquence, that would shield the wretched bond-slave from the bitterness of stripes!" " Remit the flagellation! cancel the punishment!" exclaimed the planter, an¬ grily ; " no, no! What then becomes of the example ? We punish, sir, for exam¬ ple ; as for instance------" *' Away—it shall be omitted!" now cried Abdallah, in a voice that broke like heavenly music upon the startled ear of Haly; " and I would I could, with equal facility, abolish all such examples—dis¬ graceful alike to Christians and Mussul¬ mans, and degrading to humanity. Rise, Haly, and look on me." Haly did, indeed, now regard most ear¬ nestly, and no less joyfully, his unexpect¬ ed deliverer: but to rise from his present abject posture, he found no such easy mat- VOL. III. G
ter, was already and limbs were stiff and sore from previous exhaustion. He liowever instantly re¬ cognised in the person of the magnificent¬ ly-apparelled countryman by his side, the son of Aghar Hussein, hi.s former intimate associate-—the wealthy and generous com- panion of his happier days. In a moment, the remembrance of their sudden parting —of his mad freak, wherein he had assu¬ med the likeness of the redoubted Him¬ malay, flashed across his mind; and he scarcely knew what reception he ought, for his extraordinarily ill-timed jest, in justice to experience from the (as Haly had but too much cause to fear) assuredly, b\ this time, bitterly undeceived Abdallah. But his apprehensions on this point were again speedily dispelled, by hearing the latter presently exclaim in continuation— ** You, sir," addressing the planter, " who, as a dealer in all articles, from human flesh downwards, must doubtless well un¬ derstand the value of money, u ill please
without to affix ransom, may at once enjoy the pleasure of liber¬ ating my friend." " I would rather have him punished," observed the planter, hesitating. " Rather !" involuntarily exclaimed Ab¬ dallah. " Ve«i, sir, for example's sake/ returned the ]>1 inter, si ill musing. " But, since you seem to be a gentleman," he added, glanung at the costly furred raiment of Abdall di, " I -should have no objection to trect ^ ; th yen for the freedom of this re¬ fract* }■ rogce, provided that decent lan- guagi 1 , '>nd a >roper attentien to decorum •—I mean, \\\J\ regard to the expressions made u-»e of—he preserved between us." " J)ouhtles.s, le^t mine indignant ebul¬ lition—some unguarded word of reproach, should wound your tender and suscep¬ tible feelings !'" remarked Abdallah, con¬ temptuously. u But come—few words at all are necessary between us upon the sub¬ ject-—inform me, if you please, what G 2
sum will sufficient to purchase re¬ lease ?" " His ransom must be two thousand piastres," replied the planter, coolly, thinking he had demanded an enormous sum, which it might puzzle even the haughty, rich-garbed Abdallah, to produce at the moment. " He is no more a slave!" now ex¬ claimed the overjoyed Abdallah, himself assisting to raise the grateful Haly. " Let him be tended carefully—strike off his bonds," Meanwhile the planter appeared com¬ pletely astounded at this ready compliance with his immoderate demand ; he seemed to have expected at least some portion of the murmuring and haggling usual in such cases. But to have this enormous valuation of a worthless and debilitated runaway at once agreed to, was evidently far beyond his expectations; and he griev¬ ed—deeply regretted, that he had asked no more. Accordingly, with all that shuf-
fling tact which such ruffians consider not degrading to practise, especially when concluding a bargain, he affected suddenly to have recollected something that consi¬ derably enhanced to him the value of the runaway slave; and, striking his forehead, with an oath, exclaimed-—" Ah! I had forgot, but must not sell this slave—'tis pity our bargain should have already pro¬ ceeded so far. I now remember that a wealthy gentleman, some time since, took a liking to this same sturdy African, from whom I expect to receive for him at least ^ve thousand piastres—such is the force of fancy. I am sorry; but the present proposed price is really altogether inade¬ quate to his value. Bind him again." Abdallah, who was still proceeding with the liberation of Haly, aided by several of the by-standers, who appeared almost equally gratified with the result, here dart¬ ed an angry glance upon the speaker, that seemed to dare him to the fulfilment of his words {£. e. to resume the fastening of
those bonds), and only by completing the release of his altered friend. He then advanced boldly to the planter, and looking him full in the face, with an air of defiance, at the same time taking Haly by the hand, exclaimed— " This noble Moorish gentleman is now once more my respected friend, and a slave no longer. For the rest—I am Abdallah, the son of Aghar Hussein, some time go¬ vernor of Constantia, with wealth on board this vessel, more than an hundred times sufficient to liquidate your demand. I bought him fairly—you fixed your own price; and at your peril attempt to replace his bonds." The applause of the spectators followed this spirited decision of Abdallah, thus promptly and boldly delivered; all, save the former owner of Haly, seemed satisfied with its justice: but the planter lost no time in sternly signifying his dissent from such no longer agreeable doctrine.—" Non¬ sense—nonsense!" he exclaimed: " the
agreement is null and void, no portion of the money having been received, or even proffered as earnest, to consolidate it. I must have the five thousand piastres, or yonder brawny Mahometan as my slave ^gain." " Thou shalt have neither, wretch," re¬ turned Abdallah, resolutely. " The rao- -ney is ready for thee in my cabin—that is the two thousand stipulated for—which thou shalt have on demanding it a quar- ter-of-an-hour hence. 'Fore Mahomet! it chafes me to converse with this shameless, shuffling knave: thy due shall be paid thee, Christian, but nothing further." " Yes, yes," resumed the planter, obsti¬ nately determined to contend the point, though, he already foresaw, with little hope of success, for the crowd, now greatly increased, seemed to favour his opponent. " I say five thousand------" " As many stripes with thy slave-whip, rascal! shalt thou receive, as soon as a single piastre more than I bargained for,"
returned at persistiveness in urging so unjust a claim. u Call thyself civilized I why r the very ass-drivers in Barbary are more honour¬ able, else would the blush of shame pre¬ dominate even over their sooty complex¬ ions. Thi& is forsooth a Christian flesh- monger f Would that I but possessed my father's authority, and had him in Con¬ stantia, that I might bring him round, at least, into the profession of humanity, and cause him more justly to appreciate the bitter anguish he so pants to inflict." Here again the lookers-on thought pro¬ per to testify aloud their entire approval of Abdallah's sentiments, by exclaiming— « Blackey is in the right P—" The gentle¬ man has behaved already too liberally P*— " The bargain was a fair one!" &e. and the avaricious planter, in consequence, perceiving the utter hopelessness of his cause, desisted at length from further urg¬ ing his pretended right to the liberated Algerine, or to the additional three thou-
sand piastres. With a few muttered exe* crations, therefore, and impotent threats, which his cowardly lips had scarcely cou¬ rage to utter, and which consequently reached not the ears of the roused Abdal¬ lah, he was glad to sculk unmolested away, and await the leisure of the (in this instance) spirited Moor to finish the bar¬ gain, by making the required payment, which Abdallah shortly afterwards found time to perform. Meanwhile, the changed and wretched-looking Haly, now no loun¬ ger a captive, who would fain have flung himself in gratitude at his feet, was raised kindly to the bosom of his overjoyed deli¬ verer. Abdallah clasped him affection¬ ately in his arms, and no longer trusting him even to the care of Ahmed, conduct¬ ed him gently, amid the congratulations of a whole multitude of gazers, to his own private cabin, there to commune more freely upon the miraculous chain of events which had led to this fortunate meeting;
G 3
CHAP. XL Thanks to my stars, I have not rang'd ahoul The wilds of life, ere I could find a friend. Nature first pointed out ray Portius to me, And early taught me, by her secret force, To love thy person, ere I knew thy merit. And such a friendship ends not but with life. Addisom. MANYrand warm were the protestations of eternal gratitude now reiterated by Haly in the ears of his unprecedentedly liberal friend; and no less numerous or fervent were the expressions of regard in return lavished by Abdallah upon his newly-found and ever sincerely-regretted countryman and boon companion, No word, however, of Himmalay was yet suffered to pass the lips of Abdallah; and Haly, beginning gradually to suspect, from the evidently frank and affectionate
demeanour of the former, that had even yet remained undiscovered, just¬ ly deemed the present no fitting time to mar their mutual satisfaction by entering upon such a topic, not knowing in what spirit the whimsical disclosure might be received by his kind deliverer. On every other subject, however, they conversed long, and without reserve. Haly failed not to inquire of Abdallah how he had escaped, and where he had passed the in¬ terval since their last meeting in Algiers, with respect to all of which Abdallah shrunk not to gratify his curiosity. At the news of Abdallah's rescued treasure, so providentially saved by Ahmed, the poverty-stricken Haly, whose destiny ap¬ peared ruled by a far less prosperous pla¬ net, embraced again and again, and bath¬ ed his deliverer's feet with tears of joy. It next became Abdallah's turn to require of his auditor some brief relation of his ap¬ parently less fortunate escape, and subse¬ quent adventures; and with this request*
as a matter of course, was not Unwilling to comply. f Accordingly, he told that having suc¬ cessfully eluded the massacre of that fatal evening (which he contented himself with briefly alluding to, but still without any mention of that supposed mysterious in¬ terview conducted through his agency, whicii Abdallah also had omitted to name), he half unconsciously wandered toward the beach, being in reality afraid again to enter the city, for that he was but too well known as the constant associate, and trusted friend of Abdallah, who it seemed had some way or other incurred the dis¬ pleasure of his prince. Thus driven from his wonted haunts, and constantly appre¬ hensive lest the vengeance of the dey should be extended even to so insignifi¬ cant an object as himself, he contrived to pass several weeks hidden among the sedgy banks of the sea, in hopes that some vessel might happen to present itself, which, m return for his proffered services,
or the little money in his possef sion, would offer him a chance of escape to some more. propitious clime, and safer country* At last, as he fondly imagined, his hopes were realized, and his views gratified, by the approach of a vessel that presently lay-to to search for water near the spot to which he had wandered, Haly instantly disco¬ vered himself, and was, with little cere¬ mony, taken on board, according to his desire, by several of the crew, who had landed to procure the required supply. But here his exultation ended, for he spee>- dily discovered the error he had thus in» advertently committed—the fatal mistake into which his rashness had led him, and for which he now saw no remedy. The vessel proved to be a slave-ship, and, al¬ ready laden with her human cargo — a host of despairing wretches, chiefly kid¬ napped from the neighbouring coasts, was proceeding to dispose of them at the grand market at Constantinople. The master, a remorseless ruffian, presently questioned
respecting condition, and the motives of his present singular re¬ quest ; and finding from his answers that he possessed few remaining friends of any influence in Algiers, and learning more¬ over, from his own lips, that he was actu¬ ally under the displeasure of the dey, he made no scruple of instantly consigning him to the crowded hold, as an addition sent by Providence to the number of his miserable victims. In vain did Haly now bitterly lament his own imprudence, in thus unadvisedly rushing upon destruc¬ tion ; and if he complained, the dog-whip was his answer. Arrived at Constantinople, Haly was remorselessly sold to the highest bidder, who happened to be a planter resident in the Morea, and was immediately convey¬ ed by him to the scene of his future wretchedness. Here then Haly, confined to degrading labour in an obscure planta¬ tion, was, in the first bitterness of his de¬ spondency, constrained for ever to bid adieu to hope. But as—
" hull drives on, though mast and sail torn; The roof-tree sinks, but moulders on the hall, In massy hoarine&s; the ruin'd wall Stands when its wind-worn battlements are gone; The bars survive the captive they enthral ; The day drags through, tho' storms keep out the sun," so Haly continued to exist in spite of his utter desolation, and in defiance of the load of misery that oppressed him. By degrees, too, he even effected more; he contrived to revive the enlivening flame of hope once more in his desolate bosom. But unhappily while indulging in these pleasing reveries—or rather happily, as the event proved—Haly chanced too of¬ ten to neglect his appointed duties, for which repeated omissions he was adjudged to receive a certain number of stripes. The luckless criminal was constrained to submit, and the brutal punishment was inflicted in public; he thought his heart would have burst at every resounding lash that alit upon his writhing shoulders. Released, but still smarting beneath the pain and degradation, he could think of
nothing escape: according¬ ly, that very night he succeeded in effect¬ ing it; and running along the coast, until he fancied himself beyond the reach of his pursuers, he fell prostrate with his face toward the ocean, and implored Mahomet once more for a bark that might carry him he cared not whither, so it but wafted him from his persecutors. A second time fortune favoured him, and a vessel soon hove in view, that seem¬ ed, to the enthusiastic Haly, sent by the pitying prophet on purpose to accom¬ plish his desires. It was a small Frank* vessel, heavily laden with various kinds of merchandise, and seemed bound to some of the northern ports of Europe. With delight the fugitive hailed her, fancying that he could distinguish in this incident the hand of the prophet himself stretched forth for his deliverance. In the end, he was again received 0*1 board—the captain treated him hospitably—-the winds proved * In the East the Europtans ar ost commonly called Franks.
propitious, and speedily his cruel enemies. Still, however, he was not destined im¬ mediately to be so fortunate as he expect¬ ed. A violent storm arose^—the vessel was dashed to pieces—several were over¬ whelmed by the merciless billows, and the rest of the crew were fain to betake themselves to their only boat for safety. Among this latter number was Haly, now considerably weakened both in body and spirit, by the extreme severity of his su£ ferings. For upwards of a fortnight, it was now their lot to traverse the wide surface of ocean, without compass, and but ill provided with sustenance, not know¬ ing whither to steer, nor what might be their eventual doom—a most unenviable situation. For seventeen times already the shadowy and unwelcome night— " Had grimly darkled o'er their faces pale, And hopeless eyes, which o'e: the deep alone Gazed dim and desolate;" when the eighteenth morning happily
them the vicinity of Messi¬ na, and within sight of the vessel that contained Abdallah. The manner in which they were received on board has been be¬ fore narrated : all went on smoothly for the sufferers, and still more especially for Haly himself, whom Abdallah had in¬ stantly recognised, and commanded Ah¬ med to attend with more than common solicitude, until the arrival of the planter, and his subsequent recognition of his runaway slave. This, too—insuperably unfortunate as it at first appeared—was now settled amicably, thanks to the bene¬ ficence, and (for once) to the firmness of the son of Aghar Hussein; and Abdallah enjoyed the double satisfaction of having acted nobly, and embracing once more, in spite of adverse circumstances, his libe¬ rated friend.
*
CHAR XII. The web of our life is of a mingled yarn, good ami ill together: our virtues would be proud, if our faults whipped them not; and our crimes would despair, if they v\ere not cherished by our virtues. Shakes pi aiie. In a few hours (such is the power of assi¬ duous friendship) Haly declared himself to be considerably restored, and even, he thought, sufficiently recruited to be ab 1a to travel; for it was already arranged, that in the tour of Sicily which Abdallah was about to make, Haly should accompany him, and not again be parted from his benefactor. Accordingly, the first care of Abdallah was to furnish his new com¬ panion, from his own wardrobe—for Haly was literally half naked—with all the ex¬ pensive requisites necessary to compose a " Turkish dandy," consisting chiefly of a pelisse and turban, slippers, shawl, and
equipped with and se¬ veral other indispensable articles, not omit¬ ting trousers and caftan of the finest sum¬ mer texture, the two friends presently quitted the vessel together; and Abdallah felt that tbe proudest, as well as the hap¬ piest moment of his thus far wasted exis¬ tence, was that in which he stood, after a triumphant contest, supporting his en¬ feebled countryman upon the quay at Messina. Having landed, and sufficiently refresh¬ ed themselves, the next care of Abdallah was to order horses, intending to proceed immediately to the palazzo di Castelli, whither don Caesario, during his unfortu¬ nate sojourn in Naples, had so kindly in¬ vited him. Speedily, therefore, bidding adieu to the vessel, harbour, and city, and still chiefly attended by the vigilant Ah¬ med, who now made the valuable baggage of his master his own exclusive care, they set forward by easy stages toward the pa¬ lazzo di Castelli.
Meantime, within the mansion, and among tbe household, of the distressed count Castelli, all was still confusion and despair. For a long time they had en¬ deavoured in vain to obtain the most dis¬ tant clue to the present situation, or la¬ mentable doom, of Castelli's vanished heir; when anon a communication was sudden¬ ly received from the hand of a messenger who delivered it and fled, which gave them reason still more strongly to suspect that he had fallen into the power of ban¬ ditti, and was at that moment languish¬ ing in a loathsome dungeon. The com¬ munication simply appointed a private meeting near a particular pass in the mountains, hinting also that if a certain enormous ransom were brought thither, and deposited in a spot specified, the some¬ time hope of the family, but now the cause of its so heavy affliction, might be expected to returned unharmed. This was no more than the count had long ex¬ pected, but the terms thus arbitrarily sti-
pulated were such as pride—his honour, forbade him to comply with; though the countess, whose thoughts were intent alone upon the recovery of her son, continually urged his acquiescence with the conditions proposed. Finally, liow¬ ever, the high-spirited count Castelli de¬ termined on adopting a line of conduct wholly different, but which he knew, in spite of the peril that accompanied it, would be much more likely to meet the approval of his captive son. Instead of accepting the proposals of the bandit, by attending the projected conference, or de¬ positing the stipulated ransom, Castelli resolved, in spite of his manifold infirmi¬ ties, to set off instantly for Palermo, and having sought the presence of'the vice¬ roy, lay the whole case before him, im¬ ploring his powerful aid by force of arms to recover his lost unfortunate heir. No sooner was this resolution formed, than it was put into execution; and on the same day did the dauntless count Cas-
telli, accompanied countess, who would on no account consent to remain behind, set out for Palermo. They found the viceroy busied with a memorial which represented that the noble prince Vieenza, the defender of his country in war, and friend of good government in time of peace, had, together with his favourite daughter, within the last few days, fallen also into the power of the same ruthless banditti. This memorial, as appeared from the signature, had been forwarded by a domestic named Beltramo, who, it was also reported, had at the time of their cap¬ ture escaped with difficulty. Castelli had little leisure to rejoice over his enemy's misfortune, whose condition, it seemed, was then even more deplorable than his own ; but the fact proved a further in¬ ducement to the viceroy to listen favour¬ ably to his urgent solicitations for imme¬ diate assistance. The mildly-majestic de¬ portment, too, and extreme distress of the countess, who now joined her solicitations
to those of operated no means slightly on the mind of the gallant viceroy, but, on the contrary, most power¬ fully contributed to procure his compli¬ ance with their joint request. In conclu¬ sion, therefore, he ordered a strong detach¬ ment of infantry to be placed immedi¬ ately at the disposal of the count Castelli, with instructions to redeem at once, if possible, from so loathed a captivity, the brave prince Vieenza, and his own unfor¬ tunate son; and, by the same judicious movement, to effect the total extinction of that nefarious band, if such a desirable object should be found practicable, it hav¬ ing been many times previously attempt- e& § but hitherto always in vain. This was precisely what Castelli had desired, and he accordingly (wholly un¬ practised as he was of late in the conduct of such perilous undertakings, and en¬ feebled by disease) resolved to attempt the complete annihilation, or dispersion at least, of Zachelli's rapacious horde imme-
re¬ turned with all possible haste to his pa¬ lazzo, accompanied by the detachment of soldiers appointed by the viceroy to aid his enterprise; and instantly arming the whole male portion of his household, not omitting of course the trusty Isidore, whom he wisely entrusted with the whole of his well-arranged scheme, he prepared as suddenly to set forth again upon his intended expedition. Such was tbe critical situation of affairs, and such the confusion prevalent in the neighbourhood, at the moment when Ab¬ dallah, accompanied by Haly, arrived wholly unexpected at the palazzo di Cas¬ telli. Amazed he looked around upon the martial preparations visible on every side, of which neither himself nor Haly could for some time get to understand the meaning; but when their venerable host discovered who were the persons thus un¬ expectedly about to become his guests, though busied at the very moment in di- VOL. III. H
gesting military plan, proved himself not wanting in courtesy. Count Castelli delayed his outset, for a transient period, for the sole purpose of explaining to the strangers—one of whom he now knew to be don Caesario's former preserver —the meaning and object of these un¬ wonted and threatening preparations; while the countess, as soon as she heard of the generous Moor's arrival, hastened to throw herself at his feet, in gratitude for the life they all hoped would yet once more, by means of those warlike prepara¬ tions, be preserved. Abdallah started, and grieved deeply, on learning the fresh peril which he found, threatened anew the hapless, and scarcely-yet-recovered, don Caesario; and tbe count and countess Cas¬ telli, on presently retiring to order refresh¬ ments* left their two Moorish visiters ap¬ parently absorbed in silent sorrow. No sooner did Abdallah find himself alone with.Haly, however, than his sor¬ row began to grow loquacious; and he
imparted to his friend his already- formed determination to accompany, in the character of a volunteer, the forthset- ting expedition. Haly smiled at his en¬ thusiasm, having in reality no very high opinion of his courage, (whatever opinion he might entertain of his generosity is another matter), and demanded—" Will a son of Aghar Hussein, and worthy disci¬ ple of Mahomet, risk his precious life to rescue a misbelieving Nazarene?" " I tell thee, I have already once pre¬ served his life," returned Abdallah, " by the mere exertion of a sort of superhuman privilege, which I alone—through the in¬ strumentality I grant, of a more exalted being—am permitted to exercise over the departing spirit: but of thy friend's mira¬ culous potency in such matters, Haly, thou yet knowest nothing, not having heard the recital of my familiar intercourse with a kind of beneficent phantom, which —when thou nearest—will truly astonish thee. Shall the charmed life which I h 2
then upon suffered to tamely sacrificed by a mercenary horde of blood-shedding desperadoes ? No! let me aid in striving to preserve the gift I gave, and thus render it more valuable. Neither is my own life in such peril as thou seem- est to suppose, since—though cheated, or rather robbed, I should say, of a second most invaluable boon^—I have still a charmed life in reserve for myself, should my fainting or wounded spirit chance to need such a preservation against the power of sickness, or the swords of ene¬ mies ; or for thee, my Haly, should some dire stroke of adversity happen too heavily to afflict thee." " A charmed life!" exclaimed Haly, now affecting great surprise, scarcely knowing in reality how to act for the best at this critical juncture. " Can it be pos¬ sible ! a positively charmed------" ." Ay, Haly," resumed Abdallah, de lighted to perceive his auditor thus as¬ tonished. " Even at the last sad moment,
when the ravages of ease or strife, the exhausted spirit is about to abandon its clay tenement, I can com¬ mand its stay, nay more, can ensure its obedience to the imperative mandate. I know 1 have astounded thee—this seems incredible—but twice already have I made successful proof of the awful experiment. Yet a third time, however, it still remains in my power to bestow on some favoured mortal, or myself, haply labouring under the dread of dissolution, a speedy and pangless release from his worst fears." A sudden idea now darted upon the in¬ ventive mind of Haly; he saw the course which, under the circumstances, and pos¬ sessed as he still was of his singularly facetious propensities, it glaringly behoved him to pursue. Once having conceived the fortunate idea, a moment was suttiei- ent for Haly to decide ; and that decision was sure to be in favour (if a merry thought) of putting the joke into immediate prac¬ tice. He accordingly now flung himself
at and, at once to finish the jest, exclaimed— " Ah! most gracious and disinterested friend—surely the most liberal and kind- hearted among the sons of princes! the dream our beneficent prophet but last night sent to me—praised be his holy name!—the vision of comfort that Ma¬ homet ordained should visit my sleeping senses, is then already interpreted, by my present grateful acceptance of thy trebly munificent offer; and through thy instru¬ mentality, with the aid of the mighty spirit thou hast spoken of, shall the suffer¬ ing Haly be indeed made whole. I dreamed that I was athirst in the wilder¬ ness—horribly ath ;t, st — when suddenly from the arid and u. <,t mising desert sprang a stream of crystal \* ater—to me the water of life—and I drank thereof de- liciously, and was revived. Now—little as, I grant, thou mayest have suspected it —thy friend Haly hath long laboured un¬ der a secret, but fatal malady, which, I
grieve to confess, made such alarming progress over my constitution, as convinces me that I have not long to live. Behold, then, the miraculous vision sent doubtless by Mahomet for my conso¬ lation, and the signification of which is found in thy own kind offer, pointing out to rne the sovereign balm which can alone relieve me. Ah! promise me, therefore, I implore thee, that when the evil hour arrives-—and arrive I know it will—thou wilt bestow upon me, and me only, that precious gift which alone can preserve the disconsolate Haly from an early tomb." '• I do promise thee, then," returned Abdallah, somewhat startled, it is true, by this certainly unexpected, and perhaps unwelcome confession of his wily friend, yet totally unable to refuse his favourite newly-ransomed Haly, whom the prophet himself seemed especially to favour, and whom Himmalay also had instructed him in a marked manner to reverence and oblige.—" I do most faithfully promise to
preserve only charmed now my power to grant for thee, my Haly, in thy hour of need; nor would even mine own absolute peril, I think, however or wher¬ ever I might happen to incur it, induce me to break my word." " Enough—I am satisfied," said Haly, rising, scarcely able to suppress a smile at the credulity of him who could thus easily be imposed upon.—" Yet it grieves me," he continued, " when I reflect that the mysterious treasure thus virtually bestow¬ ed upon another can no longer, even on the greatest emergency, avail thee for thy own preservation. Then where is the utility of possessing it?—-and thus hast thou parted with the whole of the charm¬ ed lives placed, by the benevolent spirit, at thy disposal ?" ( * I have," replied Abdallah, looking somewhat despondingly downwards. ** Then attend, for the time is come," continued Haly, now laughing outright at Abdallah's evident dejection. " at which
— since without any actual deprivation even of supposed advantages, as appears by thy own confession, thou mayest at length be undeceived—it doth behove thy Haly to disperse the mist that already too long hath curtained thy clear vision; and accordingly, I thus dissipate the illusion which possesses thee." He then briefly alluded to the circumstances which took place in the coffee-room at Algiers, and vividly recalled to Abdallah's recollection his subsequent remarkable interview, deemed most mysterious, with the white spirit, Himmalay, while stretched on a sumptuous sofa in the shadowy apartment of his father's ancient palace. He next slightly adverted to the apparently mis¬ prising manner in which Abdallah had quitted the coffee-room on the occasion alluded to, leaving his good friend Haly unnoticed behind, as some sort of excuse for the bitter freak he afterwards played him, and the full particulars of which he was now about to divulge. With many H &
solicitations pardon, ven¬ tured to confess to the astounded Abdal¬ lah, that his vvas the voice which had been by him so credulously mistaken for that of Himmalay—that his was, in fact, the smothered laugh which (Abdallah well remembered) had interrupted his broken soliloquy—-and finally, that in his person he viewed the only Himmalay with whom he in reality had ever held any inter¬ course. The lives, therefore, of those whom Abdallah affected to have preserved through the potent interference of Him¬ malay, Haly modestly submitted, could not have been so saved, however appear¬ ances might have sanctioned such a con¬ clusion : but he rather imputed the pre¬ servation of such to Mahomet, whose fin¬ ger, he as usual contended, was plainly discernible throughout the whole transac¬ tion. By faith, undoubtedly (such was Haly's argument)—by faith, most assu¬ redly, were those bodies thus miraculous¬ ly made whole; and faith in a power
which had in reality no foundation to warrant the production of such a desirable issue: but then it was the providence of Mahomet which provided that such an ill-founded faith should have at all existed, and his will to benefit these poor sufferers by means of its existence, as sufficiently shewn by their speedy recovery. Such was the logical decision of Haly, which declaration he endeavoured to render plausible, and also strove to mitigate the roused anger of Abdallah, by demonstra^ ting the means still further adopted by Mahomet to avert this explanation until the present hour, which, but for the pro¬ phet's especial intervention, the arch wa$ contended, must have been more speedily accomplished.
CHAP. XIII. Can any face of brass hold longer out? Braise me with scorn, confound me with a flout, Thrust thy sharp wit quite through my ignorance; Cut nie to pieces with tby keen conceit. Shakespeare. The utter astonishment of Abdallah at this unexpected communication, even sof¬ tened as it was by such a string of para¬ doxical arguments, may perhaps be con¬ ceived, but would be very difficult to de¬ scribe. In fact, it was perhaps as well, so overpowering at first appeared his in¬ dignation, that Haly had so judiciously chosen to interlard his unwelcome disclo¬ sure with such frequent mention of Allah m& the prophet; since, in spite of all his sophistical arguments, and logical conclu¬ sions, Abdallah, at one provoking period,
could hardly restrain his rage. was, he remained for some time motionless, and buried in reflection, after the voice of his companion had ceased, his large dark eyes rolling vacantly over the walls of the apartment, in apparent unconsciousness of the presence of any one. Anon he turn¬ ed them again, although somewhat less reproachfully, towards Haly, who per¬ ceiving him thus pensive, once more seized the opportunity to ply him vigor¬ ously with every argument his inventive mind could frame, to convince him that the way in which things had fallen out (i e. his having been for so long a period permitted to entertain such a ridiculous delusion), was the very best course they could possibly have taken. In defiance, however, of all his rhetoric, Abdallah still felt far from satisfied with Haly's con¬ duct, or, it might be, with his own want of discernment: he continued to regard his associate in sullen silence, and looked (to use a vulgar expression) completely chopfallen.
began to abate, and this chilling reserve also to disappear, when, regarding Haly more mildly, he muttered audibly— *' After all, I know not that I have much cause to complain ; and certainly do think it not improbable, upon a calm review of the circumstances, that Mahomet may throughout have chosen to divert himself with the direction of this matter. My first charmed life—had such been really in my gift, as I too credulously imagined —would have been bestowed upon don Caesario, who, as he happily recovered, needed it not, and has therefore lost little by its in efficacy. My second I was compelled to surrender near the same spot, to prolong the existence of a fright¬ ful ruffian—who, as it was in reality va¬ lueless, can of course have derived no be¬ nefit from its possession; and none I would have him derive. All this is as I would have it—as it should be; and, for my third—it is, it seems, thy portion,
and worthless, at equals thy serving, for practising upon the donor so scurvy a jest. With regard to the rest— why, I have gained some pleasure, not a little fame, and lost no gold, in the exer¬ tion of an imagined privilege, and that must content me. I know not that aught more need be said upon the subject—yet one thing, Haly, I would fain solicit of thee. Say, thou who hast the wit of a knave, coupled with the wonted good¬ nature of an honest Mussulman—am I likely to meet with a denial ?" Haly again threw himself at the feet of his once-more-rational and affectionate friend.—" It is but a short time since," he exclaimed, '* you gave me liberty—to¬ day, moreover, you would have given me life, deeming it in your power: what is it, then, Abdallah can demand, that Haly should refuse?" " Thou knowest, Haly," resumed the son of Aghar Hussein, dolefully, " fallen greatness, with the vulgar, is ever an ob-
rather of mere pity than respect; or rather, perhaps, of ridicule than either. I would not, Haly, become subject to their floutings, nor have the rabble who have been accustomed to trumpet forth my praises learn that I was fooled—that he, their life-giver—that the mighty magian, whose skill was the th*»me of their almost- hourly wonder—whose boast was to re¬ kindle the spark of being—to restore life to the pierced bosom of the sick and stranger, could not in reality, at a pinch, have preserved his own." Haly pressed the hand of his deliverer gratefully, giving him fully to understand that he knew his meaning—that the boon Abdallah solicited of his bounden friend was simple secrecy—and had but just time to do so, ere the count Castelli re-entered the apartment. He hastily apologized for his lengthened absence, imputing it to the " disorder of the time." He next informed them that refreshments were prepared in an adjoining chamber, and
alleged his own intention of departing, as soon as he had partaken of them with his reverenced guests. Ab¬ dallah and Haly, accordingly, prepared to follow their noble host; nor did the former omit the present opportunity of making the count Castelli acquainted with his own unalterable determination to accom¬ pany him also in his perilous expedition to the mountains, and to aid him in ac¬ complishing (if human efforts might avail to accomplish so desirable an object) the freedom of don Caesario. The aged count Castelli received this proposal with a smile of pleasure and gra¬ titude.-—" I have also," he said, "just now received a letter from a distinguished young nobleman, who happens, I find, to be at this moment fortunately resident in Sicily, and with whose father I could formerly boast the honour of some slight acquaintance. At Palermo he heard of my son's captivity, and also of the prince Vieenza's, whom, though not my friend,
cannot compassionate. too, has proffered his services in aid of my ef¬ forts to effect the release of both, together with the daughter of Vieenza, and a fe¬ male domestic, also luckless captives. When I mention the marquis Lioni as our new ally—when 1 say that the gal¬ lant Lioni intends to draw steel in our just cause, I need scarcely add, that his very name is an acquisition of strength alone sufficient to ensure the success of pur enterprise. I have, however, received his letter to this effect, since I quitted your presence, and am in momentary ex¬ pectation of his arrival here." It was not long before those highly- raised expectations were fulfilled—Lioni had not written to deceive. In a few mi¬ nutes, the marquis arrived at the palazzo di Castelli, and was found equally eager with the foremost of the party to set for¬ ward upon their adventurous expedition; for was not his still beloved Victoria (as Lioni believed) among the number of the
captives whom it might soon tunate lot to liberate? A sojourner, for a short time, at Palermo, and even yet scarcely decided in what manner he ought to act with regard to Victoria (with whom he still felt thoroughly persuaded he had enjoyed a clandestine interview, fan¬ cying himself to have been taken by her for a more favoured lover) the grieved marquis Lioni heard by chance of her present distressed situation; and, like a true knight-errant, had as immediately resolved on attempting her rescue. It was this consideration chiefly—the con¬ sideration of Victoria's imminent danger —that Victoria, the memory of whose sweetness he had not even yet been able wholly to relinquish—which had brought him thus, a devoted adherent, to the al¬ ready unfurled standard of the equally- determined count Castelli. Nor was Lio¬ ni the only brave ally who appeared un¬ expectedly to join that threatening stan¬ dard. Beltramo himself, together with
all the assembled domestics then resident at the palazzo (or castle, as it was more commonly called, owing to its embra¬ sured front, and altogether formidable as¬ pect), now flocked to the same cheering banner, to fight for the liberation of their master, even by the side of his house's most inveterate enemy—an event which certainly might be considered as ominous of the future better understanding of those two noble families. Thus strengthened and encouraged, as night drew near (a circumstance still fur¬ ther favourable to their present design) the whole cavalcade, under the guidance merely of the infirm count Castelli—the command he had most judiciously resign¬ ed to the better practised Lioni—set for¬ ward upon its destination. In point of numbers, at least, to say nothing of dis¬ cipline, thev made indeed a gallant show, as the whole party filed off toward the mountains, with Lioni capering proudly in the van, and Abdallah with Haly (who,
as a matter of course, refused to part¬ ed from his benefactor) to bring up the reai\
CHAP. XIV. Ye cloister'd fair—ye censure-breathing saints. Suppress your taunts, and leant at length to spare; 'I ho 5 mid these holy walls I vent iny plaints, And give to sorrow what ia due to prayer. J?V XiNGHAM. Within the convent of St. Rosalie, to¬ ward which, for a little space, we now turn, to afford the anxious reader a glance at the present condition of Victoria, and her future expectations, time, as usual, glided away amid scenes and occurrences, if not of a happier, at least of a much more tranquil description. To say truth, its quiet inmates (with the exception, per¬ haps, of a few " perturbed spirits," whom recent afflictions, or worldly disappoint¬ ments yet unforgotten, permitted not to rest) but seldom even dreamed of the ma-
nifold scenes of cruelty and injustice—of crime, and of oppression—of sorrow, and of turmoil, which the busy world was every hour exhibiting without their walls. Among the few, however, who formed an exception to this comfortable state of re¬ ligious apathy—this agreeable exemption from all participation in the tumults and vexations of a troublesome world, was the hourly-repining, sacrificed, and miserable Victoria. In vain were the precious and exhaustless sources of heavenly consola¬ tion spread open before her—in vain were all the well-intentioned efforts of the not unamiable abbess of that pious sisterhood exerted to divert her affections to celestial objects, and wean her from her worldly- mindedness; she returned their kindness with courtesy, but failed to benefit from the affectionate remonstrances of her friendly advisers to lay aside her grief- she listened, but " refused to be com¬ forted." Yet even amid the secluded sisterhood
of St. Rosalie, Victoria found herself not wholly deprived of the social enjoyment of friendship, nor was long without a sym¬ pathetic companion to listen to her tale of sorrows. It chanced that, at the present juncture, that melancholy abode contained also another, but more willing candidate, for seclusion from the world, in the per¬ son of a young lady to whom Victoria had formerly experienced the pleasure of an introduction. This self-devoted victim was no other than the accomplished and beautiful Miss Ebba Malcolm, already mentioned as having been formally intro¬ duced to the notice of Victoria, at an en¬ tertainment given by the marquis Lioni, in accordance with the expressed desire of the noble marquis himself, during her happier days of liberty. The truth was, that Ebba Malcolm, having imprudently placed her affections upon one far above her own sphere in life, and whose heart was also preoccupied by the image of ano¬ ther, found her peace too deeply injured
permit to encourage even the re¬ motest hope of its restoration, ere unhap¬ pily she was aware of her peril; and, in consequence, the courageous, but unfortu¬ nate girl, had determined on the desperate project of immuring herself for life within the gloomy walls of the convent of St. Rosalie. Having, in the height of her despondency, formed this resolution, all vainly had the persuasions of her kindred been tried to alter her dismal, but settled purpose. She was not to be dissuaded from her darling object—she appeared re¬ solved to take the veil: but who was the irresistible conqueror that had thus unwit¬ tingly achieved this sudden and unsought- for subjugation ? It was the gallant and admired marquis Lioni himself, who had unconsciously, and (to do him justice) without endeavour on his part, thus be¬ come the object of Ebba Malcolm's un¬ bounded adoration; and whose coldness was likely—in defiance of the ridicule of friends, and the remonstrances of relatives VOL. III. I
.—eventually to prove the cause of se¬ cession from the world. Perceiving their wayward daughter thus determinedly bent on devoting her¬ self to a religious life, although sorely against the inclination of her affectionate parents, colonel Malcolm and his lady {finding, moreover, that any longer stay in Naples would be utterly useless, as well as exceedingly disagreeable to their feel¬ ings) had quitted Italy, and returned to their native country; leaving of necessity -**not without many a pang, which lan¬ guage would fail in attempting to describe —their only child a prey to a hopeless passion, and thence resolved to effect her own eternal seclusion from society. Thus, then, at the passing moment, affairs were situated with regard to Miss Malcolm, the incautious victim of unrequited love. Mean time, the holy inmates of that sa¬ cred pile were filled with admiration at her heroic resolution: tbe revenue of the convent was about to become augmented
the accession thereto of the whole of her intended dowry; and nothing seemed wanting but the longed-for termination of her appointed brief novitiate, to induce her to take immediately the irrevocable vows. As may be expected, Victoria contrived to pass with this new companion (whose peculiar cause of grief, so directly contrast¬ ed with - her own, failed not speedily to excite her especial wonder and commise¬ ration) as much of her time as could conveniently be spared from the devo¬ tional duties of her present monotonous existence. With the whole round of these the religious sentiments of Victoria taught her, though sometimes with a heavy heart, exactly to conform; while Ebba, on the contrary, more cheerfully performed the required attendance, whe- 1 ther at morn or midnight, in the chapel, or in the gloomier cell of some of the sick sisterhood; and if her heart was ever light, it was certainly while engaged in her,„de- \%
votional exercises. evening vespers were concluded, it was not unusual with our two friends to stroll arm-in-arm to¬ gether into the little garden which be¬ longed to the convent, the same being carefully walled round for the use and recreation of such of the sisterhood as chose to take exercise in the open air, while its produce chiefly served to supply their frugal board with vegetables. To this tranquil and unpretending spot, of all places the most exactly calculated to inspire melancholy ideas, imagine them retreated one cool evening, to watch the last expiring radiance of that sun which seemed destined never to shine on them again, except within the narrow boun¬ daries of that humble enclosure. As usual, Victoria felt her " heart sink softly with him" as he vanished, and, in spite of the presence of her already-loved companion, could even have wept at her apparently desolate and condemned situation; but Ebba seemed to regard differently the
soothing scene.—" Where now was beloved don Caesario?—where, at that moment, her changed, unfeeling sire?" were the thoughts that alone presented themselves to her aching bosom; and which, when she reflected on her own sad in¬ ability to answer them—a painful inability that, alas! the progress of time was but likely to increase—cost her many a bitter and heart-breaking pang. She turned to her companion, who seemed more calmly occupied in contemplating the gorgeous magnificence of earth and sky around her, and sinking into her arms, shed tears upon her bosom.
CHAP. XV. It were all one That I should love a bright particular star, And think to wed it, he is so above me: In his bright radiance, and collateral light, Must I be comforted, not in his sphere. SnAKFSPrAne. It was a rich-hued and beautiful Italian evening, and the sun, already sunk behind the blue summits of the distant moun¬ tains, continued to shed over the western horizon a magnificent blaze of glory, which in turn reflected its gorgeous tints of gold and purple upon the glowing landscape, and tinged with a burning lustre even the far glistening spires, and marble-front¬ ed palaces, of the city of Naples, here still faintly discernible amid the soft perspec¬ tive. Anon a ruddier change steals over the scene, owing to the bright golden
hues caught by yonder sunny cloud as floats imperceptibly westward; and now again a gloomier colour " strews its man¬ tle" over the varying prospect, still gra¬ dually assuming a darker and darker shade, until— " Parting day Dies like ihe dolphin, whom each pang imbues With a new colour as it gasps away, The last stilt loveliest, till—'tis gone—and all is grey." Donna Victoria, now raising her swim¬ ming eyes, watched silently the latest re¬ tiring hues of brilliance disappear, and then excWmed—" But, Ebba—dear Ebba —my weakness wearies you. I lighten not my own misery by these foolish tears, and but add to th^ weight of thine. In future, I will endeavour to restrain them. Now tell me, Ebba, why did you pull my garment as we passed just now from the chapel ?—have you aught to communicate which it may beseem the wretched Vic¬ toria to know ?" ** I have, indeed, joyful tidings to com-
municate," returned countenance gleaming with celestial ar¬ dour, "and therefore drew thee hither." " Speak, then," resumed Victoria, with eagerness, " if it be really aught of good thou hast to divulge, for never came good news at a season when it was more need¬ ed. Keep me not in suspense, I do con¬ jure thee, dearest Ebba—I am impatient to listen to thy intelligence. I see thine eyes now sparkling brightly, and thy whole aspect seems irradiated with some¬ thing of cheering purport. A .! withhold it no longer from Victoria, if thou lovest her—believe me, I am most anxious to be a participator in those joyful tidings. Cruel girl! even thus long to have with¬ held it from me." " Then thus it is/ returned Ebba Mal¬ colm, in a sprightiier tone; " and St, Ro¬ solia grant that thou mayest receive it, as I do, with transport. The term of my novitiate, and of thine, being nearly ended, I have during the whole of this afternoon
been closeted in serious conversation with our holy abbess, preparatory to my en¬ trance into that blessed state of existence which fits the soul for heaven. I tell thee, it is decided that thou and I together, be¬ fore the sacred altar, and in presence of its priests, must soon resign all worldly vani¬ ties, and in future contend alone for a crown immortal. Thus fate, it seems, hath irrevocably decreed. nay, the day for the ceremony is even already fixed, and at hand; and I am deputed, by our kind abbess, to make thee acquainted with this approaching happy consummation. What says Victoria—is it too "audi to hope that she will rejoice with me, and hail, as a glo¬ rious triumph, the coming inauguration ?" " Oh, Heaven forbid that it should ever be !" exclaimed the startled Victoria, now wringing her hands in an agony of despair. " Must—must that dreadful hour arrive? Ah, let it not, kind Heaven ! Sooner may these eyes weep blood—earth itself vanish, and dissolve into the nothing 13
which was ere first created, than the wretched Victoria live to see that day! Oh, holy saints! hear my unaltered vow— the only vow that shall ever pass my lips, though doomed for my disobedience even to the severest penance, or condemned to exist a lonely and hopeless captive, im¬ mured for aye in the convent of St. Roso- lie—never shall the faithful lips of Victo¬ ria pronounce aught that must divide her from her affectionate don Caesario. To hira my vows are already past of unchange¬ able attachment, and devotion through all difficulties, even to the grave: but to figure a reluctant and heart-broken sacri¬ fice, in a ceremony which should cancel the very remembrance of those delightful vows—hear me, oh God ! I never will." <f Alas !* sighed Ebba, despondingly, " I feared as much: yet to me the ap¬ proaching solemn pageant presents but a cheering aspect, seeming to open a flowery future path, pleasing, although uniform, and leading its followers eventually up the
glorious steep to are fervent anticipations with regard to a con* ventual life—would that I could persuade Victoria to think so likewise." " Gentle enthusiast!" answered Victo¬ ria, tenderly embracing her, yet wholly refusing to coincide with her in her view of the present subject: " but wherefore should I strive to dissipate the pleasing il¬ lusion ?—no ! be still, my tongue, for ever, if thy utterance is likely only to produce, in so lovely a victim, irreligion and dis¬ content. Mayest thou find it answer thy expectations." So saying, Victoria again embraced her affectionately, but although she was constrained yet much longer to listen to the earnest remonstrances of Eb¬ ba (whose efforts the abbess had vainly hoped would easily prevail ove** her stub¬ bornness) she adhered most resolutely to her fixed determination never to utter the prescribed fatal vows. *' The very same hour," at length conti¬ nued Ebba, sorrowfully, " is fixed for our
taking the veil—the ceremony once per¬ formed, is meant to suffice for the accepta¬ tion of two pure virgin candidates for a peaceful abode in this world, and a celes¬ tial futurity; which hour, if thou persist- est in thy fatal resolve, may haply witnesr instead our eternal separation. Speak! is not this probable ?—and ought an event so lamentable thus little to be dreaded ?" " Over such an event, my dear Ebba," said Victoria, " deeply as I should regret so sudden a parting, it may prove impos¬ sible for either of us to exercise any con¬ trol. But of this be sure—no human ear shall ever hear the true lips of Victo¬ ria pronounce the vow which divides her from Caesario." r L**e gradually descending shades of night had now completely closed around them, and enveloped every object (for it was a moonless eve) in almost total dark¬ ness. No longer did Victoria and Ebba even faintly discern the dark forms of such of the holy sisterhood as chanced to be
disposed for exercise crossing them in their lonely walk; nor distinguish occasionally, as wont, their low plaintive voices, proba¬ bly engaged in the discussion of some pious theme. It was evident they were left alone in * he garden; and as if sud¬ denly sensible of having loitered there too long, exposed, as they now felt them¬ selves, to the baneful influence of the " cool night air," they turned hastily to re-enter the convent. On the threshold the) were met by the abbess, who, it ap¬ peared, had not failed to remark their too lengthened absence: she however for¬ bore to reproach them, but, with a bland smile, blessed them for the night; while Ebba and Victoria, separating with the kiss of peace, retired each to her separate cell in the dormitory.
CHAP. XVI. ' O all ye gods! O pretty, pretty pledge! Thy master now lies thinking in his bed, Of thee and me, and sighs, and takes my glove, And gives memorial dainty kisses to it, As I kiss thee. Shakespeare. It only remains to be observed at present, with regard to Victoria and the convent cf St. Rosalie, that Ebba's tale was true* The prince Vieenza, a short time before be took his departure with Alphonsine for Palermo, had written to the abbess, in most positive terms, commanding that all unnecessary delay should be dispensed with» as it was his urgent wish that Vic* toria should take the veil immediately. The further proceedings of the abbess on the receipt of this sudden information, have been narrated by Ebba Malcolm:
she resolved that the same a speedy one) should witness the reception of both novitiates into her peaceable so¬ ciety. She knew that Victoria, notwith¬ standing, was averse to taking the pre¬ scribed vows: but the letter of Vieenza admitted of no misconstruction—she saw that he, at least, was determined—and soon found, moreover, after a little re¬ flection, that it behoved her with all con¬ venient alacrity to obey the mandate. This decision, therefore, appeared to leave no glimpse of hope for the reluctant, doom¬ ed Victoria. Meanwhile, in a wretched and solitary dungeon of the robbers* spacious and se¬ cure retreat, had now for a considerable time languished the deservedly-neglected BiondeUa, apparently forgotten by her friends, and, on more than one occasion, maltreated by her enemies. Spalatro*^the ruffian who captured her, while Dagolino, his fierce associate, was pursuing the more fortunate Beltramo, who escaped, wished
very tauch to appropriate beautiful prize; but Dagolino* on his re¬ turn after a wearying and fruitless chase, chose most vigorously to dispute his right of possession. From that unlucky mo¬ ment, BiondeUa found herself the sport of these two ruffians, alternately, and, in effect, the prisoner of both: for each fear¬ ing lest their leader should choose to ter¬ minate the dispute by setting the captive at freedom, or some such unwelcome mode of settling the matter, if their ab¬ surd rivalry happened to reach his ears, determined to keep their possession of this personable but coquettish girl, a secret from Zachelli altogether; thus exhibiting the fallacy of at least one of those " an¬ cient saws" so heartily abused by lord Chesterfield, and proving that there is not always w honour among thieves." Thus was the wretched situation of BiondeUa rendered still more miserable than it would otherwise have been, by the constant worryings, accusations of having
on some particular occasion exhibited either an undue preference, jealousies, and wranglings of her two brutal gaolers. If perchance she but slightly favoured Da¬ golino, Spalatro abused her for it; and if, with a view toward escape, she bestowed only a stray smile upon Spalatro, Dago¬ lino was sure to discover and reproach her with it. It seemed, in sooth, a tan¬ talizing species of punishment, especially designed by Providence (or, as a Sicilian would have said, by St. Rosolia) for the heartless coquette to endure. One cheerless and solitary evening, as she was awaiting in her damp and narrow cell the approach of whichever of her sa¬ vage captors chose to visit her (such being the hour at which they usually made their appearance), she could not avoid exclaim¬ ing, for the fiftieth time-—" Alas! and is it possible that poor BiondeUa should thus by every human creature have been for¬ gotten, and left to perish in this horrid dungeon ? Does no one think my rescue
wt»th attempting? cowardly tmmo, so basely to abandon me. Ah! faithless, senseless, cruel Isidore, not sooner to sally forth, like a brave knight-errant, and burst the horrible prison of thy mis¬ tress. Perhaps, if even the dingy Ahmed knew my dreadful situation—but him I left at Naples—how, then, can I expect his aid to reach me here ? Alas! I have, indeed, no friend to depend on for deliver¬ ance except Spalatro, or Dagolino; and either of these I cannot bear to think of. Oh! could words speak my heart's loath¬ ing when I see their scarcely human vi¬ sages—but hush!—I surely hear one of them coming. Should it happen to be Dagolino, to whom last night I gave the diamond crescent, I will yet make an¬ other vigorous effort, by dint of persua¬ sion, to obtain my liberty—so, good St. Rosolia, assist me!" BiondeUa, however, happened to be ex¬ actly wrong in her conjecture: it was Spalatro, and not Dagolino, who now,
with heavy and measured steps, approacb- ed her prison. In another instant, the creaking door opened, and the light I df a torch flashed through the dungeon. It was carried by Spalatro, who now enter¬ ed, intoxicated nearly to reeling, from the effects of the midnight banquet, as was evident, by the hoarse voice of Stephano, distinguished far above the rest in the obscene chorus of a drinking catch, that seemed to proceed from their spacious salle d, manger, and the loud bursts of laughter which also frequently issued thence. He immediately set down the torch, and staggered toward BiondeUa, muttering between his teeth-—" What if he may have, perhaps, erewhile distin¬ guished himself—I am also a lieutenant— and his equal in the combat, as in tricks of the chamber—at least, so I hope. It may soon be our lot to try. Meantime, Dagolino, my vigilance here permits thee not to triumph : if thou hast a diamond ornament, I too am this night destined
to receive a treasure of which, assuredly, it will never be thine to boast. Come, pretty one," he continued, now endea¬ vouring to fold her in his loathed em¬ brace, from which BiondeUa sprang as from the sudden coil of a serpent, " thou hast deceived me —but to-night shall make all even." " Deceived thee, Spalatro! —how ? when ? where ?" demanded the affrighted BiondeUa, who felt that no sacrifice was too great to be made, so that it effected her release from this horrible situation. " Thou hast given a pledge to Dago¬ lino," returned the drunken bandit, " of value almost sufficient to madden me— but that I expect to receive from thee to¬ night a favour equally, or more valuable." " Alas! who told thee so?" inquired the shrinking BiondeUa, anxious at least to gain a little time. " I espied it in his bonnet!" returned Spalatro, malignantly—" the villain wears his favours proudly—and, on my faith,
good cause ; a prettier, or more brilliant token, of a fair lady's regard, a man may go far ere his eyes shall light upon. But this is trifling — briefly, I came hither to receive that which alone can compensate for the loss of so admired a trinket—so excellent a bonnet orna¬ ment." " Alack ! then, what can I give thee ? M sighed BiondeUa, in appearance still to¬ tally ignorant of his meaning. It was the remembered costly crescent given her by Ahmed, during her stay in Naples, that she had already bestowed upon Da¬ golino, in the hope that it might, one way or other, prove conducive to her ardently desired release: the necklace given her by the same munificent hand—the charm¬ ed amulet of such wondrous potency, which, however, had failed in the present instance to avert her misfortune—was still suspended over her aching bosom; for the robbers had hitherto behaved so far respectfully, as to refrain from plundering
person. This amulet, then, she al¬ ready foresaw, must be the price of her present! eseape from final contamination— an qdea still worse even in the estimation of the hardened coquette, than death it- sel£ Accordingly, she withdrew it from her vest, with a heart-bursting sigh, and gently disentangling it from her neck, in sueb~a way that the whole of its brilliancy was at once displayed before the flickering torch, held it out to his acceptance, say- ing+—*' Murmur not, Spalatro. She who bu J bestowed on Dagolino a few paltry diamonds, hath preserved for thee a cost¬ lier and fairer present. Behold this amu¬ let} which a prince might wear with pride; and suffer me to fling it across thy shoul¬ ders."* ^palatro's eyes glistened, indeed, as they gassed upon the astounding splendour of that>magnificent talisman, of which it was in reality next to impossible not to com¬ prehend, at a single glance, Ihe sterling value; although its concealed, or rather
properties^ would a much longer time to enumerate, than BiondeUa now thought it either prudent or necessary to bestow upon tlie subject. These, however, were but of little conse* quence to Spalatro: he remarked the gold setting curiously adorned with a profusion of filigree after the Moorish fashion-*4ie saw the lustre of those sparkling gems, and, delighted with their brilliancy, doubt¬ ed not that they were genuine.—" *Fore St. Rosolia!" he exclaimed, alternately gazing first at the necklace, and then upon his prisoner, " if I had in my custody a queen of the Brazils, I could hardly have expected a richer ransom. This is a tro¬ phy of thy triumph, Spalatro! indeed, well worthy of acceptance—I thank the fair hand that bestows upon me a gift so gor¬ geous." i He had stooped his knee to receive the precious gift, which BiondeUa; delighted with the success of her stratagem, although grieved at the loss of the necklace, had' al-
ready placed round shoulders, when Dagolino suddenly and silently dart¬ ed in upon them. Perceiving and com¬ prehending at once the attitude and action of the supposed stealthy inmates, his eyes flashed fury, and springing upon Spalatro, he held him vigorously to the ground, ex¬ claiming—" Ha! dastard, is it for this thou hast stolen the keys away from my girdle? Thou shalt relinquish that same gift, thus treacherously obtained, or never rise again!" Spalatro struggled violently for an in¬ stant in the gripe of his powerful antago¬ nist, but his wonted agility being consi¬ derably diminished by the quantity of wine he had swallowed, he found himself totally unable to-rescue his person from that vice-like grasp, or to rise from the ground to which he was pinned as by the strength of a Hercules.—" Now, 'fore all good saints put together!" he exclaimed, " this is too much. I pray you, remove your hand—mean you to suffocate me?"
" golden gorget which see gleam¬ ing at thy throat," replied the enraged Da¬ golino—*" a collar too precious for such a cur as thou art to wear—I mean to dis¬ possess thee of, and presently. Whether thou wilt retain thy worthless life, by at once surrendering the prize, is a matter which I leave—like a liberal opponent— to thy own free choice." Now, the truth was, that Dagolino hap¬ pened to be considerably flushed with wine, as well as his more luckless compa¬ nion, and would certainly have put his threat into execution, rather than have relinquished his object;' while, on die other hand, Spalatro, aware of this fact, and knowing too that he had already greatly exasperated his rival, by stealing the keys, felt in reality not a little alarm¬ ed at his awkward situation, " Help ! ho! murder! help !" at length vociferated Spalatro, almost choked, and finding his own exertions little likely to effect his extrication from the gripe of so VOL, III. K
powerful an assailant, without the of his prize. The exclamation failed not to produce a distinct hubbub, and change of tone, among the party assembled in the distant revelling-roorri of the banditti, a few of whom seemed rushing forward to ascertain the cause; when suddenly an alarm of a more serious nature again changed the whole aspect of affairs, and diverted their attention to the entrance of the cavern. This was nothing less than a whole voUey of musketry poured in at once upon the startled revellers, who, ta¬ ken thus completely by surprise (their unwary sentinels having been silently put to rest without), were indeed in a most unfit condition to encounter, or repel, their numerous and disciplined assailants. In a moment, the dauntless Lioni, sur¬ rounded by armed soldiers, whose num¬ bers seemed still increasing, stood, with drawn sabre, among the panic-struck band; and perceiving their drunken, and almost- helpless condition, gave instant order to
cease firing, and to take prisoners. another few minutes, and the gratified count Castelli, on his entrance with the rear-guard of his little gallant detachment* saw many of these long-dreaded, remorse¬ less ruffians, already bound, and at the mercy of their captors; while such as still feebly resisted were quickly assured, by dint of sundry unwelcome blows inflicted by determined hands, and with a variety of most awkward weapons, that resistance was wholly in vain; though the number of these was small, for such was the con- fusion and terror created in the minds of the banditti by this unexpected and well- ordered assault, that " scarce a hand dared rise to guard its head " A few, however, amid the general tumult, contrived to es¬ cape down some of the inner passages, and thus for a short space eluded the hands of their less practised pursuers: but from none of these dark avenues was there any egress, except through the now dou¬ bly-guarded entrance of the cavern; ow* K 2
ing to which untoward circumstance, as the whole would doubtless be diligently searched on the return of daylight, if not sooner, these luckless fugitives had little hope. There was, moreover, another im¬ portant feature in the actual position of the parties (though at present disregarded) which seemed to threaten that the work was not yet complete. This was a cir¬ cumstance of no less importance than the absence of Zachelli himself, who in fact was abroad at the time, diligently recon¬ noitring the neighbourhood with a strong party of followers, ready to dart upon the unwary traveller, if perchance such pre¬ sented himself in their course, but wholly unconscious of the impending danger, or the deadly struggle for life and liberty which awaited them on their return home. The fact, however, well known to the bound and prostrate robbers who lay bleed¬ ing beneath the strokes of their adversa¬ ries, served to afford them the only con¬ solation of which their desperate situation
was capable; and accordingly, while Lioni was occupied in doubling the guard and exhorting them to firmness, were awaiting with anxiety the expected minute of their leader's appearance.
CHAP. XVII. The lust of booty, and the thirst of hate, Lure on the broken brigands to their fate; In vain he doth whate'er a chief may do. But few remain to aid his voice and hand. Byron. Meanwhile, the count Castelli, followed by some of those who, like himself, ap¬ peared even still more intensely interested in the success of the expedition, among whom may be enumerated Abdallah, Isi¬ dore, and Beltramo, had seized a torch, and were penetrating at hazard toward those dismal recesses, wherein, it was sus¬ pected, the robbers had confined their cap¬ tives. The still-continued outcries of Spa¬ latro attracting their notice, conducted them first to the cell occupied by Bion¬ deUa; and here having arrived, and caught a glimpse of its distressed inmate wring-
and relea¬ sed, Isidore and Beltramo chose to remain, leaving foi the present all further pursuit to their companions. To be brief, Dagolino and Spalatro (each already pretty deeply intoxicated) were speedily overcome, and lay stunned upon the floor of the dun¬ geon, fit subjects to be transported quietly enough to Palermo; and the question on¬ ly remained to be decided—which of the successful champions should now take charge of the delivered damsel ? But this was a matter more difficult to be adjusted, it appeared, than even the overthrow of her ruffianly jailors: not that each was so excessively anxious to receive BiondeUa under his own especial protection, but, on the contrary, because each declared so¬ lemnly that he neither could, should, or would any longer consider himself as her proper protector. The cause of this ex¬ tremely ungallant conduct evidently was the conviction each felt that he, had been already properly jilted by her; and the re-
eacli confessed pro¬ bability of a similar degrading accident again. Yet to leave her alone in such a truly terrifying situation, or companioned only by the bleeding carcases of two half- dead men, appeared the very height of inhumanity; and they therefore both re¬ mained. Now it chanced that Ahmed, after vain¬ ly striving to dissuade his master from taking part in so perilous an enterprise, had resolved at ail risks to follow him to the place of contest, and even there, like a faithful servant, to avoid losing sight of him if possible. The eagerness of Ab¬ dallah to pursue the footsteps of the count Castelli, however, had baffled the alert¬ ness of his sable attendant; and it was in searching for him that Ahmed now hap¬ pened to stumble upon the very cell which contained his own treacherous BiondeUa, and her four Christian admir¬ ers. Thus suddenly ushered by chance into the presence of his deceitful charmer,
stood for some moments rooted to the spot with amazement, deliberating within himself whether (under the pecu¬ liar circumstances which attended their separation) he ought to advance or retire. Luckily he decided upon the former, and well was it for Ahmed that he did so; for scarcely had he entered the dungeon, ere his pleased eye fell at once upon those precious relics—the necklace, and bril¬ liant turban ornament, over which chiefly his heart had wailed so long in vain— adorning, moreover, only the ruffianly fronts of two of the banditti, apparently already slain! he had been to blame, in¬ deed, not to have made those bitterly- lamented articles his own again. Stoop¬ ing, therefore, over the senseless forms of Spalatro and Dagolino, he without ceremony loosened the coveted valuables so unjustly fllched from him, and put them into his pocket; while Beltramo, observing the action, whispered to Isidore —" Never trust me, Isidore, if this is not K3
same whom thou and myself Surprised one night beneath her chamber window—thou wottest where— at Naples. I say, never believe Beltramo again, if this is not that very jackanapes- how he got hither is another question." " I know him," replied Isidore, softly, " better than thou dost, and will frankly confess to thee that I believe thou art right in thy conjecture. It may be as well, perhaps, just to let him know that we are aware of his identity, and perfect¬ ly understand his motives for coming hither." " Agreed," said Beltramo, with a ready grin of approval; and, stepping forward a little, he commenced, addressing himself to Ahmed —" Suppose not, stranger," (thus began the pert factotum of the prince Vieenza) " whose clime may per¬ haps be admitted as some excuse for thy inexperience, that thy presence in this place is deemed an intrusion, or that we are unacquainted with the real motives of
thy coming stands ob¬ ject of thy present search, and former ten¬ der solicitude; and so far from its being our design any longer to oppose thy pre¬ tensions, thou mayst e'en take her freely and unquestioned, with many thanks to thee for so welcome a riddance." " I shall take nothing except these jewels," returned Ahmed, contemptuous¬ ly, and again exhibiting to the grieved eyes of the weeping BiondeUa the amulet and crescent he had just so providentially redeemed from the body of the passive Spalatro, and the cap of his compam n. To describe tbe grief and indignation of BiondeUa, during the whole of this scene, throughout which she heard herself slighted—contemned—even reviled, by those who would formerly have given all they possessed to obtain her smiles, would be utterly impossible. Talk of two stools! (if the reader will excuse the introduction of a very ancient proverb)—why u ere was BiondeUa surrounded by Jive formerly
anxious and suitors, all of whom ^e had jilted, and each of whom in his turn seemed prepared, nay, determined ac¬ tually to reject her. In the height of her rage and agony, she was fain almost to apply for protection to the very ruf¬ fians whom her insulting deliverers (as they still styled themselves) had over¬ thrown : but they, indeed, could not have protected her. At this critical juncture, the increased din which arose from the entrance of the cavern, accompanied by the clashing of weapons, and confused shouts of the com¬ batants, proclaimed the expected return of ZacheUi with the rest of the banditti, and the consequent re-commencement of that now doubly fearful and murderous struggle. No sooner did their ears as¬ sure them beyond doubt of this already- anticipated circumstance, than Beltramo and Isidore at once rushed fron. the dun¬ geon to the scene of contest, whither also the changed Ahmed (fancying, and truly,
that could now the voice of his suddenly-courageous master raised amid the conflict) almost as speedily fol¬ lowed them; leaving the scorned, and woe-begone BiondeUa, thus in reality to the care and companionship of the blood- disfigured Dagolino, and his drunken comrade. Arrived once more at what seemed the principal chamber in the ca¬ vern—some short time since the scene of the robbers' drunken festivity, but now of their complete desolation, and final over¬ throw— " Where wild amazement—shrieking—kneeling—throws The sword aside in vain—the blood o'erflows ;" they found the suspended fight indeed re¬ newed, and in a much more terrific man¬ ner. Zachelli had arrived, with the re¬ mainder of that band of desperadoes, and finding his long-undiscovered abode now filled with soldiers, his party apparently overpowered, and the cavern already in possession of his enemies, fought like a
the recovery a tran¬ sient period) of his ancient habitation, the present repository of all his basely-acqui¬ red treasure. It is enough, then, to say that Zachelli, rendered absoh *ely furious by the fear of losing his hardly-accumu¬ lated hoard, and aided by a few of his most desperate followers, succeeded in cut¬ ting his way, unharmed, through the whole line of his astonished opponents, towards that particular avenue, at the ex¬ tremity of which his secret wealth was deposited. Having thus reached a place of comparative security, but while even yet occasionally a few— *' groaning victims, and wild cries for life, Proclaim'd how well he did the work of strife," it chanced that the timid, shrinking Ab¬ dallah, whose small stock of valour was by this time completely expended, found himself suddenly and singly opposed to the raging bandit—the foaming and piti¬ less ZacheUi. The terror of Abdallah, at
thus next object of the enraged robber's resent¬ ment, sets all the powers of description at defiance; and it was at this truly-appal¬ ling juncture that his cries penetrated even to the ears of the distant Ahmed.—" Hold —strike not!" he exclaimed, at the same time flinging down his own weapon with ludicrous celerity; conscious, that to have wielded it any longer would but little have availed him now for his security against the already uplifted sword of his terrible antagonist. ZacheUi looked upon him earnestly, and even amid the haste and tumult of that perilous moment, remembered his supposed benefactor—the life-bestower of Naples. In another instant, his knee touched the earth, as he responded—" Strike! saidst thou ?—and at whom ?—at one to whom such strokes as mortal sinews might deal can be but the subject of derision, and not of fear. No! Zachelli knows better where to plant his weapon: he that can so easily
charmed upon others, must be himself invulnerable. But, behold!" he continued, again roused suddenly to a recollection of his present extreme danger, " I am unfortunate: my life—even that which thou gavest me—is lost!" " Are you sure of that ?" now demand¬ ed a voice just behind him, and presently emerging from the gloom, Haly stood be¬ twixt them; he had rendered good ser¬ vice during the early part of the fray, and had since retired to repose himself in an adjoining recess, from which he now is¬ sued.—" It is true," Haly continued, " that in spite of the pretended possession of fifty charmed lives, thou art assuredly doomed to die: but it is also possible that he who hath so recently exhibited a pro¬ pensity, under any pretence, to spare, may yet deserve to be spared. I have watched thy conduct, and hadst thou ven¬ tured savagely to smite one whom (what¬ ever his pretensions to invulnerability) thou sawest shrink from thee, was prepar-
ed to thee to the now mean to act differently. Here, take this cloak and turban," he added, divesting himself of the articles alluded to; " these torches burn not so brilliantly but thou mayest easily escape: they will take thee for the Moslem, and readily let thee pass. Another minute's stay in this den of ini¬ quity is certain death to thee. In this disguise (without affecting to juggle) I proffer thee in reality a charm to preserve thy life—if existence be still of any value in thy sight—and look thou learn to mend it. Decide." The tumult which had arisen near tbe entrance now again began to subside, and the banditti were evidently a second time overpowered by dint of numbers and dis¬ cipline : but a buzz of eager inquiry arose along the ranks—their leader was again missing. Zachelli quickly caught the ominous sound, and aware that all was over—that every hope of successful re¬ sistance now was futile, seized, with cor-
res|K>ndent eagerness, proffered man¬ tle and turban. He clearly saw that, could he even have now recovered his gold, there was no practicable method of escaping with it; and therefore wisely de¬ cided upon saving his life, as being, after all, the most precious article that man, in the hour of peril, can preserve. Having speedily, with the assistance of Haly, equipped himself in these new habili¬ ments, Zachelli yet loitered another mo¬ ment to wring the hand of his deliverer, and, with much emotion, said —" In a small niche at the extremity of yonder dusky avenue, a little way buried beneath the surface, there is concealed a chest containing a treasure of no mean value. I pray thee mark well the spot—it is yonder where my hand now points—there lies a treasure princes might deign to lift. Here is the key; if thou art not already rich—take it—make it thine." Zachelli now, concealing his face as well as he was able, turned on his heel
once more, and with a steady step pro¬ ceeded toward the mouth of the cavern. Haly and Abdallah continued to Watch his progress, with a degree of interest perhaps not altogether warranted by the circumstances; they saw him reach the guarded entrance (soldiers and captives giving way before him), and presently issue forth upon the open plain—Zachelli was at liberty!
CHAP. XVIII. Mark it, Cassario, it is old and plain. SlIAKESPEARS. Ye noble few ! who here unbending stand Beneath life** pressure, yet bear up awhile, And what your bounded view, which only saw A little part deem'd evil, is no more; The storms of wintry time will quickly pass, And one unbounded spring encircle all. Thom so». In defiance, however, of this ingenious device of the inventive Haly, it is proba¬ ble that the escaped bandit would not so easily have eluded the vigilance of Lioni, but for the entrance at that critical mo¬ ment of a whole group of liberated cap¬ tives, comprising don Caesario himself, the prince Vieenza, and, above all, his too- captivating daughter, who, esccrted by the enraptured count Castelli, now press¬ ed forward to taste a purer atmosphere
than they had of late been accustomed to inhale. It was not until now that Lioni discovered, to his infinite chagrin and amazement, that the present travelling companion of Vieenza—beautiful and in¬ teresting as, nevertheless, she still appear¬ ed—was not Victoria; while, at precisely the same instant (each just then approach¬ ing to congratulate the fair Alphonsine on her fortunate deliverance from thral¬ dom) the pale and altered Caesario made the same discovery. Astonishment and curiosity, as may be expected, seized them both, and for a brief interval suspended every other feeling: but here all simili- tuide between their sensations ended. Don Caesario still reflected upon Victoria as the not only fascinating, but willing fair, who had listened with pleasure to his protesta¬ tions of affection, and even received his addresses with something like a corre¬ spondent feeling of tenderness; while, on the ether hand, the marquis Lioni saw little difference between donna Victoria
and the equaUy-captivating him, and reflected chiefly upon the token glove in his possession, given him by Al- phohsfne, with whom he already began shrewdly to suspect his recent nocturnal interview had been held, and not with Victoria, as he then surmised. Mean time, the prince Vieenza failed not to perceive the sudden confusion of each, and rightly guessing the cause, in a faint and despond¬ ing, but collected, tone, said—" I see you are amazed, but let us reserve such te¬ dious explanations for a fitter period. At present I would learn to whose especial interference—an act of humanity which the fallen Vieenza can never sufficiently compensate—I owe my unexpected li¬ beration, and no less the preservation of my darling child. Briefly then, whose intercession hath procured, and whose skill conducted hither, a band of my country's veterans, to perform this gallant enterprise —an achievement which deserves my warmest gratitude?"
Lioni answered him—" He who chiefly pleaded to the viceroy in favour of this humane expedition, and afterwards led us hither to thy rescue—myself but acting under his directions, until we reached the scene of action—now stands beside thee " Vieenza turned hastily, and (for the first time—so earnestly had his whole soul been engrossed by this sudden reunion with his beloved Alphonsine) beheld the count Castelli by his side! The hand of the prince was already extended to clasp that of his deliverer, but again sunk mo¬ tionless, on beholding who it was to whom he appeared indebted for his liberty: a sudden faintness seized him, and he seem¬ ed near falling to the ground. The an¬ guish, too, of his wound (so recently received from the dagger of ZacheUi, but which had appeared forgotten during his previous excitement) now seemed more than doubly augmented by the unexpect¬ ed sight of his mortal enemy. At this period, BiondeUa, whom it seemed Bianca
and comforted, rushed and prostrated herself at the feet of her recovered mistress; while Beltramo also advanced to claim his share in his mas¬ ter's liberation. But Vieenza heard them no longer: his brain was bewildered— his pride mortified—'his body consider¬ ably weakened through long confinement, aided by loss of blood, and he presently sunk insensible into the arms of his sur¬ rounding attendants. We pass over the alarm of Alphonsine —the extreme solicitude of his domestics, and the anxiety even of those who had hitherto accounted themselves his ene¬ mies, on discovering the true situation of the wounded and broken-spirited prince Vieenza. Let it suffice now to record, that, on his recovery from that pro¬ tracted swoon, it w r as found no difficult matter to induce him solemnly to forego his hatred (already too long cherished) of the infirm Castelli, who, by the all-wise decree of Providence, had lived to render
essential service; and em¬ brace him fervently, together with his only son, don Cassario, who also, it now seemed, had been for some time his fel¬ low-captive. This important point once gained, Caesario ventured tremblingly to inquire respecting the present situation of his own adored Victoria—but here Vi¬ eenza ceased to be communicative. He, however, requested that a priest might immediately be sent for, promising to abide by his holy instructions in all things pertaining to her future destiny; and with this response, for the present, Cse¬ sario was forced to remain satisfied. While these events were passing, search was not forgotten to be made for the ap¬ parently vanished ZacheUi, whom all had seen there fighting like a demon only a few minutes before, and who, each de¬ clared, could not possibly have since pass¬ ed the rugged portal: notwithstanding these assertions, as the reader may slyly suspect, this search was made in vain; vol. in. l
nor could any other outlet to the cavern be discovered, which circumstance might have served to abate their wonder at his miraculous disappearance. The prince Vieenza proving yet utterly unable to en¬ dure removal to his residence, a priest was sent for to the cavern, according to his desire, and presently closeted with him in his cell: their interview was long —even unusually protracted; at least, so thought don Caesario, who was anxiously awaiting the result. During this interval, as may be supposed, Haly was not un¬ mindful of the last departing injunction of the grateful bandit, nor negligent in turning it to his own advantage; and ne¬ ver did the well-pleased Moor reap a richer harvest from any of the innumer¬ able droll adventures in which he remem¬ bered to have been engaged, than accrued to him on that fortunate night from the exchequer of Zachelli. Meantime, at the convent of St. Ro¬ salie, morn, noon and eve, again and
again glided away—too Victoria—while still the fatal day that was to witness the irrevocable fulfilment of her hated destiny was approaching, and at last arrived. It arrived, and its earliest dawn was hailed with transport by all the inmates of that sacred pile, except the two hapless victims who were on that day to be devoted to a life of prayer, ab¬ stinence, and seclusion. Still, however, the enthusiastic Ebba Malcolm resolved .to sacrifice her liberty, as at first intended, although her ardour in praise of a conven¬ tual life was by this time considerably di¬ minished. Disappointed love is, no doubt, a very powerful provocative—but a length¬ ened absence sometimes cures even disap¬ pointed love; and whatever the cause, it was pretty perceptible, that, as the weeks elapsed, and the day drew near that was to seal her wishes, the eagerness of Ebba to take the veil became gradually abated. But in the fixed resolution of Victoria, time had made no change: she was still
that, whatever conse¬ quence, no power should persuade her to sacrifice her liberty, or deny her affection for Caesario. At length, the long-dreaded ceremony was prepared, and Victoria must pass through the " train of youths arrayed in purest white," which conducted her to the altar, accompanied by the now almost- equally reluctant Ebba, there to pronounce the final vow which divided them for ever from the world. They did so, accord¬ ingly, Victoria, with a firm and stately step, regardless of the pomp around her— " The golden censors toss'd with graceful hand, Whose fragrant breath Arabian odour shed ; Of meek-eyed novices the circling band, With blooming chaplets wove around each head j" wholly heedless of the thousand flaming lamps, and scattered boughs of myrtle, until arrived at the fatal shrine. Here, on the question being put as usual, whe¬ ther she was prepared to resign for ever the *f pomps and vanities of this wicked
world," the spirited who chanced to be first addressed, resolutely, and without hesitation, replied—" Your office and persons are reverend, and, as I ought, I honour them ; yet am constrain¬ ed, by opposing circumstances, thus openly to decline the favour you intend me. These walls are holy—but I seek not ad¬ mittance into them. To the world-wea¬ ried—to the forlorn and broken spirit, I grant, this sanctified abode may afford a fitting home; for such let the blessed asy¬ lum be preserved—but Victoria, the daughter of Vieenza, will never yield her right to liberty!" This speech not a little amazed and per¬ plexed the whole assemblage—the priest could not proceed; it appearing necessary, ere the commencement of that solemn rite, to obtain, at least, the verbal assent of the doomed victim to its performance. Here, then, arose a difficulty which ap¬ peared insurmountable, for Victoria was evidently fixed in her determination; and L 3
novices were, consequently, conducted back to their cells. While yet deliberat¬ ing upon this strange dilemma, the abbess was surprised by a communication from Vieenza, borne by don Caesario, command¬ ing that all attempts to enforce the cere¬ mony should be for ever relinquished; and requiring, moreover, the immediate presence in Sicily of his beloved child, Victoria, whom the bearer of that mandate was commissioned to conduct, with all possible speed, to receive his paternal for¬ giveness. In a few days, Victoria once more found herself a happy and favoured inmate of Vieenza Castle (whither the prince, during the interval, had been removed), the scene of her early childhood, and hence endeared to her by a thousand pleasing recollec¬ tions : in addition to which hardly hoped- for change, she experienced likewise the satisfaction of finding herself regarded as the publicly-betrothed bride of don Caesa¬ rio. Still further, if possible, to enhance
her happiness, she hourly the grow¬ ing affection which already subsisted be¬ tween her former painfully-rejected suitor, the young marquis Lioni, and the beauti¬ ful Alphonsine, her gentle and affectionate sister, now also with herself an inhabitant of the same paternal mansion. The ex¬ planation of this sudden reverse in the fortune and prospects of both sisters may be briefly rendered as follows:—The prince Vieenza, following the advice of his ghost¬ ly confessor, had found it no difficult mat¬ ter, on application being made to his holi¬ ness, to obtain a welcome release from his fatal vow. Hence, the pope having gra¬ ciously absolved him of his oath, and his wound at the same time assuming a more favourable aspect, he began to arouse him¬ self from his long cheerless state of ex¬ istence, and actually ventured to look forward to brighter and better days. Alas! such seldom fall to the lot of a bosom so long and so heavily burthened as had been Vieenza's!
unfortunate wound proved also to be of a slight description) it is scarcely needful to add, was again re¬ ceived into the service of the Vieenza family; since whatever she might have formerly known of Zachelli, it was evident that she knew nothing of the mode of his escape. Here the favour she soon gained operated greatly to the discomfiture of BiondeUa, who, to the latest period of this narrative, was likely to lead apes (as the proverb says), ail her suitors having for¬ saken her. Of Abdallah much more re¬ mains to be said. It was soon the worthy Moor's lot to recognise, in no less a person¬ age than the abbess of the convent at Naples, his mother, Rosalie—that Rosalie, who, it will be remembered, fled from Aghar Hussein to pass the remainder of her days in penitence upon some Christian shore. This circumstance so wrought up¬ on Abdallah, that he became a Christian, and largely endowed, with his immense wealth, the holy institution of which Ro-
salie was the calling the name of her favourite and imagined patron saint. A short time afterwards, a report of his marriage was abroad, and (strange as it may appear) the name of the ru¬ moured bride was Ebba Malcolm, the some time since zealous and enthusiastic devotee, whom the resolution of Victoria alone had rescued from tbe perpetual gloom of a cloister! Don Caesario would fain have ascertained, from personal inter¬ rogation, the verity of this rumour, but was told that Abdallah had just departed for Scotland, to visit the relatives of his fair bride. For the lively, good-humour¬ ed Haly—he continued to exist as usual (in spite of his mended fortune, which sometimes has a most wonderful effect in blunting the wit) a striking proof, and living example, that there are yet true lovers of frolic and hilarity even among the Algerines. Shortly after his recovery, as Vieenza
was walking alone one evening near the castle, a wretched-looking figure darted suddenly from the brushwood, and flung himself directly across his path. In a moment the startled prince recognised the haggard features of the escaped bandit, Zachelli, and exclaimed—" Wretch! art thou still here? Is not the earth wide enough for thee to elude perdition, but thou must force me to destroy thee? What is it thou wantest ?" ** Money," replied Zachelli, in a hollow and earnest tone, " to enable me for ever to escape from Sicily." Vieenza flung him his purse—it hap¬ pened to be heavy—the delighted ruffian seized, and pressed it to his meagre lips. He would also have ventured to salute the hand which gave it, but Vieenza spurned him haughtily aside, and pursued his silent course. Zachelli was never afterwards heard of in Sicily. With regard to the prince Vieenza, like the bandit he affected to scorn, fear-
haunted, and from whom an accusing mo¬ nitor in his own tortured bosom still with* held the required boon of tranquillity— he lived, though not happily, (can guilt ever be happy ?) long enough to witness the union of don Caesario with Victoria, and also of the marquis Lioni with his beloved Alphonsine. These events being thus happily concluded, all was finished which it appeared desirable that he should live to see accomplished. Hence, gloomy and conscience-smitten, as often as the events of his past life glided athwart his memory, the onceenvied and patriotic prince continued to drag on an existence no longer enviable; and although the chiefs of those two noble families (Vieenza and Castelli) often met, a distant, and mere outward courtesy, was the utmost stretch of cordiality they could ever be brought to exhibit towards each other—a sad proof how hard it is to eradicate from the bosom a settled aversion which pass-
years have lent their powerful aid to render indelible.
THE END.
Printed by J. Darling, Leadenhall Street, London.
