Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The forest of St. Bernardo: a novel
THE
FOREST OF ST. BERNARDO.
CHAP. I. JULIANA had amused herself with reading till the shades of night had cast a gloom on the surrounding scenes which induced her to quit the temple in search of Matilda and Charles, who«; * Jong stay rather surprised her. Having sauntered some time in hopes .of meeť- voL. iv. в ing
2
ing them, but in vain, the hemisphere, being suddenly overclouded, threatened an approaching storm, which defter-/ mined her to return home as fast as possible. A winding path led to an arm of the sea, which she was obliged to cross in her way to the park. The storm had just begun, and she was involved in total darkness. Juliana, though natu¬ rally courageous, felt an unusual awe. Involuntarily she stopped; her feet seemed transfixed to the earth, «and she listened with trembling anxiety for the footsteps of her friends. A violent clap of thunder, which seemed to burst over her head, roused her. « Protect
" Protect me, Heaven í" she ex¬ claimed. At that instant she heard some tone approaching. · On turning suddenly round, by:the glare.of the lightning' she perceived two ill-looking fellows rush out of a small inclosure. Fear lent hér wings, and she had almost reached the cottage which stood at the entrance of the park when her foot struck against a stone, and she fell. Before she could rise the men seized 'her. She screamed violently, but the.storm prevented her from being heard. '■ Juliana on her knees implored mercy, в 2 and
4 and offered the men her watch and purse. They made no reply ; but ty¬ ing a handkerchief over her mouth, one of them took her in his arms. Fear deprived her of her senses.' On recovering she found herself'in bed ina smaU neat cabin. Two women (one, who seemed the superior, had a very stern aspect) were sitting, by her.' She endeavoured to rise, but'was prevented bya faint'sickness occasioned by the motion of the vessel. A violent retch¬ ing ; ensued, and for three days she . continued so Ш that she scarcely had k any recollection of what had passed. On the fourth morning she became per-, fectly çoHected, but exceedingly weak. She .
s She revolved in her mind the strange and unfortunate event that had hap¬ pened. The women perceiving Juliana had recovered her senses* brought her ' a cordial, which she took without hesi¬ tation, and found herself somewhat re¬ freshed. *- On putting some questions to her attendants they shook their heads, and made signs thaf they did not under¬ stand her. Juliana, ' as it has been already ob¬ served, was endued with a solidity of judgment and penetration far above her years, and blessed with an uncommon fortitude and sweetness of temper which В 3 never
б
never forsook her even on the most trying occasion. ît struck her that nothing could be obtained by suHen* ness or resistance, as she was evidently too much in the power of her enemy î «he determined; therefore» to do every thirig to restore her health and strength, -and by supplication and prayer implore the protcctkfn of Divine Providence, ahd resigning herself to his disposal, with patience wait the solution of her mysterious fate. This determination calmed, in some measure, the perturbation of her mind, and subdued the poignancy of her -grief. No one entered the cabin but the women, who took such good care of
7
of her that in a few days shewâs able to rise. She was amply suppHed with every article of dress in the most ele¬ gant stile. * ■* , The weather being remarkably fine^ the attendants made signs for her to ga on deck for the benefit of the air.. Cu* riosïty induced Juliana' to comply with their request. How great was her sur? prise to find she was on board a Spanish ship ! Juliana perfectry^mderstbod thé language, and spoke it with fluency. Father Edmund had in her childhood taken great pleasure in. teaching her Spanish, and often conversed with, her in it. в 4 A gen-
8
, A genteel, weH-bred man, who ap¬ peared to have the command, approach¬ ed her, bowed respectfuUy, and by signs expressed his pleasure at her re¬ covery. She poKtely returned her thanks, and addressed him in French, it having occurred to her that by con¬ cealing her knowledge of the Spanish. language she might gain some inteHi- gence relative to her destiny, FeHx (so he was called) either did not, or would not, understand her t On JuHana's retiring to her cabin the circumstance of being on board a Spa¬ nish vessel puzzled her extremely. " Who can be the contriver of this plot?"
9
plot ?" thought she. " No one in Spam knows of my existence, except my &■ ther. Surely the secret has not escaped him ! If it has, of what consequence could it be to any one to be at the ex- pense and trouble ta carry me off? And now they have gained their point» what good can arise to them from iti" In vain JuHana*s imagination wander¬ ed in a labyrinth of conjectures, tiU, per* plexed and wearied, she gave up the point; and fervently recommending- herself to the care bf Heaven, retired to rest," and irf a calm sleep for some» йоигз buried her anxiety in obHvion. - Her table wasnveH supplied, and the > 5 attendant»
10
attendants continued attentive but si- lent. The book she had been reading thať fatal evening she was 'torn from her country and friends she had put in her pocket : it was a well-chosen col- lection of Poems, and had been pre¬ sented to her by Edward.' This ren¬ deredit invaluable. « His picture, which she wore, proved a melancholy source •of'-amusement. Often for hours she would sit and gaze on it. This brought on ajtrain of reflexion, which in spite of her fortitude - overpowered her ; for though Juliana could support her own distress,' the bare idea of the sufferings of her friends overwhelmed herewith afiiiction. Since
11
Since Juliana had been able togoorn deck her strength gradually returned, and her health visibly mended. Felix 4 regularly once a day viàited her, and lent her several books и/ the - French language on entertaining and instruct¬ ive subjects. This was a real acqui¬ sition, as it engaged her attention, and often beguiled her of her fears. It con¬ vinced her tliat Felix spoke French. Thus passed hear a month, when one afternoon, being seated on deck,. she found, by trie - 'conversation, * the sailors were in ■ hopes of making land the following day. Felix gave orders to the attendants to get things in readi¬ ness. * The riext morning * the vessel в β made
ш
made the port of ------ , on the confines pf--------- . Some hours after they had cast anchor, Felix,.by signs, desired Ju¬ liana to go on' shore, and with great re¬ spect handed her into the boat. The attendants followed. On their landing she perceived an old-fashioned coach, with six mules and several servants, in waiting. This led her to imagine that Felix had given no¬ tice of Jier ar/ivaî. After placing Juli¬ ana an^jöie women in the carriage, -Fçlix followed ; and seating himself backwards, kept, as usual, a profound silence, , Had our heroine's mind been perfectly at
IS
at ease, the face of the country would have inspired her with melancholy ideas. It appeared a desert, a few mi¬ serable huts excepted. Not an habita¬ tion was to be seen, except on a rising ground, almost enveloped with trees, (which seemed coequal with the flood,) the turrets of an antique castle appeared. Ín less than an hour, though from the unevenness" of the roads they moved slowly, they reached the outward gate of this venerable gothîc püe. Aš the porter was opening the massy gate, which creeked on its hinges, Juliana in- voluntarüy shuddered. ," Ah," thought she, as they drove into the court, " how different is this gloomy
=14 gloomy mansion to the beautiful gothie structure at Upton ! Oh, my beloved friends,[what do you not suffer for your Juliana? Shall I, О merciful Heaven, shall Л ever be restored to you—ever have the supreme happiness- of again beholding you ?" ,. Tears started ;in her eyes ; Felix was affected. By signs he' endeavçured to quiet her fears. On alighting, they were received by a venerable-looking woman, whose benignity of counte¬ nance strongly f prepossessed Juliana in her favour, whom, with great respect she welcomed, and conducted her into a superb saloon furnished in the ancient style of Spanish magnificence, Felix ? bowed;,
15 bowed, and took his leave immediately. The two women remained. Refresh¬ ments of various sorts were set before her. At dinner the table was spread with every delicacy, and served in plate. Two servants waited. One of them, to her great comfort, spoke to¬ lerable French; so she had the pleasure of being understood when she called for any thing, and of hearing the sound of her own voice, to which she was almost a stranger, t * ■" ^ * Being rather -more composed, she observed that the few domestics she had seen were in deep mourning ; and on examining the arms on the- plate, she perceived they were the duke's, her
Ιβ her grandfather. What confirmed her- that she did not mistake was the crest springing out of a ducal coronet, and the cypher being the -initials of his name* She concluded that he wa3 dead ; ' but if the Marquis, her father, had succeeded to the title, what could induce him to act in so unaccountable a manner ? Why not openly demand her of Mrs. Millward, who certainly would not have detained her against his con¬ sent? Yet when she considered the character of the Marquis, the fondness he had even from her birth expressed for her, and that her intended union with Edward was at his own particular request, and seemed to be the first wish of his heart, she could not for a mo¬ ment
: , ■ ■■ ii menţ suppose he even knew¿ i of the transaction. Had the Marchioness disco¬ vered that she was still in existence, and, fearful o^f her rivaUing Elvira in the af¬ fections of -the Marquis, had ; got her into her power, and perhaps meant to, seclude her in a convent for life ? But if she was* the" amiablevígeneŕous Sophronia described, who had acted so noble, so disinterested^ by her mother, surely it was impossible - that she ľ could be guilty of such an act of cruelty ; and. she rejected the surmise with disdain. Strongly was she tempted to inter¬ rogate the servant who spoke French, but ; a moment's -consideration deter? mined her iav suppress her curiosity, and
18
arid on no account ask any questions.^ JuHana employed herself some time in looking at the family pictures/ One, a beautiful boyòf about six years old, at¬ tracted, hbr nofice; She was looking attentively at it, when Conrad entered toíáhnounte that tea'and ^cbffee were ready* ^lle'sèemed by hiä* looks to ex- pect she would ask who it Waá done for. Finding rjuliana' prepared : i to- fpHow him,^ he'said-^- ; - '" "■· ; " '^ l ^ ~ь "■ -*.'.-»- íVThé picture you v were ädmiriíig, Donna, was drawn for the Marquis of Vaena, when a child/' / . ^ > . ' » , K : ! «<"'", ' · , ι ·ι\ ' 't r '- ■■ ' - This convinced her that-she' musť be in thé power of her family^ but did not in
19
in the least tend to unravel the mystery that surrounded her. As Conrad was « taking away, JuHana asked if she might walk in the garden. '* Certainly, Donna," he repHed, ■" In the castle, and as far as, the grounds extend, you have absolute command." ' '- ' - * \ - .She desired him to send one of the women. The youngest made her ap· . pearance, and to tlie great surprise Of JuHana asked what were her orders'in very good French; She had presence of mind to-take-no notice of her having found her tongue, but <told her, with great mildness, that she wished her to accompany her in her walk." ■ .: « y ou
20
u You do me honour, Donna," she replied, and withdrew to fetch Juliana's bonnet and cloak. After walking above an hour, during which time she conversed, with her companion on indifferent subjects rela¬ tive to France, (of which Mademoiselle Amy was a native,) they returned to the castle, where Juliana found supper ready. As soon as she had finished her unsociable meal she, desired to retire for the night, r The women attended, and conducted, her to a superb apart¬ ment, llie hangings and bed were blue and gold, which, though rather tarnished, were still in tolerable preserv¬ ation. The dressing-room corresponded with
21
with the bed-chamber. The other at¬ tendant spoke only Spanish ; she was called Ursula. Juliana desired Amy to call her by eight in the morning. On bidding Amy good night, she said— ì — j * " If you have no objection, Donna, I am to sleep in the adjoining closet." - By this it was evident she was strictly watched. A variery of unpleasing re¬ flexions kept Juliana awake the best part of the night. In the morning she rose unrefreshed and languid. Amy attended her toilette, and presented a deep mourning dress elegantly made in the
22 the English fashion. Juliana put it on without making the least comment. A sigh escaped her, and a tear trickled down her cheek on viewing her sable garment. " For whom," thought she, " do I wear this? Not for my brother, for the time is past. If for the'Duke St. Udefonso, why am I not informed of it?". Amy,' who really was attached to Ju¬ liana, inquired if shew as unwell/ She answered no; and recovering herself, changed the discourse by asking some trifling question in regard to the» wea¬ ther. Ursula coming in, no more was ' said.
23 said. JuHana observed that Amy stood in awe of her, and scarcely spoke before her. As soon as breakfast waa over, Conrad said, 44 Donna, wUl you choose to go over the castle r If you do, * Ursula, Amy, and the old housekeeper wiU at¬ tend you." JuHana replied she should like to see it. Conrad caHed them, desiring the housekeeper to bring the keys. She respectfully, in Spanish, wished Juliana good morning/and with evident an¬ xiety enquired after her health. Juliana nearly betrayrd- herself, as she' was going to reply in Spanish* Luckily Amy
24
Amy instantly repeated in French what Signora Thomasina had been saying. Juliana desired Amy to tell her she was much obliged, and sorry to give her so much trouble. * fi Tell Donna Juliana," said the good old woman, " that if it was not my duty, inclination would lead me to at¬ tend her." It took some hours to view this an¬ cient fabric The picture gallery was still in fine preservation, and several of the state apartments in excellent order. The tows r in the left wing of the castle seemed in a ruinous state. Juliana, ob- f serving the housekeeper passed quickly
25 by the stairs which led to it/desired Amy' to say she wished to see the pro¬ spect from the turret. ' - ' *Ί° * l l ' ' · / - ' ' , ', ПО i f • ci Heaven forbid!" cried the'good woman, crossing herself, and téUing her beads with great r devotion. : <c Ah, Donna, that horrid place has not beeh entered for many years, nor have I the keys of it. The prophecy that is now so fataUy accomplished is enclosed in a cabinet which stands in the room oh the-first landing-place. Strange noises are often heard in it-¿-" > ,ji ■ · ' She was proceeding, 1 bût a look ; frdm Ursula stopped her; and Amy merely said ' it was unsafe, the stairs being in vol. iv. ' с many
26 jmairy parts broken. ;It directly, occur¬ red to Juliana г that she r alluded to the prophecy mentioned.in her father's let¬ ters, and she would have given the ¡«Tprid^ to jhave kno\^n the particulars : -yet, she had the fortitude to persevere in her resolution not to appear anxious , to be informed of any One circumstance. 0 Ţhus passed a month in thesame dull routine. It 'was with difiiculty that Ju¬ uliana suppottedher spirits, as she began tpjfearshewas imprisoned for life. If even she had not been sodosely watched it would have been in vain to think of escaping, 4 as the high walls that encom¬ passed the casde and pleasure-grounds .precluded the shadow of hope; and if if
27 iţ had been possible to have surmounted j these obstacles, many others would in« " tervene to prevent her making the at¬ tempt. An entire stranger to every thing but the language, her sex and age would have exposed her to dangers the bear idea of which made her shud¬ der.' < »"' She never saw the housekeeper but by chance. JuHana remarked that the worthy creature beheld her with com¬ passion blended with respect, and once she saw her turn aside thr conceal her tears. One night, after JuHana had retired to bed, she heard an unusual noise of с 2 doors
28 doors opening . and different voices. Servants were running backward and forward iri the gallery that led to, her apartment. , She plainly heard some one say— " Who would have thought of the Duke and Duchess coming so unex¬ pected at this late hour? 1 wonder what mischief » they have got in their heads'now!"' · - ' ,*..■;* : ;,, ".Heayen.protect,,th;o Lady Jujiana !" repiied a voice she knewto^be Conrad's. " Had I known what an angel she was, I never would have been concerned in ,,the afiair/',, ,;*д " : κ ,. . * ■< ',/ ţ The
29
The other person said something in so low a tone that it precluded her hearing, and they passed on. Juliana was'alarmed. Surely the Duke they mentioned could not be her father : if it was, she had nothing to fear ; yet the few words she' had heard were of a strange." import. ' What could'they'al¬ lude to? f '' These and similar reflexions prevent¬ ed Juliana from sleeping, and she counted the tedious hours as the great clock announced them. It was near two before the castle was perfectly quiet. Just as the day began to * break she heard a footstep approach the bed, and saw by the feint light a female figure ' f с 3 "open
30
open the side curtain. She had, the courage to He stUl. After gazing on her for a minute the figure stooped down, and in a whisper said, in very bad French— " Donna JuHana, peruse this letter as soon as possible : take care that no pne sees you. Particularly beware of Ur* sula. The Holy Virgin guard and pro¬ tect you!", - , - t 'f > Juliana took the letter, and was going, to reply, but the person made a sign for her to,be silent, and instantly gHded out, of the room. JuHana could scarcely be¬ lieve her senses. ' >
44 Am
31
44 Am I awake," thought > she, / e or; is it a dream?" But by the increasing light she plainly saw the letter, and) read the direction— ec To the Lady, JuHana?" Nothing could equal her as¬ tonishment and horror од rëaduur/thec foUowing lines, writteain'French: s. / 44 Wonder not, Madam, at your re-> ceiving the inteUigence contained in tluV paper : it comes from one who, wiH,*, iţ possible, save you from tţie/threatenedt danger at the hazard of his .life.-'Xçti me conjure you to put 1 impHcit/ confix dence in what I have to communicatee Sorry I am, Madam, to afflict you> but- it is absolutely necessary that you should) know that the Duke St. Udefonso and с 4 the
52 the Marquis your father are no more. You are in the power of Don Gusman, (who has succeeded to the title of-your grandfather.) He is a most atrocious villain,! and an implacable enemy to your famfly. Donna Triphosa is equally your foe.> Their scheme is bý a feigned story to prevail on you to marry their only son, a youth of sixteen. The mo¬ tive is to secure the immense fortune you inherit. I am concerned to add that the Marquis was basely murdered by Gusman and Triphosa. Believe not aiword they say, but try every method to. gain time j and take care that they do not suspect you are acquainted with their crimes. I was in hopes Pedro would have arrived in England soon' ι ' enough
33 enough to have prevented your falling into their hands. The real will of the Marquis is in the possession of Pedro, whom Gusman supposes dead. There is only öne person in this house you may trust, which is the housekeeper, who ventures to deliver this. I have taught her a"few words in French, to address you. Would to Heaven you understood Spanish, as Signora Toma¬ sina could impart many things which I dare not commit to paper. Let me beg of you, Madatn, for both our sakes, to destroy this as soon as you have read it. Do not give any credit to the pro- t. phecy, however authentic it may ap¬ pear ; iť is all a fabrication of Father Anthony and Don Gusman's mother,' с 5 who
34 who was an Italian. - I trust it will one day be brought to light. May the Holy Virgin and all good angels watch over you !" Juliana was thunder-struck. The mystery was· indeed unravelled; but into what an abyss of misery was she, plunged ! Her father murdered, herself torn from her,country and friends, and, entirely in the power of her most inve¬ terate enemy ! v <, -' . * " Surely," thought Juliana, when re¬ collection returned, r " Gusman's and Triphosa's crimes are recorded in fear¬ ful characters upon, the tablet of retri-. bution!" ,,* , - Her
35 Her sensations were too acute for tears,j her heart' felt ready to burst, Shehad the presence of mind to> destroy the paper after reading it a second time ; every word was engraven on her .memo¬ ry. The castle clock striking six re¬ minded her that she had only two hours to compose herself, and prepare her mind for the approaching trial. -/Kneel« ing, she thus addressed Heaven ; - "Ό thou awful Superintendant ; ofinu^ man affairs 1 true thou hast suffered me ; '* to be entrapped by the vile arts of Gus¬ man, but I will trust to thy mercy ahd justice for protection ; and wilt thou nóť avenge the cause of betrayed innocence ? - Pardon, О pardon the '' presumptuous с 6 inter-
36
interrogatory! pardon a weak, com¬ plaining mortal, and teach her submiss¬ ion to thy will ! Doubtless to thee, AU- wise and Omnipotent, is owing the af¬ flictions of thy servant ;, but the hand that wounds can cure. Thy goodness has raised me up an unknown friend, (reward him, Heaven !) let me not then despair, but on my part make every ef¬ fort; andrest fully assured, that what¬ ever trials thy wisdom has destined me J tot undergo, thy power can redeem me from every evil." Juhana felt herself, more calm ; and when Mademoiselle Amy entered the dressing-room she received her as usual. Nothing passed tiU after breakfast, when Conrad
37 Conrad brought a message from the Duke of St. Udefonso, desiring to see her in the library. " He and the Duchess, Donna, only arrived last night; and fearing they" might have disturbed your rest, would not announce themselves sooner." Juliana, in spite of every endeavour, was greatly agitated : she tliou ght Con¬ rad viewed her with evident, marks of compassion. As soon as she was a little recovered she told Conrad she would attend the Duke immediately. " Have courage, Donna ; I trust you have nothing' to fear. If you should, you
33
you may find friends he little thinks of." This was uttered in a very low tone. Juliana looked her thanks, but made no reply, and soon found herself in the pre¬ sence of the man she most dreaded, and the sight of whom filled her with hor¬ ror : yet supported by conscious inno¬ cence, and an innate dignity of mind, she entered the room in a* manner that abashed Don Gusman, and for some minutes he viewed her with silent awe. He was struck with the elegance of her deportment, the' interesting and be¬ witching graces of her lovely counte¬ nance, which being suffused by a deep blush, added to its natural beauty. As
39 As soon as he recovered the confusion the sight of JuHana occasioned^ he rose, and addressing her, in French^ - hand¬ ed her to a chair. His touch almost pe¬ trified her, yet she did not withdraw her hand, but curtseying with ineffable grace, seated herself. After a short pause Gusman said— " You have no doubt, Donna JuH¬ ana, been greatly surprised by my, pro¬ ceedings; but L flatter'myself when I have explained my motives you wiU not only pardon, but approve of the steps I have taken. Before I enter into particulars, aUow me to thank you for the whole of your conduct : it proves to me that the exalted character I heard of
40 of you scarcely does you justice, and evinces an uncommon strength of un¬ derstanding." * JuHana bowed, but was silent. Gus¬ man continued— " You are doubtless, Donna, no stranger to the loss you have sustained - by the death of your father and grand¬ father. The part I have acted is in consequence of the dying request of the Marquis. He conjured me to send for you to Spain, as he could not reconcile it to his conscience to let you remain an heretic, and appointed me sole guardian to your person and fortune/' '
Juliana >
41
Juliana 'could not restrain her tears. Scarcely 'could she command her tem¬ per, on Don Gusman's endeavouring to soothe her. At the instant she was going to reproach him the advice of her unknown friend darted into her mind f and summoning her fortitude to her aid, she replied with calmness,' but with great firmness, that the con¬ duct of' her lamented father appeared very extraordinary. She had always understood 'that he had resigned all" right in her to Mr. Millward, whom he had invested with full power to act in every respect by her as his own daughter. " You have been misinformed in many points." "May
42
"May I, Sir, be permitted to ask why you, did not inform Mr. Millward of the change-in my father's sentiments, and openly demand me rather than de- scend to stratagem ?" , " Because I was certain Mr. Millward would never have consented to resign you, but would have detained you as a British subject. It was not probable that \he would relinquish the large for· tune you have in England, beside the immense wealth you will inherit by the . Marquis's will, if you conform to his dying injunctions," Juliana involuntarily darted a look at the Duke that in spite of his effrontery discon-
43
disconcerted him ; and rising very hastily— " Donna Juliana," said he, " I will not at present urge the subject, but hope, nay expect, that your good sense will lead you to rf conform in every respect to the wlil of your deceased parent. AUow me ( to introduce you to the Duchess, who longs to embrace you." Though her heart recoiled at the idea of being obliged to receive the caresses of the murderers of her father and brother, yet prudence prevailed, and she resolved to suppress, as much as possible, the repugnance and detestation she felt for Gusman and Triphosa* Prepossessed
44 Prepossessed as she was against the lat¬ ter, she thought her an exceeding fine woman. The Duchess still retained a great share of beauty, her figure was commanding, her manners soft and po¬ lished. She received Juliana with ap- f parent tenderness, but at 'times a ma¬ lignant joy "sparkled in her eyes that' did not eseape-the penetration of Ju¬ liana. She perceived the great atten¬ tion the Duke paid her displeased Tri- phosa, ι At dinner they were joined by a friar whose countenance disgusted her. He was introduced to her as Father Anthony,
«.Ali,"
44 " Ah," thought Juliana, " I am not ŕ" deceived, then ! His face is a true em¬ blem of his mind." After the servants had quitted the room, the Duke told Juliana he wished her to have some conversation with the holy father, as he had no doubt of his convincing her of the errors of the pro¬ testant faith, and inducing her to em¬ brace the tenets of the Roman catholic church. Juliana begged to be excused, as she did not think herself qualified to enter into theological disputes : perfectly satisfied with the pure and simple mode of worship she had from her infancy been accustomed to, she trusted the Duke would not extend his authority so
so far as to insist on her renouncing (at least for the present) principles which were deeply engraven on her mind. " Certainly, Donna, you shall not be pressed on the subject," said the Duke. He then contrived to introduce the prophecy which Father Anthony had expatiated on largely, and concluded by saying it had been nearly accomplished: " And your grace's accession to the title and estate fully confirms the truth of it. When time and the inspiration of Heaven have effected the conversion of Donna JuHana, the dangers that threatened
47 thfêatened the august family of St. Il¬ defonso wffl entirely cease, and she be saved from eternal damnation." With mingled sensations of contempt and horror did JuHana Hsten to the pious hypocrite. 44 Oh!'* exclaimed she, mentally, " how unlike are his doctrines to those of the truly good Father Edmund í He indeed breathes the pure spirit of the Christian faith." As much as was consistent with po¬ hteness JuHana declined conversation; but the little she did say convinced the party they would find it no easy task
48
to impose on her. They were astonish¬ ed at the solidity of her judgment and her extensive knowledge. . * Just as they'were taking coffee,, Don Frederic and his governor arrived! He Was a tall, sickly-looking youth, but seemed good-natured and unaffected. He by no means inherited the abilities of his parents. Happily for „himself he was a ssranger to their crimes. He was introduced to Juliana as the Marquis Vanena. The idea of his being her de¬ stined husband made her smile—he ap¬ peared a mere boy', f Music was proposed. Juliana would fain have excused herself from taking a part
49
partin íhe.concert, but the Duke would a-ccept of no apology. He told her- he was nostrangqr to her skill and taste both as a vocal and instrumental per¬ former, and that .she ^particularly ex-, celledontheharp, ľ v . ' No ¡instrument could be -better calcu* lated to display the -various graces of her person to advantage, and she touched it in a style that raised the ad¬ miration of her auditors. The melodi¬ ous ¡tone of 'her· voice .enraptured «the Duke, who,' on Juliana concluding ^ beautiful Italian lair, ■ exclaimed, that she exeelled^he divine St. Cecilia. ч Ар soon „as supper was over, Juliana vol. iv, d was
50
was permitted to retire. The Duchess desired her company at breakfast.— Never had our heroine passed so miser¬ able aday. She dismissed her attend¬ ants almost immediately/ requesting they would leave a light, as she wished to read an hour before she went to bed. Amy- asked if she would permit her to sit up. f JuHana said— ^ , * , · 44 On no account." The poor girl seemed, by her manner, to have something to communicate, but the presence Of Ursula checked her, and with reluctance she bid JuHana good night. When alone, she gave loose to her feelings, but notv to despondency : she
Sì
she lotíged tò let the housekeeper know that she spöke Spanish, '■ and entertained a faint hope she would repeat; her noc¬ turnal visit; but in tliat'she was : disap¬ pointed. She carefully examined every part of the room', in-order to discover the private doQr : which she thought might hereafter be of use; but lier en¬ deavours proved abortive, and she re¬ tired tö bed wearied and 'dispirited; The morning proving fine, Juliana attended í ? thè ^Duchëss^- iii; ' tlie j; gafden. They were soon joined by-the. Duke and Frederick .Nothing ľ but 'generai topics were "discussed till Father -Anthony a¿£ peared. ■> The'Duke theii 'desired '' Jiili- ana^ţo favour thé'höly mán' witli half ■■Λ·ν : >ϊ.· ι '".ί.;·..ί ' ■* ■ d 2 * . ■ . " ■ : . an
52
an ť hour?s~ conversation. Ί She, knew it would be in vain torefuse, and she was compelled to hear a tedious lecture from lips which profaned the religious tenets he meant to enforce. Juliana listened,in silence; and when Father .Anthony had finished his lecture, she made no reply. . <c Will you 'not deign an answer, Donna ?" said he. 44 1 have none, Father, to make. It would s be presumptuous in me to en¬ deavour to refute your opinions, or to enter into, any controversy, incapable as I am of doing justice to the doctrine > I have been educated in 5 oblige me, therefore,
5$
therefore, by dropping the subject, and giving me time for reflection." So saying, she curtsied and left the - room. Father Anthony saw l plainly that Juliana possessed uncommon strength of mind, and that she could not be either frightened or flattered to act contrary to her judgment. He sought the Duke and Duchess, to whom he communicated his Ш success. ** Donna Juliana is the most extraor¬ dinary character I ever met with : not all rny efforts could draw her into an argument." « And ifyou had succeeded, father/ ' n 3 sai* I
.54 said the Duke, cc I suspect, in spite of all your sophistry, you would have made little impression on Juliana : nay, í am not sure that you would not have been obliged to quit the field. Her conduct and conversation astonish me ; her natural abilities are great, and by education they have been expanded and cultivated to the highest pitch." " Your observations>are just," replied the Duchess, " but she abounds in art," " I* do not think she has the least trait of it in her character. So far from it, I am certain her real disposi¬ tion is candid and ingenuous ; but situ¬ ated as she is, she finds it necessary to oppose
55 oppose art'to art. I am at à loss what method to pursue. I fear she is too well informed in every respect to be¬ come,our dupe. She certainly knows that,her fortune in England is,' at eighteen, at her own disposal. If she dies before that 'period, it centres'in Mr. Millward's . children. From^ the Marquis's papers it appears she has been ( the idol of his affection from-her birth ; and nothing but the request < of < her mother,' when' dying, prevented him from acknowledging his lovely daugh¬ ter." " It is rather singular," said the Duchess, " that the Marchioness was not entrusted with the secret, as she d 4 was
56
wás acquainted with every circumstance of Alönza's: first marriage/' ! ťť From letters I have found, she cer¬ tainly was," replied the Düke¿ ■}* and I am glad I prevented their Ming into the hands of Sophronia^ If .'Juliana con¬ tinues obstinately tő refuse coïrijplying with our proposals, she must be im¬ mured in a convent and sedulously niUst we guard the secf et of our hav- ; ing forced her from England; fot; tho* We have powerful friends* we haVe -likewise powerful opponents ; and laftı certain Don Sebastian and Sophronia ; view us with suspicions and only wait a favpurable opportunity it 6 accuser us piibHcly. If JuHana is nót produced to :"■',· ■''.;. * claim'
57 claim her immense property, we shaH юзе it, as Elvira wiH be then the sole heiress' to her father and grandfather, except the estate annexed to the title, which the late Duke has left/much en¬ cumbered. Since Lord Alphonso's death he has raised considerable sums on mort¬ gage. Our own fortune is so involved, and I am so deeply in debt, that even with the lucrative post I hold, 1 cannot support the dukedom." Father Anthony, who was not Only în ţheir-confidence, but an abettor of tiieir crimes, strongly urged the ne¬ cessity of compulsion. " If Donna JuHana were left entirely d 5 to
58
to my care," said he, " I would subdue her haughty spirit, and teach her sub¬ mission to your grace." " At present, Father," said Gusman With a frown, 4i I choose to try gentle means, nor shaU my orders be dis¬ obeyed." ' * w Juliana did not make her appearance till summoned to dinner. The Duke treated her with great politeness, and endeavoured to draw her into conversa¬ tion relative to her'friends in England, but she evaded every question concern¬ ing, them, but freely discoursed with him on general subjects. He found she had imbibed strong ideas in favour of the
59
the privileges English women enjoyed ; and though she politely avoided giving her opinion of the Spanish ladies, he clearly perceived she did not approve of the restraint they lay under; and even supposing that Juliana had not left her heart in England, Gusman was con¬ vinced she would never become the wife of a Spaniard. ' ^ - This .discovery vexed, but did not surprise him : he was conscious of Fre¬ deric's being little calculated to make an impression on Juliana ; for though handsome he was childish in his actions, and his education, owing to ill health, had been totally neglected, * i n 6 ^ Three
6$ Three weeks mbved heavily on. Ju¬ liana waá almost daily obliged to attend to the admonitions of Father Anthony, which had no other effect on her'than to render her, if possible, more unhappy. Hardly could Juliana support herself. The constant society of people whom her soul execrated was too severe a trial, At night, free from painful re¬ straint, she indulged in all the luxury of grief. It Was then her imagination .Wandered"to her friends at Upton,, and past scenete of happiness rose in quick succession to her view: but long she dared not dwell On them. Vainly had She sought än opportunity of sneaking to the housekeeper, who had
61 had not renewed her visit, nor had she received the least intimation from her unknown friend. Amy appeared un- usuaUy reserved, and Conrad she sel¬ dom saw. The Duke and Duchess, attended by Frederic, took frequent air¬ ings, but Juliana never accompanied them. Jn other respects she was treated with great complacency, even by the Duchess. One day Ursula happening to be ab¬ sent when JuHana retired to dress, Amy said— '* There is a great ibustle bebw, Donna: an express is just arrived, re¬ quiring the immediate attendance of the
62
the Duke at Madrid ; in consequence of which he and the?Duchess set off to¬ morrow. We are, I find, to be left in -this dismal castle, of which I am most heartily sick, I suppose you wiU hear * 4 all aboutit at dinner." I JuHana made Httle or no reply. On her going into the saloon the Duke la- ¿nentedthe necessity of being orHgedto return to Madrid, " I trusted," .continued he, " that I should have had the pleasure of taking you, my charming Juliana, and intro¬ ducing you at court in a manner your rank and 'fortune demand ; -'but you have frustrated my intentions by not complying
63 complying with the wishes of your father, 4 who, I must now teU you, left strict orders that you should be secluded from the world if you did not fulfil the conditions of his will. Let me hope on my return I shaU find you more ac¬ quiescent. During my absence I have no doubt of your acting with the same propriety that has hitherto marked your conduct." Juliana bowed, and only said she should never give his Grace any real cause to disapprove of either her actions or behaviour. ' No material conversa¬ tion passed during the rest of the day. The Duke appeared rather reserved and gloomy; the Duchess was visibly dis-' concerted.
64
concerted. From two or three words that Father Anthony said in Spanish to the Duke, some dis^reeable event oc¬ casioned their sudden departure. In the evening Juliana, ' being left alone, strofied into the garden. Insen¬ sibly she feU into a train of thoughts on past events, and her present perilous situation, So profound was her medi¬ tation, that unknown to herself shehad extended her walk beyond its usual bounds ; and suddenly recoUecting her¬ self, found she was in- a grove which she had never-before entered. Invo¬ luntarily she' stopped before a large tıHve tree. Stooping down to examine a curious shrub, she observed aome- thing
05 thing sparkle. On taking it up, it proved to be a ring richly set with dia¬ monds. Before she could examine ita fúotâtep alarmed hör; and she had just time to put it in her pocket when Gus¬ man appeared. On seeing Juliana he started, and, with a look of horror that astonished her, seized her hand, and exclaimed, with the greatest agita¬ tion— " What could induce the Lady Juli¬ ana to visit this accursed spot ?" The impetuosity of his manner fright¬ ened her, and she trembled excessively. In a faltering voice she replied—
'f My
44 My.lord,,chance alone was. my guide", , ^ '; " . u t But why stop r} at that accursed tree?" . å;- , Λ ν , .- 1 * , " A beautiful exotic attracted my. no- .tice, Sir." ..;,.:>* , f ', í ,' % ' л *> v j - ' .' ,' · 4í Well, well, let us leave the grove." And kissing^her - hand with an, un¬ usual vehemence,,was going to say_ something, when the voice of the Duchess prevented him. "We must join her immediately," said he. And
61 And resuming, in an instant, a calm¬ ness in his look and manner, led Juli¬ ana, without speaking, to a pavilion, where the Duchess ahd Frederic were seated. ■ v " I found this fair lady," said the Duke, " employed in examining shrubs in the grove." The Duchess ' seemed 'disconcerted, but only said— " Lady Juliana had better, in future, direct her botanical researches to some other part of these extensive grounds, where she will be secure from danger." Frederic
68 Frederic asked— ; *." Why, is the grove an interdicted place ? Father Anthony the other day forbid me to enter i¿ v I told him I had a great curiosity to explore it, and I was determined to satisfy it. He then in an authoritative tone commanded me, as I valued his friendship, to desist. One would think some dreadful ' crime jïa4be^n<PQmmittçd there* a^od it, was haunted/' * ■ ; ; . The Duke and Duchess were evident- ly confused., / The latter,. assuming a smile, said— , ■ » " My dear Frederic, the holy man * '· . ' was
69 wäfc only fearful bf your health, as it is very damp, and the air too much con¬ fined/' r ч • Kot satisfied 'with this answer, he^ was proceeding in his inquiries, when the Duke, looking sternly on him, said-*- " I bég you will drop this foolish sub¬ ject, and conduct Lady Juliana to the saloon. Your mother and I will follow immediately." Veiy little conversation passed during supper, and the party retired, at an early hour. ' The Duke 'and Duchess took leave of Juliàr&^nd expressed a wish
70 wish that ( at v their, return t they should 7 find her ready to obey, in every ; re¬ spect, the will of her deceased parent - Juliana had for some time past dis- ' missed her attendants as soon as they had set things in order, and accustomed herself to spend an hour or two in read¬ ing, reflecting on the events of the day, and in endeavouring to ^regulate her conduct for the ensuing/ v one. As soon as she was alone the ring« occurred to her. Qn examining it, she;, perceived the initials of her mother's name in bril¬ liants, on hair., -It was set round with large diamonds of. the first water. ? In ^pressing iţ she touched ^a secret spring. The,back part opene^ and,,discovered a beautiful
71 beautiful enamel' miniature, which she < instantly' knew to be her mother's. This convinced her the ring had be¬ longed to her father. The truth flashed on her mind, 0 and at once accounted for the Duke's agitation. Kissing the ring with reverential awe, she exclaimed— ' " Too sure my lamented parent \va.s murdered at the foot of that fatal tree 1 Well might Gusman shake with horror, and call it an accursed spot.—Father of Mercies!" continued she, falling on her knees, : * ζ oh hear thy suppliant's prayer! Grant, О grant that the vile perpetra¬ tors of the atrocious deed may be* brought tOxjüstice,'ánd receive the pu¬ nishment due to their crimes !"" 1( Rising,
72 Rising, she again exanuned tihe ring. Thought crowded on thought ^n such quick succession that she heeded not the time. Day-light had already dawn* ed, and JuHana had noti retired to bçd. A gentle noise awakened her from a painful train of ideas. Turning her head, she saw the worthy old house¬ keeper, whom she immediately in a low voice addressed in Spanish, t The good creature was overjoyed., <c Santa Maria be praised," said, she, / e that my dear young lady understands mel I wiU find an opportunity of con* versing with you, .Donna : at present I dare not'Stay. , Take this paper, and ob¬ serve the iristruqtiQnst it icontainş, care¬ fully
IS -f uUy. The Holy Virgin protect you ! Let me show you the secret door by which I gain admittance. In case of necessity fear not to make use of it. I must away, for fear of a discovery, which would ruin us aH." Saying this, she touched a smaU spring ; a pannel flew back. Without speaking the housekeeper pointed to a smaU winding stair which led to a dark passage. She instantly went through, and on setting her foot on the first stair the pannel closed so nicely, that it was not perceptible to the most accurate ob¬ server. 1 vol. iv. e Juliana
74 : Juliana instantly broke the seal of the pacquet, and read as follows; 44 You wiU doubtless,. Donna, won¬ der at my long silence, which has been occasioned by fear of a discovery : but I must now run all hazards, as it is ne- 'cessary you should receive some in¬ structions relative to your future con¬ duct/and be made acquainted with-par¬ ticular citcumstances. You have con¬ ducted yourself in such a manner that hitherto you^have eluded the arts of your enemies. . ; " Be not surprised when I tell you that the Duke loves you to distraction, which
Т5 which' has prevented Jiim from treat¬ ing you with severity : but be assured he is so consummate a villain, that he wiU find means to accomplish his base design, which aims at both your honour and life. The Duchess is equaUy de¬ praved, and an assistant in his schemes, which I wiU lay open to you. A forged wiU of the late Marquis wiU be pro¬ duced : it constitutes Lord Frederic his heir, on condition of his marrying you. The wretch Father Anthony wiU per¬ form the ceremony, and two or three of hh creatures be witnesses to it. 'f 66 Start not, Donna JuHana, at my disclosing crimes that must fiU your spotless soul with 'horror. On that ľ 2 very
76 very night the sacred rites are perform¬ ed, or rather profaned, Gusman means to gratify his diabolical passion, and you will fall a victim to the malice and re¬ venge of Donna Triphosa. ** But fear not, lady ; Providence has made me an humble means of your safety. The strictest caution, circum¬ spection, and vigilance are" necessary on your part. Signora Tomasina is the best of human creatures, and I have found out that Mademoiselle Amy and Conrad are much attached to you, and secret friends, but as yet I have not entrusted them. The Duke andDuchess are much disconcerted by being, sent .for to Madrid. Their conscience tells them
77 them they deserve punishment, and therefore they dread it, 44 Should Father Anthony return alone s and Signora Tomasina not think it safe to cometo your apartment, the first night that wretch arrives, as soon as allis quiet in the Castle, make use of the concealed door, descend the stairs» and turning to the left, keep straight forward. The passage, though dark, is safe. At the end you wiU find a door, which fear not to open; ascend the flight of stairs, and enter a small room on the right ; you will there be perfectly secure tiU the good Tomasina can get to you. Be not alarmed at finding your¬ self in the tower belonging to the left ' e 3 wing
Ϊ5 ' wing of the Castle, for nothing super¬ natural infests it, " I am forced to break off abruptly. .May Heaven guard the Lady Juliana, and restore her to her real friends. I need 1 not request you to destroy this paper." ... - ' Juliana,was almost petrified;, -the blood seemed frozenin her veins., " Good Heaven !" thought · she, "can such wicked beings really exist? .andare they permitted, with impunity, to destroy the innocent ? Oh no !, the All-righteous will, when he y sees fit, un¬ veil them to the world ; and even, here they
79 they will receive the reward due to their unparalelled crimes." As soon as Juliana regained some de¬ gree of composure she destroyed the letter. A trampling of horses and the sound ofa carriage roused her attention $ _ and going to the window, she saw thte Duke and Duchess, with their suite, de¬ part, t Too much discomposed to ga tö bed, she merely changed ,her dress for a morning v one, .and in order to calm her mind, took a book; but findiiigiitimi· possible to ^attend to the subject, she threw it aside, and opening a window, 4 stood some time contemplating the first appearance of the sun, which seemed to rise out of the ocean. Its beams en- в 4 livened
80 'livened the gloomy prospect,^ and in¬ spired her with a momentary gleam of comfort. /Insensible, her thoughts turned on the pains of sensibility, and the plea¬ sures of indifference. "Yet," exclaimed she mentally, i e sadly as I experience, in my present situation, the formers I would not part with feelings which, though they now render me more miserable,' have, under the influence 'of better days, made me, a,nd those dear friends ï was connected with; happier than a temper less suscep¬ tible of impressions would have done," Scarcely
w Scarcely had her reverie ceased when Amy entered. She expressed great surprise at Juliana's being up and dressed. ' f I ' " Why, Donna, did not you call me ľ I fear I have over-sbpt myself/' " No, Amy, you have not," replied Juliana, " but the fineness of the morn¬ ing induced me to rise earlier than' usual, and I have spent an hour in reading." л ' - "You do not lookweU. I do not wonder at it. I wish I dare teu' you all I know: but I am so closely watched, it is impossible. Besides, IdobeHevethe e 5 waHs
82*
walls of this haunted Castle has ears, and would betray one. However, I will venture to say two or three words to you, though I fear you will not confick in me. ' Indeed I cannot expect it, Don¬ na, as you must think very bad of me ; yet be assured I am, notwithstanding appearances, most sincerely attached to you, andere long will give you a most convincing proof of it. But hush, I hear that wicked creature Ursula. She is truly a fit engine in the hands of her employers, and equal to any mischief." Before Juliana could reply, Ursula entered with a lowering aspect, and was go cross to Amy, that Juliana was fearful she had been listening. Breakfast
83 Breakfast was laid in the room she was accustomed to sit in previous to the coming of the Duke and Duchess. She found Conrad in waiting, who seemed cautious of speaking to her, but his looks told her he was her friend. Juliana, if possible, ' felt the danger of her situation more strongly than ever : her fate seemed approaching to a crisis-, but she did not despair, nor did her fortitude forsake her. 44 It is true," thought she, " I am de¬ stined to undergo still greater trials, and all relief from my beloved friends is denied me, as they are ignorant of my cruel destiny ; yet thy arm, Omni- E 6 _ potence,
84
potence, can save a helpless sufferer from the danger which she dreads." In this composed state of mind we wiH leave our heroine for the present, and take a view of the measures her friends in England were pursuing to rescue her from the po\ver of Gusman and Triphosa.
85
CHAP. II. The trio arrived in London late on the second evening. The following morning Mr. Millward waited on his Royal Highness the Duke of С ----- ;— d, who received him in the most gracious manner ; and as soon as he was inform¬ ed of the business, assured Mr. Mill- ward that every exertion should be made relative to f it. He promised to lay the affair before his. Majesty, who he
86 he was certain would; warmly interest himself in it. He, desired Mr. Millward, would attend the levee the next day, - and that he would meet him there. On hearing Edward .wns in town, the Duke requested to see him. He then proposed accompanying Mr. Mill- ward to the Spanish ambassador's. " " He is,a man/' continued his High* ness,." whom 1 greatly respect, ? and I am certain ,will want no induccment'to lend his, aid in the cause of oppressed innocence ; yet knowing that I am par* ticularly», anxious about ч Lady, Juliana may accelerate the business/'; - j *- « 4 ■ Мг.
87 Mr. Millward expressed his most grateful thanks to the Duke. They set off for the ambassador's, who, as soon as he had heard tlie whole trans¬ action, and perused the different papers relative to Juliana, with the written ac¬ count of Pedro concerning the assassina¬ tion of the Marquis, and his letter con¬ taining the account of the murder of ' Alphonsa and Father Austin, he said it was a most black and wicked affair, and had no doubt of Gusman and Triphosa being the contrivers and perpetrators of "thè whole business. 44 1 am sorry to add they 'flave great influence over the prime minister, and we have not sufficient proof 1 of thek guUt
88 guilt to support our causer we will, however, rely on the justice of it. - Pe¬ dro I must see as soon as possible. De¬ pend on it I' will make every' effort to * bring them'to trial.' The Lady Juliana . must be claimed as a British subject by your Court, and we must boldly assert that we are certain of her having been - forcibly carried off. by the orders/of Don Gusman, now Duke- of St. Hde- fonšo; and that she is actually confined by him. s As soon as I know his Britan.-' nie Majesty's pleasure I wiU despatch a messenger to the Court of Madrid." . ' After »sťífoe further conversation Mr. MiUward'took his. leave, and returned to his lodgings, in 'BaU-M&U, as he was :j , . certain
89 ' certain he was impatiently expected~by Mr. Smith and Edward. Having in¬ formed them of the success of his visits, he asked Mr. Smith if he did not think it proper to send an express for Pedro : . " Though I am fearful the fatigue will be too much for the poor* fellow, and perhaps lay him up." * ! Edward, who was aH anxiety, and justly thought there was hot a moment to lose, told his father in his opinion if i' ' í Pedro was charged to travel in a post- chaise, and take great care of himself, he would not suffer by the journey. Mr. Smith, coincided with Edward;- but while they* were arranging matters, tö their
90 their great joy and surprise Pedro en- - tered. He brought letters from the Hall. The family remained much in the same state. *. · Pedro informed Mr.MiHward that he bad been so fortunate as to mi&e a dis¬ covery which put it beyond a doubt that Lady JuHana had beenviordbly car¬ ried off by Gusman's orders. ;-' ** This is indeed a greai point gain¬ ed/' ' said -Mr; MUlward ; '« but dò, Pe¬ dro, let us know tlie particulars." r >** He replied, that as soon as they set off he determined to examine the wood and temple, and the fishermen who lived
Ol lived on the beach. On entering into conversation with a lad, he by accident let drop there was a Spanish sailor con¬ cealed in one of the huts, who had been dangerously Ш, but was now on the re¬ covery. , 4 .' I desired the boy to conduct me to him,, saying I .was his countryman just arrived^ ard in search .of hh», and pro¬ mised to reward, him fox! his trouble. ¿The boy instantly-complied, and shewed tóe a small hut inhabited onîyby a fisher¬ man and liis sqn^iwho were out with their boat. He pointed to an inner room, and left me. On entering, I found a man, though in the disguise of a sailor, I instandy knew to bç Don Gusman's
92
Gusman's footman, and one of his prime agents. I accosted him with * How do you do, Philip?'* He was much con¬ fused, and faintly answered he had been very bad. * I am sorry for it,' I replied, ' but I hope you have had time to re¬ flect on the atrocious act you have been concerned in, and are wiUing to make every reparation in your power. I will deal candidly with you : I have proof sufficient to hang you ; but if you make a fuU confession of aU you know, I wiU venture to promise not only a pardon, but that you shaH be provided for/— , Struck^ by seeing me, whom he ima¬ gined dead, and weakened by his recent illness, he fell on his knees and told me he would faithfully unfold all he knew. ; Accordingly
9* Accordingly I took down his deposition in writing, and here it is, properly signed and witnessed. As soon as I had got it none, and informed the General and Mrs. MUlward of the discovery, I' set oft* post directly, and have only stopped to change horses ; so impatient was I to convey intelligence which I hope may be the means of saving my young lady, and of bringing to the scaf¬ fold the vile assassins of my revered master and the Lord Alphonso. Mrs. Millward has placed proper persons about Philip, and as soon as he is able to travel, Mr. Henry wiU bring him tp town." . "/This is indeed a most fortunate , ч event,"
94 event," said Mrs. Smith. " WiU it not, my dear Sir, be proper to pay the am¬ bassador a· second visit this evening ?" " I think," repHed Mr. MiUward, « I had better write to him, and send Pedro with it. I shall likewise inform the Duke of this important discovery. Ed¬ ward, you shall be the messenger." Edward was delighted with the com- о mission; the carriage was ordered to be got ready, and Mr. MiUward retired to write his letters. The ambi asador was happy to find he had now a strong proof of the guilt of the Duke and Duchess, for Philip's . confession
95
confession implicated them both. 'Pe¬ dro underwent *a long examination : the ambassador highly commended his zeal and assiduity. ť Edward was charmed with the re¬ ception the Duke gavé him. Mr. Mill- ward returned from the levee in better spirits than he had been since the loss of Juliana. The Duke had strictly kept his word, and every preparatory step had been taken. He had the honour of a private audience, to which the Duke and the ambassador were admitted. After mature deliberation it was agreed that Mr. Millward should em¬ bark for Spain, and take Pedro and Philip.
96
Phiiip. Proper instructions were to be sent to the British minister at Madrid : at the same time the Spanish ambassa¬ dor was to send an extraordinary cou¬ rier with despatches. , They only waited for Philip. As he was the principal evidence, it was thought necessary that he should be ex¬ amined before a magistrate, and swear to his deposition, which contained little more than what the reader is already acquainted with, except what relates to the carrying off Juhana. He says that Don Gusman purchased a small vessel, and manned it with his own myrmidons. They were all sworn to
■ w to secrecy, and to obey his commands ;. they were to be rewarded with ; a hun¬ dred ducats each, except himself, who ; was to receive double that sum. ; They · did not know the place of their destina-. tiohtUi they arrived off Plymouth, л He and another man were entrusted tp-exe- cuťé the plan, for, which purpose they were i ■ län ded every evening in 'the dis¬ guise of sailors. :■ - : - , He spoke tolerable;English, ;.and soon ■'. found out that Lady Juliana frequented the¡Temple^\ and ; often alone. ; x They agreed they would seize her the first pp ľ portujöity.: The storm favoured the de r sign, у >It*:was his comrade who, seized her^ and' conveyed her -on·,;.board the. '■■?· vol. iv; .;'-._' If. '.'.". vessel.
98 Vessel. Owing to the darkness of the night he missed the boat, and fell into the water. Fear of being pursued pre¬ vented the crew from endeavouring to save him. Lucidly being hear the shore, he soon gained it ; but not ~ daring to ask for shelter, he concealed himself in the cavity ,of a rock, only venturing ομί at night in search of shell-fish for ' his support. Not being able to' procure sufficient io satisfy nature, he became ^so weak, that'one night, in trying to crawl out to get ι some fresh water, her feU on the , beach quite exhausted. A poor fisher¬ man found him the next morning, ap¬ parently dead. He had the humanity to
99 to carry him to his hut, and after re¬ peated efforts restored him to his senses. A violent fever ensued, from which he v was recovering when Pedro discovered him. Mr. Millward wrote to his family, and begged them to keep up their spi¬ rits, as he flattered himself their beloved Juliana would soon be restored to them. He mentioned his determination of ac¬ companying the despatches, and that Mr. Smith had the goodness to go with him ; and Edward, he sa.id, had plead¬ ed so hard to be of the party, that he had consented to it. ' He had the satisfaction of hearing, by f 2 return
100
return of post, that the General and Mrs. Millward - approved of all his ar¬ rangements ; tliat they were much com¬ forted by the hopes he gave them. She acquainted him that Mrs. Montague and herself had had a long conversation with Philip, who seemed sensible of his crimes, and was become a sincere penitent. She hoped he would be able to travel in the course of a few days. " Yesterday," continued she, " he had a conference with our good old her¬ mit, with whom he spent above three hours. To him he made an ample сопч fession, and horrid to relate, he was concerned in the murder of the young Alphonsa and our rGvered friend the Marquis. -
101 Marquis. In short his proofs are so strong, that I think both the Duke arid Duchess will be found guilty. All I fear is, that if they should get the ïçast inti¬ mation of the affair, our d<iar \ Juliana will falba sacrifice to their insatiable ma¬ lice. May Heaven, my dearest husband, direct you for the best, and save our adopted child from the savage grasp of the most blood-thirsty of human be¬ ings L" Philip was guarded to town by Henry and· his father. The General had highly gratified the latter by giving him per¬ mission to accompany his son. At part¬ ing he added much to the favour, by saying— , г 3 "I am
102
" I am certain, James, you will take care that Philip does not escape. Henry is too young to be trusted with the care *of such a fellow : nothing else could have induced me to let you go, as I shall be quite at a loss till you return/' " Your Honour may depend on it," replied James, (making one of his best bows,) " I will not be longer absent than is absolutely necessary. But tho', thanks to your Honour's goodness, my boy has had a much better education than his father, yet, as you observe, he is far too young to be entrusted with the charge of .such a thorough-paced villain, for such I think him, notwith¬ standing he cries, and seems so sorry • for
ios
for having committed murder. Lord help me ! I wonder how he can sleep in his bed. " Heaven bless your Honour, and all the good family, whom I hope I shall find safe and well at my return. I have given orders to Betty to be doubly at¬ tentive. As I can depend on her and Mr. William, and indeed on Mrs. Ward, and all our servants, I shall make my¬ self tolerably easy/ 5 ' The General could not suppress un¬ easy sensations at parting, though foi so short a time, with his faithful do¬ mestic, who for the last forty years of lus life had been scarcely a day from f 4 him.
104
him. As to poor James, when the mo - nient arrived he perfectly sobbed; and giving Betty a hearty ki?s, rushed into the chaise without ßaymg a word· > As soon as they reached town Pedro was sent .with Philip to the Spanish am¬ bassador's. Proper officers attended .the' examination. Philip's detail of cir¬ cumstances was clear „and strong. He earnestly entreated· not to be sent to- Spain/ The ambassador told him his request could not be complied with, as his personal evidence would be. indis¬ pensably necessary,; but he might rest assured no harm should come to him. On the contrary,'.as'he was .'not a prin¬ cipal in the murder, he would not only be
.105 be pardoned, but be entitled to the re¿ ward ofiered by the late Duke and Don Sebastian. In less than a week every thing was ready for their departure. - Mr. Mill- ward, Edward, Mr., Smith, and their suite set out for Falmouth, and em¬ barked on board the .packet. James and Henry had- been previously Sent back to Devonshire,- charged with let¬ ters. The latter, who was a sehsible¿ accomplished young man, was com¬ missioned to relate every particular to the family at Upton. In less than three - weeks Mr. Mill- ward had the satisfaction of anchoring' f 5 ' in
106 in the harbour of Madrid. Mr. Smith wenťashore with the messenger who ' had the despatches, one of which was immediately addressed to the King. Mr. Smith had a letter from the am¬ bassador to Don Sebastian, on whom he directly called. As soon as he found who' Mr. Smith was, and that he had a communication to make of great importance from Mr. Millward, he welcomed him in the most friendly manner, and assured him the Marchioness, plunged as she was irt the deepest affliction, would pay every at¬ tention to friends so much esteemed by her departed husband.
Mr.
107 ' * Mr. Smith then related every circum- stance relative to the existence of Lady Juliana, and of the proofs they had of the guilt of Gusman and Triphosa. He concluded by teUing Ώοη Sebastian of the steps Mr. Millward had taken, and that he, * Edward, Pedro and Philip were onboard the packet, but wished to keep themselves private, as they feared, if Gusman got an intimation of their being in search of Juliana, her Hfe would be in danger. * Don Sebastian was greatly surprised tò hear of her being alive, and rejoiced· tó find Pedro had escaped. On mak¬ ing enquiries for him, he had been told he died-suddenly, and concluded he. e 6 had
108 had been secretly poisoned. Ho in¬ formed Mr. Smith he had strained every nerve to bring Gusman and Triphosa to justice. ι " I cannot, -' said this excellent man, *' bear to give them the title which my son should have enjoyed, and which never before was sullied. The Duke of Torcella powerfully supported me* We have so far succeeded as to obtain an order for their immediate appearance. They arrived from the country last night, and I am going* to attend the -council, vdiere>ţhey are to be privately examined. " I could wish to see the Mr. МШ- , . wards,
109 wards', and must beg of them to order Pedro and Philip to my house. I have no doubt of Lady Juliana being con¬ fined in the Castle of ------, as Gusman and Triphosa have passed the last month there. I hope on my retnrn I bhall have the pleasure of finding you and your friends with the Marchioness, whom I will inform of this strange event, and who will be prepared for your reception." At this instant a messenger arrived, requesting the presence of Don Sebastian at the council. A note from the mini¬ ster informed him his Majesty had senť, the Duke of Torcella, with a proper re¬ tinue, to escort die Mr. Millwards "on - ' shore,
ϊΐσ shore, and that the Duke ahd Duchess were in custody. Don Sebastian desired * "Л/л Mr. Smith to accompany him. On their aHghting at the palace they found an extraordinary Council assembled. In less than an hour the Mr. Mill- wards appeared, (for whom they wait¬ ed.) They had been honoured with a private audience; and had met with a most flattering reception from the Spa- > nish monarch. Every thing had been conducted with the greatest secrecy. The minister, who had so warmly espoused the cause o£ Gusman and Tri¬ phosa, was struck with horror on read¬ ing the detail of their crimes, and deter¬ mined
Ill mined they should be brought to jus^ tice. An officer was sent to conduct them into court. They entered with appa¬ rent composure ; Triphosa with her usual air of haughtiness. The several charges alledged against them were just going to be read, when a note was put in to Don Sebastian's hand by one of the attendants, who had received it from á boy, who only said—- " Deliver this instantly, or it will be too late to save the Hfe of Lady Ju¬ liana."
It contained these few words— " Send
112 u Send to the Castle of —-.— : Father Anthony and his myrmidons are [gone to despatch Lady Juliana. Be as quick as possible ; boldly accuse the Duke and Duchess ; one will appear on the day of trial who trusts he shall be able to con¬ demn them." Don Sebastian gave the note to the minister, who, as soon as he had read it, instantly quitted " the room. He gave orders for a guard and a- proper officer to set off instantly, and, if pos¬ sible to overtake Father Anthony ; if not, to proceed without delay to the castle of ------, to protect Lady Juliana^ and to wdt his further orders.
.On
на
On his return to the Council he im¬ parted to Don Sebastian what he had done, and the examination began.:—* Mr. Millward w;aa d^ked to enter .on his charge against the? prigonoi's, which . related solely to Lady Juliana, He ad¬ dressed . the Çouneü in ityench, saying his - friend (pointing to Mr.' Smith) would, if more agreeable,, be his inter¬ preter, as he perfectly underrţood the Spanish language, -, Mr, Millward entered into, a minute detail pf every circumstance, produced the papers,/the lettéi s of .the late Mar¬ quis, and his will. ' Pedro was called, to prove the validity of them.,, w
The
114
The moment he appeared the pri¬ soners seemed ready to sink. Pedro gave his evidence ín the clearest man¬ ner, and fully established the authen¬ ticity of the will and papers. Don Sebastian and the Duke of Bra- ganza swore to the hand-writing of the late Marquis, as did Mr. Millward j yet Gusman had the effrontery to deny the whole charge, and declared he had never even heard of Lady Juliana ; on which Philip was produced. * The sight of him acted as нп electric shock. Gus¬ man started j his visage assumed a ghast¬ ly appearance. He was forced to lean on a chair to support himself. Philip
115
Philip was interrogated, concerning the carrying off Juliana. He related ■* the whole plan, swore to her being forced on board the vessel, and told the accident which occasioned his being left behind. He added, he was certain she .was confined in tht Castle of ------, belonging to the late Duke, on the confines of ------, as they had or¬ ders to land at a small port within two miles Of it. In this accusation Triphosa was not implicated; in the next she was—the murder of the young Lord Alphonsa, Father Austin, and the late Marquis. The farther discussion of this dark af¬ fair
116' -fuir was postponed for a few days} Gusman and Triphosa were committed to close confinement, and an officer was mm tö put a seal on ail tlieir affecta. Hot one word could be extorted from them in. regard to Lady Juliana, '- but they left thè apartment with a malicious smile which half distracted the * Mr; MUwards and Mr. Smith. ' They determined to set off for the Castle of ■ ---------. The minister ap¬ proved of their intentions,„and appoint¬ ed proper * persons to - attend. them, and empowered Mr. Millward to act as he thought proper. > They agreed to take Pedro with them. Philip remained in custody, but received a promise ofa full pardon
117 pardon and a reward. He instructed X^edro where to find the body of the Marquis. It had been put in a vault under the tower of >thş left wing of the Castle. Don Sebastian would have accompa¬ nied them, but his presence was neces¬ sary at Madrid. He insisted that at their return they should take up their abode at his house, which they promised todo. - c í I shall," said Don Sebastian, " in¬ form Sophronia of the' existence of Ju¬ liana : I am certain she will receive her as a daughter. I long to introduce friends who were so dear to our ever- lamented
ПО - , lamented Alonza. Our little Elvira too must know "her sister/' " Ah, my Lord/' exclaimed Edward, " would to Heaven we had my adored Juliana safe !" i " Fear not;, my young friend: Pro¬ vidence, who has so wonderfully con¬ ducted things for her preservation, will restore her to your arms." After partaking of some refresh¬ ments, they set off. * Their party was strengthened by the Duke of Torcella and his retmue, who acquainted them he had beeu appointed by his sovereign to the escort of Mr. Millward, who was
119 was much pleased with this marked at¬ tention. They travelled with all the expedition that bad roads would admit. On ч the close of the third day they reached the Castle, and found the party that had been sent to rescue Juliana had arrived only a few hours before them. Every thing was in the greatest confu¬ sion, nor could they obtain an answer to their questions concerning Lady Ju¬ Hana. Pedro, who was perfectly acquainted with the Castle, undertook' to conduct them over it. They soon found Jufi¬ ana's apartment, whicli was empty.— While they were in search of her, the officer who commanded the party had heard
120 heard of their arrival, and came to pay his respects. He informed them that his first in¬ quiry was for Lady Juliana, but she was not to be found ; on which he gave or¬ ders that the strictest search should be made for her. As yet their endeavours had been fruitless. Father Anthony and one of Juliana's attendants had been se¬ cured. The other, with a man named Conrad, had disappeared. Tht do¬ mestics belonging to the Castle, b id de¬ clared that Lady Juliana had retired to her apartment about half an hour be¬ fore the soldiers rang at the gate. Father Anthony and i Ursula were sent
121
Sont for. They prbtéstcd they had i\óf seen Lady. Juliana^ since dinner ; that she left the saloon to'go to her room .7— Some questions were put to Father An¬ thony, who replied he would not an¬ swer them, 1 and warned ' them to take care how they insulted "orie Of his- sa¬ cred order. ' ■'· ' ,M ' b ' 1 ·'» "' i/; <- f -, ' , ut . ( 'U t ,;*. Λ ' - * ť< Hold thy"profane tongue,"" cried the Duke' 'of Tordella ; 1 * <4 thou 'art k dis- gTäcctb the'gáŕb ýou J wear. * Kriowyou are entirely' in that gcSitlenian's Jiower," (pointing to ' Mŕ.'Mfflward ;) ťc and fur¬ ther,'to thý confusion know that thy vile patrons and'partners in'wickedness' are in safe custody; and will soon atone for their crimes on a scaffold, if not on 1 vol. iv. * g the
122 -
the rack ; therefore thy best way is to make a fuU confession of thy guilt, or depend on it the Inquisition wiH extort it from you." I ! 'I Father Anthony was completely hum¬ bled : he .begged for mercy, but solemn¬ ly declared he did not know what was become of Lady Juliana. He owned that if she did not comply with the terms he intended t to propose, the Duke ¿had ordered her to be confined ; and that he had received a private inti¬ mation from the Duchess to get her to sign the necessary papers, and then to administer poison, which he r meant.to do that night at supper.
" Take
12S
tŕ Take him to a dungeon till Lady JuHana is found," exclaimed the Duke, " and let this woman, another instru¬ ment of their cruelty, be confined also." Ursula feU on her knees, promising to declare aUshe knew; but the Duke refused to attend to her, and com¬ manded the soldiers to take her away. Pedro entered from an unsuccessful search. He had enquired for the house¬ keeper, but she could not be found. He was fearful that she too might be murdered. Mr. MUlward, Mr. Smith, and Edward were almost bereft of their senses; the Duke therefore took the active part. g 2 For
124
For many hours they continued in this dreadful state of suspence. Pedro asked if the turret in the left wing had been searched. The soldiers replied they had vainly endeavoured to force theiocks. It struck him that Father Anthony had the keys. With some difficulty Pedro obtained them from him. On entering the turret, they found the apartments in tolerable order, which convinced him they at times had been inhabited for some secret purpose. In a small room stood a cabinet which con¬ tained the supposed prophecy. Every room and closet was examined, but no trace of Juliana could be found. Pe¬ dro,
125 dro, anxious to find the body of his adored master, proposed descending to the vault. There on the ground, as de- bcribnd by Philip, lay the remains of the Marquis. The place being dry, and the air ex¬ cluded, the body was stiU perfect. The sight of the mangled form was too much for Pedro, and he fell senseless on the earth. On his recovery he intreated to be permitted once more to behold the Marquis. A flood of tears relieved his honest and affectionate heart. As he suspected, his pockets had been rifled, and every thing taken. The picture of Lady Juliana and the ring were gone, g 3 On
126
On quitting the vault they heard a footstep, and on reaching the top of the stairs, some one asked-7- " Is it Lady Juliana?" It proved to be the housekeeper. " Thank Heaven!" said Pedro, 4t you are safe. Can you tell me aught of my young lady ?" " Oh, no,"· replied Tomasina, wring¬ ing her hands ; " I was in hopes to find ' her here,—But the Holy Virgin protect me, Pedro, ΐ thought you dead. How did you escape? and where have you been ?" «At
i 27 u At some other time I wiU teU you aH : suffice it at preseni: to say that the Duke and Duchess are in the hands- of justice, that Father Anthony and Ur¬ sula are secured, and the Castle is full of Lady luKana's friends, though í fear they have come too late to savé her." ** Where is the Duke's valet ?" asked Tomasina. " I trust he has not played us false. I relied on him й$ a sure friend/ By his order I showed my young lady the private door in her apartment, and directed her to use it in case of danger. I was to meet her here, and convey her by a subterraneous pas¬ sage to the Convent of Capuchins, and place her under the protection of the g 4 pious
1 28 pious Father Francis. I have waited here some hours, and was afraid to go in search of' her, as I know I am sus- * pected." Pedro thought it adviseable to return and inform the gentlemen, who, on hearing the accouut, entertained some ч faint hopes that Juliana had escaped through the means of Conrad and Amy. They determined to send to the Con¬ vent, and request to see Father Francis. They gave orders to search eyery place near the Castle, to offer a large reward, and to publish the disgrace of the Duke and Duchess. As speedily as possible Father Francis made
129 made his appearance. On his entering, the Duke of Torcella made himself known. The venerable aspect of this worthy man impressed every one with the most favourable sentiments- Never were real benevolence and unaffected piety more strongly depicted in any countenance, which was a true index of his mind. ct We sent for you, holy father," said the Duke, " in hopes you might give us some intelligence of Lady Ju¬ liana. If she is under your care we shall be truly happy. You need not fear to trust us j all here are friends ; nor have you any thing to dread from the Duke or Duchess ; no longer have g 5 they
İSO they power to- exercise their infamoœ * tyranny." 44 Give me leave, my Lord, to ask where is Father Anthony ?" " In close confinement." " Then," replied Father Francis, " I may with safety acknowledge that Lady Juliana is secure from danger, and well." Edward could not bear with any degree of composure this sudden tran¬ sition from .grief to joy. Heran and embraced the friar, exclaiming—
"Oh,
131
" Oh, holy father ! let me conjure you to conduct me mstantly to her : let me once more embrace the lovely Juli¬ ana—once more clasp her to my heart." Mr. Smith apologised to the friar, begging him to excuse the wild impe¬ tuosity of youth, saying— * '' w This young gentleman is indeed in-* terested in the fate of Lady Juliana/' " Have I the honour of beholding the Mr. Millwards ?" ' « You have," said Mr. Smith. 46 Then I do not wonder at these emo. G 6 tions.
132
tions. But be calm, my son, nor let the. vicissitudes of life unman you.— Happy inan am I, in having been the humble instrument of Providence in protecting the life and honour of a daughter of the iUustrious house of St. Ildefonsa ! But to Conrad and Amy is in a great measure .owing the preserva¬ tion of Lady Juliana. As the informa¬ tion I received is,true, I will resign my sacred chargé into the hands of the friend deputed by her noble father to be her guardian, and who has ever been a parent to her." The good friar was despatched to prepare JuHana for an interview with her
133 her friends, and a carriage sent to con¬ vey her to the Castle. Words can give but ' an imperfect idea of the ecstatic feelings of Edward, on beholding Juliana. With fervency he pressed her in his arms ; his trans¬ ports were too big for utterance, nor were her's less animated, though re¬ strained by innate delicacy and genuine modesty. As soon as possible she disengagtd herself from Edward to embrace. Mr. MUlward, whose arms and heart were open to' receive her. It was some mi¬ nutes before either could articulate.— When they could—" My child"—" My more
134 more than father"—*burst from their lips. The scene was truly an affecting one. Juliana soon regained her accustomed fortitude, and moderated the joyful sen¬ sations this unexpected meeting occa¬ sioned, which, from their excess, be¬ came painful'to a degree. Perceivmg her perfectly composed, Mr. Smith ad¬ vanced, saying— ** Suffer me, my higly-esteemed pupil, to congratulate you on having escaped all danger, and on your happy restora¬ tion to your friends/' "Thanks, my revered monitor," re¬ plied
135
plied Juliana, taking his hand with re¬ spectful tenderness j, ic ï need not say how happy your presence makes me/*' ι ' ·* Mr. Millward introduced the Duke of TorceHa as a particular friend of her father. Tears started in Juliana's eyes as she received and returned the Duke's compliments, who was charmed witb the uncommon loveliness o£ her person, the unaffected dignity, and elegance of manners, which so eminently distin¬ guished every look and every motion of Juliana. The Duke, in a low voice, told Mr* Millward that he thought her a para¬ gon of beauty. j Had
136 " Had my dear friend lived to have been blessed with a sight of his charming daughter, he would indeed have been proud of her." * c Will your Grace permit me," asked Mr. Millward, " to gratify poor Pedro, who is impatient to pay his duty to his young mistress 2" ì ţ " By all means," replied the Ehike. " No one values Pedro more than I do. I know his worth, and highly respect him." Edward, whose noble way of think¬ ing, soared far/ above the meanness of false pride, went directly in search of Pedro.
131
Pedro. On his entering the saloon, Mr. MiUward said— " My dear JuHana, this is the long- tried, faithful attendant, of the late Mar¬ quis your father, who esteemed him аз an humble friend, and ever found him worthy of his confidence. To him we are indebted foryour restoration." JuHana with ineffable sweetness ox- pressed her gratitude, and assured him she was happy to see him, and would do aU in her power to render his future life comfortable. Poor Pçdro's tears flowed in spite qf his endeavours to suppress them. His expressions
138
expressions of joy and of respectful af¬ fection influenced all present. -Edward, anxiously impatient to hear every circumstance that had befaUen his beloved Juliana, begged her to inform him. - " I perceive, my dear Edward," said she, smfiing, ec you are determined to make me a heroine of romance, and wish me to recite ny adventures since I have been in this enchanted Castle ; but I think it wiU be more in stUe for my attendant, so I wiH appoint Amy : though, on reflexion, as she is not ac¬ quainted with the whole, I wiU give you my
139 my journal to peruse, which I have re¬ gularly kept." " May I presume, Madam," said the Duke, '* to soHcit the honour of reading it?" «Certainly, Sir," replied Juliana j 44 but it is written in EngHsh." '* Thanks, Madam.' I shaH, 1 flatter myself, prevail on Mr. Smith to read it in French to me." - * ' ■ Juliana entreated, Mr. Mfflward to take Conrad and Amy under his pro¬ tection, they having proved themselves sincere friends/' " They
140
" They áhall, my dear child, be am¬ ply rewarded, and I wiH take care they shall not be implicated in the guilt of Ursula." · - Breakfast was brought in by Pedro. It was a welcome refreshment, the whole party having been up all night; yet no one had thought of ordering it. . As soon as it was finished, Juliana proposed to Edward a walk in the pleasure- grounds, as she had a thousand enqui¬ ries to make relative to her valued friends at Upton. The gentlemen en¬ tered on business. ' They determined to send Father Anthony and Ursula umder a strong guard ,to Madrid, and likewise to despatch a messenger with letters-to the
141 the prime minister and Don Sebastian, acquainting them with every particular. Mr. MiUward requested the latter to in¬ form him where the body of the Mar¬ quis was to be deposited. If, as he ima¬ gined, in the famUy vault, the Duke and himself would be happy to execute his'orders; and as soon as the last sad solemnities were over they would set off for Madrid, as they thought Lady Juliana's presence would be necessary on several accounts. He assured Don Sebastian that she longed to рауЪег re¬ spects to him and the Marchioness, and was impatient to embrace her sister, the Lady Elvira. Mr. MiUward was anxious to find a vessel
U2
vessel going to England, as he had only written, a few lines to Mrs. Millward, to acquaint her of his safe arrival. He now wished to give a particular account of all that had happened, especially what related to Juliana. Pedro at a great ex- pence procured a sloop, the captain of which engaged to sail for Plymouth the first fair ¡wind. The remainder of the day was spent in preparing letters. Ju¬ liana inclosed her journal to Mrs. Mill- ward ; she wroie also to Matilda, and in the most affectionate terms expressed her concern for what she had suffered on her account. t The next morning Juliana had quite recovered from her fatigue; a good night
143
night and a tranquil mind had restored the wonted brilliancy to her eyes, and the bloom to her complexion. Nor were Edward's looks less improved : he now appeared the elegant, sprightly young man of fashion. His manners were highly poHshed ; his conversation convinced 'every one that his under¬ standing was of the superior kind, and that it had been most assiduously cul¬ tivated by a skilful hand, which had carefully pruned the too luxuriant branches. The Duke expressed his ad¬ miration of Edward and Juliana in terms which gratified the feelings of Mr. Mill- ward and Mr. Smith. His Grace en¬ treated to have the honour of their ·* company a few weeks at the Castle of
144 —......- , as he wished much to intro¬ duce his son to their acquaintance. He assured them they would meet with a kind reception from his Duchess, who much wished to embrace Lady JuHana. Mr. MiUward thanked the Duke for his polite invitation/ which he said they would certainly avail themselves of, but could not promise to stay more than a few days. ' After dinner Mr. Millward informed Juliana that the body of her father had been found, and that tlie Duke, Mr. Smith, Edward, and himself intended to view it before it was removed, lest its being exposed to the air might in¬ jure
145
jure it. JuHana struggled with her feelings, and requested permission to accompany them in the mournful visit. ec I grant your request, my dear, as ï think it right for you to behold your parent, though dead ; and I am suffi¬ ciently acquainted with the strength of your mind to be certain you are able to bear the trial." - . At six in the evening the party en- tcred the 'left wing of the Castle,- at¬ tended by Eather Francis, Pedro, the housekeeper, and the domestics, who wished to pay their respects to the re¬ mains of their revered master. Tlie Dukè of Braganza and Mr.MiHward vol. iv. . h were
146 were sensibly affected at the sight of the mangled body of their friend, hor were any of the party insensible to the awfulncss of the scene. Juliana stood for some minutes like a statue : every faculty of her soul seemed suspended. At length she raised her eyes to Heaven, and kneeling by the corse, bathed it wich filial tears, but not a word escaped her. Edward, who had been a mute, tho' not unmoved spectator, knelt by her, and taking her hand, exclaimed with fervency— " Permit me, my dearest Juliana, on 'this sacred spot, and o'er this inanimate form,
147 form, to Repeat my vows of constancy and love. Oh ! would it had pleased Omnipotence to have prolonged hiš va¬ lued life, that I might from his hand have received this precious gift !" He was proceeding, but Mr. Smith observing that Juliana was absorbed in grief, stopped him : and raising her— 44 Allow me," said he, " to conduct you hence.. This scene is too much even for the strongest mind to support for any length of-time." These words roused Mr. MUlward, who was wrapped in deep reflexions, Addressing the Duke, he said— h 2 « Mr,
148 « Mr. Smith is perfectly right : it ís indeed too great an effort to dweU òn this heart-rending sight. · My friends, let us quit this dreary vault ; our stay can avail nothing to the dead.—Inhu¬ man villain 1" cried he, as he left the vault, and cast a look on his Hfeless friend, ic could not thy maHce end with his life ? No, thy insatiate revenge pursued him after death, by treating with indignity his dear remains. Pedro, bs it thy care to see the Marquis's body removed to a proper place. I need 'not add, let every mark of respect be paid toit." * In süence they reached the saloon. Mr. Smith desired JuHana to indulge him
149
him with an hour's conversation, which ~ she readily complied with. In the most fatherly manner he soothed her grief, and poured into her afHicted bosom the balm of true Christian philosophy. 1 44 Oh, how different is your doctrine, my ever-esteemed friend, to that of the ráíe Father Anthony Ί You, niy dear Sir, breathe the mild spirit of the Gos¬ pel, and whHe you aUeviate my sorrow, strengthen my faith. Teach me to bear with patience the Hb of Hfe, and to be thankful for the numberless blessings which surround me." JuHana was able to join the company at supper. Edward saw with pleasure h 3 that
150 - that her mind had regained its natural tone. She was serious, but perfectly composed. * , - tf As speedily as possible Mr. Millward received answers to his letters. Don Se¬ bastian in the warmest terms congratu¬ lated Mr. Millward on Juliana's safety, in which the Marchioness and Lady El¬ vira sincerely joined. ' Inclosed were letters from them to Lady Juliana, writ¬ ten in the most affectionate stile. Don Sebastian requested Mr. Millward to take charge of the funeral of the Mar¬ quis, and begged -he might lie in state* ", As to the rest, my'dear Sir," con¬ tinued Don Sebastian, " I leave it to the Duke
151 Duke and you, certain that every mark of respect will be paid to his remains, and due honour shown to his memory." He then entered into the foUowing particulars concerning Gusman's valet, whose name was Felix, He had come forward and discovered every circum¬ stance relative to the murders," and the forcibly carrying off Juliana, but had not the least concern in them, nor had even an idea how deeply the Duke and - Duchess were immersed in guilt, till one of the accofnplices, in his dying mo¬ ments, had made a fuH confession to him. He was obliged to see the man by stealth. Father Anthony was the only one allowed to go near him, and Hé of
152 of course gave him absolution ï but this not satisfying the poor fellow's con¬ science, he had sent privately for Felix, and desired him to commit to writing what he had to relate. With his last breath he begged him to bring, if pos¬ sible, the Duke, the Duchess, and Fa- . ther Anthony tb justice. He intreated him to warn Pedro of his danger, and to. inform him of the scheme relative to Juliana. In short, he laid all Gusman's plots open, and instructed FeHx how to get possession of the late Marquis's will. He likewise acquainted him with the fa¬ brication of the supposed prophecy. The late Duke, though a sensible mari, was rather superstitious ; and Father
153
Father Anthony had so worked on his feelings, that he firmly beHeved it, and had prevailed on him to take a most so¬ lemn oath never to reveal it. FeHx had been induced to accept of the ¿command of the vessel that brought Lady Jujiana to Spain in hopes pf feeing able to prevent her being forced away. He was fearful that Pedro would not arrive in time, and flattered himself he should be able to inform the family at Upton of the design, and so prevent its being put in execution ; but he was so strictly watched, that it was impos¬ sible for him to <get ashore, and he had nq one he çlarçjtrust with a letter. Tins being the с^ье, he; resojveçl tg á? every н 5 thing
154 thing in his^power to render Lady Juli¬ ana's situation comfortable. He dared not speak to her, as they had all taken an oath to preserve a rigid silence. 'He determined to inform Father Francis of the Duke's schemes, whom he contrived to see immediately on his leaving Lady Juliana at the Castle. Father Fţancis applauded his conduct, and advised him what steps to pursue in future. He told him he might put > implicit confi¬ dence in the housekeeper, and- bn no account to hazard another interview with him. ' - ч / ' Mr. MiUward immediately- gave · di¬ rections for preparations for the funeral. In two days every thing 'was ready.— After
155 After lying in state, the remains of the Marquis were deposited by the side oS his father ľ 'id son. The gentlemen, the domestics, and vassals attended the pro¬ cession, which was joined by the friars of Father Francis's convent, the abbot of which read the burial service in the most' impressive manner.
H*6
156
CHAP, Ш. Juliana madethe housekeeper a hand¬ some present, and promised to provide for her most amply before she left Spain. Conrad and Amy were ordered to at¬ tend them to Madrid. The evening before they left the Castle the circum¬ stance of the ring occurred to Juliana. On showing it to Pedro, he instantly knew it, and affirmed that the Marquis constantly wore it. She then men¬ tioned
151 tibned the spot where she found it, and the behaviour of Gusman. " Well, Madam, might his black soul shrink appalled, for on that spot I saw my master weltering in his blood." The Duke advised that Lady Juliana's finding the ring should be kept secret, lest she should be obliged to appear in court, which would, he thought, be highly disagreeable to her. The Duke and Mr. Millward travel¬ led together. Mr. Smith, Edward, and Juliana never had a journey that ap¬ peared so delightful. Blest in his JuH- - ana's society, the time past rapidly on, notwith-
158 ■о notwithstanding bad roads, and worse accommodation,- */ - J ; j On s their arrival at Madrid they were received -with every testimony of respect and affection by Don Sebastian and^the Marchioness, who embraced Juliana with the tenderness of a mother. The young Elvira was defighted with her sister. Juliana pressed her to her heart. AU parties were sensibly affected. A si¬ lence of some minutes succeeded. The Marchioness, with that inherent polite¬ ness so natural to her, exerted herself, and entered into conversation. During the pause JuHana had involuntarily fixed her eyes on a remarkably fine picture, containing the whole length portraits of the
159 the late Duke, Don Sebastian, the Mar¬ quis and Marchioness, Alphorísa, and Elvira. Sophronia r observing Juliana attentively examining it,» said— " Ply dear girl, that is a most strik¬ ing resemblance of your father and bro¬ ther. Your'grandfather too is almost speaking to you. It was done only a few months before we were so cruelly deprived ofour dear boy. ' l - * Tears prevented the Marchioness from saying more. Juliana'apologized for calling to remembrance her sorrows. z " There needs none, my dear, for it is a subject X love to dwell on/" " Will
160 "Will ypu excuse me, Madam,"' said Mr. Smith, " if, scarcely having the honour of being known to you, I in¬ trude my advice. My profession must plead my excuse. It is incumbent on me to soothe affiictions. Yours, I grant, are heavy, yet let me intreat you not to indulge them. Suffer me, when we are more acquainted, to have a little discourse^ with you on this head." " Most willingly, Sir. I am no stran¬ ger to your character : the Marquis spoke of you in the highest terms .at the time he mentioned to me that he expected the pleasure of yours and that young gentieman's company (bowing ι to
161 to Edward) to spend a few months with us." * " '' Don Sebastian, who had been sent for on business, returned, and inform¬ ed Mr. Millward the trial of Gusman and Triphosa was fixed for the next day; ^ { " However painful the task, I am re* solved to attend it/' Mr. Millward asked if he might be permitted to be present, and if leave could be obtained for Mr. Smith and Edward. " Certainly, Sir," replied Don Se¬ bastian s
162
bastian i " you 'have än undoubted г right, being a party concerned on ac- . count of the will; and I will take care these geritlemen shall be accommodated , vwithplaces/'./-- -Y:;· ^-y , : ·ν' ! ' •'■' : ·-:γ '' '\ ;: ^'Мг;'- : МШ\^г4 :: ' : .^цл(1 Doh Sebastian and his daughter all that the Marquis / had iso frequendy described In hklet- tersir : Sophronia 1 was still a most lovely. woman ; a settled melancholy was per¬ ceptible 'in her once-animated courite- ■ nânce^; bub she retained .thesame sweet¬ ness of temper, and the native: benevo¬ lence of her^héartsKone ¡in every word and action^ -:The ;gentlemen éàriy in -the morning '-■:';?. '/.v.-v ■ /■':..·'.'■ attended
гвз
attended the trial ; the ladies passed the day alone, The Marchioness's conver¬ sation with Juliana was most truly inte¬ resting.' Often were their feelings re¬ lieved by'the"playful liveliness of Elvira, who, young'as she was, suppressed her own grief to' dissipate that of her mother, whom she perfectly idolized. > The'gentlemen "were detained till a late hour. Gusman, Triphosa, and Fa¬ ther Anthony, 4 itoti oniy-for their de¬ signs on Juliana', ^but 'also of thb murder 'pf the Marquis, Lord Alphonsa, and "Father Austin. The evidence of Philip, which was strong and clears was corro¬ borated by the 4yfog confession 'of the principal accomplice : made toFelix. · It • . was
164 was proved that Triphosa gave the fatal stab to the Marquis, saying, with a ma¬ licious smile— ν w At last I am revenged for i the, afiŕont I sustained by ¡the refusJ of my prof¬ fered hand. Though years have elapsed, I have not forgot'it/·* ; Eather Anthony,had,been the.con¬ triver of the plan of both the assassina¬ tions, and assisted in person. Gusman headed the party that murdered Alphon- sa and Father Austin. The way they eluded the vigilant search made after them was by a trap door in the forest, which concealed a large cave that led by a subterraneous passage to a ruined castle,
165 castie, where they continued till the soldiers had returned to Madrid, They then traveUed by night, taking the least frequented paths, tiU they reached the Castle of. ------, the left wing of wliich Gusman had long been master of, whence he embarked for France, where he staid only a few weeks, and then re¬ turned privately with his family, and took up his abode in the turret of the Castle. Father Anthony supplied them with necessaries. Here they kept concealed till they heard of the Duke of St. Udefonso being dangerously ill. They then secretly set ' off for Madrid, where they arrived the day he died, and, as has been before mentioned, took possession of his house and effects. In
166 In short, ,the whole Hfe of this detest¬ able man and woman had been a conti¬ nued scene of wickedness and infamy. Things appeared on the trial too shock¬ ing to relate. ■ When caUed on for their defence, neither Gusman nor Triphosa would speak; they remained sullenly silent, nor did their countenances alter when the following sentence was pronounced : That the title and estate were forfeited, and themselves condemned to suffer on the block that day se'nnight. Father Anthony was to be degraded, and exe¬ cuted with them. He in the most abject terms implored mercy
167 mercy of the court, but was told by the judge that his crimes were of too black a dye to expect it in this world, though he sincerely trusted repentance would entitle him to hope for it in the next. He admonished the prisoners to prepare for the awful moment, and trusted they would make a proper use of the short time allowed them for that,purpose.— They were remanded to close confine¬ ment. Philip received his promised pardon. Of the four accompHces that remained, two were sentenced to be hanged ; the others were conderned to perpetual im¬ prisonment. Ursula, who proved to be a bad character, was sent to the Black Penitents,
168
Penitents, a house appropriated for the reception of criminals.. Nothing ap¬ pearing against Conrad or'Amy, they were only reprimanded for entering . into the schemes of so bad a man; but their repentance, and subsequent con¬ duct in consequence of it, were highly commended by the judge, and they were dismissed with a strict charge to be care¬ ful of their future behaviour. Don Sebastian proposed to his daugh¬ ter and the gentlemen their going out of town tiU after the execution of Gus¬ man and Triphosa,to which they readily assented. WhUe they were arranging matters, the Duke of Torcella called to pay his respects; and on hearing' of their
169 their intentions, begged they would fa- ' vour him with their company. " We shall be quite retired," said he, at the Castle of------, and the Mar¬ chioness wiji fulfil a promise she has long made the Duchess of spending a few days with her. On the Mr. Mill- wards, Mr. Stnith, and Lady Juliana I have a claim, as they allowed me to ex¬ pect the pleasure of a visit." This polite invitation was complied with, and the next morning the party set out for---------, a delightful village' fifty miles from Madrid, where stood the family mansion of thé Duke ut ------ . The description of gothie castles vol. iv. ι has
vhaş líéen feo often. giyetì, :tha.t it* is heed»; V. less to say móre. than; φαί iţ Was in the ' style of the ■ old Casťalian ma^gnificence. The píeserit Duke had modernised some of the „apartments, which lie: had Tur- nished in the English styles and con¬ trived to unite splendour with comfort; Every? attention dictated by politeness and urbanity was. strictly shown. The. ; Duke and Duchess of. Torcella had tra-: veUed a great deal, and spent a consi¬ derable time in England, for\vhich the retained' a predilection. Mr.: Millward and Mr. Smith were particularly pleased with Don Ferdinand, He was their only child, yet hè had nót? been : spoiled. His education had been "attended to in '•■V -.-'' * ;■ every^ ■
.".■.■;/"■ ν : V ' 'w .-.' .,γ::. ; ' éveïy'· point that tended;to form--the scholar and the ; gentleman; From in¬ fancy he liad been the chosen friend of Alphonsav and on tliat account Don Se¬ bastian :änd the Marchioness beheld him \vith partial eyes. Indeed the : merits òf this charming boy claimed' tlieir'aíFect- Mr. Smith hadi had thè promised ¿öia- vèrsation with the Marchioness, which at her request 1 liad been daily renewed; This worthy and 'enlightened divine, Avitliput touching on the-different tenets of their fìuthi had used sucli consoling arguments as convinced her. understand .,' Ing it was incompatible with die duty ofá Christian to suffer a rooted mèlári- ı2 choly
112 choly to take place. Ât the conclusion of one of these conversations he said·*— " To preserve,^ my dear Madam, a tender remembrance of the dead is cer¬ tainly both allowable' and commendable, when time has mellowed our grief. To dwell on their various perfections, to point them out to the surviving off¬ spring, is not only a pleasing task, hut highly incumbent on us, till the period arrives that your mind, fortified by the aid of the Supreme Being, can look back with calmness on the late tragical events. Let me, my dear lady, persuade you by change of acene to endeavour to obliterate them from your memory : .reflect seriously on the blessings you liave
173 liave still left—the best of fathers, who leans on you for, support—a lovely girl, ,who even in childhood is all the fondest parent ' can desire—a princely fortune, which gives you possession of every ele¬ gant comfort of life, and enables you to know and feel the greatest luxury on earth, by giving you the power to re¬ lieve the distressed, to place them in present ease, and secure them from fu¬ ture want. To a heart like your's this must be ecstatic happiness." Don Sebastian saw with pleasure a vi¬ sible improvement in the health and spirits of Sophronia. The J society 'of Juliana proved of infinite service to the Marchioness, 'whose affection for her ι f? increased
174 increased hourly; nor was she less a fa¬ vourite with Don Sebastian or the Duke and Duchess. Had not Juliana been proof against. that most* dangerous passion Vanity, the admiration she ex¬ cited might have been, injurious to her ; but it had no other- effect than to en¬ large her gratitude and ¡ esteem for the guardians and instructors · of her youth, and an ardent desire to render herself worthy the praises bestowed pn her. A messenger arrived at the Castle with .despatches to. the Duke, Don Se- bastianj and Mr.·Millward, to, acquaint them "that Gusmarr and Triphosa had expiated -their, crimes .on, the scaffold, ■; They- heard with pleasure, that prior ; to ■.,■,>".■.':-',- ■■ ;■ their
175 their-execution they had made a full confession of their guilt, and had died seemingly very penitent. They desired not to see their son, vrhom they solemn¬ ly declared was entirely innocent and ignorant of their crimes. They ear¬ nestly intreated the minister to take him under his protection, and, if possible,, to obtain for him the pardon of the king.; ' . Father Anthony had been precepto* to Gusman, which rendered his wicked¬ ness more enormous: he had led him step by step in the paths of vice, till he rendered him a most accomplished viUain. Anthony died as he had· lived, »a hardened sinner, execrated by the po- i 4 pulace,
17Ô- pulace, who were with difficulty pre¬ vented from tearing him to pieces. The letter added, that Frederic was so Ш that his life was despaired of. The shock occasioned by hearing of his pa¬ rent's crimes, and their ignominious end, had been too much for his weak frame, though it had been broke to him with the greatest caution by his preceptor, who had removed him into the country. . It was reluctantly fhe party quitted the Castle of.---------, where they had spent ten days in a most agreeable man¬ ner. The Duke of TorceHa, his Duchess and son returned with their friends ta Madrid.
177 'Madrid. Business of importance made the presence of Don Sebastian and Mr. Millward indispensably necessary. Don Sebastian and the Marchioness support¬ ed Juliana's claim as heiress to the estate pertaining to the Castle o f ■ -, and publicly acknowledged her as the eldest and legitimate daughter of the late Marquis of Vaena, whose will they wished to be fulfilled in every'respect* ' Mr. Millward in the course ofa week had settled Juliana's affairs entirely to his satisfaction. He appointed Don Se¬ bastian trustee to her property in Spain; The ready money», jewels, : and plate be¬ longing to her he meant to take with, him to England. ι 5 It
178 It was thought proper for Juliana to be presented at court, as the March¬ ioness, on account of her being in close mourning, could, not with propriety make her appearance. The Duchess of Torcella took JuHana" under her pro¬ tection ; the Mr. MUlwards and Mr. Smith were presented by the Duke.·— JuHana put on a slighter mourning on the occasion, but could not be prevailed on to wear colours, as she thought it disrespectful to her father's memory. . Never had Edward and Juliana ap¬ peared to such advantage. The court rung with their praises. Mr. MiUward and Mr. Smith viewed with pleasure the youthful
173
youthful pair, and felt highly gratified by the encomiums passed on them. Frederic, contrary to expectation, re¬ covered slowly. Every one pitied this· unfortunate youth, who, by the crimes of his parents, was rendered miserable. He took a resolution, from which no¬ thing could dissuade him, to enter the monastery of La Trappe, and, as soon as his probation was finished, to take the vows of that austere Order, and for ever seclude himself from 4he world Mr. Millward began to make prepa¬ rations for their embarking 'for Eng¬ land. Juliana sincerely rejoiced at it, as she longed to return to the friends of L 6 her
180 her infancy, and to her beloved Matil¬ da ; yet tlie idea of being separated from the charming Marchioness and fa¬ mily gave her real concern, nor was the thought less painful to them. The little Elvira was inconsoleable. Fain would Don Sebastian'have prevailed on Mr. MiUward to defer his departure a few months, but vain Was every argu¬ ment: he knew though the certainty of Jufiana's safety would in some measure tranquillize* the mind of his Emma and family, yet their happiness would not be complete till he restored their darling Juliana to them. This reason he gave Don Sebastian for not complying with his request, who aUowed it a sufficient one. " But,"
181 " But," continued Mr. Millward, "why, my dear Sir, must we separate ľ Cannot you, the Marchioness, and Lady Elvira join our party, and accompany us to England ? It may be the means of restoring the health and spirits of your daughter. You are both accus¬ tomed to and fond of travelling; Upton Hall is large enough to accommodate you and your suite ; and I may venture to assure you the General and Mrs. MiU¬ ward will be highly flattered in having the honour of being personaUy known by, and cultivating a friendship with persons whose characters they have long held in veneration and esteem ; permit me to add, you wiU be equally pleased with them." > The
1 82 The ladies entering the saloon, Dort Sebastian told them the polite proposi¬ tion Mr.'Millward had just made. " What, my good, my dear Sophro¬ nia, shall we avail ourselves of this, friendly offer ?" " I have no objection, my dear Sir, except my repugnance at entering into company." 4i That, my dear Madam, I can easily obviate," replied Mr. Millward. " Your apartment shall be sacred from intruders, nor shall you even be requested ito join the family circle but when perfectly agreeable/' Before
183 Before the Marchioness could answer, Juliana and Elvira had each seized a hand, and earnestly intreated her to make thenr happy by consenting. Fond¬ ly pressing them to her heart, she said— " Yes, my dear children, í will ac¬ cept the truly flattering' invitation of Mr, Millward. Elvira, you shall not lose the advantage you will reap by the society of your accomplished sister." Don Sebastian asked Mr, Millward, smiling, how long he would allow him to arrange matters, preparatory to his voyage, who politely answered he would ' on no account hurry hiűGu " Nor
184 " Nor will I, my dear friend, detain you long. I have an "excellent steward, ; and my affairs are in perfect order. If - Sophronia approves of it, I will venture -to promise to be ready to attend you in less than a month/' Matters being adjusted, nothing re mained but to reward those who had been instrumental to the safety of Juli¬ ana. The good old housekeeper, born and bred in the Castle of --------- , chose to continue there. A handsome pen¬ sion was settled on her, and a person hired to do the business, and act under fier direction. Felix, for his integrity, had a thousand pistoles presented him, and two hundred yearly. Conrad and Amy
185
Amy, who had long been attached to each other» agreed to be united. On their wedding-day Juliana gave them five hundred pistoles each, and they were comfortably settled on-the estate belonging to Juliana. On Philip Don Sebastian settled twenty pistoles a year. Pedro had been so amply provided for by the Duke St. Ildefonso, and had saved so much money in the service of his late master, that scarcely could they prevail on him to accept of any gratuity. He only begged lo be retained in the family, as he declared; he should never •enjoy a moment's happiness if he left it. His desire was complied with, and he was appointed secretary to Don Se¬ bastian. Highly was the worthy man gratified
186
gratified *by the Marchioness presenting him with the watch of the late Marquis. Bending his knees, he respectfuUy kissed her hand— " You have indeed, Madam, reward¬ ed me. This is an invaluable gift, nor wiH I ever- part with it but with life." - The Marchioness informed him of their intention of - accompanying Mr. MiUward'to England, and'.of spending twelve months„at Upton ,HaU— ' i4 > So, Pedro,- you will have the, satis¬ faction of not,being separated'from Lady Juliana/*;; , ■ ■ > :. Pedro
187 Pedro had not felt so happy since the loss of liis master. He set about making fhe necessary preparations for the voy¬ age with alacrity ; the packet was en¬ gaged to convey the party and suite to England, the captain of which promised to sail at the appointed time. The in¬ terval was spent in showing Edward and Juliana every thing worthy of ob¬ servation in Madrid and its environs. Frequent excursions were made to the principal seats of the nobility, who out¬ vied each otlier in paying respect and attention to Juliana and her friends.— The Duke and Duchess of TorceUa were of all the parties. Mr. Millward pressed them to revisit England, and to make Upton Hall at least for some time their place
JS8 piace of residence. The Duke and Duchess assured him they with plea¬ sure accepted his invitation, and that he might depend on seeing them the ensuing year. " 1 anticipate, my dear Sir," said his Grace, " the many advantages I shall re¬ ceive by your enhghtened conversation and thorough knowledge of the British constitution. Ferdinand will be of an age to share with me the benefit and pleasure." Don Sebastian, the Mr. Millwarcfc», Mr. Smith, and Juliana attended the , drawing-room, to take ieave, and to return thanks for the many favours con¬ ferred
189 ferred on them both by tl;3 sovereign and the minister. The day they embarked Mr. Mill- ward received a large pacquet from England, and had the satisfaction of hearing that the certainty of Juliana's safety, and the prospect of soon seeing her, had diffused a general joy, not only at Upton Hall, but to all that had the pleasure of knowing her. After a very pleasant passage they anchored İn Plymouth Harbour. Mr. Millward immediately despatched a mes¬ senger to Upton, to inform the family of their safe arrival, and of their having augmented their party. He requested their
190
their return might not be mentioned, on the Marchioness's account, who wished to be in private. Though every precaution had been taken to keep their arrival secret, and they even traveUed ín hired carriages, vain was every endeavour. Mr. MiU¬ ward and Edward were too weH known and respected to pass unnoticed. Miles before they entered their own domai л they were recognized, as was Juliana, by the grateful rustics, who surrounded the carriage, and greeted them with heartfelt huzzas. By the time they reached Upton the whole village wa« assembled. The acclamations were heard at the HaU. James, as usual, without ceremony
191 ceremony rushed into the drawing- room, where the family were sitting, exclaiming with joy— * c They are come—they will Ъе here in a minute—Lady Juliana and all î — Heaven bless her, how 1 long to see her!—Will your Honour have your crutch-stick and my arm ? Dó let us go and meet them/' Without waiting for the Generaľs answer, James, on hearing the tramp¬ ling of horses, ran as fast as he could toward the park, crying— íť Follow me, Betty, and tell Mrs. Evans to be ready to pay her duty." Mrs.
192 Mrs. Millward, Mrs. Owen, and Ma¬ tilda started up, and were following James, when the General said— " Pray not so fast—do take com¬ passion on me, for James has left me to shift for myself. But as I wish to re¬ ceive Don Sebastian with marked atten¬ tion, do, Emma—do, Mrs. Owen, lend me your assistance." So saying, he seized an arm of each. They just reached the saloon as the carriages stopped at the grand entrance. James, to his great joy, had already shook hands with Juliana. In the space of a moment Mrs. Millward had the happiness of folding to her heart her
193
her husband, son, and equally beloved JuHana. Tears spoke forcibly the feel¬ ings of JuHana. " My more than mother, am I in¬ deed restored to your piotection once more under this parental roof—again behold the friends of my infancy, the dear companions of my youth—my sister, my ever-dear Mrs. Owen?" em¬ bracing them both— € * my revered grandfather !" throwing herself into the General's arms, which were extended to receive her, while his eyes overflowed as he fondly kissed her. «Thank Heaven!" cried he y « I have Hved to press once mor« my dar« vol. iv. к ling
19*
Kng to -my heart !—But we forget our noble guests.—Forgive," said he, pi*e- sentinff his hand to Don Sebastian and the Marchioness, " this seeming in¬ attention, - and receive a sincere and kearty welcome to Upton Hall, which I hope you will consider as your home. Long have we been ambitious to rank in-the number of your friends." , ''•Must, Millward expressed, In the most ¿ipolite terms, the pleasure their unexpected visit gave her. Don Se¬ bastian and the Marchioness were de¬ lighted with her fascinating manners, and with the frankness and affability of the General. The Marchtoness 5 present¬ ing Elvira, said» with a deep sigh— " Permit
' I 195 " " Permit me to introduce my daugli- , ter. As the sister : of/Juliana, and the child of my lamente^ Husband, Iflatter myself that you'will alioW; her a place in your esteem/* \ * ^ . ■ '■ ■ ■- ' · -; * ■. '. This was promised, :and the compH-.. ' ments . reaHy due passed on Elvira, whose hmocent vivacity highly enter- tamed the General. Juliana eagerly en¬ quired after thè good hermit and the worthy Evans. She had the satisfac¬ tion tohear they were weU. . .·■■. ■,:■ 46 1 wiU," said she^ ťí step and 7 see 'her/'n .: .. *..:*.,■■ . у. ,Д,;.г. : ? : ... ■/.-,".,: <ζ ShaU I attend you P" said Edward, к 2 "as
196 " as we must see the rest of the house¬ hold ', and we wiU beg permission to pay a short visit to Father Edmund, who I am certain is impatient to em¬ brace you." It is needless to dweU on the reception Juliana met with from the faithful Evans, and from aU the domestics.— Father Edmund was overjoyed to see them : most fervently did he offer his thanks to Providence for the safe return of JuHana. It seemed to inspire him with new Hfe. After spending an hour with the good old man they took their leave, promising to renew their visit the next morning, and to introduce their noble friends. At
197 At their return to the Hall they found Mrs. Carre and Charles, who had been spending a few days at the Cottage, having had some business to transact. The beUs at Upton and Thorpe were rang, and open house kept for aH who chose to partake. The foUowing day the HaU was crowded with visitors, to congratulate the family on Lady Juliana's restoration. The rector and family dined at the HaU. Louisa was more Hvely than ever. Mr. and Mrs. E. Montague, who had sin¬ cerely sympathised in their afflictions, shared the joy every one evinced on this happy occasion. Even the Marchioness appeared chearful. She had spent seve- K 3 ral
198 ral hours at the Hermitage. Father Edmund had in that short period gained her esteem and confidence. Slie con¬ sented to join the dinner party ; and in the course of > a week her health was re-established, and her spirits sufficiently recovered to enter into society,, and tp enjoy the beauties of Upton and Thorpe. A grand entertainment was given to the neighbouring famiHes. It being early in "May, and the weather remarkably fine, the grounds were most splendidly illuminated. Nor were the tenants or cottagers forgot : they partook of the amusements, and were liberally regaled. Happiness being' once more restored to Upton, the accustomed avocations were
199* were resumed. Don Sebastian, often accompanied the General in his airings. His youth had been devoted to arms, and he took great delight in recounting the dangers he had escaped, and in list¬ ening to the different engagements the General had fought. In a few weeks Mr. MUlward pro¬ posed to Edward that he and Mr. Smith should visit Italy and France. '. 64 1 know, my dear boy," said he, you will reluctantly leave Juliaoa, but I. think it absolutely necessary you should make the tour. Consider, you wiU only be absent a few months, as you, must re¬ turn prior toyoûr coming of age. On к 4' that
200
that day I intend you shall conduct Ju¬ liana to the altar." Edward assured his father of his chearful acquiescence. 44 1 knew, Sir, it was your wish ; and being certain of the advantages I should reap in travelling under the guidance of my kind monitor, I have already prepared Juliana for our separation, nor has she the least objection to it. The pangs of absence will be alleviated by the hopes of rendering myself more worthy of herliand." It gave Mr. Millward great pleasure to find the young folks approved of his arrange-
2Ό1 arrangements. July was fixed for the departure of Edward, who requested that his friend Charles might accompany him. Mrs.; Carre at first objected, but could not resist the joint solicitations of her son and Edward, especially as she found it was the wish of the General and Mr. Millward. The former told Mrs. Carre that it should not be attend-. ed with any expense to her. " You know, my dear Madam,. Charles is my adopted son, and will share my fortune with Matilda/" "You have^ mý dear Sir, already jproved yourself a father, and have a κ 5· right
202 right to dispose of him as you think proper." Matters being adjusted to the satis¬ faction of all parties, the young men prepared for their departure. Mr. Mill- ward accompanied them to I.ondon, as lie meant Edward, previous to his leav¬ ing England, to pay his respects at St. James's, and to the Duke of C—«—. The parting was less distressing than was expected. Even MatUda supported it with firmness. · The Marchioness rei- gretted the absence of Mr. Smith, as his admonitions, united to those of Fa¬ ther Edmund, had tranquiUized her mind, and enabled her to bear the loss she
203 shehad sustained with a magnanimity that astonished all her fnends, though it gave them the most heartfelt satisfac¬ tion. The autumn proving fine, it was spent in various rural diversions. ' The harvest-home was celebrated with every demonstration of joy, and in the true style of old English hospitality. The novelty of the scene surprised and de¬ lighted Don Sebastian, the Marchioness, and Elvira. They every day found something new to admire: 'the. peace and plenty that reigned in the poorest: cottage astonished them. They heheld fø -the owners of ' this happy domaiil magnificence 'without „pride, - liberality 1 к 6 ' without
204 without ostentation, and reHgion with¬ out enthusiasm. Frequent letters from the travellers, containing entertaining remarks on what they saw, enHvened, and in some mea¬ sure compensated for their absence.— Mrs. Carre had given her Httle history to Mrs..MiUward: it was short andmelan- choly.r-She was the only chfld of a gen¬ tleman of large fortune, who left her sole distress of it at eighteen, "her mo¬ ther having died some years before. — Shortly after the decease of her father she became acquainted with the Earl of Greenock, an elegant and accomplished young man just returned, from making the tour of Europe. He had not long entered
205 entered his twenty-second year, and had come to the title and estate at an early period. ■ A mutual affection took place, and having no one to consult, they were married as soon as Miss Carre's mourniqg for her father expired. For near thirty years they enjoyed domestic felicity in its full extent ; the Earl was the best of husbands ' and fathers—she the happiest of wives and mothers. They were blest with three sons, who were every thing they could wish. Two of them had attained manhood. Charles, the younger, had reached his fourteenth year when the rebellion broke out in Scotland. To the Countess's grief and astonishment the Earl determined to espouse the cause of the Pretender. Accompanied
2оа Accompanied by his two eldest sons and all his clan he joined the rebel army, and supplied it with arms, ammunition, and money. In the battle of Culloden ťhe regiment he commanded was cut to pieces, and liimself and sons left dead upon the field. Unfortunately their estate lay conti¬ guous to the scene of actions and scarcely had the fatal news arrived, when the royal J party, enraged at the active part the Earl had taken, set fire to the house. The ^Countess and Charles, with two faithful domestics, had just time to escape the flames, leaving every thing of value ! behind them. They sheltered in a miserable cottage, whepe, , ' * f or
20/7 for six weeks, they suffered incredible hardships. When things were a littled settled, and the rage of party subsided, the Earl of A------, who, though a strong loyalist, had ever Hved in habits of in¬ timacy with the Earl of Greenock, traced them out, and supplied them with necessaries. He advised her to as¬ sume her- maiden name, and to leave Scotland immediately. He told hér" if she had no objection to settle in Devon r shire he would recommend hereto a most worthy family, who he was weH assured would athis request- take her under their protection. He added— -
«Mr.
208
" Mr. Millward will have the good¬ ness to direct you what steps to pursue in regard to the finishing of Charles's education/* The Earl of A ------in the most deli- cafe manner presented the Countess with a sum of money to bear her ex¬ penses, and begged she would consider him as her banker, and allow him to re¬ mit her fifty pounds every quarter, pro»- mising hereafter to use 'his interest with government in 'favour of herself and Charles^ These were the heads of Mrs. Carre's story.—The Earl of A—— had been in constant correspondence with Mr. «« Millward,
209
Millward, and they had determined to present a petition to his Majesty in be¬ half of Charles. „ When Mr. Millward returned from London, he acquainted ţ Mrs. Carre that her aflairs were in a good train. The day he attended the levee with Edward he met the Earl of A ----- at court, and was much pleased at so unexpectedly renewing the acquaintance. " I was happy, 9 ' said Mr. Millward, " in having an opportunity of intro¬ ducing Charles. The Earl agreed to spend the day with us, and expressed his approbation of Charles in very strong terms. He paid his acknow¬ ledgments
210 îedğemehts to Mr. Smith for his care and attention to his young friend. We determined jointly to soHcit the Duke 0 f С ——d's interest in regard to Charles, which we happily obtained.-— His Highness desired Edward ίο bring his friend with-him.' 'Ön conversing with' Charles, : áhc! hearitíg his'sehtimenťs relative tò political matters,' f the Duke promised to' undertake 1 his ! cause, and to do every thing in 1 hià power to serve him. When thè young men took leave of his Highness, he told Charles he had some hopes' he should get the attainder revoked, and that the estate would be restored to him. So, my dear Madam, I hope I shaU soon have the pleasure of congratu-
211
congratulating you, on the restoration of your fortune." Mrs. Carre expressed her'most grate¬ ful thanks. The winter passed imper¬ ceptibly. , Christmas was.» celebrated with every mark of festivity, and a suc¬ cession of country amusements. The approach of spring added to the gaiety that presided at the ЦаИ, as a few- weeks would render the party perfect¬ ly happy by the presence of Mr. Smith and his pupils. Their last letters were dated from Paris. The young men an¬ ticipated the pleasure of meeting. Preparations were already begun for celebrating Edward's coming of age and
212 and his nuptials. As they were sitting one evening on the terrace which com¬ manded an extensive view of the road, they were agreeably surprised by the arrival of the traveUers, who had re¬ turned a week sooner than was expect¬ ed. It is needless to describe the meet¬ ing. Suffice it to say they were re¬ ceived with the warmest affection ; and as Edward held in his arms his adored JuHana, he exultingly exclaimed— " I trust, my love, we meet to part no more." Mr, Smith gave the most flattering account of the conduct of his pupils, and their unremitted attention to what¬ ever
213 ever could embellish their minds or add to their knowledge. 4( In short," said this worthy man, " ours has been a tour r of* instruction more than pleasure. We have studied men and manners, and obtained an in¬ sight into the laws, religion, customs, and manufactures of the different coun¬ tries we passed through. Our letters of recommendation gained us a gracious reception at every court ; and I am proud to boast that my pupils have left a character behind that does honour to their country." Early the next morning Edward and Charles, accompanied by Juliana and Matilda,
214 Matilda, paid tlieir respects to the her¬ mit, who received them with a thou¬ sand blessings. He stills retained his fa¬ culties, and was able to cultivate his little garden. He had just 'finished his morning devotion, and -was going to breakfast, ' of which he invited them to partake. * They with pleasure consent¬ ed to share his little repast. It con¬ sisted of new milk, bread, and various dried fruits. Before they had -finished they were joined by Mr. Smith, and they passed two hours in a most plea¬ sant manner. On their return to the Hall they found the family at breakfast, which was scarcely over before visitors arrived to
215 to pay their compliments: to the gentle¬ men -on; their return. from : the conti¬ nent.,, · Thè morning,· was 'dedicated., to ceremony^ the rest of the day töfrieiid·» ship and:real enjoyment. Every, one was busy in arranging matters for'the approaching festival. . ; Jamesi had fufl employment., : fEor soine 'days: the General; pèrceivedhe 'bad something to commumcate¿' At: last^ after ã long preamble, hesaidri- ■^•ìv-1 " Will your Honour have the good¬ ness to permit Henryi ţo .consult > tyou' on an,: affaajr, hç has ; set .his heart orin-rthàt is,; if, it.meiets >yousr/Honour'sj approba¬ tion Щ .,^;:-;;:; : ; vrv,- .h wn ir/l ..^}'nr
216 • " Let him make his propositions," said the General, smiling; " my con¬ currence will never be wanting to any thing that is likely to promote his hap¬ piness. Tell him to come to me in about an hour/* The General received Henry with his accustomed kindness, who, after an apology;, acquainted the General that he had attached himself to the daughter of farmer Dawson, and, with his leave» wished to offer her his hand. 44 1 have not the least objection, my dear Henry, to your settling in life, and I approve of your choice. Eleanor is a pretty brunette, very amiable, and has received
211 received a good education ; I have no doubt of her rendering you happy. í wiU speak to Mr. MiUward about it, who shall settie the affair with her fa¬ ther. I suppose you have already gained Eleanor's consent." Henry answered in the affirmative, and expressed his most grateful thanks. The General related the conversation he had had with Henry to Mr.MiHward, who promised to caH on Mr. Dawson in a few days. Every thing was instant¬ ly concluded. Mr. Dawson highly ap* proved of the match. Eleanor was his only daughter, and he was proud and happy at her being united to Henry. , vol. iv. ι. "I can,
44 1 can, Sir,, thanks to Providence and your indulgent kindness, give.my φ\ a thousand pounds, down, and two b ,r -v : ι ;;νίν» ."iL or Λ α" iiri, , more at my death, without injuring my^ sons, for whom I can amply pro¬ vide. In regard to any settlement on my girl, I leave it entirely to your Ho¬ nour." r -, r л " Be assured, Mr. Dawson, I wiH take care of Eleanor." r The General was pleased at Mr. Mh> ward's account of his embassy, and re- t C- IK οΓΓΊ -.-„i' C» .?'- f 'p '^l jC l- quested that the three weddings might be solemnized on the same day. <ť With aH my heart, my dear Sir ; I highly
219
highly approve of ícelebrating tlie wed-' dings together, as I am certain, it Will· be an,addition to the happiness,pf the young folks',.asElearior was always the favourite playmate of> Juliana-and Ma» tHda." When Jamea * heard.of ,-, this arrange¬ ment his joy,knew, nabounds; he cried and laughed in a breath, and, scarcely knowing, what: he .did,;,raní.intd .the roomiwrhere ■thé family! was;sitting,' ex* claúning^.^ 44 Your Honours are toa-good^-in?» deed you are. This unexpected favour to.my poor boyris too* much to bear.— Batty and I. can^Qtiexpress:omb thanks* ĺ 2 í trust
220
I trust that Henry will strive to deserve it." Tears of gratitude stopped the utter¬ ance of this faithful veteran. " Compose yourself, my good James," said Mr. Millward ; " you and Henry merit all we can do for you." Edward rose, and shaking him by the hand, assured him it added to his feli¬ city that the friend and companion of his infancy would share the happiness of the day. . To complete the joy of this truly amiable circle, a messenger arrived from the
221 the Duke of С ■ d informing Mr. MiUward that the estate of the mis¬ guided Earl of Greenock would be re¬ stored to the widow and son, «The title," added his Highness, 44 might have been reassumed, had not the young gentleman expressly declined it j therefore permission is granted to him and his descendents to bear the name and arms of his mother's family." Don Sebastian expressed his surprise at Charles having refused the title. "He acted, my dear Sir, by my ad¬ vice," ¿aid'Mr. Millward. " My reason for wishing him : to decline it is- this : 'l 3 his
322
his father was only the second earl, and having forfeited the newly-acquired ho¬ nours, I thought it best to consign them to obHvion. I intend both Charles and Edward to take an active part in the le¬ gislative department, and -hope they wiU prove ггеа1; patriots. No vword is less understood, or more abused \ every one -who (Opposes government, ;and ex- çitesnseditıon, is honoured with .the.ap- pehatiQn by tf he {misguided and deluded people. The duty of a patriot is certain- Jy, asfar as Hes in his .power, to pre¬ vent every species of oppression, and with a watchful eye to guard the liber¬ ties and privileges of the country at large, and their constituents in particu¬ lar; butit consists not in endeavouring to
223 L· subvert our laws, in destroying sub¬ ordination, or inspiring the multitude with ideas óf their being oppressed, if the 'exigence of the times require'go¬ vernment to levy taxes ťhdťbeär hard \ipoh them." The^^tóméhVwere ioóíi 'arranged. Latìy 'JüÎİaıİâ's fortune was upward of t¥ó-hühdrëd Miisaïià prunas, reside her estate in Spain; her jewels were bf immense value. Mr.MiHward made Edward independent. Charles's'estate Was r áéventhótísancl a-yeàr ;'his mother's jointure two thousand, which reverted to Mm at his death. The General gave Matilda fifty thousand pounds, arid Mr, MiUward presented her with a very j, 4 fine
224 fine set of diamonds, and added twenty thousand pounds more. It was pro¬ posed for the young people to have se¬ parate establishments, but to the great joy of the General they declined it. They were each to have an elegant house in London, but their country re¬ sidence was still to be Upton Hall, which was large enough to accommo¬ date the respective families and their re¬ tinues. Mr. Smith and Mrs. Owen were re¬ quested to continue inmates of Upton Hall. They were too sincerely attached to every branch of the family, and their situation was too pleasant to declinatile friendly offer. . At
225
At length the ardently wished-for day arrived that was to tie the indissoluble bands. The three brides were habited exactly alike—plain, simple, yet ele¬ gant. Never was the Poet's observation of beauty being, " when unadorned, adorned the most," more fully exempli¬ fied than in these lovely girls. The bridegrooms beheld them with rapture. The ceremony was performed early in the morning by the good rector : the whole family attended. The church vas crowded with the tenants and cot¬ tagers, who, with blessings and sincere exclamations of joy, followed the car¬ riages to the Hall, where a most sump¬ tuous breakfast was prepared for all the J guests. The General gave Henry a thou- ь 5 sand
226 sañd pounds ; Mr. and Mrs. Millward made him a handsome present, and fur¬ nished him a house contiguous to the park. Henry now acted as land-steward* (under the direction of Mr. Berry,) for which he was allowed two hundred a-year. . Previous to tfre ceremony, Ed¬ ward presented Henry with an elegant pocket-book» containing notes to the amount of five "hundred pounds. Juli¬ ana and Matilda had not beenlessliberal· to Eleanor. . *. < As soon as breakfast was oveiv the new-married pairs paid a visit tö.the hermit, who-with tears of/ joy ex¬ claimed— г . «' Receive,
227 *' Receive, my chUdren, niy mošt fervent blessing. May Almighty" Pro¬ vidence protect and guide ýou ťhroughľ the rugged paths of Hfe ! May you long be blessed in each other, ahd, foUowing the 1 steps of your parents, prove the protectors of the distressed, and orna- ments of the human race 1" Thé villages* of Upton' arid' Thorpe were móstlibëraUy regaled ; the chari¬ table institutions were included in thé general festivity. Mirth' and hilarity appeared in every countenance. Never did? two people 1 enjoy more happiness than James and his wife'. As'usual they presided over thè' rustic feast. J Three days were entirely'devoted 'tó' thé té-" L 6 nants^
228
nants, household* and peasantry : open house was kept, and different diver¬ sions occupied each day. The week fol¬ lowing was dedicated to receiving and paying visits of ceremony. Entertain¬ ments were given to the surrounding famiHes, for which art and nature were ransacked to render them splendid.— Fancy balls, superb suppers, and briUi- ant fireworks formed part of the amuse¬ ments. Never had Upton HaU display¬ ed such continued scenes of magnifi¬ cence. The young people entered into aU the diversions with a gaiety natural to youth, yet -tbey returned ' with double pleasure to the calm enjoyments of their domestic circle, and to the se¬ lect society of friends. Age-
229 A general election took place in about three months after their marriage, which obliged Edward and Charles to enter on a new scene of life. The constituents of the principal borough belonging to Mr. MiUward waited on him to claim a promise he had long made them that his son, when of .age, should represent them in the senate. The offer was ac¬ cepted, and Edward elected without a dissenting voice When all was con¬ cluded, contrary to the usual mode the electors gave a ball and. supper to their. new member and family. Charles ob¬ tained a seat in. the same honourable manner. ..... - Two houses had been taken in St. James's.
230 James's-Square for the reception ôf the new-married pairs, and most elegantly furnished, and a set of servants were hired. Mr. MUlward accompanied them to London, to be present at their first appearance at court". Mrs. MiUward and the Marchioness declined being of the party. The latter consented that Elvira should spend the winter with her sister. Never had there been a more splen- did ! appearance at St. James's' than on J the presentation of the bridegrooms imd brides,- Their dress, their equi¬ pages, were the subject of general con¬ versation. It is impossible to deHneate thV admiration 1 excited 1 by thè beauty and
231
and uncommon* loveliness of Lady Juli¬ ana and Matilda : suffice it to say, the court rang with tlieir praises, in which Edward and Charles had a liberal share. Their reception by the monarch was flattering to a degree, and from every branch of the royal family. Mr. MiUward continued in town till the young men made their debut in Par¬ Hament, which they did with great eclat ; he theri returned to Devonshire. lady Juliana and Mrs, Carre entered the grande monde with moderation.— Their roufs* and suppers were splendid» but they gaveras few as possible. They had a bos: at'the Opera, but the theatre was* their favourite' amusement'; and they
232
they were so unfashionable as never to appear in public without their hus¬ bands. When the Christmas recess released Mr. Edward Millward * and Mr. Carre from their · attendance on ParHament, they with real pleasure rejoined their friends at Upton HaU. At the latter end of the ensuing summer their happi¬ ness experienced some aUoy by the de¬ parture of, Don Sebastian, the March- ioness, and Lady Elvira for Spain. In less than twelve months Lady Juli¬ ana presented the family with a fine boy, and three months after," Mrs. Charles * Carre was delivered of a 'daughter.·— Neither
233 Neither Mrs. Carre nor her son could bear the idea of revisiting Scotland, and they thought it unjust to draw large sums from a'country they never in¬ tended to reside in ; they obtained an act of parliament to empower them to dispose of their property to a distant brâncii of the late Earl's family, and Mr. Carre purchased aii estate about ten miles distant from Upton HaH, caUed Çrıor Lodge. Mrs. Carre resided with her son and daughter, though she fre¬ quently spent a month at the HaU, The good hermit lived three years after the marriage of his young favour¬ ites, .аш! died with a strong reliance on the mercy of Heaven, and a firm hope that
234 that he had atoned" for the crimes of ' his youth. He was sincerely regretted by the family at Upton, and was interred, . by his deaire, in the chapel belonging to Ше Hermitage. Mr. Millward 1 Шй "á heat mbnüfñeht erected ťo His' niembry, with Ы suitable "m'scŕiptiph. - Thè r Gënëral 'lived to séé á'nuníerouš jjröğeny of hiš thírÜ ^Heratícihájípŕokcn rhátuŕíty. : 1лкё the patriarchs 'of Old, he expired in thè bosom ! of his family, lamented by all that knew him. fíiš relatives were inconsolable, and his faithful domestics never recovered his loss. James Vurvived his master only a few* ffionths. His widow (WelchBetty), •Шо was amply provided for, at Henry's earnest
235
earnest request consented to live with him. He» had a'large -family, and was completely happy in his marriage. On the death of Mr. Berry, * (the old stew¬ ard,) he'succeeded him. His coildüet merited the approbation of his patrons, and:repaid*them for-their care find pro« 'tection of his youth. Don Sebastian lived to see Elvira united to Don Ferdinand, who shortly after became, by the death of his father, Duke of Torcella. The Marchioness, on the decease of her father, retired to a convent. The lively Louisa Montague continued single, and devoted her time to smooth the latter days of her parents. The worthy rector was grown so infirm, that
236
that with Mr. Millward's consent he re¬ signed the living of Upton to his son. Mr. and Mrs. MUlward had the felicity of beholding .their sons and daughters fulfil their warmest expectations, uni- versáUy beloved and admired ; and had the pleasing prospect, that their rising generation would emulate the virtues of their parents.
THE END.
rniNTBD BY D. N. SHURY, BEKWlCK-STKEET, SOKO.
