Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The forest of St. Bernardo: a novel
r "V s , Ι Ι г TOREST of st;bernáuoo. ) > ι . ~ . '' ' '* - ' '*''■). F " 'í ' л ' : '-< 'СЦАР^1. '/ A№ MILLWARD having finished the little narrative, said?- 'ΓΙ am happy to declare that your little interesting protegee is niece ahd^ heiress to the Mr. Edwards to whom I am executor; when /dying he made a vol. и. , , η full
full confession of his errors!;" -neveranan·- died more penitent ; he entreated me ' to make. inquiry after his brother and family ; if he or his wife survived, he , left them the interest of his fortune durin&life, and afterwards the whole to ¡ Fanny. I made a fruitless search after Mr. Edwards ; at Jast I learnt that he and his wife died in Francé, but could gain no intelligence respecting the child. I employed a person, if possible, to trace, him out, which I was the more anxious to do, as lam her trustee' and'guardian. ~ It gives me real pleasure- to*'find'heir " under the protection of my Emma, and that her education has been gobd¡and' J her» manners 'polisjied. ; When she ! conies of age she/will be entitled to ten < thousand ι pounds»? ^Wxth your appro- * / . lii . ^ bation,'
t 3 bation, Sir," addressing the General, " I think I had better acquaint Fanny with the change in her situation before I leave the HaU ; - and I wish for yours and Emma's advice in regard to her future destination. Do you think 1 should place her for a year or two at a boarding school?*' The General thought it right to acquaint-her with her good fortune im¬ mediately, but did not see any occasion to remove her ; she could be nowhere better placed, " Are you not of my opinion, Emma?" · * " Certainly, Sir ; 'it would give me в 2 pain
4 pain to part with Fanny, and I will with pleasure take the charge of finishing her education. Dancing and French she is mistress of: I have already given her some lessons in' music and drawing, as I found she had a taste for both; she speiîds her leisure time in the Temple of the Muses, and has made some progress in the sciences. Fanny was sent for; Mr. Millward related every particular; her father's story affected her greatly. Mr. Millward told her vbit the General and Miss Roberts would continue their kind pro¬ tection, and that he would manage her iertune to the best advantage. ' Fan¬ ny returned her thanks in a most ir> teresting artless manner, and expressed her
5
her joy and gratitude that she was to remain with her beloved patroness. " Oh, Madam, how happy will this intelligence make the good Lady Abbess. With your permission I will write to her by to-day's post, I must go and acquaint Mrs. Ward, who I am sure will rejoice at my good fortune." Fanny received the congratulation of her friends with a modesty that charmed them. The General insisted on a salute, and desired her to return to them as soon as she had finished her letter.
вЗ
6
CHAP. II. ,Τηε next morning Mrs. Millward and Mr. Seward set off for LondonJ; during their absence Mr. and Mrs.. Mon¬ tague were constant visitors at the Hall : preparations were made for the marri¬ age; in ten days the gentleman returned, and, as settled, the morning after their arrival, put Mr. Mi#ward in possession of' his long-adored Emma ; and James was rewarded for his fidelity at the same time, by receiving the hand of Betty * from
, 7 from his master's. THe ceremony was performed at an early hour without any parade. For that day the family went out of mourning ; only Mr. and Mrs. Montague dined at the Hall. A good dinner was provided for the.tenants and ι cottagers, and the-pleasure grounds were opened for their amusement, for the first - time since the death 'of Mr, Roberts. t The' day wás spent in rational converse. -After". tea they paid a'visit to the Her- ' mit, v who was k much pleased with this mark of attention ; the good man gave them his most sincere benediction. , The evening concluded with a concert. ι * í The following Sunday 'thé' family ap¬ peared at church, and the ensuing week was taken up in receiving visits from r ! * ' в 4 the
' ь 8 the surrounding families, and in return¬ ing them, <' ч The General expressed a wish that Mr. Millward would, on the first va¬ cancy, become ι a member of the British senate, which he declined, saying, he wished to live a retired, though not ,an, inactive life ; that he should have sufficient to employ his time, and hope to prove himself a true, patriot, by attending to the improvement· of agri¬ culture-in every branch, and in promo¬ ting the happiness of all around him. " The estate," continued he, " I have purchased will require great exertion and activity to bring it to perfection."
These
Thèse and various other arguments К induced the .General to acquiesce. As soon as ; the, hurry of visiting was Over, Mr¿ and Mrs; Millward examined all the charitable institutions ; they- had the satisfaction of .finding them under the best possible regulations ; those destined for the old and infirm were adapted for ease and comfort ; the seminary for the young, who were treated with care and tenderness, was calculated to prornote industry, and every care taken to render 'them not;onlyjuseful but valuable mem- ■■ bers of society;v ^ ^..-r ·■■■- -ñ. : ·'·· ϊ;·'· ν-:· ; ··-/.· · ; , ■■ -r. ' , 1 . ι' -,' ■ ·' . ■ ■" ' ·■'>■ * ■ ' · ■ ■■ ' л r The General and his ^amiable son and ¿daughter 7 soon?^gained 't-,thoiulove' and 'esteemiof their!dependants ; í blessed;in each other, their days glided on in unih- ( 'i-vj:;- "-;;.. в 5 ; terrupţed
ílO ι ' teíTupted tranquillity. ïn less than ten months Emma added to her father's and husband's felicity, 'by presenting them with a fine boy ; never was joy equal to the General's;' the little stranger diffused" happiness to all ; open house was kept for three days ; none more partook of the general joy than the Rector and family« \ As soon as Mrs. Millward was suffici¬ ently recovered to bear company, Mr. and Mrs. Seward joined the party, and were received with unfeigned pleasure. At the General's request the christening was solemnized in a splendid manner ; cards of invitation were issued to the ' number of two hundred y a sumptuous xlinner and ball were given on' the occa- \ sion,
■'".".'V ■■' -. ■'.: -.■■^í-i;' :..;'. : > " : . ■. siori, riòrweretheTpêásalntry ''''-'røtfa^^sli^g^^j'^^^artoøk of the .-'•ŕdfejrtijEä^Háiiá.?-. höspitalîty/-öf .Ûptöo^JrİaİI· ', To the- great satisfaction of Jariíes, he ^$as appointed master öf the- revels, and HBettyi or <■ rather Mrs. Jones, mistress of '-'-_,' - ^•.■τ. ''..,',■■;-.*'.*... '■; ,...,·'·,..-„■:·.'' ;'.-,'.', ,·',> '.'.-...- '-^ţî^ rustic feast, she having bëèn^élivered of' a boy about a^fortnight "befbréthe yoüng heir made his appearances ' \-". i; - " James and his wife could riot'"express the gratitude they^ felt, i \vJieh; they were 'told that the Geneŕalánd Mr. and Mrs. Millward intended to stand for their child,'and that^ he was tö bé baptised at 1 fiieäá^ne^ime; as their^soriV for whom ^hesßohsprS; were Mr.. arid Mrsi Seward ; íhéi^ named Щ^ ·' jani^s^feöy was^ ха!Ш wffiám'ferir^ ^^Г^ Г У--^:Г;^
12 after the General and Mr t Millward; The children were .baptised ,at church, which was crouded with^ the tenants and domestics. The company assembled bnj* before the hour of dinner, to enjoy a ramblê m the pleasure grounds. The day was spent in perfect harmony; every thing that art and nature combined cpuld produce was on this occasion displayed, yet an elegant simplicityreigned through¬ out the decorations; the hall and gardens were splendidly illuminated; nothing could exceed the magnificence and grandeur of the scene ; it appeared tlie work, t qf enchantment. ^So we ll pleased were the guests that they did not think of departing till near five in the
13 β
ι the morning ; some of the company .slept at the Hall; the next'day-was devoted to rest. ' , /'t "After the birth of Edward, 'Mr. and Mrs. Millward proposed paying a visit of six weeks to the good Lady Abbess ; Eanny was tobe of the party ; but their intended ¿our was prevented by news arriving of the death of that truly ami¬ able woman," who was, most sincerely regretted , by the whole community, which she had 4 governed^ many years. This afflicting" intelligence for a time damped the happiness of Mrs, Millward and T Fanny ; » the latter daily improved, and had made a ! rapid progress in music and drawing ; young Montague had be- come^her admirer, with the approbation - k * of
•í ofall parties : it was settled that, as soon as he was of age to /"take orders, their fate should be united. '-* ' -" 1- '.. Two years passed ón ; little Edward. .', 'was the darling of them all* he began toy . lisp óut graiídpapa, which'dehghţed tha General. Before hehadcompleteďhis ' ■third, year, Mrs; Millward : iricreased the family by 'the birth of a* daughter, who \shared their affections with her brother; . she was- named-Matilda, * after her ma¬ lternál grand-mother ; 4 the same festivity was observed at-her birth as at Edward's. :.:-:л.. .":. ΛνΛ\- ^,^: : *¡- *-.■:, ,- ■..» Au) The .'buildings'- :òn <Mr. .Millward's -, estate were-nearly finished y happy were they who could obtain a farm or cottage on his domam;. /The village was called "-i - „Thorpe;
ıs Thorpe ; it contained above three hun¬ dred inhabitants; peace and innocence x ) might be said to reside there ; every encouragement was given to honest industry, and every one* enjoyed the fruits of their labour. A school for boy& and girls was erected, and an establish¬ ment for the aged on the same plan 'as »at Upton ; Ш*°Р ег persons were 'ap- s pointed to superintend, who were capa¬ ble of the important charge. No pub- * lie-house was allowed on the estate, nor did the people want it,> they had good home-brewed ale; they met at each other's houses of an evening. ' ' * / > > A large neat chapel was built, and a handsome parsonage house ; the salary of the clergyman was fixed at two hun¬ dred
ΊΟ
.;dred a year; , this Mr» Millward de¬ signed for Edward Montague, who was r to,take orders in the couţse. of two years. ^ 'i The »Hall was a continued scene of , domestic bliss and of old English hospi- " tality; the-General's youth seemed ,, renew ed in contemplating thejiappiness - of his children and their Ioveţy offspring. \%> , ì * > · t Thus time rolled on till Edward had entered his sixth year, and Matilda, her third.?,; One evening in - the mouth of December,/as; the enraptured .parents were viewing tlie t innocent gambols of J ι ч their children, the family party were disturbed, py the sound of a carriage, , "vvhich /announced a- visitor ;. · in *a few minutes Mr.Millward «was told ¿haba /,,,) gendeman -
17 • gentleman wished to speak to him^ but did not choose to send his name. ' Mr. Millward was surprised, "but* instantly obeyed, the summons,^ and almost in¬ stantly recollected a Spanish nobleinan with whom he had contracted a friend- : г ship when at College, ,and with whom - he had corresponded, for some time after ohe resided in India ; l he ran to embrace 'j him, saying— s · ' A ^ -v ' ^ ' " Is it possible ? do I behold the Mar¬ quis Vaena ?" * " ,* t „ eţ The, same," replied the Marquis, returning with all the warmth of friend¬ ship the proffered embrace. í " To whatever event I am indebted з.'г for
18
for, this unexpected visit,"- said, Mr. Millward, ei believe,me, Lsincerely re¬ joice atk'; but why this 'appearance of privacy ì Come.· give me leave to - present you to my family/' * j r > , "Hold,;Mr.^Millward, I must first . intrude oja -your patience, and give ybu ^jny reasons for'thus precipitately intro¬ ducing myself ; the urgency of my case: must plead my excuse." V,, - " ' 'f r % - » и Make no apologies^ my friend," replied Mr. Millward, " but let me_know , how I can serve you ; my fortune is at your command.** ч í f < '* * * ,( ' ' ť "Thanks,-my dear Henry, for your f generous offer ; I am indeed going ta put
ία
put your friendship to the proof, though not in a pecuniary way, but by entreat¬ ing you and your amiable lady, not only to take charge, but supply the place of parents to a sacred pledge of affection, all that remains of my adored Juliana. Alas 1 ,am I then forced to part with my chfid?" > :î -. - The Marquis became' so agitated, he could not proceed; he paced.the^r oom in the greatest perturbation,; ,ηχ vain, for some time, was revery effort 4 of JVh*· Millward's to calm* him. By some in¬ coherent expressions 4 he found he had lost a bejöved wife ;.- at last a flood of ¡tears relieved him. ' .- , v ' , ; ¡ j - 4 " Pardon me, my friend, I fear you will
20 will think -me deranged; indeed at times reason totters ori her throne ; but I will be as brief as possible, not daring to trust myself with a recital of scenes which would' tear open 'wounds yet •scarcely closed. I have in this paper L detailed them ; but the purport of 'ray visit is to entreat of you and Mrs. Mill- ward to receive and educate, either as a - an ^orphan" of'a distant relation, my '^litde Juliana; -if you consent, I will 1 bring hér to you. I have left her with ' two ^ confidential servants at the inn at ........I travelled incog, under the name of 'Seymour. Speak, my dearest '^ friend ; do you consent to my request ? will Mrs. Millwarď extend her maternal cares, and be a mother to my helpless girl?" - . « Be
21
" Be.composed, my dear Lord, arid rest satisfied that we will do every thing you* request. My Emma, í be assured, will adopt, the little ¡stranger, whom I am impatient to behold ; Jet me prevail , on you to make "some stay with us ; we can send for. the child and servants." " Ten thousand thanks for your kind-♦ ness. I have found A a,safe and -proper asylum for my little Juliana. I must > return to her to-night; to-morrow I will pay my respects to your charming consort, whom I well remember at the time I passed a happy montli with poor St. Clair at Belle-Vue, previous to our departure from Spain. The good Ge¬ neral, too, is he well ?" , ι « Never
22 « Never better," and will rejoice' to see you ; he was talking of you not long since,, and^ wondering what was become;df you; ί: Immade every inquiry after-you^on my return to'England, and even waited oh the Spanish Ambassador, who thought you 'were atî Paris." "Ί am pressée! fór-time," said the Marquisi z" but 'L am ' determined to dedicate- a few [ ı days ^to .friendship. Adieu, r "my dear friend for' J td.riight ; make my respects, 'acceptable' to the General· and l-'Mrs'. ki ]äillwárd. r ■ ' '' I wilf- ; be with ( -уои^1 to-morrow by ; -break¬ fast." у l ' r -'»"*·' ', * ,y: -'l- ' L '■ * ' : Having conducted the\Marqtiis to' his carriage, Mr. Millward returned to his 'j^" . family,
23
family, who were· curious to know who this unexpected visitor could be. ι, ' J " You will be .surprised," said Mr. r ·' Millward, when I tell you it was the Marquis Vaena." · * " I am sure it must have given you * pleasure, to have seen your early friend : but why did he not favour us with his company?" said the General; " and why did he make so short a visit ?'* ic I can hardly tell, my dear Sir, but he has promised to be with us by break¬ fast to-morrow, when he means to place under our protection an infant daughter ; he has laid aside his tide, and assumed the name of Seymour; he was too much
24. .-
much affected to enter, into particulars, ν but this paper,will .disclose the seeming ' mystery. If you, Sir, and Emma 'ap¬ prove, I will read it aloud." «. They expressed an earnest wish to hear the Marquis's narrative. After tea· Sìr. Millward read as follows: , · ir
/ !
CHAP. III. With whaťpáinful efforts, my friend, ; I address you ! The" occasion almost ' l' rends my heart-strings. Gracious Hea¬ vens ! is it possible ? must I resign my child? part with my little darling for u ever ? Hard, hard request ! but my vow is past, the ' dying saint Jiad the strongest and wisest reasons for urging my compliance. Sweet innocent ! may tKy days pass on in 'uninterrupted hap- piness^thy bosom ever 'beatile* 'mansion " vol/ ft. с of
'?.'■■'■■ ■■■'■ ' -'-r. 2G í : ; : '· ■:''-' ;: ' : ' : " -V.. of-peace! But whither am 1 wander- ing ? let me recall my scattered senses, and relate my mournful story. It is above four years, my dear Henry, since. I have written ; till .that period > you were acquainted with the minutest- circumstances relative to my ill health ; perplexities and various disagreeable oc¬ currences occasioned my silence. In my last letter I, mentioned my father's having found out an alliance for me, but did not enter'into particulars v The lady was the only daughter of Don Alvares, heiress to an immense fortune, ' of high" rank, young and beautiful, but haughty in her demeanor, vindictive in her temper, and of a most jealous dispo¬ sition ;
tr sition : such was the woman my father ' had selected for my wife. -My h art at' that time was entirely disengaged. Had Donna Triphosa been amiable, I should certainly have obeyed, but I could not doom myself to "wretchedness ; such must have been my fate had I consented to the union. I represented to the Duke my reasons for not complying with his commands. Though indulgent > in the ' extreme, he was obstinate in carrying any point he had set his heart on, and thought unconditional obedience in the article of marriage the duty of a son. The only indulgence I could obtain was a twelvemonth's respite ; -as Donna Triphosa was scarcely fifteen, the Duke thought another year would add to her с 2 im-
281 improvement, 1 He said, he should-ex- pect I would be frequent in, my visits, and he had no doubt but г her charms. would make an impression on my« heart/ Eleven months had-elapsed, when, whether owing to uneasiness of mind^, or a cold I caught, I was attacked with a » violent bilious complaint, which 'baffled thei skills of the physicians, and very » near terminated . my > existence. This awakened all the father in.the Duke, and he repented having usedJiarshness. He conjured me to live for his sake ; and if it would contribute, to my reco¬ very, he would give up the intended alliance,-
For
'29 For some-weeks I remained in an uncertain state ; -at length the disorder took a'favourable turn, r and f was pro¬ nounced out of danger. Never was joy equal to my father's; but it was consi¬ derably damped on finding I did nôt gain strength ; and, by the medical tribe \declaring they were^fearful of a decline, la voyage was ï recommended. The dis- Uress l of 'thelDuke, hisranxietyand ten- ' derness, affected me greariy, and »made me half resolve, if I Tegained my health, I would marry íFriphosa, ? though .my heart revólted^againsťfheidea. dť was settled I should go to England, and try the efficacy of the)Bristol waters. I accordingly embarked *with a numerous suite, accompanied by ,my friend "and с 3 governor
so
governor St. Clair, Once more I landed on the, shores of Britain. The change of climate, the waters, and the salubrious air of Clifton greatly restored me; in less than a month I was able to ride on horseback/ : ι ν ¿w Jn one of our excursions, temjptèd by the fineness of tlie morning, we had exceeded pür usual : ride; I felt ; myself tired and fainty the heat í and fatigue hatl , quite' overcome me ; i St^ ; Clair, who loved me with parental affection, was alarmed ; he ordered one of the grooms to find some place of shelter from the ^inid-day .sun ; U Iľ: was obliged ţoi dis¬ mount^ orJshouId have fallen from my horse; the nian returned in a few mi-. í ñutes with a servant in mourning, bring- М:г^ : т: -..;':; .■'■■;:■,,./ ' .. mg.
31
ing a glass of wine and water, and a request from his mistress, that the gen¬ tlemen would rest themselves at the Cottage. I was hardly able to rise ; but with the assistance of Monsieur St. Clair and the servants, reached the house, which was within an hundred yards, but concealed from our view by a clump of trees. We were received at the door by an elderly lady, who conducted us into a small but elegant parlour, entirely shaded from the sun. A young lady of the name of Orme welcomed us with great politeness, and desired we would be seated. At that moment I found myself so ill, that I was hardly able to return thanks for her hospitality. Mrs. Beaumont, the name с 4 of
32
of the other, lady, begged me to repfose myself on a sofa, and gave me,some drops; refreshments of various sorts ,were brought, which' having partaken of, I found myself better, and capable of making .proper acknowledgments for her, civilities, and to remark the extreme fif , . 1 4 HI. > beauty and elegant manners of my,young hostess, who ,арредгес! about nineteen; suffice it to say, lier form, was, symmetry itself. t On t entering into, conversation J found jier face the index, of ι her mind. Two Jipurs .passed imperceptibly ; nor did.I think of going till my t good, friend gave .me a hint by looking at^hiswatebj and saying it was near twOjO'clock. I reluctantly arose, and apologised for my png intrusion. Miss Orme, with ineff¬ able
33'
able sweetness, desired me'not to hurry myself, or think of returning till I found J was equal to the fatigue. I was going to reply, when Monsieur St. Clair said— '" My dear Lord, I fear as the heat, is still intense, your weakness will not suffer you to remount your horse.' > If we shall not trespass too much on Miss Orme's hospitality, I think it would be better to send a servant for your carriage, and am sorry it did not strike me be¬ fore." . ì . Miss Orme begged I would follow my friend's advice* rand* Mrs.' f Beaumont laughingly insisted that I should not, be obstinate. I bowed my thanks. A ser¬ vant was dispatched, to Clifton; n.evcr с 5 did
34
did time pass so swiftly ; when^the man returned with the chaise I thought ^he must have flown. ^ We took our leave of the ladies, with many apologies for retarding their din¬ ner hour, for it was after four. When we took our departure I obtained leave to pay my respects to them. Mrs. Beaumont said— " I shall take the liberty, my Lord, of sending to inquire after you to-mor¬ row." I assured her I wa? much flattered by her kindness. < We drove off, but I had left my heart behind.
35
behind, and could talk of nothing the rest of the day but Miss Orme. St. Clair was alarmed ; he owned she was Nature's master-piece, yet conjured me to guard my heart against her attrac¬ tions. " Alas í my dear friend, ypur counsel is vain ; I already feel I am a slave to her charms. Let me entreat of you, my dear St. Clair, to gain some information relative to her family and situation in life." After much persuasion he consented, and the result of his inquiries proved satibfactory. She was the only child of Mr. Orme, с 6 who
36
who possessed a good fortune, and was the younger branch qf a noble family ; her mother died during her infancy, but her place had been amply supplied by Mrs. Beaumont, a near relation, who had formed part of the family ever since. She was a most amiable woman, every way competent to the charge she had undertaken, of forming the mind 'and manners of the young Juliana, whom bhe loved with a mother's fondness. ι When Miss Orme had completed her twelfth year, her father resolved to visit Italy and France, as he wished his daugh¬ ter's education to be finished in the first style. They resided four years on the Continent, during which time she wab instructed by the first masters in music
31 music and drawing, and became mistress of^the French and Italian languages. Nó wonder, with these advantages, and blessed with an excenent under¬ standing and genius, that Juliana was at sixteen a model of perfection. On their return to England, Mr. Orme had purchased the cottage where they had lived ever since in perfect retire¬ ment, as Mr. Orme thought his daughter too young to make her appearance in the beau inonde. His health too had for the last two years been in a declining state, and Juliana had the misfortune to lqse the best of fathers about eight months'previous to the commencement of our acquaintance. He left her thirty thousand pounds at her own disposal. This
■■-.·-.' s ^ This intelligence convinced me that I should not disgrace 'myself by the ^li- ance ; Лп short, an intimacy took place ; scarce a day passed that I did höt visit the Cottage ; the more I conversed with the lovely girl the more 1 became en¬ slaved; St; Glair used every argument to persuade nie tö discontinue my visits, and tö try tö conquer my passion, which, he assured me, the Duke woμld never sanction ; náy, it would certainly draW down his anger on me.. : As yet I had hot come to any expla¬ nation, but ; my eyes had spoken the sentiments of my heart; and I was .fully convinced that I was iii possession of Juliana's. Thus matters went on till near the end öf Autumn ; my health and • strength
59
strength were perfectly re-established I received a letter from my father, say¬ ing, that as -the season for drinking the - waters was over, he wished me to return to Spain, as he longed for the happiness of embracing me ; he mentioned that my " - Cousin Don Gusman,- had prevailed on Donna Triphosa to consent to a private marriage, that her father was much enraged, but he imagined time would reconcile him. " The particulars of this strange affair," he added, "T reserve for our meeting. Your cousin's fortune is.at present not large, but he has great ex¬ pectations. I sometimes think he has - hopes of inheriting my title and estates ; this
40
this makes^me, my dear Alonza, more desirous for you to marry." í This was tlie substance of the Duke's letter. I sincerely rejoiced that Donna. Triphosa had disposed of herself, as one great impediment to my union with Juliana was"removed; but my friend pointed out still stronger obstacles to get^owr, which he feared were insur¬ mountable—the difference of religion and nation. He was likewise certain that the Duke would never permit me to unite myself to the daughter of a plain country gentleman, thougli possessed of accom- , plishments to adorn a throne. r , < í' I dp .not'imagipe," continued he; " that
41 -".that fortune would?be .any consider- ¡ation, but л the * othpr "objections, I have "mentioned,are sufficient tp convince you, iny dear, Alonža, that it, would be mad¬ ness to* en tcr¡ into,any engagements with Miss Orrne ; t exert .your .fortitude, my Lord, and resplye to quit England imme- diatêly.t' i - ' . ; * « -- . \. . "Invain, my dear friend," I replied, *« Js ^yôur^counsel^r; Ltoîdyoùffronifthe first. tlíatlíjoved «Juliana ;,every succeed¬ ing day has^rivetedjny chains ; ibesic^es, my honour,is engaged. · It is true I■ have made no r declaration of my passion, but my , actions must :have convinced the lovely girl that I,adored her ; and fam certain, though she is unconscious of it, that I have gained her affections. Can
42- Can you then, who, from my earliest dawn of reason, have endeavoured to form ' my heart to every virtue, and to stamp on my mind the image of truth anďrectitude, can you persuade to ren¬ der unhappy an artless innocent girl ? Oh,jio, you cannot wish to act só'· con¬ trary to , the sentiments you have in¬ spired !" St. Clair assured me that nothing but - the fear of my incurring the' Duke's displeasure could have i induced him to advise me to give up Juliana, of whose merit he was fully sensible; and to whom; if it depended on him, he should rejoice to see me united. < c Well then, my friend, suppose I could
43 could prevail on Miss Orme to consent ' to a private marriage ?" St. Clair hesitated. He plainly saw my happiness and that of an amiable young woman's were at stake ; and as I was of age, he did not consider me as under his controul ; ' yet this truly up¬ right man could not reconcile it to his conscience to consent to what he thought might be deemed a breach of that con¬ fidence the Duke had ever reposed in him. However, my pleadings and his affection for me at length prevailed; reluctantly he agreed I should that evening open the subject to Juliana. - At an early hour we paid our accus¬ tomed visit at the Cottage ; the ladies were
44
. were .alone : ; after tea a walk was pro¬ posed. „St, Clair contrived to engage the attention of Mrs. Beaumont, and Ipft me,wjţh Juliana. t After some,general?remarks ton the .beauty of the piospect and-the: fineness ,of the weather, I entered í oni the sub- gcctjso near myzheart, ¡and-declared^my •jpasşion.in the,most-fervent .terms. (^ > - 'Juliana /blushed! ^butiher mind was .-superior to .coquetry or „duplicity. With a f look replete with modesty, .her'eyes met mine, the expression of which.con¬ vinced me my declaration-had not dis¬ pleased her. After-a short pause she replied—■
« T will
■ '"-. 45 ' • e f V I will ;rioť,-'my Lord·,'■ affèbt'tö say ' that I dö not feel-gratified by the decla¬ ration you have just made ; I háve long' J esteemed you, nor have I been insensible' to your kind assiduities.· I dbnoťdény that you are dear to me ; at the same time I am convinced that an union with you is next : to impossible ; I had there¬ fore ; hoped : you : >vould ' have' " ' quitted l ' England without coming tö, áh "explana¬ tion; "time- and a variety· 1 óf "objects "." might háve conquered the mutual pre¬ possession 1 we feel. 4 : ' Believe· me, íny' ' Lórdjj "much as iný happiness is at' ^tâ'kèj' '' I cannot condescend tó intrude myisblf ■ on a ; farriily ; that - may'/ despise r me.; Your, father's consent I. anr certain yöü " will never olitaih, and! have too mücïi your, interest at heart to* wish you to act ·.;;.■ ; \' '-'"'- ... , *\ contrary
46 contrary to his pleasure. You have owned he has long had a match in view for you - " I interrupted Juliana by saying— " That obstacle is at least removed ; I have this day received a letter from my father, informing me my Cousin Don Gusman has gained the prize. At the same time I will not, my adored Juliana, deceive you ; the difference of religion and country, added to the high notions my father entertains of rank, may throw many impediments in the way of our union, but I hope to be able to surmount them. My friend St. Clair is entirely in Our interest. I have commissioned him to acquaint Mrs. Beaumont with my sentiments ;
47
sentiments ; and trust, if she approves of them, you will not oppose them. Let us join our friends, and hear the result of their ^consultation." I soon (bund that St. Clair had been so warm an advocate in my favor, that I had little to fear from Mrs. Beaumont. On our return to tlie Cottage, I' en¬ treated a patient hearing. I then men¬ tioned my father's having recalled me to Spain ; that he was more anxious than ever for my marrying, but did not seem to have any rnatclC in view ; that the plan I had to propose was a private marriage ; my fortune, in right of my mother, was* large ; that I certainly should
4s 4 should'do every thin¿irl J mý pówW to re'concile'ťhé Duke to my choice. " Ah ! would to Heaven," I " ex- " claimed, " he could see ' my Juliana ! yèt, should heprové Inexorable,'I could maintain mý wïfe'hv a 'Style suitable tó my rank and future' expectations/* 3My Juliania,' sanctioned by her' early monitress,' iri some measure yielded to, my importunities; yét she'wished to defer our marriage'. I told her I would' ì not at' that time urge further orí ' the ž ' subject, nor would I,''without her'per- mission^ renew it. Stí Clair andlnyself took leave of thé ' ladies
49 J * ladies for the night; Mrs. Beaumonfe invited us to pass the next at the Cot¬ tage. St. Clair informed me that Mrs. Beau- ©ont was much my friend, nor could she suppose that the Duke, when ac¬ quainted with the merits of hen lovely pupil, would bei displeased with the match. " My Juliana," said she* " though not of the highest rank, is'noble by birth ; her beauty, her accomplishments, and fortune, entitle her to match -with the first families in this kingdom. Surely, even a Grandee of Spain canne t be disgraced by the alliance. - Thé differ¬ ence of "religion I own is a great objec- t VOL, II. D tion ;
50
t tal yet I trust it wifi mi prove ашоЕшгаЫе.'* " I cannot, my dear Alonza," conti¬ nued St* Clair, " be sø sanguine as this good lady s with whom you are Ш tire highest favour; yet I sometimes flatter myself yon will bfe аЫе tö prevail on the Duke to pardon what I am çer* tain he wcmld never consent to." I wrote té niy sfatte, pémislag* to leave En$and ih a few weeksy but as the Bristol waters agreed So well with me, I was ichdsed to continue there a little longer. My Mana received mfe the ttëxt'day m a triänner that delighted mê. Nlvèr had
st
had she appeared so interesting as when, blushing, she told me she consented to be mine. In the course of the day matters were purt in a train. I insisted on settling her fortune on пег,ч*Мг£ве addition of the estate I inherited in right of my mother. Mrs. Beaumont mentioned the reason of their living so retired was owing to * the desire of Mr. Опие, who had re¬ quested that Julioia should not be intro¬ duced to the gay world till she bad obtained her twentieth year; that it was intended theensuing winter to have taken a house in London, with a genteel establishment ; and Juliana was to have made het debut bt Űm region of fashion and pleasure under thep&Aøetlon of Sir О 2 George
52
George and Lady Ormond, who were nearly related to her. <e But you, my Lord, have entirely deranged our plan." I replied— " Only for a short time, Madam, as í flatter myself in a few months I shall present my Juliana at the Courts of St. James's and Madrid as the Marchioness Vaena." In less than a week the setdements were finished, and a special licence ob¬ tained. We fixed on a clergyman who had been long intimate in the family. The ceremony was performed at the Cottage j
53
Cottage; no one was present but Mrs. Beaumont, St. Clair, my faithful ser¬ vant Pedro, and a female servant who had nursed Juliana ; on their fidelity we could rely. Previously we had re¬ ceived the nuptial benediction from a worthy priest, a friend of St. Clair's, as it was necessary every precaution should be taken to render our marriage valid. It ' J >, In order to be under lesa restraint, the next day Mrs. Beaumont and Juliana gave out they were going to spend a month on a visit to a relation at Glou¬ cester. St. Clair and I were to join them at an appointed spot. I told my attendants we were going on a shooting party, arid ordered them to have every thing in readiness for my departure for d 3 - Spain
54
Spain at my return ; only Pedro and a groom who had attended me from a child, and was in the secret, accompanied us. v We assumed the name of Seymour, and travelled in the most private man¬ ner ; and we had a most delightful tour through that charming romantic coun¬ try, South Wales. л Six weeks flew on downy wings; never mortal enjoyed more happiness ; my loyely bride rose more ánd*more»in my estimation ; daily I discovered some new perfection in her person and mind. From this dream of bliss St. Clair at length awakened me, by hinting it was time to return to Clifton, as he was fearful there might be letters waiting for me.
me. TJiis^ast a gloom on my spirits, which my Juliana .instantly perceived, and anxiously inquired the cause. On my informing her, she could not conceal her emotion ; a tear bedewed her eyes, and for,a momeirt.clouded their lustre; but'finding I was much - affected, she regained her coniposure, and entreated me to exert my fortitude; that with Monsieur, St. ÇJair she thought it right to set ou*t for Clifton immediately, as we were iull tjiree çjays' journey from it.' ' 's , r ï > '' I yielded a reluctant consent to what I knew was absolutely necessary ; within a few miles of the Passage we separated ; St. Clair an4 I went on, the ladies were not to reach home tilLthe next day. n 4 On
56 On our arrival I found a letter from »ny father, expressing, in the strongest terms, his impatience to see me ; arid that he expected me to answer his letter in person. St. Clair conjured me not to delay complying with his request, as much depended on my finding him in good humour. As I knew nothing irritated him so /much assuspence, í resolved to leave Clifton in two days. Everything was ready according to my orders; I could only dedicate a few hours to my 4 adored Juliana, being obliged to make some visits of cere¬ mony. * Permit me tó draw a veil over the scene of parting; it is impossible to describe it. St. Clair forced me from my
57
my Juliana, who had fainted in the arms. of Mrs. Beaumont. " We had settled that my wife's letters should be enclosed to St. Clair, and consigned to the care of a merchant at Madrid. At soon as we reached London, I changed my dress and paid my parking visit to the Spanish Ambassador, and a few of the nobility that were Лп town. The next morning I had the happiness of hearing from my Juliana ; her letter afforded me consolation, and in some measure tranquillised my mind. It assured me she was well, and promised she would exert herself, and not suffer my absence to prey on her spirits. She conjured me to take care of myself for her sake ; in short, it breathed the most 'd5 ardent,
BB
ardent, yel the most deikafê m№šu of her affection, and hm confidence in my attachment and a ten reliance on my honour. Ir concluded by saying» she wotdd venture t<* direct ^løtefcer to Falmouth, for which glace we set off. immediately, and found the packet wouM sail in a few hours. ï wrote a long letter tø Juliana, and bid adieu to England (mem more than ever erdeared to me) with % heavy heart. We had a quick pasaage, and had the please of finding the Duke welt* and much r^gbiced to see me s though he said, I did not look so well as he expected. The anűdety of my susi had greatfy
m
injured my bealtì*. To my foğm I pleaded fatigue. A few weeks passed without anything 1ш1егЫ happening. ï had twice heard stee nay arrival· from Juliana, and wrote tot^bf^F^øi^cctimity^ Ihadnøt ţM bem Ше Ш s®rø<Lmy ßttjbei: on the s^jeet of my marriage % we had been scarcely an hour disengaged. Don Gusman and Donna Triphosa were on £ -sţiit >$c* t|të Duke, tbs Alvares was reconciled to them, and was fitting up a house at Madrid for their reception. » Tbey received me with apparent affection, and DonnaTriphosa seemed en tireîy to have forgotten that I had slighted ì^f#flfe#$d%Éind, шаавшигееу every ¡ - e 6 - means
60 means in her power to conciliate my esteem. She contrived to keep me so constantly engaged, that I had hardly a moment to call my own, or r to consult my faithful St. Clair. I was not a dupe to the art of either Gusman or Triphosa, but common politeness obliged me to pay them every attention during their 'residence with us. I longed for the moment of their departure, which they had fixed for the first week in January, and it was now the middle of December. One morning after breakfast I was accidentally alone witli the Duke, who alarmed me by addressing me nearly in 4 these words— * " I have scarcely, my dear Alonza, since
éi , -since your return enjoyed your com¬ pany; the different engagements and continual round of company, have pre¬ vented nie from entering in со any conversation relative to your future views. It is high time for you to settle ; I have many reasons for urging it. I rejoice that you disapproved of the proposed union with Triphosa, as I am now convinced that young lady would have rendered you miserable. Have you seen among the beauties that adorn our Court one thať you would choose for a partner through life ? · If not, I wish you to reserve your heart for a lady I mean to introduce you to shortly, whom ï think you will approve." I was
62 I was going tó reply as well as the agitation I was in would permit,-and which I wonder escaped the Duke's ob¬ servation, wheri the arrival of Don Gusman, Ms lady, and other company, prevented me. My father said in a low voice— " Reflect, Alonza, on what I have been saying,'and at our next conference let me know your détermination." rfeítrnyseíf relieved by this respite, but could not ' collect my spirits sufficiently to join in conversation,' which unfortu¬ nately turned on the young beauty, who was tobe presented the following week. I was so totally absent, that I was severely rallied
63
rallied on "my .inšensibilityi particularly by TViphosay rwho, ; with a malicious ■ ■smiíe¿ , -:saídr~-f , ^- l: -''· -: ^ГГГ'^-'^-^Г-. * c Surely; my dear ; cousins ýpu have left your heart in England ; some British fair one holds you in- captivity¿;or ýqu never would slight the charms of your own countrywomen." ^ í ■ This ill-timed sally increased my em¬ barrassment so much, that the Duke noticed it, and frowning, said—- " I am certain Alonza has top great ariaSèction for me to formany tie that would embitter the "short ■ remains öf myVtfe?: ' ;iU , i: : ;-;^ ť .''r;-"-->^. ■■''?:■■'■■
Had
64
Had not my friend St. Clair kindly contrived to engage the attention of the Duke, and give a sudden turn to the conversation, I should certainly have betrayed myself; fortunately at the instant a servant entered to tell me an intimate friend of mine wished to speak with me. „ I made an apology to the company, and left the room. ï had no opportunity of consulting St. Clair till the next morning. He was as unhappy as myself; not that we ima¬ gined the Duke had any idea of my situation, but we plainly perceived he was against my forming a connection with an English woman. We thought it would be improper at this period to acquaint him with my marriage. Thus passed
passed time. The' Duke did not renew the conversation ; indeed I avoided being alone with him.; At length Don Gusman and his lady took their - leave. The : morning after the Duke sent for me into his closet, and asked me what I had determined ori, arid if I had selected a lady oh whom Γ thought worthy òf conferring my name and ■ title. : ; :.- Γ ·'.' : : V' ;'·ΐν ' ?■ \?-·' "■·'.' '· ' I assured him i I had not; * Well j'* replied théDuke, ■,« I hope , in a few ; days you will surrender your heart to the beautiful Sophronia^ who is to <make her first appearance at Court; She is tlie only child of Don Sebastian, ,. л.; ! ^:<;:-л,- ■ ■ but-.
66
but her rank and fortune are her least merit." t Г * L * I promised to attend the Duke, * as I Isnew my.refusal .would offend· him, though I foresaw it would involye, me ín many difficulties. . ' To add to my uneasiness I received a letter from Juliana, informing me that shortly she should present me with a pledge of our love ; that her situation could not long bç concealed ; but- she by no means wished me to be prema¬ ture in disclosing our marriage; as she dreaded nothing so much as my incur¬ ring the " Duke's t displeasure, r Mrs. Beaumont had proposed ' a plan, which, if I approved of, they would put in ex¬ ecution.
- 67
ecution. ;'It was, to sell the Cottage, and to send her, old .servant John to inquire - for ai house and grounds in "Devonshire, that would suit a small family ; fshe proposed to take the name we had before assumed :.- she desired an imme¬ diate, answer. ; ' , - L ■ .. ' .This excellent woman .did not, by unavailing regret, add to my'Unhappi¬ ness; on the' contrary, her letters in¬ spired me with ^fortitude, ú l· wrote to her that I approved hert plan, 1 the arrangements of which I left to her and IVIrs. Beaumont, I promised, let what would be the consequence, to pay her a visit in the spring ; and hoped I should be in time to support arid comfort her in'the hour of trial. The
68
The dreaded day arrived that I was to be introduced to Donna Sophronia. •My father insisted I should make a splen¬ did appearance. It was a high festival, and the Court was brilliant and crowded ; every Cava¬ lier was eager tö pay his devoirs to the new divinity. I must do my father the justice to say, that the second choice he made for me did him honour ; never did I behold (one woman excepted) charms equal to those that adorned the young Sophronia ; they were heightened by tlie blushes caused by the universal admiration she excited. í At night there was a ball and supper. I had the honour of her hand, which occasioned
69
occasioned general envy. On entering into conversation, I found her sensible and animated. Had I had a heart to bestow, she certainly would have ob¬ tained it, so fascinating was .she in every respect. , My father watched me, and saw, with evident pleasure, that I entered into the spirit of the amusement. He and Don Sebastian conversed a good deal toge¬ ther ; I had no doubt of the subject. The ball did not break up till late. The J)uke withdrew sqon after supper, and had retired to rest long before I reached home. I was fatigued, but too much agitated to
7<*
to sleep.. ' í wished for fhôrning, 'yét dreaded to meet-my fathér, fori could not franWany'excuse/or ' make any objection tá äh' alliance with the acconi- - pushed Sophronia,«but by declaring my prior engagement, and avowing my marriage. At length I resolved to acquaint the Düke, and was just going to his apart¬ ment to wait his rising, when St. Clair entered; and 'on my mentioning my intentions hè' begged I would not think of it/ *-'-· " The Duke," continued he, " on his return home last night, sent for me to his closet,* and We had- a long conver¡»a- tion
.■';;■,-.; .:'■:■'■ 71 tiöii relative to yöu ! i líe íóld rnë he was very uneasy at: the great alteration he perceived, iri your mánri er arid mode of Г " й А1опйа ušedj' continued hiš: Grãêej ^ tö be the life òf every party, he is how bold änd märiiriiäte; tò^hight, for the first tîme 3 he sèërkiécl cheerful arid attentive' ; this^ gives^ me hopes that Dorina Sophro¬ nia^ has riïade ari impression ön ; his heart jr í háve suspicions ät times that he hìà attached'himself Britain ;''.,": but;as I never would consent^ whatever^ the rarik:òr rriérit of· thé íady¿ iö r hfâ V 'marryirig ; a jiéreticí I trüst'lriy fears aré í ğrburidİess; ! 'Г Tell т riiéì [1 mf friend, has he ; made yöıi acquainted Şvithihe state i6Í hisáñecÜoris?' ; J -г^^ : ' г 'гу': , : "Ш&,
72
" Judge, my dear Lord, of my feel¬ ings, at being thus interrogated; for the first time, since I was honoured with the confidence of his Grace, I had re¬ course to artifice and falsehood. I dis¬ avowed my knowledge of your having formed any connection ; said, I believed the lowness of your spirits proceeded from your health not being perfectly re-established; and mentioned, it was the opinion of the faculty, that it would be adviseable for you again to visit Clifton the ensuing spring. u The Duke, whose parental feelings are ever tremblingly alive, expressed much alarm, and declared his intention of questioning you on the subject of your'health. * f Surely, my dear St. Clair, you do not
73 not think my son in danger. I know your love for him almost equals mine ; do not, I conjure you, deceive me in this point." ** I assured his Grace I had no fears for your life, but thought you in that delicate state that you required great care. In short, the good Duke forgot Donna Sophronia, and we parted with¬ out the subject being renewed. If his Grace should press you to receive the hand of Donna Sophronia, plead your weak state of health ; and indeed, my dear Alonza, your looks bespeak you far from well." - A summons from the Duke to attend ' vol. п. в > breakfast
74
breakfast prevented any further dis¬ course ; however, I was convinced that my marriage must remain a profound secret. My want of rest had given me a violent head-ach. On my entering the room, my father - anxiously inquired how I did. I replied, I found myself rather fatigued with my last night's exertions. After we had discussed the topics of the duy, the Duke asked me what I thought of Donna Sophronia, and if she had answered the description I had heard of her. I said she was a most lovely creature, and that the voice of fame had merely done her justice.
" Do
" Ďó ýou mean to pay, ybur respects to her this morning?" :, ; : л ■'; ; ; ■;[ ?} *f Certainly, Sir ;. common' politeness ■ requires it." ?': :: '' ;' :: ;';;. '/; ^v Г? "?'* [ "Well, I am not "without hopes; Alonzâj that she will steal your heart ; but fake your own /time; ;ahd believe me, " in ; wishing ybu to form this älli* .-';." ànce, I only seek your liappiriëss." ■ : I was received by'Don Sebastian with ·■ every mark^Of friendships and Ъу hiš daűgliter ^ with visible j^easure.'After à little general .conversation^ Doh Se- ■ bastian: desired her to playa lesson; òn thè harpsichord,": which she executed; in ,' ; an 1 elegant 1 style ; ; she}: afterwards sang ■vv^:-;'' ": '■ '., ie' 2- ■■' several .
Ï6 Several Italian airs with a taste and judg* ment that astonished me. Spite of the uneasiness which preyed upon me, I spent a very agreeable morn¬ ing, and .received a pressing invitation to dine with them the next day. Im¬ perceptibly I was drawn into an intimacy with Donna Sophronia. My father was delighted, and was continually forming parties of pleasure. ,He gave a grand ball and supp"er on my birth-day as usual; Sophronia was my partner. I was more and more pleased with her society, and conceived a most sincere friendship for her. I loved her as a sister ; but can with safety avow that I never for a moment, even in thought, swerved from my attachment to my adored
77
adored Juliana; "nor did I perceive I had engaged the affections of this lovely artless.girl tillit was too late. St. Clair had often hinted it, but I assured him his fears were without foundation. An incident, trifling in itself, disco¬ vered the state of her heart, I was riding out one evening, when I met Sophronia and another lady, who were taking an airing. ' I stopt to speak to them', and was conversing with my hand on the carriage door ; my horse was a spirited one, and wanted to go on ; on my cheeking him he reared,' and being off my guard, I was thrown under the coach wheels; the_ ladies screamed; Sophronia fainted; with the assistance of the servants I was soon on my legs, e3 as 4
73 as I had not received the least injury. It was some time before Sophronia recovered : the .first words she uttered were— " Oh, Heavens, he is killed, and I < am wrefxhed for life P' 'í On raising her fine eyes, she per¬ ceived I was supporting her, (for we had "taken her out of the carriage for air,} never shall I forget the expression of v joy that beamed in her lovely counte« nance on finding I had escaped unhurt ; nor the delicate confusion she was in at haying discovered sentiments so warmly in my favour.- \n the most delicate manner I calmed, her
19 -
her agitation, and assured lïer of my gratitude for the lively concern she ex- pressed for my safety. She so earnestly entieated that I would not remount my horse, that, to quiet her fears, I consented to return with them in the carriage. > I found the Duke and St. Clair at Don Sebastian's, who were much alarmed at hearing of my accident, and begged a surgeon might be sent for. I laughed them out of their fears, and convinced them that no medical assistance was wanted. I exerted myself to the ut¬ most, but it was with difficulty L con¬ cealed my chagrin the discovery of Sophronia's partiality for me occasioned. On my * return home I took myself severely to task for my inconsiderate ľ 4 beha-
80
behaviour. On St. Clair entering my apartment, I exclaimed— " My dear friend, you were too true a prophet; would to Heaven I had attended to your admonitions! 'it is now, alas! too late; Sophronia loves me, and I have to reproach myself with having rendered unhappy one of the most estimable and innocent of her sex. Can you advise me how to act? the perturbations of my mind quite over¬ powered me." " Moderate these emotions, my dear Lord," said St. Clair ; " I blame myself /or not having taken effectual means to prevent what, from the first, I expected would happen; but unavailing regret will
sı
will not remedy the evil ; let us con¬ sider what is best to be done, and how you may withdraw your attentions from Sophronia without wounding her pride." After a long consultation, and form¬ ing and rejecting various plans, it was resolved I should make her the confidant of my situation, and entreat her advice how to act, without hinting that I had discovered her. partiality for me, but im¬ pute her alarm at my fall to friendship. } , ' The following day my father expres¬ sed ,a wish that I would bring things to a conclusion, as · Don Sebastian began to be impatient' at my not being more explicit» I replied, that I certainly '.. ', 'e 5 admired
82 admired Donna Sophronia, but was by no means certain that I was the favoured lover. -. s , " Make the essay," said the Duke, " Ì will ensure you.success." In order to end this discourse, I told him I was going to inquire after SophKb hia's health. I found her alonej After \ thanking her for the marks of her esteem she had honoured me with, and assuring hér of my gratitude arid friendship, the latter of which I was going to give a strong proof of, by entrusting her with a secret, and imploring her advice how to act in an affair on which my future happiness or misery depended. After
83 * After a short preface, and apologising for the liberty I was going to take, I entered into a minute detail of every circumstance relative to my passion for Juliana, our private marriage, her present situation. ' " You are no stranger, Madam," ï continued, " that our fathers have formed a plan for uniting us without consulting our inclinations; mine, in¬ deed, justly imagined J could npt be insensible to the resplendent beauties of your, mind and person.' Nothing but· my having surrendered my heart before I had the honour of knowing you, to one every way your counterpart, could have, prevented me from long .since becoming, your captive, and claiming a> е. 6 pri: e
84·
prize so many vainly aspire to. It is needless, Madam, to say, that I feat, independent of the disappointment and anger my father will feel at my not complying with his wishes in regard to you, there are other obstacles that will prevent his being reconciled to my hav¬ ing entered into vows without consulting him—my Juliana is an English woman and a protestant. *. Will you, Madam, deign to assist me in this exigency ? I flatter myself I háve exculpated myself from being insensible to your perfect tions, and if you find much to condemn in my conduct, you will at least find as much to pity." It is impossible to paint the various emotions that agitated the delicate frame cf
Q5 of Sophronia during my recital, or the different'passions her countenance ex- pressed, but it ь was easy to perceive that love and compassion prevailed; her gentle bosom "was a stranger to malice or revenge, nor could anger long dwell there. ^ - · Sophronia had heard me with a fixed attention. After a short pause she raised' her eyes, and while the blushes that suffused her lovely face added ta her charms, she, in a faltering voice, thus addressed me— - ; α I thank you, my Lord, for this can¬ did avowal of your sentiments, and for the confidence you have reposed in-me, which, rest assured, I will never betray- I wislt
8Ç
I wish yon had sooner acquainted me with your situation, it would have saved me some pangs, though I must do you the justice to acknowledge that your .atten¬ tions háve never exceeded the bounds of friendship. For some time I have disco¬ vered you were melancholy and unhap¬ py, and feared our projected alliance was the cause. Could I. hâve assumed cou¬ rage, I would háve inquired what mys¬ tery enveloped you, as even in company you were often absent arid 4 thoughtless. ι It is needless to say, that you possess both my friendship and esteem; point out how you would wish nie to act, my endeavours shall riot be wanting to ex¬ tricate you from the dilemma you are involved in."- - ' ч f / ' . . ' / i [¿j tÉ Thanks^
87 " Thanks, ten thousand thanks, most generous of women, for your unexauv pled goodness, which it will never be in my power to repay." " . cť Stop, Alonza, let us not waste the time in useless protestations, when we have not a moment to Jose, for my father meets the Duke this evening to adjust matters relative to our intended marriage ; there is but one way I can serve you ; allow mc to, consult my f father." ■ ï involuntarily started. " Be not alarmed, my friend; did you know the greatness of Don Sebas r tian's soul, the goodness of his heart, and
83
and the mildness of his temper, you would not hesitate at what I propose. Indulge me in this request ; I pledge my word you shall not repent it, only give .me full liberty to act»" iC Do as you think best, my lovely friend ; I trust implicitly to you." " Leave me at present, Alonza ; you shall, if possible, hear from me this evening. If the Duke questions you on this meeting, say I appeared to receive your declaration with coldness. Adieu 1 Heaven direct us Í" I kissed her hand, and retired, full - of admiration a_t the magnanimity of her conduct. My father had no oppor- tunity
89
tunity of speaking to me on the subject, as some afiairs of importance to the state engaged his attention. I sought my faithful St. Clair, and related the event of my interview with Sophro¬ nia ; he joined me in her praise. We anxiously waited the result of her conference with her father ; our curio¬ sity was strongly excited to know what steps she would pursue. The next morn¬ ing ï received the following billet from Sophronia— fi Every thing, my much-esteemed friend, has succeeded to our wish. -"My father, with his accustomed goodness, yielded to my entreaties, and has found means to break off the in¬ tended alliance. With me he feels for your
90
your situation. You will excuse us for avoiding an interview ; we leave Madrid this morning ; the Duke will, I imagine, inform you 'of the particulars. Γ have, - with m Yc father's consent, taken the blame on myself. Adieu. , May Heaven guard and protect you, and give you to the arms of your adored wife 1 Be more cautious than ever in keeping your secret : youi: motions are watched. · Be* * ware; of rrriphosa and Gusman ; they are. your implacable enemies. Once more adieu. Ever yours, with friendship and esteem. ' ( . - " Sophronia." The Duke returned so late, that we did not meet till breakfast. I found he' -had kept ''his appointment with Don Sebastian ;
91
1 Sebastian ; he seemed unusually ruffled. After a few moments of silence, he said— " Surely, Alonza, a fatality hangs over you." "- In what regard, Sir ?" " Why,DonnaSophronia has changed her mind,' and has found out that she wishes to. enjoy her freedom a little longer. She pleads indisposition, and that change of air is necessary.^ The old fool, her father, is alarmed, and fear¬ ful she has fretted herself sick. Instead, as I expected at our meeting, to have settled every thing, he begged I would not be oilended at his declining the alliance,
92
alliance, which he protested was the first wish of his heart, but he could not account for the caprice of young mihds. f _ " * Pardon me, my friend, for yield¬ ing to the solicitations of ray darling girl. Impute it to parental weakness,. for I cannot oppose her inclinations.* j * I made scarcely any reply to this ■ fine' harangue, only advised him to be careful how he entered into engage^ 'ments for the future, and abruptly left the room, As to you, Alonza, "I do not think your heart, was concerned in the business, therefore your disappointment is not great." I replied, it was more in compliance with
93 with his Grace's ,wishes. than; my own inclinations ; yet no one could see and- converse with Sophronia without ad¬ miring her. This affair, so happily terminated, relieved my anxiety, in some measure, but I had still much on my mind ; I was impatient to be in England, as the last letter from Juliana mentioned she was daily in expectation of being confined : she and Mrs. Beaumont were settled ( in their new habitation, within a few miles of Matlock, where she said I was anxi¬ ously expected. I grew restless and uneasy. St. Clair took occasion to mentioa to the Duke he thought an excur- ' sion
94 sion' would be ?*£. infinite' service- to me ; to his great surprise,' my father objected to my again .visiting England, 1 and proposed my making thé tour, of France ; this'entirely disconcerted our plan*. St. Clair, advised me to make no objection < to the Duke's proposal, only 1 desire to travel incog. > < ' · * * < . j/ < "> It<will be easy;" said he, " to de¬ ceive the Duke." . ■ Accordingly,* when my father expres¬ sed a wish for^ me tó spenda few months in France, L told him I approved of the scheme, only requested permission to travel as a private gentleman. To this he made T no objection, and consented -'- ' *' f ' ' '■ X'' that
95 that Monsieur St. Clair and I should only be attended by Pedro and "one footman. , ? : A few, days .previous to the time fixed for the commencement of our journey, I received a letter from Mrs. Beaumont, informing me of my Juliana having pre¬ sented me ' with a rharming little girl, and that both mother and child were in a fair way of doing well, it is impossi¬ ble to describe the different sensations Ifelt at this pleasing intelligence. How ardently did I long to clasp my beloved wife and infant to my heart. " Congratulate me,'my friend," said I to St. Clair, who had entered the room before I had finished the letter, " my
96
<е mý Juliana İs safe, and has made me the happy father of a lovely girl. · Would to ifeaven we could set off this instant." ~ <c 'Your wish, mý dear Alonza^ will be accomplished. The Duke is eager for our departure. I have just come from him.- ' By an innocent stratagem I have obtained his consent to your spend¬ ing three months, and more if necessary, ^atMadock." /,/·,.· ■ " How, mý friend, did you prevail on my father to alter his plán ?" " As í told „you, by stratagem. I bribed the physician to say he perceived symptoms of & decline; and thé only chance of preventing it was for you to . , · ' try
97
try the air and„ waters of Matlock,* as every thing is ready. His Grace wishes us, if the wind is fair, to embark the day after to-morrow. He has sent to · engage the whole of the packet to pre¬ vent any delay." „ In as short a time as possible I had the supreme felicity of embracing my wife and child ^nd the good Mrs. Beaumont. After the first transports of meeting were over, I entered into a detail of every thing that·* had passed' since our separa¬ tion ; a tear stole down my Juliana's cheek when Γ described Sophronia and her generous, conduct. " л Heroic girl l" exclaimed ¿my wife, " may Heaven reward your, unexampled vol. и. f virtue !
ss ч virtue ! How I long for your friendship, and to convince you that I estimate the sacrifice you made to our happiness as it deserves. I am afraid, my dear Alon* za r I could not have acted so disinterested a part." ,. , , ' The house and grounds my Juliana hacHiired for the season were beautifully situated, and most elegantly laid out ; to me it appeared a„ paradise. /lb/·,, I wrote to my father, assuring hini I had found great benefit from the air^nd waters, which was really true, *as I mended daily. In his answer he desired I would remain there as long as 'the season permitted, and defer my tour to France till the ensuing year. . ' ', * . * We
9&
We lived quite retired. My little Juliana, who began to take notice, was a continual source of amusement. Music, reading, and walking filled up our time? ν Six months glided away impercep¬ tibly: various were the plans formed and rejected relative to our future pro¬ ceedings. I wished to publish our mar¬ riage, though I was certain of being disinherited, but that was of no import¬ ance ; the title and entailed estate must devolve to me, and the fortune I derived from my mother was large ; and, joined with my wife's, was amply sufficient, not orly for the comforts but the luxuries of life, and to rear a young family equal to the rank their birth entitled them to. ï F&· 'What
100 What withheld me was¿ the fear of ren¬ dering my father miserable ; my Juliana too would not hear of it;" such exalted notions had,she of filial love, that she thought we ought to make every sacri¬ fice to secure the peace of a parent \ often would she reproach herself as the occasion of my Jiaving deviated from my duty. . r r-i r ' \ Ať length we determined to continue in obscurity; and had it not been for the thoughts of ourapproaching separa¬ tion, we should have been perfectly happy. St. Clair was of opinion that I ought not to defer any longer my return to Spain, It was now the middle of November, and - frcould jno longer with propriety * retard our departure. It
101
If was setded that the next summer we should meet in France. Ji-. 1 ' This second parting was far worse than the first ; a pre-sentiment of some unforeseen misfortune was strongly im¬ pressed on » our minds. My Juliana's fortitude forsook her, and for some days previous to our setting out she was the image of despair, yet she had tlie reso¬ lution to insist .on my departure. At last I tore; myself away from all I held~ dear : had it not-been for the unremitted attention of my ever-kind St. Clair, I should have sunk under the trial, j My father received «me in the most affectionate manner, and seemed ţ to have los t t all suspicion of my having formed f 3 any
202 any connection in England. To my satisfaction I found Don Gusman and his lady were at a distant part of the kingdom, attending a rich relation, to whom Gusman expected to be heir. Don Sebastian and his amiable daughter were making the tour of Italy· ' I passed the winter 'in tolerable se- Tenity. I had thé pleasure of hearing frequently from my adored wife, who assured me she was in good health, and that our little girl improved daily. ' ŕ Early in the spring I was plunged into affliction by the sudden death of my 'faithful friend and confidapt St. Clair· I'had been a day's excursion into the country!with some friends: at my return
Í03 return in the evening I found the house' in confusion, and the seryants in tears ; Pedro met me in the hall, but could not speak. " For Heaven's sake,"^ cried I, " tell me what is the matter. ' How is the Duke ?" * ( His Grace is well," said Pedro, in a faltering voice, " but Monsieur &t> Clair ------" « Whatof Mm?" " - " He is very dangerously Ш," replied Pedro. v - 1 - ί " ''l, 1 staid to hear no'more^ and flew up те the
104
the stairs; and before the attendants could prevent me,' I was 'in "his apart¬ ment. Great God! what were my feelings on beholding the guide and instructor of my childhood, the friend and monitor of my riper years, a sense¬ less corpse,- whom in themorning I left in apparent good health. He was sitting with the Duke after dinner, conversing cheerfully, and was seized with an apo¬ plexy that ina few moments terminated the existence of the best of men. I stood absorbed in the deepest melan¬ choly; my thoughts were a perfect . chaos, till roused by a message from the Duke, desiring to see me. Mechani¬ cally I obeyed the summons. The sight of my father,who was in great afiliction, awakened
105
awakened the softer feelings, and ï burst into tears, which greatly relieved me. . We strove, but in vain, to comfort each other. The,Duke sincerely lamentedjhis loss, as he estimated him highly ; but to me it was a blow I could scarcely support. I had ever felt for him the love and respect of a son, and he had ever acted as an affectionate parent,to me. I was fearful of letting Juliana know the event, as she was much attached to him ; but it was necessary to inform her of it, as my letters must come through another channel. When I could collect my ideas» I wrote the melancholy account ; and, as F 5 SOOft
106 Soon as possible," received an ariswe~rl Ah ! how sweetly consolatory were'my Juliana's arguments, how resigned to the dispensations of Providence, though ■she- most sincerely regretted the death òf this truly good man. I had the hap- - piness of hearing that she and my little girl were well, who, she wrote me, began to lisp papa. The Duke perceiving I did not rece- ver my spirits, desired me to change the scene, j ! ' * " Time, and a variety of objects," said he, K will soften the poignancy of your grief, and you will only retain a grateful remembrance of this excellent departed man. Go, then, my son ; ч for '' * - your
107 cyour sake, I deprive myself of the pleasure of your society ; for mine be careful of your health; and let me have the happiness at your return of finding you have so far conquerecl your feelings* as to be resigned -to an event which, sooner or later, awaits us alL" My father asked me where I intended to spend the su¿imer. I replied— " In the South of France." My answer pleased him. He wished me to j travel with 1 "eclat, but I declined it by saying I was unfit at present ta attend to parade or ceremony. He urged me to take some friend as a companion, but I assuréd.him* I- should sooner regain'my - · * ι * ï б spirits
IOS
spirits by being' imder, no restraint, though I felt myself truly grateful for his tender anxiety ; that he might de¬ pend on my exertions, and had no doubt but I should in a short time be able to write a good account of my health and State of minçL I at last prevailed on my father to consent to my travelling my own way ; ' his expressions of affection when I took leave affected me ; and the fervency of his blessing made so strong an impres- sion on me, that }t was .with difiiculty I restrained myself from avowing my marriage, and imploring his forgiveness. I had written to Juliana to meet me at Calais, as L preferred going by r sea ; there
109
there I had the pleasure of again em¬ bracing my .wife and child,:' The joy of this meeting was lessened by the thought of poor St. Glair, and the visible alter¬ ation in the looks of the worthy Mrs. " Beaumont, who I found had been in a declining state for some time ; but she had forbid Juliana to mentionét in her letters; fearing to add to my uneasiness. She perceived I was'unhappy about her, and endeavoured to quiet my fears by assuring me she was better, and had great hopes the mild climate of Montpellier would restore her. I . ■ » · ' ' ' ι " , The next morning I dispatched Pedro to take a ready furnished villa in the vicinity of Montpellier, -and resolved до _ wait his, return before we commenced - * our
110
«ur journey.. - Pedro soon found a re* treat "tháť in· every,respect suited us ; hè hired'the necessary servants, and left orders -to have every thing, ready for our^reception. - ? > г < ' We travelled by easy stages, and ai> rived at our villa in ten days, which was most romantically situated in a delight* ful ' valley. In this sequestered spot,. blessed with the society of my wifejmd the prattling of my darling Juliana, I soon recovered mý health and spirits. For some weeks we flattered ourselves that Mrs. Beaumont daily gained ground, and that her disorder had taken a most favourable turn ; .but a sudden and vio : lent relapse destroyed our ; hopes, andl ''' we
III we expected her speedy dissolution ; yet v she lingered nearly three months, during which time she suffered the most excru¬ ciating pain with the resignation and fortitude of a true Christian ; her un¬ affected piety, the frequent discourses we had on religious subjects, gave me a 'prepossession in favour of the Pro¬ testant mode of worship. On finding her end fast approaching, she took an opportunity," when Juliana hadTeft the room, of thus addressing me— '" I know not, my dear Lord, how to advise you to act in the present emer-^ gency. Juliana will very ahortly be deprived of my protection, and "will riot be able, I fear, in future to support your absence; besides, hér youth and beauty 1 ' l renders
renders it highly improper for ber to live separate from her husband, and » τ , r , I interrupted Mrs. Beaumont by say¬ ing, I was determined, let what would 1 be the consequence, to declare my mar¬ riage, and do justice to my wife and child, who should t no longer live in ob¬ scurity, but fill the rank in life they were entitled to." I'" " Stop, my dear friend," i said this excellent woman, " be not too precipi¬ tate ; weigh well the mode of discovery, and do not plunge into difficulties you may never surmount ; but, above all, avoid incurring the malediction of the Duke j a parent's curse is terrible, and I am
113 am certain it would be'the dôa,th of our beloved Juhana. Certain öf your honour, and the strong affection you bear your wife and child; added to my, knowledge of your principles both moral and reli¬ gious,! am assured that you never will give my darling girl cause to repent having trusted ! her happiness ^in your hands.^ * A3 it is impossible to point out what/steps you had best take, I can only implore the' Almighty to bless and guide you. If practicable, let me entreat of you to remain with Juliana this win¬ ter,;* 'she/will stand -in need of alf your care and attention,toenableher to bear the, shock my death ¿will give her. I have for some time past been endeavour¬ ing to, < prepare herfor J4 it. ι The only pang I feël in 'quitting this world is the thought
Л14 í thought of parting with those I love, and causing them affliction." Mrs. Beaumont survived this dis¬ course only a week. She retained her senses and strength of mind to the last* She had settled her worldly affairs pre¬ vious to her leaving England. Her fortune and jewels í she bequeathed our little girl, except five hundred pounctø to her woman, who had lived with het many years. A few hours before her death she took a most 4 affectionate and affecting 1 leave of us, thanked^us for o ii r care and atten¬ tion, blessed the child, and most fer¬ vently 'recommended us to the pro¬ tection of Heaven ; she then desired u& ta
'to leave her; as she wished id take some repose ; she sank into a deep sleep, in which she expired without a groan. i'. ■. . .■■'.''■· My I. Juliana had : supported herself wonderfully, but the great fatigue she Jiad ündergpnej added to the anxiety of her mindi proved too much for her gnáturaUy Helicate iframe ; she ëndea* 'vbured, fori;my sake; to conquer her ïeèlirigs; but in vahï ; unfortunately she was far advanced in her pregnancy, and In two days after Mrs: ' Beaumont's death she was delivered of a still-born son; which she survived only ten days.> Sensible of Ьегл danger, she employed her time in arming me with fortitude, and conjuring rne to moderate my afflic? tion
HG tion for her sake. She earnestly re¬ quested that our marriage should be " consigned to oblivion, and the child to be educated as an orphan, and entirely .ignorant of having a parent living. · ^ e Yet, oh, my Alonza! in, secret watch over hev helpless infancy. My -fortune," continued the dying S4int, ·" will entiUe her to an, eligible, if not a splendid situation in life. I need not .urge my dear husband to let her educa¬ tion *be liberal., Have you any friend in England to whom you can intrust, tliis important charge ?, I have often heard you speak of Mr. Millward in terms of -the highest esteem, and regret that you have dropped his correspondence ; seek him out, and to him confide the secret of
11*7 of our ill-fated marriage, and entreat him to be a parent to our,infant girl." I conjured my-Juliana not to persist in her request, but permit me to declare our marriage, and own my child, from whom I could not consent to be sepa¬ rated." Never shall I forget her looks of entreaty, grasping my hands and fixing berlangufd eyes upon me, she said— * c Docs my adored Alonza refuse my last request ?" She fainted in my arms. I pressed her to my heart in a transport of grief, and by my violent exclamations roused her : half frantic, and scarcely knowing what I did, I solemnly vowed to fulfil her
118
her injunctions; however repugnant to the feelings of my heart. " Thanks, my still-idolised Alonza; by this promise, which I know you will hold sacred, you have smoothed the bed of death, As soon as possible after my decease return to Spain, and devote yourself to sooth the latter days of the Duke. And, oh, my dear Aloiiza, if you would fulfil my last and most san¬ guine wish, do justice to the virtues, of Sophronia ; let not that lovely girl pine in secret; tlie sacrifice she made to your happiness calls for your „gratitude : tell her, as a proof ^of my regard, with my dying breath Л blessed her, and be¬ queathed her my Alonza. Let our child be brought up a Protestant, which is
11Ô
îs the reason I wish the Duke to remain in ignorance of his having a grand¬ child ------" 4* She was proceeding, but grew too faint to articulate. She lived tül the pext morning; but permit me, my friend, to draw a veil over the parting scene. She retained her senses to the last, and expired in my arms. I fear the vehemence of my grief disturbed her last moments. As soon as· she ceased to breathe I became insensible to all around me. My faithful Pedro had me conveyed from the chamber of death, sent for a surgeon to bleed me, and put mc to bed, as I-had not had my clothes off for "several days, "'' - nor
120
nor taken any rest ; nature was ex¬ hausted, and I fell asleep ; but, oh, my God ! to what horrors did I awake í Suffice it to say, that I was for some weeks in a state of distraction, which terminated in a stupoiv . The uncommon attention and care of Pedro and the women attendants saved my life, nay, restored my senses. They presented my little Juliana to me daily, but I took no notice of her innocent endearment. At last, the sight of Jier, and the exclamation of " My own dear papa,'' roused «me from my apathy; and,· embracing the precious pledge, I burst into tears ; from that moment 1 recovered my reason. ' ľ l i * « Durine?
Düririg my state öf insèrisibility,Pédro had conducted every thing as I íöuld háve} wished"; he had sent two trusty domestics over /to England" with -the remains öf Mršv Beaumoriť aäd' mý wife, ; with orders to-see them interred in the vault belonging" to-the farnily, ! arid gave; directions that every respect should be paidto theiŕľrneriipryc ■·;? ■■ ; · ^ : " I had scarcely recovered strength toľ' leave my room, when a letter arrived fŕpm'mý father^^ iriförmirtg 1 ще hé Was cprifined^bý v the 'goüt¿ ; arid- had had '-ai'?· violent 1 'attack '' öf -f it- in his ■ ; stomach, ■ -which 1 had left him weak and low; 'he entreated 'riié; tö' return tö Spain mime-' diately, { ás he was more thari eveť iriipa- tiénť toenibrace rrièl I was^obliged^ to ; .-.,'■ --'ýpii. ι:," ■■'■' ''Λ..'. g ' : .■' '.-,".-. ;■ -collect ;
122
collect my ideas to write to him.. I assured him that nothing but a severe indisposition should have prevented me from obeying his summons ; begged him not to be alarmed; that I had been c< exceedingly Ш, but was recovering fast, and hoped in less than a month I should be ţ able to commence my journey. I promised to ¿write by every post, and begged to hear from him as soon as possible. ' Weak as I was, I settled every thing in the course of three days, and set* out, -for England. I arrived in Londona week since, and from your agent had the satisfaction of- hearing you resided •at Upton Hall, and had ¿been .some years united to the amiable Miss Roberts. I,-de·
. 12Ä I determined to pay you a visit, and if ï found you the same warm friend you" had ever been, to entreat your pro¬ tection for my infant girl. - I have entered into a length of detail, which I fear you'will think tiresome, but it was necessary you should be acquainted with the minutest particulars of my unhappy story ; pardon, there¬ fore, my dear friend; my prolixity, and believe me most unalterably yours, Vaena.
oS
124
■ CHÂP. IV. * ■ The length* of'the 'Marquis's narrative had kept the family up long beyond their usual'hour of retiring;, yet, as they wished to be ready to receive him, they assembled' in the morning early. * Mr. Millward had just finished it when the' servant announced Mr. Seymour, He was received in a manner that at once soothed and flattered him. He presented - . .his
125 his little girl to Mrs. Millward, and en¬ treated her maternal care in a way so pathetic and graceful, that he affected all present. Emma could not refrain from tears. She tenderly embraced the child, and vowed she Would, from that mo_- ment, consider ,it as her own. ^The General was struck withvjhe r sylph-like appearance and uncommon beauty of the infant Juliana ; placing her on his knee and fohdly' kissing her, he « declared she 'should share his affections with his darling Edward and Matilda. { , ^ , It was some time before Alonza was suf¬ ficiently composed to return his thanks, or the party thought of taking break¬ fast. At length Juliana roused them by g3- lisping
"lisping out she was very hungry, and chat she wanted to see the playfellows her papa~ had promised her. The Ge¬ neral rang the bell, and ordered the children to be brought. " Do, "my dear," addressing Emma, " do make the tea, and give this'angel some toast.** ? j i N ' J Alonza apologised for haying detained them from breakfast. Edward and Matilda now, made their appearance, and were quite enraptured with their new playmate. /The 'General;' after, /blessing the children,' joined their hands with the little Juliana, saying—- - «My
127
c< My dears, this gentleman has brought you a new sister ; will you not love her?" " Indeed, grandpapa, I will, and dearly too," said Edward. " And me too," echoed Matilda. 'The infantine prattle and innocent gambols of the children diverted their fond parents, and made even Alonza cheerful. The morning being fine and mild for the season, Mr. Millward proposed a walk over the grounds, and in the vil¬ lage. 4
g 4
« To-
12S
" To-morrow, my dear friend, if agreeable, we will ride over to Thorpe, as I long to shew you a place that a few years back was a wild uncultivated tract ' of land." m \ | , Alonza consented, saying, he should * take great pleasure in viewing ihe park and environs of Upton. ¡ " But give me permission first to pre¬ sent you to Mrs. Evans, the person who has had the care of the child from its birth ; she is above the common class of servants in every resp set." Mrs. Evans was immediately called, with whom Emma was much pleased ; the good woman had had a thousand fears
129 fears lest she should not be continued about her little charge ; but was qui,te transported when. Mrs. Millward, with her usual ι condescension, told her she meant to retairi her. " My head nurse and you," conti¬ nued she, " will, I have no doubt, be very happy together ; she is a very respectable - person, for whom L have a great regard." » , ì k > s ì . Mrs. Barker was. sent for, and intro¬ duced to her future companion. Every * thing was soon settle"d relative to the nursery arrangements, and an apart¬ ment appointed contiguous for Juliana and her attendant. ; j g 3 The
130
, The gentlemen set off for their morn¬ ing excursion. Alonza, in conversing - with his" friend, felt more comfort than he had done since his recent loss; they passed half an hour at the rectory ; the family promised to spend the. evening at tlie 'Hall, and bring home Fanny 1 Edwards, who >* had spent a few days with them : they next visited the cha- ritable institutions. Alonza was much pleased on observing the order, industry, . and neatness that prevailed in every ' depattment òf the different establish¬ ment, and the comfortable provision the aged enjoyed. Mr. Millward during their walk briefly recapitulated the hermit's story 5 it interested Alonza greatly ; and find¬ ing
ısı í ing they had an hour to spare, he pro¬ posed paying him a,visit. They found the venerable man occupied in cultiva¬ ting his little garden. He received them - with a pleasure that he always evinced" on seeing any one from the Hall. Mr. Millward merely introduced the Marquis as Mr. Seymour, an old friend of his. The hermit welcomed him to his cell ; and after setting refreshments before them, showed Alonza every thing worthy of notice in'his small domain, t who Was· both charmed and edified with the hermit's discourse, which breathed the spirit of unaffected piety, and with¬ out seeming to notice the sable dress or thejangour that overspread the fine and expressive countenance of Alonza, en» g 6 tered
132
entered on a subject "the mpst likely to sooth an afflicted mind, the duty of our being resigned to the dispensations of Omnipotence, whose decrees were ever dictated by mercy and justice. He pointedout the necessity of submission to the Divine will, and of bearing with hu- ,mility the ! Indispensable ills óf this tran¬ sitory life. He painted in vivid colours the advantages of true religion, which . always proved an unfailing resource to the unhappy; at the same time he proved it was incumbent on us to con¬ quer our grief, and not to indulge melancholy reflections, or dwell orí mis¬ fortunes we could not prevent* » ŕ * " Let the events that afHict us," con- tinyed he with a sigh, ťí be ever so severe,
133 severe,' if they clo not proceed J from, guilt, they in time^ niay be" overcome. Frequently let-us, .my sons, raise our thoughts tô Heaven; and* with meek- eyed patience bend before the throne of mercy, convinced' that the Supreme Being never chastises frail mortals but < for wise though * 'to 'üs; unknown' pur¬ poses ; ' but pardon'rhe, my friends, for intruding my advice ; impute it ■ to my wish tomeliofate andsoftcn the pangs of a feeling and deeply-woundëd' J mind." 1 The gentlemen returned tlieir thanks, particularly -Alonza, who said, 1 if ' per¬ mitted, he should, during his short'stay, visit the Herŕnŕage daily/ J L Edmund replied, he should Шпк himself highly favoured.' ' They^then entered 'on' the ' ' . subject
. 134
subject of literature, in which the her¬ mit displayed both taste and critical knowledge. They did npt think of ' separating till the dinner hour ap¬ proached ; they then took a reluctant leave of the good old man. * i ь Alonzi's mind was much tranquiffised by the society of his early friend, and the admonitions of the hermit. At dinner lie exerted himself, and entered into conversation with some> degree of vivacity, and displayed talents that jus¬ tified tlie warmth of Mr. Millward's attachment. On the entrance of the little folks with the desert, Alonza was pleased to find Juliana quite at home; climbing on
135 on his. knee, she begged her dear papa not to take her from that fine pretty house, nor from her brother and sister Fondly kissing her, he told her if she was good, she'should remain with them. " And will you stay with me, papa ?" " No, my love, tliat is not in my power." " But you will come and see me ?" Alonza was agitated, which. Mrs. Millward perceiving, engaged the child's attention, and he soon regainea his composure. 1 1 Edward asked leave for Henry'to be permitted
лзв
permitted to come and have some fruit, for James said he would not let him because there was a strange gentleman. <- jî /■; < " Pray let me see him," said Alonza* Edward ran to fetch him. " I am glad that, honest'James * does not recollect me," said the Marquis. . m > i , s > " I had no fear he would," replied the General ; " for he was gone to see his friends at the-time 1 you favoured us with your company at Belle- Vue, and did not return tül the day before you left us." i > J V4 If ( / *J Ь í li tf« l< í- J Ji " I remember him perfectly,! as there was something in his countenance that strongly prejudiced me in his favour." í Your
'137
<ť Your skill in physiognomy; cîôbs .you credit;.he is the"best* and 'most faitliful of creatures. I regard him as one of my family, and as such shall pro¬ vide for'him." ' - " Edward and Henry now entered. The latter, according ,tp. the »'.charge given him by his mother, made his" best bow· He was a fine sprightly boy, and had received the \ sanie "instructions as' ^ 'his young friend Edward; v The children were full,of play, arid engagedthë atten¬ tion of the party tül the arrival of Mr. and Mrs. Montague, Fanny/ Edwards, and the lively Louisa, now in her eleventh year.: ', They immediately'adjourned to the drawing-room; Mrs. Millward, « . ' apo-
138 apologised for retaining the little ones · till their bed time. > " · But my friends are so good as to indulge me, and I trust Mr. Seymour will'not object to the little intruders." <e On the contrary, my dear Madam, you gratify me exceedingly," ŕ The children were « delighted ; Fanny and, Louisa were'caressiííg^them, and all joined in admiring Juliana, whose infan¬ tine attractions deeply interested all who beheld her. ,[.,·ƒ , ч İ After tea the General proposed a con* cert, which was readily agreed torand , the
ш the music-room was ordered to be pre¬ pared. The Marquis played on several instruments, and had an excellent voice, and by his taste and judgement added much to the entertainment. Fanny and Louisa took a part, and acquitted them¬ selves in a stile that did them great credit. The evening passed in a most agree¬ able manner, nor did the party think of separating till James, as usual, reminded the General it was long past his time of , retiring. , " And you know your Honour was up so very late last night." The
140
The next morning Alonza evinced by his looks he had had a refreshing sleep. When he met the family at breakfast he told them he had been paying the hermit a long visit,, and had received much consolation. '» 'l, " I found the good old man playing with the children. Edward's prattle en¬ gaged his attention. He was telling all he knew of Juliana, 'and entreating him to lovenernas much as he did him; Мал tilda, and Henry. The girls were seated on each knee, whose innocent caresses delighted the worthy man. He accosted me in the most polite and friendly m?n- ner.
« < That
141
" «That is Juliana's papa,' cried Ed? ward, who at that instant seding me, stretched out her hands to come to me. " After playing with them, and giving each some token of his affection, they and their attendants pursued their walk, and I opened my whole soul to him ; but for the particulars of^mystoryl have referred him to you, my friend ; he has indeed poured the balm of comfort on my wounded mind, and taught me to bear my sorrows like a man. The leav¬ ing my beloved child in such hands has relieved me from a weight of sorrow." ' After breakfast the Marquis and Mr. Millward rode over to Thorpe. If the ^ ' former
-142 former was charmed with the magnifi¬ cence and taste displayed at Upton Hall, 'he was equally surprised and pleased with the neatness,-simplicity, andcorn- -fort which presided in every dwelling throughout this happy village. The cheerful countenances that every where met his sight, the regularity and order of the charitable institutions, which ' were on the same plan,'though rather' more extensive than those at Upton, spoke highly in favour of the founder. The kind familiarity of Mr.Millward, andfiis minute attention to the care and happiness of each individual, could only be equalled by the unfeigned respect paid him-by the inhabitants. His presence created
■■" '. ,Ί;43'Ό' , ': ■V·-·. created ' a little holiday. The children crowded round him, to all of whom he gave little presents. Mr. Millward led Alonza to ,эп- emi¬ nence which commanded an extensive and rich prospect, with a distant view of the ocean ; a small purling stream mean¬ dered··; through various parts of this delightful spot. " Here, my friend, I intend to erect a cottage orneé ; with cultivation, and assisting,nature by art, I think I can raise a «little terrestrial paradise. I wish it to be occupiedby tenants of the higher class, who, from the vicissitudes of life, might, be impelled, ,by motives of eco¬ nomy to seek a, shelter froman unfeeling . world,
144
world. - Should· I ! be so fortunate as to select * a· famiíy of this· description} pos¬ sessed of a cultivated- understanding and a good lieart, I shall esteem myself happy, * as' it would be a great addition to-our domestic circle." -t ' , " Would to - Heaven, my dear Mill- , ward/'- exclaimed the Marquis, " thať I could become your neighbour y blessed' in your society, that of your amiable family^ and viewing the opening per- · fections of'our blooming progeny, I should pass ' my days ' in - tranquillity, though happiness is'for ever'fled: yet" that consolation is. denied me. I must endeavour to rouse thyself, arid fulfil the duties of my station"' in devoting mý time to th* service of mý country 1 . But, '' ( * - alas!
145 ' , alas ! what can an individual do where_ oppression and superstition reigns ? edu¬ cated in the land of freedom, where the inhabitants enjoy true liberty, under a mild government, and the monarch is the'father of his people; where the reli¬ gion is pure andsimple, and every one is permitted to think for himself; in such a country I should - glory in taking an active part in defending and supporting so wise, so excellent, so God-like a constitution ; rather would I have'been boriva peasant in this favoured island, thanheir to my father's Dukedom: How comes it, my friend, that, with your fortune and abilities, I .find you in a private station ?" , "Believe me¿" replied Mr.Millward; .VOL. и. u - « Jt
146 " it does not proceed either from an inactive mind, or from not being sen¬ sible that every man is destined, in some measure, tc contribute to the general welfare. For many years I was in the, service э^ the public, and flatter myself I did not abuse the confidence reposed in me ; that Г discharged the duties of my office to the satisfaction of my em- plovers, with credit to myself, and benefit to those placed under my direction. At my return to my native land, unex¬ pected blessings awaited me ; united-to the woman whom, from childhood, Г loved, possessed of riches beyond my most sanguine wishes, my soul was absorbed in gratitude to the all-wise Disposer of good and evil. I seriously reflected how I could oe most useful to , »У
147 mý fellow creatures : the plans of the late Mr. Roberts excited my admiration, and I determined not only to pursue, but to extend them. I have the pleasure of finding,'though the village of Túorpe is still in its infancy, that my endeavours have proved successful. You will allow, my friend, that so extensive^ an under¬ taking requires the constant presence of the proprietor : for this reason I have declined a seat in ParHament, and trust I shall be able to contribute more essen¬ tially to the good of my country, by being the means of giving it some hun¬ dreds of valuable members, who, edu¬ cated in -the habit of industry, early grounded in religion, and taught by precept and example ' moral' rectitude, will fill the humble walk of life wi^jji h 2 honour,
148 honour, and prove,' if called on, they have an heart to stand forth in defence, of'their King and country." - ;i j&lönzâ ' highly approved ; the reasons his friend gave for'choosing to remain ' a 'pläik country 'gentleman. They strolled to the .Parsonage, the future residence' of young Montague : and Fanny Edwards, where Alonza had agáin occasion to admire the taste of Mr/'Millward, and the delight he took in'diffusing happiness. "After seeing everything worthy of observation, they rèturnédi'tb Upton. The evening was . spent at.the Rectory^ A week passed; ' and the -Marquis, ' though reluctantly, was forced to think of
149
of quitting Devonshire. He had re¬ ceived a letter from the Duke, acquaint¬ ing him he was perfectly recovered,; and if Alonza did not find himself suffi¬ ciently strong to bear the fatigue of travelling, he would join him, and pass the winter in France. - ' This intelligence made him resolve to embark for Spain immediately/ The General and Mr. and Mrs. Millward, on being acquainted with his determination, expressed their regret at losing ' the pleasure of his society ; they strongly urged him to spend the ensuing summer with them. " I cannot, my dear friends, promise myself that felicity ; but I need not h 3 assure
, 1Л0 ,. assure you -that no endeavour on my part shall be wanting to re-visit England, where! may truly say I shall leave my heart." The evening previous to the Marquis's departure, after the children had re¬ tired, and he had recovered the shock the thoughts of embracing his little Juliana for the lasťtime had occasioned, he said—' - t . " I must 4 now intrude on you some business relative to your adopted daugh¬ ter. You aheady know that the fortune of her angelic mother was tnirty thou¬ sand pounds ; five more were added to -it by the bequest of the revered Mrs. Beatímt>nt, and I have made an addition of
151
cf fifty thou sand, ^whicli I am enabled to do without giving my father any cause of suspicion ; his allowance is liberal m the extreme; and the income I possess in> right of my mother is more than ade¬ quate to my expenses, besides a large sum of ready money come to me'when ч of; age, which had accrued during my minority ; this last sum I have placed in the hands of my banker, the rest is in the Bank of England. In a cabinet, which I shall leave in nw 1 * ' dressings room, you will find papers, properly signed and attested, which give you, my dear friends, unlimited power to act by Juliana in every respect as your k daughter. · í ,haYe resigned all right to the child; dispose both of her person and for¬ tune as you think best. The jewels and h 4 trinkets
152
trinkets belonging to her are' in a box in the cabinet ; receive the keys of both. Once 'more accept my thanks for un¬ dertaking this important charge.- Ex¬ cuse me for being brief ori the subject ; I dare not indulge my feelings." - Mrs. Millward was going to reply, but Alonza stopped her by saying— " I conjure you, my dear Madam, by our friendship, spare me ; let the sub¬ ject end here. Sutler me to reüre _a few minutes ; I will soon rejoin you." This was the' only unpleasant evening they had spent since the arrival òf Alon¬ za ; every one strove to enliven the con¬ versation, but in vain, yet they were loath to'separate. James, according to custom,
153 custom, had twice reminded his 1 master it was past eleven. At last, the Marquis starting suddenly up, took acandle from the side-board, and just articulating-r-, "l' 1 " God bless "and protect you!" rushed out of the room. - The family were so much affected by Alonza's manner, that they retired al¬ most immediately. " .. Aş Mr. Millward was· ascending the stairs, he met the Marquis's, valet, who delivered'a note from his master, ear¬ nestly requesting that the General and Mr. and Mrs, Millward would spare, him the pangs of a parting interview? promis^ ing to write as soon as possible after hia h 5 arriva 1
154 arrival in Spain. He mentioned that he intended to pay an early visit to the good hermit, with whom he should breakfast, and order his carriage to meet him at the end of the Park. - . . * \ Mrs.-Millward deshed. the children might, be kept in the nursery till she sent,-for' them. In the morning when the young folks entered the breakfast parlour, their first inquiries were after Mr. Seymour : on being' told he was gone, Edward burst into tears ; Juliana flung her arms about Mrs. Millwardfs neck, and sobbing, said— . " My dear-Mamma, ï Jove you dearly ; but I will love you still better if you will make papa còme again." Emma
155" Emma, tenderly kissing her, assured her if she was a good girl, she should soon see her dear papa. The General, though much affected, took her on one knee and Matilda on the other, and strove, by caresses and amusing stories, to quiet her. ч Matilda desired her not to cry, and she would give her her last new doll. Edward, drying his tears, iş, promised her his litde horse. 1 At length Juliana became pacified, and soon recovered her gaiety. Fanny -" Edwards proposed to walk with them to the Rectory, and bring Louisa Montague to spend the day. » " Do my dear," said the General ; " and prevail on Mr., and Mrs. Mon- н6 ^ -tague
156 _ -, tague to faVQUr us with their com¬ pany." As soon as the children had set out on their visit, Mr, MDlward fetched the cabinet which the Marquis had left in his room, and a large packet directed to him ; it contained the papers relative to Juliana, among which was the certificate of his marriage, and the name'and resi¬ dence of the clergyman, likewise the , register, of the birth of the child, and by whom christened: the. casket con¬ tained jewels and'trinkets to a large amount, with the picture of the Mar* chioness richly set with diamonds. He particularly requested that Juliana should remain ignorant of her high rank, and pass, as agreedjfor an orphan of fortune, distantly
157
distandy related to the General; for though Juliana called the Marquis-father, it was given out he was onlythe friend of her late parents, entrusted to deliver her to her guardians. No one was in the secret but Mrs. Evans and the hermit. It was settled that Juliana's fortune should accumulate; and that she and Matilda should be educated in the first stile, under the inspection of Mrs. Mill- * ward, who was so unfashionable as to think it the duty of a mother'to super¬ intend the education of her children, and to plant in their hearts the seeds of religion and virtue. Young as they were, she had already pre-
- prepared their minds for instruction. Nature had been bountiful : their tem¬ pers were good, their persons handsome and .well formed, and their dispositions and understanding promised all the most sanguine parent could desire. Matilda was gendeness itself; Edward had a warmth of temper, but was easily ap¬ peased, he had already given repeated ' proofs t of a benevolent heart, his attach- . ments were strong, \and he was generous in the extreme, Juliana, though still an infant, displayed grace in every move- ment, her manners were engaging, and her s already expressive eyes beamed with intelligence ; she was affectionate to a degree, more lively than Matilda, yet equally tractable ; every day endeared her more to the family. 1 * The
159 The General observed that it was time for Edward to be put under the direc¬ tion of a tutor— " And indulge an old man's wish, and let our god-son Henry, in some measure, partake of the same instructions as Edward." Mr. Millward replied, that he perfectly coincided.with him ; he thought Henry a very fine promising boy,, and -his tem¬ per and disposition such as deserved encouragement, and Edward could not » have a better companion. 1 ** If you, Sir, and Emma approve of it, I shall this day commission Mr. Mon¬ tague
160 tague to select a gentleman' properly qualified." ' ч . Mrs. Millward said, as she should soon lose her young companion arid kind assistant'Fanny'Edwards, she must look out for a lady to share with her the task of educating the girls. ■ 'The conversation was·for the present suspended, by the entrance of Fanny and the children, accompanied by the family from the Rectory, The .party' agreed, as the morning was fine, to walk till dinner, except the General, who took his accustomed airing in his garden chair, ' which James always drove. During
loi
During the ride the General commu¬ nicated to James the intention of edu¬ cating his son with Edward. It is impossible to describe the joy and gra¬ titude of this worthy creature ; it was some time before he could express his thanks. " Lord bless and reward your honour for your unbounded goodness to me and mine ·, Betty will be out of her wits to think that Henry is to have the honour of being brought up' with his - young 4 master; Ah, Sir, the boy is I hope good, and will prove a comfort to us ; and by his affection and duty to the best of masters, endeavour to deserve his goodness."
" I have
162 * e I have.no doubt of it, James;- and if he turns out as honest and faithful as ,- his parents, I shall think myself amply repaid for my care and solicitude. At, their return the household were informed by James of the great conde¬ scension and goodness of his master, in permitting Henry to Бе brought up with his grandson. All the* domestics re¬ joiced, as James and his wife were much beloved : nothing could equal the gra¬ titude u of this worthy pair, Henry was told over * arid over of the honour done him. After dinner Mr. Millward mentioned his determination of giving Edward a private education, and requested Mr. JVIon-
163 Montague to recommend a proper tutor. Mrs. Millward said smiling— ""As your son, Mr. Montague, will shortly deprive me of my young friend, who .has" hitherto kindly assisted me in 'instructing my littler ones, I also must depend ori 1 you to find me a substitute." Fanny blushed? which the General perceiving, gave her a hearty shake by the hand, saying— " Never, my dear'girl, be ashamed of having resigned your heart to young Montague, who, I am certain, is deserv¬ ing of you ; so here is a bumper to the speedy accomplishment of his wishes."
Mr.
164 Mr. Montague bowed and drank the toast. As „ they perceived Fanny "was embarrassed, they changed the subject, and Mr. Montague challenged the Ge¬ neral to give him his revenge at chess ; the party was instanüy made, and Mr. \ Millward agreed to take up the con¬ queror. ' The next morning Mr. and Mrs. Mill- ward strolled X)ver to the Hermitage, being anxious to learn the particulars of the Marquis's departure. They had the satisfaction of hearing he was quite com¬ posed. He had held a long conversation with the hermit, and they had parted with mutual regret. Mr. and^ Mrs. Millward unfolded to ^ ' Father
165
Father Edmund their intended plan of education, which the good old man approved of, and commended their kindness in giving Henry a good educa¬ tion. . " From the judgment I have formed of him, I will venture to pronounce your \ task will be amply repaid in cultivating so rich a soil ; the boy has quick parts and an excellent heart." They were greatly pleased that the venerable man coincided in their opinion. " I shall' trouble you, my good friend," said Mr. Millward, " to inspect the progress of the boys; and, if not too
166 too great a fatigue and intrusion on your time, I should wish them to pass , an hour with you three times a week." <c Д accept, my dear Sir, the trust with pleasure, highly flattered in your thinking me worthy of it. The society of the dear children always affords me happiness and exhilarates my spirits." Mrs. Millward hoped that the girls would be, in a year or two, permitted to shaie their instructions; and till they were capable to benefit by them, they would be allowed to visit him as usual. " Most readily, my dearest Madam, do I comply with your lequest; indeed; it would render me miberable to be deprived
167
deprived of the company of those ' lovely infants. As long as it shall please Heaven to spare my life, it shall be devoted to your beauteous progeny ; may they, as they increase in years, increase in every virtue, and may they tread in the steps of their revered parents." The conversation now turned on the different modes of education. > With the assistance of the hermit, they formed a rough sketch, which he promised to di¬ gest and commit topaper. Mr. and Mrs. Millward were delighted with having put things in so good a train, which they communicated to the General, who 'approved of the arrangements they had made, In less than a month Mr. Mon¬ tague
ies ι tague informed them that he^had found a gentleman whom he could recommend for a r tutor. " He is," said he, " an old friend of mine, though many years younger, being only just turned of forty. He, early in life, embraced the clerical pro¬ fession, but being disappointed of ^a living, which he had been long promised, he gave up a laborious curacy ; and possessing a small independency, he resolved to gratify his taste and travel. He has spent above ten years abroad ; „ has visited, not only every place in Europe worthy notice, but has made the tour of a great part of America and Asia. He is a learned sensible man, an excellent classic scholar, and no stranger to_the polite
169
polite arts ; he is likewise master of the modern languages. But you shall form your own judgment of him, as I have given him an invitation to spend som<» time at the iLcctory. About a week since I received a letter from him, ac¬ quainting me of his return to England, and mentioning he had thoughts of augmenting his income by undertaking the education of half a dozen young gentlemen, and that he was looking for a house. It instantly struck me that he was the very person I should choose for a preceptor. I wrote immediately to him, acquainting him with my com¬ mission, arid begged he would proceed no farther in his intended plan till he had favoured me with a visit, when I hoped to have the happiness of settling vol. и. ï - him
ito him near røe, as I was certain the situ¬ ation I had to offer would meet his approbation. This post brought me his answer, and he promises to be with me in a few days." ' . The General and Mr. and Mrs. Mill- ward were quite pleased with the ac¬ count Mr. Montague gave, whom they thanked, and assured they would do all in their power to render Mr, Smith's abode with them every way agreeable.
«71
CHAP. V. In less tnan a week Mr. Montague introduced the Rev. Mr. Smith at the Hall, whose appearance was truly pre¬ possessing; his countenance was an index of his mind, his deportment and manners elegant, and his conversation enlightened and entertaining ; in short, in him was comprised the scholar, the finished gentleman, and the Christian. If the family at the Hall were charmed 1 2 with
11% with* Mr. Smith, he was no less so with them. A very few hours settled the business to the satisfaction of all parties. It was agreed that Mr. Smith should devote a short time to friendship, then return to London, and settle his affairs ; and as soon as convenient to him be¬ come an inmate at the Hall. During his stay at the Rectory the families continually met : Mr. Smith was introduced to the hermit, \vith whom he soon contracted an intimacy that ripened into friendship. Father Edmund declared that he thought Mr. Smith's ideas of education, and his abilities to execute them, so superior to his, that he should decline laying
173
laying down any plan, buí; leave the mude of instructing the boys entirely to him. Mr. Smith thanked him for the high opinion he entertained of him, which he should make every exertion to deserve, but hoped to be favoured with his aď vice; and that he would, at^staged periods,' examine his pupils, and give his opinion of their progress, which Father Edmund promised to do. After spending a month with his friends, Mr. Smith set off for London ; and as soon as he had fnishcd his busi- ness, returned 'to Devonshire. His establishment at the Hall was on a most liberal scale. A handsome apartment, 1 3 with
174
with a study," was appropriated for his use ; he had his own servant and saddle horses, and a salary of two hundred pounds a year. Previously to his commencing pre¬ ceptor he had ingratiated himself with his pupils, and studied their dispositions, with which their abilities, and the pro¬ gress they had made, their extreme youth considered, he was so perfectly satisfied, that he began his employment with alacrity and pleasure. Mrs. Millward had not been success¬ ful in hér inquiries after a governess ; phe was anxious to be settled with one before the marriage of Fanny Edwards took place ; chance, at length, directed her
175 her choice. 'An advertisement in a morning paper attracted her notice, which, having perused with attention, she gave it to Mr. Millward, and desired him tp read it aloud, who, with the General, was struck with it. The lady was the widow of an officer, had been well educated, and accustomed to move in a genteel sphere ; but from various misfortunes was reduced to-a small income, which she wished to increase by being receiyed into a re¬ spectable family, as governess to one or two young ladies : tlie most satisfactory references would be given relative to her abilities and connection. They resolved to answer it immedi- 14 ately.
176 ately. Mr. Millward - wrote to Mr, Steward, requesting him to make the necessary inquiries. They were agree¬ ably surprised by Mr. Steward answering their letter in person. He said he had long intended himself the pleasure of passing a few weeks at Upton ; but the" interest he took in the lady whom they had commissioned him to inquire after* made him resolvè to set off immediately, . " İ flatter myself, General,- that you will stand her friend when I tell you she is the daughter of the late Major John son, and widow of Lieutenant Owen." " God bless me," cried the General, " her father served- under my com: mand; hewas an excellent soldier, and a most
irr ι ι a" most worthy man, Her husband was in the same regiment, but not till some years after I had quitted it : of him I know nothing. But how .comes it she , is in such indifferent circumstances ? Her father possessed a good fortune, and. she was an only child." " " True, my old friend ; bur love, almighty love, had been her ruin. Major Johnson died soon after she came of age, and left her mistress of twenty thousand pounds. Lieutenant. Owen was an elegant young man, of a most insinuating address ; and having seen Miss 'John¬ son at.a frienďs house, thought her a prize worth securing. Suffice it to say, he succeeded^ in gaining her affections^ and -they were united as soon · as the* i ô ' mourning.
118 mourning for her father had expired» He was good-natured, but thoughtless, and fond of dissipation. For some years he conducted himself with toler¬ able propriety ; but, unfortunately, he became intimate with some young men of fashion, who led him into every extravagance. A few months involved him in diificulties. He took to gaming, which, in a short time, completed his ruin and destroyed his constitution; and he died a martyr to his follies, leaving his widow totally unprovided. His effects were not sufficient to pay his debts. Mrs. Owen gave up every thing to the creditors, and obtained the pen- -sion. ¿Several friends invited her to «pend some time with 'them, which she »accepted, but resolved to exert her talents
179 talents for. her future support, yet she determined to wait till some eligible situation offered : at length she resolved to advertise. She was quite delighted with the polite letter she received from Mrs. Millward, which I sent with a note, saying I would wait on her the* next morning. As soon as we met- we re¬ cognised each other, though I had not seen her since her marriage. She was* both surprised and pleased to find that the lady who-addressed her was tlie daughter of General Roberts, and en¬ treated my interest to procure her so- desirable a situation. í In short, I pro¬ mised to pay you N a visit, and had no doubt I should bring her pleasing intel·· ligence."' 'i6 « I am.
180 " I am happy, my friend,"-said the General, " to see you on any occasion. But why did you not bring Mrs. Owen with you? you might have promised her a kind reception." " I did propose it, but out of delicacy she declined it. I have a letter for you, Madam," 'addressing Mrs. Millward. ' Mrs. Owen expressed her solicitude to be received in the family ; terms she left entirely to them. Her letter was immediately answered. She was requested to set out for Upton -Hall as soon as convenient, where she was impatiently expected. The General was
181
was anxious to receive the daughter of Major Johnson under his protection, Mrs. Millward assured her she would do every thing ta render her situation pleasant, and desired she would bring an attendant. , ι 1 Mrs. Owen arrived in the course of a fortnight. She was welcomed as an old friend, ι The General embraced her with affection, ,and hoped she would consider him as a father. Mrs. Owen was sensibly affected by her kind recep¬ tion. Mr. .and Mrs. Millward were much pleased with her manner and de¬ portment.; u and' on entering into con¬ versation^ they found she possessed a refined understanding, which had been highly
182
highly cultivated; she sppke French and Italian fluently, and was every way qualified for the important task of edu¬ cating girls of fashion, of embellishing their minds, of forming their morals, and rendering them fit for the sphere their rank and fortune entitled Jthem to move in. The next morning Mrs« Millward, w'th great politeness, told her that she had fixed her salary at two hundred a year, (the same as Mr.- Smith's). Mr». Owen would have expressed her grati¬ tude. * No thanks, my dear Madam; the obligation will be on my side; and I flatter myself that you will consider yourself
183
yourself as a friend, and„quite at home - in our family ; at present you must only be a visitor, as you must pass some weeks with us before you undertake the charge of the children ; -there- are many things worthy your-seeing ; and as the season is yet fine, we will take the advantage of it." Mr. Steward was prevailed on to pass his Christmas in Devonshire. > " It is so long since we met," said the General, " that I shall ( not easily part with you." They made several excursions to Thorpe, and paid frequent visits to - Father Edmund, with whom Mrs. Owen was
•i was quite delighted j Christmas passed' with the accustomed festivities, and open house was kept, as usual, for twelve days. .Young, Montague had left Oxford,, and had taken orders ; he was of course a constant visitor at the Hall. On new-year's day Mr. ïvfillward presented him to the living of Thorpe, which had been held for him by a neighbouring clergyman, who was liberally rewarded for his trouble. On the Sunday follow¬ ing the whole family attended to hear him preach his first serínon: ^le'acquit¬ ted himself in a manner highly satisfac- tory to his parishioners and patrons. The dreary season of winter was not felt
felt in this truly hospitable mansion,: nor by any who were so happy as 'c. io live under their protection; On their do¬ rn ain the golden - age Was nearly realised, poverty; was unknowns and 1 peace and : plenty were to be found in the cottager's humble abode ; Ino : overgrown farms were permitted on thé J estate j /- and that gestito' society^ a monopolisers - was un¬ known ; ^hefarinërs, by honest industrýj ■'■>'increased their fortunes, arid brought up ihèir ífämшЪ^ith-respecťabШty;: age was treated with respect ; :; and after . sixty^-five they dined once a month with vthe: family at the Hall. This mark of ť distinction not only highly gratified their feelings; but insured them; 1 the attention and regard -of ] the youilg pepplej who : '.^r : " 'У--? ;■■' · ■■■;'\;-4/-[ : ]'■')■■': : ' r У'-?: were;
186 were emulous to deserve the praise of their patrons. At length the day arrived that was ta unite the destiny of Fanny Edwards and young Montague, The ceremony was performed privately at the parish church by his father 4 ; Mr. Millward gave her away, Louisa was bride-maid. They dined en famille at the Hall, where they passed a week, when the bride and bride¬ groom were conducted by the General and Mr. and Mrs. Millward to their new habitation ; the family at the Rectory followed them; the parishioners met them on ,the road, and received the young couple in, a most flattering man¬ ner. An elegant dinner was prepared at
187 at the Parsonage for the principal inha¬ bitants, at "the expense of the General, who insisted on being pay-master for that day. The cottagers were not forgotten; they were liberally supplied with roast beef, plumb pudding, and ale. James' and his wife were the conductors of the feast. The charitable institutions par¬ took of the general merriment ; they were all new cloathed on the occasion ; in short, it was an holiday throughout the village. The children, had cakes, fruit, and tèa ; and the old folks each a bottle of elder wine to drink the bride and bridegroom's health. The day passed in mirth. The happy villagers
188
villagers håd a dance in thè evening: Mr. and Mrs. Millward, and most of the company' joined. The little ones had been permitted to be of the party ; and were quite delighted at being allowed to play with the children belonging to the school, to each of whom they made a present. At an early hour they were sent back with their attendants to Upton ; the rest of the company did not break up till one in the morning, when all retired with the greatest decorum До· their respective habitations. Poor Fanny's heart was full when her kind patrons took their leave ; scarcely could she bid them adieu, nor were they less affected. Louisa was left to pass some time with her. This amiable and lively
, 189 lively child was much attached to her new sister, and doated on her brother. It was settled that .the same festivities 1 с should be observed at Upton the week following. Everything was conducted exactly in the same manner as at Thorpe, excepting that the different institutions dined at the Hall, and the company was more numerous, as ,the neighbouring families were invited. Edward and Henry, to their great joy, were per¬ mitted to go down'two dances : Juliana and Matilda were humble t spectators. As on the former occasion all wás ma¬ naged with the strictest propriety, and all returned to their abodes pleased and gratified by the munificence and conde¬ scension displayed at the Hall. Mrs.
190
Mrs. Millward could not help regrei- ing the* loss of her young favourite,, to whom she had been for so many years accustomed, but the society of Mrs. Owen, her affectionate attention, joined to the reflection that Fanny had every prospect of happiness, reconciled her." Scarcely a week passed without Fanny's spending one or' two, days with her. • Juliana and Matilda were committed to the care of Mrs. Owen, whom Mrs. Millward had the pleasure of finding perfectly adequate to the charge. Part of the morning was devoted to instruc¬ tion, the rest to exercise and air. At dinner Mr. Smith and Mrs. Owen joined the party. If there was no company 9 the children accompanied them to the drawing
191 'drawing room, and they were indulged with playing at little games suitable to their age, at once instructive and amusing.- Having now happily settled our hero¬ ine, we will leave her and her young companions to pursue their education, under the most promising auspices, and follow the Marquis to Madrid, as it is necessary to take a review of some cir¬ cumstances which had occurred during his long absence.
192
CHAP. VI. . The Marquis, on his arrival at Madrid, found the Duke in a very weak state ; the meeting was an affecting one. Alonza's spirits were low, and the alter¬ ation in the looks of hie father alarmed him. V s ť . c My dear son " said the Duke, ten¬ derly embracing him, " you know not how anxious I have been to behold you. Since
- 193
Since Л wrote last to you I have had a relapse, and was fearful I should depart this life without the satisfaction of giving you my blessing. , Thanks to Almighty Providence, who has heard my prayers ! My son is returned ; never, I hopej will he quit Spain again, during the short period of my existence." Alonza assured the Duke he would obey his request, but hoped he had many years to-live. The Duke fervently thanked him. He said, anxiety on his account had, preyed on his mind. " Your frequent and long absences, my son, afflicted me ; and I was fearful· there was some hidden cause; it has been taken notice of at Court, and it required , vol. п. ' к / all
194· alťmy intérest with the sovereign to deprecate his anger, -Various reports have~ been circulated to your disadvan¬ tage, I believe they originated in Don Gusman and Donna Triphosa; they have been some" months returned to Ma¬ drid; the relation they were attending is dead, and has left them a large estate ; he is become a great favourite at Court, and holds several lucrative places ; they have been unremitting in their attentions to me ; scarce a day passes without my seeing them; and, under the mask of friendship, they have endeavoured to poison my mind ; but the affections of a father are not so easily alineated. Never could I believe my Alonza would act unworthy of himself, or deceive me ín any point," Alonza
195 - Alonza felt he had acted with dupli¬ city towards his Either. He was afraid to ask what crimes were alledged against him ; yet, conscious he had not degraded himself, òr been guilty of any vice 7 he assumed courage to inquire what had been laid to his charge. s " Nothing direct ;» Don Gusman is too artful for that ; it is by insinuation, he wounds. Far from accusing you, he only, when you are mentioned, wonders that you should be so inatten¬ tive to the duties of a subject and a son ; hopes the reports he hears arc exagger¬ ated. If he is' questioned relative to them, he begs to be excused answering, as the voice of rumour is not to be relied on ; and if it spoke truth, his к £ affection
196 affection for you is so strong, that he would conceal your errors, not expose them ; wished you would return and clear your fame, as he had in r vain ex¬ erted himself to quell the stories circu¬ lated to your disadvantage. You may be sure I have endeavoured to trace the calumniators of my son, but in vain. It is given out that you are dissipated, addicted to gaming, and have been con¬ nected with a low artful woman, in whose snares you have entangled your¬ self, and have transmitted large sums to England to support Ker extravagance." Here the emotions of the Marquis had nearly betrayed the secret. That a reflection should be cast on the memory of his beloved wife, stung him *o the soul;
197
soul; and if it had not been for the solemn promise he made her when dying, he would have revealed every circumstance to his father ; at length he recovered himself, and exclaimed— r " Perish the villain, who, by the most atrocious falsehoods, has undermined my reputation ; he shall' produce the author of those reports, or answer for them himself. Believe me, my dear father, I have not in one instance devi- · ated from moral rectitude, or been guilty of one öf the acts laid to my charge. Oh! would to Heaven, the good St. Clair was living, he would con¬ fute these base assertions; but to-mor¬ row Den Gusman shall, in the presence кЗ of
198 of my Sovereign, retract his''malicious insinuations, and clear my fame." " My dear Alonaa, be calm, and let reason guide you ; as Gusman has managed matters, no degree of blame can be attached to him; on the con- y trary, he appears one of your warmest advocates. Let me conjure you to avoid a quarrel with him ; such is his art, it would involve you in ruin. For -my sake, treat him with cool civility ; make every inquiry, and, if possible, trace the reports to the fountain head ; but strong must be the proofs ere you venture to accuse either him or Donna Triphosa." The Duke became so overpowered by his
199 ι y í his feelings, that the Marquis, fearing, in his weak state, a relapse of the ,gout in his stomach, promised to be guided entirely by him in regard to his con¬ duct towards Don Gusman : he changed tlie subject, and endeavoured to amuse his father by some pleasant .anecdotes. When he parted with the Duke for the night, he had the pleasure of-leaving him perfectly composed. Alonza was restless and agitated j he paced his apartment for some hours ; at length he recollected the promise he had made of writing to Mr. Millward. So scattered were his ideas,· that he merely mentioned his being arrived safe, and his father's recent illness ; but said к é - he
200 he should hear from him again shortly, as be had many particulars to relaté. ' Alonza retired to bed, but vainly he courted, sleep, and arose in the morning unrefreshed. He joined the Duke at breakfast, whom he had the satisfaction of finding had rested well, and was much better than on the preceding evening. They hed scarcely finished their repast when Don Gusman and Donna Triphosa were announced. The Mar¬ quis with some diificulty conquered his feelings, and received them with civility, but could not return Gusman's embrace with any degree of cordiality. The scrutinising v 'glances which Alonza cast from
201
from time to time on him and his lady, (who was profuse in her expressions of friendship) evidentìy disconcerted them, and they shortened their visit, hoping they should see their dear cousin often : a cold bow was the only answer they received. The Duke, who during their stay, had sat on thorns, fearing that Alonza would not be able to command his tem¬ per, was heartily rejoiced at their depar¬ ture, and thanked his son for-his con¬ duct. * " Be assured, my dear Sir, you shall not have any cause for 4 uneasiness in future ,on my account. As there is a levee to-morrow, I mean to pay my duty к 5 at
202
at Coriŕť; ishall find by thé reception î . meet with from mý sovereign how far y Gusman has injured me., Have no fears m regard to my safety, for I thirik.him so great a paltroon,that he is beneath '. my chastisement ; contempt is all I shall ever bestow on him." ; :: ; i£ Yet beware, í beseech ypu, my sön, ■>;.. of both him and Triphosa ;- she is artful " · ' ■ * . v '■···'■■■".· ■■'■'■■ ■.' ■'■ in the extreme, 'and capable of forming . and executing the most; diabolical plans to satiate her revenge. She, ; I am con¬ vinced, has never forgiven your refusal - ; of het hand. I wish I could present ybu ; but as that; is impossible^ suppose Γ request the favör pf Don Sebastian ; he haslong since renewed the acquaint¬ ance ; indeed,his friendship and Sophŕó- ' '"'■■." .' ' . "-.ma's "
203 ñía's seem to increase daily; they in¬ terest themselves -in all that concerns -you, nor will they "suffer, a' whisper against you in their presence. They « arrived in town last night. You will oblige me much by paying your respects to them." " Most willingly, my dear Sir ; no persons stand higher in my esteem. Is the lovely Sophronia still single ?" " She is, and refuses every alliance ; some of our most noble and accomplished cavaliers have paid their devoirs to her but in vain ; sometimes,I think,she,re¬ pents her caprice, and that she is attached to you." к б « Oh,
204?
" Oh, ?ту dear Sir, do not accuse of caprice one of the most perfect of her sex. I am certain her reasons for re- refusing me were founded on justice 'and -----" -χ' Че was proceeding, but found by the Duke's looks of astonishment that he had awakened, suspicions. Before he • could question him, he added— " What I mean by saying she had reasons that justified her breaking off the match was, that her health being at that time in so very precarious a state, it would not have been consistent with 'prudence to rharry." « Well, well," replied the Duke, " î
205
often thought your conduct and So* phronia's highly enigmatical." ' " We shall, Sir, I hope, shortly explain it to your satisfaction." * * " Ah, my son, you know not the pleasure that hint gives me." \ Observing Alonza sigh deeply, anda • melancholy overspread his countenance, j the Duke changed the discourse, and ' Alonza recovered his serenity, and ex¬ erted himself as usual to amuse the Duke. Finding him in tolerable spirits, he said— . " I will now leave your Grace, and call on Don Sebastian ; but as we cannot stir.
206 stir without 'parade,, I must order the carriage." While it was getting ready, Alonza entered into a short detail of the customs of England, which he owned herwas partial to, and drew so lively a carica¬ ture of the formality of the Spanish Dons, that the Duke could not forbear owning, in'spite of prejudice,-that the simple manners of the English afforded more'real comfort' and enjoyment. The Marquis met with a most cordial - reception from the worthy Don Sebas¬ tian, who, as soon as Alonza was an¬ nounced, flew to receive him, and em¬ braced him with fervency ; they-were both affected, and it' was some minutes before
207 before' Alonza could inquire "after the Lady Sophronia. ' " " She, thank Heaven, is much f better than she has been," replied Sebastian ; " I will acquaint her of your being here; she will be happy to see you, .Д will go and prepare her for the interview." , " " Stop, my dear Sir, I conjure you, , though I am impatient to pay my ac¬ knowledgements to the amiable Sophro¬ nia, I must entreat your permission to allow me to open my whole heart to you ; first, begging you to accept of my sincere thanks for the kind part you have acted in silencing calumnies raised against me in my absence."
%
Sebastian
208 Sebastian resumed his seat, saying— " Willingly, my Lord, will I listen to your detail ; believe me, when I assure you I feel the affection of a father for you : in regard to what I and my daugh¬ ter have advanced in, defence of your character, no thanks are due, as we merely did an act of justice ; but we will discuss this subject more fully 4 hereafter, at present I am impatient for your pro¬ mised confidence." Alonza" entered into a minute detail ©f every circumstance that had occurred · since they met ; it was with difficulty he got through the painful relation, so strongly did his feelings overpower him. Don
209
Don Sebastian did not hear him un¬ moved ; most sincerely did he sympa¬ thise in his sufferings, and deplore the untimely death of the young and beau¬ tiful Juliana; he agreed with Alonza that his promise to the departed ought to be held sacred, else it would have been better to have published the marriage. " Yet," continued Sebastian, " as you have no offspring, it is not of so much consequence." The Marquis longed to acquaint this worthy man that he had a lovely pledge of affection in existence, but his oath obliged him to silence. He begged Don Sebastian to acquaint Sophronia with every circumstance he had related, and that
210 that he would request her to favour liirn . . . ι yvith an interview. ťf I will certainly execute your com¬ mission ; but my daughter must decide for herself; if in your favour it will make me happy; for I own I am vain enough to imagine that Sophronia's Virtues and accomplishments, aided by time, will put her in full possession of your affections ; hers I know have long been fixed on you. I use no reserve to * you, which will evince the high sense I entertain of your honour." " Never, by Heaven!" exclaimed Alonza, " will I forfeit your good opi¬ nion by any act of mine ; but I have made so long a visit that the Duke wifi wonder
211 wonder at my absence. I had almost forgot his message, which is, to request you would present me to-morrow at the levee, as he is unable to attend him- ,self." ' ■ " With pleasure, and afterwards I hope you will pass the day witli us. You have nothing to apprehend in re¬ gard to your reception at Court, as I have" taken care tó counteract the machi¬ nations of your enemies." Alonza repeated his thanks 3 and took his leave. He found the Duke anxious for his. retur a. ■ ; : , " From the length of your visit," said he, " í trust you and Donna Sophronia .ard
212 are once more on the footing of lovers." " Indeed, my dear Sir, I have not had the happiness of seeing her, but have met with a most pleasing reception from Don Sebastian, whom I am to accom¬ pany "to. the levee; and have promised if you are tolerable, to dine with him, when I shall have the pleasure of renew¬ ing my acquaintance with his charming daughter." The Duke was quite delighted at this information, but being determined not to press his son, dropped the subject. Don Gusman and Donna Triphosa had "paid their respects during Alonza's absence,
213
absence, who again promised the Duke to be on terms of civility with them. The rest of the day was occupied in re¬ ceiving visits of compliment. At the appointed hour he attended Don Sebastian to Court, and'was agree¬ ably surprised at being received, not only by his Sovereign, but the whole Court, in the most gracious manner. The King congratulated him on his re¬ turn to, his native country, which he hoped would be lhe place of the Mar¬ quis's residence in future. Alonza made a suitable reply, and acquitted himself with his accustomed politeness. After the levee he had the honour of a private audience ; the King informed ч Alonza
214 Alonza of the extent of his obligation to Don Sebastian, who had been indefati¬ gable in removing the prejudices occa¬ sioned by a variety of malicious reports. , > *' Are you, my Lord," continued his Majesty, " returned free ? and I trust that you have never formed any engage¬ ments that would disgrace you ?" " On my honour, my Liege, I have not ; * nor is there, I aver, one act of mine I need to blush for." " Your noble friend pledged his word you would prove yourself worthy of your illustrious birth ; and that youi frequent excursions and long stay in England, was owing entirely to a par¬ tiality
215 , _ tiality you hád imbibed from having received your education in that country, wherej of course, you had formed early friendships.".. * ' · A long conversation' ensued, and the Marquis was appointed to a place of con¬ fidence immediately about the royal person. " It is easily to be imagined that Alonza was flattered by this mark of distinction conferred on him, »and he retired from the .presence highly grati¬ fied. Ы the anti-chamber he met Don v Gusman, who, with well-feigned marks of friendship, congratulated him on tlie many pleasing events of the "day ; the Marquis bowed, inquired after Donna Triphosa, - promised ч to call shortly on him, and took his leave. ' : He ordered
216 his carriage to stop at home, as he wished to acquaint.the Duke with all that had passed at the levee, certain it would make him happy. He then proceeded to , fulfil his engagement, and was presented tó'Sophronià by her father, whom he found as beautiful as ever ; to him she appeared more so, as a tender melancholy overspread her fine features, which ren¬ dered them inexpressibly interesting. He could not behold her without expe¬ riencing feelings acutely painful; hers almost equalled Jus.-* She forcibly re¬ minded him of his lost Juliana; the 'promise he had made rushed in his memory, and occasioned a thousand dif¬ ferent ' sensations, he kissed her hand, but could not speak. Sebastian roused him by saying— ι, - " My
2Г 7 '< My friend, we are all impatience to know the result of the private audience you were favoured with ; I have ac¬ quainted my daughter with the particu- lars of your reception." This gave Alonza's thoughts a differ¬ ent turn, by awakening his gratitude ; he, in the warmest terms, expressed the ι high sense hé felt of the obligations he laid under to Sebastian, and mentioned the honour conferred on him by his Majesty ; he received the most heart-felt compliments on the occasion. ' * - " To-morrow," said Scba lian, " my daughter and you shall have a private conference ; but as I have already in¬ formed her of most of thç circumstances vol. n. L relate e
• - Ž1S rejativetö you, this day Ì expect you will áevote to me ; Ì have jnvited a smaÛ party this evening, and intend having a concert, in, which Ì hope you will both take part." ' The Marquis again thanked him, and they conversed on various topics during dinner. By the, time the company assembled, the Marquis and Sophronia were sufficiently composed to receive them with ease and apparent cheerful¬ ness. < Alonza returned home far more tran¬ quil than he had been for many months ; the dreaded interview with Sophronia was over, and he found his admiration and esteem increased ; he even looked * forward
210 forward with imptitiencetothe moment. that wouhl· decide his fate; 'he^deter¬ mined to offer his h ind to Sophronia, at the same time «not'to deceive her in any point. r 5 í - '<. v.\ ì ,> M With these resolutions he paid an ^arly visit : < Sophronia Was alone; her manner of receiving him convinced him he was still dear to her. Void of affecta¬ tion, and holding coquetry in contempt, this amiable woman'did not seekrtd hide her sentiments, though delicacy and genuine modosty strongly-marked every word and action ; Alonza's eyes told lier he thanked -her. » Taking her hand, he respectfully raised it to his lip?, saying— W r li' " Your father, 5 Madam, has kindly L 2 spared
220 -sparedme the painful récapitulation of my late loss ; he has likewise informed you of>the vow I made'the dying» saint, and her, ¡request' to you ; strange as it may appear, the purest motives actuatecţ . her heart, the seat of every virtue—" 1 , --> ι ι Ι ν I ' - t Sophrbnia interrupted him^ by en¬ treating him not to dwell on a scene she was already acquainted with.. ' ŕ "I received," saíďshe,' / ť a letter from the dear, departed, .written in French, л few days previous to her death; she fully « explained her wishes and her ä motives. When time, my Lord, has softened your grief, you shall peruse it; it cost me many tears, but I trust I have profited by. the « sentiments of resignation and piety
221 piety which breathed through 'every* line ; she must indeed have been a para¬ gon of perfection." -/ ' " Then it Js unnecessary, Madam, to- saý more, than I wait with anxiety your decision ; yon must fix my doom ; ! ' my » Îuturè life 1 shall be happy to dedicate. to youi ' I * oner to your' acceptance,' charming 1 Sophronia^ all that T remains of an heart lacerated^and torn; my esteem, my veneration you' have lonjg possessed; if you deign to rinite your fate tov mine, every return gratitude can 'make shall be yours,"- " i! 1 "It is in vain, Alonza," replied-So- phronia, " to disguise my feelings, nor' ' do I wish it ; convinced of your-honour ŕ ŕ ' h3 , and
22S
and-the purity of your sentiments, I clare telovou that you have long been 'master of my affections, thougli, be^eve пге,\ yourself excepted, no one more sincerely lamented the death of the angejip Jugaría; sensihletbatl shaU not be ablet to supply* her^place in your heart, I fear to accepts yoıır oÇer ; consideri' wen, my Lord* Ьефге^уои enter intQ indissoluble en-, ^gementsj do not let even your.voW) infiisence youi conduct." '5 Generous, exalted Sophronia, how ■■ cloyQU; tise superior tp your sex's weak* ness ! Fear not ; cold as my heart is?, your perfections will warm it ; and if I am not an enthusiastic Jover, you shall ever find me an affectionate and tender husband." , , "Enough,
, 223, " Enough,, Al.onza, receive"my h^n4a my heart is already in your possession., May Task, without awaking new sor- *W*,,wJjfl£ iş, become of уоцг Içvely infant?, ţţaş Щщеп çeçaljed ^НФ, cherub?" т ч- AtJonza; γ&& ςοφββάί. bß, fenew «ot how to answer ; he must either deceive the living, or forfeit l?i& word to the dead; he hesitated. Before he could frame an answer, Sophronia, who con*.. eluded, from his manner, that the child was dead, expressed her содсегп for having distressed him. He took her hand without ^speaking, and kissed it with fervor. At that moment Don Sen bastian entered the apartment, but per¬ ceiving the Marquis on hiş Jţnees, was L 4 , going
224 going to retire. v Alonza, springing up, <ried— " Return, Sir, and congratulate me on having obtained the consent of your lovely daughter to call her mine.'^ * Sebastian instantly joined their hands. i -> ' " Receive, my children," said he, " my blessing ; long may you live a com¬ fort to each other. Oh, my son! (suffer me, my Lord, to call. -you by that endearing name,) in bestowing Sophro¬ nia on you, I part with every^earthly felicity : cherish the gift ; believe me it is inestimable." " Tmly am I sensible of its value, my ever
225 1 ever-esteemed friend, my more ,than father :" but let my actions more than my ' words prove I am not unworthy of. the prize. 1 · * Suffer me now to comiiiunicatc f the nëwsto the Duke,· whose wishes anttı commands -I have at length fulfilled : then, with permission, I will return, and dedicate the day to friendship*" The Marquis found the Duke just returned from taking the air.- As soon as he heard that Alonza had pledged. himself -to Sophronia,» joy almost over¬ powered him ; with tears he embraced him. . ** May - every blessing a fond parent can bestow attend, you ! may Heaven 4 hear my most ardent prayers, and bless * u5 you
22$ * you both! Oh ! myson, you have given me new life ; the most sanguine wish of my soul is accomplished.^ May this union avert the fatal prophecy!" Dropping - on his knees, he exclaimed— " Hear me. Almighty Power ! hear a father's sup¬ plication, and spare my guiltless r son, nor overwhelm me with afiliction.for crimes committed by my ancestors." ec Rise, Sir," cried Alonza ; " for Heaven's sake, what does this mean ì sutter me to ask to what prophecy you allude." - - The Duke continued a few minutes in mental ' prayer, then rose with calm¬ ness— ^ > l s > „ >:r< «My
*· My "child, I have been to blame in ^ving way to my feelings, and rousing a curiosity I cannot satisfy : bound by a sacred oath never to divulge a mystery which, if you were informed of, you could not prevent the threatened danger; therefore rest satisfied to remain in ignorance ; let us by our conduct, and strictly discharging every moral and religious duty, merit the protection of Omnipotence, who has saved you from the snares of Gusman, whose malice J find is detected ; he has received a severe rebuke for propagating falsehoods to in*· jure your character, and is deprived of all his employments, and, with Donna ' Triphosa, ordered to retire to their estate the most distant from Madrid. I h 6 gained
227 . gained this intelligence at the minister's, to whom I- have been paying my - respects : he says, from whom the king received his information of Gusman's baseness is a profound secret. To-mor¬ row I mean to accompany you to pay our acknowledgments to our most gra¬ cious monarch, and announce your intended marriage." ' ч ' ť< I am heartily rejoiced, my dear Sir," % replied Alonza, " 4 that I am released from the necessity of playing the hypocrite, and that Gusman has met with the punishment he merits. I am certain that the unknown friend is the generous Sebastian; what do I not owe that worthy man! One way only can I repay
229 repay him for his unremitting kindness to me ; which is, by exerting every nerve to render his lovely daughter happy; to her I will devote all the ¿ime I can spare from public business. I have promised to return to dinner ; do you think, Sir, it- would hurt you to join the party ?" " Not in the least ; I feel myself per¬ fectly equal to enjoying the society of my dearest friends ; we will conclude every thing before we part : the parch¬ ments are all ready for signing, being still in the lawyer's hands ; I will order them to attend this evening." } Don Sebastian was agreeably surprised at the sight of the Duke ; sincerely did he
2S0 he welcome hirn. After the usual com¬ pliments— ^ w Once more," said the Duke, cc my old and revered friend, we are met to unite our "children \ may nothing again disappoint us ν - but before we enter on business,- permit me to assure you how highly sensible I am of 'the active part you have taken to clear my son from the false imputations of Don Gusman, who I find'is in 'disgrace, and banished the court." · " Who told your Grace," said Don Sebastian, " that I have been the only champion of the Marquis ?" u f *' No one, rny Lord, for I am informed it
■·■■■. .231 /.,. ife;is a-prpfound; secret, but nry heart , pointsyou putyzndl belieyeit speaks the ■ : truths ■^'..i i : 'ГГГ^^ ■;■/;"/ ír' ШГ^ '- ■ \--br/ : iyyus:iß'ic^ .? With your Grace's permission we will;not discuss the matter any farther : 4hank Heaven, we hay^ľ got 'rid οξ /ш inveteratele,; X may acloV foes^ te }Â^ie аШг m ƒ that - the ľ lady :; . iş ; eajually , хо r ¡'be,, ' ; ťeaťedi , ^.;;í'>':: ; i; ; :-^ii;t; ; ->^ г : Щ sub¬ jects , ^Ţhe afternoon was.'? devoted enr tirèly to maldng the proper arrange¬ ments. At the particular request öf Sophronia^ the>.marriage.; was to be a& private; aş ' possible^; and : vţhey were to spenď three, mqnţho; in^thçr country previous to their 'appearance at ) Court/ b'á!¿i"' '..';" ■;: ;; "--;'='' ■/ .'■■.The.
The Marquis was charmed with this proof òf Sophronia's attention, well knowing it was to_indulge his feelings ; his eyes spoke his approbation. The Duke and Don Sebastian were impatient to y have the marriage- 1 cele¬ brated, „Sophronia,- who despised the little arts of her sex, and rose superior to false delicacy, replied, on being desired to name the day, that she left it lo her father and the Marquis to determine, nor should she make the least objection 'to their decision. 1 I ' " Generous Sophronia," cried Alon¬ za, " how .shall I ever' repay the vast debt I owe you : suffer ~me4o call you mine this day fortnight?" ' She
233
She bowed consent, and he sealed it with a kiss. Things had passed in so rapid a man¬ ner that hardly Alonza had time tp communicate his thoughts to his friends in Devonshire; - he now. resolved to write a circumstantial- account of his proceedings.- He had twice had the pleasure of hearing from Mr. Millward,' and of his little Juliana, who was in perfect health, high spirits, and a uni¬ versal favourite ; severely did he repent his vow, which deprived him of all intercourse with his child. Ah, thought he, why am I obliged to * have a secret from the amiable Sophro¬ nia; how happy would she have been ЛО
234
to have reared as 4 her own-the only* re¬ mains of my departed wife ; but ' it can¬ not be, and my Juliana is placed with persons who will every way sunply the place of parents. The· Marquis:, daily became moţe* reconciled, to. his loeg^ ajad was at times lively, 'and' entered - with, spirit intQ sèveraL httie parties which were formed for hk amusemenu . Øn the day appointed fqr his nuptja& he met his destined bride at the aitai with evident marks, of pleasure, ancl was perfectly composed during the ceremony, which .was .performed by the Etøke's chaplain in a most private manner. They set off immediately for a magnifi¬ cent
. S35 cent seat belonging to Don,Sebastian, wliich he presented, to the new-married P air · a The, Duke,, previous to his^on's mar¬ riage, obtained, the full consent of his sovereign, who indulged the Marquis with three months' absence before he entered on the duties of his appoint¬ ment. On'their return tG Madrid every thing was prepared for their reception in a most splendid stile ; their first ap¬ pearance at' Court was suitable to their rank and fortune. Sophronia gained daily on the affections of the Marquis; his health was perfectly re-established; the duties of his appointment occupied a great
2Ő6 a 'great part of 'his time;' and gave a double relish to the calm 1 hours of -domestic enjoyment. - We will now quit them, and re-visit our friends in Devonshire.
END OJP TH£ SECOND VOLUME.
