Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Montalva: or, Annals of guilt: a tale
?? ? , ι ii i i i S*.'« ' ■ S' " ίίίί Τ" ιί wï" ι ilT^Sr^^ w wÍÍi . ^???' ?? ■ Ίμ'Ί ' ■ A' i j . ¿é i ' ? . 1? ? ' - - ? ii> 'i» ii m ibi i r3fcti ■■■ Ζ ι . . h hi h U ■ / ■■
MONTALVA, &c.
CHAR L rfi May Heaven renounce me when I forget thy generous friendship, dearest D'Rosonio" (cried Montalva, as he pressed the hand of his cousin). " In truth (replied the count), you owe me no obligation, what I did arose from actual selfishness." u Selfishness, Fernando ! what, at the hazard of your own life to preserve mine? how can you prove that there was any* thing selfish in such an act?** said Montalva .„ . . VOL, ? ?
?
" Very easily (cried the count), had I abandoned you to your fate, I should never have known a tranquil moment ; by sharing it, I had at least a chance of preserving you, and my life is not so very precious to me, that I should he¬ sitate to venture "it for a friend f a mo¬ mentary sadness clouded the ingenuous countenance of D'Rosonio as he spoke, and Montalva surveyed him with an eye of pity. " Well, Fernando (cried he), we will not argue the point, but from hence¬ forth, we are brothers ; M he held out his hand, and D'Rosonio grasped it in his; no protestations confirmed i thi* league of amity, but it lasted during the lives of the friends. The count D'Rosonio, and the sig^ nor Montalva were distantly related, but they had till now been almost strangers to each other; they had in¬ deed often.met, but their dispositions were apparently different^ and though polite, they were not friendly· Mon-
3
talva's temper was of the gayest kind, he was a soldier of fortune, and though his swörd, and his descent from a long line of illustrious ancestors, was nearly the whole of his inheritance, yet few men were happier. Brave, generous, and unsuspecting, his heart glowed with universal philantrophy, and he la¬ mented the narrowness of his fortune only, when he saw distress which he could not relieve. Not less 1 noble, or less feeling than his cousin, was the heart of D'Rosonio ; but hiss" temper, naturally grave, had been saddened even to melancholy, by a disappointment which he met with in the dawn ofhis life: he had loved from his boyish days the beautiful Clemen¬ tina D* Albiei, and she returned his passion ; few female hearts could indeed be insensible to the merits of D'Rosonio· The father of Clementina was appa¬ rently pleased with their mutual attach¬ ment; and when D'Rosonio solicited B2
4
tlie hand ofhis daughter, he refused ic only on account of her extreme youth, " A little time will remove that ob¬ stacle, signor (cried the « impatient lover), might I but look forward to a certainty of calling the signora Clemen- * tina mine, were it even at the end of a whole year, though that would ap- •pear an age." " My daughter is yet a child (said the signor D* Albiei, smiling at his warmth), and one year would not ren¬ der her a woman, neither should I chuse to form any positive engagement for lier; but be assured count, that I have the highest sense of the honour you do me in seeking my alliance, and I know not at present, that man to whom I would more willingly intrust the happiness of roy child ; but Γ will not enter into any positive engage¬ ments/· The decided tone of the signor pre¬ vented D'Rosonio's reply ; and he en* dea vou red, to persuade himself that at a
a
proper lime he should have the happi¬ ness to receive the hand of Clementina from her father ; and so in all probabi¬ lity he would, but for an accident that threw Clementina in the way of a richer lover. At a ball given by the coun¬ tess D'Arfit, she was seen and admired by the Duke D'Vinci. Never till he beheld Clementina had he a thought of marriage ; but the graces of her person, the fascinating simplicity of her man¬ ners, made an immediate impression upon his heart, and to think of her, except as a wife, he well knew would be vain; yet even with the lovely Cle- tnentina, he could not consider matri¬ mony as desirable, and for sometime he wavered; but when heheard that her hand was sought by D'Rosonio, he hesitated no longer ; he made his proposals, and they were eagerly accepted hy the signor. The heart of Clementina sunk at the news, and with tears, did she beseech her father not to sacrifice his child; but
e
ambition was the predominant failing of the signor. The alliance was indeed a splendid one, and he sternly vowed that he would be obeyed. The meek Clementina, who had hitherto been all obedience, now ventured to remon¬ strate ; her father heard her with astp- nishment. "What! (exclaimed h&) thinkest thou that my purpose is to be shaken by the folly of an obstinate girl ? or that an offer so splendid is to be rejeøted> merely to humour the caprice of a child, who knows not what she would have? rank, riches, and every earthly happiness await thee as the wife of the duke; and thou wilt enjoy the de¬ lightful consciousness of fulfiling a sacred duty, by complying with my will; but shouldst thou refuse, shouldst thou rashly presume to be the arbiter of thy own destiny, mark me; hope npt, if thou becomest the partner of D'Ro- sonio's bed to taste of peace·; the curses
7
of an offended parent shall follow thee." He ceased, for the unfortunate Cle¬ mentina sunk senseless at his feet ; and it was long before she gave an}' signs of returning animation; but when she did recover, all opposition to the signor'* will was at an end. " Oh, my father ! do not curse your child, I will obey you, indeed I will ; but, oh! for Heaven'e sake, promise that you will not curee rne." " My child, my Clementina, thou shalt have my blessings ; compose thy spirits, and all will be well (said the signor, kissing her cheek); she had been too much agitated to be able to obey him, and he soon left her, as he said, to repose." But he had strewed the pillow of the unfortunate girl with thorns, and gladly would she have welcomed death, as a refuge from the misery of a forced mar¬ riage. The image of D'Rosonio, dis* tracted at her supposed infidelity, pre-
s senttd itself to her; but her father's curse yet vibrated on herbar, and she dared not suffer her thoughts to dwell upon her lover ; yet vainly did she try to recai them, an j never till this moment wa£ sbe sensible how wholly, how İn- tirely her heart was the count's. The manner in which she received the Duke l>Vinci, would bave induced any man of delicacy to withdraw his addresses ; but delicacy had no place in the mind of the duke. - He saw the coldness, the aversion which she felt for him, but be saw it with indifference; he had always been a favourite with the fair, and he flattered himself, that when Clementina was once his, her senti¬ ments would soon change, or if they did not, it was not of much conse¬ quence, her lovely person would be his, and he was incapable of appreciating the value of a heart like Clementina's. He did not therefore betray the smallest symptom of discontent at her behaviour; he begged only that the
9
marriage might be hastened, and this request was readily agreed to by her father; who wished it over, lest any thing should happen to prevent it. Immediately on the dukes proposals, signor D'Albici had forbid D'Rosonio his house, and he carefully charged his domestics to bring him every letter that came; he also observed with the greatest attention, that no person but her woman, on whose fidelity he relied implicitly, had access to his daughter; but vigilant as the signor was, yet love triumphed over his caution, and D'Ro¬ sonio contrived to convey to his Clemen¬ tina the following letter:— u I cannot, I will not relieve that it is possible for you to renounce me for ever; your father assures me that every thing is agreed upon, and that you have consented to give your hand to the Duke D'Vinci; but til! it is confirmed by your own lips, I will not believe it. [I Clementina, I cannot for a moment JUL
10
support the thought of yonr perfidy. You, in whom I had treasured up every hope of future happiness, for whom I would with transport* have shed my hearfs best blood, you who ha^e always seemed so generous, so nobly disin¬ terested, surely you can never sacrifice yourself, a willing victim at the cursed shrine of ambition. " I am convinced I must have been imposed upon, I am certain that your heart is still unchanged. Clementina, my angel, forgive me, for doubting your fidelity, even for a moment ; write to me, I beseech you, send me but a single line, say only, 'my heart is yours,' and the universe combined, shall not tear you from "D'Rosonio." This incoherent, but faithful picture of a disordered mind, increased the an¬ guish of Clementina ; and for some time she hesitated about answering it. "??? (said she, mentally), let him think me perfidious, he will then be speedily re-
11
stored to peace, he will remember me only as an ambitious, inconstant woman, and such a being he cannot regret." At this thought her tears flowed with ad¬ ded bitterness, and the romantic ge¬ nerosity which dictated her resolution, gave way to the desire of being justified in the eyes of her lover. 41 I must write to him (thought she), I jnust return the precious token which I have so long worn next my heart.* She took it from her neck, and bitter indeed were the tears which she shed upon it, as she pressed it for the la?t time to her lips. It was a beautiful trinket, in the form of a heart, wdiich her father had sufíered her to accept from D'Rosonio, but the signor knew not, when he did so, that it contained the portrait of the count ; a secret spring, known only to tiie lovers, presented to Clementina (when she wished to con¬ template them), the features of D'Ro¬ sonio, and so artfully was it constructed, that the trinket might have been mi<*
12
nutely examined without its being visi¬ ble. For more than a year she had con¬ stant^ worn it, and often had she thought that it would accompany her to the grave. The task of writing to the count, and of explaining to him her reasons for resigning him, was the severest she hai ever known ; but a father's enrse— couid she resolve lo incur tliat i impos- sible t and to preserve herself from this dreaded malediction, she resigned every earthly hope of happiness. Her letter was indeed a mortal stab to the peace of the unfortunate count. His mind was too rightly turned to at¬ tempt to influence Clementina to act in opposition to the dictates of her consci¬ ence; and unable to remain and witness her marriage, he quitted Naples for some time. In a short period after his departure, she gave her hand to the duke. She called all her fortitude to her aid dur* ing the ceremony, and when it was over,
m
she oegged to retire for a few minutes* The signor D'Aìbicì followed her to her apartment, lie found her on her knees before a little altar, which was dedica¬ ted to her tutelar saint ; her hai\ds were clasped iu fervent prayer, while her lovely eyes raised to Heaven, and the deep distress impressed upon her coun¬ tenance, shewed that m the divine mercy was her only hope. On her fa¬ ther's entrance she hastily arose, *' my child (cried he), I see, and I lament the hold which this unhappy passion hai takeri of your heart ; but my Clemen¬ tina will struggle with her weakness; think, my love, how different would be your feelings, had you rashly dared to brave the sacred authority of a parent; then every day would have added poig¬ nancy to your sufferings ; the mists of passion would speedily disperse, and a father's maledictions would have poi¬ soned your every enjoyment. Now you will fina that every hour will di* minish your regrets. In tbe new ti«
14
which you háve taken upon yourself ; and in the consciousness of having fui- filled your duty, you will recover peace ; and it must be some addition to your felicity, to know that you have rendered the declining years of your father happy. Take then, my beloved child, my thanks, and my blessing." The signor's voice faultered as he pro- nounccd the benediction, which his un¬ fortunate daughter had purchased at so dear a rate; and it is probable that, at that moment, he migli t have regretted the sacrifice which he so inhumanly urged lier to make. Clementina threw her¬ self into his arms, and tears streamed from her eyes. fe My father, my dear father (cried ebe), let me again hear you bless your child." (( Oh, may Heaven bless thee as fer¬ vently as I do, my beloved girl" (said the signor), and lie mingled his tears with hers. Hard was the struggle of the amiable duchess, to perform to*
15
her lord the duties of a wife. Proud, sensual, and vindictive, the duke, when satiated with the possession of her person, remembered with bitter¬ ness, the reluctance with which she had bestowed upon him her band, and he treated her either with neglect or studied contempt; to this behaviour Clementina appeared blind; ever gentle and submissive, ever anxious to antici¬ pate his wishes, her conduct would have claimed respect from any man not void of humanity ; but engrossed by licenti¬ ous pleasures, or ambitious pursuits, the heart of the duke was inaccessible to those sentiments which she was formed to inspire. Almost a twelvemonth had elapsed since the marriage of his daughter, and signor Albiei saw no reason to rejoice in the success of his cruel project. His daughther was indeed surrounded by all that in the opinion of the world con¬ stitutes happiness; but tlie insufliciency ©£ pomp and splendour to procure feh*
lu
city, was at last obvious to the signor, and he saw that his child *as a 'miser¬ able victim to his own ambition: this thought preyed upon his mind, and the care which the duchess took to conceal from him all the causes of actual un¬ happiness which she had, hurt him more than the keenest reproaches would have done ; he determined to remon¬ strate with the duke, but this idea he relinquished, when he considered the character of his son in-law, ivhose be¬ haviour to him had for some time past been so coldly civil, that the signor saw nothing would give him greater pleasure than an onnortunity of breaking with him. " 1 am justly punished (thought he), but, oh ! my poor sacrificea girl, thou shouldst not have suffered for my fault!" One night, at a masquerade, the duke was accosted by an elegant figure in the dress of sylph, and no habit could be better calculated to shew to> advantage, the delicacy» and the ex>
17 quisite proportion oí her light and graceful form ; every limb was moulded by the hand of symmetry, and every charm was heightened hy the studied display which she made of them. All eyes were fixed upon the lovely sylph, who glided along with all the lightness and grace peculiar to the serial character which she had assumed. " Look around thee, oh child of the dust (said she to the duke), all here is calculated to touch the senses, and to dazzle the imagination; the hand of beauty presents to thee the cup of pleasure, and her seducing voice invitee thee to quaff the delicious draught ; but thou, as if shell-bound by some evil genii, or malignant enchanter, gazest with torpid apathy on this enchanting scene." ec I acknowledge," benevolent sylph (replied the duke, who had Hstened to her soft accents with pleasure), that the most gloomy reflections had, at that moment, taken possession of my mind,
is
but thy magic powers have already dis¬ pelled then*, and one glance from thy brilliant eyes will perfect my cure." The sylph glided from him without a reply; the eyes of the duke followed her, and he saw her address a lady, whom in a few moments she led up to him. si If thou art willing (cried she), to take me for thy guardian genii, much happiness awaits thee, but my favour must be purchased by an entire obedi¬ ence to my commands ; say, art thou content to accept the terms I offer ?" The duke bowed, and she continued, fc receive from me a partner for the dance. '* She put the hand of the lady into his, and then walked away. The duke, though much disappointed, was yet too gallant to be unmindful of his partner, whom he led to join the dancers ; had not his thoughts been fixed upon the sylph, he would have been pleased with her fair friend, who pos¬ sessed much grace and vivacity, and
19
seemed studious to attract lus notice. After they had conversed for some timey the duke tried indirectly to learn who the sylph was, but this the other lady cautiously concealed. When the dance was ended, she declined joining in ano¬ ther, and she told her partner that she would no longer tax his gallantry, as she expected some friends, whom she wished to join ; the duke was not dis¬ pleased to part with her, for he resol ved ? if the sylph had not left the rooms, to endeavour to discover her. He made the tour of them unsuccess¬ fully, and he was returning to the ball room, when in a small apartment which be had neglected to enter, he caught, as the door was ? -jar, a glimpse of the fair form which he was in search of; she had thrown herself on a sofa, but she arose hastily as he entered. The duke caught her hand, and pres¬ sed with ardour for a sight of her face. For a long time she sustained her cha- lacter and evaded his solicitations, but
20 t at last, u I must be plain with yon, signor (cried she), I see that 1 have ex¬ cited your curiosity, but my vanity for¬ bids me to gratify it. My face has, in truth, not a single charm to boast of; and after all the professions of admira¬ tion, which you have lavished upon me, think how my pride would be mortified to behold you erect your eyes with dis¬ gust, from that countenance which you are now so anxious tò beholdl' For some time the duke pleaded in vain ; at length half-willing, half-re¬ luctant, she suffered him to take off her mask ; never had be beheld a coun* tenance so fascinating, her features in¬ deed were not regular, but her dark and brilliant eyes, her small ruby mouth, and the animated expression which constituted the principal charm of her face, struck the duke with the utmost admiration. " Weil, signor (cried she with a gay air), does your violence proceed from terror?" He caught her in his arms*
21
u Hold (said she, resentfully), if my favours are to be repaid with insult." 6C Pardon me, lovely signora (cried the duke, interrupting her), and allow for the force of your charm r en a sus¬ ceptible heart ; I thought indeed to have seen beauty, but I dni not expect to have beheld such uncommon loveli¬ ness ; wonder not then, that taken «jy surprise, I forgot for a single moment, that respect which Ís 4 yonr due." " Did you then really suppose (said ??? smiling), that I was the frightful creature, I represented myself to be? Oh, signor, how little do you know of our sex ; had that been the case, believe me it is the last thing I should have avowed. Beauty is the gift of all others which our sex most wish to be thought possessed of it, nor is there any woman, who would chuse to own herself desti¬ tute of all pretensions toit, if she was conscious that she was speaking the truth. You will think me a strange
22
mad creature, for thus betraying to you ihe secrets of the sex, but— " I think you are altogether the love¬ liest, the most fascinating angel that I ever beheld (exclaimed the duke), let me know, I beseech you, who you are, and never shall you have cause to repent your confidence." A long conversation ensued, but the sylph was determined to preserve her . incognito. She gave the duke hopes of seeing her again, and when they parted, she strictly charged him not to follow or endeavour to trace her. " Your doing so (said she), will be vain, for you wiíl find it impossible to discover who I am ; and should I learn that you have disobeyed my commands, you will never behold me again." "That threat is sufficient to make me all obedience" (cried the duke). " Your obedience shall be rewarded (returned she/, and now, signor, fare¬ well
23
' She quitted him as she spoke, and for a moment he was tempted to trans¬ gress the promise which he hud just given, and follow her; but thi dread of losing her prevented him; he had never before seen a woman that interested him so much; the voluptuous graces of her person, made a strong impression upon his senses; while the apparent levity ofher manners, promised success to his designs upon her, and the air of elegance that accompanied her every word and action, convinced him that his adventure was not a common one. In this respect, he was indeed right, for he was about to become the victim of a deeply laid plot, and those arts which hehad without scruple employed for the destruction of many unfortunate females, who had caught his light and fickle fancy, were speedily to be retorted upon himself; but wholly unsuspicious of the snare that was laid for him, he ran into it with avidity.
2Ί·
» UPM imi H ii MiuM ι ■ m ??, m ? ? ........ j m ι ? ?? ? ? si r iii i iii. ι ? i _ i _ i i an
CHAP. IL
Claudia Fenini (the enchantress who had fascinated the duke), was the daugh¬ ter of a peasant, and her early days were spent in the most sordid poverty, and thegrossest ignorance. Nature, which had been liberal to the person of Clau¬ dia, had also given her the strongest mental powers; but even from her birth her heart was depraved, and her vicious and ungovernable temper was a source of continual uneasiness to her parents. At a very early age, Claudia was sensi¬ ble how much she was superior to her rustic companions» and her heart
s
2$
panted for gayer scenes than her native village afforded. " Of what use (thought she, as she contemplated her lovely face in the brook near her father's cottage), is it, that I am as handsome as the Countess Durazzi, if iny days are to pass in ob¬ scurity, and to be embittered by toil? but why should it be so ? why cannot I go to Rome ? I may attract the notice of some rich and powerful signor, and spite of poverty and obscurity, I may yet outshine the haughty countess, who viewed me with sueh disdain, while I was employed in decking her boudoir with flowers/' The Countess Durazzi, whose beauty and grandeur had so disturbed the mind of Claudia, was a noble Sicilian, whose husband had lately purchased a palace in the neighbourhood of Claudia's parents; gentleness and dignity were equally the characteristics of the coun¬ tess; but though she was pleased with the uncommon beauty . of the young vol. i. ?
??
peasant, she was disgusted with her bold and assured airs ; and hence proceeded those glances of disapprobation, which had sunk deeply into the mind of Claudia, and inspired her with the design of go¬ ing to Rome. To a mind possessed of any degree of feminine delicacy, the thought of quit¬ ting for ever her parental roof, and throwing herself destitute upon the world, would have been dreadful ; but Claudia was determined to emerge from obscurity, or perish in the attempt. She privately quitted her father's cot¬ tage, and took the road to Rome. Faint, weary, and exhausted by fatigue and want of nourishment, she at last reached that city, and the ambitious resolution which had prompted her journey, had nearly sunk under the difficulties which she had encountered. Though almost sinking for want of food, she was yet too proud to beg, and she was destitute of money to purchase any : she seated
ν
herself under a portico, and burst into tears. The Signor Montoni was passing at the moment, and the evident distress of the young peasant attracted his atten¬ tion. In the soft accents of compas¬ sion, he asked the cause of her unhap¬ piness ; but Claudia, young as she was, was too artful to own all the truth. A few minutes thought enabled her to frame a story, that completely imposed upon the benevolent and unsuspecting Montoni. She was, she said, an or¬ phan, and destitute of any means of support; she came to Rome to seek a service, but her money was exhausted, and she knew not what to do. " Poor child (said the signor), thou shalt not want the shelter of a roof; come with me, and I will provide for thee." Claudia gladly obeyed, and followed the signor to his home. He called the person who superintended the affairs of his household, and gave her a charge to be kind to the young peasant. ? 2
'28
Best and food recruited the spirits and charms of Claudia ; and when her bene¬ factor saw her the next day, he Was struck with admiration at her beautv. The signor was in the decline of life, and he had long determined never to marry; but though he had not rejected the favours of complying beauty, the sin of seduction was one from which he was wholly free. The youth and inno¬ cence of Claudia called for protection, and tie strove to quel the tumultuous emotions which her surpassing loveli¬ ness excited. ts It would be the act of a fiend, to take advantage of her situation (thought he), I will be to her as a father." The illness of a nephew, whom he meant to inherit his fortune, called him at this time from his home, and Clau¬ dia remained under the care of Viletta, his housekeeper. The goodness of her master, his extensive charities, his am¬ ple fortune 5 were the continual subjects oí Viletta's praise. In the short inter-
view which Claudia had with the signor, she saw the admiration which she had inspired him with (for vanity is even more eagle-eyed than love), and most heartily did she wish that he might be the great signor destined to raise her from obscurity ; any hope of his mar¬ rying her, she did not indulge, but she would have thought herself happy in being his mistress. Montoni soon returned to Rome, and during his absence, Claudia had so in¬ gratiated herself with Viletta, ^rîiat she asked her master's permission to keep her as an assistant in the duties of her office. (i She is so apt, and so industrious (said the good woman), that I should find her a perfect treasure." u Then you may suffer her to remain Viletta (said the signor) ; provide for her whatever may be necessary, and remember that I do not wish you to be sparing of expenee."
??
Viletta carried this intelligence to Claudia, who heard it with delight; but for some time she saw little of the signor; a fit of illness, in which she as¬ sisted Viletta to nurse him, threw her more in his way; she had naturally a sweet voice, and she warbled some simple airs, with a degree of feeling and taste, that to the partial Montoni appeared surprising; the magic of her tones al¬ ways chaced away his pains, and she was frequently employed to lull him to repose. At length he began to recover, though slowly, and every hour made the company of Claudia more necessary to him ; but the languid state of his health, concealed from him the danger to which he exposed himself, and in one unguarded moment every good re¬ solution gave way, and he became, as he imagined, the seducer of the young orphan. This event introduced to his bosom a new guest; it was remorse, from whose terrible visits he had been hither*
si
to free. tí At what a price (thought he), have I purchased a transient pleasure ; and what compensation can I make to the wretched victim of my unhallowed desires ? The behaviour of Claudia, while it augmented his love for her, ad¬ ded to the weight of self-reproach, which was but too oppressive to his feel¬ ings. To provide for her amply, and to part with her immediately, was bis firm resolve ; but when, with well-dis¬ sembled sorrow, she implored not to be wholly banished his presence, when amidst her tears and her confusion, he thought he could perceive that she loved him, he was not proof against the wish she expressed to remain with him. He desired her to retire, and he began to consider the matter in a new light; that Claudia loved him, he was strongly inclined to believe, but the pride of birth forbade him to transplant this lovely flower into that soil, where she would bloom, and which she would ornament. " Yet, if she loves me (thought he), what injury can our con-
32
nexion be productive of to her ? All that love and splendour can bestow she shall command." " Can either com¬ pensate for loss of innocence ?" whis¬ pered Conscience; but her voice was drowned hy the stronger one of passion, and Montoni made Claudia, an offer of becoming his mistress. She accepted it with the greatest satisfaction ; and the deceived Montoni thought that her love for him had reconciled her to a life of infamy. The first masters in Rome were en¬ gaged by the signor for the instruction ofhis Claudia, whose progress in every accomplishment was his pride and de¬ light. Well had it been for this evil- minded woman, had her natural dispo¬ sition been capable of cultivation, but she was a rare example of inherent de¬ pravity ; the benefits which Montoni lavished upon her, made not the smallest impression on her heart; she had never liked the signor, and a new passion, which superseded even avarice
33
and ambition, rendered him odious to her. The Marquis de Laney, a French nobleman, whose gallantry and accom¬ plishments rendered him a general fa¬ vourite with the Italian ladies, saw, and was captivated with Claudia ; nor was she less pleased with him. The un¬ suspecting Montoni left her in full pos¬ session of her liberty, and she soon let the marquis know the conquest he had made. De Laney received her advan¬ ces with transport, and for some time, their intrigue was carried on with secresy. Claudia gave the marquis several in¬ timations of her wish to desert Montoni for him, but to these hints he appeared insensible ; he was indeed fascinated with her person, but his fortune was moderate, and he did not wish to di¬ minish it, by supporting a mistress in that stile of luxurious extravagance which he knew she ivould require, Claudia saw that her hints were unno* c ô
34
ticed, and she divined his motives ; but a wish to devote herself to him, in¬ spired her with a design the most dia¬ bolical that ever entered the heart of an abandoned woman. Montoni had a favourite nephew whom he always meant to make his heir ; but in the moments of doating fondness, he had told Claudia that she was amply provided for. The at¬ tention which she still thought it neces¬ sary to pay him, became to the last de¬ gree irksome to her. " His death (thought she), would give me indepen¬ dence, and the man I love would then be securely mine/ no sooner had she conceived this horrid idea, than she formed a plan for the destruction of the man to whose generosity she owed every thing. Equally artful and wicked, she determined to proceed with caution^ and the frequency of assassinations at Rome, made her judge that that was the safest way of getting rid of the un¬ happy Montoni ; could she but engage
??
De Laney in her project, it might, she thought, be easily executed, and she determined to do so speedily. She took more than usual pains to adorn her person against their next meeting, which she purposely deferred for some time; at last a welcome sum¬ mons reached De Laney, and he flew to the place of appointment. €t Claudia, my angel (exclaimed the marquis), what an age since we have met; a hundred times have I been tempted to transgress your injunction, never to write to you ; so greatly did I long to know the reason of this unkind delay." " It has not been my fault, De Laney (cried she), but I much doubt whether we shall be able to meet again ; Mon¬ toni has suspicions of me ; jealousy will soon convert them into certainties, and 4 I foresee that we must part." " No, dearest Claudia (said the mar¬ quis), I cannot conseut to resign thee ; some means must be .thought of to pre-
36
vent it ; but let us not poison the pre¬ sent by anticipations of the future. I cannot bear to see my Claudia's coun¬ tenance robbed of its usual vivacity ; look cheerfully, my love." " De Laney (cried she, putting her hand in his), am I indeed dear to you ?° " Unkind Claudia, do you then doubt my affection ? (returned the marquis)." i( Wouldst thou wish that I was wholly thine? (said she, without noticing his reply). Hear me, De Laney (con¬ tinued she, preventing him from inter¬ rupting her), should any circumstance give me freedom and independence, nay, more, affluence, might I expect that Claudia would then be- the chosen of thy heart r" She pressed the hand of the marquis to her lips, while her fine eyes were tenderly fixed upon his face, as she spoke. " Dearest Claudia (replied he), thou knowest that to be able to call thee wholly mine, would be the greatest
37
happiness of my life ; had my fortune been ample, I would long since have invited thee to share it." " I have thought of a plan which will render us happy ; 'tis one, indeed, that necessity only could have sug¬ gested ; but I repeat to thee, it is the only step that we can take to avoid being separated." She reclined her cheek upon the marquis's shoulder, and he fondly strained her to his heart, while he asked what her project was. 6i It is one that requires some cou¬ rage (said she), but it is nevertheless easy and safe of execution ; one circum¬ stance only can give me liberty and affluence, and that must be the death of Montoni !" De Laney was thunderstruck. He put her from him, and gazed wildly on her for a moment. fi Woman ! (ex¬ claimed he), woman l· nd, 'tis profana¬ tion to call thee so. Monster, fiend, wouldst thou then sink us both, to eter*
38
nal pei aition t wouldst thou commit a crime so black as murder ?" " Not willingly, De Laney (said she, terrified at the sternness of hi« looks), but think, how wholly my heart is thine, and then ask thyself, whether I could bear the thought of resigning thee?" "Thy heart (criedthe marquis); oh 3 Heaven î is it possible that such de¬ pravity can exist in human shape ; but mark me, Claudia, I do not ask thy promise (for I would not trust İt)* not to harm the life of Montoni ; but I swear by every thing most sacred, that if thou dost, my vengeance shall pursue thee ; thou shalt expiate thy crime in torments, of which, thou canst not conceive an idea; for thy own sake then, respect the Hfe of a man, whose generosity raised thee from beggary." The natural haughtiness of Claudia overcame her terror, and she reproached tlie marquis with pusillanimity : u Had fear no greater influence on thy coward $onl than conscience (cried she), ¿by
39
hand would readily strike the blow, but thou disguisest apprehension under the shew of humanity ; fool that I have been to bestow my affections so un¬ worthily." The marquis deigned not to reply. He again repeated his threats of punish¬ ment, and left her. The behaviour of De Laney had converted her love for him into hatred, and the furies of rage and disappointment darted their scor¬ pion stings into her heart. She im¬ piously execrated herself and De Laney in the same breath ; now she vowed that both Montoni and the marquis should perish; and the next moment the fear of punishment staggered her resolu¬ tion. Practised as she was in dissimulation, she could not bear to meet the eye of Montoni, and on her return she feigned. illness, and retired to bed ;, had she possessed the smallest spark, of feeling, the kindness of the signor would, have wrung her heart.. The agitation of her
40
spirits had produced a slight degree of fever, which the tenderness of Mon¬ toni magnified ; the first physicians in Rome were summoned, and the signor hung over the couch of this bosom ser¬ pent with the fondest solicitude. For some days, the baleful passions which tormented this woman's mind pre¬ vented her recovery ; and she was still an invalid, when the illness of his favourite nephew, whose recovery was very doubtful, obliged Montoni to leave her for a few days. Never was news so welcome to Claudia. The absence of the signor, would (she thought), afford her leisure to devise some plan to rid herself both of him and De Laney, who was new more odious to her than even Montoni ; she was, however, spared the commission of the crime which she meditated ; the illness of Montoni's nephew w r as a pestilential fever, the signor caught it, and his recovery was in a few clays declared impossible. Montoni met death with the firm-
41
ness of a christian. One only sin of magnitude hung upon his mind; this W,as the injury that he had (as he sup¬ posed) done to Claudia, to whom he dictated a letter, in which, in the most affecting terms, he bade her farewel ; and while be supplicated her to pardon him, he besought her not to let any temptation plunge her into a similar error in future ; he painted in the live¬ liest colours, the remorse that he felt for having caused her fall from virtue ; and he concluded by an assurance, that his only consolation was, the having it in his power to provide amply for her. The conclusion of his letter was in¬ deed the only part of it to which Claudia attended ; her joy at his death was excessive ; α liberty, and indepen¬ dence (said she) are now my own, and happiness awaits me." It was not without some 4 regret that she relinquished the idea of taking ven¬ geance upon De Laney, but self was
42
ever her predominant consideration ; she dreaded that her design might be dis¬ covered, and if it was, certain punish¬ ment awaited her. The fear of this made her at first hesitate, and finally give up her design, and to her pusillanimity alone De Laney owed his life. Released now from every restraint, she plunged into the vortex of un¬ bounded libertinism, and her wit and beauty drew many men of rank into her snares ; her unbounded extravagance however soon reduced her to pecuniary difficulties, and her admirers by degrees deserted her ; she was still very young, and lovely as ever, and she deter¬ mined to leave Rome, and seek at Naples for some lover, who was rich and w cok enough to support her in the style to which she had latterly been ao customed.
43
CHAP. III.
She had not been many days at Naples, when she fancied that in the Duke D'Vinci she had discovered à man fit for her purpose ; and she waited only for an opportunity of throwing herself in his way, when the masquerade pre¬ sented one that she determined to im¬ prove. The duke's libertinism and incon¬ stancy were notorious, and Claudia thought that it would require some artifice to inspire him with a real pas« sion. In order to effect this, she deter¬ mined to give an air of mystery to he* 1
44
proceedings, and not to suffer herself f ? be too easily won. Naturally keen and penetrating, she saw, and rejoiced in the impression which at their first interview, she was convinced, she had made ; she suffered some days to elapse before she let the duke hear from her ; at last, when his impatience was at the height, and he had nearly given up his fascinatiog incognita, he received the following Billet : " I know by the magic powers with which I am gifted, how extremely un¬ just you have been to your Sylph, but I forgive your suspicions; believe me, it Was not as you have thought, a wish to raise a curiosity that I did not mean to gratify, which induced me to defer our interview ; other, and more weighty considerations influenced me; but I am now at liberty to see you, and should your devotion lead you to vespers this
45
evening, at the church of St/Giovanni, you will find á person who will conduct you to the « Sylph.'' The duke pressed the billet with rap* ture to his lips, andjiis impatience led him to the church even before the hour of vespers ; but the service was ended, and nearly every person had quitted the church, when a woman veiled, advanced towards him ; she beckoned him to fol¬ low her, and he obeyed in silence. She walked with a quick pace 'till she had got a short distance from the town, and then stopped at a garden-gate, which she opened. " We are at length at our journey's end, signor," (said she, as the duke followed her into the gar¬ den). She led him to a small house, and opening the door of an apartment, requested him to enter, and in a few moments he would see her ladv. The duke obeyed, and when left to himself, he gazed with surprise upon
46
every thing round him. The plain, and indeed rather mean appearance of the house, afforded a striking contrast to the voluptuous elegance of tlie boudoir in which he was; and while he examined the furniture and orna¬ ments, he owned that it was decorated with a degree of luxury and taste that surpassed every thing he had hitherto seen. But the entrance of Claudia drew his attention wholly to herself. She wa# habited with an apparent simplicity ; but her dress was in reality calculated to show her light and lovely figure to the greatest advantage, " How shall I ever thank you as I ought, (cried the duke, seizing the hand which she hekl out to him, and pressing it with rapture to his lips,) for this favour ?" " Whieh you began to think I never meant to grant you. Is i* not so, sig¬ nor ?" (replied she, with an arch smile.)
4J
cí I shall begin to believe that you are indeed possessed of magic powers, (cried the duke), for I own that you have divined my thoughts ; but let me thus beseech your pardon." He threw himself upon his knees. Claudia raised him, and seating herself by his side, began a conversation, which she carried on for some time with the greatest sprightliness. The freedoms which the levity of her manner encouraged, she repelled with an air of hauteur ■ and she dismissed the duke at the end of two hours, more seriously captivated with her than he had ever been with any woman in his life. Interview succeeded interview, and so artfully did Claudia behave, that when at last she yielded to his wishes, he thought her doing so proceeded from her unbounded passion for him ; ana he felt proud of his imaginary triumph over the honour of a woman, whose
48
favours had been already indiscrimi¬ nately bestowed. Clamra now no longer refused to gratify his curiosity with an account of her life, and she easilv fabricated a tale that imposed upon him ; she re¬ presented herself as of noble births and that she had been early in her life united to a man much older than her¬ self, and who was since dead ; business she said, induced her to visit Naples, and a chance view of him, inspired her with a passion that had prompted her to take the steps she did. This story the duke implicitly be¬ lieved ; and the apparent sincerity, the simple, and the unstudied manner of Claudia might indeed have induced a man of greater penetration to have given credit to it* This enchantress seemed to have vanquished the natural incon¬ stancy of his temper, but in propor¬ tion to his fondness for her was his neglect and indifference to the lovely
49
duchess, whom he now regarded with aversion, and whom he took every op¬ portunity of mortifying by the most marked and open slights. Sut for her father s sake, Clemen¬ tina would have been almost indifferent to his treatment of her ; her hopes and wishes were fixed upon a better world ; but when she saw the anguish which her husband's brutality caused her father, when she beheld him bending under the weight of self-reproach, her spirit revolted at the insults which her unworthy husband daily offered her. The Count D'Rosonio frequently heard from Naples, and the behaviour of the duke to his lovely wife, sharpen¬ ed the thorn that still continued to wrankle in Vis heart. In the hope that the dangers and occupations of a mili¬ tary Hfe would, in some degree, banish thoáe reflections that rendered existence insupportable to him, he entered the Spanish army, and his courage and VOL, I, ß
60
humanity soon rendered him both re¬ spected and beloved. His cousin, Mon¬ talva, served in the same regiment with him. In the heat of action, the sis- nor received a severe wound, and at the moment that he was sinking under his adversary's sword, D'Rosonio rushed forward to his assistance, and bore him from tbe field. This was the act which Montalva so solemnly vowed to re¬ member, and most truly did he keep his word. Peace was proclaimed soon after, and the friends, who were now truly at* tached to each other, were unwilling to separate ; they resolved to visit Madrid together, and Montalva indulged a hope that the ladies of that celebrated city would possess sufficient attractions to banish the unhappy passion which the count was still unable to conquer : but his hopes were vain, D'Rosonio was indeed polite, and attentive to the Spanish beauties, but his heart was still Clementina's, and he acknowledged to
51
Montalva, that it would never own . another flame. u Well, Heaven be praised D'Ro- sonio, that my temper does not resem¬ ble thine (said the signor one day to his cousin), for if it did, I should be more miserable than I am : know,, my friend, that ï am in love, and that I have at this moment reason to fear that I shall never possess the object of my passion." " You jest, surely, Montalva (cried the count), or you have hitherto been very secret in your amour, for I never had the least idea of it," fi To all my secrets thou art welcome, D' Roson i ? (replied his friend), but this was not my own, it was in truth intrusted to me by a fond and unsus¬ pecting girl, and i had pledged my¬ self to her, that not even the man nearest to my heart, should know it tilt she gave me permission to reveal it. I had hoped, I own, that you would have had to congratulate røe upon my sue- D 2
52
cess—-not to condole with me on my disappointment." The melancholy air w r ith which Mon¬ talva uttered these words, proved that his heart was more interested than he was willing to acknowledge. <( Let me know (cried the count), what has occasioned your disappoint¬ ment ; I do not make professions, Stephano, but if my fiiendship can in any way be serviceable to thee, tax it to the utmost." t( I would accept your offer willingly (replied Montalva), for I know the sin¬ cerity with which it is made; but in this affair, thou canst not serve me» The mistress of roy heart is about to be· sacrificed to age and deformity, and so strictly is she guarded, that there is not a possibility of her making an escape ; but 1 ??? now relate to thee the parti¬ culars of roy adventure." u Some time ago, I was rambling one night without any fixed plan, I heard as í passed the back of a magnificent
53
house, the voices of women in conver¬ sation, and the particular secretness of one of them, induced me for a moment to listen, without reflecting on what I was doing. " * I think thou art mad, Rosana, (cried she), or at least I should be, if I followed thy advice ; how can I tell that the signor's heart is disengaged; or that, if it is, he would bestow it upon mer* " You know that of all the perfections which we admire in a woman, there is not one to me so attractive as an har¬ monious voice, and never did 1 hear tones so full of sweetness. " ' That the Signor Montalva (at the mention of my own name, I became etili more attentive)—That the Signor Montalva is a disengaged man (replied the other lady), I will not venture to say, though we have uo reason to ima¬ gine the contrary; but admitting that he is, I do not think that you can for a moment doubt that he would receive
54
an intimation of your regard with transport. Cold and insensible must indeed l«e the heart of that man who could reject the love of such a woman as my Clara.' íc t I prithee, dear tempter (said Clara), no more; I will not sin against maiden modesty. Heavens I should he reject me, Oh, Rosana, I cannot bear the thought." " ' Were you in any other circum¬ stances (cried Rosana), it would be the last step that í »honid urge you to take, but when there is a chance of escaping a forced marriage, and of being happy with the man yo« lo\e, it is at least worth the trial ; your duenna would soon learn for you whether Montalva has any attachment, and if his heart is indeed free, doubt noc, dear cousin, of your power to captivate him.' " t I have not courage to run the risk of being rejected, and perhaps scorned (said Clara). Don Juan will not surely attempt to carry his threats into effect ;
65
but if he should, I have still a resource at the foot of the altar ; I will protest against the violence offered to my in- * clinations, and declare an intention of taking the veil : in a cloister, I shall at least enjoy tranquillity, if I must not hope for happiness.' "The last words were scarcely articu¬ late, and the moment after, I could hear her sob audibly ; her companion attempted to console her, and ¿hey left the apartment* " i cannot tell ttøee, D'Rosonio, how s f ror4gly interested I felt for Clara ; I would have given the v tf orld to know, whether I was indeed the fortunate man on whom she had bestowed her heart. From the title, signor, I was inclined to hope it might be so ; yet it was more than possible that Madrid contained others of the same name and country as thy friend, though 1 knew it not. 1 resolved the next day to en¬ deavour to iind out the ???? and situa-
ì>6
tion of Clara, and at all events, to try to see her. " I was circumspect in my enquiries, but I learned enough to convince me, that Clara would be one of the noblest matches in Spain. She was an orphan of illustrious family, and immense for¬ tune. Her father, the Marquis De Liners, had bequeathed the guardian¬ ship of her person and property to Don Juan De- ------, with a proviso, tliat if she married without her guardian's consent, she was to forfeit her estate. To this indiscreet and fatal clause, all the misery of the lovely Clara was ow¬ ing. Her charming person and princely portion, tempted Don Juan to endea¬ vour, by marrying her, to gain posses¬ sion of both ; he expected indeed that she would receive his proposal with re¬ luctance, for he is old enough to be her grandfather ; but he trusted to the natural sweetncîss of her temper, and the readmess that sbe had h i then ?
ί>7
shewn to obey his wishes, for her com¬ pliance. Men of the first rank had sought the hand of the fair orphan in vain. Don Juan was resolved never to consent to her marriage with any one but himself. He kept her aldose pri¬ soner, and never suffered her to go even to church, without accompanying her. u Having learned this much, my next step was to consider how I could see Clara ; and that, as she was circum¬ stanced, was in truth no easy task; it was one that I resolved to undertake, and for several nights and days, I strolled near the house of Don Juan, m the hope that I might by accident get a glimpse of her: but my hopes were disappointed, and just as I had began to despair of letting her know by any means the passion Γ persuaded myself I felt for her, I saw an old fe¬ male domestic, whom I fancied was her Duenna, come out of the gate. " I followed the woman, but for some d å
58
time, I did not venture to address her. I eyed her with much significance, and I could not help thinking that she re¬ turned my glances. " c You have (said I, encouraged by her manner), or I am mistaken, the happiness of serving the loveliest lady in Spain.' £< ζ You are riglit, sir (replied she), I am indeed the attendant of one of the best, as w r ell as the most beautiful of one of the CasiiSian ????" íe * Fame speaks loud Ι v of the vii tues, as weil as the charms of Donna Clara (returned I), and happy will the man be who obtains possession of so inva¬ luable a prize.' <t c Ah, poor lady (said sshe), her hand will, I fear, be unaccompanied with her heart." <c Not to tire your patience, Fernando, I prevailed, without much difficulty, upon Francisca, to deliver a letter for me to her lovely mistress : in this epistle, I supplicated for an interview,
5D
and Francisca promised, that in a few days, I should have an answer, lu My trusty messenger was as good as her word, and I received a summons to the window, where I had overlieard the conversation that flattered me with a relief of Clara's partiality. ifc The angelic girl was at the casement at the appointed hour. With the most enchanting timidity, she excused the manner of my reception, but admittance to the house was, she said, impossible to procure, without a risk of my safety, which she would not run. " You, D'Rosonio, can, without being told, fancy what passed. Clara in¬ genuously informed me of the particu¬ lars of her situation, and avowed her reluctance to become the wife of Don Juan ; but in reply to my pressing in¬ treaties to escape, and bless me with her hand, she reminded me, that by such a step, she should forfeit her for¬ tune. u ζ Perish the dross, (cried I, while I
6ο
gazed with rapture on her lovely coun¬ tenance, which, at that moment, the moon afforded me a sufficient light to contemplate distinctly), if you, beauteous Clara would be content to share the moderate portion, which I can call mine, how transcendant would be my felicity.' " To this proposal she would not give a positive reply, but she promised to consider of it, and she laid me under the strictest injunction of secresy. As to our interview, 1 promised to be silent, even to thee, Fernando, 'till I was allowed to entrust thee; and 1 left Clara more captivated than I had ever been. * f Though I had never determined against matrimony, yet, the smallness of rny fortune had made m e think, that when I sought a wife, it should be one pos¬ sessed of riches ; but the beauty of Clara, her situation, and above all, her partiality for me, determined me to make her mine, if she consented, I
6i
am disgusted with the gay scenes of dissipation ; and retirement with a wife like Clara, would, I fancied, afford me happiness. v " But these gay visions were speedily dissipated by some unlucky accident. Don Juan discovered that his ward had a favoured lover, and though my person remained unknown to him, our inter¬ views were from tbis time at an end : the Duenna was discharged with dis¬ grace, and Clara more closely confined than ever, " t Do not despair signor, (said Fran¬ cisca to me), my lady will never become the wife of Don Juan, and spite of the vigilance of her tyrant, we shall yet devise some plan of escape.' The assurances of Francisca for some time kept up my spirits, but day after day passed, and I heard nothing from Clara. 1 sometimes ventured near the window, but her lovely form was never visible ; and I began to despair, when
62
my fears were confirmed by tbe follow¬ ing letter, which she found means to convey to me. " This'will be probably the last op¬ portunity that I shall have to address you. Dearest Montalva, I have strug¬ gled vainly to procure the consent of Don Juan. I have offered him my whole fortune, for I well knew your disinterested affection for me woukl in¬ duce yon to resign it with pleasure, but he has vowed, solemnly vowed, never to yield my hand to another. To escape is impossible, I have, therefore, but one alternative ; if I cannot be your's, at least I will preserve inviolate the fidelity which I owe you, and * convent shall shelter me from the persecutions of this hateful man ; he talks of having out nuptials speedily celebrated, but never, never will I consent to become his. "Oh Montalva! what pangs rend my heart, when I bid you ?? sterna
??
farewel ! May Heaven bestow upon you, that happiness of which it has før ever deprived the wretched " CLAkA." ï ' ( This Rosonio, is our present situa¬ tion. My angelic Clara flatters herself iu vain with the hope of escaping the power of Don Juan ; how easily may he have the ceremony performed in spite of her tears or reluctance : this idea maddens me ; I could, I think, with fortitude resign her to á man with whom she would have even a chance of happiness ; but what hope can there be in such a union " Do not despair, my friend (cried R'Rosonio), while your mistress re¬ mains unmarried, there still İs hope. Can the genius of Francisca devise no plan, by which it might be possible to procure Clara's escape r" " We have thought of, and rejected many (said Montalva) ; in truth, Clara
6*4
is so strictly, confined, that I greatly fear every attempt must be Hopeless." The count knew too well what the pangs of unsuccessful love were, to at¬ tempt to alleviate them by common place consolations ; he endeavoured by a series of the mostdelicate and friendly attentions to (in some measure) con· sole his friend, who was, he saw with concern, more deeply wounded than, from his volatile nature, D'Rosonio had supposed possible. One day, Montalva returned home pale, and apparently agitated to excess. " What disturbs my friend ?" eagerly demanded the count. tC I have just heard, that to-morrow robs me for ever of Clara (replied Mon tarva J, 1 have long known that preparations were making for her nup¬ tials, and the ceremony is to be per« formed to-morrow, after high mass, in the church of Pietro A'M ajella : but Don Juan shall not thus tear her from
65
me, I will rush forward, and at the foot of that altar, where he would oblige her to profane the most solemn vows, I will claim my affianced bride." " I will second you to the utmost of my power (cried the count). Every thing shall be risked to prevent this hateful union; tranquillize your spirits then, Montalva, and doubt not that we shall succeed." The following morning, the friends repaired to the church of Pietro A'Majella, before the beginning of high mass. In a short time, Don Juan and Donna Clara entered, with a numerous and splendid retinue. When D'Rosonio beheld the bridegroom sinking under the weight of age and infirmities, he felt indignant that such a being should presume to aspire to the hand of the young and lovely Clara. Joy and exultation sparkled in the eyes of Don Juan, and the friends were surprised at the calmness with
66
which Clara behaved; she was pale in¬ deed, but her countenance was per¬ fectly serene ; she lost her self-com¬ mand, however, when she beheld her lover, and for some moments her agita¬ tion was very great ; she recovered her¬ self, and gave him ? ??? full of affec¬ tion. Soon after mass began, and every faculty of Clara appeared absorbed iu devotion. She prayed with uncommon fervour ; and ae she cast her lovely eyes to that Heaven which she supplicated, the colour revisited her palled cheek, and to Montalva and his friend, she appeared something celestial, fflhen mass was over, Don Juan led her to the.altar, and the ceremony was about to begin. D'Rosonio and Mon¬ talva drew near, and the"«igi1or was upon the point of rushing forward to assert his claim, when a look from Clara prevented him. <c Stop, holy father (cried she to the bishop, w ho had began the nuptial rites)^ stop, I conjure you/ 1
67
<? Proceed (said Don Juan). Is this your promise, Clara ?" " I appeal to the church, and to you as its minister, (cried she, without re¬ garding the words of her guardian), I am the victim of the most cruel tyranny, and ï solicitj the protection of the church/ > fc You shall have it, daughter (said the prelate), provided your complaint is just." " Her words are false, reverend father (cried Don Juan), she voluntarily accompanied me here ; she promised me her hand ; and now she wishes to evade the performance of her promise, solemnly, sacredly, as it was made." " Hear me, I beseech you, father (said Clara). I am an orphan, I have no friend, I appeal to your humanity ; oh ! as you hope for mercy at the last day, let not the appeal be made in vain." The interesting loveliness of the fair supplicant, and her affecting energy,
6s
moved the heart oí the good bishop ; he desired to hear her tale, and the simple, unvarnished manner in which it ivas told, persuaded him of its truth. When she came to the period at which her guardian discovered her preference of Montalva, whose name she concealed ; she proceeded as follows.
69 '■»■■■"?? . ' » ." ,~z zzz:
CHAP. IV.
fft When Don Juan declared his deter¬ mination never to consent to my union with another, and rejected the offer I made him of my whole fortune, I begged to be allowed to spend one year in a convent ; (if he was indeed deter¬ mined to force me to be his, before our union took place) ; but even this re¬ quest was denied me, and he resolved to have the ceremony performed with¬ out delay. Driven by this tyranny to have recourse to stratagem, I feigned to acquiesce with his wishes, only sti¬ pulating that our marriage should be
γο public, with which he readily com¬ plied. I now protest, solemnly protest, that I would prefer death a thousand times to the misery of being his : if I am not allowed to unite myself with the man of my heart, I ask only to be permitted to spend the rest of my days in the retirement of a cloister ; where, in the duties of religion, I may, perhaps, obtain that peace which, as the wife of Don Juan, I should never again taste." ίζ 1 cannot proceed with the cere¬ mony (said the bishop to Don Juan), and 1 could wish, sir, to speak to you in private." Don Juan and Donna Clara left the church, accompanied by the father ; and Montalva and his friend quitted it at the same time. The signor returned home with very different sensations to what he felt when he repaired to the church. Hope, which was then extinct, now revived in his heart, and ivhispered, that Clara might yet be his.
/i
Nor were her whispers false, the good bishop represented the matter in such colours to Don Juan, that he con¬ sented, though with difficulty, to the union of the lovers : he would rather indeed that Clara had taken the veil, but this the father strenuously op¬ posed. " To offer to Heaven (said hi:), a heart that is already fixed upon an earthly lover, is a profanation that fre¬ quently calls down the Divine ven¬ geance. ín the gloom and solitude of a cloister, where no objects occur to interest or amuse, the remembrance of an adored object is involuntarily cherished, until every effort to banish it becomes vain ; and the heart cor¬ roded by the most bitter and unavail¬ ing regrets, is incessantly torn by a struggle to perform those duties to which it is unequal. " To voluntarily doom a fellow being to such a state of misery, is an act of cruelty of which a generous mind must
72
surely be incapable ; and in this ca?e your wish to do so would be a vain one ; that interest which you well know I possess at court, and which I have never yet exerted for myself, shall be strained to the utmost in behalf of Clara ; nor will our gracious sovereign suffer the orphan of a noble and loyal subject to sink beneath evident injustice and oppression." It is probable that the threats of the bishop had more weight with Don Juan than his arguments or intreaties ; but tbe lovers cared little to what motives they owed the consent, whim he so reluctantly and ungraciously gave to their union. Her guardian's consent once obtained, Clara did not delay the happiness of her lover, and their marriage was celebrated with a splendour befitting their rank aad birth. In the possession of his Clara, Mon¬ talva thought himself the happiest of men. The Spanish ladies are in ^ene-
;?
ral far from accomplished, but the re¬ tirement in "/nich she had always lived, had been favourable to the mind of Sig¬ nora Montalva. Naturally of an active temper, she had, instead of passing her time like the generality of her country¬ women, in indolence and luxury, se¬ dulously cultivated her natural talents ; and as she possessed a genius equally strong and brilliant, she had not con¬ tented herself with the usual acquire¬ ments of her sex, and Montalva found in her a companion capable of sharing in those literary pursuits, of which he was himself passionately fond. in the felicity enjoyed by his friends, D'Rosonio would have found a balm for his own unhappiness, had not the ac¬ counts he received from Naples excited at once his grief and his indignation. The duke gave the most scandalous pub¬ licity to his amour with Claudia, and the Signor D'AI bici, unable to bear tbe injuries that were daily offered to his daughter, had come to an open rupture
74
with his son-iì -laWj and the amiable, and sufièring duchess was forbade to see her father. This last cruel restriction was the death blow to the peace of the unfor¬ tunate signor ; though hf» had sacrificed his daughter to his ambition, yet, he tenderly loved her; and the knowledge, that in the midbt of pomp and splen¬ dour, she was more miserable than slie could have been in the most humble situation, stung him to the soul ; but when he reflected that her miseiy was solely owing to himself, the torments of his mind became insupportable, and he took the rash resolution of ending them bv buieide. Previous to his death he wrote to the duke, and in the most allecting and sok 4 n manner, be¬ sought him to change his conduct to Ids wife ; he painted in the most ener- "etic terms, the mildness, the angelic ? forbearance of Clementina ; he assured him that not a single murmur had ever passed her lips, and that on the subject
7?
of her husband's conduct she had been uniformly silent. tí But though my injured and un¬ happy child (pursued the signor), does not complain, yet all Naples is aware of the treatment she receives ; and her father, her infatuated father, has no refuge but the grave, from the misery which he has brouglit upon himself by sacrificing his beloved and only child. " Oh î may my death be a bond of union between you and my daughter ; never will Clementina know that I have perished by my own hand ; and may that Almighty power who protects innocence, grant, that the tears which this event will draw from her eyes, may be dried by the hand of a repentant and affectionate husband. ci On his knees, my lord, a wretched heart-broken old man, beseeches your mercy to his child : recai to your me¬ mory the moment that gave my Cle¬ mentina to your arms, blooming in ¿U J
76
youth, health, and beauty; view her now, sinking beneath- affliction, and young as she still is, exhibiting scarcely the remains of her former self* Ask your own conscience, who has caused the change ? Oh î let her voice be attended to, and the future years of my child may yet be happy. " Farewel, my lord, receive my pardon for what is past; but may Heaven so deal with you, as you do in future with my Clementina ; this will be the last wish,-the last prayer of the unhappy " D'Albici." - The -perusal of this letter, hard as the duke's heart was, had some effect upon it. The body of the unfortunate signor was found in a river at some distance from his house, and his death was, by all but the duke, supposed to be accidental. The grief .of the duchess for her father, was a little alle¬ viated *by the kindness and attention
77
with which her husband treated her; and she received the proof which he gave of his regard with such unaffected gratitude and sensibility, that when the duke contrasted her sweet and en¬ gaging manners, with the studied al¬ lurements, the meretricious graces of Claudia, he was amazed how that art¬ ful and unprincipled woman could ever have obtained such a power over Iris senses. " I will see her no more'* (said he), and for a time he kept his word ; hap¬ py would it have been for him had he never broken it. Tlie rage and disappointment of Claudia, at his desertion, would have known no bounds, but that he still was liberal to her, and that she en· tertained hopes that she shouhl **<-<,? lure him back agun. Sík \va- · -cd read in the tur>. : «ng> nnJ v. iwhm γ; the human heait, d-A «he n* ; ; tily judged that of the duke was too de-
r« pra ved to be long attached to a being, so unlike himself as the duchess. " He will soon be heartilv tired of her mild virtues (said she, wilh .ι ma¬ lignant sneer), and then will be my time to establish my empire more firm¬ ly than ever." In order to persuade him of her grief and her fidelity, she affected an air of privacy ; her equipage no longer was seen in the public walks, and lier days were spent in retirement. But while the duke supposed that she w 7 as spending her time in tears and lamentations for his absence^ she was in reality indulging a new and most disgraceful passion. A gamester of ruined fortune and infamous character saw and admired her; he was distressed—and he con¬ ceived the infamous project of irak ing her administer to his pleasures, and likewise his necessities. To any one who knew the disposition of Claudia
?9
(in which avarice was a principal tratt,) this plan would have appeared likely to be wholly unsuccessful, since he did not possess the means of conciliating her favour^ either by money or pre¬ sent ; nor wo s he possessed of any graces or attractions that were likely to catch the eye, even of a professed wanton. But there is no accounting for the strange capricious whims of a confirmed votary of vice. Claudia soon doated on her paramour, and the bounty of the duke was lavished on a wretch equally mean and infamous : yet as it was of the utmost consequence to her, to regain his favour, she acted with circumspection, and received the visits of her new lover with the great¬ est privacy. Tlie deep impression which the death of Signor IlAlbici had made upon the mind of the duke, wore away by de¬ grees, and as his licentious mistress predicted, he grew tired of the society of his amiable wife, yet he did not
80
rhuse openly to renew his mtercoui>e wit!; Claudia, cr to treat the duchess with that avowed neglect and indif¬ ference which he had formei ly done; but he lesolvcd to visit Claudia se¬ cretly, and to seek ? her blandish¬ ments an antidote to the eu nui and h^tlefesness that hung upon hit» spirits, Claudia had a female servant, on ivhole fidelity bhe had the firmest re¬ liance, and this giri had been as much attached to her as the deprived are capible of being to each other, till her connexion witli Cario Riccoliui, her present paramour. Previous to lier entering the service of Claudia, she had been this man's mistres, and though his threats and intreaties prevailed up¬ on her to be sdent as to their former connexion, she yet hated Claudia as a successful rival, and waited only for an opportunity to work her ruin. One evening, while Carlo and Clau¬ dia were together, the duke came privately, and without attendants, to
81
her house ; this girl was in the hall as lie entered, and die right öf him was most welcome to her. u Now for re¬ venge" (thought she, and she feigned to receive him with an air of confusion, and embarrassment.) C€ How is Claudia r conduct me to her," (said the duke.) " My lady cannot receive your ex¬ cellency (said she), because"—she stop¬ ped, apparently as if bhe knew not how to proceed. The duke, who was wholly void of suspicion, exclaimed, "What! is she ill ? What is her complaint ?" | (( No, not ill, your excellency—Oh T yes, she is ill." The manner in which this sentence was uttered, as well as the contradic¬ tion it implied, was sufficient to rouse injurious ideas even in the most candid mind, and for the first time a doubt of Claudia's fidelity occurred to the duke ; he was hastily passing the girl, when frhe attempted to stop him ; forgetful of
S2
her sex, he threw her from him with violence, and walked up stairs ; he passed through several apartments till he came to her boudoir, (that boudoir which had been so often the scene of his guilty pleasures). The door was of gli?_>s, and the curtains which shaded it uere partly undrawn ; through it the duke beheld Carlo reclined upon a sofa, and hanging over him, in an attitude of fondness, stood Claudia. Astonishment for some moments rivetted De Vìnci to the spot where he stood, and before he recovered himself sufficiently to rush in, Claudia ad¬ dressed her' paramour. " This is unkind, Carlo, (said she, in that soothing tone to which the heart of the duke had so often vi¬ brated with transport,) you know that I am at present poor—you know that í would not refuse you the money if í had it ; when did Claudia refuse a re¬ quest of Carlo's r" tc But if you have not the money,
S3 you have jewel«," (replied he, in a sul¬ len tone). " None but what are the £/ifts of the duke ; and those ; you well know, it would be madness to part with" (*aid she), " I understand you, madam (cries Carlo), you cannot part with those trinkets, presented you by a lover who siili possesses your heart." " How often must í tell you (ex¬ claimed «he, passionately), that your suspicions are unjust ? How often must I assure y ou, that for vour sake I loath this man, and nothing but ne- cecity shonltl ever induce sne to see bun ???\ } Rut pruhee, dearest Carlo, be reasonable, though these jewels are neailv all of \ \\ne whirh 1 poshes«, iet I ref'i^e them only fiom the r ear tim t he should know that I have parted with them, w a* 1 amurul that would not be the ca^e, thou *hou!dst have them frttlv. Oh' what shuuldbt th^u
84
not have that was in Claudia's power to to grant."' " Then set thy heart at rest^ for he shall never know what thou hast done ivith them ; should they be enquired for, it is easy to invent a tale that they are lost, and you know not Claudia the service that they will be of to me." i( Thou shalt have them, love (cried she), smile then with thy usual cheer¬ fulness ; thou knowest thy smiles are the delight of my heart/' She threw her arms around him as she spoke, and pressed her lips to his. The duke could bear no more-—he drew his sword and rushed into the apirtment. The guilty pair started from the couch as he entered. " Base, infa¬ mous unman! (exclaimed he) couldst thou find no minion for thy lascivious hours but such a u retch as this ?" He made a iuiious pass at Carlo as he ¿p'>ke, who stepped aside to evade it. The duke pressed upon him, and the villain, drawing a stiletto from his bo-
85
som, plunged it in the breast of De Vinci, at the same moment that the duke's sword entered his side. The screams of Claudia brought up her domestics. The wretched woman, whose discovery of her guilt was the cause of the fatal catastrophe, w r as nearly frantic when she saw Carlo wel¬ tering in his blood, and her violent outcries alarmed the neighbourhood. The house was presently filled, ani of¬ ficers of justice were sent for. The duke expired ahnost immedi¬ ately upon recei\ing his wound, but Carlo still survived. He was, together with Claudia and the domestic who accused herself as the cause of all, com¬ mitted to prison. The feelings of the duchess upon tbis occasion were acute in the extreme, and with the most pious fervency did she supplicate the mercy of Heaven for her guilty husband. Tiie short interval of kindness, which had succeeded his cruel treatment of her, had wholly oblite^
86
rated from the gentle and feeling mind of Clementina all traces of resentment; and she wept bitterly, when she re¬ flected upon the unprepared state iu which he was called to his last ac¬ count. The lover who for years has sighed for an adorei! object that he despaired of ever possessing, and ha« at last en¬ joyed the transport of calling that be¬ loved one his, only can conceive the rap¬ ture with which D'Rosonio learned that his Clementina was free* Montalva and the Signora warmly congratulated him on this unhoped-for happiness. te You will soon icvisit Na¬ ples, dear D'Rosonio (oritd Montalva), and we must try to prevail upon my Clara to accompany us thither." u You know (^ aid she), that 1 have no will but yours, and when you wish to depart, 1 will go with cheerfulness." She thought not that there was a storm gathering over her head, that would compel her to íly from Madrid,
87
and that malice and superstition would prevent her ever returning to it. Don Juan D -------had never forgiven her rejection of him. His heart (na¬ turally revengeful) was torn by the sight of the happiness which she enjoyed with Montalva, and he panted for an oppor¬ tunity to be revenged on her. The mind that is enlightened by science cannot re¬ spect opinions or tenets, however an¬ cient, that are erroneous : Clara had spoken freely on the subject of an Auto D'Fe, whieli was recently celebrated; and she had, in expressing the greatest pity for the unhappy sufferers, openly arraigned the justice of the power that punished them. /?? breathe but a syl¬ lable against the Inquisition, is to sub¬ ject oneself to the most dreadful punish¬ ments, but the conversation would for ever have remained unknown, but for the malignity of Don Juan ; he was told of it in confidence, by one of the guests of Montalva, who meant not harm
8S
to Clara, and he denounced her to the Inquisition, as a scoffer at its power. An accusation of less weight would have been sufficient to endanger the life of the Signora Montalva. Most fortu¬ nately for her, a concealed friend gave her notice that she was about to be ar¬ rested, by order of the Holy Tribunal, and advised her to seek for safety in. flight.
89
«—■— H» i^MH»— J— И->?1? ?1 Γι I I I 1 I. .I4 1?И? ?.? . 1?.1»
CHAP. V.
Nearly distracted with terror on his wife's account, Montalva would not suffer her to delay her escape; and from the hasty manner in which they quitted Spain, they look with them but little that was of value ; and scarcely were they arrived in safety at Naples, when they received the unwelcome intelli¬ gence, that the whole po «τ 1 v of " 1 « Signora Mouta! va was ?? *· ■· : Montalva received ihb ■ - ? ce with more fortitude than - . , who deeply regretted the loss of fortune, on her husband's account,
90 £ ' i havo saved thee, my love! (haid he) and valsile thou art safe, how can I repine? Banish thy uneasiness, dearest Clara; ?\? have still a competence, and the beiul of my beloved sighs not, 1 well know, for the gratifications of luxury or ambition/'' tí Oh, Montalva! (cried she) when I think what a noble use thou wouldst have made of the princely inheritance of my ancestors, which, in thy hands, would have been a blessing to thousands, ï cannot but repine that it is lost to us for ever." Montalva wiped away the pearly drops that stole down her cheek as she spoke, and the fond toothings of her beloved husband soon, in a great measure, dissi¬ pated her uneasiness. D'Rosonio speedily joined his friend, and the lovely duchess received him with a pleasure which she sought not to con¬ ceal. Relieved now from a tic that bad been the banc of her happiness, Clemen· tina dared to acknowl dge to her own heart, that she loved and was beloved by
í) i
the most amiable of men. Her nuptials with the count were celebrated as soon as decency would permit ; and as the wife of D'Rosonio, she enjoyed a happi¬ ness even more transcendant than she had hoped for. Similarity of temper and disposition soon united Clementina and the Signora Montalva in the strictest friendship, and the count and Montalva were delighted with the affection which they shewed for each other. Two years had elapsed since the marriage of Montalva, and his lovely wife had as yet given no promise of an encrease to his family ; but about the beginning of the third, Montalva had reason to hope that his wishes for a child would be granted; and at the same time the pregnancy of Clementina was announced. ie Should heaven send to the one a hoy, and to the other a girl (said D'Ro¬ sonio to his friend), it will perhaps be a means of drawing our families still closer, by the union of our children."
92
Montalva heartily hoped that it might be so: but they were disappointed; for the ladies were delivered, within one month of each other, of two boys. *' Well! (said Montalva) our children will at least be friends, and should hea¬ ven send us others,, our project may yet be realized." But years stole away, and neither of the ladies again proved with child. The boys were almost constantly together, and the fathers flattered themselves that their friendship vvould be perpetuated between their children. Tlie dispositions of D'Rosonio and r% - utalva were similar, though their to pers were different; but neither in dispon ion nor temper did there exist the smallest similarity between their sons. Opon, generous, and unsuspect¬ ing, the heart of the young 1 ? Rosonio was formed for love and friendship. Though naturally acute and peneti ating, the warmth of his temper rendered him blind to the faults of those whom he
1)3
loved ; and even in his childish days, the distresses of others had at any time power to deter him from the pursuit of his own gratifications, if by relinquishing them he could serve a fellow-creature. Impetuosity of temper often led him into the commission of trivial errors, but these were acknowledged with candour, and no temptation could lead him to dis¬ guise or conceal the truth. The domestics and the vassals of Count D'Rosonio looked forward, with hope and exultation, to so worthy a suc¬ cessor of their beloved master, who contemplated the opening virtues of his son with all· the pride and tenderness of a doating parent. Montalva was less happy in his ofi- spring: proud, selfish, and un tractable, the disposition of the young Stephano embittered the happiness ofhis parent*, who looked forward with tenor to the maturity of those evil passions, which neither precept nor example could cor¬ rect· He possessed however, from his
9t
earliest years, a degree of hypocrisy that enabled him, in some degree, to veil his faults from his father's eyes, but his mother was more clear sighted ; and frequently did she sigh in secret as she reflected upon the natural, and as she feared, incurable depravity of her son. Brought up together from their child¬ ish clays, young D'Rosonio felt, partly from habit and partly from the natural goodness of his heart, the warmest friendship for his cousin ; and if Stephano was capable of feeling the smallest interest or affection for any human being it was for Fernando, whose lively regard and incessant acts of kind¬ ness made some impression even on bis¬ cai loti s heai t. When Fernando was about fifteen, as he was one day returning to his father's palace from the habitation of Signor Montalva, hp observed a youth nearly his own age, whose appearance bespoke the most extreme wretched¬ ness, fc^top at the gate of a house that
95
belonged (as Fernando knew) to an opulent merchant. The youth rang, and a porter answered him, who scarcely seemed to give him time to^peak, when he closed tlie gate with rudeness in his face ; the young man Walked away, and D'Rosonio saw that the flush of indi" 1 - nation which overspread his cheek at this unworthy treatment, gave way the next moment to an ashy paleness ; his eyes filled with tears, and he cast them to Heaven with an expression of despair that sensibly touched the heart of the young count. He followed tlie youth for some time in silence, for be hesi¬ tated how lo accost him, at last, he said— 44 You seem fatigued, have yon much farther to go before you reach your home ?" u Alas ! signor (replied the young man), I have no home ; my unhappy parent and myself have indeed the shelter of a roof, but Heaven knows how soon we may be deprived of it."
iß
His eyes filled with tears as he spoke, and Fernando exclaimed— rí No, you shall not be deprived of it. I will provide you a home ; my father will befriend vou." (i May Heaven bless you, signor (cried the youth). Oh î not for my¬ self, but for my dear parent, do I thank you ; I am young, and might struggle with my ill fortune, but age, sickness, und poverty join to oppress him. Oh î how will he rejoice, that at the moment when we had resigned all hope, Heaven sent us a friend. Will you, generous signor, allow my father the happiness of thanking you r' D'Rosonio assented, and the young man led him to an abode that might indeed be »tiled tin» habitation of wretchedness. The louer order of the Neapolitans live in a state of abject poverty, which Fernando had no idea of: hb father's vassals enjoyed from the benevolence of Count D'Rosonio, all the decent comforts of life, and he
97
shuddered when he entered the mi¬ serable habitation of Camillo Sche- doni. Stretched on a couch at the further end of the room into which Camillo conducted Fernando, lay an emaciated old man, who, in a tone, the hollow- ness of which startled D'Rosonio ; asked, " Is it you Camillo, what saya your uncle :" " He would not see me, dear father (replied the youth), but thank Heaven, we have found that humanity from a stranger that he denies to show to his own flesh and blood, Providence has sent this generous snmor to our assist- ance." The old man tried to turn round ; he raised his eyes, and surveyed D'Ro¬ sonio with earnestness. " You are very young, signor (?aid he), and at your age to be alive to the duties of humanity, shows a good and feeling heart ; accept the thanks and blessing of a poor old man, and believe VOL. Ι, ν
oe
that your benevolence will not be ill be¬ stowed." 44 That I do indeed believe (cried Fernando), and if (as 1 conjecture), un¬ expected and unmerited misfortune has reduced you to your present distressed situation, in iny father, the Count D'Rosonio, you will find a powerful friend." iC Thousands have cause to bless the noble name of D'Rosonio (replied the old man), and most truly do I rejoice to think that the virtues of the sire will be continued in the son," " The worthy and distressed (said Fernando), never sought the protection of m v father in vain. For the present take this (conti¬ nued he, putting his purse into the youth's haud), and for every thing ne¬ cessary for your future comfort, Ì will answer for my father." He was then about to depart, but the old man begged so earnestly that he would hear the cause of the wretched¬ ness he had so generously relieved, that
99
he complied ; and the father of Camillo related his simple tale. tt The merchant, at whose door you this day saw my son supplicate in vain for admittance, signor, is my brother"—« * e Good heaven! (cried Fernando), and does he then know your actual situation ? does he know"—(that you are perishing for want, he was about to add, but mo¬ tives of delicacy induced him to sup¬ press the latter part of his speech: young as D'Rosonio was, the r turai nobleness of his temper revolted at the thought of wounding the object of his benevolence, even by a word.—How few, how very few are there, who possess this intuitive delicacy of sentiment! and how often is the meed that benevolence bestows ren* dered little, by the ungracious manner in which it is given !) But to return : " Yes, signor, he does indeed know that I am sinking under the pressure of calamity (said the old man), and though in the possession of riches which he does not want and can- F 2
too
not enjoy, yet he refuses to relieve the distresses of an onlv brother. " My name, signor, is Camillo Sche¬ doni, and my father was a merchant of some eminence; myself, and my brother who is two years younger, were his only children, and as he intended us for his own profession, he spared no expenee, as we grew up, to initiate us in ail the mysteries of commerce. Naturally in¬ dustrious and of an active disposition, my attention to business rendered me my father's favourite, and this prefer¬ ence my brother never forgave. While we were yet young, our parent died, and bequeathed his fortune in equal propor¬ tions between us. Attached to and ex¬ pert in trade I continued to traffic, but my brother declined remaining with me, and quitted Naples. He went to Rome, and there married a woman whose for¬ tune was superior to his own ; he re¬ turned with her to Naples, and for some time he lived in a stile of luxury and extravagance ill befitting his situation
toi
in life. I used the privilege of a bro¬ ther, and remonstrated with him on his conduct ; but he heard me with indiffe¬ rence, and replied in a manner that proved my admonitions were far from welcome: from that time we beesnie almost strangers, and my marriage soon after totally divided us. " My wife was of humble birth, and unblest with the gifts of fortune; but her heart was good, and her temper gentle and affectionate. The haughty wife of my brother, however, treated her with contempt; and as I was resolved not to suffer her a second time to be insulted, all intercourse between us ceased. u Providence blessed my industry, and I saw myself in possession of every com¬ fort, and gifted with the means of being serviceable to my fellow-creatures. 6i My brother's mode of life, as I had foretold, soon involved him in difficul¬ ties, and in a short time he was reduced almost to indigence ; hurt as I had beeu by his behaviour, yet I could not forget
102
that he was my brother, and I strained my credit to the utmost to serve him ; iny wife, too, overlooked-the contemp¬ tuous treatment that she had received from her sister-indavv, and endeavoured b'/ *«- kindest attentions to alleviate the borrows which that v.iin and unfeeling »oman had brought upon herself. '* Grown wiser by misfortune, my bro¬ ther now sedulously applied himself to business, aud in a short time his affairs began to wear a prosperous appearance ; H* aven knows how sincerely 1 rejoiced in his good fortune, mid he hypocritically pretended to fetd the warmest gratitude for what ï had done, and to ascribe his Micctss solely to my advice and assist¬ ance : but while I saw with pleasure that he dailv throve more aud more, í found that, by one of those vicissitudes which unfortunately occur but too frequently amongst com mereiai men, my cre¬ dit received a shock: I recovered it, however, and for some time 1 proceeded as formerly.
Ï03
tí But I was destined to meet with se¬ vere trials : my wife, who had been the soother of eveiy care, died; and this blow was for a time more than I could bear. My boy was too young to be sensible of his loss, or to be of service to me, but I committed my affairs to the care of my brother, and I resigned myself wholly to the indulgence of a grief, which I found it was in vain to try to conquer. " For some time, absorbed in sorrow, I heeded not how my business proceeded; nor did I rouse from my lethargy 'till it was too late-—'till I was ruined. Oh, signor, what were my feelings when the truth burst upon me î w hen I found that I had been a victim to a brother's malice and duplicity, and that myself and two helpless children (this youth, then ten years old, and a girl two years younger), were reduced by him to beggary ! " The malignant pleasure with which he announced to me the state of my af¬ fairs, first opened my eyes to his trea¬ chery ; and when I asked the assistance
104
which, as a brother, I had a right to de¬ mand, the vague and frivolous manner in which it was refused, convinced me that I was his victim, and that all hope from him was vain. Too proud to com¬ plain, I bore my misfortunes in silence ; and as his wife offered to take the charge of my children, I hoped that industry would enable me, after some time, to procure bread for them and for myself. "It was however my lot to drain tbe cup of poverty even to the very dregs ; my brother's conduct influenced others, and every where I was treated with un¬ kind ness. iC c Why do not you apply to your brother ?' was the reply of all those from whom I solicited assistance; he is rich and childless, doubtless ' he will enable you again to enter life with credit.' tc Alas! so far from serving me, he strove to embitter my situation ; my sou was accustomed to hear him daily speak of the imprudence of my conduct : I had charged Camillo never to notice
105 these speeches, but childhood is not the season of dissimulation, and my affecti¬ onate boy dared to resent the calum¬ nies with which he heard his father loaded. " r What!' cried my brother, f do you presume to insult the man to whom you are indebted for bread ? base, ungrateful wretch ! leave my house, and seek pro¬ tection from the beggar whom you so insolently defend.' " My son waited not to hear this cruel mandate a second time repeated ; with a heart bursting with grief and in¬ dignation, he quitted the house of his uncle and came to me. " I saw by his countenance that some¬ thing had happened, and 1 dreaded to enquire what it was. c( ( Father (cried he, bursting into tears), I am come to you; I am old enough now to work for you, and I will ; yes, father (continued he), you shall have bread, if the labour of your son can procure it for youl F 5
10?
" I pressed my poor boy in my arms, and I mingled my tears with his; I could not avoid grieving, to think that he should share my unhappy lot, and I would have made him return to his uncle, but this he positively refused. ίς c No (cried he), if I had offended him, I would ask his pardon on my knees; but never will I solicit it for having taken the part of my father.' ίς From that time, signor, which is two rears since, to the present, I have bee ? uniformly unfortunate; and, to crown all my miseries, a long fit of ill¬ ness has reduced me to the state of abject misery in which you now see me. Fear¬ ful that my daughter would incur the fate of her brother, 1 have wholly de¬ prived myself of the sight of her, and charged her, on pain of my severe dis¬ pleasure, never to come near me; with tears and supplications, my poor chiid besought me to recall my words, but prudence compelled me to steel my heart against her intreaties, and I have not seen her for some time.
107
Despair induced meto hazard an ap¬ plication to my brother; you, signor, were a witness of its ill success, and to your generosity I owe that relief which he has so unfeelingly denied me : may Heaven repay your kindness a thousand - fold!" He ceased, and the young count again repeated his promise of further assist¬ ance, and returned to his father's palace.,
?,
108
CHAP. VL
The story of Camillo was most feelingly told by Fernando, and the count highly approved of his son's generosity : the for¬ tunes of the poor old man were soon re¬ established on a more secure footing, and his young benefactor enjoyed the great¬ est delight in having restored a whole family from misery and want to compe¬ tence and happiness. Camillo had taken his daughter home, and frequently did he bless the noble youth whose genero¬ sity had restored her to him, to be the comfort of his age : she was at this time little more than a child, but her opening
109
loveliness gave a rich promise of beauty in her maturer years. The life of D'Rosonio had from his union with Clementina been one conti¬ nued scene of happiness ; but the time approached that was to deprive him of the most exquisite felicity, and to cou* vince him that happiness is a fugitive upon eaith. The health of Clementina had for some time been upon the de¬ cline, but the physicians who attended her had not thought her symptoms alarming, and the naturahmildness and gentleness of her temper made her suf¬ fer with the most uncomplaining sweet¬ ness. She was not however destined to suf¬ fer long ; her angeliG spirit was sudden¬ ly called from this world ta one for which it was indeed a fit inhabitant, and where her virtues would meet with a bright and unfading reward. Her death was indeed a severe blow to her doating husband, for it was one for which he was wholly unprepared;
??
he endeavoured to struggle with his grief, and he called in the aid of reason and religion to enable him to bear the destruction of his earthly happiness: but though he submitted without a mur¬ mur to the divine will, yet he could not subdue the keenness of feelings that preyed upon his hfe, and gradually undermined a constitution naturally good· The death of his mother had been sensibly felt by Fernando, and 'rith the most pious solicitude did he endeavour to soothe the sorrows of his remaining parent ; but the barbed arrow had sunk too deep for the hand of filial piety to extract it, and in less than a year the Count D Rosonio breathed his last, in the arms of his son. The splendid inheritance which this event bestowed upon Fernando was no consolation to his feeling heart for the loss of a beloved parent; and but for the attentions of Montalva, and his second sskother (as he used to call the Signora
Ill
Montalva), the grief of D'Rosonio might * have been attended with the most fatal consequences. They indeed lavished upon him every consolation that friendship could bestow; both had deeply regretted the death of the count and his lady, and both were as fondly attached to him as to their own son ; frequently did they in secret wish that Stephano possessed his vir¬ tues ; but little tendency to good ap¬ peared in the disposition of young Mon¬ talva, and a circumstance that occurred about this time, convinced the signora that his heart was worse than she had supposed. The behaviour of Stephano, notwith¬ standing his father's remonstrances, and his mother's intreaties, had always been severe and haughty to their domestics ; in particular, a venerable old man, whose whole life had been spent in the íamily of Montalva, had frequently been much hurt at the unfeeling insolence of the young signor, when all at once a change
112
took place in his manner, that delighted and astonished old Pedro, He became gracious, and condescending to excess. Strongly attached to the family of Mon¬ talva, the old man hoped to end his days in it, ard he exulted in the thought that young Montalva, whom spite of all his faults, he loved with the fondest affection, was at last likely to correct the defects of his temper and to resemble his amiable father. But the change which had gained him such credit in the eyes of Pedro, was occasioned by the most unworthy mo¬ tives ; the old man had a young and lovely granddaughter, on whose opening beauties Montalva had cast the eye of licentious desire, and it was solely from a wish to insinuate himself into the favour of Lauretta, that he changed his xnanners to her grandfather. He found indeed no difficulty in gain¬ ing the affections of the pretty and simple Lauretta, who utterly unconsci¬ ous of the ruin which she was about to
113
bring upon herself, felt highly gratified at the notice of the young signor; and more from natural weakness of intellect than any passion for Montalva, or any decided depravity of character, she rea¬ dily surrendered her honour to his licen¬ tious wishes. Naturallv of the most inconstant dis- position, Montalva was soon satiated' with the person of Lauretta, pretty and attractive as it was ; and he became sensible of his imprudence, in engagiog in an intrigue, that if known would ruin him with his father. Guilty pleasures are dearly bought, and the young liber¬ tine, though proof to remorse, was suf¬ ficiently tormented by anxiety, as to the consequences of his fault. While mat¬ ters were in this situation, Lauretta had on offer of marriage from a domestic of the count's, but full of the idea that Stephano's love and constancy would be eternal, she rejected it with scorn. Feminine vanity induced her to ac¬ quaint Montalva with her new conquest,
И4
and he, seeing in an instant the advan¬ tages that he vvould derive from a mar¬ riage that would rid him of all his fears for the i uture, insisted upon her accep¬ tance of Lodovics hand. For some time dieobMirute'y refused compliance, but terrified by tlie threats of Stephano she at length conscnt°d, and the Signora Moi, Uliva, who had alwavs been palliai to the gir', presented her with her wed¬ ding cloaths, and a small portion. Lo¬ dovic was a favourite servant of D'Roso¬ nio's, and his munificent spirit led him to provide handsomely for the young couple. Lodovic doated upon his bride, and had Montalva possessed the smallest dí gree of honour or humanity, Lauretta might have ended her days in happy obscurity, but convinced that all danger of discovery was over, Stephano's incli¬ nation for her person revived, and the weak and guilty woman was but too easily persuaded to, a renewal of their connection. But at the moment that they sup-
115
posed themselves most secure, accident betrayed to Lodovic the injury that they had done him. Though humble in station, the feelings of this unhappy man were kcenlv alive to the destruc- tion ofhis domestic peace, and had he been armed at the moment that he sur¬ prised the guilty pair, the lifeof Montalvo might have paid the fot fei t of his crime. Lauretta threw herself at the· fe* I of her husband, but he spurned her from him, and hastily quitting his habitation fiew to relate to Pedro his granddaughter's infamy. The poor old man was horror- struck at the news ; tha' .he son of his beloved master should thus poison the little remnant of his days, was a severe aggravation of what he suffered, and he betrayed the affair to the Signora Mon¬ talva. Deeply was the heart of that excel¬ lent woman wounded by the knowledge of her son's crimes, and &he shuddered when she reflected on the hardness of heart that could have prompted him to
116
the commission of so great an enormity ; both herself and Montalva had a par¬ ticular value for Pedro, whose sincere, though humble attachment, as well as his long services, made them consider him rather as a humble friend than a domestic. Frequently did the old man boast that three generations of the family of Montalva he had carried in his arms ; and he hoped e're he closed his eyes in peace to see the fourth. Poor old man thought the signora, Jitt?e didst thou think that thy peace would be destroyed by a descendant of that house to which thou wert so fondly attached. Determined, before she acquainted her husband with the affair, to learn all the particulars of it ; the signora went to the habitation of Lauretta ; there all was confusion and distress ; Lodovic had absented himself, and his wife feared that he had in the first transports of his grief laid violent hands upon his life ; terrified at the consequences of her
?7
crime, the wretched woman made a full oonfession of all her guilt to the signora, and thus placed the conduct of Ste¬ phano in the blackest point of view. The grief and indignation of Montal¬ va at his son's depravity were equal ; for the venial transgressions of youth, the signor would have made ample al¬ lowance, but the crime of Stephano was neither to be excused nor palliated, and Mon+alva sincerely regretted that he had ever given birth to such a monster. That hypocrisy, which was a promi¬ nent trait in the character of Stephano, though it could not enable him to gloss over the affair to his parents, assisted him to impose upon the Count D'Rosonio, to whom he artfully criminated Lauretta in such a manner that the count was convinced much of the guilt lay at her door, and that the fault of Stephano was occasioned rather by passion and accident than any natural depravity. To retain the friendship of the count, was indeed an object of moment to the
118
voung Montalva; his father's fortune was very moderate, and his allowance for his rank was small. Notwithstanding the friendship ivhich had subsisted be¬ tween the father of Stephano and the late Count D'Rosonio, the signor had never been in a pecuniary way obliged to his friend ; his lofty spirit could not bear the weight of obligation, and though he might at all times have commanded the purse of D'Rosonio, yet, he preferred living within the bounds of his own fortune, moderate as it was. Sprung from one of the noblest fami¬ lies in Spain, and inheriting a portion of Spanish pride, the Signora Montalva's natural haughtiness and independence of spirit, even surpassed her husband's; and she laboured by the strictest atten¬ tion to the economy of her household, to support that appearance which the signor's birth required him to make. But though in many respects proud and haughty to excess, yet the young Montalva did not inherit that indepen-
?9
dent spirit, which characterized his pa¬ rents; foud of expensive pleasuies, he disdained not to owe the means of pro¬ curing them to the bounty of his cousin, whose favours were bestowed with a grace and generosity peculiar to himself ; and who in the warmth of his heart, saw nothing mean in tbe demands wdiich Stephano daily made upon his purse. The young friends were now both nearly nineteen, and both were largely indebted to nature. Tall, Graceful, and symmetrical, the finely-proportioned figure of D'Rosonio, excited admira¬ tion in every beholder ; while the match¬ less regularity of his features the bene¬ volence of his smiles, and the sparkling animation of his dark and brilliant eye, gave him the fullest claim to manly beauty. Stephano was not less handsome than his friend, but his countenance bad a disgusting expression of haughtiness, which when it disfigures the features of youth is peculiarly unpleasing; and
?22
Spain. When he waited upon the count to take his leave, D'Rosonio warmly wished him that prosperity which he deserved, and slipped into his hand, what he called a small token of friend¬ ship ; it was in truth a magnificent present ; and Camillo would have de¬ clined it. iC I must be allowed the privilege of a friend, Camillo (said D'Rosonio), in assisting you to enter life with com¬ fort; ï insist then that you accept this trifle, without scruple." Camillo obey¬ ed his benefactor, on whose head when he took his leave, he invoked the choicest blessings of heaven. The natural kind¬ ness of D'Rosonio's heart led him, when the young man was gone, to be more frequent in his visits than he had before been to Schedoni's, but these visits, which sprung from the most amiable motives, had nearly proved fatal to his own peace ; the person of Victoria, who was two years younger than himself, was cast in nature's fairest *"<jHJ<j. and her mind was a fit inhabi-
123
fant of its lovely tenement ; mild, sus¬ ceptible, and affectionate, the gentler virtues were all her own. The only material defect in her character, was want of firmness, and that, to a young and lovely female, is often the most dangerous of all others, This peculiar softness of temper led her deeply to regret the absence of her brother, whom she loved with more than a sister's fondness ; and from the most benevolent motives D'Rosonio endea* voured to console her. One day when he had been convers¬ ing with her upon the subject, he said, tí If for the present you have lost one brother, you have gained another; if you will accept of my fraternal regard." " I shall think myself both honoured^ and happy in your lordship's friendship/ replied the blushing and delighted Vic¬ toria. But alas! friend-hip was too cold a name for the sentiment which the count
g 2
124
soon inspired her with ; and young and susceptible as D'Rosonio was, it cannot be wondered at that their passion be¬ came mutual : yet, both were for some time unconscious of its existence, and so they would probably have long re¬ mained, but for an incident that opened the eyes of both to the nature of their sentiments. A young man the son of an opulent merchant, was captivated by the beauty of Victoria, and asked her hand from her father. Wholly unsuspicious that the heart of his daughter was not in her own possession, Camillo readily promised the young suitor his consent and interest with his child, whose affec¬ tions he said he knew were disengaged; and highly pleased with the proposed alliance, he took the earliest opportunity of mentioning it to Victoria. (i The young D'Arfet has just been with me, (said he to her), you have seen him my love, what think you of him ?*'
Î25
" He appears a good and ingenuous. young man, (replied she), and was my btother's favourite." i( His circumstances are good, (said her father), and he is now of an age to settle in the world ; he wishes to do so, if he can obtain the hand of my Victoria." Camillo fixed his eyes upon his daughter as he spoke : he was surprised to see the colour forsake her cheek, and the next moment she burst into tears. " Why this agitation my beloved girl ? (cried the fond parent), you know that your choice shall be governed by your own inclinations ; never will I force my Victoria to give her hand where her heart cannot accompany the precious gift." He threw his arms round the weep¬ ing girl, and kissed away the tears that trembled upon her cheek. " Oh, my father ï my dear father, (cried she), how happy have you made your child ; indeed, indeed, 1 should be
13β
ftiiserabîe if I thought that you wished 4ne to marry this man." <: Your affections my Victoria, I know are disengaged, and I should have been happy to see them so worthily bestowed; but we will not now pursue the sub¬ ject." Victoria soon after retired to her chamber, her fathets words vibrated upon her ear ; " Your affections I know are disengaged." She trembled as she repeated them to herself. Oh, heavens ! thought she, can it be, that the affection í have hitherto indulged without scruple, is of a nature that I ought to blush at? Can I have had the wetness to cherish a passion for a man evei7 way my superior ? The pang that rent her heart at this thought, was a sufficient confirmation that her fears were too just; that heart, equally gentle and pure, had indeed imbibed a passion the most fatal to her repose.
Î2T
Accident prevented the count from visiting the habitation' of Camillo for some days, and in that short time the uneasiness of her mind had occasioned a visible change in the looks of Victoria. D'Rosonio was shocked to see her pale and languid ; her cheek flushed as he entered the room, but the burning crim¬ son that suffused her lovely countenance as her eyes met his, gave place the next moment to an ashy paleness. The count hastily inquired whether she was indisposed, and received a reply in the negative, " What then has hap¬ pened to distress you, dearest Victoria ? for something has I am convinced," cried D'Rosonio. The soothing tenderness of his tone, penetrated the heart of Victoria, and not daring to trust herself longer with him, she made an excuse for her absence and quitted the apartment. In a few minutes her father entered, and from him D'Rosonio eagerly de*
12$
manded the cause of that distress, so visi¬ ble in his daughter's countenance. " In truth, my lord, (replied Camil¬ lo), I know not what has deprived Victoria of her cheerfulness; but for some days past, she has indulged a me¬ lancholy that afflicts me; our neighbour D'Arfet has viewed her with partial eyes, and though he might aspire to a richer bride, he sought from me the hand of Victoria; but she refused to listen to his suit, nor would 1 cross her inclinations; not for the wealth of worlds ivould 1 see my child unhappy, and know myself the cause ; but though I explicitly told her so, yet, from that time she has pined,' and every hour seems to increase her dejection," The words of Camillo gave to the heart of Fernando the most painful sen¬ sation it had ever experienced; he felt that he loved, and he recollected a thousand little circumstances that con¬ vinced him he was beloved ; but the
129
transport, that had he been differently situated, would have accompanied such a conviction, was destroyed by the bitter remembrance of the insurmountable bars to his union with Victoria, and he sunk into a reverie that was unnoticed by Camillo. ÍC Your lordship has so kindly in¬ terested yourself for me, and mine, (continued the old man), that I know you will forgive my presumption in re¬ questing one more favour. I think that the fear of making me unhappy, notwith¬ standing my assurances to the contrary, has rendered Victoria so melancholy; if you would condescend to assure her, that could I see her cheerfulness return, my felicity would be complete; your words would I know have weight with her : may I, my lord, hope that you will grant me this request?'* (i Most readily, (replied the comit), but not to-day, you shall see me soon againi and then, (added he, with a sigh), g 3
130
we will try what can be done to restore the mind of Victoria to peace. He interrupted the acknowledg¬ ments of Camillo, whom he quitted with a mind more disturbed than he chose to own, even to himself. '
131
CHAP. VIL
Tme various emotions which he dared not indulge, and which he could not repress, robbed D'Rosonio for that night of repose ; fancy pictured to him the happiness which he might enjoy in a union with Victoria. Cl What ! though her birth is hum¬ ble (thought he), yet her virtues and her graces would add lustre to any rank ; and shall I deprive myselfnf the possession of a woman so formed to ren¬ der me happy, merely in compliance with prejudices which I ought to des¬ pise l' But when he asked himself*»
132
whether his father, his beloved and re¬ vered father, would, were he living, consent to his marriage with Victoria, he was compelled to own that such an union ivould never have received his sanction : he recollected the admoni¬ tion he had received from the late count : " When you marry, my son, let wealth be your least consideration ; you are rich enough to support the dignity of your house ; seek only for a woman whose virtues and whose birth will re¬ flect lustre upon your choice." Often had Fernando promised to his father implicit obedience on this point. " And does his death (thought he) exonorate me from my promise ? Oh ! no. It renders the performance of it a sacre j duty. Yes, dear shade of my revered father, solemnly do I swear never to forget that injunction you have so often laid upon me." Severely did he now blame himself for that intercourse, innocent as it was,
133
that had given rise to those sentiments so destructive to the peace of Victoria and himself. He took a retrospective view, of his behaviour to her, and the idea that she supposed he meant to offer her his hand occurred to him. 'Twas true, nothing that had ever pas¬ sed between them could have given her reason for such a thought ; but he was sensible that he loved her, and if she had perceived his passion, what must she have thought of the avidity with which he sought her society. After some hours of painful reflection, he re¬ solved to endeavour without wounding the delicacy of Victoria, to erase from her mind any idea that he entertained more than a paternal regard for her, u Yo, Victoria (thought he), I will indeed be a brother to thee; and, oh î may thy happiness equal my fervent wishes; ble^, supremely blest, will then be thy lot." '* The sooner this was done (thought he) the better, for the health and tran-
134
quillity of Victoria ; and in a few days afterwards he went to the house of Ca¬ millo. He found Victoria alone, and he rejoiced to see that she looked better than when they had last met. For some moments the behaviour of both was constrained ; but D'Rosonio endeavoured, by plunging at once into the subject of his visit, to remove the embarrassment under which they la¬ boured. His voice faultered when he perceived the evident agitation with which Vic¬ toria listened to him ; and when he ceased, she strove in vain to reply. <t Will not my sister speak to me ?" said the count, taking her cold and trembling hand in his, * e I am sensible of your goodness, my lord (replied she), indeed I am ; but just now I cannot thank you as I ought." " Do not talk thus formally to me, Victoria (said the count) ; regard me a$ your friend, as your brot lier "
135
" Oh! would to heaven (cried she) that you were indeed my brother; how blest should I have been, and how dif¬ ferent would my feehngs be, if-------". She paused; hut enough had escaped to dye her lovely countenance with crimson, and she hastily averted it from tl\e ardent gaze of the count. Shocked at what she had said, her agitation became excessive, and unable to restrain her emotions, she burst into tears. With the most soothing gentle¬ ness, D'Rosonio endeavoured to console her. " Oh, my lord (cried she) speak not thus kindly to me-—I know, 1 feel that you must despise me. Weak, unhappy creature that I am.** " Despise thee, dearest Victoria ?· (said the count, thrown ofl' his guard by the softness of her tone)* No ; Heaven is my witness how dear you are to me ; and was it in my power to call you mine, I shoukl esteem myself the hap¬ piest of men."
136
Felicity the most exquisite was for a moment the portion of Victoria, at a declaration so gratifying to her love and her pride. She raised her eyes to D'Rosonio's, and the hand which she had attempted to withdraw involuntarily pressed his. The arm of D'Rosonio imperceptibly encircled her waist, and her head sunk upon his bosom. At this dangerous moment, when the voice of passion alone was heard, and conscience and reason had abdicated their thrones, the eyes of the count fell upon a ring that had belonged to his father, and which, since his death, Fer¬ nando constantly wore : it contained a small lock of his late mother's hair en¬ circled with diamonds. In an instant, the recollection of her angehe punty recalled him ro his senses. tr Farewell, Victoria (cried he); my sis¬ ter, my friend, farewell," imd he rushed out of the room. u Blessed spirit, (thought he, as he
137
walked with hasty steps towards his own palace,) from what a crime has the remembrance of thee saved me ? What agonizing remorse w r ould have been the portion of my future life if, yielding to the suggestions of passion, I had rob¬ bed Victoria of her innocence? Heaven;, and thy dear remembrance he praised, that I am spared the commission of such an act." The danger which she was sensible she had been upon the brink of, had the most salutary effect upon the mind of Victoria; she bhuddered when she reflected what a ivrttch a few moments might have made her and she deter¬ mined to conquer a passion that had nearly produced such dreadful conse¬ quences. A. Victoria was a proof that much may be done by those who determine to do much; and that our passions, without they are weakly indulged, never become our tyrants. The conquest of her's· was not, however, the work of a moment;
? long and severe were her struggles, but they were ultimately successful. D'Rosonio was convinced that for him the only chance of safety was in flight, and he quitted Naples for a short time. To give up the pleasure which the society of Victoria afforded him, caused him indeed a painful ef¬ fort ; but it was one that every princi¬ ple of honour and prudence demanded him to make, and never had he been deaf to their suggestions. He made an excursion to Rome, in which he was accompanied by Ste¬ phano, who was happy in escaping from a home that was now become pe¬ culiarly unpleasant to him. Lodovic had never been heard of since he fled in consequence of his wife's infidelity; and old Fedro had from that time drooped, till at last he had sunk into the grave. His death, even depressed as he was with the weight of years, would have been regretted by the sig¬ nor and his lady* but when they re-
139
åected that their son had most proba¬ bly hastened it, their feelings were doubly keen. Stephano would have been perfectly unmoved at the decease of the old man, whose life or death was not in his eyes of consequence; but the coldness, and even severity with which he found himself treated by his parents, who were shocked at his evi¬ dent want of feeling, rendered him anxious to escape from their presence for some time. Lauretta had, upon the death of her grandfather, been placed by the sig¬ nora in a secure and hnmhle asylum ; she appeared very penitent for her crime, and to penitence the heart of Signora Montalva was at all times -ac¬ cessible, She did not reproach the un¬ happy girl for the past; she only ex¬ acted from her a solemn promise to avoid future errors ; and grateful for kindness, where she had expected only to meet with reproach, Lauretta readily
140
made, and solemnly kept the promise which her benefactress desired. The gaieties of Rome soon chased all care and gloom from the mind of Montalva. Free from all restraint, and liberally supplied by the connt with the means of indulging his natural pro¬ pensity to pleasure, he soon became distinguished amongst the gay and dis¬ sipated, a ?' 1 frequently laughed at his cousin, ν ^e gravity be asserted was inconsistent with his years. The pursuits of D'Rosonio were in¬ deed widely dissimilar ; not that he wholly turned from the cup of pleasure, but he quaffed the intoxicating beverage with moderation, nor did the morning ever bring him cause to reproach him¬ self for the excesses of the night. The fairest and the noblest of the Roman dames, did not disdain to dis¬ tinguish the cousins ; but the remem¬ brance of Victoria acted as a talisman in steeling the heart of the count, and
141
the brightest eyes in Italy strove to pierce it in vain. Licentious amours only had charms for Montalva ; and with them he was too much engrossed to have leisure, or indeed inclination for any others. De¬ void of delicacy, and a slave to sensual appetite, the most celebrated courtezans of Rome were by turns his ' favorites* D'Rosonio would have expostulated with him on his conduct, but delicacy sealed his lips : he had supplied Mon¬ talva with money, and he feared that remonstrance from him might appear to his cousin impertinent or ill-judged. Stephano therefore pursued with avi¬ dity his career of dissipation, when an event happened that for some time put a stop to it. This was the illness of the elder Signor Montalva, in consequence of which Stephano received a summons to return home. Greatly shocked at the illness of Montalva, whom he loved and revered as a second father, the count açcom«
142
panied his cousin back to Naples. When they arrived, they hastened to the signor, but the countenance of the domestic who received ihem destroyed the hope that D'Rosonio had enter¬ tained of his friend's recovery ; Mon¬ talva was indeed yet alive, but hope was extinct. Stephano heard this intelligence with affected dejection, but in reality he was far from grieved. Tenderly affection¬ ate as the behaviour of the count had ever been to him, Stephano did not love his father; their characters were indeed totally dissimilar. Frank, open, and unsuspecting, the elder Montalva was in the truest sense of the word a good man ; and hypocrisy, which formed so striking a trait in the character of the son, was of all vices the most opposite to the open and noble nature of the father. The detection of Stephano's intrigue with Lauretta, though it could not wholly destroy Montalva's affection for his son, yet in a great measure les-
143 sened it ; and the naturally vindictive temper of Stephano was roused to its utmost pitch of acrimony, by what he thought the unnecessary severity of his father's behaviour at that time. To his son therefore, the death of Montalva'would be a source of pleasure, rather than regret ; but veiling these re¬ flections under an assumed sorrow, he hastened to his father's apartment; as Montalva had desired to see him the moment he arrived. Unfeeling as he was, Stephano re¬ ceived a momentary shock from the ap¬ pearance of his father, on whose coun¬ tenance death had evidently set his seal ; the Signora Montalva sat by the bedside of her husband, and held one of his hands in her's ; the other Montalva feeb¬ ly extended to his son ; Stephano pressed it to his lips. " I rejoice that I am spared to see you once more my son, (cried Montalva,) I have much to say to you." Si Not once but many times more,
144
my father, heaven will yet restore you to our prayers, said Stephano. Ci Do not deceive yourself, (replied his father), I have an internal monitor that tells me I am hastening to the tomb. Clara, my beloved, (cried he, turning to the signora, whose tears flowed in si¬ lence,) repress this grief, my life I trust has not been wholly unworthy of the angelic purity of thine, and in that blessed abode which will doubtless be the reward of thy virtues, we shall I hope meet again." The signora gave her beloved hus¬ band a look that seemed to say their meeting would not be long delayed ; and Stephano observed with surprise the ravages that grief had made in her still lovely countenance. She was pale and thin, and the fire that had once sparkled in her brilliant black eye was almost exj ti nguished by tears. Stephano listened with feigned hu¬ mility to the long and pathetic remon¬ strance which his father made on his
115
former conduct; and readily promised that his future life should be such as would reflect honour upon his illustrious descent. " Oh, my son, (cried the signor,) never forget the lesson that this day affords you, never forget that a life of virtue leads to a death of peace. What at that aweful moment are all the riches and honours of the world ; the recollec¬ tion of the good we have performed is thus our only comfort, and bitter in¬ deed must be the feehngs of the unhap¬ py man, who has to reproach himself with an i U -spent life; to such a one, the misery of a death bed, is a dreadful anti¬ cipation of the punishment that awaits the wicked conscience, whose voice had been stifled by wordly pleasures : it then paints to the expiring sinner in the most glowing colours those enoimities uf which he has been guillv, and that "ood O tí J n which he might have done: Oh! mv son, most fervently does your father im- vol. i. ?
146
plore of heaven, that your last moments may be free from terrors such as these." Montalva was obliged to pause, for his strength was almost exhausted ; he desired after he had had a little repose, to see the Count D'Rosonio, whom he loved with the affection of a father ; with the deepest regret D'Rosonio witnessed the change which so short a time had made ; he list ?d with reverence to the signor, whose advice to him was brief; of D'Rosonio indeed, lr had no more to desire than a perseverance in his pre¬ sent conduct, for well did Montalva know, and truly did he value the virtues of the count» "Your father and myself (said he), were in the truest sense of the word friends, and it was his wish, as it is mine, that our children should be united in bonds of the strictest amity; Ste¬ phano has neither your stability nor your strictnv^s of principle; yonr friendship
14?
may bc a m°ans of rendering him hap¬ py and virtuous." "And never shall it be withdrawn, (cried the count); Stephano has been, and always shall be, the brother of my heart ; but was he less dear to me, yet your desire should be complied with ; believe me dear signor, that the injunction of my own respected father, would not hav* more weight with me ? than your's." Montalva pressed the hand bf his young friend, and then desired to be left to repose. " I feel myself drowsy, (said he), and a little sleep will per« haps enable me to see you and Stephan· in the evening." The count left him, and he sunk into a tranquil slumber ; he slept for some hours. " His repose has been long, may it prove salutary, (said the signora, as she gently put aside the curtain to view him as he slept.) He lay appa¬ rently tranquil, and a placid smile adorn ■ *d his countenance ; but a second glance
us
convinced the signora that life was fled for ever. Bitter was the grief of the unhappy wife, but she bore her afflic¬ tion in silence, D'Rosonio omitted no consolation in his power to offer, aud Montalva behaved with outward affec¬ tion and respect to his endowed mother, but the penetrating eye of the signora saw through the heaitlcss civilities of her son ; saw and despised the motives from whence they sprung, and his want of filial piety, was no small aggravation of her grief. S lie was not destined long to lament the loss of an adored husband ; her health had for some time been bad, a id the death of her husband was a blow that she never recovered; she gradually declined, and as she was perfectly sensi¬ ble of her situation, she anticipated with pleasure the moment that was to unite her to her beloved Montalva; and six months after the death of the signor, she followed him to the grave. Montalva though internally rejoiced
Mí)
at this event, assumed all the outward appearances of grief, and the warm-heart¬ ed D'Rosonio exerted himself to console his friend. The death of his parents· had rendered him master of the whole of his small paternal property, but in his hands, it was as nothing. Naturally luxurious and extravagant, he had not the means to indulge these darling pro¬ pensities, and the baneful voice of envy, at his cousin's superior fortune, began to take root in his heart ; "yet, (said he) mentally, my descent is not inferior to D'Rofeonios; a splendid marriage will enable me to restore the house of Mon¬ talva to its original splendour and mag¬ nificence, and amongst the Neapolitan fair ones, I may without difficulty, select a rich and noble bride." Cam dio Schedoni waited upon the Count D'Rosonio at this period one morning, to bid his benefactor farewell. His son had established himself most opulently in Spain, and the old man yielded to his entreaties, and agreed to ? 3
150
pass the remainder of his days with him. D' Rosonio had by this time conquered his love for Victoria, of whom he took leave with a brotherly affection ; nor did his heart throb, as it would once have done, with pain, when he learned some sime after that she had given her hand to an opulent Spaniard ; most sincerely did he invoke heaven to bless their uni¬ on, and his prayers were heard; for the lot of Victoria was as happy as she had deserved it should be.
151
^ί ^" 1 *^ ^^tH^?^^^^ l,
CHAP. VIII.
Soon after D'Rosonio had attained his twenty-third year, Montalva one morning burst into his chamber. tí Congratulate me, (cried he in a tone of rapture), the loveliest and most af¬ fluent woman in Naples will be mine* "I docongratulatetheemy friend,(said D'Rosonio, warmly embracing him), but may I not know thy fair one's name r'* "Bianca Lupinetti,(replied the signor); thou knowest she is the only surviving branch of one of the noblest families in Naples, and her fortune which is im¬ mense is at her own disposal : that for- 11 6
152
tune and her lovely person, will be thy happy friend's. But if I can collect my¬ self I will tell thee all. " Some time since, as î was passing the Palazzo Da Vinci, a woman closely veiled, followed me. " ' Hist! hist î rignor, a word with you,' said she. i( What would you? cried I. <t i I would know signor, whether your heart is in your own possession,' replied she. u Tiuly, (cried I), for a stranger, your question is------- —- * e e Abrupt I own, signor, but hear my reason for asking it,' said she ; ( There is a lady, r Naples does not boast a fair¬ er,) who has seen and who admires the Signor Montalva; should his heart be disengaged, he will find her's a prize, well worth his acceptance ; but mark me, signor, this is no idieaffairof gallantry; no licentious wife, who wishes to deceive her husband; young, beautiful, rich, «and nobly born; the signora whom I
153
serve must be approached with reverence and ree pec t. ec And so she shall, (cried I), only conduct me to her, and------— u { Softly, signor, you have not an¬ swered my question/ said the woman. " Oh! my heart is wholly free, (ex¬ claimed J.) I swear by every thing most sacred, that------- ί( ς Hold î hold! signor, (cried the wo- man laughing), I perceive at least, that you are sufficiently impatient to see my lady; but I cannot now gratify your wishes ; meet me here to morrow, and perhaps I may devise some means to introduce you to her soon.' u Thanks my kind friend,(said I), and now accept of this small token of my gratitude. I attempted to put my purse into her hand------ " * No Signor (cried she), I am not accessible to bribery; the munificence of her, whom I serve, puts me above temptation; should I find you worthy of her hand, you will have in me a h 5
154
warm, and perhaps a useful friend ; one thing I must caution you against, do not attempt to watch or follow me ; if you do, you will never see me more :* she walked hastily away before 1 could reply. " I puzzled myself in vain, to conjec¬ ture who the incognita could be; and the next day I took care to be there at the same hour. In a few minutes the woman appeared. α € You are punctuality itself, signor, (saîd she) and to-night you shall see your incognita, be near the church of St. Giovanni a little before midnight ; and I will conduct you to her.' " You may be sure Fernando, (con¬ tinued Montalva), I did not hesitate to promise obedience ,* and never did I long for the arrival of an hour, as I did for that of midnight. At last it came, and just as the clock was striking, my incog¬ nita's ambassadress approached me. * Follow me,' said she ; I obeyed, and for some time we proceeded in silence ;
155 she then turned round. ζ We are now very near the place to which I am about to conduct you, signor, (cried she), suffer me to tie this handkerchief over your eyes. I hesitated. » ? * Nay, (cried she) on no other condition can you accompany me. These words were sufficient ; I suffered her to tie the hand¬ kerchief round my eyes, and she then led me forward. In a few minutes she unbound them, and I found myself in a large garden opposite to a magnificent house ; my conductress took from her pocket a key, and opening the door of the house, she led me upa flight of back stairs to a small apartment ; we had no light but what the moon afforded. tt t Stay here fora few minutes, signor, (said she) and I will return to you:* slie quitted the room as she spoke, and I observed that she locked the door after her ; 1 had not time to indulge many conjectures upon this circumstance : a blight noise made me turn to that part of the apartment from whence I thought
15?
it proceeded ; I saw a pannel slide back, and by doing so, discovered to me a most magnificent apartment, splendidly illuminated; the woman who had brought me there, now entered through the panne! ; she motioned to me to fol¬ low her, and I obeyed : but the magni¬ ficence of every thing around me, had no longer power to attract my attention, when I beheld the loveliest female figure my eyes had ever seen, advance to meet me; a long veil which fell infolds to her feet, while it concealed from me her countenance, gave additional graces to her figure ; tall, majestic, and command¬ ing ; the graceful symmetry of her per¬ son could not be excelled; while the feminine delicacy of her air and man¬ ner, would alone have been sufficient to excite admiration. C£ We conversed for some time before she would suffer me to see her face ; as. la^t, she raised her veil ; and what a heaven of beauty met my eyes. I gazed upon her in speechless transport ;
»r
her attendant's entrance prevented my expressing the admiration with which she had inspired me ; the woman whis¬ pered to her and she then said to me.— «. í p or the present I must bid you farewell.' " But may I not hope to be allowed to see you again' cried I " t Yes, (said she), in a few days.' I supplicated for a shorter period, and received permission to come again on the following night. Flora her confi¬ dant, who had before conducted me, was to meet me at the church of------and with this permission, I was obliged to retire; totally ignorant of the name or rank of my fair enslaver. Her woman led me again into the garden, and boun^ my eyes. In a short time 1 found myself near the church where we had met. α ' And now, signor, (cried Flora), a- dieu 'till to-morrow night.' (C Stop a moment (said I,) may I not
158 " t What you please to-morrow night, signor (cried she), bût now I must away.' tb She left me as she spoke, and I has¬ tened home. I retired to bed, hut I courted repose in vain.— Thou know¬ est, Fernando, that I have hitherto thought but lightly of the sex; and often have I sworn never to part with my li¬ berty", yet I saw clearly that this ad¬ venture, if pursued, must end in matri¬ mony. True, such an angel, if possessed of wealth and birth, might render the fetters of hymen less galling than 1 had, ever thought them ; but might it not be all a cheat? Might she not have sought me out, to hide perhaps the disgraceful consequences of some amour in which she had been engaged ? or"— α Now, on my life s thou didst not de¬ serve the generous confidence she placed in thee (cried D'Rosonio), how couldst thou indulge such mean suspicions oí such a creature as thou describest her io be? For shame, Montalva !"
159
ζζ D'Rosonio, thou wilt never know the sex ; what thou termest suspicion, I call caution; but in this instance I will own it was unnecessary. To be brief, I saw my incognita again the following night, and three hours conversation made her appear if possible more lovely in my eyes. I ventured to express a wish to know who she was, but I did it guardedly. " 4 will be frank with you, Signor Montalva (said she) ; my rank is such as I need not blush to own, but at this moment 'I know not whether we can, after a few days, ever meet again.' "Heavens! signora, (said I), can you be serious ? Flattered as I have been witk the hope that I was not an object of indiflerence to you, can you determine to give me up for ever ? í¿ r Alas ! (replied slie), it does not depend upon myself whether we shall meet or not ; but of this be assured, should I from circumstance" be obliged
lGo
to give you up, no other man shall re¬ place you in my heart, " I pressed to my lips the lovely hand which she held out to me, and she con¬ tinued: f It will at any rate be three days before I can let you know when we may with safety meet again ; should the worst that I dread happen, I will at least endeavour to see you once more. When I desired Flora to endeavour to accost you, I thought not of what might happen, or the change that a single day might make ; but let us converse on some other subject, for this to me is irksome.' " I dared not venture to press her fur¬ ther, and for some time I strove to sup¬ port a conversation on indifferent 'sub¬ jects; at length, Flora was summoned to conduct me out, and I took my - leave. tt You will believe that the three days appeared three ages to me; en the morning of the fourth I received a note ; only these words ;—*
l6l
ίι Be at the usual place to-night, if \ou wish again to see <c ' Your u c ÍNCOGMIA.' ie I pressed the dear mandate to my lips: ah î (thought I ) she is well assured of my obedience. " Midnight came, and with it the trus¬ ty Flora ; and in a few minutes I found myself in the presence of her lovely mis¬ tress. ei And now (exclaimed I), may 1 hope to be freed from the tortures of sus¬ pense? may 1 dare to enquire if-----~ Ci ' Yes, signor (replied she), my fears are over; I am now at my own disposal ; and if you think it worthy of your ac¬ ceptance, the hand, the heart, and the fortune of Bianca Lupinetti, are yours.' " Bianca Lupinetti ! (cried I) is it possible ? " ( 'Tis indeed true, signor (said she) ; but I have a little history to relate to you ; may I claim your patience ?
1?2
" I did not immediately reply; in truth I could not : lovely as I had before thought her, she now appeared more charming than ever; her dress heigh¬ tened her natural beauty, and her fine eyes, fixed on mine with an expression of pleasure, robbed me for a moment of all command of myself, and I pressed the Jovely creature to my bosom. " She instantly disengaged herself í * Take care, signor (said she, in a tone of severity), or'------ " I did not suffer her to finish the sen¬ tence ; I besought her pardon, and she granted it. " ' I perceive, signor (cried she), that my name and family are not unknown to you.' (e All Naples (returned I), are by re¬ port informed of the Signora Lupinetti's surpassing loveliness, both of mind and person. ζζ She bowed to my compliment, and proceeded :
UÌ3
deprived mc of both my parents ; but the kindness of Signor D'Orsini, my guardian, left me little reason to lament their loss. The signor had an only son, of whom he was passionately fond ; and well did Alberto merit his fathers love : this youtii and myself grew up together, and I loved him as a brother. A warm¬ er sentiment, however, had impercep¬ tibly stolen into hi« heart, and he owned to his father, that without me he would be miserable; my guai dian, who knew that my heart was disengaged, had not a doubt but I would accept of his son's hand, and lost no time in communicat¬ ing to me the affection with which Al- berto regarded me. I had not then (continued she), felt the power of love.* —Never, Fernando, shall I forget the look with which these words were ut¬ tered, nor the glance that accompanied them. She paused a moment, and then proceeded: " c The regard which I was conscious
1?4
I felt for Alberto, was I thought suf¬ ficient for our mutual happiness, and I did not scruple to promise him my hand ; but as his fortune was far inferior to mine, Signor D'Orsini refused to let the ceremony of our marriage be per¬ formed 'till his authority over me was at an end.' £i ( 'Twill be said (cried he) that I have influenced your choice; and, dearly as I love my son, his happiness must not be purchased at the expenee of his father's honour : in less than two years you will be your own mistress, should you then prefer my son, with what delight will I join your hands!' Alberto acquiesced in this delay, though with reluctance, and nearly a year passed away. My affection for him, calm, steady, and rational, seemed to myeelf incapable of increase or diminution ; but this regard did not satisfy the warm and impassioned heart of Alberto; ever anxious to be near me, and unhappy if any accident separated
1?5
us, even for a short time; the proofs which he daily gave me of his passion were irksome rather than pleasing. " * You do not love me, Bianca (would he frequently say) ; my presence creates no joy, and my absence gives no pain to your heart ; your calmness, your tran¬ quillity, are inconsibient with love; and I greatly fear, that to your regard for my father, and your friendship for me, 1 owe the promise of your hand. Oh, Bianca! was I sure of that, dearly as 1 love you, yet I would not call you mine ; the possession of your lovely person, without your heart, could not satisfy me.' α t In vain I assured him that the sentit ment I felt for him was all I was capable of feeling, and that I was conscious it was amply sufficient for my happiness. 6i ' You do not know your own heart, Bianca (would he reply) ; it was made for a warmer sentiment/ These perpe¬ tual declarations, that I regarded him with indifference, made me look into
\6?
my heart, and I was compelled to own that, compared to his, my sentiments were cold ; had he never appeared dissa¬ tisfied with the nature of my sentiments, I should not have suspected that the existence of more impassioned feelings were necessary to my felicity ; but in giving me an idea that that was the case, he disturbed my tranquillity with¬ out increasing my regard for himself. While my mind was in this state my guardian died, and I removed from his house to that in which we are at pre¬ sent. Signora Valdorna, a woman of family but reduced fortune, gladly ac¬ cepted the offer of residing with me; and I renewed my assurances to Alberto that, when decency permitted our union, my hand should be his. I could no longer suffer him to see me daily, as he had been accustomed to do ; and to dis¬ sipate the grief which his father's death occasioned him, he left Naples for a short period. He took his leave of me with evident emotion, and I strove to
1 67
persuade myself that 1 saw him depart with regret, but I could not conceal frorn my own heart, that I felt as if I was now for the first time at liberty ; and I shud¬ dered when I reflected how inconsistent with real love such a sentiment was. " c Soon after the^departure of Alberto D'Orsino, I chanced, signor, to see you at the church of St. Giovanni: after what has passed (added she, blushing), I ought not perhaps to scruple owning that the first sight of you convinced me Alberto was right, when he declared that my heart was made for a warmer sentiment than the one I felt for him. Deeply did I now regret the engage¬ ment that I had formed ; yet, when I thought of Alberto's declaration, I al¬ most doubted whether I ought, prepos¬ sessed as I was in your favour, to marry him. I determined to see you, and if I found on conversing with you, that you were all that my fancy presaged, I thought I would at least make an effort to recover my liberty ; but on the very
i6s
day after you had made your first visit, a letter from Alberto apprized me of his speedy return, and that he had received an appointment from our sovereign for a foreign court ; he besought me on this account to shorten his probation, and consent to accompany him. " : This was a severe and unexpected blow, and 1 knew not what to resolve upon. I had intended by degrees to prepare the mind of Alberto for intelli¬ gence which 1 was conscious would oc¬ casion him the greatest pain : but this was now impossible, and I had no choice but to marry him, or to abruptly inform him of the alteration in my sentiments. To be brief, he came. The agitation of my mind, on seeing him, was too great not to btrike him forcibly, and he pressed to know the cause of it, which í at last summoned resolution to tell him. I shall not attempt to paint to you the scene that ensued ; the generous Alberto gave me back my liberty, and vs e parted for ever.*
lb'9
Cí She ceased, and I thanked her with transport for the preference that she had given me; she suffered me to remain with her an hour, and before my depar« ture I received permission to visit her as her acknowledged lover. And now, Fer¬ nando, I again demand your congratula¬ tions; I had indeed intended never to marry, but a wife like Bianca is a rare treasure: wit, beauty, birth, and riches, all combine to render her desirable; and senseless must the man be that would reject such a prize.
JVQhã*
170
(TIAP. IX.
Montalva ceased, and D'Rosonio again warmly congratulated him. (i Thou must see my Bianca, my friend (cried he); my happiness will not be complete 'till you know and esteem each other; and ^o-morrow I will pre¬ sent thee to her." Montalva now hurried away, and left D'Rosonio to ruminate oil what he had heard. Very different were the feelings w r ith which the friends regarded the conduct of Bianca ; Montalva Γ ought of nothing but the preference which she gave to himself, but D'Rosonio concaved that
171
her conduct was a violation of female delicacy, which he could not have ap¬ proved of in his mistress. i( She thinks not of the pangs wdiich she has inflicted upon the susceptible heart of D'Orsini (said the count, men¬ tally) ; and for Montalva, a stranger of whom she knows nothing but from re¬ port, she breaks through an engagement that ought to be held most sacred ; and this is the woman with whom he ex¬ pects happiness: Alas! Montalva, great¬ ly do I fear that thou wilt find thyself mistaken ; but vain would be at present every effort to undeceive tnee." The next day Montalva presented his friend to Bianca, who received aim in the most flattering manner. " Cou n t D'Rosonio, signora (said Mon¬ talva as he introduced Fernando), the friend of my youth and the brother of my heart, intreats the honor of being known to you ; he is most anxious to merit a place in your esteem." ι 2
u If fame speaks truly of the Count lTRosonio, it is impossible to know without esteeming him (said the signore, as she extended to him her beautiful hand), and his being your friend, signor, is a sufficient passport to my favour," D'Rosonio made a suitable reply to this speech, and the conversation became general. Montalva had not exaggerated when he spoke of the personal charms of Bianca; she was indeed beautiful, but D'Rosonio thought that an air of ill- concealed levity spoiled the effect of her charms; he did not however own his opinion to Montalva ; who, when they left her, dwelt with rapture upon her perfections. Montalva now daily spent a portion of his time with the Signora Lupinetti, and D'Rosonio was often of the party. Montalva frequently pressed his lovely mistress to fix a time for their being united, but this she always declined, under one pretence or other. <c Let us
173
be better known to each other, (she would say), you have not yet had time to find out half my faults." In vain did the enamoured Montalva protest that he should never be able to discover any ; she would not say when she would bless him with her hand, and fearful of offending her, he did not chuse to be too pressing. In the account that Bianca had given him ofher contract to Signor D'Orsini, she had not adhered to truth ; the vio¬ lent passion which she pretended the signor felt for her never had existence : while she was his father's ward, D'Or¬ sini had treated her as a sister, and so he would ever have considered her, but for a prepossession which she avowed in his favour. Bianca was of a temper the most inconstant; she fancied that she loved D'Orsini, and her passion m le some impression upon his heart; his fa¬ ther, though he felt a regard for Bianca as the child of a deceased friend who had been very dear, to him, yet would
174
unt willingly have chosen her for his da'ighter-in law ; he therefore wished the marriage to be deferred, and his son acquiesced in his desire. No sooner did Bianca become the affianced wife of D'Orsini, than the natural inconstancy of her temper prevailed, and bhe soon regarded him with indifference. Her passion for Montalva converted indiffe¬ rence into disgust, and she determined to break her engagement to D'Orsini. The signor's pride and spirit rendered this an easy matter; he interrupted the excuses she was making for her perfidy, by an assurance that no excuse was ne¬ cessary. %c As long as 1 had reason to suppose that your hand would be accompanied by your whole heart, signora (said he, coldly), I would have held the gift dear as my own soul ; but, far from reproach¬ ing, I thank you for the frank avowal you have made, that ï no longer possess your affections; 1 willingly resign all titie to your favour, and wish you
175
happy." He bowed as he spoke, and retired. Happy as Bianca felt in her release from an engagement so irksome to her, yet her pride was deeply wounded by the manner in which her liberty was re¬ stored. D'Orsini did not however bear the disappointment so calmly as he af¬ fected to do ; both his heart and his pride were hurt, but he disdained to let his perfidious mistress see her power, and he determined to seek refuge in flight. He quitted Naples almost im¬ mediately: this absence was peculiarly gratifying to Bianca, who lost no time in apprizing Montalva that she was at liberty. " What dost thou think, Flora (said she to her woman, one night as she was undressing), of Signor Montalva's friend, the Count D'Rosonio ; dost thou think him handsome ?" i( Oh yes, signora (replied Flora), very handsome, though not as much so
ιγβ
(added she, recollecting herself), as the Signor Montalva/' ts Nay, Fbm, there I think thou art wrong; the Count D'Rosonio is a'mo¬ del of manly beauty : what grace in every motion ! what spirit, yet what softness, in his dark brilliant eye! and when he smiles—didst thou ever mark his fmile, Flora? The attendant w r asa moment without replying; she gazed with surprise on Bianca, whose eyes sparkled with plea* sure as she spoke of D'Rosonio : she perceived the earnest gaze with which Flora regarded her, and she blushed and became silent. After a pause of a few moments, she desired Flora to fi¬ nish undressing her, and she retired to bed. The form of D'Rosonio haunted her slumbers. " What, thought she, (alarm¬ ed at finding that she could not banish him from her mind) what can this mean ? Involuntarily she compared the
ι??
friends ; and the comparison was in the counth favour. - u I must not, I dare not think thus," (cried she), and rising from her bed she threw on a light dishabille, and paced* her apartment, in hopes that fatigue would obtain for her some sleep ; but she was not successful, and the morning dawned before she closed her eves. Too certain of her regard for himself, to be very suspicious, the increasing cold¬ ness of Bianca's manner did not for some time strike Montalva ; but every day increased her predilection for D'Rosonio, and her infatuation at last became so obviou?, that the count, though perfectly free from vanity, per¬ ceived it. The discovery hurt him. " What (thought he,) can this coquet mean hy attentions so marked? Poor Montalva, would to heaven thou hadst never seen her." By degrees the count absented himself from the house of the signora, and her inquiries after 15
iye
him, created in the breast of Montalva, a suspicion of her inconstancy. tt 1 know not signora, (said he petu¬ lantly, in reply to some expressions of wonder she made use of at his absence), I know not what can have detained D'Rosonio so long from your presence ; did he surmise the anxiety you feel to see him, I have no doubt he w r ould speedily present himself before you." The sarcastic tone in which these words were uttered, confused Bianca; but she speedily regained her self-com¬ mand, and her reply was haughty in the extreme. Montalva left her bursting with rage, which he vainly strove to dissemble, and flew to D'Rosonio. * c Tell me, (cried he) tell me I desire, Fernando, whether Bianca Lupinetti has given you reason to suppose she loves you r ,J " My dear Montalva, what a question," said the count.
1?9
" Ry heaven ! 'tis one tliat I will have answered," (exclaimed the signor). " Montalva, (eried D'Rosonio) is this language to your friend ?" tí Forgive me Fernando, (said he), but this woman, curses on the sex ! this vaim, inconstant woman,, treats me with contempt ; and from her manner, 1 have reasoti to believe you are her present favourite." (i I have no reason to suppose so, (re¬ turned the count,) but trust me Stepha- noj was Bianca to prove herself so un¬ worthy of thy love she would have no charms for me ; and surely contempt would overpower affection in the bosom of my friend·" Montalva was silent, but his comité* nance shewed that his mind was consi¬ derably agitated ; the person of Bianca had captivated his senses, and her for¬ tune would render him affluent and happy ; yet, to marry her : to marry a woman whom he had reason to suppose
180
inconstant, was a stab to his pride ; and he almost resolved to give her up. u Yet, no, (thought he) such a step would gratify her; and I will not resign her fortune ; it would be madness to lose it." D'Rosonio watched the changes ofhis countenance, and rejoiced to see it gra¬ dually assume composure. " Your suspicions may be wrong, my friend, (said he) ; you may have judged too hastily ; or perhaps some womanish pique has made the fair Bianca wish to prove her power over you ; and to ex¬ cite your jealousy was the readiest me¬ thod to ascertain her empire." rC Perhaps you are right D'Rosonio, (cried Montalva); at any rate, I will sus¬ pend my judgment." But not long could he do so, the in¬ fatuated Bianca, forgetful of the modesty of her sex, wrote to D'Rosonio ; and in the most unequivocal terras avowed her paitialiÝy, and offered him her hand.
isi
The count rejected her offer with all the contempt which he thought her conduct merited; and maddened by the scorn with which he treated her, she dismissed Montalva; whom she vowed never to see again. D'Rosonio was with his friend, when he received a letter from Bianca, an¬ nouncing her determination. " Vile, perfidious woman ! (exclaimed Montalva, as he perused it;) but I will be revenged. I swear by heaven ! that thou shalt dearly expiate thy falsehood : read that accursed scroll, Fernando, and tell me what such a wretch deserves." " Punishment, undoubtedly, (replied the count); but leave her to the ven¬ geance of heaven. How my friend couldst thou punish her ? (He paused, but Montalva was silent.) Thou wouldst not now marry her," conti/med the count. " Marry her î (repeated Montalva in a tone of scorn,) thou dost not think so
182
meanly of me ; marry, no by heaven ! were she a Venus, with the dowry of a princess, I would reject her with scorn and abhorrence ; but there are ways to humble her ; I will possess myself of her lovely person, ï will enjoy the triumph of seeing her kneel at my feet to supplicate for that hand which she now so inso¬ lently rejects, and I will spurn her from me." ζζ Good heaven ! Montalva, what dost thou say, (cried the astonished count) ; surely my friend will not turn ravi slier ; will not for ever stamp his name withdisgrace and infamy. Heaven know r s, Stephano, how dear thou art to my heart ; but could I for a moment believe thee serious; could I suppose that ought but rage and disappointment urged thee to talk thus, I would instant¬ ly renounce thee. Leave this perfidious woman to her own conscience, that will sooner or later avenge thee; and in other pursuits thou wilt soon forget one, who was never ivorthy of thy love.*'
183
Montalva heard the count with stifled rage, but he resolved to dissemble. " I thank thee my friend, (said he), my cooler judgment would have sug¬ gested what thou hast said ; but passion mastered reason ; we will speak of this no more." D'Rosonio embraced him. if Now, (cried he,) I recognise my friend ; that was spoken like Montalva. Come, will you accompany meto the Palazzo Romaldi? The lovely marquise has to-night a bril- ^ liant party, and the gaiety of the scene will amuse you." Montalva consented, and they went. The marquise's guests, were as usual, the most elegant people in Naples ; and Montalva in the midst of a circle of beauties appeared to have forgotten his chagrin: but his gaiety was entirely dissembled, his mind was occupied with schemes of vengeance on Bianca; but as he feared that D'Rosonio might inter¬ fere with his project, he resolved to lull the counts suspicions asleep, by affect-
184 ing a tranquillity that he was far from feeling. The ingenuous D'Rosonio, who had not an idea that Montalva would deceive him, nas completei)* the dupe of his artifice; and rejoiced to see that he had banished the unworthy Bianca from his mind. While Montalva was arranging a plan for carrying off the Signora Lupinetti, she suddenly left Naples; nor could he discover where she was gone. Montal¬ va's rage at this event knew no bounds ; he fancied that D'Rosonio suspected his * intentions and had given Bianca inti¬ mation of them ; and this supposition created in his bosom the greatest enmi¬ ty to the count ; nor could the favours which D'Rosonio daily lavished upon him, excite in return a spark of grati¬ tude : on the contrary, when be reflect¬ ed that Biancas fortune would have rendered bini as affluent as his cousin> he inwardly execrated the count as the cause of his losing it. Montalva, soon after the affair with
IS5
Bianca, entered into the army ; and the counts interest and fortune were so great¬ ly serviceable to him, that he obtained rapid promotion; his opinion of thenar sex, never good, had been rendered worse by Bianca's perfidy ; and he vow¬ ed that riches only should tempt him to m arr v. D Roson io became enamoured of the beautiful Maria De Velorno. Nature had been lavish of her gifts to Maria; her person was lovely, and her mind was the seat of every virtue ; her birth and fortune rendered her a suit¬ able wife for the count, who proposed for her, and was accepted. The marriage of Fernando and his Maria, was an event far from pleasing to Montalva, who often visited the castle of the count ; and bitter were his feel¬ ings when he* contemplated the happi' ness which this amiable pair enjoyed. " Such, (thought he), might have been my lot; had not D'Rosonio stepped between me and happiness."
18β
One day, while he was indulging in refle tions of this nature, D'Rosonio ob¬ served him attentively, "All is not right in the mind of my friend, (cried he); tell me Stetihano, what disturbs thee?" Montalva evaded the question, and the count continued, " î have thought since 1 have myself known the delights of domestic happiness, that thou might- est perhaps have sighed for them ; for¬ give me, but the depresión which ï have for some tisne percened makis me think that an attachment to some fair one, rich only in the gifts of uatu«*e, preys upon the spirits of my ¡YærJ ; if this is tlie caj?e Montalva, thou knowest that my fortune is thine. " I thank thee from my eon!, D'Ro¬ sonio (said Stephano), h\ú thou nñ mis¬ taken ; no my friend, I have done with lave, the perfidy of Bianca has steeled my heart against the attractions of beautv ; and bliould 1 ever marry, it must be to a woman post>ebsed of suffi¬ cient riches to restore the fading honours
i$7
of my house. I thank thy generous friendship, already have I been but too much obliged to thee." Soon after this conversation, a youth« ful friend of the countess's arrived at the castle ; never had Montalva beheld such beauty, but Valeria Di Soranza was poor; to think of heras a wife u a* impossible; and the friendship with which the countess regarded her, made Montalva fear to endeavour to gain her as a mistress ; she was an orphan and of noble birth ; young, artless, and for¬ med for love, her heart soon spoke 'm favour of Montalva ; the graces οι whose person and manners were indeed most striking. He saw, and ungenerously pur¬ sued the advantage he had gained, and the unfortunate Valeria soon became deeply attached to him. Had Valeria been rich, Montalva would not have hesitated to avow his passion for her, but to give her his hand, and owe to the generosity of D'Rosonio tlie portion of his bride, was a humilia-
ISS tion which his pride could not submit to; yet, every day her beautv and softness made a deeper impression upon him, and hK mauler to her became more tender. The count's castle was situate at some distance fro>n Naples, and Montalva had prolongál his visit much beyond its U4:al length ; he did not love the coun¬ try, and he was incapable of participa¬ ting in the happiness which the cou>it and countess enjoyed : he was therefore iu general anxious to escape from their society; but now, the presence of Valeria acted as a spell upon his senses, and he seemed to have no power to fly. iC Confusion ! («aid he mentally); what am ï about? I will return to Naples, and in the smiles of venal beauty, lose the remembrance of Valeria." He mentioned his intentions to the count that day; Valeria was present, and he watched her looks while he spoke of leaving the castle; she avoid¬ ed meeting his eve, but the deep suffu¬ sion of her cheek, the ashy paleness that
189
almost instantly succeeded it, and the trembling of her whole frame, proved that she did not hear the intelligence with indifference. i( Nay, Montalva, (cried the count), we cannot consent to lose thee : How say you Maria, (turning to the countess, who at that moment entered), wi! you and Signora Di Soranzo suffer Mou- talva to depart ?" cr No, in truth, (replied she), if our commands to the contrary have power to stay the signor." tC They would be irresistible ; (cried Montalva, bowing) ; but that business of import"------- " Heed him not Maria, 4is buta mere excuse, (interrupted the count,) he is ti¬ red of the peaceful shades of D'Rosonio, and sighs for the dissipation of Naples ; is it not so, Stephano ?" " No, on iny word you wrong me, count, (said Montalva) ; it is business, and of consequence, that obliges me to tear myself from this castle,"
190
They did not press him further, and the next day lie quitted them ; but he sought in vain to banish the remembrance of Valeria ; her lovely image was ever before him, and for the first time, he turned with disgust from the blandish¬ ments of the fairest conrtezans iu Na* pies. The signor Fiorenzo, who was dis¬ tantly related to D'Rosonio, became at this period an inmate of his castle for a short time ; the lovely Valeria caught his heart, and he did :,ot hesitate to offer her his hand. The Signor Fiorenzo was of middle age, his person had been accoutìted handsome, and might still be reckoned fine; his temper was open, cheerful, and beniga, and his birth and fortune were far bevond what Valeria could expect. The count and coun¬ tess D'Rosonio rejoiced at a proposal so flattering to the signora, whom they both loved with the tenderest affection ; and Maria undertook to acquaint her with it.
i { Ji
rí Methinks, (cried the countess to Valeria), we have been more cheerful since the arrival of our new guest, who will I hone remain with us for some time« What does my Valeria think of the Signor Fiorenzo ?" " He appears good and amiable," re* plied Valeria. e( And his person,(cried the countess); we women generally mention that first, what think vou of it ? u indeed (cried the signora), I hardly know what to say, for the truth is that I never have observed it." if But the signor has not been so un¬ observant, (said the countess); he thinks Valeria De Soranza equally lovely and amiable ; (she paused, but no expression of pleasure appeared in the intelligent countenance of Valeria, and the countess continued), " the heart of Signor Fio¬ renzo has hitherto been inaccessible to love, and some of the fairest of our Nea- apolitau dames, have tried their charms in vain ; but lie now acknowledges
ι W the force of beauty, and sues for thé af¬ fections and the hand of my friend." Valeria turned pale. " I feel grateful for the signor's notice,(cried she), but—'' " Nay, dear Valeria, (interrupted Ma¬ ria,) think before you positively refuse; Fiorenzo is a man so formed to make you happy that------" " I own his merit, (cried she), but dearest friend, think me not ungrateful, if on this one point, I must differ with you; indeed, indeed, my heart can never be the signora ; and never will I, friendless as I am, bestow my hand, where I cannot give my heart:" she burst into tears as she spoke. " No, dear Valeria, (said the countess, embracing her) ; you are not friendless ; never will I again speak to you of Fio¬ renzo. Are you not the sister of my ^heart ? and does not D'Rosonio, equally with myself, love and regard you ? Ba¬ nish then the unkind idea, that we could wish ought but your happiness." " Oh ! my friend, my dear friend, (cried
1 0?>
Valeria as she returned the countess*s embrace,) why cannot I------" she stop¬ ped at that moment, her whole heart was upon her lips, but a natural and ingenuous shame made her hesitate to own her affection for Montalva. Ah I ill-fated Valeria, hadst thou confided thy secret to the bosom of friendship, what misery hadst thou been spared. The countess mentioned to her lord the manner in which Valeria received the intelligence of Signor Fiorenzo's passion, and D'Robonio agreed with her that it would be cruelty to importune the signora further. tí I am more hurt my friend than 1 could have supposed possible, (said Fio¬ renzo when D'Rosonio reluctantly ac- acquainted him with the ill success of his suit); I thought «ot that my heart was so deeply engaged, but thesiguota's will shall be my law, and as I cannot remain with safety to myself, I must fly from her presence,** vol. i. ?
194
D'Rosonio knew too much of the liuman heart to press the signor to re¬ main, and in a few days he quitted the castle D'Rosonio.
1^5
CHAP. Χ.
Restless and unhappy, Montalva persuaded himself that he might with¬ out danger return to the mansion of the count. cc I can have nothing to fear from Valeria, (thought he,) and D'Rosonio will think my absence unkind. A letter of the counts containing the warmest invitation to the castle lay before him. ίζ I must accept it,'* (said he, mentally); and the next day he left Naples for the castle D'Rosonio. The count and countess welcomed him with all the warmth of friendship, ? 2
196 'but in the glow of transport that lighted up the lovely countenance of Valeria, Montalva read a welcome the sweetest to his heart. " We will make a prisoner of thee now, Montalva, (cried the count), and no business of import shall again rob us of thee." u You will not say so count, (replied Montalva, laughing); by and bye, for I have come to tire out the patience and the hospitality of my friend." " You observe the challenge Valeria, (said D'Rosonio), and remember, Mon¬ talva, that now thou art bound to stay.** ?^??? glance which he stole at the varying countenance of the Signora Di Soranzo, betrayed to the acute and pene¬ trating Montalva the emotions of her heart. " She loves me, (said he exultingly to himself); and passion for a moment silenced ambition. Every ddy Montalva almost unconsci¬ ously shewed Valeria, by a thousand
m
minute attentions, the power she possess¬ ed over his heart ; yet had he art enough to veil from the count and countess his love for the signora, who resigned her whole soul to the influence of a passion which she cherished with delight, un¬ conscious that it was soon to become the torment of her existence. The day after Montalva's arrival,, D'Rosonio told him of the Signor Fio- renzo's proposal for Valeria. " Had Fiorenzo asked the hand of my sister, and she gave it to him wil¬ lingly, I should be proud to call him brother ; and for Valeria's sake I grieve that she should reject him, but her heart did not speak in his favour, and who shall dictate to the heart ?" " The signora's is probably engaged," said Montalva confusedly. " The countess thinks not, (replied D'Rosonio) ; and indeed when we con¬ sider that she has been secluded in a monastry from her birth, 'till she accept¬ ed the countess's protection, I do not K.3
lös
tÜink triat her young heart has yet felt the power of love." Ci 1 have heard you say that she is an orphan, but of her story I know nothing ;" cried Montalva. cc Her father was the friend of my Maria's, (said the count), and never was there a braver or a worthier man than Di Soranzo. Of noble birth·, but scantily gifted with the favours of fortune, Di Soranzo sought by his sword ~o restore his name to its ancient splendour ; he fought and bled for Naples: his sovereign acknowledged his services with thanks ; but laurels, not p leferment, was the re¬ ward of his bravery; and though a na¬ tion's idol, he pined in honourable indi¬ gence. One night, that he had dined with a party of officers, and was return¬ ing home at a late hour; he observed a man much muffled up, slowly following a gentleman who was evidently unconsci¬ ous that he did so ; Di Soranzo saw him put his hnd into his bosom and draw from it a stiletto, and he instantly con-
199
jectured his purpose; nor was he mis¬ taken ; the assassin drew near his destin¬ ed prey, and at the very moment when, his arm was raised to plunge the stiletto into the bosom of the signor, Di Soran* zo arrested the blow ; the bravo dexter¬ ously eluded his grasp, and fled. Di So¬ ranzo would have pursued him but for the stranger, who overwhelmed hinn with thanks and expressions of gratitude. ' Ci I guess,(cried he,) from whence thi s dastardly blow proceeds, and my life would have fallen a sacrifice to the ba¬ sest treachery, but for the goodness of heaven in sending you to my assistance ; and never will I, signor, forget the debt of gratitude I owe you.' 4Ç Di Soranzo interrupted his thanks 5 by an assurance that th^y were mispla¬ ced, since common humanity only would have impelled him to save the life of a fellow creature, even at some hazard; whereas, in truth, there was none in what he did. He insisted upon walking
200
home with the stranger, who was, he found, the Signor Lodivico Verezzi, He rejoiced that providence had made him ' the instrument of saving the life of so good a man ; for the worth of Verexzi was well known to him by report. When they reached the house of the btgnor, Di Sq- ranzo declined his invitation to enter it ; and promis : g to see him in the morn¬ ing, to ? his leave, <c Early the next day, he paid his pro¬ mised visit to Verezzi, who received him with the Avarmest demonstrations of pleasure. fi ζ You look pale and unrefreshed sig¬ nor, (said Di Soranzo) ; 1 hope that your last night's adventure is not the cause r' " e It is indeed, (replied Verezzi) ; this is the third time that my life has been attempted; and 1 have reason to believe that these attempts proceed from the son of my dearest friend.' ί£ ζ But surely, (cried Di Soranzo), re-
201
gard for your own safety, would impel you to punish the assassin, if you know him to be such.' " i Though rny suspicion is strong, and I think well founded, (said Verez¬ zi,) yet, I have no absolute proof; and for his father's sake, I am unwilling to take any step against him ; I wilL tell you signor why I suspect, and you can then judge whether I am right, " t Heaven has blest my declining age with one daughter, who is my only child., During the pregnancy of my wife * I had a severe fit of illness; and almost despairing of my recovery, she vowed if I was spared, to dedicate her expected infant to the service of heaven ; her * prayers were heard ; I recovered, and my daughter before she saw the light was destined to a life of monastic beclu- sion. When I rec vered, and my vnfe acquainted me witli the vow she had made to the Virgin, I deeply regretted it ; but there was now n remedy, and as the infant proved a giil, i cuibul»·' ? 5
202
myself with the hope that heaven would bless us with a son ; these hopes were however disappointed, we had not any more children, and I could not help re¬ pining, when í thought that we must one day lose our Albertina, who was the delight of our lives. <( t When my child was about fifteen, it pleased heaven to deprive me of her mother ; this was the severest blow I had ever met with ; and but for Alberti¬ na, I should have sunk under it : she Was indeed an angel of consolation, and her pious cares at length succeeded in calming my mind, and restoring me to tranquillity, though not to happiness. ï had taken care to keep my Albertina as much as possible secluded from soci¬ ety, that she might not have to regret those pleasures which she was destined never to enjoy : but chance presented her to the view of the Count D'Avi fa ; hë was captivated with my child, and he thought that his rank and immense wealth would make her accept his offe?
K>3
ed hand with transport ; hesides, his fa¬ ther, the Duke De — ...... [had been my patron, and was still my friend* Had not røy wife's vow rendered the marriage of Albertina impossible; yet, never should she have become the wife of D' Avila; whose youthful depravity had tarnished the honour of the illustrious bouse. The air of proud condescension with which he made his proposals, roused my indignation; but I suppressed it, * and coldly returning him thanks for the honour he intended me, informed him that Albertina was already dedicated to tbe church. " * I shall not attempt, my dear signor, to repeat to you the blasphemous things which this young libertine uttered^ . when he found that 1 was firm in my pur¬ pose. ( Respect for your father, young man, (cried 1) prevents me chastising your insolence as it deserves ; but I in¬ sist upon your instantly quitting my house:' he obeyed, but he vowed re¬ venge, and I- have but too much reason
204
to believe that he strove to keep his word. Tiiis is as I have told you the third attempt that has been made upon my life; and while I remain in Naples, I think 1 shall not be safe from the dag¬ ger of the assassin. It is now time that my daughter's noviciate should com¬ mence, but I have hitherto wanted reso¬ lution to part with her ; the sacrifice must however he made, and when I have placed her in a convent, I mean to travel.' tf Di Soranzo approved of tbe signor's resolution, and after some time spent in conversation, he took his leave. Soon after, Verezzi quitted Naples ; and at the time of his departure from that city, Di Soranzo was absent from it. Soon after his return, his cousin Martina Di Soranzo, made a temporary retreat from the world, in consequence of the loss of her mother ; she took up her abode for some time with the nuns of St. Cathe¬ rine ; und Di Soranzo often visited her* <t £ We have here, (cried she one day
205
to him), one of the loveliest girls I ever beheld ; she is, a novice, but I pity her from my soul ; for had she been allowed to chuse, I am well convinced that a convent would not have been her desti¬ nation ; she seems however resigned to her fate, but it is the resignation of des«* pair, or I am much mistaken.' *' Di Soranzo joined with her in pityn ing the young novice whose name he thought not of inquiring, and when he visited Martina again, he saw a young and lovely female at the grate conversing with a lady advanced in life. When Martina addressed her cousin by his name, the young novice started, and ti¬ midly regarding the signor, c Surely, (cried she), I behold the preserve* of my father; is it not to you, signor, that Ve*- rezzi owes his life? 1 u i The service that I-rendered Signor Verezzi was the mere result of accident, (replied Di Soranzo wishing to wave the acknowledgments with which Alber¬ tina overwhelmed him). Never had he
W6
beheld such beauty, and he sighed wh^n he reflected that she must for ever re¬ nounce that world, which sbe seemed born to ornament. " I will not tire yonr patience Montal¬ va, with an account of the progress of a passion, which Di Soranzo and Alberti¬ na disguised under the name of friend¬ ship; the innocent girl thought it was impossible for her to be too grateful to the preserver of her father; and Di £?~ ranxo imagined that, knowing as he did that their union was impossible, he could regulate his desires, and love her as a sister : How many shapes docs this insi- duous passion put on, to deceive its vo¬ taries ? and what caution, what prudence, can ward off its attacks t The first thing that opened Di Soranzo's eyes to the na¬ ture of his sentiments for Albertina, was the death of her father ; Verezzi left to the convent tbe whole of his property, with a proviso that his daughter took the veil there ; but if she proferred any other religious house, she possessed the power of ebusmg any convent in Naples.
sor
The time of her novitiate was nearly expired, and the abbess thought that this melancholy event should rather hasten than retard her taking the veil. <f When Albertina contemplated her lot, her spirits sunk in absolute despair ; she was persuaded that the tears which she incessantly shed, flowed only for the loss of her father; but she deceived herself, the idea of renouncing every social tye, and burying her youth and hopee in the gloom of a cloister, cost her many pangs; of Di Soranzo sbe did not suffer herself to think ; yet, his idea would intrude, and vainly did she strive to vanish it from her mind : her perpetual strugga impaired her health, her soft cheek los^ its bloom, and her eye its lustre, and ft became a doubt - whether she would live to take the vows. *' Father Velasquez, the confessor of the convent, saw and compassionated the struggles in the soul of the young novice; he communicated to the lady
208 abbess his fears, that obedience to the will of her deceased father alone in¬ fluenced her to take the veil. " ζ But surely, father (cried the ab¬ bess), her repugnance to a monastic life will in time subside ; she was destined to it even before her biith, and it is im¬ possible for her to regret a world to which she is a total stranger.' " ? I cannot think (said the father), that she is obliged to fulfil the vow made. by her mother; nay, 1 do not think hcv mother " Unable in mr ng such a^ vow.' u c Father/ cried the abbess in a tone of astonishment-— *' f No one (returned Velasquez), can, í trust, entertain a. greater veneration for religion than myself; but no ratio¬ nal being ??? suppose that a parent's rights extend to such a length ; and if tins young creature is decidedly averse to a monastic life, 1 should advise her to get the church's permission to return to the world.*
2??
4i f I am sorry,father (said the abbess), that these are your sentiments, for they are not mine; but if Albertina prefers returning a beggar to'— iC ζ A beggar !' repeated the father. " * Yes (said the abbess, firmly h a beggar; for by the will of her father, the convent where she takes her vows is to possess her fortune; and as she well knows that he never would have sanctioned her returning to the world, she surely cannot think of claiming the deceased signora property, which it is evident he meant to employ ín the ser¬ vice of the church.' iC Ä And can you then (cried the father in a tone of indignation), think of ap¬ propriating the possessions of this or¬ phan r f " c No, Father Velasquez (replied the abbess), I call Heaven to witness that, should she prefer any other convent to ours, ï would v\ ith pleasure re>Ìgn the hope of enriching ourselves: but the
ÛIÙ
Virgin forbid, that when I have the power to punish, I should reward sacri¬ lege ; were I to do so, I should consider myself as an abettor İn the crime.* " The benevolent father saw that it would be vain to argue with the abbess ; he knew the disposition of the holy mo¬ ther of St. Catherine's; but that she should think of enriching the convent, by appropriating to it the whole posses¬ sions of the hapless Albertina, was $o glaring ati act of injustice, that he won¬ dered at her open avowal of it. u € Poor Albertina ! (said he, mental¬ ly); in ã convent thou wilt be miserable ; yet what other asylum hast thou r thy youth and loveliness woukl be but snares to thee in a world, where without friends or fortune, thou must be wretched.' u But when Albertina again knelt at the confesbional ; when the father saw hei lovely form withered by secret sor¬ row ; the resolution he had made to be rilent gave way to the emotions of pity
2ί?
with which his heart was filled ; and he mildly asked her the cause of her de¬ jection. " A burning blush sufrused her cheek, but it almost instantly gave place to an ashy paleness, and she hesitated how to reply, ** ' I fear, my child, that you are not happy in your mind (said Velasquez) ; the death of your father was I know a severe stab to your tranquillity, but there is something more, 1 am con¬ vinced, that presses upon your spirits.' " Albertina burst into tears : 4 Oh ! holy father (cried she), I scarcely dare own it even to myself, but though I have from my infancy known that I was destined to a monastic life, yet I feel an unaccountable repugnance to it ; yet, what can I do ? Alas î I was even before my birth a destined victim'— " She stopped, frightened at what had escaped her. (S ί I know not what to say to yon, my child, (cried Velasquez) ; I think it
??
might be possible to obtain from the church a dispensation for yonr mother's vow ; v\hich, in strict justice, I know not that you are obliged to fulfil ; but what, my poor child, could you do in the world r The abbess, 1 fear, possesses a power which she is determined to exer¬ cise, of appropriating the fortune of your late father to the use of her convent ; you have no relations on whose bounty you might rely for protection and sup¬ port ; what, therefore, I must repeat, would become of you l tí At the mention that it was possible for her to avoid a monastic life, the eyes of Albertina sparkled with joy ; but when the father painted what her situa tion must be in the world, their lustre was again dimmed by tears. (i { Try, Albertina (said the friar), to reconcile your mind, if possible, to the destiny your parents intended you for; but if you cannot, yet let your spirits not sink in despair; remember, my child, that you are not obliged to take
213
the veil immediately: you may take your own time to decide, and Heaven may, audi hope will, restore your mind to peace.' " The father now bestowed upon her his benediction, and she departed. Ve¬ lasquez was the confessor of the Mar¬ quise Tivoli, one of the richest and most benevolent women in Naples: ' Though pious, the marquise is no bi¬ got ; she has no children, (thought Ve¬ lasquez), and her near relations are not people who would be envious of her bounty lo an orphan; if she did but in¬ terest herself" for Albertina, the poor child would be saved from the gloomy fate that otherwise awaits her/ fC Father Velasquez was a true disciple ofthat meek Saviour, who iC went about doing good :" he lost no time in speak¬ ing of Albertina to the marquise, and he pleaded her cause so powerfully, th::t the benevolent marquise resolved to af¬ ford the young orphan her protection ; provided that Albertina gained permis-
214
sion of the church to leave her convent ; and that Father Velasquez undertook to procure. " The joy of the young orphan when the friar communicated this intelligence to her, may easily be imagined ; but her transports were checked by the fear that the father would be unsuccessful in pro* curing her release from the convent. The friar's interest was however greater than she had supposed ; and he repre¬ sented her case in such a manner to his eminence the Cardinal----------, that she had permission to return to the world. The lady abbess's rage knew no bounds ; she affected to be shocked at the im¬ piety of Father Velasquez, in obtaining Albertina's liberty; and she declared that she could not, consistently with her notions of religion, consent to suffer the convent to lose any part of the Sig¬ nor Verezzi's fortune. Velasquez knew that it would be in vain to try to wrest from the iron gripe of the church the patrimony of Albertina ; and she was
215
too happy in regaining her liberty, to waste a thought upon her fortune. " The marquise received the signora in the kindest manner; and the gratitude of Albertina, her amiable temper, and gentle manners, soon converted pity into a sentiment almost maternal. The death of a near relation had obliged Di Soranzo to leave Naples for a short time ; when he returned, Albertina was under the protection of the marquise.— Those only who have loved, and endured the torment of supposing that it was criminal to indulge a passion which it was impassible to subdue, can conceive the delight which Di Soranzo felt, when he found his Albertina at liberty. * She may yet be mine,' cried he, in a tone of transport. His poverty was forgotten, and every suggestion of reason and pru* dence vanished before the magic power of love. " Di Soranzo was not personally known to the marquise, but he found it an easy fnatter to procure an introduction to
Uì6
her; and Albertina's account of him was sufficient to make him a favourite with her patroness, who soon perceived that the young people regarded each other with affection. She communi¬ cated her discovery to Father Velas¬ quez : c ì will own .to you, father (cried she), thdt I could have w ished it other¬ wise; Albertina's beauty and birth might have procured her a husband amongst the noblest youths of Naples : than Di Soranzo none can be worthier, but he is poor.'—She paused— f What I can do shall not be withheld, but that will be little. I solemnly promised my late lord that, at my decease, I would leave thé property which I enjoy from his bounty to the children of his nephew, now in Spain ; my power to serve the lovers therefore, you see is limited.* " In a short time, the marquise spoke to Di Soranzo, who acknowledged his pas¬ sion for Albertina, and with all the so¬ phistry of a lover, endeavoured to per¬ suade the marquise that, limited as his
21?
fortune was, it would be sufficient for his happiness, if Albertina deigned to share it. c This (said the marquise with a smile), is the usual reasoning of lovers; but believe me, Di Soranzo, I will not be your enemy.' (( She communicated to Albertina, his wishes and his hopes ; and her blushes, her confusion, convinced her patroness that her heart Was Di Soranzo's. To be brief, the lovers were united in a short time, and never was felicity purer, or more likely to be permanent, than that of Di Soranzo and his Albertina. " The death of the amiable marquise, was the first interruption to their happi¬ ness; and it was indeed severely felt by both : it was also in a pecuniary way, a loss, as the marquise had little to be¬ queath, and during her life time her adopted daughter had shared her for¬ tune; but in justice to Di Soranzo and his lovely wife it must be owned, that their tears flowed solely for the death of their benefactress ; and self was vol, i. ?
218
forgotten in their sorrow for her. Time restored them to tranquillity, and the birth of a girl made them once more happy. ef Though of a contented and humble spirit, Signora Di Sorao had been ac¬ customed to all the elegancies of life, and as she was not aware how limited her husband's means were, and how in¬ sufficient to support that stile of life to which she had been accustomed ; and Di Soranzo loved her too tenderly to be as prudent as he ought to have been. In a short time after the death of the marquise he found himself involved ; Albertina was shocked at what she term¬ ed her own imprudence, and most sedu¬ lously set about a reform in their ex¬ pences ; love divested poverty of its horrors, and all might have been well but for the death of their infant. Di Soranzo felt this, blow severely, butto the heart of Albertina it was a mortal stab. Her mother, (after whom she was named), was by birth a German, and in
219
her early years had professed the reform¬ ed religion, which she had renounced upon her marriage with Verezzi; she had been, though a good, yet a bigotted woman ; and the mind of Albertina was tinctured with superstition ; she imbibed an idea that the death of her child was a punishment for her rejection of a mo¬ nastic life ; and from the moment that she entertained this thought she was miserable : a second pregnancy Di So¬ ranzo hoped would relieve her mind, but he was mistaken ; gloom and des¬ pondency, had taken hold óf her spirits, and in a short time her health declined; the birth of Valeria gave a temporary check to her mother's malady, but it soon returned, and before her daughter was a year old Signora Di Soranzo sunk into the grave. " The loss of his wife had nearly cost Di Soranzo his reason, and it was indeed a blow which ho never recovered; he placed Valeria in proper hands, and re¬ solved to travel. When his daughter h 2
220
had attained the age of seven years, he returned to Naples; but the pleasure which the sight of Valeria would have given him, was poisoned by her resem¬ blance to her mother, whose image she was. Time had not healed the wound¬ ed spirit of Di Soranzo, and the sight of his daughter, instead of a consolation, was a torment to him. He placed her in a convent, and again quitted Naples : Death soon after put a period to his suf¬ ferings, and the little Valeria became an orphan, with but a slender portion. tr My Maria was educated in the same convent, and from their earliest days, ihey were friends ; Maria was four years older than Valeria, and the sweet girl looked on her as an elder sister. Since the countess's marriage they have con¬ stantly corresponded, and I was happy in an opportunity of obliging my Maria, when she expressed a wish for the soci¬ ety of Signora Di Soranzo : but I soon loved the dear girl with a brother's af¬ fection; her disposition -is indeed so
221
good and amiable, that it is impossible to know without loving her." D'Rosonio ceased, and Montalva, who had listened to him with interest, thank¬ ed him for his narrative ; and as he soon after sunk into a reverie, the count left him. " I must think no more of Valeria, (said Montalva, mentally): true, D'Roso¬ nio declares that he considers her as a sis¬ ter, but could I bear to marry her and owe her portion to his bounty? No, never shall Montalva be so degraded." His thoughts now reverted to Bianca, and with bitterness did he execrate the hour in which he had introduced the count to her. u But for him, (thought he), ï would now have been rich and happy ; the cup of felicity was at my lips, and his hand dashed it aside : true, he did it not intentionally, but what matters that to ?» me. Reflections like these rendered Mon¬ talva gloomy and absent ; but he strove L 3
222
to disperse them, and to deck his fea tures in smiles. Near the castle Di Roso¬ nio was a wood, and passing one day through it Montalva heard the sound of music; he listened attentively, and found that the sound proceeded from a grotto at a litde distance. Montalva was passionately fond of music, and he stopped to hear the air ; it was simple, but sweet ; and most tastefully played. When it was concluded Montalva enter¬ ed the grotto ; a female, who was seated with her back towards him, started and turned round at his approach ; he was surprised to perceive it was Valeria, ie This is an unexpected pleasure, signora, (cried he); but how is it that you have concealed from us this charming talent." " I am but a learner, (replied she, blushing); and I must make some pro¬ ficiency before I own that ï can play." fi You are a learner, signora, (cried he, taking up her lute), who surpass in taste and skill many ladies who think
ooi •it tio
themselves mistresses of this charming science." " I am fond of music, signor, (said Valeria), and I have pleased myself with the thought of surprising the countess by my knowledge of it, when I five made some proficiency, and as this is a retired spot I often practice here." Tbe innocent Valeria thought not of what she said, but Montalva treasured up her words, and 4 Vom that hour he found whenever he walked, that some spell drew him to the grotto; the de¬ light which he expressed at hearing Valeria play, was to her a strong stimu¬ lus to excel, and often did she inno¬ cently say, <£ that she thought she might soon let the countess into her secret." IVlontalva had no settled purpose of seduction, but unused to curb his pas¬ sions, he yielded to their influence; and in one fatal moment, the peace and ho¬ nour of the unhappy Valeria were lost for ever. fi No soorsr was the guilty transport
Sí 24
over, than the bitterest reflections filled the mind of the signora ; she wept in agony, and for some time her seducer strove in vain to calm the violence of her sorrow ; he vowed to make her all the reparation in his power, and be¬ sought her to check emotions, which might tend to betray that secret they most wished to hide. Valeria listened to him in silence, and she strove to be calm ; but though her tears ceased to flow, her eonvu.rive sighs, and the des¬ pair painted in her countenance, spoke what passed within, iS For heaven's sake, my Valeria, (cried Montalva), break this silence ; the bitterest reproaches will be more wel¬ come to me than to see you thus." u I have no right to reproach you, signor, (cried Valeria); 1 must indeed eternally reproach myself. Oh ! good heaven, (exclaimed she, rebpsing into an agony of grief), what, what have I done ?" Again did Montalva renew his protes-
325
testations: on his knees he vowed to make her his wife; he conjured her to banish from her mind all regret for the past, since the proof she had given him of her love, had only made her dearer to him ; and solemnly did he call upon heaven to renounce him when he aban¬ doned her. By these protestations he succeeded at last in restoring some de¬ gree of calmness to the mind of Valeria, but when she returned to the castle she felt for the first time afraid to meet the eye of the countess ; and pleading in¬ disposition, she retired to her chamber. When the chaos in the breast of Montalva had a little subbsided, he ex¬ ecrated himself for what had passed, A marriage with Valeria, solemnly as he had sworn to make her his by every sacred tie, was yet a step that he could not resolve to take, " What surety can 1 have o£ the faith and honour of a wanton, (said he, mentally); she will not for her \ sake betray the past, and Izmust hnd some excuse for speedily L Ò
22?
leaving the castle." For a moment his heart smote him as he recollected the agonies of Valeria's mind, but he has¬ tened to banish the impression, ano smoothing his brow, joined the count and countess. Maria was lamenting the illness of Valeria as he entered, and the crimson of conscious guilt suffused his counte¬ nance as he forced himself to enquire the cause of the signora's indisposition. (i It is sudden, (replied the countess), nor can she assign a cause for it ; I hope that my fears are without foundation, but the change in her looks, aud the quickness of her puhe alarms me." Montalva did not attempt a reply. ss Do not frighten yourself my love, (said the count) Valeria's illness is not I hope dangerous, and we will have the best advice." The following day Valeria appeared at dinner, to Montalva's great joy ; he tenderly enquired after her health, and the glance that accompanied his words,
227
spoke the concern which her illness had occasioned him; the presence of the count and countess rendered him guarded, but the signora hoped every thing from his honour and his love. IVlinds of a delicate and -suscep¬ tible nature, (and such was Valeria's), while under the influence of passion, deck the object of their love with every virtue; and it is only the bitterest expe¬ rience that can dispel an illusion, of all others the most delightful. <c The signor is the friend of the count, (thought she) ; Maria too, speaks highly of him ; he loves me, and he would not, he could not, be so cruel as to abandon me ts misery and disgrace/ She ventured to meet the eyes of Mon¬ talva; they spoke the tenderest afíexv tiou, and Valeria endeavoured to calm her spirits, and appear cheerful. Three days passed, and Montalva did not seek to speak to the signora in pri¬ vate; though Valeria woukl have given
228
the universe to know when he meant to perform his promise, yet she was too ti¬ mid to throw herself in his way. On the morning of the fourth he had letters from Naples, and he directly announced his departure must be immediate. This news was like the sentence of death to Valeria ; he took an opportunity to as¬ sure her, <e that she might depend on his return the moment that he could escape from business of tbe most un¬ pleasant nature; he besought her to make her mind easy, and to rely upon his "honour." " I do, signor (cried she) ι Oh, how miserable should I be if I doubted it !" She wept as she spoke ; yet the perfect confidence which her look and manner expressed, gave a momentary pang to the heart of Montalva. ( * 'Tis barbarous to deceive her, (thought he), and he renewed his pro¬ testations; but when he quitted the castle, his dislike to the idea of marry-
229
ing her, returned ; ambition and insen¬ sibility resumed their influence over his mind, and the wrongs and sufferings of Valeria were forgotten,
230
???? ???«. uy n ■»??? ? ?????. 1
CHAP. XL
Weeks passed away, and though the Signor Montalva corresponded regularly with the count, yet there was not a hint given by him of an intention to return, to the castle D'Rosonio. u Stephano's absence is unusually long, Maria (said the count to his wife one day, in the presence of the Signora Di Soranzo) : he has boasted so long of escaping the power of Cupid, that I should not wonder if he was caught at last, and a reluctance to leave the object of his passion prevented him from seeing us," The heart of Valeria beat at these
231
word«, and fearing that her emotion would be visible to her friends, she left the room. i: 1 fear, my dear lord (cried the coun¬ tess), that your friend has unconsciously robbed my poor Valeria of her heart ; 1 have observed that since he left us she has appeared melaneholy and de¬ jected. if I hope you are mistaken (replied the count), for 1 much fear that Mon¬ talva is not likely to return her affec¬ tion ; and to a heart like her's, no tor¬ ment could be equal to a hopeless pas¬ sion. " I have thought (replied the coun¬ tess), that he regarded her with tender¬ ness ; but his long absence, for which he does not assign any suflicient reason, makes me fear I was mistaken.* 1 Every day increased tlie dejection of Valeria ; but what words can paint the distraction of lier mind, when in a short time she had reason to believe herself pregnant? Despair aud horror took pos-
232
session of her soul, and for a moment she entertained the thought of putting an end at once to her miseries and her life ; but this idea was momentary ; and, fall¬ ing on her knees, she implored the par¬ don of the Almighty for so impious a thought. To let the Signor Montalva know her situation was now her first wish, but from the idea of addressing him by let¬ ter she shrunk involuntarily ; yet there was no other way that she could take to communicate it to him : a latent hope yet remained that this circumstance might induce him to perform his pro» mise, and in a few incoherent lines she acquainted him with the consequence of their indiscretion. Montalva was dressing for a gay party when the letter of Valeria was delivered to him ; and he could not help muttering execrations on his own folly, as he pe¬ rused it, What was to be done, to prevent D'Rosonio knowing the circum¬ stance ί ίς I must remove her privately
233
from the castle (thought he), and when all is over, immure her for life in a con¬ vent: but will she consent to this? She must, if once I have her in my power." Too politic to answer her letter other¬ wise than in person, he hastened to the castle of D'Rosonio; he was received by the count and countess with pleasure, and Valeria presaged every thing that she could wish from the promptitude with which he had hastened to her. The moment he had an opportunity of speaking to her in private, he tender¬ ly lamented his absence, which business of the most vexatious nature, he assured her, only could have occasioned ; his af¬ fairs, he grieved to say, were much de¬ ranged, and at present it was absolutely impossible for him to offer her his hand; a short time he hoped would put it in his power to perform his promise; but 'tilt he did, there was but one way for her to avoid discovery ; he would pro¬ vide an asylum, where she could remain 'till he, in tlie face of the world, owned
234
heras his wife. The heart of Valeria sunk at a proposal so different to what she had expected; but she dared not refuse compliance. " Tell me, my Valeria (said Mon¬ talva) ; do you agree to my wishes ?" " Alas ï you know I have no choice, (replied she) ; ï must do as you please, signor ; my fate is in your hands." u My future life (cried hei eagerly), shall prove that 1 deserve the confidence you place in me." The eye of Valeria met his, and for a moment he shrunk abashed from her mild but penetrating glance. D'Rosonio and his Maria had been now nearly two years married, and they were both desirous of children ; the countess had been lavish of her gifts to the convent of her namesake, the Vir¬ gin, and daily did the amiable enthusiast beseech the Holy Mary for an heir to tlie estate and title of her beloved lord. For some time past she had had reason to think that her prayers were heard, but
23Ö
she carefully kept to herself expectations that might be disappointed ; and it was not 'till hope became certainty, that she communicated her situation to the en¬ raptured count. Perhaps nothing could have aggra¬ vated the misery of the unfortunate Sig¬ nora di Soranzo more than this circum¬ stance; her nature was too noble and too pure for her to envy the happiness of her friend, but when she contrasted the countess's situation with her own, her heart was rent with the severest pangs. Tenderly solicitous for the health of his wife, the counts eye fol¬ lowed her steps with an expression of mingled pleasure and anxiety. Did she express the slightest wish for any thing, he was miserable until it was procured for her; tenderly attentive as he had always been-to her, he was now if pos¬ sible more so than ever, and her health and amusement seemed to be his sole care. How different was the fate of Valeria!
236
Though her pregnancy was not yet vi¬ sible, she shrunk with terror from every glance, fearful that it should be sus¬ pected ; and often, when sinking under the severest sufferings both of mind and body, she strove to appear as usual, lest the countess should insist upon her hav¬ ing advice, which she knew must disco¬ ver her situation. Montalva had again left the castle^ after promising to return before it would be necessary for her to quit it; the dread of discovery made her most anxious to be gone; yet, when she thought of leaving, perhaps for ever, the oaly friends she had on earth, her very soul recoiled^ and there were mo¬ ments when she thought of acknow¬ ledging to the countess what had passed ; but her native modesty prevented her taking this step, and she awaited the re* Usui of Montalva in à state of mind tliAt might excite pity even in the bo* som of a savage. For his mwi sake Montalva kept bi$ pi omise; he had arranged emry thing
237
for Valeria's flight, but fear of being sus¬ pected as the cause of it forbade his ac¬ companying her. Nothing could ex¬ ceed the consternation of the count and countess when she was missed ; the most diligent search was made for her, but in- vain ; and grieved as D'Rosonio was at her loss, he was doubly so from the fear that her flight would injure the coun¬ tess's healdi. Neither D'Rosonio nor his Maria had the slightest suspicion of Montalva, who remained at the castle for some days after Valeria left it. From the castle, he returned to Na¬ ples; and stopped there for some time before he ventured tojóin Valeria, whom he had placed in a retired situation some miles distant from thence; callous as his heart was, he felt shocked and sur¬ prised at the alteration which so short a time had made in the victim of his arts ; her hollow eye, for ever dimmed by tears ; her pallid cheek, from whence the rose of youth and health had van* Ulied; spoke volumes of reproaches,
23?
though her tongue utiered none, It wanted yet some months to that time, which Valeria so much dr^ndrd ; but though Montalva paw her frequently, he did not again mention the performance of his promise, and every day diminish- eu her faith in his word ; slowly, and reluctantly s did she acknowledge to her own heart, the unworthmess of a man, who bpiteof reason, she i>ttll loved ; and as the timo of lier becoming a mother approached, the idea oí what would be the future destiny of herself and her in¬ fant, almost distracted her. At kst the moment to which >he lortked foiuard with m unirli ten yr ar» rjved; ??? >he gave birth to a biely girl, (Hi, nature,how sweet bth\ pow- ι r over tht* heart of a mother* ull ÚlaZ the unfortunate Valeria had suffered, all t liai 4r might Midir, was /örgütten» win n ¡«h e pUH*ix! her babe lo ber bo-tui», aml w rt ii d its hule fíitv w ilİi loar*· of «U light. Muntaha was M Vîp -??, whiìì the <t* -
*¿9
cotithcment of Valeria took place, and nearly a month elaspsed before he saw her ; but what a revolution had that time created in the mind of Valeria ; tlie birth of her child had opened to her a source of happiness, the most unhoped for ; she was never tired of caressing it, of g»iz»ng on its little features, and tiacíng in them lier ow» likeness, and that of Montalva. Ofhis making lier his wife, she did not now retain a hope, but she had dett mimed on a plan that would, she thntight, meet with his approbation ; and she longed impatiently for his return that übe might communicate it to him. Montalva 1 * resolution in respect to ihe future desti nation of Valeria, had long been fixed; and he purpose! v re¬ frained from seeing her t J] he thought 4w had regained sufficient strength bt hear her fate without «langer to her life ; ?» ???? a* he thought that was the cast-, ht* 1 1 solved to lu»e uo time m announc¬ ing tu her hb determination.
340
He found her, with her infant in her arms; she presented it to him, and he coldly kissed its cheek. ίζ I have much to say to you Valeria, (cried he) ; will you dismiss your child, and hear me. 1 '' His words and still more the manner in which they were uttered fell like a bolt of ice upon the heart of Valeria; she gave the infant to her attendant, who hñ the room, and Montalva proceeded. ίζ I have unfortunately, Valeria, injur¬ ed my estate, which was never large, by borne youthful errors, and ï have not at this tif ie die means to support a wife in ^?^ manner which my rank demands; this is the only excuse I have to offer, for the η on -performa nee of my promise to you ; but it is an excuse which when vou reflect upon the miseries that attend a union where prudence^is not consulted, you will, I think admit the justice of." He paused, but Valeria replied not, and he continued. "After what has passed, there is but one step which you can take with propriety ; but one safe and
241
honourable asylum, to which you cari resort ;—-—a convent." "A convent! exclaimed Valeria; what then becomes of my child r" " I will see that it is properly taken care of," cried Montalva. tC Oh ! no, no, (said Valeria), never will I consent to part with my babe; I can remain in obscurity; I had determin¬ ed to do so ; you have nothing, indeed you have not, to apprehend from me ; but I will lose my life sooner than my child." The emotion of Valeria, for a mo¬ ment staggered the cruel resolution which Montalva had formed ; but it was only for a moment. cs Check these wild emotions Valeria, (said he sternly); every consideration of reason and prudence, calls imperiously upon you to part with the infant, whom it would be madness to keep.'* The tears, the distraction of the un¬ fortunate Valeria, could not prevent her child being torn from her army, and for VOL. 1. M
2İ2
some days afterwards she was so ill, that Montalva dared not remove her to the convent where he intended to place her ; her illness indeed appeared so dangerous, that he begun to fear for her life, and hardened as he was, he started at the thought of being her murderer: he sent her a message by her attendant that he had something to propose which would alleviate her grief, and Valeria, who hoped that he meant to restore her child, instantly admitted him. * After endeavouring to palliate the step he had taken, he informed her that though for the present, he was compel¬ led to separate her from her infant, it was not his intention to doso for ever ; since in a very few years, he would place the child in the convent where he meant she should reide. He thought that if she knew he was positively determined, that she should take the veil, it would be a blow that she could not support ; this part of his resolution therefore, he concealed frorn her.
243 The hope of again seeing her child, had an almost magical effect upon Vale* ria, and in a short time, she was so far recovered, as to be removed to the con¬ vent where her seducer meant that she should end her days. Montalva had told the lady abbess, that she was an orphan, and his near re¬ lation ; and that a wish to preserve her from the snares to which youth and loveliness is liable, was the reason he placed her in the convent of St. Sebas¬ tian. As he was well aware that the nuns would be anxious to dive into the cause of her melancholy, he added that she had recently lost an aunt with whom she had resided the greatest part of her lite. He told Valeria the tale he had fabricated, which he advised her for her own sake not to contradict, and he assu¬ red her, that on her acquiescence with his will in this, and every other respect, depended her hope of seeing her child. His victim heard him in silence, her meek spirit was indeed bowed to M 2
244
the earth by affliction, and Montalva exulted in the hope that his baseness to her would for ever remain concealed. The nuns of St. Sebastian welcomed her with kindness, and as soon as he had placed her there, Montalva returned to Naples.
245
CHAPTER XII.
During Montalva's short absence from Naples, a change the most melan¬ choly had taken place at the castle of D'Rosonio. The count had looked for¬ ward with delight to the moment that was to make him a father ; little did he think the price which he was to pay for that endearing name ; his adored wife lived to give birth toa daughter, but her angelic spirit fled in a few hours after. This blow overwhelmed the unhappy D'Rosonio ; he shut himself in his cham¬ ber and refused all consolation. No sooner did Montalva learn this M3
24?
melancholy news, than he hastened to his friend, not with the hope of admi¬ nistering comfort, but with the desire of gratifying the long cherished hatred he ???? to the count. Never had he for¬ given the preference which Bianca shew¬ ed to D'Rosonio ; and innocent as the count was of her perfidy, Montalva from that hour, regarded him with ab¬ horrence; self-interest, indeed, made him carefully conceal his sentiments, and he was a master of dissimulation; with the joy of a demon, did he witness the agonies to which the unhappy count abandoned himself; while with the most hypocritical affectation of pity, he joined him in deploring the loss of his Maria. The infant who was named Isabel, had been given to the care of a nun in the neighbourhood of the castle, as the sight of her aggravated her father's grief. For some months, Montalva remain¬ ed at the castle of D*Rosonio ; and such was his dissimulation, that the count
247
believed Montalva's grief for the coun¬ tess was inferior only to his own. A sum¬ mons, as the signor pretended, from Na¬ ples, compelled him to quit the castle, and he bade the count adieu, with a pro¬ mise speedily to return. The letter was from the abbess of St. Sabastian's ; she informed him that Valeria's death was every day expected, and begged him if he wished to see her alive, to lose no time in hastening to the convent. He travelled with the utmost expedi · tion, but he came too late, for when he arrived, he learned that Valeria had just breathed her last. Conscience for a moment blanched the cheek of Mon¬ talva, at this intelligence; he could not conceal from himself that his hand had conducted the poor lost one to the tomb; her lovely form drooping in silent and uncomplaining anguish was before him, and he vainly strove to stifle the anguish which the fate of his victim had occa¬ sioned him. A few days before her death Valeria had %vritten to him : no
248
reproach for lost fame or happiness es¬ caped her ; she merely conjured him to be a father to his child. "I do not know what request that letter contains, signor, (said the abbess, as sbe delivered it to him); but I think if you had seen the writer when she had delivered it to me, you would not hesitate to grant it." u I will grant it, (replied Montalva earnestly), 1 swear by heaven î that her request shall be complied with. Yes, Valeria, (added he mentally), I will in¬ deed be a father to thy infant." He hastened to the cottage where he had placed the babe, and his mind was a little soothed, hy the thought of atoning to her, for the wrongs he had done her unfortunate mother ; but his pur¬ pose was vain, the child had died iu convulsions a week before his arrival. He returned to Naples and strove to banish reflection by plunging into dissipation ; but the image of Valeria was before him, and bitten remembrance mingled the çup of pleasure with gafl. A letter
249 from D'Rosonio recalled him to the cas¬ tle, and his soul sickened at finding the count more tranquil ; the loss of his Maria still sat heavy upon his spirits, but he sought for and found consolation in the caresses of his child : the little. Isabel and her nurse had during Mon¬ talva's absence, become inmates at the castle. She was now nearly a year old, and when one day D'Rosonio thanked that almighty power, which in depriv¬ ing him of his wife, had spared to hint hie child, the bitterest reflections swell-, ed the heart of Montalva almost to* bursting. " Yes, (thought he), thou art indeed the favourite of fortune, but no happi-* ness is reserved for me ; I have caused the death of an innocent girl* and the only means of atonement I had m my power is wrested from me, andthou D'Rosonio art the cause of alt; hadst thou not gained the affections, of the weak and wavering Bianca, I had now been -afHuent and happy ; no, ????? . M. ,5
250
would have corroded my bosom, no re¬ morse poisoned my enjoyments." Thoughts like these cast an unusual gloom over the countenance of Montal- va ; he shortened his visit and returned to Naples ; restless and unhappy, he sought in vain to drown reflection in wine. The Neapolitans are strongly addicted to gaming, but though dissi¬ pated, this was a vice from which Mon¬ talva had hitherto refrained ; he now, fatally for himself, sought to find in it a refuge from thought ; this destructive habit soon grew into a passion ; his suc¬ cess was various, but for some time his losses and his gains were nearly equal ; this however was not long the case, for¬ lune seemed to have set her face against hitìì, and he lost continually; he ap¬ plied' under different pretexts to D'Ro¬ sonio, 'till he had drawn from him a very large sum, and he feared that generous as he knew the count to be, prudence would at length stop his hand. While he was in this embarrassed and unbap*
25 t
py state, D'Rosonio was taken suddenly ill, and a messenger from himsummon- ed Montalva to the castle. The coun¬ tenances *>f the domestics on his arrival sufficiently infor ed him of their mas¬ ter's danger* " How is the count?" said Montalva to the ola steward, who came to receive him. u Alas ! signor, (replied Pietro) we fear he canaot recover. The loss of our dear lady was a heavy blow, but should heaven f \e his excel lenza, what will become of those who owe their subsis¬ tence to his bounty, he is perfectly sen¬ sible, and I know that he will rejoice to see you, signor ; for he has mentioned you several times.'* tf Will you then, my good Pietro, en¬ quire whether I can be immediately admitted to hi« chamber?" said Montal¬ va, Pietro obey 1, hut returned to say ihat tbe count had tallen into,'a dose. " It is the first sieep, signor, (cried
252
the old man with joy in his countenance), that my lord has had for some days, and please the virgin, it will do him good." The counts repose continued for some hours, and he awoke much refreshed ; he was rejoiced to find that Montalva was arrived, and desired to see him im- ¥ mediately., Short as the count's illness had been, Montalva fancied that Pietro was right in saying ¡at scarcely a hope of his recovery remaiued. In a lanquid tone, he expressed his pleasure at the sight of the signor, whom he said he scarcely hoped to have seen in this world again»'* (( Banish these fears, dear Fernando, (cried Montalva), you have still I hope many happy days to see." " I think not, my friend, (replied the count), but I am in the hands of an all-merciful judge, and to his decree I bow with submissive reverence : In the event of my death I have appointed you guardian to my child ; and should hea«· ven be pleased to take my Isabel, be thou
253
my heir, I have no relation nearer than yourself, and not one half so dear." Montalva knelt by the side of the bed, and he hid his face on it at this moment, to conceal the joy which in spite of him* self sparkled in his eyes. " I know that to thee, (continued the deceived count), wealth will be a poor compen¬ sation for the loss of the companion of thy youth; but heaven may yet restore me." An impious wish to the contrary, though it reached not the lips, burst from the heart of Montalva. From this hour D'Rosonio appeared to gathes strength, and the physicians gave the most flattering hopes of his recovery ; but this circumstance which filled every other bosom with joy, was a dagger to. that of i>Jontalva. From.the moment that the court had told him that in th© event of his own and Isabel's death, the rich domai h? of D'Bosonio would be his, imagination had converted his chance of inheritance into a certainty* 4is present difficulties were such as no
254
trifling sum would remove, and were he but possessed of riches, he thought he should be secure of happiness. " Thank heaven, signor, (cried Pietro about a week after Montalva's arrival), the physician has just told me, that if the favourable symptoms continue, his excellen za will in a few days be out of danger ; how many hearts will his re¬ covery cheer, but 1 mu^t hasten with the good news to the convent of St. Francis, the fathers have offered up masses for his health every day since his illness first took place," It was well that Pietro was neither penetrating nor suspicious, or else the alteration in Montalva's countenance must have struck him. " Confusion î (said he mentally, as he paced the room, when Pietro quitted him), he will re¬ cover; and what then becomes of me ? But why must he recover, is there no way l 0 —_ } ]ie paused — Dark and ma¬ lignant as his soul was, murder had not yet occurred to him ; and slowly did his
255
mind receive the horrid idea, that D'Rosonio must die, if he would exist in peace : ra istaken Montalva ! when did peace dwell with the assassin ? For some days his mind was a perfect chaos ; un¬ steady in his dreadful purpose, he saw with terror that every hour the count gathered strength. Fool, madman that I am, (thought he), shall I wait his per¬ fect recovery, and so run the hazard of detection ? or shall I give up my pur¬ pose, own my distress, and meanly cringe to him for the means of removing it? No, I will perish first ! Why should I hesitate to destroy him, has he not blighted all my hopes oi* happiness ? stepped between me and a noble fortune, and rendered me miserable for years. past ? and have I now a chance of peace but from his death ? away then with this childish weakness, he shall die !" When Montalva had formed this dreadful resolution, he sought for means to accomplish his purpose without sus¬ picion ; he was skilled in chemistry, and
256*
he procured a poison of the subtlest nature; he always administered the counts medicines, and with a trembling hand did he present to the unhappy D'Rosonio the last draught he ever swallowed ; the operation of the poison, though certain, would not he a well knew be attended by any of those signs that usually accompany it ; and the cause of the counts death, he flattered himself, would for ever remaina secret; with well dissembled grief, Montalva gave, orders for a most magnificent funeral, and the remains of the murdered count, were consigned to the grave with a splen¬ dour befitting his illustrious rank. Many were the hearts that mourned for D'Ro. sonio, and the tears that flowed in abun¬ dance from his dependants, as they knelt to beseech the mercy of heaven for the soul of their departed lord, was &.more certain testimony of his virtues, t than the pompous inscription, which his* assassin caused to he engraved on hi$. HJcmument* v
257
"When the funeral obsequies were per¬ formed, Montalva took upon himself, as the late count had willed, the guardian¬ ship of the little Isabel ; but the sight of the child was hateful to him. Too young to be sensible of her irreparable loss, she lavished, unconsciously, on the destroyer of her father all the fond ca¬ resses of infancy. To remove her from the possession of her inheritance, with¬ out taking her life, occupied all his thoughts. When once that was done, he flattered himself he should be happy ; he affected an uncommon attachment to the child, and pretending business at Naples, took her with him to a mag¬ nificent palazzo which he purchased there. To the murder of the count no one was privy, but to remove Isabel without a confidant would be impossible; but in whom could he confide ? No servant of the late count would, he was con¬ scious, assist in wronging his orphan, and there was no domestic about his
258
own person whom he thought it would be prudent to trust. While he was iu this perplexed and anxious state, as he was one day rambling in a wood at some dÍ£tance from his palazzo, a stranger, meanly habited, approached him, and solicited his charity : Montalva, whose thoughts were busily employed on Isa¬ bel, repulsed him with harshness ; again he supplicated, and was again denied. " Nay then (cried he), there is but one means," and he drew a stiletto from his bosom ; the eye of Montalva followed, with the quickness of lightning, the mo¬ tion of his arm ; and at the moment when he was about to plunge the sti¬ letto into his heart, Montalva arrested the blow. tc Miscreant î (exclaimed he), what could tempt thee to this atrocious act ?" * s What tempts many to similar deeds (replied the assassin, sullenly)—poverty: brought up to the prospect of a splendid inheritance» of which one rash act has deprived me, I perish for want ; but no
25$
friendly hand is held out to succour or to save me ; I thought I could have pe¬ rished ere I could have stooped to beg relief, yet I was mistaken ; I did beg it, and it was denied me." Montalva's eyes were rivetted upon the face of his intended murderer ; his features, which were strongly marked, bore the traces of care and disappoint¬ ment ; and the tire of despair sparkled in his eye. " ν " Thy life (cried the signor), is for¬ feited to the laws of Naples, and thou hast deserved to lose it ; yet I wish to spare thee." <c I will not thank you for your in¬ tended mercy, signor (replied the stran¬ ger), to me 'tis cruelty ; life, to a wretch who has no means to support it, is a gift not worth accepting ; pursue, therefore, the advantage which my folly has given thee, and deliver me into the hands of justi„¿." " I would fain know thy story (cried Montalva); perhaps I may befriend thee;
???
but be sincere ; the slightest deviation from truth will for ever lose thee my favour." " Your caution is needless, signor (said he, proudly) ; after what is past, I can have no wish to conceal from you any thing I have ever done ; but dissi¬ mulation (added he, sarcastically), is natural to man, and therefore I am not surprised at your suspecting me,"
'2?\
CHAPTER XIII.
" Mv birth is noble, but the name of my family, signor, you must excuse my divulging ; the patrimony I inherited from myparents, was small ; but a maid¬ en aunt, whose fortune was immense, adopted me ; and from an early age, I was considered ?? her heir ; I had the usual faults of young men, but my par¬ tial aunt saw them not ; and to her blind indulgence, I owe all my misfortunes. The death of my father placed my lit* tie fortune in my own power, and I soon dissipated it in riot and extravagance. Though my aunt had avowed that I was
2?2
to be ber heir, she did not, large as her fortune was, make me an allowance sufficient for my rank ; and the habit of dissipation, which I had acquired, be¬ came my torment, when I lost the means of supporting it. A young Frenchman, who was one of the companions of my idle hours, advised me to have recourse to a jew ; who would, he said, supply me with money ; but on the most exor¬ bitant terms. To that I was indifferent, the death of my aunt would put me in possession of immense wealth, and from her time of life it was an event which I thought must soon happen; I therefore told my friend that 1 was willing to agree to any terms that the usurer might * demand, and he took me to the house of the jew, who was named Isaac Mén¬ dez ; with the most fawning civility the extortioner offered me any money I wanted, and in an evil hour 1 borrowed a large mm« I fully intended to be more prudent in røy expenditure, than î had yet been,
2??
aud I hoped that the money thus ob¬ tained, would last me till I had the means to satisfy my creditor; but I knew little of my own heart, and less of the temptations to which I should be ex¬ posed. When my fi iends, as they stiled themselves, were informed of themeans by which I became possessed of money to continue the career of dissipation which I had begun, schemes of pleasure were daily proposed,» which I had not the resolution f ? object to, and my mo¬ ney wasted rapidly. In an excursion which I made a few miles from Naples, I was struck with the appearance of a small neat dwelling, embosomed in a grove ; it appeared too humble to be the abode of affluence, and and yet too good to be inhabited by the children of poverty. Fatigue and heat had rendered me thirsty, and I deter¬ mined to try whether the tenant of this lovely spot would afford me rest and re¬ freshment. An aged domestic opened the rustic gate, and courteously invited
2β4
me to enter ; he placed wine and refresh¬ ments before me ; when I had satisfied my thirst, I asked him| who inhabited the cottage besides himself. u Two ladies, signor, whom I have the honour to serve," (was his reply); and as he spoke, they entered. I rose, and apologized for my intrusion. u You are welcome, signor, (said the eldest), to what our cottage affords ; its fare, though homely, may be acceptable to a weary traveller." While I replied to this speech, I gazed attentively on the signora ; she was upwards of fifty, but never did 1 behold a form so noble or so dignified ; time had indeed stolen from her cheek its fresh¬ ness, and from her eye some portion of its lustre; but he had no power over the graces of her countenance, and her figure was symmetry itself. In thanking the signora for her hos¬ pitality, 1 requested permission to rest a few minutes longer ; which she read dy granted. Her young companion now
2θ5
spoke to the domestic, and the melody of her voice attracted my attention ; her figure was small, but beautifully formed ; and her countenance, though not strik¬ ing, was rendered inexpressibly interest¬ ing, by the roost expressive dark blue eyes I ever beheld. * c Retire to your chamber, Viola, and finish the drawing which yoti began this morning," (said the elder signora); and the fair Viola, timidly bowing to me, retired. Notwithstanding the no¬ ble frankness of the signora'» air and manner, there was a dignity about her that forbade familiari tv, and after 1 had tir * rested for a short time, 1 again thanked her and retired. "Strange,(thought I), that t\\ ? women, whose appearance bespeaks them of a rank far superior to the vulgar, should be the inhabitants of so recluse a spot. The curiosity which I felt was hut of bhort duration ; new ??????* of pleasure put the adventtire out of my thoughts, and in a few day·» it was forgotten. VOL·, ι» 4
266
Want of money soon drove me again to the house of Isaac Méndez, and I found htm as ready as before to accommodate me, but what was my surprheat behold¬ ing Viola under his roof; I almost thought my eyes deceived me, but the heightened colour of Viola, and the timid glance of recognition which she cast at me, convinced me I was right ; she quitted the room, and I asked Mén¬ dez, carelessly, whether she was any re¬ lation r " * None (replied he) ; she is my ward;* and he tried to change the sub¬ ject ; but my curiosity was now so much raised, that I was determined to gratify it if I could ; I therefore mentioned to the jew my having before seen Viola at the cottage, and expressed the surprise I felt at seeing her in so obscure a situa¬ tion· "* She then resided with her aunt, Signora Velloni, (cried he), hut the sig¬ nora has quitted Naples, and Viola is entrusted to my guardianship, 'till her return·'
267
" Will her absence from Naples be of long continuance, said I ? " \ Tis uncertain/ (replied he) ; and as I could not press the subject further, it dropped. " Again did I agree to pay the most extravagant price for the money I re¬ ceived, and again it was squandered in the wildest dissipation ; a third visit to Méndez became necessary, but he did not receive me as he had done when I went to borrow from him before/' .** €l ' This sum, signor (cried he, when I had told him what I wanted), and what you have had before, will make your debt to me so large, that*— ' u Aré you not certain of being amply repaid, interrupted I. u ζ How can I be certain of it, signor, (cried he), yo jr aunt may outlive you, or if she does not, she may change her mind ; and your hopes of inheriting her property may be vain.' " I tried to persuade him that he was mistaken, and that there was not the N2
2??
h asî probability that my aunt would «ilter lier avowed resolution of bequeath¬ ing me her fortune, but he appeared to listen to me with an air of sullen dissa- tibfaction. 4 1 cannot at this moment give vou a pos. ive answer, signor (cried he); I am sorry that it is not in my power directiv ίο oblige rou, but I must not utterly lose sight of my own interest/ 6i òìy blood boiled with indignation, when I recollected the sum I had agreed to pay him for his compliance with my demand.«, but I was obliged to suppress it. " When can I have your positive ans¬ wer, said I ?~ e I will send to you in a day or two, signor, cried he ; and with this promise I was obliged to be content. That· evening î received a note which contained the following lines : u ( Signor, " c You are in the hands of a fiend : the writer of this wishes to save you, and will run every rbk to do so : be at the church of St. Giovanni this evening at vespers, and you shall know more.'
z6$ €t This note was written in a female hand, and strongly excited both my cu¬ riosity and surprise; I repaired before vespers to the church of St. Giovanni, and knelt on purpose in a conspicuous place. When vespers were over, 1 lin¬ gered for some time, but I was not ac¬ costed by any one, and I was about to quit the church, persuaded that the vv ri¬ ter of the note meant only to trifle with my curiosity ; when a female, veiled, touched my arm ; I turned round, and she motioned me to follow her ; she walked forward with quickness, 'till we were clear of the crowd that had left the church with us, and she then stop¬ ped : I could perceive that bhe trembled, ' c t A wish to save you from a snare the most diabolical, has brought me here, signor,' said she, in a low and tremulous voice, which I thought I had heard be¬ fore, She paused a moment, and then continued, ' You are indebted to the Jew Méndez.' " Ha î what of him, interrupted I ?
270
tl * He seeks your rui n, (cried she); and \iithout this warning, he would most probably have accomplished it: he means to-morrow to send for you, and tell you that he will let you have the money, if you will sign a bond to repay it upon terms more exorbitant than any he has yet asked you; should you agree to this, which he has not a doubt that you iiiil, he means to substitute a bond in the place of the one you have read, by which he will become possessed of your aunt's whole fortune, after her decease.' " What unparalleled villainy ! ex¬ claimed I : r Warned as you are, signor, (said she), you will find it easy to es¬ cape, but sure destruction awaits me, if you own that you are aware of his de¬ sign.' e( Trust me, my kind preserver, that I will not; and now, may I beg to know to whom T am indebted for my safety? said I. * u After what I have told you, signor, (cried she), í need not hesitate to own
27 t
to you who I am. Have you forgotten your chance-meeting with Viola?" " Viola, generous girl! (cried I), but how is it that you arc an inmate with this monster ? " t My story is too long to tell you now, signor, nor dare I longer delay re¬ turning home ; I wish most anxiously to escape from Méndez, but friendless as I am, I know not where to go, said she. " Will you suffer me to procure you an asylum, cried I ?—I swear to you on my honour, that I will protect you with my life. " ' We will speak of this at a future time, signor, (said she), but how do you mean to evade the usurers demand ?' " There is but one way, returned I,-— I must pretend that 1 have raised the money elsewhere ; but I cannot pavt with you 'till I know by what means I may learn your story, and how I can be of service to you.
272 tCÍ If you will be at Mendez's 'garden gate to-morrow night, at the hour of midnight, signor, (cried she), you shall know all, but now I must leave you.' " I promised to be punctual the fol¬ lowing night, and we parted."
EM> OF THE FIRST VOLUME*
