Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Duncan and Peggy: a Scottish tale
DUNCAN and PEGGY; A SCOTTISH TALE. CHAP. I. " If this is gentry, I had rather be What I am ilìlli ----------------» Allan Ramsay/ 4 THE day after Mrs. Donald's de¬ parture, l*cggy attended dinner for rlie firft time ; previous to which, however, flie had been introduced to Lord Beugle, who was a handfome man, though in tlie decline of life ; perfectly polite to his lady, and all the world, regarding fuch behaviour as indifpenfable in a man of fafhion. He had married becaufe it was necefíàry Vol. II. ? to
to leave an heir to his eftate ; but in his natural difpofition was cold, care¬ iefs, and indifferent of every object but himfelf. He therefore welcomed Peggy with his ufual politenefs, de¬ claring himfelf particularly happy in her vifit, though on the firft moment of her abfence, he would moft proba¬ bly have forgotten flie ever exifted.· Peggy had now feen the whole fa¬ mily, except an only fon, Lord Wil¬ mot, who had accompanied Captain Campbell to Harwich when he em¬ barked with the troops., and from whence he had not yet returned, re¬ maining with fome young men of fafhion whom he vvas acquainted with in that part of the country. As Peggy had for a confiderable time been ac¬ cuftomed
euftomed to the Colonels table, her behaviour was eafy though timid j So¬ phia, who fat by her fide, kindly ad- drefiing her during the whole ; nor indeed was Lord Beugle backward in paying her fome little attention, for which he received two or three con¬ temptuous fneers from his lady. After dinner the family party ad¬ journed to the drawing-room, as her ladyíhip remained that evening at home, having a private concert ¿ at which, however, her felcct friends to the number of fifty or fixty were ad¬ mitted. Peggy, as a young and beautiful ftranger, claimed every one's attention, And iC Who is ihe ? Where does ihe come from ?" was univerfally whifper- B 2 ed
ed round the room, without any one being able to refolve the queftions, until an old beau ventured to addrefs Lady Beugle with, te I never faw your ladyfhip accompanied by your daugh¬ ters, but I confidered you as the re- prefentative of Venus j the likenefs only imperfect in wanring a third grace : it is now complete : but who is this wonder your ladyfhip has fo fuddenly brought among us ?" " A protegee of my uncle Campbells," re¬ plied flie coolly, " with whom he has troubled me for this feafon/' — 44 Ah ! ah !" exclaimed he fignifi- cantly, <4 I underftand you; he was always a fly rogue." " You miftake, my lord," anfwered flie, 4t the girl is no relation to Colonel Campbell : -you may
may have heard he İs rather an extra¬ ordinary character, and bringing her up in a manner improper to her birth is nothing more than one of his whims." The difcourfe was here broken upon by the concert being opened by Lady- Eleanor; who fung, and accompanied herfelf on the harpfichord in a very pafTable manner. When flie had con¬ cluded, Lady Sophia took her place ; performing, however, in a ftyle far fuperior to her fifter, then returned to her feat which fhe had chofen next to Peggy. Eleanor, who had not feer* unmoved the attention Peggy had at¬ tracted during the whole evening, now determined to gratify her fpleen, and fliew her to the company in an unfa- 5 ?ou rable point of view ; therefore ad- ? 3. xlrefEng
dreffing her with more feeming kind¬ nefs than ufuaj, flie defired her to favour them with an air. Teggy would willingly have excufed herfelf; but the more fhe declined, tlie greater were Lady Eleanor's entreaties—as it con¬ firmed her in the furmife that Peggy knew nothing of the inftrument. At length, thus prefled, flie rofe, and co¬ vered with bluflies took her place at the harpfichord ; where fhe foon con¬ vinced the mortified Lady Eleanor, that had fhe contrived to fhew the girl fhe defpifed in the molt fafcinating man¬ ner, fhe could not have done it more effectually. Lord Withers, which was the name ofthe old peer before mentioned, could notat this difplay of her talents conceal lus
his raptures, but preffed forward to lead her back to her feat, compli¬ menting her İn the moft high-flown language. " It was not neceffary, enchanting creature !" faid he, 44 to give us a proof that vour voice w T as equally charming as your perfon ; were you not before fufEciently dan¬ gerous ?—Alas ! my heart felt you too much fo!" Peggy, unaccuftomed to fuch compliments, and from an object whom ftie regarded as an old fcare- crow, could not fupprefs a fmile, al¬ though her fpirits were by no means good, and dropping him a graceful curtfey, retook her feat by Sophia. Lord Withers remained fixed by her fide the whole evening. The concert over, and the company departed, So* ? 4 phkt
phia and Peggy retired to their apart¬ ments ; which being adjoining, before they went to reft, they entered into a convcrfation refpecting the com¬ pany ; Sophia laughing, and congra- iulatİng Peggy on the conqueft ihe had made. " Indeed/' faid Peggy, " I did not think it poffible that any one could be fo ridiculous; but he was certainly in jeft : yet how he was dreffed—poor man ! I think at his age a woollen coat wo,uld be more comfortable than a filk jacket. I am fure I felt quite forry for him, he look¬ ed fo poorly, until I faw him malte fuch a monkey of himfelf." Sophia could not refrain burfting into laughter at this fpeech. 44 Why, you faucy pufs !" exclaimed (he, 4( do you knoy he
he is one of the richeft peers in the kingdom y has never been married, but is actually now on the ??? -out . for a wife—young, beautiful, and ac- compliflied enough to make him bear the marriage chain, to credit the head of his table, and to produce him an heir to his large fortune ? Confider how you would furprife your northern friends ; an elegant equipage, coronets and tide Countefs of Withers : then fuch a charming fmug old hufband to complete the whole ; you furely could not refufe him !" " You forget my rank in life, Lady Sophia," replied Peggy, fmiling at her humoyr; " yet ï affure you, notwithftanding that, Γ would not marry Lord Withers, nor indeed any man, had they the world
to lay at my feet." iC Yet I think í could mention a youth who has only a little ^bit of Scotland, whom you would not refufe: what fay you to my coufin Duncan ?" returned Sophia. Peggy remained for a moment over¬ come with confufion and covered with blumes : at length flie faid, ,c I am not weak enougii to think of fuch a thing, Lady Sophia, yet can truly af" fure you that I fhould equally refufe him. Was giving up my life neceflary to his happinefs, I would not hefitate a moment ; but to difgrace him, and return my obligations to the Colonel with ingratitude, never L n ** He has made an impreflion on Eleanor," replied Sophia, " but I fancy he prefers eafe and nature to affecta* tion
tion and art ¿ which, I am forry to fay, totally deftroy the effect of my fitter's* perfonal charms. Indeed he appeared infenfible to every amufement my mo¬ ther could project for him, and en-. tirely taken up with his regiment, ?? elfe loft in thought." Peggy was fcarcely able to conceal· her agitation during this fpeech. Lady- Eleanor flie Irad never liked, flie now detcfted her. 4t Heigh-ho ; I am fure I wifb him happy : Lady Eleanor is very handfome," faid ihe faintly, Cf and is his equal in rank." 4i True—but flie ftands no chance for all that ;. in¬ deed I neither, wifh Duncan nor her fo ill, they are of very different tem¬ pers. She cannot exift but ina crowd,, ? ? and*
to which Lords Beugle and Withers were to efbort them. They were foon ready; indeed So» phia and Peggy wanted no preparation, but die addition of hats tmd gloves· Lady Beugle and Eleanor, indeed, had to add fome little to their complexi¬ ons, which however being perfected to their liking, our party fet off in twa carriages to* the fee ? of action. Here ?? was new to Peggy* chefie attention was engroffed though not amufed : her eyes running over the ?arious gaudy trinkets before her, yet without a defire of pofleífing them. A row of remarkable fine diamonds attracted Lady Beugle's attention, but were of too ferions a price for her to think
think of purchafing without tlie con^ currence of her Lord ; who ??, to oonfefs the truth, no great inclmatioo to lay out fuch a funs to decorase tbc neck of his wife, ; a fecret her lady- fliip was well aware of» fo forbore to mention k, although the feif-demai coft her a figh. Lady Eleanor, on %h% contrary, rati into the ??? rapturous praifes oa the enchaming brill iaøts, appealing to Pe^;y tf ihe hsâ ever feen fo beautiful a necklace. " Never, madam/' replied ihe : then turning to Sophia, ? a low voke, fhe added, 44 I w Üb my Lord Beugle would par» chafe it for Lady Eleanor." The ài£* courfe was here broken off by the auctioneer holding up the glittering prize, and entreating the Sadies not to
feo kt (b favourable an opportunity ftp, oí fumiíhing themfelves wttb what might never again be in their power to cqisuL Lord Withers had heard Peggy an* firer Lady Elinor in favour of the aeckiace? he had alfo perceived her whifpering to Sophia, and heard the words / wtß ; and as there was nothing prefent which he apprehended could he fo defirable as a diamond necklace to a female, concluded that to be die ultimatum. Determined to mew at ©ace his love and generofity, he bid a thouland pounds for the omamenr, which however was raifed to fifteen hundred before the final rap declared ? his. As Lord Withers was a ba¬ chelor, this purchafe attracted the at. tention
temioii of all the female part of the aflcmbiy, w hofe eyes inftinctiveiy fixed on the party that accompanied him % who however were at as great a lofs as themfelves, and whofe curiofity wa# equally excited to guefs what happy env icd female was to poffefs the gor¬ geous ornament. Peggy's curiofity alone was unexcited ; the fum ex¬ pended on fuch a bauble furprifed her, and indeed engroffed her whole atten¬ tion, until difturbed by Sophia aíking her what fiie was confidering fo feri¬ oufly. 4i To confefs the truth," fakl flie, 44 I was reflect i üg what a valuar ble wife that man muft poffefs, whofe lady's drefs is thus decorated." Sophia laughed until Lord Beugle ùilìtted ort knowing the caufe ; of which when in^ formed &
formed, he heartily joined, to the great confufion of the author of the mirth, who felt half angry with Sophia for difclofing it, particularly as Lady Beu¬ gle and Eleanor feemed by no means to rcliih the jeft, and Lord Withers ap* peared creft-failen, though he attempt¬ ed tojóin the laugh. Our company now returned home, when Lady Sophia and Peggy framed an excufe to retire ; the one to drefs, the other to write to Kenneth Cattle, caving Lord Withers, Lady Beugle, and Eleanor, for Lord Beugle had not Teturned home with them. Peggy had remained chatting with La#y Sophia fomewhat better than an hour, when Lady Beugle's French waiting-maid knocked at the door to inform
inform Mifs Grant, her ladyfhip wou'd be extremely glad to fpeak to her * ? command which was inftamly obeyed with the greater alacrity, as the fiat¬ tered herfcif her ladyuiip had received letters from Scotland· Lady Beugle and Eleanor were alone on her entrance, the former of which addreucd her thus t ** From the particular rtfpecr. 1 enter¬ tain for my uncle Campbell, Mils Grant, I was induced to take on my* feif the care of introducing you to the world j hoping, as your perfon is pretty and education tolerable* you might be fui tunare enough to meet fome good match, who would conde« fcend to forget your birth, and place you in a rank above your expectations. Such a party now offers, who gene· roufly
íouily meafls to raife you to an elevation my moft fimguine hopes could never have expected, and which I have no doubt you will gratefully accept, and endeavour to merit : in fhort» not to keep you in fufpenfe, the party is Lord Withers. I fhall write to Co¬ lonel Campbell in a day or two, to communicate thefe fortunate tidings, which I am fure will pleafe him as much as rnvfeSf." Had Lady Beu¬ gle continued until the morrow, Peg¬ gy's aftonifhment would have prevent¬ ed her anfwering, and even on the lady's conciuding her harangue, fhe ftill continued the fame ; her eyes âxed on the carpet, and her face glowing with blufhes. " I do not wonder at your furprife," continued Lady
Lady Beugle after a ihort filence i 44 but Lord Withers will be here this evening, and will then himfelf con¬ firm his noble intentions ; which I have no doubt you will receive pro¬ perly, as this is a bufinefs which I fhall take the utmoft pleafure in having fpeedily fettled." Thefe kft words operated like a magic charm, unfèal* ing Peggy's lips at once; who railing her eyes timidly from the ground, her complexion ftill dyed with a crimfon bluih, anfwered, 44 Your ladyfhip's condefcenfion has indeed been above my moft flattering hopes and deferta, as are alfo the offers of Lo i d Withers ; an honour which I feel myfelf fo un¬ equal to, that I muft entreat to decline it. Born, as your ladyfhip well ob- ferves,
fèrves, in humble life, it is the fphere beft fuited to my inclinations and ta¬ lents ; a ftain which I can never wifh to obliterate by an ill-fuited marriage : poor as my birth is, I will never dif- grace it, then can it never difgrace me. I am thoroughly fenfible of your lady- íhip's goodnefs, but muft entreat you to add to your condefcenfion, by an¬ fwering Lord Withers in a manner fuitable to the favour conferred, but that î totally decline the honour he intends." 44 You furely are not a- wake!" anfwered Lady Beugle ; '« re¬ fufe a peer, whofe offer I fhould rea¬ dily have accepted for Sophia. You forget yourfelf ftrangely, Mifs Grant ; give this bufinefs a fécond thought, and prepare to fee Lord Withers in the
the evening: a young woman muft have fome great predilection to induce her to refufe fo very advantageous a match. I will not return fo improper an anfwer : if you choofe to throw away fuch an offer as may never return, you are certainly at liberty : his lord¬ ihip will not, I dare fay, force you to be a countefs, and one of the richeft women in England." 44 I had rather be the pooreft in either England or Scotland than his wife," replied Peggy with firmnefs ; 4< but, as your ladyfhip commands, will obey, and fee him this evening." So faying Peggy rofe, and, making a curtfey, left the apartment. Her firft care was to haften to Sophia, whom ihe informed of the whole of what
what had paifed. " Good Heaven l' exclaimed (lie, 4i how could the man think of fuch a thing ? Why he is old enough to be my grandfather ! though that is not my reafon for refufing him j his years make no difference ; were he but twenty I ihould equally difiiké him.' 1 Sophia expreíTed but little amazement at the information. " In¬ deed," faid ihe, 4ζ I expected fome fuch thing, he ufed to be rather at¬ tentive to me; nay, î believe, my mother entertained hopes that I had made a'conqueft: but you, wkktd witch, have robbed me of my lover, and what is worfe, are not thankful for your good fortune.''------ tf For goodnefs fake do not jeft, but
but tell me what I ihall fay to him* for Lady Beugle ill naturedly declares that flie will not give him a denhh" 44 Deeds are more effectual than words ; tread on his goury to^s, it will fpoil his gallantry for the whole even¬ ing. I once got rid of his company by fuch an expedient.** 44 Nay» but dear Lady Sophia, be ferions ; indeed this affair makes me very uneafy : yet I cannot think my refufal will difpleafe the Colonel, he π too juft, too good to wifh mt fo un- happy."------ 44 Certainly not, but write ro Ιι··:ι to-morrow after you have feen Withers· 1 find nothing in the bufinefi» ίο very alarming ; the old beau cannot marry you u η leu you are willing. Had he \£pi- II. ? off.red
offered himfelf to me, 1 muft have been much worfe ofl', yet would never have married him notwithftanding, though my mother and filter would both have been his advocates, and moft likely my father into the bargain. You have no parental duty to combat; fimply therefore give him a deter¬ mined anfwer, and leave the reft to chance." Peggy now felt the confolation of having a friendly female bofom in whom fhe could repofe her griefs, and therefore dreffed and attended dinner as ufual, Lady Sophia kindly chatting to her on indifferent fubjects. Indeed fuch fupport was neceffary, as Lady Beugle and Eleanor appeared by no means friendly or communicative, except
except to each other. Dinner over, the ladies had but juft reached the drawing-room when Lord Withers was announced, to the great difcompofure of Peggy. His Lordihip entered with that happy eafe which feltapprobation ever gives*, a refufal was the laft thing his vanity could apprehend : how could fuch a girl poffibiy deny a peer ? for Lady Beugle had not concealed Peg¬ gy's real fituation from him ; a cir· cumftance which fhe however palliated by obferving, that as ihe had been brought up fo far diftant, no one need, on her fettling in England, be ac¬ quainted with that fecret. Lord Wi¬ thers, after a general compliment on the whole party, feated himfelf by P e £gy> w bo «ow considered him with ? 2 redoubled
ledoubled difguft, which her averted eyes plainly evinced. Lady Beugle at length arofe, faying, 4( Mifs Grant, I ihall be particularly obliged to you to make tea for my Lord Withers this evening, as myfelf, Eleanor, and Sophia are engaged. Adieu, my hord I I fuppofe I fliali find you here on my return." Peggy felt ready to fink, and involuntarily caught hold on Sophia's gown ; who, though fhe fincerely pi¬ tied her, could only prefs her hand, and give her an encouraging fmile as flie quitted the room. Thus Jeft, Peg¬ gy felt no inclination to break filence, until Lord Withers ventured to hope that the propofal he had made Lady Beugle had met her approbation, at the fame time attempting to take her hand ;
hand ; but recoiling as though bit by a ferpent, flie anfwered with downcaft eyes and faltering accent, * c Indeed, my Lord, I fcarcely know how to re¬ ply in proper terms for the honour you have conferred on me, an honour which I muft beg leave to decline."— 44 You will not furely be cruel enough to refufe me, Mifs Grant ?" replied the aftonifhed peer; who, however, on a moment's reflection, confidered her words but as the effect of maidenifh coynefs and country education. " That beautiful bofom," continued he, c< can¬ not, I am fure, cover an obdurate heart, or doom to mifery the moft faithful of its votaries. Speak again, divine crea¬ ture ! but firft permit me to lay at your feet a bauble which I flattered myfelf, ? 3 this
. ihr morning, met your approbation/* »So laying, he prefented her the neck¬ lace which liad attracted fo much at¬ tention at the auction. Guefs his aftonifhment, to find the girl whom he expected to fee dazzled and inchanted with his generofity, decline his prefent. 44 As I hope foon to return to the Highlands," faid fhe, " fo elegant an ornament would be ufelefs, for a wreath of rofes there would be more eftimated. Indeed this fplendid coftly glafs on my neck, inftead of pleafure would be a trouble any where, as I fhould be in perpetual fear of lofing or breaking it. I muft therefore entreat you, fir, to preferve it for fome one more fen¬ fible of your condefcenfion and its value, for me, born in humble life, and
and unaccuítomed to fuch decorations, I look on them as fuperfluous, and re¬ gai d the hoarding fuch expenfive or¬ naments but as a dead fund of money, whofe intereft ought to be otherwife employed." 4t Madam, Mifs Grant !" replied the peer, who could hardly fpeak from the aftonifliment her dif¬ courfe had thrown him into—for though he certainly thought her an accom- plifhed girl, yet her words fliewed a reflection above her years-— u permit me to admire fentiments which at your age are fomewhat uncommon : however, you are perfectly right, you need no ornament, yet fuffer me to hope !"—" Pardon me, fir," inter¬ rupted Peggy with firmnefs ; 4ς I muft entreat you not to mifunderftand me t ? 4 I ihall
I fhall ever think of your offers whh gratitude, but can never accept them.'* 44 Never, M i fi» Giant ' you furprife me ; what objection can you poffibiy have ?" furveying hi& withered figure with complacency in the glafs — tf My fortvine I am fure is undeniable, and as to my perfon—----" 4 * Are both objects" replied fhe, 4t on which I have not beftowed a thought. I never perhaps intend to marry, more parti¬ cularly one fo much my fuperior, I am poor, my Lord, but proud, and will never accept a ftate I am un- equal to fupport." Lord Withers, who was really as much in love as it is poffible for a debauchee of fixty, not¬ withftanding his vanity was piqued at her refufal, yet determined not to give up
up the point fo eafily; therefore throw¬ ing himfelf at her feet, and feizing her hand, which fhe ftruggled to dif- engage from him, he was in the midft of a moft paíTionate fpeech when the drawing-room door fuddenly open¬ ed, and a young gentleman of a very prepoffefiing appearance entered ; but who, on the fight of Lord Withers's humble pofture, paufed until the old peer made fhift to rifa and advance to meet him, exclaiming, 4t You are wel¬ come home, m) Lord/' The ftianger, w ho was no other than Lord Wilmot, leplied, « I beg your pardon, but really 1 had no idea of any one being in the drawing-room, for the fervant infoi med me my mother and fifl m were out." It would be impofiîbîe to ? 5 paint
paint Peggy's confufion during this difcourfe: Lord Wilmot furprifing Withers at her feet, made her unable to raife her eyes, while he on the con¬ trai y appeared proud of being caught in fo gallant a pofition· Lord Wil¬ mot's eyes were fixed on Peggy with the moft fcrutinifing attention : as he knew nothing of her coming to Lon¬ don, he could not conceive who or what fhe was, that he thus unexpect¬ edly found in his mother's apartment* and more particularly tête-à-tête with Withers. 4ζ You have remained at Harwich longer than Lady Beugle ex¬ pected,'* faid the peer." <t I met with fome fi lends," replied Lord Wil¬ mot, i( who entreated me fo warmly that ï could not refufe, and with whom I ic-
I returned this day to town, they being obliged by exprefs to attend at the War-office; from whence I alfo learned that my coufin Duncan has joined his regiment, and is now at no great diftance from Franckfort, near which it is thought the armies under the command of Granby and Rocham- beau will foon meet and come to ac· tion, in which cafe our young captain may perhaps have an opportunity of fignalifing himfelf, as it is expected to be a warm engagement»" f*eggy, whofe confufion had prevented her raj fing her eyes fince the entrance of Loi d Wilmot, forgot every other con¬ sideration on the news of Duncan's ap¬ proaching danger, and involuntarily ejaculated, "Heaven protect him !" at ? 6 the
the fame time her features affumİng # deathlike languor, and with the utmoffe exertion preventing herfelf from faint¬ ing. Her emotion was by no means- loft on either of the gentlemen·; the «Ideft of whom now accounted for the eoldnefs with which fhe had treated his addreffes y by her agitation on only the bare fuppofition of Duncans danger. Lord Wilmot on the con·. trary wa3 ftill more bewildered ; and as foon as fhe had in a fmall degres recovered herfelf, determined no longei? io bear the tortures of fufpenfe, and therefore retired for a few minutes to enquire of his mother's attendant, who was the young ftranger he liad fo u un¬ expectedly met with. During Lord Wilmot's abfence, Wither
Withers once more attempted co mol¬ lify Peggy, whofe mind being deeply wounded by the news fhe had heard, anfwered more peevifhly than before, cc I beg, fir, you would receive as my final anfwer, what I have already faid, nor trouble yourfelf or me any farther» as my mind is fixed, and cannot alter." * c On Captain Campbell, doubtlefs !" interrupted the mortified peer with a- grin. 4ς I did not fufpect you were engaged, madam, or fhould never have taken the liberty to offer my¬ felf y Lady Beugle indeed ought to have informed me of it." Peggy re¬ mained a moment too much confufed to reply : at length ftruggiing with her natural timidity, fhe anfwered, " You have no reafon, fir, for fuch a furmife* Colonel
Colonel Campbell and Captain Dun» can are my benefactors, and my heart muft ever feel the moft lively anxiety for their welfare. I think proper to fay thus far, as doubtlefs your fuppo¬ fition originated from the concern, I was not hypocrite enough to conceal, I felt for Captain Campbell's danger." 44 Oh ! you have no caufe for alarm," replied the difappointed beau with a malicious fneer, 44 he will certainly be careful of fo precious a life l ** Cap¬ tain Campbell," returned Peggy with a haughtinefs that thofe accuftomed to her natural gentlenefs would have thought her incapable of, " will ever do his duty, and fhew his courage againft opponents worthy his anger, or able to withftand it." Withers was
was on the point of making an anfwer that probably might have increafed Peggy's anger, had not Lord Wilmot at that moment entered the apartment, having gained the information he re¬ quired. 4t Mifs Grant," faid he, " I know not how to apologife, but my ignorance of who you were muft plead my excufe." Peggy replied to his compliment, and a few minutes after Lord Withers took his leave, hardly deigning however to look at Peggy, who was heartily rejoiced at his de¬ parture, nor was Lord Wilmot lefs fo.
C H ? P.
CHAP. IL ** So doth the turtle challe and true Her fellows death regrete, And daily mourns for his adieu, And ne*er renews her mate.*' Marquis οψ Montuose. I^ORD Wilmot was about twenty- four, handfome, generous and brave ¡ bred in the fafhionable world, he gave into its pleafures more from cuftom than inclination; he had made the tour of Europe, was perfectly accompliihed, and univedally pronounced a complete gentleman. Heir to a confiderable for¬ tune, he had for fome time been thought a defirable match by feveral prudent fa¬ thers, and poffeffed of a good perfon and lively underftanding, by no means diiliked
diiliked by the daughters; but, defended by indifference, his heart had withftood .ill attacks. In his addrefs to women, his manner was peculiarly foft and pleaf¬ ing ; to his own fex open and manly: partial to his youngeft fifter through a iimilarity of difpofition, he ever warmly efpoufed her part, defending her againft the ill humours of Eleanor, which he was particularly enabled to do from the power he maintained over the mind of his mother. His likenefs to Sophia gained him at once an intereft in tbe grateful heart of P e ggy> who, on the departure of Wi¬ thers, converfed with him lefs timidly than fhe had done with any man fince her arrival in London. Lord Wilmot was apprifed from his mother's abigail oí
of Withers's bufinefs, the tête~û~îtîe was therefore accounted for ; Peggy's diftant behaviour, and the difappointcd peer's departure, likewife informed him of his bad fuccefs: he therefore employ * ed the whole force of his fatire to repre- fent the offended beau in the moft ludi¬ crous colours; which, however, was far from exciting any mirth in the bofom of Peggy, whofe thoughts were intirely fixed on Duncan's approaching danger. Lord Wilmot finding Peggy had nei¬ ther abilities nor tafte for fcandal, though nyeríted, changed the converfa¬ tion, by inquiring how íhe liked Lon* don ? 4t Really, my Lord, to confefs truly, not much ; the variety of ob¬ jects and perpetual buftie bewilder me, and make me regret more than I think 1 even
î t ven fliould in a quieter life, the plea- iuies of Kenneth Caftle."— 4i At your age," replied he, u few ladies are fond of retirement, in fo lonely a fpot too, for I think you have no neighbours within fome miles ; did you not there find time frequently hang heavy on your hands, or rather how did you dif¬ pofe of it ? M —" Very eafily, for we were perpetually bufy from fix in the morning to eleven at night : as foon as* breakfaft was over, if the weather was fine, the Colonel and Mr. Sommers walked, and ufually condefcended to take me with them ; on our return, Captain Campbell,'* faid fhe with a figh, " or myfelf read until dinner, after which, converfation, mufic, or very fre* quently dancing clofed the day—happy days*
days, that never can again be known at Kenneth Caftle, Ihould, which Heaven forbid ! Captain Campbell fall, Alas !" continued flie, the agitation of her mind overpowering every other idea, " even now perhaps he bleeds, far from thofe who would footfi his pains,, and give their lives to fave his."— 4€ Happy Duncan !" exclaimed he, 4C as you doubtlefs include yourfelf among the number." Peggy remained for a mi¬ nute filent through confufion and vexa- tion, that her ready lips fliould ever difclofe the thoughts of her heart. 44 Colonel Campbell and Mr. Som¬ mers, my Lord, I am fure could not fur¬ vive his lofs; for myfelf, my obligations to him—his virtues—"—" My dear Mifs Grant," interrupted he, u your behavioui
A SCOTTISH TALE. 45 behaviour needs no excufe, it is too amiably interefting: Duncan I doubt not will return fafe, nay, Ihould he fall, by Heaven I do not know the man that would not envy him !"— * t La¬ ment him rather, my Lord," faid fhe, miftaking his meaning ; ic what heart acquainted with him, but even now muft feel his danger ? Ah, why would the Colonel, who loft his only fon in one of thefe horrible encounters, ven¬ ture fo precious a life l* The difcourfe was here broken off by a loud knock¬ ing at the ftreet-door, and a moment after Lady Beugle and her daughters entered : Lord Wilmot's furprife had been extreme on feeing Withers and Peggy alone ; but his aftonifhment was trifling compared to that of the Lady on
on finding the old beau gone, and hi*. place fupplied fo little to her liking. However, concealing her vexation, fhe inquired for Lord Withers, who, Peggy replied, had been gone a confi¬ derable time; a piece of information to which her Ladyfhip anfwered with cool- nefs, 44 1 am forry for it, I hope he met with nothing to render his ftay in my houfe difagreeable. You, Wilmot, I íliould have imagined would have been polite enough to have retired when you found Mifs Grant particularly engag- ed. ,> —" Particularly engaged!'*repeat¬ ed he, laughing—" my dear madam, I never fufpected íhe was fo, nor indeed on my entrance knew what to think on finding an angel and a fatyr tête-à-tête ; curiofity therefore compelled me to ftay,"
ftay." Though Lady Beugle was by no means fatisfied, fhe laid no more on the fubject, but after fome general conver¬ fation, the whole party retired for the night. The following morning brought Peggy frefh vexation. Lord Withers complained loudly of his refufal, falfely affirming that Mifs Grant had threat¬ ened him with the vengeance of Cap¬ tain Campbell ; an accufation, to which though Peggy pleaded not guilty, Lady Eleanor treated with great acrimony, nor Lady Beugle lefs fo. Sophia was filent; but on the matter being fpoke of before Lord Wilmot in Peggy's abfence, he undertook her caufe in the moft ftre- nuous terms : " Isit poffible, madam," faid he to his mother, ** that you could expect
expect fuch a facrifice ? a worn-out debauchee, the refufe of evet y proíti- tute in town, to be united to fo much beauty and innocence ! if you give it a fécond thought, you cannot defire it. Confider, my dear madam," continued he, kiffing her hand, ** had any one re¬ quired fuch a fevere tafk of you at Mifs Grants age, when 1 am fure you were gifted with all thofe charms, which make that old wretch fo ardently feek her."—"But, Wilmot," interrupted the Lady fomewhat foftened, " remember the difference of birth—is it not anamafe- ing offer for fuch a girl ? But I affure you fhe is very proud, and nothing lefs than difgracing the family who has raifed her can fuffice, the name of Campbell alone gratify her vanity."— " My
€i My brother, madam," faid Lady Eleanor fatirically, " is partial to pretty women : no wonder then he takes the giils parti nay, perhaps he envies Dun¬ can's happinefs in being beloved by fuch a beggar. I wonder how ever Lord Withers could think of difgracing him^ fel f by fuch a marriage."—" True, Elen, I am very partial to pretty women particularly thofe whofe faces are unbe* daubed by cofmetics, and forms und if- torted by affectation. Duncan's tafte is perhaps fomewhat fimilar; but,my fweet fifter, as you appear fo interefted in pro¬ viding Loid Withers a wife, where cart he find one fo charming and fafhionable as yourfelf ?" Lady Beugle was here obliged to interfere, which, together Vol, IL D with
with the entiance of company, put an end to the difpute. Peggy wrote the day aftei Wiihcis's difmiffion to the Colonel, informing him of the whole, as well as her timi¬ dity would permit : Lady Beugle had alfo written to him, condemning her re¬ fufal as veiy impiudent, as fuch a mar¬ riage would inevitably have made her fortune. Thus were affairs at Lord Beugle's : his lordfhip fcimally complaifant; Lady Beugle cold and haughty; Eleanor fati- rical and diftant; Sophia gentle, affable and kind, blunting the acutenefs of her family's ili-humour by the fweetnefs of her own, friendly to Peggy, and treat¬ ing her lather as a beloved fifter than an ii.fi rior. Lord
Loid Wilmot, befoie Peggy's arrival in town, was feldom at home ; he was now perpetually fo, unlefs he accom¬ panied her with his mother and fitters to any public entertainment, in which cafe he was fixed by her fide, paying her all thofe littleattentions which well- bred men adopt *hen they ftudy to pleafe. Sophia was tenderly attached to him, which, added to his own beha¬ viour, made bim eftimable to Peggy, who had no more idea of his being in love with her, than if flie had been his giandmother. Withers vifitcd Lady Beugle as ufual, even fomctimes en¬ deavouring to mollify Peggy, who, in fuch cafes, took icfuge by Sophu, nay, often by Lord Wilmot ; for, as fhe had peremptorily refufed to fee him any D 2 mor
more alone, he had no opportunity but in public company. In this manner fix weeks elapfed, during which nothing material hap¬ pened, the time pafiìng in a continual fucceflion of amufementV of "different kinds, all of which Peggy attended with a heavy lieart : her difagreeable iituarion at Lady Beugle's prefled on her fpiiits, which were ill-formed to withftand pride and haughtinefs, and that would inevitably have overpowered her. but for tiie generous fupport of Lúd y Sophia, and the attenrion of Wilmot, who, careful to gratify her w i ih es, ever brought her the news from the army, informing her about the period above mentioned, that the action near Frankfort had taken place, during 2 which
which Duncan had fignalifed himfelf in a particular manner. Fortunately no one but himfelf and Sophia were in the apartment when he communicated this news to Peggy, whofe raptures on hearing of Duncan's fafety were as un» governable, as her fears for his danger had before been ; every word and action being convincing proofs how/ tenderly (he was attached to him— ? cer¬ tainty that forced a figh from the bofora of Wilmotb
*- Οι
CHAP.
Ç Η Λ P. III. #< The pc íl of fute imíhtmLuig I maintain." Homs. W HILE Peggy was counting the hours until the time that fliould reftore her to her beloved friends, the Colonel and Mr. Sommers did not pafs their days fo cheerfully as ufual at Kenneth Caftle ; they both found the want of their youthful companions, news from whom ever afforded them peculiar plea- fure. Lady Beugle's letter refpecling Peggy's rc fu fal of Lord Withers, in- ftead of exciting Lis anger pleafed him ; c< I would have given her up forever," faid he, " had ihe been dcfpicable enough
.SCOTTISH enough to let his paltry wealth influ¬ ence her to facrifice herfcif to fuch an, old dotard." Peggy's de fe ript io n of him excited his mirth. 4t Figure to yourfelf, my dear fir," faid flie in her letter, 4i a man who they fay is not more than fifty, but-that appears older than our high- landers at eighty, tall, meagre, bony, and emaciated ; his eyes red and funken, yet fquinxing in ftrange frightful direc¬ tions—but that, Lady Sophia fays, he means for ogling ; then his hair is dref- fed in the moft ridiculous manner, being curled all over ; his body ft rai tiy compreffed in a filk jacket, for it cannot be called a coat ; and under his arm a little three-cornered ilat thing, which Lady Sophia informs me is a hat, or I ûiouki never have gueffe.1 it for fuch ; D 4 his
his legs fwelled to a dreadful degree, but decorated with filk ftockings, and, to complete all, his old withered hands ftuíled in an enormous muff. His perfon muft at once intereft pity, were he not fo clothed, and did not make himfelf ftill more difagreeable by his behaviour, which is ridiculous beyond conception. Indeed, my beft friend, could you once fee him, I fliould ftand perfectly excufed; for I well know that you could not help defpifing him, for his wealth and titles would have no weight with you," Such was Peggy's defcription of Withers to the Colonel, who in return informed her that he was fatisfied with her refufal, as he thought the match a very improper one. To Lady Beugle he replied in much the fame
fame terms, thanking her for the care flie had taken of her charge, but ex- preffing ? fixed refolution of not exert¬ ing his power over her in ? circum¬ ftance in which her future happinefs was fo materially concerned. The Colonel frequently heard from Duncan, and had alio received the moil íhtterino teftimonies of his courage from feveral veteran officers with whom he was acquainted. Thefe informed h ini' that Duncan had behaved fo bravely, that he had been pitched on to com¬ mand in fomc defperate íkirmithes, and had accompanied Prince Ferdinand and Granby in their attack againft Stain ville, , who had ported himfelf in a wood near CafTel,at the head ofthe flower of the French infantry, in which action heglori- D 5. oufly
oufly diftinguifhed himfelf, receiving a wound in the arm. His own account of it to the Colonel ran thus : 1C You have doubtlefs, my dear fir, before now heard of our engagement with Stamville, in which the fortune of the day was with us; two battalions only ofthe enemy efcaping, notwithftanding they behaved bravely. 44 Mr. Sommers and yourfelf I hope are well. He informs me in his laft, that Peggy is gone to Lady Beugle's : why would you deprive yourfelf of her com¬ pany ? Neither can flie, I am fure, be fo happy there as with you ; I think I know her heart, it is too much like my owp to be amufed with the foppery that reigns there ; let me prevail with you, my dear fir, to recall her.—I have juft 3 received
received an order to hold myfelf in in- ftant readinefs tojóin the troops cover¬ ing the fiege ofCaflel, from whence, by the firft opportunity, you İh all hear Írom me. I almoft forgot to tell you I received a fliot through my left arm, but it is now quite well. I íliould not have mentioned it, but feared that you might be otherwife informed of it, and think it fomething material; but I afime you it is fo mei e a trifle, that I do not believe I (hall be able to iliew you the· fear. I was fortunate enough to form* an acquaintance at Lady Beugle's with a young officer called Orfield, and l/ho* embarked at the fame time as myfelf. Little obliged to fortune, nature ap¬ pears to have been determined to make* bim amends for that flight, by beftow*- 1 D ? ing'
ing her favours in profufion. A good perfon, a brave and generous heart, an open demeanour, a ftrong and polifhed underftanding^ ought not, my good fir, to languifii in obfcurity ·, he muft, there¬ fore, on our return become your friend, as he is already mine. A pairof colours is too poor a provifion for fuch a man : nay, to tel! you a fecret, which by the way is rather a breach of fiiendfhip, he loves and is beloved by my coufin Sophia, but in the unhappy itate of his finances,. dares not hope to meet, with Lady Beugle's approbation, and h determin¬ ed rather to relinquish her for ever, than marry to reduce her to live on his ilender pittance. Adieu, my dearimek,. 1 have juft received an·* order that obliges eie to break off—Let me entreat %» you
you to fend for Peggy back to Kenneth. Caftle ; confider how dear you are to her—The drums beat, I 'murt away-» once moie farewell! Duncan Gampp^ll.'* 44 Orfield ? faid the Colonel. " 1 knew his father wfcll; he was a Captain· in the twenty-ijxth regiment of foot, and what is. more. Sommers, was as valiant a fello vv as ever headed a com¬ pany, and, by Heaven ! his fon fliali not want-a friend while ï have life and abi- lity *. he is a gentleman, and, though perhaps not Sophia's equal in point of' fortune, is· by no means behind hér in rank, as his family is both ancienc and honourable. 5 * The difcourfe now turned on various feibjects^ and on Peggy among the number,
number, whp Mr. Sommers obferved would, he fuppofed, re turft' in about two months, cxpi effing alfo his fatisfac¬ tion that her grandmother wa? not yet come back from Sky, u as," faid he, '* flie might be difappointed on finding her abfent : however, the time will now be fhort; and, upon the whole, ï think it vvas rather a good thing that we have not informed her of it, as the poor creature would have been perplexed with a thoufand anxieties for her grand¬ child."
? H ? P..
CHAP. IF. *' To me ??? after days nor nichtb Will eir bc faft or kind ; I'll fill die air with heavy figlia, And ¿leQt till I am blind. " Old Scottish Ball At». JL\OTHïNG material' happened to difturb the peace of Kenneth Caftle for near a month after the Colonel received Duncan's letter, and all remained as before mentioned at Lady Beugle's, except that Peggy had become much thinner than ?? her arrival'in London, a circumftance which fhe had never mentioned in her letters, determined to wait with refignation her recall. She had heard of Duncan being wounded in the arm
arm, an event that had preyed on het fpirits, and rendered her almoft incapa¬ ble of maintaining an appearance of calmnefs, although Sophia, who really loved her, took all poffible pains to confute and convince her his wound was not dangerous. e< My dear Peggy/ 5 faid ftie, as they were one day alone, ζ< you feel-too acutely ever to be happy; believe me,- my heart is as anxious as yours for one who is in-equal danger with Duncan; peihaps I inali give you fatisfaction when I tell you it is his par¬ ticular friend, yet I· do not imbitter every moment of my life with the re¬ flection that he will be killed. Alas !" continued fhe, <t if he returns fafe, I never can be his/* She then with frankncfs informed Peggy, that flie had long'
long loved Enfign Orfield, but t liat their affection was a fecret to the whole family : " as," added fhe, 4t though my fortune is tolerably good, you know my mother too well to imagine íhe would confent to fuch a marriage ; for fhe would rather fee me a miferable countefs, than the happy wife of a com¬ moner.'* Peggy, confoled by the friendihip of Sophia and repeated airuyanees from every quarter that Duncan's wound was completely healed, began to look forward with pleafing expectation to the time that íliould reftore her to Kenneth Caftle; a circumftance that gave redoubled fatisfaction, as there was 'a ftrong report of peace—news that contributed more towards re¬ lieving
,* heving her fpirits than any other caufe. Lady Beugle, though much difap¬ pointed at the Colonel's letter, yet con¬ cealed her* vexation for fear of incurring her uncle's difpleafure, and fiuftrating what fhe ftill hoped to bring to perfec¬ tion, the union of Duncan with Eleanor. For Lord Betgle, his indolent temper hardly permitted him to give a thought on what was paffing ; but, his opinion afked, he was ever roo priite to difíent from his lady. One evening that Lady Beugle had remained at home fiom a cold, Lord Withers entered, and after fome pre¬ vious convet farion informed the ladies that a decifive action had taken place orrj" at CafTcl, the garrifon of ten thoufand mea
men being obliged to" evacuate the place. As both Peggy and Sophia were intcicftcd in this intelligence, they Jiftencd with the utmoft attention, nei¬ ther, however, daring to venture any qucftion, Peggy with difficulty fupport- ing any appearance ofcalmnefs. i( Your nephew I think, Lady Beugle, is at CíLÍTd ; k h to bc hoped he will efcape fafe. Fame gives him to you, Lady Eleanor," faid he, with a fpiieful leer at Peggy i <4 it is therefore to be hoped that lie will return with the ufual num¬ ber of limbs, for fo much beauty muft not be beftowed on a hakin» nartner.'* Ο ι. Peggy's agitation became mere ana more violent. Siie was employed in fy r 'SS in S mufl-a, and endeavomed to coDceal her concern by working with u n ufual
unufual fpeed, fewing one ftitch over another, pricking her fingers, and forming the flower fiie was embroider¬ ing in fuch a ftiape, that it was impof- fible to have known u for fuch. 44 Fame, my lord," faid Lady Elea¬ nor, tc is frequently falfe. Duncan, even in the ftate I have already fctn him, needs much alteration before he can pleafe me; then I leave you to> judge whether the lofs of a limb or two would be any additional recommenda¬ tion."—" The woman to whom fuch a misfortune would not render him more dear," faid Peggy with heat, her anger maftering even timidity and fear, i( is unworthy of him."— <( Mifs Grant," interrupted Lady Beugle, " you forget yourfelf."—*" I beg your Lad) (hip's paidon, 5 *
pardon," replied fhe, " but-" The entrance of Lord Beugle put a ftop to the difcouife ; in his ufual indolent manner he threw himfelf upon a fopha, faying carelefsly, 4C I am forry ? be the meffenger of bad news, par¬ ticularly as it muft materially diftrefs your uncle Campbell. Duncan is dangerouily wounded in his endeavours to refcue Enfign Orfield—but—blefs me, what is the matter ?" feeing Peggy fall fcnfelefs on the carpet, and the moment after his daughter Sophia, who made an inftinctive effort to fave hci, but funk overpowered on her bofom in the fame fituation. Affiftance was immediately admi- niftered, but without effect on Peggy, who was removed to her apartment in a ftate
fiate of infenfibility ; her fituation, how* ever, exciting no pity ineither Withers or Eleanor, the former of whom í aid, 44 I hope the partiality which I inform¬ ed your lad) fli ip I fufpected is now vifible enough ; indeed I had heard the news when 1 came, though I did not choofe to be the meílenger : but I muft take my leave : —this vexatious event will, I fear, deprive the world of your charms until you learn the real fiate of your coufin. Adieu ! I (hail do myfelf the honour of inquiring daily after your health."—Lady Beugle had not paid much attention to the peer's I aft fpeech, being wiapt in meditations of' a different nature. Should Duncan die, which from the account received was- the moil probable event, her lady¬ fhip
Ihip became heirefs to fome valuable eftates ; fhe might likewife expect, as the Colonel's ncareft relation, to inherit con lìtici ably from him—ideas that doubtlefs enabled her to bear her for¬ row with great fortitude. Nor had this prudential confideration lefs effect on Lord Beugle, who converfed with his Lady on the misfortune with truly phi- lofophic calmnefs ; Lady Eleanor in the mean-time reclining on the fopha, fmel- ling her falts, deploring her weak nerves, and paffing fatirical remarks on the ex . quinte fenfibility of Sophia. Peggy re¬ mained for a confiderable time infenfi¬ ble; Sophia, who had fpeedily reco¬ vered, giving her every attention which friendíhip or feeling could dictate : at length, rcftored to a keen fenfe ol the horrors
horrors that had occafioned her dif- order, fhe gave gave way to theanguifli of her heart* Sophia in vain endeavour¬ ing to bring her mind to compofure« xt Alas!" faid flie, joining her tears with Peggy's, 4< Duncan's misfortunes I think they fay originated from his at¬ tempt to refcue Oi field, who has, per¬ haps, fliared his fate : if fo, my fi iend, my lofs will be fevere as yours ; yet let us not give way to defpair—we generally learn the darkeit fide of misfortune: Duncan, I have no doubt, is wounded, and perhaps feverely, yet, it is very pro¬ bable not fo dreadfully as reprefented ; let me intreat you therefore to becalm, while I endeavour to learn the real ftate of the cafe. Wilmot unfortunately was out when we heard the fiift account, perhaps
perhaps he is now returned, and can inform me more particularly." Peggy, diftracted with grief, entreat¬ ed her to do fo, and Sophia immedi¬ ately left her inqueftofthe intelligence fhe wifhed to gain. Wilmot really loved Peggy, yet was a generous rival ; he refpected Duncan, and was fincerely concerned for his misfortune ; from him Lady Sophia learned that her coufin's wounds were very dangerous, though not decifively pronounced mortal : he had received a fliot in the fhoulder, and feveral other wounds with a bayonet on different parts ofthe body; particularly one in the thigh, which appeared the moft alarming, as it was feared an am¬ putation muft take place; in confe¬ quence of which, an exprefs had been Vol. II, E fem
fent to Colonel Campbell; the mef¬ fenger that came over wibh the account having likewife brought ? letter for him written with Duncan's own hand. " But how came my coufin fo much in. the heat of the action ? demanded Sophia, trembling and dreading an aiifwer* 4C Enfign Orfield," replied he, 44 was taken prifoner by four of the enemy; upon which Duncan, who had even then received fome trifling wound, r u fhed forward and endeavoured to refcue him ; an attempt in which he had undoubtedly fallen, as he had no fécond, Orfield having been difarmed when fit ft taken· The odds were too great againft him, yet hefought undaunt¬ edly with two, the others being em¬ ployed in guarding the Enfign until, one
ofie failing, one of thofe who had t! t care of Orfield fupplied his comrade's place. Duncan's lofs of blood began to overpower him, when Orfield, who, though unarmed, had now only a fingle an t agon i ft to encounter, made a bold efloit, freed himfelf, and matching a bayonet that had appertained to the foldier who had fallen, ruflied forward to affift his brave deliverer : but the conflict was ftill too unequal—the enemy preffed hard upon them, Orfield fhield- mg Duncan to the utmoft ; his efforts were, however, vain, and both molt probably muft have been victims to their friendíhip, had not, at the very hit extremity, a Scotchman joined them, who feeing the diftrefs of his countryman, for Duncan had fallen, E 2 with
with heroic courage defended him, and fo fuccefsfully, that with his own hand he brought two to the earth, the third feeking his fafety in flight. You may eafily imagine they did not take the trouble to purfue him, their whole cares being now on Duncan. Orfield was wounded though but flightly, yet too much to affift in helping him oñ*. A detachment of the enemy was at no great diftance ; and the brave foldier, for he was only a private, unaflifted bore our coufin from the field/*— 44 Ble flings on him !" exclaimed So¬ phia ; " but Orfield, brother, are his wounds dangerous ?" 44 By no means fo—but my dear fifter, foften this account to Mifs Grant ; her gentle nature will, without proper
proper care, fink under fo Tevere a blow." Sophia had no need of this charge; (he was pofíèffed of too much huma¬ nity to wound any one when it was pof- fible to avoid it. On her return to Peggy (he found her much more calm than ihe expected, but on her features a fixed melancholy that was far more alarming than turbu¬ lent grief: ít You come to tell me, my kind Lady Sophia, that he is dead. I am prepared. Heaven is kind ; our flates were unequal here—but there that difference will ceafe, and we íhaíi part ilo more !"— 4{ My dear grl/' replied fhe, «' you ever furimfe the woift; Duncan is certainly dangeroufly wound¬ ed, but not dead, nay, the meifen^er E 't that
that arrived with the news alfb brought a letter written by himfelf to the Co¬ lonel; I therefore leave you to judge on calm reflection, whether he can be in fo much danger as report firft pub¬ lished." She then, in terms foft as fiiendfhip could devife, related the whole to Peggy, fearful that fome voice lefs confoìatory ihould bear the tale of woe. When fhe came to the account of his prefervation by the brave foldier, P e ggy* s languid and funken eyes for a moment beamed with animation: " Gal¬ lant man !" exclaimed (he, ζζ may your reward be equal to your valour I may Duncan live, then will you feel the gra* tîtude of a noble heart !—but alas !** continued ihe, her features again re* lapfing into their former languor, " í flatter
¿latter myfelf;—he cannot live, and his death will fink the Colonels grey hairs with forrow to the grave. What then remains for me when they are my all, my whole world, but to pray to join them ?" Sophia was now obliged to attend her mother, who had fent for her, leaving Peggy alone. " Teil Lady Beugle the truth, my dear Lady Sophia," faid (he : " if flie afks for me, I am nnable to wait on her, and care not now what furmifes may be formed on my conduct ; my firft, my generous benefactor, either lies dead, or at the laff extremity; and can I drefs my face in fmilès ? Ah no, never, never fhall the wretched Peggy fmile more !" While the family at Lady Beugle's were fituated as above defcribed, the E 4 Colonel
Colonel and Mr. Sommers had mci with a great furprife, though the un¬ happy news of Duncan's misfortune had not yet reached them.
CHAP. Vi 4 * I took her ín my arms j tbc barnie fmild Wi* fie a look, wad made a fdvagc mild. Nor do I rue my care about the wean, For ihe*« weel worth the pains that I ha'e tane. ?? fee flic's bonny ; I can fwear ihe'e good, And am right fure fhe's come of gentle blood: Of whom I kenna»" ? Allan Ramsay* 1 W ? days after the melancholy news of Duncan's misfortune reached London, as the Colonel and Mr. Som¬ mers were fitting playing at chefs, Mrs. Donald entered to inform them, that
that Peggy's grandmother was juft ar¬ rived from the Ifle of Sky, and appeared much hurt at her grand-daughter's ab¬ fence. ' f Admit the good woman in¬ ftantly," faid the Colonel, 4t I warrant we will comfort her." ** She feems not fo well as ufual," replied Mrs. Donald, '5 which J fancy makes her feel the abfence of Peggy more fe¬ verely ; but when you inform her fhe will fo fpeedily return, fhe perhaps may be more compofed." Mrs. Do¬ nald now retired, and in a few mi¬ nutes introduced Jannet, whofe health indeed appeared much impaired. The Colonel kindly infifted on her fitting down, which after many apologies was complied with. 4( Jannet,'* faid he, " I am forry to fee you look worfe^ than ufual. Peggy I expect home in E 5 about
about a month > flie is on a vìfit at my niece Lady Beugle's, fo I defire you will not make yourfelf uneafy ; but as your health appears indiffer¬ ent, remain at the caftle until her return, Mrs. Donald will take care of you," " The God of Mercy re¬ quite ye," replied fhe, " I am ftricken in years, and canna lang furvive. I have had meikle forrow fin* I left ye· 1 ha' laid my pure fifter in the grave, and feel that I fiiall foon follow. Wae is me, perhaps I may na live to fee my dear bairn: alack, year after year I Battered myfell that my brae lad Allan wad return and affift her ïn claifîng my ene ; but the hope was vain, he has preffed before me to the grave."—· 44 Allan !" faid the Colonel : " I un- derftood your fon was dead a long time
time previous to Peggy's coming to the caftle." 44 1 told you, fir,** anfwered (he, t( I had long lofi the ftarT of my age \ but I did na fay he was dead, though mair forrows me, he is too furely fo. It is above thirteen lang years fin' he quitted poor Peggy and me, during which time I ha' never heard of him, though I left our prefent direction wl the minifter of the kirk from whence we came, in cafe he returned or fent any letters."— 44 Indeed, Jannet, I always under¬ ftood he was dead," replied the Colo- lonel ; <c I am fure you informed me Peggy's mother was fo." " I did truly ; thefe hands claifed her ene, tne brighteft ene that ever mine beheld, the day after Peggy's E 6 birth.'·
birth," " Perhaps the lofs of a va¬ luable wife drove your unhappy fon to forfake his home and infant child/* faid Mr. Sommers. " Ye ha' all alang mifta'en me," replied Jannet, " and it was ??? my intereft to fet ye right, though my heart revolted at deceiving, even with¬ out telling a lie—a deceit however of which Peggy is as ignorant as your- fells ; therefore dinna impute to her my faults, nor the faults of her parents. Alack, I feared I fliould never live to get hame to difclofe it ; and whatever may be the hazard will declare a', left death fhould prevent me." 44 You have deceived me then re¬ fpecting Peggy i " faid the Colonel gravely. The old woman appeared weighed down
down with the importance of what ihe had to reveal, and was for fome time unable to proceed, until Mr. Sommers gave her a glafs of wine, faying, 4t I cannot fuppofe, Jannet, you have any thing to difclofe that can either draw the Colonels anger on yourfelf or Peggy, therefore relate what you have to fay without fear." " Alack," replied lhe, " the con¬ fufions fome years back muft excufe me; and your attachment, gude fir, to the family at prefent on the throne, and abhorrence to the Stuarts, caufed my filence ·» or gratitude would lang fin ha* opened my lips : but I feared your anget, yet canna die with fie a fecret on my heart. If my dear bairn is what ye ca' a rebel, can fhe help that ? 8
that? Dinna caft her off; in gude troth ye'll break her heart P* The Colonel remained filent« *' She certainly cannot help the er* rörs of her parents ; therefore proceeds and ?? aflured of pardon from the Co¬ lonel, if you merit it/* faid Mr. Som¬ mers· The old woman thus encouraged, after a fhort paufe, began, tf I believe I before informed ye that I kept houfe within three mites of Edinburgh,— My gudeman died when my fon was about eighteen, wlia immediately took on Him the care of the land which we farmed; and that fo prudently that we thrived mamly, until the unhappy con¬ fufions of one thoufand feven hundred and forty-five· Content in our hame, we did
dtd na trouble ourfells wi' kings and princes, whofe quarrels we thought wad' never (hake fae humble a roof as ours. My lad was then about twenty-five, and^ troth, as cadgie a pawky youth as any in Scotland, and weel favoured withal. During the troubles at Edinburgh, the foldiers, who ufed to act as they lifted, ? over-ran our fields, trampled down our - corn, and carried awa' our fheep; fae that I grat day and night, for nae- thing but ruin was before my ene^ My brae ion ufed to ecjmfort me with faying, " Hoot àway with ye mither, fie doings canna laft lang, a* will fune' gae weel again j if not, thank God I am able to maintain ye by my labour." As naething is fae fweet as comfort from thofe we love, his words cheered me, and
and in fpite ofthe troubles I kept on my · · fpinning and ufual occupations. One χ day it was, I weel remember, the nine¬ teenth of April one thoufand kven hun- i dred and fort y- fix, my fon went to pay t his rent to the laird to whom our land belanged, and, who detained him until \ it grew late. As he was returning hame, he met twa laffes in a chaife, and a wee! dreíled mon on horfeback, l' who called to him to afk the way. The ane that appeared the miftrefs, and wha had a foreign accent, faid, '* My gude friend, can you tell us where we could lodge to-night, ??? matter how humbly, fo it is quiet î" My fon, who as he profeffed himfell, was at anes ta'en wi* her faft voice, anfwered, There were plenty of gude inns
inns in Edinburgh ; but that for quiet- ncfs the town coudna much boaft. The mon then afked, If he didna ken fome private-houfe where the ladies coud repofe for a night, as they were Wearied wi' travelling ? My Allan re¬ plied, he ken'd ??? lodging ; but that if they wad be contented wl fie cheer as his hame afforded, they fhould be wel¬ come. Weel, to be brief, they agreed, and accompanied him, knocking a loud rap at my outer yett, which I ever kept carefully fattened for fear of danger. My heart trembled within me, for I thought naething lefs than it was fol¬ diers; therefore I Iuked out of the window demanding wha beat fae rude¬ ly j but my fears foon ceafed on hear¬ ing ?? fon laugh, faying, <c Doff your fears
fears mither, and dinna leave me ihiv· ering in the wind." Upon this I needed ??? haftening, but went and unbarred the door. Guefs my furprife when I faw wha he had broughr wi' him. 4i Mither," faid he, 4( mak up a brae fire, and prepare our beft bed : thefe travellers were diftreffed for a lodging, and ye I weel ken'd wad bid them welcome." I loo'd Allan, and was weel fatisfied to do what he re¬ queued; therefore fetched a meikle coal, and bid them be feated. The lady wha appeared the miftrefs was big wi' bairn, and feemed farely op- preffed wi* forrow. The ither, and the mon wha accompanied her, on the contrary were canty ; indeed the lafs I think was his lemmane. The lady queftioned
queftioned my fon particularly refpect¬ ing die war, on which fhe wad heave fie fighs as reached at anes the bottom o' my heart. In the courfe of th« evening, flie faid fhe was on her way to Argylefliire, and ??? doubt flie fpake truth, for furely falfehood was; never concealed under fie a heavenly Tİfage ; but I ha' ??? occafion to de· fcribe her—Peggy is her very marrow. " My gude friend," quo* flie to Allan, 44 1 will requite your kindnefs to me ; but can ye do me the favour to gang til town to-night, and enquire what news from the Highlands. The Duke of Cumberland I weel ken is in pur- fuit of the Chevalier j perhaps before now," continued fhe with a heavy figh, <c they have had an engagement." As I thought
I thought fhe might ha' a gudeman in the army ; I preiTed Allan to gang, who was ready enough of himfell to oblige her,' though it was rather late at night. Weel, he returned in about twa hours, with an account that the report was, that the Chevalier had gained a battle ; in confequence of which the Jacobites had given a ball, though the news was by ??? means confirmed. The lady faid licrle, but grat until her heart was like to break, and at length retired to bed wi' her maid; the mon wha accompanied her ileeping wi' Allan. About ane o'clock we were diilurbed by the firing of the caftle guns and thofe in the harbour ; on which Allan rofe, took his ????, and went to fee what could occafion fie an
an alarm in the dead of night, and found that the news he had brought hame before was unka faie; for in- itead of the Chevalier having gained a battle, he had been completely de¬ feated at Culloden. The lady had rifen at the firft alarm of the guns, and troth we had meikle to do to keep her frae fainting during Allan's abfence ; and 1 coudna help obftrving to her companion, that 1 dreaded the fright mould bring on the pains of child- hiith. Wcel, we retired anes mair to reft; but I could hear the pure foul making mane a 5 nights and as foon as day-break íhe rofe, and drawing me afide, put ñ\e guineas intil my hand ; which, though î refufed repeatedly, íhe wad infift of my taking-—faying, *· Alas !
** Alas ! if my beloved huiband has out- Hved the horrors of the battle, ye fhall ??? find my gratitude ftap here," She then defired my Allan to gang to tow n anes mair, and enquire into a* parti¬ culars, and if poílible to gain a lift of thofe wounded or killed on either fide. My lad obeyed, and remained a lang while abfent ; but was na* fnccefsfu', as he brought word back that he coud¬ na get a fure account until night. The agitation ofthe pure ladya' day would ha' grieved a heart of ftane, yet it feemed to ??? ??? meikle impreiïïon on her maid. At even Allan went again, and returned wi* the fatal lift, which the lady plucked out of his hand wi' eagernefs ; but, wae to tell ! Ui e hadna iuked ñvQ minutes before ihe funk ? from
from her chair in ? fainting fit, which terminated in convulfions. We im¬ mediately took her up to bed, where fhe was preien tiy feifed wi* the pangs of child-birth, though ftill ftrangely convulfed and infenfible. I haftened for a howdy, wha remained wi* her a* night ; during which her agonies never ceafed, and about ten the next morn fhe was delivered of Peggy. I fliould ??? neglect to inform ye, that through a' this mournfu' fcene, neither of her companions were fo dowie as myfell, that was but a ftranger til her· She continued İn dreadfu* fits a' the day after her labour, until near even, when the convulfions left her, and (lie recovered her fpeech ; but was farely wrang in her head, calling on feveral of
of the Chevalier's party and others About midnight fhe fell afleep, and continued fo till towards morn, when fhe awakened, but was farely changed ; her face was covered wi* the cauld fwat of death, and her bonny blue ene al¬ moft loft in their fockets. She tried to fpeak, but was too feeble, and laid ane of her white hands on her brow, as if fhe was endeavouring to think. Hearing me mak mane as I ftude by her fide, for my heart bled to fee her, fhe turned and faw the bairn which lay preffed on my bofom. ï held it til her, faying, " It is a bonny lafs — Heaven ftiield her !V Never ftiall I forget the luke íhe gave it; furely it w r as fie a luke as angels give on faik« lefs innocence, and leaning her heao forward,
forward, fixed her fweet but already cauld mou on the babe, makinga convulfive endeavour to fpeak, but only faid, 4t Al¬ mighty God—protect her !" And w? a heavy figh her heart burit İn twain, dying w i' her mou on the bairn's cheek.------By your leave, firs, for a moment I canna help greeting, even now, though it is near fcventeen years back. I wad-na undergo fie anither fcene for the world's lucre. Pure feck¬ lefs bairn, thou haft coft me dear, and I ha' loo'd thee dearly in return. Yc ha coft me my only lad—but Heaven's will be dune : it is na for me to com¬ plain." So faying, the old woman wiped off the tears that hung on her venerable cheek, and was preparing to continue; but theColonel, who as Vol. II. F well
well as Mr. Sommers was moved at her fimple yet feeling recital, infiftcd on her paufing ? -while, and taking fome refrefliment, which with difficulty fhe complied with, and then continued her narrative. 44 The fpirit had na funer left the faireft of a' earthly man¬ iions, than the lafs wha attended and the mon held a lang conference alane ; after which they called me, and fhe faid, " The lady wha lies dead is of a very gude family in the north, where fhe was ganging to join her gudemon» It is proper that her family fhould be acquainted wi' what has happened ; we will therefore leave the bairn w i' ye, and tak that mournfu* charge on us. I wad gang alane, but think in thefe troublefome times it is dangerous for
for laíles to be unprotected ; and this young mon might gae, but is unac¬ quainted wi' her friends. Ye may de¬ pend of hearing frae us in about a fortnight ; in the mean while bury the body, for which I will leave ye money, and fome likewife for the bairn if ye are willing." I readi'y confented, Heaven kens, ??? for lucre of gain, but for the fake of the fecklefs bairn, whole faiklefs innocence knockit on my heart ; firft however confult ing Allan, wha replied, " The mither of the bairn is dead, and I dinna like thefe folks at a'; and by the living ? —, they fhall ??? ha the lafs till they prove their title til her. They feem ro me, for a' their fpecioufnefs, mair glad- fome than waefu' at her death, for F ? which
which I fufpect them to be gude for nought. Let them bring back furn- cient teftimonies of right to the bairn, and we will gi' her up ; if not, I wad as fune truft the fecklefs lamb wi' the bludy wolf. If they canna do that, mither, flie fliali be mine; flie will fune be a canty companion for ye, and I fliali ha a bairn without mounting the ftool." Weel, I ha informed ye, ï confented, and troth they fune were ready to depart. The lady hadna a great deal of baggage i the whole being contained in a trunk that was fixed ahint the hired chaife that brought them, and a fma' box which flie carried in her ain hand when flie entered our houfe. Weel, the lafs hiked up a', packing in the chamber where her miftrefs lay dead,
dead, and that fae racklefsly, that I could hardly contain my temper, or help fhewing my abhorrence ; but î Iuked on the dead lady, and my angr.r was rebuked. 4t Ye fmile, ye faft faint Y' thought I, 44 and fliali I dare, evui before your fcnfelefs clay, to let paf¬ fion overpower me ?"—To be brief, they hired a chaife and fet off the very eve after her death, leaving the bairn wi* me, and ten guineas for the burial; 1 needna tell ye they tuke a' the geer wi' them, not forgetting even the little box, which I canna help thinking was of value, they appeared fae carefu* of'it; but the lafs faid it only con¬ tained her miftrefs's letters* Troth* I was gladfome to fee them depart ; and. that very night Allan went and F 3 fpoke
fpoke for a coffin, and likewife to fetch my fifter, wha then lived in Edinburgh, but has fin retired to Sky, to affift in the mournftl bufinefs we had in hand. 1 fliould ha told ye before, that I wadna ha the lady müv¬ ed out of bed, though the brute laftie that was wi* her, faid, 4C Lay her out on the fackclaith ; s ' but I couldna help replying, " Hoot awa 1 , fackclaith for yourfell; (he fhall na be pulled out, and her decent bonny limbs exposed and affronted in my houfe." The day but ane after her death, che burial men brought the coffin: wae is me, I think I hear even now its dolefu* rumbling up the narrow ftairs. I coudna> but greet over the bairn, whofe wee hands were clipft round my finger, as til crave
crave protection. Weel, the men en¬ tered, and went to the bed in order to remuve the body. " Haud, for your lives,** cried I, " I winna fuffer it ; women alane fhould perform the lafl duties to women/* Sae fpeaking, í made them depart, and wi* a heavy heart tuke the bairn down to Allan» to haud while my fifter and felf put the dear foul in her laft hame. I had a holland fheet, the marrow to that in which I buried my gudemon, and I fetched it to wrap up the lady 5 put- ling her on alfi> my bridal coif, which was the beft I had : weel, as we went to put it about her, I was nearly aftound on difcovcring on her bonny breaft, the picture of a lady hung til her neck w l a black ribband : we F 4 tuke
tuke it off, furm iling, and trotb ï thmk truly that tbe hatefit wench had forgotten it in her fpeed to be gane* When we had wiapped her in the ihect we put her in the coffin, and haftened down to Alan wi' the difcovery we had made ; he was as meikle aftounded as ourfells; but faid, " Mither, why furely it is her ain ? but I believe la¬ dies dinna wear their ain portraits- yet it can be ??? ither." Oh ! it was a benny picture ! wi' juft fie foft ene as Peggy's, a fmiling mou, a beautifu* nofe, a fkin fair as mountain fna, wi 9 cheeks like pale rofes : behind was fet a lock of hair, which was alfo the fame colour as Peggy's." 4i And where is this picture," interrupted the Colonel, <c that bears fo ftrong a refemblance to Pcoax' ·*'*
Peggyr"—Alack, I ha ??? it; but will fpeedily inform ye by what means I loft it. Weel, to cut my ftory fliorr, the morn before we meant to bury the lady, the minifter fent for Allan, wha immediately went til him. " í am meikle concerned,** quo' he, " til hear ye are guilty of fie doings." 4i Doings l' replied Allan, «* I kenna what ye wad be at; pray ye esplain ?" cc Why," faid he, <£ ha ye ??? gotten a bairn contrary to the laws of God and thofe of the land ? a bairn whofe mither, as 1 am informed, lies dead at this mi¬ nute in your houfe ! Hoot, lad, it is a wicked action, which ye muft anfwer baith in this world and the next." 4t Haud ye there, gude fir," replied F 5 Allan,
Allan, 4t 1 am fafe frae puniihment in the next warld ; and for this, lookye, was I the father, I wadna heed the ftool abawbie, fae lhad purchafed the bairn without the lofs of its bonny mither. God never furely fent fie a heavenly babe to bring puniihment on its parents, and ye may heciure to the day of judg¬ ment before ye perfuade me it was a ün til mak he a ane 1" " If ye are ??? its father, v*ha is ?" faid the minifter, for he wcel ken'd that Allan was ??? lyan Allan then repeated briefly til hima' that had paifed, upon which the minifter ceafed til blame him ; but faid, it was an unka pity he didna mak the people, that attended the lady, declare wha ihe was, as he ftrangly fufpected, as they had taen her gear, they wadna come
come back. The minifter then ac¬ companied Allan hame, and Iuked at the lady,, and the picture which was on her breaft, almaift as aftounded z& ourfells. and after a lang confideration,- faid, " I kenna what to think ; there is a lady which the Chevalier left wi* bail n at Carlifle, when he marched to the Highlands. She is faid to be a foreigner, and attended wi' but twav domeftics, a lad and lafs; it İs weel kenned ihe came the Edinburgh road^ and is at this moment eagerly fought after. The íhock ihe received at the· news of his defeat, and reading the lift of the dead and wounded^ ihe w ihe was deeply concerned, and Ì think mak it probable is the very woman» 1 therefore advife ye, as a friend,- til F 6 keep
keep the affair fecret fora-while, til ye fee how matters turn out—or ye may et intil meikle trouble for fecreting a rebel. I had my information of tlie affair frac the burial men, wha fun ply- think it is your bairn : let them think fae ftill, I will protect ye, in cafe of neceffity, frae blame*" The gude mon fune after departed, and in the even the lady was laid in the earth. I kenna why, but her fafr manner had wan upon my heart, and I grat as if ihe had been my ain bairn. Wecl, a fortnight elapfed, and ??? lafs returned ; after which, T canna fay, 1 had meikle expectancy of her. The bairn thrived amp in, and was the fole delight of my Allan, wha wad ha her called Peggy, as he had anes lued* a maid
maid of that name, but wha died when he was about twenty-one. In the mean time the gude minifter made a* poffible enquiry concerning the lady, wha was faid til be wi' bairn by die Chevalier,, and wha anfwered til the defcription of Peggy*s mither ; but coudna gain any tidings, fome faying flie was concealed in Scotland, ithers that fhe was gone off til France. When we found a' enquiries vain, we made ourfells eafy ;, entering intil ??? explanations refpecting Peggy, wha was generally believed to be a bairn of Allan's. Naething material happened for three years. Peggy was our hale delight, cheering us wi' her guiielefs tricks : Alan particularly ken'd ??? pleafure U
in her abfence, flie was ever trotting by his üde, calling him dad and myfell mimue ; the gude minifter advifing us til keep 1 her, even in an advanced pe¬ riod, in the fame happy ignorance, un¬ lefs we could difcover her parents ; u for," quo' he, " it could only infpire hopes that wad render her difcontent Wiethe ftate in which God hath placed her, and perhaps end in her ruin." Allan planted twa bonny frees over the lady's grave til mark the fpot, a green bay at her head, and a cyprefs at the fit, for as we didna ken her name he coud¬ na fix a ftane over her. Allan wad frequently luke at the bairn and figli, faying, 4t My bonny love, ye were ??? made for fie a cot as this," and I could, fee he was often loft in
in meditation. One day he faid, 4t Mi¬ ther, I ha lang thought of taking a journey, but fear ye will ??? approve it. This dear bairn is furely of high blude, and we do ??? juftice in bringing her up in obfcurity ;. what think ye ? were I to gae to the Chevalier's court, and endeavour to get an audience, per¬ haps the picture might lead til fome difcovery : if ???, we are but where we began, the bairn ftiall fliare our hame, and become truly ours," I canna fay but I was meikle againft fie a project, and reminded Allan ofthe many dangers that might attend the en- terprife, but I could fee he was deaf to a\— <c Ye ken, mither," replied he, " a' is now at peace, the journey to France therefore is a mere naething." Seeing
Seeing him refolved, and that he wad be uneafy if prevented, I at length agreed wi* a heavy heart, and Allan went to con¬ fult wi* the gude minifter, wha was weel pleafed at his intention, faying, " I am ??? rich, but will willingly furnifh ye with five guineas towards your journey. tjWecl ken a gentleman in London,wha ean gi' ye a letter to the Chevalier's court ; to this friend ye fliali bear ane frae me, and I truft your journey will be fuccefsfu'." Allin returned hame veel fatisfied wi' the minifter, and in a few days was ready for his departure, taking little wi' him but tlie picture, his beft ctaife, and a few neceflaries. Ah me ! never fhall I forget my forrow at parting wi* him ; I called him back, for my heart was farely opprefled·
Peggy greeting, though (he, pure inno¬ cent, ken'd ??? why, " ??? hafte, dad," quo' fhe : «* Ay, love," replied he, " ΙΊ1 fpecd me back to thee, and truft til bring thee hame a better fa- ther."— (ζ 1 winna ha him, I will ha nane but ye," quo* the bairn, clipfing his neck until Allan himfelf was muved* wha, putting her intil my arms, gave us ? laft luke, faying,, «« Heaven íhield ye 1" and haftened out of the houfe. The old woman's tears for fome time prevented her continuing ; the Colo¬ nel, though filent, was moved ; huma¬ nity fruggling againft the prejudices of party : but Mr. Sommers, whofe tem¬ per was neither elate with the ardour of heroifm, nor yet humble below the dignity of man, and fervant of the firft of
of kings—evenin his patron's prefence, whofe abhorrence to the Stuarts he welt knew, and whofe expreffive features fhe wed he- was by no means pleafed with Allan's journey to the Chevalier's comt, took the old woman by the hand, bidding her be comforted in terms of mild philanthropy, that feldom fails oí its effect on the wounded mind· - After drying her tears, Jannet con¬ tinued thus;—" Allan, I before inform¬ ed ye, was til tak London in his way, in order to get a letter to an attendant of the Chevalier* Frae London I had a letter, my bonny lad informing me he was til quit that city the morn after in a veffel bound til Dieppe,, having pro- cured the necefîàry recommendation. Weel, frae that förrowfV day, I ha ??? ken'd
ken'd what became of him ; montb after month, and year after year have I greeted and waited his return, but he is gane never mair to blefs my agèd ene* If I ha dune wrang againft the lawso£ the land, and if the lofs of my only hope is na fufficient, let me be punifii¬ ed : I canna feel any thing mair fe* verely than what I have already dunej, but let the comfort of my age, my· bonny, now only bairn efcape cenfure;, fhe kens ??? her origin to be otherwife than ye thought it." 44 Are you fure you fpeak truly irL that ?" faid the Colonel : 44 it is very aitoni filing, asilie is now grown up you never difclofed it to her."— 4 * In a moment I will inform ye a'," replied the old woman, " Allan's lang abfence,, as
as weel as giving me forrow caufed my ruin ; I coud na manage the land with¬ out him, and was farely back in my rent, and at the end of little mair than ane year, was completely undone. The gude minifter affifted me what he could, but a' was ??? fufficient, for though wi* that I fpinned night and day, I coud na pay the arrears ¿ the laird took a' my gear, and I had ??? refource but til come hither, this wee houfe being, as I before informed ye, my ain. Weel, the minifter promifed me to tak any letter that came frae Allan, or in cafe of his return to fend him til 1 us, giving me^ as he had alfo before done to Allan, a certificate of the truth of the bairn's birth and the death of its mither at my houfe, Allan and myfelf taking our
our aiths of what had pafied in his pre¬ fence, and that of anither minifter, his friend. Weel, 1 ha little mair til fay, but that before my departure, the gude mon advifed me til ? „?? a' fecret, * £ as," quo' he, 4t it wad be weaknefs to put thoughts in the bairn's head which I fear canna now be ever realized.; bring her up til honeft induftry, and leave the refttil God, wha, nne doubt, if neceffary, will in his ain time bring on a difcovery: if ???, he conceals it for wife purpofes that our frail mortality canna compre¬ hend, but which are ever for the beft." Weel, I determined til tak his advice, and accordingly fat out for the high¬ lands wi* my bairn : goud we had nane, and filler but tittle, and that we owed til the kindnefs of the minifter. We had alang
a lang and wearifome journey, our hale fupport being a few oat-cakes and milk for the fortnight w^e were walking. At length we reached our prefent hame, where wi' the bleffing of God and your kindnefs, we have thriven mair than I could ever ha* expected ; but in a" thefe years, never ha' I heaid frae Allan, and but anes frae the gude minif¬ ter, wha I ha' meikle fear is dead ; fot 1 ha' repeatedly written, but never re¬ ceived any anfwer fin the fiift year. In my vifit till my fifter lately dead at Sky, fhe queftioned me meikle concerning Peggy, whofe birth fhe weel ken'd, being as I before tauld ye at Edinburgh at the time. She ftrangly advifed me til confult a feer in the neighbourhood on the affair, which I agreed til, and wha
wha bade me reveal the hale to ye, which, as fune as death releafed my puir fitter, I ha' faithfully dune, let what¬ ever will be the confequence, and now can die contented when it fhall pleafe God to ca' me, fae ye dinna difcard Peggy." On the old woman's conclufion, the Colonel affured her that he could by no means condemn Peggy for what flie was unable to prevent, fuppofing her Ä which he notwithftanding hoped er¬ roneous, the daughter of the Chevalier· 44 1 would rather," faid he, cc have her the child of an honeft cottager, than the offspring of depravity however highly graced :—for the prefent, Jannet, re¬ tire with Mrs. Donald, and endeavour to regain your health." So faying, he called
called his houfekeeper to conduct the good woman to Peggy's apartment, which was deftined for her ufe.
CHAP. VI. * t ShouM auld acquaintance be forgot, Tho' they return with fears? Thefe are the noble heroe's lot, Obtain'd in glorious wars. Olo Scottish Ballad. IT is a ftrange tale," faid tht Colonel to Mr. Sommers, on Jannet's departure. " I have, in all piobability, been affifting the child of licentiouf- nefs, and what is more, the offspring of my country's foe."-—* 1 Grant it fo," ¡replied Mr. Sommers, " which, for my own parr, I think by no means to be depended
depended on, as the proofs are but cir- cumftantial, and thofe very flight; her unhappy birth does not lefien her per¬ fonal merit, nor your humanity ; rebel¬ lion appears neither in her heart nor features, and I would venture a good wager, that even informed of the fu p- pofition of her origin, ihe would rather deplore it than otherwife, confidering herfelf as no longer fo eftimable to you." <t Be it as it may," replied the Colonel, *' it has nxcd my opinion refpecting Duncan's attachment to her, which if he purfues farther than friendíhip, he lofes my affection for ever ; the idea was difagreeable before, it is now be¬ yond all bounds. I will certainly ftill continue my intentions in her favour, for I have been too long accuftomed to Vol. IL G her
her not to love her, but we muft nevei¬ be nearer related."— ct I am an enemy to the doctrine of punifliing children for the errors of their parents/' replied Sommers, 4t and Peggy, the daughter of a prince or of a cottager, will remain equally eftimable to my heart : her mind I am convinced is as fpotlefs as her form, and the little I have faved of my own patrimony in the many years I have been honoured with your fiiend¬ fhip, at my death is her's."·—Here the converfation was biokcn off by the abrupt entrance of Sandy Mackintofh, *vho, with an air of alaim rather than pleafure, announced a meílenger fiom London, that brought news, and a let¬ ter from Captain Campbell.— (t From Duncan '" replied the Colonel, a mo· me n tary
mentary palenefs ? verfpreading his fea¬ tures, which however as inftantane- oufly gave way to an univerfal glow : — 4( Give mc his letter," continued he with firmnefs, " he is a valiant lad, and all muft be well." The meffenger prefented it, and re- tit eel with Sandy, who longed to qucf¬ tion him refpecting his youthful laird. Mr. Sommers trembled—the death of James ruflied upon his mind, and made him dread the contents of this unexpected letter, whofe conveyance befpoke it to be of confequence. The Colonel with a forced compofure'broke the feal, and found the following words ;
G a « My
ít My beloved and revered parent*, 44 I have received fomc wounds before Cartel, which the furgeons wifh to perfuade mc are dangerous ·, but you well know thofe gentlemen are not in¬ fallible, and as I thought a letter would alarm you lefs than the news by any other means, preferred informing you myfelf of what had happened. I can* not enter into particulars, which, how¬ ever, you will learn from the gazettes, but thofe you well know exagge¬ rate matters : for my own part, I de¬ clare I have great expectation of enjoy¬ ing in a fliort time the pleafures of Kenneth Caftle, as peace will certainly foon take place : but, my dear uncle, as in this fubl unary world nothing is <^-!ain, we fliould in fome me ¿fure pre¬ pare
pare for the worft. If I live, it will be with honour; if otherwife, my death hab noc difgraced you. My only wiih fur life is for the fake of thofe fo defeiv- ingly dear to my heart, for yours, for Mr. Sommeis's, and, permit me to add, for Peggy's; I need not inform you that I love her, well convinced that at this moment I filali not incur your dif- pleafure by affirming, what in health I did not deny ; and muft intreat you, in cafe of my wounds taking an unfavour¬ able turn, to transfer the affection you bore me to her. Indeed, my dear fir, the merits it ; you are not aware how facred your commands are to her: to prove it, I freely confefs that before my departure I ufed my utmoft efforts to perfuade her to G 3 confent
confent to wed me in fecret, having provided a minifter for that purpofe ; but fhe was inexorable. Oh my dear uncle, regard her as the wife of your Duncan, let the meannefs of her birth be loft in that thought; affured of which, ï can meet death with the firmnefs of a man and a foldier ! Tell Mr. Som¬ mers all his kindnefs is written on my heart, and that, having nothing fo efti¬ mable as his and your friendíhip to be¬ queath, I wifh him to transfer his where î entreat you to place your's. I have much to fay, but am weak. Do not for¬ get Enfign Orfield, he is a brave fellow, and will introduce an honeft private to your notice, who I doubt not will meet your favour. Farewell, my dear, dear father í
% father ! I know no name fo applicable to our relationfhip. Adieu ! write by the moft fpeedy means." The Colonel and Mr. Sommers both remained for fome minutes filent, the former violently ringing the bell, which however was not anfwered with the ufual alacrity. Sandy at length making his appearance with a face expieffive of the deepeft forrow : " My good fel¬ low, " faid the Colonel with a figh, " fend up the meffenger : I fee you have heard bad news-—but we are foldiers, Sandy."— <4 We are," fobbed Sandy, <c but troth we are men alfo ; I feel ? hae lived too lang, and canna help d------ g the blundering engineer that pointed his gun fae ill at Dettingen, not to ftrike my body inftead of my leg, G 4 leaving
leaving me a mifeiable hii pling wretch to outlive a' thofe maift dear til mc." With thefe words he called up the mef¬ fenger, who gave much the fame ac¬ count, though rather foftencd, as has been before ftated, of Duncan's wound?, the manner of their being received in de¬ fence of Orfield, and the refcue of both at length by a private foldier. " Oh the brae chiei!" exclaimed Sandy, unmindful ofthe prefence of his laird; " I ha' faved forty pounds, and by the living G— he fhall hae it every baw- bie P'— <c He fiiall not need thy forty pounds, my honeft Sandy," replied the Colonel ; " he muft henceforward be thy friend, and my friend ; let my brave lad live or die, he fhall be rewarded. Cheer up, Sommers," continued the vcteram
veteran, feeing the good man with his head funk on his bofom, and loft in filent anguifii— 4( Heaven will not, I truft, deprive me of my laft hope, and, for the lofs of a leg, we muft learn to bear that. What fay you, will you ac¬ company me to Germany ? dead or alive I will fee my biave Duncan. The Gazette of Lift Saturday announced a tranfport veilel in the port of Leith, bound to Embden. J will this day fet off, and bring back my boy with tranf¬ port if alive ; if dead, fink with him to the grave/*— u My dear fir," replied Sommers, 4í fuífer me to go alone ; you have, 1 am fure, fufficient intereft to procure me a pcrmiilion for that pur¬ pofe. Duncan İs dear to me as to yourfelf, and you may depend will G 5 wan r
want no care that I can beftow,"— 4i I know it well," interrupted the Colonel, 44 but, Sommers, I cannot bear the agonies of fufpenfe ; we will go toge¬ ther, my old friend, and Heaven fend our cares may be fuccefsful." He then ordered Sandy to withdraw and enter¬ tain the meffenger to the beft of his power. 44 How frail are oui firmelt refolvesî" faid the Colonel to Mr, Sommers : " how willingly would I at this mo¬ ment unite him for ever with Peggy ; flie is a noble girl, and let her be whofe daughter flie will I care not; her honour in refufing him, and his affection, ftiall not go unrewarded. Can you, Som¬ mers, write to her, and I think defire her to ftay in London until our return? Tell
Tell Jannet alfo not to mention the af¬ fair fhe has difclofed to us, as fhe values my favour; at leaft for the prefent, hereafter flie is at liberty." Mr. Som¬ mers inftantly agreed, writing to Peggy in the following terms : " My dear child, 44 You have doubtlefs before this heard of our Duncan's misfortune. We are all in the hand of God, Peggy, and muft fubmit to his decrees, however painful. Bleffed are they who receive the ftroke allotted them without murmur; but as neither you, the Colonel, nor myfelf, I fear, can boaft of fo much for¬ titude, we in this trial muft endeavour at leaft to fupport each other; nor let felfifh weaknefs increafe the fuffer- ing of thofe friends which the bounty G 6 of
of Heaven yet fpares. The Colonel and myfelf this day mean to depart for ? Leith, in which port is a tranfport vef* fd on the point of failing, and that we mean to take the advantage of to con¬ vey us to Germany. Duncan per¬ haps yet lives, and the cares of his uncle and friend may contribuie to¬ wards his cure ; at all events, my dear girl, I will· return by the way of Lon¬ don, and bring you back with me, the Colonet wiibing you to remain in town till that period. Your grand¬ mother is at the Caftle, fo you may be perfectly eafy on her account. Adieu I Archibald Sommers." The Colonel before his departure fpoke to Jannet, affuring her that he would
, would ftill prorect her grand-daughter j alfo defiring the utmoft care to be taken of her health during his abfence. The veteran and Mr. Sommers as before projected fet off immediately for Leith, where they arrived in fàfety, finding the veflel they expected ready to fail in the courfe of a tide or two ; on which they embarked, and foon after took their departure. CHAP. VII. fl I joy that thou art fafe ; and I admire Him and his fortunes vvho hath wrought tl»y fafety. ι ■ ι The foldier now of hope He Rands confpicuous ; fame and great renown Are brought within the compafs of his fword." Home. DURING the furprife occafioned by the old woman's tale at Kenneth Caftle, and
and the fbbfequent forrow on hearing øf Duncan's wounds, all was not more compofed at Lady Beugle's ; Peggy at intervals being feized with faimings of a moil alarming nature, remaining en- tirely confined to her apartment, her eyes fixed on the ground, and fcarcely ever breaking filence; a fituation which deeply wounded the generous heart of Sophia, but excited no pity in Eleanor, who never mentioned her but with a fati- rical fneer, which paiTedunanfwered, un- lefs in the prefence of Lord Wilmot, who was fure to return it with redoubled acri¬ mony ; for as he was at leaft as great a favourite with his mother as Eleanor, that lady never interfered farther than to redore peace between them—Wil¬ mot, though in the main a good fon, perfectly underftanding how to profit by Lady Beugle's vanity, which he never failed to gratify at the expence of ? few harmlefs compliments, Sophia
Sophia was hardly a moment abfent from Peggy ; for as etiquette required the family of Lord Beugle to live re¬ tired during the uncertainty of Dun¬ can's fate, fhe had but little to prevent her attendance, foothing her to the ut¬ moft, yet fearful of infpiring hopes that would, perhaps, redouble the violence )f the fliock, ihould any ill news ar¬ rive. A fortnight elapfed in this un¬ certainty ; at the conclufion of which, the meffenger returned, bringing Peggy Mr. Sommers's letter, which was in fome meafure an alleviation to her trouble. If Duncan yetfurvived, the cares and prefence of fuch dear friends lhe hoped would have the happieft effects. " If," faid (he, weeping, " he fhould have the misfortune to lofe his leg, for I am fure^ it either İs, or is fear¬ ed it muft be fo by what that wretch Lord Withers faid to Lady Eleanor, and which, my dear Lady Sophia, is cor* roborated
roborated by your own avowal of his moft dangerous wound being in the thigh ; the fupport of the Colonel and Mr. Sommers I am fure is neceffary. Why am I deprived of the mournful fatisfaction of attending him ? Whofe attention would be fo conftantly awake as mine? Ah ! Lady Sophia, all I atk of Heaven is his life ; let him be fpared, and I am content to fubmit to every thing. How handfome, how graceful, when he went to this hateful war, yet if disfigured his friends will but efteem him the more. His mind, his generous foul will remain the fame ; and could I only diftinguifh his voice, my heart might figli, but could have nothing farther to wifh. Alas !" continued fhe, weeping bitterly, " fhould he be dreadfully maimed, no power on earth, no commands but his own fliould re¬ move me from him, every confideration muft fink before fuch a duty. J have not
not the vanity ever to expect to be his wife ; and I will be no man's miftrefs," added fhe firmly, u but Duncan's faith¬ ful friend through life. Let the cen- foiious woild fay what they pleafe, confeious of innate rectitude their venom can never reach my heart. If even he furvives, haraifed peihaps by pain, and the remembrance of what he once was, will he not require the fofteft voice of friendíhip to reconcile him to it, to convince him that perfonal charms are trifles, and that the lofs of them have no effect but to increafe the love and efteem of true friends!"— ct Bear up, my dear girl," replied Sophia, " I truft Duncan will recover, and hope the day is not far diftant when 1 may falute as my coufin one I already love as a futer." While the above difcourfe paffed be. tween Sophia and Peggy, one of a very different nature took place with Lady Eleanor
Eleanor and her waiting-maid. " Heigh- ho!" yawned Lady Eleanor, viewing herfelf in the glafs : 4ζ It is ufelefs to drefs, Fringe, until we hear from the army. I am abfolutely annihilated with ftaying at home. If you have nothing more material to do, look up my black, as in all probability I fhall want it."— 44 I fear your ladyfhip will indeed ·, it is a pity fuch a fine young man fliould be killed, or even maimed. All the fer- vants were in hopes we fhould have had a wedding ; what a charming couple your ladyíhip and him would have made !"— 4t Pr'ythee, Fringe, do not mention it; his perfon was certainly very well, but the horrible vulgarity of his .education I fhould never have been able to fuffer. How could I poffibiy bear fuch a figure in my drawing-room ? a fright¬ ful plaid on his back, and then his bare knees muft fliock the modefty of any delicate woman. No, Fringe, I could never
never fubmit to facrifice myfelf to fuch a highland moniter, unlefs indeed he would confent to undergo a total me¬ tu mor phofis." ------ tc Indeed!" replied Mrs. Fringe, 44 Mademoi felle La Pa¬ pillotte told me her lady had fuch in¬ tentions; but as your ladyfhip truly obferves, he is a very different figure from moft of the gentlemen that vifit here» though for my own part I think his drefs looks very graceful; and ?? for his knees, they are fo white that I declare I fee nothing at all íhocking in them."— c< Pr'ythee have done with the difcourfe," replied the lady, " he is fit for nothing but a huiband to that Scotch wench, who, I fuppofe, is very graceful too in your wife ideas."— α Lord, ma'am ! now you mention her," added Fringe, furmifing her rniftrefs's thoughts by the polite epithet fhe had made ufe of, c< did you ever fee fuch an Un¬ garn creature ? Why, flie is taller than your
your ladyfhip—and then how awk¬ ward fiie di efies herfelf—To be fure (lie has good hair enough, and mig l .t look tolerably well, had flie your ladyfhip's tafte i but, poor girl, how can it be ex¬ pected ? La Papillotte fays, flie was a mere country wench when Colonel Campbell took her· I was obferving the other day, that I wondered how gentlemen could debafe themfelves in fuch a manner ; and I affure you my Lord Wilmot's valet behaved very rudely to me, faying nothing but envy could make any one rail at her, and that he did not believe that all Eng¬ land, or Scotland either, could produce fuch another woman."-— ct Doubtlefs he is a great judge," fneered Lady Eleanor. 4ς Wilmot I fancy is of the fame opinion. I wifh my mother may not have reafon to repent being plagued with her. Did you ever hear fuch in- folence «is that of her refufing Lord Withers ?
Withers ? Should Duncan furvive, which however will be a pity, as by all accounts he muft be a fad fpectacle, 1 think he cannot now do better than engage her for his nurfe." A few days after the foregoing con* veifation, a meffenger arrived, who brought letters for the Beugle family, and one particularly for Peggy, written by Mr. Sommers, which ran thus : 44 My dear girl ! " As I am fure it muft give you equal fatisfaction with myfelf to .know that our young friend is aimoit out of danger, I could not refift affording you that pleafure as foon as poffible. The Colonel and myfelf had a very f^ eedy paffage ; and I believe our prefence was not a little efficacious to Duncan, who, I however aifure vou, was not fo dangerouily wounded as at firft thought, the hurt in the thigh being the only one that gave alarm ; but î which
which, from the excellence of his con¬ ftitution, youth and ftrength, will now, we have fcarcely any fear, be cured without amputation, which was at firft ferioufly apprehended. As foon as he can be moved with fafcty, we fhall re¬ turn home, I know not whether the Colonel will come by the way of Lon¬ don, but you may be affured I fhall, according to my promife. Enfign Or¬ field, and the brave Scot who fo gal¬ lantly defended Duncan, and alfo pre- ferved him from falling into the ene¬ my's hands, is conftantly with us ; the former has nearly recovered his hurt, and the latter received none worth men¬ tioning. He has been our Duncan's conftant attendant, and I affure you is no inconfiderable favourite with the Colonel, who, having purchafed a lieu¬ tenancy for Orfield, has, by his intereft, procured his enfigncy for the brave fellow, though, as he fays, but as the preliminary
preliminary ftep to farther advance¬ ment. You cannot form an idea of any thing more interefting than our firft interview. The Colonel had hardly pa¬ tience to wait until announced, as I feared the furprife affed İng the invalid too greatly. He fpeedily ruflied after the foldier, throwing himfelf on the couch of his nephew, unable to articu¬ late a word for fome minutes ; at length exclaiming, €< My boy ! my brave boy ! Heaven fpares you to my wifhes ! my age will not be funk to the grave with forrow—See Sommers too 1 reach him thy hand, my fon; fpeak to us, and let thy voice confirm my hopes !" Duncan, as fpeedily as the aftonifhment caufed by our prefence would permit, readily obeyed his uncle, afluring him he was already half recovered by the cares of his honeft deliverer, who had neither left him night nor day fince his receiving the wounds, attending him with unwearied attention,
attention, and ileeping on a mattrefs by his fide : at the fame time point¬ ing him out to thè Colonel as he ftood at a refpect ful diftance. I cannot defcribe the Colonels features at that moment ; they glowed with an animation impoffible to form an ade¬ quate idea of, without having feen it. He loofed his nephew from his em¬ brace, and advancing towards the fol¬ dier, who appeared overwhelmed with his condefcenfion, ihook him heartily by the hand, faying, t4 Henceforward regard me as your friend. The man to whom I owe my nephew has a fa¬ cred right to that title." The honeft fellow, who appears about forty, with one ofthe moft benevolent faces I ever faw, replied modeftly, *' I did but my duty, fir, and the pleafure I have reaped in being inftrumental to the lafety of my captain and countryman, greatly compenfates for the little ef¬ fort
fort î made in his favour : all I afk in return, is to be his faithful attendant.** fi< No !" replied the Colonel ; " the man to whom Duncan owes his life muft be his friend : he would bluih to view him in any other character.' 1 Much more paffed, which however I neither entirely recollect, or have time now to inform you of. Suffice it that Duncin appeared to mend daily, and at this moment is thought nearly out of danger ; though many officers, who were far lefs feverely wounded, have funk under the fever that ufually at¬ tends their fituation, but from which Duncan has been uncommonly clear. After our arrival the Colonel, at Duncan's requeft, adopted the mea¬ fure I have before mentioned in fa¬ vour of Orfield and the honeft foldier, who received his promotion with a mo- deft, but manly gratitude ; his friend Duncan at the fame time prefenting Vol. II. H him
him with two hundred guineas, to equip him properly. The Colonel infifted that during our ftay here he fhould eat at the fame table -, a requeft he found the utmoft difficulty to make him comply with ; but which both his patrons and Lieutenant Oi field warmly infifted on, as the rank and counte¬ nance of the Colonel could not fail of removing the cloud in which his former fituation might envelop him. I know not, my good girl, when ï have before written fo long a letter, but I thought every circumftance would be pleafing to you. Adieu—our meeting 1 hope will be fpeedy ; keep up your fpirits, and hope all for the beft —Once more adieu 1 A. foMMERS." The meffenger who brings this has a letter for Lady Beugle, Sophia was with Peggy when Mr. Somme ri's letter was brought her : an univerfal
univerfal trembling prevented her opening it. " Read it, Lady So¬ phia,*' faid ihe ; " I will try to col¬ lect myfelf, and prepare to hear the worn."—Lady Sophia inftantly broke the feal, though not without being in¬ fected with fome portion of Peggy's alarm. Glancing her eyes over the beginning, in order if poffible to form ? -i idea of the purport ; the nrn two or three unes at once removed appre- henfbn, and, unable to read or fpeak more fully, fhe exclaimed with rap¬ tare: tc Duncan is better! He will recover, my Peggy ! Look, he is out of danger 1" at the fame time throw¬ ing her arms around Peggy's neck ; tears of thankful nefs and pleafure fi ream ing from the eyes of both, and mingling as they fell on each other's cheeks. For fome minutes neither could afk nor read a confirmation of the happy H 2 ridings.
tidings* Peggy at length faying, in a voice agitated at once with joy and fear, tf Perhaps, Lady Sophia, you might miftake on fuch a flight glance« Alas î íhould it be fo, how dreadful the difappointment." " Banifh your fear/' replied Sophia, wiping off her tears.; ".I will foon .fatisfy you, my eyes have not deceived me :" So fay¬ ing, flie. began to read i but had pro¬ ceeded no faniler than to learn that amputation was no longer apprehend- .ed, than í eggy, > finking on her knees, exclaimed, ' s Spare me, Lady Sophia ! fpare me·! the effects of joy are painful as thofe of forrow, 1 can bear no more î To .Heaven be the praife with which my heart overflows, but that my tongue cannot utter. Wretch that I was to doubt its protection of the beft, the .moft deferving of mortals !" Lady Sophia, after a fhort paufe, continued } every line confirming Peggy's hopes, ??&
and almoft overpowering her with pleafure. TJic honeft Scot, who faved Duncan, likewife came in for his (liare of praife. *' Beit of meni" exclaimed fhe, "thoughunknown, I already love you ; what a heart, Lady Sophia ! Is he not a living proof, that the noblefl fpirits 4 frequently dwell in thofe who have neither birth nor education to difc tinguifh them ? Thank Heaven, he will no longer fhrink under the command of thofe whofe minds are perhaps un¬ worthy that diftinct ion : he will be the Colonels friend, and needs no other fupporter." Thus did the affection¬ ate foul of Peggy i un into rapturous effufions of grateful fenfibility :—nor was Lady Sophia- lefs thankful ; fhe before refpected and efteemed Dun¬ can, but his friendíhip for the man moft dear to her had now redoubled thofe fentiments. The letter to Lady Beugle, which H ; accom-
accompanied that for Peggy, was from the Colonel, and merely fpecified that Duncan was thought out of danger.defir- iiig her to communicate thofe pleafing tidings in the moft fpeed v manner to her father and mother. Lady Beugle was by no means fo tranfportcd with this news as Peggy and Sophia had been ; but as flie had not given up the project of a match between Duncan and Elea¬ nor, fhe confoled herfelf with that idea. Lady Eleanor received the information with the urmoft calmnefs, fimply ob¬ ferving that Ihe fuppofed they fhould now be honoured with the company of the love fick damfel ; but in that fur¬ mife fhe was however miitaken, Peggy not making her appearance publicly for fome days ; for although the news of Duncan's returning health in great meafuie removed her cleprcffion, yet her heait had not fufliciently recovered ils
its feren ir ? to fuffer her to mingle in the fafhionable circle that frequented Lady Beugle's : befides flie dreaded the fcrutinifing eyes of her lady fliip, and the fatirical fneers of her daughter. Therefore, forming the mot delight¬ ful pictures of future happinefs and enjoyment with her beloved friends at Kenneth Caftle, fhe beguiled the time, except when favoured with the com¬ pany of Sophia, who paffed every hour with her flie could poffibiy fteal from her mother's drawing-room. 4 I WW —I m » CHAP. VIII. " 11 . m Eager looks, and dying figbs, My fecret foul difcover ; While rapture trembling through mine eyes Reveals hou- much I love her." Scottish Ballad. 1 EG G Y's health mending dally, fhe was at length obliged to make her ap¬ ri 4 pearance
f earance in public ; and accordingly one morning, with a beating heart and ilow ftep, entered the breakfaft room accompanied by Sophia, who endea¬ voured all fhe could to laugh her out of her fears. Lady Beugle received her with the moft marking coolnefs. Eleanor, after fome few minutes, faying, ** You are a great politician* I fancy, Mifs Grant : the news from the army affects you fingularly ;" Peggy re¬ mained filent, her eyes ready to over* flow ; but pride reftrained her tears, and determined her not to gratify Ele¬ anor's malevolent fpleea by fuch a weaknefs. Lords Beugle and Wilmot foon af¬ ter attended ; the former compliment¬ ing Peggy with his ufual indolence, the latter addreffing her with a foftnefs and attention that did not efcape either Lady Beugle or Eleanor. The news of Duncan's returning health,
health, which was confirmed in a fhort time by another letter from Germany, relieved both mother and daughter from the torments of confinement, tet¬ ting them at liberty to mingle in the whirlpool of fafhionable amufement^, from which Peggy would willingly have excufed herfelf, but was retained by a fear of giving offence, though fre¬ quently in the moft fprightly feenes fhe wiped offa tear that intruded itfelf on herdieek. The Colonel in his laft letter had informed Lady Beugle, that as there was no doubt but peace would foon take place, he ihould return by the way of London. At which time the lady determined to propofe to him the union of Duncan and Eleanor ; who, notwithftanding ftie pretended the utmoft indifference to him, might be truly compared to the fox in the ùble, who called the gripes four only becaufe he defpaircd of reaching them. H ^ ??? -σν *■* ? x v bo)
Peggy, fince her return to public com¬ pany, had however enjoyed one pe¬ culiar fatisfaction, the abfence of Lord Withers, who had been in the country for a fortnight previous to that event. It has already been obferved, that Peggy was ufually firft in the breakfaft parlour. One morning that fhe was fitting reading until the appearance of Lady Beugle and the family, the fer- vant entered, and prefented a note with her addrefs ; a ciicumftance that furprifed her, as fhe was unacquainted in London, and made her obferve it was perhaps fomc miftake : but the man replying he fancied it was only a petition, fhe immediately opened it, and found as follows : 44 Madam, " Diftrefs renders the moft timid bold. My own forrows I could bear, but the mifery of a parent is hard to fupport. A native of Scotland, and ftranger
ftranger in London, I have no refource but to apply to yourfelf, who by chance I learned are of that country. The miferies of our fituation are too numerous to enter upon in a letter; but would you permit me the honour of an audience, I have no doubt of interefting your compaffion in favour of ? diftreffed widow and unhappy daughter." Peggy enquired of the fervant for the perfon who brought tlie note. The man anfwered, it was a young woman, who faid fhe would call the next morn¬ ing. 44 Poor girl !" faid Peggy when alone, " I fhall do no more than my duty in affifting you 1 Was I not the child of poverty myfelf, till raifed by the kindnefs of the Colonel ? 1 have money remaining fufficient to help you, and which wtU be better ex¬ pended on your neceffities than my H ó fuper-
fuperiluities. Alas î I myfelf might have (huddered over my grandmother* unable to affift her, but for Duncan j, and ought I not, when in my power, to footh the diftrefs of others? She needed not to have mentioned her country to intereft me; every child of misfortune has furely an equal claim on the afiiftance of thofe who have the means of relieving them ; Scots, En% gliíh, or <;ven Ethiopians,, my heart can know no difference." Such we r e Peggy's thoughts dll the „entrance of die family ; the diftrefs of the poor girl intruding itfelf on her mind the whole day, ihe waited the next morning with impatience, longing to dry the tear of mifery, or at leaft to foften its bkternefs. The young woman was true to her .time, being introduced by the footman 'into the anti-chamber, where ihe was fpeedily joined by Peggy, who felt the
the pity (he before experienced for fier redoubled by her demeanour and : interefting perfon. She was about twenty-three, and perfectly handfome,,, though her face was (haded ν by a large cap and bonnet by no means calcu¬ lated to fet off her charms; Her gown and cloak weie of old black filk, which,· without being ragged,, plainly befpoke the poverty of the wearer. ** Pardon me, madam," faid fhe with tears, *' I am not ufed to beg ; but my mother's diftrefs has banifhed every other con- fideration : confined to her bed, from whence my father was taken but a fhort month fince to the grave—widi- out nourifhment or friends, I dared apply though unknown to you; but you are of Scotland, as 1 was informed,. and 1 flattered myfelf I ihould not fue in vain for a d) ing parent." %i Heaven forbid you fliould !" faid Peggy, pre- fenting her a purfe, which contained nearly
nearly alî flie pofileífed : " Take this, affift your mother ; hereafter, if poffi¬ ble, I will help you more." The young woman interrupted her with the moft rapturous thanks, faying, " May every wiih of your heart be gratified ! You will fave my mother from death. Alas !" continued flie, concealing her face with her handkerchief, <t perhaps, had I received this before, 1 had yet had a father." Peggy's fufceptible heart was moved ·, fhe entreated the young woman to be comforted— aíking, to divert her grief, from what part of Scotland flie came. " From Aberdeen," replied ihe; " my father's name was Thompfon, and for¬ merly İn trade, but had retired fome years from bufinefs with a decent compe¬ tency, which he placed in a builder's hands at a more advantageous intereft than commonly allowed, and that was regularly paid for fome time; but the β villain
villain whom he entrufted, having a reputation of probity, obtained feveral large fu m st and made off. For a long while we were ignorant whither he had fled; but at length heard he was in London, on which my father fet off for this city, determined to ftop him : •but, alas ! he had by fome means in¬ formation of his intention, and depart¬ ed the day before for the continent. My poor parent, haraifed and difap- pointed, fell fick, and was obliged to employ a ftranger to inform us of his fituation. My mother inftantly fold our furniture, which was all the pro¬ perty we had left, and accompanied by myfelf haftened to London. My fa¬ ther lingered three months and then expired, during which we expended all ; and my mother, oppreíled with diftrefs and forrow, appeared haften- ing after him, though I now truft by your bounty to be able to fave at leaft
leaíl one parent." The grief of Mifs Thompfon, during this recital, was ex¬ treme. Peggy dropped a tear at her férrows, entreating her once more to be comforted, and defiring her to let her bear from her in the courfe of a day or two. Mifs Thompfon then de¬ parted, and Peggy returned to the breakfaflsroom, where (lie was foon after joined by the family. In the courfe cf the day ihe informed Sophia of her morning's adventure, who en¬ treated her to let her purfe aílift the unhappy girl, which Peggy promifed if ihe found occafion. Two days elapfed without hearing· any thing ofthe object of her bounty -, but on the third Mifs Thompfon call¬ ed, informing her, with many expref- fions of gratitude, that her mother was better, and that ihe hoped foon to be able to return to Scotland, where ihe could fupport her with the help of her friends
friends and needle-work, which íhe- underftood perfectly well. Peggy con¬ gratulated her on the occafion, faying, that ihe however hoped to procure her fome further affiftance by the help of a, young lady who was her particular friend, defiring her to call again in a fliort time for that purpofe : a promife ihe readily gave, and then took her leave· About a week after this vifit, Lady Beugle received a letter from Germa¬ ny, that had nearly overpowered Peg¬ gy with pleafure. It informed her that the Colonel propofed to be in London. in a fortnight from the time it was·* written; news that caufed Peggy's eyes to fparkle with delight \ which was redoubled with the intelligence of Duncan being nearly recovered, and< likely to rtceive no ill confequence. from his wounds· ??.
On Lady Beugle and 1?? daughters retiring to di els, Pegg} remained alone in the drawing room, u fleet ing on the pleafing intelligence, until diftutbed by the entrance of Lord Wilmot ; who, with a figh, had beheld her joy at the información of the Colonels return. His face was pale, and his fpirits un* ufually dep ? ¿Ted ; thi owing himfelf on a fopha, he remained filent until Peg¬ gy, with a voice of kindnefs mixed with alarm, faid : " You look ill, my Lord 1 can I do any thing to relieve you ?" " Mifs Grant l' faid he, taking her hand, " you fee before you one of the moft miferable of men ; doomed to love a woman whofe heart is de¬ voted to another, and he my friend too—what then remains for me but defpair ? To fly her, and to feek in fome diftant clime a foigetfulnefs of all that can make woman amiable," " Alas ?
** AUs !" replied Peggy, blufhing to be made the confidant of a love tale, though ignorant of its object, yet grieved to fee him fo depreffed— (t you ore furely too much affected, and 1 too young to advife you ; but the Co¬ lonel is coming home—go with him to Kenneth Caftle, we fliali there find means to reftore your fpirits," " To Kenneth Caftle i" repeated he, 4t to death rather ! No, innocent angel, I fhould but imbitter your pleafures ; the torments of the wretched Wilmot would force a figli from that fufcepti¬ ble bofom, even in the prefence ofthe happy Duncan!" " Merciful good¬ nefs !" exclaimed Peggy, at once com¬ prehending him, and withdrawing her hand, " what do you mean ?" "By Heaven, I fcarcely know my* fc\î\ pity me, do not flirink thus ! I meant to conceal this unhappy paffion in mv own bofom ; but the news of Duncan's
Duncan's return has forced it from me ι fay but you forgive me, and I will never more offend V 9 44 Do noti fpeak thus, my Lord ; you forget you are addrefiing the object of your uncle'à bounty; which, but for the humanity of Duncan, had never been honoured to ftand in fueh a pre¬ fence." " Ah! why," replied he, 44 did Heaven peculiarly beftow on the fortunate Duncan fuch a diftinc- tion ? Who could have acted otherwife ? who could fee and not love you ? or who know, and not refpect you ? Ah I would to Heaven I might be fuffered to lay myfelf and fortune at your feet!" 44 My Lord !" anfwered Peggy, " ceafe fuch difcourfe I entreat, or I muft leave you. I honour, I efteem you for So¬ phia's fake, for your own 3 but cannot íiften to what at once diftrefles me, and degrades yourfelf. Gratitude, or Jove,.my Lord, attaches me to Dun¬ can !
can'! I know not the nice diftinctions of refinement, but feel his happinefs is neceffary to my extftence. You too .ftiall give me a (hare, which I feel my heart has room for: a-fifter's part, ano- ther Sophia, though a humble one." u Be what you pleafe, enchanting Peg¬ gy !" exclaimed he, " I will endeavour to be fatisfied with any place in that valuable heart." " Brother, then ?" faid fhe, i4 and henceforward let your behaviour be confonant with that name : ■I efteem and love -you as fuch ; your own conduct alone can force me to alter thefe fentiments, or oblige me to conceal them, ** You lhall do neither, my be¬ loved girl!" replied he, thro wing himfelf at her feet : 4t your brother then—cold name ! while »the happy Duncan will enjoy the firft of all earthly bleffmgs—· the rapturous title of your hufband 1" 44 Why, my Lord !" anfwered Peggy, blufhing deeply, 4t will you again put me
me under the necefiity of reminding you of my birth, and obligations to your family ? which," continued flie, 41 ought to banifh every fuch idea." 4t Were you in Duncan's place," re¬ plied he, would fuch cold prudential motives guide you ?" «' I know not," faid fhe, hefitating, 4t how to anfwer your queftion—my obligations are fo great, that did I poilefs a throne, it could poorly íhew my gratitude ; but I entreat you rife, my Lord, I cannot fee you in that poft u re !" Juttat that moment the door opened, and Lady Eleanor entered, furprifing Wilmot at Peggy's feet. t< 1 beg pardon," fit id flie, " for my intrufion ; it is true I long fufpected this bufinefs, and con¬ gratulate you, Mifs Grant, on your happy forefight, in having provided a party in cale Duncan's wounds fhould take an unfavourable turn." " Eleanor," replied Wilmot, " I could eafily un¬ deceive
deceive you if I thought it neceffary, but will neither gratify your curiofity or impertinence by any conceflionj yet muft infift that you curb your malevo¬ lent temper, nor fuffer it to infult one by no means able to contend with you, and as fuperior in difpofition as per¬ fonal charms." tC Mean, barbarous wretch !" ex¬ claimed Eleanor, «« fjr I cannot call you brother j but Lidy Beugle will not furfer me to be treated thus." Indeed, La ly Eleanor !" faid Peggy, en- deavouring to recover from her confu- tv lion, you are difpleafed without ?? »ufe; had vou heard my who'e V." i.iverfiition with Lord Wilmot, you -o id have held me biamelefi>." " Go! ro!" in- terrupted Eleanor ruíbly. ' t you are a cunning dehgning crea* ure; but my uncle lhall be acquainted wiih your arts; nay, even Duncan too, whom you have drawn in by your pretended innocence,
innocence, fliali know all." 4t I am fatisfied, madam," replied Peggy» 44 that they fliould know, not only ■my actions, but even if poffible my very thoughts : they would find no¬ thing in either worthy of forfeiting theirfriendfliipand protection." Peg¬ gy's calmnefs increafed Lady Eleanor's rage, 4S Infolent V* returned flic, " I have no doubt but you have art fuffi¬ cient to perfuade them to any thing; nor indeed is your cunning to be won¬ dered at, when your origin is remem¬ bered." 4i Peace ! I can bear no more, Eleanor!" interrupted Wilmot. " Mifs Grant is a living proof how fuperior the qualifications of the mind and tem¬ per are to thofe of birth ; while on the conrrary you truly reflect, that rank cannot ennoble a foul naturally mean.' r " For Heaven's fake!" exclaimed Peg¬ gy, ** my Lord, 'Oo not fay fuch cruel things to your fifter 9 her miftake is 7 nor
not to be wondered at; relate to her the whole that pafied." Lady Beugle juft at that moment entered, and was not a little furprifed to find Eleanor funk on a chair, endeavouring to call up the affiftance of tears—Peggy overwhelmed with confufion, and Wilmot walking up and down the apartment in a frame of temper that was plainly pourtrayed on his features. " For goodnefs fake, what is the matter r" faid Lady Beugle; an anfwer to which queftion flie re¬ ceived from Eleanor, who related the whole fcene with various additions, be- fides endeavouring to increafe the in¬ tereft flie w i flied to infpire by tears. Lady Beugle heard her in filence, re¬ garding Peggy with difdain; and on her conclufion turned to Wilmot, aik- ing an explanation of his behaviour. cc Pardon me, madam," replied he, 44 if I decline difcuffmg it in the pre¬ fence of that puppet, whom I bluih to Vol. II. I call
call my filter : 1 am ready to give you any fatisiaction, but will only aflure you now, that, by my honour, if there is any blame it is totally mine." 4( In¬ deed, Mifs Giant," faid Lady Beugle, 44 I fiiall be very happy to give up the charge of you to my uncle."------' f I muft beg, madam," interrupted Wil¬ mot, " that you will not accufe Mifs Grant until informed of the whole* reproof you will then find needlefs." " Oh, fir !" cried Eleanor, " the fooner you make the lady's defence the betters 1 will retire and leave you to exculpate yourfelf by what falfehoods you pleafe: but my dear mamma," continued flie, with a frefh flood of tears, * c will not fee me infulted fo cruelly, for no rea¬ fon but having furprifed you in a fitua- 'tion at once derogatoiy to your rank and fortune." " IVythee begone, .child !" replied Wilmot, 4ζ the ena¬ mel is entirely waf 1 off your cheeks, and
and it will take you a confiderable time to replace it." As he fpoke, Eleanor left the apartment—Peggy entreating Lady Beugle's leave alfo to retire, which was affented to by a contemp¬ tuous bow. Lord Wilmot now cntetv ed into an explanation of his conduci, with a modefl but manly firmnefs : he confeíled he loved Peggy, but that he had never before difclofed it to her ; he likewife related her behaviour, en¬ tirely exculpating her from any (hare of ???? ; concluding the whole by firy ng, " Mifs Grant, madam, is the finì woman I ever loved, and my hcau is itrangely deceived if any other re- placea her there, although I am per- íedly convinced íhe will never be mine." Lady Beugle, though extremely dif- plcafed, in fome meafure concealed ir. As Peggy's flay was now in all proba¬ bility to be iliort, ihe hoped her ab- 1 2 fence
fence would entiicly deftroy Wilmots attachment : her ladyfliip's affections being as fafhionable as her garments, fhe imagined her fon's the fame, and as eafily worn out ; therefore difmiffed him with a mild reprimand—firft ob¬ taining a promife that he would not behave particularly to Mifs Grant dur- ing her ftay; anaflurance that he how¬ ever refufed, until her ladyfhip gave her word to treat Peggy as ufual ; nay, more, to inform her that Wilmot's de¬ claration had convinced her fhe was blamelefs. Peggy declined going down to din¬ ner : the occurrences of the afternoon had greatly vexed her ; Lady Sophia endeavouring all flic could to br.nifli her uneafinefs, c\en fitting up to chat with her for tv\o hours after the family vvere in bed. Peggy had but little fleep—fhe wifli- nd a thoufand times that flie hud never come
come to London, where íhe met w idi nothing but repeated vexations. In the morning, Lady Beugle deigned to in¬ form her that Wilmot bad entirely ex- culpated her; at the fame time defiring (he would in future avoid him — a pio- mife that was readily given, after which Peggy accompanied her kuUfhip ? break fait.
CHAP. IX. « ι. What perils and injuiîice Await the poor roan's valour!-—---------" Home. JDY the letters from Germany, the reader is already informed that Dun¬ can was neaiiy recovered, Orfield had obtained a lieutenancy, and that the brave Scot was railed far above his ex¬ pectations. The Colonel particularly ap¬ peared to think his bravery,could never I3 be
bc fiiffjciently repaid ; his manners too increafed the veteran's eftecm for him, poflciTing a ftrong underftanding and excellent heart. His name was Grant, which, though a common one in Scot» land, made him, if poffible, more efti- mable to Duncan, as it was likewife that of the woman ever prefent in his thoughts. Duncan's health being at length re- cftabliihed, the Colonel took the op- portunity of remitting thedeuer before mentioned by a meffenger to Lady Beugle, as alfo one to Scotland from Duncan to his grandfather, informing them they ihould fet out in a day or two for England, Duncan's regiment being ordered home. Grant entering at the time of the Colonel delivering the packet to the meflfenger, the vete¬ ran affced him if he had any commands to Scotland, as he would inclofe his Ictterf. {i Alas! none," replied he; 44 thofe
* f thofe that rendered that country dear to me are either dc<\d, or gone I know- not whither," The Colonel, forry to have awakened a painful fenfation in the breaft ofthe honeft Enfign, difpatched tlie meffenger, and endeavoured to re¬ lieve the mind of Grant by changing the fubject. But Duncan, whom youth rendered more fanguine in his expecta¬ tions than the Colonel, replied : 4i As you exprefs yourfelf, Grant, you are not certain your friends are dead, why therefore defpond ? When î was con¬ fined, 1 think you told me you had been a great traveller, and met with many misfortunes, which you promifed to relate to me. We are now a fnug party ; if not difagreeable,, my uncle will, I am fure, be pleaftd with fuch a mark of your confidence."—" Alas !" faid he, " my misfortunes have all arifen from fulfilling the duties of hu¬ manity, and a wiih to fuccour a fweet 14 little
little innocent, whofe mothti dkd in vmknown ftranger in my hou' e four days after the battle of Culloden."— *' Good Heaven !" intet ruptcd Mi. Somme« s, his name and the fimikiiity ofthe account inftantly ftriking him as refembling that of Jannet, Ci you are not furely the fon oi Jannet Giant who formerly lived near Edinburgh, and whom ihe loft many years ago?"— ** Too furely I am that unfortunate fon," replied he, gazing on Mr. Som¬ mers with aftonifhment ; "but, my dear fir, fatisfy my impatience, for you furely knew my mother. Does ihe yet live > Is my little dai ling well ? Perhaps you know her too ? how have they exifted ? where have thev wandeied ?"— <c They aie both well," inturuptcd theColonel hailily, *' and aie under my [utricular protection ·, how they came fo \ou iliaU k-iow hci cafter; at piefent, excufe my impatience, have you )et the pichiró that
that appertained to Peggy's mother? You find, my good fellow, that we are acquainted with more of your affairs than either of us at firft apprehend¬ ed. Are you yet fit isfied who were her parents?"—·" Parents! whofe pa* rents ?" exclaimed Duncan with fur¬ prife. " Peace !" replied the Colonel, 46 you fliali know all ; but iii ft fpeak, Grant, have you yet the pornait. ; "— *' Yes!" returned Giant; α for many years it has been my conftant compa¬ nion, and my fearch to know the origi* nal the fou ree of all mv misfortunes." —" Quickly give it me," faid the Co¬ lonel; tc the aftoniftiing refemblance your mother informs me it bears to Peggy, makes me curious to fee it."— " 1 have i ? not about me," replied Grant, " but can eafily procure it. The day previous to that 1 reckon the moft fortunate of my life, tint on which I all lit ed your nephew, 1 went to the chaplain of the thirty-fevenrii regiment, î ς H'üucftingr
requefting him to take charge of a fmaii packet, and in cafe any thing happened *o me to open it; which packet con¬ tained nothing more than my own name unci former place of abode, fome ili ort detail of my misfortunes, and the pic¬ ture, with a written account how I came by it. My reafon for preferring him to our chaplain was fimply this : his cares foi the fick and dying had given me a. ben er opinion of him. Since my ad¬ vancement he has offered to reftore it> but 1 entreated him to keep it till our return to Britain, as it was fafe with Lim ; indeed, had you not prcvioufly mentioned it, I fliould have informed you of it in the courfe of the ftory I wai> about to relate." Grant then depai ted to fetch the por¬ trait ; Mr. Sommers in his abfence re¬ lating Jannet's account to Duncan, whole anxiety was ftiongly imprint¬ ed on his features, hazarding no qncf- tion
tion throughout, left he fhould lofe a word of a recital that fopowcifully in¬ terefted him. Mr. Somme!s had hardly concluded, when Grant returned, faying, he had not been able to meet with the chap¬ lain, who he was ii-formed had dined with fome ofliceis belonging to tiis regiment; but had left his bufinefs with the man who attended him. This de¬ lay in fome meafure damped the fpirits of the party, their curiofity being awak¬ ened to fee the poi trait found on the bofom of Peggy '? mother, and which was laid to refemble both paient and child fo exactly. Mr. Sommers then informed Grant whar he had been relating to Duncan in his ablcnce, entreat ino him to begin the account at his own depar¬ ture from Edinburgh. '* You fay, gentlemen," replied Grant, " you are acquainted with all previous to that period; you ni ?? theie* I 6 fo**·« 4
fore imagine me fafely arrived in Lon¬ don, where I piocured a letter to a per¬ fon that attended on the Chevalier from a friend of our minifter's, who gave me a recommendation for that purpofe. I then wrote to my mother, informing her ï was to depart the day following on board a veílel bound to Dieppe ; the evening previous to which, I went to a public-houfe near the water-fide, where Ì had appointed to meet the mate who »vas to accompany me on board. I had not fat long, before I fell into convcrfation with a man of a very fpe- cious appearance, and who foon found I was a ftranger in the metropolis, offer¬ ing me a thoufand civilities, all of which í thousxht real. As the mate did not come according to appointment, when it grew dark he offered to accompany me on board of ftiip ; an offer I thought particulaiiy polite, as he was an utter ftranger, and that I gratefully accepted of
of, as I hardly knew my way along the ftreets. In ihort, about ten we fet off together. I had not been on board before; my new fiend, how¬ ever, affured me he knew the veffel and would fee me fafe. At length we arrived at the water fide; my compa¬ nion gave a loud whittle, on which α boat was immediately put oft' from a veffel that lay near the fliore : my friend got in, myfelf following, and a few minutes brought us to the fliip ; where indeed my conductor feemed perfectly acquainted ; but as I had bar¬ gained for my paffage with the mate, the reft of the crew were totally un¬ known to me ; he foon after took his leave, myfelf expreffing a thoufand thanks for his kindnefs. I was fliewn to a decent birth, where l flept tole¬ rably well till towards midnight, when I found by the motion of the veflel that we had weighed anchor and were on our way. AU appeared quiet when I came
came on board, but now nothing but horrible oaths were to be diftinguifhed on every fide, intermingled however, at intervals, wiih the voice of complaint. As foon as day broke, I role and went on deck, where, not to weary you with long details, I was foon convinced, that, inftead of being on board a mer¬ chantman of Dieppe, I had been kid¬ napped into a veflel bound for Ame¬ rica, and which had a number of con¬ vias on board. You, gentlemen, doubtlefs need not be informed that fuch practices were common at this period, though rather beginning to de¬ cline. It was in vain to remonftrate with fuch wretches, whofe brutality I faw daily frefh proofs of; I therefore made a virtue of neceffity, expecting however to be heard and relieved v%hen I got on fliore. Alas ! how bitter my difappointment ! On our arrival at Wiliiamiburer. I was lecommended as a ftrong
ftrong hearty fellow, and, to complete all, to my utter aftonifliment a forged certificate was produced, whicli accufed me of having been guilty of thefe, for which I was condemned to a tranfpor¬ tation of fourteen years. All patience at this accufation for- fook me, and I verily believe, had the villainous captain who fabricated ic come in my way, I fliould at once have been guiltv of a worfe crime than that with which they charged me. Proteftations- wore vain, I was fold for the term be¬ fore fpecified, and doomed to drudge in whatever way my owner, who lived feveral miles up the country, thought fit. I had been ufed to labour, but it was for thofe I lovcd r and could not fub¬ mit without repining to work for thofe 1 defpifed ; for which I frequently got feverely reprimanded. Our feulement was, as I before ob¬ ferved, at a confiderable diftance from the
thé coaft. I knew nothing ofthe coun¬ try, and feared to attempt an efcape * left I fliould be feized, as it was necef¬ fary at every diftrict to produce a cer¬ tificate from whence you came. Money I had none, and clothes barely necef¬ fary to ihekcr me from the weather. The picture, on my departure from home, I had few ed in an old flannel waiftcoat which was too indifferent to tempt the avarice of the villains who brought me over. In ihort, I paffed five years in this horrible flavery, de¬ prived of every comfort, uncertain of the fate of thofe moft dear to me, and regardlefs of life but for their fakes. One day, being weary with labour and the extreme heat, I fat down; my inhuman mafter happen¬ ing to pafs at that moment, came up, and, not content with reprimanding, ftruck me. I am not gifted with a more than ordinar ν ftock of patience, and therefore
therefore repaid it with intereft. Seve¬ ral flaves came out at his cries ; Τ was inftantly feized, bound, and confined in a horrible dungeon, or rather cellar, which was under our dwelling, aud from whence I was brought on the third day to be tried for my crime by three or four planters who lived in the fertlement. It was in vain that I plead¬ ed the rights of a freeman, and related my being kidnapped ; all was either difbelieved, or pretended to be fo. I was accufed of the moft unpardonable of crimes, rebelling againft my owner; for which I was at firft condemned to die, a fentence that, however, they de¬ fired me to entreat to get changed into a longer period of flavery, but which I peremptorily refufed. I was then re¬ taken to my dungeon, and fed ftill more fparingly than before, having fcarcely fufficient allowed to fupport nature, I cannot fay I did not feel thofe
thofe calamities, but not fo greatly as you might fuppofe ; Ì was torn from ali that rendered life dear, and longed on my own account to be rid of a burthen, which was daily marked with frefh mif- fortunes; but that the horror implanted in us both by nature and education prevented me from ihaking off. The coward, faid I, bafely deferts his poft if perilous, but the brave foldier ftands out the heat of the day, nor forfakes his, until relieved by fuperior com¬ mand: thus then will I weather thc ftorm : come death when it may, I will welcome it ; but not extinguifh with felon hand the divine fpaik that ani¬ mates this earthly clay, which the Great Giver meant to burn until defigned for a nobler ufe. The ills of life are but a debt impofed on weak mortality, which, nobly borne, intitle the duft they agi¬ tated with every idle wind, to lafting happinefs. The longeft or the fhorteft life^
; : :V, the moft fortunate or moft mifer* ,ib\e, how fpeedily they pafs, and undif- tinguiihcd are forgotten Í— Accuftomed to think thus, I calmly bore the ills that furrounded me, determined to wait the event with patience, and bear all with refignfttion. I was at length again taken before my judges, who informed me that my mafter, through mercy for me, had entreated what I refufed to do for my¬ felf—a feven years added to my ilavery» and to receive five hundí ed lafhes ; de- firing me, when they acquainted me with this favourable fentence, to return thanks to my mafter and the court, which I did, nearly as I can recollect, as follows: " You fee before you a man u n con¬ feious of guilt, unaccufed by the laws of his country, meanly im rapped and fold for a flave, but whofe foul in fpite of all is free, and that will one day claim a,t the great tribunal, where all hearts Qui!
fhall appear undifguifed, that juftice de¬ nied him here—at that court where the king and the beggar, the planter and the llave, íhali meet on equal terms : where no counfel takes ? fee, nor venal judge decrees, but one that fits fupreme in light infallible and views the hearts of all. At that tribunal alone will 1 cither plead my caufe or return thanks ; I owe no duty here, I am free aat yourfelves ; gold may purchafe men's bodies but not their fouls, they remain in fpite of you at liberty. Where is the difference between the mafter and the ilave ? Myfelf have convinced you, it is a mere name ; was not my arm as ftrong as his ? my blood as red ?—am I not as fufceptible of pain ? Where then is this boafted fuperiority? It is not in the body, you muft allow : I grant it is in the mind. Scourge me, you are wel¬ come ; 1 ftiall not fue for mercy, I de* fpife ye ail ; difcharge my foul when you
you pleafe from the mİferaLle tenement which nature, rather than the fubtleties of fchoolmen, obliges it to keep, and that will rife to meet the ftroke that fets it free : but you will not do it ; gladly as you would fhed my blood, your in¬ tereft withholds you, until my nerves, unftrung by labour, have loft the power to wield the hoe, or till your lands. Then will ye meanly devife fome weak excufe to difembarrafs yourfelves of one no longer ferviceable; regardlefs, or at leaft forgetful that you are fending forth another witnefs, whofe every fear fhall be a mouth to condemn you be¬ yond the power of mercy. 4 They had often attempted to inter¬ rupt me during this addrefs, but, careiefs of life, I braved them to the utmoft; the confequence of which was, that i was immediately ordered to the whip- ping-poft, where they tied me, exercif- ing their fury until fpent with its own 1 violence.
violence. An obftinate bravery kept me firm, determining me rather to ex¬ pire under their blows, than give them the fatisfaction of hearing me complain. An old Cherokee chief, who had come to our fettlement fome days before to trade, and who was greatly feared among the planters, by the power he poíleífed over the minds of his countrymen, ftood fmoking with apparent unconcern while I received part of my puniihment : he had likewife been prefent at my con¬ demnation, having accompanied one of the planters through curiofity, poffef¬ fing fuíücient Englifh, from a long in- tercourfe among them, to underftand common topics and traffic. At length he llepped forward, and by his manner feemed to be making a propofal to my mafter, who appeared to demur for fome rime, but ordered the fentence to be awhile fufpended, ftill converting with the old Indian, who I afterwards found
found was bargaining for me, and which was at length concluded, much in favour, you may be well aflured, of the infamous planter, who 01 dered me to be untied i when prefcming me dreaming wich blood to the Cherokee, he faid rather in a low voice, t< Go, vil¬ lain, and learn the difference between a Chriftian and a Heathen." If thou arc a Chriftian, replied I, with as much difdain as my ftate could poffibiy af¬ filine, I thank Heaven for the change. The Indian was a venerable old man of a copper colour; his hair lightly fprink- led with grey, and his features, though ftrong, foftencd with a benevolence that could not efcape an accurate obferver. He ordered two Indians who attended him to drefs my wounds, himfelf afiift- ing to bind them up with plantain leaves, giving me, during the opera¬ tion, a large bumper of rum ; after which he faid, taking the calumet from his
his mouth and prefenting it me t— <c Chriftian Englilliman, but indian foul—no more flave —-forget bad coun¬ try, worthy good—no mind fieih wounds, foon heal—bad heart never cure/' 1 know not how I exprefled my gratitude to the humane Cherokee, whom, I afterwards found, lhad been fortunate enougii to intereft in my fa¬ vour by the energy with which I ad- dreíled the planters, and likewife by the careiefs manner in which I received their chaftifement ; the Indians confidering as the higheft proof of heroifm, a regard- leflnefs of pain. We remained but three days at the fettlement, and thefe merely to enable me to gain fufficient ftrength ?? accompany them in their journey, which by, their care I then found my¬ felf equal to ; the generous Indian re¬ fufing u 1th great obftinacy to fuffer me to carry any burthen during the way, tliough 1 often attempted it, faying, t * Indian
44 Indian carry now; when Indian fick, white man carry." In ihort, we travelled twelve days, repofing in the extreme heat, and walking during the night. At length we reached our place of def· tination, where my friendly Cherokee was received with every mark of refpect: t liefe uncorrupted fouls knew how to exprefs. They hallooed, they clapped their hands, furrounding him and ad¬ miring the purchafes he had made, which confined of hatchets, guns, pow¬ der, ftiot, fpirits, &c. and for which he had exchanged ikins and other commo¬ dities. The relatives of the old Che- lokee confuted of a wife and fon, the former of his own age, the latter about twenty, and to whom he particulaiiy in¬ troduced me, relating as I knew by his expreffive geftures, his reafon for pur- *tiafing me, and at length fhewing them my back. During this recital I 'ould form a tolerably juft idea of their Vo/,. II» ? ffintiments.
fenti.mciits, iov tears ft reamed from the old woman's eyes, while her fon's fea¬ tures aílumcd by degrees, as the Che¬ rokee continued his talc, a marking and ferocious difdain, which 1 muft confefs gave me fome alarm, until at his father's conclufion he itepped forward, prefent- ing me the calumet, again viewing my back, and ftamping with an energetic expreífion, which plainly fliewed his anger was againft my oppreifors. This young man and myfelf were foon upon the moft intimate footing ; í ft ud ied to gain his friendflïip —a conduct that pro¬ cured me alfo that of his father and mo¬ ther, who, after my being fome fhort time with them, made no vifible differ¬ ence between us. I taught him as much as in my power, our ikill in hufbandry ; learning him Englifh, at the fame time tliat he inftructed me in the Cherokee language ; in iliort, we feemed two affectionate brothers, the fame purfuits 4 employing
employing both, and never happy afunder. The efteem of the old chief procured me likewife tliat ofthe reft of the tribe ; and had not the remembrance of my mother, and the innocent babe, whom I loved as my own, interfered, I fiiould have been perfectly fatisfied with my fituation, nor ever fought to change' it : but, as it was, a thoufand diftracting ideas made me infenfible of the blef- fings I poflefíed. My mother and her little charge were defti tute of that fuc- cour I could have afforded them, and perhaps reduced to the utmoft mifery. All communication with Europeans ap¬ peared for ever cut off. I was at a pro¬ digious diftance from any fettlemenf, and, had I even gained one, fliould have been treated as a defertcr; being nakeá* unprovided with a pauport, or, what was yet more neccfiary to bribe their cupidity, gold. In fhort, I had re- nwned feven years among them, when ? 2 one
one day being out hunting with Abou- rou, the fon of my benefactor, fuddenly a tyger rufhed from a thicket, and attacked him with a rage which was redoubled by hunger· I haftened to his affiftance, but not time enough to prevent his receiving a defperate wound in the bowels from the ferocious beaft, who would infallibly have killed him on the fpot, as he feized him una- waies, had I not been fortunate enough to make him lofe his hold by a well- applied íhot, which Abourou inftantly repeated with a fiimnefs, notwithftand¬ ing his wound, that brought the tyger* to che earth, where we at length dif* patched him. The immediate danger over, my whole cares were for my friend. I gently led him to our hut, where, with the afliítánce of his father, and other Cherokees, I bound up his wounds, which appeared of the moft dan¬ gerous kind j the intrepid youth, how- q ever,
€?? , ? '' l r ?-- 4 complaint, but relating wiyi enthuliaftic fervour v*^ %.· ^ ? ?? . vice I, had rendered him ; all which I now urnlerftood, being, by his cares quite converfant in the Cherokee lan¬ guage* On the fourth day, the wound 'becoming vifibly worfe, he defired his father to fend for the principals of the tribe; which being complied with, he raifed himfelf on his mattrefs with aftoniftiing fortitude, and addreffed them, as nearly as í can recollect, to the following purport ? " I feel, my friends, that the fpirit which animates me is ftruggiing to be free,.and muft foon join our fatners in the land of fouls j a circumftance that ???? own account gives me infinite fatisfaction, as doubt¬ lefs the change muft be for the better : but my father, weakened by age, re¬ quires the attention of a fon ; on whom can he ñx more worthy than Allan ? Eighty times has the moon changed ? 3 fince
ax» ??.??? ; ¿„„? i* r ? , ?^ι nas he not mit e ins ftay aiv-·- J J ? , ι ,.* 0 cu, ou»·, firm as íhe braveíl Chc- îcïkee, delerves to be confidered a: f ich, and no longer humiliated bv anv other appellation. Ad.mt him then, my fathers fo fh.dl you not feel my lofs, nov i the ???? of kavme \ou without a fon." Suth was the lequtft cf the young CheioLce, which was immedi¬ ately complied with, his father promif¬ ing to füfil his defire to the uttermoft. To be brief, Abourou died in my arms the dav fol low in î?, : his death was a tcverc afîhction to me, as, from what tittle inftruction I had given him, he was an agreeable as well as friendly companion. Being wiih his father and mother in the hut when he died, I could not refrain teais, as í confidered my¬ felf now bereft of all that could make that favage life bearable. The eld Cherokee obfcivcd me fume time i íilence, then rebuked me, filing in his own
own language, " Banifii fuch Europe m eileminacy, which muft inevitably leflen you among my companions; my fon v, ?? biave, and I doubt not is happy in th? ¡arid of fpirits. Repine not at h.s felt- city, but from his example make } jur- lc!l ? ] u ail y w ? rih ?.*' AboLirou's mother did not poilefs fo flinch fortitude; grief preyed on herin fpite of all myfelf and the old man could do to bani İh it, and brought her to the grave in about a month after her fon. One day, being alone with the old Cherokee, who treated me with tlie tendernefs of a parent, and for whom I had equal attention, 1 ventured to coiv- fuk him on my future refolutions, telt¬ ing him thit I was determined to ha¬ zaid all rather than flay in that comtry, ihould any thing happen to him; that duty and inclination piompttd meto feck my mothei, who, ú lhe even yet luivived, muft be phiur/al in the great- 4 cit
.* eft diftrefs ¿ requefting his advice, how in fuch a cafe to gain a fea- port where I might embark for England. The old man endeavoured for a confiderable time to diffuade me, but in vain—I iledfaftly affirming I would never quit him; but that, in-cafe of his death, nothing ihould prevent my attempting to regain my native land. The old man appeared grieved at my deter* mination, which he would frequently entreat me to relinquiih ; but finding pterfuafions fruitlefs, he at length con¬ fented to.procure me the means, faying: áf I determined to go, he had too much affection for me to neglect it till his death, however difagreeable it might be to part from me ; as he obferved, from the power he maintained, he could more fecurely obtain me a paffage to Eng¬ lund than any of his brethren. In ihort, the year following, on his going to traffic at Cbaiks-Town, he took a double
double quantity of goods, and accom¬ panied by myfelf and about fifty Che¬ rokees began his march, which we per¬ formed in ten days. On our arrival my worthy patron was prefented to the governor, to whom he made a prefent of fome of his fineft ikins, informing him of the manner in which he had purchafed me of the planter for a con¬ fiderable quantity of goods, adding, that I had been adopted as his fon, but was weak enough to wifh to revifit my own country. The governor liftened to him in filence; the friendíhip of the Cherokees he well knew the value of» and after fome paufe confented to what he lequefted, which was, procuring me a paffage to Britain. The old man then prefented me with various articles of trafik, which I changed for habiliments, and to pay the captain. The picture I had never fliewn to any one, being fear¬ ful of their wifliing to deprive me of it; ? 5 therefore
therefore kept it carefully concealed among the rags which covered mc dur¬ ing my whole ftay with the Cherokees, The day at length arrived on which wc were to fail. My heait was at once overwhelmed with joy and forrow ; th c firft from the hope of regaining my ow ? country, the other at leaving my ge¬ nerous hoft, who pai ted fromme with the utmoft reluctance, faying in Eng¬ lifh as we fcparated, " Tarliceli live t oolong—all fons gone—go home die! îs <■— fí No, my father," interrupted I, penetrated by his difintereftcd beha* viour, and the affection he expreffed for mo, " I will fooner go back and re¬ main in your country for ever, than diftr^fs you ; I am yours, honour and cr it. tude both demand it."—" No !" replied he with fiimnefs s 4{ go, re¬ member Cherokee, Cherokee ever re¬ member white man." So faying, he departed with his companions, leaving mc
nie on boaid of ftiip. England and France were then at w ar, a circumftance 1 was unaeouaintcd with until our arri·- val at Cha» les-Town ; for though a pai ty of Cheickees went yearly to fome or other of the Enghfh feulements, yet from their account I could gain but little information. Our voyage v-as ?? secularly..Jiaapy, afri^rng-^n the Downs in fomewhat more than a mentii. Dtlsgh:cci as I was to reach Britain, yet a number of fears i libit- tei ed that pleafure; I dreaded my long abfe.ice hid been fatal to my mother and the helplefs child; and de¬ termined to haften to Scotland as fpeed¬ ily as poffible and relieve my doubt«, where if I found them well, l conclud* ed, notwithstanding the liad fuccefs oi my iii ft enteipnlc, to hazard another in puifuit of the babe's parents. At Deal we touched to procuic ve¬ getables and fieih provifions; but had Κ υ noi
Hot taken them in, before we were boarded by a prefs-gang, who feized Oft nearly all our hands, and obferving my fun-burnt complexion, infifted like- wife I was a feaman. It was in vain I protected ; the account I gave of my being kidnapped was by no means fatisfactory, but rather furniíhed them with weapons againft myfelf ¿ the lieu¬ tenant fwearing I was an old offender, and might be glad to be fent for a failor, rather than hanged for returning from tranfportation. In fhort, I was dragged before a regulating captain, ai>d the whole ftory related to him. My appearance I muft confefs was not much in my favour ; my complexion of a red brown ; my clothes, though whole, of the moil indifferent kind, and to complete all, nòt a fingle penny in my pocket : for though the friendly Cherokee prefented me with a confi¬ derable number of ikins, the whole were
were diípofcd of for my pafiage and habiliments; the honeft fa vage not having the moft diftant idea that I could need farther afiiftance when I îeached my country and fellow-citizens. The regulating captain was deaf to all I could urge, and fent me immediately on board a ν eifel defti ned to a three years ftation in the Weft Indies : here, however, they found their miftake, for I was fo awkward in maritime bufincis, that previous to our failing the captain ofthe veflel fent for me into the cabin, and offered, if I prefeired the land fer- vice, to turn me over to his brother who was a lieutenant in the army, and was then going to London. I accepted this offer with tranfport, and that very day the lieutenant coming on board to take leave of his brother, 1 accompanied him en fliore, and from thence to London ; where, however, we were to ftay but a fbort time, being ordered to Germany. I can
I can tnily aifure you thefe late cala¬ mities made, if poffible, more impiei- fion on me than all the former ; a thou¬ fand times did I curfe civilifed fociety . *— 4ζ Savages," exclaimed I, <£ do not dwell in deierts, but in poliihed cities; the firft are the unconnpted children of nature, the latter the offspring of am¬ bition, avarice, and a thoufand other vices ; to fatisfy which, they employ 'every art* regardlefs of the ties they rend afunder. What to them is the paternal pang ? They feel it not, in¬ fenfible to all but the gi ati ficat ion of their wiflics í The tender appellations of father, mother, chikt, brother, and countryman are (wallowed in the gulph of felf-intereft ! What to them is iLw cry of mifery ? They hear ic not in the aims of wanton debauchery ! nor can it reach them through the ι iot ofthe table, glutted even to btuulity with all the luxuries that wealth can beftow! Are. not
not thefe then the real barbarians ? in what are they fuperior to brutes ? do rhey not devour the weak, opprefs the defencelefs, and gratify at any expence the vileft panions ? yet they boaft their refinement ! in what doth it confi ft ? civilifed cruelty, and unfeeling educa¬ tion !—The Cherokee bravely and openly attacks, kills, and fcalps his enemy ; but the name of parent, í, icnd, or countryman, with him, ate indeli¬ ble ties, nay to even the ftranger the bare pud of fmoke which evaporates from his calumet is a more faci ed bond than that which pedantic refinement has given to the poìifiied world !—Sou» ed with misfortunes, thu? did 1 reafon. My '??.???? to London, however, gave me fome ilight iatibfaction, as from thence I hoped at leaft to be able to write to Scotland, and procure news of my mo¬ ther: in fhort, on the very day of our anival I wrote two letters, one to njy mother.
mother, the other to the minifter who was acquainted with the bufinefs I went -opon, and who had advanced me five guineas towards my expenees; calling alfo at the houfe of the gentleman who had given me the recommendation to the Chevalier's court,, but he wis re¬ moved no one could tell më whither. As to the letter, it had many years been worn to atoms ; for though I was tolerably careful of it, yet having no place to fecure it but about my perfon,, it was impofhblc it fhould be otherwife. I waited the return of the poft with, im¬ patience, fearful of being fent on board of Ôiip before I could receive an an¬ swer. At length it arrived, but brought me no letter ; diftracted, I almoft de¬ termined to deferì and go to Scotland, whatever might be the confequence ; however, on calm confideration, I re- folved to try the event of another en¬ quiry, which I addreffed to a man I had
had fome little acquaintance with in Edinburgh, entreating him in the moft preffing manner to favour me with an immediate anfwer* A week after I had written this laft we were ordered to de* part for Harwich. I will not attempt to defcribe to you my frenzy at this com¬ mand : to gain a furlough, even for a day, was imponible ¿but the lieutenant ofthe íegiment, who really was a man of humanity, in companion to my fuf- ferings, left a ftrict command at the poft-office, that if any letter came with my direction it ftvould be forwarded to him with fpeed. In ihort, we arrived at Harwich, and had juft got on board of (hip which was ready to fail when he fetit for me, and delivered one from, the perfon I had laft written to. This- informed me the good old minifter had been dead twelve years, and that my mother had left that part of the country- previous to his deceafe,, and was faid ta· have
rECfïV have retired into the Highlands, but he knew not whither. This letter afforded me at leaft fome gloomy fatisfaction ; my aunt had removed to the I fie of Sky the year before my departure ; my mother, if flie yet furvived r might be with her, or, what I however lefs ex¬ pected, at the little cot my father had left her, but which we ufed to let at the humble ftipend of ten (hillings per year· Our veffel was already on its way, fo it was impoffible to make any reply to this, or procure further infor¬ mation : however, it infpired hopes, that, fliould I ever return, I might by fome means difcover my mother and the child. Such was my fituation when we arrived at Cartel; here î could find no opportunity of procuring intelli¬ gence -, í therefore wiote my name with fome fhort account of my misfortunes, and what related to the infiuivand de¬ livered it to the clergyman, defu inc¬ hini,
him, in cafe any thing happened to me, to open it. HcaVen, however, appears to view me with a more benign al¬ pe ? ímce 3 by making me the humble means of afiiiling Captain Campbell: it not only has given me information of my parent, but raifed me above my higheft expectations ; a reverie of for¬ tune which í hope í (hall bear with moderation, nor ever forget the leffons of humility ad ver fit ? has, taught me. As to your offer this day of fending any letter, as î was fo unceiuin of what place to find them, I declined it, parti¬ cularly as fortune had now put it in my power to leek them in fo ihort a time; little aware at that moment, my own advancement was among the leaft of my obligations to you." At the conclufion of Grant's ftory, the Colonel ihook him heartily by the hand, faying, " I congiatuîate myftlt en being acquainted with you. By Heaven,
Heaven, I would go three times the diftance of from hence to Scotland, to ferve fo honeft a fellow ! But tell me, how came you by an education which I muft certainly think fuperior to the feumble line in which you were bred ?" 44 If í poffefs any," replied Grant, 4C I owe it to the kindnefs of the minifter befoie mentioned, who ufed to have me a great deal with him, until the death of my father rendered my pre¬ fence at home necefîàry." At this moment a foldier entered to inform Enfign G tent, that a gentleman de¬ fired to fpeak with him. " It is doubt- kfs Mr. Bennet, to whom I entrufted my little packet ; have I your permif- fion to introduce him ?" To which the Colonel affenttng, Grant withdrew, and foon returned with the chaplain, who was a venerable old man of a very prepofle fiing appearance. The Colonel and his company rofe to re¬ ceive
ceive him; Grant in the mean time apologifing for the trouble he had given him. " My good fir!" faid the Colonel, " 'tis myfelf who have occa- fioned it: my friend here informed me you had been kind enough to take charge of a packet, that contains a portrait which has greatly interefted us all." u I have it about me," replied he a 44 as I imagined, from what my fervant informed me, that Mr. Grant wanted it, as I hear he is on the point of leaving; Germany C' —fo faying, he drew out a final 1 parcel neatly folded and feaied, which he prefented to the Enfign, who reached it to the Colonel, faying, ,t Open it, fir; to your charge I now deliver it, determined to be direcled by you in what manner to act in re- fpect to procuring the intelligence I wiih to gain." Curiofity made the Colonel hailily unfeal the packer, nor were
were Mr. Sommers and Duncan di¬ verted of that fcntimcnt, all being anxious to behold the picture; which however had no fooner met the Co¬ lonels fight, than he became ener¬ vated with aftonifhment—the picture dropping from his trembling hand, at the fame time exclaiming, in a voice hardly articulate, " Merciful God ! it is Mary Frafer !"—" Mary Frafer l* interrupted Mr. Sommers, not lefs amazed than the veteran ; " can this be Mary Frafer's portrait, and which was found on the neck of the lady who dieu at Grant's houfe ?" tc 'Tis, in¬ deed, that which was found on her bofom," replied the Enfign, " and as İike her as is poffible for the art of man to draw one." Duncan had now in his turn feized the picture that caufed fuch wonder: iC Mary Frafer l' exclaimed he : 4C no, on my life 'tis Peggy's por¬ trait :
trait : her every feature—the likenefs Is too ftrong to miftake it : nay, her hair too—look, fir; you muft confefs it can be only hers." « No, Duncan," replied the Colonel, 4C it is indeed Mary Frafer's, and, what will furprife you yet more, the very portrait flie prefented me; but which I returned to Lady Jane Montgomery above forty years ago. The amazing likenefs Peg¬ gy bears to her ftruck me even at firft fight, and perhaps increafed my par¬ tiality to her; nay, I told Sommers flie had a claim on my favour which he was not aware of, but that I would iòme day difclofe to him." The chaplain, who had brought the portrait, appeared during this difcourfe to liften with the utmoft attention. " Pardon me, fir," faid he, (t for the queftion ; but you furely cannot mean Mifs Frafer, the daughter of Alexander Frafer ? And yet," continued he, 4ζ the portrait
portrait bears a ftriking refemblance of that lady, who however could not have exifted at the period you men¬ tion.* A momentary flufii croffed the features of the ColoneL <c No," re¬ plied he, it is her mother's : the beft, the moft abufed of women : as to her daughter, I know her not; that ihe be¬ longed to Alexander made her name deteftable to me for many years : but now that time has in fome meafure calmed my paffions, I hci that anger unjuft. The parr fhe held from Mary- gives her a claim on my affection. Can you, fir, inform me, whether flie yet furvives } Her villainous father, I once heard, had educated her even from her rnoft tender age in a convent, design¬ ing her for a religious life." *' I know not whether flie be living or dead," returned the chaplain, 4( but need not now fear to difclofe a fecret, which long fince rnuft have ceafed to be one. Mifs
Mils Frafer, the daughter of Alexan¬ der Fraier, I myfelf married above leventéén years back to a young Scot- tiih officer of Argylefliire, named James Campbell, and by whom İhe was with child when ihe left France, in the early part of the year one thou- fand feven hundred and forty-fix, fince when I have never heard of her." ...... "Merciful FI caven!" exclaimed the veteran, " it cannot be ! fpeak—fay— defcribe his perfon; fure 'tis imponi¬ ble !' tC Ceafe your agitation, my dear fir," replied Sommers; tí unwil¬ lingly I difclofe what 1 had determined fhould die with me rather than d Hl refs you. Your fon James Campbell was indeed marned to Mifs Frafer, the daughter of your once beloved Marv ; a truth 1 am well afiured of, though the particulars are even at this mo¬ ment unknown to me." "And why," returned the Colonel impatiently, 4ζ was Vol. IL L it
it conccakd fiom mer Such a decep¬ tion, Sommers, vvas unworthy your calling, and doubly unworthy o,¡r friëndfliip." 44 1 am clear from blame/* anfwercd he ; " nay, even now I wiili I could conceal it. The woman fo beloved by your fon did not deferve that distinction ; at leaft I have been led to believe it : as to her being with child, I was totally unacquainted ; but thus unwillingly forced will relate all I know. The morning before your departure for Culloden, Captain James came to me in the baakfaft pai lour: tt Mr. Sommers," faid he, *' 4 1 have long wiíhcd to fpeak with you on an affair of tlie utu oft importance, but a foolifii dread has kept me filent ; yet I know you are my fiiend, and that you will not increate my father's anger again ft me. In ih ort, my dear fir," continued he, taking my hand, ** I am maiiied"—*' Married 1" interrupted I, with
wiih aftonifhment-------" and without the knowledge of your father, whole concurrence you could not doubt for a defcrving object ! you have at once been guilty of imprudence and ingra¬ titude." " Peace, my dear fir !" re¬ plied he ; u the object is truly worthy, and yet could never have been ap¬ pi oved of by my father, whofe dcltrved hati ed to Alexander Frafer would hwc placed an tnfupeiabL bar between his daughter and myfelf." *' The daughter ui Mr. Frafer '" cued 1: " is ir polii ble you can have man ied one fo very ob¬ noxious to \tur ruber : " " Slie is the bea, the faireft ol women," replied he, i; nay, th.e) ull me, the ???? image of hvT mothei—then ž- it L· extiaordiiury * that my heait fliould be as fulceptible as his? It we ieturn Lúq^ I mean to difclofe it to him, ior I cannot live longer feparaud fiom her; eipecially v during the war our corre fpondence La is
ís perpetually broken by fome accident or other ; for I have heard from her but twice fince my return to Britain, AU I entreat, my dear fir, is; that ihould any unlucky accident befall me, you would reveal this marriage to my fa¬ ther: how í became acquainted with her is too long to difclofe now ; fuffice it, 1 am fure, when once known, he cannot fail to efteem her. I fliould have informed him of the whole, but for the continual bufinefs he has been employed in refpecting the danger of our country, and, if 1 return, will not hefitate a moment. Should I fall, my dear fir, ili e muft be your charge : introduce her to my father—let her know a bleílmg fhe has never yet ex¬ perienced, that of pofíeíTing an affec¬ tionate parent. Alas ! her gentle na¬ ture will need every fuppoit, fliould fuch an accident happen." He then informed me (he was boarded in a convent
convent at Lifle, having refufed to take the veil, though ftrongly preiTtd by her father, who wifhed to difpofe of her in that manner in order to en¬ rich an illegitimate fon. Our difcourfe was here interrupted by your entrance, nor had we any other opportunity oi renewing it, as you both departed as foon as breakfaft was over. Six days after this converfation, the decifive battle of Culloden was fought, and you returned childlefs and overwhelm¬ ed with forrow : you muft allow this was no time to increafe your agita¬ tion; a thoufand refolves did I make to difclofe the fecret that weighed fo heavy upon my fpirits. A number of times did I endeavour to introduce a fubject in which Frafer neceffarily bore a part ; but the anger that name ever infpired you with, deterred me. At length I refolved to go to Flanders, feek Mifs Frafer, and, if I found heras L ? amiable
amiable as defcribed by your fo;^ perfuade her to return with me iu fpite of every cbftacle, and truft to the humanity of your own heart, and James's attachment to her, to obtain the place in your affection I wifhed her to poffefs. In fhort, you muft re* member that about fix weeks after you came from Culloden, I informed you that indifpenfible bufinefs required my abfence for a time, and to which >ou acquiefced without inquiry. I depart¬ ed from Kenneth Caftle, travelling with the utmoft diligence to London, from whence, being at war, I had no re¬ fource but going by the way of Ger¬ many. On my arrival at Lifle, I hat tened to the convent mentioned by your ion, inquiring for Mifs Frafer at the grate; but was informed that flie had quitted it fom e w hat more than three months. Naturally fup. pofing (lie might be with her father, J en-
\ entreated to fpeak with the abbefs, who 1 apprehended might give me a more circumftaniial account ; and was accouhngly favoured by her pre¬ fence. I told her bufinefs of the ut¬ moft confequence made me thus im¬ portunate, defiring her in the moft preiti n g terms to give me all poffible information refpecting Mils Frafer; which at length íhe did to the follow¬ ing purport : 4t Mifs Frafer," faid ihe, * c was not with us more than a year ; her father having purchafed an eftate in this vicinity only about eighteen months ago, when he removed from Paris. She frequently went home, at which times flie doubtlefs formed an improper acquaintance ; as fhe was fince known to have had feveral private interviews with her father's fecretary, and with w r om flie finally eloped about the period 1 before mentioned, being feen in a chaife L 4 with
with him and her maid, at the feveral poft-houfes they paffed. You may fuppofe they were immediately pur- fued, but had ufed too much fpeed to be eafily overtaken *. fome conjecturing they were gone to England, or other- wife to Holland," This is all the in¬ formation I could gain from the ab- befs ; and that caufed me a vexation í cannot exprefs, as 1 confidered Cap¬ tain James the dupe of an artful wan¬ ton, who eloped equally from him as her father—that event taking place above a month before the battle of Culloden. Determined however to be better informed, I went to the village where Frafer lived, and made feveral inquiries, all of which confirmed tlie abbefs's ftory ; Mifs Frafer being known to have held feveral private conferences with Iver father's fecretary, and on the night of her elopement was ften to enter a chaifc with him and her maid*
maid. Her father had made many in¬ quiries, all of which proved fruitlefs ; though on the whole he was perhaps not difpleafed to be quit of one whom he regarded as a troublefome incum¬ brance on the fortune of his fon. Dif* gufted with women, from the falfe¬ hood of Mifs Frafer, I returned to Scotland, determined, unlefs neceffi- tated, to conceal a marriage which every way muft give you pain, and perhaps awaken thoughts derogatory to your fon ; a resolution tlut time itrengtheiied rather than decreafed ; for although I frequently inquired for fome years through different channels after Mifs Frafer, yet it was without effect——a circumftance which con¬ vinced me of the truth of the ftory I had heard, and that the worth lefs wo¬ man was fo attached to her paramour as to make her regardlefs of every other object." L 5 » Juft
44 Juft are the ways of Heaven, though beyond the comprehenfion of man !" exclaimed Mr. Bennet. " Little did I think, fcventeen years back, that I fhould live to give my weak teftimony of the innocence of a woman whofe beauty was her leaft endowment.— Warmly, though fecrerly attached to the proteftant faith, fhe became the wife of Captain James Campbell, who I now underftand was your fon ; a cir¬ cumftance that I was before unacquaint¬ ed with, being even a ftranger to your name and rank. To render my ac¬ count as clear as poffible, I muft inform you, that ever fince the year one thou¬ fand feven hundred and forty I mar* ried, and fome time after meeting with repeated misfortunes retired to France, both for perfonal fafety from unfeel¬ ing creditors, and alfo upon economi¬ cal principles. Chance placed me at no great diftance from Mr. Frafer's, with whofe daughter my wife became fome
fome Httle acquainted, though not in¬ timately ; Mifs Frafer being ufually at the convent where fhe boarded. Some fliort time previous to the battle of Fontenoy, a young gentleman, clofely wrapped up, came one evening to my houfe, and, after a genteel apology for his intrufion, informed me that he had a favour of ihe utmoft importance to enti eat, which was no lefs than uniting him to Mifs Ft afer i telling me at the fame time flic was in her heart a pro¬ teftant, and unlefs that ftep prevented it, would be forced to take the veil. He then faid that his fortune was fu¬ perior to her's ; his name Campoell, from Argylefliire, and under the com¬ mand of the Duke of Cumberland ; re¬ newing hi* inftances to efpoufe them on the morrow, as he ran the 4itmoft rifle of being taken for a ipy, as he had only through the favour of his difguifé L 6 and
and night eluded the vigilance of the enemy ; concluding the whole by in¬ forming me that Mifs Frafer had recom¬ mended him to me, and would meet him for that purpofe, if I would con¬ fent. I muft truly confefs there was fomewhat in this young man's whole appearance and behaviour that intereft¬ ed me in his behalf. In fhoit, I mar¬ ried them on the morning following* in the prefence of my wife, Mifs Fra¬ fer's maid, and the fecretary, with whom I am fure you have unjuftly fufpected her of evil, and whofe name I well recollect was Simpfon." ** Simpfon !" exclaimed Grant, in¬ terrupting him—" Simpfon was the $ame ofthe man that attended Peggy's mother ; I well recollect her calling him fo, addreffing him as a domeftic. He was of a more than common fize„ fallow compiexioned, with a deep cut acroß
acrofs his right cheek.'* " He was exactly as you defcribe him," replied Bennet ; ** the maid black haired, yet much freckled, and very fhort and fat." C( The fame, the fame !" inter¬ rupted Grant ; 44 if this picture then is a refemblance of Mifs Frafer, whom you term Mary, on whofe breaft was it fo likely to be found as her daughter's ?" 44 Heavenly powers ! if this be fo," exclaimed Duncan, throwing himfelf on his uncle's neck, *< whofe child is Peggy ?'* The various parlions con¬ tending in the breaft of the Colonel prevented his anfwering, but by a filent embrace. Mr. Sommers, though hardly lefs agitated, entreated Mr. Bennet to continue. 44 Mrs. Campbell, who however was itili known by no other name than Mifs Frafer, returned to her convent fome days after the marriage, it being determined
determined to keep it a fecret until he had divulged it to his father. They, I well knew, ufed to have private meetings whenever fhe came home, Which flie now did as frequently as poffible ; and I am fure thefe inter¬ views were always with the privity of her maid and the fecretary. About four months after their mar¬ riage, Captain Campbell returned to England, leaving his wife in the-con¬ vent, who feldom came to her father's after his departure, confequently we did not fee her as ufual. However, in the beginning of March, flie called on my wife, telling her, in the courfe ofthe converfation, that fhe hoped to be able in a fhort time to go to Scotland, and make her marriage public, as it was - now neceffiry (being with child), ex- preffmg the warmeft wifhes for our happinefs; and on her departure, what¬ ever my wife could fay to the contrary, prefented
prefented her with a note for fifty pounds, faying, " My beloved Camp¬ bell defired me to act thus, and his defires fhall ever be facred to his Mary." So faying ihe left my wife, and a few days after we heard was gone no one could tell whither. As to the ftory ofthe fecretary, I certainly heard it, but knew its falfehood -, for had fiie any fecret interviews with him, it was certainly to contrive her efcape, in which he doubtlefs accompanied her as a guard ; having, as I heard after her departure, taken with her ? confidera¬ ble quantity of jewels which were left her by her mother, totally independent of her father, and that fiie had in her poileífion at the convent, from which ihe brought them previous to her elopement." £t All ! all confirms Ms the fame !" replied Grant; " their hafte to be gone ; the little caiket they were fo cautious of doubtlefs contained thofe jewels that caufed
caufed them villanoufly to abandon the infant; as had they declared her birth, they muft have produced the property that the unhappy mother took with her. The extreme anxiety fhe fhewed concerning the army, though fhe did not exprefs of what party ; her declaration that ftie was going to Ar¬ gylefliire to feek a beloved hufband, and the fatal lift of the dead in which your fon was included, undoubtedly ftruck the blow that brought her to the grave." " Alas I I have little doubt but 'tis as you fufpect," replied the Colonel ; 4i dear beloved child, of un¬ happy parents ! the attraction my heart felt towards thee was not chimerical ; Heaven ftamped the well remembered features of Mary on thy innocent vi- fage for its wifeft purpofes. What a debt of love do I owe thee, and that I fhall now glory in paying!—precious wreck of all my foul once held dear !·— the
the part thou beareft from Mary Frafer, my Jemima, and her beloved fon, obli¬ terates all remembrance of the hated Alexander !" 44 My good fir," faid Sommers, 44 might I advife you, though I con¬ fefs I have as few doubts on this mat¬ ter as yourfelf, to make a particular in¬ quiry by advertifements for thofe peo¬ ple who were faid to attend your fon's wife on her leaving Flanders ; if it were poffible to find them, you could not have the fhadow of a doubt, as they muft declare, in cafe of her death, where that event happened, and how they difpofed of the property fhe had with her." 44 I cannot flatter myfelf," anfwered the Colonel, 4( that I fhall ever enjoy that fatisfaction, as Lady Jane Mont¬ gomery's jewels were half left to Mary, and were doubtlefs thofe my unhappy daughter-in-law took with her, and of &rea.t
great value. Be it as it may, nothing filali prevent me rcrardine, Pesrtrv *?? my giand-daughter : ίο Duncan," con¬ tinued the veteran cheerfully, u thou haft loft a tolerable (ortune, and found in exchange a coufin." <r A coufin, fir !" replied Duncan with a figli.— 4C Aye! a coufin, Duncan; nay» never look grave·—I know no crime againft either the laws of God or fociety in a man loving his coufin." " Nor I either, upon my foul !*' rejoined Grant in a tranfport of pleafure: i4 fhall I then -live to fee my darling raifed fo high Í— îiow will my heart rejoice to prefent »one fhe muft glory in acknowledging a parent !" " When ihe ceafes to ho¬ nour, nay, call you fuch, fhe forfeits a grandfather," replied the Colonel ; " how little does fhe owe me compara¬ tively to what fhe ftands indebted to you !" "I flatter myfelf," anfwered Mr. Sommers, " that Peggy is not of a dit
a difpofition to forget her old friends ; hut if I may hazard the queftion, where is Mr. Frafer now ? as I know he is yet living, or we muft have heard who inherited his eftates in the high¬ lands." iC I am but little informed of any thing refpecting him more than already difclofed," replied Bennet, 44 for my wife dying in the year one thouland fevtii h mid red and ññy, I returned to England, where I have undergone various vicilikudes of for¬ tune ; until a twelvemonth fince I ob¬ tained an enfigncy for my fon, who is ,my only child—myfelf choofing rather to accompany the regiment to which he belonged as chaplain, than accept a more lucrative fituation diftant from him." 44 My good friend," returned the Colonel with warmth, u hke myfelf you are too much in the decline of life to encounter fatigues. 1 have a fnug
home, though in the highlands of Scot¬ land, and wiih juft fuch a companion as yourfelf to make up our parties. Your fon, when unemployed for his country, can there join us; we will endeavour to make you forget the ills you have hitherto met with." Mr. Bennet returned thanks to the veteran, promifing to profit by his in¬ vitation, as it was expected their regi¬ ment muft alfo foon return to England, as there was now no doubt but peace would fpeedily take place. After much more converfation on the amazing event which chance had brought to light, they turned the dif¬ courfe on their departure; to which no party wanted haftening, all being now doubly anxious to return to Britain- Duncan, as he flattered himfelf he might now give way without reproof to the parfion that conftituted his whole felicity—The Colonel longed to em¬ brace
brace Peggy, and contemplate in her beauteous face the refemblance of thofe features which were too ftrongly en¬ graven on his heart for time to oblite¬ rate them— Sommers, to congratulate his favourite on an event which gave his virtuous mind the utmoft fatisfac¬ tion —Orfield, to fee his much-loved Sophia Wilmot, with whofe mother the Colonel had promifed to be his advocate—and Grant, to embrace a venerable parent, and the innocent caufe of all his misfortunes. With fuch incentives they determined to de¬ part on the fécond day after this dif¬ covery : Mr. Bennet promifing to join them in a fhort time.
CHAP·
? Η Λ Ρ. χ. ci ------- —— virtue îs Its own reward!— I think that I have hit the very tone In which íhe lovçs to fpeak.'* HOML·.. W HİLE the party from Caffcl were on their way homewards, rejoicing at the difcovery they had made; Peggy's impatience hourly increafed. An hun¬ dred times a day did ftie confult her watch, and as often run to the window on the flopping of any vehicle. Care¬ ful of keeping her promife to Lady Beugle, fhe ftudioufly avoided meeting Lord Wilmot alone, paffing the inter¬ vals fhe was abfent from the drawing- room with Lady Sophia. Mifs Thomp¬ fon had called twice in great dejection, informing Peggy that her mother had relapfed, and was in the utmoft danger; S a cir-
? circumftance that gave her compaf- fionate heart a femuncnt of forrow, even in the midit of her pleafing ex¬ pectations* A few mornings after, as flie was juft rifen, Mifs Thompfon again entreated to fpeak with her ·, on which fiie haftened down, having procured the evening before a fupply fiom Lady Sophia. On her entrance flie was in the moft poignant diftrefs, her mother, as. ftie informed Peg^y, being at the Lift extremity, the phyfician declaring flie could not fui vive the day. " Alas !" faid flie, ee her whole angindi is on mv account; ftie is perpetually exclaiming that I fiiall be leit unprotected in this great city, an idea that makes her re¬ fufe all comfort." i( Indeed, indeed, you fhall not," replied Peggy; " though I cannot promife to a ifi ft you myfelf, yet I am fure a young lady in this houfe will, for my f ike at leaft, enable jou to reach your native country, wheie you fay
fay you have friends." " Alas!" fob¬ bed fhe, " I told my mother I was certain you would help me; but I can¬ not convince her, íhe thinks I only fay it to render her eafy : I fcarcely dare afk, yet you are fo good that î am fure you will forgive, if you cannot grant my requeft," continued fhe, throwing herfelf on her knees before her, " deign, belt of women, to fee and fpeak confolation to her ; we live but three fhort ftreets off, it will not detain you a quarter of an hour—~fhe will believe you, and die in peace : it will fave me from defpair, and confer on yourfelf a fatibfaction which virtuous minds can only feel. " Do not," faid fhe, clinging round her, t4 refufe me ; hear my entreaties, and grant my re- queft." Peggy was moved at her forrow ; Lady Beugle never breakfafted before eleven, and it was now but juft eight ; ι therefore,
therefore, after a ihort paufe, flie went to fetch her hat, in order to accompany the diftreifed girli calling however firft in Sophia's room to inform her of her intention, but finding her in a fweet fleep, declined waking her. Peggy now came down ftairs, and im¬ mediately went out with Mifs Thomp¬ fon, who teftified her gratitude with the moft rapturous expreftion?. The morn¬ ing was peculiarly fine, and Peggy re¬ fufed to tide, as the diftance was trivial, though not quite fo fhort as fhe had at firft underftood. At length they came to a handfome paved court, at the end of which was a fmall door, where the young woman ringing, it was immedi' ately opened by a middle-aged man, whom ihe afked how her mother did ? to which he replied, 4t Much the fame," {hutting the door after him. Mifs Thompfon led the way through a long dark paffage, which at once Vol. H. M opened
opened into a fpacious and well fur- mined hall; a circumftance that not a little aftonifhed Peggy, as fhe ex¬ pected a very different: abode. They next reached an ante-chamber ; Peggy trembled, yet fhe knew not why, and inwardly reprobated her folly in ac¬ companying a ftranger, who appeared to have left her melancholy on the out- fide the houfe, her eyes fparkling with a quicknefs and fire that alarmed her. Peggy ftopped—yet recollecting her¬ felf, afked the young woman if her mother lived there ? to whicli replying in the affirmative, (he opened a parlour door, and taking Peggy's hand, intro¬ duced her, not to a fick mother, but to Lord Withers, who fat on a fopha by the fire-fide. Peggy remained fome minutes filent through aftonifhment ; but Lord Wi¬ thers rifing and attempting to take her handj fhe exclaimed, " Monftrous hy- pocrify I
pocrify ! would to Heaven I had never feen this hateful city, where I have been daily doomed to fuffer vexations ! For what purpofe, my Lord, has that vile girl deceived me hither? weak creature that I was to truft myfelf with a ftranger! but my imprudence is punifiied. What are your commands? it will foon be Lady Beugle's breakfaft-time, from which I was never abfent. 2 " Lord Wi¬ thers attempted in fome meafure to excufe his conduct, fa) ing, c * Banifh your fears, divine creature, and pardon the effects of a pafiion which even your cruelty could not overcome! You know my former öfters ; 1 am willing to ful¬ fil them even jet, and introduce you to the woild to-morrow as my bride.** 4i I beg, fir," ? pi ied ihe, ci }ou would* fuller me to ittuin home; the mean de¬ ceit you have ufed to get me into your power is beneath you· As for you, vile hypocrite !" added fhe, turning to M ? the
the girl, 4t depend you will not efcape unpuniihed. Merciful God ! who could have furmited that fuch infa¬ mous treachery dwelt under Co fpe- cious an appearance ?" Mifs Thompfon replied by a loud laugh, faying, 44 What think you of my plan now, my Lord ? I believe you doubted my powers of acting ; but could you fup¬ pofe that I had fo entirely forgotten virtue, as not to be able to atlume its fanctified tone ? I hope, in future, you will do more juftice to my talents. Come," continued fhe, advancing familiarly towards Peggy, " dont be angry with your countrywoman, who has taken all thefe pains to ferve you, and root out your fooliih prejudices. Have I not plainly proved that virtue is all a farce, to be aílumed at pleafure; a troublefome companion that deprives us of a thoufand enjoyments ?—Before long yjuwill thank me for this little deceit,
deceit, and confefs that one woman has no more bufinefs with virtue than another." 4t Moniter, begone 1" exclaimed Peggy, fhuddering with horror ; tc nor dare íhock my ears longer with your vice and ignominy !—Difgrace to the form your bear J how can you judge of what your heart is incapable of feel- ing f 44 To fhew you I am very good- natured, I fhall not i^e affronted at any thing you fay," leplied Thompfon, laughing yet more than before—*' Do now pray comfort my poor mother," (pointingtoLordWhhers,andafluming an air of diftrefs)" a little confolation will certainly be of infinite fervice. Com¬ paffion is a virtue, and virtue is its own leward : beftow fome therefore on an object that appears to ftand fo much in need of it."—" Mifs Thompfon," interrupted Lord Withers, who was by M 3 no
no means pleafed with the conclufion of her fpeech, " I (hall be obliged to you to retire ; the fervi ce you have rendered me lhall be repaid."—" î fiy, my Lord !" replied flie— rl what a ftupid being was 1 to ftay I Adieu — and remember that fortune favours the bold." With thefe words this votary to fhame departetl finging, leaving Lord Withers and Peggy alone, who now endeavoured by all poffible menns to perfuade him to fuffer her to depart; for flie truly apprehended it was not pofíible but by his permilfion. The windows of the room where they were, lhe obferved, opened only into a paved yard furrounded by high walls ; ihe had therefore no hopes that any exer¬ tion flic could mike with her voice would be heard, and might only in¬ creafe the horrors of her fituation. Entreaties weie however vain—he pe¬ remptorily 14 fu fed. €i My wife, or milli ?? ^
miftrefs!" find he, s< fix jour choice : it the firft, I will immediately nbarry you; which, if you do not confent to, 1 have infallible means of fecuring you for the latter, and taking you where I have a retreat fafe from interruption ; there time will reconcile you to your fituation, leaving however a wifii that you had profited by my^generous of¬ fers."—" Dcfpicable man !" exclaimed Peggy, blufhing with refentment and anger, " know that no power on earth fhall unite me to you ; nor you, with all your fiends to aiUft, ever triumph over my honour : you may murder me, I believe you vile enough ; but fhall never reduce me to fhame."— a Very well, madam—'tis very well; do not 1 educe me to extremities," re¬ plied he— <€ profit by my generofity, or take the. confeqi/ence." Peggy maJe no reply: his Lordfhip a few moments after ringing the bell M 4 for
ίοι break fail, which was brought in by an old woman, whofe figure, had a painter wifhed to peifonify vice, w r as ixactly calculated for that purpofe, nnd whom Peggy could not view with¬ out dillen and honor. Lord Withers defired her to tnt! eat her miftrefs to favour Mifs Giant and himfelf with makmg ? ??? faft—a requeft flie im¬ médiate ly left the room to obey. He then attempted to footh Peggy, who replied, " It is in rain, my Lord, to torment me further, my mind is fixed; let me depart if you have any mercy— ú not, this houfe fiiall be my grave, fooner than I will fubmit to be the wretch you would make me," The entrance of the miftrefs of the manfion here interrupted the difcourfe : flie was about forty, with the remains of a tolerable perfon ; but fat, and all the external appearance of being given to drink. She fixed her eyes on Peggy with
with the fcrutinifing gaze of female curiofity; but inftantly ftart ing, her face became of a deadly palenefs, an uni- veifal tiembling feizing her whole frame, and, unable to articulate a word, ftood motionlefs in the middle of the apartment. " What is the matter ? are you fuddenly taken ill?" faid Lord Withers. iC No—no, fir !" replied the woman, hefitating; " but—" Peggy, who beheld her agitation with furprife, fiattered herfelf it was an emotion of piry, and running up to her, exclaim¬ ed, " For the love of Heaven affift meí 1 am fure you have a feelmg heart ; I have friends that will requite your kindnefs." <c God defend me!" re¬ plied ihe, fhuddering at Peggy's voice, which was foft as the flute*s dulcet note, as though it had been harfh as burfting thunder. ic Protect me i'* added Peggy, 44 and depend on my evedafting gratitude ! You well know M 5 the
the deception that has been ufed, and the ignorance my friends are in re¬ fpecting me ; dare to be juft, declare the truth, and depend on protection and pardon." Lord Withers now in fome meafure, by his interference, re¬ lieved the miftrefs of this execrable manfion, faying, " Indeed, Mifs Grant, you alarm Mrs. Brown ; retile, madam, and fend your hufband or Mifs Thomp¬ fon to make tea." Mrs. Brown, whofe fpirits were uncommonly agitated dur¬ ing the whole of this fcene, did not wait for a repetition of his lordfliip's defire j but, roughly difengaging her«- felf from Peggy, haftily left the apart¬ ment. Peggy» judging fhe had nothing to hope from this behaviour, gave way to the anguifh of her heart, Withers in vain endeavouring to appeafe her. After fome time Mr. Brown, the Jiufband of the lady, or at leaft who paffed for fuch, entered to know his lordfhip's
lordfhip's commands, and likewife to apologize for the extraordinary dit order of his wife -, who however he informed him was now quite recovered· During this account his eyes were earneftly riveted on Peggy, whom he before had but a tranfitory glance of as fhe entered : though among the faireft of female forms, yet her beauty appeared of the petrifying kind to this well-matched pair; for if it had not that vifible effect on him as on his wife, yet for fome caufe it raifed a blufti on cheeks that had long been ftrangers to the glow of ihame : but it was a tranfient fenfation which his ac¬ commodating confcience ftifled in an i n ftant. Peggy refufing to* tafte any break¬ faft, the tea-table was fpeedily re¬ moved, and Mr, Brown retired ; after which Peggy remained fútnt^ or gave fuch anfwers as in no meafure flatter- M 6 cd
252 DUNCAN AND PEGGY î ed the paffion of the old debauchee, who, wearied with her obftinacy, de¬ termined to fucceed in his project by any means, however vile. Under pre¬ tence therefore of ordering dinner, he retired for a few minutes ; though in reality it was but a plaufible excufe, his bufinefs being to confult his agents on what meafures to purfue to accom¬ pli fli his purpofe. Peggy, left alone, looked cautioufly round her, but could difcover no means of efcape ; to endeavour to leave the rpom fhe knew would be ufelefs, as in ihe ante-chamber ftie heard the voice of Mifs Thompfon converfing with the old hag that had occafioned her fuch difguft, and who was applauding her ingenuity in the fcheme againft Peggy ; interlarding her difcourfe with oaths and vulgarities, that made Peg¬ gy's heart flirink ; and, though alone, caufed a burning bluih on her cheeks. Oppofitc
Oppofite to the parlour door at which fhe had entered was a fmaller one : this Peggy concluded led to fome other apartment which might be fituated near the ftrcet ; an idea that inftantly de¬ termined her to fatisfy herfelf—there¬ fore cautioufly advancing towards it for fear of noife, fhe gently turned the lock, and to her great difappointment found it was but a clofet, without com¬ munication, containing bottles, a few books, and various other articles. Vex¬ ed, and hopelcfs, Peggy was turning haftily away, when on a fhelf fhe dif¬ covered a pair of loaded piftols. She was no coward, and determined not to let flip an opportunity which might never return ; therefore feizing one in hafte, flie put it in her pocket, faying, " This fhall protect me in cafe of dan¬ ger—or at leaft give me death rather than diflionour !" She then clofed the door, and had juft feated herfelf when Lord Withers returned. CHAP.
CHAP. XL " Defpair and anguiíh fill my breaft." Scottish Ballad. AWHILE Peggy was larneating the folly flie had been guilty of, in trufting herfelf with a ftranger however fpecious in appearance, her abfence caufed uni¬ verfal wonder at Lord Beugle's : fhe was accuftomed to be firft in the break· faft room5 where not attending, Lady Sophia immediately afked after her; the fervant replying fhe had been gone out above three hours with a young woman. u A young woman !" re¬ peated Lady Beugle in amaze— <( what acquaintance can fhe have formed un¬ known to the family ?" Lady Sophia, well aware it could be no other than Mifs Thompfon, whom, however, fhe had never feen, her vifits being alway· paid very early, replied, that fhe had no
no doubt but it muft be with a perfon from Scotland, who fome time before had entreated and obtained affiftance from her. Lady Beugle made no other anfwer than, Doubtlefs, if that was the cafe, fhe would foon return, yet muft think the ftep fhe had taken unbecoming either her youth or fitua¬ tion to go without her concurrence. " Perhaps, madam," obferved Lady Eleanor, fixing her eyes on Wilmot, 44 fome love-fie k f wain may have per¬ fuaded this beautiful damfel to elope, in which cafe her knight may diftin- guifli himfelf in England as well as Germany."—" Mifs Grant," replied Wilmot coolly, <c has too much deli¬ cacy and underftanding to confent to fuch a degradation ; the man who would not glory in leading her to the altar ¡a the face of the whole world is unworthy her."—" indeed," replied Lady Beu¬ gle, " Wilmot, you fay very improper things
things refpecting this girl, who, I thank Heaven, is now on the point of leaving us; for furely my unele cannot fail being in town to-dayt or to-morrow at fartheft, when I fliali willingly give up a truft that has at once been derogatory and troublefome." Lord Beugle, who during all the inquiries after Peggy had not afked a queftion, or made a fingle obfervation, now gave a yawn, then replied, " Very troublefome and derogatory indeed, madam—Put more fugar in my next cup of tea, Eleanor— What you were faying refpecting an elopement, is impoffible ; who wotild fteal a girl fimply for a good perfon ? unlefs indeed for a miftreb " " I fancy, my Lord," returned Eleanor, " no man of fafhion, or underftanding, could confider fuch a girl in any other point of view; except, indeed, Lord Withers, whom fhe had the infolence to reject." ««Your txquifite delicacy, then, Eleanor," replied
leplied W'ilmot, tt excufes fuch a ftep? On this fubject, I muft confefs, I ihould prefer a lady whofe ideas were not fo refine d l Sophia, during this little dialogue, had fat in the greateft anxiety for Peg¬ gy -, nor was Wilmot in reality lefs un- eafy—therefore rifing as foon as poffible, he retired, and queftioned the fervant afrefh, who however could give him no farther information than he already pofteffed. Breakfaft over, Lady Beugle and Eleanor went to pay fome morning vifits j Sophia excufing herfelf from at¬ tending them under pretence of being indifpofed. On their departure, fhe haftily ran to confult her brother on what meafure to purfue, as ihe had no doubt but fome dreadful accident had befallen Peggy. " My fufpicions reft all on one perfon," replied Wilmot j Ci I cannot help thinking that Withers is concerned
concerned in her abfence, and am at this moment going to procure what information I poffibiy can refpect¬ ing him."—With thefe words he left his fifter, who again returned to the drawing-room, where flie fat over¬ whelmed with melancholy. On tlie entrance of Lady Beugle and Eleanor, their firft queftion was refpecting Peg-^ gy, whofe abfence Lady Eleanor in- fifted muft be voluntary, as flie went out willingly with a ftranger i giving diftant inuendoes that Lord Wilmot was concerned in her flight, a circum¬ ftance that, however, afforded her fa¬ tisfaction rather than otherwife, as the ftep muft infallibly ruin her with the Colonel and Duncan. Lady Sophia's temper was uncom¬ monly mild. She had been accuftomed to fuffer the intuits of Eleanor with patience and good humour ; but on hearing her thus cruelly flander the perfon
perfon whom fimilarity of difpofition had rendered dear to her, fhe forgot her ufual calmnefs, replying with acrimony, tí rvíifs Grant is as fupenor to fuch conduct, as flic would be to furmife fo vile a flander, which muft at once pro¬ ceed from a weak head and bad heart, Wilmot, by your account, ioves her, and I am fure is too honourable to de¬ grade the woman he diftinguifhes. Duncan affo lave*, her, and you fay is beloved in return; then wherefore fhould fhe fly from the man who would glory to make her his wife, or from him for whom flie would devote hers ?"— This reply brought on one replete with bitternefs againft the innocent object of the controverfy from Lady Eleanor, Lady Beugle only endeavouring to make peace between them ; for though ihe by no means liked Peggy, yet ihe did not believe the fcandal of Lady Eleanor
Eleanor to have any foundation but m hei own idea. Thus they continued difputing : So¬ phia, for die firft time in her life, con¬ tended with tven more obftinacy thaT Fdeanor, until at lensth a loud knock at the flicet-door gave notice of vifitors ; but the difpute was at too gieat a height for either party to give way, until the fervant entered, and announced the Colonel, Captain Campbell, and com¬ pany. Lady Beugle inftantly rofe to meet them, the Colonel faluting her on the ftair-cafe, at the fame moment anxioufly gazing round for Peggy; Duncan in the mean-time, regardlefs of etiquette, ruihing by them into the drawing-room, determined to be the firft to prefs Peggy in his arms; Mr. Som¬ mers, Grant, and Orfield, being behind the Colonel. On entering, his eyes in vain wandered after Peggy ; for a mo¬ ment
ment he was mute, from difappointment and amaze. Eleanor, whofeface was ufu¬ ally more inclined to the lily than the rofe, was now of a deep crimfon, occa¬ fioned by vexation and paffion ; while Sophia's natural glow was replaced by a pallid languor, and her eyes fuffufed with tears. On the Colonel's entrance, he was no lefs difappointed than his nephew ; and, haftily fpeaking to his nieces, afked for Peggy ; Orfield, in the mean time addreffing bodi fitters, his eyes enquiring, in a language well known to Sophia's, the caufe of her diforder. Lady Beugle now entered into a hafty detail of what had pafled, not without reflections on her charge, which Eleanor fupported with redou¬ bled acrimony and falfehood from the late difpute, adding, to complete all, that flie had feduced her brother. l< You are both cruel and unjuft to advance fuch an untruth !" anfwered Sophia :
Sophia: i€ that my brother loves her, 1 am wellaware—but is nothappy enough to be beloved in return j her whole foul is my coufin's, witnefs her diftrefs during his danger, which, had it not terminated well, I am fure fhe would not have furvived."— 44 Sophia," in¬ terrupted Lady Beugle, "I do not comprehend fuch behaviour------ leave the room."— i4 I will, madam," an¬ fwered Sophia, rifing to obey her; 44 but again declare, either an accident has happened to Mifs Grant, or flie has fallen into the power of fome villain ; fhe is the moft amiable and innocent of women, and I will pledge my life on her honour." With thefe words So¬ phia was leaving the apartment, had not the Colonel inteifered, entreating her ftay. During the whole of their difcourfe, Duncan vvas walking haftily up and down in an agitation which was too ftrong to be concealed; Lady Beugle
Beugle itili endeavouring to throw the blame on Peggy, but exculpating her fon ; the Colonel liftening to all with the utmoft attention, his face glowing with paffion; Sommers aíking q ueftions that he 'thought might lead to fonie difcovery; and Grant murmuring with vexation, and taking .ftrides along the drawing-room as heedlefsly as if he had been traverfing a Cherokee hut* in this difagreeable moment Wilmot entered, fcarcely lefs agitated than the ftrangers :—however, he collected him¬ felf fufficientlv to addrefs his uncle and coufin Duncan ; the latter only reply¬ ing, i( Do you know any thing of Mifs Grant, Sir?"—" No, on my foul!" returned Wilmot warmly; 44 but I have ftrong fufpicions that the villain Withers has, by fome means, drawn her into a fnarc ; for I have juft learned, that though he was faid to be out of town near a month, he has been
been feen two or three times within that period; and by Heaven I will not fleep nor reft until fatisfied !" There was fomething in the whole of Wil¬ mot's manner and appearance, that at once found belief in the breaft of the Colonel, who replied, " You are, I am told, partial to Peggy , ? "—" I am not accuftomed to be brought to confef- fion," returned Wilmot firmly, t( yet in this cafe will not deny that you are truly informed, and that was Mifi. Grant's heart free, I ihould glory in raifing her to a rank ihe was formed to adorn !''— t( Your intentions, fir," in¬ terrupted Duncan, " will be bette/ ex¬ plained to me than thus publicly."— 44 If you pleafe/'replied Wilmot calm¬ ly, " for the prefent, unite your efforts to mine, if poffible to difcover where flie is concealed ; hereafter we will enter into any explanation you choofe :—let us feek the part of the town where 5 Withers
Withers refides—thefe gentlemen will perhaps be fo obliging as ¿ to affift us in making enquiries."— iC To-morrow," interrupted Lady Beugle, 4ζ will furely be time enough ; you forget, Wilmot, that your uncle is juft arrived from Germany."— cc True, madam," an¬ fwered he ; Cr but as this is a cafe that will not fuffer me to remain in a ftate of fufpenfe, I imagined it might ac¬ tuate others equally." At thefe words the Colonel rofe, faying, ít Wilmo:, I believe you an honourable fellow, excufe the petulance of Duncan ; favour me to accompany him in the fearch of Mifs Grant."------ ie With your permiffion," faid Mr. Sommers, " I think lieutenant Orfield had better go with Mr. Campbell, while with Lord Wilmots leave I will attend him."—" 'Tis a good thought," re¬ plied the Colonel, " nor will Grantand myfelf be idle. Alas! if I have loft her, this forrow will be the fevereft 1 Vol. IE N have
have experienced : would to Heaven ï liad never fuffered her to quit Kenneth Caftle!"—" Indeed," returned Lady Beugle fomewhat piqued, " I have taken all poffible care of her, though I muft confefs, when I confidered her birth, it was out of refpect to you that 1 fubmitted to fuch a humiliation."— £< I am forry," anfwered the Colone coolly, 4t that you have been fo de¬ graded ; however, if I regain her, when it is known flie is heirefs to one of the nobleft families in Scotland, that dif¬ grace will be obliterated." Lady Beu¬ gle appeared in the utmoft aftonifh¬ ment, as did all thofe unacquainted with the fecret : but there was no time for explanations. Wilmot readily con¬ fented to accompany Mr. Sommers ^ Duncan alfo prepared to depart inftant¬ ly, Orfield firft ftealing a farewell glance at Sophia, who preifed them to haften away ; Lady Beugle defiring, and Elea- ???
nor m vain entreating them, at leaft to remain till after dinner ; for in fpite of her pride, and the little hope fhe could have of fubduingthe heart of her coufin, fhe had been thinking for a whole long half hour¿ that it would be even poffible to live with fuch a man in the barba¬ rous highlands of Scotland, as inftead of his perfon being injured by the fa¬ tigues of a campaign, ic had acquired a dignity and manhood that rendered him doubly pleafing. The Colonel and Grant now followed, though both ftran¬ gers to the town, being provided with all the information Sophia could'give them refpecting the perfon of Mifs Thompfon, who had been defcribed to her by Peggy. It was about four o'clock when the gentlemen departed on their fearch; Lord Wilmot and Mr. Som¬ mers firft going to Withers's, who the fervants firmly infifted was out of town ; but on being contradicted by the evi- N ? dence
dence of fome neighbours, .confefTcd that he had been at home-twice lately. Lord Wilmot then infifted on being fuffered to examine the houfe, which with fome difficulty was agreed to, walking over the whole accompanied by Sommers and the domeftics. This fearch being fruitlefs, they next made repeated enquiries all round the vici¬ nity, but equally vain, and av length returned to Lady Beugle's wearied and difpirited about ten at night. Duncan and Orfield were near two hours later, but equally unfuçcefsful ; they had tra- verfed the town, enquired in the envi¬ rons, and at all the turnpikes, if any carriage had paffed which .they could furmifehad conveyed away Peggy. Dun¬ can, on his entrance, was diftracted with his bad fuccefs, throwing himfelf on a fopha, unable to hold any converfation; viewing, at times, Wilmot with a look .of fufpicionj and turning with difguft from
írom Eleanor, who attempted to footh him. The Colonel and Grant were not yet returned, which aitoni died the whole party, as it was now midnight : a¿ delay that, however, was occafioned by their ignorance of the town, wandering and bewildering themfelves amoncr the different ftreets, exploring their way through dark alleys and courts ; unwil¬ ling to hire a vehicle, as it would pre¬ vent their enquiries; and promifing re¬ wards to all the watchmen they met, eould they make any difcovery of the object they fought. CHAP. XII. «*- -------- * ■ Had 1 one grain of faith In holy legends, and religious tales, l·fliould conclude there was nn aun above That fought agai n II rae. and malignant turn'd To catch myiUf, the fubtle fnarc L fet." Home. UN Lord Withers'S return to the apartment where he had left Peggy, he N 3 again
?
again endeavoured to perfuade her by all poffible means to accept his hand : fortune he poffefled fufficient, he there¬ fore only wiflied to gratify paffion and vanity, by poffeffing a woman that mud caufe him to be univeifally envied. His ihetoric was however vain, and the dinner hour arrived, without making any alteration in Peggy's fentiments. Mrs. Biown attended, and performed the honours of the table with tolerable compofure, fpeaking however but little; gazing at times intently on Peggy, whom flie endeavoured to footh by all poffible means, entreating her to eat, which fhe refufed, drinking only a glafs of water. To complete Peggy's vexation, the infamous Thompfon came in after dinner : her former drefs has been defcribed ; it was now gaudy, and licentious to the higheft degree, being fcarcely half a covering; added to which, (he gave her language a freedom which
which could not fail to fliock the inno* vence of Peggy, who, however, enjoy¬ ed one advantage, that of not compre¬ hending the half of what ibe uttered. This party, truly worthy of each' ether, tried all their arts to reconcile Peggy to her fituation, and perfuade her to take fome refrefliment; but their trouble was fruitlefs, flie denied alt they could offer. Mrs. Brown, as the night advanced, remarked flie appear¬ ed fatigued, defiring her to retire to, reft ; which, however, ihe peremptorily refufed, faying, flie would not leave that apartment. Mis. Brown and Thompfon at length retired, after which, Withers renewed his perfec¬ tions; Peggy anfwering all by entrea¬ ties to be releafed from that dreadful houfe. " Confent to efpoufe me," faid' iie, <( I can procure a fpecial licence, and marry you to-morrow morning', after which I will take you home, where N 4. you'
." you fliali be abfolute miftrefs. No¬ thing but the neceffity of employing Thomplon to fecure you could lu\c made me bring you hither, but it will be a feci et bcuccn us ; confent then, and ??? yourfelf from confinement." 1 Peggy remained filent through defpair i her mind not only torn with ths dangers of her fituation, but likewife diftracted on the account of her friends—In all probability the Colonel, Mr. Sommers, and Duncan were leturned, in which cafe, what could they think of her ab¬ fence ?—fhe went our with a ftranger, and they muft naturally fuppofe her flight willing, an idea that drove her almoft to mad nefs. Lord Withers alfo appeared no longer inclined to bear her fcorn and eoldnefs, which, every anfwer íhe gave, became more pointed : his offers were all rejected, his love re turned with difdain ; to fucceed by fair means, he defpaircd of i the houfe and i?>
its inhabitants were exactly fuited to the moft infamous purpofes ¿ the former being placed far back in a lonely court, the latter deaf ro every cty, however piercing, but that of intereft—confci¬ ence indeed fomctimes intruded on the hoftefs ; but that Mr. Brown affirm¬ ed was a malady eafily icmoved by biandy, for his heart was too callous to be actuated by fuch a trifle. As for Thompfon, gifted by nature with ? haud fome perfon, and an oil dient un· derftanding, fiie had prollituted both to the vileft purpofes, eaily forfakinga paternal roof to become a votary of ihame, glorying in ftanding unrivalled Ín wickednefs, and reduc ng others to her own level. The old attendant com¬ pleted this hateful gto'p; worn out with debauchery, fiie was a living example ofthe difgufting conftquencc$ of iuch a life, and might hive even ren¬ deled vice hateful to any bofom in ^S m hiv h
which the glimmer of one faint fpark of virtue remained ; but that was a fcntiment long fince extinguifhed in Thompfon, and as totally obliterated from the minds of the owners of the manfion. Withers being alone with Peggy about eltven, ventured to approach, and taking her unawares kifled her neck. Peggy's temper had ever been fuppofed, by thofe acquainted with her, to be peculiaily mild ; but if fo origi¬ nally, its foftnefs at this infult intirely forfook İt, and, darting a look of ineffa* ble fury and difdain, flie bade him be* gen ', in a tone of voice that demanded- obedience, had not the old wretch at ihat moment been determined topiofit by the opportunity, uhatever might be the confequence. Advancing therefore towards her in fpite of her cues, whicli no one appeared inclined to pay any attention to, he attempted to take her in
in his arms ; but Peggy's form, though extremely delicate, had all the advan¬ tages of a conftitution healthy by na¬ ture, and uncorrup-ed by a falfe educa¬ tion ; therefore feizing the villain trem¬ bling through excefsof vice, fiie threw him violently from her, his head light¬ ing in the fall againft the fender, where he lay deprived of fenfe and motion ; then rufiiing towards the door, heed* lefs through alarm, fhe darted along the dark paffage j. but the opening of the outer door was too difficult to be immediately done, and the heavy fail of the iron b\r inftantly nlarmed the family, who had before been deaf to her cries i her hand was already on the laft bolt when they entered ihe pafiage. Defpair gave her fu pern atunl courage ; fhe remembered the piftol, and, Hutch¬ ing it from her pocket, fu ed it undirect¬ ed among them ; at the fame moment· throwing it down and rufhing out of. N 6 tht
the door, which ihe made ihift to un¬ bar, amidft the horrible fcreams the pifto! had occafioned. She preifed for¬ ward, unmindful whither, not doubting but the fiends were behind her, until, on turning out of the court in which the houfe was fituated, through the extreme dark nefs of the night, ihe ran againft two men, exclaiming, " Protect me ì protect me 1 or I am undone !"—at the fame moment her fenfes, from the vio¬ lence of the exertion, failing, ihe funk at their feet. "Merciful God! that voict·," faid the elder, as he in vain at¬ tempi td to raifeher, w 1 furely dream Γ Help me to fupport her, Grant ! 'tis Peggy ! what can have reduced her to thisextremity ?"—" Peggy !" repeated- Grant in an accent of furprife (for it was no other than himfelf and the Co¬ lonel, whom a happy ignorance of the town had bewildered to this fpot), *'< fure- 'tis imponible!" The amaze* ment
ment caufed by thus unexpectedly finding the object of their fearch, and in fuch a fituation, had an effect on both that placing them in the front of a battle could not have produced : they trembled till almoft unable to raife her, which they had hardly performed before the cry of " Stop her ! ftop her !" ftruck their ears. Brown, his wife, and the old harridan at that moment reach¬ ing them,'* I thank y ou for catch ing her," laid ihe firft of this infernal trio, <4 flie has committed muider."—" Murder ! n repeated the Colonel, fupporting^eggy ftill fenfekfs in his arms, 4i then fatal neceffity has reduced Iilt to it ; but who aie you that arrogate the power to detain her ?"— c< A power that you fiiall feel to jour coft if you do not in¬ ftantly gri e : er up/*ieplicd Brown, in- folently advancing to fcize Peggy from the Colonel ; but Grant, whofe trepi¬ dation, as well as that ofthe veteran, had immediately
immediately vaniflied on being thus ad- dreífed, ruflied before him, and with a well applied blow, at once ftretched Brown on the ground, faying, 4f Lie there, villain !"—'« Murder ! thieves l murder !" now yelled the whole crew, in fo fliri 11 a note that even Peggy began to ftir, the veteran preffing her clofe to his bofom, and uttering words of confolation and fupport to banifh her fears ; though her ear was yet as deaf to diem as her heart was infenfible of the bleffing flie enjoyed of being in perfect fafety. The icreams of thefe furies at length alarmed the watch, and' now from every quarter the noife of rattles, and repetition^ of 4f where ?' where?" were only diftinguiíhable. At length the watch 1 cached the fcene of confufion, all running with ftaves and lanterns to difcover and end the fray. Brown by this time had rifen, but was kept at a diftance by Grant, having-
having no inclination to feel the weight of his hand a fécond time. The watch¬ men now enquired the caufe of the alarm; but holding up their lanterns,. feveial recognized the Colonel and Grant, who had already in the evening given them money, and promifed large rewards for the difcovery of Peggy, who, he now informed them, was the perfon they fought, defiring their affift- ance tO'Convey her home. t{ He isa noble gentleman !" exclaimed they, 44 and has besn enq'iiring for the young bdy all the night."— t< She has com¬ mitted murder !" b.iwied Brown, 4( and 1 infift fhe he (topped."—" Nay," re¬ plied one of die watchmen, cc if you are Aire (he has committed murder, we mud take her into cuitody : but you had better have acare, Mailer Brown, your character is prctry well known ; this is a gentleman, 1 am fure, by his genero- fityi and I as reprehender of the con- ftable
fiable of tl ? night, who reprehends tlu* juftice, who reprehends the king himfelf, nififts that you, to make good the accufation, pioduccs the body/'—Peggy at that moment reco¬ vered her lecollection—gazing round her in furprife, then fixing her eyes on the Colonel, clafped h s neck in a tranf¬ port of amazement, unable to fpeak for joy. " Fear nothing, my dear giri," faid the veteran, ( * you are fafe ; fpeak, how came you here }" —" Oh î fir," faid fhe, pi effing him ftill clofer, i( an infamous woman cruelly deceived me." «— Ci This is no place for examination,*' intciruptcd Brown ; " fecure lier, I ac¬ cufe her of muider: if you doubt my woid, walk in to my houfe, and íàúbfy yourfelves ; the young woman is defpe¬ rately wounded, if not killed " " W r hat provoked her to fuch an action ?" an- fweicd Grant— tí Ay, ay," repeated the watchman, 4i what provoked her } we
we know your houfe before to-night, Mafter Brown; if ihe has killed a woman in fclf-dcfence, the law cm only make it manflaughter — theie¬ foie i fays let us fee the corpfe."— 41 'Tis well thought î lead the way,'* faid the Colonel.—" Oh í fir, for Heaven's fake," cried Peggy trem¬ bling, " do not enter that hateful houfet I have, indeed, perhaps killed fome one."— 4t Fear nothing, my child, I dread to hear your provocation 5 you are now fafe ; I will defend you with my life and fortune ; then let us fee this wounded woman." Brown now en¬ tered, followed by the Colonel and Grant fupporting Peggy between them, the watchmen behind completing the group. On entering the parlour, even the Colonels afïurances could hardly prevent Peggy fiom fainting. On a fopha fat Withers bathing his head with brandy, and by his fide Thomp¬ fon
fon 'crying bitterly, from the agony (he fuftained by a bullet having paffed through her cheek, and demoliflied her front teeth. Withers ftarted with amazement, for though he had little doubt of Brown bringing back Peggy, yet he by no means expected her thus accompanied. " Sir," faid Brown ad¬ dreffing him, 4t thefe gentlemen would not be convinced of the mifchief that wicked girl has done ; what fay you now, will you give her up to juftice r"' —" What provocation had ftie?" de¬ manded the Colonel— u What rig' t have you to queftion ?" returned Wi¬ thers, recovering the furprife the fight of ftrangers who appeared above the common rank, though unknown, had occafioned: <c I am a peer of the realm, my name Withers, and will fubftantiate the charge ; you have ???? fatisfied your curiofity, therefore begone and leave her."— 4( Defpicable wretch ! I am al¬ moft-
moft lorry you are too mean for my anger," anfwered the Colonel ; ** I now guefs all ; fay, Peggy, has that vil hi n dared to infult you?"— sc Had he nor, fir," replied Peggy, <( 1 fliould not have wounded the infamous girl who be¬ trayed me hither under pretence of fee¬ ing her dying mother : but Heaven prefer ved me from ruin, and alfo di¬ rected my hand in the ftroke which, though flie richly deferved, I cannot but lament."—** Enough, my child V* faid the Colonel. " Now, fir, in your turn," addreffing Withers, " learn that though I have no title to dittin- guidi me, I am not of a family that tamely bears infult ¿ nor ftiall even your infignifìcance protect you; for though ï ihould bluih to meet fj weak and dcfpicable a foe, whofe crazy body muft fink beneath my arm, yet you ftiall fuffer the utmoft the law can in· ílict." Grant, during this difcourfe, had remained
remained filent, his eyes fixed fiiil ?:? Brown, then on his wife, with the moil' fcrutinizing attention. ". Your name," faid Grant, " 1 think, isBiown ; pi ay» fir, how long may you have been ίο called V* There is nothing perhaps fo dangerous to a villain as to be taken unawares. e * Name, fir !" repeated he, 44 name ! my name is Brown, fir."— ·* On my foul you lie, fir !" interrupted Grant— tC your name is Simpfon í I am fure I am not miitaken, ï will prove the charge againíl you with my life : What have you done with the property of the lady, villain, whofe infant you bafely robbed and left at rny houfe r 53 — tf Sir," replied Brown trembling, and finking at once to the lowed ebb of cowardice— <c you furely miílake, í am not the perion :—the young wo¬ man, 1 hope, is not dangerouily wound¬ ed *, perhaps fhe may recover ; take the lady home to-night, give me your di¬ rection,
veft ion, you fhall hear from me to¬ morrow — tt You Hull hear me to¬ night ("exchimed Grant— Ct Speak i for by Heaven í will not lofe fight of #o\i till iiiformed of the lady's name that died at ray houfe; nay, look at me, 'have fcventeen years made Iuch an al¬ teration that you do not recollect me ?" Peggy thuddcred, and clung clofer to the Colonel ; while the watchmen, whom his liberality had entirely gained, remained in filent afton iihment, except the former fpeakcr, who faid, (t Why, Matter Brown, don't be down in the mouth, 'tis not the firft íkirmiíh you have been İn ; to be fure a pitcher that goes fo often to the well, ufually gets broken at laft." — tc Seize him," inter¬ rupted the Colonel— iC His perfon, in¬ deed," addreffing Grant, ít exactly an¬ fwers your former defcription ; nay, the cut in the cheek is too remarkable fo r you to miftake—Speak, if you expect mercy !
mercy ! what was the name ofthe lady you attended, and who died a few days after the battle of Culloden ?"— Ci I know not what you mean," replied Brown trembling, " I will anfwer your queftions to-morrow." " Prevaricating villain !" exclaimed Grant, " you ftiall anfwer diem now before Colonel Camp¬ bell."— 4( Colonel Campbell Γ feream - ed Mrs. Brown finkine; on her knees, 44 Oh î forgive me, forgive me ! I will difclofe all."—" Do fo, then, if you expect favour," replied the Colonel, " is this the woman who accompanied him?"— cc It is," returned Giant, 44 N ough flie is much altered, and had fhe not been in his company, I pcihap-^ fhould not at once have recolleclcd her; for him, I will fwear to in any court in Britain."—" Speak, woman," faid the Colonel, 4% who was the lady ? I am al¬ ready informed ofthe whole; yourtef- timony is immaterial, yet I will force the
Uie truth from your lips,"-—" Alas ! fir, the hand cf God is this day upon me ; nothing lefs could have brought Mifs Grant, whofe appearance has awakened agonies long fince ftiflcd. The pei fon who died at the farm near Edinburgh, was a daughter of Mr* Alexander Frafer, and married to your fon, if 3011 are Colonel Campbell of Kenneth Caftle in Argylcihire."— 4i Gieat God!" replied the veteran, " juft are all thy ways, however intri¬ cate !—Peggy, thou İh al t yet rejoice at this day's dilafter.—And w hat became of the jewels and property you purloined of the unhappy Mrs. Campbell's ?" de¬ manded the veteran. 4( I will inform you all, and likewife make all the re- ítitution I can," replied fhe; ff I have a certificate of the marriage, and fome letters."—" Do fo," fifid the Colonel, " and you fhall efcape puniihment· This villain I confign to the law j feize him.
him, Watch ! to you I look to produce him : I accufe him of theft, having fe venteen years back fiolen a confider¬ able quantity of jewels that belonged to my daughter in law." The watchmen now fecured Brown, or more properly Simpfon ; the veteran likewife order¬ ing two to convey his wife to Lady Beugle's, defiring them not to lofe fight of her, as fhe was to bring the papers with her. Lord Withers, on learning the rank of the Colonel, and hearing the accufation againft Simpfon, was overwhelmed with fhame; he was like- wife witnefs of the Colonels fondnefs for Peggy, and had no doubt he would warmly refent the affront that had been offered her ; therefore the fiift minute he could find an opportunity he flunk off, leaving his partner in vice under the care of a furgeon, which the old harridan had procured to drefs her wound. 7 CHAP.
CHAP. XIIL ■»" A little while Was I a wife ! a mother not fo long !" ? Home. rpi 1 HE Colonel, Grant, and Peggy, now entered a hired vehicle : the latter part of the converfation that had paf¬ fed at Simpfon's was a perfect enigma to her ; but her deliverance and happy meeting with the Colonel obliterated every other idea. At length they reached Lady Beugle's ; the whole family being ftill, though paft one, in the drawing-room. " ir is my uncle," fud Duncan faintly, when he heard the coachman knock : « he, I fear, has not been more fuccefsful than myfelf" With thefe words, as in great difquie- tude we catch at the moft ilender hopes, he advanced to the ftair-cafe, Vol, II. ? Lord
Lord Wilmot and Mr. Sommers following him ; but guefs their fur¬ prife on feeing the Colonel and Grant leading Peggy up between them î Duncan gazed for a moment unable to advance; then fuddenly recollecting himfelf, with one leap he cleared the ftairs between them, and caught her in his arms, regardlefs of every thing but the joy of finding her. Peggy invo¬ luntarily returned Duncan's preffure, both fpeechlefs with pleafure, the Co¬ lonel enjoying the fcene in filence. Peggy was the firft to ι ? collect herfelf; fhe remembered her former promife, and withdrawing from Duncan's em¬ brace, her face and neck of a deep crimfon, faid, " I am fo happy ro fee you, that iiidced I know not what I do."—Mr. Sommers now advanced to¬ wards her, Peggy running to meet him with the affection of a daughter. The Colonel then prefented her to Grant, faying,
faying, t£ This gentleman is your name- fake and countiyman, Duncan's pre- ferver, and my friend ; you muft learn to love him, Peggy."— (i I have learn¬ ed it already, fir, before I faw him," faid flie as Grant faluted her; <e can I be infenfible that I owe him the life of my fi 1 ft benefactor?" Sophia now came in for her fliare of carefles, being, however, the only one that bad fuffi¬ cient recollection to obferve that Peggy looked ill.— u Indeed," replied flie 44 I feel very faint, but 1 was too happy to be fenfible of it ; perhaps it is occa¬ fioned by my having had nothing to-day but a glafs of water." ???, by Peggy's defire, was now brought; during which, Lord and -ady Beugle, who wet e by no m^ns pleafed with the attention paid die girl, whofe fituation with the Colonel appeared more and more an enigma, retired to reft. Lady Eleanor alfo pleaded wearinefs; indeed ? % her
her malignant heart was overflowing with difappointed pride and vexation, and longed to be relieved by tears. Lord Wilmot in the courfe of the day had been acquainted by Mr. Sommers with the difcoveries made in Peggy's favour—a circumftance that raifed no emotion in his bofom ; he loved her¬ for herfelf alone, and fortune could make no addition to his affection. After Peggy's taking fome refreihmenr, the Colonel infifted on her retiring with Sophia j a command which íhe reluct- *ntly obeyed, Duncan leading her to the door and whifpering a foft adieu, while Oifield followed his example with So¬ phia. Ti.* Colonel and the friends who accompanied v.irn from Germany, were now left alone with Lord Wilmot, to whom Duncan advancing faid, «* Par¬ don me, Wilmot, my behaviour to-day needs an excufe ; the lofs of Peggy dif- tracted me, and made me even fufpi- cious
cious of you."—" Your apology is fufficient, Duncan," replied Wilmot, " yet you pught to have had a higher opinion of my honour. I love Mifs Grant, or, as I now underftand, Mifs Campbell; but that fentiment could never make me act unworthy her or myfelf." At this moment the fervant entered to inform the Colonel that two watchmen were below with a woman. Lord Wilmot inftantly ordered them up, when the veteran was informed that their companions had conveyed Simp¬ fon fafely to the watch-houfe; on which he difmiffed them, with a prefent to be fliared with their comrades. Mr?. Simpfon was now left alone with them, and after many tears, pro¬ testations of forrow and remorfe, pro¬ duced a little box with various letters from Captain James Campbell to Mifs Frafer, both before and after fhe was his wife ; alfo a certificate of the mar- O 3 riage
riage figned by Mr. Bennet. Mr. Som¬ mers raifed his eyes to Heaven in filent thankfulnefs ¡, the Colonel haftily glan¬ cing over the contents, dropped at once the tear of paternal affection for James, and that of rapture on having difcover¬ ed all that remained of fo beloved a fon. 44 Mrs. Simpfon/' faid he, " I have promifed you meicy, but it depends on your difclofing the truth; ι elate the whole you know of my fon James's attachment to Mifs Frafer." Mrs. Simpfon, with many apologies for her conduct, began thus : " I was hired to attend on Mifs Frafer in the year one thoufand fcvtri hundred and forty-two, flie then being about fixteen. Mr. Frafer lived in Paris with a fon about two years older, and to whom he was f ? partial that he neglected his daughter, keeping her al¬ moft perpetually in a convent, and pref¬ fing
fing her to take the veil ; which, however, fiie declined, replying, that ihe would willingly remam a boarder, but never confent to an irrevocable confinement. Fler mother, you per¬ haps knew, died foon after her birth, and* by what I have heard, never loved Mr. Frafer; íhe therefore, befuio" ?? ? deceafe, left in truft for her child, in the hands of an old counfellor of known probity, a confiderable quantity of jewels independent of her father, and to be delivered at the age of eighteen, tying alfo her own picture round the babe's neck ; where it ever remained, and, if not difcovered (for in theconfu- fion I forgot it), was doubtlefs buried with her. At the age before mention¬ ed the gentleman gave her the jewels, defiring her, as (lie valued a dying mo¬ thei's commands, to fecure them for lier own ufe, as the inhumanity of Mr. Frafer might make fuch a fupply ne- ? 4 ceflary.
cefíàry. Mifs Frafer promifed to obey, and always kept the jewels at the con¬ vent, where íhe ufually refided, only vi- fiting home at intervals ; the counfel¬ lor dying foon after, and renewing his commands. About the beginning of the year one thcufimd feven hundred an<* &>*iy*five, we went to Flanders, where Mr. Frafer had purchafed an citate; my miftrefs was confequently removed to a convent at Lille. One day that we had been at her father's, 1 and were returning home in a poft- chaife, we were (topped by a detach¬ ment of Engliih foldiers from Tournay, who had been on a foraging party, and fuppofing us French made us priíòners, our only guard being my prefent huf- band, then Mr. Frafer's fecretary. My miftrefs was greatly frightened, until a young officer belonging to the party, but not with them when we were feized, came up, and enquired her name and country ;
country; which when informed of, he en¬ treated her not to be alarmed, affuring her fhe was free, telling her at the fame time, her mother had been too dear to his father for her perfon not to be facred ; concluding by faying his name was Campbell, and of Argylcihire. My miftrefs was no ftranger to the name, nor indeed myfelf; for 1 have often heard Mr. Frafer reproach his daughter for her mother's partiality to Colonel Campbell, to which fhe never made any reply but tears."— 44 The villain Í" ír· terrupted the Colonel rifing, and croif- ing the apartment with a hafty ftep ; but recollecting himfelf he returned his feat, and defired Mrs. Simpfon to con¬ tinue. " In ihort, Mr. Campbell not only releafed us, but put us on our way in fafety, taking our names and addrefs; my miftrefs faying to me after his de- pariure, " Alas ! it the Colonel is like his fon, who could blame my mother's O g partiality
partiality for him ?" We did not go home again for near a month, when Simpfon told Mifs Frafer he had bufi¬ nefs to communicate, and which was no other than that Captain Campbell had bribed a French fentinél, who had brought him a letter to deliver to her, accompanied with a confiderable pre¬ fent for himfelf. Mifs Frafer loved the Captain, and replied to his letter—en¬ treating him, however, to decline writ¬ ing, for the fafcty of both, while the war continued. This command was of no avail ; for three nights after, by the means of the fentinél and Simpfon, he paifed the out- poft as an Irifh foldier, and brother to Simpfon. Mifs Frafer was at once delighted and terrified ; ihe met him in Simpfon's apartment, which was rather diftinct from the houfe, and where they in futuie had many private interviews. In ihort, fome time before the battle of Fontenoy, he perfuaded my
my miftrefs to efpoufe him in fecret, as the hatred their fathers had to each other would otherwife, if poffible, feparate them. My miftrefs conferring, by her advice he applied to a Mr. Bennet, who married them in the prefence of his wife, myfelf, and Simpfon. Captain Camp¬ bell ilill continued <his vifits, till fome time after the battle of Fontenoy, when he was obliged to ieturn to England to affift againft the rebels. Never fliali I forget their parting : my miftrefs fainted on his bofom; he, amidit a thoufand carenes, telling her he would return and fetch her as foon as the rebellion was quelled, which he had no doubt would be in a fhort time. After his depar¬ ture the received feveral letters, in which he complained of the uneafinefs he fu tiered from their corre fpondence being fiequently broken by the taking of the packets. About two months after ihe found herfelf with child, and ? 6 now
now waited with impatience his pro¬ mifed return, delaying however to in¬ form him of her fituation, as flie faid, 44 Such an occurrence would make my beloved James hazard every thing, and perhaps haften matters, and difpleafe his father: 1 will therefore wait with patience a few months, and tiy the event." Prince Charles's fortune at firft on his landing in Scotland, pro¬ longed the lebellion ; and my miftrefs's fhape became fo enlarged, that our ut¬ moft arts could hardly conceal it. In fhort, the confufions in Britain not being terminated ; in the beginning of the month of March, one thoufand feven hundred and forty fix, flie confuked Simpfon and myfelf on going to Scot¬ land ; and on our agreeing to accom* pany her, we departed in a poft-chaife, ufrng the utmoft fpeed, by the way of Holland, where we were however de¬ tained a confiderable time before we could
could fail for England. At length we reached the Downs ; and after a day's reft, which was abfolutely neceflary for my miftrefs, though her impatience would hardly let her confent to it, we took the way to Scotland, Simpfon at¬ tending us. We arrived fafely within about three miles of Edinburgh, where my miftrefs prefeïred ftaying, to enter¬ ing the city. Here it was fhe learned the death of her hufband from the lift of the flain, and that no fooner apprifed of, than flie fell into convulfions; in which ftate flie remaned fome hours, and was then delivered of a daughter, dying the day following, without ever being able to enter into any explanations refpecting the child or herfelf.—Simpfon had long paid his add refles to me, and acquit ed a power over me from my affection to him : he preffed me to let us feize the jewels, which he faid no one was cpprif- -td of. ln fhort, forgive me, fir, we took all
all and departed, Simpfon felling the diamonds to a Jew in London for four thoufand pounds. Five hundred how¬ ever were only advanced, the remainder being promifed next day ; but the Jew, no doubt furmifing they were not honeft 1 y come by, decamped in the night, and got clear to Holland, from whence we could never recover any thing, nor yet dared to puifue him. Simpfon then changed his name, hired a houfe, 2nd was employed by feveral men of fafhion in providing for their pleafures ; among whom was Lord Wi¬ thers, who has occafionally ufed our houfe ever fince we kept it. About a month ago he came, and faid, he would give five hundred pounds to get a young woman into his power, who was com¬ panion to Lady Beugle. " But," added lie, 4t no common method will do ; flie never ft irs out but with the family, is perfectly virtuous, and by no means to
be caught by either pride'or flattery." My hufband confidered for along time, then confuked Thompfon, who lives with us. She queftioned Withers on every particular of Mifs Grant's tem¬ per i and on his faying, he had remark¬ ed flie had a feeling heart, and was very charitable, replied, " 'Tis enough, I afk no more ; if I dont fucceed, here¬ after fet me down for a fool." The next morning I was much furprifed at her odd drefs, which had every appear¬ ance of poverty, and foon learned her plan was entreating affiftance of Mifs Grant; which obtained, under pretence of gratitude flic vifited her frequently after, and at length went in apparent vio¬ lent forrow, faying, her mother was ex¬ piring, and could not die in peace, un¬ lefs fome one would promife to enable her to get back to Scotland, which flie pretended was her country. Mils Grant fell into the fnare, and accompanied her
her home : indeed, had it not been the dread of my hufband, flie fhocld never have been infulted ; for on our firft meeting, my furprife was not loft even on hen I could not help thinking it was Mifs Frafer rifen from the grave to reprove my wickednefs, nor do I now know who the young lady is, but can hardly doubt, from her extreme likenefs to my miftrefs, flie was led by Heaven to bring detection on me. Finding herfelf deceived, fhe profited of an opportunity, Heaven knows for what purpofe, to take a piftol from the clofer, which, on our endeavouring to ftop her flight, fhe fired among us, defperately wounding Thompfon, after having firft thrown down Withers, who, on our entrance into the parlour to difcover the alarm, lay with his head over the fender ; flie feizing the mo¬ ment of his infenfibility to efcape from the houfe as virtuous as ihe entered it." "By
44 By my honour fhe is a brave girl ! I fhall love her the better as longas I live/* laid the Colonel. " Where will you find me another woman, who at once poffeffing all the foftnefs of her fex, can defend Herfcif fo nobly ?"------- « Not many indeed, I believe," replied Wil¬ mot : " a modern fine lady would faint at the bare idea of fuch a vulgar ex¬ ertion," The Colonel, being now fatisfied, difmiffed Mrs. Simpfon, faying, u I have no intention of punifhing you ; the villain Simpfon fhall alone feel my vengeance.—Begone ¿ and hereafter act uprightly." Mrs. Simpfon difmiffed, the com¬ pany prepared to retire to reft; Orfield returning home for the night; the Co¬ lonel firft thanking Grant for taking no further notice than as a ftranger of Peggy—a forbearance he had entreat¬ ed, fearful of her fpirits fuflering greater alarm ¿
alarm -, then flmking Wilmot by the hand, " You are>a good fellow," faid he, 4i and, though I cannot give you my grand-daughter, we muft be friends." Wilmot anfwered by a figli ; a general good night, or rat h cri morning, fonti after taking place. Peggy was too happy to fleep found : a thoufand delightful ideas amufed her imagination. Never had theColonel, though always kind, behaved with fo much affection : Duncan too was im¬ proved, rather than injured ; he had embraced her in the prefence of the Colonel, with a freedom he never be¬ fore attempted, and which by no means feemed to difpleafe the veteran. The converfation too at Simpfon's was re¬ membered. " Who could they be whofe crimes were fo well known to the Colonel, and likewife to Grant?" thought ihe. 4C The Colonels fon mai ried, I think they laid, to Miß Fi afer;
Frafer; and fomething about robbing and abandoning an infant." Thefe ideas, the more purfucd, the more be¬ wildered; and foon gave way to a whifpering certainty of being beloved by Duncan. The only diiagreeable thought was Thompfon's wound, winch flie fincerely hoped would however not be dangerous j a wifh the gentlenefs of her nature prompted, and that fhud- dered at being, even in felf-defence, the means of giving pain to the moft unworthy· In the morning the company met in the break faft- room, all but Lady Elea¬ nor, who fent an excufe of indifpofition. She could not endure to fee the girl fhe defpifed, fo greatly diftinguifhed, and theiefore determined rather to keep her apartment. The tea-things were no fooner removed, than the Colonel, who was feated by Pegg v, began fpeak¬ ing of her grandmother Jannet, faying, 44 My
€ί My dear girl, you have I fancy but little remembrance of your father ?" ** Alas ! no,** faid (lie, the fmile that wantoned on her face fuddenly giving way to a look of forrow. " 1 was fo young that I fcarcely recollect him : yet fnmeumes t think I remember fit¬ ting on his knee. Since ï came to any knowledge, I never dared mention him to my grandmotlitrj who lameatshim the more bitterly, as fhe never knew how he died, he being fiom home on bufinefs for the minifter," Perhaps then,*' faid the Colonel, ** he may not be dead, Peggy ; nay, more, I have good reafon to think heb not." (i Not dead !" replied Peggy, ** is it poffible Heaven can have fuch a bleffing in fiore for me ; fuch a comfort for my dear grandmother ? Oh, fit ! keep me ftot in fufpenfe ! I am fure you know more of him than you fay, for you never infpire hopes without fome cer- 3 tainty ;
tainty : but you fear my fortitude j indeed, fir, I am very calm !" conti¬ nued fhe, trembling exceflively: 4t per¬ haps he needs my care, and is fink¬ ing under diftrefs, while I, bleft with your favour, enjoy every gratifica¬ tion P'------« No, Peggy ! the man thou calleft thy father is the friend to whom I owe Duncan's prefervation, and"------ 4t Duncan's prefervation !" interrupted fhe, rifing and fixing her e}es on Grant j who, unable to bear more, ftarted from his feat, and caught her in his arms, exclaiming, " My dar¬ ling ! how gieatiy are all my forrows overpaid !" 44 My father '."cried fhe, finking from his embrace to his feet, *' how ftiall I exprefs the rapture with which my heart overflows, and pay the long arrears of duty I owe you . ? "— " You owe me none," faid he, laifing and leading her to the Colonel, cc here pay your duty. Heaven only made my
my mother and myfelf the humble inftruments of faying the wreck of a noble houfe."—" Yes, beloved repre- fentative of thofe moft dear to meí" faid the veteran, matching her to his breaft, "in me behold a parent who glories in fuch a grand-daughter; Pre¬ cious remains of James Campbell and his Mary Frafer ! No longer now a cottager, and dependent on my bounty ; but the heirefs of Kenneth Caftle, and welcome claimant on my warm eft af¬ fection."— fC Gracious Heaven 1" re¬ plied Peggy, " you are too good to fport with my feelings ; and yet, how can it be? the child of poverty—the honoured dependent of your bounty— my fenfes are furely bewildered."— 44 Recall them, my Peggy, my much- loved coufin, recall them," faid Dun¬ can, 4i and liften to a tale of wonder." —" Oh ! in pity relate it then ; I feel, : I know that happinefs awaits me, and 8 Jong
% long to be informed by what means. I fuffered much yefterday, and cannot but think my fenfes in fome meafure now deceive me."— cc Never lefs than at this minute, my child," faid the Co¬ lonel : cc be compofed, and Grant, thy reputed, though ever to be honoured father, will clear all doubts. Nay, feat thyfelf by me, pride of my age, and hear a recital, which, however, muft coft thy fufceptible mind a tear." Peggy obeyed in filence, eagerly fixing her eyes, with expreffive anxiety, fiift on the Colonel, then on Grant, who, after a fliort paufe, related the ftory of her mother, as before told by Jannet, though in more elegant terms. At the defcription of Mrs. Campbells death, Peggy hid her face on the Co¬ lonels bofom, fobbing aloud until Grant mentioned the circumftance of her expiring with her lips on Peggy's cheek.—" On my cheek !" interrupted fbe,
íhe, <c Oh fay ! wmich received the ho* noured falute ?" involuntarily putting up her hand to her face. *« On your left, I well know," replied Grant; <e for my poor mother ufed to fay that Hea¬ ven had fixed a dimple in the fpot to render it a lafting mark."—" Ay, Peggy," added Duncan, in order to divert the forrow which he obferved ready to overwhelm her, tf it was juft there," gently ftealing a kifs from her cheek ·, a trick which covered Peggy's face with blufhes, but in fome meafure difturbed her forrow, and forwhichthe Colonel was by no means difpleafed. Grant then continued, and difclofed the whole, nor omitting the difcovery ofthe night before; Peggy liftening with wonder and aftonifliment. The Co¬ lonel, at the conclufion, produced the portrait of Mary Frafer, and prefented it to Peggy, faying, <t My beloved child, receive the faint refemblance of thy grand-
grandmother; wear it as thy mother did, ever remembering it is to thee doubly facred, as İt muft not only recall a parent to thy memory, but was the inftrument which raifed thee to the place thy birth defigned." Peggy re¬ ceived the picture, preffing it to her lips in filence, and, turning afide, drop¬ ped it into her bofom. Loid Wilmot now congratulated his new coufin, as did Sophia, in the warmeft terms; Lady Beugle coldly retiring to communicate the ftory to Eleanor; Loid Beugle, with a yawn, obferving ic was a wonder¬ ful d İ fco verv.
Vul. Ii Ρ CHAP.
CHAP. XIV. 14 Not worfe the fruit, That in the vvildcrnefs the bloflom bîow'd, — ......... ■.....,,,. - , ¿n the humble cot I lcam'd fome leffons, which I'll not forget When I inhabit yonder lofty towers." Home, A. FEW days after the foregoing difcovery, the Colonel, to the complete fatisfaction of Duncan and Peggy, began talking of returning home i the puniihment of Simpfon alone detaining him, and for whom Peggy pleaded a ong time in vain, but u ho, from her re¬ peated folicitations, was at length fet at liberty, the Colonel, however, giving fuch an account of him to the police, that they piomifed in future to keep a ftriét eye ovei him, ordciinghim, under pain of profecution, to give up houfe- keeping. Loid Wichers had, the very
\cry morning after tlie confufion at Simpfon's, fet off for the continent -, a ftep that did not prevent the Colonel commencing an action, which, though not terminated until many months after our party returned to Scotland, went fo unfavouiably againft him, as to be the moft expenfive of all his villanies; money which, however, the Colonel or¬ dered to be diftributed among the poor. Thompfon, who lay heavy on Peggy's fpirits, was in a fair way of re¬ covery when they left England, though greatly disfigured, Peggy pi ivately fend¬ ing her a note for fiíty pounds. Eleanor ftill kept her apartment, deci iring* Peggy's birth ? ftory which fhe could not give the leaft credit to, and that it was doubtlefs comrILd anions them. Duncan now openly avowed his paffion· Wilmot contemplating his happinefs with ? figh, an J, when pi e tied to accom¬ pany them to Scotland, leplicJ, Ci Some P :: time
time hcn-ce, when I can truft myfelf, iuch a journey will be very agreeable, but at prefent you muft excufe me ; it would coft mc too dear." The Colonel, v,ho was not regardlefs of the promife he had made Oi field, now attacked Lady Beugle. For fome time ihe was inflexible ; but the veteran declaring that on fuch a marriage taking place, he would make an addition of ten thou¬ fand pounds to Orfield's pay—her iad> fhi p } by the advice of Eleanor, who was glad to be rid of a fifler whofe manners were a perpetual reproach on her, confented ; the union of Sophia and Oifidd being to take place at the fame time a? that oí Duncan and Peggy. The Colonel, on the firft dhcovery of his giand-daughter, had written to Scotland, to his brother Campbell, en¬ ti catino him to meet him at Kenneth Caille, and witnefs the union he meant to take place foon after his arrivai there. Lord
Lord and Lady Beugle declined to accompany them ; Sophia dropping a tear, even on feparating with an un¬ worthy fifter, and obtaining a promife from Wilmot tojóin them in the courfe of the enfuing fu m mer, at which time they likewife expected Mr. Bennet and his fon. Our company now departed, and after an eafy journey of nine days reach¬ ed Kenneth Caftle ; having ftopped one day on the road, to view Grant's former dwelling, and vifit Mrs. Campbells grave, in the village kirk-yard, which they found, as defcribed by Jau ner, with a laurel, or, as fiie called it, a green bay at the head, and a cyprefs at the feet, between which the Colonel order¬ ed a marble monument to be erected to the memory of his daughter, Peggy weeping over the fpot until the Colonel taking one hand, and Duncan the other, obliged her to quit it. Fifteen P £ miles
miles from home they were met by fome hundreds of the Colonels valíais and dependents, headed by Sandy Mack- iiitoih on horfeback, who received them with repeated acclamations of pleafure ; after which, they continued their way ; Grant, who was alfo on horfeback, en¬ tering into a converfation with Sandyy as though they had been twenty years acquainted. On reaching the Caftle, Grant, im¬ patient as he was to embrace his mo¬ ther, lingered behind untiMhc was in¬ formed of his arrival.. At die entrance ftood Jannet and Mrs. Donald. Peggy flew to her grand-mother's arms, neither beins able to fpeak for fome minutes ; and at length, accompanied by Sophia, retiring with her, when in the moft cau¬ tious manner Peggy, informed her of what difcoveries had been made> and who waited to be introduced to. her. M Bleffing of my eild !" replied Jan- netj
net, ce though thou art difcovered to be of high blude, thou wouldft not mock my grey hairs; yet it canna fure be true. My Allan alive! My bonny lad! Ay, if fae, I muft die wi* pleafure ! but let me feehim, for I canna but think fome ane has impofed on thee." Sophia now left them to fetch Grant, who returned with her, accompanied by the Colonet. 44 My mother ["exclaimed Grant, clafp. ing her in his arms. u My bairn ! my ain Allan !" returned fhe, finking on his neck, unable to fpeak, until relieved by tears, '* do I live to fee thee fafe ? Yet alack, thou art farely changed; rue- fu* mifliaps have attended thee, or thou wouldft not have been fae lang ab¬ fent. Mercifu' Father ! have I then lived to fee my dear lad come back til claife my ene ? and my bonny Peg¬ gy amang the firft of Highland la¬ dies ; what can I wifh for mair ? I am ready til gae whenever it pleafes Hea¬ ven
ven til ca' me."------ i€ No, my dear grandmother," interrupted leggy, 44 you will, I truft, be fpared to fee I am not ungrateful, and that I will en¬ deavour to pay the intereft of a debt of gratitude, whofe principal can never be returned."—" Ay, Jannet," faid the Colonel, Ci cheer up, we may want you hereafter to nurfe a young Duncan, or a Peggy."—A loud ringing at the park-gate now announced vifuors, and that proved to be no other than Mr. and Mrs. Campbell, whom the Colonel haftened to receive, Duncan having met them at the firft entrance; Mr. Som¬ mers, accompanied by Orfield, being in the mean time employed in informing, in a brief manner, the variais, that Peggy was now their lady, and the acknow¬ ledged daughter of their beloved laird. Mr. Campbell and his lady expreffed the utmoft furprife at the ftrange events that had taken place, whicb, however, were
were too clearly authenticated to be dis¬ puted 3 Mr. Campbell informing his brother that Mr. Alexander Frafer had been in the Highlands for more than two months back ; the illegitimate fon, for whom he fo cruelly neglected his daughter Mary, being dead lince their arrival there. The Colonel now fent Duncan to defire the attendance of So¬ phia and Peggy, who inftantly obeyed the fummons, Mrs. Campbell receiving both with the utmoft complacency ; for as Duncan was to efpoufe Peggy, it was not material vvho was the immediate heir to the Colonels fortune. Mr, Sommers and Orfield now joined the company-; Mrs. Campbell making no objection to the Lieutenant, as he was of an ancient family, and fo highly countenanced by the Colonel. Dinner was now announced, at which, however, her pride was to receive a fevere fliock ; the Colonel introducing Grant and his mother,
mother, who in vain attempted to bt excufed; he infilling with the greater! obftinacy on their fitting down, fay¬ ing irt 4 a tone that convinced Mrs* Campbell any remonftrance would be fruitlefs, tí Do we not owe you the greateil obligations ? how low would our pride have lain, had it not met your fupport ! The life of Duncan, and the prefervation of Peggy, are both your gifts, and think you we will bluih t6 acknowledge them ? Certainly not 5 thofe who are above confeffing an obli¬ gation, are unworthy to receive one."' With thefe words he obliged Jannet to fit at table with the reil ofthe company ; Peggy ftealing a look at th_ Colonel which expreffed her pleafure ; Mrs. Campbell, whatever (he might fufler from burfting pride, being obliged to conceal it. About a week after their return, Mr· Sommers united the enraptured Duncan and
and Orfield to their blooming brides : the firft, by the command ofthe Colonel receiving his much beloved Peggy from the hand of Grant. The whole village were invited to the ceremony, that was celebrated by a ball, at which birth and riches did not fcorn to join hands in the merry round with the ruftic children of induftrious poverty j even honeft Sandy hopping a reel on the occafion, faying, " The man that wadna ftir a fturnp on fie an holiday, ought to be banifhed Scotland for ever."
FIN/S.
