Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The farmer of Inglewood Forest: a novel
THE FARMER í O F INGLEWOOD FOREST.
CHAP. I. EDWIN gave a cry of horror, his ftrength forfook him, 'the candie dropped from his enervated hand, and he fell fenfelefs on the ground by the fide of the coffin. The noife alarmed the houfe, and Godwin leaving Mrs. Smith with Fanny ran towards the apartment, being joined on the flairs by Felix, who had heard the noife, and who was vol. in. В alfo
alfo haflening to learn the caufe. Though aftonifhed on their firft entering the room to find a man extended, in all appearance life- lefs on the floor, yet that fenfation was fpeedily banifhed by humanity, curiofity, and .every other idea, giving way to the fituation of the intruder. é Edwin was in deep mourning, and had fallen on his face, which circumftance, added to his drefs, totally concealed him from the knowledge of his father. Felix, moft alert, ran to raife him, and turning him from the pofidon in which he had fallen, at once dif¬ covered to Godwin the face of his guilty f ortt t — « Execrable murderer !" exclaimed the old man, withdrawing the hand he had firetched out to affift him, as if it had touched a ferpent» " doll thou perfecute her even in death ?" By the application of water to his tem¬ ples, and the cares of Felix, Edwin began to recover.—"Ccafe your attention," con. tinued
tinued Godwin, gazing on him with a coun¬ tenance impreffed with mingled grief and refentment, " let him die, left he live to commit more crimes, and fwell the account beyond the reach of mercy." Edwin flowly revived, and though nekher fear nor fuperftition had any İbare in his charader, yet his eyes firft fixing on the figure of Felix bending over him (fo power* ful was the fenfe c f guilt) that, ftriving to difengage himfelf, he exclaimed, fliuddering witn horror, " Merciful God ! what art thou ?" His eyes at that moment met thoíc of his father, and the emotion, occafioned by the perfon of Felix, as the lefler evil, inftantly vanifhed, and hiding his face on his ihoulder, he cried^—" Hide me— fave me¬ rný father's prefence is too much—all elfe I can bear." " Unhappy, guilty wretch !" exclaimed Godwin ; " if you ihrink thus from my fight, how will you meet that of á juilly В 2 offended
rfľended God, from whom neither your ciimes or murders are hiiden? The lon^eft life fptnt in contrition and penitence can fcarcely atone for parricide, perjury, the vio¬ lation of innocence, and the fell confequences of your depravity, the death of one, whofe only fault was her mifplaced tendernefs, and, finally, that of an unhappy babe doomed even in irs mothei's womb to fall a vidim to your offences ! Can fuch deeds, Edwin, hope for mercy ? If they can, de 'ay nor, but repent, and with a fincere α r.uiùu.n feek for pardon." " I dare not hope nor afk it," anfwered Edwin ; " I am forfaken of God, and ere this you muft have curfed the day in which 1 received my being." " Alas!" replied Godwin, "in an un¬ happy hour of diftradion, Î, indeed, did more—I curfed thy felf; but what is my curfe ? Seek to deprecate that of Heaven ; guilty that I was, when the mild angel moil injured,
* * ι » ' ţ injured, forgave, and even %itli^her lati* breath entreated pardon for thee^T* *■-" - " Enough," cried Edwin, ** iť ir com¬ plete ; my own curie is fallen on my devoted head ; repentance and contrition arc* vain g can they recall the paft, rcinftate roe ia inno-' cence and your affedion, bring back itf mother from the grave, or awaken Agne* and her infant to life ?" " Her infant V* replied Godwin ; but in¬ ftantly recolleding himfelf, and giving into Edwin's miftake, he added, * c Thank Hea¬ ven Kfcr infant is beyond the reach of its inhuman father I" " Oh, God!" cried Fldwin, in an agony of grief, as he gazed on the litelefs forms, " could I have fufpeded this ?—a child !— Oh ! Agnes—Agnes—what muft have been thy forrows ? This babe too, that might have been a pledge of love between us, is but a freíh weight to plunge me yet deeper in per·* B j dition I
dition ! Oh î had Ihe but lived so hear mj penitence, to know my forrow, or had even the inhnt been fpared, that I тщкг repair to it the wrongs done to its unhappy mother ; but it feems as if all the avenues of mercy were cloicd againft me ; yes, I feel the hand of Heaven is upon me, and to ftruggle with my hie is vain ! You weep, my father; but what do í fay ? I have no father—no bro¬ ther—I am alone—curfed even in exiftence i Could tears of blood obliterate my offences, yet what would they avail ? Oh î that look of innocence," his face failing en the bofom of Agnes, " will fentence me ш everkftİng perdition 1" The diftrefs of Godwin was too powerful to be expreilêd in words ; he leaned aganft trie foot of the coflin, and appeared ready to fink on the floor from the violence ot his emotion. " You have called me your friend," faid Felix, addreffing Godwin í " at this time permit
регаж me to ufe the mfbcnce of one, with- drew from this fcsœ ; confider eke fftuatioa of your daughter-in-hw, and tibe anxiety ibe h now labouring under." With theie words Felix gfötíy шок die arra of Godwin, who mack тю щау, and teu him from the üght of Edwin s unavailing forrow, Edwin now left alone gave way tø the moft frantic grief; he called aloud on Agnes, execrated himfelf, wept over her, kifled her cold lips and her right-hand, then raifinghrr left, what was his furprife to fee on her fin¬ ger the ring which he had placed there on the fatal night of her undoing. This filent, but painful remembrancer redoubled his anguiíh and diftradion ; he ftarted» the hand drop¬ ped from between his, and ftriking his fore¬ head with his clenched hands, he ruihed out of the apartment, exclaiming, " Hell—hell, thou canil not give fuperior torture." В 4 Felix
Fclixin the mean timeled Godwin to his daughter-in-law's chamber, where he forced him to fwallow a glafs of wine, then haftened down to the room where he had left Edwin, who was gone, as already related, and in fuch .confufion that his hat ftill lay on the floor, where it had at firft fallen. Felix had but juft communicated this intel¬ ligence to Godwin, when a ringing was heard at the gate, and which proved to be William, who was arrived from Inglewood. His for¬ row for the lofs of Agnes was not inferior, to that of his wife and father, and was greatly increafed by the fcene which he heard had juft paffèd. The news of Agnes's death had reached him two days before, but the diftreis of Bernard had rendered him incapable of attending them there j the particulars of the unhappy event were therefore unknown r.o him. Agres had died on the third day after her delivery, the fiattering fymptoms fo frequent » 4 Ю
in decays having fuddenly difappeared, and given place to the immediate prognoftics of approaching difiblution. Calm and refigntd flie endeavoured to fpeak comfort to her weeping fifter, and the ftill more unhappy Godwin; gave the kindeft remembrances of duty to her father, and gratitude to Mrs. Palmer and William, and finally, in the bro-' ken fnatches of her breath, fervently prayed for her infant and Edwin, \ " Oh, Father of mercy !" cried ihe, " byţ the peace thou haft deigned to ihed on m'y foul, I truft I am forgiven : Oh ! extend thy goodnefs to the partner of my crime, awaken him to repentance and virtue; his faults are not beyond thy power to pardon ; error to man is as inherent, as mercy and forgivenefs are to thee. Blefs my babe; may t:vay forrow I have felt be repaid by a bkífing ел my child. Make her worthy thofe friends, whom thou haft raifed to ibield her from the opprobrium that muft luve othenvife faile« В 5 on
on her helplefs innocence. At fome diftant time may her father love her as I would have done, fo ihall my fpirit, if permitted to look ' down on earth, be gratified/' Agnes ccafed for a few moments, and appeared to ílruggle for breath; but reco* Vering, in fome degree, ihe refumed, ad¬ dreffing Godwin : — " Oh ! my dear, my honoured parent, for fo I will call you for this laft time, give not way to forrow, weep not for me, Fanny will repay my debt of love and duty. Fanny, my beloved compa¬ nion—fifter^—friend—what words can I find tò addrefs thee, or what bleiungs equal to my wilhes ? The ftrongeft J can exprefs is, Thy own deeds hang over thee : Affift my worthy brother in comforting my father ; tell him I wifhed to ñx my laft looks on him." Then turning her expiring eyes to¬ wards Godwin, ihe added, after a painful and convulfivc paufe :—" Blefs all my friends, 'pardon my father — pardon the deluded Emma—·
Emma —tell her I remembered her at this fearful hour : And, oh God of mercy ! hear my prayer—forgive my unhappy Edwin." This fentence flie pronounced with ener¬ getic earneftnefs, her e.yes raifed with fervent hope, and a fweet fmile of placid happineis 'enlivening her features ; then gently bowing' her head forward, as flie pronounced the laft word, expired without a groan, ftruggle, or any convulfion, that might mark the final fepara- tion of ¿he active fpirit from its earthly tene¬ ment í Though this event had long been expec¬ ted, yet the fliock it occafioned was dreadful. Flad not Godwin's grief been diverted by the fituation of his daughter-in-law he had undoubtedly funk under it ; but her furrow, in fome meafure, beguiled him of his own. She had been delirious the whole niiiht after her fitter's death, calling aloud on Agnes> and flruggling to get out of bed to go to hei ¿ В 6 but
but exhaufted by the exertion, towards morn¬ ing had fallen into a heavy fleep, during which Mrs. Smith had perfuaded Godwin to have the body of Agnes removed, as the fight at a future period would but increafe her grief. Fanny, after a few hours reft, awakened, relieved from the fever,and refigned to her lofs, the acutenefs of lier firft forrow finking into a ferenity that at once befpoke her fortitude and religion. At firft ihe feemed diffatisfied that Agnes was moved ; but her father's reafors were admitted with a figh of acquiefcence, and preifing the babe to her bofom, flie ex¬ claimed, tc Agnes, ifever I forget thy worth, fo far as to love any child more than this thy facred de pofit, may the Almighty ihew me my error and ingratitude by depriving me of ir *' lt. f * In the morning a man had been fent off to Inglewood by the furg-on, as Felix could ill be
be fpared in the general diftrefs, to convey the news by letter to Mrs. Palmer,entreating her to break it to Mr. Bernard and William, rhe former of whom had been fo violently fhocked at the intelligence, that William, however diftreffed, and anxious to attend his wife and father, could not determine to leave him until he became more calm, Agnes, in this interim, had been put into the coih.i, and the babe of Fanny, conforma¬ ble to what fiie had herfelf expreffed, placed by her fide. This arrangement had likcwire another incentive ; Fanny wiihed her infant tobe buried at Inglewood, and by this means flie was conveyed thither without the quef¬ tions which a fécond coffin would doubtlefs have occafioned. On Agnes being placed in lier laft recep¬ tacle, Mrs. Smith had attempted to draw the ring from her finger ; but either from the ftiffnefs of death, or its fwell ing, had found this difficult to effed, and therefore had re¬ ferred
ferred the tafk to her brother, in which interim Edwin had arrived, and added re¬ doubled anguiíh to the yet bleeding wounds of the family. William, on his firft arrival, haftened to the chamber of Fanny, whom he found em¬ ployed in endeavouring to reflore his father to fome degree of calmnefs. He looked at her in filent admiration ; traces of the moft poignant afflidion fat on every feature, yet lhe evidently endeavoured to fuppreis her own feelings, fearful of adding to the general un- happinefs. Fl aving firft embraced his father he advanced towards her, and throwing ids arms about her as fiie fat up in bed, could only exprefs his forrow by fpeechlefs agony. For fome time flic joined her tears with his ; but foon recovering her emotion fiie laid : — " Is this, William, the way you fliould teach. me fortitude ? Wc both loved Agnes, as our adions to this little one fliall prove, but we have alfo other duties to fulfil ; to comfort cur parenes, by conquering our own giief, and
and enabling them to bear theirs, by fliewing them they have children yet left to foften the forrows of their age." " Matchlefs woman !" cried Godwin ; — " with fuch a monitor fliould William ever err, how heavy muft be his condemnation ?" Then flruggling with his emotion, he entered into the particulars of what had paffed, ex- pteffing his concern at the outrageous grief of Edwin, and his furprife how he could enter the houfe, and alfo depart fo privately. Ί nis myftery was, however, foon explained by Felix, who informed them that the glafe door to the garden had been left open, and that he had doubtlefs entered and departed that way. His difcovering their retreat was alfo a fubjed of wonder; but his apparent ignorance refpeding the infants convinced them his intelligence could not give them material uneafinefs, as he would not fail to keep fecret the ihare he had in Agnes's death. " Gcod
" Good Héaven !" cried Godwin, " fliould the unhappy boy, in this hour of anguifti r rufli into the preience of his Creator, alas 1 I even yet tremble at the remembrance of the horror and defpair which diftorted his features." William made no reply, but foon after leaving his father and Fanny, he, with Felix 7 walked into the town, and inquired at the various inns for his brother, both by name and defcribing his perfon. At the laft he called he was told, that 1иф a Gentleman had that very evening arrived about i'even o'clock, and inquired (or a man who had rtiided thrre near a week ; that both had gone out together, bur returned feparately, the firft ref dent in a ihort time, the other after fon:?: fir y, and in a ftate of frenzy ; that he had (truck his companion, and ordered a chaife aid four almoft inftantly after his return, and, finally, had been gone, accompanied by the man, who was appan ntly his fervant, near two hours* Wiih
With this intelligence William haftened to his father, to whom he difclofed it, both being more reconciled on the reflcdion that Edwin was not, at fuch an hour of defeivcd puntili* ment, left entirely to himfelf. William, before he retired for the night, itole alone to the receptacle that contained his fifter Agnes, and killing her cold lips, cheeks and forehead, bade her a final adieu. " Merciful God !" exclaimed he, as he gazed on her, " is this all that is left of the beauteous and blooming Agnes, who two years fince was hailed the Queen of May, whole lively, harmonious note was moil diftinguiihed in the fong, and whofe adive ftep was foremoft in the dance ! Cruel Ed¬ win, what haft thou done ? grafped at a vain 'ihadow, and caft from thee a treafure never, never to be regained !" By Fanny's defire the burial was delayed until flic ihould be able to return to Ingle¬ wood ;
wood í the coffin therefore on the following day was clofed, the furgeon firft taking off the ring, which was now removed without difficulty, the fwelling having entirely iub- fided, A few evenings after arrived the friendly and humane Mrs. Palmer : William now loft no time, but taking an affectionate farcwel of his wife and father, delighted to leave them in fuch hands, he haftened away in order to adminifter comfoit to the dißreficd Bernard.
CHAP.
CHAP. И.
EDWIN, on his ruining out of the houfe, had, as the man truly told William, returned in л ftate little ihort of frenzv, and having no other object on whom to vent his rage, had (truck Harris, and cur fed him in the bittereit terms, accu fing him of twice drawing htm into the moil horrible dilemmas; Harris, however, had borne all with temper, endeavouring to perfuadc his mailer to go to bed, but in vain ; he infiited on a chaife being inítantíy made ready, and fetting off immediately for London. " I will fly," faid he, in a paroxifm of rage, " I will fly, and forget
forget them ail ; a father too ; accui fed ffghc in which I purchafcd a momenta« y gratifica¬ tion at the expence of years of pain ; infer¬ nal villain that 1 was to take advantage of the alarm and emotion my arts had created i buH-am juftly punifhed, die pangs of heil cannot equài-íhoje I feel. My wife too, ac- curfed name, diedj/avif on purpofe to moe к my hopes ! Another murdcŕľ^V^cJÍ— -леП— well— ib not my number yet compieteT^Fer. what have I now to live ľ Nothing. My deareit hopes deftroyed, and by whom ? — Fool, knave, idiot, mifcreant, that I am, by myfeifr The chaife being prepared he threw him¬ felf in, and had advanced three (tages to¬ wards London by the next morning, when he found himfelf too ill to proceed, and was unwillingly obliged to give way to Harris's entreaty, and retire to bed. Reft, however, was not to be procured even by the fatigues he had undergone, the horrors that detracted him redoubling by quiet and inačtior fo that ia
in a few hours his overcharged brain loft the faculty of /ifiirdiy thinking, and was be- wildtied in fuir. I 1 r ris immediately called ir nudi .1 '"π" <e w ho pronounced him in a hi¿;h fiver, ¿>\d »ίΙ\1 t .e neceíľary means to relieve him, but ah heir cares were unavailing ; for three weeks his defirium crnfintied with ihort interval», the paroxifms being nor only dreadful to the fuffcrer, but alfo to the beholdt rs, daíhing hb head agai dt -Xiv; (чч1 pofts, ftriking his forehead, gnaihirg his teefrrj^nd casing perpetually on Agnes, his wife, or motfterv " Take them away," cried he, fC drive them back to the grave—thev torment me to death—my wife has poifoned me—my mother has fhot me through the head—and Agnes," exclaimed he, with redoubled emo¬ tion, has ftruck a poignard through my heart.—Murder—murder—who has com¬ mitted murder ?—Not I—I can kill without poifon—piftol—or dagger—my love can do the
the bufinefs.—-Now fee— fee —they all laugh at me 5—nay, then, I'll laugh too—ha—ha—· ha.—Oh ! oh ! Agnes ! Agnes !" Thefe paroxifms were ufualiy followed by infenfibility, nor was his delirium always raving, but frequently partook of the melan¬ choly call, yet always referred to the fame objcds,—" Hark !" faid he, α they are let¬ ting Agnes's coffin down into the grave-—they are placing her on my mother—the worms that devoured the firft will now feaft on the laft. —See, two are already fixed on her ruby lip, and one in the dimple of her downy cheek; will no one remove them ì Call my wife, ihe can take them off, for ihe helped to fix them there. *— Tell her 1*11 give back all her wealth* What, cannot ye find her ? Seek her then in the charnel-houfe ; bl^ncr4âke_ail, but fave my Agnes." Such was the unhappy ftate of Edwin, a vidim to his own crimes, and a terrible ex* ample
ample that the pangs of confcience can render even this life a hell, though poffeffed of youth, ftrength, beauty, underitanding, and wealth. At length he began flowly to recover, but was for above three months unable to leave the inn where he was taken ill. When he gained a lirde ftrength, he made íhortexcur· fions round the country, carefully avoiding all correfpondence with his Emily, whom he could not now bear to think of, as he was convinced th it they muft regard him as the caufe of all thtir misfortunes, and hate him accordingly. A month after Agncs's death ihe was re¬ moved to Inglewood for interment, Godwin, Bernard and William, preceding the hearfe on horfeback, in deep mourning, and with hearts yet more gloomy than rheir habits. — At a Ihort diftance behind was Mrs. Palmer's chaife, containing herfelf, Fanny, and the litde
little one, attended by Felix on horfcback ; in which order they reached the Foreft in two days, the fcattered inhabitants of which, being informed by the diftreffed Bernard of the ti r.e the body would arı İve, having col¬ lected to receive it at fhe diitance of a mile from home, the elders on horfeback, the you'/tb on foor, in their bit hah ili ments, at¬ tending the maidens in white gowns, and mufnn hoodb. On meeting the cavalcade the hearfe was ftepped, and fix young Farmers drawing out the coffin, proceeded with it to church, two young gii Is walking beil i e fire wing fi weis, tight fuppoiting the j all, ;.nd the u г» ainde r following, with the \ouths uniting a iuneral hvmr.. The whole family, together with Mrs. palmer, had fo ftrongly urged Fanny to be taken immediately home, that ihe conffnted, though with difficulty, the Laoy accompany¬ ing her.
The
The alteration that thi ее months had made in little Reuten, who ^s now ne.ir a year ok', his artkfs carelli s , the jerdouí curiofity with which lie appeared to view the young ftranger, ail confpired to blunt the acutenefi of her m iff. He viewed the in- fane's hand*, touchedits feet, ch'jckkd, ani finally, held up his chubby face to l:if> her, Fanny prenk d both to her bofom, wept over them, and her teais having eafed her over* chai ged bofom, by the time the unhappy mourners rrturned from the funeral flie had calmed her emotion, and received them with compo ild i i ι ai ne Ь. It was harpy for Fanny that flie had bien d'Ûliaded nom attending the burial, /oi Gi d- u ii/s diftreis had deeply affected die fpio f a- tors. The eaith had been removed fom Mrs. Godwin's coffin in diíľľiiKľ the crave of Agnes, who was {had by her fide, which fight redoubled hib guef to fuch an excels that his fon couid icarceiy fnpport him, Bernard wringing his own hands, \n vol. ui. С lobbing
fobbing words of comfoit to hib brother-in- law. " Oh 1 Agnes, Agnes," cried Godwin, cc would I had tied for thee; how much better would mv me have become the mave than thy youth an 1 fweetnefs ?" " Be comforted, my belt friend," faid Ihriutid, taking his hand , "u buaks my h, ¡t to fee you i'lu Jame'u a child of mii.e. t> 'dga\e her,and hath taken her bat k, but he l.imkfi u·» other childien, we are not then as jut n with 'Ut hope, the:^fore be comforted," All fiald until the grave was clofed, w lien Bemard tvkinc the liîïh.t arm of Gov win, AVilliam holding the kit, they proceeded homewards accompanied by ihe fi lendly villagers, wdio Aw them fafcly entí r their own houfe, and then departed in filence to their refpedive homes.
For
For fome Wv-eks the family remained ab- ■forbed in grief; at length the len-.ent hand oi time began to reconcile them to their lofi, and the living rather than the dead caufed their tears to flow. By Mrs. Palmer's banker in town they had made inquiries concerning Edwin, and learned his Lad) \ death, but of himfelf n thing. As to Emma all refpeding her vas fik nt, tlie family therefore would have thought themfelves more happy to weep on their graves ıhan continually to deplore the errors of their lives. Godwin's health, in the mean time, ap* peared, by almoit imperceptible degrees, to recover; but his foimcr mufcular ftrength was gone, and he was reduced into a thin old man.' Felix, whom he had introduced to Ber¬ nard, was their favourite companion, and С 2 frequently
frequently helped them to beguile the long winter evenings with tales of his former days, the unhappy fiate of the negro fiaves under inhuman mailers, and numberlefs other fub* jeds all new to Bernard, who, on the rela¬ tion of any exertion of cruel power, would clinch hb fift, fcarcely refrain an oath, and wiih he had the fair breaking of the oppref- for's bones. Reuben at firft, on the appearance of Felix, would hide ids face in his mothei's apron ; but foon grew familiar, would run to meet him, climb on his knees, or explore his pocket for an apple, which was ufualiy depofited theie. William, by his adivity and good ma¬ nagement, took the whole care of the farms on himfelf, Fanny being equally diligent in her department.
Margery,
Margery, according to her promifc to Mrs. Godwdn, was only employed with the children, two ftrong girls, as the family was large, being taken for the houfchold woik.
С з CHAP,
>**tt—W»ÎİUWW>«ill*l iT lil л
С H А Р. ЦГ.
D WIN had, in fome degree, recovered „J his heaith, as before obferved, but his fpirits had received a blow not eafily over¬ come; he determined to haften to London, difpofe of his commiflion, retire abroad, and endi.ivour, by travelling, to conquer his melancholy ; but before he went refolved to ¿ide over to the Foreft, vifit the grave of Aiïnes, and take an everlafting farewell of the í pot. One fine morni.ig he accordingly executed his purpoie, having been for fome days within a few miles, and leaving his horfe at a houfe of entertainment at the village, walked forwaid to the well-known church-
church-yard. A plain itone, with his mo¬ ther's name, mai ked the fpot wheie flie was laid, at, d by its fide flood one equally fimple, with this infcription : AGNES BERNARD, J DIED SEPTEMBER IO, I7----, j Aged 19. ! Flis mind, though inured to forrow, was not proof againft this trial ; he threw him¬ felf on the ground, and wept aloud for a confiderable time, until a labourer coming over the İtile whiffling dİfturbed lijm from his poftuie, the man by his fpade and fliovel fliewing he was going to make a refidence for iome new inhabitant* The fellow, who had only come to the Foreft to affift the fexton, wdio was a man hv years, fince Edwin's departure, feeing a fine Gentleman, pulled off his hat, made a kg, С 4 and
and faid, " Mayhap, Sir, if you be a ftranger, you may wiih to fee our church r" Fklwin conquered himfelf fuffkicndy to reply in the negative, and was about to de¬ part, when the countryman adüed, " You ha' been reading the grave ftones belike, I ufed to read them myielf before I was fo much among them ; many a time have I fpelled over them till I cried again, but now Ì think little ^bout fuch matters, or if I do I fing or whiftle to drive it out of my head." Edwin made no anfwer; he wifhed to tear himfelf away, but could not remove his eyes from the grave of Agnes· " Ah ! mailer, you be looking at that there new itone," faid the man ; if you had but feen the gill it covers, you would have owned vou had never met her like ! Poor foul, fhe went mad for love, and died. -— Damn the fellow, fay I, that occafioned it ; he
he could never have the heart of a man, for had I been King of England, Member of Parliament, or even Lord-Mayor of London, I would fooner have took her with a fingle fmock than any far-fetched Princcfs, though flie brought her weight of gold and dia¬ monds." This fimple eulogium firuck Edwin to the heart. He could hear no more, but haitily throwing the man a crown, he covered his eyes with his handkerchief, and precipitately departed. I ïe had not proceeded far when he per¬ ceived a woman and two children at fome diitance, and foon difcovered it to be Mar¬ gery. He would fain have avoided her, yet a thoufand fond lemembrances rofe on his heart, foftened as it was by the foregoing fcene, and determined him not to fliun her. Anna, now near four months old, was in her arms, while Reuben, holding by her С 5 apron,.
apron, trotted by her fide. Margery gave a cry of furprife; her mafier's children had all been fondled in her arms, and were as dear as though they had been her own. She was ihookcd at the wan and languid countenance of Edwin, and readily agreeci to fit down and con verfe with him.— " Lovely children," faid he, cart fling them, " I did not know my biother had a fécond, happy William; —thou art bleffed, while I am curfed ; thy virtue* indeed, is rewaided, and my vice İs punifhed. This little one I think," continued he, with a figh, " has the features of a girl, born, 1 fuppofe, in the height of calamity." Ci She was born," replied Margery, £i three days befoie Agne s's death; my m i it re fi was frightened into labour by her agonie ь, bur, thank God, the child is ftrong and hcu;ty." Edwin gnafiied his teeth in anguiíh, and for ibme moments was unable to reply. At length he uttered, in a rremuîoib tone, — t{ V\ t!l, well, lay no mo.e, 1 am sunili ed L\Cn
even fuffìciently to gratify the moil rancorous hatred." t( And who hates you ?" faid Margery : u If wiflies for your repentance iş hatred, then αο they, indeed, hate you, for prayers are never faid at night without you and Emma being particularly lemembered." <c I thank them," replied Edwin, haughtily, pride for a moment overcoming every other ienfation "But let us baniih this fubjed; tell me, Margery, all that relates to my Agnes, and I will fit while I have life to hear ; you, I am fure, know every fee ret, and are acquainted with all my follies." <c Follies!" replied Margery; "that is the London name, I fuppcie, for wicked- nefs. Little did I thank, w ht n I nurled you in r hefe arms, that you would turn out fuch a bad man !"
Св
S\ ekne fs
Sickî.efs and forrow had depreffed the fpirits of Edwin, he therefore bore the re¬ proaches of Margery with more temper than he ufualiy poffeiied, and at length concili¬ ated her fo far, that fhe related to him the whole procefi» of Agnes's illnetV, her deli- lium, and confiant aliufion to the ling, wiih the repetition of—/ an Edwliŕs r ¿i'{fe> Edwin's heart was pained with the recital; he wept aloud, but entreated her to continue. " I have no more to fay/' anfwered fhe : * ( Bv what 1 have heard, you know the left too well. How you could fi duce her I could never devife, for furely a better, or a more modeft girl was not under the fun. You muft have ufedfome cfyour London potions I fuppofe, for I have heard of fuch tldngs, or furely flu never could have been overcome." Edwin denu d the accufation. — "No, Margery," faid he, ct I am fulticiently guilty without
without that crime; but relate to mc every circumftance ; why was my beloved removed from Inj^evvood :" <ς Why marry, to hide your ihame, for I cannot call it hers ; ih e was removed to lie-in privately, and there-------." <c Died !" croaned Edwin. " Alas ! too u well όο I know that." Cf Her pangs were fo heavy, that thev fiirjitencd your brother's wife into labour; Agnes died in three days, and the chil J was buried with her !" a Enough—reaie,"—exclaimed Edwin—■ unlefb you would drive me to cliilraclion. —. ¡Methinks I fi*e them now ; never will the remembrance be effaced from my memory !" Margery was, as Edwin truly obferved, in all the fecrets of the family; a faithful 6 fervice
fervice of thiity-feven years had entitled her to confidence, and fhe was worthy the tiuit. ïicr anfwcrs to Edwin uere ft riti ly true, yet they difclofed nothing ihe was bound to conceal. 4i And now, Margery," fild Edwin, after a paufe, " I will bid you farewell, a long fare¬ well ; for, Heaven only knows, whether we may ever meet again." tr What Ï without feeing any of the fa¬ mily r" replied Margery : " Surely you cannot mean it." " I would fooner fice death than either Eernaid or my fâcher," anfv.tred Eduin ; — t£ a..d ilr William, tvcn when he was in town, and did not knov the extent ot my íoíhes he d;oo/ me hon Lin: l.ke an аск.ег, whof* че. y touch v. JS \<. .<лиои- ; what then it oui/. I expect now ? N >, Marge?y, they all hciic me, and I wdl kave them idr ever. lLd
Had Agnes lived I might have fued for pardon, and they, perhaps, have beftowed л ; as it is, all is now immaterial; my ddtiny ь fixed; I will feek the villain that feduced my filler, and on ids accurfed head levenge the mifery he has for ever entailed on me !" " God mend us all/' fished Mercery. — I wifli you would Lot be fo paffionate ; but leave vengeance to God, you may be hue it will overtake him ; befides, the Scnpture fayo, pluck the beam out of thine own eye, before thou takeft the mo'e from thy neigli- bouj's, or words to that purpofe ; but I fuppofe you have forgot your religion fince you turned rich Gent eman, — Your fine London wife too, God reft her foul, I hear is dead ; due was furely greatly t>> Ы me, for ihe well к nev/ you \\аъ ti-^'ged io Ag. л*. Ilu\e Ilen tuíHkJi of Londoi^rs to nake me ddľik ' t lie m as lorg as I live ; they well repaia \ ο·η father's kindmb; buc for mem all iiad ben right — your mother ak w —■ ¿лот a
Emma virtuous—Agnes a bleffed wife and mother—and you, initead of being an un¬ happy fine Gentleman, a plain, honéit, cheer¬ ful Farmer, like your father, beloved by the vhdeo unti), and almoft adored by your fa^iK." Fdwin was for a few minutes too much afile t d by the ι eltedion to leply, and wept bitterly, while little Reuben, who had ftutk himfelf between his knees, peeped up in his face v ich mournful iympathy, and taking up his hock wiped off the falling tears. €C It grows late," fiki Ed »un, Cí and Î muil be pone. Tell my father and William that о - you have fe^ n nie, and that if í hear of Ltmr.a they ihall know it. Say to Bernai d, that would my life, and all 1 poffefs, recall the paft, I would ïejoice at the forature. — Say alfo to Ivnny, that if ihe knew what ракЧь here (L\i"g his hand on his heait) tnougli fhe muíl hate me, yet her pity would far
far furpafs her hatred. Farewell," continued he*, killing fiift Reuben, and then the little mil, who chuckled at the pre fibre of his lips. " By Ht aven," cried he, tc fhe has the finding mouth of Agnes, »nd the beauteous dimple of her cheek. Obi may they hereafter tempt no villain to deflroy them ; or> if they ßould,'* continued he, after a paufe, " may he> if $oßbIe> be fiïll moe curfed than I am.'* — With thefe words he rofe haftily from the tuif on which he was fitting, and waving his hand as he ran, ere Marger) could make reply was almoft out of fight. What had paffed feemed to Margery al¬ moft a dream ; flie, however, as fpeedily as poffible returned home, and related all to the family. Edwin's pallid and altered perfon flie did not fail to defcribe, together with his apparent contrition and forrow for the paft ; his obferving the likenefs between the infant and Agnes, his vowed vengeance on Whitmore, and his firm convidion that he was
va. too much rbhoircd by tke whole fa miîy ever to meet t. en pardon. " We hate him not," replied Godwin, " but abhor his crimes ; to expiate them is impoffible, up, eis reptntance ^ouid awaken the de^id. Let him, by the mo*t exemplary conduct, endeavour to make his peace wdth Heaven, wmeh h far more mateiial than the pardon of a weak old m 'n, which, however, ihall not be with-held if he returns to vir¬ tue, for fliall an ei ring mortal deny to his fellow finner what God hath promiied to all? But for my part I will not fcruple to fay, that this frenzied forrow and contrition ap¬ pears to me rather the effeds of his difap- pointed paifion than fincere repentance ; penitence is calm and humble, and by the moft blamelefs condud endeavours to obli¬ terate the errors of the paft by the innocence of the furine, it is not fo with Edwin ; did he not fay he meant to feek revenge on Whitmore, and for what í a crime that he has
has himfelf more than doubled, for no pro¬ mue, or expedancy of marriage, could feduce Lmma; fhe was ace u finti-d w/.h His fitua¬ tion, and voluntaiily rulhcd m^o ι uin, while Edwin's was a premeditated and cruel feüuc- tion, rendered doubly attrocious by his re¬ peated perjuries, when even at the moment he was the huiband of another : Is he then a man to draw the fword of vengeance ì Surely no î —his heart muft fail him in fuch a rencounter, and his guilt-ftruck confidence enervate his arm. Had he indeed faid, I will leave thofe feenes which firft reduced my unfufpeding innocence, fiy from pride and ambition, feek Emma, and, by my own repentance and condud endeavour to influ¬ ence hers ; or, if I fail, retire to fome peace¬ ful retreat, and dwell in inoffenfive obfeurity; then, indeed, might my heart have cherifhed hope; but, as it is, I fear this contrition will wear off, and his vitiated mind, like a rank foil, produce fiefli thorns to wound us/*
" Though
" Though I am convinced," repked Ber¬ nard, " that your opinion is ufualiy better than mine, yer, in this cafe, 1 muft differ from you, and 1 cannot fay but he w u,d make a great ftep towards my f givent is, if I heard he had fairly Lhcd that vıuaın Whitmore." " \Vould murder then, think you, leffen his crimes ?" aniwertu ü u '^ \ u for a du- elhft is at once a filicide and a murderei ; if he falls, doeb he not ruíh unt rdded into tne pre fence of his God ; oi, if he conquers, hateful alternative ! has he i^tinught, and fpilled the blood of his fdbw ? Thue does not live the man, Bernard, no not even Edwin, who has rnoft injured you, that you would flay ; nor, on calm confideration, would you approve the action in an ther : Reafon difclaims it, it is merely the offspring of falfe honour, which facrifices the nobler feelings of the foul at the altar of p/ide and vain glory ; a mafií of bravery to cover cowardice, big
big word-, and rails actions frequently con¬ cealing a tie nbling and daftardly heart. —- ^ Ttue coinage, in my opinion, confiib in Ьеачпц the common ills which attend human nature wich calm nefs, not fuffcring our own temper to be ruffled at the folly or knavery of others, to be able to repulfe violence on in fult with a firm coolnefs, to defend the weak and oppreďed with dead me П>, in tine, to feek the life of ¡to man > but ú our own is attacked to defend it as a lacred trui', deputed ia our hands by out Gavt Creator, and not to be pufiUanimoufly iurrtndered.—Oh,my friei d ! can the blood of Whitmoie ıecalİ the pall ? Can it wailì out the ftains of the polluted Emma ? Can it rettore us peao , or ht r inno¬ cence ? Ah no 1 it can do none of thefe i it сап only plunge bis corrupt foul beyond all repentance, and heap frcih. crimes on the devoted head of Edwin." With your approbation, my father," faid William, " I will write to Edwin, and give him
him our joint opinion on the fubjed ; a letter will doubtlefs find him at the houfe of his late wife." <f The adio n will become you, my fon," replied Gvxhvin, iC and acquit you to your own heart, whatever may be its luccefi." William in the evening wrote to his brother, not it is true with the fame friendly fpirit that formerly dictated his letters ; but with manly firmnefs, and without reproach, conjured him to abftain fiom every adion which might contribute to increafe his father's imeafine'b ; and that, if by any means he fliould meet with Emma, to endeavour, by lenient meafures, to draw her from guilt, and leave vengeance to that Power, who had cal¬ led it his own peculiar Province.
CHAP.
С И A P. IV.
D WIN had no fooner parted with Alaigerv, but he haftened forwaid to the little public-houfe wheie he had kit his horfe, and mounting him kit off full ipeed, in vain endeavouring to banifh the uneafy refkdions that oppreíľed hím. At night he flept at the diitance of thirty miles from the Foreft, and the next day joined his fervant, w ha waited for him at Ferrybridge, tie ordered him to prepare to depart the next morning for London, and upon the whole Harris con¬ fide red him as more calm than before his journey. On
On his arrival in town he repaired to his own houfe, and for the firft time fincerely lamented his wife. " At leaft had flie lived," laid he, " I fliould have had one friend ; unhappy woman, fiie proved how much fiie loved me by the facrifice ihe made, and I requited her as I did ail the reft. Hence¬ forward 1 muit live foi myfelf alone, if life is defirable on fuch conditions, money muft purchafe fubftitutes for happinefs, for the reality is for ever vaniihed from me." Three days after his arrival he received William's letter. " They have not quite caft me off," faid he ; " but how altered ! — William's letters ufed to breathe nothing but friendfhip, this contains only cool advice, and that given, methinks as if he felt the fuperiority of his virtue, and is rather chdated to preferve the peace of the family, than out of affedion to me : I will therefore fimply thank him in his own itile, and ad as my fate Ihalí dired, for my life is neither valuable to myfelf nor others/' He
He then fat down and replied to William's letter, thanking him for his advice, faying, that though he had been heretofore unfor¬ tunate enough to caufe his father great un- happinefs, yet he hoped in future to give no frefli fubjed ; that he meant to relinquiíh his commiffion and go abroad, from whence, if his prefent diipofition continued, he Ihould not, in all probability, return, concluding the whole by expreffmg his beft wiflies for the happineis of the family, and duty to his father. His next care was to fettle his money concerns, difpofe of his houfe, and relinquiíh his commiflion. His favourite companion (Mrs. Whitmore) had been gone two months to the Continent, but her place of deftination w v as uncertain, nor had Edwin the moil ilen¬ der wifli to be apprifed of it ; for the hearts of neither had any ihare in this connexion. On Mis. Whitmore's part it was merely to gratify her pride by having fo handfome a vol» in. D fellow
fellow in her train; but after in vain expec¬ ting his return for fix weeks, her patience was exhaufted, and ihe had fought amufe¬ ment in the gayer feenes of Fiance. Edwin's attachment was merely licentious, and confequenrly the fentiments fhe infpired en calm rt flection rather caufed difguft than pleufnre. During his flay in the country he had fcarcely thought cf her, and even now, on his return, felt no inclination to renew the acquaintance, had fhe been even on the fpot. All his bufinefs fettled he fat eff for Paris, which he reached in lafety, where a nf-w fcene ofdifiipation prefented, and fometimes, for a Ihort feafon, ban i ih eel the cruel re¬ membrances that deftroyed his peace; his fortune procured him admittance into the moil fafiiionable parties, and his pride was gratified at the expence of large funis, which he was perpetually lofing at play. One even¬ ing,
ing, that he happened to be at the French Comedy, he discovered Mrs. Whitmore in the oppofiie box, who alfo foon perceived her recreant lover, r*nd gave him a fmile o(. invitation i bu: he only replied by (lightly bowing, without offering to move from his filiation. cc And is it poíľible," faid a fprightly Frenchman, who was prefent, and ipoke Engliih, "that you can be infenfible tofo charming ah invitation ? The Lady, however, will be foon conloled, íb¿ is univeifally ad¬ mired as an Engliíh beauty with French manners." Soon after two Gentlemen, of diftinguimed rank, enteied Mrs, Whicmoie's box, and appeared to p y her the moft marked atten¬ tion.—" There now," faid the Frenchman, u I told you the Lady would foon be re¬ venged on your coldnefs \ you have miffed an opportunity not to be regained, for Du- D 2 marefque
marefque ъ at once the moft gallant, as well as the moft hand fome man in Paris." It has been before obferved, that vanity was one of the moft predominant paillons of Edwin ; therefore, though his heart was totally indifferent in regard to Mrs. Whit¬ more, he refolved to ihew the Frenchman his miftake, and immediately icpaired to the Lady's box. At firft flie received him with coldnefs, but after ibme time with her ufual indulgence. She obferved he was much altered, and uncommonly dull, л cir¬ cumftance he accounted for by informing lier of his iilnefs; in ihort, the meeting, after ibme little difcourfe, appeared radier agree¬ able to both, Edwin's vanity being gratified by fliewing the Frenchman that he could eafily regain the opportunity he had appa¬ rently loft. At the conclufion of the piece Edwin waited on the Lady home, where flie ven¬ tured
tured fome queftions refpeding the bufinefs that had fo completely concealed him fince the death of his wife ; but he was in no humour to gratify her curiofity y and flie foon changed the difcourfe to more lively fubjeds. After fupper, having drank plentifully of wine, he grew cheerful, and for the firft time fince Agnes's death a fmile enlivened his features. Before they feparated for the night they agreed to keep houfe jointly, for who could prefume to fcandalize a Lady who was under the protection of her brother ? Edwin now no longer felt his former compundion ; he was rejoiced that he had met with one who could help to divert his chagrin, and fometimes baniih painful re¬ membrances from his fancy ; his temper, however, had fufiered beyond the fafcination of Mrs. Whitmore to remove; to his do¬ meftics he was harfli and unkind, was fre¬ quently inebriated, and gave way to the moft outrageous paifion on the moft trifling fub¬ jeds. D 3 After
Afif. r fom months flay a: Paris Mrs.Whit- more expreffcd a wifli to fee Biuffels, to which Edwin having no objection rhey de- patted, and reached that city, where they entered with avidity into the various amule - ments, the I/ady from a nuuial love of difii- ])ation and pleafuie, and her companion as a kind of fopoiific to lull the toi ments of re¬ flection. Hauls being ft nt bifore, h ла hiied - pnrt- nií-nts in a larae furnifhed hotel, and in about a foi flight after the remainder of the houfe was engaged for an Englifii family that were daily expected, and who accordingly arrived late one evening after Edwin and his com* panion had ι ctired to reft. The following morning, as Edwin was defcend.ng the ítaiis, he was furprifed by the fight of Whitmore'« valet on the lower iloiy, and the moment after by Emma lier¬ it If, who came out of one of the apartments to
to sive orders. He immediately haftenetl down, opened the door of the room ihe had re-entered, and prefer·ted himfelf before her. An exclamation of mingled aitonifhment and pleafure efcaped her, and opening her arms to embrace him, ihe ciied— c * L it pofiible, my dear brother, that I meet you he¡. ?" —- But putting her back, he anfwered, " I luve nothing to lay to you, infamous çlrl ; with your pa rameur I have a long account, ¡ iow is it poffble, at your age, to have fo foon forgotten the precepts inculcated nem your Oii · youth ?" ζ< Ay, how is it poffible, indeed, Edwin," anfwered ihe, t{ to forget the ldľons of whole years in an inftant : To confefs the truth, my dear brother (for I cannot adopt your cold¬ nefs or anger) I but foliowed your lead ; your marriage with Mrs. Delmer but paved the way to my Might, as it fuiniihed oppor¬ tunities too difficult to be refilled ; but finooth your rurlied brow, and tell me ail D 4 the
the news ; your wife we have heard is dead· Are you prepared to do juftice to Agnes ? Ah, Edwin, that was a bad bufinefs ! How are all the dear family at Inglewood ? for though I have learned to laugh at their pre¬ judices, I have not learned to forget them, and yet 1 hope they have forgotten me." " Your mother at leaft has forgotten you," replied Edwin, " for your condud has ------." " Oh, God I" interrupted Emma, trem¬ bling : " Do not fpeak what I dread to hear; for though I am convinced that I have aded right by following the didates of reafon and nature, unfliackled by the ties of prieftcrafr, yet I cannot bear to think it fliould be fatal to her." " The didates of hell and damnation !" exclaimed Edwin. " The infernal fophiftry of Whitmore has plunged your family in mifery, and your mother in the grave, and by her fide lies ------." «Whom:'
<ŕ Whom г" demanded Emma, with a look of horror. u Agnes," replied he, with fcarcely lefs emotion. <c Alas ! Agnes," repeated Emma, " cruel Edwin,has my con lud caufed her death too?" " No, the cauie was the natural depravity of my own heart, affrfted by the accurfcd maxims of Whitmore; ambition fiift be¬ guiled me from home, and the wealth of Mrs. Delmer tempted me to falfify my vows; but unable to live without Agnes I, in an accui fed hour, feduced her! Her death has been the confequence ; ihe is now an angel, and I living bear the pangs of hell." tf Oh, my dear mother ! my fweet Agnes ! and aie ye both gone ?" cried Emma, weep¬ ing,— fi Ah, Edwin ! fuch cruel confequences are enough to force us to lament not fol¬ lowing the precepts implanted in our in¬ fancy." D 5 « May
" May the villain be accurfed," replied Edwin, " who taught us to defpife them ; but where is he, fay, is he in the houfe ?" " He is not," anfwered Emma, " if you mean Whitmore. But why, Edwin, will you i peak thus of a man to whom you have been ib highly obliged. You would not furely rai i e ycur hand in anger againft the father of the infant I bear, and particularly when you remen doer he is the brother of the woman who has made your foitune." " Sav marred it n ther," repied Edwin; " for can palu y gidd r: ľjrnpenfe me for what I haveíacníivcd toobtaio it—Parents— brother—Aj_nes—ail! But tell me, Emma, will you leiv ,n j Ingle woed, il the family coiifent tv, к cuve you r" " Never," iepiied ihe, with cr.ergy ; " İ would die for thJr ferviee, but never more will 1 behold mem. Think you, Edwin, I could
could meet the eye of my father, or even that of William, prejudiced as they are ? — How defpicable—how funk n uft I appear before them ! No, Edwin, I have chofen my fate, and will abide by it." At that moment Whitmore entered. Ah, Edwin, well met," laid he j u I had j uft heard you was in Bruflels from my feivant j you have a fair companion too I find ; İ hope you behaved well to my fiiter, and* ier aught die J am your humble feivant." (c We are indeed well met," cried Edwin, u for we ha\ e a long account to fettle on pecuniary fubjech, and a yet larger on the fcore of honour." ŕí Honour ľ' repeated Whitmore, with an ironical lau£>h ; íC vou will re'timber that it is through me you were fiift intitled to ufe the word honour i but as thefe are fubječts on which I never balk my man, nor talk of D 6 before
before women, prithee let us for the prefent banifh the difcourfe : Come, tell us what is paffmg in England." fc For your pecuniary favours," replied Edwin, taking a draft on his banker for three hundred pounds from his pocket book, and throwing it on the table, u this may repay them, for I acknowledge no ether. — To your fifter were the left due; would to Hea¬ ven ΐ had peiiilied before I accepted of either." cc I have, indeed, heat d it whifpered," iaid Whitmore, Ci that you were not altogether fo feniible of lier conde fcer.fion as mu'hi have been expected, but could never believe к until this confi fiion," cc For good'4 f> fake do not quarrel," cried Emma ; <£ my heart is ah cad y almoit broken; my motherand Agnes are, Edwin informs ше, both d cud !" Whitmore
л
Whitmore endeavoured to banifh her fears, and comfort her, while Edwin, calling a look of rage at both, left the apartment. About an hour after Harris, by Edwin's order, found an opportunity to give a note privately to Whitmore, containing an ap¬ pointment for the next morning, and which was immediately accepted.
CHAP.
««мтамятмИВППМйЬ
CHAP. V.
THE following morning Whitmore, attended by a Gentleman of confidera¬ ble fortune, with wdiom he had formed an acquaintance fince his refidence abroad, met Edwin at fonie diftance fiom the city, who, on his part, was accompanied by a young officer, whom he had known in England, and accidentally encountered at one of the places of public amufement. The weapons chofen by both were Avoids, as their İkili was pretty equal. The firft paites were made without effed on either fide ; but the fécond effay was more fatal, for Whitmore received a
a thruft in the fide, and inftantly fell. — tc The chance is yours, Edwin," faid he, with his ufual levity, " and in faith I deferve it for fubitituting the fword for the dung fork i but why the devil could you not have refted as fitisfied with your filler's chaftity as I was with my wife's ? Confound all new candidates for honour fay I, they rake fuch a d — d deal of trouble to efta- bliíh their fame, that a man is never fafe with them." A furgeon, who was in waiting at fome fmall diitance, was now called, and flopped the eftufion of blood; but declared, that he entertained the moft alarming doubts re¬ specting ihe wound : Edwin therefore deter¬ mined to lofe no time, but haften back to France. On his licentious companion (Mrs. Whitmore) he fcarcely beftowed a thought, limply giving Harris orders to follow with his
baggage, firft leaving a letter to be delivered to Emma. Whitmore was immediately carried home, where his wound was pronounced mortal, and he was informed that, in all probability, a few hours would terminate his life. Though this information could not fail of being pe¬ culiarly difpleafing to a man of Whitmore's charader, yet he received it with his accuf¬ tomed careleffnefs. " If,'' faid he to the Gentleman who aded as his fécond, " I had fallen by the hand of a virtuous man whom I had injured, it would have forced me to believe fomewhat of retribution, but as ît is, this convinces me that chance direds all, for Edwin İs certainly as faulty as myfelf. To be fure I found him virtuous, but he was as ready to learn as I to teach ; and if I feduced his fifter, has he not returned the favour with my wdfe, and by my fifier's folly ftepped into an eafy fortune ? One thing only concerns me ; my eftate is greatly entangled, and if ϊ
ϊ die will immediately be feized by the next heir ; nor ha^e I it in my power to make any prov*/ wi for Emma—a circumftance that °>vu, me great uneafinefs, both on ac¬ count of her fkuation and future comfort/' fC Let not that difturb you," replied his fiiend, whofe name was Hartford: " I give you my word to protect her." At that moment Emma entered in a ftate little flioit of detraction j fhe wrung her hands in agony, and in the bitternefs of her grief curfed her brother Edwin. The letter which he had fent her, and that fimply con¬ tained his defire ihe would join him at Paris, with a note of fifty pounds, ihe tore in pieces. Whitmore, as well as he was able, endeavoured to comfort her, but in vain, her grief knew no bounds until nature ex- haufted funk into a fainting fit, in which ihe was removed írom the apartment, and a few hours brought tm an abortion. Whitmore
Whitmore paffed a dreadful night, and on the following morning death w\ìs legibly painted on his countenance; but firm to his accuftomed tenets, he appeared to treat its approaches with contempt, recommending Emma warmly to the protection of Hart- foid, faying, with a faint fmile, " Though by Heaven I would not living have fufiered a ι i val in her love, yet I have no objection to a worthy fucceffor ; íhe is too charming a idrl to be bui ied in obfeurity, and coil me iome pains to ciadicate the follies of country education. Be kind to her, and fuffer her grief to weaken itfelf, it is violent, and there* fore cannot laft long." The furgeon entered foon after, his face rather than his words declared his opinion.—· tc Why, man," filici Whitmore, " your fea¬ tures may ferve as a kind of thermometor to prognofiicate the fituation of your patient, to me they appear beyond the freezing point. Piih, hang grief, ever live while you can, and
nnd baiiiilì painful ufieclion ; it ha 5 ; hereto¬ fore coítme fome trouble to do it, but I at length came off" conqueror, and have en¬ joyed lire as much in twenty-feven years as many in fixty." A violent convulfivc pang here put a flop toWhitmoie's ipeech, and he drugged for fome time in great a»íonv, from which at О O'* length he was, in a fmall degree, recovered, but appeared much weakened, hib \\ irits more depreffed, and likewife feemed shocked a: the awful crifis that was approaching/' Towards the clofe of day, and juft before his diffolution, his attendants declared him delirious, for, ftarting as from a kind of doze, he exclaimed : if The farce is over— the curtain drops—darknefc and—doubt—- old Godwin's kindnefs was ill repaid. I wiih 1 had left Edwin in his native ------. Emma too—tell her------." A dreadful fpafm hcix ior fome moments flopped his utterance ; at
at length, faintly flruggling, he added, " Her father ! — forgivenefs ! — Inglewood !" and with another pang expired !" Thus fell, in the prime of life, the gallant, gay Whitmore, a vidim to his own follies, and the vices he had inculcated. Whitmore's death was a dreadful blow on Emma, as it not only deprived her of the man for whom flie had facrificed every thing, but left her in a fituation flie could not con¬ template without horror ; a return to Ingle* wood appeared the only alternative, for the decorations of luxury he had laviihed on her with fome trifle of money was all ihe pof- feffcd. " And how," cried ihe, " can I ever itand in their pre fence, they will accufe me with the death of my mother, and view me with hatred ? The country people too will point at me, and fay the fine London Madam was obliged to come back to her old home» Oh ! I can never, never bear its
It ; 1 will fooner labour in the moil menial manner than fubmit to it. Would to God í had never left them, or that Edwin had died before this horrid meeting ! Join him at Pai is — No, never ! —■ The murderer of Whitmore !—-I will periíh firft." At that moment a perfon was announced from Mis. Whitmore, who laid claim to whatever property might be left at Whit- more's deceafe, and of which ilie fnould, as his wife, render the proper account to the next heir. Emma, in this diftrefs, knew not what method to have recouife tu; her dif- tiefs was aîmoil too great to bear; the man me loved dead in the houfe ; her fel f confined to her bed ; in a ftrange country, and on the point of being deprived of the paltry bau¬ bles, for which ihe had bartered both her peace of mind and innocence. LJncertain what mcaiures to puifue, ihe was loft in the moit diftračting refìecìions, when a note was p re fented
prefented her from Hartfoid, and contained Madam, ic The fear of intruding on your diftrefs has alone witlidield me from offeiing my fcr~ vices to fettle your afia irs ; but as í under- li and Mrs. Whitmore's conduct hrs made it necefiary, beg you would command me to the utmoft. I am, Madam, Your humble fervant, E. HARTFORD." Emma immediately replied, by requeuing Hartford to ačl for her as he ihould think molt proper, expreffmg her thanks for his kindnefs. Hartford thus empowered waked on Mrs, Whitmore, and by his rhetoric and well
well placed compliments prevailed on the Lady to decline her firft intention, and the more eafily as he affured her the efieds weie of little value. The bui ¡al of Whitmore he alio ordeied, had him inclofed in lead, and fi. n t to England, to be laid by his parents and his fiiter in Eeictfteríhire. Emma in the mean time had recovered from her indifpofition ; and her giief, at the end of two months, began to loie .ts bitter- neis. To Edwin's letter ihe then wrote an anfwer, and fent accoiding to the addı e k he had J p ее i filed to Paris« " Though at the firft receipt of your hate¬ ful letteti had determined not to anfwer it, yet, on mature deliberation, 1 have refolvec^, for this laft time, to addrefs you, though only to fay how much I defpife you. What had I e\ er done that you fliould feek to make me wietched ? Or why was Whitmore's friend¬ fhip to be repaid by murder? I remember when
when we met at Bruffels, you faid that youf eirors were owing to his pernicious tenets: How weak muit you naturally be to blindly adopt principles that your own heat t told you were erroneous ; for furely, if they oc¬ cafioned the death of Agnes, the effect muft have been eafily forefeen. Seek not then fuch paltry fubterfuges to palliate your vices, they but add the name of fool to that of villain. Did the example of Whitmore in¬ fluence you to forfake Agnes, wed his fifter clandeftinely, and afterwaids offer the moft facred promifes to your deluded vidim : — No, it taught you none of thefe, the depra¬ vity of your own heart alone prompted them, and now, coward like, you would fain call the opprobrium on another. Think you, woman as I am, that I will have recourie to fuch defpicable evafions ? Never—my follies be on my own head. I imbibed Whitmoie's opinions from reafon, and though when I fled with him I certainly expeded he would procure a divorce from his wife and marry me,
me, yet, when I found that ftep was im¬ practicable, and muft materially injure his fortune, I readily relinquiihed it, preferring the intereft of the man I loved in defiance to the weak cenfure of a few ; and though you were pleafed to fay that my conduct occafioned my mother's death, I have no doubt but your own had at leaft an equal íhare in it. " You aik me to return to inglewood :— I anfwer you definitively No. The dear inhabitants I love and honour, for they aci up to the principles they profefs, while you have behaved with confiant duplicity, and been a flave to the moft unpardonable avarice, not only deceiving your parents, but falfifying your vows both to your wife and Agnes—a girl whom a Monarch might have gloried to obtain 1 Then, to complete all, you have bafely ihed the blood of a man to whom you owed your advancement ; and what is your excufe ? The feduition of y cur vol. ш. E filter,
fifter, while you are revelling in the wealth of his, and living in bold adultery with his wife. " I have nothing more to add, but that, whatever may hereafter be my deftiny, my firm refolve is, to avoid you as I would a pefiilence, not from fear, but hatred. In my father's or William's prefence I might ihrink, but in yours my foul could feel no fentiment, but contempt, averfion, and dif- dain ; therefore purfue me no more. 1 leave Bruffels this day, and my utmoft wifli re¬ fpeding you is, that my eyes may never more be tortured with your prefence; or y if they are, that they had the power, not to ib ike you dead, but to dart never-dying anguifli in your heart." EMMA GODWIN." Edwin's rage at the receipt of this letter was beyond all bounds ; his filter's leproaches ftung
ftung him to the heart, and had íhe been in his power at that moment he would willingly have facrificed her to his fury. He immediately wrote to Bruffels to the the mafter of the Hotel, and inclofing a gratuity, entreated to be informed whether Emma was in reality gone, or had only de¬ ceived him on that fubjed. By the moft fpeedy conveyance he received for anfwer, that ihe had indeed left her lodg¬ ings about a fortnight before, and gone away in the company of Hartford, apparently very melancholy, and in deep mourning ; but that he was uncertain as to the place of their deftination. Wearied with France, and de~ rermined to take no more heed of his fifter, Edwin refolved to return to England, inform his friends by letter of what had paffed, and, as he ftill continued unhappy, to devife fome new means, if poflible, to banifh refledion, and recover loft peace/' E 2 Thi«
This refolution was diredly put in prac¬ tice, and the family at Inglewood three weeks after received the intelligence that the feducer of Emma had fallen ; but that her¬ felf was totally abandoned, for that flie had taken another paramour, and withdrawn her¬ felf from the knowledge of her brother.
CHAP.
CHAP. VI.
EDWÎN's letter caufed great uneafintis at Inglewood, renewing the wounds thac> though far from healed, wt re at leait palliated by time. Godwin by no means approved Edwin's hehaviour; he had but incrcafed his own crimes, and plunged Emma into frefli guilt, which would yet more familiarize her with vice, and render proititution habitual. " Had he but fent us word when he found her," faid Godwin, " inconvenient as fuch a journey muil have been, William fhould im¬ mediately have undertaken ir, and, perhaps, E 3 by
by lenient meafures, have prevailed on the poor mifgüided girl to return, for the feeds cf virtue cannot be totally eradicated from her heart, and would, perhaps have revived at the f uind of forgivenefs; buc Edwin has rendered all fruitlefs, and by his violence forced her to have recourfe to deeper guilt, rather than truft to a parent's mercy, whofe confiant prayer is her return to virtue, and a íeníe of her error," He then replied to Edwin's letter, totally bkming his whole conduct in the bufinefs, and defiring him that, if ever in future chance ihould throw Emma in his w r ay, he would give them information, without firft having recourfe to violent meafures, lamented that he had added to his former guilt by the death of Whitmore, and finally defiring him to review his conduct and repent. This letter increafed the vexation of Ed¬ win. iC I might have been certain," laid he,
he, " of meeting their difpleafure,, it is only for the calm difpaffionate William to ad with propriety ; however, in this cafe I am fatis¬ fied with my own behaviour, and am carelefs of their opinion. Emma may hereafter ad as flie pleafes, I have done with her, and in all probability with them all ; they have no affedion to beftow on me, and 1 do not want their advice." Edwin thus refolved, returned no anfwer to his father's letter, but fought as ufual to lofe refledion in diffipation ; but finding it unavailing, and that both his fortune and health were evidently impaired, in twelve months after his wife's deceafe he began feri- oufly to repent his giving up the army, as it would at leaft have ferved to employ fome part of his thoughts, and divert more acute tnfations. Thefe fexitiments made him aiiain refolve to feek military promotion, and by dint of E 4. application
application and money well applied, he foon got reinftated in his former rank, but in a legiment, which, to his peculiar fatisfadion, was ordered abroad. He felt fome uneafinefs at not informing his family of this new re¬ folve ; but certain that this, as well as ail his other late condud, would not meet their approbation, he left the kingdom without even a fingle line tc inform them of his defti¬ nation. In the mean time the family at Inglewood had no cares but what were occafioned by the thoughts of Edwin and Emma. Wil¬ liam was regarded as one of the moft prof¬ perous and happy young men in the whole county, his land was highly cultivated, his barns well ftorech and his houfe a little para- dİfe ; the fatisfadion of the old men, the fmiles of his wife, and the cheerful antics of the little ones, repaying all his toils. Reuben was now in his third year, Anna in her fé¬ cond, and a young fon, called Edward, after Bernard,
Bernard,again filled Fanny's arms, andfliarcd her maternal tendernefs. Mrs. Palmer, who was their confiant vifitor, and more affectionately attached to them than ever, now propofed to take Anna, who was grown the pet of the whole family, and particularly of Godwin, on vvhofe knee ihe never failed to climb, while Reuben took the fame place on Bernard's. To re-' concile Anna to the change of fituation Reuben was for fome time to accompany her, and both foon grew fo perfectly familiarized to their new fituation, that they appeared to confider it as much their home as the farm. Mrs, Palmer taught Anna to call her mamma, and, indeed, nothing but the name was ficti¬ tious, for her care and affection was truly maternal. Anna ihe had defigned for her particular favourite, but Reuben, by a thou- fand little beguiling words and actions, con¬ trived tomaie her tendernefs. If Anna called ha- mamma, he was fure to fay, u and Reu- E 5 biffs-
ben's mamma too /' or if Mrs. Palmer kiffed her adopted child, Reuben was ever ready to hold up his head, prefent his ruby lips, and claim the fame favour. Mrs. Palmer, whofe attachment to the parents increafed with her affection to the children, had for fome time formed the de- fign of rendéi ing William independent, tho' íhe could not txadly fix on the means, until one day happening to be at Godwin's when he received a letter to inform him of the c;eath of the perfon who had hitherto managed his money bufinefs, and in whofe hands his javings had been conflantly depofited ; the luir at law icquefting to be infoi med of his pleafuie, adding, that he was leady to pay up the funis in his hands at a week's notice. Godwin expreffed his forrow at this intelli¬ gence, and immediately had recouife to Mrs. Palmer, to advife on the beil means of dif- pofing of the fum he poffefied, which, though b it a few hundreds, was to him too confide¬ rable :o be negb-ded» " Snppofe
" Suppofe," replied the Lady, " you made a purchaie, fliould you meet a good offer, 1 think that an eligible method of difpofing of money." " I am of the fame opinion," faid Godwin, " and the only objedion is, that it would be extending our cares with our property ; the money was originally, or at leaft the greater part, laid by for a little fortune for our un¬ happy Emma : She, alas ! I fear will never claim it, or itili would I regard four hundred pounds -ль hers, not now as a marriage por¬ tion, but to place her with fiugahty above want. I have, however, other outies," con¬ tinued the old man, wiping offa ftarting tear, and looking fondly on his grand-children, " 1 would therefore willingly place our little all in fafe hands, or, as you fay, Madam, make a purchafe for their future benefit." " Well, then, what fay you to buying the whole of the land you rent of me, which, E 6 with
with what you already poffefs, will be a re¬ fpedable property?" " Madam 1" replied Godwin, afloniihed at the propofal, " we have not half the fum your land is worth, the purchafe of which was the fartheft from my thoughts, for fo kind are you, that the moft diftant idea of a change never entered m ν mind." " It is, however," anfwered ihe, " as you have aiked my advice, the moft prudent plan ; befides, now I think of it, I may have an occafion for fix or feven hundred pounds, and 'would fooner let you have a bargain than. another." " Pardon mc, Madam/' replied the old man ; " if your penerofity forces you to be extravagant, it muft not make us, the moft obhged of your dependants, impropeily im- pofe en that goodnefs. Extenfive as arc your charities, I have heard you aver, that you always Ihed within your income, and can
can but regard your offer as an effufion of the friendfliip with which you have honoured us. Condefeend, Madam, to place our money with fome you may doubtlefs have out at common intereft, it is the utmoft I afpire to. Hereafter, if ever it ihould be in William's power, for he is uncommonly profperous, to make an honeft purchafe, I have no doubt, to poffefs the land which gave his father bread, would be the height of his ambition ; at prefent it is as far beyond our abilities as our wiflies; a dependance on you, I am convinced, we fliall never find painful." " I have ever thought," replied Mrs, Pal¬ mer, with a fiiiilr, " that you was very-much unacquainted with the ways of the world. — Pray what bufinefs have you to value mv land ? To ftate the price is my bufinefs, and yours to get it as cheap as you can." " Not at the expence of your generofity, and my own probity," anfwered Godwin. "To
" To make your fon William independent has for fome time been my intention," re¬ plied flie ; " but I could not conveniently before devife the means : I have now dif¬ covered them, and ihall feel myfelf offended if not fufiered to gratify my inclinations at the expence of, what is to me—a trifle." Godwin was unable to reply, fentiments too great for utterance fwelled in his bofom, and prevented fpeech, while Fanny, who was alone prefent at the difcourfe, remained alfo filent, overcome at once with gratitude and pleafure. William and Bernard at that moment entered, and Mrs. Palmer, in a lively manner, immediately referred the dif- pute to them. A crimfon flufli fora moment overfpread William's face ; but having ex¬ preffed his thanks he begged leave to decline what he muft ever confider, fliould he accept it, as an irnpofition on her generofity. " Simply then," replied the Lady, " you- refufe what would give me the higheft fatis¬ fadion,
faction, as I ihould confider myfelf inftru¬ mental to your welfare, and take delight ia it accordingly. If you out-live me you may chance to have the land at a cheaper rate ; but then remember 1 ihall not have the plea¬ fure of contemplating my own work." This laft obfervation was too much for all ; but Fanny, whofe affection was far fupe- rior to her refpeót to Mrs. Palmer, threw her arms around her neck, and wept on her bofom. t€ Never, never may I live to fee that day," faid ihe, " again, ihould I bfc a hiter, and again would my Anna become an orphan/* " Not fo," replied Mrs. Palmer, looking affectionately round ner ; *' Anna can never be an orphan while any of thefe furvive ; but, however, for a moment attend to me, then, if you decline my oft t r, I have done, and withdraw it. My notions on fome fub¬ ječts are fmgular, and I, perhaps, have ideas of
of gratification peculiar to myfelf. What Ì die pofìeffed of will doubtlefs be difpofed of to my friends, or for purpofes which I may think for the beft ; but believe me 1 had rather bcftow living, what cannot injure my fortune, and fee the effect of my gifts, thai have afterwards itatucs erected to my me¬ mory when I am infenfible what fruits they have produced. Let me then contemplate your rifing profperity, let me have the fatif- fačlion to think I contributed towards it ; nothing but either a falfe idea of probity, or pride, can make you decline it. I have no relations who want it, no claims but what my fortune can ten-fold repay, and to reconcile you to the bufinefs I offer to take the whole of the money you poffefs, yet would far more willingly make it a gift-; what then have you to object ? If you ac¬ cept my offer I ihall be obliged and grati¬ fied ; if you do not, I ihall look upon you as a proud family, who defpife even the at- fnlance of a fiiend." « God.
" God forbid that," íàid Bernard; "not one here but what loves you dearly, but at the fame time are fearful of impofing on your good-nature and kindnefs. I am an old man, Madam, and fimple ; but with your good liking, if you accept the ready money, to which I can add about three hundred pounds, I think William, by continuing his ufual pay¬ ments, in a few years might be able to dé¬ charge the whole." " I will accept only kvçn hundred," —~ returned Mrs, Palmer ; " if the eil ue is worth more, to you I will leave it in truft, to pay the overplus to Reuben and Anna, whom I regard as my peculiar charge ; the firft from the recollection of my own beloved boy, the lafl from both promile and affection ; nay, no reply, be it as I have faid, or I muft regard my friendfhip as fpurned, and act accordingly. The deeds ihall be immedi¬ ately ready, and I expect your concurrence without further hefitation, as you value my future good opinion." " May
May we never forfeit it, Madam," replied Godwin : " Be all as you have faid, and Heaven make us worthy your goodnefs." This concluded the bu finels that placed the Farmer above dependence, and gratified the generous mind of Mrs· Palmer· The writings of the eftate were regularly affigned to William in a few days, and feven hundred pounds paid down, which Mrs. Pal¬ mer declared to be her full demand, while William, on the other hand, protefted he could only regard that fum as one-third of the purchafe. From this time Godwin's confequence increafed in the country, for though he did not proclaim what had paffed, yet Mrs. Pal¬ mer made no fcruple to declare fhe had fold the eftate, and who was the purchafer. The title of efquire now began to be tacked to the name of Godwin ; but this was fo pe¬ remptorily
remptorily re fui ed that it was fpeedily drop¬ ped. S^The appellation of efquire," fiid Wil- likvL one day to a Farmer, who thus addreíľed him, " by no means belongs to me : I am like yourfelf, a plain Farmer, and my fupe- rior fuccefs in life intitles me to no fuch diítinčtion. Had I lived, indeed, in the days of chivalry, 1 might, perhaps, have imbibed the folly of the times, in thinking the name glorious, and have poffibly thrown away my life in the fervice of fome filly knight, who chofe to affirm his paramour a miracle of chaftity, or conftellation of beauty ; but thefe Quixotifms are pait, fimple reafon prevails, and knights are no longer fo valorous, nor efquires put to fo hard a fervice. The name now in general implies, either a fox-hunter, or a man who can exift without labour. Î am not the firft of thefe, nor can 1 live without induftry : t am therefore plain Wil¬ liam Godwin, or farmer Godwin, no efquire, but,
but, I truft, an honeft man, and as fuch at your fervice." Notwithftanding thefe con traded ideas William was univerially efteemed ; not a refpedable man in the whole country paffed him unnoticed, nor a poor one without a bleffmg. In the midft of happinefs, anxious for Edwin and Emma, he had by every pof- fible means inquired after them, but in vain, and was at length obliged to ftruggle to for¬ get them in the harmony of his domeftic. circle.
CHAP.
CHAP. VII.
THUS paffed days, months and years, honour increafing with age in the one part of the family, and reaibn, aftedionj ftrength and beauty., with the other, until Reuben had attained his fourteenth, and Anna her thirteenth year, a period that had given William two more children, Edward and a blooming girl, called Agnes, all happy as they were innocent, their hearts as free from guile as forrow. The education of the boys was now the amuíèment of Godwin, who, furrouneied by his
his grand-children, forgot the feventy winteis that had paffed over him. The remembrance of the ungiateful Edwin, and Emma alone caft a cloud over the otherwife ferene even¬ ing of his days, though he now had not any doubt but that both weie dead, as no tidings had tranfpired for fo long a time. Edward was fomewhat more than two years younger than Reuben—Agnes in the fame piopottion from himfelf, of fimilar tempers, open, cheeiful and humane, and tenderly attached to each other; but if there was any particular partiality it was evidently between Reuben and Anna, who, although they did not live together (Reuben refiding at his father's) could not pafb a day aiunder; Anna, educated from her moft tender infancy by Mrs. Palmer, knew no difference between the affedion flie felt for her and her reputed mother ; ihe looked up to both with duty and tcndernefi, and would fiequently, in the ovei flow ings of her с little
little heart, exclaim, " What a happy girl am I to have two mothers !"■—an exprcffion that never failed to force a tear from Fannv. and caft a momentary gloom over the party. Bernard was ftill ftrong and hearty, and apparently as happy as his grand-children ; he fung with them, played with them, and was ever foremoft in devifing fports for their amufement. Godwin and William were 1 is oracles—Fanny his paragon ; but the chil¬ dren yet moie than all were his pi ide, his delight, and his companions· 4 · l'uj.n irotn to noon, fiom 2100η to dewy eve. '* About the period before-mentioned Mrs. Palmei 's fteward dying, and having no one ihe could immediately appoint, with the affiitance of Godwin and Felix, Pne for fome time tranfačted her own bufinefs, during the tourfe of which a leale of confiderable value expiring, ihe entreated William to take a journey
journey to London, and renew it to the for¬ mer holder on terms ihe fpecified. William accordingly departed, taking Reu-. ben, who was now almoft as good a horfe- man as himfelf, for a companion, and, after a pleafant and eafy journey, reached the metropolis. The bufinefs that brought him to town was his firft care, and which completed he would willingly have haftened immediately back ; but Reuben's curiofity had a number of incentives, which his father chofe rather to gratify, than, by oppofitionandunceitainty, leave him to fuppc к they were more pleafing and defirable than they really were. They vifited the Tower, St. Paul's, the Abbey, and laftly the Theatre, where hap¬ pening to be late, and on an evening when the hovfe was uncommonly crowded, Wil¬ liam, fooner than difappoint his fon, went into
into the boxes. Until near the end of the fouith ad their attention had been totally drawn towards the fcene ; but William then caiting his eyes around difcovered, in one of the oppofite boxes, a perfon that at once attraded his whole attention : It was a wo¬ man pail the bloom of youth, but yet ex¬ tremely lovely, though art appeared in fome meafure to fupply the ravages that intempe¬ rance haei made on beauty. Her arms were naked fir above the elbow, and her bofom uncovered, even fuffìciently to have occa¬ fioned difguft in any but the breaft of a libertine : neverthelcfs this woman entirely attraded William's attention, and for the lime not only banifhed the play, but every other objed from his thoughts. He gazed as if he doubted his fight—fighed—got up- fat down—and at length, unable to bear the torments that diitraded him, fondly as he loved his boy, defired him to remain where lie was until he again rejoined him. vol. in. F The
The Lady, whofe eyes had been thrown aiound in fearch of prey, had obfeived the peculiar attention fac infpired, and in her tum had carefully examined the perfon of William, w ho was as diftinguifhable from the furrounding beaux by the manly beauty of hi-, pci f n, as by the plainnefs of his hahit —· Though emotions of the tender kind aie ft Idom felt by Ladies of her defenption, yet her he«it iVmp-.thized w : di the emotions of 'W iliian* ; hei boiom fuelled ahroil to iuilo- CJticn, 1. er eyes o\crf!owed wiJi teais, una г a. fing /it m to w ards Heaven w idi a look of dc pan, frç haüıly kft the box in which ihe was fittir st, the moment airer William ΐαά quitted hlS. Unacqrainttd with the Theatre William miftook his way, and though he hafte ned round was too late to meet the object he fouo-hr, who had.already left the houfe, all his inquines being fruitlefs to trace her ; the on!) i.ice Igen e he could procure was fiom v e
the box-keeper, who infoi med him flic had been a celebrated courtezan, but was now on the decline, and ulually attended the boxes every ni «dit. William, more unhippy than he had been for fome \eais, teturned immediately to Reuben, and tnough he foiced himlclf to fit ou: the reft of the play, was fo evidently dif¬ ordered, that Reuben, v holly interefted for his father, faw the cui tain drop with plea¬ fure, and attended him to the inn whet с they lodged, mote concerned at his melancholy, than amufed with the remembrance of w hat he had fecn. The idea of the Lady banifhed reft during the whole night from William's pillow, and riling at the dawn of day, leaving his fon in a found fleep, and in the care of his hoftefs, he inquiied the way to the printers of feveral news-papers, in all of whom he ordered the following advertifement to be in 1er ted : F 2 « If
" If Ľ — m — a G — d — n, who foui teen years fince left her friends, through the art¬ ful peifuafions of a woithlds man, and who is now known to be very unhappily fituated, will letuin to her relations in Cumbeiland, or inquiie for hei brother W —I— m G — d — n, at the Swan, in Ead-Eane, he will leceive her with open aim·*, and fiie may yet meet the fcrguentfs of a paient befoie he chops into the grave." This advcttbeircnt, though repealed for a whole month, during wh.ch he icma'nal in town for that purpofe, met no leply, nor w tie his vifits to tkcThea:ics moie umilino ; at length he wa^ obliged to depait, leaving, however, with his hoftefb a veiy pai ticular mefiage refpeding the pei fon who might apply, and an order for any money flie ι en¬ quired. During William's ftay in London, he alfo made particular inquiries after Edwin; but uncertain
INGLEWOOD FOREST. uncertain were to ?pply, was obliged to have recourfe to the heiis of Mr. Delmer, as his Lady's jointure falling to them, he conjec¬ tured they might be able to afford fome information; but they fimply knew that Edwin had turned the whole of his propt rty into money, entered again into the army, and was gone abroad. With forne piins William at length found out to what regiment he be¬ longed, and on applying to the rgent, gained the farther information that Edwin had fome years before a fécond time refgned his com- miffion, fince which he knew nothing re- fpečting him, but recollected to have heard one of the officers, who belonged to the fame regiment, fay, he was advantageouay married. On William's return to Inglewood he dif- clofed the intelligence he had received re- fpečting Edwin ; but remained totally filent in regard to Emma to all but Mrs. Palmer and Fanny, as that information could but F3 unavaiiu^iy
unavailingly have given frefli anguifli to his father. Reuben was delighted to find himfelf once moie at home, and haitily embracing his family inquired for Mrs. Palmer and Anna ; but had fcarcely given them time to tell him that both were well ; when he declared that he was not in the leaft tired, but would go and fee them ; then, with the fpeed of a greyhound, flew from home, and took die load to the manor houfe. Mrs. Palmer and Anna appeared to par¬ ticipate the pleafure he felt at this meeting. Anna hung round his neck, and wept with joy, while Reuben fondly killed her lips, cheeks and forehead, faying, "I will never go to London again, Anna j indeed I have been very unhappy." " Unhappy!" replied Mrs. Palmer, — "Pr.ay, my young friend, what made you fo?" a Why,
" Why, in the firft place, Madam, my father was uncommonly melancholy, and when we fat down to our folitary meals, and I looked round, and faw neither my mother, my grandfathers, my brother, little Agnes, you Madam, nor my Anna, my heart funk in my bofom, and I was more ready to cry than .to eat : Then, as I fiept in the fame room with my father, in the night he would figh bitterly, when he thought I w..s afícep ; but I was as little inclined to forget myielf as he was, for when all was quiet I remem¬ bered the pleafures of home, and compared them with the buftle of London, wiihed we were fafe back, and never more to leave Jnglewood." " But furely, Reuben, fome of the plea¬ fures, or at leaft fights of London, amuleti you ?" anfwered Mrs. Palmer. " They rather furprifed than amufed me, except the Theatres," replied Reuben ; " for F 4 example,
example, one morning, after pufbing through numberlefs crowds, and narrow diity ftreets, we came at once to that magnificent building, called St, Paul's, which ftruck me in a man¬ ner I cannot defcribe ! With my father's permiffion I walked round it in wonder and admiration, as I had not before fuppofed fuch an edifice in the whole world! From thence we proceeded fomewhat farther, to a place where the noife and confufion of languages brought the tower of Babel fo ftrongly to my mind that I could not foibear laughing; but my mirth was of fliort continuance, for a little on one fide we paffed a place full of the moft ill-looking gloomy beings I ever faw, many of whom were filent, and appa¬ rently loft in thought, their eyes fixed on the ground, their foreheads knit, and their eye-brows fcouling ; others were talking fail and loud, and feemingly, by the little my ear could catch, enumei ating."
" Well,
" Weil, but, Reuben," interrupted Mrs. Palmer, " you faw the Tower, did you not ? What think you of that ?" " Wby, that was arrc-r» my difappoint- ment%, Madam : I expected quite a thfteunt building, and when I f^ond a mere jumbled crowd of houfes I was difcufte 1 before I entered." " But the inner part certainly repakl you for your dnappointme.u," faid Mrs. Palmer. " Did you not adı »are the armor) ľ" " I w T as afloniihed at the ingenuity, or rather at the pat.cnce of the man who ρ .ul the weapons : Perhaps I fliould have viewed them wkh form; pleafuie, had not my fat.»er given rife to a very difagreeable idea, bv faying, How many viď -ч and orphans, think you, Reuben, thofe infiniment·» of death have m к ? This remark diluiteti me with them, and on reviewing them I could almoft F 5 have
have fancied the points of the fpears were ftained with blood." " But then the other curiofities — the jewel-office, and the wild beafiV cf For the firft, Madam, I am no judge, though I think they would have delighted my fifter Agnes. My rather particula! iy called my attention towards them, by ob- ferving how vr ry much to be pitied vvas the virtuous man whom fate had deftined to fupport fuch a weight of caie as muft ever accompany a crown. But, Madam, pardon me afkingjvű/í a queftion—what are the uie of the wild beafts ?" " Indeed, Reuben," replied Mrs. Palmer, if I cannot v> dì anfwer you ; but I fuppofe they a¡ e kept ti her for curiofity or amufe¬ ment/*
«» T
ct I would fooner keep a lamb or a dove," faid Anna : "lam fure ferocious monfters would never am ufe me." " The beafts I fee we muft give up," added Mrs. Palmer; "but the Abbey — was not you chain ied with that, Reuben ?" " Yes, Madam, it infpired both pleafure and awe : I was delighted to ile monuments ereded to genius and merit, and refit ded with re\ erence on the once diihnguilhed charadeis that fui rounded nie. At that moment I could .dmoft have wiihed I Ii*d been born tobe a warrior; but my father agam Called ori my attent. on, by pointing to a worm that had been thiown out with ibme eaith, defiling me to notice the difitience between tha: aiid the woims that fed on plebeians in the chuich-yard at Inglewood." " And p.ay what might be the purport of yom obíw vation :" iaid Mrs. Г./ткг, la u íj· h i n л:. F б " Very
" Very trifling, Madam," anfwered Reu¬ ben, joining her mirth ; " but I was aware why my father advanced the fubječt. He obferved with what pleafure I contemplated the tombs of particular charaders I had either heard or read of: I therefore pretended to look carefully at the worm, and replied» the only diftc rence, I believed, was, that this was rather fater." " An excellent incentive for а man to become a beio," returned my father; " yet fo fai \ mvit confifi, heroes are the beit fri 'tids to woriiib, a¿ uiey procure them moft food." " We were then fliewn the wax-work," continued Reuben, " a number of iti ange, unmeanirg, tawdry, ill dreiľed figures, with fixed c;l^ and / ar neithu gi\e pieafure, nor caufe any emotion, rut only excepted; this my father ι eluded witlifo muchitfpcd, th¿t I k.voluataiily caught it from him." " Was
" Was it General Monk r'* interrupted Mrs. Palmer. <c No, Madam, it was Lord Chatham. My father afterwards, as we paíľed through the Park, related fuch things of him, as made me almoft ready to run back ana look at him again." " But the Theatres, Reuben," faid Mrs. Palmer. " Oh! they delighted me," replied he.— " I fa w fome of Shakefpeare's Plays, and while my eye a were wet \\\ h the iorrowa of one frene, the wit and hurrk ur of the next made me almoft ready to bui it with laugh¬ ter." " Well, after all," faid Anna, " if the pleafures of London are only what you de- fciibe, I fee nothing among theo to be prefeired to a dnnre on the green in fummer, or in the manor-hall in win tei." u Preferred !"
íf Prefirred!" replied Reuben, "there are none equal to it, at leaft none to my fan*'y ; and if ever my ùthtr goes ng un it is Eu ward's tum to accompany him ; lam fine I ihall not envy him." The duc( mfe was here put an end to by the aim al (t William, and fome others of the famih, who, alar pafling a cheerful evening with Mrs. Palmer, returned he rue,
С ПАР.
CHAP. VIII.
I~^OR near four years, after the journey- to London, no mateiial occorrente difluí bed the harmony at Inglewood. The okimén, though novy both verging tuwai /ь eighty, were itili able to walk about, their fenh s pt ι fed, and were neither troubleiome to themfelves or others. ìso news had yet tranfpired of e.ther tdwin or Emma, and William cherifhed the hope, that his un¬ happy fifter 'h vices were terminated by death. Mrí·. Palme·*, who had the news-papers regulari) ι emitted, one day, in leading the contents
contents of one, became informed, that the eftate in Jamaica, which had formei, y . pper- taintd to ner uncle Wakers, was to le íold, together with the flock and m groes. " 1 have a ftrong inclination," fiid fhe to Godwin, who was prefent, "to makeinquiiy whether any of the fiaves, formerly belong¬ ing to my uncle, are living; ! wo'dd freely purchafe, and reflore them to li^nty. —■ Though I am unacquainted with them, Felix can diu d me on the occafion, and wdll in diis cafe be the moft proper commiflioner." The Godwins all warmly applauded the motive, and Felix, being called and con- fulted, accepted the office with a je y little fliort of rapture. Fie was now tu»ned of feventy, but declared, that, was it not ¡. ofii- ble to tranfiid the bufinefs in London, he would willingly undertake a voyage r· Ja¬ maica on fuch n occafion ; but which louot- lefs would be unneceffary, as the eftate was to
to be fold publicly at Garraway's, if not previoufly difpofed of by pi ivate contrad, and there muft neceffarily be an agent in town, who perfedly underftood the whole, and what negroes were upon it. Reuben, it has been before obferved, was not particularly partial to London, he there¬ fore had no inclination to take a fécond journey ; but Edward, who was now fixteen, felt the warmeft defire to accompany Felix, and whifpering his wiihes to Reuben they were foon conveyed to his father, who, willing to gratify him, immediately propofed his accompanying Felix, an offer that was ac¬ cepted with the utmoft pleafure. Furnifhed with a letter of credit on Mrs. Palmer's banker a few days a*ter they fat off for London, travelling by eafy ftages in a poft-chaife, for Felix now grew too much in years to ride far on hotfeback. After repo- fm<¿ one "clay on their arrival, they repaired
to the agent, who, however, was unacquainted with any thing but the grofs of the bufinefs ; but referred him to a Lady of the name of Fitzmorris, who was filter to the owner, whom he obferved was out of town ; but that he had no doubt the I^idy couid give every information, as flie had refided Ibme years on the eftate, and was alio now accompanied by the owner's daughter, who might affift her recolledion. Thus informed, Felix and his young com¬ panion waited on Mrs. Fitzmorris, and were immediately admitted. The Lady was not alone, the daughter of Mr. Fitzmorris, a tall girl of fourteen, was feated at work by her fide, and pofllffed one of thole fffcinating countenances that might almoft be faid to be impoffible to be loc ked on without interefting the beholder. Her features were exquifitely formed, her complexion brunette, but fo clear, that every variation of the mantling blood was difcernible ; her eyes were black and
and fparkling, but foftened by modeity and gentlenefs, they appeared rather formed to fteal into the heart than take it by furprife ; her hair was dark-brown, and waved in luxu¬ rious negligence down her waift, which fhewed the perfect: fymmetry that might be expected when its growth was completed. Felix and Edward were received by the deleft Lady with politenefs, and being in¬ formed of the bufinefs coolly approved the motives, while Mifs Fitzmorris applauded it with warmth, and laying down her work viewed the Étrangers with a pleafure that fparkled in her eyes· " I have a lift below," faid Mrs. Fitz¬ morris, " of the perfons, ages and names, of all the negroes, which my brother defired me to fend to the agent ; but I have omitted it through forgetfulneis. If you pleafe we will refer to that, and if any of the negroes there are among thole you w i İh to liberate, ί
I will defire the agent to accommodate you, as Mr. Fitzmorris is now at Bath, and will not, lam fure, difapprove my obligingyou. w With thefe words the Lady ordered the lift, and with Felix examined accurately the pei fons and names *. Felix, however, only found two of his old acquaintance among them, and thofe very much advanced in years. While they were thus bufied Mifs Fitzmorris had withdrawn for a few minutes, but returned before they had concluded, and drawing near to Edward, while her aunt leaned over the table, gave him a fmall par¬ cel undirected, and that fo cautioufly, that ic was unobferved by any but the party to whom it was prefented, who inftincVively put it in his pocket, though with a trembling hand. Felix, furnifhed with the intelligence he wiihed, letired with his young companion, who foon informed him of the ftrange occur·* ι ence. '1 ney immediately aüjourned m; the firlt
firft houfe of entertainment they found for their purpofe, and Edward; with an agitated hand, haftily broke the feal, and found, to his utter aítoniíhrnent, five lank notes for ten pounds each, inclofed in a paper contain¬ ing thefe lines : " As I know neither of you, I cannot addrefs you by name; but my heart whiipers you are pofllffed of humanity, or the good Lady, whofe charity leadb her to liberate thofe unhaonv negroes would not make you lier aqents, M v father and aunt are both good people, but are too much accuftomed to the Wtit-Indies to think on thofe fubjeds ss ycur employer does, and have therefore refufed me the ficcdom of a woman flave, and lier fon, whom I dearly love, for the woman attended my mother in her laft iilnefs; what I would rcqi.ift: therefore is, that you would condefeend to mention this circum- fiaiicc to the Lady, and entreat her to buy them among her number; the purchafe will, I
3 fear, be more than I have inclofed, which is ail I at piefent pofiefs, and what I have been thefe two \e«is accumulating for that purpoie; but tell her, ií I live, I wiil grate¬ fully repay the ovejphb ; eveimcie efteem myfelf her debtor, and love her dcaily for inteieft, IDirilA FITZMORRIS. P.S. Ett me know the Lady's name, if ike condefrends to grant my requeft. The flive alluded to is cvÀkd Julia, and her fon, ς· * >» ^CiOlO. 1 Tl e amazement of Felix and Fid w ard at the Cv ntenb of this letter, is eafier to be con- cci\ed than defciibed. The open fieedom of the young Lady chai med the okí man.— " Ah, fweet maid !" cried he, " I am forry your father is going to fell the plantation ; rny poor c( untrymen will not, I fear, find iiK I* another kind miflrefs."
"Then
ft Then fhe is fuch a lovely girl, F'elix," returned Edward, fí I thought ihe looked like an angel скп bc İbre fhe ipoke. I wifn ihe lived near Inglewood; my fifter Anna would, I am fure, be charmed with her ; as it is we fluii never fc ö her more : But what do 5 ou mean to do in regird to the woman and her fon, whom ihe has mentioi ed r'* Cí Fi ее them ην ft certainly," anfwered Ikìlx; iC I am \\oyv.\ mote thin twice as rmiui money as ν ill ¿o that, and will wil¬ lingly expend it in iuch a caufe. Her notes I will return, ihe will lind many ufes for them, and there is no occafion to let her know the addr is, as it will but put her to Hunts to endeavour to repay the money/' u Then/' replied Edward, "we ihall not rv:i hear of her again; \er, perhaps, za )0U lay, it would bu: diiuefb her." l\!ix rr.di Feb aid then adjourned to their 'o/ging, w heie, on fu ther inveftigaticn of the
the bufineil, it was agreed that Felix, on the next morning, ihould again wait on Mrs. Fitzmorris, pretend to look over the lift of fiaves, and fix on the two additional ones ipecified by the young Lady. FVhx then inclofed the notes ready to re¬ to· \ to her: Edward wiihed to wiiie a hu v ť/i them, and fat down to execute his î u ρ ' ; — but in vain, afur repeatedly be ' m?, and tearing the Daner, he gave t.p ''e attempt, unable to fatisfy himfelf in v/uu Ik: wiihed to exprefs. The next day Felix and his young com- ¡ affmn waked on Mrs. Fitzmorris fio early that ti e Lady уль not rifen, but fent down о rc; u·. Л they would wait a quarter of an hour, ^licn fiie would attend them. They were then fliewn into a parlour, but had feivfccly taken a feat when Mif» Fitzmorris eľitxiw! ; a crimibn bluih for a moment dyt d the
4
the cheeks of Edward, which as fpeedily communicated to thofe of the young Lady, "Ah!" laid flie, "I fear you think me a ftrange bold girl, but, indeed, neceflity forces me to be fo ; for if my poor Julia and her boy were fold it would break my heart. The money allowed for books and my pocket I have \о1щ been hoarding, and will foon as poflible make up the remainder of the fum." <c They fliall be freed, young Lady," re¬ plied Felix, " never fear : but as I am ready to oblige you in this bufinefs you muft alfo, in your turn, favour me, by taking back your money ; a heart like yours will often find occafion for it. For me I am an old man, and have an earned wifli to do a pood adion before I die; let this be ir, you lock too gentle to be pioud, and I Matter myfelf will notdifdain to be obliged to а пеш'о." о о " Difdain !" replied ihe, holding out her hand wdth the freedom of an old acquain- v ol. ni. G tance,
tance, ťť No, 1 will think oí your kindnefs as the kindnefs of a father. Alas !" continued íhe, " my father called my icqueft folly, and fo did my гит; but you have com¬ plied with it, and made me happy, though, indeed, you mult take the money." u Not now/' rep'ied the old man, <f I will demand» it hereafter, if I humour you, you murt alfo humcui me," Felix no\; pre fented the notes, which w c: e with great icìuftance reaivuî by the young La ly, and Mrs. i-itzmonis entering ίυοη ι. fter the bufinefs was brought forward, Felix again examined the iiil, and fixing on the mother a..d f w, requeued they might be added ω his numbei, lining, that lie had fome confufed recollection oí knowing the former when he leftded on Mr. Walter's cítate, though (lie then belonged to a different ai aite r. This
This requeft was readily agreed to, and Felix depaited with a line fiom Mrs. Fitz¬ morris to the agent, lequiring him to fufhr the bearer to poi chafe the fiaves fpecified.— Felix and Edward being fortunate enough to meet with him at home the bufinefs was completed, and a fum, over and above tlie agreed price, left in his hrnds tO'tranfmit to the perfons liberated, either to aífift them in Jamaica, or to enable them to reach their bcnefadrefs, to whofe lawyer in town they were di reded. Felix and Edward paffed fome fliort ti ire afterwards in London, to gratify the curiofity of the latter, and then returned to IngV- wood, where they were received with delight, though Mrs. Palmer was erieved that no moie of her uncle's fiaves furvived to ex¬ perience her bounty. All were particularly pi ел led with the be¬ haviour of Editha Fitzmorris, in whofe praife G 2 Edward
Edward was never weary. The purchafe of her favourites had coft an hundred pounds, which no periuafioncould make lelixfwe rve from infilling to pay, though Mrs. Palmer would willingly have had the young Lady her debtor ; ihe was, however, confiiamed to reftm in his favour. о Editila was now the confiant theme of the younger part of the farnih, Anna would frequently wiih fhe \\аь acq ι .inted with her, and Reuben did not fail to exprefs pleafuie at her chande' „ but all prahe was cold to Edwaid/s, for with him flie was at once a miracle of goodneh and beauty. ťí Ah, Reuben !" fald he, one day when alone with hio bro lier, "i nave often thought our fiile«* a lovely gii I, but me is not to be comp.'*- fl v Wh Mifs l-itzmoiikj her fine liaz'e yes ai far iup-Ttor to tuna's blue one 5 and / >t you thi«. к dar!; hair moie beratı ful tİKui *¡ght ?" <f Not
" Not I, indeed," replied Reuben, warmly, " I do not difpute but flie may be a likely ghl; but to fay that ihe is handfomer than Anna is ridiculous. No one can perfuade me that any eyes can exceed hei's in loveli- nefs ; the iky itfelf is not of a more charming tolour, and then Anna's hair, can any dark locks equal that t' No, furely, Edward, you muft be a very bad judge, for Аппа'ь hair is the fineft I ever faw ; it is the firft iliade of bright brown, and in the fun looks like threads of waving gold. Felix, at that moment entering, rhe difpute was referred to him, and he was appointed judge between them. " Indeed," faid he, " young men, you have fet me rather a difficult tafk ; your fifter Anna is a lovely fair girl, and Mifs Fitzmonis, though brown, equally lovely, therefore I cannot give to either the fuperiority ; your opinions of beauty it feems are different, and oppofite to your own per¬ fons, for Reuben himfelf has dark eyes and G 3 hair,
hair, ytt he admires fair complexions ; white Edward, on the contrary, is light-coloured, and is charmed with the brown. My coun¬ trymen," added the old man, laughing, <ς ara no: fo puzzled, our beauties are nil of a colour." The warm attachment between Reuben and Anna, while it pleafed the family, yet iome ti mes gave them a fentiment of forrow, I\>nny paiticularly would frequently lament that ihe had acknowledged her, as qtherwife lhe might have become the wife of her fon. The partiality of Mrs. Palmer for Anna added to her own lovely form, in the mean time, notwithftanding her youth brought her iome unexceptionable offers ; but as both her reputed parents and Mrs. Palmer de~ dared her at liberty on that fubjed they were rej e d ed. ťt Ah ! Madam," faid flie to Mrr. Pal¬ mer, í£ I will never leave you, for where can
can I be fo happy ? Not my mother herfelf is dearer to my heart ; ihe, Heaven 1 e praiffd, has many to comfort her; but you," continued ihe, fondly killing her, " have only your poor grateful Anna I 51 " Far be it fiom me," replied Mrs. Palmer, " even to wiih to be feparated from you, my love ; yet, Anna, I cannot but lay I ihould hke to fee you happily fetcied." <( And fo I am," replied fhe, <f Ah ! Madam, I always pray that you may live to fuch a good age as my grandfathers, and then you know we ihall both be old together." ct Six or feven-and-thirty years will always make fome difference between us," anfwered Mrs. Palmer, with a fmile ; * c however, be affuied, in the article of mairiage you are totally your own miitreiì." The affection of Mrs. Palmer for Anna knew no bounds, fhe regarded her as a tender G 4 bloffom
bloíľom ike had reaied, and gloried in thz expanfion of vii tues (lie lud 'meuìco.zed, in¬ li uduung lier to thofe few íricnds fine regarded as a beloved child, and ever, when fpeaking of her ufing the name of An ia palmer, an appellation, as it gratified her beneia-trefs, that flie was generally called by, not only by the domeftics, but even by the whole neigh¬ bourhood, Mrs. and Mifs Palmer being the common diftindion.
CHAP.
С II A P. IX.
RS. PALMER had now paffed near nineteen years in the peaceful retreat which her heai t approved, when ihe one day received a letter fiom her attorney in town, entreating her to haften to the metropolis, as her father, who was now above eighty, and not expected to live long, had exprtffed the moit ardent wffn to fee her befoie he died. His ion had been ibme vears ceàôy fince .f which event the influence of his wife had been in vain exerted to divert him fiom the earneft define he had to once more embrace his now only child. Determined at all events G 5 to
to fatisfy himfelf on a fubjed fo near his hearts he had employed her attorney to make his will, and likewife requefted him to fend her word that he wiihed to fee her in town. Mrs. Palmer immediately replied to her correfpondent that fhe would fet off for London as fpeedily as poflible, entreating him, in the mean time, to procure her either a fmall houfe ready furnifhed, or convenient lodgings, as flie did not choofe, if even in¬ vited, to be under the fame roof with her mother-in-law. Anna ihe propofed to take with her ; but her old and faithful Felix was now too feeble to undertake fuch a journey, the laft being almoft too much for his ftrength, Anna, though tenderly attached to Mrs, Palmer, felt but little prediledion for the journey, and the evening before rhey were to depart, when ihe took leave of the family, appeared overwhelmed with grief.
" With
" With no one but your beft friend, my love, would I truft you," faid Fanny, as ihe embraced her, but under her guidance you are fafe ; for, though bred and educated in that nurfery of vice, how fpotlefs and un- blemiihed has ever been her conduct ? I fluii anxioufly wait your return, for my happinefs can never be complete while any of you are abfent ^ and I fincerely confefs, I hope to find you as little pleafed with London as your brother Reuben was, for I cannot but fay I fear my Edward was rather partial to it." " No, indeed, my dear mother," replied Edward ; " I certainly ihould like to fee it once more, though not from any particular attachment to the place ; I only wiih to hear what Mifs Fitzmorris fays refpeclİng her fiaves, and to know whether ihe ь well ; íhe muft furely have a cruel father to ìefufe her fuch a requeft. Ah !" continued he, with energy, " I wiih íhe was your daughter, or G 6 any
any Farmer's daughter, near Inglewood ; flie would then, I think, be much happier, and 1 am fure 1 fhould never wifli to fee London again." Fanny faw with concern that, young as her fon Edward was, his heart was pi e poffeffed in favour of Editha ; but trufting to time to i e move fo early an impreffion, flie paffed from the fubjed to fome other lefs interefting to him. " Mrs. Palmer," faid Anna, returning the converfation, " has determined to vifit Mrs. Fitzmorris when fiie goes to town, and thank her for the trouble flie took concerning the fiaves, if it is only to form an acquaintance between her niece and myfelf." " Oh ! how kind and good," exclaimed Edward; " how charmed will you be with her Anna ! I am iure you muft love her ; tr 11 her we talk of her at Inglewood, and wiih 6 her
her as happy as her company would make us." cc You, Reuben," faid Anna, u will write to me I know, and tell me every particular reflecting home ; and in return I will inform you of every circumftance that happens in town/' Reuben threw his arms fondly round her, a tear trembling in his eye. " Ah, Anna," faid he, " I have frequently lamented that you were brought up from home ; had that not been the cafe, we ihould not now have been ieparated." <c It will be but for a ihort time 3 , my brother," replied ihe, Lifting his cheek, — i{ and 1 ihall return to Inglewood with rap¬ ture ; for what can make me amends for beinp о feparated from fuch dear friend a ? I am fure, Reuben, if I had my will, I would wiih never to be parted from you." Fanny
Fanny regarded them in filence, while a tear ftole down her cheek ; but Mrs. Palmer at that moment joining them the converfa¬ tion became general, until the parties fepa¬ rated, after lepeated adieus, embraces and tears. On the morning following Mrs. Palmer and Anna út off for London, where they arrived after a pleafant journey of five days, and found all prepared for their reception, Mrs. Palmer's correfpondent having pundu- ally obeyed her orders.
СИЛ P.
вя
CHAP. X.
IT was in the beginning of the month of January that Mrs. Palmer and Anna far off for London, leaving the family at Ingle¬ wood more oppreffed with their abfence than the gloom of the feafon. The weather was particularly fevere, the fnow had fallen in great quantities, and prevented the poor fi om having recourie to their ufual induitry. In this dittreis William had ftepped forth, though without oftentation, and fupplled them with corn at a reduced price, and even to many, who weie yet more diftreffed, without pay¬ ment;
ment ; a conduri that, if he was before be¬ loved, made him now perfectly idolized. One night, after being employed during the whole clay in thefe humane and charitable dilti ibutions, he retired early to reft, fatisfied with himfelf, and recounting every pai ticular to his Fanny. The clock had flruck eleven before either felt inclined to fleep ; the wind blew a per¬ fect hurricane, the rain and mmgied fnow beat againft the window, and Fanny, in the charity of her heart, had recommended to the protection of Heaven all who were ex- pofcd to the inclemency of the night, when, in the intervals of the tempeil, a kind of hollow moan ili иск her ea;. She liftened, and again heard the fame found, but io blended with the ftorrn as to render it lin¬ cei tain fiom whence it could proceed. ■—· Alarmed, ihe fhook William, who was almoit aOVp, and bade him liften; but all was again
again quiet, except the weather, and Wil¬ liam would fain have periuadcd her that what ihe had heaid was merely the wind. " Alas! I fear not," faid Fanny i ff I rather dread it v> fome unhappy creature, who is bit in the mow, and perhaps by thb time is incapable of any exertion, for the voteci ícemed faint and псдг> and I am convinced was human/* Nothing more was neceíľary to awaken the humanity of William, He arofe haitily, and putting on his clothes, as did alfo Fanny» they defcended, calling fiift to awaken their fons, snd to tell the old men, who aiked the reafon of their rifing, that they feared fome one was bewildered in the fnow, as F^nny had heard a voice of d iftrefs apparently very near, defiring them to lay iiill, and ihey mould be informed of their fuccefs. Reu¬ ben and Edward w eie dreiľed in a moment, and {allied out, accompanied by their father, in
in fearch of the caufe of their alarm. After having repeatedly hallooed round rhe houfe and adjacent grounds without receiving any anfwer, they determinei! to return from tht ir fuceefslefì, errand. Fanny in the mean time ,had not been idle ; hoping they would meet with the diftreffed objcd, ihe had (ti r red up the kitchen fire, and fetditd out a bottle of wine and fpke, in ouler to prepare what ihe thought neceffaiy on fi^h an occafion, when ngain, in an ir.tenvì of filenee fi um the floi m, ine h cai d the found that had at firft alarmed her, but more faint, and to her imagination almoft clofe to the houfe. Fanny was no coward, and placing her candle in a lanthcrn flie went out, and looked cautioufly around, but could fee nothing, yet again heard a groan. Convinced now that It proceeded from the wood ihed, fhe haftened thither, and holding up her light faid, " if any one is near let them fpeak, and they fliall have immediate affiitance/* Her
Her only anfwer was another groan ; but the liidit at that moment difcovered to her fi_;ht a human foim 'laying on the ground, if not lifelefs, at leaft io benumbed with cold as to be almoft reduced to the laft extiemity.— \\\imy now felt gieatly alai med, though not lui ridenti;/ fo to prevent her ufing means to „fiift the futte rer, and finding íhe was unable alone to be of much fervice left the fhed to call her fervant maids; but meeting with her huiband and fons, who were returning from their fruitlefs errand, informed them of the di fco very íhç had made, and that the un¬ happy object was a woman. Reuben being firii, lifted her in his arms, and carried her into the houfe, where all were now employed in her fervice, Edward in heaping piles of wood on the fire, Reuben in warming wine, and their father and mother in chafing and endeavouring to recover the ftranger. Her face was diftorted by convulfion?, the pale livery of death appeared to overihadow every featuie, and for íòme time all their cares weie
were ineffectual ; but at length the convulfivc fpafms, being folely occafioned by cold, ap¬ peared to decreafe, and her features to fettle into their regular form. William and Fanny had their eyes fixed upon her; but as her fiatuies lecovcred their proper fymmetry, theirs became imprinted with horror, amazement and pity, and with¬ drawing their looks from tke objed that had before totally employed them, they now en¬ deavoured to read each other's thoughts. — " It is impoffible!" exclaimed William; " yet furely I cannot be miftake n —-it is—i: is my fifter—the unhappy loft Emma !" " It is indeed our Emma !" replied Fanny, " and bleffed be the hour that reflores her to us; it is a proof that fiie has abjuied her errors, and who fliall re fufe her forgivenefs r You ¡¡ave frequently, my ions, heard us la¬ ment her unhappy deviation írom rectitude, which, from what you now fee, has been followed
followed by the moft direful confequences. Retire, her feni es may fpeedily return, and it might occafion a relapfe to find other wit- ruffes than your father and myfelf; we will call if more help is neceíľary. In the mean lime do not let a word tranfpire to your grandfather of what has paffed, for if he is informed too fuddenly it may prove fatal." " Be it as vour mother has faid, mv fons/' added William ; " her prudence, even in this furprife, I fee has nod forfaken her." Reuben and Edward immcdiateiv with¬ drew in filence, deeply impreffed with com- pafiion. A few fpooufuh of warm wine were with much difficulty <¿ut down Emma's throat, and her fen fes beoaii to return ; but fixing her eves on Wiiiiar.i flie flid from her feat to the ground, holding her hands in a iuppliant poft ure. Fanny dropped by her fide, and prefling her to her bofom, exclaimed, " Fear not, Emma,
Emma, you are thrice welcome to your native home. Have you forgotten that there is more joy in Heaven over one finner that repenteth, than over ninety and nine juft perfons who need no repentance ? And ihall it nôt on earth be the fame ? Nay, weep not, nor wring your hands thus." " Oh ! fay," at length fobbed Emma, in a voice far from articulate, <c is not my father dead ? Miferable wretch that I am, I can never receive his forgivenefs." c< Not fo," replied William; "he ís yet fpared to afford you that comfort, if you merit it ; but for the prefent endeavour to recruit youi ftrength by refiefhment and reft; our father muft not this night be told of your return, his age, and the repeated (hocks he Ьъ received, might render fuch information dangerous ; he fliall fimply be told we have íbecoured fome one bewildered İn the fnow." (< Ani
<c And can you, William/' anfwered Emma, as fhe yet more recovered, ťí and you, virtuous Fanny, can you forgive a wretched proftitute ? Ah, no I you cannot when you know the extent of my crirrves ; they are beyond human forgivenefi, nay, I fear, beyond the reach of Divine mercy !" As fne fpoke her head funk on her bofom, and for fome moments fhe appeared over¬ powered with anguifli. "Ah ! happy abode of my youth and innocence !" At length flie exclaimed, gazing around her, " and fliall 1 be permitted to draw my laft polluted breath under this roof, ftained as I am with a thoufand vices? Will Heaven permit it? Ah, no ! when you know all you will fpurn and deteft me, as I do myfelf." " Alas!" anfwered Fanny, "whatever may have been your faults, repentance, and your prefent mifery, will, I truft, atone for them. William, your fifter is at prefent unable
unable to walk, let us bear her to bed, after which go to our parents, and if they are not afieep relate what has happened, without mention of perfon." William now bore Emma in his arms to the bedchamber, where he left her with his wife, who undreffed her, and was nota little fliocked to fee the emaciared ftate of her body, her bones being almoft fharp enough to break through the ikin that covered them. * Flaving placed her in bed Fanny would fain have perfuaded her to take fome refrefh- ment, but fiie declined ir, Fanny judging reft the moft falutary to her exhaufled frame, for a fliort time retired, and joined William, who waited her below flairs. The ftrangenefs of the whole occurrence employed all their thoughts and conjedures Emma's drefs was clean, though of the moft fimple
fimple kind. Her features, though mu Ji emaciated, were yet lovely, and, notwith¬ ftanding flie was pail the age of thirty-fix, might ftill have been accounted captivat ng. Several times during the night did the kind and attentive Fanny fteal into the apart¬ ment to loo!; on the poor penitent ; but conitantly found her awake, and liftening at the door, heaid her always earneft in prayer.
vol. ín.
H
CHAP.
CHAP. Xï.
IN the morning Godwin and Bei nard in¬ quired, in the kindeft manner, after the it rawer, of whom they had no iufpicion beyond vvhat had been told them, until after breakfaffc William, having fent his ions and ii-rvants on diťľerent errands, determined to difclofe the truth of the bufinefs. ťt ' My father," (aid he, addreffing Godwin « I о rie ve whenever I reflect on the many forrows that have embittered your life j it is to me a proof that even virtue is not a fecu- rity for happinefs here below, for whole life has
has been more fpotlefs, and yet who has felt more calamity ì But, my father, you have borne up nobly, have ftruggled with afflic¬ tion, and will not, I trufe, fink under a fur¬ prife, which on the whole muft give you more pleafure than pain." " My fon," replied the old man, calmly, " the Power who has heretofore fupported, will not at this hour, I truft, forfake me : Speak then, and fear not ; I feel thy care; thou watciieft my age with the tendernefs of a parent, and haft been the prop of my declining years ; but for thee, William, and thy angel wife, I had long fince funk into the grave ; but thy duty and affedion have fupported me, and I have lived even to the time when man's days are iaid to be labour and forrow ; vet it is not fo with me, where- ever I look round I fee blefiings, and bow with reverence to Fleaven, wdio, though ic has afflided, has alio bleffed me beyond the common lot of man." Η 2 « Beft
" Beft of men and parents!" replied Wil¬ liam ; " our fifter Emma is returned penitent, and í hope worthy your foi givenefs." Neitheragc nor time had fiiffeiently blunted the feelings of Godwin to hear this intelli¬ gence without emotion. The old man turned pale, an univerfal trembling fliook his fi ame, and for a moment he caft hi:, eyes anxioufiy around, then funk fenfelefs on the bofom of his fon. flis fituation for fome time caufed alarm, bur by the cares of his attentive chil¬ dren he was at length recovered, and rifing, he laid, " Lead me, lead me, to m\ mif- imkbd daughter ; if Pne is indeed rcpentair, Ì have but one wiih remains ui Erdsfied, and that is, if Edwin lives, that he may be the fame." " Precipitation, my father," replied Wil¬ liam, " mi^ht be fatal; l'Imma is gieatly reduced ; we will iirit, İf )ou pleafe, inform her yru condefeend to iee her, and that ihe rm.y ii< 4 e for ; our forgivenefs." " Be
" Be it fo," replied Godwin ; " in the mean time I will retire, and offer up my heart-felt thanks for t hia unexpecìed bleífing." Godwin now took the arm of his fyn, while Fanny retired to inform Emma that her father was appriied of her arrival, and to prepare her for his prefence." During the abfence of Fanny, Emma, weak as flie w;s, L. Ì ik'en, and fat dreiľed by the bed-fide ; file hacì apparently been weeping, and on the entrance of her ññ^r dropped on her knees, and entreated her to plead for her with her father. Fanny, in the moft gentle terms, told her that he was informed of what had pa í fed, at the fame time conjuring her to be careiul of her behaviour, as fiie dreaded any 11 rong emotion at his time of life might be fatal. At length the found of feet on the flairs gave notice that William and his father ap- FI 3 pro ached,
prua-, hed, and kimma, unable to fupprefò ıh·: alarm tiuit overpoweied her, funk on the bed, exclaiming, in a voice of terror, " Open earth, and hide fiom the piefence of a vir¬ tuous fathti, a ironiler, unwoithy to fee the light—a proftitute—a pan kide- —a ------ \ Oh, d eat God ! my ciimes cruih me, and, infinite as is thy mercy, I dai e not hope to mee; it." At that moment the door opened, and F_mma, with more exertion than lherm:>í\uťd capable of, threw heifelf from ihe brd a: the feet of her father, crying lť mercy ! mercy !" while Godwin could not fpeak, but gazed in filence on his once beautiful and innocent daughter. " Oh, my father !" added ihe, " you cannot forgive me ; but cruih me even beneath your feet, and I will blefs you." The old man for a moment raifed his eyes to Heaven, then turned with a look of com- paffioib and fobbing aloud, exclaimed, —► " Biefied
rf Bleffed Saint î if thou art permitted to view us at this moment, plead at the Throne of Mercy for this thy unhappy daughter, who, 1 truft, has abjured her errors." " Oh, my father I" cried Emma, "does the flaughtered lamb entreat for the wolf that has flied its blood ? How then can a mur¬ dered parent plead at the Throne of Mercy for the parricide that plunged her into an untimely grave ? Ah î Heaven would reject the prayer, and pour freíh hoi rors on my devoted hea 1 ; }ct curfe me not, my father, my guilt is fufììcient, and my punifrment, though perhaps not adequate to my fmlts, yet has been fevere ; the Hand cf God, I am convinced, is on me, then add not your hatred to the blow." " If my forgivenefs can footh thee thou haft it," replied Godwin; " thy errors have been great, let thy repentance be exemplary."
FI 4
Emma
Emma was for fome moments unable to reply ; fiie clafped her father's knees, and, in the humiliation of her heart, kiffcd the ground on which lie ftood. At length ihe exclaimed, " Ah ! you know not the extent of my ciimes, or you could not pardon me; vice has bi ought me to rhe very gates of hell ; attiocious in guilt, Heaven has been exemplary in my puni fii ment." tť V/harcver may have been thy erron·," nphed Godwin, <( I trufi, finceie крегк.дтсе n «ay obliterate them ; to thy own heart le- capkulate, and to God alone confefs them. Thy pallid countenance betokens ill health ; foon m3yft thou, perhaps, be fummoned be¬ fore that awful Tribunal, from whofe juftice theie is no appeal. The forgivc j nefs of an earthly Lther thou haft, Emma, none but tfiyftlfcan procure that of thy heavenly one/' " William, wlio dreaded to prolong а кепе fo painful to both, now add: elfed hl.
his father, faying, " Our fiiter, Sir, requires reft, fuffer me to attend you for a while, in an hour or two both will be more compo- fed, and equal to another meeting/' " Be it fo," replied Godwin, taking his fan's arm. u Emma, feek repentance, and thou fhalt even yet find peace. Faie^elJ, thou fhalt not need my prayers." f< Bleffings on his honoured head !" cried Emma, as he left the apartment. " Alas i how has forrow changed him !" Cr Time, as well as ibi row," replied Fanny, (t have contributed towards the alteration : His health, however, thank Heaven, is (лт better than it was ibme years back; vour return too will, I tiult, add to his comfoit. Could we now but hear that Edwin, if he is living, had renounced his vices, we ihould have but little to wifli/*
H 5 «Edwin
" Edwin living!" replied Emma, fliud¬ dering. — " Alas ! do you not know he lives ?" " No," anfwered Fanny, " he has not been feen by any of his family fince about four months after my beloved Agnes's death, which is now near feventeen years ago. — On that event he quitted the army, but has fince re-entered it, as we learned, and alfo a confufed account that he was again married ro ibme woman of large fortune. Oh ! may Fleaven, if it is fo, infpire her with the power to lead him back to virtue." " To virtue !" repeated Emma, wildly. " No, Edwdn is not returned to virtue, ex¬ cept ------;" then becoming more calm, flie continued : " We began the courfe of vice together, monfiers in iniquity; may our crimes have terminated together."
" You
" You know then that he is living," re¬ plied Fanny, afloniihed at the manner in which ihe fpoke. " Too well I know it," anfwered flie; " yet, for pity fake, afk me not how ; nor am I informed of particulars, only that he is rich, and equally abandoned of God as myfelf." " We will not then name him to our father," returned Fanny, with a figh. " He had better think him dead, or entertain the moft diftant hope of his reformation, than be told what would lay heavy on his heart." As Emma appeared faint and exhaufted by the converfation, Fanny perfuaded lìci¬ to endeavour to reft, and foon after left her, to difclofe to William wdiat fhe had heard refpeding Edwdn, and the emotion ihe fhe'.ved at the mention of his name. Hú "Alas f"
" Alas !" faid flie, "I am convinced flie is informed of fome horrid circumftance, which, perhaps, we are happier to be igno¬ rant of. Heaven has brought back one wan¬ derer ; in its own time, perhaps, it may alio lead back the other/'
СИЛ P.
С FI A P. ХИ.
EMMA, after fhe had been returned a week to the farm, fo far recovered from her fatigue, and the mifery ihe had undergone, that ihe was able to leave her room ; but her health was vifibiy declining, and a hectic cough, with an expectoration of blood, daily reduced her, though by almoft imperceptible degiees. The whole family tieated her with peculiar kindnefe, and fpared no p.iib to recover both her health and fpi- ìits; a circuii. fiance that ever called forth the moit bitter felf-accufation. Her perfon was even yet lovely, but vanity was dead in her
her bofom ; her hair, which had been un¬ commonly fine, was cut off before her return to the country, and her d refs íhe continued equally fimple as that flie then wore. In the morning flie arofe with the earlieft dawn, and after paffmg an hour or two in prayer, wrote until breakfaft time, when her eyes were ufualiy fvvollen with weeping. She af¬ terwards, in fpite of all Fanny's entreaties, would affift in domeftic occupations until dinner, o t which flie eat very fparingly,. drinking nothing but water, and in the even¬ ing a draught of milk, which concluded the regimen of the day, then retired veiy early, though not to reft, two or three hours being, devoted to the fame duties as the morning. The name of Edwin ever caufed her the moft violent emotion, and was therefore, as much as poflible, fuppreffed by William and Fanny, without giving fufpkrion to their father. To the little Agnes, Emma war, particularly attached, and if ever for a mo¬ ment
ment ihe forgot the forrow that devoured her it was in her company. In the mean time Mrs. Palmer and Anna were fettled in town, where they much feared they ihould be long detained, as Mr. Som- merton's health was in a moil precarious ilate, and he had lived to be fenfible of the attentions of a virtuous daughter, from whom he declared he would be no more feparated. His temper naturally bad, was now yet more embittered by iilnefs and age, and though he had fome years before left his only daughter, her huiband and infant, to periíh with want, yet now expeded that daughter to devote herfelf to him. She frequently lamented having brought Anna to London with her, as ihe was under the neceflity of either confining her to a fick chamber, or leaving her for whole days together. This confideration determined her to haften to form an acquaintance, if poflible, with the Fitz¬ morris's
morris's family ; for if íhe found them agree¬ able, Editha, though younger than Anna, would prove an agreeable companion. One morning therefore with Anna flie paid the preliminary vifit, and was received with particular refped. Mrs. Fitzmorris, according to the common acceptation of the word, was a good fort of woman, but pof- 1 effe d none of thofe humane fentiments that diftinguiihed her new vifitor ; of her niece fiie was particularly fond, and being pleafed wdth the perfon of Anna, readily acquiefced with Mrs. Palmer in the wiih of a farther acquaintance with them. The young girls were mutually delighted with each other ; nor was Editha lefs pleafed with Mrs. Palmer, with whom flic wiihed to con verfe without the reftraint of her aunt's prefence, and give vent to the overflowings of her heart. The next morning Mrs. Fitzmorris, to »ratify her niece, returned Mrs. Palmer's vi fi 1 3
vifit, and invited her and Anna to dinner on the day following ; an invitation which, tho* her attention to her father obhged her to decline for herfelf, flie accepted for Anna, whom ihe propofed to call for in the even¬ ing on her return home. Anna was delighted with the invitation, and charmed with Editha, who, though not much above fourteen, poffeffed an under¬ itanding uncommon at her years. In the courfc of the afternoon Mr. Fitzmorris was announced, bufinefs calling him to his fifter's, whom he feldom vifited on any other account, poffeffmg none of that parental fondnefs for Editha, who conftantly refided with her aunt, that many parents might have felt for fo amiable a daughter. On his entrance, the appearance of a ftran¬ ger excited only an inclination of the head ; but after a few minutes the beauty of Anna more particularly engaged his attention, and .10
he condefcended not only to addrefs her, but alfo to congratulate his daughter on fo amiable an acquaintance. Mr. Fitzmorris was apparently not beyond the middle age, but bloated, and bore the appearance of a free liver. In his manners he was hauglity and imperious, and in his diipofition at once avaricious and prodigal, by every means in his power accumulating wealth, and fquandering itin the gratification of every favourite vice ! Such was the father of the arrlefs, open hearted Editha, who from her tender years had trembled at the prefence of a father, and whofe youthful mind had received a fevere íhock two years before when ihe loft a mother, from whom alone ihe had ever ex¬ perienced parental affedion. Fitzmorris had alfo a fon, about two years younger than Editha, but for whom he ap¬ peared
peared to have as little affedion, and that he kept conftantly at fchoJ, perhaps fortu¬ nately for the youth, for, at leaft, it preferved him from the contagious poifon of ill ex¬ ample. Fitzmorris's ideas were too depraved to admire beauty without wilhing to poffefs it; he therefore contemplated the innocent at- tradions of Anna as the kite doth the dove, whom he means to devour, and on her leaving the room for a fhort time with his daughter, queftioned his fifter re- fpeding this new acquaintance, Mrs. Ficz- morris, who judged from the behaviour of Mrs. Palmer, and the appellation by which Anna was diftinguifhed, that ihe was un¬ doubtedly her daughter, replied, by informing him that ihe was adually fo. <f And who/' faid he, " is Mrs. Palmer ? Have you long known her ?"
His
His fifter replied in the negative, faying, " I became acquainted with her merely in comequence cf her purchafing, while you was at Bath, thofe old negroes that I men¬ tioned to you. She is the onlv daughter to Mr. Sommerton, and is reputed to be im- menfely rich." This intelligence w 7 as not fo pîeafıng to Fitzmorris, as if he had heard Anna was poor and u n protected i for in that c?Sc his fortune mijiiC have aíľiíted his defignr, as it was he regarded fuccefs to be almoft im¬ practicable. Anna and Editha in the mean time were cementing their new friendfhip by a number of little interefting communications. " Ah, Mifs Palmer !" faid Editha, u how happy are you to poffefs fuch a mother 1 Indeed 1 do not envy you, but her tendernefs, when ihe addreffes you, brings my own fo ftrongly to my remembrance, that my eyes, notwith- ftanding
ftanding all my endeavours, overflow with tears. Ah ! if you had known her, you muft have loved her, even our negroes almoft idolized her. Their lamentations on her death even yet make my heart fink when I refiečt on them ; ihe was ever their media¬ ti ix, and frequently turned the anger of my father from them to heifelf. How often luve I wiihed I had died with her !" fC That wiih is wrong, my dear Mifs Fkzmonis/' replied Anna, * c and almoit un¬ grateful to thofe dear fríen îs you have left. Ha\e you not a tender father, and a good aunt ?" <c That is true," anfwered Editha ; <f but mv father's manner is fo diftant, that, though I often long to embrace and ciaip hia neck, yet I dare not, he looks fo coldly on me. I hope he loves me, Anna ; but I fometimes fear he does not."
« He
tc Ile muil love you," replied Anna, warmly. " llow c:n he avoid i r , when even I that know you í о little love you ? Mis. Palmer loo, the woithy Felix, my brother, and all aie charmed with )OU." <c Your brother ! Was that youth your brother then that accompanied the good old man who came to purchafe the negtoes, and to whom I am fo much indebted for his goodnefs ?" " Yes» my younger brotiici Edward," — anfwered Anna. I have ulfo a brother called Reuben, and a fweet young finer, named Agnes." (t Bleis me," cried Editha, u you amaze me! I u.iderilood you wete Mn, Palmer's only child, by tht: manner in which İh e Jpoke of you." if You mifunderftood her kindnefs, my ¿càv } " replied Anna i tf Mrs. Pahner is only my
my godmother; but Drought up with her from my infancy, the nan e is more Lmiliar to me than my own : I love her equally wdrh my mother, and flie, I am fure, loves me as her child." " That is fufiîciently evident," an five red Editha. " I fappy, happy Anna, to ha it two mothers, and, perhaps, a tender father !" " Yes, my love, a dear, kind, and affec¬ tionate one ; and who, though only a Far¬ mer, is uniyeikdiy îefpededand beloved." " Rich, 1 ich Anna!" exclaimed Editha ; ^ 1 would I was your fiiter, and my peor bi other alio youi's." Thus ended the difcourfe, but not the uuprc fiion it made on both. Anna's heart was aifiided for the gende Flditka, wdio ap¬ peared to deferve more tende meß than flie apparently met with. Editha on her pai t re fleeted
refledcd on the happinefs of Anna, and was afloniihed to find ike was not Mis. Palmer's daughter, as that Lady always ud/imhed her with thy dear child) or fpeaking of her laid, Anna, or Mifs Palmer. That ihe was a Farmer's daughter did not leiten het in Editha's opinion; but flie was too veil acquainted with both the diipofition of her Et. e» . cd aont not to know it w cul i nave a ce -iti u y t ik či on them ; yer, too delicate to ıv.tniiC n tl is to her new fiiend, íhe deter¬ mined to fay nothing about it to either but leave the difclofure to chante. After paffing a very agreeable day, Anna rtturned home in the evening with Mis. Palmer, wdio called for her at Mrs. Fhz- moi ris's, and having thanked that Lady for her kindnefs to her Anna, obtained her pío- ir, i fe that Editha fliould pab the eniuing d^y at her houfe.
Fidili
From this'time the acquaintance became peimanenr, and the young folks were fiddom a day a-part. As Mrs. Palmer was con* ftantly confined with her father, ihe was overjoyed to find fuch amufemer. r for Anm, who, ín company with Editha, her aun: and father, the lattei now frequently conde fien ling to be of the party, viiited ilveili pubic places ; yet fuch was the coldnefs of manners, natural to Mis. Fitzaionis, and the ihme- thinff itili more' difmituifì; in thofe of her brother, that Anna at moft but nfpected them, and, naturally timid, feldom fpoke more in the presence oí either than what was abfolurcly neceíľary ; while on the contrary every moment paffed alone with Editha was employed in the exchange of their mutual tho lights n nd ob fe i vations. Edi tha, who w\b leis tin/id, had in ihe mean while infenfibly made herftdf an interelt in the heart of Mrs. Palmer, whom lhe would run to meer, if flie heard her coming ; or when at her hcufe, and only her and Anna prefent, would ileal vol. hi. 1 foftly
foftly behind her chair, and taking her round the neck, kifs her checks, faying, " I have no other way of paying the debt of love I owe you, and I am determined you Ihall take it thus—thus—and thus"—repeatedly faluting her, Anna, though flie was truly attached to Mrs. Palmer and her friend, yet fighed after the calm p'eafuies of Inglewood ; ihe wrote frequently to the family, and expieffed the warmeft wiflies that her letuni might be fpeedy ; one of her letteis roher fuppofed mother iun thus : " My dear — dear Mother ! í am fick of this gieat r.c ify, diity town, and am horn I v wiíhrg that ui) good mamma's dutv would pennit her to return to Ingle¬ wood; but as yet we have no profped of fuch hippinefs, as Mi. Sommertone health İs ftiil ш die Jamt piecanmis ftate. We have
have formed an acquaintance with the Fitz- morris's family, and I am quite delighted with Ediiha, whom 1 ttuly believe is one of the beft, as ihe is the handlomeft girl I ever law. Her aunt, Mrs. Fi:zmorris, is a very good woman, and fond of her i but her par¬ tiality is fo ftrangely fhewn, that it does not reach the heart hke fuch kindnefs as my father and you ever expiefi» for me. She never fays my love—nor Editha—nor my child—as you addrefs us ·, but Mifs Fitz¬ morris, or Mifs Editha, as if ihe was fpeak- ing to a ftranger; then holds long tedious difcourfes about the diftinctions due to buch and fortune. She likewife fiequently chides Editha for addreffing the domeftics, as if they were her equals, though I can afiure you it has no bad effect, for they almoft adore her, and are ready to diipute who ihall fiift fiy to ferve heu Mr. Fitzmorris has been a handfotne man, and appears about ten \ears older than my I 2 radier,
father, yet, perhaps, he is not fo much ; but he has a iixed gloom on his features, and an habitual fro v. n 'that keeps one at a dii¬ tance, and which Iditha feels as much as me, though ihe is hb onlv dau« luer, and accuftomed toit; yet he ib vciy kind, and 1 feci myielf ungrateful in thus iinüing fault with him. Editha has a brother at Winchefter fchool, who ihe is very fond of, but whom flie fees rarely, as her father does r /Ч fuffer him to come home except at the vacations. Ohi my mother, how unlike you and и у farher ! I am vain en· u di t" think you have as often wnhed ίοι me at home again, as I ni)felf have lighed a:rer it. I have feen a great many fine things but indeed finera! of ť em iked me even at the momcnr, and would y^r rucie ίο were I го attempt giving a defeription of them ; I ¿¿¿all theiefoie omit them until we meet round
round our dear fire -fide : I will then produce them againft Reuben and Edward, who have been tiaveilers as well as myfelf, and the fiift of whom I well remember was as glad to get back as I lhali be. My dear mamma yefteiday made me a prefent of a purfe, containing fo much money that I would fain not have taken it, as 1 had in reality no occa-* fiou foi it ; but fiie infifted on my obedience, ani not only fo, bu of my buying what was moft pleafing to me ; I have therefore pur^ chafed knee and flioe buckles for my fattier and brothers—two walking canes for my dear grandfathers—a gown for you—a frock for Agnes—and, what ihe will like ftill better, the prettkft doll I could meet with. Adieu, my beloved mother. I need not bid you remember me in your prayers. — Kifs all the dear family a hundred times for aie, and believe me your Grateful and afTcdîonate daughter, ANNA 1'ALMi.R GODWIN."
I3
I had
" I had almoft forgotten to tell you that 1 am fo fine fometimes when I go out with Мгя. Fitzmorris, that I feel uncomfortable ; but it has been merely to giatiiy her tafte for ihew, as 1 now fiequentiy accompany her in public. Mrs. Palmer iaid the other day, " My dear Anna, we will throw by all thefe ufelefs decorations when we get home, and if our unadorned manners and perfons cannot procure us refped, wc will endeavour to be fatisfied without it/*
CHAP·
CHAP. XIII.
ANNA's letters were ever received with delight at Inglewood, particularly as they all breathed the pure fpirit of a heart \m~ contaminated by either pleafure or pride. — Fanny and Emma were alone when the for¬ mer received this laft epiftle, and having read it, reached it to her fifter : " Charming innocence !" faid fhe, as íhe returned it, " may Heaven, ac leaft, not be deaf to this prayer ; mayft thou walk through life un¬ tainted as thou art at prefent ; but I have no doubt thou wilt, for thou poffeflcft not thofe 14 dcttfted
dctefted keds of vanity that wrought me to my ruin. Ah! Fanny, weli do I icmember my unnaturally preifing n.y mothei to lufter me to goto Ľmdoii. A-mes too .iflved it ihr nie, yet (he W4 pt t> fee my mothers itluc- tai.ce, and faid, tl'ü.t, l.^l flie !xen ii my pl.cc, ine would not have v,\:de a parent fo lìieaiy to pur^haic a ìur^icmi ; but I was ik¿{ to all but my vanity, thou dì I was then far fiom thinking of tf-mmhti;ig evil, and only wifhed to be d ι effed, and partake of thofe pleafures which the unhappy Whit¬ more and his fifter defciibed to me. He hrd awakened thofe fentiments of pride that were natural to me, and I longed to ihew myfelf and be admired." " Alas!" replied Fanny, " how deceived was your father and mother in the character ot that unhappy man ; his fifter, poor woman, was punifned I fear, for it is plain Edwdn never loved her/*
« Edwin/*
fí Edwin Î" repeated Emma, with the ufual emotion the name ever occafioned, <£ Edwin, would to God he had pcrifheci in the cradle, or I in my mother's womb !" " My dear Emma," replied Fanny, " rar be it from me to wiih to diftrefs you ; but the impreffion the name of Edwin makes on you ь almoit dreadful ! That he was W hit- more's murderer U too true; but the Hand oi God alone fuik red Edwin to become the avenger of his family, and to be the icourge of thofe vietò he had io pernicioufiy incul¬ cated ; endeavour then, my fiiter, to think on iiim with lefi» anguiíh." " Never !" interrupted Emma ; "for the death of Whitmore Heaven forgive both him and me ; for furely my follies conti ibutcd towards it, as much as his falie idea of honour : But there are more latent caufes— canfes which, once known, would make you ihrink, though guiltlefs, nay fpurn me again 15 to
to mifery ! Never, my virtuous fifter, can I Jhock your chatte ears with recitals fo hor¬ rid as the events of my life ! It was, indeed, my firft intention, but I found it would be impoffible, I have therefore done as my father advifed; I have recapitulated my errors to my own heart, and confeffed them to God. Ah ! would to Heaven my prefent contrition, or tears, could obliterate them ; but it is in vain, my repentance comes too hue. Ah ! how often in rny fleep has my mother feemed to ftand before me, and re¬ proach me with her death, the vices of my own life, and prognofiicate the final deftruc- tion that awaited me !" Though Fanny endeavoured, by every means in her power, to foften the poignancy of the grief that evidently undermined the conftitutionof Emma, yet all was unavailing, the grew daily weakei, and at length was unable to leave her chamber, though fhe itili employed herfelf in writing, and never laid
bid down to fleep without firft imploring not only the forgivenefs of Heaven for her of¬ fences, but alfo of her fither ; in fliort, her penitence and humility interefted all, giving at once pain and pleafure, the firft fiom the cruel rcfiedion that her vices had made io fevere a penance necefiary, and the Jail, that her life had not only been happily piolonged beyond her guilt, but that Heaven had given her time and inclination for repentance. At length flie was reduced fo much as to be obliged to keep her bed; at times was dehiious, and fo violently agitated, that lier fuffei ings were tei rilde to the fpedatois. Fanny now, even upon her knees, « n- treated her father-in-law to be abfent fiom luch a fcene of horror. u No," faid the old man; " my dúld is penitent, rnd fliall I abandon her at this hour r In hci lurid intervals I will pray by
her, and endeavour to infpire her with hope. Ahl Fanny, thou art thyftlf now aparent, and at once nobly performert the duties cf a daughter and a mother; lay couklft thou, though Heaven forbid thou mouklft ever Lave the trial, ccııîdft thou, at fuch a fearful moment, refrain from admmiitering ail the comfort in thy power r" li Alas!" no, my father," replied Fanny ¡ ft but my fear for your health makes me thus anxious. The lois of Emma, j uit retto red to Ub, and as fuddenly matched away, will, indeed, be hard to bear ; and mould it а! Го deprive us of you, we inali fink beneath the blow." u The confeioufnefb of having acted right, eun in that cale Fani, y will fupport yon. —- ît is now nineteen years fince the happy day mat you became the wife of William ; nor have 1, in that penod, feen one morn or eve without olefinig the hour that united you.— b You
You are the mother of my old age, and your children the comforts of my fécond child¬ hood." Bernard, who was fitting by the fi re-fide with Agnes between his knees, nurfing her new dolí, raifed his eyes as Godwin ceafed fpeaking, and replied, " Sure enough Fanny has ever been a dutiful daughter and a good wife ; but if ihe was ten times better William h defeivinff of her." Ö " They are worthy of each other," re¬ turned Godwin ; "nor to my knowledge has one a virtue, that the other does not equally poikfs." Godwin then adjourned to his daughter's chamber, whom he found calm, but ex- tiemely weak and exhaufted, kneeling by her, he ptayed long anei fervi ntîy; then, in a difcourie replete with true devotion, pointed out the infinite mercy of God, blciľed and killed
kiffed her.-—" Emma," faid he, " thy life has been fliort, and full of fin and forrow j mine has been long, and alfo replete with error ; yet, I doubt nor, with true repentance, we fliall meet again in the Land of Peace to part no moie !" Emma was at fiift too much affeded to reply, but pi effed her father's hand, and tnt h ed it with ker tears. At lenoth, Ашс- gíing with hei emotion, íl e exclaimed, faint¬ ly, "Ah! my father, the polluted pairii ide Emma will nevei be pern.itttd to fnaie the rewards of the righteous." " Defponding woman !" rnfvNered Gi4h\in, " ihall thy contraded undei ftanding fet limits to God's теку ? Nevei —never yet, l· mma, did he ι eject a repentant and contute he ai t." Godwin foon after wkhdiew, and F π ma fell afieep, during which Fanny was joined by
by her huiband, both anxioufiy remaining by her until ihe awoke. Her ftrength being fome what recruited by the reft ihe had obtained, her delirium on her firft awakening was uncommonly vehement, and required all William's ftrength and tendernefs to at once oblige and iooth her to remain in bed. u I will go to Inglewood," exclaimed foe -, " my mother commanded it ; your paths are the paths of hell ; my ioul ihall never again know pollution; I defpife your threats; what are ptifons to me ? Then looking at William with a fixed horror, íhe cried, " Be gone, Edwin—-fiend— moniter —any thing but bro¬ ther !" Then in a lower voice, " You ate I know a man of blood—you murdered Whit¬ moie; but that you may waih your hands írom, his wife will forgive you, for ihe let you upon the deed I fuppofe ; but who ihall forgive you this laft —this woift—this de- teilab'e
tellable------?" Exhaufted by the exertion as fhe uttered the iaft word flie funk on the pillow, and after fome litde time appeared to fleep, while William and his trembling wife looked at each other in filent tei ror. — After icmaining tolerably compofed for half an hour ihe again awoke, but more placid, i\nd apparently infenfible of her laft delirium. " My kind brother and fifler," faid flie, " for you permit me to call yon fo, un¬ worthy as I am, Fleaven will, I hope, requite vour goodnefs to me. In the little drawer belonging to the table is a manufcript which connina the fatal hlftory of my errors. I co ild not have a heart to relate them, but i npofed the penance on myfelf of recapitu¬ lating them thus. Oh ! eto not hate and defpife me wddle you lead, nor, unlefs you hoid it particula: ly necefiary, do not ihew it to my father ; not to conceal my own ihame do I fpeak, but beca ufe the recital would fink him to the grave. Nay, why do you both weep ? my father bids me tiuft to the mercy
mercy of God, and even thinks I may be forgiven. — Alas ! he knows not half my crimes; his worth, pr ivers and bleffings, have, however, comforted me, and my heat t is no longer funk in defpair. One thing now alone preffes feverely en my fpirits, which, perhaps, you will only attribute to the wanderings of ficknefs, yet which to me always appeared the erted of a Divine million. From the time of rny mother's death in my dreams I frequently faw her, but always with a fevere and angry counte¬ nance ; and in particular about a month before I came to Inglewood, Heaven alone knows the impreffion ihe made on me. — Since that time, reftlefs as have been my nights, I have never fince feen her ; methinks it feems as if ihe had totally abandoned me, for though flie frowned, and chid me, her anger has been falutary to my foul, and I feel I could die fatisfied, were I even for a moment to fee her again."
" My
" My dear fifter," replied William, " the life of error you were wont to lead being, as I truft, contrary to your natural difpofitiou and education, both confpired to give rife to ideas which, however you might banifh waking, you could not ftifle in thofe hours when wv retrace, with mingled truth and fid ion, vari- us fubjeds. Your mother's death had doubtlefs made a particular im- preflion on you, and caufed you frequently to dream ; ihe uttered thole reproaches which your own heart alone didated. Since your return to virtue, Emma, thofe felf-reproaches have, in fome meafure, fubfided, and your agonized fancy no longer prefents the image of an unhappy, angry parent/* " It is a natural coniufion, William, for you to make" replied Emma ; yet you know not how ftrong, how awful the laft injundion, which I ftridly obeyed, yet, my brother, ihe has fince abandoned me I"
" We
" We will then fuppofe, my dear fifter," replied Fanny, " that the errand of mercy, on which flie was permitted to come, is ful¬ filled, and that flie has no farther bufinefs until flie greets you in a happy eternity," " Bleffed thought," replied Emma 5 " yet if I could but once more have feen her, and without that frowning countenance, I confefs it would have made me die happy ; but God's will be done/'
CKAP.
CHAP. XIV.
FOR two days after the foregomg dif¬ courfe Emma yet ftruggled hard with anguifli, but towards the ciofc of the fécond evening her approaching diffolution recame apparent; her fenfis had been pei fed fince the laft mentioned deliiium, and her death was as edifying as her life had been eiroreous. Surrounded by the wlHe family, evt n lhe old men, flie joined her pra) ers ard bleffings with them, particulaily admonifliing Reuben and Edward to beware of vice, and tread firm in the paths of redicude. The
The youths liftened with pious attention ; the dym¿ moralift made an impreffion moie permanent thin all the eloquence of learning, or pedanti y of books. They beheld a wo¬ man yet in the prime of life, and uncom¬ monly lovely, linking into the grave, the vidim of her own enors, and a linking ex¬ ample of the inefneacy of every human en¬ dowment without virtue. The youths each held one of her hands, already covered with the coid damp of death, and preifing it to their lips promiied to re¬ member her injundions, rendei ed yet more facred by rhe folemn hour in which they were given. The friendly Bernard kiffed and wept over her. " Ah 1 Emma," faid he, " thou fhouldft have ftriven againft this unhappy iilnefs ; thou ihouklft have lived to ninfe и* old men, not thib have huiried to the grave before us. What, if thou haft been faulty,
faulty, thee art not the fiift : God has for¬ given thee I am fure ; and let him that hath no fin throw the firft itone." Godwin next approacheei, his venerable form bent to earth, but his eyes raifed to Heaven, and praying, he bleffed, and re¬ peatedly forgave his d>ing daughter. " I had a wiih," faid Emma, faintly, ;c to fee your Anna, but deprived of that pleafure, fay I blcfild her. Agnes, my love," turning to the little girl, " ever be attentive to yout parents; forget not your duty, and God will not forget you." William then approached, his manly cheeks covered with tears, and unable to fpeak, he preffed her hand to his lips. " William," faid íhe, α my beft, my deareit brother, whofe worth, alas ! I was fenfible of too late, do not hate my memory. My Fanny too, kind fifter, nay weep not, how worthily have
have you fulfilled the duty which I amafhamed to have negleded. Long may ye be happy, worthy pair, and may the bleffings of Hea¬ ven be multiplied on your heads !" Emma now appeared exhaufted, even to almoit fainting, Fanny therefore entreated her to ceafe fpeaking, and endeavour to fleep ; a defire fiie immediately complied with» firft looking kindly, but fixedly, around on every particular object, as though ihe would im- prefs her perfon on their memory, then defiring to be placed rather louer in bed, ihe, after fome time, fell into an apparent heavy fleep, in which fhe continued without ftruggle, or the leaft convulfion, for more than two hours, all fitting round in filent dejedion, and waiting the event of her next awaking, which they feared would be decifive. At length fhe began to ftir, and the atten¬ tive Fanny was inftantly by her fide. t( My fifter," cried Emma, with a fmile, which was the
the firft they had feen enliven her features fince her return. " Oh ! you know net how happy I am ; I have again feen my mother, and ihe has told me I am forgiven. Ah ! Fanny, I have nothing now to wiih ; nay, look there/' cried fhe, with exultation, ťc fli e comes again ; fee, ihe fmiles, and beckens me ! Bleffed fight! I come, my mother," ftretchingout her arms : <£ Receive your repentant—happy—happy daughter !" As ihe uttered the laft word her voice died on her lips, her head reclined, and her contrite fpiiit efcaped its once frail tenement. " God of mercy and companion, accept my penitent child," ciied Godwin, falling into the arms of his fon ; " let her repentance atone for her offences, and mav we hei eafter meet İn Heaven !" " Ah! my father," replied William, tf how few have died like Emma ! we will therefore bear our iorrow with resignation. Had ihe indeed
indeed died in her errors, we ihould have had caufe to mourn; as it is, how great the mercy of God, not only to awaken her to a fenfe of her guilr, but bring her home that wc might witnefs her return to virtuel" Godwin railed his head from the bofom of his ion, and ejaculated : " Biefied be the Name of God I" Then taking h ; s arm he iaid, t£ I will go forth , my pre fence is no lonrer u.lfuh ani the fi^bris moie than my ¡ме cm well bear !" о William and Renker, immedi, :e! v accom- ρ miai him into nn jthei .qv.iťnent, and weie foon after joined by tht left of the family, ex'ept Fanny, who ftaid belfind with her in lids to perform the 1. 'i mournful гксь to rhe once beauteous and idmiied Emma—to finit thofe now dim eye*, \J10fe biightncfb had fiequently been extolled be;ondeveiy thing Imnnn, and to clofe thofe livid lips, which hid hum ctlebutcd above the ruby vcl. 111, K. a M d
and the damafk rofe. " Alas î friend—iiftc:, companion of my childhood, why has thh tafk devolved on me," faid h'anny, killing her, " thy forrow and repentance have, I ti uft, atoned for thy errors? Would :o God thou hadft been fpaied, the filler of my be¬ loved hufband fliould have fliared all my tendernefs, and our kindnefs would at length have forced her to forgive herfelf." William at that moment entered. " Fanny, my love," faid he, " in our affiiciion for the dead, we muft not forget our duties to the living ; fuffer me to lead thee from this fcene of mortality; thou haft performed all that duty and tendernefs requite. Oh, Fanny! in how many forrows have my unhappy family involved thee ? When 1 contemplate thy patience and virtues, how ofun do I complain of my own unworthinefs, and ex¬ claim that I am bleffed above the lot of man ?"
* And
" And 1 above that of woman ?" replied Fanny, thro ving her ams round his neck, and preifing her cheek to his: " Bt. ft of fons, falheis and hufbands, bleffed be the hour that made me thine, and may 1 never be lefs fen¬ fible of my happinefs than I am at prefent." William clafped her to his bofom, and pia'ing h\b ami round her waift, drew her írom the apaitment w irdi the attentive kind¬ nefs of a bridegroom. Seven davs after tlie kut remalns of Emma were depofited at the; foot of her mother's cofín, m the church¬ yard, the whole family, except Godwin and Bernard, attending the funeral, and who were both ib warmly entreated to relinquuh it, -hat they at length coníènted.
К i
CHAI'.
С H A P. XV.
HILE the fo repoina fcene was taking piace at Inglewood Mis. Pal¬ mer, on her pc.it, was alfo fu: iounded with uneafinefs in London, her fathefs health grew daily worfe, and пи peeviíhmk increafed to fo great a degree that he could fcarcely bear her out cf his fiVht. The hours therefoie ñ\e had to pafb with Anna were few; yet fhe was in ibme mea¬ sure confoled, by having found her lo agree¬ able a companion as Editha, and ib rcipecia- ble a p rot«, d refs in her abftrce as Mr?, Fitzmonis. It İs tiue, the Lady was one for w lì ли
w
whom íhe could never have cxpeiienccd a tender fiierdihip, аь fl: e wanted that fimi- 1 »ι .tv of difpoíicnn tint iimfes hearts, but \\,ь n >twî thftan í ing a de hrable acquaintance, an ! a very proper perfon to be iní ruited with the gmuľice oj y oiita 3 as fne was particulaily careiul of their moraL, faw little company, that cr.ofen, and of a deicription, thrr ü e melt rigid pi ude could not 'nave objeded Í. У » üne evening, af и ι Mr?. Palmer had ie- turned fiom liti fatlur'b, fiie KCtived a note from her attorney, infoi mıng her, that in the Jamaica fleet, juft arrived, was the female negro ihe had purciuftd of Mrs. Fitzmoiris; but that of the other three, two had chofen to remain behind with the ftipend allowed them ; tint the fon of the woman, juft ar¬ rived, Was dead, and her money in confe¬ quence would be returneel, concluding his note by entreating her further orders refpec- ting the bufinefs. Ki Mrs.
Mrs. Palmer immediately anfwered, by defiling him to fend on board the veffel for the woman, and caule her to be conducted to her on the following morning, to pay all к xpences, and place it to her account. The nc;;t day слпу Mrs. Palmer fent a card to ¡Mrs. Fitzniorr::>, rcqueilincc the 'i о favour of Editha's company for the whole day, a defire that was readily complied with, and íhe íoon after entered. The expectancy Mrs. Palmer had of Julia's arrival me refolved not to mention; but determined to furprife her agreeably, and accordingly, about an hour after, on the attorneys being announced, apologized for introducing him. He entered, followed by the liberated female, who no focner per¬ ceived her young miiirefs, then giving an exclamation of pleafure, ihe luihed forward, and throwing herfelf at her feet, embraced о ·* her knees, while Editha fell on her neck unable to articulate a word. cc Julia
" julia free, Mifiey!" cried flie, " poor Julia free ! Come, live, die, willing flave, to dear Mifiey !" " My good Julia" replied Editha, reco¬ vering her turpi lie, " how I rejoice to fee you here ! But where is my poor Scipio r ϊ expeded him too." " Ah, Mifleyl" anfwered Julia, a tear ftealing down her cheek, " Scipio die î Ah, Miffey ! when I fee no move—no fpeak— hand cold—my heart how fink ! But when I tink again, poor Scipio free ! I laugh—clap hands—fay, Scipio free ividcut buy—gone home— dere no white man whip—no black Have cry— dis comfort poor Julia—dry up tear.—Ah ! good Mifiey, you cry too—cry for poor negro Scipio !" Then perceiving a tear that had dropped from Editha on her hand, flie kifled it off, adding, " White man's fmile and tear gain negro heart, Mifiey warm mine—make forget forrow." К 4 « To
íť To this Lady," anfwered Editha, taking Julia's ebon hand with her own ivory one, and leading her towards Mrs. Palmer, fC we owe every thing. You muit love her, Julia, as you loved rny mother, and muft ferve her as faithfully/' ic Julia will ferve as faithfully," repeated п\е у laying her hand on her heart with a fi «'h, ic And you will love her too," replied Editila, tf as I love her. She did not know you, yet ihe would have bought you, together with your Scipio, and now gives you free¬ dom." ff Julia will give her life. Lady make Julia love ; but no promifc before know." " I like your honefty," returned Mrs. Palmer. " Love me only as you find I deferve." Editha
Editha then explained to her more parti¬ cularly the obligations ihe had to Mrs. Pal¬ mer, and the песет" ty there was of neither Mr. nor Mrs. Fitzmorrib knowing that ihe had been inftrumental in procuring her free¬ dom, as it might be conftrued a wilful difo- bedience of her father's commands. Mrs. Palmer then told her ihe íliculd, fe^r the preient, remain with her, and artend oa Annai and having already fpent more time than ihe could well affoid from her father, ihe took her leave, and left them together for the day, Mrs. Palmer, on reaching her father, found iiim yet worfe than ihe had before it\-n him ; but itili, notwithílandinü; his .».eat aí .-, í-í attached to life, that lie hadji.it refolved to try the Bath waters, which hau buen cafnalìy mentioned, and warmly preffed his daughter 1 to accompany him there imme.lutely. Thl-j requeit was particularly unpleailmt to Mi>. К 5 * Palmes
Palmer, as flie could not well refufe a parent in fuch a fituation, and yet knew not how to difpofe of Anna, whom, if even flie took with her, flie fliould not know where to place when ihe arrived there, as the fame objec¬ tions would hold at Bath, as on their arrival in London. After repeated deliberations, flie at length determined to int; ude ib faron Mrs. Fitz¬ morris's kindnefs, as to entreat to leave her there until her father could fetch her back to the Foreft. Thus determined, flie waited on the Laciy, and apologizing for the liberty, propofed her fuit, which was immediately granted, infilling, however, that Mils Anna's vifit fliould be prolonged until their return from Bath. Thefe preliminaries fettled, Mrs. Palmer found herfelf more at eafe, and, on her re¬ turn home, informed Anna and Editha of the arrangement that had taken place. This
This news had at once the moft oppofite effeds ; Editha was enraptured to have Anna entirely with her, while Anna was overwhelmed with grief on the idea of being feparated from Mrs. Palmer. " My dear child,"—faid that Lady,— " was I not fo unhappily fituated, nothing fliould part us ; but, my love, the abíènce will be Ihort, and your grief, however flat¬ tering to me, is ungenerous to your friend Editha." This gende reprimand dried Anna's tears ^ flie was hurt to appear ungrateful, and deter¬ mined to conform to what appeared moft convenient, without fhewing any more un¬ eafinefs, whatever it might coft her. Mrs. Fitzmorris's carriage foon after fetch¬ ing Editha, they feparated for the night, Mrs. Palmer promiiing to take Anna in the morning. Кб On
On Editha's departure Mrs. Palmer en¬ tered more fully into the bufinefs. She informed Anna that her father liad infilled on her flaying in the fame houfe with him when they reached Bath ; and that, thus fitu¬ ated, flie had no other feafible mea fure to purfue ; but left it to her own choice whether fhe would remain at Mrs. Fitzmoi ris's, or whether ihe fliould write to her father to fetch her home as fpeedily as poflible. c< My dear Madam/' replied Anna, " í feel I behave like a petulant, fpoiled child, and yet you condefeend to humour me ! I will not trouble my father to make fuch a journey at this time of the year, when there is no abfolute neceflity. I love Editha, and I refped Mrs. Fitzmorris, and will, if you pleafe, remain with them until ycur return. To part with you I confefs is unpieafant to me ; but I wiil endeavour not to difgrace your goodnefi. by my behaviour."
" My
£f Mv beloved child," anfwered Mrs. Palmer, " a reparation cannot be more dif- pleafmg to you than to me. Vou are be¬ come effential to my happinefs ; I am arrived at that age, Anna, when attachments fo long cemented, are painful to be broken, and nothing but the duty I owe my father" could force me to be a day deprived of your com¬ pany. You are every where received, my love, as my daughter; nor, were you truly fo, could you be dearer to my heart. Mis. FirzmonU's hofpiiality muft be requited, for my Anna muft not be under an obliga¬ tion ; there are a pair of pearl bracelets in my cafket that I would wiih you to prefent to Editha ; her aunt is fond of ihew, and will doubtlefs be pleafed with this mark of attention. I would alfo wiih you, while there, to d refi» more than you ufu-lly do, us it will gratify her to introduce you to lier company, while you youifelf have too muJi good fenfe to fuffei your mind to attach itfelf to fuch frivolities; you ihall therefore, my love, take
take that cafket of glittering toys with you, and wear cccafionaliy fuch as may beft pleafe you, pieilnting firft the pearl bracelets to Editila." " Oh ! Madam, how good, how confide- rate are you for your Anna ! Cm you wonder I fliould diead even a week's feparation ?" Mrs. Palmer then affed Anna's opinion of Julia, and finding it conformable to her own, it v/as agreed that, if Mrs. Fitzmorris haei no objedion, fiie fhould accompany Anna thither as her attendant. The next morning the feparation took place, both Mrs. Palmer and her young friend ftruggiing with their own feelings, fear¬ ful of diftreffing the other. Mis. Palmer concluded Anna to Mrs. Fitzmorris, into whofe care flie refigned her, and finding flie had no objedion to Julia's
Julia's attending her, foon after fent her for that purpofe. In the afternoon Mrs, Palmer departed for Bath, wiidng finito Inglewood, and inclofing a letter ùoM Anna, informing ихеал of the change that had taken place, and defiring them to make themfelves happy on her ас - co im", as fiie was placed in perfect iecuiity. This letter reached them about a week before Emma's death, and when fiie was judged in the moft immediate danger. The removal of Anna ¿ave them fome uneafinefs, but the prudi nee of Mis. Palmer was fo well knosvn to theni, that no idea of her being İn any danger fiom the change obtruded on their imagination.
CHAR
CHAP. XVI.
ON the fàr^e day that Anna became an inmate at \Ls. Liz morris's, that Lady tow aids evening com¡ mied of a fore thi oat, and on the following moin'r j t found herielf fo ill that a ph}/kia f i wa: called İn, who declared ker difoi ki to bea malignant feven In the coinfe of the morning Fitzmonis dropped in, and being in cxpedancy heir to the Eady, was by no means the le« ft inte¬ refted of the family. He wasafionhhed to find Anna а pe: manem vuitor, but too good a diffembiei to fhe w the pleafuie th it cir¬ cumftance give iiim, for his pi udente, or latlui
radier his cunning, feldom forfook him, un- iels he was inebiiated, which, however, was frequently the cafe, on which occafion he poifeffed more of the brute than the man, sivine wav to the moft unbridled гл.ГГюпь, his dľiighted family flying before him, like ilieep before the hungry wolf; at other times his hypociify even furpafied his other vices, for it Web great enough to cover all the reft, and even to thofe who were not thoroughly acquainted with him found an excufe for his exceíľes, if by any chance they were difco¬ vered, being pitied for fhe unhappy propen¬ fity he had to liquor, which could transform fo refpečtable a man into a creature fo unlike himfelf. For two days Mrs. Fitzmorris grew worfe, and on the third w as declared'in great danger; Mr. Fitzmonis in conference was advifed to move his daughter, as the malady was Via ry communicative., and m ght endanger her health. Fddi t ha
Edítha had lived entirely with Mrs. Fitz¬ morris fince her mother's death, now two years pait, and looked forward wdth horror to the lofs of that friend, as ihe then muft undubitably leturn to her fatheľs, an event fiie dreaded. Mrs. Fitzmorris loved her as much as the coldnefs of her difpoficion would permit ; an affedion which Editha returned with intereft, regarding her as her mother, and obeying her as fuch ; her grief therefore at this event required all Anna's tendernefs to footh, while Editha's forrow taught her how keenly fuf- ceptible her heart was to the fuffer ings of a fiiend, as in her calamity fiie almoft forgot her own grief ou parting with Mrs. Palmer. Mr. Fitzmorris, apprifed of the danger of the malady, immediately determined to remove his daughter, ai>d her companion, to a houfe he had, fituated on one fide of Hounflow Heath, where he informed them they
they ihould remain until the event was known. Editha, tho' fhe grieved to leave her aunt, yet dared not difpute the will of her father, and accordingly pio ni fed to be ready to accom- omy him on the ne\t mommi', Fi:?. morris allumimi the utmoft complacency, ι\νΔ en- treating the iv'-.ov.d mipjit not ucnrlve them of Mifs Palma 's company. On his depaiture Anna fat down to write to Mrs. Palmer an account of what had paffed, exprefling her fatisfadion that, as fuch an unhappy event had occurred, flie was on the fpot to confole the afflided Editha, and requefted Mrs. Palmer's opinion in regard to informing her parents of what had paffed, as flie was rather inclined to remain iiient to them on that fcore, as ic might pro¬ bably give them uneafinefs, fpoke highly of Mr. Fitzmorris's kindnefs, and entreated her ir.uiieo.'ate anfwer. On the removal of the young Ladies to liounfbv/, they found all prepaied for their reception*
reception, Fitzmorris receiving them with a pleafure which İli tick Anna as unfeeling, a: a pei iod w lien hi ι filler was in danger. The only dome »tics were his valet and an old woman, who ufuillv kept the houfe, and who, having dďúy affı/ıance, made other fer¬ vants iinneeefiluy, especially as Fitzmorris feldom fic-pt thcie fjr more than a night or two together, and then ufualiy accompanied by people befo: e whom he could throw off all difguife, and with whom little ceremony was neceíľary, Editha, as her father had not exprefsly commanded it, did not prefume to take a fervant with her; but was not io fcrupulous on account of Anna, and therefore, before her departure, had ordered one of Mis. Fitz- morris's fervants to conduci Julia to the ftage, and give a proper diiection where to leave her. Fitzmorris, who fimply knew that forne fkves had been purchafed by Mrs. P alme r ,
Palmer, or her agent, had never given him¬ felf the trouble to inquire inro paiticulais, and was therefote not a little afiou. ihed on the codch flopping, to fee Julia, whom he par¬ ticula» ly difliked, enter his houfe ; inquiring inro the caule, he found ihe was one of thofe j ; .Ura:ed, and now the attendant of Amu. In the fiift pr.ioxifm of his rage, he gave his fifer, M:s. Ik. kuer, Juha, a':d the whole troupe, to the devil, curing bis own fcliy K,r veiling any jviver in Ivlrs. Fitzmorris ; biit luckily ι ot luípečting 1>\ъ dhujduei, who, ? s fhe W3b befi ie a fli anger to the parties, he cí uhi not ir elude in die offence, though he wil! knew i)\e was partial tf) Julia, who had attendi d his late wife. To ihew his dif¬ iiké would, he cormdered, oiűy ferve to txpofe himfelf, he therefoie determined to conceal it, and even treat her with a kind¬ nefs he had never íhevwi before. Julia, in the mean time, was as little fatisfied with her old mafter, at whofe fight flic even yet fli udde ι ed.
fhuddered. However, being warmly attached to Editha, and pleafed with the gentle de¬ meanor of Anna, ihe confoled heifelf with the idea that he had no longer an imlimittcd power over her. The apartments of the young Ladies were on oppoGte ficks of the houfe, a ciicumftance impleafmg to both, and which Editha men¬ tioned to the houfekeeper ; but on her re¬ plying it was bv Mr. Firzmorris's particular order that Mifs Palmer mould be accom modated with the beft bedchamber, ili e dkt not prefume to reply. On Fitzmorris's retiring for the night to his own apartment, being alone with his valet (who was nodiing inferior in villany to his mafter) he aiked him, while a more com- plaifant fmile than ufualiy enlivened his fea- tuies, what he thought of their new vifitant ? " Why, in good faith," replied the man freely, " I fcarcely know ¡ ihe is a charming 3 g lrl '
ohi, and I think, Sir, you look as if you would have no objedion to give us a new mifticfs." " No, on my foul," replied Fitzmorris, " I never intend to commit matrimony more. I cannot fay but if the girl had not been fo confoundedly well born and provided for, in point of fortune, I would have endea¬ voured to make her eafy ; l ut as flie is fituated, any attempt would be tıuıtlcfs." " You weie not ukd to be fo eafily dif- heartened," iepiied the confidant; "you have taken fome pains on lefs inteiefting fubjeds." " Tuie ; but I am no longer of a temper to dance attendance, and fue for favours which man ought to command. The women in Turkey are more properly educated, and know how to efteem a compliment offered them ; but now I think on it, how the devil came
came Julia among the number offlives, libe¬ rated by their damned humanity, and my fifier's curfed officiouihefh ? She was not one of the old incumbrances, for my father-in- law, I am fure, pu rc hai ed her.'" " Idia t is more than I czn tell," replied the man, " for I well know you never meant her to be free ; but the bufinefs is paft recall ; fine wl c , if I miftake nor, acquainted with the affair of the little mulatin, and gave a hint to my miftrefs, wdio never held up her head a fre r w a rdi,." " Perdition feize you," anfwered Fitz- morris, "for Introducing fuch a fubjed ; it wiil banifii fleep ; fetch me a glafs of brandy; curfe the flut, I wiih flic was poifbned." Idie fervant foon prefented the foporinc, and then continued the difcourie. " I at¬ tempted to fift her to night," faid he, but fiie either knows nothing, or is obftinate : -— Thinking
Thinking the old impreffion might remain, tried a trifling threat, but it was of no ufe, for fhe feems to be aware of the advantage of liberty, grinned in my face, and fnapped her fingers." « J)------ n } лСГу {χ i s better to footh than to anger her, for it mry prevent her prating ; we muft find fome way, if poflible, to get rid of her; in the mean time be ftill." Such was the converfation of this deteftabie pair, after which the fervant retired, and left Ids mafter to his own thoughts and machi¬ nations. The valet, by mentioning the little mulatto, had not only given rife to leverai very difagreeable reflections, but had alio leminded his mafter of another circumftance, not altogether fo unpieafant as it was an al¬ moft ceitain recipe for villany to triumph over innocence. vol, m, L CHAP.
CHAP. XVII.
IN the morning, while the party were at breakfaft, they received a meffage from town, informing them that Mrs. Fitzmorris was better, news which conveyed the utmoft fatisfadion to Editha, and alfo to Anna, who fympathized in her grief, but was totally dii- agreeable to Fitzmorris, who the day before had flattered himfelf he had an additional ten thoufand within his grafp. During the afternoon there was fomething in the looks and behaviour of Fitzmorris, fo different %
different from vvhat Anna had been accuf¬ tomed to, that fhe flirunk from his ardent gaze, and her face was covered with biuihes. Editha too perceived the change, and well knowing how addided her father was to liquor, trembled, left he Ihould expofe him¬ felf before her new friend, for the alteration flie was too innocent to attribute to any other caufe, particularly as ihe remarked he drank uncommonly during dinner. Until this day Anna had been perfedly fatisfied with her fituation ; it now began to be difagreeable, and though, like Editha, flie totally attributed the caufe to liquor, yet ihe determined to write to her father on the enfuing morning, to fignify that fhe wiihed to return home. At fupper Fitzmorris was outwardly cheer· ful, but at intei vals feemed loft in reflcdion, a fudden gloom at thofe times ovei fpreading his features ; his confidential fervant he had L 2 fent
fent off that evening to town with orders not to return till the next morning with an account of Mrs. Fitzmorris's health. During îuppcr he apologized to Anna for.the abfence of his domeftics, who were all, lie truly faid, at his town houie, prefenting both her and his daughter with what they wanted. After fupper,, as they had drank nothing but water, Fitzmorris warmly preffed them to pledge him in a glafs of wine to his filter's health, at the lame time reaching each one from the fideboard, and fo peremptorily urging them that they could not ìefufe. Soon after the young friends withdrew, Editha accompa¬ nying Anna to her chamber, in the moit delicate manner;excufing her father's unhappy, propenfity to wine, and conjuring her not to let İt weaken their friendfhip. Fitzmorris now left alone, his head refting on his hand, for fome time remained loft in thought; at length breaking filence, "What адп I about to do ?" faid he, « violate the ñghts
rights of hofpitality, and, perhaps, involve myfelf in ruin ; for, ihould it be difcovered, what will be the confequence ? Piih confe¬ quences, I defy them, none can aiife ; in two hours flie will be infenfible to every thing, anel I may in fafety feize what I ihould in vain entreat ; for weli can I read the coldnefs of her heart in her averted eye and diftant behaviour. D ------ d rcßedion, enemy ίο pieafure, be gone !" drinking a goblet of wine: " With my fortune, am I to ihrink ar fuch a trifle ? Surely not ; ifit is difcovered, who v. ill believe fuch a tuk*? My ili tune and chat ader will pio ted me; be fides, I have, prudently in this cafe, no accomplice, m/i therefore need not fea¡ ùfcoveiy/' Wh'le the villanous Fitsmoirib was thus pbtcir.g the moft iinein.il klunse thai eomd dfi'aCi mammaa, Anra and ikî:i u »a weie in iu. id oin\ eríj/k>!i in the c.ì.ìuk 4 * r oí the ornivi', uhi*, İn tke C" Ιί.νΐ Ì M uf ?vîïh. btiuionibk» id healtu ano t: e»: к;,: uv.k had noc
not until now recolleded the pearl bracelets * that her beft friend had defired her to prefent. to Editha : Taking them therefore from the. cafe, which íhe had in her pocket, flie fixed them on the arms of her companion, who received them,faying, Anna"I will keep thefe for your fake and Mrs. Palmer's : but, in¬ deed, on my own account, did I poffefs all the jewels in the univerfe, I would give them never to fee my father inebriated again/* They then examined the contents of the cafket, which contained a pair of ear-rings, and necklace of pearl, a locket, and feveral rings, on which trinkets, having no more material converfation, they difcourfed, trying on ibme, and admiring others, until at length Anna complained of being uncommonly fleepy, and Editha kiffing her, bade her good night. Anna, when alone, endeavoured to undre fs herfelf, but was, unable; íhe felt fick, her. hands
fiânds fuddenly became liftlefs, and confufed* ideas, on different fubjeds, at once floated on her difordered fancy. c< Oh !" faid íhe, faintly, " it is furely the hand of death—the wine has killed me—it tailed bitter, and my heart recoiled. Fitzmorris's looks frightened me as he prefented it, and I fcarce knew what I did, or I ihould not have drank it.. 1 ihall never more fee my family—parents— Mamma—nor yet'Reuben ! Oh, God ! pro- ted and guide them. Oh, Editha ! Editha ! why—why have you left me?" As flie concluded ihe arofe from her feat to call, but found the giddinefs in her head too great to fuffer her to make any exertion, and reeling. towards the bed, flie threw herfelf upon it,, convinced ihe ihould rife no more. All was now ftill throughout the houfe, luft anei villany ahine weie waking, and, in- the form of Fitztïk'iiis, itole into the cham¬ ber—like the hateful ioe of mankind, dark nefs was beit íuked to his deeds ; he there¬ fore
fore had extinguifiied his candle before he entered, and was not a little furprifed to find a light burning on the table, and Anna d re fi¬ fed, though in a lethargic and death-like fleep, her cap, handkerchief, and the con¬ tents of the cafket, laying fcattered on the floor where they had fallen as fiie attempted to rife. Fie judged rightly, that the ftrength of the potion had ovei powered lier, and rejoiced to find the e ill d fo favourable to his wilies. Determined to feaft his eye» with her beauty before he extinguifiied the light, as there was not the moft diftant profped of her awaken¬ ing, he approached, and for a moment con¬ templated the enchanting Lvelinefs of her face and perfon, iicentioufnds adding a deeper ctimion to his check than even the flu i h of wine. He ftooped to embiace her, but a convulfivc fmile at that inftant ovenpieadmg her fac4, difplayed the beauteous dimples of her cheek, which, however they might have cha: n »cd
charmed any other beholder, app^ned tr¬ havé a different effect upon Ек^тлшь, vho gave a momentary ftart ; but it íiar^iy reco¬ vering himfelf, fnatched up her hand, and imprinted it with an ardent kifs ; but as fud¬ denly again dropping it, he ftood tranfixed with aítoniíhrnent — г voice more than human appeared to found in his ears—a clammy fweat hung on his forehead—the intemperate fever of paifion gave way to the cold fhiver- ingsof an ague, and defire was loft in amaze¬ ment and horror í
JBND OF TKE THIRD У01ДШ2;
