Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Anna St. Ives: a novel
ANNA St. IVE'S; A NOVEL·
LETTER I. ANNA WENLOURN ST. IVES TO LOUISA CLIFTON. Wenhourn-ltUl, İTİERE are we, my dear girl, in the very height of preparation. We begin our journey fouthward at five to-morrow morn¬ ing. We fliall make a fhort ftay in Lon¬ don,.and then proceed to Paris. Expec¬ tation is on tiptoe: my bufy fancy has pictured to itfelf Calais, 'Montreuil, Abbe- vol. i. " ; ?' ville.
ville, in fliort every place which the book of poft roads enumerates, and fome of which the divine Sterne has rendered fo famous. I expect to find nothing but mirth, vivacity, fancy, and multitudes of people. I have read fo much of the po- puloufnefs of France, the gaiety of its inhabitants, the magnificence of its build¬ ings, its fine climate, fertility, numerous cities, t fuperb roads, rieh, plains, and teeming vineyards, that I already imagine myfelf journeying through an enchanted land. I have another plcafure in piofpeci. Pray have you heard that your brother is foon to be at Paris, on his return from Italy ? —My father furprifed me by inform¬ ing me we fliould probably' meet him in that capital. 1- fufpecl Sir Arthur of an implication which his words perhaps will not authorize; but he afked me, rather fignificantly, if I had ever heard you talk of your brother; and in lefs than five mi¬ nutes wiflied to know whether I had any objections to marriage. ' My
My father is exceedingly bufy with his headman, ?? plotter, his planner; giv¬ ing directions concerning ftill further im¬ provements that are to be made, in his grounds and park, during our abfence. You know his mania. Improvement is his difeafe. I have before hinted to you that I do not like this factotum of his, this Abimelech Henley. The amiable qualities of his fon more than compen¬ fate for the meannefsof the father 1 ;"whom I have long fufpected to be, and am in¬ deed convinced that he is artful, felfifh, and honeft enough to feek his own profit, were it at the expenee of his employer's ruin. He is continually infinuating new plans to my father, whom he Sir Arthurs, and Honours, and Nobles, at every word, and then perfuades him the hints and thoughts are all his own. .The illiterate fellow (has a language peculiar to him¬ felf; energetic but half unintelligible ; compounded cf a 'few fine phrafes, and an" inundation of proverbial wifdom and uncouth cant terms.' Of the fcanty num-
ber of polite words, which he has endea¬ voured to catch, he is very bountiful to Sir Arthur. - r That's noble ! That's great tc your noble honour ! Well, by my truly " that's an elegant ideer ! But I always " faid your honour had more nobler and " elegunter ideeis than any other noble * c gentleman, knight, lord, or dooke, " in every thing of what your honour " calls the grand gufto." Pfliaw! It is ridiculous in me to imitate his language ! the cunning nonfenfe of which evapo¬ rates upon paper, but is highly characier¬ iflic when delivered with all its attendant bows and cringes;· which, like the ac¬ companiments to a concerto, enforce the character of the compofition, and give it full effect. I am in the very midft of bandboxes, portmanteaus, packing-cafes, and travel¬ ling tiunks. I fcarcely ever knew a mind fo fluggifh as not tò feci a certain degiee of raptuie, at the thoughts of travelling. It fliould feem as if the imagination fre¬ quently journeyed fo fail as to enjoy a fpe- ,cies
of dragging the cumbrous body after its flights. I cannot baniih the hints of Sir Arthur from my bufy fancy.—I muft not, I ought not to praciife difguife with any one s much lefs with my Louifa ; and I cannot but own that his queftions fuggefted a plan of future happinefs to my mind, which if realized would be delightful. The -bro¬ ther of my dear Louifa, the chofen friend of my heart, is to be at Paris. I fliall meet him there. He cannot but refemble his fifter. He cannot but be all generofity, love, expaniion, mind, foul ! I am deter¬ mined to have a very fincere friendfliip for him; nay I am in danger,of falling in love with him at firft fight ! Louifa knows what I mean by falling in love. Ah, my dear friend, if he be but half equal to you, he is indeed a matchlefs youth ! Our fouls are too intimately related to need any nearer kindred ; and yet, fince marry I muft, as you emphatically tell me it will fome time be my duty to do, I could almoft wifli Sir Arthur's qucf- * 3 tions
tions to have the meaning I fufpecl, and that it might be to the brother of my friend. Xio not call me romantic : if romance {i be, it originates in the fupremc fatisfac¬ tion I have taken, in contemplating the powers and beauties of my Louifa's mind. Our acquaintance has been but fliort, yet our friendfliip appears as if it had been eternal. Our hearts underftand .each other, and fpeak a language which, alas, we both have found to be unintelligible to the generality of the world. Once more adieu. You fliall hear from me agöin at London. Direct to me "as .ufual in G'rofv'enor Street. Ever and ever your a. w. ST. IVES. P. S. I am ferry to fee poor Frank Henley look fo dejected. lie has many good, 'nay I am well perfuaded many great, qualities. Perhaps he is difappoint¬ ed at not being allowed to go with us ; for
'for which I know he petitioned his father; ■but was refufed ; otherwife Ί could'eafily have prevailedonSir Arthur to have, con¬ fented. ■ - '.■'' - ' I am determined to take King Pepin* with me. It İs furely the moft intelligent of all animals; the unfeathered bipeds, as the French wits call us two-legged mor¬ tals, excepted. But no wonder: it was my Louifa's gift; and, kifliiig her lips,.. imbibed a pari of her fpirit. Were I to· leave it behind me, cats, and other good for nothing creatures,'would teach it again. to be fhy, and fufpicious; and the prefent charming exertion ..of its little faculties would decay. The developement of mind even in a bird, has fomething in it highly delightful. ,V/hy, my Louifa, my friend,, ?? fifter, ah, why are not you with me? Why tío yo4i participate my" pleafures, catch with · me the riling ideas, and.cnjoy the raptures
? 4 ' of
of novelty? But I will forbear. I have before in vain exhaufted all my lheioric. You muft not, will not quit a languifhing parent ; and I am obliged to approve your determination, though I cannot but ι egret the confequence, LETTER H, LOUISA CLIFTON ?? ANNA WENBOURNE ST. IVLS. Rufi-Ban&, ? E ALTI I, joy, and novelty attend the fteps of my ever dear and charming Anna ! May the whirling of your chariot wheels brins; a fucceflion of thoughts as cxhila- lating as they aie rapid! May gladneis hail you through the day, and peace hufh you to flecp at night ! May the hills and valleys fmile upon you, as you roll over and
ï
and beride them; and may you meet feftivity and fulnefs of content at every ftep! I too have my regrets. My heart is one-half with you ^ nay, my beloved, my generous mamma has endeavoured to perfuadc me to quit her, arguing that the inconvenience to her would be more than compenfated by the benefit accruing to myfelf. The dear lady, I fincerely be¬ lieve, loves you if poffible better than flie does me, and pleaded ftrenuouily. But did ihe not know it was impoflible flie fliould prevail ? She did. If my cares can prolong a life fo precious but halfan hour, is it not an age? Do not her virtues and her wifdom communicate themfelves to all around her ? Are not her refignation, her fortitude, and her cheerfulnefs in pain, lcíTons which I might traverfe kingdoms and not find an opportunity like this of learning? And, affection out of the queftion, having fuch high d Lities to perform, muft I fly from fuch an occafion, afflici ing ? 5 though
though it be ? No ! Anna St. Ives herfelf muft not tempt mc to that. She is indeed too noble ferioufly to form fuch a wifli. Anfwer, is flie not ? Oh that I may be deceived, but I fear you expect too much from my brother. Oh that he might be worthy of my Annal Not for my own fake; for, as flie truly fays, wc [That is our fouls, for I know of no other we. We] cannot be more akin; but for his own. lie is the fon of my beloved mother, and moft devoutly do I wifli he might be found deferving of her and you. He would then be more de- ferving than any man, at leaft any young man, I have ever known. Though bro¬ ther and fifter, he and I may be faid to have but little acquaintance. He lias al¬ ways been either at fchool, or at college, or in town, or on iiis travels, or in fome place where I did not happen to be, except for fhort intervals. I have told you that his perfon is not difpleafing, that his tem¬ per appears to be prompt and daring, buc gay
gay, and that his manners I doubt are of that free kind which our young gentlemen aflect. To fay the truth, however, Ihave heard much in favour of Coke Clifton; but then it has generally -been either from per¬ fons whofe good word was in my opinion no praife, or from others who evidently meant to be civil to me, or to the family, by fpeaking well of my brother. T believe him to have much pride, forne ambition., a hiffh fenfe of fafhionable honour; that he fpurns at threats, difdains reproof, and that he docs not want generofity, or thofe accomplifliments which would make him pafs with the, world for a man whofe alli¬ ance would be defirable. But the huf¬ band of my Anna [you perceive I have, caught your tone, and ufe the word huf¬ band as familiarly as if there were any fe¬ rious intention of fuch an event, and as if it were any thing more tliat the fportivc effufion of fancy, or rather the momentary expaniion of friendfliip] the hufband of my Anna ought to be more, infinitely more, ? 6 · than
th í» n that the world underftands by fuch phrafes ; ifit can be faid to underftand any thing. Forgive the jingle, but, to pair with her, he ought to be her peer. And yet if flie wait till time fliall fend her fuch a one, and that one every way proper for her alliance, in her father's opinion as well as in her own, I am afraid her chance of marriage will be infinitely fmall. Were I but affured that Coke Clifton would be as- ? ind and'as worthy a huf¬ band, to Anna St. Ives, as any other whom it were probable accident fliould ever throw in her way, I fliould then indeed ferioufly wifli fuch a thought might be fomething more than the tranfient flight of fancy. But enough. You are on the wing to the city where you and he will probably meet. Examine him well ; for¬ get his fifter ; be true to yourfelf and your own judgment, and I have no fear that you fliould be deceived. If he prove bet¬ ter even than a filler's hopes, he will find in me more thari a lifter's love. Hike Sir Arthur's favourite, Abimelech Henlc/j
Henley, ftill lefs than you do. , My fears indeed are rather ftrong. When once a taftefor unpovement [I mean building and gardening improvement] becomes a paf¬ fion, gaming itfelf is fcarcely more ruinous. . I have no doubt that Sir Arthur's fortune * lías fuffered, and is fuifering fevercly ; and that while that miferly wretch, Abimelech» is deftroying the fabricyhe is purloining and carrying off the beft of the materials. I doubt whether there be an acre of land in the occupation of Sir Arthur, which hat> not coli ten times iis intrinfic value to make it better. It is aftonifliing how Sir Arthur can be [pardon the expreffion, my dear] fuch a dupe! I have before blamed, and muft again blame you, for not exert¬ ing yourfelf fufficiently to fliew hitn bis folly. It concerns the family, it concerns yourfelf, nearly. Who can tell how far off the moment is when it may be too late? My mamma has juft heard of a new mort¬ gage, in procuring of which the worthy Abimelech acted, or pretended to act, as agent : for I aifure you I fufpeci he was really
really the principal. During my laft vifit, if I do not miliake, I feveral times faw the pride of wealth berra) ing itfelf; and only fubducd by the fuperior thrift of gain. Poor .Frank Henley ! Is it not miracu¬ lous that fuch a father fliould have fuch a fon ? I am tempted to give utterance to a ftrange thought ! Why Ihould I not ? What is the opinion of the world; what are its prejudices, in the prefence of truth? Yet not to refpect them is to entail upon our¬ feives I know not what load of acrimony, contempt, and mifery ! I muft fpeak—I never yet met a youth whom I thought fo deferving of Anna St. Ives as Frank Hen¬ ley ! The obftaclcs you will fay are infur¬ ili oun table. Alas! I fear they arc. And therefore 'tis fortunate that the fame thought has not more ftrongly occurred to you. Perhaps my caution would have been greater, but that I know your affec¬ tions are free; and yeti confefs I wonder that they are fo. If it be the effect of your reafon, the praife you merit is infi¬ nite; and .1 hope and believe it is; for, notwithftanding
notwithftanding all the tales I have heard and read, my mind is convinced of no¬ thing more firmly than that the paffion of love is as capable of being icpreffed, and conquered, as any other paffion whatever, and you know we have both agreed that ' the paillons are all of them fubjeci to reafon, when reafon İs fufficiently deter¬ mined to exert its power. I have written a long letter; but, writ¬ ing to you, I never know when to end. Heaven biefs my Anna St. Ives ! LOUISA CLIFTON.
LETTER IIT.
FRANK HENLEY ?? OLIVER TRENCHARD. Wc^louìne -??. OLIVER, I am wretched ! The feeble Frank Henley is a poor miferable being ! The
The fun fli ines, thè 'birds warble, the flowers fpring, the buds are bin fling into bloom, all nature rejoices; yet to me this mirth, this univerfal joy, feems mockery— Why is this? Why do I fuffer my mind thus to be pervaded by melancholy ? Why am I thus fieeped in gloom ? She is going—Thurfday morning is the " time fixed—and what is that to me ?—· Madman that I am !—Who arn I ? Docs flie, can flie, ought flie to think of me ? And why not? Am I not a man; and is flie more than mortal ?—She is ! She is !— Shew me the mortal who prefurnes to be her equal ! 4 But what do I wifti ? What woukl I have ? Is it my intention or my defne to make her wretched ? What ! Sink her whom, I adore in the eftimation of the world; and render her the feoff of .the foolifli, the vain, and the malignant ί¬ ί !—I make her wretched !—I !— Oliver, flie treats me with indifference— cold, calm, killing indifference! Yet kind, heavenly kind even in her cold nefs ! Her chearful
A NOVEL',
chearful eye never turns from me, nor ever fecks mc. To her I am, a ftatue------ would I were! Why does, flie not hate me ? Openly and abfolutely hate me .'--- And could I wifli her to love ? Do I love ? Do I ? Dare I ? Have I the temerity fo much' as to fufpe£t I love ?—Who am I? The infignificant fon of------ And who is flie ? The daughter of a .Baronet— Píli a ! What is a Baronet?— ■ Away with fuch infolent, fuch ridicu¬ lous diftinffions. She is herfelf! Let Folly and inferiority keep their diftance ! But I ?—Low bred and vulgar let Pride and Error call me, but not villain 1 I the fcducer of men's ' daughters ! Noblemen and ftill nobler daughters ! I ! Why, would I be fo very vile a thing ? Would I if I could ? Yet who fliall benumb the underftand¬ ing, chain up the .fancy, and freeze fen¬ fation? Can I command myfelf deaf when flie fings, dead.when-flie fpeaks, or ruth into idiotifm to avoid her enchant¬ ments ? Defpife
Defpife me, Oliver, if thou wilt, but the deep fenfe I have of my own folly docs but increafe the diftempcr of my brain. She herfelf pities me, yet does not fuf- peci my difeafe. Tis evident flie does not; for her foul is above, artifice. She kindly afked—was I not well ! I owned I was not quite fo chearful as 1 could wifli to be; and f wouldft thou think itr] was prcfumptuous enough to hint that I thought the enlivening air of France might do me good. 'Ihou feefl hov/ frantic I am ! She anfwered with the utmoft eafe, and without the moft diftant fufpicion of my felfifh, my audacious motive, that flie would fpeak to Sir Aithur. But I was obliged to requeft her to forbear, till I had fiift tried to gain my father's confent, of which indeed I had but feeble hopes. Every way miferable, why am I oblig¬ ed to think and fpeak of niy father with fo little refpect? Indeed he 'u ------ Wei!, well !—He is my father------1 am con¬ vinced he is become wealthy; nay in¬ deed he gives me to underftand as much, when
when he wifhes to gain any purpofc, by endeavouring to ex-cite avarice in me, which he hopes is, and perhaps fuppofes muft be mine and evo ? man's lifting paf¬ fion. Yet, no ; he cannot : his complaints of mc for the want -of it arc too heartfelt, too bitter. He as kept me in ignorance has much as was in his power. Reading, writing, and arithmetic is his grand fyftcm of education ; after which man has nothing more to learn, except to get and to hoard money. Had it not been for the few books I bought and the many I borrowed, together wilh the effential inftruciion which thy excellent father's learning and philanthropy enabled and induced him to give me, I fliould probably have been as illiterate as he could have wiflied. ? fon after his own heart! One of his moft frequent and moft paffionate reproaches is w 4he time I wqfle in reading." I fcarcely need tell thee he was almoft in a' rage, at my requeft to accompany Sir Ari hur to Fnir,ee ; ftating, as I did, that
that it ought to be and muft be athis ex- pence. Othei wife he cares but little where I go, being lather regarded by him as a fpy on his actions than as his fon. Thou canft not conceive the contempt with which he treats mc, for my Want of cunning. -He defpifcs my fenfe of 'phi¬ lanthropy, honour, and that fevere probity ,to which no laws extend. lie fpuins at the poifibility of preferring the good of fociety to the good of felf------But once again, he is my father. Prithee lend me thy Petrarch, and fend it in return by Thomas. I had nothing to fay, though I have written fo much, except ta afk for this book, and to burden thee with my complaints. Remember nie kindly to thy moft worthy father, and aii the familv. Thine,
?. HLNLEY*
LETTER IV. ANNA WENBOURNE ST. IVKS TO LOUISA CLIFTON,
London, Grofvewr Street, , Louifa ' I have fuch a narrative ! Such accidents ! Such— í But you ihali hear. We are arrived ; and, thank God and good fortune, are all alive ; which, every thing confidered, is no fmall confolation. The chaife was at the door punctually at five on Tburfday morning. Abİmclech Henley had been very bufy with Sir Ar¬ thur over night; and was in clofe con¬ ference with him again previous to our de¬ parture. Frank too was there, as difconfolate and as attentive as everj acHve and watchful that every thing was as h fliould be.
??
How the difference between foul and foul riifcovers itfelf in fuch feenes ! I very much fear his father treats him unkindly, and that he grieves more than he ought ; nay more than a perfon of his youth, flrong form, and ftill ftrongcr mind, could be fuppofed to grieve. I underftand he very much laments the lofs of a college education, which the m ife r his father could very well have beftowed upon him, had not his heart been as contracted as the mouth of his purfe. Mr. Trcnchard luckily for Frank, early difcovered his genius, and gratuitoufly aided him in his ftudies. Frank reveres him as a more than father, and loves his fon Oliver like a brother: He is but too fenfible that a,true father feeds the mind, and that he who only provides for the body is no better than a ftep-father. I have fome, fear that there is another caufe for his diflatisfaclion, and that he has cherifh¬ ed fome filJy thoughts of an impoffible nature. ,If fo' an effort muft' be made which I hope will reftore him to reafon.
And yet what right have I to conclude that he reafons erroneoufly ? Have I fuf¬ ficiently examined ? This is a queftion which has feveral times lately forced itfelf upon my mind. I am not infcnfible of his high worth : it opens upon me daily. What I am going to relate will picture that worth bettor than any praife of mine. I will therefore continue my narrative. Every thing ' being -adjufted, off we went; Ï, Laura, and Sir Arthur, in the' chaife, and one footman only with u í, who was to ride before as our courier, and prepare horfes. » I told you of my intention to take King Pepin with me; but the morning of our departure was all hurry, and· it feldom happens that fomething is not-forgotten, amid the tumult into which the paflions feem to plunge as it were with delight, gratified with the confufion which them¬ felves create.- I muft own I was vexed and offended with myfelf, when I found that the fomething overlooked on this oc¬ cafion was the gift · of my »Louifa. lii-
gratitude with all its reproaches rofe up to fling me ; and I immediately refolved to punifii myfelf, by informing my Louifa how unworthy I am of. the gifts of fuch a friend. It was at the firft ftage where we changed horfes that I »made this dif¬ covery. One moment I was inclined to petition Sir Arthur to ftay, while a mef¬ fenger fliould be fent ; but the next I de¬ termined that my fault fliould incur its due pains and penalties. Every thing was ready; but juft as we had feated ourfeives in the. chaife, and were again proceeding on our journey, one of the fervants <of the inn called to Sir Arthur to ftop, for young Mr. Hen¬ ley was coming up full fpeed on the bay mare. Frank and the bay mare are both famous through the whole country. My father immediately prognofticated fome bad accident, and I began to be alarmed. Our fears however were foon diffipated, his only errand being to bring my char¬ ming favourite. I confefs I was not a little moved by this
this mark of attention, which indeed is but one among many, as well as by lhe peculiarity of the youth's manner in deli¬ vering the bird. He was fearful, vifibly fearful, that his defire to oblige fliould be thought officious. He attempted to apo¬ logize, but knew not what to fay. I thanked him very fincerely, and in the kindeft manner I could ; and, feeing him booted, the thought inftantly ftruck me to requeft Sir Arthur's permiifion for him to accompany us to London, which I imagined might give him pleafure. The requeft happened to coincide with fome new project of alteration which Sir Arthur 4 had conceived, and which, he faid, after having further digefted, he could better communicate to Fi ank than defcribe on paper. The mare is faid to be one of the beft travellers in the kingdom ; and, as flie was very capable of performing the journey, and the carriage being rather " heavily loaded, he accordingly kept pace -with us. : During the day we paffed many de- .^..XOL.ju .......... c lightful
lightful feenes, and enjoyed the charming- profpecis which the rich cultivation of England, and the road we travelled, afford. __ Frank Henley was fcarcely ever out of fight, though he was rather watch¬ fully afliduous than communicative. SirAithur, for his pair, did not forget to point out to us what a charming paik fuch and fuch giounds might be turned into; how pLSturefque a temple, or a church fteepJe, would look in this place ; what a fine effect a fheet of water would have in that bottom ; and how nobly a clump of tiees would embellifli the hill by which it was overlooked. I believe I am a fad wicked girl, Louifa J î was once ftrangely tempted to tell him I was much afraid his father had miftaken the trade to which his genius was beft adapted, when he made him a baionct inftead of a gai dener. However I had the giace to bite my tongue and be filent. He might have had the retoit courteous upon me, and have replied that gardening was much the moft honom able trade
trade of the two. But he would never have thought of that anfwer. Thus -the day, as I tell you, paffed pleafantly and whimfically enough. But the night!'Oh '—The night!------You ihali hear. It wasche dufk of evening when we were at Maidenhead. We had then three flages to go, and Sir Arthur began to be alarmed by the rumours of depredations which had lately been committed on the road. I really do not know what to fay to it; í but there appears to be fomething . deeper in the docírine of iympathies than fuch filly girls as I can either account for or comprehend. I endeavoured with all my might to oppofe the fenfation, and yet I found my father's fears were catch- ring. Frank Henley indeed begged of me, with great energy, not to be alarmed; for that he would die fooner than I fliould be infulted. Upon my honour, Louifa, he is a gallant } 7 outh!—You fliall hear—. But he is a brave, a gallant youth. I cannot fay but I wiflied I were a ? 2 man:
■man; though I am convinced it was a foolifli wifli, and that it is a great- mif- rtake to fuppofe courage has any con¬ nexion with fex; if we except,' as we ^.ought, the influence of education and habit. My dear mother had not - the bo- •diJy ftrength of Sir Arthur; but, with re¬ fpecl to cool courage and aclive prefence •of mind, I muft^favj Louifa, there was .no comparifon. We fet off, however, Frank having firft -provided himfelf witb a hanger and a •pair of'piftols;- and he now kept clofe to ■the chaife-door, without once quitting his ilation. I believe Sir Arthur was heartily ,glad at being thus provided with a guard, .as it were unexpectedly, and without any -forefight of his own. For, not to men¬ tion gold watches and trinkets, he had ;morc money with him than he would have chofen tó have loft, fright out of the queftion. : . "We proceeded thus without moleftation as far as Brentford; but not without re¬ ceiving frefli hints that it was very poffible we
we might be vifited ; and then,- though it bogan to be drawing toward midnight, Sir Arthur thought the danger chiefly over. As it happened be was miftaken. Pie was indeed, my dear! I affure you I could tremble now with the thoughts of it, but that my woman-hood forbids. I remember how valiant I have been in laughing at the pretty fears of pretty ladies, with their falts, hartfhom, fits, and burnt feathers. Befide, I would not have my Louifa think too meanly of me. Y'ct I aifure you it was a teirible night. We had juft paffed the broad part of Turnham Green, as Frank has fince told me, and were near the end of a Jane wiiich ftrikes into the Uxbridge road, when the poftillion 1 was flopped by one highwayman, while almoft at the fame inftant another daihed his piftol through the fide-glafs into the chaife, full in Sir Arthur's face/ Frank was on my fide—Notwithftand¬ ing the length of the journey, he feemed to infufe his own ardour into the fpirited ? 3 animal
animal on which he rode, and was round inftantaneoufly—It was really dreadful !—» The highwayman faw, or rather heard him coming, for it was prodigioufly dark, and fired., Poor Frank was fhot !—In the flioulder—But he fays he did not feel it at firft—He returned the fire ; and the highwayman exclaimed, with a fliocking oath, "lama dead man !" He rode away however full fpeed; and .his aflbciate, who ftood to guard the poft-boy, rode after him. Frank imagines that, owing to the darknefs ofthe night, and his being fo clofe under the chaife, they had not per¬ ceived him when they came to the attack. Buf here let me tell you, for I am fure I ought, our protector, our hero ris not dangeroufly wounded. He indeed makes very light of it ; but I ám perfuaded he would do that if hehad loft an arm. The moment the highwaymen were gone, he rode round to me to intreat me not to be alarmed, for that all was fafe. Imagine whether I did not thank him, and bids him; at Jeaft in-ejaculation. Imagine.
Imagine what I felt, after what I had heatd, at hearing him talk to me, and at being convinced that he was actually alive. I had not the leaft fufpicion of hib being wounded, he fpoke fo cheerfully; yet I naturally enquired if he were hurt. His anfwer was—" No ?? —Not hurr —But he fpoke with an emphafis that imme¬ diately raifed my apprehenfions. I re¬ peated my queftion—■" Are you fure you are not hurt; not wounded?" He could not fay no to that, and therefore anfvveied —" He believed he felta flightconmfion in the flioulder; but that he was convinced it was trifling/' I was now feized with a fit of terror much greater, in effect, than my fonner panic. I fervently intreated Sir Arthur to let the fervant take the bay mare, and ride for help' I begged, ? gently, vio¬ lently, for God's fake, that he would take my place in the chaife İ I would mount the mare myfelf! I would do any thing. All the replies I could get were ftill moie ? 4? Ychement
vehement interceffions from Frank Hen¬ ley, that I would not be alarmed, aflur- ances that there was not the leaft danger, the moft obftinate determination not to quit his poft, and, notwithftanding the pain which he could not but feel, a per¬ fifting to reload the difcharged piftol, and then to proceed. I know not myfelf how my fears were fo far pacified as to yield to this, except that his energy feemed to overpower mine. Indeed I fuffered dreadfully the reft of the way. I knew the youth's generous fpirit, and my imagination was haunted with the idea, that the blood was flowing every foot of the road, and that he would rather drop from the horfe than be fubdued) it is impoffible, indeed it is, ίο tell you what 1 felt. - At laft we arrived in Grofvenor Street ;" and fure enough the poor fellow was faint with the lofs of blood. " My God!"— faid I to Sir Arthur, when the light was brought, and ,1 faw him— tf Send for a furgeon !
furgeon! Good Heavens! Run! Some¬ body run for help!"—He ftill infifted he was but llightly hurt, and began to re- fume all his earneftncfs to quiet me. Sir Arthur did it more effectually by fending as I defired, and by telling me that, if I continued to agitate by contending with him fo much, I might very poffibly throw him into a fever, and make a wound, which moft probably was not in itfelf dan¬ gerous, mortal. I faid not another word; except feri¬ oufly and folemnly requefting him to calm his mind, for his own fake, if not for mine; for that, after being .wounded in defence of me s and my father, to die by my fault, weie dreadful indeed. Fie re¬ tired with more apparent fatisfaction in his countenance, than I think I ever faw before. I was refolved however not to eo to bed, till I had received fome account from the furgeon. He came, the wound was examined, and word was immediately fent me, by the exprefs command cf ? 5 . Fi ank,
Frank, who had been told I was fitting up for that purpofe, that there was, as he had affured me, no danger. The furgeon indeed thought proper to qualify it with no great danger. It is an old remark that iurgeons are not prone to fpeak too lightly of the miracles they perform. This fliort fyliable, great, did not fail however to difturb me very confiderably. I waited till the ball was extracted, and [Would you believe it?] brought us; for I infifted upon feeing it. Sir Arthur called me a mad girl, adding there was no ruling me. I perfifted in queftioning and crofs-exa- mining the furgeon, till I was convinced that, as he faid, there was no great dan¬ ger; and I then retired to reft: that is, I retired to the fame fwimming motion which the chaife had communicated to my nerves, or my brain, or I know not what, and to dreaming of fwords, piftols, mur¬ dered men, and all the horrid ramblings of the fancy under fuch impreflions. To convince me how trifling the hurt was, the gallant Frank infifted the next day
day on coming down to dinner; though he was allowed to eat nothing but chicken broth, and a light pucMing. I never faw him fo lively. Flis only prefent danger of death, he faid, was by famine ; and com¬ plained jocularly ofthe hardfliip of fafling after a long journey. I could almoft have perfuaded him to eat, for indeed he is a brave, a noble youth. I know I never need apologize to my Louifa for the length of my letters. How can we enjoy equal pleafure to that of thus converfing in defpite of diftance, and though feparated by feas and mountains ? Indeed it is a kind of privation to end; but end I muft—thcrefoie—Adieu. A. w. ST. IVES,
? ? LETTER
L E T T E R ■ V.
FRANK HENLEY ?? OLIVER TTvENCHARD.
London, Grofvenor-Strect, JL OU did not expect dear Oliver, to receive a letter from r.if dated at this difi. tance. By the luckieft accident in the world, I have been allowed to accompany her thus far, have ridden all day with my eye fixed upon her, and at night have had the ecftatic pleafure to defend, to fight for her ! Perhaps have faved her life ! Have been wounded for her !—Would I had been killed '—Was there ever fo foolifli» fo wrong, fo romantic a_wifli ? And yet it has rufhed involuntarily upon me fifty times. To die for her feems to be a blifs which mortal man cannot merit ! Truth, fevere truth, perhaps, will not juftify thefe erfufions, I will, I do, endeavour to
to refift them.—Indeed I am afiiamed of myfelf, for I find I am very feeble. Yet let not thy fears be too violent for thy friend : he will not lightly defert his duty. Let me tell thee, before Γ proceed; that my wound is flight.—We were flop¬ ped by a couple of highwaymen. Thou never wert a witnefs of fuch angelic fen¬ fibiiity as the divine creature difcovered, when fhe found I had received fome hurt. She alarmed me beyond defcription, by the excefs of her feelings. Oh ! She has a foul alive to all the throbs of humanity ! It flioots and fliivcrs in every vein !—Then too when we arrived, when candles were brought [I had bled fomewhat freely, and I fuppofed looked rather pale] thou haft no conception of, it is impoffible to con¬ ceive the energy with which flie infifted on fending for the beft and moft immediate help. We had another battle of fenfibiiity ; for I aifure thee I was almoft as much ' [Did I not know her I fhould fay more.] alarmed for her as fhe could' be for me. Yet
Yet do not imagine I am fool enough' to flatter myfelf with any falfe hopes. No : it was humanity; it was too deep a fenfe of a flight benefit received ; it was totally diftincl from love. ---------Oh no! Love, added to fuch ftrong, fuch acute fenfations, furely, Oliver, it would have fhrieked, would have fainted, would have died !------ her fears and feelings were -powerful I grant, but they weie all focial, and would have been equally awakened for any creature whom fhe had known, and had equal caufe to efteem. And flie efteems all Λνίιο have but the fmalleft claims to fuch refpecl ; even me !—Did I tell thee it was ihe who petitioned Sir Arthur to lay his commands on me to attend them to London, knowing I wifhed it ; and that this was in return for the tri¬ fling favour I had done her, in galloping after her with her favourite bird ? Oh ! She is ail benignity ! All grace ! All angel ! Never did I feel fuch raptures as fince I have received this fortunate, this happy wound ! — Yet why ? —— Is not hér heart
heart exactly what it was ? It is. I fliould be an idiot not to perceive it is. Strange contradiction ! Hopelefs yet happy !—■ But it is a felicity_ of flioit duration. Would İt were poflible for me to ac¬ company her to France ! My re'ftlefs „foreboding imagination has perfuaded me flie will be in danger the moment flie is from under my piutrction. Vain fool! Who, what am I ?-^—Becaufe a couple of daftardly highwaymen have galloped away at the fiift repoU of a piftol, my inflated fancy has been bufy-in perfuading me that I am. her hero ! Yet I wifh I might go with her ! Tell me, Oliver, wouldft not thou wifli fo too? Would not all the world wifh the fame ? Didft thou ever in thy life behold her without feelings unufual, throbs, doubts, defires, and feai s ; wild, incoherent, yet deriving ecftafy fiom that divinity which irradiates her form and beams on every object around her?—Do!—Think me a poor, raving, Iovefick blockhead! And yet it. is true! All I have faid of her, and infinitely
.- infinitely more, is true ! Thou nor the world cannot difprove it ! Would I might go with her!.
I have feen the fellow with whom I had the rencounter. His wound is much more fevere than mine. Sir Arthur fent infor¬ mation to the office in. Bow Street.— Wouldft thou think a highwayman could be fo foolifli a coxcomb as to rob in a bright fcarlet coat, nnd to ride a light grey horfe? The blood-hunters [lam forry that our abfurd, our iniquitous laws oblige me to call them fo] the blood-hunters foon difcovered the wounded man. Forty pounds afforded a fufficient impulfe.— They were almoft ready, to quarrel with me, becaufe I did not choofe to fwear as heartily as they thought proper to prompt. Thou knovveft how I abhor the taking away the life of man, inftead of feeking his reformation. After perfifting that it was impoffible for· me to identify the perfon of the high¬ wayman, as indeed it really was, and luckiiv
luckily prevailing on Sir Arthur to do the fame [though he, like 'moft folks who have any thing to lofe, was convinced it woukl be an excellent thing if all logues could be inftantly hanged, like dogs, out ofthe way] I paid the poor wretch a vifit, pri¬ vately, and gave him fuch a lecture as, I iliould hope, he would not eafily forget. It was not all cenfure : footh ing, reafoning, and menace were mingled. IV^y greateft effort was to convince him of the folly of fuch crimes ; he had received fome proof of the danger. He was in great pain, and did not think his life quite fecure. He promifed reformation with all the appa¬ rent fervour of finceiity, prayed for me, bleffed me very heartily, and prai fed me for my bravery. He fa v s the Bow Street runners will leave- nothing unattempled to fecure the reward, and take awa) bis life. I have therefore engaged to hire a lodging, and bring a hackney coach for him myfelf, at feven in the moin ing, the hour leaft likely for him to be watched or traced. I believe I was more ealncft to prevent barm happening to him than - he
he himfelf was ; for, having met a man- upon the ftairs, whofe phyfiognomy, drefs and appearance led me to fufpeft him, I queftioned my penitent, who owned it was his accomplice ; a determined fellow, according t-o his account; an Iriih "gam¬ bler, whofe daring character led him, after a run of ill luck, to this defperate refource. It was with fome difficLilty I could per¬ fuade him the fellow might betray him, and join the Bow Street people. The gambler, as he fays, experts a fupply, and has promifed him money. But he has confented- to leave his lodging; and' I think I have convinced him of the folly, danger, and guilt of fuch -connections. I found he-was poor, and, except a few ihillings, left him the trifle of money which I had; endeavouring by every means to reftore a loft wretch to virtue and fociety.' 'The fellow was not flint. The tears guflied into his eyes, and I own I came away with hopes that my efforts had not been wholly ineffectual.
I have.
? have written by the firft poft, that thou mayft know what is become of me, Farewell. F. HENLEY.
LETTER VI. LOUISA CLIFTON το ANNA WENBOURNE ST. IVES. Pofi Baia. 1 HAVE only time for a fmgie line, but I cannot forbear to tell you how great the emotions have been which I felt, my dear Anna, at reading your laft. Ten thoufand thanks for )^our hiftory; for fo it may well be called. You have quite filled my mind with the pictures, incidents, and adven¬ tures of your journey. ------Then your deli¬ verer !—Such courage !—Such fortitude ! ???? ------! ï muft
Ι muit not finiih my fentence. I muft not tell you all I think concerning him. There were two or three paifages in your letter which raifed doubts Ίη my mind,; but of thefe I was foon cured by recol¬ lecting a fentence at the beginning— (i An effort muft be made which will reftore him to reafon. Yet the queftion muft be, examined." 1 —Certainly—You could not be Anna St. Ives, and act or feel otherwife. But I abfolutely adore this youth, this Frank Henley ! The boy is waiting ; he will be too late for the poft. Be that my excufe for the briefnefs of this; but do not fail, my dear dear Anna,, to write fully every thing that paifes. Your laft has both warmed mv feelings, nay in fome meafure my fears., and excited my curiofity. Yours eternally,' L. CLIFTON. ? P. S, I will write more at length to¬ morrow. " - LETTER.
LETTER VII.
ABIMELECH ΗΕΝΙ/ΕΓ TO SIR ARTHUR ST. IVES,, BARONET, ι I TIT I n'iii i l II » Wenbourtie-HU!. Moil onnurable Sir, my ever onnurd Matter. iL HE inftruclions * you wus pleafed to give mc have bin kept in mind. YOur .* Th? editor has fome tiraeq found it very difficult totrantl.ite the letters of this correfpondent, out of bad ([Hilling into EngHfli. Had they been left as they were written, they would have been half unin¬ telligible. The editor however has ufed his own judgment, in fufleiiiig various words to retain their primitive drefs j the better to preferve what would otherwife have been too much unlike its author, had the ortho¬ graphy been rendered perfect. It would have been affaliination to have omitted any ofthe dialectic or cant terms, in which this ho¬ neft Abimelech takes fo much delight : for which reafon they have been carefully retained. ·
onnur's commands is my duties ; your precepts is my Jaws. For why? Your noble onnur knows how to command, and I knows how to obey. The willow dell is fiilin up ; all hands is at work. I keeps 'em to it. The floap ofthe grande kinal will be finiih t and turft over in S wckes ; and I have chofen the younk plants for the vardunt hall ; nice wons they be too, your onnur ! But Ihave a bin ponderaitin on all thefe thinks, and footh an trooth to fay, your •onnur, ι doubt as how the bitt [I mean the kole, your onnur] witch your noble onnur has a been pleefd to ftipilate and lay by for thefe here improvements [And glo¬ rious improvements they will be, let me tell your onnur. I think I knows a fum- think of the matter, thof to be fure I muft a fay as how I am no more nur a chit, a kintlin, to your onnur, in matters of tafte and the grande goofto, and all a that there ; but I'll give your onnur my two ears if there be any think at all kompariffuble or parallel to it in all England.] But as I wus
wus a fayin to your noble onnur—I am afeard we fliall, want cafli;.and I ama fure that would be a ten m of pities.— Efpecially if your onnur thinks any think more of the vifter, with another church fleepilm profpekfliun. And to be fure it was ? -noble thoft ; I muft fay. it would a be a fin-and a fli ame to let fuch an elegunt ideer a flip through your fingui's. And then, pardn me your onnur, but for what, and for why, and for wherefore ? Befides all witch, your onnur wus a menfliinnin a willdurnefs, and a herm- mutidge, and a grotto ; all which as your onnur faid would conceal the dead flat anenft the 3 old okes. And would your onnur think of ftoppin fhort, after havin a done all that your onnur has a done, to bring Wenbourne Hill into vogue an rep- pitaifliun, and make in the talk ofthe hole kuntree ? Nay, for the matter of that, it is a that already ; that I muft fay. But then, as your onnur fays, in anfwer, nothink is done till everything is done. , And fo I have 'paradventered umbelly to
to fpeak my foolifli thofts, on this here bufinefs. For why? I knows a what your onnur will fay. Your onnur will tell me, when your onnur comes back. Ay, honeft Aby, I wifli the flvincrs thai I a fpent and a bamboozİld İn that there France had a bin ftrewed over thefe here (grounds. For, over and above of what I abin a men- (hinnin to your onnur, there is the tempel befide a the new plantation, of a witch your onnur has fo long a bin talkin of a buiidin of. And then there is the cxten- flinn and ogmcnfliun of the new ruins. So that all together, I muft fay that if fimple honeft Aby might paradventer to put in my oar to fo generous and fo noble a gen¬ tleman, and moreover won of hid majefty's baronets, why I would keep the money now I had a got it ; fince, as your onnur finds, money is not fo eafy to be a come at. Pray your onnur, I beefiege your onnur dont forget that ; money İs notfo eafy to be a come at. And fo I moft umbelly rimmane, with the blcfim oî almighty mercifool praife, your
your onnur's moft umbel and moft obe¬ dient, very /aithfool and very thankfool, kind farvent to command, ABIMELECH HENLEY. ] P. S, I pray your onnur to think ofthe vifter, and the willdurnefs, and the, herm- mutidgc ; I pray your onnur* doo ?? ; riot forrgettin the tempel. Think ofthe money your, moft dear gracious noble onnur ; and think to what vantidgc I could alay it out for your onnur ; that İs, take mc ritely your moft exceptionable, onnur, a favin and a fayin under your wife onnur's purteciion, and eurreclion, and every think of that there umbel and very fubmiffive obedient kind. Bring me, the man that a better knows how to lay out his pound or hi s 'penni than myfelf; that is, always a favin ι and exceptin your noble onnur, as in rite and duty boundin. And then as to forin parts! Why, lawjus mighty ! Your noble, onnur has 'em at your fingur's ends. The temple will ftand ; blow or fnow, a there it
it will be ; I'll a anfwer for that ; a fliii- lin's worth for every fliillin : but aft for the money a fquitterd a here and a there in förin parts, what will your moft noble on¬ nur ever fee for that? I moft umbelly condyfend to beg and beefiege your good and kind'onnur's noble pardn forali this audacious interpolation, of and by witch any but your moft difrefpeclfool ( onnur would fay wus no better but fo much mag : but I hopes and trufts your onnur, as you always have bin henceforth in times pafst, is in the mind a well to take what a well is meant. And fo I wonce and again moft per- rumptallee beg leave, in all le-wlinefs by ' the grace and' bleflin of God in .his infinite goodnefs and mercy to fuperfcribe ?^?1? "ABIMELECH HENLEY,
LETTER VIIL ANNA WENBOURNE ST. IVES ?? LOUISA CLIFTON. London, GrofvemrStWU FRANK FIENLEY's accident has necelfarily delayed our journey for a fort¬ night; nay, it was within an ace of being delayed for ever, and [Would you think it poffible ?] by the artful remonftrances of this Abimelech Henley. I have been obliged to exert all my influence, and all my rhetoric, upon Sir Arthur, or it would have been entirely given up. Rapacious and narrow in his own plans, this wretch, this honefl Aby, as my father calls him, would not willing¬ ly fuffer a guinea to be fpent, except in improvements : that is, not a guinea which fhould not pafs through his hands. A let- D 2 ter
ter fiom him to Sir Arthur has been the caufe of this conteft. I hope however, my dear, that Sir Aithui's affahs aie not in fo bad a tiain as your feai s [expreffed in your letter of the third] caufe you to imagine. Should they be fo, what will become of my bro¬ ther ? A mere man of fafliion ' ?? ive in the "whole etiquette of vifiting, di effing, driving, riding, fencing, dancing, gaming, writing cai db of compliment, and all flic frivolous follies of what, by this clafs of people, is called the ziojL·! ·> but indolent in, or more propeily incapable of aH ufeful duties. I ftand rathei high in his opinion, and he has done me the honour to confult mc latel) on a family aflair. The Edgcmoor cítate, of eight hunched per annum, is entailed on him, as the heii of St. Ives, by my giandfather's will ; with light of pof¬ feffion at the age of twenty-four. Sir Aithur I fuppofe does not find it conve¬ nient to abridge his income fo materially, and has been endeavouring to peafuade him
him that it is his duty and intereft not to infift upon poffeffion ; at leaft for the pre¬ fent. My brother is not pleafed writh the propofal, and has complaifantly written to afk my opinion, with an evident determi¬ nation to follow his own, he having now almoft completed his twenty-foui th ƒ ear. My anfwer was an attempt [I fear a vain one] to call to his mmd the true ufe of money; and, uniefs he fliould have found the ait of employ irig it worthily, I advifed him to fliew his filiai affection and oblige Sir Arthur. I can prophecy however that he will have no foibearance. Not to mention debts, he has too many imaginary and impatient wants to fubmit to delay. Neither have I any great defire that he fliould ; being convinced that the want of money is the only impediment than can put a ftop to Sir Arthur's impiovements. But this honeft Abyl—The fame poft that brought me your letter of the eleventh * brought "one for Sir Arthur :
d3
and
and while I was meditating on the con¬ tents of yours, and not a little chagrined at the^ confirmation of your intelligence concerning the mortgage—[Chagrined that my father fliould be the infti umení, the tool of fuch a fellow.; chagrined that his family fliould be in danger, and him· , felf made a jeftj—while I was confidering what were the beft means, if there were any, of inducing Sir Arthur to abandon projecìs fo foolifli, and fo fatal,. Laura came running with the news that our journey to France was all over, that orders to that effect had been given, and that a chaife'was to be at the door in an hour, to take Sir Arthur back to Wenbournc- Hill« This incident, in my then temper of mind, produced its full effect I knew Sir Arthur's way : I knew he would not willingly fee me himfelf; and, immedi¬ ately fufpecling that his letter was from honeft Aby, I determined if poflible he 4hould not efcape me. He was in his own room ; and how to draw him out ? An •hour would foon be gone! I theiefoie employed
~effiplöyéH"an artifice, wnicn, on atter re¬ collection, I am convinced was wrong; very wrong! I went into the drawing- room, and bade the footman go to him and announce Mifs Wenbourne. I have a maiden aunt of that name, whom I was chriftened after, who lives in London, a'nd whom I believe you never faw. The ,tiick fucceeded, and Sir<-Arthur came into the drawing-room. He looked difconcer¬ ted at feeing me, and the following dia¬ logue began. Heydey, Anna ' Where is your aunt ? Sir, I am afraid I have done an unjufti- able thing. [My confeience then firft fmote me, with a conviction that what I had perfuaded myfelf was a defenfible artifice was neither more nor lefs than a direct falfehood ; which of all crimes, you know I think one of the moft mean, hateful, and pernicious. The juft confufion I felt had nearly ruined my caufe.] Why !—-What!—What do you mean? —Where is your aunt ?
d 4
She
and while I was meditating on the con¬ tents of yours, and not alitile chagrined at the^ confii mation of your intelligence concerning the mortgage—[Chagimed that my father fliould be the infl'i.:nent, the tool of fuch a fellow; chagrined that his family fliould be in danger, and him¬ felf made a jeftj—while I was confidering what were the beft means, if there were any, of inducing Sir Arthur to abandon projects fo foolifli, and fo fatal,. Laura cume running with the news that our journey to France was all over, that orders to that effect had been given, and that a chaife was to be at the door in an hour, to take Sir Arthur back to Wenbourne- Hílk This incident, in my then temper of mind, produced its full effect. I knew Sir Arthur's way : I knew he would not willingly fee me himfelf; atad, immedi¬ ately fufpecling that his letter was from honeft Aby, I determined if poffible he ihould'not efcape me, He was in his own room ; and how to draw him out ? An -hour would foon be gone! I theiefoie employed
employed an artifice, which, on after re¬ collection, I am convinced was wrong ; very ΛνΓοι^! 1 went into the drawing- room, and bade the footman go to him and announce Mifs Wenbourne. I have a maiden aunt of that name, whom I was chriftened after, who lives in London, a'nd whom I believe you never faw. The ,trick fucceeded, and ShvArthur came into the drawing-room. Fie looked difconcer¬ ted at feeing me, and the following dia¬ logue began. Heydey, Anna ' Where is your aunt ? Sir, I am afraid I have done an unjufti- able thing, [My confeience then firft fmote me, with a conviction that what I had perfuaded myfelf was a defenfible artifice was neither more nor lefs than a direct falfehood ; which of all crimes, you know I think one of the moft mean, hateful, and pernicious. The juft confufion I fel.* had pearly ruined my caufe.] ????! —What!—What do you mean? ■—Where is your aunt ?
d 4 She
■g She is not here, fir. It was I who wiflied to fpeak to you. You! And fend in your aunt's name? My name is AVenbourne," fir. Your name is St. Ives, mifs. I feel, fir, how exceedingly culpable I arti; and peihaps do not defervé that you fliould pardon me. [My father began to fufpecl the re a fon' bf my wifhing to fpeak with him, and did not know whether good nature 01 ill would ferve his caufe the beft. I perceived him caft an eye toward the door.] This is extraordinary!------Very extia- ordinary, upon my foul ! [I faw it was time to recover my fpirits.] I have heard fomething which I fcaiccly can believe to be tuie, fir. What have you heard ? What have you heard ? ' That you are going back to Wenbourne. Hill. Well, what then? And that you do aiot intend we flwuld vifit France. Who
Who told you fo? The fervants have orders to that effect. The fervants are a parcel of bufy blockheads ! What can have occafioned you, fir, to change your opinion fo fuddenly ? My affairs. [He looked .again towaid the door, but he felt it was too late; and that he muft now either defend or aban¬ don his caufe.] The journey will be too expenfive. If, lir, the journey would İn the leaft: ïm ban afs your affairs, and if I did not d ily fee you entering into expences fo infinitely greater than this, I would not anfwer a wore! to fuch an argument. I think it my duty to be as careful of your, propcity as you yourfelf could be; and for that íèafon have often wiflied I couid pre¬ vail on you, in fome meafure, to alter your plans. I have no doubt, mifs, of your prodi¬ gious wi'clom, you remind me of it daily. Your plans to be fure would, as you fay, be infinitely better than mine. When you ? 5 are
are married, or I am dead, you may do as you pleafe; but, in the mean time, fuffer me tq aci for-myfelf. I do not choofe to- be under tutelage. ' ï am forry; my dear papa, to fee that ï offend you ; butindeed I mean the*very reverfe. Indeed Ido! it is my zeal· for your intereft,- my love* of : you, [I ven¬ tured to take his hand] that oblige me¬ to fpeak— , And plainly to tell me you do not apr- prove of my proceedings ! Plainly to tell you the truth;· becaufe I believe it to be my 'duty. Upon my word ! A very dutiful daugh¬ ter !' I 'thought the duty of' children was to.obey the wills of their parents. Obedience—[Pardon· my fincerity, fir.] ■—Obedience muft'have limits. Children fliould'love and honour their parents for their virtues, and fliould cheerfully and 2eaIoufly do whatever they inquire of them, which h not in itfelf wrong. Of which children are to judge ? 4 Yés, fir: of' which children are to
Ä fine fyftem of obedience truly ! They cannot act without judging, more or lefs, be they obedient or difobedient: and the better they judge the better will they perfoim their duty. There may be and there have been miftaken parents, who have commanded their ehildi en to be guilty even of crimes. And what is that to me? Upon my * word, you are a very polite young lady ! A very extraordinarily polite mifs ! God forbid, my dear papa, that you fliould imagine I think you one of thofe parents. I really don't know nor don't care, ma¬ dami what you think me.—My plans, in¬ deed !—Difupproved by you ! If J faw any'perfon under a dangerous miftake, mifled, wronged, preyed upon by the felf-interefted, fliould'/I not be in¬ dolent or cowardly, nay fliould I not be criminal, if í did not endeavour to con¬ vince fuch a perfon of his error ? And what fliould I be if this perfon were my father ? p Q Upon
Upon my honour, mifs, you take into¬ lerable liberties' The licenfe of )our tongue is terrible ' It were better, fir, that I fliould fub¬ ject myfelf to your difpleafure, and make you think unkindly of me, than that others, who pretend to be your fervants, and your humble but friendly advifers, fliould injure—fhould-—-Iiknow not what! We have often heard of ftewards, who have acled the mortgagee to their own mafters. [This hint was a thunder ftioke. Sir Arthur was wholly difconcerted.' His mind apparently made ieveial attempts to recover itfelf; but"they were all ineffec¬ tual.] Well, well—I, I'—I know what the meaning of all this is. You—You are vexed at bemg difappointed of your jour¬ ney—But make yourfelf eafy, child, you fliall go ; you flian't be difappointed. 'Tis true, fir, I wifh to vifit Paris; but not if it will be in the leaft inconvenient to you, in money affairs. Though I own I ihould indeed be vexed to fee the fmall fum
fum you had appropriated for this journey wrefted from you, to throw up a hill, or build,a fantaftic temple in fome place where its very »fituation woukl render it ridiculous. Upon my word !—Was ever the like of this heard? —Don't I tell you, you fliall go? Indeed, fir, going is but a fmall pai t of the fubjeft: there is another point, which, if I could but gain, would give me infi¬ nitely more pleafure. Pfliaw ! Girl ! I can't ftay to argue points with vou now! I tell yo.i, ; o· 1 ihali go. I give you my word you fliall go ; and ίο let's have no more of it.—Do you hear, Anna? I am too old to be fchooled. I don't like it! Mind me ! I don't like it! 1 am very "forry, fir, that I cannot find words to fpeak the truth which would be lefs offenfive. Τ tell you again there is no truth to be fpoken! Have not I promifed you fliall go? There's an end ofthe bufmeli>. You ihall go. And
( And away went Sir Arthur ; apparently happy to get rid both of me and himfelf: < that ís, of the difagreeable ideas which, as he thought, I had fo impeitinently raifed. You blamed me jn your laft for not exerting myfelf fufficiently, to fhew T him his folly. You fee the fufficiently is ftill wanting. Peihaps I have not difco¬ vered the true mode of addrefling myfelf to Sir Arthur's pallions. For, though my remonftrances have often made him un- eafy, I cannot perceive that they have ever produced conviction. And yet I ihould fuppofe that a certain degree of momentary conviction muft be the refult of fuch converfations. But the r fortitude to caft off old habits, and aflurne new, is beyond the ftrength of common mortals. Frank Henley is a favourite with you, and very defervedly, But, in anfwer to ihe furprife in your former, my dear, that he has never engaged my affections, as well as to the cautionary kind hints in your two laft, for fo I underftand them', let me fay that, had I imagined love to be that unconquerable fatality of which I have
have been fpeaking, I do not know what might have happened : but, having been early convinced that a union between him and me muft be attended wilh 1 know not what (cenes of wretchednefs, in fliort, knowing the thing in a certain fenfe to be impoffibh. it has always been fo confi¬ dered by me, and therefore I have no rea¬ fon to think myfelf in any danger. Doubts occafionally rife in my mind, but in ge¬ neral foon difappear. Should they return I will not conceal them. I remember it was a remark of your's that " Admiration is the mother of love." So it is, of love fuch as I bear to my Louifa; and of fuch perhaps as angels might be fuppofed to bear to angels. I admire Frank Henley, greatly, > ardently admire him; yet I certainly do not Jove: that is, I certainly do not permit myfelf to feel any of thofe anxieties, alarms, hopes, fears, perturbations, and endear¬ ments, which we are told are infeparable from that paffion. I extinguifli, I fuffo- cate them in their birth, lam
I am called fort Adieu, my ever dear. Louifa, ?. w. ST. IVES..
LETTER IX.
SIR-ARTHUR ST. IVES TO ABIMELECH HENLEY. London, Grofveror Street* i HAVE received your letter, good Abi¬ melech, and own your reafoning has its force. Much is yet to be done to Wen- bourne-Hill. Year after year I have faid— " This fliall be the laft: we will now bring affairs to a finifh." But improve¬ ment is my delight ; walking, talking, fit¬ ting, Handing, or lying, waking or fleep- ing,' I can think of nothing elfe. We live you know, honeft Aby, only to amend: fo
fo that, inftead of concluding, I find more things to do at prefent than ever. I have the wildernefs very much at heart: but the foil is excellent, and I fcarcely know, Aby, how we fliall make the land fufficiently barren. Yet it would have a fine effect ! Yes, that it certainly would, and we will try our utmoft. The hermitage too at the far end ! The mofs- grown cell, Aby! With a few fcattered •eglantines and wild roots! We will plant ivy round the three old oaks, and bring a colony of owls to breed ! Then at the bot¬ tom of all a grotto: Oh! it will be deli¬ cious ! *" Shells will be expenfive, for we are not within forty miles of the fea. But no matter: it muft and it fliall be done, fori have fet 'my'heart on it. _ Nay, from what you faid to me, honeft Aby, knowing you to be a careful thrifty fellow, full of fore- fight, I was fo warm in the caufe that I had determined to take your advice, and renounce or defer the journey to France ; but tho blabbing fervants got a hint òf the matter,,
matter, and it came to my daughter's ears. So, for peace and quietnefs fake, I think I muft e'en indulge her, and take her a flioit trip to the continent. But we will go no further than thé neigbouihood of Paris. Befide I wifli, for my own part, tò fee how the country is laid out, I,am defirous to know whether all Fiance has any thing to equal Wenbourne-FIill. And yet, Aby, I find it is impoflible to pleafe every body. You know what con¬ tinual improvements' I have been making, for thefe laft twenty years; for you have fuperintended them· all. I have planted one year, and grubbed up the next ; built, and pulled down; dug,- and filled up again; removed hills, and fent them back to their old ftations; and all from a deter- , ruination to do whatever could be done. And-now, I believe, there are no grounds in all England fo wooded and fliut in as thofe of Wenbourne-FIill; notwithftanding its fituation on a very commanding cini- - nence. » We are furrounded by coppices, groves, efpalicrs, and plantations. 'We have
have excluded every vulgar view of diftant hills, intervening meadows, and extenfive fields; with their infignificant .gieen her¬ bage, yellow lands, and the wearifome eternal waving of ftanding corn. And yet, Aby, after haviiïg done all this, comes me Sir Alexander Evergreen, and very freely tells me that we have fpoiled Wenbourne-Hill, buried ourfeives in gloom and darknefs, and fliut out the» fineft profpecis in all England ! Formerly the hall could be feen by travellers from the road, and we ourfeives had the village church in view, all of which we have now planted out of fight ! Very true : but inftead of the pai ifli fteeple, have we not fteeples of our own in every direction ? And, Inftead of the road, with the Glou- cefterfhire hills and leffening clouds in perfpeCtive, have wc not the cedar quin¬ cunx? Yet fee the curfe of obftinacy and want of tafte ! Would you think it, Aby? , Of this Sir Alexander complains ! It is in vain to tell him that we are now afl within ourfeives ; that every body is furprifed
furprifed to fee how fnug we are ; and that nobody can fufpecl fo many temples, and groves, and terraces, and afeen ts, and defcents, and clumps, and flirubberies, and viftas, and glades, and dells, and ca¬ nals, and ftatues, and rocks, and ruins are in exiflence, till they are in the very midft of them. And then ! Oh how have I enjoyed their admiration ! Nothing is fo •great a pleafure to me as to' bring a gen¬ tleman of tafte, who knows.how to be ftruck with what he fees, and fet him down in the middle of one of my*great gravel walks ! For all the world allows, Abimelech, that" our gravel walks at Wenbournc-Hiil are fome ofthe broadeft, the ftraireft, and the fineft in ihe-kingdom.- Yet obferve how men differ, Abimelech. Sir Alexander wants me to. turf them over ! lie fays that, where you may have the fmooth verdure, gravel walks are ridi¬ culous ; and are only tolerable in common pathways where continual treading would wear avuiy the greenfward. But I know what has gi\cn him fuch a love for the foft
íbft grafs. Sir Alexander is gouty, and loves to tread on veU'Ct. Befide he is a cynic. He blames all vve have clone, and fays he would render one of the defcrts of Arabia the garden of Eden, with the money "we have wafted in improving AVenbou.'ne-H:ll ;.which he affirms, before we touched it, was one of the moft beautiful fpots in the three king¬ doms. I confefs, Aby, that, if as I faid I did not know him to be a cvnic, I fliould be heartily vexed. But it either is, or at any rate it fliall be, one of the moft beautiful fpots in the three kingdoms, ay or in the whole world ! Of that I am refolved ; fo go on with your work, Abimelech. Do not be idle. The love of fame is π noble paflion j and the name of Arthur St. íves fliall be remembered at AVenboume-Uill, long after his remains are laid in their kindred clay, as the poet fays. I defired your Ion Frank to accompany uš to London. He is a fpirited voung fel-
foft grafs. Sir Alexander is gouty, and loves to tread on velvet, Befide he is a cynic. He blames all vve have done, and fays he would render one of the deferts of Arabia the gardon of líden, with the money "we have wafted in improving Wenbourne-Hill ; which he affirms, before we touched it, was one of the moft beautiful fpots in the three king¬ doms. I confefs, Aby, that, if as I faid I did not know him to be a cynic, I fliould be heartily vex-cd. But it either is, or at any rate it fliall be, one of the moft beautiful fpots in the thrze kingdoms, ay or in the whole world ! Of that I am refolved ; fo go on with your work, Abimelech. Do not be idle. The love of fame is a noble paffion ; and the name of Arthur St. Ives fliall be remembered at Wenbourne-Hill, long after his remains arc laid in their kindred clay, as the poet fa vs. I defired your fon Frank to accompany us to London. He is a fpirited voung fel¬ low, and behaved well on the road, where he
■lie had an affair with a highwayman, and ,got a flight wound·; but he is in no dan¬ ger. He is a fine fellow, a brave feliow s and an honour to you, honeft Aby. Some grounds which I faw on my jour¬ ney, witb water purling, meandering, and occafionally dafhing down a fteep declivity, or winding along a more gentle dcfcent, as it happened to be, fuggefted an idea to me. .It came into my mind that, as we lie high,'if we'had but a lake'fufficiently large on tlie top of the hill, wc could fend the water down in rivulet ? on every fide. But then the difficulty ftruck mc how to get it up again. Perhaps it may be over¬ come. It would have a charming eflect, and wc will think of it hereafter. When you have received my addrefs at Paris, do not fail to let me know,· once a week, how every thing proceeds. Be particular in ypur accounts, and do not be' afraid of wearying me. My heart is in my grounds and my improvements ; and the more places and things you name the more pleafure you will give me. Write to me
mc too concerning mv herd of deer, my Spanirh fheep, my buffaloes, niy Chinefc pheafants, and all my foreign live ftock. I will make my journey as fhort as pof¬ fible; it fliall not be long before I will re¬ vint my Wenbournc-Hill. To own the truth, honeft Aby, after reading your let¬ ter, I had ordered the chaife to the door to come down again ; but Anna St. Ives would not hear of it, fo I was obliged to yield. But, as I tell you, my heart is with you; Wenbourne-Hill is never out of my mind. I, could wifli you to be cautious in your communications, Abimelech*, concerning our money matters. My daughter gave mc a hint about the laft mortgage, which I did not half like. Children think they have a right to pry into a father's expen¬ ces; and to curb and t brow-bcat him, if the money be not all fpent in gratifying their whims. Be more clofe, Abimelech, if you would oblige me. ARTHUR ST. IVES.
???
LETTER X, HH I JI l WI ι LOUISA CLIFTON * TO ANNA WEKBOURNE ST. IVLS.
Pofi Bank. i AM exceffivcly'angry with myfelf, my dear Anna. I have not ticated you with fne open confidence which you deferve, becaufe Ihave had improper fears of you. I have doubted left an excefs of friend¬ fliip and generofity fliould lead you into miftake, and induce you to think well of my brother rather for my fake than for his own. But the more I reflect, the more I am convinced that duplicity never can be virtue. Your liift letter has brought me to a fenfe of this The noble finceiity with which you immediately accufeà yourfelf, forhav-
ing practifed an artifice [wbich I, like you, do not think was innocent, becaufe artifice cannot be innocent] has taught me how I ought to act; and Sir Arthur's ca¬ price is an additional incitement. I have for fome time known that it has been very much defired by my mamma to fee you and Coke Clifton united. She mentioned her wifh to Sir Arthur, and he feemed pleafed with the idea. She did me the honour to confult me ; and Ι ορ¬ ρ? fed precipitate proceedings, and flre- nuoufly argued that all fuch events ought to take their natural courfe. This was the origin of your prefent jour¬ ney to Paris ; and I confequently was en¬ joined fecrecy, of the propriety of which I doubted at the moment. Τ am now con¬ vinced that fecrets are always either foolifli or pernicious things, and that there ought to be none. The ficklenefs of Sir Arthur however, relative to this journey, both furprifes and pains me. It fhews his weaknefs as well as the power of his favourite, Abimelech, E t ' tO
to be greater than even I imagined ; and my former thoughts were not very favour¬ able. After having concerted this plan with my mamma, and after preparing and proceeding a part of the way, I can fcarcely imagine what excufe he would have made toher. His mentioning my brother to you like- wife furprifed me. In converfing with my mamma, I had told her that, if fuch an 'event were to take place, it were defira¬ ble that you and my brother fliould become acquainted, before any hint or propofal ought to be made to you.' I at prefent believe this to have been wrong and weak advice ; but İt prevailed^ and the arrange¬ ment was that my mamma fliould write to Coke Clifton, to direct his route through Paris ; that he fhould be there at a fixed time, to tranfact fome pretended bufinefs for her; that Sir Arthur and you fhould make a journey thither on a party of plea¬ fure, which vve all knevtf would be r.gree- able to'you ; and that you and my brother fliould meet as if by accident. But it ap¬ pears
pears that Sir Arthur, when he has any favourite project in view, can fcarcely forbear being communicative* not from principle but from incontinence. Witb refpect to my brother, having told you all that has paffed, I have only to add, it is my earneft advice that you fliould be careful to put no deception on yourfelf* but to fee him as be is. His being the brother of your friend cannot give him dignity of mind, if he have it not already.' Were I a thoufand times his fifler, I could not wifli him another wife fo deferving as my Anna.— But fifter fliall be no motive with me to make me defirous of feeing perfons united whofe fentiments and fouls may be diffimilar. Had I not fo much •confidence in your difcernment, and truth to yourfeF, I fliould not be without uneafi- nefs. 4 My opinion is that jhe parties fliould themfelves reciprocally difcover thofe qualities which ought mutually tò fit them for the friendfhip of marriage. Is not that the very phi afe, Anna; the friendfiip of marriage ? Surely, if it be not friendfhip, according to the beft and e 2 _________ higheft
higheft fenfe in which that word is ufed, marriage cannot but be fomething faulty ajnd vicious. I know how readily you will forgive the wrong I have done you by this conceal- rrtent ; becaufe you will perceive I acled from well meant but miftaken fentiments. I haxte told my mamma my prefent thoughts, and have fhewed her all the for¬ mer part of this letter, which fhe approves. Her affeciion for me makes her delight in every effort of my mind to rife fuperior to the prejudices that bring mifery into the. world? and I often fear left this affeciion fiiould deprive her ofthat force, and acu¬ men, which in other inftances would be ready to detect error, whenever it fhould make its appearance. I need not tell Anna how tenderly flie joins with me, in wifhing her a fafe anct pleafant journey. All other matters flie entirely commits to my Anua's penetra¬ tion, and difcretion. Adieu.
L. CLIFTON.
F. S. My brother is not rich, but has great expectations. This as I imagine occafioned Sir Arthur to receive the pro¬ pofal with pleafure ; and my mamma tells me they had fome talk of fettlements.- He was exceedingly warm and active, in con¬ triving this journey, for a few days; after which I thought I obferved his ardour abate. And the probability is that Abi¬ melech, from the fiift, had oppofed the ex~ Gurfion; but- that further converfations with my mamma, and the pleafure which the projected journey had given you, kept Sir Arthur to his purpofe. I own I began •to fufpecl that, fliould fuch a match take place,' the recollection of parting with money, which he would willingly have expended on improvements, had influ¬ enced his conduct ; and it is fome relief to hope that he was rather acled upon than acting, if he really did feel any wifh to- retraci. Flow far he may be, or may have been, acted upon in other inftances, as well as this, is ftill a further queftion. I cannot fliake off a doubt which" hangs e- 3 on
on niy mind ; though I have been debating all morning whether I ought to mention it or be filent. I (ufpect that you yourfelf have not folved it entirely to your own fatisfaction. Frank Henley !—It is I think indubitable that he loves you.—He would make you happier than perhaps any other man could upon earth. Be not fwayed by your arfe ci ion for me : beware of any •fuch weaknefs. That you could love him if you would permit yourfelf, nay that you are obliged' to exert your whole force not to iove him, I am convinced. You are confcious of it yourfelf.—Is your decifion juft?—Indeed it is a ferious queftion.—. What is the magnitude of the evil which -would refult from fuch a union; and what -the good ? Enquire—I give no opinion. There is a mift before my eyes, and I dare not give any, .till I can fee'more dftinctly. Think, be juft, and refolve. Your own. 'judgment ought to determine you.
LET-
LETTER XL
ΜΛΝΚ HENLEY TO OLIVER TRENCHARD» London, Grofvtmr Street, OLIVER, what are we ? What is man? What is virtue ? What is honour? t —my pride has received a wound much more acute than that which the ball of the highwayman inflicted on' my body—1 have had money palmed upon me— 'Money! A man. cannot behave'as he ought, and as İt would be contemptible not be behave, but he muft be paid ! His - vices are paid! His virtues are paid !— - All is mercenary ! I to be fure muft be. oneof the number !—A twenty pound bank note, I tell thee, forced upon me by Sir Arthur !—No, no—Not by him—He ne- E 4· ver
fiO ANNA ST. IVES : s ver could have made me accept what I fuppofed [falfely, however; as fact and reflection have fince led me to rufpect] it was mean and degrading to accept. She only could prevail. She whofe commands are irrefiftible, and who condefccnded to entreat !-—Her eye gliftening with a tear, which fhe with difficulty detained in its beauteous 'orbit, flie entreated !—/There was no oppofing ftich Jnterceffion ! Her eloquence was heavenly 1 God be praifed that it was fo ! For, as it has happened, I am perfuaded it has preferved a poor diftrefled creature from phrenfy—Have patience and I will tell thee. I had removed my penitent, and had been taking a fhort airing in the park; and, as I was returning, I faw a crowd collected in a court. Led by curiofity to enquire what was the matter, I was told that two men liad juft been purfuing a third over the roofs of the neighbouring houfes ; and that, having been obliged to defcend through a trap-door, they had fol¬ lowed him, where it was fuppofed he had at
. at leaft been taken. I afked what .his crime was, but nobody knew. Some be¬ lieved him to be a thief, fome thought it was a prefs-gang, and others conjectured they were bailiffs. It was not long, however, before a decent, well-looking, and indeed hand r fome young woman, with a fine child in her arms, came running lip the couit,, made her way through the crowd with terror in her countenance, and with the moft pier¬ cing cries demanded—"Where is he ?— '* Where is my dear Harry?—Who has " feen him ? Where is he ?" ' Some of the people pointed out - the houfe. She knocked violently, continued her cries and lamentations, and at laft gained admittance. Her grief was fo moving, fo fympa¬ thetic, that it excited my companion, and made me determine to follow her. Accor¬ dingly I elbowed my way, though I felt that I rather difturbed the furgeon's dref- fing; but that was a trifle. I followed e 5 , . her ' ·»
her up ftairs without ceremony. With refpect toher, affeciion, "a mafterlefs paf- " fion, had fwayed her to its mood ;"— flie was not to 'be repulfed. The prifoner and his purfuers had de- fcended to the iecond floor, in which the poor fugitive had endeavoured to feek refuge, but not foon enough to find pro¬ tection from the bailiffs, as they proved and as he knew them to be. Never didft thou fee terror fo ftrong, nor affeciion ίο pathetic, as this excellent young Woman, his wife, difcovered. Excellent I am certain flie is. She wrung her hands, flie fell on her knees, flie held up her babe , and, finding thefe were ineffectual, flie fcreamed agonizing prayers to fave her Hairy. The idea flie had conceived of the lofs of liberty, and the miferies of a prifon, muft have been dreadful. - But tears and prayers and cries were vain; ihe was pleading to tlie deaf, or at leaft to the obdurate. As foon as the violence of her grief gave a momentary refpite, I enquired what the fum
A' NOVEL'. 83" fum was for which he was in thraldom, and found it to be fixteen pounds, befide cofts. It was not a debt originally con¬ tracted by himfelf; it was for a note, m which he had joined to ferve his wife's brother. It feems they are a young· cou¬ ple, who by their induftry have collected a trifling fum, with which they have taken a fmall fhop. I did not afk of what kind. She ferves her cuftomers, and he follows· his trade, as a journeyman carpenter. It did not a little pleafe me to hear the young creature accufe her brother of being falfe to his friend ; while the hufband defended him, and affirmed it could be nothing but neceffity. I could perceive however that fhe grieved to think her brother was not fo good as flie could have wiflied him. to be. The horrors of a jail were fo imprefled, fo rooted in her fancy, that flie was wil¬ ling to fell any thing, every thing; flie would give them all ihe had, fo that her Harry might not be dragged to a damp, . foul dungeon; to darknefs, bread and ' e 6ï f water,
water, and ftarving. Thpu canft not imagine the volubility with which her paf- fions flowed, and her terrors found utter¬ ance, from the hope that it was not poffi- able for Chriftian hearts to know all this, and not be moved to pity. I am well perfuaded however that, had I not been there, thofe good Chriftians the bailiffs would have paid no other attention to her panic than to fee how it might be turned to profit. The mifcreants talked of five guineas, for the pretended rifle they fliould run, in giving him a fortnight to fell his effects to the beft advantage.— They t io could recommend a broker, a very honeft fellow—By what ftrange gra¬ dations, Oliver, can the heart of man be¬ come thus corrupt? The harpies looked hatefully. Luckily I happened to have the twenty pound note, which pride had bidden me reject with fo much fcorn, in my pocket. Thou, .1 am certain, wilt not afk what J did with it. I immediately tendered thofe fame Chriftians I told thee of their money. The
A NOVEL. SÍ5 The rafeáis were difappointed, and would have been furly ; but a fingle look filenced their infolence. One of them was dif¬ patched, according to form, to fee that there were no detainers ; and, being paid, they then fet their prifoner free. Now, if thou thitikeft, Oliver, thou canft truly figure to thyfelf the overflowing gratitude of the kind young creature, the wife, thoti art egregioufiy miftaken. She fell on her knees to nie, flie bleffed me, prayed for me, and faid I was an angel from heaven, fent to fave her dear Flarry from deftruclion ; flie kiffed him, hugged, God bleffed, and half fmothered her hea¬ venly infant, as flie truly called it, with kiffes ; nay flie kiffed me—in fpirit, Oliver, ■—I could fee flie did : ay and in fpirit I returned her chafte careffes. She entreated me with fo much humble love and gratitude to come and fee her poor houfe, which I had faved, and ίο tell her my name, that flie might pray for me the longeft day fhe had to live, that I could not forbear gratifying her fo far as to go with
with her. As for my name, Τ told her it was man. The quick huflley underftood me, for flie replied—No, it was angel. I found her houfe like her perfon, neat, and in order. What is ftill betler, her Harry feems a kind good young man, and alive to as weU as deferving of her affeciion. Wouldft thou think it, Oliver?—The pleafure I had communicated had rever¬ berated back upon myfelf; yet the fight of a couple thus happy gave-birth to a thought of fuch exquifite pain that------! Something ihot acrofs my brain—I know not what—But it feemed to indicate I ihould never be fo mated ! Still, this money, Oliver------Prithee be at the trouble to examine the question, and fend me thy thoughts ; for I have not been able to fatisfy myfelf. What is the thing called property ? What axçmeum and tuumi Under what circumftances may a man take money from another? I would not be proud; -neither would I render myfelf defpicable. Thou feeft how I delight to impart my iovs
joys and griefs to thee. Thou telleft me thou partakeft them ; and, judging by myfelf, I cannot but believe thee. Tell me when thou art weary of me ; I have long and often been weary of myfelf. Yet flie is very kind to me, and fo kind that I have lately been betrayed into hopes too flattering, too ecftatic to be true. Oh ! Should flie ever think of me ! Were it only poflible flie ever fhould be mine !— The pleafure is too exquifite ! It is infup¬ portable !—Let me gaze and wonder at humble diftance, in fiience and in awe!—■ Do not call me abject—Yet, if I am fo s do ; tell me all that ought to be told.—It is not before her rank that I bend and fink. Being for being I am her equal : But who is her equal in virtue ?—Heavens ! What a fmile did flic beftow on me, when I took the money I mentioned to thee ! It has funken deep, deep in my heart ! Ne- Ver can it be forgotten ! Never ! Never ! Peace be with thee, F. HENLEY.
LET-
LETTER ??. ANNA WENBOURNE ST. IVES TO LOtrrSA CLIFTON.
London, Grayvenor-Slreet, MüST I be filent? Mail I not'tell my Louifa how infinitely her candour and juftice delight me ? With the voice of a warning angel flie bids me enquire, examine my heart, and refolve. I think I have refolved; and from reafons whicb I believe are not to be overcome. Yet I will confefs my opinion, ftrong as it is, receives violent attacks; as, Louifa, you will be convinced, when you have read the whole of this letter. My friend cautions me againft being partial, even in favour of her brother. Such a friend is indeed worthy to advife, and
and ï will remember her precepts. This brother may be a degenerate fcion from a noble ftock: yet í can hardly think the 4hing poffible. That he may have fallen into many of the miftakes, common to the world in which he has lived, is Indeed moft likely. But the very qua¬ lities which you defcribe in him fpeak an aclive and perhaps a dignified na¬ ture. We have duties to fulfil. Few oppor¬ tunities prefent themfelves to a woman, educated and reftrained as women un¬ fortunately are, of performing any thing eminently good. One of our moft fre¬ quent and obvious tafks feems to be that of reftoring a great mind, milled by error, to its proper rank. If the mind oT Clif¬ ton fliould be fuch, fliall I cowardly decline what I believe it to be in¬ cumbent on me to perform? Let him be only fuch as 1 expect, and let me be fortunate enough to gain his affections, and you fliall fee, Louifa, whether trifles fliall make me defili. . What
What high proofs of courage, perfe¬ verance, and of fuifering, do men conti- nua'ly give ! And fliall we wholly re¬ nounce the dignity of emulation, and wil¬ lingly fign the unjuft decree-of prejudice, that mind likcwife has its fex, and that women are deftitutc of energy and for¬ titude ? But Frank Henley!—Let me not hide a thought from my Louifa. He is indeed worthy of being loved, every day more" worthy. I have a new ftory to tell, which will be more effectual praife than any words of mine. Likeycu I am perfu?ded he has fome affection for me. I am no'c in fenfible to his woith and virtues; I ought not to be. Where I to indulge the reveries into which I could eafily fall, I might be as much milled by paffion as others, who are fo ready to complain and pity themfelves for being in love. But a wakeful fenfe of the confequences is my fafeguard. It cannot be. I fliould render my father, iny relations, and friends, miferable. I ihould fet a bad example to,
to my fex. I, who aim at fliewing them mind is fuperior to fex. Such are the thoughts that protect me from the danger. His menial excellence perhaps I love as truly as heart could wifli. But, as the lover who is to be the huf¬ band, .no! I will not fuffer my thoughts to glance in that direction. I might, but I will not. Nothing but a conviction that my principles ' are wrong fliall ever make me ; and that conviction I hold to be impoflible. Do not imagine I am guilty of the miftake of fuppofing myfelf his fuperior.. Far the reverfe. The tale which I am now about to relate will inform you better ofthe true ftate of my feelings. You muft know, my dear, that on our arrival in town, Sir Arthur, with my help, prevailed on Frank Henley to accept a twenty pound bill, that he.might have the means of gratifying his inclinations, and enjoying the pleafures 'which at his age it is natural he fliould wifli to enjoy. Thefe means I had but too good reafon to.
to be convinced had been denied him by his father, which I fufpected tq be, and am now fatisfied was, the true reafon that Frank refufed to attend us on our journey. % The youth has quite, pride enough, my dear : he is defirous to confer, but not to accept obligations ; is ready enough to give, but not to receive. As if he had not only a right to monopolize virtue, but to be exempt from the wants which are common to all, and to fupply which men form themfelves into focieties. He feems to flirink with exquifite pain from the acceptance of money. However I was determined to conquer, and conquer I did. Nor can I fay, confidering" them as I do, that I was forry to offend the falfe feelings even of Frank Flenley, for whom I have an infinite efteem. After receiving this prefent, he accom¬ panied me two or three times to thofe public places to which crowns and half guineas gain admittance ; and, as you .may imagine, was far from appearing in- fenfible
íenfible of the powers of poetry and mufic. Suddenly however he refufed to be any more of fuch parties, for which I own I could divine no reafon. I knew he had been educated in habits of ceconomy, and therefore could not fuppofe, generous though I knew him to be, that he had fquandered away his pocket-money in fa Ihort a time. I endeavoured both to rally and to reafon, but in vain; he was. pofi» tive even to obftinacy; and I rightly conjectured there muft be fome caufe for it which I had not difcovered. You have heard me fpeak,* I believe, my dear, of Mrs. Clarke, as of a careful good woman, and a great favourite with my dear mamma, when living. She was then our houfekceper in the country, but has lately been left in the town houfe; becaufe the" furniture is too valuableto be entrufted to a lefs attentive perfon. This Mrs. Clarke had a fifter whofe name was Webb, and who, left a fon. and a daugh¬ ter, who are both married. The fon as you will foon hear; has been a wild and . gracelefs
gracelefs fellow ; but the daughter is one of the moft agreeable and engaging young creatures 1 think I ever faw. Yefterday my good Mrs. Clarke and her niece were fliut up together in clofe converfation for a confiderable time ; and 1 perceived that their cheeks were fwel- led, their eyes red, and that they had been erving violently. I almoft revere Mrs. ?????? as my mother, becaufe of 'the excellence of her heart'and the foundnefs of her underftanding. I therefore could not forbear earneftly enquiring whether it were poflible for me to remove her caufe •of grief; for grieved, I told her, I could plainly perceive flic was. She burft into tears again, on my queftioning her, and endeavoured to exprefs feelings that were loo big for utterance. Turning to her niece flie faid—"I muft inform mydear ' " young lady." " For God's fake don't ! " For the Lord's fake don't t" cried the terrified creature. " I muft," replied the aunt. "It is proper." "He will have ** no mercy ihewn him ! He will be han- "ged
" ged !" exclaimed the other, in an agony. "You do not know this lady," faid the aunt. "Indeed fhe does not," added I, " if flie fuppofes I would have any crea- " ture upon earth hanged." Retire, Pcg- « gy," faid the aunt, " while I relate the " the vile, the dreadful tale." " No, no ! For mercv's fake no !" replied the niece. t( I muft ftay, and beg, and pi ay, and " down on my knees for my brother ! He " is a wild and a wicked young man, but " he is my brother." " Pray let her ftay," faid I to the aunt.. " And fear nothing, " my kind-hearted Peggy. Be affured I "will not hurt a hair of your " brother's " head. I will do him good iff can, but no " injury." "Tlie God of Heaven blefs and " reward your angelic ladyfhip l' cried the half frantic grateful Peggy. Mrs,Clarke attempted to begin herftory. She was almoft fuffocated. I never heard fo heart-rending a groan as flie gave, when flie came to the fatal fentence ! Would you believe it, Louifa r This nephew of the worthy Mrs. Clarke, this bother of the
the good Peggy, is the very highwayman 'who fliot Frank Henley ! His benevolent aunt has been with him, for he is ftill under the furgeon's hands ; and has confeffed to her [I am angry with myfelf, Louifa, to find I wonder at it] he has confeffed that the brave, the humane, the noble-minded Frank has vifited him feveral times, and has fet the folly of his wicked purfuits in fo true and fo ftrong a light, that the man protefts, with the ut¬ moft vehemence, if he can but efcape puniihment ibr the faults he has commit¬ ted, he will fooner perifli than again'be guilty of his former crimes. Tiie firft time Frank vifited him he gave the poor wretch a guinea; and went him¬ felf in fearch of another lodging for him, as well to remove him from the knowledge of his wicked companions as to preteci him from the forty pound hunters. The man wants to efcape over to the continent ; and appears to be fo fincere, in his refolves of reformation, that Frank has undertaken to furnifli him with the means. You
-t You cannot imagine, Louifa, the heart¬ felt praifes which ihe worthy Mrs. Clarke beftowed on the youth. And Peggy faid that flic hoped flie fliould fome time or another live to fee him, that flie might fall down and kifs his footfteps! But, added ihe, with great ardor, I find indeed there are very good men in the world ! Still there appeared fomething enigma¬ tical to me, between Frank and the money account. I could not conceive how he fliould want the means imme¬ diately to furnifli fuch a fum as would have been fufficient for the poor fugitive. And this again reminded me how affidu- ■oufly Frank had lately avoided every occa¬ fion of expenee. While we were in the midft of our dif¬ courfe, who ihould enter the room but Frank ! Never was I prefent at fuch a fcene ι ------" Good God Almighty !" ex¬ claimed Peggy, the moment flie faw him. "This is he.! This is the very bleffed, " dear gentleman, that faved my poor " Harry from thofe terrible jailors." F « f Tt
<c It is impoffible ?" cried Mrs. Clarke. " It is, it is he ! He himfelf!" faid the full-hearted Peggy, falling down on her knees, and catching the flap of his coat, which flie kiffed with inconceivable entliu- "íiafm. Poor Frapk did not know which way to look. Good deeds are fo uncommon, and *fo much the caufe of furprize, that virtue "blufhes at being detected almoft as deeply ?? vice. I knew Frank had a noble heart ; and Σ own, Louifa, ) was not much amazed when ï'eggy, with abundance of kind expreflions and a flow of fimple eloquence, related the manner in which Fxank had faved her hufband from the bailiffs, by paying a debt which with cofts amounted tó upwards of eighteen rxninds. X did not however forbear feverely to reprove myfelf, for having dai ed fo much as to imagine that a* youth-with fuch high virtues could not, in a city like London, find opportunities of expending fo fmall a fum as twenty pounds in acts of benevo¬ lence.
lence. I ought at leaft to have fuppofed the thing probable ; yet it never once en- teied my mind. The thanks, bleffings, and prayers of Peggy were endlcfs. Finding him not only to be what flie knew, the man who relieved her fiom the moft poignant diftrefs, but likewife the vanquifher and the favi- our of her brother, flic faid and protefted flie was fure there was not fuch another angel upon earth ! She was fure there was not! Frank'was afiiamed bf and almoft offended at her inceffant praife. It was fo natural and fo proper, for him to acl as he did, that he is furprifed to fincl it 'can be matter of wonder. I muft infift however/ upon feeing him reimburfed : and I peifuade myfelf there is one thought which ΛνίΙΙ make him fubmit to it quietly. I have but to remind him that die good of others requires that men, who, fo well know the ufe ot it, fliould never be without money. Adieu. I have no time to write more at prefent,—Yet I muft, for I ought to ? 2 add
add, that though I thought myfelf fo fully convinced when I began this letter, concerning lrank and the only right mode of acting, doubts have (everal times in¬ truded themfelves upon me, while I have been writing. I will think when the fancy is not fo bufy as at prefent ; and when I have thought do not fear my refo¬ lution. ■> JSver moft affectionately yours, A* W. ST. IVES. ^?' ' — ■■„ ■ ?,??? ______ .—■; ------- ?— ■ =. SLETTER 'XIII.
FRANK HENLEY ? TO OLiIVER TRENCHARD.
Χ?πίίο», Gro/vewr-Sfreet, JLT-is an'intolerably ftrange thing, Oliver that man cannot perform the mere ne¬ ceffary
ceffàry duties of humanity, without be¬ ing fuppofed almoft a prodigy. Where is the common fenfe, I will not'fay deli¬ cacy, which would teach people that fuch fuppofilions are an infult, not only to the perfon but to all mankind ? I am young, I grant, and know but little of the barba¬ rity which it is pretended is univerfal. I cannot think the accufation true. Or,, ifit be, ï am.convinced. it muft be the refult of fome ftrange perverfion of what may be called the natural propenfities of man. I own I have feen children wrangle for and endeavour to purloin, or feize by force, each others apples and cherries ; and this may be a beginning to future rapacity.—» But I know the obvious courfe of nature would be to correct, inftead of to confirm, fuch miftakes. I know too that there are individual inftances of cruelty, and infen- fibility. But thefe furely are' the excep¬ tions, and not the rule. I vifited a man whoie vices, that is whofe errors and paflions were fo violent as to be dangerous to. fociety, and ftill f ä more ,
more dangerous to himfelf. Was it not my duty? I thought myfelf ceitain of convincing him of his folly, and of bring¬ ing back a loft individual to the paths of utility and good fenfe. What fliould I have been, had I neglected fuch an oppor¬ tunity ? I have really no patience to think that <a thing, which it would have been a crime to have left undone, fliould poffibly be fuppofed a^vork of fupererogation ! I fa w an induftrious rifing family on the brink L of¡ ruin, and in the agonies of de¬ fpair, which were the confequences of an acl of virtue ; and I was not felfiih enough * to prefer my own whims, which I might choofe to call pleafures, to the preferva¬ tion of this woithy, this really excellent little family. And for this I am to be adored ! For no word is ftrong enough to exprefs the fooleries that have been acled to ,me. They were well meant? Tme. They were the ebullitions of virtue ? I t do not deny it. But either they are an unjuft fatire upon the world in general, or it is a vile world. , I half .fufpecl, indeed, it is not quite what it oughtto be. In
In addition to all this, I have been obliged to receive a fum equal to that which I thought it my duty to beftow. This is the fécond time ; and perhaps thou wilt tell me I am not difficult to perfuadc. Read the following dialogue, which paffed between me and the moft angelic of Hea¬ ven's creatures, and judge for thyfelf. She is really a prodigy ! I never knew another mind of fuch uncommon powers! So clear, fo collected, fo certain of choof- ing the fide of tiuth, and fo fecure of victory ! í am an afs ! I am talking Arabic to thee. I ought to have begun with in¬ forming thee of a circumftance which is in itfelf odd enough. The highwayman and Peggy. [Pfliaw ! The wormm whofe hufband was arretted.] r I hey are not only brother and fifter, but the nephew and niece of Mrs. Clarke. Think of that, Oliver! The nephew of fo worthy a wo¬ man fo audacioufly wicked! Well might the diftrefled Peggy exprefs anger which I could perceive was heartfelt, though fhe herfelf at that time knew not of this acl. F- 4 But.
moie dangerous to himfelf. Was it not my duty ? I t thought myfelf certain of convincing him of his folly, and of bring¬ ing back a loft individual to the paths of utility and good fenfe. What fliould I have been, had I neglected fuch an oppor¬ tunity ? I have really, no patience to think that ,a thing, which it would have been a crime to have left undone, fliould poffibly be fuppofed a work of fupererogation ! I faw an induftrious rifing family on the brink pf ruin, and in the agonies of de¬ fpair, which were the confequences of an act of virtue ; and I was not felfiih enough - to prefer my own whims,_ which I might choofe to call pleafures, to the preferva¬ tion of this woithy, this really excellent little family. And for'this I am to be adored! For no word is ftrong enough to exprefs the fooleries that have been acted to t me. ? Tliey were well meant? Tuie. They were the ebullitions of virtue ? I do not deny it. But either they are ¡an unjuft fatire upon the world in general, or it is a vile world. I half fufpecl, indeed, it is not quite what it ought'to be. In
In addition to all this, I have been obliged to receive a fum equal to that which I thought it my duty to beftow. »This is the fécond time ; and perhaps thou wilt tell me I am not difficult to perfuade. Read the following dialogue, which paffed between me and the moil angelic of Hea¬ ven's creatures, and judge for thyfelf. She İs really a prodigy ! I never knew another mind of fuch uncommon powers! So clear, fo collected, fo certain of choof- ing the fide of tiuth, and fo fecure of victory ! - I am an afs ! I am talking Arabic to thee. I ought to have begun with in¬ forming thee of a circumftance which is, in itfelf odd enough- The highwayman and Peggy. [Pfliaw ! The woman whofe hufband was arretted.] They are not onl y brother and fifter, but the nephew and niece of Mrs. Clarke. Think of that, Oliver! The nephew of fo worthy a wo¬ man fo audacioufly s wicked!, Well might the diftrefled Peggy exprefs anger which I could perceive was heartfelt, though flie herfelf at that time'knew not of this acl. f 4· But
But to my dialogue. Liften to the voice of my charmer, and fay whether flie charm not wifely! You have made a generous and a noble ufe, Frank, of the fmall fum which you were fo very unwilling to accept. [She treats me with the moft winning famili¬ arity! What does flie mean? Is it pur¬ pofely to fliew me how much flie is at her eafe with me ; and how impoffible it is that any thing but civility fliould exift be¬ tween us? Or is it truly as kind as it feems? Can it be? Who can fay? Is it out of nature? Wholly? Surely, fuiely not. Thefe bui fting gleams of hope beget fufpenfe more intolerable than all the blacknefs of defpair itfelf.] I acted naturally, madam; and I con¬ fefs it gives me fome pain to find it the- fubject of fo much wonder. It is no fubject of wonder to me. , Υου? inferiors in underftanding I know would not act like you ; but the weak do not give law to the ftrong. I own that I have been dull enough, unjuft enough, nbt to fufpecl
íufpect your Mie motive for refufmg, as you have done lately, to accompany us to public places. But this is a heavy penalty on you which an acl of virtue ought not to incur. If it be a penalty, madam, I am fure " it is one which you have too much gene¬ rofity to wifh to deprive me of the plea¬ fure of paying. I underftand your hint: but I am not fo generous as you think me; for I am de¬ termined, and you know what a pofitive girl I am, to fhare both the penalty and the enjoyment with you. I beg your pardon, madam, but that cannot be. Oh! But, in fpite of r your ferious and very emphatical air, it muft be. Excufe me, madam. I am certain you have too high a feñfe of juftice to impofe laws to which you yourfelf would not fubmit. Very true. Prove me that and I am anfwered. Nay, fo confident am 1 of the goodnefs of my caufe, that I will not re- F -? quire
'quire you to'take up this [Laying down another bank note, of equal value with the former.] uniefs I can on ??? ' contrary prove it to be nothing but falfe pride, or miftake, which can induce you to refufe. You perceive, Frank, 'I am not afraid of offending you by fpeaking the plain truth. Pray tell me, when you faw 1 ' the worthy couple whom you relieved in diftrefs, had you perfifted in your refufal of the paltry bit of paper which I before prevailed on you to receive, what would you have faid to yourfelf, what would have been your remorfe, when you found yourlelf xinable to fuccour the unfortunate, merely becaufe you had been too proud to receive that which you wanted, and which there¬ fore you had no right to refufe. [You fee, Oliver, flie matched my own fword from my fide, with which to difpatch me. If thou art too dull to underftand me, con¬ fult my laft letter.] You were ready to protect, though at the rifk of your life, thofe veiy perfons at whofe favours, as they are falfely called, your fpirit is fo equally ready to revolt. Perhaps in de¬ fending
finding usjoi^díd no moie than you Qught; but we cannot be ignorant how few are Capable of doing fo much. And^ iince you are thus prompt to perfoim all which the moft autiere morality^canje- quire, fo'long as it ihall be apparent to the world that your motives are not felfiih, proceed a ftep further; din>gard the world, and every being in it ; that ?&, dif- regard their miftakes; and, fatisfied that your motives are puie, defy the falfe in¬ terpretations to which any right action may fubje£t you. Neither, while you are ¡actually difcharging t the higheft offices of humanity, deny to others the right to fulfil fome of the moft trivial. ¡ I could.not aci; otherwife than I did, on both the occafions to which you allude, madam. I believe it, İs our 'duty always to be guided by circumftances ; but not to be guilty of an impropriety, becaufe it is poffible fuch circumftances may again occur. You are right. We only differ concern¬ ing the meaning of the word, Impro- r β priety*
prietVs or propriety, we'íhall come to pre¬ fently. You have promifed your wounded penitent money, to facilitate his efcape," and you have .none. I have fome trifling ufelefs property, madam. * But you have a journey to make back to Wenbourne-Hill, according to your prefent intentions. _ Do you imagine, madam, I cannot fail for a day? Oh yes ' I doubt it not; for a week, Frank, to effect any great, any laudable purpofe. But I muft be plain with you. It is ungenerous of you to wifh to en- grofs all virtue and fenfibiiity. Befide, you have duties to perform to yourfelf, which are as preffing as any you owe to fociety, becaufe they are to fit you - for the focial duties. [Hearken to the angel, Oliver!] It is as much my duty, at prefent, to afford you the means 1 which you want, as it -was yours to vifit the wounded highwayman, or aid the dif- treffed Peggy. You ought to fuffer me to
to perform· 'my duties, both for my fake and your own. You ought not to neg¬ lect, while you are in London^ to feize on every opportunity which can tend to en¬ large your faculties. You have no com¬ mon part to acl ; and, that you may acl it well, you fliould ftudy the beings with whom you are to aflbciate. You muft not fuffer any falfe feelings to unfit you for the high offices for the execution of which men like you are formed. [Didft thou ever hear fuch honeyed flattery, Oli¬ ver ?j Something more—You muft ac¬ company us to France. Madam ! —■— Impoffible. Hear me, Frank. The journey will be of infinite fervice to you. A mind like yours cannot vifit a kingdom where the manners of the people are fo diftincl as thofe of the French muft be from the Englifh, without receiving great benefit, Your father is rich. That he denies, Madam. To you ; and you and I know why. If your delicacy ihould object to a gift, I am fure
fure it cannot with propriety to a loan*. Going with us, ycur expences will in fact be only cafual. I can fupply )ou with fuch money as you want, which you may hereafter repay me, when I may perhaps be glad that I have fuch a debtor. My father's property,' madam, is of his own acquiring ; I have no legal claim upon it ; and it would be diflioneft in me to fpend that, upon fpeculation, which perhaps never may- be mine. Yes; to fpend it, in unworthy purpofes would, be diflioneft. But I again recur to your duties. However, fince you, ai e fo tenacious on the fubjecl, .1 will become a ufurer to pacify your feelings, and you fliall pay for rifk. Fifty pounds, uniefs you meet with more Peggies, L dare fay will bear you free. [It is twenty pounds more, thou knoweft, than I afked of my father.] You fliall give mc eighty when¬ ever you have a thoufand pounds of your own. Madam !^ ----- Well, well ! You fliall give rne a hun¬ dred -,.
dred ------[Very ferioufly] It almoft vexes me, Frank, to be refuied fo very flight a fa¬ vour, for I can read refufal and oppofition in your eye. But if you perfift', you will givs me great pain ; for you \\ ill con¬ vince me that, where your own paf- fions are concerned, you are not fuperior to the paltry prejudices by which the reft of the world are governed. I own, madam, my mind has had many ftruggles on the fubject; and I am afraid, as you fay, it has been too wil¬ ling to indulge its prejudices, and its pride. But if you ferioufly think, from your hcait, it is my duty to acl in this cyfe as you direct— I do, ferioufly, folemnly, and from my heart, think it is your duty. Then, madam, I fubmit. Why that's my kind Frank ! as noble in this inftance as in every other------1 could love you for it if you would let me—[In a moment my heart was alarm¬ ed ! I could feel myfelf change colour ! I am certain flie faw my agitation ; her manner told me -fo, for fhe inftantly added
added, with a kind of affectionate fignifi- canee which I know not how to inter¬ pret—] I would fay as much to the whole world, but that it is a foolifli world, and wants the wit to conceive things truly as they are meant. She was gone in an inftant, fmiling, failing, and her countenance brightening with heavenly radiance, as flie departed. What can this be? Her words are con¬ tinually refounding in my ears!------ She could love me, if I would lei her! ------ Heavens!------Love me?—■—Let her? — Let her!— Oh !— It is a foolijk world ■■■-She fears its cenfures -----Love me ! —Is it poffible ? ------Tell me, Oliver, is it poffible ?-*—— It tuants the wit to ???- ceive things truly as they are meant ------■ Was this forbidding me to hope ; or was it blaming the world's prejudices ?------ I know not------Ah ! To what purpofe warn the moth, uniefs ffie could put out the light ?—Oh, blafphemy !------Love me if I would let her ?—— I cannot for¬ get it, Oliver!------1 cannot!------Oh! I
I could weep like a child, at my own confcious debility. Why fliould í defrftir?------With a'mo¬ dern mifs, a fine lady, I might ; but not with her. She has a mind fuperior to the world, and its miftakes. And am I not convinced there ought to be no impedi¬ ment to our union ? Why fliould I doubt of convincing her? She dare do all that truth and juftice can demand—And íhe· could love me if I would let her—Is not my defpondency abfurd ?—Even did I know her prefent thoughts, and know them to be inimical to my paflion, what ought I to do?""Not to defert my own* caufe, if it be a juft One : and, if it be the contrary, there is no queftion : í will make none. Let me but be convinced of my error, and it fliall be renounced.. Yes, Oliver,! dare boldly aver·—it ihalU But fhall I forego a right fo precious,.. if it be mine ?—No ! Kingdoms fliall not tempt me !—Why is this timidity ? Why does my heart palpitate ? Why with in¬ ward whifpers do I murmur thoughts which
which I dare not fpeak aloud? Why do they rife qui veiing to my lips, and there panting expire, painfully ftruggling for birth, but in vain? Oh! How pooily do I paint what fo opprefively I feel ! I would have thee read my whole heart.. I fli udder to fuppofe it poffible I fliould. be a fcducer. Falfely to be thought fo would trouble me but little. But tamely to yield up felicity fo ineftimable, in com¬ pliance with the, errors of mankind to renounce a union which might and ought 4 to be productive of fo much good, is not this a crime?—·—Speak without, fear. Shew me what is right. Convince me,, then blame me if Lquail. , And uow, Oliver, it is probable thou, wilt not fee me for thefe three months., Delicate aa thefe money favours are be¬ come in the tranfactions of men contemp¬ tible as they, often aie in themfelves, and unwilling as I have been to fubjecl my¬ felf to them, I am glad that flie has con¬ quered. I would not have befitated a. moment ; for obligation, if obligation it were,
i were, to her would be heaven : but flie has her own wants, her own mode of doing good. Thefe I was very defirous not to abridge. But, fince 1 muft either comply or remain behind, 1 am glad to have been fo honourably vanquiflied. My father, I know, is willing enough I fliould go to France, or where I pleafe, fo that I do not afk him for money. In¬ deed he told me as much. He thinks it matters not what becomes of a fellow fo ufelefs, and fo idle, as he fuppofes me to be. However I have'written to inform him of my intention, and once more to remind him, though certainly in vain, of the manner in which he ought to acl. Ever thine, ,F. HENLEY. 1\ S. Thou art an unwilling, fluggİfli correfpondcnt. I have juft received thine ofthe 21ft. I find I am in no danger of repioof, from thee, for the acceptance of thefe
thefe pecuniary obligations : but I half fufpecl, from the tenor of thy letter, that thou wouldft bid me take all that any body is willing to give. Be juft to thyfelf and thy friend, Oliver ; flirink not from wholcfome feverity. Let not thy fuavity of temper, or thy partial kindnefs to me, fway thee to the right or the left ; left hereafter I fliould make the fearful demand of my loft principles, or ' at leaft relaxed and enfeebled, from'thee. Beware of the kindnefs of thy heart. Do not omit my 'moft refpeciful and kind acknowledgments, to thy father and family«
LETTER
£ E TT E R XIV.
ANNA WENBOURNE ST. IVES LOUISA CLIFTON.
London, Gro/benot'Stieet I! HAVE had a ftrong conteft, my dear., with our favourite" youth/ to overcome ■what I believe I have convinced him is prejudice ; and I hope he is cured of falfe delicacy, for the future. He is to go with us to France, and is no longer under the «eceffity of abftaining from innocent and inftructive amufements, becaufe he is pofifeffed of fenfibiiity and a high refpect for virtue. But he 'had no fooner accepted this fupply than away, he was gone to his convert. This I fufpected. For-which ^jeafoiil had previoufly difpatched Mrs.
Clarke to vifit her nephew. The good woman could not be prevailed on to re¬ ceive any money for his relief; urging that flie was very capable of fupplying him herfelf. That being fo, I did not choofe violently to conteft the matter with her ·, as I do not wifli to encourage the moil diftant appioachcs to a fpirit of avarice. I only told her.it would be unjuft ihould flie ever- want money, for ufeful and vir¬ tuous purpofes, if flie did not apply to due : and flie with much good fenfe an¬ fwered flie thought as I did, and would certainly act accordingly. She is a very woithy woman. She was with her nephew when Frank ■came in ; and the fcene, as deTcribed by her. was affecting. The poor culprit had been repeating all his obligations to the generous Fiank, praifinghis bravery, 'and dwelling, with a degree of conviction which gave Mrs. Clarke great pleafure, on the effecb of goodnefs ; fince it could render a man fo undaunted, fo forgiving, fo humane, and fo much as he faid like a faint.
faint. You know, my dear, that 'faint, in the language of fuch people, docs not mean an impoftor, who pretends to carry burning coals in his hands, drive rufty nailsl into his legs, adore a morfei of rot¬ ten wood, or decayed bone, and pretend to work miracles, or preach exclufive doctrines of faith and falvation. A faint with -them is a perfon more perfect, in the -difcharge ofthe higheft moral duties, than they believe any other earthly being to be. Letus accept their definition", and-enroll the name of Frank Fíen ley in our ca¬ lendar. Frank was difappointcd, and in fome •meafure difpleafed, that any perfon fliould offer his reformed friend, as fiom the beft of motives he called him, money but him¬ felf;'and the reafon he gave was not without its force. This is a memorable epocha in the life of a miftaken man, faid he ; and no means, which can move his mind to'a better performance of his duties thari he has hitherto attempted, fliould be left untried. It is but natural that he fliould
ihould think more of me than of moil other perfons: [" I can think of no one elfe !" Exclaimed the poor fellow, with enthu- fiafm.] and, the more caufe he fliall"have to remember me with affeciion, the more weight will the reafons -have with him which I have urged. The culprit acknowledged that, from ill advice, vicious example, and violent paf- fions, he had become very wicked. But, faid he, I muft be wicked indeed if I -could ever forget what this gentleman has Said, and done, to fave my family from ili a me and mín, and me from deftruclion .¿md death. There is the, greater reafon to hope, 'becaufe Mis. Clarke fays that he has been what is called well educated, his ftation in life confidered : and indeed of ihis I imagine flic nerfelf had taken care. ι Peggy came in, and by her excefs of s gratitu*de, and which is better of admira¬ tion for her hero, flie drove the over deli¬ cate Frank away. This is one of his defedi s, for which we muft endeavour to fincl
find a remedy. Men arc not expofed to the fulfome praife which we unmarried females are calmly obliged to hear, or be continually at war; or Frank would be 4 more patient. Indeed he ought to be ; becaufe, in this inftance, the praifes he receives are the effufions of perfons who had never before feen virtue exert herfelf with fo much ardour. Though the nephew be not an old or hardened offender, he has committed fome depredations of the confequences pf which, were they proved upon him, he himfelf is ignorant. His accomplice has difcovered his retreat ; another more private lodging has therefore been taken for him, to which he is to remove with all poffible caution. And, when he is fufficiently recovered, which Mrs. Clarke tells me will be foon, he is then to depart for the continent and work at his trade, which is that of a cabinet-maker. Englifh workmen are. in - high efteem abroad, and he will eafily find employment. Fie is more than reconciled to labour, he is eager to begin ; and, as it ύ appears,
appears,, docs not want activity of mind ; of which the dangerous expedients to •which hè refoited are fome proof. So much ior the hiftory of a highway¬ man ; which I think is at leaft as deferving of remembrance as that of many other de- piedators. I have been making fome efforts to decide the queftion, not of love, but, of duty. Love muft not be permitted, till duty fliall be known. I have not fatisfied myfelf fo well as I could wifli, yet my former reafons feem invincible. Ought my father and my family to be offended? Ought I to fet an example that might be pernicious? Is it moft probable that by oppofing I fliould correct or increafe the •world's miftakes ? The path before me is .direct and plain; ought I to deviate ? In vain I fear fliould I plead his extra¬ ordinary merit. Would the plea remove the load of affliction with which I fliould overwhelm thofe who Jove me beft? At prefent they think well, nay highly of me. · J fometimes have the power to influence^ them
lhem to good. What power fliall I have when they imagine 1 have difgraced both myfelf and them ? Who ever faw thofe treated with efteem who are themfelves fuppofed to be the flaves of paffion? And could the world < poffibly be perfuaded that a marriage be¬ tween me and the fon of my father's fte¬ ward could ever originate, on my part, in honourable motives ? Ought I to forget the influence of ex¬ ample ? Where is the young lady, being defirous to marry an adventurer, or one whofe mind might be as mean as his origin, who would not fuppofe her fa¬ vourite more than the equal of Frank ? For is not the power of difcrimination loft, when the paflions are indulged ? And ought my name to be cited? Ought they to be encouraged by any act of mine ? Yet the oppofing arguments are far from feeble. His feelings are too ftrong to be concealed. Perhaps the only weaknefs ï can think him capable ofis that of loving me. For iflove be contradictory to rea- G 2 fonj
fon, it isa weaknefsj'but fliould he anfwer that love and reafon are in this inftance united, we muft come to proofs. That he loves is too vifible to admit of doubt. I have feen the word trembling as it'weie on his tongue. I am almoft certain that a filly thing which I faid', with a very diffe¬ rent intention, would have produced an avowal of his paflion, had I not added fomething to prevent it, and hurried away. Well then ! Am I, certain Lam guilty of no injuftice to him ? And why ought I not to be as juft to him as to any other being on earth ? Who would be more juft to me ? Who would be more tender, more faithful, more affectionate ? I know nof whether I ought to flirink from the vanity which feems annexed to the idea, for I know not whether it b e ~ vanity, but I cannot fometimes help afk¬ ing myfeif whether the good that might refult from the union of two ftrong minds, mutually determmed to exert their powers -for the welfare of fociety, be not a reafon fuperior
fuperior even to all thofe I have enume¬ rated. If this be fo, and if our minds really poffefs the ftrength which I am fo ready to fuppofe, I then know not what an¬ fwer to give. I reject the afle'clation of under eflimating myfelf, purpofely that I may be called ? modeft humble young lady. Humility 1 am perfuaded, though not fo common, is as much a vice as pride. But, while avoiding one extreme, I muft take care not to be guilty of another. The queftion is embarraffing; but ï muft not by delay fuffer embar- raffment to increafe. With lefpeci to your brother, I can at prefent conclude nothing, and can con¬ jecture but little. The idea which has ofteneft occurred, and which I have be¬ fore mentioned, is the infinite pleafure of feeing an active mind in the full poffef¬ fion of its powers; and of being inftiu- mental in reftoring that which miftake may have injured, or in part deftroyed. It feems a duty pointed out to me, at- G 3 tended
' tended perhaps with difficult)', and it may be with dangers but thefe increafe its force. -And if fo, here is another argLi- ment to add to the heavieft fcalc. Yes. It muft be thus. The more I examine, and while 1 am writing perhaps î examine the beft, the more 1 am con¬ firmed in my former decifion. Pity for 'Frank ought not to be liften- ed to. It is, always a falfe motive, un¬ iefs fupported by juftice. Frank will never condefccnd to endeavour to incite ????????; it is not in his character. He will rather aflert his claims, for fo he ought. I do not mean that a com¬ plaint will never efcape hirn. The beft of us are not always fo perfecily mafter of our thoughts aš never to be inconfif- tent. But his fyftcm will not be to win thai by interceflion which he could not obtain by fair and honourable barter. The moment I have entirely fatisfied and convinced myfelf, I have no doubt of in¬ ducing him to behave as nobly on this as he has done on every other trying occafion. And
fcnt farewel. I do not fuppofe I fliall t write again, except a line to inform you of our fafe arrival after having crofted the channel, till we come to Paris. I expect to be amufed by the journey. Though L cannot but own I think that, as far as- amufement was concerned, the good ladies under the reign of the 'fudors,. who travelled twenty'miles a day, ona ftrong horfe and a pillion, that is when fummer made the roads paffable, had 1 much better opportunities for obfervation - than we, who, fhut up in our carriages, with blinds to keep out the duft, gallop further in two days and two nights than they could do in a month. This hafty travelling, when hafte is neceffary, is a great convenience. But nothing, except the inordinate ardour of the mind to en¬ joy, could induce people on a journey of pleafure to hurry, as they do, through villages, towns, and counties, pafs un¬ noticed the moft magnificent buildings,. and the moft delightful profpecis that fo-· refis,, rivers, and mountains can afford, g 4 and
and wilfully exclude themfelves from all the riches of nature. To look about us, while thus furrounded, feems to be a very natural wifli. And if fo, a portable clo- fct, or rather a flying watch-box, is but a blundering contrivance. You know your Anna: her bufy brain will be meddling. And perhaps flie trufts too much to the pardoning affeciion of friendfhip. Once again, adieu» Yours ever and ever, A. W\ ST, IVES,
LETTER
LETTER XV.
FRANK HENLEY TO ABIMELECH HENLEY.
SIR, Londotti Grofocuor Street. JL ??? I may not appear to negleci any filial duty, all of which it has been my moil earneft wifli to fulfil, I write to in¬ form you that, at the requeft of the fa¬ mily, I am preparing to accompany Sir Arthur to France. From cur laft conver¬ fation I underftood you had no objection to the journey, except that of furnifliing me with money; for it was your pleafure to remind me that a man fo idle, as you fuppofe L am, may be or go any where, without the world fuffering the leaft lofs. g 5 I own,
I own, did I imagine the fame of my¬ felf, it would make me wretched indeed. You thought proper, fir, to refufe me the fmall fum which I requefted of you for this purpofe. I do not wifli to Wreft what you are unwilling to give. You underftand your own reafonings beft; but to me they appear to be either erroneous or incomprehenfible. I wiflied to explain to you what my plan of life was, but you refufed to hear me. I had no fooner faid ,that I thought' it my duty to ftudy how I could beft ferve fociety, than you an¬ grily told me I ought firft to think how I could beft ferve myfelf. From a recol¬ lection òf the paft, I am convinced this is a point on which we fliall never have the fame opinion. For this I am fincerely forry,"" but as I hope not to blame. Suffer me 'however once more to re¬ peat, fir, that tbough my'young lady has kindly offered to furniih me with money, I ftill think it wrong that you ihould permit me .to accept her offer; having as I am wefl convinced the means to fupply
fupply me' liberally yourfelf. ï affure- you, ii r, I would forbear to go, or to lay myfelf under the neceffity of afking you for money, weie I not fully per¬ fuaded of its propriety. In order to per¬ form my duty ( in the world, I ought to underftand its inhabitants, its manners, and principally its laws, with the effects which the different, legiflation of different countries has produced. I believe this to be the higheft and moft ufeful kind of knowledge. Could I fortunately induce you to think as I do, you cei tainly would not refufe my requeft. Thii ty pounds to you would be but a trifle. But froni my late failure I have fo little hope, that I rather write to execute a duty, than with any expecta¬ tion of fuccefs. I fubmit this to your confideration, and have the greateft defire to prove myfelf your dutiful and affectionate fon, F. HENLEY*-
g 6 LETTER
LETTER XVI.
ABIMELECH HENLEY TO FRANK HESTLEY. Wenlom ?? -Hrfl. HERE'S a hippiftle! Here's ' tanta¬ rums! Flere's palaver! Want to pick my pocket ? Rob me ? And fo an pleafe ?? he's my. dutyfool and fekfliinait fon ! Duty fool, indeed? I fay fool—Fool enough ! And yet empty enough God he knoweth! Youpeery? You a lurcher? You know how to make your 3 farthins íhine, and turn your groats into guineas? ■—Why yourV a noodl ! A green horn ! A queeze quaumee pick thank pump kin ! A fine yonk lady is willin to come down with the kole, and the huiver headed hulk wants to raife the wind on his own father ! You
You face the philiftins! Why they will bite the nofe off a your face ! Thirty pounds too! The mercy be good untóme! Me thirty pounds! Where muft I get thirty pounds ! Does the jouit head think I coin? Would he have me go on the highway? Who ever giv'd me thirty pounds? Marry come up! Thirty pounds? . Why I came to Wenbourne- Hill with thrums immee pouch. Not a brafs farthin more. 'And now ihow me the he or the burr—Shiner for fliiner—- llool a cry hold firft?—Thof as to the mat¬ ter of that, younker, why that's a nether here nor there; that's a nothink to you dolt. I never axt you for nothink. Who begottee and fentee into the world but I? Who found ?? in bub and grub but I? Didn'tee run about as ragged as any colt o'the common, 'and a didn't I find duddz for ?? ? And what didde ever do for me ? Diddee ever addle half an ounce in your life without being well ribb roftit? Tongue "* pad me indeed ! Ferrit and flickur at me ! Rite your hippiftles and gofpeis! I~/a ' . butturd
, butt urd my pai fnips finely! Am I a to be h uft o' this here manner, by a fir jim- mee jingle biáins of my own feedin and breedin? Am I to be ramfliaklt out of the fuper nakullums in fpite o' my teeth?- Yea and go foftlyl I crack the nut and you eat the kernel! * I tellee once again youVe an addle pate o* your own L Go to Fiance to leamto dance, to be fure! Better ftay at home and learn-tb tranfmogrifv a few kink's 'piciers into your pocket. No many come fairly! Squire Nincompoop' He would not a fifflicate Sir Arthur, and advife hitn to ftay at home, arid fo'keep the rhino for * the roaft meat ! He would not a take his cue, a dunder pate'! A doesn't a know fo much as his a, b, c! A hasn't fo much as a fingle glimm of the omnum, garhrum in his noddl! And pretends to hcktur'and, doktur 'me! Shave a cow's tail and a goat's chin, an you want hair.' And then again what did I fay to ?? about miffee? What did I fay? Didn't I-as good as tellee witch way ihe. caft a fheepz >
flieepz i? Tliat indeed woukl a be f um¬ mut! An you will jig your hcirio amunk the jeny ??? poopz, you might a then dance to fome tunc, I a wanuntee la got áll t a my i teeth im me head. What doesn't I know witch way the wind fets when I fees the chimblee f moke? To be fure I duz; 'as well witb a wench as a weather-cock ! Didn't I telle y'ad a more than one foot i'the ftiirup? She did'nt a like to leave ,her jack in a bandbox be¬ hind her; andfo miffee forfooth forgot her torn-tit, and mafter my jerry whiffle an pleafe you galloped after with it. And then with a whoop he muft amble to Lunnun; and then with a halloo he muft caper to France ! She'll depofit the rhino; yet Nicodemus has a no notion of a what^flie'd be at! If you've a nó wit o* your own, learn a little of folks that have fome to fpare. You'll never a be woith a bawbee o' your own favin. I tellee that. And aft for w hat's mine why it's my own. So take me rightly, now is your time to 'Jook about ??. Then indeed! If fo, why fo
fo be it; ??? ay'and amen, a God's name, fay I. /JThe fool a''held his mouth open, and a down a dropt the plumb. Not after all that it would a be any fuch a mighty mirakkillus catch nether, as I fliall manage matteis mayhap. But that's a nether here nor there. And fo you know my mind. Take it or leave it or let it alone. It's all a won to I. - Thof and I gives all this here goud advice for no- think at all, what do I get by it? Give me but the wide world and one and 20, with" 5 farthins ten fingers and a tongue, and a turn me adrift to-morrow; I'de a work my way: I'de a fear nether wind nor weather. For why? I'de a give any man a peck of fweet words "for a pint of honey. What! Shall I let the lock ruftee for want of a little oilin ? Haven't I a told ?? often and often, that a glib tongue, fmoothand foftiy, always with the grain, is worth a kink's kinkddum ? So mind what ?? be at. Play your cards out kuninlee ; and then, why if fo be as thinks fliould turn up trumps, why we, fliall
a no notion that ?? fliould take it into your nobb noddl that I means to fuppofe that 1 fliall come down with the duft. No for¬ footh] For what and for why and for wherefore ? We fhall fee—Why av to be fure !—But what fliall we fee ? Why we fliail fee how generous and howkappaifhus my younker will 'be,, to his poor old fa¬ ther : we fhall fee that. Not but if the ready be wantin, ,plump do you fee me, down on the nail head, and if Sir Arthur fliould a fay as it muft be fo, why fo. Mayhap we—But I tell ?? again and again that's a nether here nor there. Befides leave me to hummdudgin Sir Arthur. Mind you your hitts with miffee, I'll a foiftce fubb he. And fo now ihow your affeciion for all this my lovin kindnefs and mercy; and crown my latter days with peace and joy, which nothink can xfeed but the joys of heaven in his glory everlaftin^ witch is a preparin for me and for all kriftfliun foles, glory and onnur and power and piaife and thanks
thanks givin, world without end, forever and ever, God be good unto us, and grant us his falvation ; amen, an it be his holy will. . ABIMELECH HENLEY.
LETTER XVII. THE HONOURABLE MRS. CLIFTON TO HER SON, COKE CLIFTON. * Re/e Bank, J. DIRECT this letter to you, my dear fon, at Paris; where it will either find you, or lie at the banker's till your,arrival. A packet accompanies it, which contains the accounts of your late uncle with Mon- fier de Chateauneuf; by which it appears there
NOVEL. there is a confiderable balance In his fa¬ vour, which as you know by will devolves to me. 1 hope when yon have fettled this bu- t finefs, you will be difpofed to îeium to England; and that I fliall once again have the happinefs to fee you before I'die. Do not imagine I fpeak of death to attrae! any falfe pity. But my ftate of health obliges me to confider this ferious event as at no great diftance; though I do not think myfelf in immediate danger. ' Sir Arthur St. Ives and his lovely daugh¬ ter will foon be in Paris. They requefted letters from me ; and, among others, I thought I could not recommend them to any one with moie propriety than ? my fon. There isan intimacy between our families at piefcnt; which was fiîfl occa- fioned by an atfechon which youi fifter Louifa and Anna St. Ives conceived for each other, and which has continually in¬ creafed, veiy much indeed to my fatisfac¬ tion. For, befoie I faw this young lady, I never met with one whom I thou&ht de- feiving
ferving of the fríendíhip of your fifter,. Louifa ; whofe ftrength of mind, if I do not miftake, is very extraordinary for her years. Yet even I, her mother, and lia¬ ble enough to be partial, have fometimes thought flie muft cede the palm to her friend, the charming Anna. My reafon for writing thus is that you may be guilty of no miftakes of character, which indeed I think is very unlikely, and that you νγ?1 do Sir Arthur all poffible refpect, as well as his daughter, İn juftice to yourfelf, and as the friends ofthe family. Your fifter writes under the fame cover ; and I cannot doubt, whenever you read her letters, but that you muft receive very great fatisfaction, to find you have fuch a fifter. I fcarcely need tell you, Clifton, that though you have refided but little with me, I feel all the fond affection of a parent; that I am earneftly defnous to hear of your happinefs, and to promote it: and that no pleafure which the world could afford to me, perfonally, would equal that of feeing you
you become a good and great man. You have ftudied; you have travelled; you have read both men and books ; every ad¬ vantage which the moft anxious defire-to form your mind could procure has been yours. I. own that a mother's fondnefs forms great expectations of you ; which, when you read this, be your faculties ftrong or weak, you will very probably fay you are capable of more than fulfilling.—- - The feeble, hearing their worth or talents queftioned, are too apt to fwell and affume ; and I have heard it faid that the ftrong are too intimately acquainted with themfelves to harbour douht. I believe it ought to be fo. I believe it to be better that we fliould acl boldly, and bring full conviction upon ourfeives when miftaken, than that a timid fpirit fliould render us too cautious to do either good or harm. I would not preach ; neither indeed at prefent could I. A thoufand ideas feemed crowding upon ■my mind ; but they have expelled each other"as quickly as they came, and I fcarcely know what to add. My head-
achs difqualify me for long or confiftent thinking ; and nothing I believe but habit keeps me^from being half an idiot. One thing however I cannot forget; which is, that Lam your mother, Clifton ; and that I have the mbft ardent and unre¬ mitting defire to fee you a virtuous and a happy man. In which hope my bleffing and love are moil fincerely yours. ?. CLIFTON. ?1> IIII» ...... .>« ??»» » H l I U I I . » .I H H ?И ??? ?» ...... 1 1 . 1И?1? «. LETTER XVIII.
LOUISA CLIFTON ?? HER BROTHER, COKE CLIFTON. Rofe-Bank, İT is long, my dear brother, fince I re- reived a letter from you ; and ftill longer fince I had the pleafure to fee you. Flow manv
many rivers, feas, valleys, aïid mountains have you traverfed fince that time ! What various nations, what numerous oppofite and characieriflic countenances have you beheld I From all and each of them I hope you have learned fomething. I hope the fucceflion of objects has not been fo quick as to leave vacuity in the mind. My propenfity to moralize ufed former¬ ly [And ourformcrlies you know, brother, are not of any long duration.] to teafe and half put you out of temper. Indulge-me once more in hoping it will not do fo at prefent; for I believe I am more prone to this habit than ever. What can I fay to mybrother? Shall I tattle to him the fcan- dal of the village, were I miftrefs of it? Shall I defcribe to him the fafliion of a new cap ; or the^ charms of a drofs that has lately travelled from Pcrfia to Paris, from Paris to London, and from London to Rofe-Bank ? Or fliall I recount the hopes and fears of a fifter; who has fometimes the temerity to think; who would befo unfa fliion able as to love'her brother, not for
for the cut of his cut, not for the French or Italian phrafes with which he might inter¬ lard his difcourfe, not for any recital cf the delight which foreign ladies took İn him and which he took in foreign ladies, not for a loud tongue and a prodigious lack of wit, not for any of the antics or impertinences which I have two frequent¬ ly remarked in young men of fafliion, but for fomething directly the reverfe of all thefe : for well-digefted principles, an ar¬ dent defire of truth, incéffant ftruggles to fhake off prejudices; for emanations of foul, burits of thought, and flaihes of ge¬ nius. For fuch a brother, oh how eager would be my arms, how open my heart ! Do not think, my dear Clifton, I am \mjuft enough to mean any thing perfonal; to fatirize what I can fcarcely be faid to have feen, or to condemn unheard. No ; your faculties were always lively. You have feen much, muft have learned much, and why may I not fuppofe you are become all that a fitter's heart can defire ? Pardon me if I expedí too much. Do we not all admire
A NOVIİL.
admire and feck after excellence ? When wc are told fuch a peifon is a man of genius, do we not wifli to enquire into the faci ? And, if true, are we not defirous of making him crur intimate ? And do not the tics of blood doubly enforce fuch Wifhes, in a biother's hchalf? From what you were, I have no doubt but that you are become an accompfifhed man. But I hope'you are' alfo become fomething much better, I hope that, by the exertion of your talents, acquirements, and genius, I ihall fee you the'friend of man, and the 'true citizen ofthe world. If you are all that I hope, I think you will not be offended with thefe fifteily ef¬ fufions. If you are not, or but İn part, you may imagine me vain and impeitincnt. But ftill I fliould'fuppofe'you will foi give me, becaufe you are fo feldom tioubled with fueh grave epiitles ; and one now and -then, if not intolerably long, may be en¬ dured from an elder fifter. Yet why do I fay elder ? Neither age nor ftation have any juft claim ; for there .íl can.
can be none, except the claims of truth and reafon ; againft which there is no ap¬ peal. I am eighteen months older than my bi other, and up rifes the claim of elderfliip ! Such are the habits, the pieju- ces we have to counteract. My dear mamma has mentioned Sir Arthur St. Ives, in her letter, and his lovely daughter, Anna; more lovely in mind *even than in form, and of die latter a fingle glance willenable you to judge. I need not requeft you to be attentive and civil to her, for it is impoffible you -fliould be ^otherwife. Your own gratification will induce you to fliew her the public places, and render her eveiy fervice in your power; which will be more than overpaid by aifociating with her ; for it is indeed a delight to be in her company. For grace and beauty of perfon, flie has no equal ; and ftill lefs can flie be equalled, by' any perfon of her age, for the endowments of wit and underftanding. I am half angry with myfelf for pretending to recommend ber; when, as you will fee, flie can fo much
,
much more effectually recommend her¬ felf. I have nothing to add except to fay that, when my dear brother has a moment's leifure, I fliall be glad to hear from him ; and that I remain his very affectionate ( fifter, L. CLIFTON. P. S,, On recollection, I am convinced it is a falfe fear which has prevented me from mentioning another perfon, very eminently deferving of efteem and refpect; a fear of doins: harm where I meant to do good. We ought to do our duty, andriik the confequences. The abfurd pride of anceftry occafions many of our young gen¬ tlemen to treat thofe whom they deem their inferiors by birth with haughtinefs and often with fomething worfe"; forget¬ ting that by this means they immediately cut themfelves offas it were from fociety: for, by contemning thofe who are a fup- ' pofed ftep below them, they encourage and incur contempt from the next imme- H 2 diately
diately above them. This is in fome mea- fuie the practice: and, weie it true that 'biith is any merit, it would be a practice to which we ought to pay a ftill moie ftiift attention. The young gentleman how¬ ever whom I mean to îecommend, foi his great and peculiar worth, is Mr, Frank Henley, the fon of a peifon who is » gardener and ftewai d to Sir Arthur ; or lather what the people among whom you aie at prefent would call his homme d affaire?. But I muft leave my friends to fpeak for themfelves ; which they will do more efficacioufly than can be done by -any words of mine.
'LETT E R
LETTER XIX.
???? CLITTON" ΊΟ GUY FAIRTAX, AT VENICE» Pafh, Hoteide lUmverfité, pifr le Pont Royal. I WRITE, Fairfax, according to pro¬ mife, to inform you that I have been a fortnight in France, and four days in this city. The tradì of country over\vhich I have paffed, within thefe three months, ¿s confiderable. From Naples, to Rome ; from Rome to Florence ; from Florence to Venice, where we fpent our carnival ; from Venice to Modena, Parma, and Genoa ; from thence to Turin ; from Turin to Geneva ; then, turning to the left, to Lyons; and fiom Lyons to Paris. -Ob¬ jects have paffed before me in fuch a rapid fucceflion, that the time I have, fpent h 3 abroad
150 ANNA ST. ivls: abroad, though not more than a year and half, appears fomething like a fife. Ί he fight of the proud Alps, which boldly look eternity in the face, imparts a fenfation or length of time wholly inadequate to the few hours that are employed in palling them. The labour up is a kind of age ; and the fwift defcent is like falling from the clouds, once more to become an in¬ habitant of earth. Here at Paris I half fancy myfelf at home. And yet, to timid people who have never· beheld the ocean, and who are informed that feas divide .France and England, Paris appears to be at an unat¬ tainable diftance. Every thing is relative in this world ; great or fmall near or djflant only by comparifon. The traveller who fliould have paffed the deferts, and fuffer¬ ed all the perils all the emotions of a jour¬ ney from Bengal by land, would think Himfelf much nearer home, at Naples, than Ido, coming fiom Naples, at Paris: and thofe who have failed round the world feem fatisfied that their labour is within a hair's
hair's breadth of being at at end, when they arrive on their return, at the Cape of Good Hope. You, Fairfax, have frequently afked me to give you accounts of this and that place, of' the things I have feen, and of the obfervations· I have made. Blií I have more frequently put the fame kind of quef¬ tions to myfelf, and never yet could return a fatisfaclory anfwer. I have. feen people whofe manners are fo different from thofe of my own country/ that Ihave.feemed to* acl with them from a kind of conviction of their being of another fpecies. Yet a mo¬ ment's corìfideration undeceives me : I find them to be mere men. Men of dif¬ ferent habits, indeed ; but actuated by the farne paflions, the fame defire of felf- gratification. Yes, Fairfax, the fun,,moon and liars make their appearance, in Italy,. as regularly as 'in England; nay much more fo; for there is not* a tenth part of. the intervening clouds.. When molefted. by. their dirt, their- ver¬ min, their beggars, .their priefts, and their h 4,, prejudices,.
prej* udices, how often have I looked ar fhem with contempt ! The uncleanlinefs that lefults fiom heat and indolence, the obfcquiousflaviflinefs ofthe common peo¬ ple, conti afted with their loquacious im¬ pei tinence, the fenfuality of tlieir hofts of monks, nay the glutton}- even of their beg¬ ging friars, their ignoiant adoiation of the lags and rotten wood which they them¬ felves drefs up, the protection afforded to the moft atrocious criminals if they can but efcape to a mafs of ftone which they caU facred, the little horror in which tjiey hold murder, the promptnefs with which they affaffinate for affronts which they want the fpirit to îefent, their giofs -buffooneries icligious and theatrical, the ridiculous taies told to the yulgar by their preachcis, and the improbable farces which are the delight of the gentle and the fimple, all thefe, and many other things of a, fimilar nature, feem to degrade them below îati- onal creatures. ;ll Yet leverfe the picture, and they ap¬ pear lather to ??_ demi-gods than men' Liften
ings ! Examine their palaces, their bafins of porphyry, urns and vafes of Numidian marble', catacombs, and -fubterranean ci¬ ties; their fculptured heroes, triumphal arches, and amphitheatres in which a na¬ tion might affemble; their Corinthian columns hewn from the rocks of Egypt, and obelifks of granite rtranfported by, fome fttange but forgotten means from Alexandria; the fimplicity, the grandeur and beauty of their temples and churches; the vail fruitfulnefs of their lands, their rich vineyards, teeming fields, and early harvefts; the mingled* fublime and beau¬ tiful over the face of nature in this coun¬ try, which is flieltered from invaders by mountains and feas, fo as by a fmall de¬ gree of art to render it impregnable; their dcfolating eaithquakes, which vet feem but to renovate fertility; their voléanos, fending forth volumes of flame and rivers of fire, and overwhelming cities, which though they have buried they have not ut¬ terly deftroyed; thefe and a thoufand other h 5 particulars,
particulars, which I can neither enume¬ rate nor remember,- apparently fpeak them a race the moft favoured of heaven, and announce Italy to be a country for whofe embelliíhment and renown earth and heaven,', men and gods have, for ages contended. The recollection of thefe things appears to 'be' more vivid, and to give me greater pleafure than I believe -the fight of them afforded. Perhaps it'is my temper. Im¬ patient of delay, I had fcarcely glanced at one object before I was eager to hunt for another. The tedioufnefs of the Ci¬ ceroni was to me intolerable. What can¬ not inftantly be comprehended I can N fcarcely perfuade myfelf to think worthy of the trouble of enquiry. I love to en-. joy; and, if enjoyment do not come to me, I muft fly to feek it, and haften from object to object till it be overtaken. Intellectual pleafures delight me, when they are quick, certain, and; eafily ob¬ tained. I leave thofe'which I am told arife from' patient ftudy, length of time, and
and'feverc application, to the fools who think time given to be fo wafted. Rofes, grow for me to gather: rivers roll for me to lave in. Let the flave dig the mine, but for me let the diamond fparkle. Let the lamb, the dove, and the life-loving eel writhe and die; it fliall not difturb me, while I enjoy the viands. The five fenfes are my deities; to them I pay worfhip and adoration, and never yet have I been flack in the performance of my duty. What! Shall we exift but for a few years, and of thofe fliall there be but a few hours as, it were of youth, joy, and pleafure, and fliall we let them flip? Shall we caft away a good that never can return; and feek for pain, which is itfelf ' in fo much hafte to feck for us ? Away with fucli folly ! The oppofite fyftem be mine. The voluptuous Italian, as wife in this as in other arts, knows better. He lives for the moment, and takes care not to let the moment flip. His very beggars, haik¬ ing in the fun, will not remove, fo long as h 6, . hunger
hunger will fuffer them to enjoy the hap» pinefs of being idle*. Who fo perfectly underftand the luxury of indolence as the Lazaroni of Naples? The Italian, indeed, feems to exert all , the'craft for which he is fo famous, to ac¬ compliih this fole purpofe of enjoyment. He marries a wife, and the handfomeft he can procure; that,,when the ardour of defire is fatiated, flie may fleece fome gal¬ lant, who fliall pay for his pleafures elfe- where. And, as variety is the object of all, gallant fucceeds to gallant, while he himfelf flies from mİftrefs to miftrefs, and thus an equal barter is maintained. This office of Cicifbeo is however an intolerably expenfive one; efpecially to our countrymen. The Signora~is fo in¬ ventive in her faculties, there are fo,many trinkets which flie dies to poflefs, and her wants, real and artificial, are fo nume¬ rous, that the puifc is never quiet in the pocket. And every Englifliman is fup¬ pofed to be fumiflied with the purfe of Fortunatus, The
The worft becaufe the moft dangerous part of the bufir.efs is, tht· ugly and the old think ibernici ves entitled to be as amorous as the young and beautiful ; and a tall fellow, with a little frefli blood in his veins,, is fure to have < no peace for, them. Prithee, Fairfax, tell me how the Conteffa behaved, when flic found I had efcaped from her amorous purfuit. She, began to make me uncafv; and I almoft thought it was as necefiary for me to have a tafter as any tyrant in Chriftcndom, Poifon and the ftilctto difturbed my dreams; for there were not only flie, but two or three more, who feemed detcr^ mined to take no denial. I congratulated. myfelf, as I was rolling down mount Ccnis, to think that I was at length ac¬ tually fafe, and that the 'damned black- looking, hook-nofed, fcowling fellow from Bergamo, whom I had fo often remarked dogging me, was no longer at my heels. But I have now bidden adieu to the Cafììnì, the Canuv.di, and the Donne; and foon fliall fee what provifion this land of
of France affords. For the fhort time that I have been here, I have no occafion to< complain of my reception. I do not know why, Fairfax, but we Englithmen feem to be in tolerably good repute every where, with the ladies. Well, well,, pretty dears, they fliall find me very much at their fervice. I fliould be forry to bring difgrace upon my nation, Fairfax. Would net - \ ou? I expeci to find you a punctual corref¬ pondcnt. Fail not to let me'know, when, weary of being a Cavaliere fervente, you fliall leave the proud banks of the Adria¬ tic, and the-wanton Venice, for fome other abode ; that our letters may never mifs their aim. I will relate every thing that happens to me, when it can either afford you amufement to read, or me· fa¬ tisfaction to write. You have too much honour and honefty not to do "the- fame. Or, if not, I will try what a threat can do: therefore remember that, uniefs you fulfil the teims of our agreement, and give me an account of all your rogueries, ad¬ venturers,
? ventures, fucceffes, and hair-breadth ef- capes, I will choofe fome other more punctual and more entertaining correfpcn- dent. t Obferve further, and let that be a fpur to your induftry, I have a tale in petto, a whimfical adventure which happened to me yefterday evening ; but which I fliall forbear to regale you'with, for three fub- ftantial reafons: firft becaufe it is my good pleasure ; fecondly becaufe I like it ; and laftly fuch is my fovereign will. Nay, if that be all, I can give you three more ; firft becaufe I am almoft at the end of my paper; next becaufe I may want a good fubjecl when I write again ; and finally becaufe the poft is a fturdy unceremonious * fellow, and does not think proper to wait my leifure. So farewell; and believe me tobe very fincerely yours, COKE CLIFTON. ; P. S. I have this moment received in¬ formation that Sir Arthur St. Ives and his daughter arrived yefterday in the' after-
-ST.
noon- at Paib. I have heard that the. daughter is the moil beautiful woman in England, and that her wit is even fupe¬ rior to her beauty. I am very glad ofthe accident,, for I have a great defire to fee her. My mother's laft was partly a letter. of bufinefs, but chiely of recommenda¬ tion, particularly of the young lady : and in it was enclofcd one from my fifter, Louifa,, which gives a'very high chai acier of her friend, Anna St. Ives. They have become acquainted fince I have been a- broad. The letter is loaded with advice to me, at which, as you may well think, I laugh. Thefe girls, tied to their mother's apron-firings, pietcnd to advife a man who has feen the world ! But vanity and conceit are ftiangc propenfities, that total¬ ly blind the eyes of their poffeffois. I have lived -but little at home, but I always thought the young lady a forward imperi¬ ous mifs; yet I never before knew her fo much on the ftilts. I expect flie will foon put on boots and buckfkin, and horfewhip her fellows heifelf; for flie,improves apace. Once more farewell.
LETTER XX.
ANNA WENBOURNE ST. IVES TO LOUISA CLIFTON. ,
París, Hotel d'Ej'pagn'e^ Rue Guenegaude^ Fauxhonrg St. Germain,^ .FTER abundance of jolting in carria¬ ges, fea-ficknefs, and fuoh like trifling ac¬ cidents, incidental to us travellers, here -we are at laft, dear Louifa. My very fiift demand has been for pen, ink and paper, to inform my kind friend of our, fafe arri¬ val : though I am fo giddy, after this poft hafte four day's hurry, that I fcarcely, can write a ftraight line. Neither do 1 know whether I have any thing to fay ; though I feemed to myfelf to have acquired an additional ftock of ideas, at the very mo,-
ment that I firft beheld Calais and the coaft of france. What is there, my dear, in the human mind, that induces us to think every thing which is unufual is little lefs than abfurb? Is it prejudice, is it vanity, or is it a fliort and imperfect view : a want of difcrimination ? I could have'laughed, but that Iliad fome latent fenfe of my own folly, at Úit fight of a dozen" French men and women, and two or three loitering monks* ' whom curiofity had drawn to¬ gether upon the pier-head, to fee us come into port. And what was my in¬ citement to'daughter?—It.was the differ¬ ent cut of a coat. It was a filk bag, in which the hair was tied, an old fword, and a dangling pair of ruffles; which none of them fuited with the. poverty of the drefs, and meagre ap t earance, of a perfon who feemed to ft'rut and value himfelf upon. fuch marks of diftinciion. Sterne was in my pocket, and his gentle fpirit was prefent to my mind. Perhaps, the perfon who thus excited ä tranfient emotion of rifibility was a nobleman. Eor
the extremes of riches and of poverty are, as I have been informed, very frequent among the nobility of France. He might happen to think himfelf ? ???? highly un¬ fortunate 1, and aggrieved. The fuppofition occafioned my fmile to evaporate in a figh. But the houfes !—They were differently built !—Could thai be right ? They were not fo clean ! Tliat was certainly wrong. In what ftrange land is theftandard of pro¬ priety erecied ?—Then the blue and brown jackets of the women; their undaunted manner of flaring; their want of hats, and ftays; the flovenly look of flippers not drawn up at the heel; the^clumfy wooden ihoes of fome ? and the bare feet of others ; ? nay their readinefs to laugh at the uncouth appearance of the people who were con¬ demning them for being ridiculous; what could all this be? But how came I fo un¬ accountably to forget that children and beggars fometimes go barefoot in Eng¬ land; and that few people, perhaps, aie- more addicted to ftare and laugh at ftran¬ gers.
gers than ourfeives ? Oh !, But the Fren civ are fo polite a nation that even the common people are all well bred ; and would enter a drawing-room with more eafe and grace than an Englifh gentleman !— Flave you never heard· this nonfenfe, Louifa ? The character of nations, or rather of. mind, is apparent in trifles. Granted. Let us tuin our eyes back to the fliores we have fo lately left : let us examine the trifles we hang about ourfeives. , Flow many of them, which characterize and as "it were flam p the nation with abfurdity, efcape unobferved ! We fee them every day ; we have adopted and made them our own, and we fliould be ftrangely of¬ fended, fliould any peifon take the liber¬ ty, having difcovered the. folly of them, to laugh at us.
I wrote thus far laft night ; but learning, on enquiry, that Tucfdays and Fridays are foreign poft days, lieft off; being lather indifpofed after my jouincy. 'Tis only a fwimming
fwimming in the head, which will foon leave mc; though I find it has returned upon me ocafionally all the morning. But to my pleafing talk ; again lei; me prattle to my friend. " The innkeepers of Calais come them¬ felves, or fend their 'waiters, -to watch for ••and invite paffengers to their houfes ; and •will not be difmiffed without difficulty. The mofi daring endeavour to fecure -cuftomers, by feizing on fome of their trunks, or baggage. But we had deter¬ mined to go to Deffein's, and the aclive Frank foon made way for us. I was amufed with the handbill, ftuck _ iip againft the walls of this inn, or hotel, as it is called ; announcing it to be the largeft, the compieteti, the moil m agni fi¬ xent, with a thoufand et'cæteras, in the univerfc ; and recounting not only its nu¬ merous accommodations, but the multifa¬ rious trades which it contained within its own walls ; to all which was added a ¿playhoufe. A playhoufe it is true there -was, but nò players ; and as for trades, 4 there
there were at leaft as many as \\:e u an ted. Sir Arthur took over his own caiiiagc ; otherwife this firft of inns in the univerfe would not have furnifli e d him with one, but on condition of its being purchafed. 'Sir Arthur obferved it was. ftrange that the French innkeepers fliould not yet have difcovered it to be tlieir intereft to keep carriages for travellers, as in England. To which Frank Henley flircwdly anfwered, that the book of poft roads, in his hand, informed him government was in reality every where the innkeeper ; and referved to itfelf the profits of polling. And the deepeft thinkers, added Frank, inform us that every thing in which governments in¬ terfere is fpoiled. I remarked to him that this principle would lead us a great way¿- Yes, faid he, but not too far : and, t play¬ ing upon my words, added, it would lead us back to the right way, from which we appear at prefent toftiave ftrayed, into the very labyrinth of folly and blunders. Frank is earneftly ftudious of the effects of governments, and laws ; and reads the authors
A NOVEL, 167 authors who have written beft on fuch fub- jecis with great attention, and pleafure. He and Sir Arthur by no means agree, in politics ; and Sir Arthur has two or three times been half affronted, that a man fo young and fo inferior to himfelf, as he fuppofes Frank to be r fliould venture to be ofa different opinion, and difpute with him ; who wasonce in his life a member of par¬ liament. I am obliged now and then flily to remind him of the highwayman and Turnham Green. And now, Louifa, traveller like, could I regale you with a^melancholy narrative^ relating how the fields in this country have no hedges ; how the cows are as meagre as their keepers ; how wretched the huts and their" owners appear ; how French poftillions jump in and out of jack-boots,- with their flioes on, becaufe they are too heavy to drag after them ; how they har- nefs their horfes with ropes;"how dexte- oroüfly they crack'the mercilefs -whips with which they belabour the poor hacks they drive ; how we were ' obliged to pay for five
löå anna' st. ivès: five of thefe hacks, having only four in our carriage, and two of them frequently blind, lame, or ufelefs ; with many other items, that might be grievous to hear^ could I but perfuade myfelf thoroughly to pity or be angry at the whole French nation,' for not exactly refembling the Englifh. But do they themfelves com¬ plain ? Mercy on us! Complain?—No¬ thing is fo grateful to their hearts, as the praife ofthat dear country, which Englifh travellers are fo prone to defpife ! Frank as ufual has been all attention, ^all ardour, all anxiety, to render our jour¬ ney as'pjcafant as poffible. His efforts have been chiefly directed to me ; my eafe, my fatisfaction, my enjoyment, have been his continual care. Not that he has ne¬ glected or overlooked Sir Arthur. He over¬ looks no living creatine, to whom he can give aid. * He lofes no opportunity of gaining the efteem and affection of high and low, rich and poor. His delicacy üievcr flumbers. His thirftof doing good ■is never alfuaged. ' I am young it is true, Mi.
but I ncvei before met a youth fo deferv¬ ing. Think of him myfelf I muft not; though I would give kingdoms, if I had them, to fee him completely happy. And now, dear Louifa, I am foon to meet your brother. ???? do I feem to recollect this with a kmd of agitation ? ? there t rebellion in my heart ? Would it fwerve from the feveie dictates of duty ? No. I will fet too ftrici a watch over its emotions. What ! Does not Louifa ho¬ nour me with the title of friend, and fliall I prove 'unworthy 'of her friendrhip ? For¬ bid it emulation, truth, and virtue^ How happy fliould I be were your bro¬ ther and Frank Henley to conceive an immediate partiality for each other 1 How much too would it pi omote the project. I wiih to execute 1 I have been taxing my invention to form fome little plot for this purpofe, but I find it barren. I can do nothing but determine to fpeak of Frank as be deferves; which furely will gain bim the love of the whole world. And for
, . ,. , s forhis-part, Ι knowhow ready he will be to give merit its due. J I have.more than once purpofely men- fionedyour brother's name ta Sir Arthur, -when Frank was prefent ; in fome ?????? to prepare and guard him againft furprife. But I could not but remark my hints had. an erle£f upon him that betrayed how miícb his heart wa&akrmed. He thinks too favourably, and I fear too frequently of me; Wha't can be done ? The wifeft of us are* the flaves of circumftances, and of-the prejudices pf others;· How many excellent qualities are inet in him 1 and fortliefe tobe rejected— · ! Alas !— We mùft patiently fubmit to the awful· laws of' neceffity. Neither 1 is Sir Arthur without his fears and fufpicions. His difcourfe betrays bis alarm s. - He ? cannot conceive that a love of the merits of Frank can be diftinft from all love of his perfon.—* The crime of difobedience in children, $iè ruía of families by fooliib arid unequal marriages^
marriages, and the wretchednefs which isr the refult of fuch guilty conduct, have been hinted at more than once lately 5 and though not with many words, yet with a degree of anxiety that gave me pain, for it taught me, being fufpected, half to -fufpecl myfelf, '· But I muft conclude? my travelling vertigo I find is not ' immediately to be íhaken off. I imagine that a few hours calm fleep will be my beft phyfician.« Adieu. I fhall wait, with fome impati- ence> for a letter írom my dear Louifa., A. W. tT. ,?γΕ&
r« JLÊTTER
LETTER XXI.
FRANK HENLEY TO OLIVER TRENCHARD. Paris, Hèlel d'Efpagne, Rue Gw.negaude, Fattxhourg St. Girmaht. IS/1 Y emotions, Oliver, are too flrong to permit me to narrate common occurren¬ ces. I can only tell thee our journey is ended, that we arrived yefterday, and that we are now at Paris. My feelings arc more tumultuous than they ought to be, and feek relief in the mild and liftening patience of fríendíhip. Firft however I muft relate a fin gular adventure, which happened yefterday evening. After I had feen our baggage properly difpofed
A NOVBL, . difpofed of, curiofity led me, though night was approaching, to walk out and take a view of the famous façade of the Louvre. From thence I ftrayed, through the gar¬ dens ,of the Thuilleries, to the Place de Louis XV; being delighted with the beauties around me, but which I have not now time to defcribe. A little farther are the Champs Elyfées, where trees planted in quincunx afford a tolerably agreeable retreat to the Parifians. It was now twilight. The idlers had retired; for I fuppofe, from what fol¬ lowed, that it is not very fafe to walk after .dark, in -thefe environs. Ignoiant of this, and not apprehenfive of any danger, Iliad ftrayed to a confiderable diftance among the trees, againft one of which I ftood leaning, and contemplating the banks of the Seine/ the Palais Bourbon, and other furrounding objects. All 'was filent, ex- 4 cept the diftant hum of the city, and the -rattling of carriages, which could but juft Jae heard. Amid this calm, I was fuddenly alarm- i 3 , ed
ed by voices in anger, and approaching. They fpoke in French, and prefently be¬ same more diftinct and loud. Draw, fir, faid one. Mort de ma vie 9 come along, anfwered the other. Draw, fir, I fay ; replied the, firft. I · neither know who you are nor what your intentions may be. I wi 1 ! go no further. Uiaw! Sacrißi, anfwered his antagonift, we fliall be interi upted : the guard will be upon us in a moment. ' The firft however was refolute; and ia an impei ious voice again bade him draw. Their fwords were inftantly out, and they began to affault each other. Thou mayft ■imagine, Oliver, I would not cowardly ftand and be a fpeclator of murder. They were not twenty paces from me. I flew ; when, to my great furprize, one of them 'calledi in Englifh, Keep off, fir 1 Who -are you<i Keep off! And, his enemy ha¬ lving dropt his guard, he prefented his ¿point to me. üt
It was no time to hefitate. I rufhed Tefolutely between them ; holding up my open hands above my head, to ihew the Englifliman, who feemed apprehenfive of a confpiracy, he had nothing to fear from me. His anger almoft overcame him : he held up his fvvord, as if to ftrike with it, and with great haughtinefs and paffion again bade me begone. Have patience, fir, anfwered I. Men ihall not affaffinate each other, if I can prevent it. Let us retirei faid the Frenchman : I 'knew we ihould be interrupted. You fliall not fight. I will follow you, added I, will call for help. You are a damned impertinent fellow, -fáid the Englifliman. Be it fo; but you fliall not fight, was my anfwer. The combatants, finding me ίο deter¬ mined, put up their fwords, and mutually exchanged their addrefs ; after which they feparated. So that it is probable, Oliver, jny mterference has done no good. But ι 4 that
that 1 muil leave to chance. I could-not aft otherwife. This incident, fo immediately after my < arrival, in a place fo ftrange to me, and coming fo fuddenly, made too great an impreiïîon upon me not to ,tell it thee. Though I have another topic much nearer my heart j the true ftate of which has been ihewn me, by an event of which I will now inform thee. We are lodged here in the 'firft floor, confifting of many chambers, each of which is a thoroughfare to the moil diftant. It is' not ten minutes fince I was feated, and preparing to write to thee, when Anna came to pafs through the room where I was, and retire to her own apart¬ ment. She was fatigued, I imagine, by the journey ; though I frequently fear the ardour of her mind will injure her confti- tution. She walked with fome difficulty, was evidently giddy, and ftaggered. I was alarmed, and was rifing, when 'flie -called to me faintly,—« Help me, Frank 1" I fprung
I fprung and caught her as flie was fal¬ ling. Iiecetved her in my arms? And my agitation was fo -violent, that it was with difficulty I could preferve ftrength enough to fupport her, and feat her in the chair*I had quitted. The houfe to -me was a kind of wil¬ dernefs. -1 knew not where to run, yet run I did for water. I called Laura, with a latent wifli that nobody might help her but myfelf; ,and, as it happened, nobody heard. I returned ; flie recovered, thank¬ ed me, with her ufual heavenly kindnefs, and I conducted her to her apartment, flie leaning on my arm. Oh ! Oliver, is it wrong to feel what I feel, at the remembrance ? If it be, re¬ prove me ftemly ; teach me my duty, and i I will thank thee. Surely there is fome¬ thing fupernatural hovers over her.l At leaft flie refembles no other mortal ! Then her kindnefs to me, her looks, her fmiles, her actions, are all intentional benignancy. She is now but three chambers diftant from me ; enjoying as I hope refrefhing flum* 1 5 bers.
Angels guard her, and infpire*her dreams. No matter for .the nortfenfe of my words, Oliver; thou knoweft my meaning. She ^defired me to bid Laura not difturb her; 'irnd 'here 'I fit, watchful of my precious" 4 'charge. Grateful, heart-foothing*office'! And now, Oliver, what am I to think? ^My fears would tie my tongue; but, ei¬ ther Pam deludedor hope brightens upon »rae, and I want the felf-denying refolution •of "fiience. Yes, ^Oliver, I muft repeat, therevis fuch fweetnefs-in her countenance, •when'-ihe fpeaks to me, fuch a fmile, fo inviting, fo affirmative, -that Τ am incef- fantly flattering myfelf it cannot but have a meaning. *I 'have ???????1 :times lately heard her figh; andonce fo emrjhatically that I think it impoflible I ihoulu Ibe de¬ ceived, ft and Sir Arthur were»cGuverfing. I was endeavouring to fliew the perni¬ cious tendency of the prejudices óf man¬ kind, îind inadvertently touched upon the abfurdity of fuppofing there could be any fuperiority, of man over man, except ι that which genius, and virtue gave. Sir Arthur
.Arthur did not approve the doctrine, and was pettini. I perhaps was warmed, by a latent fenfe of my own fituation, and exclaimed—" Oh! How many noble " hearts are groaning, at this inftant, " under the oppreffion of thefe prejudi- " ces! Hearts that groan, not becaufe " they fuffer, but becaufe they are denied " the power effectually to 4Ìd their very ·" oppreffors, who exert the defpotifm.of ' " numbers, to enforce claims which they *" themfelves feel to be unjuft, but which *" they think it difhonourable to relin- " quifli!"------'It was then the figh burft .forth of which I told thee. I turned and found her eyes fixed upon me. She blufhed and looked down, and then again bent them toward me. I was heated and . daring. We exchanged looks, and faid—! Volumes could not repeat how much'!— But furely neither of us faid any' thing to" .the other's difadvantage. Oh ! The blifs to perceive myfelf un¬ derftood , and not , reproved í To meet fuch emanations of mind— ! Ecftafy is a 1 ? poor
poor word ! Once more flie feemed to re¬ peat— She would love me if I would let lier. Tell me, then—Have í not reafon on my fide ? And, if I have, will flie not Men? May flie not be won ? Shall I doubt of victory, fighting under the banners of truth? Alasi— Well well— My own fenfations, Oliver, aie fo acute, and I ara fo fearful left they fhould lead me aftray, that I could not forbear this detail—Let,us change the tlieme.
Well, here we are, in France; and, wonderful to toll, France is not England ! I imagine it is impoffible to travel through a foieign country, without fall¬ ing into certain reveries; and that .each man will fafliion his di earns Ίη part fiom accident, and in part according to tbe manner in which he has been accuftom- ed to ruminate. Thy moft excellent fa¬ ther, Oliver, early turned my mind to the confederation of forms of government, and
and their 1 effects upon the manners and morals of men. The fubject, in his efti¬ mation, is the moft noble that comes un¬ der our cognizance ; and the moie I think myfelf capable of examining, and the more I actually 'do examine, the more I am a convert to his opinion. How often has it been faid of France, by ι various Englifh philofophers, and by many of its own fages, What a happy country would this be, were it well governed! But, with equal truth, the fame may be faid of every country under heaven; England ii> felf, Oliver, in fpite of our partialities, not excepted. How falfe, how futile, how abfurd is the ι em ark that a defpotic government, under a perfect monarch, would be the ftate of higheft felicity ! Firft an impofli¬ ble thing is afked; and next impoffible confequences deduced. One tyrant ge¬ nerates a nation of tyrants. His own miftakes communicate themfelves eail;, weft, north, and fouth; and what ap¬ peared
peared to be but a/park becomes a con- .flagratton. Mow inconfiftent are .the demands and f complaints of ignorance! It "wiflies to tyrannize, yet exclaims againft tyranny.! .It grafps at wealth, and pants after -power; yet clamours -iiloud, ,againft the powerful and the wealthy! It hourly ftarts out into all the infolence of pride.; yet'hates and endeavours to fpurn at the -proud ! Among the many who have a vague '.kind of fufpicion that,things might be 'better, are mingled a few; who feem very /defirous they fhould remain as they are. ■Thefe are the rich; iwho, having by ex¬ tortion and rapine plundered.the defence- .lefs, and heaped up choice of viands and the fat of the land^ forne· fufficient to feed ten, ' fome twenty, fome a hundred, fome ■a-thoufand, and others whole aririies, and being themfelves . each only able to eat for one, fay to -.the hungry, -who have no food—" .Come ! Dance for my fport, and " I will
(ff I will give you bread. Ltck the duft *" off my flioes, and you fhall be indulged 6( with a morfei of meat. Flatter mc, " and you iliall wear my livery. Labour " for me, and I will return you a tenth of " your gain. Shed your blood in my be- " half, and, while you are young and " w robuft, I will allow you juft as much as **' will keep life and foul together; when " you are old, and worn out, you may ' w rob, hang, rot, orllarve," Would not any one imagine, Oliver, that this were poetry? Alas! It is mere, literal, matter of faci. Yet let us not complain. Men?begin >to reafon,-and to think, aloud; and thefe . things cannot always endure. I intended to have made fome obferva¬ tions on the people, the afpect ófthe coun¬ try, and other trifles ; I fcarcely now know what: t but I have wandered into a fubject fovaft, fo interefting, fo fublime, that all petty individual remarks fink before it. Nor will I for the prefent blur the majefty of the
ihe picture; by ill-placed, mean, and dif- cordant objects. Therefore, farewell. F. HENLEY.. - P. S. Examine all I have faid, and what I am" going to add, relative to my¬ felf, with feverity. Mine is a ftate of mind in which the jealous rigour of friend¬ fhip appears to be effentially neceffary. I have been feized with 'I know not what apprehenfions, by fome hints which flie has two or three times lately repeated, con¬ cerning the brother of her dear and worthy friend Louifa; who, it feems, is to give us the meeting at Paris. Is'it not omi¬ nous? At leaft the manner in which flie irítroduced the fubject, and fpoke of him, as well as the replies of Sir Arthur, were all of evil augury. Yet, why torment myfelf with imaginary terrors? Should the brother refemble the friend—! Well! What if he fliould? Would it grieve me tofind another man of virtue and genius, be¬ caufe it is'poflible my perfonal intereft might
IDOVEL. 185 might be affected by the difcovery? No. My mind has ftill ftrength fufficient to .reject, nay to -contemn, fo unworthy a thought. But he may be fomething very different! Love her he muft: all who be¬ hold her love! The few words flie has occafionally dropped, have led me to fuf¬ pecl " more was meant than met the ear." Whenever this chord is touched, my heart inftantly becomes 'tremulous; and with fenfibiiity fo painful as fully to lay open its weaknefs; againft which I muft care¬ fully and refolutcly guard. It is thefe incongruous, thefe jarring f tokens, that engender doubt, and fufpenfe, almoft infupportable.
XETTER
¿ETTER XXII
ANNA WENBOURNE ST, 1VES TO 'LOUISA CLIFTON.
.Parist HoteJ d'jEjpagne, RüeGuenegaude^ Fauxbourg St. Germain. Å HE oddeft and moft unlucky accident imaginable, Louifa, has happened. Your brother and Frank have unfortunately half quarreled, without kuowing each other. I mentioned a giddinefs with which I was feized ; the confequence, as I fuppofe, of 'travelling. I was obliged to retire to my • chamber; 4 nay fliould have fallen as I *went, but for Frank. I defired he \wpuld 'tell Laura not to difturb me; and-he it -feems planted himfelf fentinél, with a de¬ termination that neither .Laura nor any
other perfon ihould approach. I am too often in his thoughts : he is wrong to be¬ ftow fo much of his time and attention on me. Sir Arthur**was gone to look about him ; having firft feñt a note, unknown to me, to inform your brother of our arrival -, and requefting to fee him, as foon as con- , venient. Away 'hurried your brother, at this mal apropos interval, with Sir Arthur's note in his pocket, to our hotel. He enquired for my father ? He was gone out. JFor me ? Laura anfwered fhe would call me. She was running with gieat hafte, for tthis purpofe, but was intercepted by Frank; who, agreeably to my defire, vwould not fuffer her to proceed. She »returned ; and your brother^ referring again to Sir Arthur's note, was much-^ .furprifed, and rather vexed. He afked by whofe order flie was fen* back. She anfwered by the order of Mr. ^ Jlrank,
Who was Mr. Frank ? A young gentleman ; [Laura has re¬ peated all that paffed] the fon of Mr. Aby Henley. < ■ - And who was Mr. Aby Henley ? The fteward and gardener of Sir Arthur; his head man. ' Steward and gardener? The fon of a gardener a gentleman ? Yes, fir. To be fure, fir, among tho¬ rough bred quality, tbough perhaps he may be better than the beft of them, he is thought no better than a kind of a fort of a gentleman ; being not fo high born. Well, fiiid your brother, fliew me to this fon of Mr. Aby; this peremptory gentleman ; or, as you call him, kind of a fort of a gentleman ! ' Laura obeyed ; and flie fays f hey were quite furprifed at the fight ofeach other; but that I fuppofe to be one of the flourifhes of her fancy. Your brother, 'however, as I underftand, defired, witb fome haughtinefs, that Frank would fuffer .the maid to pafs, and inform me he was come,
come, agreeably to fir Arthur's requeft, to pay his refpecls to me. Frank refo¬ lutely refufed ; alleging I was not well. Not well ! Said youi brother. Is not this Sir Arthur's hand-writing? Yes, replied Frank ; but I aflure, you flie is not well : and I am afraid that even our fpeaking may awak'en her, if fhe fhould chance to be afleep. I muft therefore requeft, fir, you would retire.. The oddnefs of the circumftances, and the pofitivenefs of Frank, difpleafed your brother. Sir Arthurjiappened to return ; and he went to him, fcarcely taking time for firft compliments, but afking ( whether it were true that I was not well. 'Sir Arthur was furprifed : he knew, nothing of it! Iliad not thought a giddİnefs in the head worth á complaint. Laura was again fent to tell me"; and was again de¬ nied admittance. Sir Arthur then, with your brother," came to queftion Frank ; who continued firm in his refufal; and when Sir Arthur and your brother had heard that I was fo dizzy as to be in dan-
ger of falling, had not he fupported me r they were fatisfied. But fuch a meeting be¬ tween Frank and your brother, was quite vexatious : when the very reverfe too was wiflied ! However he ís ib vifit us this morning ; and I will then endeavour to da juftice to the worth of Frank, and remove falfe impreflions, which I have fome rea¬ fon to fear have been made. I will paufe here j but, if I find an op¬ portunity, will write another ihort letter, under the fame cover, by this poft : that is, ihould I happen to have any thing more to fay—This accident was exceed¬ ingly unlucky, and I feem as if I felt my¬ felf to blame; efpecially a*I am quite in fpirits this morning, and relieved from my giddy fenfations. I am forry 5 very forry : but it cannot be helped, A. w. ST, IVES.
İETTER XXIII. COKE CLIFTON TO ? -UY FAIRFAX.
Paris, Hotel de VUn'lverfite, pr}s le Pont Royal. İT was well I did not tell my tale in my íaft, Fairfax; it would have been fpoiled'. I knew it only by halves. It has ended in the moft fingular combination of circum- ftanceSsOne could welHmagine. You remember I told you of thé arrival of Sir Arthur St. Ives, and his daughter y 2 believe it was in the poftfcript ; and that I was immediately going to—Pfliaw i I am beginning my ftory now at the wrong end. It is throughout exceedingly whim¬ fical. Liften, and let aniazement.prop your open mouth. You
You muft have obferved the eafe with which Frenchmen, though perfect ftran¬ gers to each other, fall into familiar con, verfation ; and become as intimate in a quarter of an hour, as if they had been acquainted their whole lives. This is a cuftom which I veiy much approve. But, like all other good things, it is liable to abufe. The other day I happened to be taking a walk on the Boulevards, it being a church feftival, purpofely to fee the good Parifians in all their gaiety and glory ; and a more cheerful, at leaft a more noify people, do not, I believe, exift. As I was ftanding to admire a wax-work exhi¬ bition of all the famous highwaymen, and cut-throats, whofe hiftoiies are moft re¬ nowned in Fiance* and liftening to the fellow at the door, bawling— Auv Voleurs! -Jux grands Voleurs!— Not a little amufed with the murderous looks, darknefs, dun¬ geons, chains and petty hoiror which they had mimicked, a man uncommonly well «kefled, with an elegant perfon and pleaf¬ ing
ingi manners, came up and immediately fell into difcourfe with me. I encouraged him, becaufe he pleafed mei We walked together, and had not converfed five minutes before, without feeming to feek an'opportunity, he had informed me that; he was the Marquis de Paffy, and that he had left his carriage and attendants, be¬ caufe he like me took much pleafure in obferving the hilarity of the holiday citi¬ zens. Fie had accofted me, he faid, be¬ caufe he had a peculiar efteem for the Englifh ; of which nation he knew me to be, by my ftep and behaviour. We talked fome time, and though he made no deep remarks, he was very com¬ municative pf anecdotes, which had come widiin his own knowlege, that painted the manners of the nation. Among other things, he-told me it was not uncommon 'for valets to drefs themfelves in their maf¬ ters clothes, when they fuppofed them to - be at a diftance, or otherwife engaged, affume their titles, and pafs themfelves upon Ûiç-.Bourgeoife and foreigners for
counts, dukes, or,princes. It was but. this day fortnight, faid he, tliat thé Mare¬ chal de R ------ furprifed one of-his fer¬ vants in a fimilar difguife, and with fome· jocularity publicly ordered the'fellow to' walk at his heels, then went tc his car-' riage, and ■ commanded him, full drefled^ .as he was, to get up behind. ' . Í - He "bad fcarcely ended this account before another perfon came.up, and with· an air of fome authority aikecL him where his mafter was, and what he did there, and other queftions. • To all this my quidam acquaintance, with a degree of furprize that .feemed to be tempered with· the moil pleafing and' unaffected urbanity, replied; without be¬ ing in the leaft difconcerted, fir, you mif¬ take me : but I am fure you are too much of a gentleman to mean any wilful affront. 'Affront!, Why whom do you pretend yourfelf to be, ,fir ? Sir, I am the Marquis de Pafly. ι You the Marquis : dé Paify?— ,
Ves, fir jI!— Infolent fcoundrel '— No gentleman, fir, can fuffer fuch lan¬ guage ; and I infift upon fatisfaction. — t— And accordingly my champion drew his fword. His antagonift, looking on him with ineffable contempt, anfwered he' would take fome proper opportunity 'to cane him as he deferved. I Own I was amazed- ï reafoncd a fliort time with myfelf, and concluded the' peifon was miftaken ; for that it was im¬ poflible for any man to coimteifeİtfo much eafe, or behave with fo much propriety, who was not a gentleman. I thercfoie^ thought proper to interfere, and lold the intruder that, having given an infult, he ' ought not to be afraid of giving fatis¬ faction — l , And pray, fir, faid he, who aie you? - A gentleman, fir, anfwered 1-^- Yes. As good a one as your compa¬ nion, I fuppofe— l You know, Fairfax, it is not cuftomary with me to fufter infolence to triumph
unchaftifed, and I ordered him immedi¬ ately to draw. . What, fir, İn this place, faid he ? Fol¬ low me, if you have any valour to fpare. His fpirit pleafed me, an'd I followed. I knew not what became of the fellow, whofe caufe I had cxpoufed ; for I faw him no more. My antagohift led me acrofs the rue St. Honoré, to a place which I fuppofe you know, called the Elyfian Fields. It began to be late, and I am told there is danger in paifing the precincts of the guard. I apprehended a confpiracy, and at laft refufed to proceed any farther.— Finding me obftinate he drew, but faid we fliould be interrupted. He was no falfe prophet ; for we had not made half a dozen paffes before a youth/ whom from his boots and appear¬ ance I fuppofed to be Englifh, came run¬ ning and vociferating—Forbear ! I was not quite certain that his appearance might not be artifice; I'therefore accofted him in Engliili, in which language he very readilv
readily replied. He was quite a fturdy, dauntlefs gentleman ; for, though our fvvords were drawn, and both of us fuffi ciently angry, he refolutely placed himfelf between us, declaring we fliould not fight; and that, if we went farther, he would follow. Nothing was to be done ; and I now * began to fufpecl the perfon, with whom I had this ridiculous quarrel, to be really a gentleman. I gave him my addrefs, and he readily returned his; after whicli we parted, he finging a French fong, and I curfmg the infolence of the Englifh youth, who feemed to difregard my anger, and to be happy that he had prevented the fpilling of blood. Remember that all this happened on the preceding evening, after I had written the greateft part of my laft long letter.— The next morning I finifhed it, and receiv¬ ed a note from Sir Arthur St. Ives, as I mentioned. As foon as I could get d re ífed, I haf- ie 3 tened
tened away ; and, arriving at the hotel, enquired for the knight ? He was gone out. » , For his_daughter?— She had retired to her apartment. I fent in my name. The maid went, find returned with an anfwer that Mr, Frank did not think it-proper for her mif¬ trefs to be difturbed. Now,. Fairfax, guefs who Mr. Frank was if you can ! By heaven, it was the veiy individual ,youth .who, the night before, had been fo ãbfolute in putting an end our duell I was planet-ftruck ! Nor was his fur¬ prife lefs, when he Taw me, and heard my errand and my,name. I found my gentleman as pofitive in the morning as in the evening. He was the dragon; touch the fruit who dared! Jafon himfelf could not have entrance there! And he was no lefs cool than determined. I was almoft tempted to tofs him out of the window. Flowever I am glad I contained myfelf; for,
for, bn the entrance of Sir Arthur, we came to an explanation; and I find the young lady 'was 'really 'indifpofed? But, confidering his mongrel birth and breed- » ing, for he is the 'fon of a gardener, I really never faw a fellow give himfelf fuch high airs. . Sir Arthur 'received me witji great, ci¬ vility'. I have not yet feen'the daughter, but I expeCl to find her a beauty. She is the toaft of the county where her father refides. I am to be with her in half an hour; and, as I fuppofe I fliall be fully engaged witb this and other affairs for fome days, I fliall feai up my letter : you muft therefore wait for an account of her, till inclination and the full tide of events ihall induce me again to indite of great matters. I fliall diredi this, agreeably to your laft,' to your banker's, in Parma. Do not fail to tell me when you fhâll be at Turin. Yours, very fincerely, ? CLIFTON. ? 4 P. S. My
V. S.' My opponent of the Eyilan Fields has juft paid me a vifit. He is a man of .family; feems to be of a flighty pleafant humour'; and acknowledged that what'he had heard convinced him he had miftaken my character; for which he was very ready either to cut my throat or aik my pardon. His eafe and good temper fpoke much in his favour ; and I laughed, and anfwered, in mercy to my throat, I would accept .his-apology. In confici era tion of which we are to cultivate an acquaint¬ ance, and bê fwora friends.
LETTER
LETTER XXIV.
ANNA WENBOURNE ST. IVES TO LOUISA CLIFTON. Paris, Hotel d'EJpagne, Rue Guenegauáe y Fauxbaurg St. Germain. 1 RETURN eagerly'to my Louifa. Mr. Clifton, my dear, has this inftant left vis. I give you joy! Yes, he is the .brother of my friend! I do not fay he is her equal, though I am not quite fure that he is her inferior. Fie is all animation, all life. His perfon is graceful, his manners pleafing, and his mind vigorous. I can fay but little from fo fhort an acquaint¬ ance; except that I am convinced his, virtues, or his errors, if he have any.. [And who is without ?] are not of fhe feeble kind. They are not characterifèd, ? 5 by
by dull mediocrity; which,, of all quali¬ ties, is the moft hopelefs, and incapable. He gave his earneft defire to fee me^when he was refufed by Frank, tlie air of a handfome^complîment; politely accufing himfelf of improper impatience, when he was in expectation of what he was pleafed to call an uncommon pleafure. Though it was our firft interview, he felt no re- ftraint; but faid many very civil things naturally, and with an exceedingly good grace. I purpofely turned the converfation on* Frank, related fome anecdotes of him, and beftowed praife which was confirmed by Sir Arthur^ Your brother, whofe imagination is warm and active, called him a tiufiy Cerberus; and faid hehad a mouth to anfwer each of the three ; mean- - ing 1 Laura, himfelf, and Sir Arthur. Va- rious rerøaiks which efcaped h mi fliew that he has a fondnefs for pleafant falire,, and fimifies of humour. He praifed Frank, after hearing our account of him ; but his praife was qua¬ lified
lified with the word obftinacy. There was an appearance of feeling that the gen¬ tleman ought not to have been fo ilei niy repulfed, by the fon of a fteward.—And was'this his kindred quality to my friend? —Forgive me, Louifa—It was unjuft in me to fay I was not quite fuie he is your inferior—However I can very ferioufly af¬ fût e you, he is not one of }our eveiy day folks. Frank came in, and your brother ad¬ dreffed him with good humour, but in a tone denoting it was the gentleman to the foi t of a gentleman. I own it pleafed me to obferve the eafe with which Fiank, by his anfwers, obliged Mr. Clif¬ ton to change his key. But I foon had occafion to o'bfeive that the warmth of your brother's expreffions, his eagernefs to be immediately intimate with us, and the advances which he wilh fo little fenfe of eraban afsment made to me, hati an effect upon Frank which, T gi early fear, was painful. I muft look to this; it is a ferious moment, and I muft feri- K. <3 ou íly
qufly examine, and quickly refolve. In the mean time, your brother has kindly infifted upon devoting himfelf wholly to our amufements; to attend on us, and .ihew us the public buildings, gardens, paintings, and theatres ; as well as to in¬ troduce us to all his friends. And what muft-we do in return for this well-meant kindnefs? Muft we not endeavour to weed out,thofe few errors, for few I hope they are, which impove- rifli a mind in itfelf apparently fertile and of high rank?—Yes, it inftantly fuggefted itfelf to me as an indifpenfable acl of duly—The attempt muft be made —With what obftinate warfare do men encoun¬ ter peril when money, bafe money, is their propofed reward! And fliall we do lefs for mind, eternal omnipotent mind? Fie is returned. Adieu. You fhall foon hear again from your A. W. ST. IVES.
LETTER
LETTER XXV. ???? CLIFTON TO HIS SISTEK, LOUISA CLIFTON. Pam, Hoie İ de l'Umverßte, prh îe Pont Rojai. I WRITE, agreeably to your deíl % finer, to thank you for all obligations, not forgetting your advice. Not but I am exceifively obliged to you; I am upon my foul, and ferioufly, for having done me the favour to bring me acquainted with your charming friend. I have feen many women and in many countries, but I never beheld one fo fweet, fo beautiful, fo captivating ! I had heard of her be¬ fore I left England, her fame had reached Italy, and your letters bad raifed my ex¬ pectations. But what were thefe ? The accompliih-
accomplifliments and graces of her per¬ fon, the variety, the pleafure infpiring heaven of her countenance, the cupids that wanton in her dimples, and the de¬ lights that fu im and glitten in her 'eyes* arc each and all exquifite beyond ima- , gination! Whatever you may think of me, Louifa, I do perfuade myfelf I know -fomething of women, I have ftudied them at home and abroad, ai\d have often probed them to the foul. But I never before met with any one in the leaft com¬ parable to the divine Anna! She is fo unreferved, fo open, that her foul feems to dwell upon her lips. Yet hei* thoughts are fo ïapid, and her mind fo capacious, that I am perfuaded it will coft me much longer time to know her well than any other woman with whom I ever met. Having thanked you very heartily and' fincerely for this favour, I fliall juft fay a w word or two in anfwer to 3 oui s. And fo you really think you have fbme morality on hand, a little fiale or fo, but • '2 ??. s
ftill found, which you can beftow with advantage upon me? You imagine you: can tell me fomething I never heard be¬ fore? Now fiave you fincerely fo much vanity, Louifa ? Be frank. You ac¬ knowledge i have croffed rivers, feas, and mountains; but you are afraid I have· finit my eyes all the time! A loud longue¬ and a prodigious lack of wit ! Antics and impertinences of young men of fajidon ! Really, my dear, you are choice in your phrafes ! You could not love your bro¬ ther for any recital of the delight which foreign ladies took in him, and which he took in foreign ladies ! But you could be in ecftacies for a brother of your own invention. Do not fuppofe I am angry ! No, no, my dear girl; I am got far above all that! Though I cannot but lau'gh at this extra¬ ordinary brother, which you are faihioning-- for yourfelf. If, when I come into your fublime prefence, I fliould by good luçk happen to ftrike your fancy, why fo ! My fortune will then be made! If not,'fifter,. we-
we muft do as well as we can. All İn good time, and a God's name. Is not that tolerable Worcefterfhire morality ? I am obliged to lay down my pen with laughing at the idea of Mifs Louifa's bro¬ ther, fuppofing him to be exactly of her modelling. I think I fee him appear be¬ fore her ; flie feated in ftate, on a chair raifed on four tr eifels and two old doors, like a ftroliing aclrefs mimicking a queen in a barn ! He dreifed in black ; his hair fmugly curled; his face and his flioes ihining; his white handkerchief in his right hand; a prayer book, or the morals of Epictetus in his left; not interlarding his difcourfe with French or Italian phrafes, but ready with a good rumbling mouthfuk of old Greek, which he had compofed, I mean compiled, for the pur¬ pofe! Then, having advanced one log, wiped his mouth, put his left hand in his breeches pocket, clenched his right, and raifed his arm, he begins his learned dif- fertation on well digefied principles^ ar¬ dent defire of truth) incejant-ßruggles la ßake
f talce off prejudice?, and forth are chanted, Jn nafal twang and tragic recitative, his emanations of foul, burfis af thought, and flafhej of genius ! But you would not befatmcal. Gentle, modeft maiden ! And furely it becomes the tutored bother to imitate this kind forbearance. My faculties were always lively l And / muß pardon you if you ex¬ pect too much ?«——Upon my foul, this is highly comic! Expect too much! And there is danger then that I fliould not equal your expectations?—Prithee, my good girl, jingle the keys of your harp- /ichord, and be quiet. Pore over your fine folio receipt book, and appeafc your thirft after knowledge. Satisfy your long¬ ing defire to do good, by making jellies, conferves, and caraway cakes. Pot pip¬ pins, brew ralpberry wine, and candy orange chips. Study burns, bruifes, and balfams. Diftii furfeit, cholic, and worm¬ wood water. Concoct hiera picra, rhu¬ barb« beer, and oil of charity; and fym- pathize over fprains, whitloes, and broken ihins.
ihins. Get a' charm to cuie the ague, and render yourfelf renowned. Spin, few, and knit. Collecbyour lamentable rabble around you, dole out your chari¬ ties, liften to a full chorus of bleffings, and take your feat among the faints. You fee, child, I can give advice as well as yourfelf; aye and I will beftow it moft plentifully, if, you happen to feel any defire after more. I hate to be ungrate¬ ful; you fhall have no opportunity to utter 1 your mufty maxim upon me—« That the fin of ingratitude is worfe than the fin of witchcraft." You fliall. have weight for weight, meafure for meafure, chicken*; aye, my market woman, and a lumping pennyworth. Brotherly for fifterly efju- fions ! ι As for the right of elderfliip, I recol- leci that a dozen years ago I envied you the prerogative; but now you are wel¬ come to it with all my heart. If, among your miraculous acquirements, you have any fecret to make time ftand ftill, by which you can teach me to remain at fweet *
fweet fivc-and-twenty, and if you will dif¬ clofe it to me, I will not only pardon all your impertinenccs,Ïi$yo\x fo pertinently call them, but do any other thing in reafon to fa¬ tisfy you; except turn philofopher and feed upon carrots ! Nay I will allow you to grow as old as you pleafe, "you fliall have full enjoyment of the rights of elderfliip. In the mean time, fifter, lonce more thank you for bringing me acquainted with your friend. You feem to have " put powder in her drink;** and I freely tell you I wiflied flie loved me half as well as flie profeffes to love her imma¬ culate Louifa. But thefe I fuppofe are the flajhes of genius, which you have taught her'. However flie is an angel, and in her every thing is graceful. As for your other prodigy, I fcarcely know what to make of him ; except that he feems to have quite conceit enough of himfelf. Every other fentence is a contradiction of what the laft fpeaker ad¬ vanced. This is the firft time he ever ventured to crofs his father's threfliold, and.
and yet he talks as familiarly of king¬ doms, governments, nations, manners, ^and other high, founding phrafes, as if he had been fecre tary of ftate to king Slinos, had ridden upon the white elephant, and ftudied under the Dalai Lama I He is the 'Great Mogul of politicians ! And as for letters, fcience, and talents, he holds them ?'? by patent right I He is fuch a monopo¬ lizer that no man elfe can get amorfei! If he were not a plebeian, I could moft fincerely wifli you were married to him ; for then, whenever my foul ihall hunger and thirft after morality, 'I fliould know where to come and get a full meal.— Though peihaps his not being a gentleman would be no objection to you, at leaft your letter leads me to fufpeft as much. Do not however miftake me. I mean this jocularly. For I will not degrade my fifter fo much, as to fuppofe flie has ever caft a thought on the fon either of the gar¬ dener or the fteward, of'any man. Though, tied to her mother's apron-ftring and fliut up on the confines of Worcefterfhire, flie may
may think proper to lecture and give rules of conduct to a brother who has feen the world, and ftudied both men and books of every kind, that is but a haimlefs and pardonable piece of vanity. It ought to be laughed at, and for that reafon I have laughed. For the reft, I will be willing to think as well of my fifter, as thib fifter can be to think of her catechifed, and very patient, humble, younger brother, C. CLIFTON. 4 P. S. I have written in anfwer to my mother by the fame poft. From» the ge¬ neral tenor of her letter, I cannot but ima¬ gine that, juft before flie fat down to write s flie had been liftening to one of your civil lectures, againft wild brothers, fine gen¬ tlemen, and,vile rakes. Is not that the cant ? One thing lei me whifper to you, fifter : I am not obliged to any perfon who fufpecls or renders me fufpecred. I claim the privilege of being feen before I am
condemned, and heard before I am exe¬ cuted. If I fliould not prove to be quite the phoenix which might vie with fo mira¬ culous fo unique a lifter, I muft then be contented to take fhame to myfelf. But till then I fliould fuppofe the thoughts of a fifter might as well be inclined to paint me white as black. After all, I cannot conclude without repeating that I believe the whole world cannot equal the lovely, the divine Anna St. Ives : and, whatever elfe you may fay or think of me, do not lead her to imagine I am unjuft to her fupreme beauty, and charms. · An infi- nuation ofthat kind Iîvvould never forgive ■—Never !
END or VOL. I.
Printed ?? J» Crowd« 1 , Waïwick-Square,
