Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Italian mysteries: or, More secrets than one: a romance
ITALIAN MYSTERIES. «■> JU -t********************** 4++*+**■*****■*+*+*+* + *+*+*+! Г* í"
CHAPTER L
Г ///Í//M//*J .
There cannot be a pinch in death More sharp than this is.
•------------1 beseech you, sir, Harm not yourself with your vexation ; I Am senseless of your wrath—a touch mort' rare Subdues all pangs—all fears. Cymbeltnc W E must now once more change our scene for a while to the farmhouse of San¬ cho di Borges. Urbino continued anxi¬ ously to await the farmer's return, and he was ultimately disappointed by a neigh¬ bour stopping at the house, with intelli¬ gence that he had met the farmer in the course of his rides about the country, and that he had requested him to give infor- voL. in. . в mation
mation to his family, that some business which he had to transact at a distant vine¬ yard would detain him from home till the following day. Urbino consequently deemed it futile any longer to entertain Calvino ; and having purchased of him the slipper, dismissed him from the farm¬ house, and compelled himself to er fa¬ vour to lull his apprehensions for the fate of Paulina, by dwelling on the assurance of her safety, which had been given him by his unknown visitor. Valeria struggled to call the assistance of duty to her aid, in her attempts to drive from her recollection the event by which that day had been marked, and applied herself with more than usual earnestness to administer to the comforts of the blinel Averilla. Urbino retired at an early hour to his chamber—not to sleep, but in the hope of soothing his ruffled feelings by the joint aid of solitude and reflection. Upon his table lay the papers which had been deli¬ vered
vered to him by Julio; and without an intention of perusing their contents, he took them up, designing to deposit them in his writing-desk, in order to screen them from the perusal of others, when these words caught his eye :—*·' As they will fully elucidate the mysteries of the Castello della Torbida, and remove all apprehension of entering its walk from the minds of those who may have imbibed stich a terror." This sentence was a most for¬ cible appeal to his curiosity ; and consi¬ dering that in this part of Julio's narrative there would not, in all probability, be con¬ tained any matter connected with the fate of his lamented son, he could not forbear satisfying himself on a point which had. for some time past, so greatly perplexed him. Searching, therefore, for that period in the confessions of Julio which was sub¬ sequent to his departure from Venice in the gondola, to which the tender but broken-hearted Di Cavetti haei guided him, as his only means of escape from в 2 the
the retributive hand of justice ; and which our readers will recollect to be the exact moment to which he had deduced the portion of his manuscript confided by him to the perusal of Valeria, Urbino proceed¬ ed to read the following words :— ťí On being landed, as I have already said, upon a part of the country to which I was an utter stranger, but still appre¬ hensive that the description which had been circulated of me by the officers of justice might cause me to be identified, even by those to wdiom I had before been unknown, my first care was to change my dress, wdiich having, not without some difficulty, accomplished, in such a manner as to evade the suspicion of those befor** whom the alteration was made—simply and rustically clad in my new attire, I took up my abode at a small country inn, from whence I wrote to my confidential servant, whom I had left in Padua, di¬ recting him in what manner to supply me with
with money, and at the same time strictly cautioning him not to let our correspond¬ ence be known. " For the few first days after my be¬ coming acquainted that Valeria was the sister of the man who had fallen by my hand, and consequently perceiving the barrier which now intervened between my ardent desires, and the probability of their ever being realized, I sunk into a stupor of faculty, which scarcely per¬ mitted methe power of reflection, or even the consciousness of my own being. When I did become capable of consideration, I earnestly desired to die, reluctant as I was to meet my fate, either from the axe of the executioner, or from my own hand ; and I implored Heaven to terminate my existence, resolutely determining to spend the remainder of my days in seclusion from all society. " My restless mind sought relief in wandering about the country, and in my rambles I was led to the Castello della Tor- в 3 vida ;
vida ; anel having learnt that it had long been uninhabited, and was expected to remain so, I resolved to penetrate within ib walk, and, if I found my idea practi¬ cable, to remain their inhabitant. I en¬ tered by means of a window on the ground- floor, and visiteel its various parts, in order to convince myself that it was as void of inmates as it had been represented to me. í found the account I had received to be true, and my resolution of becoming its tenant was immediately fixed. Litt ίο diel I that moment imagine whom the progress of time was destined to lead thi¬ ther, similarly determined as myself. " In the course of my investigation of the Castello, I observed a small door open¬ ing from one of the chambers, situated in an angle of the building, which opened into a small apartment, from which branch¬ ed off a narrow passage, that ran nearly round the edifice, and from which two dif¬ fère nt flights of steps conducted into a dark and vaulted way, terminating m a low
low arch beneath the garden-wall, the mouth of which was choked up with weeds and briars ; anel as the trench which ran beneath the wall was filled with frag¬ ments of stone, the withered boughs of trees, anel clods of earth thrown heedlessly upon ca h other, this outlet was utterly undiscernible to those who had never gained the secret of its existence from within. " On reasceneling ane! closing the door which interveneel between the chamber in the angle and tlie small apartment with which the obscure passage communicated, I found that the doe>r closed with a spring* ; anel after some time and labour passed in examination, I discovered that the spring- was moved by the pressure of the finger on the head of one of the apparent nails with which it was thickly studded ; and it ivas constructed with such masterly neatness, that not a crease was visible which could betray it to be any other than a part of в 4 the
the wainscot with which the chamber wa# surrounded. *' Accordingly, in the small apartment. and the chamber between which the se¬ cret door was situated, I decided upon fix¬ ing my residence, consideiing that it would be infinitely preferable for me to go out and come in by the vaulted passage, whieli there was every reason for me to suppose I might do unobserved, than by either passing through the window by which 1 had gained my first admittance into the Castello, or by forcing open any one of its doors for my egress and ingress, subject myself to be seen, and if not com¬ manded te quit my asylum, perhaps be questioned upon my motive for having selected it, in a manner which I might find it equally unpleasant as unsafe to an¬ swer. ie By degrees 1 transported to my new abode the few requisites of which I stood in need ; and ha\ing contrived to piace a couple
couple of wooden bars across the door of the chamber which communicated with the main body of the Castello, in order to prevent the possibility of my being sur¬ prised by any visitors to the spot, my days passed on, for a considerable time, unin¬ terrupted, till one morning, as I was sit¬ ting in the little apartment beyond the chamber, I heard voices in conversation* followed by an attempt to burst open tlie door ; and from some vords which passed between the speakers on the outside of the door, I learned that it was the design of one or more persons to fix their resi¬ dence, like myself, within the Castello ; and that it was the intention of one or both of tiiose now conversing to return thither on the morrow. 1 had become at¬ tached to the spot of my seclusion ; and desiring to remain uninterrupted in the negative comfort which it aíľorded me, I determined to have recourse to some ex¬ pedient for endeavouring to deter tlie strangers from fulfilling their purpose, в 5 This,
This, í conceived, might easily be effect¬ ed, is I was lea to bcliewe that anv warn- .f ing of a mysterious nature must terrify strangers from becoming inhabitants of a place, of which the deserted, gloomy, and decayed state, could not fail to inspire minds, of a corn mon nature, with sensa¬ tions already prepared to encounter some event tending to the enigmatical or the miraculous. I accordingly conveyed from lhe chamber into the smau adjoining apartment, every article which could be¬ tray tlie spot to have sheltered a human inhabitant ; and having removed the bars from the door, ï inscribed upon it this sen¬ tence—* avoid these walls;' which, when I had done, I confined myself to the small apari ment, unxiou.s]y awaiting the event of my plan. " About the hour of noon, on the fol¬ lowing day, I heard the approach of foot¬ steps; and listening attentively to catch the words spoken by the unknown per¬ sons, I, to my disappointment, discovered, that,
that, although considerably surprised by what thev beheld, they w r ere not shaken from their purpose of making the Castello their residence ; and determined as I was not to hold intercourse with any human beings, and considering it impossible that if I remained in my present asylum, some chance should not lead me to an encoun¬ ter with the strangers, however cautiously I might guard my conduct, my instant re¬ solution was to seek a new abode. fii In my wanderings about the country, I had observed the deserted hut of a her¬ mit, named Anselmo, some time dead ; and this I determined to make my future abode. Thus decided, I repaired to a vil¬ lage at some distance; and having pro¬ vided myself with the disguise of an aged beggar, and affixed a label to my breast, signifying my loss of speech, in order to avoid replying to the questions which might be addressed to me, when, in sup* port of my assumed character, I occasion¬ ally appeared abroad as a mendicant, I by D б night
night conveyed my little store of earthly wealth to the hut by the side of the brook, and once more hoped to be permitted to vegetate uninterrupted and unknown. " Once more I applied myself to the transmitting of my eventful life to paper, with which self-imposed task I had hither¬ to occupied most of my time, since joint inclination and necessity had withdrawn me from my fellow-beings ; and it caused me no inconsiderable anxiety that I could not decide on any one individual in whose hands Τ could feel satisfied in placing the transcript of my misfortunes and my suf¬ ferings. ** ï accustomed myself frequently to wander about in my disguise in the vici¬ nity of my dwelling, for the mutual bene¬ fit of air and exercise; and in one of my rambles, chancing to pass the Castello della Torvida, the reader may easily appreciate the astonishment, the powerful and com¬ bined fælings which assailed my heart, when 1 espied from a distance, in the gar¬ den
den attached to the building, my adored Valeria, her cousin Paulina, and her in¬ estimable father, who had so generously preserved to me my existence." Urbino could read no longer; he threw down the manuscript, and starting from his chair, he began to pace the chamber with disordered steps. In the adjoining apartment slept Averilla, whom Valeria having attended in retiring to bed, fully aware of the unsettled and painful state of her father's mind, from the uneven pace at which she distinguished him to be wan¬ dering about his chamber, ventured to rap at the door; and on his opening it, in¬ quired whether, as he had retired so early from society, and still did not appear dis¬ posed to rest, she could read, or converse with him, to amuse him ? He desireel her to eniter, and when she had done so, he closed the door, and in a brief manner communicatee! to her what he had been reading, and the reason by which he had been led to the perusal, adding,
adding, that he felt it impossible to dwell with composure on characters traced by the hand which had bereft him of a name, and requesting her to cast her eyes over the continuation of the narrative, and to impart to him the ht^ads of such matter as it contained, connected with the enig¬ matical cloud which had for some time past low r ered upon the Castello della Tor¬ vida. Valeria had already resolved to pursue the path which duty and religion com¬ manded her to tread ; and assuming a com¬ posure, and even firmness of countenance and voice, she proceeded to obey her fa¬ ther's injunction. The subsequent p;iges of the manuscript stated, that being once become acquainted with the proximity of his residence to that of Valeria, he had immediately con¬ ceived an unconquerable wish of being once more able to behold her, and con¬ verse with her, for the purpose of unfold* in«· to her the event which haei for ever separated
separated their hands, if not their hearts, and of which he had a presentiment, and a just one, as it had subsequently been proved to him, that she was ignorant. Accordingly, he had formed the plan of restoring to her the ribband which he had taken from her shoulder at the carnival at Venice, and which had ever since that moment been worn by him next his heart —a token which he judged she could not mistake to be an unequivocal proof of his being near her, if even she doubted the lines which accompanied it to be his, as it was possible she might do, having never before beheld any characters traced by his pen ; and which plan he had effected on the anniversary of the wedding-day of Sancho di Borges. There followed a few sentences, of which the sum was, that as he had not a single thought wliich he wished to conceal, after his death, from that world to which he w r as desirous of vindicating his actions from intended criminality, lie could not but
but confess that a part of the motive by which he had been actuated in desiring once more to beholel Valeria, ! id been the hope of obtaining a promise from her lips, that the heart which she had bestow r ed on him should never be transferred to another — a promise wliich, he declared, could alone render the residue of his earthly pilgrimage enelurable. These lines Valeria hastily read, and withheld from her father. Next in place succeeded a brief account of his having attired himself as a cavalier, and bribed one of Sancho's domestics to deliver to her the letter in which he warned her to expect to see him at some moment when she was least prepared to expect his presence. To this were adeleel a few words of digression, explaining, that having trained the secret of one door in the Cas- tello which was governed by a concealed spring, this knowledge had led him to dis- cover several others of a similar nature, opening from the narrow passage into tlu various
various chambers of the building—that by one of these, believing all the inhabi¬ tants of the place from home, he had en¬ tered, when Francisca had beheld him writing to Valeria in her closet; and that having once ascertained which was her chamber, and utterly unconscious that the alarm excited by his appearance in it had induced her father to remove thither him¬ self, he had ventured through one of the spring pannels on that night on which he had been seen by Urbino, and fired at by him. Here Valeria paused, for the remainder of the narrative had already been explained to her by Julio's own words, and to her father, by their unexpected meeting at the hut by the side of the brook. She replaced the manuscript on the table, and Di Ca¬ vetti, perceiving by her action that it con¬ tained no farther matter of interest for him, said—" How easily are our nerves affected !—by what slender causes are our apprehensions awakenedj and when we solve
solve the most difficult enigma which hu¬ man means can present to the seuses of frail man, how are w r c surprised that from causes so simple have proceeded effects to disturb and perplex the brains of ration¬ ality ! And yet," he added, after a short pause, " there is one point connected wdth the events at the Castello which still re¬ mains in obscurity, and which the key that I have received to the remainder does not enable me to unlock—by what means could Julio escape being wounded by the balls emitted from the pistols which I dis¬ charged at him ? Or if¡ as it now appears, he did escape them, to what cause could it be owing that no fractures were dis¬ cernible in the wainscot through which they must inevitably ha\e passed ?" " Oh, my dear father !" exclaimed Va¬ leria, clasping his hand in hers as she spoke, " from me receive that explanation, and I am certain that you will not deem me culpable, for having been the means of preserving you from spilling that blood wdiich
which you had once so nobly spared. From the evidence of concomitant cir¬ cumstances, I ever believed the supposed apparition to be Julio; but in compliance with the injunctions to secrecy contained in his letters, I durst not confess my be¬ lief. You cannot but recollect the ear¬ nestness with which I supplicai 1 to re¬ main in my own chamber, nor can you have forgotten that when you positively refused to comply with my request, I ex¬ cused myself, early in the evening, for re¬ tiring from your society, alleging my wish to remove some articles from my own chamber into the one I was that night to inhabit. Paulina retired to rest. Te¬ rence remained in conversation with you. I seized upon the adventitious moment, and extracted the bullets from the tubes which contained them." As Valeria ceased speaking, she pressed the hand of her father to her lips, and burst into tears. " Press it to thy heart, and be that heart
heart for ever its sanctuary !" exclaimed Urbino. " Thou hast withheld it from the commission of an innocent crime, un¬ der the impression of which, I think my tired existence would have withered and decayed Î" He clasped her to his breast; their cheeks were presscel to each other, and tears of mingled gratitude and admiration flowed unrestrained from their eyes. Equally to the father and sister of the man whom his weapon had consignea to an untimely grave, did Julio owe the pre¬ servation of his own existence ! And oh î may the comparison between the reelings of the preserver and the destroyer restrain the hanel of passion, and thunder with the voice of destiny into the ear of rashness, that it is better to suffer than to ski ! A considerable time was passeei by Ur¬ bino and his daughter in reflective silence; i t was broken by Valeria, who pressed her fa¬ ther to retire to rest.-—-"Not yet, my child," he replied ; H 1 feel that I am unprepareel for
for sleep ; when my mind is disturbeel, I am always restless on my pillow." He spoke of Paulina, and, more particularly than he had vet done, detailed to his daughter the conversation which had pass¬ ed concerning her between himself and his unknown visitor ; and after a few mo¬ rnenes given to thought, he proceeded by saying—** From what passed between the stranger and myself, it appears highly pro¬ bable that I shall be very shortly called upon to relate what little is known to me of Paulina's history ; in which case I do not deem it just that y ou should be the last made acquainted with what concerns one whom you have eyer ioved as a near rela¬ tive." " And is not Paulina such to me ?" ear¬ nestly inquired Valeria. " She does not stanei in any nearer con¬ nexion to you," rejoined LTrbino, " than as the beloved companion of your child¬ hood, the esteemed friend of your increas¬ ing years, and as a being, who, although by
by birth an utter stranger to your father, has received from him a parent's protec¬ tion, and has planted for herself a daugh¬ ter's interest in his heart. I have already said that I was not disposed to retire to rest ; are you too weary to remain for an hour or two longer my companion?" *' Xot weary, in truth," answeied Vale¬ ria, " but never less so than when I con¬ sider my society to give you pleasure." " I will then embrace this opportunity of acquainting you with what little is known tome of our dear Paulina's story." He drew a chair ío the side of that on which Valeria was sitting, and spoke thus: —-'* You, my dear child, were somewhat more than two years old, 'hen Τ was one day summoned to attend a lady, in my medical capacity, at the hotel of San Marco, in the square of that name in Venice. 1 found her to be a female, apparently of at most twenty-two years of age, of a more îl hí usually-beautiful person, and of an extraordinary elegant form. Her man¬ ners
îiers were by no means inferior to the graces with wdiich she w T as exteriorly adorned ; and the affability of her conver¬ sation irresistibly won upon my senses wdth such fascinating strength, that I almost appeared to feel in her an old acquaint¬ ance, before 1 had passed an hour in her society. " At my first \ isit to her, she complain¬ ed of extreme ill health, wdiich both her blooming countenance, and the state of her pulse, appeared to deny her to be suffering under; and conceiving her to be more nervous than ill, I prescribed a slight me¬ dicine, and promised, at her particular re¬ quest, to call upon her again on the fol¬ lowing day. " At my second visit, I found her re¬ clined upon a sofa, and in her arms kıy a lovel} r female infant, of about ten months old. On my entrance into her apart¬ ment—'I am very glad you are come, sig- noi/ she said; ť I am very ill indeed to¬ day—much worse than I was yesterday.* She
She extended her hand towards me wdiilst speaking ; and on taking her wrist, I dis¬ covered her to be affected wdth a consider¬ able degree of fever. I confessed to her the state in which I had found her, and she answered—* It is not to be w r ondered at, considering the extreme pain which I am enduring.'—* In your head?' I asked. — ť No, no, no ľ she ejaculated. She paus¬ ed а few minutes, during which her coun¬ tenance underwent several changes ; then said—' I have been acting very foolishly —I am sure I have ; but under certain im¬ pressions of distress and anxiety of mind, whatis it that we are not sometimes tempt¬ ed to do ! If ï persist in the concealment of my disorder, I am more fully con vi need that it will destroy me. I sent for you yesterday, with a full determination to confide to you the cause of my malady, but my resolution forsook me when we met : I can now no longer forbear seeking alleviation for my sufferings.—Here, here,' hhe added, tearing open her dress as she spoke,
spoke, * is the cause of my anguish !' And she followed her words by disclosing to my view a deep wound beneath her left breast, the bleeding of which had been staunched by an application of lint, containing some styptic, which, for want of being renewed, was now adhering to the part affected. " That it must have occasioned her pain to remove it, I am certain ; but she bore my operations with silent firmness, only saying-—* I hope, I dare believe, signor, that men of your profession never reveal the maladies of their patients.'—* I trust that it is a general rule with men of my profession," I returned ; e with me, at least, it is an infallible one.'—* I am satisfied, 1 she answered. í Can you promise to re¬ lieve and cure me soon ?'—* I think I can, 1 was my reply. ť But you have been ill- treated in the first instance.'—' Things hastily done are seldom well done/ she returned, attempting to smile as she spoke; —* Your wound was inflicted by the point of a poniard, or a sword?* I said.—'In Godtø vol. in. с name
name recall not to my mind the dreadful recollection—I beseech you do not !* she eagerly pronounced, " In the course of about three weeks, I informed her that her cure was certain, and would now, I trusted, be very speedy. She thanked me for the attentions I had paid her, and the concern I had shown for her unhappy situation, in words and ac¬ tions, both far exceeding my desires or expectations.—' You have been the saviour of my existence,' she one day addressed me by saying, ' and I must always value you as such ; but, alas ! perhaps it has only now been preserved, that at a future period it may again become the victim of a wretch.' She paused.—' Thank Heaven, my child lives too !' she presently proceed¬ ed by saying ; i and oh I may a gracious Providence shield her innocence from the fury of her enemy ! Oh ! methinks I now behold his tall commanding form—his pal¬ lid, but impressive countenance, illumined by his dark and piercing eyes, and shaded by
by the raven locks that fall around it !— behold his sinewy arm raised with that dagger wdiich------' She placed her hand before her eyes, as if believing herself actu¬ ally to behold the form wdiich she w T as de¬ scribing, uttered a faint shriek, and sunk back upon the couch on w Inch she was re¬ clining. " I maintained a strict silence, not only because I concluded that any questions advanced by me might add to her distress of mind, but also that I conceived I had no authority to propose any inquiries to her. " When she again turned her eyes to¬ wards me—-' I scarcely know, signor,' she said, * wdiat expressions my hurried ima¬ gination just now tempted me to utter. Whatever they were, I hope they are bu¬ ried in the silence of your bosom. One unheeded word spoken abroad might tend to destroy the life of this innocent, in wdiose preservation I rejoice much more than in my own.' с Sí 4t i assured
" I assured her, that what she had ut¬ tered had not furnished me wdth any ex¬ planation of her private concerns, and that if it even had done so, under the circum¬ stances which had introduced us to each other's acquaintance, she might have re¬ lied on my inviolable secrecy. " Her wound continued hourly to ap¬ proach towards perfect convalescence, and I thought I could perceive that her feel¬ ings became likewise more tranquillized. The days passed on, our knowledge of each other being now about a month old, when a note was one morning brought to me by a waiter of the hotel where she re¬ sided, requesting that ï would call upon her immediately. 1 obeyed her summons, and on entering the apartment in which I had always been received by her on my former visits, I found no one within it but her child, who was sleeping upon the sofa. I amused myself for about a quarter of an hour with a book which lay upon the table, every minute expecting her ap* pearance ;
pearance ; and as she did not come, I was on the point of ringing the bell, to inquire whether she were informed that I was ar¬ rived, when the waiter entered, and pre¬ sented me with a second note, of which 1 found the contents to be, as nearly as I can recollect, these words : * SIGNOR URBINO, * Farewell, for ever î I have dis¬ covered your heart to be tender and hu¬ mane, and Heaven whispers to mine, that you will not desert the helpless infant be¬ fore you« who has at this moment no other protector but yourself. Stern necessity or¬ dains that she should for ever be separated from those who gave her birth ; in the be¬ nevolence of your soul, supply to my poor Paulina the absence of her natural che- rishers—Jet her name you her parent, and live in ignorance that she ever possessed any other. Do this, and your reward will be in heaven. Once more, farewell Î'
c S " When
" When I had somewhat recovered from the surprise into which this strange and unexpected appeal to my feelings had thrown me, I summoned the waiter into my presence, and inquired where the sig¬ nora was who had commissioned him to deliver me the note which I had just re¬ ceived from him ? and he replied, that on having put it into his hand, she had quit¬ ted the hotel. Did he know whither she had gone? was my subsequent demand. His answer was in the negative. Did she go away alone ? I next inquired. He •eplied, that she did, and that he had never seen any person in her society, ex¬ cept myself, since she had resided in the house. ' She had paid liberally,' he added, ' for her entertainment, and had appeared to be supplied with a rich purse;' an ob¬ servation which several points of her con¬ duct towards myself had convinced me that she possessed. I asked if he were ac¬ quainted from whence she had originally come, on her first arrival at the hotel ? and his
his reply was, that she had entered the house one evening, about the hour of twi¬ light, wrapt in a travelling cloak, with her child in her arms, and had, on the follow¬ ing morning, asked for a recommendation to an eminent physician, in consequence of which my address had been given to her, and she had immediately dispatched a messenger to summon me into her pre¬ sence." Urbino paused an instant, and Valeria, profiting by his silence, said-—" And from that moment, Τ conjecture, our dear Pau¬ lina became your adopted niece ?" " All endeavours to trace out her mys¬ terious parent," returned Urbino, ťí proved ineffectual, and tempted by no other re¬ ward for my humanity than that which, in the words of her mother, might be laid up for me in heaven, I immediately con¬ veyed her to the care of my lamented wife ; and between us it was agreed, that in order to silence the tongue of curiosity, she should be spoken of as the orphan с 4 child
child of a deceased sister of mine, whom I had taken under my r protection." " And thus, I imagine, concludes the short tale of my beloved friend," said Va¬ leria. " Kot entirely," replied Urbino ; " when your mother undressed her new charge, for the purpose of changing her habili¬ ments, she was surprised by finding a wound at the bottom of her neck, and another on her left shoulder, which, it was evident, had been healed by a part of the preparation which I had applied to that of her unfortunate parent. Why that parent had not communicated to me the state of her child, was not more strange than why an innocent babe should have suffered thus undeservedly from the bru¬ tal attempts of some unfeeling hand- There existed, however, no clue to the mystery, and the extraordinary, the pite¬ ous, the impressive situation of the hap¬ less babe, attached me as strongly to her as if she had indeed been my own. " Years
" Years rolled on, and no circumstance occurred which appeared connected with the fate of Paulina, till one evening in the month of that carnival at which you first beheld the ill-starred Julio! It was at a masked ball, to which I had accompanied you, that I was accosted by a man in the dress of a pilgrim, who entered into con¬ versation with me, by praising your figure and dancing, and thence proceeded to in¬ quire if Paulina were my daughter ? and to propose to me many other questions concerning her, which would alone have awakened my suspicion that he had some private motives for his inquiries ; but, on observing his countenance, which was of a peculiar cast, I felt convinced that his fac* 1 and person exactly tallied with the ac¬ count of that being wdiom the mother of Paulina had once, in the horror of a ner¬ vous recollection, described to me as the dreaded enemy of herself and her child. His form was tall and commanding ; his countenance pallid, but impressive, ilhi- c 5 mined
mined by a dark and piercing eve, mai shaded by the raven locks that fell around it. From the moment that I had received this instinctive feeling; í avoided him; and the carnival over, ï beheld him no more. But my suspicions that he had some knowledge of the countenance of Paulina, or of the mode of her introduction into my family, were considerably heightened, when, one evening, whilst you were pre¬ paring to visit the opera, I heard Paulina describing to you the close attendance which had been paid her during the car¬ nival, by a tall figure in the garb of a pil¬ grim, and which she had mistaken for the attention of a lover. At first this appa¬ rent conviction of my apprehensions alarmed me, but the impression faded un¬ der the hand of time; and till the moment of her disappearance, my fears concerning her had never again been awakened."' Here ended such particulars as Di Ca¬ vetti was acquainted with concerning the child of his bounty ; and after severa! comments
comments on her former fate, and prayers for the happiness of her future days, had passed the lips of Valeria and her father, the former retired to her own chamber.
с β CHAP-
t CHAPTER IL
Ji u t what are these, So withered, ami so «¡hi ; n their attire, That look not like th' inhabitants o'tlie earth, And jet are on it r Macbeth. It has often been remarked, that whilst the minds of the great are perplexed with the revolutions of states and politics, the souls of their inferiors in station are fre¬ quently as greatly disturbed by events which do not weigh the tithe part of a feather in the general scale of human occur¬ rences, as if the destiny of millions, and the fate of empires, depended upon the fa¬ vourable issue of their wishes. In a com¬ parative degree, a parallel of this nature was at this time existing in the members of the hospitable mansion of Sancho Di Borges ; the breast of the worthy farmers niece,
uiece, F ıncisca, without a real care to dis¬ turb her tranquillity of mind, was agitated by feelings which caused her to experience anxiety and torment little inferior to those with which the weightier hand of actual grief assailed the hearts of Di Cavetti and his daughter Valeria. Francisca's misfortunes were those which the world is but too apt to deride, but which, to weak and ignorant minas, furnish serious subject for misery and dis¬ satisfaction ; they arose from envy, disap¬ pointment, and an evil temper—the most inveterate tormentors by which t lie breast of humanity can be inhabited. Francisca was now in her fortieth year, and unmarried; she had been a pretty girl in her day, but, from motives of vani¬ ty, had outstood her market, and now, to her uncontrollable chagrin, perceived that the market had returned her upon her own hands as unsaleable. Upon Te¬ rence O'Donnovan's handsome face and manly person, she had cast an eye of ad¬ miration,
miration, ever since the first moment of her beholding him; blither beauty, if any she now possesseel, and which consisted at best of a meagre countenance, enlivened, by the application of artificial colour, iní с that animation which a corpse may be sup]x>scd capable of receiving, and so dia¬ metrically in opposition to the plump cheeks, florid with the rosy hue of nature and of health, which badalone possessed charms for Terence in his native country, that she had perceived herself utterly ne¬ glected by him, and in return for his ne¬ glect, as not indifference, but hate, is too usually the consequence of a disappoint¬ ed passion, had grown into despising him. By her aunt, to whose necessities she could not with any degree of temper ac¬ commodate herself, she still thought her¬ self ill used, by the preference which Averilla displayed for the kinel offices of Valeria, over her ungraciously-performed services; and in short, although she might have made every one around her her friend,
friend, she persuadée! herself into believing them all her enemies; and by indulging in the chimeras of her brain, rendereel her existence as unpleasant as it could have been, if her self-created miseries had been founded in reason or in truth. On the following morning, when Vale¬ ria entered the breakfast apartment, she beheld Francisca, with her elbow rested on the mantlepiece, and her heael reposing on her hand, whilst the expression of her countenance was thoughtful, and conse¬ quential.—" Ah, signora," she said, with a half-suppressel sigh, on perceiving Vale¬ ria, " Heaven and the Virgin only know where I may be this day month '" " How so ?" inquired Valeria. " Needs must when the devii drives,' signora, as the proverb says," replied Francisca ; " I would sooner ' èg my bread than live here moping an longer with my stupid old uncle and v y blind aunt. 1 dare say, signora, bee ι se you see me a single young woman, ; >u may think
think that I have never been invited to change my situation. Oh dear ! oh dear í the offers I have had! but we can neither count the grains of sand on the seashore, or recall the moments that are past! Well, well, I now perceive that I have wasted enough of my prime, and am resolved opce f more to return to the great world ; as I have told you before^ signora, I have waited on some of the first ladies in the land, and why shouldn't I do so again ?" " I think," returned Valeria, " that you might live very comfortably here with your relatives." " Quiet comfort is my detestation," an¬ swered Francisca ; " I had rallier lodge in a trunkmaker's shop than live in a per¬ petual round of dulness, as I do here. Many and many a time have 1 repented that I did not join tlie army, which 1 might have done, a few years ago, upon the most advantageous terms," " Yøu
" You join the army !" ejaculated Va¬ leria. " Yes, me, signora," rejoined Francisca ; " a cousin of my father's, who served in our lemonade-shop in Florence, enlisted into a brigade of Florentine volunteers, and he was dying for me at the time his duty compelled him to quit our city. I have never heard of him since, but 1 hope he committed no rash action on account of my cruelty. He has sworn to me a million times over, that he had rather have ι ie for his wife, if I had not a pair of shoes to stand in, than any other wo¬ man, if she were stuelded, from head to foot, with pearls and diamonds." " These are the ordinary expressions of men," said Valeria, " I don't think they are ordinary ex¬ pressions at all, signora," returned Fran¬ cisca : " begging your pardon for differing with you in opinion, I think they are very handsome ones, and a very hand¬ some fellow, I must say he was, who pro¬ nounced
nounced them ; but perhaps, signora, you will say with the proverb, ' handsome he wdio handsome does/ and handsomely he did offer to do by me, I assure you ; for he would willingly have sold his silver watcli out of his pocket, to buy me a pair of rose-diamond hoops for my ears, if I would but have followed the camp wdth him. Perhaps I shall never see him again, but I cannot help remembering wdiat he was ten years ago ; never man in Italy stood upon a finer pair of legs; one might almost have supposed them carved out of wood, they were so well proportioned— such a sharp eye in his head—such a beau¬ tiful head of curling auburn hair, and as strait as a dart even before he was drilled, signora, that what must he be now, after ten years hard service ! I almost wish my¬ self by his side again, there is something so noble in an experienced soldier !" She was interrupted by the sound of a horse's feet approaching towards the house, and Iti a few seconds Valeria observed Di Borges
Borges alighting at the door. She imme¬ diately procecelcel to inform her father of his return ; and as soon as Urbino had de¬ scended from his chamber, he retired with the farmer to a private apartment, into which breakfast was sent to them from the family-table. Although the friends haei been separat¬ ed only for a short period of time, Urbino haei much to communicate. With the greatest pleasure Sancho heard that every objection was removed to the family of Di Cavetti once more taking possession of the Castelli). With regard to what had occurred during his absence concerning Paulina, he deemed it advisable, that, not¬ withstanding the declarations made by the stranger to ( 'rhino, for whose performance of his promise they had no security but his own word, he should see Calvino, and endeavour to gather from him the exact spot where the slipper had been dropped; and accordingly he resolved, without de- lay, to proceed to the cottage of his mo¬ ther
ther Bianca, in the hope of either finding him within it, or learning where he might be seen. As he was quitting the house for this purpose, suddenly turning back, and ad¬ dressing himself to Urbino, he said—· ih Lend me your purse, for 1 parted with mine yesterday on the road, anel have not a coin upon me : if I had not been well known where I slept last night, I might have gone supperless to bed. Without a bribe, nothing can be done with Calvino." Having received the required purse from the hand of Urbino, he continued speaking thus—" You well know that I am not fond of encouraging common beg¬ gars ; but you are as well acquainted that my heart always melts at the sight of real misery, and I never yet saw any objects more strongly calculated to call forth my compassion, than a set of unfortunate beings whom I yesterday encountered travelling from the mountains, as they informed me, towards Venice, and who, according
according to their forlorn and debilitated appearance, seemed scarcely capable, as I should imagine, of crawling half a league in the course of a day. They consisted of a wounded soldier, carrying at his back a small wallet, which, I suppose, contained their all, accompanied by a delicate and sickly-looking female, whom I concluded to be his wife, bearing in one of her arms an infant, and dragging along with her other hand another child, wdio seemed hardly old enough to walk. I gave them my address, with permission to call here, and refresh themselves on their way. I think they can hardly have yet performed the distance betw r een this spot and the one where I saw them ; but should they ar¬ rive in my absence, I leave you in pos¬ session of my directions to see them well entertained." " I believe you know that they are en¬ trusted to one who will not discredit any exertion in the cause of humanity," replied Urbino ;
Urbino ; and, with a reciprocal smile, the friends then parted. W hen Di Borges w r as gone, the morn¬ ing being unusually fine for the season of the year, which was that of the decline of autumn, Urbino conceived an inclination to walk to the Castello, and relieve the minds of his humble friends, Jeronymo anel Terence, by acquainting them that they had in future no visits to apprehend from the supposed spectre which had late¬ ly haunted the building ; and leaving in charge, with a confidential servant, San- cho's commission to have the poor travel¬ lers well entertained, and detained until his return, if they biiould arrive during the period of his absence, he went in quest of nis daughter, whom he w r as desirous of engaging as his companion in his walk. He found her in the apartment of Ave¬ rilla, in which was also Francisca, who had been repeating to her aunt the senti¬ ments which she had already that morning delivered
delivered to Valeria, and who, as he en¬ tered the chamber, was just declaring that she was more than hal r esolvcd to proceed to Florence, where she felt almost certain that she must fall in with hei dear Bernar¬ do, as she called him, who, there could be no doubt, was now settled in that city, as she had understood that the Florentine brigade in which he had served had been disbanded, in consequence of the late peace, and he would, in all probability, be settled in business with his brother, who had suc¬ ceedeel to the lemonade-shop on the death of her uncle. Averilla represented to her, t liât setting aside the gross indelicacy of a iemale going in pursuit of a once-rejected admirer, the many chances there existed of his having fallen in battle, or, if he had survived the perils of steel and powder, the probabi¬ lity of his having never returned to the spot where she had known him; and if even he had elone so, the possibility of his passion, which must undoubtedly have been
been cooled in the fir Л instance by the re¬ buffs with which she had treated him, hav¬ ing been so far smothered by the progress of time, that it might be hopeless to ex¬ pect again to rekindle the suffocated em¬ bers. " Oh, no !" Francisca replied ; " she had never really loved any man but him, though she had concealed her affection from him, and she w r as sure that he would love her alone till the day of his death ; and to set out for Florence she was de¬ termined, be the event of her journey what it might ; chance wliat would, she could easily provide foi herself—she had lived by her own endeavours before. The best of places she had had the good for¬ tune to procure ; and as the proverb wisè- ly observed, " there was as good fish in the sea as" ever came out of it." Urbino readily perceived, that not So much her affection for her dear Bernardo, a» that fretfulness of disposition which not unñ^quenfcly assails the unmarried of thè softer
softf ~ sex, at the age to which Francisca had advanced, was the enemy of her peace, and sorry likewise to observe the anxiety with which Averi Ik heard her strange de¬ claration, anel the earnestness with which she endeavoured to dissuade her from her purpose. Ill as his own spirits were at that moment adapted to becoming the consoler of another, Le endeavoured first to rally her upon the romance of her in¬ tentions ; and perceiving his attempts to promise little success, he next sought to divert her thoughts from the subject on which they were bent, by informing her that he had discovered the cause from whence her alarm at the Castello had pro¬ ceeded, and inviting her to walk thither that moriu'ug with himself and Valeria, promising to point out to her, on their ar¬ rival there, the hitherto-concealed means by which the supposed apparition had trained access into the building. Valeria, perceiving the motive by which her father was guided, warmly seconded vol. in. d his
his invitation, wdiich Francisca, with lit¬ tle reluctance, accepted, saying—" Oh, I don't intend to set off to-day, nor perhaps for a week, or it may be a month to come ; and I am sure í am always proud of the honour of being in the company of a real signora, like yourself, as you have often heard me say before, and nobody knows better who is w r ho than I do. Living where I have lived, if I did not, who should ? But, ah ! dear signora!" she whis¬ pered, as they quitted the apartment to¬ gether, tť you don't know what it is to have lost the man of your heart." Valeria did not reply, but hastened to her chamber, tc prepare for her w r alk. On arriving at the Castello, it so chan¬ ced that Urbino's attention being attract¬ ed by some stones which had fallen from the top of the building, and which he was detained by reflecting on the necessity of engaging a workman immediately to replace, Valeria and Francisca had preced¬ ed him a considerable number of paces, and
and entering the edifice by tlie principal door, which in the daytime was not un- frequently set open for the admission of air, and advancing towards an apartment which, during the residence of Francisca at the Castello, haei been appropriated to the use of Terence anel herself, when they re¬ tired from the labours of the kitchen, their ears were greeted with the voice of Te¬ rence singing the following words to a national tune, which he was particularly attached to chanting in his moments oí mirth and recreation-— *' Then kiss me ηςηίιι, my own little life ! I like you so »eli, I could take you to u ife : I never lov'd any v> de.4-|y as you, Vour clieekb are mj ic l t and your eyes aie ьо blue. Sing tiltale w, tiltak u, mkijalew ï" And these words were followed by a cor¬ dial smacking of lips, accompanied by a titter of satisfaction. At the sound of the singing, Valeria and Francisca had both stopped, as they liad frequently done before, to listen to d 2 the
the unaelorned notes of Terence; but on the sound of the accompaniment—" Bless¬ ed Virgin ! hear that !" exclaimed Fran¬ cisca. " Why, signora, did you ever know the like ? f As sure as eggs are eggs,' as the proverb says, that impudent Irish fel¬ low has had the audacity to introduce some vile woman into the Castello." The flush of jealousy and disappoint¬ ment started into the countenance of Francisca, anel she appeared half prepared to dart forward and satisfy her curiosity, whilst Valeria, moving to an opposite side of the hall, expressed her wish that her father would appear. At the same moment the door of the apartment, from whence the singing had proceeded, opened, and from it slowly issued old Jeronymo, bearing in his arms an infant, to whose cheek his own was pressed, whilst from his lips proceeded a scarcely-audible murmur, intended to lull his charge to repose. " Jeronymo!" pronounced Valeria, on beholding
beholding him — *' whose child is that, Jeronymo ?" The countenance of Jeronymo, on per¬ ceiving Valeria, assumed a cast which plainly manifested that he was placeel in a situation wliich compelled him to dissent from his taciturn habit—" Mine—mine—» mine, signora!" he exclaimed; and as he spoke, the tears streamed down his furrow¬ ed cheeks. " Yours, Jeronymo !" replieel Valeria. " Yours !" echoed Francisca—" and at your years too ! You may well shed tears of repentance ; I never heard the like in all my life !" " It's devilish little, in my opinion, that you ever heard or saw either, notwith¬ standing all your braggery," cried Terence, proceeding as he spoke from the apart¬ ment ; " but, be that as it may, I think you are come to an age that might teach you compassion for a fellow-crater's mis- f òí times. " Хол, uimiu/zle your ntsdoin." υ 3 " Mis-
" Misfortunes !" rejoined Francisca ; " such misfortunes indeed ! But let me #et out of the house, for I expect the roof to fall in, and crush us all ;" and thus say¬ ing, she darted towards the outer door, at which she was met by Uibino; and when he had entered, she glided into a spot of concealment, desirous of Ьепж thought to have left the place, but still more anxious for the development of what she had seen and heard. " Plase your honour," said Terence, ad¬ vancing to meet his master, " we have got a strange family in the Castello. I hope I have not done amiss ; but I think I have acted just as you would have done yourself, anel as I am never so proud as when I expect your commendations, I hope, for the sake of the poor souls that I have made hould to harbour, that myself will not be disappointed of rccavhig them now." Jeronymo burst into a fresh flood of tears, advanced towards Dì Cavetti, and extended
extended forward to his notice the child in his arms, with a mingled look of sorrow, entreaty, and compassion. L T rhino requested an explanation of the scene before him, and it was given him by Terence to the following effect. It appeared that about the hour of twilight on the preceding evening, Te¬ rence had discovered a female lying in a state of apparent insensibility at the foot of a tree near the entrance to the sycamore walk. By her side slept an infant, and bendin«; over her in an attitude of the deepest concern, stood the meagre and disabled figure of a man, at whose feet sat a second inf mt, weepmg bitterly. 'Terence advanced towards them, and addressed the man, who, in reply to his inquiries, informed him that they were travelling towards Venice, but that his companion, who had long been labouring under ill health, had become suddenly so much exhausted as to be unable to pro¬ ceed, and in despite of his remonstrances, D 4 bao!
had thrown herself down upon the ground, where he beheld her, and where he believ¬ ed her to have fallen asleep, as some mi¬ nutes had passed since he had been able to make her speak. The man added, that they were not so much in want of money as of a place to repose in, as a kind signor, whom they had that day had the good fortune to meet upon the road, had made them a handsome present, and, moreover, given them his permission to call and re¬ fresh themselves at his house, which they were to pass in the course of their journey. Terence immediately guessed their be¬ nefactor to be Di Cavetti, and having in¬ quired if such were the name of the sig¬ nor whom they had encountered, and learned that it had been the worthy far¬ mer, he no longer hesitated to give them that shelter which their necessities re¬ quired within the Castello, until the fe¬ male were sufficiently recovered to proceed on her w r ay. Accordingly, with the joint assistance of
of Terence and Jeronymo, the sufferer was conveyed into the Castello; anel having been provided with a beel, Jeronymo un¬ dertook to furnish her with such nourish¬ ment anel medicine as he judged woukl best suit her weak anel delicate state; anel her younger infant, at her particular re¬ quest, having been placed beside her, Te¬ rence took upon himself to provide for the wants of the man and the other child, who was a beautiful and engaging little girl, of about three years and a half old, who at this moment appearing, ran up to Terence, clung to Ms leg, and explained the mys¬ tery of the caresses in which he had been overhearel to indulge himself, by begging him to sing her another song, anel pro¬ mising him, if he diel so, to kiss liim again for his reward. Terence took her up in his arms,. anel; giving her a silencing nod, which she, with a smile, obeyed, proceeded in his narrative.. The man, he said, though not. в a, muchi
much beyond the prime of life, was one of the greatest cripples he had ever be¬ held. He had been a soldier, and so greatly wounded in battle, that it w r as al¬ most a miracle his life had been preserved to him. t( Oh, holy apostles !-—poor boy ! lasso ! lassoT ejaculated Jeronymo; and again t ic tears gushed from his eyes. The repeated tears and increasing agi¬ tation of the old man excited the concern of Urbino; and turning aside from Te¬ rence, he compassionately inquired the cause of his unusual emotion. Though now willing to speak, the tu¬ mult of Jeronymo's feelings tied his tongue; and Terence perceiving his ef¬ forts to articulate vain, spoke for him, by raying— Si It has been a strange affair that has happened, your honour; I was just coming to that part of the story, if you had listened to me a little longer: it seems this poor ould jontk mon w r as once the fa¬ ther
ther of a brace of sons, and this wounded soldier, now in the house here, turns out to be the one of them." Jeronymo seized the hand of Urbino, and dragged him into the apartment, where he placed him opposite to a figure wliich was indeed an object of commise¬ ration; wdiat remained of his emaciated form was supported on two wooden legs; his right hand was rendered nearly use¬ less by a wound which he had received in his wrist; and one of his eyes was co¬ vered with a black patch. "Are you Fernando di Ζ ubica?" asked Urbino, when recovered from the momen¬ tary surprise into which the uncouth ap¬ pearance of the unfortunate being whom he was addressing had thrown him. " No, signor; I am his younger bro¬ ther/' replied the soldier: " Fernando is dead." At these words a deep sigh accompa¬ nied the tears of old Jeronymo. " Both you and your brother/* rejoined Ό 6 Di
Di Cavetti, u deserted your father in a cruel and unnatural maimer; and it ap¬ pears that you have met the punishment due to the neglect of filial duty." " I was only eighteen when I ran away from Venice," answered the soldier ; " my elder brother prompted me to the action. I have many a time since reflected on the impropriety of my conduct : if I had been as wise then as I am now——-But there is a vast difference, signor, between the idea& of eighteen and forty-four." " When you did repent, why did you never inquire after your father?" de¬ manded Urbino. " Indeed, signor," replied the soldier, " I felt ashamed of my past conduct, and reluctant to meet the parent to whom I had been unfeeling; and nothing but the unceasing entreaties of my sister-in-law could ever have prevailed on me to visit this parr of the country again ; though in¬ deed I have often wished to know if my father were still alive, and how he fared, equally
equally regretting that it was not in my power to add any comforts to his declin¬ ing years, and blaming myself for having abridged his means of procuring them, by my dissolute conduct in my youth." " Well, well," pronounced Urbino, af¬ ter ρ short pause of reflection, " repent¬ ance, in any shape, deserves a welcome; and I trust that your presence may still add a gleam of sunshine to the closing years of your parent's life." Jeronymo clasped his arms round the neck of his son, and pressed him to his heart—" I forgive you all," he ejaculated ; " and I would willingly have forgiven Fernando too, for all his cruelty, from the very bottom of my heart, if I could but once more have held him thus." It w T as the longest sentence which the old man had perhaps ever uttered in the course of his life; and overpowered by the effort, he sunk, wdth his eyes half-closed, into a chair^ by the side of which his son was standing. At
At the expiration of a few" seconds, Ur¬ bino proceeded to inquire of Jcronymo's son, in what circumstances, and in what situation of life, his brother had dieel? But Jeronymo prevented his reply, by explaining, partly in words and partly by signs, that his fceìingù were so much overcome by the occurrences of the few- last hours, that he, at least, could not, for the present, be an auditor of any farther detail relative to the ill-fated beings to whom he had given birth ; and with his hand pressed to his temple, indicative of the disturbed state of his brain, he retired, to compose his mind in the solitude of his private apartment. Valeria having heard the conclusion of Terence's account, had immediately pro¬ ceeded to the chamber of the female, whom Jeronymo's son haei represented as the widow of his deceased brother, and in whom she found an interesting young wo¬ man, of speech and manners superior to the common orders of society, and who wept
wept tears of gratitude at the kind ex¬ pressions with wliich Valeria endeavoured to sooth her feelings, and to assure her oi' the protection and friendly services of those to whose acquaintance her fate had coi ulu c t ed her. At the departure of Jeronymo, his son began to reply to Urbino's inquiries, by sa viny, that after his brother and himself had quitted Venice», being as careless of the preservation of the little property which they possessed, as they had been indifferent about the means which had made it theirs, they had for many years struggled with various turns of fortune, and often desired to revisit a home, to which pride and shame had jointly with¬ held them from returning; that at length he had enlisted, and his brother, by the death of a friend to whom he had been .•»ervant, had been enabled to settle in a small bu.lness. For some years they were then sepa¬ rated. On his regiment being disbanded, he
he had proceeded to seek his brother, anei had found him upon his deathbed. He was married, and the father of tw T o chil¬ dren—" Those two babes whom you be¬ hold here, signor," he continued—" he strongly recommended them to my pro¬ tection ; and little, as I was conscious, that in my disableel state it could be in my power to do to serve them, I promised never to desert them ; and I never will, to the day r of my death, signor, while they require my presence, " In the course of a few days Fernando died; and his interment being passed, his widow% reminding me of the promise by wliich í had bound myself to my deceaseel brother, entreated me to accede to a pro¬ posal whieli she was going to make to me. I desired her to explain herself; and she said, that the trade of their shop had of late been so very small, as scarcely to af- forel them a maintenance ; that the busi¬ ness was not worth retaining; and that she haei resolved to convert the little she possessed
possessed into money, and to set out for Venice, the neighbourhood of which city she had a most unconquerable desire to visit. I inquired her reason ; she unfolded it to me; and finding it impossible to over¬ rule her inclination, or to withstand her entreaties, her little property was disposed of to the best advantage, and we began our journey." " And what coulel be the urgent mo¬ tive which induced her to this step?" in¬ quired Urbino. <È You must pardon me, signor, for re¬ fusing to be your informer on that head," replieel the soldier; ťí I have given her my solemn promise never to elivulge it with¬ out her permission ; and I love and respect her so much, that nothing coulel induce me to break my word with her, or to give her pain.' The sentiments expressed by Jerony¬ mo's son began to redeem his character in the opinion of Urbino, who having dé¬ clarée!
dared his approbation of his conduct, the soldier continued thus:—-" Unable to af¬ ford the expence of any conveyance, you may imagine, signor, how slowly our journey was performed : at last our little stock of money began to be nearly ex¬ hausted, and I perceived, with an anxiety which I endeavoured to repress within my own breast, that my companions were becoming hourly more unfit for the task which they had undertaken. Ours was a group to excite compassion; anel as there are always some charitable hearts scattcreel over the face of the earth, we were always tolerably well supplied with the necessa¬ ries of life. It is needless for me, signor, to dwell on the particulars of our pro¬ gress; you have heard already how fiu* fa¬ tigue anel weakness had overpowered my poor sister, when we last night reached this spot ; and it must be alike needless for me to repeat with what joy I recog¬ nized, in the person of one of those who humanely
humanely came forward to administer to our necessities, my long-lost and lamented father." " It is a merciful Providence, I think, which has conducted you hither," rejoined Urbino; " I cannot pretend to say how promising your sister's prospects may be on arriving i.t the spot of your destina¬ tion; but the most flattering of human expectations are liable to disappointment, and in that case what could have been your resource?—-whence was the mainte¬ nance of you all to be derived?" " 1 have a small pension, signor," re¬ plied the soldier; "butit would scarcely have supplied us with dry bread. It is a miracle, signor —it is the hand of f leaven itself which has guided us hither," '* The age of miracles is past," returned Urbino; " that is, the age of those open interpositions of Providence in the aflairs of man which once procured that title. But it is my fixed opinion, that the finger of
of Omnipotence still often in mercy points out that way to the earthly pilgrim, to which short-sighted man but too frequent¬ ly believes that a blind chance has led him." Their conversation was here interrupted Jby the appearance of Valeria, who came \p inform her father, that she had left the feViale in so alarming a state of debility anel fever, that she deemed it necessary he should immediately see her anel pre¬ scribe for her relief. ■ Urbino, without dela} r , proceeded to accompany his daughter to the chamber of the stranger; and the disabled soldier and Terence were thus left together. Af¬ ter a silence of a few moments—" Ah !" ejaculated the former, with a half-sup¬ pressed sigh, " it may well be said, ű what has mortal man to be proud of?' I re¬ member the time when I was foolish enough myself to be vain of my person ; and what am I now ? These," he added, pointing
pointing to his wooden legs as he spoke ; " these afford an excellent lesson for the coxcomb." " Get thee to my lady's chamber, and tell her to paint aa meh thick—to this complexion bhe must come at lau !" solemnly pronounced Terence. The soldier well understooel the mean¬ ing of the sentence, although he was ig¬ norant whence the words w r ere deduced, and proceeded speaking thus—" What fools the women often make of the men, and of themselves too at the same time ! When they admire a man solely for his person, must he not. be a fool to be grati¬ fied by their admiration ? and must not they be equally ibols themselves, to give all their consideration to his outside, and not to investigate what he is made of within ?" " By the powers, anet you may say that!*' replied Terence; "in my judge¬ ment, a woman that looks only for beauty in a husband, can never make a wife * A4
* As rhaste as ice, ;is pure аз snow,' as ould Willy expresses it ; for if beauty r was all she married for, divil a bit myself would wonder if her husband chanced te» fall in xvid any r little sort of an accident. like yourself, but she might continue to look out for beauty still, and be after for¬ getting her husband altogether." fS And what could be said to her then ?" ejaculated the soldier. "It is not what could be said to her then/' replied Terence, " but it is what shoulel have been saiel to her before she got hoidd of the chance of making any thing w r orse of an honest man than Heaven intended that he should be. 1 (¿К thee to a nunnery—to a nunnciy go!" ťť I was once myself so silly as to be in Sove with beauty," rejoined the soldier, " and when I went to the wars, leaving the girl of my heart behind me, w r as the only part of the business that gave me pain ;
pain ; though I have often thought, up¬ on consideration, that I was most likely quite as well without her; for she was a great coquette, and, perhaps, when she had seen me with these wooden sup¬ porters, might, as you say, have forgotten the husband, and only continuée! to look out for beauty. Her temper was not one of the best either, and that is a bad ingre¬ dient in the compounel of matrimony. I can't say but I shoulel like to see her once again, though I dare say she would scarcely recollect me, if she saw me thus." " If she could think the worse of you for bearing the marks of your bravery about w hi you," replied Terence, ' Let her teauiy Look tin oii£h я easement to allın e false hearts, And he f.iUe with them;' her love never was worth the dregs of an empty poteen, take my word for it. Talk¬ ing of that," continued Terence, " I am after thinking yourself would not be the worse to wet your one eye wid a drop of wine?,
wine, this morning, to keep your heart up after your journey, and myself has a flask in this closet that is not for sneezing at." Terence rose to fetch his flask, and at the same instant, Francisca, who had been loitering about the hall, anxious to learn every particular relative to the strangers, without having any one to whom she durst apply for information, and who had for some time past been listening, at the door of the apartment, to the conversation of the soldier and Terence, but who, on the rising of the latter, feared to be detected on her post of curiosity, darted into the room, and placed herself upon the first va¬ cant chair. Having poured out a draught of wine for the soldier, and drank another himself, Terence turned to Francisca, and bidding her good morning, inquired if she would take a sup of the water ? " No, indeed," replied Francisca, with an affected toss of her head, " I never drink any thing but lemonade." "It
fi It was in a lemonade-shop," said the soldier, addressing Terence, " where I be¬ came acquainted with my beauty ; she was, as I have already told you, too much of a coquette to confess her love for me to my¬ self, but she used to speak freely enough about me to my neighbours—a way that many young women have of conveying their sentiments to the men of their choice; she used to say, that I had a piercing eye, and that my legs were so well proportion¬ ed, that she could aimosi; believe they were carved out of wood. I wonder what she would say, if she could behold me, now I have only one eye, and my legs are indeed carved out of wood? I wager it would not be—* Oh, my beautiful Bernarelo!' and e Oh, my dear Bernardo di Zubica !' with her, as it used to be." At these words Francisca made a vio¬ lent start, and sunk, with an hysteric shriek, upon the floor. The soldier and Terence both proceeded to raise her up, and place her again in her vol, Ш. E scat ;
seat; and when they had done so—" What can be the matter with this poor woman?" said the soldier, ** Likely a little touch of the wind cholie/' answered Terence ; " if she had sucked a drop of the wine I offered her, it might have kept the complaint under ; but I'll take out the flask again, and try lier now," " Wind cholie !" ejaculated Francisca, whose momentary insensibility had been afíected ; then addressing the soldier, who was supporting her, she added—" Keep your hands off me, and don't annihilate me with your touch," « What have I done to offend you ?" asked the soldier. " Oh, you wretch ! to go to the wars, and make that fright of yourself" exclaim¬ ed Francisca, pretending to burst into tears, and hiding her face in her hands. " I cannot perceive how my misfortunes can have excited your displeasure/' was the soldier's reply. « why,
"Why, don't you know Francisca?" roared out the disconsolate damsel, start¬ ing upon her feet as she spoke, and clench¬ ing her hands in the violence of her mor¬ tified feelings. *' Francisca !" exclaimed Bernarelo, for Bernarelo was indeed the person speaking. *' why, you cannot mean that you are that Fra\cisea w r ho was niece to old Lupo, who kept the lemcnade-shop in Florence*, to whom my brother Fernando was first shopman, and then succeedeel him in bu¬ siness? why, that Francisca had plump cheeks and a natural colour, sparkling chesnut eyes, with the whites as clear and as bright as------" " But," ejaculated Terence, interrupting his harangue, " when nature hath made a fair creature, may she not by fortune fall into the fire?" " Hold your tongue, you impertinent Irish monkey !" cried Francisca, " and * speak when you are spoken to,* as the proverb says : it is no such thing—-I have к 2 not
not fallen into the fire, and I am Francisca, the niece of old Lupo who kept the le¬ monade-shop in Florence, and you must know me, if you are indeed Bernardo ; what can have changée! me?" (i Why, the hand of Time," answered Bernardo; " why may not you be grown old, as well as I be grown ugly ?" " Oh mercy ! oh Holy Virgin ! what have 1 done that I should live to be called old, and by one too who once professed to adore me? I would rather be called anything than old—-what have I done to be thus mortified and despised?" " Done !" replied Terence ; " why, you have lived so long an ould maid, that amongst your other losses, you have lost vour temper, and view men and things through a wrong madium ; there was a time you would not marry him for love, thou gl i it seems the biggest disappointment, after ail, fell upon yourself in that same case ; now, then, marry him for tenderness anel compassion, that would once have married you
you for love, and apply the remainder of your days to make him a good nurse—the best office a woman of your years can un¬ dertake !" " What!" exclaimed Francisca, " mar¬ ry a man with wooden legs ! it would b' 1 a standing joke against me as long as I live ; my very children would cast it at me, as a reflection upon my choice of their fa¬ ther !" " No fear of that," replied Terence ; * ť poor Bernardo's is an infirmity that I never heard of its descending to the next generation." The presence of Urbino, who informed Bernardo that his sister-in-law requested his presence in her chamber, put a stop to the conversation, and the soldier according¬ ly accompanied the worthy physician to the bedside of the suffering female, where a detail of some past circumstances was confided to the knowledge of Di Cavetti and his daughter, which will hereafter be laid before the reader. е У CHAP-
CHAPTER III.
t f*** -Г f r*+* J
]\h nrcumstancfs Beiti^ so near the truth as. I udl make them, Mi.jt firbt mduoe von to believe; whose btr«PĽtb I will confimi with oath; wh I doubt not, You'll çive ше letu e to spüre, when you shall fiiul Yo» need it not. CyinbtUne. On arriving at the cottage of Bianca, wdiich consisted of one apartment of the meanest description, Di Borges found Calvino and his mother within, the former of whom, as he entered, was looking with ecstacy into the hand of the latter, in which were con¬ tained some pieces of silver coin, which the old woman appeared to be counting.—" 1 fear I interrupt you," said Sancho, smil¬ ing.—" ΐ am glad, however, to find you so well employed." " Ab, signor," returned Bianca, " Hea¬ ven
ven knows it is very seldom I have money to count; the most of it I finger comes from your charitable hand; this was given to me by a poor creature who is reposing on my beel yonder." Sancho directed his eyes to the spot at which she pointed, and through theraggeel and flimsy curtains with which the bed was inclosed, he could perceive the outline of a human form in male attire.—" That is," continued Bianca, " when I say, ( poor creature,' I don't mean poor in purse or in person, but to be pitied is what I mean ; for I verily believe the signor's brains are disturbed." " I)o you know him ?" inquired Di Borges. " No, signor," replied the old woman ; " this morning, when Calvino was return¬ ing from the spring with water, this young signor darteel across his path, and asked leave to drink out of his pitcher, which Calvino, poor boy, of course permitted." E 4 " And
" And he drank, and he drank, and he drank," cried Calvino, laughing vacantly at the recollection, " as much water as I could have swallowed, if there had been wine in the pitcher." " The poor soul is burnt up by an in¬ ward fever," said Bianca; " I went out at the moment, for it was close by my door they met, and I was so struck by the sig¬ nora melancholy appearance, for it had rained hard all night, signor, and his clothes were wet through and through, and his hair was drenched; for he had no hat on his head, and his face was as pale as a shroud ; and seeing him so distressed, I made bold to ask him if he would con¬ descend to walk into my cottage, and dry himself? He didn't say a word in answer, but suffered me to take his hand, and lead him in ; and, oh dear ! signor Sancho, his hand burnt like a living fire." *' lie's asleep," said Calvino, who had been peeping into the bed through a rent in
in the curtain, "or at least his eyes are shut ; but I have often been wide awake with mine closed before now." " When I had leel him in," continueel Bianca, " I askeel him if he woukl take a little refreshment, such as I could give him, or suffer me to dry his clothes? and he replied, in a still slow voice—* Suffer me to sleep a while, ifit be possible that I can sleep—-I need no other nourishment.' I showed him what my heel was, and told him he was heartily welcome to make use of it, if ne could deign to repose upon it. He did not turn his head te> observe it ; but drawing from his pocket the pieces of silver now in my hand, he threw them upon the table, and then cast himself upon the bed. It is now some hours since he arrived, and he has not spoken, nor at¬ tempted to undraw the curtains which I closed around him. Peep at him, signor, and see if he is known to you." Sancho complied with her request, and discerned sufficient of the countenance to e 5 have
have recognized an acquaintance by ; but the person of him whom he beheld was unknown to him. After some farther comments had passed between them on Bianca's guest, and San¬ cho had declared his intention of remaining a w Idle at the cottage, in the expectation of the stranger waking, that he might offer him his services, or afford him that protec¬ tion which Bianca seemed to apprehend that his apparently-disturbed state of mind required, he proceeded to the business which had brought him to the aid woman's dwelling, and began to question Calvino relative to the spot where he had found the slipper of Paulina ? After many ambiguous answers and de¬ scriptions, which his mother, who was his usual interpreter, managed to explain with tolerable perspicuity, it was ascertained that the place where he haei discovered the slipper was an acclivity of green sward, leading to the drawbridge of a stu- ø pendous Cartello, situate at the distance of
of about a league and a half from the spot where they were standing. *' It must be the Castello Alfonta that he means," observed Sancho. » " It can be no other, signor," replied Bianca. " Though at so short a distance from my own abode," replied Sancho, " that is a part of the country I seldom visit, and know less about, as the whole territory belongs to the proprietor of the Castello, and, consequently, presents no invitation to the speculator or the farmer ; but if 1 recollect rightly,, it has for many years past been deserted by its owner, and inhabited, only by the stewarel and his family." " You are right, signor," answered Bi¬ anca ;. " the steward's name is Lipardo di Moralta ; but the name of the marchese, for he is a marchese to whom the Castello Alfonta belongs, L cannot recollect." " Nor I," rejoined Sancho, " though it Ε β musi.
must be impossible but what I have heard it." " The signor Lipardo, as he is called, has a fine place of it, by ail accounts," resumed Bianca ; " I can remember when his wife was only a servant in the Castello, and now she dresses in her silks and satins, Sundays and working-days, and all alike. I warrant me, the steward, or major domo, or whatever he may be, for some people call him one, and some the other, hasn't his good fortune for nothing; he has done his work for his money, I'll be bound to say. He brought up his master's ne¬ phew from his infancy, just as if he had been his own child; that's one thing he has done—but there's more than that, 1 dare say." Sancho did not immediately reply, and Bianca, with a look of infinite sagacity, added in a half-whisper-—" I suppose you ha\ e heard, signor, that there was once a murder said to have happened in that fa¬ mily ?" " Come,
" Come, come, Bianca," replied Di Bor¬ ges, smiling, " none of the marvellous ; you know I don't relish it." At this moment a deep sigh proceeded from the bed, which was followed f ^ther sounds, which bespoke the stran <> > be awake, and Sancho was on the nt of proceeding to address the unfortup per¬ son, in whom he felt no ineonside ie in¬ terest, from the account which h been given of him by Bianca, when tlie old woman, sudelenly clapping the palms of her hands together, exclaimed—" I have it, signor —I have it-—the name of the great marchese to whom the Castello Al¬ fonta belongs is Di Valdetti." " So it is," answered the farmer, " and I now remember hearing one of my neighbours mention, the other с that the marchese Di Valdetti was e on a visit to his Castello ; but it bao iped my recollection." " The marchese Dİ Valdetti ^ ичхг at hand!" exclaimed the stranger, starting up
up from the bed as he spoke : " direct me instantly," he added, addressing Cab vino, where to find this Castello Alfonta." Then apparently sinking into an abstrac¬ tion of thought, he muttered between his lips«—" Avoid the marchese Di Valdetti/ pronounced the mysterious pilgrim ; * you have every thing to fear from him—per¬ secution, dishonour, death !' No matter, Heaven grant us but to meet ! then, if he possesses the secret of my birth, let me either tear it from his heart, or, failing in the only wish now left me, let him free the wretched Julio from an insupportable existence í Come, where is this Castello Alfonta ?" he repeated, and, with a piercing and bewildered eye, he darted out of the cottage. " There, signor Sancho," said Bianca, íť I told you how it was with the poor creature; he is quite distracted, quite mad !" Calvino, who was at other times p 'one to be too, forward in giving his services, appeared
appeared half-terrified by the wild aspect and solemn tones of his mother's guest ; and instead of presenting himself to point out the way to the spot required, had re¬ tired to the most distant part of the dwell¬ ing. On hearing the name of Julio, Di Bor¬ ges had been instantly convinced who the speaker was, and he stood for some mo¬ ments irresolute how it became him to act, or in what point of view to consider the words which he had heard. He at length stepped out of the cottage, to ob¬ serve what direction the unfortunate be¬ ing had taken ; but Julio was nowhere to be seen. It will be recollected that such pages oí 1 Julio's manuscript as contained an ac¬ count of the visit which he had received from the mysterious pilgrim by night, at an inn upon the road between Rome and Padua, had not been read by Urbino, and, consequently, their contents were unknown to Sancho di Borges, who had received
received the information of wliatever he was acquainted with concerning Julio from his friend Di Cavetti ; hence the agitation evinced by Julio at the sound of Di Valdettľs name w r as to him incom¬ prehensible, and he could only resolve to refer the question to the solution of Ur¬ bino. Julio himself, on rushing out of the hut by the side of the brook on the pre¬ ceding evening, had darted into the midst of the forest, anel had w r andereel there through the night unsheltered, but sense¬ less of the fury of tlie storm to which he w r as exposed. He haei believed that he haei armed himself with fortitude to bid Valeria farewell for ever, without a tear. But the moment of trial unmanned his most firm resolves ; the power of nature triumphed over that of reason ; and the task was rendered more severe than he had apprehended to find it, by the unex¬ pected entrance of Urbino into the hut, and especially by his presence having withheld
withheld him from receiving, at the lips of Valeria, that promise of fidelity, possess¬ ed of which, he had nursed himself into the belief that he could endure with re¬ signation an eternal exile from the idol of his soul. In the course of a few hours, the agita¬ tion of his mind produced a violent fever in his blood, which, contrasted with the damp earth upon which he was extended, created a painful shivering in his frame, which w r as only equalled by the scorching thirst which he was enduring. At this moment, chancing to raise his eyes, he be¬ held Calvino bearing his pitcher, and flew towards him. Almost insensibly, as the olel woman had described it, he haei suffered her to lead him into her dwelling, anel in that state of mind which has no choice of situation or pursuit, had cast himself upon the bed, anel professed a desire to sleep, in order to avoid being compelled to speak. Here, as he lay, once more he fervently ished and prayed to die; but still he re¬ volted,
%olted, as he had before done, at the thought of meeting his fate from the hand of an executioner, or staining his memory with the crime of suicide. The name of Di Valdetti, pronounced by Bianca, con¬ jured up a host of new ideas to his imagi¬ nation. The pilgrim's injunction to him respecting the marchese of that name had always led him to conclude that being, whoever lie was, acquainted with the se¬ cret of his birth ; no event could render his existence more miserable than it was at the present moment, and he considered it ά satisfaction to be enabled to rush upon hi3 fate ; and thus impressed, as his own words have already acquainted us, he quit¬ ted the cottage of old Bianca, Unconscious of the chord which had been touched in the heart of Julio by the name of Di Valdetti, Di Borges conceived the exclamation which he had uttered, ima his subsequent conduct, to be the effects of a waudering brain; and uncer¬ tain how Urbino might wish him to act, either
either in his case, or that of Paulina, he resolved to lose no time in returning home, and advising with him upon the subject. On reaching the farmhouse, and learn¬ ing that Di Cavetti was gone to the Castello della Torvida, the impatience of mind which he felt to commune with him determined him to follow him thither. He liad not proceeded far on his way, ere he w f as met by the friend of whom he w r as in pursuit ; and placing themselves upon a bank by the side of the road, a considerable time was past in recapitulating to each other the adventures wdiich each had en¬ countered during the short period of their separation, all of wdiich have already been circumstantially laid before our readers, with the exception of wdiat had passed in the chamber of Bernardo's sister-in-law, after he had entered it, in compliance with the summons to that effect delivered to him by Urbino. " On entering the chamber of the un¬ known female with Bernardo," said Di Cavetti»
Cavetti, " she beckoned him to her bed¬ side, and spoke thus— i From the proofs which I have already received ot 1 the ten¬ derness of heart of this excellent signor, and his daughter, and also from observing the kind esteem with which they honour your father, ï judge that I cannot ask ad¬ vice of any persons who will more con¬ descendingly bestow it on me, relative to the object of my joarney to this part of the country, than themselves.' " Bernarelo warmly coincided with her in opinion, and she rejoined-— ' I must in¬ trude upon you to listen to a short account of my past life ; it is necessary to the in¬ troduction of the point upon which I wish to obtain your counsel.* " We beggeei of her to proceed as best biiited her story ; and as she appeared al¬ most too weak to enter into conversation, at least upon any subject in which she was deeply interested, we proposed to her to delay her disclosure till she was restored to better health ; but as she replied that her
her mind would be easier when her secret was committed to the confidence of those whom she regarded as friends, we consent¬ ed to hear her, only begging that she would proceed slowly, and not agitate her¬ self in her present weak state. '•The first years of my life,' the female began her account by r saying, ť were passeei in travelling about the country, with a woman named Leonora Velinos, who sole! French lace, and other trivial articles, for the embellishment of dress, to such sig- noras as she could prevail on to become her customers. Whilst an infant, I was carriee! in one of her arms, and her box of wares in the other. As I aelvanced in age, I ran by her side, and was provided with h little basket of toys, for which I was instructed by her to solicit purchasers amongst the younger branches of those families in which she courted the favours of the adult. * When I was between ten and twelve years of age, Leonora settled herself as a milliner
milliner in a small shop in Florence. Be¬ sides the shop and a contiguous apartment wdiich we inhabited, the house contained a chamber and a closet, which Leonora let as a lodging. Various were the tenants which, in the course of four years, pos¬ sessed it ; and at the expiration of that time it was hired by Fernando di Zubica, who served in a lemonade-shop, situate in the street in which w r e resided. ' it is needless to dwell upon circum¬ stances irrelevant to that point to which ï am desirous of directing your attention ; suffice it therefore to say, that from my first knowledge of Fernando, he paid me the most marked attentions, and ultimate¬ ly sought me for his wife. I was at that time just turned of seventeen, and Fer¬ nando more than double my age. I liked him as an acqu ain tance, but as a husband I could not view him with the same fa¬ vourable eye. Thus passed on another year, Fernando nothing diminishing in his assiduities, and Leenora backing his suit
suit by every means in her power. At this time Leonora was taken extremely ill, and her life despaired of, She now represented to me, that at her death, which she foresaw must shortly be expected, I should stand alone in *' e world, without a natural or an allied protector, unless I consented to accept the hanel of Fernando. She repeated to me, that the age of the parties united in wedlock was not of so much consequence as the amicable senti¬ ments which they felt for each other ; said she was sure that Fernando loved me, and that with him I was certain of enjoy¬ ing a comfortable inelependence, as his master, who was so old that he could not, in the course of nature, live very long, had promised that he should succeed him in trade. Her arguments prevailed, and I became Fernando's wife. ť The last moments of Leonora conti¬ nued to be very rapidly approaching ; and one elay calling me to her bedside, she said—** Come to me alone to-morrow evening—
evening—-I have something of consequence to unfold to vou before I die." I obeyed her injunction, and after a few sentences, intended to prepare me for the disclosure which she was about to make, she informed me that I was not her child. I was begin¬ ning eagerly to interrogate her who my parents were,and why my birth had been thus kng concealed from me, when we were interrupted by the arrival of a priest, who daily attended her, and his office was scarcely ended ere her physician appeared After a few moments passed by her heel- side, the í hysician quitted the chamber, and beckoned to me to rollow him.—" It is my duty^" he said, " to inform you that you must not flatter yourself with the expec¬ tation of your mother's existence being prolonged; she has now but a very short time to live." ť He departed, and I hurried back to Leonora, and hastily repeated my ques¬ tion, who are my parents? I perceived that a considerable change had taken place
place in her countenance since I had last conversed with her, before the entrance of the priest, and that it now cost her a se¬ vere struggle to articulate. At length— ' Venice------' she, with difficulty, pro¬ nounced, s Venice——The marchese di Valdetti——'—* Is he my father?' I has¬ tily asked. With still greater difficulty she whispered forth—* He can inform you —he knows your story------he——' Again she paused, exhausted, and almost speech¬ less—* Oh ! for Heaven's sake,' I exclaim¬ ed, * leave me not in this suspense I in the name of mercy unfold this riddle !' Moved by my earnestness, she made an effort to collect her fleeting strength— ť There is a woman near Venice,' she said, * who knows all that——' Once more she paused, and once more she spoke—* Her name is-——' The words were her last, anil she sunk back lifeless on her pillow. * Some time after the decease of Leo¬ nora, I imparted to my husband what had passed between us previously to her death, vol. Ш. f and
and besought him to take me to Venice, and endeavour to prove the truth of her confession. He derided my idea, said, that probably the senses of the old woman had been wandering in her last moments, and that, at all events, we must be regard- eel as distracted beings, if we were to set out upon so blind a business. If there is a marchese di Valdetti in Venice, he said, how could we expect to gain his atten¬ tion to such a vague account as we have to offer? We should only put ourselves to expence and trouble, and be laughed at for our pains. To the day of his death he persisted in not listening to my entrea¬ ties on the subject, whilst the inclination which had seized upon my heide from the moment of my receiving Leonora's con¬ fession, continued hourly to gain strength.' " And here," said Urbino, " concluded her simple narrative, with the exception of her having repeated to us the difficulty with which she had prevailed upon Ber¬ nardo to consent to her pilgrimage, and to attend
attend her on it.— ť I dare say,' she added, * that I almost appear in your eyes, as my deceased liusband foretold, that I must be regarded in the opinion of any strangers to whom I should ever confess the object of which I had suffered myself to be led in pursuit. I know not how deceptive my feelings may be ; but they urge me forward, with a degree of warmth, which appears to me as if it were imparted by the breath of destiny.' " It does indeed appear a most infa¬ tuated idea upon which this poor being is acting," said Di Borges; ť · and it is not a little extraordinary that the name of this marchese di Valdetti shoulel thrice, within so short a space of time, have occurred to us in connexion with different objects who excite our interest, the unfortunate Julio, our dear Paulina, and the unknown suf¬ ferer at the Castello. Are you acquainted with the marchese di Valdetti, or his his¬ tory ?" " Not in the least," replied Urbino. f 2 « When
" When I w r as informed by my servant Terence a few weeks ago, that such a noble¬ man was come to reside in the neighbour¬ hood, was, I believe, the first time I ever heard the name, and 1 conclude from your question, that yon know as little of him as 1 do." " Ì know no more of him," replied San¬ cho, " than that the family, of wliich he bears the name, are reputed to be very rich and powerful, and that many years have passed away since any of them have re¬ sided at the Castello Alfonta ; but where their residence has been held, I am igno¬ rant. I do not perceive," continued the farmer, after a pause, " that we are autho¬ rized to display ourselves as interferers in tlie cause of anv one of those persons, be¬ tween whom and the marchese there ap¬ pears to be an obscure chain of connexion ; but our dear signe>ra Paulina, and indeed tlie finding of a slipper, wliich she once wore, in the front of a mans dwelling, ap¬ pears in itself a very slender reason for ac¬ cusing
cusing him of being the thief who stole her." " The point requires consideration," re¬ turned Urbino. " And it must have it," rejoined D/ Borges ; " we must strictly guard against drawing down upon ourselves the ven¬ geance of a powerful man like the mar¬ chese, by a false accusation against his ho¬ nour." " The promise ^ Inch I have received in writing of her safety would, in such a case, operate against us," remarked Urbino. " Materially," answered the farmer; and expressing a wish to sec the female at the Castello, they turnee! their steps towards its walls, both deeply buried in reflection.
f 3
CHAP-
CiíAPTKRIV. There stand—for vou are sprll-btopp'd ! Shakespeare. We must now return to the long-ne- gleeteel Paulina. At the sight of the mar¬ chese eli Valdetti, a breathless trepidation seized upon the heart of Paulina; fears, not inferior to those which she entertained for her own safctv, assailed her breast for tiiat being to whom the most solemn ties had just united her, and she sunk senseless into the suppeírting arms of lipardo. On recovering from the stupor of faculty into which she had fallen, she found her¬ self extended upon a bed, and by the flame of a lamp, which was burning in a distant part of the apartment, she could discern the figure of a man standing by her
her side—»" Where am I ?" slie hastily ex¬ claimed. " In safety, signora," replied the man ; " let that assurance satisfy you." The voice of the speaker w r as unknown to her; and after a moment's pause— íť Where are Vincentio and Lipardo? Why are they not with me?" she demand¬ ed. " Hush !" answered the man, fcť name them not; hush !" and with this injunction, whisperingly conveyed, he glided out of the apartment. She started from the bed, and examined the apartment : she had no recollection of having seen it before. It was meanlv furnished, and received its light from a circular window in the roof. She listened: not a sound broke ihe stillness of the hour. She knew not where to conclude berseli', and trembled with agony, as she reflected to what fate her friend Lipardo, her hus¬ band Vincentio, and herself; might not be f t doomed.
doomed. She knew not whether to con¬ sider the voice and words of the man who had just left her, as friendly to her interests, or the reverse ; his countenance, the dimness of the light which the lamp afforded, had not given her an opportu¬ nity of beholding; and the ambiguity of the admonition with which he had left her. might equally construe him into an adherent of either party. In the course of about an hour, the lamp faded and dieel away; and its extinction enabled her to behold the first tints of the rising dawn appearing through the case¬ ment. In a state of mind which igno¬ rance of the truth, anel apprehensions founded on conjecture, rendered almost insupportable, she continued to watch the increasing light, but when it had reach¬ ed the brightness of perfect day, no sounels which announced the operations of life to be passing near her met her ear, and she knew not whether to believe herself in a retired
retired part ofthat building which she had for the few last days been constrained to inhabit, or removed to some other spot. After a time, the door, which she now found to have been bolted on the outside, was opened, and a man entered.— ^ How fare you, signora ?" he said, and she was immediately convinced that it was the voice of him who had addressed her tha f morning, when she had first been restored to recollection. " Here is some breakfast." he continued, placing some articles which he took from a basket in his hand upon the table as he spoke; " they are not of the most delicate kind, signora, but the best which your friends are at the preseni time able to send you," " My friends ! What friends ?" ejacu¬ lated Paulina. " Do you know this ring, signora ?" re¬ joined the man, extending towards fier his hand.—" But you cannot fail to remem¬ ber it." Paulina perceived it to be a topaz, set F 5 m
in a circle of emeralds, wdiich she remem¬ bered to have observed on the finger oí Lipardo.—" Yes, I think— í —yes, f am certain I ha\ e seen it before," she replied. (( Then you must know who it is that employs ine," rejoined the man, with a sig¬ nificant motion of his head, wliich drew the regards of Paulina ίο his countenance, and subsequently to examine his features and person, lie w r as tall and muscular, but the contour of bis face presented no remarkable impression.—'· Keep it, if you please, signora," he continued, " and re¬ store it to the owner when you see him ; it has done its dut), in convincing you that S come to you commissioned from him.* 1 " But may 1 not behold him." rejoined Paulina, ' 4 or be ilìade acquainted why he does ι ot visit me himself?" u Before this time to-morrow, signora,' rejoined the шап, "лой will know all ; but the utmost caution is necessary in the proceedings of tiiose around you ; for my¬ self,
self, I dare remain with you no longer : but observe this one admonition which I give you; for upon your observance of my words depends the e rent of a stratagem now working. When you see me again, do not fail to follow my directions for your coneluct, which I may point out to you by signs, as it may perhaps be unsafe for me to address you. About the hour of twil'ght you will, at all events, behold me : till then, farewell, signora !" and so saying, he departed. It was equally impossible for Paulina to divine what events had taken place since she had last beheld Vincentio and Lipardo, as for her to attempt to explain the con¬ cealed meaning contained in the ambigu¬ ous address of the man who had just left her ; and she could only await the deve¬ lopment of her situation with anxious im¬ patience. The hours passeei on leaden wings ; at last the shades of twilight began to veil tlie lustre of day, and these had been some ν в time
time succeeded by the raven tints of night, ere the door of her apartment was again opened. The same man once more ap¬ peared ; anel placing a lamp upon the ta¬ ble, he lakl down a bundle of clothes by its side, anel whisperingly addressing Pau¬ lina, said-—" Make all the haste you are able in exchanging your own garments for those 1 have brought you. You must assist nv i to relieve the guard at the foot of the drawbridge." The last sentence he particulari ν emphasized, anel again quickly retired. Paulina examined the bundle, and found it to contain a suit of regimentals, such as the armed л assai of an Italian nobleman might be supposed to wear. The man who had brought them to her was habited in a similar suit; and from the words which he had addressed to her concerning the drawbridge, she concluded herself to be still in tlie Castello of the marchese di Valdetti. and that her escape from it was [o be effected by means of the disguise with
with which she had just been provided. At any other moment, her feelings would have revolted at the idea of exchanging her own habit, for that of a sex whose manners she knew so ill how to assimi¬ late ; but her situation was such as silenced the fainter voice of delicacy, and she pro- ceedeel to equip herself in her new habili¬ ments, which she founel accompanied by a military cap, with a deep verge in its front, well calculated for the concealment of her countenance. In less than an hour the man returned. He expressed his satisfaction at her equip¬ ment by a silent nod of approbation ; then again addressing her in a whisper, he said —■" Take my arm, and speak not, on your life !" and with these words he led her out of the chamber. They passed on in silence, and without meeting a single individual, through ma¬ ny long and intricate passages, faintly light¬ ed by occasional lamps placed against tlie walls, and at length entered an enclosed square,
square, where the first person whom they had encountered hailed them, in the voice of a sentinel, with the demand of— i( Who goes there?" i( Honour!" replied Paulina's compa¬ nion, and they were suffered to pass on. Having crossed the square, and passed through an enclosed archway, they found themselves at the portcullis leading upon the drawbridge. The same question was again advanced, and the same reply given ; which ceremony being passed, Paulinas conductor stopped before an open door, through which, perceiving some men ha¬ bited in suits similar to her own, sitting round a wood fire, she conjectured to be a guardhouse. " Come, Giraldo, are you here ?" said her companion. " No, he's not here," replied a voice from within ; " you will find him waiting for you at the foot of the drawbridge." " Very well," answered Paulina's com- prnion, and was moving away, when oik* of
of the men who had been sitting before the fire, starting from his seat, and darting forward, seized him by the arm, and in a voice rendered scarcely articulate by in¬ toxication, exclaimed—" You shall drink with me before you go—by all the saints, you shall, Philippo ! not one step do you stir till you have put my flask to your mouth" " For shame í for shame, Paulo Í" re¬ plied Paulina's companion, whose name she had thus discovered to be Philippo ; " you are drunk. Lie down upon the bench yonder, and take a sleep to sober you." ' ť Iťs not your fault, Philippo," ex¬ claimed the sentry, " that any of us are sober; you have plied us often enough with French brandy to-day to have turn¬ ed all our brains for us ; but we are much obliged to you for your kindness, I am sure, comrade." " Whenever I have any good luck, I like to share it amongst you," answered Philippo.
Philippo. " My nephew here, who has just received the marchese's sanction to be¬ come one of us, procureel me the treat of which you have partaken." " The devil he did !" cried the intoxi¬ cated Paulo ; " and do you think I will not make him drink my health in his own liquor ?" and, '^ he spoke, he endeavour¬ ed to put the mouth of his flask to the lips of Paulina. " Be quiet, I tell you !" returned Phi¬ lippo, protecting Paulina from his intru¬ sion. " The lad does not like liquor ; be¬ sides, he is bashful amongst strangers ; he'll know you all better when he comes back ; I have the marchese's permission to go with him to-night to his mother's, who resides at a short distance from hence, anel acquaint her with his new ot cupation ; and to-morrow I shall bring him back, and commence drill-serjeant over him." (i Well, that is all very well, verv well, indeed," stammered out Paulo, still placing himself in their road ; 4 but if your nephew
nephew cannot drink with me, why can¬ not you ? By St. Agnes, you shan't stir a step till you have taken a pull !" " Well, well," replied Philippo. " if that will content you, I will no fuse to oblige you ;" and having take mo¬ mentary draught, he returnee! 1 -lask into the hand of its owner. " Now that is like an honest m«»^ and a soldier," returned Paulo; "a" now you and your nephew both shak ands with me, and wish me good-nigh and I will go and take a sleep as you desired me." This was directly agreed to; and Pau¬ lina, on receiving the hand of the solelier in hers, felt him place a slip of paper in her palm, to which he endeavoured to arrest her attention by the emphatic pressure of his fore-finger, with which he accompani¬ ed the action; his meaning was under¬ stood by her, and she immediately clench¬ ed her hand, equally to conceal and to se¬ cure his mysterious gift. A general
A general good-night now passed be¬ tween the soldiers and Philippo, and he and Paulina then passee! across the draw¬ bridge. At its foot they were hailed by another sentry ; and the same forms as before having been gone through, a ıran, who haei been standing by the side of the sentinel, advanced a few paces towards Philippo, and said-—" Here am I, com¬ rade." '* Giralelo ?" inquired Philippo. " The same," was the reply. " Now then we start/' rejoined Philip¬ po ; ane! Giraldo placing himself by the side of Paulina, invited her to take his arm also to assist her in walking. The night was extremely dark ; a few faintly-shining stars rendereel the canopy of heaven dimly visible, anel the air was raw and uncomfortable. Paulina shivered as the dews of night fell upon her; which Philippo observing, said—" Vou are cold. signora, and no wonder, for I dare say you are not accustomed to nightly walks like ibis.
this; you should therefore endeavour to fortify yourself against the necessity which circumstances impose on you ; so take my advice, and drink a little of a cordial which I have here in a small flask," producing one from his pocket as he spoke. Paulina declined his offer, anel besought her companions to inform her whither they were conducting her, anel when she might expect to see Vincentio and Li¬ pardo? " Signora," answered Philippo, '* it is said, anel with great truth too, that walls have ears, and windows have eyes ; so why may not the trees, amongst which we are passing, conceal listeners? On this ac¬ count 1 have already been cautioned to avoid conversation on the road, and 1 beg of you to subscribe to the admonition." " Wasit Lipardo who gave you this in¬ junction?" askeel Paulina, whimperingly. '· I hope you have not lost his ring, sig¬ nora?" ejaculated Philippo. " No, no," answered Paulina ; u I have it
it very safe;" and having some time before taken an opportunity of placing the paper given her by Paulo in her breast, she press¬ ed the finger upon winch she wore Lipar¬ do's ring against the hand of Philippo, in order to convince him that it was still in her possession, conceiving, from the ear¬ nestness with which he haei inquired after its safety, that it was intended for some future service. " I know it by tlie touch," replied Phi¬ lippo ; " thus, if we only abstain from speaking, all is well." After about an hour and a half of leisure walking, as nearly as Paulina was able to estimate the time, a faint and twinkling light appeareel in the prospective of their path, which Giraldo observing, said—" I see Bellini's house ; we shall soon reach repose and refreshment now, signora." Another quarter of an hour brought them to a house, from one of the windows of which the light, which they had lately been observing, had proceeded ; and Philippo knocking
knocking at the door, it was opened by a stout and decent-looking woman, who sa¬ luted Paulina's companions by their names; and as soon as they had entered, placed seats before the fire, which she invited them to occupy. Philippo, without re plying to her invitation, drew the hostess asitle ; and during this period Paulina stood silent, still supporting herself upon the arm of Giraldo. lier eyes wandered round the place, and she concluded it to be the common apartment in a house of public entertainment. In one corner of the chimney sat a young man, whose head was rested in a melancholy position upon his hand ; and around tlie fire were gathered the children of the hostess. After a few minutes had passed in con¬ versation between the hostess and Philip¬ po-—" All shall be as you request, depend upon it," replied the former; "the youth shall have as comfortable a chamber as he can wish to repose in, and may ascend to it immediately, if he pleases." " Follow
" Follow the hostess," whispered Phi¬ lippo, addressing Paulina ; " this is no place for you ; and if you are not satisfied with your accommodation, ask for me." The hostess took a lain}) from the table; and desiring Paulina to accompany her, leel the way up a few stairs into a neat chamber ; and telling her, that when she required attendance, she had only to stamp with her foot upon the floor, which was immediately over the kitchen, set down the light, anel left her. The moment she was alone. Paulina took from her bosom the paper which had been put into her hand by the intoxicated solelier. At the first glance, the characters which it contained appeared almost illegi¬ ble and were evidently traced by a hand little accustomed to the exercise of the pen. After some time vshe deciphered this sentence — ê * Mah с ¡four escape a^ quickly as possible from your present com¬ panions ; they are the cmhsaries of tlu marehcbe di Valdett L"* The
The paper fell from her hand, and she мшк into a chair, overpowered by con¬ tending feelings. If she were in the power of the adhe¬ rents of the marchese, what might not be the fate of Vicentio and his lather ? This was the only idea on which her mind for a time was capable of dwelling. Gradually the tumult of her feelings began to sub¬ side into the power of reasoning, and hhe endeavoured to reflect in what manner it might be possible for her to lollow the advice which she had recel л eil from her tuknoun friend. As there was no appearance of her con¬ ductors intending to гетоле her that night, she considered that her most pro¬ bable chance of escape musí: rest upon her efforts during the hours that they were locked in sleep, and accordingly she re¬ solved to watch for a period when univer¬ sal stillness prevailed through the house, and then to make the best attempt she was able for her own preservation. After
After a short interval, the hostess ap¬ peared, bearing in her hand some refresh¬ ments, wdiich she placed before her, say¬ ing, that the signors below begged she would partake of them, and endeavour to compose herself to rest ; and Paulina, in order to lull suspicion, replied, that she was so weary as to require only repose, and should very shortly cast herself upon the bed, and hoped to sleep. When the hostess had retired, Paulina knelt down, and applying her car to the various chinks which occurred between the boards that formed the floor of the chamber, endeavoured to gather some part of the conversation which was passing in the kitchen ; but the whistling of the wind without, and the incessant strum¬ ming of an old musical instrument, with whieli one of tlie children was amusing its comrades, rendered only partial sounds audible ; and these did not appear to bear any reference to herself or her situation. From the few words wdiich she could distinguish,
distinguish, and which were spoken by her guards, the hostess, and a voice of which she had no recollection, she under¬ stood that some person had been inquiring his way to the Castello Alfonta, whieli some subsequent sentences informed her was the name of the building inhabited by the marchese di Valeletti. The history and character of the mar¬ chese seemed to be the next points of dis¬ cussion ; but almost every other sound was drowned in the active preparations now making for supper; and a knocking at the outer door put a final period to the conversation. From what followed, it appeared that a stranger had just arrived, who had found some difficulty in obtaining accommoda¬ tion, but was at length promised shelter for the night; and in the course of a few minutes, the hostess, making her appear¬ ance in Paulina's chamber, said—" There is a holy man just arrived, who requires to pass the night here, and we dare not, vol. in. о as
as Christians, refuse the protection of our roof to one of his religious order : I hope, therefore, that you will not think me im¬ pertinent or troublesome, in desiring that you will permit him to sleep in a small closet through your chamber: you can have nothing to apprehend from a man of his function." " If he be a man worthy of the profes¬ sion of which he is a member," reflected Paulina, " I may, perhaps, be able to in¬ terest him in my cause : the providential care of Heaven may have sent him to my rescue ;" and she requested the hostess to use her pleasure without ceremony. The hostess thanked her by the name of an obliging young signor ; and opening a narrow door, gave to view a small closet, in which stood a bed. " Here is a bolt," said the hostess, " with which you may, if you please, lock the father in; and there is another on the other side, with which he can, if he thinks proper, fasten the door upon himself." The
The hostess now went down stairs, and in the course of a few minutes returned, lighting the way to the holy man of whom she had spoken. He was clad in a friar's habit of brown serge ; the cowl was drawn down over his face, and as he passed through the chamber in which Paulina was sit¬ ting— "Benedicite, youth !" he mildly pro¬ nounced ; and entering the closet appro- priateel to his use, into which he earned with him a lamp that he haei received from the hand of the hostess, he closed the door, and drew the bolt. In the course of another hour the sounels in the kitchen became less frequent and lower-toned, and Paulina cast herself upon the bed, without undressing, simply draw« ing over her the coverlid, in order to affect the appearance of careless repose, if any inspector visited her chamber. By degrees all sounds died away, and she concluded every inhabitant of the place to be retired to rest ; and now, as the moment of action approached, she g 2 felt
felt more and more undecided in what manner to proceed. She crept towards the door of the closet in which the holy man was reposing, and by his heavy breathings found that he already slept. To awaken him might inspire him with a sudden surprise, under the influence of which he might communicate his alarm to the house. Again she considered whether it might not be practicable for her to ef¬ fect her escape unknown to any of the in¬ mates of the place : with caution, she be¬ lie veel that it might be possible for her to accomplish her purpose. She again leant down her head to the chinks in the floor : not a sound met her ear, and from this she concluded that there w r ere no reposers in the kitchen, as, were there any, she could not, in the present absence of other sounds, fail to hear their suspiration. She accordingly resolved to blow out her lamp, and bearing it in her hand, in its extinguished state, to descend into the kitchen ; and if met by any one in her way, to
to advance her wish to re-illumine it, as her excuse for having quitted her chamber. She now blew out her lamp, and with every caution proceeded to open the door of her apartment, when, to her inconceiv¬ able disappointment, she found it fastened on the outside. The extinction of her own lamp enabled her to perceive a faint glimmering of light which shone through a crevice in the door, and acquainted her that the holy father had not extinguished his. But if she- were now to awaken him, and even found him inclined to serve her, of what use could his sympathy be under the present circumstances? More than ever alarmed by the precau¬ tion of the bolted door, which she could not doubt to be a caution used by her guards for her security, she opened her casement, in the faint hope of descrying some means of effecting her escape from thence ; but she found it raised consider¬ ably higher above the level of the earth g 3 than
than she had believeel it to be, and the light of a rising moon enabled her to per¬ ceive that it was placed immediately above a rushing stream, on the waves of which danced the beams of the silvery planet. Wretched beyond expression, and al¬ most hopeless of relief—in a state of mine! scarcely conscious of its actions, she cast herself upon the bed ; and here, in agony of heart, she called, in smothered tones, upon Vincentio and Lipardo, to come to her rescue, unmindful how fatile were her stifled shrieks and bursting sighs. In the fervency of grief and Christian hope, she addressed herself to the Univer¬ sal Distributor of events, and her address was followed by a short-lived calm, in which nature seemed to have exhausted ail her powers. To this feeling gradually succeeded an absence of recollection, the joint efíect of misery and fatigue, and a faint slumber stole over her senses ; but it was not accompanied by the refreshing balm of undisturbed repose. She imagin¬ ed
ed herself in the Castello Alfonta— believ¬ ed that she saw Vincentio bleeding under the poniard of the marchese —herself as¬ sailed by his ruffian touch, and fainting beneath his brutal menaces. In vain did she call for rescue—" Vincentio ! save me, Vincentio!" burst unanswered from her quivering lips. Vincentio came not, and the tyrant of her fate caught her in bis- loathsome arms. At this juncture terror burst the bands of sleep, and awaking, she started up wildly on the bed ; her eyes rested upon a light which gleamed by her side, and thence wandered to a dusky figure, in whose hand the light was held. She gazed an instant on the countenance—" Shield me í protect me, Heaven, from the mar¬ chese di Valdetti í or in thy mercy snatch me hence!" burst frantically from her lips; for in the person of the figure now bend¬ ing over her, she beheld the tall and com¬ manding form-—the pale and impressive visage—the piercing eye, and the raven α 4 locks
locks which characterized the dreaded mar¬ chese. " ln the name of Heaven, why does my presence thus alarm you ?" asked the object of her terror : " I intend you no harm. í am the holy man who this even¬ ing passed through your chamber to the bed provid——" " Oh, monster of deceit and iniquity !" Paulina interrupted him by ejaculating, *' I see—I perceive the infamy which you have practised towards a defenceless being ! Oh, thou wretch without a heart ! instant¬ ly quit me, or the only resource left me from your tyranny shall be joyfully flown to;" and whilst speaking, she elarted to¬ wards the casement, and throwing open the sash, gave unequivocal proof of the w T ild intention which was passing in her mind. The lamp dropped from the hand of the friar ; he ran to Paulina, and clasping her forcibly in his arms—" Whoever thou art," he exclaimed. " oh, listen to me, and let
let not a false imagination be the cause of thy destruction ! If I am the marchese di Valdetti, greatly as I am perplexed to di¬ vine how I can be known to thee------" The struggles of Paulina to free herself from his grasp increased, and as he pressed her more strictly in his arms, in his at¬ tempts to withdraw her from the window, shrieks, long and piercing, issued from her lips, mingled with the detesteel name of Di Valdetti. In the course of a few seconds, the door of the chamber was burst open, and a mot¬ ley group, consisting of the various inha¬ bitants of the house, rush eel in ; but fore¬ most darted forward the young man whom Paulina had, at her entrance, observed seated in a disconsolate position by the kitchen fire-—" Who names the marchete di Valdetti?" he exclaimed: "if he be here, let him stand forward—I demand to see him !" " The marchese di Valeletti is not here," replied Philippo " he is safe enough at с 5 his
his own Castello ; but,'* stepping forward, and addressing Paulina, " what has alarm¬ ed you," he added, " that we have all been disturbed by------" At this instant his eye fell on the figure from which the alarm of Paulina w r as pro¬ ceeding, and after gazing a few moments on the countenance of Giraldo—" What is this ?" he said. " The marchese himself," fal teri ngly pronounced Giraldo. " Your excellency would have done well to have forewarned us of this^ he added. " The marchese himself!" repeated the young man. " Well met, marchese ; long- have I sought )ju, and Heaven is at length propitious to my wishes. My name is Julio—a foundling, laid at the gate of a monastery in the city of Padua, and thence——" And here, as if an electric shock had convulsed his senses, he suddenly paused, and fixing his eyes, with a look of inde¬ scribable emotion, on the features of the being
being whom he was addressing-—" I can¬ not be mistaken," he solemnly pronoun¬ ced; " you are—-you must be the pil¬ grim who once, in a mysterious man¬ ner, addressed himself te> me when a boy at school, and since that period visited me once by night, at an inn near Rome." For the space of a few seconds, the ap¬ parent friar gazed, in expressive silence, on the countenance of Julio ; a tear started into his eye, and in tremulous accents he said—" This is, indeed, an unexpected meeting ; but this is not a place for con¬ versation : retire with me to some private apartment." " Why, we have been nicely deceived," ejaculated Philippo, addressing his com¬ panion. " I'll swear this priest is not the marchese, our master: the voice is not his. You are not his excellency the marchese Alberto di Valeletti—are you, father ?" " Indeed I am not Alberto eli Valdetti/' was the reply of the person addressed ; and motioning to Julio to follow him, he was g в proceeding
proceí ding towards the door of the cham¬ ber, when Paulina, rushing forward, cast herself upon her knees between them, and exclaimed—" Oh, pity my defenceless state ! rescue me nom these my enemies ! I am not what I appear, but a weak and suffering woman-—betrayed—stolen from my friends-—abused by------" Her tears choked her farther utterance» Philippo and Giraldo both stepped for¬ ward to contradict her assertions, and to endeavour to force her from the spot. Julio darted between the suppliant and her foes, and in a voice of hasty, but impres¬ so e reeling—" Your features are familiar to me," he said ; " tell me, what is your name ?" " 1 am Paulina, the niece of the signor Urbino di Cavetti," was the reply. " The friend, the cousin of Valeria ?" demanded Julio. " Oh, yes, yes !" ejaculated Paulina, " wretchedly lallen into the toils of tlie marchese di Valdetti." " Heaven
" Heaven has now ihen placed it in my power," criée! Julio, " to confer a service on tlie house of Di Cavetti, as some slight reparation of the evil which it owes to my hand. I bless the chance with which it has presented me. Fear nothing, my elear Paulina," he added ; " with my life I will protect you." Then, turning to her guards, he said—" Quit this place instantly, nor dare to return into it at the peril of your existence !" " Why, who are you," exclaimed Phi¬ lippo, ' ť who elare thus to interfere with the commands anel concerns of the mar¬ chese di Valeletti ?" " Or what has persuaded you that we are such poltroons as to fear your threats ?" ejaculated Giraldo. " We have a solid argument or two to offer you 1 j fore we yield. Run to the chamber where we slept, Philippo, and bring hither our swords ; their eloquence may be more effective than ours." Philippo instantly prepared to follow his
his directions, and Julio darting forward, and placing himself before the door, in order to prevent his quitting the chamber, spoke thus—" Hold an instant, and hear me ! If I were dealing with men, I should endeavour to prevail with them by the arguments of truth and reason ; but as the horror which this helpless being, to whose rescue the hand of Heaven has guided me, argues you to be the hired bravoes of a villains licentious will, I shall treat you as it becomes every man, who possesses the feelings of a human being, to deal with those wdio bring contempt upon their own species by their disgraceful actions. You heard me last night mention that I was desirous of procuring an interview wdth the marchese di Valdetti; I appre¬ hended to find him a being of the nature wdiich you, his adherents, have sufficiently proved him ; and thus forewarned by in¬ stinct, I provided myself for encountering any reception he might give me. These," he added, drawing a pistol from each poc¬ ket,
ket, 6t once intended to have forced a con¬ fession from the tongue of your employer, shall now be directed to a more beneficial purpose—the preservation of an innocent female, inhumanly trampled upon by that sex w T hich nature ordained to be the guar¬ dians of her weakness. Instead of com¬ manding you to leave the chamber, I now direct you to remain, till I permit you to retire; I have business with you yet; anel by the sacred blood of my Bedeemer, I swear, that he who first attempts to leave the place dies upon the spot !" " My pride ! my glory ! my Julio ! my son !" exclaimcel the supposed friar, flying as he spoke towards Julio, and clasping him to his breast, " I can no longer con¬ ceal myself from thee, thou reward of all my sufferings! thou balm of all my woes! oh ! call me father, ane! overwhelm me with the bliss of that ecstatic sound !" "My father! thou my father!" ejrfil¬ iated Julio; "oh, Provielence! how im¬ penetrable to the narrow limits of human comprehension
comprehension are those labyrinths through which it is thy will to produce a revelation of the truth! though what I listen to ap¬ pears almost incredible to my bewildereel senses, there is a pulse which beats within my heart, that throbs with joy anel with conviction."' The pilgrim again cast himself into the arms of Julio, and for a few moments a si¬ lence, more affecting and expressive than the most laboured eloquence, ensued.
CHAP-
CHAPTER V.
W ľ know uluit we aie, but know not и hat W t ni'iy f,f --------- 1 liupe all will be well. ------We пиЫ be ¡nudit. Hamlet, During the time that the scene just re¬ corded was passing between the newly- found son and father, Philippo anel his companion, although not unobservant of the discovery which had been made, haei been conversing together in whispers, and Giraldo, interrupting Julio, who was be¬ ginning to propose to his father such in* quirics as were the natural consequence of the surprise with which he had just been affectée!, said—" Permit me, signor, to say a few words to you : I am sure it has been far from us to coneluct ourselves un¬ handsomely towards the young signora; I am certain she must vouch for us, that we
we both behaved towards her with the greatest civility." " To what purpose is this declaration ?" demanded Julio. « Why, signor," replied Giraldo, " after what has just happened, we dare never re¬ turn to the marchese, as his vengeance would, in all probability, deprive us of our lives, for having failed in a business which he had entrusted to our execution ; and though we have been for a consider¬ able time his servants, especially myself he has always kept us so poor, in order that when he wished to engage us in the performance of any secret transaction, his bribes might the more readily win our services, that w r e have not the means of flying from him." Tempted by this confession on the part of Giraldo to address him, Paulina step¬ ped forward, and said—" Since you can¬ not now apprehend an increase of the mar- chese's displeasure from any disclosure which you may make concerning him, I beseech
beseech you to acquaint me whether Vin¬ cén tio, and his father Lipardo, have escaped his fury ?" It was a question, Giraldo replied, which he was unable to answer ; his companion, he added, might perhaps be able to sa¬ tisfy her, as he was sometimes in the ha¬ bit of sharing a greater portion of the mar- chese's confidence than himself. Philippo's features betrayed that he was in possession of the information required; his countenance underwent several chan¬ ges, and at length—" No, I will not be- bray my trust," he said; " I am sure I didn't wish the young signora any evil, nor was any intended to her, to my know¬ ledge ; but it is cursed hard to meet with such a disappointment as I have done, and to have been foileel in the execution of my business, in the unexpected manner I have, when I was to have receiveel a hun¬ dred pieces of gold from the marchese on my return to the Castello." " I think," said Paulina, gazing ear¬ nestly
nestly upon Julio as she addressed him, *' that I cannot be mistaken in supposing you that Julio to wlum the heart of Va¬ leria di Cavetti ------" ťí I am the same Julio," he interrupted her by exclaiming; "and for her sake, and those to w hom she is allied, bound in faith and honour to render you every as¬ sistance which my abilities can be capable of affording you." ** I beseech you then—I implore you," returned Paulina, " use any arguments that will prevail with this man to unfold to me the fate of Vincentio ; I am but young a wife, yet it is for a husband's safety that I express my anxiety." " Hear me !" pronounced Julio, address¬ ing the vassals of Di Valdetti ; " although you behold me in this plain attire, I am perhaps as able to reward your services as the marchese. You are aware that I have at this moment absolute power over your actions; be wise then for yourselves ; yield the information of wliich you have con¬ fessed
lesed yourselves in possession, and trust to my generosity in paying you for the communication ; and let me solemnly ad¬ vise you, in the temper of mind in which you just now behold me, not to provoke me to force from you the intelligence which I demand, or to punish your obstinacy in withholding it." " If I were sure of the hundred pieces of gold," replied Philippo, " it's all the same to me from whose hand I receive it." " I could satisfy you, if it were my in¬ clination to do so," replied Julio ; " for when I expect to meet knaves, as I pre¬ dicted would be the case, if I visited the Castello Alfonta, I always take care to be provideel with the different weapons by which they are to be combatted ; but if the gold were once in your possession, what security have I for your speaking the truth?" " Why, signor," returned Philippo, " I should have no temptation to deceive you, and it is never worth a man's while to lie for
for nothing; and if even I w<?re to at¬ tempt to play tne dumb game with you, you have pretty good security in your hands for either keeping me dumb for ever, or making me speak out plainly, which you choose." Julio's heart acknowledged that there was some truth in the arguments of Phi¬ lippo ; and the streaming eyes of Paulina, eagerly bent on his countenance, appeareel so irresistibly to plead for the information which she desired to gain being at any price procured her, that he was on the point of drawing from his pocket ihe bribe by which it w r as to be purchased, when the attention of all was arrested by a loud knocking at the outer door of the house, accompanied by voices which im¬ patiently demanded admittance. The light of day was already in the heavens, and Paulina flew to the casement, in the hope of descrying from it who were the claimants for entrance ; but the door was not within her view. Various
Various sensations and conjectures passed in the mind of each, whilst they listened to the opening of the door by the hostess, and endeavoureel in vain to catch the short conversation which ensueel between her and the persons whom she had admitted into the house. In the course of a few minutes the step of the hostess was heard upon the stairs, and when she had nearly reached the top—" Here is an old woman below," she cried, " who requires instantly to see the young signor who slept in that chamber last night." Unable to divine who it could be that sought her, but cherishing the hope of meeting a friend in the inquirer, Paulina ran down the stairs, and beheld a form standing on the opposite side of the kit¬ chen, which, though the face was at that instant averted, immediately drew from her lips the exclamation of—·" Ricarda !" for the dress of that ancient female 1 , as has already been remarked, was too sin¬ gular to be mistaken. The figure in¬ stantly
stantly turned towards her, and to her surprise and joy she beheld that the habi¬ liments of Ricarda now enveloped the per¬ son of her husband Lipardo. " Blessed be Heaven ! my dear lady and daughter !" he exclaimed, clasping her to his breast, " that I hold you once more in my arms ! Thanks be to God that I have overtaken you on this spot, or it might have been too late------" " For what ?" ejaculated Paulina. " Oh ! no matter now," answered Li¬ pardo ; " praised be the Virgin ! all dan¬ ger of evil is over, and before I can ex¬ plain matters to you, you must give me time to recover my breath, for I have run like a roebuck from the Castello. Paulo has been my companion—there he stands," he added, pointing to him as he spoke ; " didn't he do his business very well? he is an honest lad, and has bound me his friend for ever ; and I hope his informa¬ tion was of service to you ?" " But,"
" But," said Paulina, " you have not told me of Vincentio ?'* " That," replied Lipardo, " is because I am quite easy that he is as safe as I can wish him ; he is in the Castello, to be sure, and in the custody of the marchese, but he dare as soon swallow his own poniard as touch a hair of my son's head ; so let that assurance keep your heart at rest. But where are the rascals who had you in charge from the marchese ? I must treat with them before I can say another word to you." Paulina hastily explained to him the position of affairs in the chamber above, and, with an emotion of the deepest agita¬ tion taking possession of his features, he instantly proceeded thither :—whither, be¬ fore we accompany him, it is necessary that we should give a detail of such cir¬ cumstances as had taken place at the Cas¬ tello Alfonta since the night of Paulina's marriage with Vincentio. The marchese di Valdetti was a mmk vol. ш. и whose
whose life had been replete with schemes. devices, and nefarious transactions of everv nature, which had rendered it indispens¬ ably necessary for him to employ agents. who had, of course, participated in his se¬ crets, and thence become acquainted with the- springs by which his heart could be movevi. The principal of these was li¬ pardo di Moralta, his former major-domo, anei now his steward; but his agency had only been employed in one transaction, of a nature far exceeding in its weight and importance such every -dav matters as were confided by the marchese to any ready in¬ strument in whom a temporary confi¬ dence could be placed. The secret wliich reposed in the breast of Lipardo w r as one which involved the fortune, the fame, and the life of the marchese : and the secu¬ rity with which he believed liim to have guarded it, had raised him in his opinion far above the agents of his minor concerns ; and the cause which had kept Lipardo a stranger for the last twenty years to the circumstances
circumstances of the marchese's life was, that he had constantly resided at the Cas¬ tello Alfonta, whilst the marchese had lived alternately in Florence anel Venice, seldom visiting his estate, and when he by chance did so, remaining upon it only for a very few elay s together. Amongst those who \iewcd the prime favourite of the marchese with the most jealous eye, was he who himself stood se¬ cond in the partialitv of 1 k· marchese; and this was Philippe», who had been nearly as long in his seri ice as Lipardo^ and had lived constantly about his person; and when any transaction, in the execution of which he required assistance, was entrusted to him by his employer, the objects whom he selected as the participators of his dis¬ graceful exertions were Giraldo, and an¬ other man named Duretti, v. ho having both been for a considerable time the ser¬ vants of the marchese, necebsarily shared a portion of his pretended esteem. The marchese di Valdetti had never π 2 been
been married, but he had been a most fervid and universal admirer of the sex, ol w hom not a few hae! been left to be¬ wail the witchery of his tongue, and of his purse. From the first moment of his beholding Paulina on one of his rides near tlie farm of Sancho eli Borges, he became énamourée! of her person, and reserved, if possible, to possess her. He was the su¬ preme of the territory on which he resided, and consequently had no immediate inter¬ ference of the law to dread, where he was himself the distributor of justice ; the in¬ jured might indeed refer their cause to a higher tribunal ; but e\en there his political influence, and exalted situation in life, had on similar occasions so frequently enabled him to throw almost-insurmountable de¬ lays and obstacles in the way of his oppo¬ nents, that his inclination had become his sovereign rule of life, and Paulina was, without hesitation, doomed to be his vic¬ tim. He inquired who she was, and learnt her
her to be the niece of the signor Di Ca¬ vetti, once an eminent physician, who haei retired from Venice with his family, to pass the evening of his days in seclusion from the w r orld. Upon this information he paused ; it vibrated upon a secret chord in his heart ; and he changed his purpose from the dishonour of Paulina into the resolution of elevating her to the rank of his wife. He accordingly issued his com¬ mands to Philippo, and by the joint ex¬ ertions of himself and his eo^pam 011 · 4 - Paulina was transportée! to the Castello Alfonta. It was not fill within an hour of the time at which she w r as expected to arrive, that the maichese communicated the in¬ formation of what was passing to Lipardo, and commanded preparations of the hand¬ somest nature to be made for her recep¬ tion. Lipardo, who satisfied himself with the lucrative situation of wdiich he was already in posssesion, and with the place which я 3 he
he held in the esteem of the marcbese, had always resolved not to run the hazard of diminishing the favour which now shone on him, by interfering with his actions, heard his commands without a reply, anel was departing to execute them, when the marchese rmdîed him into his presence, and said—" Two material points 1 had for¬ gotten to mention to you ; the first, that the young person whose arrival I am mo- mentarilv awaiting, is not brought hither for the mimose of seduction; the other, that I wish your wife to be her occasional companion, and to treat her with all the delicacy due to a female who possesses my most honourable esteem." The words of the marchese were fre¬ quently so ambiguous, and his actions so indescribable, that they could only be de¬ veloped through the progress of time ; and Lipardo, with a slight answer, proceeded to make the arrangements for which he had received instruction. But when, on the morning following the arrival of Paulina
Paulina at the Castello, Ricarda was sum¬ moned by the marchese into his presence, and charged by him to use her utmost en¬ deavours to induce his guest to the friend¬ ly acceptance of hit hanel in marriage, at the same moment an unexpected disco¬ very, and a subject of perplexing consi¬ deration, were opened to the mind of Li¬ pardo. In Paulina he found the very fe¬ male to whom his son Vincentio had for some time past been declaring his heart devoted, anel imploring his permission te> marry; and in the intention which the marchese had declared of becoming a hus¬ band, he saw him prepared to elissolve the very tie by which he was bound to him for his past services, and a continuation of his fidelity. Whatever the secret which rested mutually in the hearts of the mar¬ chese and his stewarti, the terms upon wdiich it had been maintained sacredly in¬ violate by the latter, were, that the mar¬ chese shoulel lead a life of celibacy, and at u 4 his
his death bequeath his title and estates to Lipardo's son, Vincentio, in quality of his nephew, in which character Vincentio had from his infancy been educated and consi¬ dered. Ilicarda, in surprise, imparted to her husband the injunctions wdiich she had received from the marchese, and required his advice how to act. Λ short interval of reflection determined Lipardo, and he directed her to follow the instructions which she had received, and to confide the rest to him. Li nardo soon found an ormortunity of — t - — - - tl conversing privately wdth the marchese, and reproaching him with the breach of articles, towards which he was proceeding. The marchese replied, that he was urged to the step which he was about to take, by a circumstance so intimately connected with his peace of mind, so entangled with an occurrence of which the constant recol¬ lection laboured painfully in his breast, that
that its achievement could alone procure him relief for a tortured imagination, and besought his sympathy. The concise reply of Lipardo was, that if Vincentio were to be cut off from the inheritance which had been promised him, or at least to be iijbjected to the chance of an heir arising from the marriage-bed of the marchese, that he must be indemni¬ fied for his loss, by the receipt of ten thou¬ sand pieces of gold, before the union could be permitted to take place. Extravagances of every description, and, not least, of the gaming-table, had lately so much reduced the finances of the mar¬ chese, that the curtailments in his usual state and luxuries, ίο which he was now compelled to submit, had driven him to his estate, where his retrenchments would not be observed by the eye of the con¬ temptuous world. Between the two points which agitated his breast, anxiety and fear mutually assailed him on either hand; and the only determination to η 5 which
which he could bring himself was, at all events, not to accede to the demand of Lipardo, till he had gaineel the consent of Paulina to become his wife ; and with his proceedings to this end we are already ac¬ quainted. The kindness shown by Li pai do and his wife to Paulina was, as may readily be imagined, at the instigation of Vin¬ centio, to whom it was difficult for them to refuse any request, but that of their sanction to his union with Paulina; to which they could offer no other objec¬ tion, than the hope with which they had ever buoyed themselves up, of his one day forming one of the most exalted al¬ liances i a Italy, in his character of the marchese di Valdetti. But the discovery of the scars on the person of Paulina opened to them a secret, not less impor¬ tant than unexpected; and the sole and darling object of their wishes now was the completion of that union on which they had before frowned. Rivals,
Kivals, İn every station, are naturally jealous of each other, and Philippo had long looked with an evil eye upon lipar¬ do; he saw the steward raised to a situa¬ tion of the first respectability, and living in a happy independence, when he had once known him by no means his superior in the advantages of fortune; whilst he, who considered himself to have done as much to deserve the liberal rewards of the marchese, was still in the humble trammels of an ordinary domestic, and so involved with his employer, that he could not hope readily to effect a change of situation. A note, conveyed in a bunch of flowers to Paulina, and which she conjectured to have been written by Lipardo, had warned her not to attempt a second interview with Vincentio at the window of her clo¬ set, as they had been observed; by Li¬ pardo it had indeed been written, and he had been urged to what he had done, by a suspicion which he entertained of Phi¬ lippo having gained some knowledge of H 6 their
their meeting. The questions asked by Vincentio of the servants of the Castello, concerning the stranger within its wails, had given rise to some ideas in the breast of Philippo, which determined him to watch what was passing on the part of Lipardo, his wife, and son, eagerly de¬ siring, with the natural avidity of all jea¬ lous and interested minds, to find some opportunity of aggrandizing himself upon the downfall of others. The long, dark, and intricate passages, adapted to stratagem and concealment, leading from the inhabited parts of the Castello to the prison of Paulina, favoured the lurking curiosity of Philippo ; and he descried enough to ascertain that Lipardo and his wife were friends to the prisoner, towards wdiom he could not doubt them to be kindly affected by sympathy in the feelings of their son, whose emotion at learning Paulina to be an inhabitant of the place, had sufficiently disclosed the sentiments which he bore her. On the arrival
arrival of the priest wlio had bet v n selected for uniting the fates of Vincentio and Paulina, on a pretended visit to Lipardo, and understanding that he was to pass the night at the Castello, a conviction of the truth flashed upon his mind, and he judged it expedient immediately to place himself in the road to better fortune, by disclosing his suspicions to the marchese. The event of his information, in leading the marchese to the prison of Paulina, at the critical moment at which he appeared before the astonished group which it con¬ tained, has already been described. A few moments recovered the marchese from the emotion into which he had fallen, at the sight of the scars upon the person of Paulina; and starting from the arms of his attendants, Giraldo and Duretti, he commanded them to seize Vincentio, and redeem from him the weapon which he had just wrested from his hand ; and call¬ ing upon Philippo, who had hitherto been guarding the door, to enter, and prevent the
the interruption of Lipardo, he snatched the senseless Paulina in his arms, and bore her to a chamber in a distant part of the Castello. After no inconsiderable struggle, the adherents of the marchese succeeded in so far overpowering Vincentio and his father, who possessed only the single poniard of the latter for their defence, as to inclose them within the prison, and fasten upon them the door. The aged priest, alarmed at the tumultuous contest, had fled the spot, and Giraldo, encountering him in one of the passages, conducted him to an apartment, to await the decision of the marchese upon his conduct. When Philippo rejoined the marchese, he commanded him to go and watch by the side of Paulina ; and when she reco¬ vered from the state of insensibility in which he had left her, to address to her a few words, calculated to dispel lier appre¬ hensions, by leading her to believe that she had been conveyed to the spot where she
she now was by her friends, Lipardo and Vincentio ; and when he had done so, to return to him for fin ther orders. Philippo obeyed, and once more re¬ turning to the marchese, found him cm- ployed in writing, which when he had concluded, he put his epistle into the hand of Duretti, who was 'm waiting by his side, and directed him to take one of the fleetest horses from the stables, and to use every expedition in proceeding to Venice, and delivering the letter which he had given to him, according to the superscrip¬ tion with which it was inscribed. When Duretti was gone, the marchese addressed Philippo, mquiring of him if he were acquainted with any house at the distance of about a league from the Cas¬ tello, where it might be possible for him to procure accommodation for Paulina, his comrade Giraldo, and himself, during the ensuing night? Philippo replied, by informing him of a house of public entertainment, little fre¬ quented,
quentcd, belonging to a widow named Bellini, whe v e he conceived they might be safeiy lodged. " About the hour of twilight, then, you shall depart," answered the marchese; ŕ€ but as it might create suspicion, if a fe¬ male were seen in your society, or even by one of those unaccountable channels through which intelligence is so often found to be conveyed, lead to a disclosure of the past to her uncle, Di Cavetti, you must persuaelc her to equip herself as one of the armed vassals of my Castello, whom, from many causes, it is this day my in¬ tention to assemble. To your comrades speak of her, in her disguise, as a relative of yours, w r hom I have admitted into the ranks of my adherent«: ; and for this rea¬ son, more imperion ily than any other, because it is impossible to decide which amongst my servants, with the exception of yourself, Giralda, and Duretti, may re¬ main faithful to me, and which incline to the side of Lipard n ; and impossible as I conceive
conceive the escape of either himself or Vincenti© to be, ï do not wish them to gain any intelligence of Paulina, till I judge it expedient to release them from their present confinement." Philippo remarked, that he believed he might, with the greatest facility, impose himself upon Paulina for an emissary from her friends, had he but any token whbh she would recognize to be Lipardo's, and which he might adduce to her as an evi¬ dence of his truth. The 'marchese agreed with him in opi¬ nion ; and a sufficient number of his do¬ mestics having been s^nt, under the gui¬ dance of Philippo, to the prison, to defy the cjfforts of the captives for liberty, Li- pardo and his son were forced into sepa¬ rate cePs, and the ring, with which Phi¬ lippo subsequently presented Paulina, taken forcibly from the finger of the steward. The day was passed in assembling those vassals who were compelled to bear arms at
at the call of the marchese, who appeared himself agitated with some apprehension extending beyond the boundary of present circumstances; aue! desirous of winning the hearty of those whose exertions he was suspicious of soon requiring in the sup¬ port of his cause, the marchese distributee! freely to his soldiers, by the hanel of his confidant, that animating draught for which they falsely believed themselves in¬ debted to Philippo and his supposée! ne¬ phew. Every attention, but their restoration to liberty, was paid to Lipardo and his son, for the heart of the marchese silently confessée! him not so great a conqueror as he was willing outwardly to profess him¬ self; and in 'he course of the afternoon, an imperious demand, on the part of Li¬ pardo. to behold Di Yakletri, brought him to his prison. The marchese expected him to speak of Paulina and his son ; but he perceived him standing against the wall, with his arms folded together, and a serene
a serene expression beaming on his coun¬ tenance.»—" It is not for mvself, nor any 'e connected with me," said Lipardo, ..hat I have required this interview·—I only beg to inquire of you, whilst you de¬ tain me a captive, what becomes of my prisoners ?" A deadly paleness overspread the coun¬ tenance of the marchese, his lips quivered, and he replied— i£ Give me the keys of their prison, and I will assume the forti¬ tude to------" he hesitated. " There are no key T s connected with the spot which they inhabit," replied Lipardo: " besides, you are well aware that you are not yourself acquainted where that spot is situate; anel Avere the situation disclosed to you, the entrance could not be di covered without my instructions.'' " Will you not, in such a case as this, impart to me your knowledge?" demand¬ ed the marchese. " Never! never!" emphatically pro¬ nounced Lipardo. " Then
" Then the prisoners must die!" fab teringly pronounced the marchese. " If it is your will, they must," rejoined Lipardo; " you know you are absolute." " í am wretched!" ejaculated the mar¬ chese. " A combination of circumstances drives me to distraction !" " A just dominion over your passions might once have spared you those feel¬ ings/' calmly replied Lipardo. " It is too late to comment on the past," rejoined the marchese; " the present is almost too much for patient endurance! You will not then oblige me, Lipardo?" a I have already told you—no !" sternly aimvered the steward. The marchese slapped his palm in ago¬ ny against his forehead ; then, after a few moments of hurried reflection—" I will see you again at midnight—perhaps in the course of a few hours," he said, and quitted tl·'* cell. Whilst this was passing in the Castello, Philippo, wdio had been regaling such of his
his comrades in arms as had, at the com¬ mand of the marchese, already mounted guard, with the treat of branely, of which he had taken the credit to himself, and his nephew, who was supposed to have enter¬ ed the Castello unnoticed, or at least un¬ known, amidst the bustle of military pre¬ paration, which had brought many other strangers to the same spot, had retired with Giraldo behind a low buttress, where he was communicating to him the plan in which he was to participate, as arranged between the marchese and himself. It so chanced, that on the other side of the buttress, lay one whom his share of the liquor would soon have lulled into the for- getfulness of sleep, had not his curiosity, exciteel by accidental expressions which he overheard, as they fell from the lips of Philippo, kep' him waking ; and this was no other than Paulo, the relation of the miller of Molina, whom we have already heard warm in the praise of Vincentio, whose favourite domestic he was, and to whom
whom many an act of kindness had strong¬ ly a "ached him. Acquainted with the outline of what was passing in the Cas¬ tello, the broken sentences of—" Paulina in a soldier's habit—pass out unsuspected after it is dark—-cottage of the widow Bel¬ lini—believes me the emissary of Lipardo, as I gave her his ring," convinceel him what was practising against the idol of his beloved master's heart ; and unable to con¬ vey intelligence to him, he formed the plan of acquainting Paulina with the de¬ ception of which she was the innocent dupe. Accordingly, assuming the appear¬ ance of intoxication, and awaiting the ar¬ rival of Paulina and her guide at the pe>rt- cullis, he entered boldly upon his attempt ; and as the success of almost every endea¬ vour depends upon the courage with which it is undertaken, his efforts were crowned with success. At the last interview to which Philip¬ po was summoned with the marchese pre¬ viously to his departure from the Castello, he
he commanded him to avoid returning di¬ rect answers to any questions ael vaneed by Paulina, and to remain with her at the house of the widow Bellini, a particular di¬ rection to which he obtained from him, till he either saw him, or heard from him, which he intended should be on the fol¬ lowing morning. Paulina and her guards having crossed the drawbridge, the marchese visited the aged priest, and after a severe reprimand for the step of which he had been guilty, commanded him to quit the Castello ; and this done, the order which had hitherto subsisted—that males only were to be al¬ lowed to pass the drawbridge, was re¬ voked, and a command issued that none but females should now have the liberty of crossing it; and immediately after this mandate had been published, domestics were sent to give enlargement to Lipardo ; but Vincentio was still detained a pri¬ soner. Lipardo
Lipardo smiled inwardly at the motive for which the marchese had permitted him his liberty, and immediately retired to his private apartment ; at the door of wdiich, soon after, appeared Paulo, just re¬ lieved from a duty of twelve hours, who requested to see him. He was admitted ; and his communication being made, Li¬ pardo expressed his gratitude for his kind¬ ness in the warmest terms, and directed him to call upon him again in the course of two hours When Paulo was gone, Lipardo sent, to request an audience of the marchese; it was immediately grant¬ ed ; and on his entering the apartment— ** Have you visited your prisoner since your own enlargement ?" eagerly inquired Di Valdetti. " Being again at liberty myself," re¬ plied Lipardo, " I alone am now account¬ able for whatever befalls them ; you are relieved from the charge. The reason of my having desired to see you, is to ask the
the liberty of my son, and an interview' for myself with his wife." *' To-morrow any thing you please shall be complied with," answered the mar¬ chese, " but to-night-------" He hesitated. " Nothing," said Lipardo, completing the sentence. The marchese did not speak, and Lipardo resumed thus.—" I accept your silence as a negative to my request Marchese, I have never yet spoken harshly to you, but the present moment nerves my heart, and strings my tongue ; if you have the hardiness to raise but u finger of injury against my son, from that instant dread the resentment of his father's power !" and having uttered these words, he haughtily quitted the apartment. No message recalled him into the pre¬ sence of the marchese ; and at the appoint¬ ed time Paulo returned to his apart¬ ment. " What is the word of the night ?" ask¬ ed Lipardo, on his entrance. " Treason, signor," answered Paulo. VOL. III. I « It
64 It is well," replied Lipardo. " About the hour of three in the morning be near the portcullis ; and when you behold a fe¬ male crossing the drawbridge, which will be myself, disguised in the habiliments of my wife, for in no other shape can I hope to pass out of the Castello, after the order which has this evening been issued, pre* pare to follow me, for we must depart to¬ gether." " I would do any thing to serve you or the signor Vincentio," answered Paulo ; " but will not my life be in danger, sig¬ nor, for quitting the Castello, since I have been ranked amongst its armed force, without the permission of the marchese ? —Not that I so much value existence on my own account, but I have a poor old father, whose sole dependence is on me, and who would be destitute without me." i£ Fear not," replied Lipardo ; " whilst under my protection, you can have nothing to apprehend from the authority of any one
one within this place. If it were my will, and my time for action were ripe, I would crumble this proud building into frag¬ ments, and humble its haughty possessor with the dust !" Paulo was now depart¬ ing, when Lipardo detained him, by say- inir— " You are certain that it was not be- fore to-morrow morning that the marchese prepared his emissaries to see him, or to hear from him ?" Paulo replied that he w r as certain ; and Lipardo rejoining—" About the hour of three, then, as I before appoint¬ ed, expect to meet me near the portcullis," they parted. AVhen left by Paulo, Lipardo proceed¬ ed to acquaint his wife with his intentions, and to instruct her in what manner to re¬ ply to any inquiries which the marchese might advance to her in his absence ; and the hour of two being arrived, and it be¬ ing ascertained by Ricarda that the mar¬ chese had retired to rest, Lipardo made the necessary exchange in his dress ; and, ι 2 under
under the cloak of his female attire, and his knowledge of the w r ord of the night, he crossed the square without obstruction, and quickly reached the portcullis, where he was punctually met by Paulo, with wliorn he immediately set forw r ard to the house of the widow Bellini. On entering the chamber where Julio was guarding the humbled Philippo and his companion, and the supposed friar was watching with an eye of anxiety over the safety of his long-lost son, Lipardo, ad¬ dressing himself to the father of Julio, said •—" You will scarcely recognize me in this attire, but I am sure you will be glad tG see me, and I never in my life w r as so truly happy to behold you. Had I offered up my most ardent prayers at the present crisis to Heaven, and they had been be- nignly accorded, this meeting had been the grant bestowed upon my wishes." " Mv friend!" exclaimed the friar, "no disguise can conceal you from the pene¬ tration
tration of my eye. —Welcome, welcome I my best friend, Lipardo !" he added, press¬ ing the extended hand of the steward in his ол\ n. Unmindful of the silent sneers, the mut¬ tered threats, and the uncontrollable agi¬ tation of Philippo and Giraldo, Lipardo, addressing Julio, said—"Permit me those pistols"—a request to which, as it was urged by the acknowledged friend of his father, he readily acceded; and when Li¬ pardo had received them at his hands— " Signora Paulina," he continued, " do me the favour to direct Paulo to attend me ; and do you, my friends," he added, turning to Julio and hib father, iC retire to another apartment, and I will immedi¬ ately follow you thither." Paulina had already descended in qne&t of Paulo. Julio and his father prepared to quit the chamber at the request of Li¬ pardo; and as they retired from it, Paulo t n tered. " Look you, Philippo and Giraldo," ι У baid
said the steward ; " your lives are in my power; but I do not wish to shed your blood, unless you are refractory to my commands ; and if you become so, no mer¬ cy shall be shown you. The only coneli- tion upon which you may consider your- •selvcs in safety, is to remain patiently and quietly in this chamber, till I think proper to release you from it. Ishall place Paulo with these pistols at the head of the stair.s, in case you should endeavour to force your way out; and I am too well acquainted with the situation of this house, to appre¬ hend that you should attempt to effect your escape by the window." The culprits, not less indignant at be¬ holding the detested Lipardo the arbiter of their fate, than aggravated at the loss of the reward which Julio had, at the time of his entrance into the house, been on the point of bestowing on theirs began to solicit permission to see the young signor once more ; but Lipardo did not listen to their entreaties ; and having bolted upon them
them the door, he put Paulo in possession of the pistols, and directed him to take his station upon the stairs. Lipardo now proceeded to the apart¬ ment to which Paulina and her companions had retired; and upon his entrance, he immediately discovered that she had been unfolding to them the relation in wdiich he stood to her. *'Oh, Lipardo Г' exclaimed the pilgrim, the moment he observed him, " how T mi¬ raculous are the events of this hour ! The protector of your Vincentio's bride is my son!" " Your son !—your son !" ejaculated Li¬ pardo, clasping his hands together in as¬ tonishment as he spoke, " can it—can it be possible that this is indeed your son ?" He paused a moment; then catching one of the hands of Julio, and pressing it afïec- tionately in his— ťi Welcome ! welcome» youth Í" he added, " not less for thy fa¬ ther's sake than for thine own !" A short interval of expressive silence on i é the
the part of the pilgrim and lipardo, and of doubtful anxiety on that of Julio, fol¬ lowed. Paulina spoke.—" Was it not strange, lipardo," she said, " that my be¬ wildered senses mistook this stranger for the marchese di Valdetti ? and there is a resemblance between them, which makes me still almost incline to believe him so." " Continue to think him so, signora," pronounced Lipardo, ťí anel you will not be deceived." " Oh, my friend, beware !" ejaculated the pilgrim ; " this disclosure------" " Is unattended by danger," replied Li¬ pardo ; i( I am prepared to attest you what you are—-the marchese di Valdetti !" " The marchese eli Valdetti my father!" exclaimcel Julio; " and thou------" he added, in a voice of inquiry. ťť We are a family united beyond the power of fate to solve the bonds that form our coalition," answered Lipardo. " Oh my friend," he continued, addressing the pilgrim, " you have often averred that the bands
bands of friendship could never be drawn too strictly between us ; they are at this hour cemented more strongly than it is pos¬ sible that you can conceive them to be. This day, which has restored to you your long-lost son, has made you parent of a second son, who likewise claims from you the name of father." " Explain this riddle," ejaculated the pilgrim ; " I cannot penetrate your mean¬ ing !" " My son Vincentio," replied Lipardo, " is your son also. My heart was, as you know, ever devoted to you ; you now pos¬ sess my heart and soul. In this lovely being, behold the chain which thus indis- solubly links us to each other; she is the wife of my Vincentio, and your daugh¬ ter !" The scene which folioweel was acted by the feelings, and mocks the insufficiency of the pen to portray it with adequate effect.
15, CHAP.
CHAPTER VI.
I, under fair pretence of friendly ends, And weli-placctl words of glo /лпг courtesy, Bruited «uh reasons лоЬшиЛаичЫе, Wind me mto the гльу- heurt ed man, And IniĽ, İnin into simres. Mit ton, I.IEAYINC» for а while the parties, wdiom we have just seen overwhelmed by the ex¬ tremes of joy and of astonishment, it may not be improper to lay before our readers и recapitulation of past events, in a less interrupted manner than the detail pro¬ ceeded, for the information of Julio and Paulina, from the lips of Lipardo and the marchese ; for as such we must now know r the pilgrim. The marchese Claudio di Valdetti was the father of two children, who were both sons, and twins. To the elder his own name
name of Claudio was given ; the younger was distinguished by the appellation of Alberto, The wife of the marchese was the descendant of a family of the first dis¬ tinction, who had brought him an im¬ mense dower at her marriage, upon which prerogative, added to her exalted birth, she assumed an imperial authority over the ac¬ tions, and almost the thoughts, of her husband. The spirit of the marchese was benevolent, and his temper mild ; he was a man who would sooner submit to an ac¬ knowledged wrong, than er ter into a con¬ troversy for the support of his rights. The marchese, on the contrary, was proud, self¬ ish, and overbearing in her disposition—a woman wdio appeared to nourish a nature which triumphed in every success, accord¬ ing to the struggle by which the victory had been obtained. From the hour of their birth, the per¬ sons of the two boys bore so great a re¬ semblance, that they could scarcely be re¬ cognized from each other, when not seen ι 6 together;
together; and the likeness strengthened progressively with their years. But this si¬ milarity in form and countenance did not extend to their minds; in disposition they were as dissimilar as the extreme of feel¬ ings could render them. Their opposite characters a few words will explain. Clau¬ dio was the gentle prototype of his fa¬ ther's mild anel unassuming temper ; Al¬ berto w r as a strengthened picture of his mother's imperious and unbending soul. As they advanced in years, each natu¬ rally grew in the favour of the parent whom he resembled. With such a strong dis- similarity of temper, it was impossible that the brothers could take delight in the society of each other. Claudio, perceiving the soul of Alberto incapable of being soft¬ ened by friendly argument, retired from the gusts of passion which his advice haei frequently provoked from his lips, and the harsh spirit of Alberto hated Claudio for having ventured to disapprove his con¬ duct. In
In this cold and unsocial intercourse had nearly twenty-one years passed over the heads of the family Di Valdetti, when the marchese was called from his transitory existence upon earth; and from the mo¬ ment of his death, Claudio became expos¬ ed to all those open insults and attacks from his remaining parent and unnatural brother, which their inability to drive him from that succession to which his primo¬ geniture entitled him, created for him in their hearts. Another year passed on, at the expira¬ tion of which the marchesa followed her husband to the grave. The resielence of the late marchese had been alternately at the Castello Alfonta, and at a palazzo which he possessed in Florence : his death had occurred at the Castello, and the pe¬ riod which had intervened between his decease and that of the marchesa, haei likewise been passed there by his sons anel widow. Claudio and Alberto, thus left upon the field
field of life, unprotected by the shield of parental authority, began, in some mea¬ sure, to draw towards each other. Clau¬ dio had ever been desirous of displaying his heart, as a brother's, towards Alberto ; and Alberto, for the present, seemed dis¬ posed to stifle the real feelings of his soul. Claudio was a fervid admirer of the beau¬ ties of nature, and a lover of literature and of the arts, and hence he resolved that the Castello should in future be his constant residence. Alberto, on the contrary, tur¬ bulent in disposition, and a votary of plea¬ sure, existed only in the crowd of a city, and the animating successions of varied society ; and declaring Florence to be the place in which he was most delighted, Claudio requested him, in addition to the fortune which their father had by will be¬ queathed to him, to accept the family pa¬ lazzo in that city, for which he said, that he was certain that he should himself have very little occasion. Alberto accepted the gift with great de¬ monstrations
monstrations of joy, and for a time con¬ ducted himself in the most friendly man¬ ner towards his brother ; for the most un¬ ruly tempers, under the influence of dis¬ pleasure, are not unfrequently found to be the most ostentatious in the display of their satisfaction. Some months after the interment of the marchesa, Alberto, conceiving a sufficient time of seclusion from the world to have been given to her memory, became impa¬ tient to visit Florence, and Claudio, whose temporary presence was required in that city, for the regulation of some of his late father's concerns, agreed to accompany him. For the first few weeks after their arri¬ val, the aflairs which had called Claudio to Florence occupied his time, whilst the hours of Alberto were constantly employ¬ ed in those festivities and gallantries which make up the sum of every day's business, to a young man of an untempered spirit and a welkfílled purse. One
One day, when Claudio was expressing his intention of shortly returning to the Castello Alfonta, Alberto said—" You must not depart till you have given me your opinion of a beautiful girl with whom I have fallen desperately in love." (e Is she in love with you in return?" asked Claudio, smiling. " I hope so," replied Alberto ; " but my acquaintance with her is so short, that I have hardly had time to ascertain. Her name is Camilla di Zelti ; she lives close by the city, with an aunt, who, with her¬ self, are almost the sole surviving branches of a once-noble family fallen into decay; and in the hope of partially reviving their faded splendour, her aunt is unceasingly wearying her to give her hand to a rich old conté, named Del Faressi, a withered gallant, who pants and quivers for a deci¬ sion in his favour, whilst she seems tacitly to pray that some younger adventurer in her cause may relieve her from the fear of wearing the conté's trammels." Alberto,
Alberto, having received a general in¬ vitation to the house of Camilla's aunt, insisted upon introd icing Claudio there. He found Camilla more than answerable to the description which his brother had given of her perfections, and w T as so much charmed with her beauty and conversa¬ tion, that he frequently repeated his visits; and in the course of a short time, it was unequivocally evident that Camilla beheld him with the eye of partiality with which it was the desire of Alberto to be regarded by her, whilst the favourable sentiments which Claudio in return entertained for her, although suppressed by delicacy to¬ wards his brother's passion, were still suffi¬ ciently palpable not to escape the eye of jealousy ; and with a burst of l:e swelling every vein, Alberto accused him of having treacherously undermined him in his af¬ fections. Claudio denied the charge of having en¬ deavoured to supplant him in the heart of Camilla, but, with the truth and candour natural
natural to his undissembling mind, con¬ fessed that she had given rise in his heart to feelings unknown to him before, anel that as Alberto had never yet made to her an open declaration of his passion, and ^~--*4*ощедчзеп11у could not consider himself as her acknowledged suitor, he considered it most satisfactory to each, that their pre¬ tensions should both be laid before her, and her decision cast the die of liappiness. Not without some reluctance, which the flattery of self-love alone enabled him to overcome, Alberto acceded to ClauehVs proposal ; and a petition, in writing, for her hand, was sent to her by each of the brothers, Camilla, it has already been said, had imbibed the liveliest affection for Claudio, almost from the commencement of their acquaintance. Her aunt, who had only desired her union with the conté del Fa¬ ressi as a feeble prop to their declining honours, joyfully listened to the marchese di Valdettľs proposal to lend the giant support
support of his alliance to their fading name; and Claudio was immediately made happy by the permission which w r as grant¬ ed him to consider Camilla as his destined wife. Upon gaining this intelligence, the dis¬ appointment and rage of Alberto—the joint effects of his wounded pride, not less than passion, burst out in the most vio¬ lent and opprobrious epithets, against his more fortunate brother and his chosen bride. At one instant, he vowed imme¬ diate revenge against them both, for his neglected and injured love; at another, he declared them beneath either his recollec¬ tion or contempt ; and at length, in a par¬ oxysm of mind, almost bordering upon frenzy, he quitted Florence, declaring that he would never suffer himself to behold either Claudio, or the object of his affec¬ tions, again. At the expiration of a limited period, Claudio led his lovely bride to the altar, and shortly after conducted her to his Castello»
Castello, at which he had commanded every preparation to be made for her re¬ ception. Two years glided on happily after their marriage, the first of which produced them a son, and the second a daughter, and dur¬ ing which time Alberto was not heard of by them. About the commencement of the third year, a courier one day arrived at the Castello Alfonta, with a letter for the marchese, which he was not a little surprised to find signed by the hand of his brother, and dated from Venice. The con¬ tents also w r ere very opposite to what the peaceably-inclined disposition of Claudio had led him to expect, and almost to fear that they would prove. The sum of his epistle was, " that he re¬ gretted the folly and ungenerous conduct of which he had been guilty at Florence, and that, wishing his brother ίο be con¬ vinced of his repentance, not only from his words, but by an observance of his actions^ he requested his permission to visit
visit him and his marchesa at the Castello Alfonta." Claueiio was not a little gratified by the step which his brother professed himself to have advanced towards the amendment of his temper and his morals, and sent him back a most cordial invitation to come and visit him. At the time appointeel Alberto arrived, like the tempter of Eden, dressed in a fair outside, whilst in the secret recesses of his heart rankled projects of the blackest art and treachery. All the scenes of dis¬ sipation and of gallantry, in which he had been engageel since the hour of his quit¬ ting Florence, had not been able to di¬ minish his passion for Camilla; and by indulging in those ideas which a due obe¬ dience to the mandates of honour woukl have instructed him to banish from hiß thoughts, he wound himself into the de¬ termination of using all his arts for en¬ tangling the marchesa into a return of his caresses. He
He commenced his operations by those wily insinuations wdiich the female to wdiom they are addressed cannot misap¬ prehend ; and Camilla, safe in her own ho- nour ? satisfied herself with imperiously repelling his advances in private, and so conducting herself towards him in public, as not to communicate pain to the heart of her husband, by awakening his sus¬ picions of the villany of his designing bro¬ ther. Thus passed on several weeks, during which the ambiguous Alberto conducted himself in the most specious and friendly manner towards his brother, and during which, the repulses which he daily expe¬ rienced from Camilla determined him to make one final essay to gain the desired object of his soul, or upon the failure of his attempt, to involve the innocent beings with whom the frustration of his wishes rested in irretrievable misery and despair. His plan was deeply laid s and adroitly executed. The apartments usually inha¬ bited
bited by the marchese Claudio and his Camilla in the Castello, were a dining- room, communicating with a library, through whieli was the chamber in which they reposed. On the other side of the dining-room were a sleeping apartment and closet, which had been appropriated to the use of Alberto, and beyond these a chamber occupied by his confidential grooms, who were Philippo and Duretti. On the day appointeel for the trial which he had resolved upon making, Alberto, by design, encountered the major-domo, Lipardo, on the lawn in front of the Cas¬ tello ; and entering into conversation with him—" So, you are still a bachelor, I per¬ ceive," he said ; " I thought long ere this to have founel you united to your favour¬ ite Ricarda, the superintendant of the kit¬ chens." Lipardo replied, that if he were able to maintain a wife, he would undoubtedly not remain long single. " I wish, for учни* sake, I w r ere the lord of
of these domains, instead of my r brother," rejoined Alberto; " I would instantly place you in a superior situation, of which I think that your long services to our fa¬ mily render y r ou highly deserving." Lipardo bow r ed in silence in return to this compliment, and Alberto continued —*' By-the-bye, I know you are acquaint¬ ed with all my Ые father's secrets, anel I wish you one day to shew me the con¬ cealed dungeons beneath the Castello, of the private entrance to which I understand that you alone possess the secret, since the death of my father." " I should imagine," replied Lipardo, " that there could be but little pleasure, signe>r, in visiting places which damps anei darkness must render it disagreeable to enter, and which are of no use in the time of peace." " I must, however, have my curiosity gratified," answered Alberto, and the ap¬ proach of Camilla put a period to the con* versation. In
In the evening, Alberto conducted him¬ self at the supper-table with an assumed hiiarity very foreign to the real tone ofhw agitated spirits; and when the marchesa, who retired early to rest, on account of her being by night, as well as by day, the nurse of her female infant, had repaired to her chamber, Alberto entered into con¬ versation with his brother on many occur¬ rences which had marked some of the most memorable days of their youth, and professing, in the progress of their dis¬ course, to have forgotten the lian d writing of his father, requested Claudio to fetch him a specimen from his writing-desk in the library; and when the unsuspicious dupe of his arts had retired to comply with his demand, he poured into a cup of wine, which had already been filled out by Claudio, a sleeping draught of the strongest nature which could be adminis¬ tered, without endangering the life of the person by whom it was swallowed. vol. in. к When
When Claudio returned, he presented Alberto with a few papers, which exhibit¬ ed the handwriting of their parent upon different occasions ; and Alberto, after hav¬ ing professed to examine them with the utmost attention, proposed to his brother that they should, in silent reverence, drink to tlie memory of him to whom they mu¬ tually owed their existence; and Claudio, instantly complying with his brother's re¬ quest, emptied the prepared cup to the bottom. Alberto still continued to converse gaily, and Claudio, after gradually sinking under the influence of the drug which he had .swallowed, yielded to the infiuence of the soundest sleep The time of action was now arrived for Alberto ; he crept softly to the chamber of the unsuspecting marchesa, and observ¬ ed her sleeping with her infant in her arms. Ife awakened her, and drawing, at the same moment, a dagger from his side,
side, with the fierceness of a monster, he presented to her the alternative of death or dishonour. On perceiving by whom she was ad¬ dressed, the confused exclamations and smothered shrieks erf Camilla for a while rendered him incapable of fixing her at¬ tention to his question; and when she heard his menaces, struggling to avoid the upraised steel, yet cautious not to unfold the arms which clasped her infant to her breast, the dagger of Alberto wounded, first the shoulder, and i m mediate! ν after- wards the neck of the child. At the sight of her infant's blood. Camilla uttered a loud and piercing shriek. " Wilt thou be mine ?" roared out Al¬ berto. " 1 \\ ill sooner die '" replied Camilla. Alberto beare! no more, but plunged his dagger, as he hoped, into her heart. An awful silence of some minutes en¬ sued, during which Alberto employed himself in elragging the senseless form of к S his
his brother into the chamber ; and having cast Mm upon the floor, and placed, the dagger with which he had himself just perpetrated his crime, in his hand, he stained various parts of Claudio's person anel dress with blood, and having washed the damning witness from his own hands, he opened one of the doors leading from the suite of apartments upon the gallery, and called aloud for help and rescue against murder. In the course of a few moments the chamber was filled with various domestics, bearing lights, who found Alberto half fainting, and leaning for support against the door e>f communication between the apartments, and Philippo and Duretti standing near him, the first of whom said, that on hearing the cries of his master Alberto, he had rushed into the chamber, and had arrived there just in time to res¬ cue him from the upraised dagger of Clau¬ dio, who now lay stunned by a blow which
which he had given him, in defeating his attempts upon his brother's life. " He has long been jealous of me," saiel Alberto, " and I have known him to be so : but conscious of mv own innocence. I have forborne to speak my thoughts, or to use security against his ill-placed sus¬ picions. This night, it appears, he had destined for the immolation of his hapless wife and myself, and I can only bless Pro¬ vidence for having sent my faithful ser¬ vants to my timely rescue." An universal tumult now prevailed throughout the Castello, and the extraor¬ dinary intelligence, that the marchese had murdered his wife, flew from tongue to tongue.
к 3
CHAP-
CHAPTEK VII.
------------------------To do a great rignt, Do a little uiong. Ntrchunt of V ι nie e The females flew to the assistance of Ca¬ milla, whilst the males used their endea¬ vours to re\ i\ e the insensible marchese ; and a very short time only had transpired, ere Alberto elirected the major-domo te) be sent to him into a private apartment. Upon the entrance of Lipardo, Alberte) closed the door, and spoke thus— " It can¬ not be requisite for me to declare to yon the anguish with which my heart over¬ flows, af beholding my brother amenable to the laws of his country, for the rash act of which he has just been guilty. I fear there can be very little hope of the mar- chesa's recovery, and even if she shoulel survive,
survive, does there not exist the most in¬ controvertible evidence of his ruffian at¬ tempt upon my life also? He must be found culpable in the eye of justice, and be condemned, at least, to pay the penalty of attempted homicide, if not of murelor. Would to Heaven that it were in my power to rescue him from the ruin and disgrace which arc preparing to overwhelm him ! I think-—I believe that the means are in my power; with your adjunction in my wishes, I am persuaden! that they might be so. I am certain that you ever respected Claudio ; will you then refuse to stretch out to him your sa\ing hanel at this moment of his need?" Lipardo begged him to proceed. " You will rece>llect," he rejoined, " that no longer ago than this morning, I was speaking to you of certain conceaieel vaults beneath the Castello." Lipardo elid recollect; and if he had before entertained a suspicion of the foul conduct of Alberto, in the ambiguous к 4 transaction
transaction of the night, it was infinitely strengthened by the connexion which he was now drawing between his former in¬ quiry, and the present object of his thoughts. " You must be aware," continued Al¬ berto, " that if he is permitted to appear before a judge, condemnation must be the issue of his trial ; the evidence against him, m the persons of my servants, who by their timely interposition so happily pre¬ served my life, is too strong for the voice of a brother singly to counteract ; we can only save him, then, by conveying him to hose hidden vaults, where the eye of man "an never trace him out." " It may indeed be the only way to ;ave him," considered Lipardo, who now relieved that he could clearly penetrate into the views of Alberto; and without dwelling on a part of our history which must be obvious to the reader, as must ilso the motives by which Alberto and he major-domo were actuated in the con¬ duct
duct which they severally pursued, it will suffice to state, that effective means were taken by them for conveying the still-in¬ sensible Claudio into one of the dungeons beneath the Castello, unknown to all hut Lipardo, and his nefarious brother. Enclosing himself within the library with Lipardo, Alberto professée! himself to be passing the night in watching over the senseless form of the marchese, which was believed by the domestics to have been borne to a couch in that apartment ; and here were arranged between them all those plans to which the future was to give birth. Such relief as the inhabitants of the Castello were capable of affording the marchesa, was carefully administered to her, and the flowing of the blood having been staunched, information was brought to Alberto, about the midelle of the night, that she was reviving, and had askeel for her husband. Alberto, in reply, directed that evasive answers should, for the pre¬ sent, be returned tôlier inquiries, and that к 5 they
they should endeavour, if possible, to com¬ pose her to sleep. Early in the morning, taking with him Lipardo, Alberto proceeded to the cham¬ ber of Camilla. They found her not less inclinée! than unable to converse, but still clasping her infant to her breast; and on returning to the library, which they had only quitted for the purpose of visiting the marchesa, Alberto instantlv raised an alarm that the marchese had fled during their absence; and directing the attention of the servants to a window in the library, which he had himself thrown open previ¬ ously to his leaving the apartment, a pur¬ suit after the supposed culprit was in¬ stantly set on foot, in the direction towards which the casement led, and wliich, oť course, proved fruitless; Alberto profess¬ ing to satisfy himself with the confession of Claudio's guilt having been tacitly ac¬ knowledged by him in his flight. The astonishment of the marchese, on awaking from the lethargy into wliich he had
had fallen, may be readily imagined. The lamp, which had been placed by his side, smothered by the surrounding damps, scarcely emitted sufficient light for him to distinguish that there was one burning near him; and when Lipardo at length entered, it was only by his voice that he recognized whom he was addressing : but it was not long that Lipardo permitted him to continue in his present uncomfort¬ able situation ; Lipardo, w r ho had been the confidential servant of his father, was, as Alberto had imagined, acquainted with many secret recesses within the walls of the Castello, of which his deceased master had given him a knowledge; and he soon found an opportunity of conveying Clau¬ dio to that very apartment in which it was afterwards his fate to ameliorate the lot of his daughter. An explanation quickly took place 1ю- tweeii Claudio and his sincere friend the major-domo; and too well acquainted with the nature, of his brother, to hope that any к 6 btcp.
step, but the one which had been pursued, could preserve to him his existence—over¬ whelmed with gratitude to Lipardo for the interest which !u had taken in his fate, and the promises which he had made to him of protecting his wife and children. till some apt opportunity should present itself for unveiling his wrongs, and proving his innocence to the world—-with a reli¬ gious meekness inherent in his disposi¬ tion, he bent himself before that Supreme Power, under whose influence he consider¬ ed that his enemies were, for some hidden cause, allowed a temporary triumph over his feelings. Not a day had passed, after the transac¬ tion which had reversed the fortune oí' the brothers in the scale of human prosperity, ere Alberto preferred the major-domo to the situation of steward, and fixed upon him a handsome annual stipend, out ot which he was only required to provide* for the necessities of Claudio; and then hasti¬ ly quitting him, lest their being seen too frequently
frequently together should breed suspi¬ cion of a concealed understanding exist¬ ing between them, Alberto appointed to meet him on the ensuing night in the library, and consult with him concerning the future destination of the marchesa and her children. Lipardo went to the library at the time appointed, and was greetetl by tidings which he little expected to meet, Alber¬ to informed him that Camilla, notwith¬ standing the weak state into which they had supposed her to have been thrown by the loss of blood which she had suffered, had still retained sufficient strength to My the Castello, and to convey her infants away with her ; that the time of her flight could not be ascertained, as her absence had been very lately discovered; and all the inhabitants of the Castello solemnly declared themselves unacquainted with her means of escape. Lipardo doubted the words of Alberto ; he believed him accessorv to tlie fate of Camilla,
Camilla, whatever it might be, and threat¬ ened to give up all agency in his affairs, if he did not instantly confess to him the truth. The repeated oaths which Alberto swore of his innocence, did not carry with them so much weight to the heart of Li¬ pardo, as the evident disappointment with which he saw r him affected at the loss of Camilla. He at length maintained the appearance of silent belief, and Alberto seized this opportunity for thus address¬ ing him—" The rew r ards which I have al¬ ready conferred on you, for your kindness to my unfortunate brother, are trifling to those with which it is my intention here¬ after to remunerate yon ; but I have also another service to require at your hands. As you have already succoured the father, do not surfer an innocently-afHicted babe to escape your pity ! I told you that the marchesa had carried with her both her in¬ fants, and the inhabitants of the Castello believe her to have done so ; for on the mo¬ ment that I was made acquainted with her
lier having conveyed hence the girl, I seiz¬ ed an opportunity, unobserved, of stealing the boy from the chamber of his nurse, and immediately promulgated the intelli¬ gence of bis mother having made him also the partner of her flight. But behold him here/' he added, drawing aside a cloak which was thrown over a couch in the apartment, and upon which Lipardo be¬ held the son of Claudio, an infant of about fourteen months old, sleeping. After a short pause, he continued thus —" Not less to shield the unfortunate son from the contempt which he might meet from the world, in consequence of his fa¬ ther's crime, than to cheer the solituele of the father in his perpetual imprisonment, make him the partner of his father's seclu¬ sion, and the reward which I propose for ye>ur humanity is this:—Espouse, without delay, your favourite Ricarda ; I will pre- sent her with a handsome dower. Should fortune smile upon you, in giving you the promise of an heir, remove your wife to some
soine distance from hence during the pt j ~ riod of her confinement ; and should your child prove a son, give out, on your re- trim, that your own offspring is dead, and that the child which accompanies you is an orphan nephew of mine, whom your wife has kindly undertaken to nurse at her own breast; and should circumstances thus turn out agreeably to our wishes, I will pledge myself, in any manner you please, to confine myself to a life of celibacy, and at my death your son will consequent¬ ly inherit the title and domains, wliich, according to the arrangement that ï have just stated, I shall from this day possess." The agreement was accordingly entered into ; Julio was conveyed to the cell of his father; Lipardo became the husband of Ricarda ; and, in the course of time, the paient of a son, named Vincentio, who was published to the world as the nephew of the marchese Alberto di Valdetti. Under the religious infiuence by which the nana of Claudio was swayed, he did not
not vent his sorrows in complaints against the cruelty of his enemies, because he con¬ sidered them eeiually to denote a repining spirit against the decrees of Providence, by whose permission alone the actions of man could be accomplished ; but the two points which created him the greatest anx¬ iety of heart were, his ignorance of the fate of his beloved wife and female infant, and the dislike which he entertained to the idea of his boy being reared in a solitude, where his faculties could not have an op¬ portunity of expanding themselves, or his understanding of receiving the cultivation of science. Almost immediately after the arrange¬ ment concerning Julio had been made be¬ tween Alberto and his steward, the former had quitted the place, and taken with him his own favourite domestics ; and Lipardo so cautiously conducted himself in his vi¬ sits to his prisoners, that not an individual in the Castello had the slightest idea of his possessing such a charge. The
The friendship which subsisted between Claudio and the steward, who had ever loved the former from a boy, having been attracted towards him by those virtues which so conspicuously shone in his cha¬ racter, and in which Alberto was so rudely deficient, was of a nature which could not admit a doubt of its truth or constancy on either side; and Claudio having explained to Lipardo the motives by w Inch he w r as actuated in desiring to emerge from his seclusion for a certain period of time into the world, received from him a sum of money sufficient for his expenditure on his expedition, and, in the disguise of a pilgrim, bearing in his arms his child, he conducted him safely and secretly without the walls of his Castello, Claudio directed his steps immediately towards Padua. He w r as acquainted, from report, with the excellent disposition of the abbate of the monastery, to whose pro¬ tection he had resolved to commit his son; and having written the letter, which we are
are already acquainted was found with him in the basket in wdiich he was con¬ veyed to the holy mansion, he remained in Padua a sufficient length of time to understand that his petition had been com¬ plied with, and then set out upon a hope¬ less search for his Camilla—a search which he had now nearly for twenty years, at intervals, pursued, and again and again returned heartbroken and disappointed to his prison in the Castello Alfonta, to taste in the friendship of Lipardo the only balm which was now left him upon earth, to a visit of wdiich nature he had been proceed¬ ing, when he accidentally stopped for re¬ freshment and repose at the house of the widow r Bellini. Thus far had the narrative of past events, detailed for the information of Julio and Paulina, been deduced, sometimes by the lips of Claudio, sometimes by those of Lipardo, and not unfrequently by their intermingled voices, when Claudio thus addressed his son—" From that hour I have
have only twice beheld y on—at the semi¬ nary where the good father Antonio had placed yon, and at the inn where you slept on your journey from Home to Pa¬ dua, upon wdiich occasion the brooch which you wore was my certain guide to the identification of your person ; it was the first gift of your mother's love to me, and of so peculiar a form and composition, that, believing there could not be another found to resemble it, ï had directed it to be constantly worn by you, that it might upon any emergency infallibly lead me to your discovery." " And why, my dear father," asked Ju¬ lio, " did you not on that night address me as your son, confide to me the secret of my birth, and admit me to the confi¬ dence of your heart ?" " In all my actions, since the hour of my brother's treachery," replied Claudio, tť I have been governed by him," pointing to Lipardo, " to whom we owe obligations, which make his word a law, and never have
have I beheld him without his exacting from me the most solemn promise, that I would never confess myself to any indivi¬ dual being, till the moment of my retribu¬ tion, if such a moment were ever fated to arrive, should appear to be at hand. I have this day broke*n my promise to him, in the acknowledgment which I made to you before his arrival; but he is himself a father, and will know how to pardon my feelings." Paulina spoke.—" It must have been you, my father," she said, " who, in your disguise of a pilgrim, addressed such пц* merous questions to me, and to my pro¬ tector, the signor Di Cavetti, at the car¬ nival of Venice?" " Yes, my child," replied Claudio, " I believed myself to beholel an unequivocal likeness in your countenance to that of your lovely mother, and on that account used every endeavour, but in vain, to learn who you really were; from being tQQ, minute in my inquiries. I was re* strained
strained by the sacred promise which I had made to Lipardo. My children," he continued, " by the blessing of Heaven, I have recovered you both ; but whether your beloved mother be still in existence, is a point wliich all my wanderings over Italy have not enabled me to ascertain." It nc"' became a necessary task for Ju¬ lio to relate, in as few and as chosen words as the subject would permit, what had been knowm to him of Antonia at Padua. " I cannot—I will not believe a syllable that sounds to her discredit, even though my f on aver it !" ejaculated Claudio ; " Camilla was of all earthly beings the most pure ; dishonour and her heart could never meet in unison !" Julio produced the portrait which was still suspended round his neck, and placed it in his father's hand, accompanying his action by a short account of the means by which he had become possessed of it. Claudio gazed upon it a few moments in silence, the colour fled from his cheeks, his
his lips quivered—" It is, it is," he falter- ingly pronounced, " the very portrait with which she presented me on the day of our marriage; but yeti cannot—will not believe her to have deviated from the path of virtue !" " Can it be possible/' said Lipardo, " that your villanous brother eventually triumphed over her innocence, anel ——" " Oh, name it not !" exclaimed Claudio; ( ' the bare idea banishes my present joy, and recalls the agony of the past with ten¬ fold strength !" Paulina burst into tears, anel the emo¬ tion of all present closed their lips in si¬ lence. But whilst we are occupying ourselves with those characters of our ihama whose misfortunes and whose virtues challenge for them our interest and our sympathy, we must not neglect to record the progress of those actions on the part of their nefari¬ ous persecutor, by which the pitying hand of Providence gradually wrought the dis¬ closure
closure of his villany and the catastrophe of his fate. Immediately on his brother's infant son having become the sharer of his unfortu¬ nate father's pi>on, Alberto, as has already been said, taking with him his confi T ential sei-vants, quitted the Castello Alfonta. He considered, that if he returned to Florence, where his family was well known, that various questions, which he might find it difficult to answer, would naturally be proposed to him concerning the fate of his brother; he therefore resolved in fu¬ ture to make Venice the scene of his un¬ checked pleasures, and accordingly repair¬ ing thither, under the newly-assumed title of the ducca della Riviera, he purchased a handsome mansion, and surrounded himself by a sumptuous establishment, Thu& passed on a considerable number of years, during which he seldom visited the Castello Alfonta ; going thither occa¬ sionally solely for the purpose of consulting with Lipardo upon the means of increas¬ ing
ing his income, for the supply of his daily augmenting extravagances; and when he did so, remaining upon his estate only for a very few days at a time, during which he exhibited, to the gratified, but silent Lipardo, all the symptoms of a mind suf¬ fering under the terrors of a guilty con¬ science. At these his visits, the portraits of his brother and Camilla were taken down from their stations on the walls ; the suite of apartments which they inhabited were never entered by him ; and he slept regu¬ larly with fire-arms on a table by the siele of his bed, dreading tlie appearance of his injured brother, whom he believed still a prisoner in the dungeons amidst th© foun¬ dations of the Castello, and whose image, haunting him in his dreams, not unfre- quently drove liim in frantic wildness from his couch, as :t will be recollected was the case on the first night passed by Paulina beneath his roof At his last visit to the Castello, not only Шъ. m* L immense
immense losses at the gaming-table, but transactions of a dishonourable nature, in which he was whispered, amongst other suspected characters, to have been a par¬ taker, against the state of Venice, had dri¬ ven him from the city to the refuge of his own domains; and here, during the first weeks of his constrained residence, he ex¬ perienced the most tormenting sensations with which a fallen mind could be assailed. Compelled to inhabit the same walls of which he believed that brother and nephew, against wdiom he had so grievously sinned, to be inhabitants—withheld, by the re¬ duction wdiich had taken place in his purse, from purchasing himself such pleasures as could steep in a temporary oblivion the stings of thought—-he was reduced to a state of mind almost insupportable, when he first beheld Paulina, whose beauty, captivating with more than common force his senses, he resolved to possess her, care¬ less, as it has already been shown, of the consequences of his actions. . The
The motive by which he was actuated, in desiring to make Paulina his wife, on learning hen* to be the supposed niece of Urbino di Cavetti, our own time for re¬ vealing is not yet arrived. The venge¬ ance with which his soul was fired on be¬ ing acquainted by Philippo that the son of Lipardo was not only his favoured ri¬ val, but on the point of becoming her hus¬ band, cannot require a comment; and on the disclosure of the relation in which they stood to each other, unfolded to him by* his observance of those scars with which he had himself, in her infancy, marked her person, resolved, in revenge for his own disappointment, to defeat likewise the views of Lipardo and his son, he formed the instant determin»; ion of con vev ine Paulina to a nunnery, and compelling her to take the veil. On the road to Venice, between tlie pass to that city across the Gulf, and the Castello Alfonta, was a foundation of this nature, for the reception of females of L 2 family,
family, in whicl» he possessed considerable interest, the present confessor of the house being a man wdiom he had materially served in the early part of his life, and who was also in some measure indebted to hira for the situation which he now held. To him accordingly he w r rote, ex¬ plaining that he had a niece whom he wished immediately to place in the com¬ munity of which he was a member; and requesting that he would, without the slightest delay in his proceedings, send proper delegates from the holy mansion, to receive her at his hands, to the spot where he wished to meet them, he con¬ cluded by saying, that his confidenţial ser¬ vant, by whom his letter had been convey¬ ed, would conduct them ; and this w r as the epistle with wdiich Philippo had supposed Dr- retti commissioned to Venice, and the spot of appointment the cottage of the widow Bellini, to wdiich Alberto had him¬ self resolved to repair in awe time to meet the envoys from the nunnery. Having
Having thus, with the exception of the reason by which Alberto was actuated in desiring to make Paulina his wife, in the belief of her being the niece of Di Cavetti, deduced to the same period the antece¬ dent histories of our most prominent cha¬ racters, we may once more regularly pur¬ sue the thread of our narrative.
s. 3
CHAP-
CHAPTER Vill.
My hour is almost c-mie ! İlamlı I. A consideraiìle time having now elaps¬ ed since Lipardo had placed Paulo sentry at the door of tlie chamber in which he had confined Philippo and Giraldo, hav¬ ing first exchanged his habiliments for those of his own sex, by procuring the loan of a coat and a hat from the landlady, in addition to such of his own vestments as had heen concealed beneath his disguise, he proceeded to inquire of his centinél huw his prisoners had conducted them¬ selves in his absence, when, on reaching ihe foot of tiic stairs, lie observed Paido lace his finger on his lips, as a caution to him to be silent, and at the same time beckon
beckon him to advance, and by signs invite him to listen to w r hat w r as passing in tlie chamber. When he had ajmroach- ed near enough to hear the conversation of those within—" I repeat," said Giral¬ do, ť< that 1 feel persuaded, that friar can be no other than the marchese Claudio himself; the resemblance is so striking that I cannot be deceived." " Well, and suppose it should?" gruffly answered Philippo. " Why then we arc in a hopeful way* depend u pon it," replied Giraldo ; " ï al way s thought that major-domo was no friend in his heart to our master Alberto ; he is a deep follows and depend upon it, that the marchese Claudio is not so near the Cas¬ tello without his knowledge, and to an¬ swer some good purpose into the bargain. However, come what may, my mind is made up." " To what ?" asked Philippo. ** To act like a wise statesman," answer¬ ed Giraldo, " and withdraw my countc- L 4 nance
ance from those who are going out of place, and adhere to those who are cominii in. All the work! has witnessed great gene¬ rals, who, having made war their trade, did not care what side they fought for, so their services were but well paid. And do you suppose that any transaction I have had a share in, was undertaken by me from goodwill to the party that employed me? No, no, friend Philippo, my affec¬ tions were always given to the purse, anel not the man ; and I am sure Alberto di Valdetti has not conducted himself to¬ wards me in a manner to work a change in my habits ; I have been paiel sparingly enough for the dirty work I have done for him." " You would have been worse than sparingly paid," grumbled out Philippo, " if he had known of the bribe which you took from the marchesa Camilla." " Likely," answered Giraldo, " but a man in business must run the risks of his trade ; to further the interests of arrV one who
who hires my services, is my profession ; and if I do the best I can to serve all my employers, where can be the harm of my taking a fee on both sides, like some of the lawyers?" « Why, truly, if this be the marchese Claudio," rejoined Philippo, " our evi¬ dence can alone save Alberto." " And setting that aside," rejoined Gi¬ raldo, " if we were to blab what we know of the marchesa Camilla, his business would be settled in a trice." Lipardo could restrain himself no long¬ er, and darting into the chamber, he ex- claimed^—" I have overheard your conver¬ sation ; it is useless for you to attempt to retract one word of what you have uttered, for I have a witness of all that has been said ; but from what I have hearel you de¬ clare of your motives and your principles, I expect that when you understand me, you will answer me explicitly. You were, I think, to have received an hundreel pieces of gold from Alberto, if you had L 5 successfully
successfully executed the business upon which he last night dispatched you from the Castello ; only acquaint me what was the fate of the marchesa Camilla, and you bhall receive two hundred from me." " Philippo," said Giraldo, in a tone of voice which denoted him half undecided how to proceed without his comrade's sanction. u 1 am content, if I share the money," replied Philippo. Greatly delighted at the prospect which non· presenteei itself to Ifim, of being ena¬ bled to relieve the marchese Claudio and his children from the agony of suspense with wliich they were affected, by their ignorance of Camilla's» real fate, Lipardo repeated his promise to the iniquitous pair, and the following confession pro¬ ceeded jointly from their lips. It appeared that the marchesa, on re¬ ceiving the intelligence which had been circulated by the designing Alberto, of her husband having fied from the Castello, in
in consequent of his having been detected in an attempt to murder her, dreading alike to encounter the passion or the menaces of Alberto, formed the resolution of quit¬ ting the spot, and besought the assistance ofafernale whoattended upon her, and who had displayed herself upon every occasion attached to her mistress, in the execution of her design. This girl had conceived an affection for Giraldo ; he had thence be¬ come the confidant of all her secrets, and the one with wdiich she had been entrusted by the marchesa was consequently alike divulged to him. Giraldo, who, as his own words have already informed us, was always ready to serve any liberal employer, advised the girl to accept the reward which the mar¬ chesa had offered her; promising that if she would give him half the bribe, İh? would find the means of accomplishing Camillas wish. Matters were accordingly arranged to that effect ; the marchesa pro¬ vided herself with money and jewels from L 6 the
the cabinet of her lamented husband, and Giraldo conducted her and her female in¬ fant, by night, to the nearest posthouse, from whence she immediately procured a conveyance to carry her on her journey ; but of the road which she had taken he was ignorant. " From that period "continued Giraldo, " I had heard nothing more of the mar- obesa till about a year, or somewhere thereabouts, from the present time. It was one day about that period, that Alberto, having summoned Philippo and myself into a private apartment, informed us that he had seen Camilla in the streets of Ve¬ nice, and having described to us the dress in which she had appeared, he commanded us to search for her; and when we had found her abode, to watch a proper oppor¬ tunity for waylaying her, and bringing her to his palazzo. íť In the course of a few days, we disco¬ vered that her residence was in a mean little dwelling in the suburbs of the city, anel
and that most of her time was passed in a little garden at the back of the house ; we lurked constantly near the place about twilight, and after a few evenings, suc¬ ceeded in carrying her off unseen; and our superior strength enabling us to stifle her cries for assistance, we conveyed her in safety to the palazzo of Alberto. Various circumstances had already convinced us that his passion for her had entirely died away, and that the only sentiment with which he was now affected towards her, was the dread of her evidence ever rising against him." *-' Her evidence!" ejaculated Lipardo. " Alberto then itwus, as lever inspected, who inflicted that wound of which the in¬ nocent Claudio has so long borne the guilt !" Giraldo hesitated, and again looked for counsel at Philippo, w r ho said—." Nay, it matters not now; we have ventured so far into the stream, that nothing but a bold plunge through the water can serve us." A full
A full avowal was now made by them of the drug which had been administered by Alberto to his brother, and of the bribe wdiich they had received of him to deliver it as their evidence, if called upon in a court of justice, that Claudio had been stunned by a blow from Philippo, in repelling the stroke which he had aimed with his dagger at the breast of his mas¬ ter. " But the marchesa Camilla !" ejacib lated Lipardo; " what more is it that yon know of her?" " Immediately after we had lodged her in the palazzo," said Philippo, " we were again sent out in disguise, with one of our companions named Duretti, and two others of his domestics, whom Alberto selected for the undertaking, to convey to his mansion a physician of eminence in the city, in the same obscure manner in •which w r e had brought thither the mar¬ chesa. In the course of an hour after the departure of the physician, Alberto in¬ formed
formed us that Camilla was dead ; anel a few days after she was privately in terree!, and her funeral spoken of as that of an in¬ ferior domestic of the family." This strange account Lipardo consider¬ ed incompatible with the description which Julio had given of his having, about two years since, beheld her a corpse in the anatomy chamber at Padua; and the con¬ tradiction of the two assertions cast him for a few moments into a reverie of re¬ flection, from which he was aroused by Philippo adding—" The physician who attended her in her last moments was the signor Urbino eli Cavetti, who is the un¬ cle of the signora Paulina, and who im¬ mediately quitted Venice, and has e vei¬ si nee resided at the Castello della Tor- vida." " Could it be possible," lipardo con¬ sidered, " that the man of whom Paulina had spoken in terms of the highest com¬ mendation, both for the humanity and the honour of his heart, could have been an
an abettor in the murderous plans of a be¬ ing like Alberto!" He returned to the apartment where he had left his friends, and submitted his doubts to Julio and Paulina, both of whom, with the greatest warmth, declared themselves incredulous of the assertions of Philippo, and indig¬ nant at the calumny with which he haei aspersed so worthy a man. Lipardo observed, that it was his opinion, that an explanation of past oc¬ currences from the lips of Urbino himself, could alone unravel the maze of perplexi¬ ties in which they were enveloped with regard to the fate of Camilla ; and was pro¬ ceeding to inquire in what manner they could most reaelily see him, when the voice of Alberto, who had just entered the house, sounded on his ear. With a signal to his friends for main¬ taining silence, Lipardo descended into the kitchen. He perceiveel Alberto stand¬ ing with his back towards him, in the act of disencumbering himself from a cloak, in
în which he had been muffled ; and hav¬ ing done so, he drew from his girdle two pistols, which he placed upon a table* and which lipardo, moving cautiously behind him, eagerly secured, and was in the act of fixing in his own belt, w T hen Alberto turned, and beheld him. " Lipardo here !" he exclaimed, and di¬ recting his eyes towards the pistols, on the head of each of which a hand of Lipardo was rested—'* What mean you by this?** he added. " Self-preservation !" replied Ι Λ pardo ; "the character of every man determines me how far it is wisdom to trust him with the instruments of life and death ; I shall therefore, for the present, keep these in my own custody." "What!" ejaculated Alberto, "am í menaced by tl· „*, thou------" He checked the epithet which was rising to his tongue, and in a softened tone of voice continued —" Replace the pistols where you found them,
them, and Vincentio shall immediately be liberated from his confinement." " He shall be freed from it when I think proper to command his enlarge¬ ment," answered Lipardo. The stern frown of the steward struck terror to the heart of Alberto, and he called aloud upon Philippo and Giraldo. " They are engaged, and cannot attend you," replied Lipardo, deliberately. "Ami then beset by villany !" exclaim¬ ed Alberto ; and casting ina eyes wildly around, in the hope of espying some relief at hand, for the consciousness of his crimes augmented his fears of danger, they fell upon a casement, through which he be¬ held Duretti advancing on horseback to¬ wards the house.-—" Thank Heaven !" he added, " here is one who will not desert me!" and with these words he flew to¬ wards the door, which he had no sooner ojjened than he nerceived a vehicle ap¬ proaching, through one of the windows of
of wdiich instantly descrying the figure of an ecclesiastic, he doubted not that it con¬ tained the delegates from the nunnery. With the most feverish trepidation Al¬ berto awaited the approach of the carriage, from wliich at length descended the con¬ fessor, to whom his epistle had been ad¬ dressed, and tw r o nuns, who liad been commissioned to take the charge of Pau¬ lina,—" Welcome, welcome, holy father!" ejaculated Alberto, as they entered the house. " Benedicite, son !" answered the con¬ fessor ; " we have attended thy summons, to receive under our protection thy niece, whom thou hast so laudably devoted to the service of the church." " I forbid the act !" solemnly pronoun¬ ced Lipardo. " Thou ! who art thou?" demanded the holy man. "Her father," replied Lipardo; "and 1 deny her to you." " Duretti, will you see me thus insult¬ ed Г
ed ?" cried Alberto ; " draw your sword against this daring man." " Is it thus," said the confessor, " that you would recommend yourself to the servants of the church ?" Duretti, awed by the solemnity of his voice, checked the hand by which he had been preparing to draw his sword, the only weapon of defence with which he waf» armed. " This man is not her father," rejoined Alberto ; " he is only the father of a youth with whom, as my heiress, he would tre¬ pan her into marriage." " I am the father of a youth to whom she is bound by the most sacred ties of religion," said Lipardo. " But their marriage is happily not yet consummated," answered Alberto, " and she is therefore still a virgin in the eye of the law ; at all events, I must possess г* right to the greater authority over her, as being her relative in blood, whilst he can only claim an adventitious connexion with her,
her, formed by the unjust device which he had planned to worm his son into my inheritance." " Yield then those possessions, of which you display yourself so strenuous in the protection, to their just owners," pronoun¬ ced Lipardo, " and I will instantly forego my son's claim." "I — I am myself that just owner," stammered out Alberto. " Have then an elder brother and his son no superior claim to yours?" asked Lipardo. " But wdiere," ejaculated Alberto — " where are those unfortunate, those la¬ mented beings, to wdiom you refer, to be found ?" " Here !" emphatically pronounced Li¬ pardo ; then, in a heightened tone of voice, he added — " Claudio ! Julio ! appear ! I am your protector !" His mandate was obeyed ; and upon the appearance of the marchese and his son, to the latter of whom clung the trembling Paulina
Paulina—-during the first moments of ex¬ cessive astonishment wdiich chained the senses of Alberto, the sounds of '* Claudio! Claudio !" proceeding from the lips of one of the nuns, arrested the attention of all present—the veil of the speaker was in¬ stantly thrown back·—" Dost thou still live to me, my Claudio?" she added, and flying into the arms of him whom she ad¬ dressed, sunk fainting on his breast. ín the person of the nun, Julio believed himself to behold the countenance ofthat Antonia who had been known to him at Padua; Claudio, Alberto, and the stew¬ ard, recognized in her the marchesa Ca¬ milla. " My mother ! can this be my mother?" ejaculated Paulina. Her question was addressed to Lipardo; and as he turned to answer her, Alberto seized the moment in which he believed him to be thrown on* his guard, and snatch¬ ing one of the pistols from his girdle, pointed it at the pair whose reunion com¬ municated
municated a pang worse than death to his heart. With the swiftness of the light¬ ning's flash, Lipardo flew to wrest from 4 him the upraised weapon. In the strug¬ gle which ensued, the mouth of the tube was turnee! to the breast of Alberto. A, the same instant the spring was touched ; and the sound of its explosion was the last instant of Alberto's existence.
CHAP
CHAPTER IX. I have a tuie t'unfoid, so full of wonder, As cannot meet an easy faith ; But 'tis true. King Lear. It was indeed the long-lost Camilla whom Claudio now pressed to his overjoyed and astonished heart ; but as the account which she was competent to give of past occur¬ rences was insufficient to elucitlate some of the mysteries apparently connected with her fate, which have been presented to our readers, w r e shall here explain some circumstances, which the progress of time, aided by unceasing inquiries, alone deve¬ loped to the marchese Claudio and his fa¬ mily. The marchesa Camilla di Valdetti w r as one of three sisters, equally distinguished for their personal beauty ; and there ex¬ isted
isted amongst them a family resemblance, by which they could not fail to be recog- nized,and which,although considered as re¬ markably strong when they were separately seen, lost a considerable portion of its force when they were compared to each other. Camilla, as has already been said, on quitting the Castello Alfonta, repaired to Venice ; and under the dread which she entertained of the unprincipled disposi* tion of Alberto, considering that her infant would be safer in the protection of any other individual than herself, she formed the resolution of casting it upon the hu¬ manity of Di Cavetti, in her opinion of whose benevolent nature she believed that she could not be mistaken; anel having bedewed the cheeks of her infant with the tears of separation, she had no sooner ascertained tlie arrival of Urbino at the hotel of San Marco, than she proceeded to seek her aunt at Florence. On her arrival there she found her aunt dead, and her elder sister, Lucia, married VOL. Ш. M tO
to the conté del Faressi, whose hand she had herself formerly refused. The death of their aunt having bereft her sisters of their only protector, and also diminished their means of existence, as the principal part of their support had been derived from an annuity which had died with her, her slow consent to become the wife of the conté had been wrung by the force of circumstances from the lips of Lucia ; and her younger sister, Antonia, she un¬ derstood to have fled from Florence, with a young officer of a wild and profligate disposition, to whom it was surmised that she was not allied by any stronger bonds than those of inclination. Had Camilla found her aunt in exist¬ ence, it was her intention to have retired with her to some solitary abode, and there have awaited the intelligence of her hus¬ band's fate, with which the progress of time might furnish her; but her relative being no more, she did not expkiin the nature of her visit to Florence, which was consequently
consequently supposed to have been merely one of friendship to the deceased; and again epiitting the city, procured a retired lodging in its vicinity, where she formed an acquaintance with a venerable eccle¬ siastic, who attended her as her confessor, anel of whom she inquired where an asy¬ lum aelapteel to the exigency of her situa¬ tion could be found fe>r her, in a religious house, in her character of a wife ; under which title she could not be permitted to take the veil, even if it were her inclina¬ tion to do so—a step from which her hope of being one day reunited to her Claueiio would at all events have withheld her. The holy man informed her, that there was a foundation of the nature which she desired to find in the neigh bou rhooel of Venice, anel that he was intimately ac¬ quainted with the superior of the house, and could furnish her with an introduc¬ tion, u hieb would admit her an inmate of the community upon her own terms. With the most fervent thanks, Camilla M 2 accepted
accepted his proposal, and once more set out in search of a new asylum. ín the course of her journey she was one evening surprised at being informed by the servant of an inn at which she was going to repose, that there was a signora in the house, who had seen her enter, and requested to be admitted to her presence. It was equally disagreeable to her to as¬ sign any reason for not seeing visitors, as to be compelled to a conversation with those in w T hose society she felt no interest; and at a loss which of the evils to choose, she desired the signora to be introduced into her apartment, and was not a little astonished to behold her sister Antonia. Camilla considered, that as Antonia had yielded her honour to the flimsy security of a lover's promise, every lesser confidence would > of course, be entrusted to his dis¬ cretion ; and not desiring her own imme¬ diate concerns, or those of the persons with whom she was connected, to be made the subjects of a stranger's coi* versat ion or animadversions,
animadversions, she resolved to withhold from her a knowledge of her circum¬ stances, and replied evasively to all her inquiries. The object of Antonia's passion had al¬ ready, as it appeared, been three weeks absent from her, without her being ac¬ quainted whither he was gone, or what was the cause that delayed his return ; but she existed on the hope of his speedy ar¬ rival, with which flattering belief her wishes fed her expectation ; and with dif¬ ficulty brought herself to confess to Ca¬ milla that she was already reduced to some pecuniary embarrassments by his absence. This was an irresistible appeal to the feelings of Camilla, and she presented her with some valuable trinkets, of which she could easily procure the exchange into coin, Antonia received them with the most gracious thanks, and said—" How have you disposed of that remarkable brooch wdiich you inherited from our father?" m 3 "I presented
" I presented it to my husband previ¬ ously to our marriage, 5 ' replied Camilla; " and he promised me never to part from it, except as a bequest to one of our chil¬ dren. But," she continued, looking, a< she spoke, into her jewel-case, which she held in her hand, " here is a likeness of my seli', wliich you must remember being painted; and as it is possible that we may never meet again, and my own portrait can be of no use to me, wear it for my sake, and give me your word that you will never part from it, unless, in your intercourse with the world, chance should throw in your way my son (for 1 am the mother of a son); and should accident ever lead him to your acquaintance, transfer it to him, and tell him that it is the gift of his mother.'' Antonia promised obedience to her sis¬ ter s injunctions: and in the morning they parted, Camilla pursuing her journey to¬ wards Venice: aud on arriving at the nun¬ nery, she found the introductory letters with
with which she had been furnished highly satisfactory to her wishes, and immediately became a lay-sister of the establishment, where we must for a while leave her, and follow the steps of Antonia, The man who wins a prize too easily is generally the first to neglect its keep¬ ing, especially in the affairs of the heart; and the possessor of Antonia's, after the first dream of joy was past, fled the once- adored idol of his soul. Difficult is the task of inconstancy to the woman who lias once tasted the blessings of a pure af¬ fection ; but to her who at her first ac¬ quaintance with love has overstepped the barrier of feminine delieacv, a transfer of the heart naturally becomes a subject of lighter consideration. Deserted bv her first love—cast upon society without a natural or an adventitious protector, An¬ tonia sought the countenance of stran¬ gers, and submitted to win them at the price of lier wounded feelings; and thus became gradually habituated to the capri- M 4- cious
cious fluctuation of ever-changing fa¬ vourers. But at length, becoming wise from mortification, she began to nourish the wish of defending herself against the frowns of fortune ; and reversing the scale of extravagance upon which she liad hi¬ therto lived, now studied the amplification of her purse. There is not a situation in lire in which caution will not, in some measure, lead to independence; Antonia's system proved successful ; and after many years past in smothered restraint, and an affectation oí enjoyments which never reached lier heart, she found herself in possession of a consi¬ derable sum ; and well had it been for her, if she had then closed a career upon which reflection could only dwell with sickening or with horror, and endeavoured to repair the errors of the past by the virtues oí the future. But daily are the proofs ad¬ duced to the eye of observation, that lhe mind must be cast in a mould of a more than commonly strong nature, which сан reel ai ni
reclaim itself either suddenly, or altoge¬ ther, from those practices which have, írom habit, almost formed a coalition with its blood. Ciiancc had placed Antonia in the city of Padua, at the period at which she had resolved to commence a reform of conduct; but what the vicious denominate a reform is too frequently, in the opinion of the vir¬ tuous, no more than a counterpart of the former evil; and Antonia became the pos¬ sessor of a splendid mansion, where all the mysteries of dissolute pleasure were so¬ lemnized under her sovereign nod. She had not been longin this situation, when the person of Julio, whom >lv often beheld from her window, for she now sel¬ dom passed through the Strniš, made .-o forcible 1 , so unconquerable an impression upon her heart, that she conceived the de¬ sire of making him lier husband. But wishing, if possible, to inveigle him intoa passion for her, before she dibcjo-sed io hini her wishes, those plans which lune already M 5 beüt
been detailed in the course of our narra¬ tive, were pursued by her for bringing him into her presence ; and this end being accomplished, she was on the point of disclosing to him lu v r Ik art, at the moment when her eye rested on tlie well-known brooch which haei been be¬ queathed by her father to Camilla; she ree'olleeted the words which Camilla had spoken at their last meeting, and disap¬ pointment, mingled with horror at the idea of the crime, from the eommÍ>siou of which îdıe had just been rescued, de¬ prived her, lor a few seends. of all ret ol- leet i on. On reiivin^, she remembered the re- mi'^t which her >Ísttr had made of her concerning the portrait: she геы>Ье! to obey her wish; and accordingly, hastilv tracing the few lines wluch commuuieatcd to Julio th.it it w as seni ît* hiin bv his mother, she caib Л the portrait and ht r epistle to be placed in his possession, and then gave directions for liim to be сон» vev ed
veyed to the pavilion in his own garelen, in the manner with wliich we are alreaely acquainted. From the period of this occurrence the spirits and health of Antonia lost their usual flow, pleasure no longer animated lier senses, nor did the temptations of va¬ rying society carry weight with them to her iieart. The dreadful crime into which her devotion to self-gratification had near¬ ly plunged her, preyed upon her mind ; .she dill not sicken, but she drooped ; that otic act, upon whieli she could not inces- Miıtly forbear to reflect, appeared to have opened her ewes to all the atrocities of her past life; and when tlie world, for which lie had before lived, had lost its charms, she silently withered to the grave. The alertions consequently made by the ill-fated brother of Valeria, concerning lier whom he, as well as Julio himself, be¬ lieved the ]K>rtrait worn by the latter ta represent, were founded in truth, and the μ 6 form
form which Julio had beheld exposed to the knife of science was that of Antonia. Lucia, meanwhile, after experiencing various changes anei misfortunes, originat¬ ing in a conduct the very opposite of that which her heedless sister had pursued, after passing a life of restraint in her union with a man whose person and age were incapable of challenging her love, anel whose selfish nature forbade her to supply the deficiency of affection with respect, saw him sink gradually and peevishly to the tomb, pampered with luxuries, which his fortune, already too much diminished by the gratification of every idle appetite, could ill afford, and was left to sorrow away the remainder of her life on a miser¬ able stipend, which denied her alike the charms of society or of solitary enjoy¬ ments. In this state she had lingered through о о six years, when seized by the emissaries of Alberto, on the belief of her being the marchesa
marchesa Camilla, and hurried by them to his palazzo; and on being seated in an apartment of the mansion, overcome by terror, and happy to accept any relief which appeared to present itself to her in¬ supportable feelings, she drank unhesita¬ tingly of a cup which she received from the hand of Philippo, containing a refresh¬ ment which had been commanded for her by Alberto, and sunk into that sleep from which she was fated never to awake on earth. Determined on her death, yet dreading himself to perform the awful act of mur¬ der, and equally unwilling to confess his crime to any of his attendants, lest he should place himself still more in their power, than he with pain reflected that he had already done, Alberto resolved to call upon the aid of the signor Di Cavetti, not doubting that the profuse bribe which he was prepared to offer him would have ef¬ fect with a man who could cover his action with the cloak of his profession. The
The mind e>f Alberto, although that of a villain, w r as in other respects a common mind; he diel not conceive himself equally guilty in commanding the perpetration of an act of unfair death, as in executing it ; and upon a similar argument, he feared not to find Urbino compliant to the perform¬ ance of a deed, wliich might be attributed to the failure of his medical endeavours for the restoration of a patient, whose case haei been misrepresented to him. But the mind of Urbino w r as not a common mind* We have seen the contempt with which he spurned at a participation of Alberto's villany, and can hardly require to be tolel that Alberto, roused to desperation by his refusal, himself accomplished the bloody act. And thus perished the innocenkLu- cia, unrequited for a life of patient suffer¬ ing—an incontestible proof that the final account of the human race is closed beyonel the limits of this earth. And here it may not be improper to re¬ mark, that Alberto, who had ever stood i"
in that awe of Urbino with which every criminal mind considers the being who possesses the secret of his guilt, upon learning Paulina to be his niece, imme¬ diately entertained the wish of making her his wife, in the hope of an alliance cement¬ ed between their families effectually closing the lips of the physician upon the revela¬ tion of those shades in his character with which he was but too well acquainted ; anel the ignorance which we have seen Urbino to profess of the name of the mar¬ chese di Valdetti, although a resident in Venice, arose from Alberto having been known in that city only as the ducca della İli viera. To Camilla, the last, but hitherto not the most unfortunate of her race, we now return. Year after year haei passed tedi¬ ously on, during which the existence of Camilla had been but as a vegetation upon earth, animated solely by the offices of re¬ ligion, and her unceasing prayers for her liusband and her children, when the epis¬ tle
tie of Alberto was brought by Dtirctti to the nunnery. The confessor read it alouel to the community, and having received the sanction of the abbess to admit the claimant for reception, the swell of joy with which the heart of Camilla was di¬ lated, may be readily imagined, when, after having in painful silence listened to the perusal of the letter, of which neither the writer nor the female referred to in it could be mistaken by her, she heard her¬ self named as one of the derogates com¬ missioned to undertake the charge of the intended nun, on her journey to the holy mansion. Further explanation must be unneces¬ sary. On beholding her husband and her children, all that the world possessed for her of value was presented, at one view, to her ae i ceptancc—all her past sufferings overpaid. But whe j n we consider the fate of the unfortunate Lucia, as a lesson that final retribution rests beyond the skies, let it equally prove a precept to the mind of
of reaso", that where remuneration is made to the sufferer upon earth, tenfold will be the requisition demanded at his hands in heaven. Upon the death of Alberto, his former attendants were immediately set at liberty by Lipardo, wdio, availing himself of the overpowering raptures into which Claudio and his family were thrown by their un¬ expected and happy meeting, caused the dead body to be removed from their sight —thus sparing them the shock of behold¬ ing a countenance which the reproaches of a guilty conscience had stamped, in the moment of its dissolution, with the most honid expression of agony and dread. The confessor from the nunnery in pî ted on remaining a while in prayer over the corpse of the man from whose hand he had once received acts of friendship, and whose present humbled situation moved his feelings to pity. Claudio and Ids relatives were no sooner capable of listening to the admonitions of Pi pardo,
Lipardo, than they were hurried by him on their way towards the Castello Alfon¬ ta, attendee! by Gii aldo, whose companions were left by him in charge of their de¬ ceased master, and who did not lose a mo¬ ment in offering their services, and declar¬ ing their allegiance to his brother. One mingled sensation of joy and grati¬ tude flowed in the hearts of all; for, how¬ ever a character like that of Alberto might, as Christians, excite their pity, it was im¬ possible that their sorrow could be awaken¬ ed for one from whom they had individu¬ ally so severely suffered. On arriving at the Castello, where Ca¬ milla anel her husband found it difficult to believe themselves once more reinstated in their so-long abdicated possessions, an ad¬ dition was made to their joyful party by the presence of Vincentio, whom Claudio thus addressed-—" If any event can add to the happiness which I enjoy, in my re¬ union with my family, it is the alliance so indi visibly formed between my valued friend
friend Lipardo and myself, of which you and my dear daughter form the connecting bond." Vincentio returned a suitable reply to the kind address of the marchese; and В icarda, who, for a short time after her re¬ ceiving the information of the unlooked- for events which had marked the few last hours, had considered it very hard that her son, who had not only been bred to believe himself heir to a marquisate, but who had alsoespoused the presumptive heiress of the familv, should be reduced a step in the scale of worldly dignity, at length reflect¬ ing that it was, after all, infinitely better to be mother to the husband of a mar- chese's daughter, than only the simple wife of a steward, complacently added the mite of her congratulations and .smiles to the sum of general happiness.
CHAP-
CHAPTER X.
List scene of ;iiJ, Ikit ends this strange eventful шччгу, Ль you hike li. Кот less in compliance with his own feel¬ ings than the entreaties of Paulina, that her revered protector Urbino should im¬ mediately be made acquainted with her present happiness, lipardo proceeded to the Castello della Torvida, and was re¬ ceived by the worthy physician, who in¬ stantly recognized in him the stranger by wdiom he had been a short time before vi¬ sited, and who had so ambiguously ¡iiade inquiries of him concerning the origin of Paulina, and left him with those assurances of her safety, wdiich had alone supported him during the period of her mysterious absence. The
The detail wdiich the steward had to make could not be easily concluded ; but in as concise a manner as it was possible to render the substance of past events com¬ prehensible to the senses of his auditor, they were narrated by him to Di Cavetti, who introduced to Lipardo his daughter Valeria, and tlie worthy Di Borges, as par¬ ticipators of his joy. After a due time had been given to those comments and reflections which na° turally arose from the narrative of Lipar¬ do, Di Borges said—" As you, signor, are doubtless well acquainted with every mem¬ ber of the late Alberto di Valdettľs fa¬ mily, you will be able to inform me whe¬ ther he had a domestic in his service na¬ med Duretti?" " 1 am," replied Lipardo ; " the man you mention is полу at the Castello Al¬ fonta." " You will excuse me," returned San¬ cho, " for interrupting the joy of yourself and your friends/' pointing to Di Cavetti and
and his daughter as he spoke, " by request¬ ing your attention to an extraordinary cir¬ cumstance which particularly affects me, and which, if I delay to investigate, may be past the possibility of solution. You must know an old woman, who lives not far from hence, named Bianca ; she has just been here to inform me that a sister of hers, whom she has not seen for many years, is just arrived at her cottage, in an apparently-dying state, who says that she has travelled hither from a considerable distance, in order to relieve her mind be¬ fore her death, by the disclosure of a secret with which it is burthened, and in which I am concerned, but which she refuses to reveal to me, except in the presence of a servant of the marchese Alberto di Val¬ dett^ named Duretti," Lipardo perceived equally the anxiety of the farmer, and the urgency of the case, and immediately dispatched a servant, who liad accompanieel him to the Castello, to command Duretti to attend him. During
During the absence of the messenger, Lipardo invited Urbino, Di Borges, and Valeria, to return with him to the Castello Alfonta, where he said their presence would communicate the most heartfelt sa¬ tisfaction to the happy beings within its walls. Urbino and the farmer gave a ready ac¬ quiesçai. Valeria retired from the apart¬ ment, and shortly after returning with two letters, which she had written, one of which w as directed to Paulina, the other to Julio, requested Lipardo to deliver them into the hands of those to whom they were addressed, and to excuse hır attendance at that time. Duretti without delay attended the summons of Lipardo, who, at the urgent request of the farmer, consented to accom¬ pany them to the cottage of Bianca. On entering the place, Di Borges per- "cived, lying on the bed on which he had a* his kbt visit beheld Julio extended, the pale and emaciated form of an aged female, who
who appeared upon the verge of earthly dissolution. " This, signor," said Bianca, addressing Di Borges, " is my sister llodovina, whom I have not seen or heard of for these twen¬ ty years past, and whom I believed dead." The half-closed eyes of llodovina wan- elered amongst the assembled group which surrounded her bed, and at last fixing them on Duretti—*' Do you not know me?" she said. " No, I do not," was the reply. " Ώο you not," she rejoined, " remem¬ ber a poor woman, one Roelovina, who used to gain her livelihood by telling for¬ tunes, and whom you once employed, at the command of the marchese di Valdetti, to teal you a child ?" 6C Can you be she?" said Duretti. " 1 am indeed," replied the woman ; if and feeling that I could not die easy, without I had made all the reparation in my power to the injured parents of the babe, with inanité pain ï have travelled hither,
hither, for the purpose of informing them that their infant was conveyed by you to the marchese di Valdetti, and of calling upon you to acquaint them what lias been its subsequent fate." Lipardo looked at Duretti for an ex¬ planation of what he heard ; in reply to which inquiry Duretti said—" Alberto once entertained an idea of bringing up a child, to represent the infant daughter of his brother, conceiving that, as her lawful guardian, he might enjoy those possessions of which she would be considered the heiress, with greater security than by open¬ ly declaring his own ; but the child had been only a few days brought to his pa¬ lazzo in Venice, when, considering how easily the imposition might be detected, by the child being free from those scars with which the person of the signora Pau¬ lina was marked, he changed his purpose, and commanded her to be removed from him." VOL. III. N And
" And what became of her then ?" ask¬ ed Rodovina. " By the order of Alberto," answered Duretti, " I placed her, with a consider¬ able sum of money, in the hands of a woman who travelled the country with merchandize, and who promised to bring hei* up as her own ; her name was Leo¬ nora Velinos." " And that of the parents of the child whom you stole," said Sancho, eagerly, u was Di Borges !" " Ay, ay ; you are her father ; 1 know you well—too well," ejaculated Bodovina. "Oh 5 forgive me, dear signor! forgive me, that I may die in peace!" The agitation of his mind for a while imposed silence on tlie lips of Sancho. After a short interval — " Woman !" he said, " ask forgiveness of Heaven, for thy souľs sake ; as a Christian, I cannot deny thee mine ;" and quitted the cottage, fol¬ lowed by Urbino and the steward Moralta, whom
whom he requested to proceed to the Cas¬ tello Alfonta, and permit him to visit his daughter alone, for the purpose of disclos¬ ing to her the discovery which he had just made.
In a narrative, as in a drama, when the anticipated events are drawn to a certain point, the sooner the curtain falls upon the scene, the more impressive the effect ; İn conformity with which rule, a few words will now lead us to the conclusion of our tale. The marchese di Valdetti and his Ca¬ milla enjoyed the most perfect happiness, in deriving their chief gratification from contributing to the felicity of others. Vin- centio, with his Paulina, and the parents of the former, all formod a part of the es¬ tablishment at the Camello Alfonta ; and as Urbino had resolved υ pon fixing his fu¬ ture residence soleVy in the country, al- N 2 most
most every day witnessed an exchange of social intercourse between their two fami¬ lies, and that of the worthy Sancho di Borges. " Oh, my dear child !" exclaimed Ave¬ llila, on clasping her long-lost daughter in her arms, " is it possible that I once more fold to my breast that beloved in¬ fant, w hose golden coral I have so often wept over ! Blessed be Heaven, that has restored you to me in my present dark and helpless state !—But I have not been ne¬ glected by its goodness, even in your ab¬ sence ; it supplied me with an angel's kindness, when it led me to the know¬ ledge of the dear signora Valeria." Old Jeronymo wept aloud, and pressed the hand of Averilla to his quivering lips. When arranging his future establish¬ ment, Urbino gave Terence his choice of being either made the superintendant of his affairs, or of being presented with а sum of money, to convey him back to his own country ; of the former Terence made choice.
choice.—" I cannot be happier than I am here in your sarvice? he said, " and why should I be after making a change? I only desire an honest man formy master; I am sure you are that same ; and if Pro¬ vidence kindly suffers me to outlive you, I'll end my days wid you, depend upon it." Urbino smiled at the national slip of the tongue into which the fervency of Te¬ rence's feelings had led him ; and Terence resumed—" I am sure we shall all be as happy as sweet butter-milk ; and whenever you and the signor di Borges, who is as kind and as condescending a man as your ho¬ nour, do me the favour of a little chat wid me in the garden, to pass off the time like, when I am at work about the Munster apples, or any thing of the sort, " Thou, he, and I, retir'd to some с1оье cell, Will gently puss our short reserves of time In culm reflection oji our fortunes past. Thus our remains Shall in an even course of thoughts be раы, Enjoy the present hour, tur fear the last."
n S Francisca,
Francisca, completely w r eaned from the fascinations of love and beauty, was con¬ tented to live in the service of Valeria. Bernardo also continued to reside with his father in the Castello della Torvida ; and continuing single by joint consent, they jogged on through life, as friends, in a much more unruffled course than they would probably have done in the charac¬ ters of man and wife. The letter which Lipardo had been re¬ quested by Valeria to present to Julio, con¬ tained her promise to live unmarried, and her request, that if any correspondence existed in future between them, it might only be by letter. Julio had now obtained the darling wish of his heart ; and having described to his pa¬ rents Ihedehcate situation in which he stood to the family of Urbino, declared his inten¬ tion of becoming, for life, an inhabitant of the monastery in Padua which had shel¬ tered his infant state—-a resolution which he a few days after carried into effect. In his correspondence
correspondence with Valeria, he uniformly declared himself perfectly happy, and only regretted, that her acquaintance with him, and the constancy of hei affection, had rendered her less blessed upon earth than her existence might have proved had he never known her ; to which assertions Valeria regularly replied—»" Whatever the happiness which you conceive me to have lost, I am contented with that which I possess ; and shall ever consider, that no fe¬ licity can exceed that which results from the recompensing consciousness which I feel, of having done my duty ľ Urbino would frequently aver, that the event of his life that he most regretted, was the loss of his son ; and that the recol¬ lection which, of all others, gave him the greatest satisfaction, was that of having preserved the life of Julio.-«-" Forgive¬ ness," he said, " is the universal duty OF MAN, AND THEY MUST BE EITHER COLD IN HEART, OR ARROGANT IN SPIRIT, WHO CAN HOPE TO RECEIVE THAT FOR¬ GIVENESS
GI VENESS OF HEAVEN, WHICH I'HEY ВЕКУ TO ТЙЕ1Н FELLOW-BEINGS UPON KAÄTH."
THE
