Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The mysterious freebooter: or, The days of Queen Bess: a romance
( ■Ill t ........ H «■* ■■■ ! Il II ............. W I E 1II 4H— H — Il HI fMM i THE MYSTERIOUS FREEBOOTER. CHAP. L în Gotľ« name, cheerly on, courageous friends, To reap the harvest of perpetual peace, By this one bloody trial of sharp war. SHAKFS?£AKB. ¡LORD William de Mowbray and his troops meanwhile pursued their march, ¡under tlie stillness of the night, without fany interruption, save what arose from the ¡nature of their route; thc difficulties of fhis kind which they had to encounter ^vere indeed not a few. As it was of con- is vol. и. в sequence
sequence to them to use whatever speed was in their power, they quitted the high road, which would have extended their journey several miles; and though at¬ tended by skilful guides., they found it by no means an easy task to wind up the unfrequented passes of the mountains which they were obliged to cross, or to ford the numeious rivulets which ob¬ structed their progt ess. However, these weie difficulties thought lightly of by men who had been accus¬ tomed and inured to fatigue and danger, asniostof Lord Williams men had been, both before and since they had been taken into his service ; and they made such good use of their strength and spi¬ rits, that ere the morning began to break, they found themselves within a short dis¬ tance of the spot where Donald's infor¬ mation had given them reason to helieve that Allanrod and his advanced body had halted during the night, Tiie cheeks of the youth Donald glow¬ ed
ed with anticipated vengeance on tbe murderer of his father, and the ravisher of his sister's honour ; and he could not forbear expressing his joy as they marched on. The Baron presently commanded a halt, in order that he might have an opportu¬ nity for consulting with his chief leader, Irwin, on the measures best to be pur¬ sued at this crisis. The situation occu¬ pied by him and his soldiers at the mo¬ ment he issued this command, Was one most favourable to the purpose of a short repose ; it was a romantic glen, enclosed, on all sides, by rough and stupendous mountains, thc frowning, craggy tops of most of which appeared to bespeak them impervious. Placing, Therefore, guards at the avenues, which were alone believed accessible by De Mowbray and his com¬ manders, the Baron seated himself, with his friend Irwin, and the youth Donald, at the foot of one of them ; while his men reclined themselves on various spots в % suited
stilted -to/their iíicľmations ; and their horses were permitted to browze upon the .grass which the valley afforded, y A little refreshment was necessary to all after their march, and wliile they were taking it, Lord William submitted to his companions the propriety of re¬ mai ning* 'awhile °n the spot where they now were* and dispatching from tlicnce a spy or two, to gain, if possible, infor¬ mation of the enemy's situation. ' This proposal appeared to Irwin and Donald so perfectly judicious, that they strongly .recommended its being put into execu¬ tion without delay; and'three oftheir party were accordingly chosen for the purpose.· . One of these three was one of their guides, and to him Donald made it un¬ derstood in what direction to proceed for gaining thé desired information.· It was not till this scrutinizing party was dis¬ patched, that the Baron himself began to taste the refreshments' which were ne- •y . · cessary
cessary to tbe support of his strengtii ; • and as he pressed Donald tó join with liim in his meal, he perceived that the youth's fatigue was so great., as to haye entirely deprived him of a wish for food : he drank willingly ofa flask of ale which Irwin offered him, but hè refused all sub¬ stantial . nourishment ; his, agitation ap¬ peared every moment ťo be increasing, and the Baron besought him to endea¬ vour to compose his : mind, and not to suffer the recollection of the past, or the anticipation ofthe futuie, thus to harrass bis feelings', as it wotdd entirely unfit him for the enterprize thev were shortlv to- rush upon. The youth replied-t-" Fear me not. my Lord; agitated as I. am, and Violently too, believe me, that joy aflect s me morc than pain, and that I wilWlo my duty when we meet Allanrod—would to God that the moment was cornei*'/ A shrill whistle, blown through the fingers at this moment, called thc. atten· s ; > > в 3 tion.
tion of the Baron, and he saw two of his ^pies returning with the utmost speeel down the steep side of a mountain. The Baron sprang υρ to meet them, and as soon, as they could be heard—"The enemy î the enemy l'* burst from their lips. " Do they come?*' exclaimed Donald. 44 Thank Heaven ! thank Heaven !" Instantly the drum beat to arms, and Lord William and his men snatched up their rested weapons.; every one was, in as short a time as possible, in a posture of defence ; and, quick as were tlieir movements, they bad not an instant to spare; for already а body of freebooters- appeared at the mouth of thc only ave¬ nue m hieb the Baron believed practicable for leaving lhe glen. To escape from the circle of danger which was environing them, Lord William thought tbe only means, to rush through tbe enemy by the strength, of arms ; and their only chance ôf conquering, to attack tliem on a level·· grouud;.
ground ; as the fortune of the war must be indisputably against them, were the event hazarded in a spot where the enemy had the advantage of height over them, as they had in the present instance. lie had little time for reflection, hut he could not help repenting that he had not marched earlier on the preceding evening from his own castle, vhich would have prevented his present sur¬ prise. The enemy, aware of the Baron's in¬ tention of forcing a passage through them for his troops, stationed their strength at the point for which he was making, and opposed his approach towards it vvith the most obstinate vigour. Equally resolute did Lord William's men shew themselves in tlieir attempt at gaining the pass; and a most severe contest ensued, in which the freebooters were repeatedly driven back, by the skilful use made by the English soldiers of their fire-arms; but although frequently repulsed, they re- в 4« turned,
(urned, with the violence of wolves, to the attack ; and the party of De Mow¬ bray had still gained but little progress towards the mouth of the valley. Por atime,, the effects of steady disci¬ pline and regular tactics prevailed emi¬ nently over savagç ferocity and irregular vehemence; but Lord William now made a discovery, uncomfortable in the ex¬ treme to bis feelings, which was, that the> troops of the Scottish banditti, as. repeatedly as they were driven back, re¬ turned to ч the combat with increased numbers ; which discovery brought with it the sad conviction that Allanrod had already collected his forces into one body, contrary to the opinion of Donald, or the still more to be dreaded apprehension that Donald himself was an impostor. He looked around for him, and per¬ ceiving hirn mixing in the English ranks, the momentary doubt which had arisen in his miud of his truth, was dispelled, and. he now thought that he had only n - * beeni
been faulty in his calculations, and not soin his intentions. All men are apt to judge from events, and Lord William was, in this respect, a man in the full sense of the expression. Burning vvith almost maddening disap¬ pointment and chagrin, that the issue of the present contest was likely to prove contrary to tl)e opinion lie had formed of it at its commencement, he began to believe that he had been guilty of an imprudence, in followmg an enemy into their own haunts, uncertain of their strength and number; and to think.that he would have done better in awaiting their arrival before his own. castle; al¬ though the evils of such a delay had been fully represented to him, and upon that representation he had acted : Lord William, iiv short, felt as all disappointed ríen do who have not sufficient fortitude tp restrain the effervescences of their passion within the bounds of sense and reason ; and seeing the situation of hun¬ ii 5 &el£
■ At thc mercy of this ferocious band,. the few çxisting meu of De Mowbray's party entertained but small hopes of pre¬ serving that life, whieh their Lord de¬ spised-on- the terms upon which he now held it: tliey had hung down their,con«· quered heads in despair and sadness, while their savage opponents triumphed over them, mixing with their insults threats of torture and death. Lord William was offering up a silent prayer to Heaven, in the first despair of a vain; mind, foiled in its plan of glory, to be released from an existence intoler¬ able, under the circumstances which at the present hour attended his, when one of the leaders of the borderers advanced, and having motioned vvith his hand to enjoin silence, he spoke thus:— iC Our loved ancl venerated chief commands me · to inform the conquered De Mowbray*, that as the fortune of the day bas placed bim in his power, he must not expect him to yield bis person to liberty, witlir out
-out the remuneration of a valuable ran¬ som. In the mean time, he condescends to assure him that he shall experience no other ill-treatment than that of impri¬ sonment. " Who is your chief?" asked De Mow¬ bray. li Allanrod, the great and powerful Allanrod," replied the leader; " behoid him on yon mountain's brow!" Lord William turned his eyes the way the leader's hand was extended, and per¬ ceived, on the top. of a craggy moun¬ tain, less elevated than the rest whicb fenced in the valley, a man of extraor¬ dinary bulk and height, clad İn the Highland fashion, and leaning on a matchlock of enormous length, one end of which was rested upon the ground, an*l his arm laid across the, other : everv .part of his dress.and arms corresponded with those worn by the Scottish freeboot¬ ers, except that of his head, and upon tbis hc wore a helmet, tbe vizor of which was 1 » I
Baron rested scarcelv an instant on the form ofthe conqueror; it turnea to sl small figure, in the attire of his own soldiery', which was hanging on the arm of Allanrod, and whicii. though its coun- tenance was turned f<om him, he could not hesitate to decide the treacherous Donald. The Baron's feelings at this discoverv defied controul ; and he exclaimed to the leader—" Tell me, I entreat you, is not he who leans upon hisarm a youth named Donald ?" 44 I have no time for parley, Sir," re¬ plied the leader; "my commission to vou from our chief is delivered, and we must now on without delav, or we shall not reach our quarters by nightfall," "'It is he, by Heaven i'* cried the Buron. *' Curses on his villainous hypo¬ crisy!" * His exclamations were unnoticed by the enemy, or, at least, not replied to; ' . all.
all their attention was directed to the commands issuing by their own.leaders; and these were for tliem to ieave a suffi¬ cient number of their party to take care of the wounded ; and for the rest to guard the prisoners from the valley to their own fortress. Maddening were tbe reflection» of the Багоп ; he now perceived, or fancied hc perceived, that he bad been made the dupe of a tool from the enemy, com¬ missioned to his castle for tbe purpose of drawing him into the entanglement which had just hú to his ruin ; and although he could not but think, that were the same circumstances to occur again, the plausibility of a tale like that delivered by the youth two evenings before, in the hall of his castle, would again lead him to pursue the same steps he had taken, still he felt enraged at himself that he had taken tliem, now he· believed it probable that by observing a contrary conduct be bad been saiev CUM*.
CÎİAP. ît Wllçe I мя tkmeVtmái, 1 bob witb камИш« ott anytdi. Ύ ÅT was now high noon-day, and the sun unob*cured by a single cloud to soften its heat. Their way lay over steep mountains, and through rugged paths; and, owing to the weakness which they felt from their exertions in the battle» and tlte wounds they had received, the progress of both the conquerors and the conquered was considerably retarded. As they moved on, the Baron looked sorrow·
sorrowfully around oti hts beaten troopv and found that the number of the stirviv- iag was scarcely forty ; of these, his chief leader, Irwin, wa§ one, but thc wounds he hail received were so great, as to oblige him to be borne ou a litter, formed of the branches of trees. About the time that tlie sun began to withdraw his light from the earth, and usher in the twilight of the evening they entered upon a wide and dreary heath: for nearly three miles they pro¬ ceeded along, without any signs of culti¬ vation or inhabitants meeting their eyes ; from the slowness of their march io these three miles, the twilight had retired be¬ yond the expanded curtam of night, and the pale silvery light of a rising moon alone gave a faint illumination to the scene. The country continued wild and deso¬ late in the extreme ; no vegetation could yet be perceived, except a short bro w a grass*
grass, on which one solitary pflock of sheep were picking their scanty meal ; and here and there, piles of enormous stones, the growth of ages, broke the melancholy sameness of thp barren Uaih. iit last their road wound into a rus&ed path, on one sidt* of which arose im¬ mensely steep mountains clothed with a black furze, which gave to the scene a gloomy ¡md funereal appearance, height¬ ened by the shades of night, from which the eve of the traveller turned to seek relief on the opposite side of the road ; and here it no sooner rested, than it shuddered at the sight of a ίίαψ 'gulf, from which there wae neither natural nor artificial protection, and which appeared expressly designed either to perpetrate or couccaťa murder in ; and there was not wanting evidence that of such a scene the spot beneatii had been a witness, for a creaking noise drew towards it the eye of the Baron, and he found that it pro¬ ceeded
ceeded from the rusty chains of a gibbet, on which hung a half decayed figure, which the wind agitated, and caused the links to grate each other in their motion. Tİıe Harun shuddered as his eyes rested on the horrid object ; the freebooters passed it with jocular observations on the fate of the unfortunate wretch, who had been placed there as a warning mark to those who were now treading in his path of iniquity. As they drew towards the end of this path, thc Baron perceived a speck in the horizon, wliich he conjectured to be a distant building : a short time convinced him that it was so; and as thev advanced towards it, the conversation of the free¬ booters informed hitn it was their haunt. For the first time since the commence¬ ment of their march, the Baron spoke.— 44 Is this the abode of your chief?'* he asked. The reply was in the affirmative. "Is
"Is it a castle—a building of strength r K he rejoined. ** Oh no, no, iťs no castle/* re¬ plied one of the freebooters ; "nor is there much strength in if, except that of some good muscles and hearts : it was once a monastery, but it is turned to a much better use now ; what they used to pray for, and never get, we fight for, and always enjoy," One of his companions was going to reply, when a horn, sounded from an ad¬ vanced body ofthe Moss-troopers, obliged him to siience, or at least prevented his being heard. The horn Lord William found to be a signal to those at home of the approach of their comrades? for in a very few mi¬ nutes many torches were visible about the building, and their light exposed to him the ruinous state it was in; for not one of the torches was as yet in the air, but gleaming along the vaulted aisles, and
and winding passages, which had once formed the beauty of the edifice, and which were now decayed, either by the hand of Time or violence, and appeared to leave almost the heart of the mansion naked to the light. Those who now issued from thc various outlets of the edifice with their torches, appeared, if possible, more ferocious than their companions; the triumph of the latter was instantly made known, and congratulations ofiered them by tlie for¬ mer. Before this edifice they halted: the leader who had addressed Lord WiU liam on the held ot battle, again ap¬ proached him, and having commanded the prisoners of interior глпк to be kd into the subterraneous» vaults of the building, vvhich had formerly beeu the cellars of the monastery, he preceded the Baron into a large gloomy iiall, which appeared once to have been the nave of a church : it was faintly illuminated hy an iron lamp, suspended by a chain from the
the roof, which served to discover the many obscure passages that branched off from it into the several parts of the building, and led to wide and lofty stone staircases. Irwin was immediately taken up one of these : the Baron could not forbear expressing some anxiety for his fate, al¬ though he did not helieve such an ex¬ pression calculated to procure him any adtîi tional advantages amongst the savage set thev were now with ; but the leader, who would have been considered a man of a most dark and forbidding counte¬ nance, to have been seen alone, but who, by comparison with the more ferocious faces he was now amongst, ahnost de¬ served the name of gentle, assured the Baron that every care his situation re¬ quired should be shewn to him ; and then desired the Baron to follow him to the apartment destined for himself. The Baron's pride wanted relief as much as his hotly; and considering ita conde-
condescension, if not a mark of respect to his situation, in the leader, to denomi¬ nate that his apartment which justice would have allowed him to have called his prison, lie followed vvith more com¬ placency of temper than lie believed he could, in his present trying situation, have commanded. It may be urged—" What eould he tio but obey ? he knew resistance or com¬ plaints to be in vain." To this it is re¬ plied, 'that it is a mind of more than common energy that can restrain its feel¬ ings in a situation so galling to its peace ; and that it is the custom of the multi¬ tude most to murmur, where murmuring least avails ; because their complaints are always great in proportion to the great¬ ness of their sufferings ; and, a sense of suftering takes away from them the; power of reasoning upon the good or evil effect of bewailing tlieir misfortunes.. Followiug the leader, he ascended a flight of stone stairs, although not thtí vol. п.- с same
same up whicu Irwin had been carried, and passed into a long gallery, faintly lighted in like manner as the hall ; hence they proceeded to some smaller stairs, which appeared to wind up a tower : there was here no lamp, and a torch was necessary to shew them their way. The stairs were extremely decayed, and eveu dangerous to pass ; they were, however, few in number: thus, notwithstanding their ruinous situation, tbey soon arrived at the top of them. The leader drew frcm his pocket a key, and giving it to one of his attendants, ordered him to unlock a small iron door which presented itself to their view. With difficulty the man turned the key in tbe rusty wards, and then forced open the door, from which issued a cloud of dust that almost blinded them, and proved the length of time the apartment had been unoccupied. The man who bore the torch entered first; him the leader followed, and called
called to the Baron to come in after hira k The Baron obeyed, but not without casln ing on his conductors a look of suspi¬ cion, to which they replied by a mató* cious and satisfactory smile. The room they had now entered Ьояе every mark of having been built for a prison : it was large, and high ; «the" walls of stone, appeared once to have been plastered, but were now, in many places, bare, and in others covered with a green and mossy dew ; the roof was formed of beams of oak, worm-eaten, and black with age ; and the only place for the admission of light was a small grated window fixetl nearly at the top qf the wall. , i In the middle of the apaitment stood an iron pan, in which wood seemed once to have been burnt, for ashes might bç discovered in İt, as also scattered abouj; the floor. The only furniture was а зшаЦ table and a chair, and in pue corner с 2 stood
stood a large oaken chest, over which hung a rude- wooden crucifix. Lord William looked around him with marks of dejection at the appearance of the place, which the leader observing, told him tbat it should be made more comfortable, and immediately gave di¬ rections for a fire to' be lighted, and a lamp to be brought him ; which being done, some provisions vvere set on the table, and a mattress and blanket spread for' him ; on the floor ; and the Moss¬ troopers then all departed, the chief ob¬ serving íthât it would be very soon i u his own power to shorten his imprisonment. The door was shut upon him, antl he heard it locked and barred without. The Baron, left to his own reflections, east his eyes once more hopelessly round his prison, and, heaving a deep sigh, he threw himself into the chair, and felt hb hearrsinking vvithin him. The pride, the vanity of his life, which it
it had been his soul's passion to feed and to support, had met a blow, from which it might never rise again to its former dignity and honours : the Queen might believe that he had been faulty and rash, in marching tovvards the quarters of the enemy, and might withdraw her counte¬ nance from him, as a man vvithout suffi¬ cient skill to guard the frontiers of her kingdom. From himself, his thoughts wandered to his daughter; what pain would she not experience at his not return¬ ing to his castle; for he believed she still loved him, notwithstanding the rigour with which he had enforced over her his parental authority. His own unfortu¬ nate circumstances softened his heart; and Uow he supposed her to be regretting his' absence, he thought he loved her more tenderly than he had ever tlone, and wished, more ardently than he had ever done before, to clasp her to his breast. с 3 The
Tfee bud voices of the freebooters, who appeared in dispute, probably, he thoughts, about the division of the spoil, i>r else under the influence of intoxica* tion, or perhaps both, sounded, at in¬ tervals, from the lower paus of the building, and broke the silence of the flight. At length, about an hour after midnight, universal silence prevailed, and the victorious crew beneath him appeared m have retired to rest. - Hb longed to tnow how his soldiers, and his leader, Irwin t were treated \ •but fche wish was vain ; and relying but little on the promise made tò him by the leader who had conducted him to his prison, he fel£ for them a degree of mnxiety which heightened his own un* ' pleasant sensations ; for, as we have be»- fbre said, Lord William's heart always inclined to the side of feeling, where it did Dot interfere wkh his darling passion, to exercise hishenevolenceand humanity* His
His march had been a krøg and weary one, and the cravings of nature impelled him to examine the contents of the basket which had been, placed upon his table; he found in it a loaf of brown bread and some broiled fish; and by their side stood a stone jug of malt li¬ quor aud a flask of spirits. It was at this moment some small relief to bim to find a supply fot hià appetite¿ and having eaten what necessity required, and drunk a draught óf the spirits, iü the hope of inducing sleep, he threw himself upon his mattress, having first 'trimmed his lamp, and laid au additional log of wood on his fire. Painful reflection for a long-time com¬ bated fatigue, and drove off the approach of sleep ; at last it stok upon him, but his slumbers were sho*t aad disturbed : he fancied that he heard various noises* sometimes of persons running up the fitairs of his prison ; then, as if the door ©f his apartment was unlocking* Several с 4 tim§a
times he sprang from his mattress, and paced the room, to examine if any dan¬ ger was lurking near him, and severely lamenting that he was unarmed : no¬ thing, however, Was to be seen or heaul, when herose up; and believing that his fears might have been the suggestions of his huiried imagination, he again stretch¬ ed himself on his haul bed. The dawn was now beginning to peep through the narrow casement that alone gave light to his prison, and feeling more secure, as the daikness of night died away, he soon fell into a profound sleep. When he again awoke, the strength of thc light vvhich entered his apartment proved to him that the morning was far advanced, as did his lamp and fire, which were both exhausted. He instantly began to use the light of day, for, more closely investigating his prison than he had yet been able to do, he examined thc door; ttie bolts were all too firm to admit of the hope of an escape
escape that way : he placed his table un¬ der the window, and upon jt he put his chair, upon whicii he mounted ; but the casement was still beyond his reach, nor couhi he, by all his endeavours, catch through it a glimpse of any object but the passing clouds. lie descended, and his next step was to endeavour to lift up the lid of the chest, but it bid defiance to all his efforts : he kicked against it, and the hollow sound which followed his knock seemed to bespeak it empty. lie continued to walk round and round his prison, hoping to find some chink, some outlet which might flatter hitn with the hope of an escape; but all in vain ; the walls appeared strong in every part, and fully capable of resisting the effoits of an unarmed individual to force a pas¬ sage through them. He observed tliat they were not in every part bare, but that here and there fragments of tatten d tapestry were still adhering to them ; manv of these which were within his с 5 reach
reach he pulled away, hoping still some chasm might present itself to his sight behind them, but dust only followed their fall; and the wall beneath appeared , perfectly firm in every part. The leader had, on the preceding night, said that it would be his own fault if his imprisonment was of long duration ; thus aH he had now to do was to await in patience the proposed terms for his ran¬ som. He had not been risen more than an hour when one of the men appeared, and brought him bis breakfast; with the evening· his provisions were again renew¬ ed, and his oil and fuel replenished ; but Still no one but an inferior of the free¬ booter's party had been into his apart¬ ment* and he had heard nothing of the expected terms of ransom; His night was not at all more easy thaa the former one had been, indeed rather less so, as he began to entertain suspi¬ cions that he was meant to be detained a .^ v * prisoner
V' " ■ priaoner for life, or perhaps to be delit Veted, tıp to a death of torture. Late in the evening of the following day, the leader appeared. " I am glad to see you," said De Mowbray ; <l I feared that you hadfer- gotten me : I have been expecting, ere this, to have heard from ypu. What are the terms of ransom which you даеа* tioned to me ?" "I have purposely delayed visiting you*" replied the leader, * c lest, in the first heat of your disappointalent át not being yauißelf the conqueror, which you know ^Hanrod to be, you should have apurned at terme which, on cool reflect tion, will no doubt appear to you as rea¬ sonable, M "I am fully prëparetl %& liear theiï^^ feturiied the Baton. "·, .■■ i( Ånd foolish will you be»" answered the kader- ■ *'.if you do not as readily comply with them ; aod thiuk youifelf ■ i -v ■ с 6 blessed
blessed in the easy terms oflered to your acceptance. Remember, proud Lord/' he continued, " that it is in tlie power of Allanrod to confine you hei e for life ; to keep the spot of your confinement a secret, hy detaining your çaptın td sol¬ diers litre Üke yourself; and if the spot be suspected, and a force marched out to attack it in your behalf, it will be iu his power to cut off your liberty by death. Reflect well on the superiority lie has over you, atul then hear ids conditions/* Lord William's blood boiled within him. Conditions frtnn the leader of a savage band cf freebooters to the Lord of. De Mowbray Castie, was a sound worse tlian poison to his ears; but policy command¬ ed him to subdue his feelings, and with an effort wiiich cost him many pangs, he said, in a voice of composure — " Speak!*' " Pi omise *o give your daughter in marriage to Lord Rufus dé Madgine¬ court,
court, and you are this instant free, and shall be conducted with honour to your own castle,'' replied the leader. if the mind of the Ľaron had before been agitated, vvhat vvere his feel i и «s at this demand ! Astonishment'closed his lips, and he stood fixed in silence and surprise : his eyes encountering tliose of the leader—*' (Hve my child to Lord Rufus! 1 ' he exclaimed, after a pause. 4t As I say," returned the leader. " Never, by Heaven î" answered the Baron. " Deliberate upon it for tlie night,'*' returned the leader: " I will see vou again to-morrow,'*—and vias departing. il No deliberation, no idea of my own liberty, shall ever induce me to sa¬ crifice my daughter to the monster I know him to be," returned the Baron: " but btay—I conjure you, stay, and tell me how am I to understand this de- maud—as proceeding from whence, and from whom? Is it urged by Lord Rufus him-
himself, or by Allanrod, your leader, for him?' Ιφ Lord Rufus here? How is Allanrod interested in his happiness?" 44 Nòne of these points can be replied to/till you hfave answeied io the affirma* tive," said the leader,. He then Re¬ peated—" 1 will see you again' to-mor-^ row," and departed.
CHAK
fs
CHAP. IIL
Nowjo^r the one hilf **>ddt Nature seems dead, and wicked dreams abust / The curtain'd sleep» JWClETIfc Д HE Baron sunk mto his chair, in a state of greater wretchedness of mind than he had ever yet experienced: ta solve the mystery which hadi just been? presented to him; he found himself лпи adequate ; but he plainly perceived that he had; bé№ the dupe ;of a plot deeply planned to wiu his consent to an union which lm owfi sbul now abhorred, ţ^oţ kás than did his unhappy Rosalind. .- у & -"': Wh®
Who could this Allanrod be, whose piisoner he was?—and how were Lord Rufus and he connected, as this demand seemed to bespeak them ? were questions wliich he proposed to his own mind manv different times durin«: the night, v OCT' and which he was obliged as often to dismiss from it agaiu unanswered. The transactions of tbe few last davs / appeared to him a dream : lie could scarcely believe himself now awake. He felt suspicious of the truth of every oc¬ currence of recent date whicii his me¬ mory registered as facts; and knew him¬ self certain only of one tiling, and tbis was, that, be his own fate what it might, his consent should never be extorted to tliat man becoming the husband of his daugìiter, wlio vvould have been a suffi¬ cient monster to have led her to a second marriage bed, while yet her lawful hus¬ band lived. In the morning, the leader returned as he
he had foretold he should do.—" Well," he said, lc are you determined ?" " Yes, I am," replied Lord William, tc never to agree to your terms of li¬ berty." Thc leader placed on the table some paper, some ink, and a pen. (t When you change your mind,* 7 he said, " as there is no doubt but you soon will, write your consent on that paper, sign it, and order it to be given to the leader Mourose, who is myself; till then you will see no more of me, rest assured." The Baron was beginning again to propose to him one of the questions re¬ lative to the connexion of Allanrod and Lord Rufus, which he had urged in vain the evening before; but Mourose inter¬ rupted him, by saying—*' Not a sylla¬ ble from in4 till you have* given your consent ;" and with a malignant smile he left the place. Two days passed unmarked by any event, but increasing misery to the Ba¬ ron;
ron ; on the next he determined to tam* per with the men who attended him, and to endeavour to open their feelings to his situation by the master-key of gold, which fits the wards of almost every heart. The first on whom he resolved to make the attempt, was the fellow whose observations on the gibbet they had passed^ in their march, had so much shocked him ; and his reason for select¬ ing him was, that he thought he did not appear to possess sufficient sense of feel¬ ing to bind him honest, even to his com-" fades in dishonesty. He it was who -usually brought him his mormng repasts and on this day he came todiis wish. " How long have you been a free*· booter?" said the Baron to him, as atl opening to the conversation. 4( Long enough," replied the man> и to be much richer than 1 am." " Perhaps your honesty has kept you poor," rejoined the Baron ; " and though you
you are not above a robbery, you may¿ perhaps, scorn a bribe." {i I was never tried," answered the fellow, with an arch smile. t( I have three pieces of gold at your service," returned the Baron, *' in return for some information I want to gain of you." " Respecting what?" asked the maft. " Respecting your leader, Allanrod*' f replied the Baron. " I want to learn how he stands connected with Lord Rufus de Madginecourt. Do you kno^ any thing of their concerns ?" 4 ' A little, I believe," returned tlie fellow, with another intelligent smile. " Then what say you to the three pieces ?" rejoined the Baron. " I say that if they were nine," re¬ turned the Moss-trooper, *' and in my hand, my communication should be at your service." Nine pieces were all the Baron Ыа about him, but lie considered them worth bartering
bartering for information upon so obscure, so mysterious a point, and one so greatly important lo him ; and he put them into the hands of the man.—" Now, then, speak/* said Lord William. " Not a word," answered the man. '* Now you see I have honesty to my chief, and know how to use a bribe, though it is the first I ever received /'— and with these words he left tiie place. To curse was in vain : the Baron clasped his hands, and paced his prison in an agitation which he would not at anv other time have believed the insolence and treacheiy of so mean a wretch could have excited in his mind. He had never before been in a situation to lament the loss of such a sum, but it was now his all, and, in more friendly hands, might have rendered him the most essential service: hc had now nothing of value left him with wliich to win the robbers to his cause, and he despaired of making an impression by any other means than those
those of gold, on the heart of a free¬ booter. At night a stranger appeared, with his fire and provisions ; he doubted not but that the other had found an excuse for not coming again into his presence. For three successive days he saw only this stranger, and another man, whose features were equally new to him. The first of the two seemed to be cast in a less rugged mould than were the general part of his comrades, and him the Baron resolved first to address : he had only promises to hold out to him ; but he hopeel to be able, in some measure, to prevail by these, as he recollected that none of the Moss-troopers could be un¬ acquainted with his rank and wealth. Oťr the fourth morning he accosted him when he brought ,in his breakfast. The man did not reply, or raise his eyes from his employment, when the Baron spoke.· lie addressed him again; still he replied not. He spoke to him a third time,
time, and with as ill success, the man* »ot even looking towards him. As he was about to leave the apart¬ ment, thè Baron crossed upou him, and spoke once more: the man fixed liis eyes on him, and having for some mo¬ ments watched the motion of his lips, he shook his heátl, and pointing to his ears, indicated that he was deaf. The Baron made a, sign to him not to depart, and the man waited patiently to see what he required. Lord William tore a slip from the paper which had been brought him by the leader Monrose, and on it he proposed a question, in writing, and shewed it to the man. '< I can't read," said the man, " but I'll send somebody to you that cau hear you, directly." ^ He went away, locking the door after him, and leaving the Baron to lament a second disappointment, He had not many moments for reflection, before the doorv opened again, and another man ap T peaied.
peared. — " Do you want any thing, Sir?" he asked. t4 Murdoch thinks you do; and we are ordered to grant you every accommodation you may re¬ quire." " Indeed !" exclaimed the Baron, sur«» prised at the question— л then tell me, who is Allanrod ?" " That is an accommodation he or¬ dered us not to grant you," said the man. 44 And do you refuse to grant any on your own account?" asked De Mow¬ bray. ** You were unlucky the other day/* returned the man— <f you met with one of our chief's first favourites." "Whom do you mean?" asked the Baron. " His name is Frasier," was the reply ; " he that got the nine pieces of gold of you : he has bragged enough below of ţiis deceit to you." The Baron was' now auimated with a spark
spai к of hope which announced a friend at hand; and bitterly did he lament that an enemy had snatched from him the only reward he had been possessed of, and which might now have been valuable , indeed to hum , " Would to Heaven," cried Lord Wil¬ liam, " that I vvere possessed óf thrice that sum to bestow on thee ! but I have not a single coin about me. 1 do not scruple to tell you this, because I think I read in your eye that you wilt not doubt the sincerity of any· promise I make to you : and to shew you that my promises arc not vain, answer me faith¬ fully to a few qučstion^ which I shall ask of you, and I will give ypu my written promise on this paper." *' Will you give me a promise for twenty pieces of gold ?" asked the mah. " On my life I will," returneel the Baron, with the energy hd felt. *' Enough/' replied the man; *' then propose your questions; but do not be¬ tray
. .ľ tray me—it would expose mc to tort uie, and render you no additional benefit." The Baron promised most solemnly not to reveal what sliould be imparted to him, and then proposed liis first question—- " What connexion is it tliat exists be¬ tween уош* chief, Allanrod, and Lord Rufus de Madginecourt?" " Connexion ľ' replied the man, ťc why they are——" " Rascal !— villain ľ' exclaimed a voice, and at the same moment Frasier darted into tlte prison. " This I expected/' he cried, 4t from your^cmarks when 1 shew¬ ed you my nine pieces : but I am in time to prevent your damned tattling.—Out, imp ! your life is uot worth an hour's wear/' Violently he drove him towards tlie door, and was following him out. ťí For Heaven's sake!" cried the Ba¬ ron, "report him not: on my soul he has disclosed nothing to me !" " That was not his wisdom, but his vol. ıı. d want
Avant of time," replied Frasier; " and we, who exist only by honour to each otlier, are philosophers enough to consider the will and the deed the same." The door was instantly shut, the Baron left without hope, and the unpleasant¬ ness of his feelings materially increased by the punishment which he dreaded awaited him who had shewed a readiness to becomehis friend. The paper, upon which he had been about to give his written promise of a reward to the man who had been just hurried from his presence, was still in his hand. He had found one heart, which from interest, or perhaps partly from humanity and partly from interest, at least he wished to believe it so, had been about to become a friend to his cause; and he doubted not but there were others amongst the freebooters possessed of the same feelings, if he had but an opportu¬ nity of seeing them, and selecting one for his purpose : as he had not this op¬ portunity,
1 5 portunity, being aware that, now Allan- rod'^ favourite, Frasier, had unfortu¬ nately been the first object of his temp¬ tation, none, who were likely to incline to his suit, would be permitted to ap¬ proach him ; chance must inevitably be his guide in his future attempts at free¬ dom : accordingly having torn off a part of the paper, he wrote upon it— ť< Lord William dc Mowbray promises to reward, with a thousand pieces of gold, him who siiall give infoi mation at De Mowbray Castle that he is a prisoner in tliis build¬ ing." Tliis done, he tied the paper to a piece of rusty iron, which he iouiid on the floor of his prison, and again placing his chair upon tlie table under the wiudow, he climbed upon it, and threw out what he had written : he had secured it fiom being carried away by tiic wiud, aud all he feared was that it might fall upon the roof of some lower part of the building, and thus be lost for ever. The chances D â were
were also much in favour of its falling into unfriendly hands. liowever, he must either submit to these hazards, or forego all attempts at liberty ; and he resolved to repeat vvhat he had that day done on every successive oue, whilst any of his paper was yet remaining. Iu the evening his oil and provisions were brought to hiin by thc deaf mau : he heard the voice of Frasier on the stairs, but he did not come into the prison. Late in the night the Baron laid him¬ self down to rest; the fatigue ofmind which he hail endured during the day inclined him to sleep, and he soon sunk into the lap of repose : but his imagina¬ tion was too much disturbed for him to derive much refreshment from his slum¬ bers ; and dieams of a horrid nature floated in his brain. He imagined his daughter sinking under the ferocious em¬ braces of Lord Rufus, and calling to him for assistance, while he stood by ata short
short distance, anxiously desiring to res¬ cue her from her ravisher, but unable to move towards her : the agitation of his mind awoke him, and as hc awoke, he heard the clock strike twelve. In a short time he again composed himself to sleep; stiil dreams, ofa like dreadful nature, haunted his fancy : be thought himself cntaiudal in the labv- rinth of a wood ; a rough-looking figure approached him, and he besought it to point out. to him his way. The figure beckoned to him to follow it, nnd he did so; but it appeared only to lead him still farther into the entanglements of the forest : presently it knelt down, and scratching up a tuft of grass, discovered to his view, beneath it, the skeleton of a cliild ; the fig'ire, at thc same moment, assumed the likeness of Hubert, and darted at him a blow with a dagger. In an agony of mind he awoke, and started from his bed ; his lamp was not entirely extinguished, and a faint ligut still pro- ώ 3 ceeded
ceeded from the dviner embers of his fne : he cast his eyes fearfully around his prison, almost dreading to behold the form he had seen in his dream ; as they turned towards the great oak chest, he perceived the lid open, and a haggard countenance appearing beneath it. He started at the sight, and uttered au exclamation of surprise : the face imme¬ diately disappeared, and the lid fell down with a loud clap. Terror seized him : he could not dis¬ vili ite the ideas of his dream, ami his waking observation ; he believed tlie hag¬ gard countenance which lie had just seen to have been that of Hubert. Could it be possible that he was one of tlie free¬ booters, and reallv determined on his life, as ids dream had predicted? 41 Oli that the cliild of Rosalind vvere living I" he exclaimed, in mental agony ; i£ oh that tiie black hour of my misfor¬ tunes were not deeper dyed by the recol¬ lection of my crimes !" Trembling
Trembling hc staggered towards the chest (for security of the worst is better to endure than suspense), and endea¬ voured to raise the lid ; but as, on all liis former trials, it resisted his efforts, he again kicked against it, to ascertain wiiether it would now return the same sound of hollowness that it had before done; and thc sound was still the same. He retired to a corner of his apart¬ ment, anxiously listening, and expect¬ ing momentarily to hear some fresh sound of terror, or behold some object of alarm; but the silence of the night was un¬ broken, except by the echoes of his own quick breathings. After a length of time had elapsed, and nei'liei sounds nor objects returned, to rc*excite his terror, he became almost ready to impute the impression of the past to his pertui bed imagination, as being merely a pait of his dream, or the consequence of it; but he could not pass thc soothing im¬ pression on his seuses ; he felt too ceitain ©4 of
of liaving been reaily awake, aud too strongly convinced that what he had seen was no vision of sleep, -no waking dream, but a reality. He traversed his chamber in an agita¬ tion of despair ; a few minutes put a period to the life of his lamp, and he was constrained to pass more than two- hours in dreadful darkness, ere thc grey niorning began to break through the clouds of night; and when the rays oť day once more entered his prison, he felt a reluctance again to return to his mat¬ tress, and placed hitnself in his chair, where he hoped for awhile to forget his miseries in sleep ; but thought drove off its approach, and tliough his mind was busily occupied by reflection, ideas croud¬ ed so fast upon each other, that he felt himself entirely incapable of so arranging them as to produce any thing like reason¬ ing.
CHAP.
CHAP. IV. v LuoR where it comes ! It harrows mc with fear and wonder. HAMLET* ABOUT an hour after sun-rise, Lord William heard a drum beat; an imme¬ diate bustle seemetl to ensue throughout the building; he heard the voices of the borderers calling to each otlier, and sometimes ti.yr hasty steps approached cinbe to his pi ¡son. For a moment he entertained the faint hope of a rescue being near at hand; but as the noUes seemed all couiined to thc inside of the d 5- build i uk»
building, the idea of its being attacked by any friends of his soon vanished. In about an hour more, the siugle drum beat a call, and in a few minutes after it was joined by several instruments which piayed a lively march : for some time they appeared to be stationary, either on the outside of the edifice, or in some court within its wails. They then began to recede from it, and their sounds were heard by him giaduaily decreasing, till they died away amongst the whisperings of the floating breeze. It was tiie first time since liis confine¬ ment that he had heard the sounds of instruments, and he doubted not but that tliey were now used to lead the free¬ booters to sonic act of plunder and de¬ vastation. During thc day no one but the deaf man and the malignant Frasier attended upon him. About noon he again threw a paper out of his window, similar to tlie one he had let fall from İt the day before :
before : as the evening advanced, he de¬ termined to be sparing of ids fuel and oil, that he might not again be left in darkness during any part of the night. The whole day he had traversed his prison in the greatest inquietude of mind, and as the dusk of twilight began to add the gloom of nature to that whicii already obscured his feelings, Hubert was the only subject of his thoughts ; nay, he even fancied that thc passing breeze seemed to whisper in his car— 4i Mur¬ derer of thy grandchild ľ' In agony insupportable, lie wrung his hands, and from an aching heart liis lips groaned forth— íť Iiow blessed arc the innocent in misfortune, when compared witli wliat the guilty suiier !" Still he attempted to flatter himself with tiie idea that his present conduct, in so tcsolutcly refusing to sacrifice liis daugìiter to Lord Rufus, must be of some weight in his favour in the scale of good, to balance lm foimer cruelty to her ami her chiid; his lua; t D 6 íickiiow-
acknowledged it a feeble consolation ; but he grasped at the only straw of com¬ fort vhich there appeared in view for him to catch at in his present sea of cala¬ mities. About midnight he sunk to sleep in his chair : how long he slept he knew not, but when he awoke his lamp was out, and his fire u as also nearly exhaust¬ ed; two or tî 11 cc expiring sticks were all tliat remained of it. aiui these threw a feeble light upon the wall on one side,. leaving the rest of tiie room in dark shade.. He directly rose, to replenish the fire, and as lie approached it, he heard a noise, lescmbling the nibbing of two pieces of iron agaiust each otlier í he stopped, and listened ; tlie sound of an opening door followed immediately alter, and all was then still again. Several minutes elapsed, and the sounds did not ictuin: he heaped more fuel on his ihe, vvhich for the present rather choked than added to the little light Mİıich
which proceeded from it: suddenly a loud noise, like the falling of chains, burst on his ear, and seemed to proceed from the chest. lie recollected the hag¬ gard countenance which he had once seen under its lid, and trembled : he doubted not but that tiie performance of some treaciiery was at bund, and he was unarmed, thus unable to defend himself. He now heard something creak vvithin the chest, and thought he could distin¬ guish the drawing of breath. A loud snap in its "mside made him start, and he stole into tiie shade, to observe what he could not fly from. The gloom he now looked through upon the chest was thick, and almost impenetrable, by the slender light his fire afforded ; but he thought lie.could perceive the lid lifted up; a faint gleam of light, which immediatelv appeared beneath it, convinced him it was open. Ail anxiety and dread, he durst scarcely breathe. The light in¬ creased gradually, but not to any great 5 strength,
strength, and an armed head appeared rising up above the edge of the chest ; its features, as well as he could discern, for the shade of its helmet was strong upon them, appeared black, and distort¬ ed ; and he felt, for the first time wliat excessive fear is. Tlie figure continued to rise slowly up, its eyes rolling wildly about, аз if endeavouring to look through the misty gloom that pervaded the pri¬ son ; its right arm was now stretched out, and in this it held a lamp and a, dagger. Lord William continued, involuntarily, shrinking back from tiie appearance before him ; and as he receded towards the wall, a violent blow on his head brought him to the ground : a loud crash ensued—a dreadful giddiness seized him, and in a moment all was darkness and siience. -Ти 4P тг w ττ τ? 4F When Lord William's recollection re¬ turned to him, he found himself lying upon the ground, and totally insensible how
liow long he might have lain there. He awoke from his stupor sore and bruised, and entirely ignorant where he was ; the place to which he was transported ap¬ peared to hissenses full of misty vapours, and a strong earthy smell assailed his nostrils. The grouud was clammy and uneven ; and, iu endeavouring to raise liimself, he several times slipped down again. He extended his hands on every side— ail was vacancy : he moved on a few steps, and a stone wali, dripping with- humid exhalations like that of a sepul¬ chre, met his touch. Guiding himself by this wall, he de^ tcrmined, if possible, to measure the extent of the place lie was in, and en¬ deavour to learn if there was no opening for him to escape by. As he proceeded, unwholesome vapours met his breath, and the dewy damps, wliich settled on his hair and clothes, ran down in drops upon his face and hands* He
He trod on cautiously for a consider¬ able time, his hands constantly heid out to warn him of any obstacle that might intercept his progre&s. Suddenly a short but rapid declivity in the ground agam threw him on his sirle, and at thc same moment a deep groan struck his ear. With suspended respiration, iie awaked its repetition; but no similar sound was heard ; all was agaiu profoundly silent. He sighed aloud, thinking that it had periiaps been the echo of liis own bieath which had alat med him, and willing' to ascertain if it was so. No echo now re¬ plied to it, but at the moment wiien he expected to have heaid it, the air close by him was cut by the rapid movement of some substauce passing through it¬ änd all was then again still. He had heaid no footsteps accompany¬ ing the sound, but dreading that danger was lurking near him, he made an effort to rise : he could not find the wall which had before been some protection to him in
in moving along ; still he thought that a few steps might bring him to it. The ground became more slippery than ever : he again stumbled, and in his attempt to catch at something wliich might save him from falling, he encountered in his. grasp a—skeleton ! He threw himself from it, 'as if a serpent had met his touch, and, darting on one side, he again found himself by the wall : cold drops of perspiration burst fiom every pore, and a deadly sickness seized him ; he groaned aloud in agony, and the spot where he now stood returned him the celu of his own voice in hollow sounds, which fear might have believed to have proceeded from the mouths of aa hundred spirits. Lord William stood chained to the spot, at a total loss how to proceed amidst the liorrors he was existing amongst : at length, recovering, in some measure, his fortitude, as no fresh cause of terror assailed him, he thought he perceived the
the gleam of a faint light at a distance : he fixed his eyes on it ; it appealed of the same nature with that which had issued from the chest, on the opening of its lid that night; he fancied that it moved, but if it did, its progress was remarkably slow. He presently ascertained that il did recede from him, and considering that his only chance of escaping from this spot of horrors was to follow it, he anoved boldly forward. The ground became drier, and thus favoured his advances towards the light; he kept it still in view, and believed thí» t he could discern by it a deep and lofty vault, into which he was entering : gra¬ dually the vault became narrower and narrower, and at length lie moved along with one hantl upon either wall. For a considerable time, he continued to pro¬ ceed, the light appearing to him to move at nearly the same pace he did, and be¬ coming neither stronger nor paler, till on a sudden it totally disappeared. In this dilemma»
dilemma, Lord de Mowbray felt himself as much at a loss ashe had ever been how to act ; he dreaded equally to advance, or to recede from the spot where he stood, and to remain there, could not forward his hope of escape ; he therefore deter¬ mined, at all hazards, to proceed. After a progress of a few moments, he found himself at the top of a flight of steps, down which his extreme caution just saved him from falling. He de¬ scended about a dozen steps of stone, and on arriving at the bottom of these, he again caught a glimpse of the light, and, as he believed, of the figure which he had seen rise from the chest. He again stopped, to deliberate ; was he really under supernatural influence?—- was the spirit of Hubert haunting him ? or was the living Hubert the agent of a plot for his destruction ? The clock at this instant struck three ; it sounded loudly, and appeared much nearer to hiui thau it had done in bis prison ι
prison : he started at the sound, for its reverberations beat from vault to vault. The light was now again swiftly dis* appearing, and still fearing to be left in total darkness, he again quickened his pace; but his progress was almost imme¬ diately stopped by a grated door. He placed his shoulders to it, and it flew open with a noise which resounded tnrough the place like distant thunder; and at the same instant he felt himself precipitated down several steps, upon a hard and flinty ground. He immediately raised himself up> again, painful as was the efFort, and looked around hastily for the light, but it had entirely vanished. The dungeon into which he had fallen was so small, that its extent measured scarcely a dozen paces; hut he could perceive in it no outlet, no means of quitting it, but by tlie stairs down whicb he had fallen, and which were so decayed and broken away, as to defy all his at¬ tempts to re-ascead them.
For a considerable time, he continued in this wretched situation, till chancing to raise his eyes to the opposite side of the dungeon to that on which he was standing, he saw a faint illumination playing upon the wall, which appeared to be the reflection of some light above his head : he turned his eyes to the spot, and discovered a cleft of considerable size, through which the moonbeams were gaining admittance. His heart leaped with joy ; the cavity was not above his reach, and hanging upon it by his hands, he easily raised himself up to it. He perceived that it was indeed the welcome light of the moon winch was cheering him, and a fine star-light night presented its beautiful serenity to his view. He now blessed his unknown conduc¬ tor, wiiatever his intentions might have been, and began to place all his strength upon his endeavours to force himself through the aperture. Those
Those alone who have been exposed to the situation İn which Lord de Mowbray had been condemned to exist, can be adequate judges of the force with which the expectation of freedom arms the nerves; at another time, the Baron him¬ self would have asserted his incapacity to rend the rock which pointed out li¬ berty to him, and still denied him its enjoyment; now, with strength almost supernatural, he, by small particles/ crumbled away the envious earth, till he was enabled to thrust his body into the aperture : from theuce tlie descent to the ground was but a few feet, and, without hesitation, he leaped down. On looking round, he found himself at the foot of a rocky piece of ground, on which stood the building where he had so lately been a prisoner. He raised his eyes, and beheld the very turret which had been the scene of. his miseries, frowning upon him from the gloomy grandeur of the shade in which it was enveloped.
enveloped. He had liowever enjoyed but very few moments of exultation, vvhen he heard the silence of the night broken in upon by the sound of footsteps. His heart sunk within him : if he was pur¬ sued, how dreadful might be the punish¬ ment decreed against his escape, al¬ though he himself had not been the ori¬ ginal agent of it. He crept into a cleft in the rock, and here he endeavoured to hide himself; the sounds advanced nearer, and then again receded from him : thus they several times returned, and then again died away ; and the Baron at last discovered that they were the footsteps of a sentinel who was pac¬ ing his allotted portion of ground on a prominence of the rock nearly above the cavitv in which he was standing con- ceaied. Once more Lord William feared to move; one glance of the sentinel might destroy all his hopes of escape : he per¬ ceived, however, that the moon was rapidly
"rapidly withdrawing her light from the atmosphere, and knowing that there would be an interval of at least an hour between her disappearance and the rising of day, he determined to await that time for fl} ing from the precincts of the castle; accordingly, when the orb of night had sunk below the horizon, he again ventured forth : the stars were also withdrawing their influence, and the country/ was now wrapped in the dark shades of night. The road towards his own castle he knew to be intricate, and he vvas unacquainted with the track, which it became him to pursue. After he had moved a short distance from his hiding-place, he discerned a path down the rock on which the castle stood; it was steep, and covered with knots of furze and loose stones, which rendered his going down it not only dan¬ geious but difiicult. Arrived at the bottom, he resolved not to proceed by the regular path, lest he should encounter any
any of his enemies returning to their haunt; but to deviate from the road, still keeping if as much as possible in view, and making it the rule öf his pro¬ gress. He wandered on, through an immense valley, bounded on each 'side by lofty hills, and soon discovered that he was passing through that very gulf which on the evening that he was conducted pri¬ soner to the monastery, had struck him with terror as,a spot suited to the dread¬ ful purpose of murder. The gibbet was scarcely discernible at the present time, but the creaking of the 'chains met his ear, and he shuddered at the sound. Over thc range of Jiills which encir¬ cled the valley, he perceived he must climb, before he should quit the purlieus of his enemy's encampment, and with extreme difficulty and caution he arrived on their other side, without any obstruc¬ tion, but such as the ruggednesş of the vol* n e Ë huls
hills themselves presented to his pro¬ gress. Although the exertion was overpower¬ ing, he abated nothing of his speed, and as the dawn of day began to break, he believed himself at least six miles from the spot where he had so lately been a prisoner. Thirst was the most painful sensation hc suffered under, and perceiving no cottage near, he slacked his drought at a rivulet ; sweetened by liberty, the draught was delicious, and seemed to inspire him with fresh spirits and strength. Morning was now beginning to break ; the grey dawn had for some time mixed its lighter tints with the sable ancl retir¬ ing shadows of night ; and the dappled clouds, separating İn large masses, un¬ locked the rosy gates of day.
CHAP.
ЯЯЗЕ
CHAP. V· Rous'd by the cock, thc soon-clad shepherd leaves His mossy cottage, where with peace he dwells, And from the crowded fold, in order drives Ms flock, to taste the verdure of the mora. THOMSON. j\BOUT an hour after sun-rise, the Baroli felt a faintness, the consequence of fatigue, seize upon him, which re¬ quired some short respite of his progress; he accordingly threw himself down at the foot of an oak, where his bed was >erfumed by the violets, which shrunk Vom view amidst the herbage ; and here ie lay for awhile, almost entranced, en- E % joying,
joying, in luxury, the beauties of the scene, and contrasting them with the horrors of the preceding days and nights ; and but for the recollection of his impri¬ soned men, and the uncertain state of his affairs at home, he would for some moments have revelled in perfect happi- aess :—so exquisite is the air we breathe in that liberty which has for any time been denied us. Short, however, were the moments of his blissful trance—a distant sound re¬ sembling the tones of music, mixed it¬ self with the rustling breeze that played upon his ear; it grew gradually louder, and he plainly distinguished the voices of warlike instruments ν be was now as miserable as he had just before been happy ; he doubted not but that the sounds portended the return of some of the Moss-troopers from a sally for plun¬ der, and the dread of discovery again seized him ; he crept towards some bushes, through the foliage of which he couid catch
catch a glance of that part of the coun¬ try from whence the sounds proceeded, without exposing himself to view. "He perceived a long, train of men, whom he instantly recognized to be Scottish freebooters, winding up the side of a hill, at the distance of scarcely a furlong from the spot where he stood : he could also perceive that they were laden with plunder, and he conjectured, heavily too, by the slow pace at which they moved. The road along which they must pass ran close by the present con¬ cealment of the Baron ; to quit it, how¬ ever, he judged more hazardous than to keep close within the cover it afforded him ; and he therefore skulked down beneath the underwood, in a state of dread and anxiety, which equalled every unpleasant sensation he had before expe¬ rienced. The music continued to sound, and the rough voices of the freebooters were now audible, even amidst the din of their e 3 instru-
instruments. The Baron crept still closer to the earth, not daring to raise an eye from his hiding-place. They at length passed within a stone's throw of him. By the few words he overheard of their Conversation, he discovered that they were conducting some prisoners to their fortress. He pitied those condemned to the cruel fate from which he had so re¬ cently, so unaccountably escaped him·* self, and from returning to which he yet scarcely thought himself secure. At length they had all passed the spot, and he ventured to raise his head ; but those he looked for were no longer vi¬ sible, although the sounds of their voices and instruments were still reverberating on his ear : they had marched into a valley, into which his eyes were prevented from sfollo wing them by a cluster of trees which grew at the entrance of it. That this body of freebooters had been reneoun tered by him in his way, the Baron was glad, now he had escaped their
their observation; because the chances appeared in his favour, that he should not meet any of the party to annoy hiin during the remainder of his journey tQ his own castle. Inspired by this hope, he again set forward ; the sounds of the instruments were now scarcely audible, and he saw his enemy at a considerable distance, proceeding along the upper part of a road, where their appearance was that of one moving body, separate ob¬ jects being no longer discernible. Lord William felt the want of suste¬ nance growing upon him at every step ; but still he wished to proceed a little, and still a little further, before he asked refreshment of any of the shepherds whose huts were scattered about, lest he should be recognized by any of them, as he dreaded vvhat connexion they might have with the freebooters. Whilst he was thus debating with his own mind, he perceived three men coming towards him : he was at first startled at the e 4 ' sight,
sight, and felt undetermined whether he should avoid them ; but perceiving that they were shepherds, and that they saw him, he collected himself as much as he was able ; and assuming the manners of a weary traveller, besought their hospi¬ tality. They returned his salutation vyith gieat friendliness; and the eldest, who was the father of the other two, a vene¬ rable, grey-headed old man, immedi¬ atelv invited him to his cottage, which he told him was situated on the other side of the hiil, which the Baron was ascending when he met tliem. One of the sons being left with the flock, the other returned back with his father and Lord William, and, after a few minutes waik, they arrived at tiie humble dwelling of the shepherds. The hut was as rude as it could well be con¬ ceived to be ; the wails vrere of boughs, plastered vrith mud, and thc roof of thatch, was in many parts quite broken away, and in others nearly overgrown with
with moss and weeds ; the door was too low to allow a person who did not stoop, to enter it ; through a few narrow chinks in the walls, was admitted all the light the cottage received ; the fire was contained in a hole dug in the centre of the floor, and the smoke having no chimney to conduct it out, had dyed the inside of the roof with its dusky influence, and cast innumerable blacks on the beams and rafters, in finding a way out for it¬ self. Two or three wooden benches, and a rough-hewn table, composed all the fur¬ niture of the place, except some straw, which was scattered in one corner, and covered vvith sheep-skins for a bed. Every thing around denoted the poverty of its inmates, yet they appeared cheerful and contented ; and with a most cordial wel¬ come, they joined many apologies for the humble roof beneath which they re¬ ceived him. е 5 A female,
A female, of a hale and florid com¬ plexion, whose attire corresponded with the meanness of her habitation, rose, at ťheir entrance, from her employment, to Welcome the stranger ; and at the com¬ mand of the old man, she set before the Baron some new milk and some oaten cakes : the old man introduced her to his guest as the wife of his son. Readily did Lord William partake of the humble but palatable repast which was placed before him ; and he then threw himself upon the shepherd's bed, which, in a state of less fatigue, he Would not have been emulous of press¬ ing, but which now wore the most in¬ viting form. After a few hours repose, he awoke, and found himself alone in the cottage, with a boy of about five years old, vvho appeared to have been placed there to watch his waking, and give notice of it to the woman ; for the moment he opened his eyes, the child 4 rau
ran to the door, and calling out— t4 The stranger is awake," the female entered, and graciously enquired what she could do to serve her guest ? " Nothing further, I thank you," returned Lord William; " I am now sufficiently recovered from my fatigue to proceed on my journey." The boy was standing by the side of the woman, as were two other children, apparently younger than-he was: the Baron's eyes fell on the child, and he* observed him to be remarkably beautiful, and of a most interestiug couutenance ; his face was round, aud lighted by a pair of arch and nearly black eyes; a vivid colour painted his cheeks; his hair was a few shades deeper than the flaxen, and his scanty raiment displayed the fairness of his bkin. u Tiiat is a very handsome boy," satd the Baron. *' He is your child, ţ sup¬ pose ?'' e e "No,"
44 No/' returned the woman, " they are all mine but him." 44 And whose is he ?" rejoined De Mowbray. ~ <f My brother's, " was the reply. 44 He whom we left with the flock, when I first met your husband and fa¬ ther, I guess," said the Baron. ei No, another brother," the woman replied. The old man at this moment entered the hut, with some firing, which he had been cutting : he had · overheard their conversation as he approached, and pat¬ ting the boy on his head, as he spoke, said—" Aye, Heaven bless him, I call' him mine, for he has nobody else to look up to at present; all have not humanity enough to take care of their own." Earnestly did the Baron, at the pre¬ sent moment, wish that he was possessed ©f the means of rewarding his hospitable eutertaia-
entertainers; but being destitute of them, he proinised that they should not be long without meeting a return for their kind¬ ness. The old man replied, that a reward was what he did not wish for, nor think of;—he had but little, it was true, he added, but he had never found that little less, for relieving with it the hungry and weary traveller. 14 With such ideas," returned the Ba¬ ron, ť£ thou art more blessed than affiu- ence could make thee; thy comforts, however, may be increased, without en¬ dangering the purity of thy happiness— and depend on it they shall." The Baron, by enquiring the nearest road to his own castle, had found that the cottage where he had met with so hospitable a reception was but a stone's throw from the valley where he and his men had been surprised by Allanrod and his freebooters. At this spot he quickly arrived ; and although it had led him nearly
nearly a furlong from his road to visit it, he could not resist the impulse he felt to pass that way, and learn whether the banditti had possessed sufficient humanity to bury his soldiers who had fallen iu that day's contest. Having gained a sight of the tumulies which enclosed their bodies, he set for¬ ward again, with all the speed he was ca¬ pable of making. But bixteen miles lay between him and his castle : it was now little more than noon-day ; thus, at a moderate pace, he might reach its walls by sun-set. This idea inspired him with strength, and lent wings to his speed. At length the turrets of De Alowbray Castle, rearing their heads above the troves which surrounded it, met the eye of their Lord ; the sun was at this mo¬ ment on the horizontal line, and its golden light painted the scene with a glowing influence, which communicated itself to the heart of the Baron, and almost drew the teara of joy into his eyes. * Nimbly
Nimbly he ascended the velvet turf which led to the moat of bis castle, and eagerly he turned the last angle which lav between him and the drawbridge: on coming within sight of it, he found it down ; this did not surprise him, as he supposed that some one had lately passed over it, or was about so to do; but on arriving at its foot, he perceived no sentinel near, nor any human being Avhatever in view. This startled him ; lie cast his eyes to the watch-tower ; it was without its accustomary guard ; and those places on the battlements which had for years past been the stations^ of senti¬ nels were all vacant. He crossed the drawbridge, and arriv¬ ing at the gate of the first court, he found no obstruction to his entering it ; the heavy portcullis hung suspended in its chains, and gave free access to the interior of the building. In the utmost astonishment, he stepped forward. What were his sensations, on entering the se¬ cond
cond court, when fragments ef the broken walls met his sight, scattered on the earth, and mingled with the balls of the musketry, the snapped blades of swords, the barrels of match-locks, the unbent bow, and the useless sling. Plainly did these bespeak that his castle bad been besieged in his absence, and too clearly did the state of the draw¬ bridge and portcullis declare that the enemy had conquered, and despoiled his mansion. '* Where was his daughter?— was the building deserted, or were there still some remaining within its vanquish¬ ed walls, to tell him the sad tale?"—were the instant questions which he proposed to himself, and rushed towards the cas¬ tle, to gain a reply to. The doors stood open ; wildly he entered the castle hall, and called aloud upon his household, in various names, to which no answer was returned. He rushed into the first apart¬ ment which preseuted itself to him—it was the saloon, where oft the assembled group
roup of joy had made the vaulted ceil- ng ring with the echoes of the dance nd song ; now how altered its state ! very feature denoted rapine; the heavy hairs alone remained of all its sumptu- us furniture ; the golden tripods, which ad supported the fragrant exotic, and he blooming shrub, were no longer here; the silver lamps were torn, with tieir chains, from the walls, and the wers and basons of massy gold, which ad been the containers of the scented rater devoted to the refreshment of the artakers in the dance, were' alike no юге to be seen. " Allanrod, accursed, damnable AÎ- mrod ! these are thy ravages, these are lie marks of thy savage fury," exclaim- d Lord William, as he gazed on the sene before him. íť Doubtless, from iy castle was thy ruffian band returning p iih their wealthy spoils, when I this lorning beheld them from my covert ;—· crhaps at that moment my faithful ser¬ vants
vants passed me, the prisoners of thy inhumanity ;—nay, perhaps at that in¬ stant my unfortunate child was led tliy captive, unconscious how near to her was her unhappy father, ignorant of her fate—unable to succour her, if it had been known to him !" It was still possible, he thought, though hardly probable, after the demand which Allanrod had made of her for his friend Lord Rufus de Madginecourt, that she might be in her chamber. Thither flew the Baron. The stairs which led towards it bore indubitable marks of the avarice and ferocity of the spoilers of the build¬ ing ; spots of blood, strips of garments, and broken weapons, lay every where scattered amongst such articles of furni¬ ture as the ravagers had rejected. The door of Rosalind's apartment stood open—no one appeared to meet him at his entrance—he called on his daughter, but his invocations were in vain—he clasped his hands in agony, and stood almost
almost maddened by the idea of what atrocious sufferings she might have been condemned to, or still might be reserved for. In a stite of mind that bade defiance to cool leflection, tlie Baron continued to run from one apartment to another, in the vain hope of at last finding some individual who might reply to his interro¬ gatories : at length despair seized him, and, overpowered equally by his recol¬ lection of the past, his ideas of the present, and his anxieties for the future, he sunk, overpowered in body and mind, upon a couch. The shades of night were beginning to close in the day, and the gathering dark¬ ness added to the misery of De Mow¬ bray's mind. Still he did not attempt to quit the castle; he knew not whither to go at so late an hour, and he felt equally unwilling to remain where he was : his mind was too much harrassed to admit of any resolution or plan, and he continued
continued to lie where he had thrown himself down. The apartment to which chance had led him vvas the cedar chamber, in which the Baroness, his wife, had died : this alone appeared to have escaped the fury of the spoilers, and at the present mo¬ ment he could scarcely avoid believing that fate had preserved the solemnity of this scene entire, to add one more pang to the tortures of his soul There is a state of frenzied grief to vvhich the mind is driven by accumulated sorrow, in which it ahnost wishes, rather than dreads, an increase of misery and ter¬ ror; imagining it almost impossible that it can feel more than it already does; and almost desiring that it may experi¬ ence enough of horror and afíliction, to end all feeling at a blow. In this situation was De Mowbray ; he felt, as it were, prepared to see the spirit of his wife approach him, and de- maud the cause why he had not given Rosalind
Rosalind to the man of lier heart ? He recollected the awful, the unknown voice, which had called upon him, to spare Rosalind, on the night when in tliat chamber she had fallen in supplication at iiis feet, and he had declared to her his resolution of yielding her to the de¬ tested Lord Rut m ; he expected to hear the voice again address him, and his feelings were worked to that pitch of horror, that something like disappoint¬ ment attended the iaii ure of his expecta¬ tions. Then came to liis mind the remem¬ brance of his pairing with Hubert, and the innocent countenance of the babe whom he had committed to his mercy. To this idea succeeded the recollection of the terrible visage which had gazed on him from the chest in his prison, in the fortress of Allanrod ; and which he believed himself to have followed through those vaults into which hc had so un¬ accountably
accountably been introduced. Had this been Hubert, or the spirit of Hubert? His tongue was parched within his mouth, a burning fever drank his blood. — 4i О Godi" he cried aloud, " thy punishments are just, but they are se¬ vere. О Power Omnipotent ! accept my repentance; let the infant spirit of him whose blood I have spilt plead to thy mercy for my ofience: my weight of woe already crushes me to the earth— forbear, forbear to torture me further—I am humbled before thee."
CHAP.
CHAP. VI. To what new wonders am I now reserv'd ? Ptovidence and Heaven ! Oh failing eyes, deceive ye not my hope ?— Can this be possible ? This little crossi —I know it by sure marks— - — .. - .. ., , .. . -------- rising thoughts, And hopes and fears o'erwhelm ine. ΑΛΗΟΝ HlbL. now return to Rosalind, whom ve parted from on the day succeeding hat which was marked by the setting >ut of Lord William and his men from he castle, to meet the advanced body of \Hanrod"s troops. Rosalind
We
Rosalind slept peacefully, although the Tumour of the black ghost, which had been 'seen on the drawbridge, and on many parts of the ramparts, interfered with the repose of some of the inhabit¬ ants of the castle, and caused them cu¬ riously to watch the burning of the lamp at midnight, dreading thc appear¬ ance of its flame turning blue- But although Rosalind experienced no anxieties on account of the spirit which her household so universally dreaded, still her* mind was rendered ill at ease by those which she derived from other sources ; for her father she could not help feeling a degree of interest, not¬ withstanding lus conduct towards her had been so unlike that of a tender parent ; and for the life of Gertrude, her only female companion, and whom habit and aifection combined, had taught her to consider in the light of a kind friend, her alarm was not less than for the safety of her father* Gertrude
Gertrude had suddenly been taken ill, and from the first moment of her indis¬ position, her disorder had worn so alarm¬ ing an appearance, as gave Rosalind the 3nost serious uneasiness on her account. Bereft of her, she should be deprived of every one whom she now looked upon with any degree of affection, and whom she considered as feeling any real love for her. Mr. Wilmot, the family physician* had been nearly two years dead ; his loss had only been replaced by a youth in the castle, to whom he had, at leisure hours, given some little instruction iu the art of medicine ; and Rosalind trem¬ bled for the safety of her servant, com¬ mitted to the care of his slender skill. Day and night, Rosalind herself at¬ tended upon her with unremitting care ind attention ; she did not for an in¬ stant suffer herself to quit her apartment ; ìven her devotions, which she hatl for a ength of time been accustomed to vol. ii. f per-
perform in the chapel, were now offered up in the chamber of Gertrude. As she one night watched by her bed, observing her to be fallen into a slumber, she amused her thoughts, and kept her¬ self from sleep, by composing the fol¬ lowing—*
ODJS то НЕЖТН. Thou, who mak'st the cheek to glow, Health !—prime blessing here below, What can all the worid bestow If thou'rt not nigh ? What to soothe the voice of tvoe, Of pain and misery ? Need Experience tell his tale ? , Ah ! too surely riches fail!— But thro' the tugged path of fate, Âltho' a thousand ills await, Tho' thorns around, And stings abound, And numerous brambles scatter'd lír, To wound the naked feet of Poverty,
¥et with the wretch, if thou wilt stay, Thou strew'st with roses still his way. See on his crimson couch of stat« Thc wealthy Crcesus laid î Around physicians wait, And livery'd slaves ; who, with officious aid» Attend his anguish'd eye ; All ready at a glance to fly——. Vain, vain their help ! The fever-heated brain Rages ; nor can the icy poles allay the pain. —" Oh ! for yon beggar's ease, yon beggar's health, *' A moment grant it, and take aU my wealth ! ** He, by some greenwood side *' Contented opes his wallet's humble store, . ** And quaffs the clear, coo! tide ** Of the fresh rivulet ; happy, tho* poor ! *' Presses the grassy turf in thoughtless sleep, " While 1, worn out, eternal vigils keep." The tantalizing thought adds keener firce ; Hc sterms, he madly rages, and— «pires. Riches oft tempt excess ; Thc costly wine, and viand season'd high, Contain the slow disease ; nor less » Thc enervating bed of Luxury. w u Witfe
With palsied band, Intemperance takes his ready stand— A bloated mass ; And prompts the feast, and circulates the glass : Health flies the reve'ling board ; Still 'midst fresh fields and dews she loves to stray, To sip the sweets of young-bora day, Far from Temptation's scourging rod. Then beep thy boasted gifts, О Wealth í Be thou itiy better portion—Health. Thee, Groddess, with the rosy crest, Florid check, and azure vest, Sparkling eyes of heavenly blue, Shall my eager homage woo ! With thee from smoky towns I'lL fly $ To scenes of rural peace we'll hie ; Inhaling Zephyr's balmy breath, Sweeten'd o'er the yellow heath ; Blown from beds of scented broom» Open'd now, and all in bloom i Climbing up the mountain's side, To behoid the prospect wide; Dells, and woods, and lawns, and streams, Gilded with the sun's bright beams ; Now to view the lessening sail Siak beneath a cloudy veil ; Now
Now to hear the feather'd throng Tune their magic-breathing song ; Now to roam thro* grove and dale, ' To listen to the shepherd's tale, Drawn from softly-breathing reed, Дпа, listening, check our eager speed ; While exercise gives sweetest zest To each short interrai of rest. Thus would I live, and live content, To know with thee my days were sftertt ; Far from the witchery of wealth, Bless'd with thy better portion—Health !
When Rosalind laid down her pen, she perceived that Gertrude still slept, and she hoped that it might prove an omen of her returning health. Her wish was ac¬ complished ; for on the morrow Gertrude shewed signs of approaching convales¬ cence, and Rosalind once more enter¬ tained a bope that her only companion of her own sex would be spared her.
f 3 Twelve
Twelve days the Baron, her father, had been absent, and no tidings of him had reached De Mowbray Castle : every day increased the anxiety of Rosalind for his fate; she knew not whether to believe him the victim of a powerful foe* or de¬ layed from returning by pursuing the freebooters to their holds. /She had no beam of comfort to cheer her desponding mind, but that which Heaven had kindly granted her in the life of Gertrude; and situated as she was at the moment of its favour, she felt à mofe than common gratitude for its indulgence. On the eighteenth day after thè de¬ parture of thé Baron f from his Castle, Gertrude's health was so far improveóV that Rosalind feit no hesitation iii quit¬ ting her, for the hours Which she had be¬ fore her illness been accustomed to spend in demotion, by the side of her toother's tomb, in the chapel. Ambrose attended her> and opened fof her the gates, which had lately been kept locked,
locked, on account of the communica¬ tion of the vaults with the northern rampart. Rosalind knelt on her accus·" tomed stone, and with her eyes raised to heaven, she mingled her prayers of re¬ quest and thanksgiving ; when her devo¬ tions were ended, her eyes fell upon the marble which enclosed the ashes of her loved and lamented parent ; and upon a white spot of its surface, where the veins of jet which variegated the stone did not interfere with its purity, she per* ceived a glittering trinket, which arrested her observation; she looked closer, and discovered it to be the very cross of ru«· bies set in gold, which had been the le« gacy of her deceased parent to her lost Edward ! The sight startled her, and a thousand distracting ideas rushed into her bram.-r**» 44 Ambrose !" she exclaimed— f 4i Am¬ brose, who has been into the chapel? can you explain this mystery?" ν 4t Ambrose
Ambrose entered hastily, and enquired the meaning of her question. A secret instinct, for which she could not account, whispered to her lieart to be silent on the occurrence of the fore¬ going minute, and she replied —" It is so long since I have left my chamber, in attending to your niece, that I tremble at my own shadow; my momentary alarm is past, and forgotten." " No one has been within the chapel, I am certain," replied Ambrose; íť the keys have not been from my side. " Rosalind attempted to change the sub¬ ject, and to chat with Ambrose on other matters, as they together returned to¬ wards the castle hall ; but she observed that he saw her mind occupied by some recent impression, and she felt that her efforts to conceal the emotions of her heart were very inadequate to her de¬ sign. She repaired quickly to her chamber, and
and here, her first action was to draw the cross from its hiding-place in her bosom, and to assure herself that it was indeed the same which the Baroness de Mow¬ bray had bequeathed to her beloved Ed¬ ward. The same it was, beyond all doubt; she recollected a small fracture in a rim of the gold which enclosed one of the stones, and which certified it to be the very cross that she had at first be¬ lieved it. She considered that ín Gertrude's pre¬ sent weak state, it would be wrong to make her the confidante of this disco¬ very ; and. that she would be an equally unfit subject for the deriving of an opi¬ nion from-: accordingly, she was doomed to confine her thoughts to her own breast.—r" By wiiat means," she began with asking 'herself, ťí could this cross have been conveyed into tlie chapel? and for what purpose, but to meet my obser¬ vation?" Then succeeded the question of— *' By whom had it been placed f 5 there ?"
there?" At this demand, a sensation, £f>jproåching to frenzy* seized her brain ; she almost dared t© hope that Edward iftight himself be alive !~~The chapel gates, Ambroee had said, were constantly kept locked ; but Edward was acquainted with the entrance to the vaults from the rampart, and the passage which led from thence into the chapel. Through therii had Edward gained admittance oti the night which- had made her his wife. Could İt be possible that Edward was himself alive ? A flood of tears came to the relief of her overburdened heart ; and as the first impression of hope wore away, she begau to chide herself for the weak latitude which she had allowed to her thoughts and expectations. Edward was a corpse, and had been so for six long months— sad testimony of his death had reached her father, and no doubts could hang 'ou the heart-rending fact. Thought is ever busy to torment the breast
breast that it inhabits, and thus it whis* pered in the ear of Rosalind :—" Never would Edward have parted from this bequest of her whom he considered as his mother, but in death. He died far from his native soil, in Flanders. Who then could have been sufficiently ac¬ quainted with the history of this trinket, to have returned it to the spot from whence it was brought; or if any one had gained this knowledge, or, frøm his intimation, had learnt that it would be regarded as valuable by her, 4 vhy not bring İt to her iu person, aud place the şacred relic in her hands?—why commit it to the chance of never reaching her¿ by leaving it on the spot where slie had discovered it?" The finding of this cross, so well known, and highly revered, on account эг those to whom it had belonged, in so peculiar a situation, must have some meaning, some reference, to herself; and lo discover what tliis might be, she f 6 wanted
Wanted no spur to goad her on ; where alone she failed, was in devising the means for discovering лу!ш design lay concealed beneath her finding it where she had done. The day passed in thought and anxiety unequalled by any she had ever before experienced ; she knew not what to ex* pect, or what to believe. The gates of the chapel Ambrose had declared to have been kept locked ; thus, whoever had placed the cross there, must have gained admittance from the vaults which opened upon the northern rampart. A chaos of ideas filled her brain, and from the mass, she determined (she could scarcely ans¬ wer to herself vvby) to ask of Ambrose the keys of the chapel that night, under pretence of going, earlier than usual, to prayer on the following morning ; and to visit the chapel at that hour of the night at which she had met Edward there pre¬ viously to their marriage. With the dusk of the evening, she accord-
accordingly called Ambrose into her pre¬ sence, and having required of him the keys, she indulged him vvith half an hour's conversation, spent in surmises on the fate of her father in iiis present at¬ tack upon the forces of the freebooter; and then retired to iier chamber, where the hours crept heavily on till thc clock of the castle struck twelve.
CHAP.
СПЛР. VII. Oh that I were a Ged, to shoot forth thunder On these paltry,, servile, abject drudges ! His army is a ragged multitude Of hinds and peasants, rude and merciless. HENRY У1. PART II. OHE directly took up her lamp, and, with a heart trembling with agitation, she left her chamber : - she reached the great hall of the castle, l without meet¬ ing a single observer; as she was turning «into a passage, which led from it to that wing of the castle which she was under the
the necessity of passing in her way to the chapel, sounds, which startled her, met her ear. She Was, at first, at a loss what to conclude them ; but as she moved a few steps towards a casement, of which an upper compartment had been left open, she clearly distinguished the ap¬ proach of martial music. Before she had time for reflection, an alarm was sounded from the watch-tower of the castle ; the sentinel at the draw¬ bridge replied to it with his horn ; the trumpet in the watch-tower sounded a second and a third blast—"To arms! to arms !—an enemy !—to arms !" ran from sentinel to sentinel on the ramparts ; and in a few seconds, the soldiers of the castle burst from all parts into the great hall, in quest of their arms. The first who recognised Rosalind was Ambrose : he had no suspicion but that the terror of the moment had drawn lier from her chamber, and addressed her with—" Dearest lady, be of good cheer; 4 ' · Heaven
Heaven still protects the innocent amidst the din of war. We have sturdy fefiows in our castle, who will oppose the enemy's force to the last drop of their biood." " But should their courage be over¬ powered by numbers?" said Rosalind. " Even tiiese ravage t s must shew mercy to females," answered Ambrose. Seymour, the leader, on whom the command of the troops belonging to the castle had devolved, during tlie absence of Lord William and Irwin, now ad¬ vanced, and requesteii Rosalind to suffer herself to be conveyed, witli the other females, into an interior apartment, where they migli t iu safety await the issue of the attack, Rosalind accepted his counsel, and retired to the room which he had pointed out. Already was the combined force of the musketry and die bow levelled from the ranks of the enemy against thc defenders of De Mowbray Castle. Rosalind threw herself
herself into a chair, and in that dread of mind which imposed silence on her tongue, she sat awaiting the event, and endeavouring to catch an idea of the fortunes of the hour, from the mingled sounds which assailed her ear. Now a shout beneath the ramparts caused her to believe the invaders victorious ; now the voices of her father's soldiery seemed to bespeak them conquerors. Of the^ wo¬ men wl¿o were, at this trying moment, her companions, some wept from cow¬ ardice, some from their apprehension for the safety of individuals amongst the soldiery to whom they had attachments, Gertrude was too weak and ill to express her sensations, and Rosalind was without a consoler. Ambrose alone visited the chamber; he was the only male whose age exempted him from an active share in the contest: the intelligence of hope which he one moment brought, his entrance on the next
next crushed 5 a third visit would again perhaps revive the sensation ; and a fourth once more banish it entirely from the heart. Thus did Rosalind pass three hours, between the extremes of hope and de¬ spair. The dawn of day was now be* ginning to break, and with the first ap¬ proach of twilight she distinctly heard the cry of— " Quarter," from her father's troops. Dreadful was the sound, and still more terrible was that which suc¬ ceeded it ; for in a few seconds more she heard the castle gates burst open, and the riotous band of conquerors rushing through the building. Ambrose came again into the apart¬ ment.—" Oh, lady !" he exclaimed— " dear lady!—that 1 should live to bear you these tidings !—we are the prisoners of the freebooter Allanrod. Oh that I had died, ere I had seen this wretched day!" 44 We
44 We are still the creatures of Provi¬ dence," cried Rosalind ; " in its mercy, I trust." The gleam of torches which now played upon the roof of the vaulted passage leading to the apartment where Rosalind sat awaiting her fate, announced the ippfoach of the freebooters. About thirty were seen advancing : the females n the apartment fled to the remotest extremity it afforded them, and united :heir shrieks for mercy. By an effort dmost superior to her strength, Rosalind Ose from her seat, and moving a few Íteps towards the door, she surd—¿".If ,чш are men, sully not your pretensions о the name by cruelty to the defenceless у tain 'not your conquest by inhumanity о helpless woman 1" One alone, whose dress bespoke hint uperior to his fellows, entered the apart- nent; the rest remained without, closing tp the entrance.—" You are, I presume,** te said. " the Lady Rosalind ?" " I am
44 I am that Rosalind," she replied. " Fear nothing, lady," returned the man; " no injury is intended you: com¬ ply willingly with my demands, and you are safe and happy." " Will you extend the same promise to my poor attendants here?" asked Rosalind. 44 At your request, they shall be safe," returned the Moss-trooper. 4i Come, lady/* he added, taking the hand of Rosalind, to lead her forth. " Whither do you require me to go?'* she said. " To a place better suited for your abode than the despoiled castle of your father," answered he. " Oh! where is my father? tell me that, I conjure you ?" asked Rosalind. *' More of that anon,"' returned her conductor, still leading her away from the apartment. " Tell ше whither it is that I am re¬ quired to go; only tell me that," suid Rosalind* " I have
€t I have already told you, to a place of safety and happiness/' he replied.— '* Nay, lady," he added, drawing Ro¬ salind's arm through his, " be not re¬ luctant to your own good ; no force will be used with you, but in this particular." It was in vain, she knew, for her to resist the power vvhich had conquered her father's soldiery, thus suffered her¬ self to be led by him through the hall of the castle, where spoil and rapine presented themselves to her sight at every step : they proceeded to the outer court, where the light of the morning rendered the torches no longer necessary ; and here she beheld a carriage, wliich, from the preparations making about it, she doubted not awaited her. Her conjec¬ ture was not ill founded ; she was desired to get into it, and the Moss-trooper who had led her to it, having once agaiu requested her to lay aside all apprehen¬ sions for her safety, the door was closed, and the carriage put into motion. Rosalind
Rosalind threw herself back in the carriage, and, with her handkerchief held to her eyes, she sat for some time in wretched thougbt ; when she again opened them, and looked around her, no light met them, except a faint gleam which burst through a crevice in one of the shutters that occupied the space of the windows. She attempted to open them, but they were too securely fastened to be moved by her. Patience and resigna¬ tion, she now perceived to be alone left her, and with a mournful silence she endeavoured to retain her composure of mind. They travelled during the wbble of the day, stopping only at intervals for refreshments, which vvere brought to her by the same Scotchman who had in the morning been her conductor to the car¬ riage : about the dusk of the evening, they arrived at a house of rather mean appearance, where she found they were to repose that night. Her guard led her to
to an apartment which seemed to have been prepared for her reception ; a deU¬ cate repast was served up to her by a decent-looking woman and girl, and the Moss-trooper remained standing in a re¬ mote part of the room. Rosalind questioned him upon various subjects, and gained his ready replies to them all, except that of her own desti¬ nation, from which he stiil assured her she had nothing to fear : relative to her father's fate, he declared liimself igno¬ rant. She wished to have been left alone with lier hostess; she believed that she might have it in her power to reveal what her guard withheld from her; but this opportunity was not given to her ; for when the hour of rest arrived, her con¬ ductor to her chamber was still this man» She found it a comfortable apartment, with a lamp burning ready for her on a table, and both a key in the lock, and a bolt on the door, to secure her from in¬ terruption in the night. Stiil
Still waiting respectfully at the door, the guard enquired if she would have any objection to pursuing her journey at five on the following morning, or if the hour was too early for her pleasure ? She replied, that she could not have any plea¬ sure in an action of force, like the one she was now constrained by; except of accelerating, as much as possible, her journey, that she might the sooner know her fate. Tİıe Moss-trooper bowed, and retired, after telling her that he and his compa¬ nions were to occupy the adjoining apart¬ ment through v\hich she had passed to her's, and that she need entertain no fears for her safety during the night. Of this assurance, the strangeness of her fate would not allow her to feel certain herself; but apathy had for so many years benumbed her feelings, that she was almost indifferent to the event of her captivity. She sat for some time dwelling on her fate ; and knowing her¬ self
self to be the piisoner of the freebooter Allanrod, with whose name she had heard her father threatened on the even¬ ing previous to his departure from De Mowbray Castle, she concluded that she was now carrying to his fortress, as an hostage for an immense ransom. Her thoughts dwelt also on the circumstance of the eross which she had found on the to:nb of her mother ; and what she la¬ mented by no means the least in her present captivity, was, that it had pre¬ vented her from visiting thc chapel at that hour, when a combination of strange circumstances seemed to have promised her some occurrence of surprise or plea¬ sure. She thought of Gertrude, and hoped the Moss-trooper had kept his pro¬ mise of sparing her, and the other fe¬ males of the castle : she thoimht also of her father; cruel as he had been to her, she prayed for him, and then laid herself down, without undressing, upon the )ed. vol. n. G In
In a short time, her guards entered the adjoining chamber, but none of the riot attendant on conquerors marked their approach ;^ their footsteps seemed to be lightly set, and every mark of silence and respect observed by them towards her. The fatigue of the day had brought on the attacks of sleep, and re-assured by the conduct of her guards, she pre¬ sently sunk into repose. When she awoke in the morning, she heard her guards stirring in the adjoining chamber. She arose, and looked out of the casement ; a landscape presented itself to her view ; a few scattered cot¬ tages appeared amongst the knots of trees that diversified the scene ; and she saw that the country she looked upon vvas a spot perfectly new to her. When her guide enquired at her cham¬ ber door if she was ready to set out, she immediately opened it, and came out to meet him. On entering the carriage, she requested to be allowed to remove the
;he shutters from the windows, which vas directly complied with : he vvho had )een her constatit attendant rode by the »ide of the carriage, and she shortly ieard him addressed by the name of Sir Maurice. Their progress was much the same as it iad been on the preceding day, and tlieir ntervalsfor refreshment divided in nearly .he same manner. The country over ivhich they journied had, duiing the morning, ofiered some beautiful diversi¬ tés of hill and dale, watered by the circling streams ihat ran amongst them, now glittering under tlic refulgence of ihe sun's rays, now hidden by tlie cius- :eriug forest ; but they had passed, though ict unnoticed, stiil uuenjo\ed by Rosa- ind. Towards evening those verdant pro¬ jects which had hitheito decked the ace of uature, began gradually to disap¬ pear. The herbage no longer vied in »paikling greenness with the emerald; & 2 but
but brown and withering, it appeared tc conceal hs meanness beneath the wide- spreading furze and bramble, which over¬ ran the earth: the road was now a heavy sanil, and a slow walk the only pace at vhich the horses were able to drag along the carriage. Stony cliffs bounded the road on either side, and the few solitary 1 1 ees vvhich broke the uniformity of the set ne were all bent in one direction, and hai ely clothed with a few brown and shrivelling leaves. Rosalind umarked the change to Sir Maurice, and he replied— " We are ap- proachiug towards the sea." The ocean was a sight entirely new to Rosalind, vuth which she was yet ac¬ quainted only by description ; and eveu iu her present state of anxiety, she felt something like pleasure at the idea of beholding it. — ,4 Shall we see it?" she askı d of her guide. 14 It vvill burst upon us," he answered, * É at the next turn of the road." 41 Indeed!"
" Indeed !" said Rosalind—" we are aot far from it then ?" *' Scarcely three miles/* was the reply. The shades of night were now descend¬ ing fast, and when tlie carriage arrived it the anticipated spot, tlie object from which Rosalind expected gratification was scarcelv visible even to one unaceus- tomed to behold it ; for, in the duskiness of the evening, the horizontal line was lost, and the ьеа appeared but a conti¬ nuation of the clouds, ultimately losing themselves amongst the cliffs. But as her eye roved over the scene, it fell suddenly upon an object, on which it rested vvith a kind of superstitious awe and dread : this was a building whose towers seemed mingling with thc skies, and wiiich, in the present twilight, she couid only discover to be immense. " What is that?" she asked Sir Mau¬ rice, pointing to it vvith her finger. " Rockmount Castie," he replied. о 3 She
She had heard the name before, but could not immediately recollect where or by whom, and echoed his words. *' Yes, Rockmount Castle," he re¬ peated, £ ' the mansion of Lord Rufus de Madginecourt." 44 О God!" exclaimed Rosalind—"am I then in the power of Lord Rufus ?" " You are under Ыь piotection, lady/' returned Sir Maurice. 44 Oh ! why am I not rather the cap¬ tive of Allanrod ?" continued Rosalind. " I should expect more humanity from that freebooter, than from Lord Rufus." '* It is from his savage ferocity," an¬ swered Sir Maurice, " that Lord Rufus has rescued you." The senses of Rosalind became bewil¬ dered, as in a hurried dream. The name of Lord Rufus brought with it the re¬ membrance of never-to-be-forgotten hor¬ rors ; a thousand ideas crowded on her mind, but she could dwell on none: recollection
ecollection of the past united with it )itter regret ; anticipation of the future ihe most sickening terrors—she burst nto tears, and sunk back in the car¬ riage.
4
CHAP.
CHAP. VIII. Eye me, blessM Providence, and square my trial To my ptoportion'd strength. MILTON. X IIE roaring of the waves clashing their milky foam against the foot of the rocks, roused Rosalind from the trance into which she had fallen. Just suffi¬ cient of the light of day was remaiuing to shew her that she was on the point of entering the lofty gateway that led to the castle; thc building itself appeared equally gloomy and sublime, Tiie nu¬ merous lights which vrere moving vvithin İt, and constantly passing and repassing the
the high and narrow casements, shewed it to be immense and dreary. While Rosalind was lost in contempla¬ tion, the carriage entered the castle court ; the open door of the building presented to her sight a spacious and lofty hall, of grey stone, thickly illu¬ mined with lamps, which cast their re¬ flection on various trophies of highly- polished armour, that were hung upon the pillars, and formed a dazzling con¬ trast to the gloomy scene without, where nothing was visible but the dusky rocks on one side, and the agitated bosom of the ocean on the other; each sinking under the veil of night. A number of richly clad attendants approached to receive her'; Sir Maurice handed her from the carriage, and con¬ ducted her through the hall : they as¬ cended a flight of steps, leading to an apartment, of which the attendants who preceded them with lights threw open the door; and as Rosalind arrived at it, a 5 Sir
Sir Maurice let go her hand, and Lord Rufus advanced to receive her. 44 Welcome, fairest, dearest Lady Ro¬ salind Í" he cried—" the happiest moment of my life is that in which 1 am enabled to afford protection to such divine excel¬ lence and beauty," He took the hand which Sir Maurice had just quitted, and led her to a seat, placing himself by her side ; the attend¬ ants retired, and thev were left alone. " My Lord/' said Rosalind, address¬ ing him in a trembling voice, as soon as she could command the power of utter¬ ance, 4i all .that passes now befoie my senses appears to them as a dream. Do not, I beseech you—do not trifle with the feelings of a wretched woman ; tell me, I conjure you, why I am brought hi¬ ther ?" "It is my proudest boast/' returned Lord Rufus, " to explain to you the cause:—you cannot, lady, require to Jiave it repeated to you that your father's castle
çastle is fallen a prey to the Scottish freebooters, commanded by the famed Allanrod—famed for his cruelties, his oppressions, his brutal ferocity ! Need I tell you what horrors, females, young, beautiful, and alluring, like yourself, have to expect from such a conquest, and from such a conqueror? Dreadful the bare idea !^-too horrible for tongue is the relation ! Such a fate awaited you ; but Heaven, which ever guards the inno¬ cent and deserving, by a strange fate, placed it in my power to rescue you from trie brutality that threatened you." Strange appeared this information to Rosalind, and not less strange the soft accents ia which Lord Rufus delivered it : biit universally benevolent as were her feelings, she could not still give credit to the vaunted friendship of Lord Rufus; she could not but believe that some fraud was lurking behind in his jtøart. G б " My
44 My Lord," she said, " the man whom I have so long considered as the cause of all my misery in life, my avowed and unfeeling persecutor, I cannot thus easily be induced to consider as influ¬ enced to save me by any motive but a seiiish one: I cannot therefore feel grati- tude for your protection from Allanrod, till I have proof that it is disinterested." '* What proof can I give to convince you that I am your slaver" asked Dc Madginecourt. " Convey me instantly," returned Rosalind, "to my .sovereign ; place me under the willing protection v/hich siie will afíoid me; and leceive her thanks for saving one whom 1 dai e believe dear to her." " Wise is your request," returned Lord Rufus, ťí and dictated by that sense and modesty which are the ornaments of your mind." These words he uttered in a slow and hesitating
hesitating tone, his eyes averted from Rosalind as he spoke, and fixed upon the floor. The expression of his counte¬ nance was that of mingled reflection and sorrow. Without observing him, Rosalind spoke again.— ťť Von applaud my wish then," she said,' li and consent to my proceed¬ ing immediately to the court of Queen Elizabeth ?" " Would it were in my povver to give that consent !" returned Lord Rufus ; " but, alas ! it is not. There is a tie—a bond, subsisting between myself and Allanrod, which denies me the power of allowing yon to pass tiiese walls." *' Am I then your prisoner?" exclaim¬ ed Rosalind. " Oh no, no, no P replied Lord Ru¬ fus : *' name not so harsh a word, I en¬ treat you ; there is no indulgence which my power does not allow me to shew-you within this castle ; you are therefore not its prisoner, but its queen." " The
" The name cannot alter the reality/' answered Rosalind; " and whatever you may call me, I shall still feel myself ц captive. You are endeavouring to amuse me from my purpose, like a child with toys and promises: — if you had the power of bringing me hither, why have you not equally the power of conveying .me hence?" " You know not," returned Lord Rufus, ** fair Rosalind, the strait in which I am placed—the hazard I have encountered, to save you from Jbrutality, or you wouid bless the fate tliat has preserved you, and ask no more than the protection you enjoy. To disobey the commands of Allanrod would, after what he has given up to me, in respect to yourself endanger my life; nay, it would endanger the life of onc most nearly connected with your ovvn—your jfather, lady." 44 Qh ! where is my father?" exclaim¬ ed
ed Rosalinde ' ť I implore you to tell me what you know of my father ľ' <( He is, and has been long," returned Lord Rufus, íť a prisoner in the fortress of Allanrod : unsuccessful in his sally against the freebooters, with his van¬ quished men, he was conveyed to their strong-hold, where he now enjoys all the comforts which captivity can give him—and those he owes to me : without my interposition, he had been the inha¬ bitant of a dark and loathsome dungeon, where his necessities would have been so scantily supplied, as merely to give a keener edge-to famine." Rosalind shuddered at the idea, and a deep sigh escaped her lips. Lord Rufus was silent, and Rosalind, after a pause, spoke thus :—" It is strange, íny Lord, that in some instances you should pos¬ sess the power of turning this Allanrod from his purposes,, and that in others you should appear to dread his resent¬ ment ! It seems also equally strange by a what
MYSTERIOUS FREEBOOTER. what means you should be thus well ac¬ quainted with the proceedings of the enemy of your country; and that you siiould appear so well content to live in awe of him whom you miglit raise a force to que 11, serving at once your sovereign and youiself i " 44 Oh, lady/' replied De Madgine¬ court, "you know not wliat you urge} for your sake, 1 liave disclosed to you a tie, a union, wliich no one but yourself knows to exist betweeu Allanrod and me. Do not, I conjure you, by endea¬ vouring to frustrate the counsels I ¡rive you, by an attempt to act in opposition to the conduct 1 mark out to you as ne¬ cessary, drive to perdition the man wlio has rescued you from the extremity in which you stood : let it satisfy you to be assured, that your father suffers no ill treatment, though a prisoner ; and that 3 t ou, altiiough * restricted for a time to these walls, are still their mistress. In \be name of mercy, for your own sake, and
and*mine, be guided by my advice!— none but myself can save you from Allanrod ; and Allanrod is the director of De Madginecourt's fate." * f Strange, inexplicable declaration !" was on tiie point of bursting from the lips of Rosalind ; but as Lord Rufus ceased speaking, he rose suddenly from his seat, and taking her hand, led her towards, a door at the end of the apart¬ ment, which lie threw open, and disco¬ vered to her view an elegant saloon splen¬ didly illuminated ; in the centre of which a repast was spread, and at its extremity, in a gallery, appeared a number of musi¬ cians, who instantly awakened to sound the cliords of their instruments. Lord Rufus led her to the table, and placing her at its head, lie said— ςί Does this look like captivity^ Lady Rosalind?" Rosalind knew not whether to believe him frieml or foe, and, absorbed İıı thought, she forebore to í eply. Her
Her entertainer pressed her to taste the numerous delicacies of which the feast was composed ; but anxiety deprived Rosalind of all power to eat The min¬ strels sang, and their plaintive notes produced an oppression of spirits which drew the tears into her eyes; a sickly faintness at the same time stole over her, senses, and she could scarcely support herself upon her seat. Lord Rufus perceived her emotion, and every restorative was called in by him to animate her drooping strength— buk in vain ; the roses fled from her cheeks, and she fainted in his arms. On reviving, Rosalind found herself extended on a bed, and several females surrounding her, one of whora she heard say-—" Inform my Lord that the Lady Rosalind recovers." As she moved her eyes round the cham¬ ber, she perceived that it was of the same superb order with the other apart¬ ments
ments of the castle that she had already seen ; the bed and hangings were of rich velvet, sumptuously embroidered in gold, and loaded with tassels and devices : the females who stood round her were all in a similar dress, which bespoke them at¬ tendants, and all of them young, ex¬ cept one, whose appearance particularly struck her from its singularity. Under the burden of apparently a cen¬ tury of years, she was the very essence of alacrity, and no sense seemed defec¬ tive in her but her eyes, which were assisted in their function by a pair of spectacles, of which the bows clasped down to her cheeks two locks of per¬ fectly white hair; if she had more, it was concealed by a point-lace cap, of which the lappets hung down upon her shoulders ; and this was surmounted by a large hat of black silk, with a conical top, that seemed to emulate the length and erectness of a church spire : her gown was of black silk, drawn up be¬ hind
hind through the string of her apron, to prevent its being an impediment toher moving as quickly as the present occa¬ sion of Rosalind's illness might require : her petticoat was of rose-coloured satin, over which hung her short apron of lace, and from the string of this depended an immense bunch of keys, and a pincu¬ shion : yellow stockings of worsted, with black clocks, and a pair of embroidered shoes, with square toes and high heels, completed her dress. This good lady had, for three succes¬ sive generations, been the housekeeper and superintendant-général of the economies of the castle ; she had been brought to it when a girl, and had never stirred be¬ yond thé limits of Rockmount, since her first becoming an inhabitant of it : her name was Edith, to whicii the title of Dame had, for the last thirty years, been added. *' See, see! the sweet lady bird re¬ vives i" said Dame Edith, as Rosalind opened
opened her eyes. c< Oh, bless her ! she is as beautiful as the Lady Helen, that the siege of Troy was fought about —Go, go away, all of you," she added, address¬ ing the other females ; " the quieter my Lady is kept, the better, after the fa¬ tigue of travelling ; so ГП put her to bed myself.—You won't be ashamed of an old nurse to put you to bed, will you, my Lady ? I dare say you have read that Penelope had her old nurse Eu- ryciea," Rosalind did not attend to the old dame's learning, but merely to the voice of tenderness in which she addressed her, and replied thankfully in thc affirmative to her question ; upon which the other females retired. ** The blessings of Heaven fall upon us," said Edith—" how weak you are, sweet lady !—but you'll soon get better, now my Lord has rescued you from that brutal tobber ;—why, he is quite another Nero in his cruelties, 1 hear i" Silence
Silence prevailed until Rosalind was undressed, and put into bed. Dame Edith then said—" Good night, sweet lady-bird ; may Morpheus visit you 1— and should you want any thing, only call Dame Edith, and you shall be re¬ plied to immediately from the adjoining apartment : you sleep here, lady, quite in security, like Sem iram is in her bower, surrounded by your virgins, of which I am one ;" and with these words the good dame departed, leaving two wax tapers burning on a table. Rosalind knew not the hour of the night, but the castle appeared perfectly still, and no sound met her ear but the soft murmuring of the waves. Reflec¬ tion, for a time, drove off repose from her pillow; but Dame Edith's wish at length prevailed, and' she sunk into the arms of the God of Sleep.
CHAP.
CHAP. IX. Smooth runs the water where the brook is deep} And in his simple shew he harbours treason. SECOND PART OF HENRV TI. MOSA LIN D awoke early in the morn¬ ing, and the same stillness prevailing as when ehe had fallen asleep, she justly concluded that no onc was yet stirring in the castle ; the tapers burnt no longer, and the light of day peeped through the curtains of her bed ; busy reflection haunted her mind, and rendered her suspicious of her security in her present abode, and of the friendship of him who professed
professed himself her deliverer from the cruellies of Allanrod. Sbe judged that it migbt bave been possible, and she had ofien believed it to have been the case, that her father iiad hern more culpable in regard ro urging tlie addresses of Lord Rufus, than he hod hinbelf been ; and upon this belief she considered that he might desi re, by his present piotec¬ tion, to repair to her the former injuries to which lie had exposed her. But even with tliis allowance for his present conduct, she felt it impossible to place immediate confidence in a man whose actions slie knew to be veiled with that degree of mystciy which clouded those of Lord Rufus. What but an evil one could be his tie to Allanrod, tliat he should fear to bring him to justice, and award to him the pimishment due to his unwarranted depredations ? Who could Allanrod be, that Lord Rufus should fear him ? What motive could induce
induce Allanrod, in any point, to yield to the entreaties of Lord Rufus? Again she reflected on the strange con¬ duct of Lord Rufus, duiing the.time he had been an inmate of her fathers castle; % of his returning by moonlight to the castle, from some nightly ramble; of his still more extraordinary conversation vvith his page, in hî.s bed-chamber, in the dead of thc night, of which she had over¬ heard a part, and that part of a most dreadful nature, bespeaking unfair death. Every fiesh idea, as il came across her mind, tended only to render her more dissatisfied with her present situa¬ tion. There was but one point of view in which it appeared tolerable, and that was, that she was delivered by it from the brutality of a ferocious freebooter, and that for the present she vvas safe. She arose, and went to the window of her apartment ; it looked upon a garden, gaily luxuriant iu every blooming flower, which was enclosed within a square vol. τι. n formed
formed by a part of tiie castle walls : this alone, and the lofty turrets which bound it on every side, were visible from her apartment. She wandered across her chamber, and an open door into an adjoining apart¬ ment drew her eye; within it, she beheld sitting Dame Edith, with a large folio Volume on a table befoie her, and her hands clasped as in prayer. *'Good morrow/' said Rosalind—"but I fear I distui b you. " The dame did not reply, and Rosalind, concluding her at her devotions, walked away fiom the door, and returned to the window. In a few minutes Dame Edith tripped into the room. — ťť Many pardons, my sweet lady/" she said, " for not ans¬ wering your kind salutation just now ; I hope you'll not take offence, at me ; but the first I address in the morning is always my .Maker ; for eighty years past, 1 have always saicl my prayers, and read tvvo chapters in the Rible, as regularly as the
the morning came, and then I am ready to attend to my business for. the rest of the day." The fain ily of the castle, Rosalind learnt, were all risen ; but the apartments appropriated to her use were too far re¬ moved from those whicii were occupied by them, for he to be disturbed by their movements. Rosalind's breakfast was prepared for her in an elegant apartment, to wiiich she passed through two otlier rooms, which Edith informed her were all set apart for her use, as were an equal num¬ ber on the other side of her chamber, for the domestics wliich-weie appointed to attend upon her. When her repast was removed, Lord Rufus requested permission to viMt her. He entered the apartment in the most respectful manner, and enquired, with the greatest tenderness, after her heahh ; informed lier that tlie garden which she had beheld from the window of her h 2 chain-
chamber was for her particular use ; and that a part of ttie ramparts which com¬ manded a view of the sea, had been pre¬ pared for her to walk upon at her plea¬ sure. He particularly questioned her whether every attention had been shewn to her by Dame Edith and his domestics; urged her to inform him whet lur there were any means by vvhich he eould add to her happiness, or the tranquillity of her mind ; and so great was the interest which he appeared to take in bestowing comfort on her, that Ro.suiind was half won to feel gratitude for lus kindness. In the same respectful manner, he en¬ quired whether it vvould meet iter inclina¬ tion to join hiin at dinner, in the castle- hall, or whether she judgeel it most con¬ sonant with tlie delicacy of her present situation to dine aione in her own apart¬ ment? of which latter Rosalind made choice. During the whole of the day Rosalind bail been oppressed by a Lmtness and head-
head-ache, which the agitation of her mind tended greatly to increase ; and in. the afternoon she requested Dame Edith to lead her to the garden, hoping to gain a little relief from lasting the air.— The sea-breeze was serene and refreshing, and from it alone she could derive any enjoyment, save what the many-coloured parterre, studded thickly with fiowers, afforded her ; for nothing could be seen from it but the sky, and the surrounding walls. As Rosalind was returning from tiie garden, through a hail in the castle, to her apartments, the sound of boisterous mirili drew her eye, and she beheld a youth, in an extremely rich dress, gam¬ boling on a staircase, near the foot of which she was passing, with some fe¬ males, who immediately, on seeing her, stifled their laugh, and fixed their eyes upon her. "Who are those?" asked Rosalind of Dame Edith, when they had passed the h 3 group
group which had attracted her atten¬ tion. " Some of thc foolish virgins, who do uot put oil into their lamps," returned the damé, " wasting their time in folly and idleness,* instead of laying up trea¬ sure for a rainy day ; and that silly boy, Alwin (or man, I suppose he calls hirn¬ seif now), thinks he is a very Apollo amongst them." " Is that the page Alwin?" said R-o- saiind. " Yes, my Lady," returned Edith, 44 \t is Alwin ; and a rare job his page¬ ship is to him, for he is as much lord of this castle as my Lord himself İs." '* Indeed !" said Rosalind— 1¿ is he so great a favourite with Lord Rufus as that ?" " Heaven forbid I should question my Lord's actions i" replied the Dame,—~ * ť but I can't think what good qualities he finds in him, to set such store by hinv as he does ; but if he asked for gold to. eat,.
eat, he*d have it of my Lord.—I blush to tell your Ladyship, but those giris vou saw on the stairs With him are all kept to be his playfellows." Rosalind was silent ; she recollected the conversation which had passed be¬ tween herself and Gertrude, some years before, on the partiality of Lord Rufus to Alwin, and believed, as slie had then done, that she was periiaps the only per¬ son wlio could solve tlic enigma. " Are you not fond of reading, my Lady?" asked the Dame. ''There isa large library in the cattle, full of ex¬ cellent books, which there is not above one person in the house ever enters." " Lord Rufus, I suppose," said Ro¬ salind. 4( Blessings on the heads of us!— шу my Lady, not he; 1 don't think iie iias been into the libra» y these fifty years : the last time 1 saw him tliere was when I carried him in my arms into it, to shew him the illuminations iu the histories of и 4 Colbrand,
Colbrand, the Danish champion, and strong Guy, Earl of Warvick. / am the only reader/' " And you seem to remember well what you have read," said Rosalind, " for í have remarked your quoting many passages both from true and fa¬ bulous history." " I hope I am not wickedly vain," went on tlie Dame, " but I rio pride myself a little on what I have learnt by book-reading. It is now more than eighty-seven years since I have crossed tiie castle moat, and yet I know more than any one in it, except his Lordship, saving your Ladyship's presence, now you aie here. But it is a hard thing upon me that there is not any one soul in the castle with any learning besides my¬ self: if I mention the name of an old hero amongst them, they ail stare, and arin ; and if I talk of the Gods and rt * Goddesses, they laugh right out in my face, and call me an old Bedlamite." Rosalind
Rosalind could not help laughing her¬ self. " Hours, days, months, and years, as I may say," rejoined Dame Edith, * ť I have passed in that library; for it suits my taste, my Lady, far better to read in wise books, than to converse with foolish men and women. Had Socrates been my husband, I had never behaved to him as Xantippe did." " You shaii shew me the library İn the morning," snid Rosalind. Tlic remainder of tlie pre*ent evening she spent alone; she felt uneasy at the conviction of such scenes of wantonness as the one she had just broken in upon, where Alwin was the principal actor, being too common in her present abode, to excite a comment, even in the appa¬ rently well-disposed Dame Edith : she also reflected, with horror, on the ascen¬ dency vvhich Alwin possessed over the man in whose power she now was, as she accounted for it, in her owa mind, by и 5 the
the words which she had overheard him utter in De Mowbray Castle.—She went to bed, and passed-a sleepless night. Tovvaids noon, on the follo wing day, Dame Edith reminded Rosalind of tho library, and she directly expressed a wish to visit it. A long vaulted corridor, up¬ on one end of which a door in the bed¬ chamber ot' Rosalind Opened, led to the library, which was situated at the other extremity. Dame Edith opened the door, and Rosalind entering beheld a large and lofty apartment ; such parts of tiie wainscot as were not hidden by shelves of books, or almost illegible maps and charts, the hand of Time had turned nearly to a black; the windows were of painted glass, and the dust which had gathered upon them, from neglect, lending its assistance to the paint, to keep out the rays of day, increased the gloomy and dismal appearance of the place. . ţ " Your Ladyship sees what a state it is 3 in;
in ; you can't want to be told it is negv lected," said Dame Edith, as she fol¬ lowed Rosalind ; " every volume is an inch thick of dust : any that your Lady¬ ship wishes to peruse must be brushed before you can touch them." Rosalind opened several of the volumes, and found, with satisfaction, that there was here some amusement fov her solitary hours. She continued some time in the library, in conversation with Dame Edith, and when she was about to leave it, and was turning towards a door for that purpose, the Dame said—" Not tbat way, my Lady—you are wrøng; that is not the door we came in by ; it is on the other side of the room : but you might easily mistake it, for the two doors ave exactly alike. That door/' conti¬ nued she, after a short pause, " leads to a set of apartments that I have not been into for some years myself, and I believe Lam the only person that has been into h б them
them at all, since she who inhabited thera died." <e Who was she?" asked Rosalind, with some degree of interest, 44 She was, as I may say, a Venus from the ocean," returned Dame Edith, " for she came hither by sea, and landed on the beach below the castle ;—she vvas the wife of my Lord and master." " The wife of Lord Rufus ľ\ echoed' Rosalind. 41 Aye, my Lady," returned Edith, " for one short year, and scarcely'that : her death was sudden ; a malignant fever brought her to the grave, and I doubt rot she went to heaven, although she was a Catholic and a Frenchwoman/' Rosalind stood wrapt in thought;-— words which she wished she had never heard, returned to her memory; a chill stole over her blood, and she felt sick at heaťt, 44 Will you like to see her apartments?" conti-
continued Dame Edith, opening the door which led to them. Rosalind followed her, without speak¬ ing. They passed through a suite of apart¬ ments, of which the touith was a bed¬ chamber, and beyond this an oratory, which commanded a view of the sea. 44 Nothing has been moved/' said Edith, iC since the sad event which so greatly affected my Lord ; it is now full twenty-three years since the death of my Lady, and still he can't bear to hear her name mentioned, or to see any thing that ever belonged to her. These apartments have no communication with the rest of the castle, and nobody ever comes near them now." " Did you attend the Lady de Mad¬ ginecourt in her last illness ?" asked Ro¬ salind. 44 No, my Lady/* replied the Dame, " I was at that time confined to my bed ν with
with a sprain I had received in my back, by a fall I had down stairs. My Lord himself was her principal attendant ; he left her neither day nor night." Having taken a cursory view of the apartments, Rosalind returned to her own, and shortlv after dismissed Dame Edith : her thoughts were too busily engaged for her to need a companion, and they rested on the information she had just gained of Lord Rufus being a widower. Strange, that she should ne¬ ver have heard this before 1—that her father should not have mentioned it to her, when he first introduced to her Lord Rufus! —still more strange, if the cir¬ cumstance had never been known to him!—Why this concealment? why this mystery with regard to his first mar¬ riage? Could it have been of his wife that he had spoken on that, dreadful night, when she had overheard him in his chamber in De Mowbray Castle?— " God
ζζ God forbid it ľ' she cried, as she sunk upon her couch, and gave vent to those tears which she could not repress, although she could not explain why. they, flowed from her eyes»
(ШАР..
»■'■ "■' . ■ ■— y »
CHAP. Χ. I could a tale unfold, whose lightest word Would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood, * Make thy two eyes, like stars, start fronv their spheres, Thy knotted and combined Jocks to part, And each particular hair to stand on end, Like quills upon the fretful porcupine í IIA M t ET. UN the following day Lord Rufus de Madginecourt requested to see Rosalind : her dislike to him was now again strength¬ ened by a combination of circumstances, which she could scarcely for a moment drive from her mind ; and she felt more averse
averse than ever to beholding him : but she considered that however great her suspicions of his evil cbnduct, still she had but suspicion to rest her opinion upon ; and that the certainty of her being in his power taught her, for her own sake, to act towards him with com¬ placency : she recollected also, how often, her deceased mother, iu tliose precepts which she had been in the constant habit of giving her for the regulation of her conduct, had enjoined her, as a principal virtue, to act with every lenity of opinion towards those who shewed kindness to her ; and to disregard what¬ ever of evil the world might prattle of them. — " Remember, my child," she had frequently repeated to her, " how many good actions are required, in the opinion of the world, for a man to be accounted worthy by it; and, on the other hand, how decidedly it stamps him a villain, for one single crime. The unfair judgment ofthe world, it becomes the
_1β2 the individual, whose opinion is perhaps ©f more consequence to him, to rectify ; and to remember that it is the general tenor of a man's condnct, from which his heart should be judged, not from a single action. The most depraved fre¬ quently practise a single virtue in its greyest purity ; the law of universal imperfectness, which governs tlm sublu¬ nary world, may lead one of the purest of its inhabitants into a single crime. Erom no single action should a mau'» worth be rated." Slie desired that he might come to her apartment, and in a few moments he appeared in it. After the usual salutations at meeting,. Lord Rufus spoke thus,—" Lady Rosa* lind, I am suddenly obliged to leave iny castle ; my absence will, I trust, be but for a few days, but I could not quit it without informing you in person of my departure/' He had hiraself commanded, all tlm attend·
attendants to retire on his entering Rosa¬ lind's apartment; but once more casting his eyes around it, to be assured they were gone, he added—" I have sum¬ moned Allanrod to a meeting; foryour sake, I have done that, which ho extre¬ mity of my own should have induced me to : when we are together, it is my intention to urge him for his permission to conduct you to the protection of the Queen : should he comply, may I rely on your not revealing to our sovereign that you are privy to the subsistence of any union between myself and the free» booter? may I rely that you will joia me in saying that fate led me to the spot whither you had been dragged by the lawless Scottish freebooter, after the de¬ spoiling of your father's castle, and that Fortune granted me the triumph of res«** Cuing you from his power?"* ** Shall I not, my Lord," asked Rosa* lind* " by joining in your fabricated tale, perhaps hereafter! render, myself ac* countable
countable for actions in which I may be deemed an accomplice, although I have liad no share in them ?" (i I see your fears," answered Lord Rufus, "and cannot but commend them, and the purity of your heart, vvhich re¬ coils, even for its own safety, at the idea of falsehood ; but trust me, you have nothing to fear of the nature which you apprehend ; and I hope that İt will not be necessary for you to become a party in any fallacy. I have every expectation that at m}' return ï shall be allowed to conduct you to the presence of your sovereign, in a manner that will render any enquiry, on her part, into my con¬ duct, unnecessary. Let this idea cheer your spirits, and keep alive your happi¬ ness : my stay will be short—with to¬ morrow's dawn 1 shall depart, and the evening of the succeeding day will, I doubt not, mark my return to my castle. Trust me, Lady Rosalind, that I have terms to offer the freebooter in your be¬ half,
half, which I think he will know his own interest too well to refuse." Lord Rufus pressed the subject of his request no further, but immediately changed the conversation. After he had passed some time in her apartment, he said— i4 I must request you, Lady Ro¬ salind, ere my departure, which will be with the dawn of day, to accompany me into the hall of my castle." 44 For what purpose, my Lord ?" asked Rosalind. 44 For a mere matter of form," ans¬ wered he, smiling, " but one under which I siiall depart happier than I else could do; and you will live liere i» more security of your ou n peace than you might do without it " He took her hand, and she suffered him to lead her into the hail of the castle. Heie she found assembled a numerous body of attendants and vas¬ sal, who appeared to be awaiting her coming ; they received Lord Rufus and herself,
herself, on their entrance, with every mark of humility and respect ; and Lord Rufus, leading her into the midst of them, said—" My friends and servants, I have convened you here, to request that, in my absence from my castle, ye consider her whose hand mine now clasps as your lady m ¡stress; that ye obey her as myself, and tend to her every duty, affection, and willing service, which ye could render to me." The hall rang with united promises of obedience to Rosalind, from the assem¬ bled servants and vassals ; and Lord Ru¬ fus bowing to them his head, in acknow¬ ledgment of their compliance with his request, reconducted Rosalind to her apartment. The present action of Lord Rufus was not more extraordinary to Rosalind than every other part of his conduct had been, and she remarked it in silence.— Having returned with her to her apart¬ ment, he again expressed his hope that the
the issue of his conference with Allanrod, concerning her, might be such as it would be satisfactory to her io hear ; and took his leave of her with a wish for her happiness during iiis absence How earnestly did Rosalind desire that the intention wliich Lord Rufus had ex¬ pressed, of endeavouring to obtain the grant of Allanrod for placing lier under the protection of Elizabeth, might be sincere, and that good angels might smile upon its issue ! she breathed a prayer to Heaven for its event, and sunk upon her pillow, more composed than she believed she couid have done in the castle of Lord Rufus, since her conver¬ sation vvith Dame Edith in the library. At early morn the sound of wind in¬ struments awakened Rosalind, and Dame Ediţii, who was also aroused by it, in* formed lier that it was the signal of Lord Rufus de Madginecourt's departure. — The general bustle throughout the ca&tle appeared great, for it was tlie first time that
that any of the movements of its inha¬ bitants had reached the ears of Rosalind. In the course of an hour the sounds began to die away, and she beheld the cavalcade which accompanied Lord Rufus descending into a valley on the heath, from one of the windows of an adjoining apartment, which overlooked the country. It was a morning of peculiar serenity, and Rosalind, for the fìrbt time, desired Dame Editli to accompany her to that part of the rampart which Lord Rufus had informed her was prepared for her to walk on. The glassy bosom of tiie ocean, reflect¬ ing the golden beams of tiie rising sun, and sprinkled with tlie white^sails of pass¬ ing vessels, presented to her a scene of novelty wliich called fortli in her mind emotions unknown before, and whicii had the happy effect of silencing for a while the cares of her aching bosom. After her morning repast, Rosalina repaired to the library, which Dame Edith
Edith informed her she would findou a better state than on her former visit ; for she^ had ordeied a couple of female servants to brush the books, and dust the furniture. Rosalind took a volume, and sat down with it on one of tlie window-seats ; Dame Edith stood at some little distance from her, with one of her favourite au¬ thors in her hand. Rosalind had frequently requested the good Dame, when with her, to sit with¬ out restraint, which she had regularly refused to do; once moie Rosalind de¬ sired her to take a seat, and Dame Edith replied— " Since you are so good as to permit me, my Lady, I will sit down to-day, and not be ashamed of my fa¬ miliarity cither ; for to-day I think I have gained sometliing like a right to sit in the presence of any one, saving your Ladyship's presence/' She placed heiself in a chair, and then continued—" And that rigiit, my Lady, is, tliat I am this vol. ir. ι day
day one hundred years old : till that time I think it a servant's duty to stand in the presence of their superiors ; at that age, I think they may have an excuse for wanting a seat, wherever they are." Rosalind paid the Dame some com¬ pliments on her hundredth birth-day, which proved gratifying to her feelings ; and she told Rosalind that she had a request to make of her, which was, that she would allow her to be absent from her apartment, for a few hours, in the afternoon, as she had long promised a treat to her fellow servauts on her biith- day ; and that it would hurt her to break her word to them. Rosalind desired her to use her time as her own, assuring her that the library was capable of afl'oiding her sufficient amusement for that day, and many more, should she so long continue an inmate of Rockmount Castle. The volume which Rosalind had first taken up, was one with the contents of which
which she was well acquainted, and she shortly replaced it, desiring to exchange it for one which she had not read before. As her eye roved along the shelves, a small volume, which was laid across the tops of the other books, caught her at¬ tention : she took it down, and, turning to its title-page, found written on it tlie following sentence, in French :— " Let those vvho think their own lot tlie most unfortunate, their own suffer¬ ings the most acute, read the following pages ; and learn that a still greater wretch than themselves has existed—even she who wrote these words." Rosalind turned the leaf, and on the other side she found written — ť ' The History of Eloise de la Valois, unlawfully made the wife of Lord Rufus de Madginecourt" The book almost fell from her hands ; curiosity and surprise shook her every nerve : she turned towards Dame Ediths to ascertain whether she had noticed her ι â agita-
agitation, but her eyes were fixed on her book, Rosalind instantly replaced the volume on the shelf, resolving to use the time of the Dame's absence in the afternoon for its perusal, and rejoicing that such an opportunity would be given her. " Has your Ladyship done reading?" asked Edith, as Rosalind walked away from the spot where she had found the manuscript. " For the present I think I have," replied Rosalind. " And so have I, Lady," returned the Dame: u when I come to a grand cli¬ max, I always close my book ; and 1 am at such a one now; I have just left Juno I on her visit to Jupiter, when she was girt with the cestus of Venus; and there I shall leave her, till I have made the cakes for my treat. " " Can you read French ?" asked Ro¬ salind. 44 Heaven
** Heaven forbid I" replied the Dame ; 14 it might only lead me into evil read- 5> Rosalind was satisfied. The manu¬ script she had just found was then pro¬ bably a secret to all the world but her¬ self»
.V3 CHAR
CHAP. XL List, list, О Übt I HAMLET« İT appears almost needless to say that Rosalind seized the first moment of Dame Edith's absence in tiie afternoon for re¬ turning to the library, and beginning to репье those pages η bibb seemed to im¬ plicate the real character of Lord R'-^is de .Madginecourt. Their contents were as follows :— " О may a heart of feeling peruse tlie lines which I now write i may it drop a tear of sympathy to my sufferings!—it will
will be a balm to my sad spirit, if it shall haunt thc spot where my miseries were endured. " 1 am the only daughter of the Marquis de Ta Valois; I lost my mother at an early age, and for some yeuià my rather was to me tlie kindest of parents, till love in my heart, and intciest in his, disunited from me his affection. " My father's marquisate was situated in the neighbourhood of La Valence, and on a small adjoining estate lived я youth named D'Altonville, whose slender possessions did not prevent me from de¬ siring that his petition to my fatlier for my hand might be accepted. But, alas ! my father sternly repulsed his suit, and bade me thiuk of him" no more, on pain of falling under his eternal anger. Hovv common is it for parents to issue a com¬ mand agaiust the thoughts of their cliil¬ dren, without considering how impos¬ sible it is for those childreu to restrict their thoughts according to their bidding ! ι 4 "After
*'After the declaration of his passion for me, D'Altonville was refused admit¬ tance to my father's house ; and from the terms >of intimacy on which vve had before lived, as neighbours, we now saw each other no more ; we had not eveu the opportunity o 4 ' corresponden ee, and í was ignorant of all that related to my D'Altonville, except that I was certain his sentiments with regard to me were tlie same as wheu we had last met ; he had breathed the most solemn vows of un¬ ceasing love, and judging of his heart by my own, I iloubted not their truth* nor was I deceived in him. "About six months after my father had refused to him my hand, a stranger, from jigiand, who brougiit with him a recommendation from our King to tlte hospitality of my father, arrived at our castie. This was— oh, bane ofmy oeace! poison of my earthly happiness í the vi etch, Lord Ruí us de Madginecourt, withm whose hated vails it is now my only,
only consolation to commit to paper the events of my Avretched life; and as I see the ciiaracters flow from n.y pen, it is something like happiness to ne, to know that the miseries already endured cannot return, and that I am so much nearer the termination of a wretched existence. " At my first introduction to Lord Rufus, it was my misfortune to please him : my person was handsome, and this is all he is capable of valuing in woman. My father hekrd his sentiments of me with unfeigned pleasure: ids high rank, and great wealth in England, were well known to him; and he now doubly applauded himself for having broken off my acquaintance wirii the less wealthy, but moie wortliy, D'Altonville. ťí in less tiian a week after the arrival of J 4'd Rufus, my father informed me tliat he liad done me the honour of ask¬ ing my hand in mar ringe, and that I was destined to become his wife. 15 "I feli
4i I fell on my knees before him, and besought hiui not to sacrifice me to a man who, though almost a stranger to me, I was weil convinced that no length of time could induce me to love; ratiier than marry him, I entreated to be im¬ mured within a convent's walls, where I declared myself prepared to make a vow of retirement for ever from the world. 44 He pretended to smiie at wliat he called the frenzy of a girľs thsappoint¬ ment in her first love, and told me that in a 'e w years time I siiould return him thanks for the excédent choice he had made for mc, and rejoice that thé beggar D'Altonville was not my husband.— * Besides/ added he, ' your D'Alton¬ ville is, by t jiis time, probably no more, for he has joined the naval force whicii our King has just sent out against Spain, and it is rumoured that a bloody en¬ gagement has taken place/—and with this humane information he left me. " I was
4C I was still on my knees, and breath¬ ing a fervent prayer for the safety of him I loved ; 1 concluded it wiui a wish that if his soul had fled ñym earth, mine might be called to follow it. " Wretched beyond description, I continued for two days alone in my chamber ; in the evening of the third, my father came to mc, and exerted his parental authority to compel me to dress myself, and join a party which I found he had invited to a dance that night, İn honour of Lord Rufus. *' Constrained to obey, I dressed my¬ self, and went down ; to my astonish¬ ment, I found that the festivities of tho night were to be held in'the air, and that the gardens were illuminated for that purpose. 1 entered them ; various groups of dancers, in the dresses of shepherds, shepherdesses, and other fan¬ tastic characters, met my eyes; and Lord Rufus, tJ ie g a ) eiît °f the,festive croud, саше directly to me, to claim ι 6 my
my hand as his own. Heart-rending' con¬ gratulations on my approacliing marriage were poured into my ear from every tongue. *' The music, and various sounds of mirth wiiich filled the gardens, almost maddened me; and with the first oppor¬ tunity I retired into a corner, where I burst into tears. The only individual who observed my reheat was a persou in thc garb cf чи old shepherd, whose grey hairs and grizzly beai d almost con¬ cealed his countenance : I saw him pass two or three times before the arbour where I sat ; at length he spoke.— 4 Eloise, do you not know me?' he said. —It was the voie? of D'Altonville. * Good Heavens Γ I exclaimed—* are you here?' 'Yes/ returned he; 'but to-mor¬ row I depart. I am thankful that I have found this opportunity for bidding y on farewell. Angels guard you, and make you blest and happy ľ he cried, pressing me
me to his breast—' we may perhaps never meet again ľ * Are you then going to join the fleet?' I asked, in trembling accents. * My destiny has readied you V he said. * Yes, eloise, I cannot be happy here; and it is immaterial to me whither I fly to seek death, since peace in life is denied me.' *' Again he clasped me to his breast; footsteps approached tbe spot where we were standing. 'Farewell for ever!' he exclaimed, and darted amongst tbe trees. ' Stay, stay, I entreat you!' I cried; *'moie I couid not utter, ere I sunk fainting tò the earth : when 1 revived, I found myself supported İn the hated arms of Lord Rufus ; a faint shriek escaped my Hps—my father stood by me and his presence awed me from fur¬ ther expressing my sensations of horror. " When the festivities cf the night were over, and i was permitted to retire 5 to
to my chamber, I did not attempt to enter my bed, but òat deliberating vvith my ovvn mind how it would be possible for me to ace, in order to prove the * farewell for ever/ of D'Altouville falla¬ cious. " On the morrow he had said he was to depart; the midnight hour had sound¬ ed, and that morrow was already come— already he might be some leagues pro¬ ceeded on his journey towards the sea; a few more hours might indeed render îıis párting atldress prophetic; the tliought was frenzy— intolerable even in idea, and I resolved immediately to follow liis steps. " The point of greatest difficulty was how to escape unobserved from my fa¬ ther's house ; disguise I had none, nor had í any hope of procuring one wiiere 1 now vvas : I had no friends in tlie house vvho would not be overawed from lending assistance to me, by their dread of my father's resentment, if tliey were disco¬ vered in it. I had, accordingly, nothing to
to depend upon but the smiles of For¬ tune, in suftering me to depart unde¬ tected ; and judging that no time could be more favourable to my design than thè present, at wliich all the inhabitants of the castle were wrapt iu sleep, after the fatigues of the preceding night, I lost no time in dressing myself as plainly as my wardrobe would permit; and tak¬ ing: vvitii me nothin«; but a smali sum of money, of which I was possessed, I boldly sallied forth iuto tlie garden, from which a private door opened upon tlie lmrii roatl. " In reaching this, fate smiled on me, and I left my father's territories without a sigh of regret: I lost not a moment in gaining ground on my journey, whiie I considered my departure as yet unknown. I passed near the small estate which had beeu rented by D'Altonville, but for many, reasons, I judged it most prudent > not to stop an instant longer than neces¬ sary within view of it; althougli my heai t
heart panted to enquire whether its mas¬ ter was yet set out on his journey. ** I knew that the fleet destined against Spain was to sail from^Toulon; from this pkce my father's residence was deemed only a journey of three da^s; thus I doubted not but the energy of my mind îti the pursuit I was beut on, wouid support me in strength and spirits for the time î bhould require them to bear me to the spot of my destination. *' Aliout an hour after su n -rise, í ar¬ rived at a smaii town, which 1 judged to be five leagues from the spot from whence I hail begun my walk ; 1 felt myself already extiemely weary, and stiil more subdued with the agnation of my spirits than fatigue of body : I dreaded to enter any house of public refreshment, iest I slwHild-be pursued, as sueh liouses would "naturali} be the first where I should be - sought; 1 therefore stopped at tiie door ofa mean cottage, of vvhose iniiabitants, an old man aud his daughter, I re¬ quested
quested a bason of milk ; promising to reward them for their kindness, if they would comply vvith my request, <c The daughter readily tendered me every service in her power : the old man I found to be blind, anil this was some relief to my mind, аз the old are more suspicious, and inspire us wiih greater dread, when we are acting under any deceit, than those of our ovvn years. In the course of my meal, 1 informed the girl that I had a brother on board the thet, whom I had an earnest desire, once more, to see, before he should sail, and that I was for that purpose travelling towards Toulon. I had been travelling some time, I added, and was not only very weary with my journey on foot, but also extremely fearful ι hat he might have sailed before İ sliould reach the place; on both whicii accounts, I wished to procure some conveyance forwards, if it were but for a pai t of my journey. " She
f * She informed me, that if I turned aside to the right, about a league and a half from the road I was in, I sliould come into the high road from Paris to Toulon, and that upon it I should find numerous conveyances proceeding with the seamen to the port of embarkation. 1 But surely,' added she, * though the method is ea^y, it is both hazardous and disagreeable, as you wiU be the only woman amongst them, to join so large a company of men as you will meet with.' ' That,' said I, ť alarms me, I confess ; and I wish very much I could procure a disguise for my sex : could you contrive to get me one, 1 would willingly reward you for your trouble, and feel more grateful to you than I can express.' 6 Theie is nothing to be procured in our town,' she replied ; ' if you thougiit you should soon be back this way, I would, with all my heart, lend you my brother's Sunday clothes; he is younger than
than you, and I think they would fit you.' "I told her, if she would accommo¬ date me with them, I would leave her the value of them, and my own clothes into the bargain, as a surety for my returning them. She readily, antl unsuspiciously, assisted me to equip myself; ami when I was attired, I set forward to cross the forest which she had said would bring me into the high road from Paris to Toulou. " About noon I reached a small village; at the entrance into it, I perceived two vehicles standing before a house, at the door of which sat some sailors ; and from this circumstance I directly concluded, that it was one of the places of refresh¬ ment for the seamen on their journey to the fleet. I accosted them, and found my conjectures to be just. * Will you/ said I, i have the charity to admit me into your party ? I have run away from . a cruel master, and have no resource , against
against famine, but entering on board tlie fleet/ " They pitied me, and readily agreed to my petition. I thanked them from my heart, and directly begged leave to get iuto the vehicle, where a seat ap¬ peared to mc at that moment the most enviuble treasure in the world. They brought me refreshments, both of meat and drink ; but I durst not offer to pay any part of my own expences, lest I should draw suspicion on myself for being possessed of money, after the story I had told of my unfortunate case. " I enquired of them whether I shotild be allowed, on my arrival at the port, to enter on board any ship 1 pleased ; for that a kind lady, who knew my situa¬ tion, had instructed me to make use of her name as a recommendation to an officer on board thc fleet, of the name of D'Altonville ; and that I sliould like to sail in the same ship with him·? " To this they could give me no satis¬ factory
factory answer, but said, that the point would be easily ascertained when we ar¬ rived at the port, which would be in little more than two days. c< Towards the evening of the second day, vve saw before us a carriage of a su¬ perior order to those in which I and my companions were journeying, which had broken down on the road. When we came up to it, our driver stopped, to offer asöi&tance to tîıe passengers, and one of tlie fiist countenances which If beheld amongst those who had alighted! from it, in consequence of tlie fracture, was—blessed chance! D'Altonville hitn-; self! tť Tiiis occurrence took place in th dusk of the evening, and as I had re solved not to let myself be recognised b D'Altonville, if I could possibly preven it, till the fleet should have sailed, lest h should find means of preventing me fror embarking, for my safety's sake, I judge this a favouiable opportunity for speakin t
! to him; I accordingly said—* Pray can lauyofyon gentlemen informine where 11 may be likely to find an officer of thè J name of D'Altonville, when ï reach the | port?' I * That is my name, boy,' he instantly [replied. í * Ь it, Sir?' I said; ť then I hope p you will be a friend to me, and get me la situation on hoard your ship.' I* On what pretensions do you ground this hope ?* asked he— ť who are you ?' * I am a poor boy, an orphan,' I an¬ swered, e without any other means of gaining my subsistence ; and my hope of your kindness is founded on the pro- ¡mise of a good lady, who bade me ad¬ dress you in her name.' I ť Indeed !* said he—' who is she ?' : ť The Lady Eloise de la Valois,' I re- iturncd, ť who said she was sure you would be kind to me, if I mentioned it [to you as her wish that you should be ¡m' "He
44 He sighed, ancl said—* Whatever she desires, it is a happiness to me to perform—depend on my protection.' ťť He then directed me on board what ship to find him on my arrival at the port, and gave me a paper signed with his name, which he told me vvould prove a passport for my admission on board, should he be absent from his ship at the time I went to make my demand. ** My mind was now comparatively at ease, and I dropped a silent tear of gra¬ titude to the kindness of my fate. "The carriage in which D'Altonville was journeying was in a short time re¬ paired, and then set forward again with much greater speed than that in which I was a passenger was abie to travel ; I thus quickly again lost sight of the only man whom the earth possessed, of value to me. " On our arrival at Toulon, we learnt that an unexpected order had been re¬ ceived by the fleet to leave the port; and
and that twelve hours only were allowed them for preparing to saik c< D'Altonville was himself on board his ship when I went to it ; but the hurrv of the time so much engrossed his mind, that he paid no further atten¬ tion to me, than to appoint me to my station, which was that of a cabin-boy, to serve him; a tabk vvhich I, vvith raptuie, heard assigned to me, on ac¬ count of tfie frequent opportunities it would give me of seeing him, and being ne;ir his peison. lt ï found that I was one more than the ship had been intended ro'contain, but admitted to the number of the crew, merely on account of the fabricated message I had delivered to its captain from lier he loved ; and on this ac¬ count, as there и as no hammock for me, a small cot, made up 'm one coiner of thc captain s cabin, was appointed for my sleeping-place. rt It was about nine in the morning vvhen
when I reached the port, and three of the twelve hours allowed for preparing the fleet to sail were alreatly elapsed ; thus about six in the evening, the v\hole of the French squadron was under weigh. Throughout thc day, D'Altonville had been too busily employed, in giving instructions to his men, and receiving on board the stores necessary for his voyage, to suffer his attention to rest for above á minute at a time upon me ; and when İt did so, I always turned aside from him my features, or managed to conceal them beneath the face-piece of my cap; still dreading that a discovery of who I was might frustrate my darling scheme of living, or dying, with the man of my heart. " With the object of onr sailing Γ was unacquainted, ex^pt that the general voice informed r t jt was to the annoy¬ ance of Spain ; but how, or in what manner, that was intended to be effected, [ neither learnt, nor did I feel a wish to vol. ιι. к know;
know ; one idea, and that alone, occu¬ pied rny whole soul. " When 1 was informed that my at¬ tendance for the night could be dispensed with, and that í might retire to my cot, how strange, liow fearful, yet how plea¬ sureable, v\ere the feelings of my heart! Possessed 1 seemed of every earthly bliss, in heir, g the partner of my DAlton- ville's fate ; hks^ui bevond the power ol" fate to torture we, in the certain knowledge that in one fortune tiie lixes of us both vicie involved: but tlien, might not D'Altonvitlc upbraid me for the excess of my love, in having so far forgotten the softness of mv sex, the effeminacy of my education, as to have endangered my morals, my peace, in a society so little adapted to tite delicate tenderness in whicl) every hour of my past life had been nursed ? might lie not judge tiiat my presence would lead him into difficulties, involve him in situations of hazard, vvhich had not been known to him
him had ï been absent, and render him perhaps a coward in the bor.r of battle, when his own natural spiiit might, with¬ out my presence, stamp him the hero of the fight ? (i I shuddered at the idea; thc tears forced theiiHches into my evis, and lifting my-clasped hands to IIcuwu, Γ fervently prayed that my presence might, not provea bane tu rbe sight of him, for whom, and whose love, life appeared to me of little value. My fears almost * subdued my spirit; a new and inexpres¬ sible feeling rendei ed me alarmed al the thougiit of hc'ioldmg him whom 1 had sacrificed all т^л'т to se« 1 , and to be near ; and I resolved not to let him know me, if it we're possible to conceal the secic.t from hiui, but to rest satisfied that I was the vri r ncsb of his fate. * ťk An hour-glass btooj upon a table in the cabin, and by its side burnt a lamp. By the darkness of the night, I con¬ jectured it to be about ten o'clock, wheu к Û I was
I was dismissed from the deck to my cot, and, according to this calculation, the running sand pronounced it near two in the morning, ere the fall of footsteps announced the approach of D'Altouville. " I had only thrown myself upon my bed, without undressing, and upon his coming, I turned my face downwards, 4 to avoid meeting his eyes, and expe¬ rienced a sensation doubtless new to every bosom but my own. *' D'Altonville entered with a slow step: after a momentary "pause, and turning the wasting sand, he threw his hat upon the ground, and let himself fall upon his bed ; at first I conjectured him overpowered with the fatigues ofthe day, and thought that he had sunk has¬ tily to sleep; but a short time convinced me of the contrary. He turned fre¬ quently upon the bed, clasped his hands in the wildness of frenzy, struck them frequently upon his forehead, and, duiing all these actions of a disturbed mind, he held
held converse with himself, and many a loog-drawn sigh, laden with my name, escaped his lips. " My breathings probably informed hhn that 1 was no more asleep than him* self, for ; after a short interval, he ad¬ dressed me with—' What is your name,' my lad ?' * Albert, Sir/ I replied. 4 liow long have you been known to the Lady Eloise de la Valois r' ' Ever since í can remember myself, ' I returned. * And you esteem her?' he went on. * And love her,' I rejoined, ' as ten¬ derly as I do myself' '* He sighed —* What drives you from your home and country ?' he enquired. * Love, 1 I falteringly replied. * Indeed V said he ; ' you are very young, to feel it thus acutely, and I pity you the more, on account of your youth ; fbr it is a passion which but too ed'tea holds war with reason, and your & 3 youth
youth must therefore render you less able to struggle against its attacks. I well know myself what is tiie power of love.' ' And is your love, Sir, ' asked 1, * par¬ don the question, at variance with rea¬ son?' 4 You cannot ask tliat question seri¬ ously, I am sure,' he replied; c as you have known Eloise from her infancy, you 'canuot but know the mutual attachment which long Las, and 1 trust ever will subsist between us ; and you cannot but know also, that it was founded on every pretension that can render love worthy of applause. ' t( He turned hastily on his bed, as he pronounced these words, and the emo¬ tions of liis soul were too audible to admit a doubt of his sufferings. A long silence ensued : I duist not venture to break it. At last he spoke.—'.I have,' he said, ' ргерг: ed my mind to meet death in the engagement which we have daily to expect; and all the anxiety I ì now
now feel proceeds from my fear that the apathy ' with which disappointment op¬ presses my soul will make me appear a coward in tiie fiVht. Oh that it were possible tiiat tlie countenance of my Eloise eould sbirro upon me at that mo¬ ment 1 her smue would arouse in my mind the sensations of a hero, and I bhould then die a death of glory and honour, becoming* thc man who had sought and possessed her love.' " This was an exclamation not to be passed over ■— ť О, D'Altonville!' I cried, 4 be blest in the accomplishment of your wish—the countenance of your Eloise shall shine upon you in tlie battle's heat; her smiie shall be tlie excitement of your heroism ; her form siiall be your shield against deatli, and her prayers preserve you for a iife of tilorv and honour ľ " I liad pronounced these words in my own natural voice, without the disguise under which 1 had concealed its real tones, whilst I had desired to remain к 4 unknown
unknown to him; and starting wildly up, he exclaimed— 1 Almighty God î do you mock me, or is it—is it, indeed, my Eloise who speaks ?' * It is,. indeed, she who now addresses you,* I said, in reply. ' What reception wili she meet for her temerity in follow¬ ing your fortunes ?' " He sunk on his knees hefore me, and pressing my hand to his lips—' Ex¬ alted paragou of thy sex's constancy and truth/ he exclaimed, 6 what reward, what recompence, can one honoured like myself, dare to offer in return for such heroism of affection? JSiy hand, my heart, are all I have to offer ;—long have those been your own ; and witness for me, Heaven, while yet I kneel in adora¬ tion of your constancy, that none but yourself, either in your life or death, shall ever possess thetn/ 44 Oh what an hour of bliss was this ! too exquisite to be permanent, and so richly ¿den with happiness, as to be the certau^
certain forerunner of misery, as acute. It was one of the fast happy moments I was doomed to enjoy on earth ; in heaven it may yet be reserved for me, as my re¬ compence for all the woes that have been heaped upon my unoffending head, again to meet my D'Altonville in scenes of purer- bliss—in scenes where the tempes¬ tuous passions of the heart have no influ¬ ence, and the more iefined feelings ofthe mind yield happiness in its state of ut¬ most purity. " A short interval of silence restored a ealm to the feelings of D'Altonville, and he then began to express his dread of the perils to which I had exposed myself, in becoming the partner of his voyage. ťl After the confession I had already made of my heart, and the steps I had taken, any concealment would have been folly ; I therefore assured him* and I spoke the truth, that in his presence I could brave any danger which I might be fated to encounter; and told him that il 5 the
the only thing which could render mt otherwise than satisfied with my present situation, would be to see him unhappy in his fears on my account. " He received my acknowledgment with the utmost delicacy as well as grati¬ tude; he instantly insisted on giving up to me the cabin appropriated fbr his own use; assuring me that he could easiiy procure a bed in another part of the ship ; and vrith this assurance, he directly left me, saying that I must greatly re¬ quire rest, after the fatigue of body and miud I hatl been undergoing for the last few days ; anil baving directed me how to fasten myself within the cabin, where he told me I might lie down to repose with the utmost security of no interrup¬ tion being offered me, he retired. ** His conjectures were just, for my strength was greatly exhausted by my journey ; and notwithstanding the no¬ velty of my situation, I soon closed my eyes in sleep. "Thb
" Tlie tvvo succeeding days 1 passed entirely in D'Altonviile's cabin, in a calmness of mind to whiclf I had long been a stranger ; he visited me at such intervals as his presence on deck could be dispensed vith; and the delicate conduct which iie observed towards me, rendered me morc than ever convinced that he mei iteti from me the step I had taken for his happiness and my own. '* On thc evening of the third day intelligence was brougiit, by a frigate whicii had beeu sailiug somewhat in ad¬ vanee of tlie ship we were on board of, that tlic enemy's fleet was bearing down upon us. " D'Altonville brought me informa¬ tion of these tidings ; he besought me to keep my spirits as calm as possible during tlie scene I was constrained to pass through, and conveyed me to a part of the ship beneath tiie surface of the water, where, almost in total dar ¿ness, the sounds of hurried preparations over к 6 my
my head, and on each side of me, dis¬ tinctly reached me. íť Öne hasty embrace was all that his call to duty allowed him.—* The God of battles shield thee, my D'Altonville !* I exclaimed, and he disappeared from my sight. " In less than an hour the cannon began to send forth their dreadful thun¬ der—how terrible were the sounds ! Eaclv explosion, my hurried imag'nation fan¬ cied might have borne with it therfor of D'Alton ville's existence. My fears worked on my senses, till every nerve became fixed in daad, and .my brain swam in a chaos of sensations which almost maddened me. My senses were recalled tp their functions by the shrieks and groans of the wounded, who were bringing down from the scene of action into a part of the ship which was only divided by a slight partition from the spot where I was placed. " Unspeakable were the horrors which 3 assailed
assailed my ears—dreadful were the groans of the dying !—still more piteous were the shrieks of those whose wounds com¬ pelled them to seek tlie preservation of life from the amputating knife of the surgeon. "The thunder of war still roared with unabated violence, and, to complete the sum of my terrors, the flickering lamp wliich had hitherto afforded me the slen¬ der consolation of light, in my awful solitude, now died away in its socket ý and by leaving me the exercise of oniy one sense, rendered me more capable of distinguishing all the wretched souuds that were passing arounďme. lt About nine iu the evening, as nearb as· 1 could gum the hour, the cannon suddenly ceased to roar, and in a few minutes D'Altonville appeared, to con¬ duct me from my confinement.—« Thank God, he lives !' I exclaimed 1 —* I am blessed ľ Little did I foresee, at the moment of this exclamation, how short migh£
MYSTERIOUS FREEBOOTER. might yet be the life of him I adored ?— little did I suspect that ihe d^km-ss of the evening had pur a sto,) to the en¬ gagement, and t ha'- it was to Oe re.it wed with fresh vigour at liie break of tîıe succeeding dav ! " 1 know not whether the moments of suspense which intervened between this hour and the moniin«; were not more dreadiul than those of the actual fight. * ť D'Altonville was slishtlv wounded in the arm, but his mental anxiety for the event of the contest rendei ed him almost insensible to bodily pain ; his spirits wanted both refieshinent and strength, I pressed him to eat; prepared for him an invigorating beverage; and after I had induced him to swallow it, I u rged him to seek tiie repose of a few liours sleep. Natuie was greatly exhausted in him ; he sunk at my feet, and let Jiis head fall into my lap; his slumbers never lasted above five minutes together, and then they
they were broken by starts and involun¬ tary exclamations to his crew (i At length the twilight began to pe¬ netrate through the windows of the ca¬ bin, and the dreadful signal gun for all to meet on deck was fired. D'Altonville again led me to my retreat from danger : in our way thither, I ventured to en¬ quire of him whetlier he believed the French would gain the victory ? He did believe it, he answered mc. * The haud of God be stretched out to them ľ I cried. <c As he closed tlie door upou me, I sunk, exhausted by the vioient emotions of my mind, upon the ground, and an¬ ticipating a repetition of the honors wliich had before assailed me on this spot. Had my senses been awake to any idea but the danger of him I loved, I might justly have apostrophized to tiie all-powerfulncss of love, which had driven me to the present crisis of my fate. 44 Yet,
44 Yet, oh reader of this my fate, Avhoever thou art, if thy gentle nature already bleeds for my sufferings, already leads thee to exclaim—' Is she thus pu¬ nished for flying a cruel father and a hated lover, for tlie arms of him whom reason and whom every virtuous prin¬ ciple taught Jier to adore?*—oh, do thou read no further of my wretched story ! What I have yet to relate of my destiny will sink what I have already unfolded to thee, in the scale of comparison, till thôu wilt forget that these were suffer¬ ings at ail. I warn thee, and proceed. Yet grant me one word more of digres¬ sion ; nor, as thou readest it, judge that a wretch like me can advance aught from vanity—oh no ! all the unhappy speak is truth : afiliction wears out all the sub¬ tlety of human nature, and leaves the feelings too much weakened for the practice of hypocrisy. Believe then that amidst the many sufferings of my life, I have never yet doubted the justice of the
the God who permitted their infliction ; that I have never ceased to doubt thae some future recompence will await my many trials ; that the veil which at pre¬ sent separates me from penetrating the wisdom of their infliction, will, at some future day, be withdrawn from my eyes, and that I shall then bkss the cause to* which I now bend. True it is, that I have wept over my sorrows ; it i^ allowed a woman's privilege ; and it is a relief no sufferer need blush at; ŕt к a balm with which sorrow soothes itself* by Nature's law, by which Providence unburdens the heart of grief, when man* would choak it with a load of agony, tc* swell and break it. '* Again the struggle of the war raged with its bloodiest fury, and the dreadful sounds which pierced my еатз exceeded even those of the foregoing evening; every moment I believed too much ladea with horror for the next to equal it in tho power of communicating terror, to the- senses ;.
senses ; but each outweighed the last iu shrieks, confusion, and thunder. <c Thus'elapsed three hours, at the expiration of which sounds of a dif¬ ferent nature succeeded to those I had before heard ; running to and fro upon the deck, and a confusion of French and Spanish voices, were all that I could now distinguish, for the cannon had for some minutes ceased to fill the air with their vibrations. " The intelligence of our fate soon reached me; thc Spaniards were victo¬ rious, and we were boarded by the crew of an enemy's ship, wiio vvere come to take possession of our vessel, and to secure us their prisoners. With all pos¬ sible expedition, we were conveyed from onr own ship into theirs ; our own had been much injured in the action, beyond the power of preventing her from sink¬ ing; and the utmost celerity was ne¬ cessary to save the crew from going down with hen " The
"The Spanish vessel on board of which we were taken was a first-rate ship of war ; but the damage she had received in the engagement vvas so considerable, as to render her wholiy incompetent to sailing at an equal rate with the rest of the victoi ious fleet ; indeed she could scarcely sail at all ; only one of her masts was left standing, and the small quantity of canvas this was capable of bearing ren¬ dered her progress scarcely perceptible. '*The captain of the Spanish ship we found to be a man of a humane and friendly disposition, who did not wish to make his prisonei s feel the rigours of captivity, while he had it in his power to lighten to them the misery of their fate, D'Altonville and myself were kindly in¬ vited by him to his cabin and tabie: he looked upon me with surprise; the un- usualness of a female in a situation simi¬ lar to mine, made him inquisitive on the singularity of the adventure ; and D'AI- touville,
ton ville, believing him a man of honour, entrusted to hirn the secret of my ease. " He was th® man of honour whkh my fever believed him, and \m kindness to us was redoubled as he became ac¬ quainted with the peculiarity of our for¬ tunes. '* The shattered situation of our ship rendered her extremely unruly, and we were tossed about for several days on the ocean, without making any advance of consequence towards the Spanish port·. The captain said he conjectured that his admiral must have concluded his ship to have sunk, by the distant situation which her disabled state had obliged her to maintain from the rest of the fleet, or he undoubtedly would have sent a frigate to her assistance» α We were ňve davs at sea in the. situation I have just described, and the captain entertained hopes of making the desired gort ia tw© days more, when a vessel.
■vessel was descried bearing down upou us, which proved to be an Algerine corsair: the alarm occasioned by this sight was immediately conveyed to every individual on board, and, with one emo¬ tion, we all ran upon deck. When the Algerine was arrived within gunshot of our ship, she fired upon us : we directly struck our colours, which was an act of necessity on the part of our captain, as he had not a single charge of' powder left'; his whole stock having been ex¬ hausted in the fatal engagement wliich had made us his prisoners. " The Algerines now sailed boldly up, and immediately boarded us. I fancied their appearance more horrid than that of any men ï had yet beheld, and my heart sunk within me. If such were my feel¬ iugs at the bare sight of these new directors of the unhappy fate of D'Al¬ tonville and myself, what must they have been when I saw him, in commoa with ail hk fellcW-captives 3 French and Spar nish
nish (for the conquerors of the last hour were now sunk to an equality with the vanquished), loaded vvith chains, and secured from rescuing the vessel from the hands of her new possessors. I alone, on account of my sex, was spared the gall¬ ing chain, and conveyed to a separate cabin, where 'my savage keepers confined me far away from my D'Altonville; heed¬ less of my tears, my shrieks, my pray¬ ers to breathe my last si«»h in tlie arms of my beloved. My strength was at that moment so dreadfully exhausted, that I believed thç last hour of my existence to be fast approaching; but 1 lived to experience liow capable was my nature of sustaining stiil gieater struggles vuth misfortune. ** The terrific ideas wiiieh í had formed of the treatment I should be doomed to undeigo from the Algerines was, happily, not verified ; they behaved towards me witli kindness, placed before me luxuries both of wine and viauds, at which my sick
sick heart palled; and vvhat was infinitely- more acceptable to me, as 1 was not permitted to see my D'Altonville, they left me almost continually to solitude. " After a voyage of nearly a week, during wliich my imagination had been ban owed up with tlie miseries which it had pictuied to me tliat both my D'AI- touville and myself would be doomed to encounter, wear. ived at Algiers. " On our landing, I saw not my D'Altonville, except that I perceived a vast number of captbes leadiiii* alon«: the shore, aiul cnnjettuied him to iie one amongst them. K'crv care and 'atten¬ tion was shewn to ;oc o r i mv leaving the л vessel; and 1 wa* conducted toa magni¬ ficent pal«cc, which 1 understood to be a seraglio belonging to tlie Dey, aiul that I was a piesent to him from tîıe captain of the corsair. " Wretched, it may easiiy be con¬ ceived, was my fate; 1 sat, heart-broken, in the midst of splendor, and regarded the
MYSTESIØUS FREEBOOTER. the costly habiliments which were put upon my person as tacit mockers of the misery I was enduring: the females with whom I had intercourse expressed sur¬ prise that I did not rejoice at the honour, as they called it, which had fallen upon me: most "of them had, I found, been educated in ideas favourable to the easy mode of providing for their daughters, which their parents had taken advantage of, in placing them under the roof of the Dey ; and they could not be brought to comprehend the feelings of one whose affections were placed on an object to whom any sensation but that of gran¬ deur had led her heart, and appeared wholly unacquainted with the crimina¬ lity which I dieaded every hour to be forced iuto. " Earnestly did I wish to see the Dey. I thought it possible that ray grief might penetrate his heart, and that he might at least, for my sake, ameliorate the fate of D'Altonville, if he would not spare me the
mysterious freebooter. 217 the hated honour of his favour; and I expressed my wish to obtain an interview with him. " This desire my female associates con* strued into my eagerness for an opportu¬ nity of trying the effect of my charms on him ; and, stung by envy and jea¬ lousy, the- only passions of which their minds appeared to be capable, they told me that I might lay aside my hopes, for that the D r, y had for two years been con¬ stant to a beautiful slave, whom he yet passionately loved ; and lhat, if he were to forsake her, tiiey believed that many iu the semidio had claims on hislicarr, that woukl, for as many years longer, at least, keep it from feelmg that povver of . wliich I seemed to be'ieve my person pos¬ sessed. * ( I heard their reply in silence: it would have been impossible to haye con¬ vinced theni that for myself I considered their information the happiest that ever fell from tongue. For D'Altonville*« VOL. u. t Síi'
sake, I still secretly wished that I couhi have seen the Dey, although I felt, at the same moment, persuaded that any interference of mine would be without avail. Alas ! what could my insignifi¬ cant voice have effected with him ? He was, doubtless, too happy himself to have leisure for the cries of grief to enter his soul ; perhaps too fearful of the power of bis transient joys to continue their charm over his senses, to hazard the listening to any sound that might whisper to his heart— { Canst thou laugh alone, when ail who make tbee blest are weeping around thee?' " How many exist, who dare not look into the causes of their pleasure, and who possess the povver of swelling their joy into heavenly ecstacy, would they but assume the courage to investigate its source, and to resolve that the rose which perfumes their senses with delight, should pierce no other hearts with its cancerous thorn Ì 4t Not
" Not the slightest intelligence could î gain of D'Altonville, either fiom my female companions or the eunuchs who attended on me ; and I could not even gather, from their replies to my enquiries, whether they were ignorant of him and his fate, or concealed their knowledge from me; it was most probable, I judged» that they were wholly unacquainted with his name. " I must now pursue the story of D*AltonvilIe, rather than my own, as it more fully explains the progress of our fate during our captivity in Algiers. " D'Altonville and bis fellow-captives, on being taken out of the ship, were led, chained in pairs, to a large square in the city, where a public market for slaves was held ;, himself, the Spanish captain, and six others, were bought by the superintendant of thc Dey's gardens, and appointed to work in those which ran under the northern side of th*" seraglio. Within these walls, Γ L 2
ville had found means of learning that I was held a captive, though all access to me, even by message or letter, was de¬ nied him ; and it was some slight allevia¬ tion of the hardships of his toil, that he beheld thc roof which sheltered me : my apartments were on the opposite side of the building to that wbicii overlooked the gardene he was employed in ; but of this hc was ignorant; and often did lie incur the anger of the task-master, for desisting fiom his labour, to fix his eyes oa the lattices of the seraglio, in the vain hope of seeing me appear at one of them. " One day, nearly three months after tiie commencement of his captivity, as he was reclined, at noon-tide, by the foot of a tree, beneath the boughs of which he sought shelter from the meri¬ dian rays of a powerful sun, his frame being equally exhausted by mental and bodily fatigue, a shrill whistle, which seemed to issue from one of the windows of
ofthe seraglio, chew his attention ; and as he raised his eyes to tiie spot from whence he believed it to proceed, a small white parcel, which hc perceived flying through thc air with great velocity, caught his eves: it fell near his feet: he picked it up, and found it superscribed — * For the French slave.' <ť He opened it: it contained a jewel of value, set in a ring. Oii the paper were thcöC words :—
4 By your voice, which î accidentally overheard, I find you are my countryman. I am grieved to' see you in your present humiliating situa¬ tion, as there is something in your mien wliich infoine me that you were not born to endure ha¡Jship»: the melancholy air of your countenance has sank into my heart. If vou will be to-niçht. at clc- ven, iu the arbour between the two date- L 3 trees,
trees, perhaps you may hear of com¬ fort. ť Farewell ! Relieve me one sincere in her professions. '
'* Having twice perused this extraor¬ dinary note, he shewed it to his friend, the Spanish captain, (for captivity had firmly bound them in the ties of amity) and asked of him his opinion how he should act under it. His friend recom¬ mended him, by aLi means, to comply with the invitation contained in it: his situation, he remarked, could not be worse than it at present was ; and on this consideration, as in the case of a drown¬ iug man who seizes at a rush for support, he wouid be wrong not to place himself in the way of any chance which might ameliorate his condition. il In opposition to tins advice, D'Al¬ tonville urged that tbe invitation wore the
the appearance of an invitation to love ; that his heart, placed irrevocably on me, was callous to the witchery of any sigh which might be breathed to him as a lure to passion ; and that, with his heart thus steeled against the practice of that soft¬ ness which might alone be calculated to gain him favour with her vvho had just written to him, he judged it better to avoid her presence, lest his coldness at their interview, if her intentions were directed to his heart, should provoke her to seek revenge, for his not throwing himself immediately at her feet. 44 To this the Spaniard replied, that if such were the temper of the writer, she might be as likely to revenge the slight shewn her, in neglecting to keep her ap¬ pointment ; and that it was undoubtedly better to risk the termination of the ad¬ venture, than to incur an equal hazard, without having sought the opportunity of receiving a benefit. L 4 " Over-
u Over-ruled by the arguments of his fiiend, D'Altonville resolved to be in the arbour at the appointed time.—The walls of the garden were too high for the idea of effecting an escape over them to be for a moment entertained by any of the slaves; they were therefore left to the liberty of pei ambulating the gardens at any hour of the day or night. The mean huts where they lodged were situ¬ ated in a remote corner of these gardens, and sheltered fiom observation by knots of luxuriant shrubs. *' D'Altonville arrived fint at the ar¬ bour ; the night was one of those in which a refulgent moon shines upon the world, scarcely inferior in brilliancy to the 01 b fiom which she receives her splen¬ dour; ahd by the, force of contrasted shade, leaves vaiious daik nooks upon the earth, directed, as it weie, to the very purpose of concealment. In one of the.se stood the aiboùr mentioned iu the letter
letter of the unknown ; and here, ac¬ cording to the appointment of the wri¬ ter, he placed himself. The path leading to it lay immediately exposed to the light of the silver planet, and he awaited, with a degree of anxiety, the appearance of an expected, but undefined form, coming to seek him in his retreat. " The path was strait and long, and at its extremity he presently discerned a moving body, which, on its nearer ap¬ proach, he discovered to be one of the mutes of the seraglio. He entered the arbour, and signifying to D'Altonville that he was the person he was in quest of, he untied a bundle, containing a suit of apparel similar to that worn by him¬ self, and directed D'Altonville to strip oif his own garments, and put on those he had brought him. D'Altonville had proceeded too far in the adventure, not to¬ pu rsue it boldly, thus easily complied with the instructions of the mute, who hid D'Alton villes clothes under a bush l5 . on
on one side of the arbour, and then beckoned to him to follow him. ' Oh that it were to my Eloise !* men¬ tally exclaimed D'Altonville, ' that thou wert about to conduct me ! May the God of mercy, who directs the finger of Fate, grant that my present compliance may place in my power the means of rescuing her from the oppression she now groans under!'—and with this silent prayer he followed the steps of the slave. " His conductor traversed an angle of the garden, and arriving at a small door in the wall of the seraglio, he entered it, and invited D'Altonville to do the same, <4 They passed on through a long pas¬ sage, which led to the foot of a hand¬ some staircase; this they ascended, and entered a gaUery of lofty dimensions and rich workmanship : at a door on one side of this gallery the mute stopped—D'Al¬ tonville did the same. The mute mo¬ tioned to him tq make no noise—D'Al¬ tonville obeyed. The mute hit the door 4 twice
twice with his knuckles, in a manner that gave his action the appearance of a signal agreed upon between him and some person vvithin the apartment : the lock was immediately heard to move in its wards, the mute pushed open the door, and by his signs directed D'Alton¬ ville to enter. He did so, and the mute following him in, closed the door, and pointing to him to pass through an arch to the right, disappeared hastily himself through another which corresponded with it on the left. D'Altonville proceeded according to his instructions; and penetrating the arch which had been pointed out to him, he perceived a beautiful female reclining on a couch, amidst all the voluptuous¬ ness which an eastern monarch's favour¬ ite could command ; and with a smile of countenance, happy as the most satis¬ fied votary of pleasure could be dressed in. L 6 "The
ťí Thè fair form which D'Altonville now, for the first time, beheld, was named Clotilda ; she was the natural daughter of a French nobleman ; and having been left, by the death of her father, dependant on an uncle of a dis¬ solute and mercenary disposition, liad been sold by him to the providers of beauty for the seraglio of the Dey. Born of a woman whose immorality had raised her to the only notice and consequence which she had ever obtained in the world, Clotilda had inherited, both by birth and precept, ideas which had ren¬ dered her a fit inmate for the walls she now resided in ; and her arts and beauty combined, had gained her so great an ascendency over her master and lover, the Dey, that no woman had ever been known to sway his inclinations in the manner she possessed the power of doing: —Clotilda was, in fact, the female whom my companions had informed me had for the
the two last years fixed the heart of thè Dey solely on herself. " The pride of Clotilda was indeed gratified by the chains in which she alone held him for whom all hearts panted ; but her passions had no share in the gra¬ tification ; for the Dey was a man whose person she disliked ; and to repay herself for this sufferance, the spirit of intrigue with which she was born was continually mounting, in some varied form, to her brain. " Many plans siie had already formed for allying to herself a favourite, but she had not yet ventured to put any one of them into execution ; perhaps as much because she dreaded a discovery depriv¬ ing her of that ascendency she now pos¬ sessed over the Dey, as that her attach¬ ments were of an unstable nature, and that she felt a difficulty in deciding on whom to select. ·' Slaves were all the males whom it was possible for her to see ; but the con¬ ditura
dition of those amongst whom her choice must unavoidably fall, did not weaken her inclination to sin. Those who give themselves up to the practice of delibe¬ rate criminality, it is remarked, are sel¬ dom nice in the objects of their selec¬ tion—a proof of the unworthiness «f that indulgence which sinks the use of every rational sense in its gratification. " On D'Altonville then fell the des¬ tiny of her smiles ; her ascendency over the slaves that attended on her person was too great to cause her long to wish an interview, and wish in vain : she watched the first absence of the Dey from his palace, and having given D'Al¬ tonville the intimation of her favourable intentions towaids him, in the note which I have already given a copy of, and in which she placed the jewel it contained, more to give it sufficient weight to en¬ sure its reaching the spot where he lay, than from any other motive, she in¬ structed the mute who conducted him to her
MYSTERIOUS FREEBOOTER. her apartment from the appointed árbour, in the part he had' to perform in the business—a failure in which the poor tacit instrument of hôr plan well knew would cost him his life. "The moment Clotilda perceived D'Al¬ tonville in her apartment, she ran for¬ ward to meet and Welcome him ; and taking both his hands in her's, she led him to the couch, and placed him upon it.—>' Welcome, my countryman ľ she said. * We are both slaves, and must endeavour to soften to each other our lot : the toils you suffer are imposed on your bodiiy strength—mine on my heart ; I am the tool of pleasure to a man I hate/ ' And you wish, doubtless, to fly from your galling captivity/ replied D'Alton¬ ville. ť Alas ! your wish, I fear, is vain ; these walls are impervious/ 4 You mistake me/ returned Clo¬ tilda ; ' I do not wish to fly them, but to ensure myself happiness within them.
them. Every wish of my heart has here been long gratified, except one : I can¬ not love the Dey; all I desire, iu addi¬ tion to the luxuries he heaps on me, is a heart, not vvhich 1 can call my own, for such is the Dey's, but a heart to which I can feel satisfied in giving mine ;— such a one, countryman, I regard your's to be/ • * You are flattering in your selection/ returned D'Altonville, ' and your frank¬ ness demands justice on my part ;—I have no heart to receive vour's in.' * Perhaps you are married ?' she said. 4 No, I am not,' he answered. ¿ Or intend to be so ?' she asked. ' I hope the blissful moment, although protracted, will one day arrive,' ex¬ claimed D'Altonville. 4 And is the anticipation of that bliss¬ ful moment,' returned Clotilda, * to in¬ terdict to you every happiness till it ar¬ rives?' . ' The anticipatnn of it,' answered D'Alton-
D'Altonville, ' grants me every happi¬ ness of which the interval is capable; without that happy period for my thoughts to dwell upon, life would be a blank, captivity and labour insupportable mise¬ ries; but that idea cheers the void with many prospects of delight, and wrests from toil and bondage half their power to gall my spirits under tliem.' ' And is the bliss of klea so great, that you mock all substantial pleasure, when it presents itself to your accept¬ ance?' asked Clotilda. ť That,' returned D'Altonville, ζ is alone substantial which will give a se¬ cond pleasure on reflection ; while a re¬ trospect capable of calling a blush, though even a secret oue, into the cheek, must curtail the enjoyment of that feli¬ city towards which i hope to be advanc¬ ing through my present pilgrimage.' , 44 Clotilda burst into a satirical laugh at the resolute calmness with which my D'Altonville uttered these sentiments ; her
her mind could not comprehend tlieir delicacy, and her heart spurned their tendency. " D'Altonville remained unmoved by her reproofs. ** It is but too often that a sneer can subdue a virtuous inclination, and that a jest can damp the fervour-of a religious intention ; but tlie principles and affec¬ tion oí D'Altonville were both too firmly gromi 'ed to be shaken by the breath of fleetiug pkasure; and rising from his seat, he said— ť If the friendship or the advice of D Altonville can be serviceable to you, vou may command them. As one sunk İn criminality, I pity you, and feci it my duty to offer you such admoni¬ tions as I think may reclaim you from that part of the immorality of your con¬ duct into which you voluntarily plunge yourself: if you will resolve to listen to me, I shall never judge my time ill spent in giving you my society. Suffer rae now to depart; reflect on what I have
liave already said ; and if you determine to profit by my future visits, send for me again ; you will find me ready to comply with your invitation—but on no other terms let me hear of you more.' " Disappointment was the only pas¬ sion which at that moment swayed the breast of the lost Clotilda ; her breath¬ ings were almost choked by the repres¬ sion of the entreaties which she could scarcely smother, and which wounded pride yet restrained her from uttering. D'Altonville had moved to the door by which he had entered, and now de¬ manded to be reconducted to the gar¬ den. Clotilda sprang towards him ; she seized his hand, and endeavoured to carry it to her lips. D'Altonville drew it resolutely back, and placed his fingers on the lock of the door. " Personal danger stared her in the face, when she perceived him attempting to rush out alone iuto the gallery ; as he might mistake his way, and a discovery of.
of lier wantonness be immediately con¬ veyed to the Dey, She struck tiie ground with lier foot, and the mute appeared to attend him. 6 For Uie love oť Heaven, stay yet one moment ľ slie exclaimed. e Tor the love of lionour, no ľ re¬ plied D'Altonville — antl rushed out of the apai tment. " On arriving at tlie arbour, the mute assisted him in taking off his disguise, and dressing him again in his own clothes; und this done, he left him. " D'Altouville directly repaired to hie hut, where hc communicated to his friend, the Spanish capťiin, the issue of his ad¬ venture; they agreed tiiat lie hail no¬ thing to fear from the revenge of Clo¬ tilda, as she had shewn herself a coward of any discovery, by immediately allow-. ing hiin to depart from her apartment, on his demanding to leave it ; and D'Alton¬ ville slept peacefully t Iiat night, in the' consciousness of having acted rightly. " Tea
" Ten days passed on with D'Alton¬ ville unmarked by any occurrence; on the eleventh he was informed by the su¬ perintendant of thc gardens, that him¬ self, and some others of tiie slaves, were. to be sent, on the following morning, to a spot at the distance of about three hours journey from thc grand seraglio, where the Dey had lately erected a light elegant building, to which his favourite mistress was sometimes permitted to re¬ tire; and that she who now possessed his favour had obtained leave of him to carry thither a certain number of garden¬ ers, to decorate tlie ground contained within its walls more fancifully than it now was. " D'Altonville knew not that Clotilda was the sole regent of tbe Dey's heart, and little imagined, vvhen he received the superi n tendant 's information, that it was into her service he was going. *' Tiie discovery was very quickly made to him; the day after his arrival at
at the villa, as he was digging the earth, by the order of the superintendant, in a part of the garden remote from the other slaves, he heard a voice address him in the language of his own country ; and, on turning round his head, per¬ ceived by his side Clotilda, attended only by two mutes, who stood at some distance from her. ť You perceive,* said she, 'that though I excited only your scorn, at our former interview, I cannot forbear renewing our acquaintance.' ' I hope,' replied D'Altonville, 'that you are convinced of the value of those admonitions which I gave you, and aie come prepared to 'reap a further benefit from my tongue.' * Foolish mau !' she went on, * to slight my favour, the only alleviation of your captivity which you can expect or hope for.—Ungrateful man ! to permit a woman to sufler for your sake, who descends from her own sphere, and humbles
humbles herself by entreaties to a slave for his smiles !—you have not even com¬ plaisance enough to desist from your labour whilst I am speaking to you.' ' In so doing,* answered D'Alton¬ ville, 4 I should only incur the displea¬ sure of the superintendant of the gar¬ dens, to listen to that which I had rather not hear.' 4 Camazin, the superintendant of the gardens,' replied she, ( is my friend; you have nothing to fear from him, although every hour we remain here were passed by you without labour ; I have acquainted him with my passion for you, ami bribed him to leave you ahvays apart from the other slaves. ' 'Then if tbis Camazin ever receives the wages of the ľ>ey again, he is a villain, and it is fit he should be dis¬ graced,' exclaimed D'Altonville. 4 Folly Γ cried she. ŕ He vvho knows not of his wrongs, does not suffer by them ; thus you ought to think of your mistress,
mistress, and we should then both be blessed.' * Impossible!' answered D'Altonville; * he who acts wrongly, cannot be happy under the reflection, although he to whom the wrong is done be unconscious of its existence.' * You are a coward/ slie returned, 4 who have nothing to lose; I have risked every thiug for my love to you : shoukl the Dey discover the motive of my visit to this spot, which was under¬ taken solely that I might here enjoy your conversation without interruption, I shouid be undone for ever. The Dev is employed in affairs of state, which I understand must confine hini to the city : do not then cast the gloom of disappointment upon the few days, of happiness wliich I have promised myself with you in this seclusion.' * If for me the journey was under¬ taken,' replied D'Altonville, ' let me entreat you instantly to rtturn to the city,
city, as your remaining here will but provoke your indignation, and my con¬ tempt* " The same arguments were continued for some time to be repeated on either side, without their making any imprea¬ sion on the object to whom they were directed ; and with the evening D'Alton¬ ville saw no more of the infatuated Clo¬ tilda. " In the morning he encountered Camazin.— ť Having seen me only in thc habit of a slave/ said D'Altonville, ad¬ dressing him, ' you probably conceive my mind as abject as my situation ; ybu know not the heart that animates this breast, or you would not have brought me hithei to expose me to the licentious passion of Clotilda : words are the only means which captivity does not deprive me of for asserting that my nature is not of the meati texture you gave it credit tor being, in acceding *o her infamous vol. ii. ai plan;
plan ; or words should not be the means I would employ to tell you so/ *' Instead of the haughty reply which D'Altouville aAvaited from the powerful Camazin, something like an air of humi¬ lity overspread his features, and he said— 4 I have a large family, and Clotilda has been my benefactress/ ' But you owe your first obligations to the Dey, y pronounced D'Altonville, * from whom you derive your regular employment ; believe me that your fa¬ mily will prosper better under the ho¬ nesty, than the craft of their father/ " Camazin muttered something like an apology, and slunk off to a different part of tbe garden. " For several successive days Clotilda continued to haunt D'Altonville, and to repeat to him those arguments in favour j of her passion, by which he had resolved ; »ot to be moved : he continued uniform W treating her with indifférence and con¬ tempt,
tempt, except at those moments when' he endeavoured, by the effect df reasoning to open her eyes to the atrocity of her conduct; but every method proved ina¬ dequate to the subduing of the passion which devoured her soul. " During this time Camazin was not met by him. "At length a day arrived on which he saw not tlie favourite of the Dey, and he began to entertain a hope that her ill- founded passion was beginning to evapo¬ rate before the influence of returning rea* son ; but in the evening, about the hour of twilight, a paper was brought to him, which contained these words : — ' Clo¬ tilda desires to see you in' her apart* ment. * " He tore the paper into atoms, and scattered them into the air, as a signal to the mute who had brought it, that he did not intend to comply with the request contained in it, M 3 "The
44 The mute beckoned to him to come ; but with a frown of indignation on his brow, he turned from him, and moved along in an opposite direction. The mute immediately slapped the palms of Jiis hands together, and several of his fellows darted out from behind a bush, who caught hold of D'Altonville, and confining his arms, dragged him for¬ cibly towards the building inhabited by Clotilda. " They led him into an apartment, Which Clotilda was traversing with a hasty step, and the wildest emotion painted on her countenance : she stop¬ ped, and faced him as he entered, her full dai;k eyes resting on his, and de¬ scribing the war of love and anger which was raging in her soul. m 4 Why this outrage against my person?' asked D'Altonville, calmly— * r \ml brought hither?' ƒ Because, inhuman man!' returned Clotilda—
Clotijda—the lost, the shameless Clo-. tilda, * I cannot live without you. I cannot exist under your contempt ; and, fbr the last time, I entreat you to become the*partner of my joys,' * For the last time, then,* replied D'Altonville, ' take my answer to your importunities. No earthly power can shake my resolution. I know my duty to an absent being, who merits every consideration I can pay to her; and knowing my duty, I perform it. Once more, be advised by me to perform your's* towards the Dey ;—and now let us part for ever.' 'No, no,* exclaimed Clotilda, * yout are more a slave here than you imagine. Part ! What, suffer you to go, that you may, bear to another woman that love which I have humbled myself to be res- fused ! Believe it not ţ- Clotilda has pledged an oath to Heaven, that you either requite her love, or yield your breath upon the spot you stand on.' из " The
-" The fury of a disappointed womau raised no fears for his safety in the breast of D'Altonville; he trusted that her threats would never be put into effect ; he neither conceived her authorized by the Dey to take away the life of one of his slaves, nor did he fear, that if the naked sword were presented to his throat, she would not herself again recall it, as while he lived her hopes might still be kept ajive. ' You do not tremble, I perceive,* she said ; * but your calmness probably arises from your not giving credit to my words. I will convince you what my design is.' She turned to one of the mutes, and commanded him to bring the bowstring. " The mute complied, and two others advanced with liim, to perform the dread¬ ful act ; one of whom held in his hand a cloth, to shade the features of the suf¬ ferer in his last moments. * Now,
4 Now,' then, thy choice— Götilda, or the bowstring?' she exclaimed* ' When death and sin are placed iu opposition/ D'Altonville replied, ' tbe grim tyrant loses all his terrors; if, by fly¬ ing to his arms, I avoid the evil that might make me dread to meet his touch here¬ after, sufFering unwarrantably here, I have nothing to look forward to but. recom¬ pense—-* ' Bind htm !' exclaimed the female fury. " The mutes obeyed, and one of them held the noose ready to slip over his head» 4 Whilst thou/ continued D'Altonville; with an unfaltering voice, * at some un¬ expected moment, wilt meet thy merited punishment!' * Truly hast thou spoken !' exclaimed ai voice, which proceeded from one of those whom D'Altonville had hitherto believed to be all mutes: * be that cord her instant fate;—obev me!' 44 As it weie by magic, the noose which bad been presented to the neck of D'Alto n * и 4f vitle
ville encircled that of Clotilda ; the cloth was thrown over her face, and a low moan bespoke h« r ; n ihc agonies of death. *\ Wonder i-.'.zcd the irame of D'Alton* ville, and bc stood gazing on the scene before him. <e The appaient mute again spoke.— * Thus t ver perish licentiousness and in¬ gratitude joined ľ— tlien turning to D'Al¬ tonville, he continued— ť Frenchman, know in me the Dey of Algiers; that wo¬ man possessed my heart—my soul ! You perceive how slie has trifled with the good she enjoyed, and how deservedly she has suffered.—I confess I loved her; but I had rather mourn a disappointment than know myself a dupe. Camazin, the super¬ intendant of the gardens, discovered to me the injustice that was practising against me, and concerted for me the plan of this disguise, by which I have had personal conviction of her guiit; he informed me also of the nobleness of your mind, which refused to wrongin his affections, even the mau
man who held you iu bondage; I Ъь.г myself also seen the workings of your glo¬ rious spirit; I have punished the bad; it now alone remains for me to reward the worthy; ask of me any boon, it is your's, in addition to your freedom, and safe convoy to your own country/ " Need I tell my reader that the gift which D'Altonville asked was his Eloise? " The Dey heard his story with inte¬ rest, and invited him to return with hira immediately to Algiers. " I was that night on the point of re¬ tiring to my bed, when a slave came to my apartment, and informed me that the Dey requested to see r^ directly; alarm seized me; I apprehended .-consequences of the worst nature from the message, but I had no alternative but to obey it; for if he were determined on seeing me, my sim¬ ple refusal could be of no avail. I threw my veil over me, and with a slow and trembling step, I followed the messenger, who conducted me to an apartment bril* m 5 liantly
liantly lighted, in the midst of whieh I saw a repast spread, and cushions of pur¬ ple and gold surrounding it. 44 From behind a curtain of flowing silk, at the upper enti of the apartment, a per¬ sonage richjy habited, and whom I could not mistake for the Dey, from the humble obeisances of the slaves, as he passed'along through the midst of them, advanced to¬ wards me. lie took one of my hands in his, without which support I believe I should have sunk at his feet, and thus addressed me—' Fair lady, I invite you liere to present you with a lover tx uiy wor¬ thy of your highest esteem ;—'tremble not, it is not myself I am recommending to your heart;—here comes the man!' 44 1 looked towards the curtain, and beheld my D'Altonville no longer habited as a slave, but with the naval uniform of his country restored to him. i4 We flew into each other's arras, and for some succeeding moments I was wholly insensible. " The
44 The Dey invited us to pass the even¬ ing in his apartment, and our gratitude to him was too great not to make us feel a true pleasure in complying with any re¬ quest which came from his lips. At the present moment, I learnt but slightly the cause which had restored to me my lover, as D'Altonville, from delicacy to the feel¬ ings of the Dey, forbore to revert to the conduct of one whom, it was yet evident, the Dey had loved better than she had deserved. "What bliss! what ecstacy did I enjoy, during the hours we passed in the apart¬ ment of the Dey, to fee) myself once more in the presence of my D'Altonville!—to know myself secure from dauger, in those very walls, and in conversation with that very man from whom I had dreaded the de¬ struction of my peace—the eternal separa¬ tion of my lover and myself I the joy was super-human, and transient as it was great: the last happy moments of my existence had now been nearly all enjoyed. и 6 " Against
44 Against the following evening, the Bey had promised to provide us with a vessel, which should convey us to any port of France of which we should make choice, and D'Altonville икеа upon Toulon. " Encouraged by the suavity of manners of the Dey, and the openness of his heart at the present moment, D'Altonville ven¬ tured to request of him the liberty of the Spanish captain, whose conduct towards us I have before remarked as kiud in the extreme, during the time of our being prisoners oa board his ship, and whose friendship had Ьеед the only consolation of D'Altonville's bondage. *' The Dey acceded to. his request, and the poor Spaniard was made happy in the morning, by the intelligence of his ипехл pected reverse of fortune. " I passed the night in golden dreams of bliss to come— óf blessings which never roseto light, fostered alone within my breast
breast, and over-shadowed at their birth by the lowering clouds of affliction; " At the appointed, hour on the follow¬ ing day, after receiving a most friendly farewell from the Dey at parting, we em¬ barked on board the vessel destined to convey us to France; the Spanish captain, as had been already settled,, being our fellow-passenger. 44 On the third day of our being at sea, a rough; gale sprang up, and as tbe waves washed over the deck, L went down, into the cabin. I was assured by the Spanish captain, who was himself, as well as my D'Altonville, an excellent mariner, that there was not the slightest danger to be apprehended; and thus satisfied, I retired to bed. 44 The sudden change from grief to joy which. I had experienced within the last few days, had entirely exhausted my strength and spirits; and when I sunk to sleep, I slept soundly, and for a length of time. ."Oh
44 Oh God î so great are now my emo¬ tions at the recollection of the scenes which followed my waking, that my hand almost refuses to trace them upon the pa¬ per before me; but the task shall be ful¬ filled ; the wretch of hereafter shall be shewn that as miserable a being as herself has existed before her. *' On my waking, oh, what strange events had taken place during my sleep! —on my waking, the first object in the cabin, on which my eyes fell, was—Lord Rufus de Madginecourt ! " Ere I speak of my alarm, let me relate what had preceded it. " The violence ot' the wind had in¬ creased with nearly every hour of the night, and towards morning it was almost grown into a storm, A little after the break of day, D'Altonville had espied, through tlie mists of the morning, a vessel, about the size of the bark we were on board of, as he believed, in distress.
<f The
4t The Spanish captaiu and himself di¬ rected the mariners to make towards her. In a very short time, they perceived that she was foundering, and in a few minutes more, she entirely disappeared beneath the waves. D'Altonville, who kept his eyes fixed on the spot where she had sunk, declared that he saw some of the crew struggling with the waves. Our vessel soon came up with them, and succeeded in preserving the lives of two men, who were buffeting the foaming billows on a mast, to which they were clinging. These two men were no other than Lord Rufus de Madginecourt and his adherent Ravil. They had been on their passage in an Italian ship from Genoa to Cette, and by bad weather and adverse winds, had been blown out oftheir course; their vessel had sprung aleak, and every one on board but themselves had perished. ** Ravil was the son of a geutleman of small fortune. Chance had introduced bun to the acquaintance of Lord Rufus, 4 who
who finding htm* to be one of those young men who prefer submitting to the drudgery of making themselves useful to a wealthy patron, rather than undergoing the toil of earning for themselves an honest mainte¬ nance, free from such dependance, had made him his companion; and his abilities in the accomplishment of his patron's views,, of whatever nature they might be, had raised him extremely high in the good favour of Lord Rufus. ** This youug man had accidentally seen D'Altonville, during his residence with Lord Rufus, on the marquisate of my father, and lost not a moment in convey¬ ing to his patron information of who the person was to whom he owed his life. Upon receiving this intelligence from Raz¬ vil, Lord Rufus directly enquired ofthe captain of our vessel, if there was auy female on board, which he, doubtless, sus¬ pected to be the case,, as no hesitation was made in France, at saying that I had. eloped with D'Altonville. The captain, satisfied
satisfied him in this point, and he directly bought his services vvith a purse of gold, which he had preserved about him. ** With the most rancorous villany brooding in his heart, he returned to that part of the deck where D'Altonville was standing, and while in the act of acknow¬ ledging him as thc preserver of his life, he drew from his girdle a pislát which he aimed at his head: fortunately the mur¬ derous weapon missed fire; of this the Spanish captain being uncoascious, and only sensible of tho danger in which he saw his friend 1 , darted forward, to wrest the implement of death from the hand of the wretch who grasped it ; in the strug¬ gle, the pistol discharged itself, and the Spaniard was shot through the heart. " The consternation of D'Altonville at the scene just past was so great, that both his power of utterance and action failed him. It was by accident that the pistol which Lord Rufus happened to have upon him, had been loaded; a second charge he had
had not at command, so threw from him the useless tube; but in the moment ofthe action, whilst hc was reflecting on the present inutility of the weapon, his sen¬ timents underwent a change, which he expressed in these words, unintelligible to D'Altonville—' No, theu shalt live to see my triumph over thee!' " Ravil and Lord Rnfus then bound him to the foremast of the vessel, D'Al¬ tonville called upon the mariners for assist¬ ance, and upbraided thetn for suffering him to undergo the evil treatment he was enduring from two strangers, whom his humanity had just rescu^l from death; but the Algerines bad been bought to pas- si veness by gold, and they religiously adhered in faith to the God they wor¬ shipped. " D'Altonville now turned himself to thc strangers, and began to remonstrate with them on the ingratitude oftheir con¬ duct, and to demand the reason of the cruel treatment they were shewing him ? t< A.
44 A thunderbolt bursting upon his head could not have occasioned a greater pang to his senses, than he received in the in¬ formation that Lord Rufus, the persecutor of his Eloise, stood before him. In the wildness of his agony, he called upon Heaven for assistance; his eyes fell on his bleeding friend ; he perceived his bosom still heaving with the gaspings of expiring life ; he called upon him by name, in the vain hope that the sound of his voice might reanimate his closing powers. Lord Rufus commanded the mariners to throw the body into the sea, fearful, as it were, of its recoveiy. The eyes were not closed, and D'Altonville believed that they rested on him, as the body sunk beneath the waves. "These particulars I learnt at a future period from Ravil. " Having secured D'Altonville beyond the power of disengaging himself, Lord Rufus ordered Ravil to remain with him upou
upon deck, to ensure his receiving no assistance from the sailors; for vice is al¬ ways doubtful of those engines whicii are merely bought to assist ín its purposes, without possessing any interest in their being effected ; and with this caution hc came down into the cabin, where I lay sleeping "Whether the sound of his voice, or his more hated touch, awoke me, I know not; I cali only now recollect,, that ou opening my eyes, my sight fell on his detested form. On perceiving it, I uttered a frantic exclamation, which I seconded by calling for assistance on D'Altonville. ' Lay aside your fears, dearest lady, I beseech you,* he pronounced ; 'you see before you one too much devoted to your happiness, to render it necessary for you to call on any being for assistance but himself!' ť Aiy Lord, ' I replied, ' I acknowledge but one protector ; there can be but one man
man whom a woman's heart tells her she has a right to confide in, and you already know that you are not he.' c I am, at least, blest in thinking, that since a chance, which I revere, has brought me once more into your presence, I shall soon be the envied man you describe,' answered Lord Rufus. *You!' I exclaimed, 'never! never t Were my D'Altonville at this moment on his bed of death befoie me, ami were his last reimest to me, to admit you to my' affections after his decease, not even iu compliance with his dying breath, could I tolerate you—could I feel any sensation but aversion for the man who leagued himself with a cruel father, against an in¬ jured daughter's cause. By what autho¬ rity you arc here, I know not; but what¬ ever it be, I trust my request to you im¬ mediately to depart, will supersede it.* ' Though an angel utter the command, * returned the artful man, ' we are slow ia obedience, where death must follow com¬ pliance;
pliance; I ean only live in your presence; from the first moment I saw you, my pas¬ sion for you was extreme, and I care nofe what sacrifices I undergo ţo call you my own ; you can make no terms to which I shall not accede, so you do but give me yourself; but urge me not to desperation by your obstinacy, for on whatever terms İt bé, you must be minel* * Never in my life, rny Lord,'I replied ; * nor can this declaration, on my part, wound any generous feeling of your heart: after the sentiments you have just avow¬ ed, I am sufficiently convinced that a pas¬ sion far inferior to love, stirs your warmth ; the noble sensation of love is unacquainted with theyorceyour Lordship talks of, and feels its greatest happiness in that forbear¬ ance which blesses the object of its selec¬ tion.* " Lord Rufus smiled contemptuously. ' Besides,* I continued, * you are al¬ ready well acquainted that I have pledged my faith to one wherø empires should not tempt
tempt me to renounce; and though tne perversity of fate has hitherto prevented our union, the hour is not now, Γ trust, far distant.* ** Oh, would my tongue had cleaved to my lips, ere I haď uttered that semence ! Fierce joy sparkled in thc eyes of Lord Rufus, and he exclaimed—* Not yet his! Am I then so blest? Are thy beauties yet untasted, and the first fruit of thy charms reserved for me? Fear no intemperance on my part now, lady; thou art my des¬ tined wife ľ 4 Where is my D'Altonville?' I cried. ' Why is he not here? Why does he not appear to vindicate my fame—to protect me from insult? D'Altonville! D'Alton¬ ville! oh, where art thou, my D'Alton¬ ville!' 4( Of what succeeded these moments, I have no perfect recollection ; I alone re¬ member that I fell sick and giddy, and sunk upon the- floor, before the monster who
who was exercising his inhumanity over me. "■When I awoke from" my trance, Lord Rufus was still with me. The sounds-with which I opened my lips were the same that I had closed them with—' Where, where is my D'Altonville?* * Acknowledge yourself my destined bride/ returned De Madginecourt, 'and you shall instantly see him.' * * There are emotions of the heart which no tongue can express—-there are souls which no arguments can move; of the former were my sensations, of the latter class Lord Rufus. 1 clasped my hands in agony towards Heaven, and remained silent." Rosalind, for the first time, turned her thoughts from the eventful page she was reading.—" Oh Heaven ¡"sheexclaimed, íť İn the power of this monster am I at the present moment!—Shield me, Omni¬ potence, with thy protecting arm ; encircle me
tne with thý guardian spirit fróiri tîfeıifîf- chinations of this fiend!" Shèp¥useda while, itt Comparative retìectidu ovi the fate of Elöise and herself. Agiin she spoke*. '*' Am I destined tö be the second victi'm of his liceritious desires? or is the friend¬ ship which he now professes towards mè real, and exercised as an atonement for his past transgressions? 1 God of mercy, do thou, in pity to my friendless state, soften and ameliorate his rugged heart !" * The shades of evening were already de¬ scending to the earth, and when Rosalind again turned her eyes to the manuscript, desirous of pursuing the narrative it con¬ tained, she found that the retiring of the light of day had rendered the characters no longer discernible; and not choosing to carry it with her to her own-apartment, she rehictantly replaced it on the same spot where she had found it, and left the library. Dame Edith met her in her chamber, той ιι. n with
MYSTERTOUS FREEBOOTER. with many apologies for her absence dur¬ ing the «afternoon., Rosalind felt disinclined to conversa¬ tion, and alledging a head-ache as an ex¬ cuse for retiring early to rest, dismissed the good old dame for the night, and sunk upon her pillow, where reflection on the past, and anticipation ofthe future, ren¬ dered the visit of sleep broken and unre· freshing.
CHAF.
CHAP. XII, Mighty Godi v What had I done to merit such affliction ? HOME, .Anxious for the conclusion of еь- ise's fate, Rosalind left her bed at an early hour, and repaired to the library, unob¬ served by dame Edith, who was either still asleep, or occupied with her morning devotions ; she opened at the page where she had left off the evening befoie, and found the narrative continued thus:— " For several days I was kept a prisoner in the cabin, and saw only Lord Rufus, and his equally vile adherent, Ravil ; not n % a single
MYSTERIOUS FREEBOOTER a single reply could I gain to my enqui¬ ries relative to D'Altonville ; and at times I believed that the wretch who aspired to my hand, had freed himself by death from the rival whom he saw uie resolute in pre¬ ferring to himself. " At length, when Ravil was one day _ alone with me in t lie cabin, I thought he appeared more than usually disposed to reply to my questions, and I urged him, in tlie most imploring terms, to inform me what was the fate of D'Altonville. He told me that he was alive, hut not^al- lowed to descend iuto the cabin tome. * Whither are we sailing?* I next asked. * We musť have reached Fiance long ere this, had not the destiny ofthe vessefbeen changed/ ' We are sailing towards England/ he re^liea. 4 Lord Rufus de Madginecourt has a castle on the margin of the shore, wbere we are to land/ ' Then that castle is destined to be my f grave!* I «'exclaimed· " Ravil
" Ravil fixed his eyes on me ; I thought they gleamed pity/ at least they did not appear to exult in my agonies. 1 More likely the grave of D'Altonville, ' he replied* * It is not the nature of Lord Rufus to suffer those to live whom he hates. D'Altonville is a biave fellow,' he added, after a short pause; ' he saved my life, so did he abo that of Lord Rufus; but Lord Rufus has a heart unacquainted with gratitude.' * ť He then proceeded, unasked, torelate to me the accident which had introduced Lord Rufus and himself on board our vessel ; he expatiated on the death ofthe Spanibh captain ; dwelt on the villany of Lord Rufus, who had attempted the life of D'Altonville, a moment after he had owed his own to his humanity;' and added—'Woukl it were in my power to &ave the life of D'Altonville!' '* The iniquity of Raviľs heart was not then so fully known to me as it was soon after; aud catching at the expressions N a which
which had fallen from his tongue, as if the Fps of an angel had breathed a sound of comfort in my ear, I said—* Are you then. as fully convinced as myself of Lord Ru¬ fus's villany, and will you stretch out your arm in the cause of the innocent?' ť Most willingly/ he returned; ť it would be my pride to rescue you from the power of Lord Rufus. ' ' But the means?' I returned. ' Lord Rufus has bought the captain to his side. My D'Altonville is bound. What can your single arm, or mine to back it, avail against numbers?' *■ The numbers might soon be our own/ rejoined Ravil. ' I have twice the sum of gold about me with which Lord Rufus bought his services ; no fear but a double bribe would as quickly bind him to me/ ' O, for the love of Heaven, make the attempt I' I said. e It remains with you, lady, to give the signal/ he answered : ŕ say but that the heart which you cannot give to Lord Rufus,
Rufus, shall be mine, and I pledge my soul to you that the life of D'Altonville shall be sacred.' " To express what were my sensations at that moment, is not in the power of language. * Wretch ľ was the only sound that escaped my lips ; my eyes spoke 'vo¬ lumes of indignation and contempt. ' Be not so hasty in your decision, lady/ he rejoined, with tiie utmost calm¬ ness of tone ; 4 you have not yet heard all the arguments I can advance in favour of my passion. If Lord Rufus be allowed to maintain his piesent power over you, little do I believe that his pi omise of marriage will be attended to, when you are once within thev* Is of his castle; and certain I am that the life of D'Altonville will be as short as the period of your honour: if, on the contrary, you will accede to my proposal, Lord Rufus, who feels no repug¬ nance àt attempting the life of a man to whom he owes his own, shall be cut oft\ and buried in those waves whose murmurs N 4 blab
hjlafe no secrets; you shall become a.lawfuî, honoured wife, and J) Altonvilje shall live to see you happy.' " J spojíte vpt; the expression of my couutenance <vas sufficient tc convince him of the abhorrence in wbich my soul held him. lt Requesting me to reflect on what he had said, he shortly after left the cabin. ,*' The misery of my mind was now, if possible, increased, I dreaded more at the moment from the cahn villany of Ravií, tjiap from the haughty brutality of Lord Rufus. I considered that I might free myself from the importunity of the for¬ mer, bv a representation of his conduct to his patron. But would \ -^ this very act of self-defence be aii inimical step to mr owa'peace? Would not a complaint to Lord Rufus of his creature be allowing Lord Rufus an ascendency over him in my heart? would it not be saying that Lord Jtufus was not the being most hated by me in the creation? and would not tliis COll"
confession lead him into the opinion of his having obtained sorae influence over my heart?—Horrid idea! Whatever I might suffer from the persecutions of Ra¬ vil, I resolved not to owe my release from them to Lord Rufus. " On the following day, Ravil attempt¬ ed to win upon me by a display of passion, which he artfully pretended to make a merit of restraining vvithin the bounds of respect: more disgusted by this hypocrisy than by his open fallacy, I commanded him to leave me, on pain ofmy informing Lord Rufus of his conduct. He laughed contemptuously at my threat, and tokl me tliat Lord Rufus entertained too good an opinion of his fidelity to be easily shaken from it. He mentioned a large sum, which he said Lord Rufus had willed to him for his honest services, (on these words he laid an ironical emphasis, as if he gloried in the deceit which he had lived in), and added, that ere long I might probably see him in possession of it. к 5 " His
íť His words made no impression on me; I regarded them as the froth of villanous disappointment. i( A few nights after, I had fallen into a slumber, in which horrid dreams haunted my sickening fancy; a loud blow upon the door of the cabin awoke me, and a confusion of tongues at the -same time met my ear; a second blow upon the door burst it open, and from the light of the lamp which was suspended from the top ofthe cabin, I saw Lord Rufus pursuing Ravil vvith his drawn sword. Ravil was unarmed, and his violent efforts to escape the threatened danger, had forced him a way through the door in the cabin. (t The struggle was as short as any con¬ test must necessarily be, where one man has the superiority of arms over a naked opponent. Ravil fell, the blood gushing from a wound in his breast, aud another in his side. " Although contempt alone had met Raviľs infamous proposals to me, he had vigo-
vigorously pursued the desperate plan which had entered his diabolical rnind, of wrest¬ ing me from Lord Rufus to himself, and of stepping through blood into that inde¬ pendence which his knowledge of the con¬ cerns of Lord Rufus ensured to him on his death. Accordingly he had, during the day, appointed the captain of the ves¬ sel to meet him at midnight at the foot of the cabin stairs, the spot which, of all others, he conceived the least liable to interruption, informing him that he had something of consequence to communicate to him. " At the time fixed on, Ravil was re¬ pairing to the place of appointment. Thc night was very dark, and he could merely distinguish a moving figure which ap¬ peared to be on the point of ascending the stairs, as he was going down them. * Remain there/ he said; and the figure ceased to move. Ravil went down, and taking from his pocket the purse of gold he had mentioned to me, that he was pos¬ li 6 sessed
sessed of, he put it into the hands of the person before him, and said—* Your ser¬ vices are now given to Lord Rufus; take this purse, and let them henceforth be gi¬ ven to me; your compliance shall be re¬ warded witii treble the sum when we arrive in England/ 44 The hand vvhich received the gold was not that of the supposed captain, but of Lord Rufus himself, who was coming upon deck for air. 44 Needless must it be to observe that vengeance was the sole passion which ani¬ mated the heart of Lord Rufus, on this un¬ expected and unequivocal discovery of the perfidy ofa man who owed tohim his all; his sword was in an instant drawn from its scabbard, with an .exclamation sufficient to convince Ravil whose arm he had to dread; and terror lending him strength, he had buist his way into my cabin, in his vain attempt at flying from the avenging steel.
*' Thc
(i The icy hand ofdeatii was upon. Ra-| vil, but still neither remorse for the past,! nor dread of the hereafter, occupied hist mind; true to the vicious principles under it whicii he had lived, and vvhich had raised j him to the rank of De Madginecourt's fa-j vourite, in the last moments of his life, " ; he only thougiit of revenging the failure ţ of his ungrateful villany. His head had J fallen near-piy feet, and I stood hanging J over him, my faculties suspended, in hor-| ror. He fixed liis eyes on mc ' i)*Al- 1 ton ville/ hc said, 'is bound to the mast- take tiiis dagger to defend yourself, r (draw- *, ing one, as he spoke, fiom his girdle), 4 and fiy to his release.' ф ť God forgive thee!' I exclaimed, snatch- 1 ing the dagger from his baud, and flying towards the spot he had named. The vvhole was but the transaction of a mo* ment. ** Ardent hope gave wings to my feet, and I reached the deck, without scarcely touching the stairs thatled to it. * D'AI- 3 touville/
ton ville,' I cried, * thy Eloîse calls upon thee ľ * Eloise f' replied the well-known voice, and in an instant my hands were upon the cords ihat bound him. He was sitting upon the deck, and his arms were con¬ fined to the mast in such a manner as to prevent him from rising. Scarcely was one arm unbound, ere the hand of Lord Rufus, calling vehemently on the mari¬ ners for assistance, held mine; my shrieks were mingled with his cries; the night was too dark for me to be able to discover whether I had given D'Altonville the power of wholly unbinding himself; and my dread of Raviľs prophecy concerning his life being at that moment fulfilled, wound me up almost to frenzy, and ï raved for mercy for my D'Altonville. " Lord Rufus snatched mein his arms, and was returning with me into the cabin ; at that moment I recollected the dagger; with all the violence of my strength, I darted it at his breast. Forgive me, Hea¬ ven,
ven, for the deed! At any other time but that of the most wretched desperation, I would not have attempted the life even of so cruel an enemy ; notwithstanding the sufferings I have since endured from him, I thank God that the blow was not fatal; I had not died in that peace with my own heart vvhich, I trust, will now attend my last moments. " But although the blow was not fa¬ tal, the point of the dagger had entered his arm just below the shoulder; he con¬ trived to stagger with me into the cabin, and there he let me drop. My garments were covered with the blood which had issued from his wound. Thc loudness of the noise which I heard upon the deck, filled me with the hope that D'Altonville was at liberty, and triumphing over the attempts ofthe sailors toiebind him; but alas! the hope was futile. The captain brought information to Lord Rufus, that the villain was safe. Villain ! oh f what was
ι í lb was Lord Rufus, if my D'Altonville was a *ť ; villain? " Ravil had ceased to breathe, and the ¡a dead body was removed, at the command t of Lord Rufus, vv hose wound, I perceived, ι gave him pain; he darted at me a look f which was meant to upbraid me, but p ehecked by his consciousness of the pro- c vocation I had received; lie took a linen I girdle from his waist, and bound it round t his arm ; this done, he called to him one y of the mariners; and having seen the door ^ sufficiently repaired for again acting as a ι ^ prevention to my leaving the cabin, he « departed in silence, turning the lock upon r me, as he went out. f u I tore off such of my garments as Ì were stained with the blood of my detest- j ed enemy, and threw tliem upon the floor;. this done, I sunk upon my bed, my brain t and heart endeavouring, as it were, to ex- - ceed each other in their throbbings; an л immense weight appeared to press down ( my eyelids; my ideas were bewildered ; my heart
heart seemed to require the relief of weep¬ ing, but the tears would iţot flovv» " A ťleadly coldness stole gradually from my feet towards my jheart; I Ы* lieved the »termination of my life to ţ>e fasjt approaching, and I piayed only ofHeaven to grant D'Altonville resignation under my loss. " The pain I endured was great, yet were my sufferings for my D'Altonville still greater; exposed to the jnclemency of the night air, confined to the most irk¬ some of positions, perhaps dcuied those aliments which could atone render hjbi strength capable of bearing up under the affliction he was doomed to undergo. " A violent shivering §t seized me, and unable to resist the acceptance of present relief for my feelings, though, i U reality, heedless of the protraction of uiy Ufe, I, fçr the first time, drauk a wnaU cup of some wine, which Lord Rufus had a few days before brought we iuta the cabia. I feared pot tbrt it. should be drugged,
drugged with any sleepy potion, as the power of instilling such a drug, had it been his incUnation so to do, would have been the same into any drink brought to me; nor did it seem likely that such should be his idea; I could not, in the deepest sleep, be more in his power than I was at every moment of my present ex¬ istence. 14 Towards morning I sunk to sleep ; the wine had probably invited its approach ; although the quantity I had swallowed was small, still, upon my exhausted spirits, it had possessed the power of a larger dose; when I awoke, 1 found my accustomed- morning repast by my side, and I saw that the blood-stained garments which 1 had taken off the night before, were gone. 4( My brain was more capable of thought than it had been before I had slept. ' What, ' I enquired of myself, 'is the fate of D'Al¬ tonville? to what end does the tyrant spare his wretched life?' I could find no repiy to these mental questions, but that the
the wretch who was usurping an unwar¬ rantable right over my liberty, felt averse to the commission of deliberate murder, and therefore suffered him to live till some new fit of passion should drive him on madly to the deed. ** It is not uncommon for villains te* juggle thus with their own conscience, and not to appear sensible that the cool determination of an evil action is the same as the performance of it. 41 When Lord Rufus entered the cabin, he said—' To-morrow, lady, it is proba¬ ble that we shall reach England ; a very short time will now, therefore, place you in the situation your charms were born to I shine in ;—two days more will make yoa my wife.' " I did not reply ; my determination was more fixed than ever, rather to die than to suffer myself to be allied by the tenderest name to the man I hated ; but I considered it useless at the present mo¬ ment again to express it.
* ' In the night, as I lay upon my restless bed, I imagined that I heard some one over my head, singing; the tones were those of the deepest melancholy, and the songster sighed with the most bitter sob¬ bings. At length I heard my name pro¬ nounced. I couid no longer be ¿leceived in the voice; it was that of D'Altonville Again he sang, and at the close ofa long and mournful cadence, he exclaimed— 1 Oii Eloise, why hast thou fied to Heaven before mer' ' Fled to Heaven ľ I involuntarily echoed. ' Docs he then believe me dead ? Impossible 1—it is his sleeping fancy that speaks!' " I sprang upon the table in the cabin, in order to approach as near to him as possible, and exerting my voice to its full¬ est extent, I called upon him by name, He either did not hear me, or did not attend to my invocation, for he did not reply ţo me, but continued sighing. ' Eloise Γ he presently exclaimed. 4 ИегоЛ
' Hete, here/ I replied, for I thea doubted not that he heard my voice. 'That blessed star is Eloise,* he added ; and I heard him move quickly away from the spot. '* It was now impossible for me to ad¬ mit any opinion concerning what I had heard, but that D'Altonville believed me dead ; the fabrication must have been conveyed to him by Lord Rufus ; but could I imagine that D'Altonville would, inthis point, give credit to his tongue? Oh no; and yet, might not the weakness of his harassed brain conspire with his eneny to gain his ciedit to the last pang he could ever be capable of feeling on earth ? " Again I heard his voice pronouncing my name, and singing a melody which he had iu former days often heard me play to him upon my lute. Again I heard nis footsteps move on the deck. On what account was he now at liberty, when he had hitherto been so closely bound? " A tide of agony rushed upon my brain» aud
!Шб MYSTERIOUS FREEBOOTER. and each moment appeared to predict that it would burst the next. " Truly was that night a night of hor¬ rors; at every interval ofthe roaring waves and rustling breeze. I heard his wretched, his frantic voice. About an hour after daybreak the wind rose higher, and ex¬ cluded every sound but the hoarse roar¬ ings occasioned by itself. Lord Rufus did not, as had been usual with him, visit me in the morning; my breakfast was brought me by one of the mariners. About noon, certain words, which I heard upon deck, led me to be¬ lieve that we were within sight of land. I stood by the door of my cabin, anxiously endeavouring to catch the sound of my D'Alton vi He's voice, whose brain, I now firmly persuaded myself, had been affect¬ ed by his misfortunes; but I heard him not. I placed my hand by accident on the handle of the lock of the door, and my action having, without design, turned it, it flew open; my surprise at finding that
tliat it was not barred, was great ; but I determined to profit by the happy chance for once more seeing D'Altonville; I rush¬ ed out, and turned my steps towards the cabin stairs; but alas! the door at their top, which opened upon the deck, was closed, and refused me a passage. * She is not dead—it is a villanous fal¬ lacy—she is not dead ! suffer me once more to see her—to die in her arms!' These words, in the voice of D'Altonville, I dis¬ tinctly heard. ť Frantic at the sound, I flew to ano¬ ther part of the ship, where I had some recollection of having seen an entrance to the deck ; 1 gained it, and once more stood befoie the only man on earth that I could ever love! but oh, how changed since last I had beheld him ! With the cha· racters of death legibly written on his countenance, and clasping my blood-stain¬ ed garments to his heart, lay D'Altonville extended upon the deck· c Monsters! I knew she lived!' he ex¬ claimed
claîfried on seeing mè ; and at the same instant endeavoured to spring from the ground, but the effort overpowered him, and he sunk down by my side. ť Do not, at the peril of your sóulš, attempt totear me from him!* I cried, addressing Lord Rufus and the wretches' allied to him by gold. * Ye have mur¬ dered him, and I will receive hts last breath ' '* I believe there was something in my maimer which struck awe even to the hearts of those around me, for they suf¬ fered me to remain on my knees by his side. ' Blessed God, I thank thee that I see her once again 1' said D'Altonville, en¬ deavouring to ñx on me his eyes. 'They gave me these,' pointing to the garments I have already mentioned, * and told me thou w ert dead ! Frenzy seized my brain ,¬ Ι broke my bonds. He came, and found me once more at liberty,' (he pointed to Lord Rufus as he spoke) *and his sword— He
He could no more; his hand explained tlie rest, by placing itself beneath a wound in his side. ' Oh save him ! save him V I jxclaimed ; 4 inhuman villains! will ye let him die for want of aid? 1 ' It would come too late/ said D'Al¬ tonville, once more opening his lips ; ' the pangs of death recalled my reason-—it convinced me thou wert still alive! I prayed only to breathe out my last sigh in thine arms i —Oh Eloise, it is accom¬ plished! Almighty Heaven! shield------* The words died on his tongue; his spirit was fled for ever. ei Without a groan, without a sigh, I saw-him expire; for a minute all my senses seemed stiffened into apathy,, then burst a maddening tide of grief into rny veins; one heart-drawn shriek escaped my lips, and I ran to plunge myself into the deep, and end my woes in death. " An arm snatched me back, and all sense fled from me. vol, iï. o "Oh,
- " Oh, why was not that moment my- last? Why did not Heaven kindly ciose my eyes in death, and spare me the hor- , ror of opening them upon the murderer ofmy D'Altonville? " I cannot dwell on the remainder of my narrative as I have done on that al¬ ready written; it is my desire to com¬ plete it before my death: It is a singular, an inexplicable consolation to me to com¬ mit my fate to paper: perhaps I am ani¬ mated by the idea tiiat those sorrows which during my lifetime were shut from the knowledge of the world, may excite a tear of compassion after my decease. I must hasten in my self-imposed task, for I feel a presentiment, a foreboding, that my miseries on earth will not endure much Jonger. Lord Rufus scorns the wretch he has made. " Upon recovering my senses, I found myself in the apartment where I am now writing, and from which I have never been permitted to stir, except into the 4 library
library adjoining to it, where I shall depo¬ sit mv sad recital, when I have concluded it, if that power be ever granted me. " Lord Rufus andsome attendants were iu the apartment with me; he dismissed the latter, and a priest, at his call, entered from the library. * The moment of my happiness is now come!' was the short in¬ timation which he gave me of his inten¬ tion respecting myself. My tears, my prayers, my remonstrances, were unheecb· ed alike by him and the priest; and a ceremony, which was by them called mar¬ riage, having been performed, tlie priest left the chamber. u And here I must for a while lay down *ïny pen. I can dwell with comparative composure on the death of my D'Alton¬ ville, to the sensations which my mind at this moment experiences in the recollec¬ tion of the hour which followed that mockery of religion. " When a month had expired, Lord Rufus, probably judging of me by the ο α impression
impression which auy occurrence of joy or grief made on his own unfeeling mind, and conceiving the time of afiliction for the loss of my D'Altonville to be past, was urgent with me in his entreaties for me to quit my chamber, and to shew my¬ self to his household, and to the world, as the wife of his choice. He should expe¬ rience much pi ide, he said, in carrying me to the court, and introducing me there, in a stile becoming the rank to which he had raised me. " I replied, that I should ever consider myself the victim of a tyrant, and feeling that J was so, I would, if possible, shut myself out from my own sight, much more from that ofthe world. "The policy of Lord Rufus was too great to force me into society against my inclination, how strongly soever he might desire to sec me emerge into the world. Tlie tale of his villany at present lay bu¬ ried in his own breast and mine; within the walls of his castle, I had no means of making
being. The domestics I saw were few, and those as wholly unacquainted with the French language, as I was vvith that of England. Had I suffered myself to have been led into the world, with the splendour which would have accompanied my intro¬ duction into it as the wife of Lord Rufus de Madginecourt, he probably conceived that vanity would have dazzled my thoughts from a recollection of the past, or that if I had ever made the disclosure of my situation to any heart, little credit would have been given to the misery of a woman who was blazing in what the world knew' to be grandeur^ and therefore would conceive to be happiness. " My thoughts frequently reverted to the living as well as to the dead. I thought of my father, and I prayed for him; he was, indeed, the author of all my misery, but he was stiil my father—I still owed to him the duty of a child, though he had omitted to perform towards me the part of о 3 an
an indulgent parent. Sorrow softens the heart into universal benevolence; it is the channel through which Providence pours the greatest balm into the breast of afflic¬ tion, by rendering it conscious that it suffers undeservedly, when it unexcep- tionally forgives. " The conduct of Lord Rufus continued consistent with the crimes he had already committed. Indifference quickly succeeded possession, and he did not hesitate to offer me insults, when he found me about to become the mother of a progeny more wretched than myself, because condemned in the very womb to lie under the hatred of a monster and a father. " Alas! I shall write little more; I feel the moment of my pains approaching; the ouly consolatory sensation I have for some time experienced, is a whispering at my heart, that my existence will now be short; the belief would be exquisite, were it not that a wretched being may receive fife from my death, whose unhappy state might
might be somewhat ameliorated on earth, even by the little share of comfort it would bein its hapless mother's power to bestow on it. 46 My hour of suffering is at band. May it be no crime to wish that Heaven would hear my prayer, to snatch my babe to the - arms of its mercy, rather than consign it I to those of its miserable mother!" | A chasm in the manuscript here etisued ; and when it vvas again continued, the characters were hardly recognizable for those of the same writer; they appeared| to have been traced by a hand almost t0O| feeble to commit them to paper. | " Once more I resume my pen, but myii hand, weak and tremulous with illness^ and suifering, almost refuse* to perform] the office I require of it. í ( 4 Still, even on the margin of the grave, j the desire of leaving a record ofmy affiic-fj tions haunts me, and gives me thatj strength which I could not exert for any other purpose. 0.4 "Thei
" The hour that was destined to make me a mother gave birth to a female infant, which was followed by one of the other sex. Nature never fails tö call forth the affections of the parent for her progeny; and much as 1 had supposed I should la¬ ment the birth ofa child, I instantly felt that it would be an increase ofmy suffer¬ ings to be deprived of them, now they were given to me. " Lord Rufus did not appear to wel¬ come his children into existence. " On the third day after their birth, the girl closed her eyes to the light. I now almost wept that my prayer to Heaven had been heard. Still n>y boy was left me, to console my sad and solitary mo¬ ments. On the following morning, Lord Rufus came into my apartment. Instead of one observation relative to the recently created claim upon his affection—instead of one word, even of pretended tenderness to me, he abruptly informed me, that as the girl had died under my care, he had resolved
resolved to remove the boy to the super¬ intendance of a nurse, and required me immediately to take leave of him for that purpose. " In vain I remonstrated with him—- in vain I endeavoured to convince him that the nurse which Nature has appoint¬ ed to each child, in its mother's breast, must be its ablest rearer. He made no reply to my arguments, but merely re¬ peated his own determination. I pressed my lips upon the cheek of the babe, and held him to my bosom. Lord Rufus put his hand upon the child, to tear him from me—I was not able to speak—I raised my eyes to him in eloquent silence; his heart could not relax to pity, and he bore the child avvay. " That moment I learnt that there are still fresh pangs iu nature for every suf¬ ferer's bosom, although he may believe himself already arrived at the climax, of his misery. " Sometimes I dreaded lest the life of о 5 my
my child should be unsafe in the hands of its unnatural father; at others, I almost wished that whatever the means, it might be snatched from life, while its sufferings eould only be short and bodily, rather than that its. existence should be spared for the lengthened and more acute pangs of the mind. 44 ïn a few days, the conduct observed towards me, served to convince me that my boy had been taken away from me, merely that he might never have a know¬ ledge of his unfortunate mother, who was now reduced to that humiliating situa¬ tion which should attend the lost to vir¬ tue, but which, for some unknown end in the wisdom of Providence, is too fre¬ quently transferred to the innocent suf¬ ferer. " The mere necessaries of life were now alone brought to me ; and the apartments, vhich it had before been a voluntary act in me not to quit, were now, I found, be¬ eome my prison. Heretofore the domes¬ tics.
tics, who did not understand my language, had made İt their study to comprehend my wants from the signs I had given them ; now, only one servant, and that of the opposite sex to my own, appeared in my apartment, once, or at most twice, in each twenty-four hours, and he obeyed no sig¬ nal, nor observed towards me the slightest respect. " Even at this time a reflection came across my brain, which administered some¬ thing like peace to my afflict d mind-« What, in a situation similar to mine, I considered, must be the feelings of a Avretched object, whohas voluntirily bent to infamy, and sacrificed her innocence for gold and splendour? When the clouds of adversity and disdain overwhelm her, where can she fly for consolation ? That which the world denies her, she cannot receive from her own heart; her present existence is misery; and she has nothing to look forward to but punishment. Dread¬ ful state of miud! While 1 have stili a о 6 friend
friend in my conscience, and can indulge in the delightful view of the miud, which presents to me the sun of eternal reward rising upon me, as my recompence for having leant firmly to the anchor of reli¬ gious hope, whilst tossed on the sea of worldly calamity. ťi Thus passed on two months, during which I saw not Lord Rufus. One day my attendant laid down before me, upon my table, a small parcel. I found it to contain a dagger, and a paper, on which were written the following words in the hand-writing of Lord Rufus: —
' Perhaps you will not im¬ mediately recollect this dagger; it is the one which you once aimed at my life!'
•Where/ I involuntarily exclaimed, 'is the
the sword with which you drew the life- blood of my D'Alton ville? The tears burst from my eyes, and for some moments pre¬ vented me from returning them to the paper in my hand; it was continued thus;
* You have long since informed me, that your life was a burden to you. Your existence now stands as much m the way of my projects, as it can do of your own happi u ess : you are therefore at liberty to part with it as soon as you please. I doubt not but that you will receive my present thankfully, and for once acknow¬ ledge a benefit at the hands of i RUFUS DE MADGINECOURŢ/
41 This note 1 have transcribed into my narrative, the moment after my receiving it, as I would uot that this last act of cool-
cool-blooded villany should be unknown to the future peruser of my fate. I con¬ sider myself as now writing for the last time. His letter plainly expresses that Eloise must die, and shortly too ! If she will not commit suicide, it but remains to close the scene with her murder. " So then it shall be. Having endured thus long, worlds sliould not purchase me to fly even the cruel death he may intend me, by an actjon that would destroy my hope of meeting D'Alton viliéin Heaven. 44 Prepared myself to die, with every soothing sensation that can attend a suf¬ ferer to the margin of the grave, my thoughts still lean towards the iess fortu¬ nate than myself, in their mental compo¬ sure at so awful a moment; and I pray to Heaven that I may be the last victim of his villanous heart. 64 This is probably tiie last time I shall ever hold a pen. The night is closing i u fast. Ishall, as usual, place my narrative in the station I have chosen for it in the library, and retire to rest. 4< Reader,
" Reader, whoever thou art, that hast thus far accompanied me through the jo irney ofmy sufferings and afflictions, I thank thee for thy patience—I thank thee for the tear which I take to myself a pride and pleasure in believing that thou hast shed over them.—Farewell, should I never return to my task—shouldst thou never know how I died, believe, and remember, that Eloise will never lift her hand against her oxen existence ľ'
CHAP,
СИАР. ХШ.
Can such things be, And overcome us like a summer's cloud, Without our special wonder ? MACBÏ.TH. JlJLERE ended the manuscript. 44 Thou didst never return to thy task, then, unfortunate Eloise!" exclaimed Rosalind, ťť and didst, doubtless, perish by the hand of villainy ï The tear that thou didst pray for falls upon thy writ¬ ing, and the sigh that thou didst desire is heaved to thy memory, by one whose fate is equally wretched as tjiine own." Rosalind
Rosalind now heard the step of Dame Edith approaching towards the library, and replaced the manuscript on thc sheif where she had found it. íè It is strange," said Rosalind, ad¬ dressing her, " that I should never have known Lord Rufus to have been married, till you mentioned it to me the other day." *'Why," replied the Dame, '* your Ladyship can hardly have been born when the Lady de Madginecourt died ; it is now full twenty-three years ago : be¬ sides, as I have befoie told you, she was a French lady, whom my Lord fell tn love with on his travels, and made his wife. She was wholly unacquainted with the English language, and also of a very melancholy turn of miud; from both which causes, as I guess, slie disliked mixing with society ; for I can't say that I remember her ever quitting this suite of apartments which she'inhabited." " I think
MYSTERIOUS FREEBOOTER.
" I think you said she was his wife but a short time," remarked Rosalind. ·* Not quite a year," returned Edith: " she bore him twins; they both died on the third day after their birth ; the poor Jady was desperate at their loss ; her fe¬ ver ran high, in addition to which her milk flew to her brain—and—she died," added the Dame, hesitatingly. " Poor unfortunate!" sighed out Ro¬ salind, fixing her eyes on the Dame ;— they probably bore in them a suspiciou that Edith knew more than she had spoken ; for the Dame advanced a fevr steps closer to Rosalind, and in a lower tone of voice added—" Unfortunate in¬ deed, my Lady; fbr it is asserted that the frenzy of her malady caused her to la}' violent hands on herself. " Rosalind shuddered at the account: she recollected the last lines of the narra¬ tive, wiiich had declared that whatever her fate, she would never lift her hand against ber owu existence; and she doubted
doubted not but that the wretched Eloise had been the victim of unfair death, and had t гп falsely stigmatized with the crime under which she had suftered. " Such accidents are dreadful to re¬ flect upon/' thc Dame continued ; "but we trust they are forgiven, because the sense is defective when they are per¬ formed. For the sake of her soul, I hope that Queen Dido was frantic, when she immolated herself upon the funeral pile." Rosalind herself felt so strongly inte¬ rested in the subject she was discussing, that she could hardly forbear an excla¬ mation of anger or contempt at the last remark made by the Dame, who had plainly displayed that her feelings were of the languid kind, by the easy transi¬ tion which she could make from face to fable, and lay an equal emphasis of feel¬ ing on both ; and she could not, for some time, liave commanded her emo¬ tions sufficiently to have addressed the Dame
Dame with complacency, had not her ardent desire to learn all she was able of the fate of the unhappy sufferer on whom her thoughts were bent, over-ruled every other propensity. " Did you see her children during the short period of time they lived ?" asked Rosalind. *« No, my Lady," answered the Dame, " I never saw the lady herself above two or three times ; I could not speak her language, or she mine ; so, as I had not the power of offering her my services, I did not intrude myself into her presence ; and at the time her children were born, as I think I have told you before, I had been a couple of mouths confined to my bed with a sprain in my back ; and I had not the use of my limbs again till some time after her death." 41 Had she any French servants ?" asked Rosalind, conscious that she had not, but still unwilling to drop the sub¬ ject in which her mind was wrapt, and at
at a loss hovv to continue it, withojit be-| traying herself acquainted with those particulars of which she did not at pre¬ sent chuse to avow a knowledge. " No, she had not onc French ser¬ vant," answered the Dame; " and those English domestics vvho were particularly in lier service have all left the castle, or are since dead." A silence ensued. li The secret then lies buried in the breast of him who will hereafter have to account for it," tliought Rosalind. * £ She was a most beautiful lady, in¬ deed!" continued Dame Edith; " and I dare say as amiable as she was beautiful, for my Lord »cannot forget her to this day ;—that is, he never suffers himself to be put iu miud of her ; for these rooms have been uninhabited, though not lock-* ed up, ever since her death. His Lord«* ship does not so much as enter the gal¬ lery that leads to them; and I well re¬ member once, about five years ago, when Ы
he was giving directions to some work* men on the ramparts, and his eye fell upon these apartments, seeing him turn hastily away, put his hand to his face, and shudder. " To me at least thou standest con¬ victed ofthy guilt," said Rosalind, men* itally. * f Heaven grant that the secret of í which I am possessed, may give me power to shield myself from the vil¬ lainy tby heart may intend against me!" The remainder of the day passed on to Rosalind in painful reflection ; she wished ■to taste the air, but she forbore to visit the garden, or the rampart, not chusing to witness a repetition of the scene she Jiad once caught a glimpse of, in passing \ (through the castle hall. That hour of the evening at which Lord Rufus had acquainted her, at his departure, that he expected to return to his castie, and to bring with him the leply of Allanrod to her petition of being placed
placed under the protection of the queen, at length arrived» She awaited his approach with a degree of impatience natural to the unpleasant situation İn which she was placed, and with an anxiety which could not fail to harass her mind, as she dwelt on the mystery which formed the inexplicable union that subsisted betweeu Lord Rufus and the Scottish freebooter. The supper hour came, but Lord Rufus did not arrive. The spirits of Rosalind sunk at his absence, lf he really in¬ tended to act towards her the part of friendship, this delay seemed to bespeak Allanrod unwilling to comply with her request. If he were in heart still her enemy, she wished his condnct rather to be shewn to her at once in its true co¬ lours, than thus to endure the pangs of suspense. On either consideration, she prayed that his return might not be longer protraeteci. Whilst
Whilst she sat with painful thought for her only companion, in an apartment which received a faint light from the thin crescent of a growing moon, that was rising slowly above the ramparts of the castle, Dame Edith entered the room, v/ith a much more hasty step than she usually moved with, and throwing her¬ self, without ceremony, 'nto a chair— " I am terrified out of my senses, my Lady," she cried; iť I kuow not whe¬ ther I stand on my feet or on my head, with fear ! Ilea ven send my Lord may return to the castle to-night, or I shall never dare to go to my bed !" Thc Dame had brought with her a lamp, and Rosalind saw real terror de¬ picted on her countenance.— <e What is it that has alarmed you ?" she asked. ** A spirit! —a most wicked and abo¬ minable spirit, that haunts the castle*!— Blessed be the lioly Ghost, and grani; that its appearance be not thc foretelling of
of the death of some of us !" replied the Dame. Rosalind's incredulity, with regard to spirits, has already been shown. Much as she had heard them talked of, no re¬ port concerning them had ever yet reachr 1 her, which had gained her credit to their existence ; and she had as regu¬ larly found tliat no arguments can reason those who are disposed to place belief in them, out of the conceit : accordingly, as she easily discovered okl Edith to be one of that class, slie remained sdent, hoping that she would receive her taci¬ turnity as a proof of her incredulity, and go elsewhere to tell her story, which Rosalind, at the present moment, felt particularly disinclined to be teazed with. But no; Dame Edith was not to be disappointed of her tale; slie was willing to believe that Rosalind maintained si¬ lence for the purpose of inviting her to continue her narrative, and she proceeded to recount, that the spirit had appeared to vol. ii. p' several
several of the household, in the course of the preceding night, vvho had some taken to their beds, and some gone half dis-· tracted, in consequence of vvhat they had seen ; that she knew she should die, if it appeared to her, which she did not seem at all inclined to do just yet, old as she was; and that her anxiety for tlie return of Uord Rufus pro çáed, not from any particular receipt which he possessed for jcturning such air-born forms to their oriiţinal vapour, but in order that his permission might be obtained to send for a priest who was competent to perform the task for him. The Dame would talk, and therefore Rosalind, was obliged to hear a long ac¬ count of the diiferent situations in which the alarming spirit had been seen, and of the d i (feren t persons who had beheld it, and their degrees of bravery under the sight, which she concluded by saying, that the ghost was dressed, from top to toe, hi black armour, and that its face was
was pale and livid, like that of a corpse, with a streak of blood down" the 'left cheek. This last sentence arrested the attention of Rosalind : she was struck with the re¬ semblance that Dame Edith's description bore to the ghost which Gertrude had ' some time before informed her had been | $een at De Mow bra ν Castle, and which I had passed the drawbridge, to the great ' terror of old Ambrose, the porter, and Philip Watkins, the sentinel. j The singularity of the incident made a { forcible impression on her. mind :—oa ¡ the evening of her father's departure from his castle, she believed that she had heard , herself called upon by name, when wan- l dering for air on the ram ( arts, and that at the same moment, she had seen a dusky \ figure in the act of rising above the para¬ pet wall, which had immediately disap- j peared, on the sound of Gertrude's voice* } On the same evening of this occurrence, j Gertrude had informed her of the appear--' 3 auca-
ance which had been witnessed at De Mowbray Castle. No sooner was sbe ar¬ rived at Rockmount, than its inhabitants were terrified by a vision exactly similar to that which had been described to her to have occasioned alarm to her father's .household: there was something undefi- nabiy strange in this coincidence, which she could not so easily reconcile to her mind, as she would have done the ap¬ pearance of any spirit which had been said to have assumed a different form :— according to the description which Dame Edith had given her, it seemed as if that particular appearance flew in her path, and flitted around the spot which she iu» habited.
EKD OF VOL. Ib
