Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Mystery: a novel: in two volumes
MYSTERY. S i .I U I И?И T 1?????&* LETTER I. Major Seymour to Charles Melford^ Efa. my dear charles, ? Albany, 178— r EIN G at length become ftationary for a time on the fpot from whence I write, I once more addrefs the friend of my bo¬ fom, in the hope of this paper reaching him. How long a time is it, fince I have heard of your welfare ! how long a time fince I have been able,to inform you of mine ! and how much longer fmce we have met I—Ought we to repine that the vari¬ ous walks of life in which men are fated' to move, fo ufualiy feparate, in maturity, the friends of boyhood, fchool, and college? By too many fuch friendftnps are made only the caprices or conveniences of Üie hour, vol. ?. ? and
d
and diffolve on parting, becaufe they want the union of mind on wdiich I have never doubted that ours has been eftabliflied.— Next to the pieafure of feeing thofe we efteem, is the beholding their welfare af- ferted by their own hand ; and confcious that you will not receive this with lefs ar¬ dour than I write it, I feel delight at this moment almoft amounting to what I fliould experience on feeing you. I do not doubt that you have written to me, and often too ; but it is now nearly eighteen months fince i have received a letter of yours, and no wonder; could you fee how we 'are haraffed from place to place, what feenes of confufion our almoft daily battles or ík i r- miflies occafion, how each is employed in providing for his own neceflities, you would ceafe to be fur] rifed, as I do, that w r e are cut off from intelligence with our friends in England. I am a foldier, and dare af¬ firm that no tongue, except that of malice or injuftice, can accufe me of ever having flinched when oppofed to the enemies of my country ; but ftill I may fay İn fecret to my
3
my friend, that there is no greater curfe, either to an individual or a country, than w r ar ; whether it bu uffeimve or defenlive, the effeds are the fame : I am not fpeaking particularly of the one in which we are en¬ gaged, I fpeak of war as a general evil : if it weighs down the individual with taxes levied for its fupport, the fame caufe natu¬ rally weakens the finances of the country ; and trivial are thefe ills, if we turn our thoughts for an inflant to the miferies of the field of battle, and the breaking hearts of thofe who mourn tlie fallen. Thofe days are happily gone by, when every ten¬ der feeling was facrificed to pairiotifm ; the hearts of parents are now no longer infenfible to the fufferings of their fons, when fighting againft the enemies of their country ; wives now no longer rejoice that their children are fathcrlefs, becaufe their hufbands have died in warfare : and how¬ ever this unnatural ftoicifm may be ap¬ plauded by thofe wdio inflame nations to meet each other, determined on the deftrudion of their fpecies, I think what a 2 they
4 they would ftyle the weaker feelings, are the nobler ; in them humanity appears to gain ground, and through them a greater lhare of tranquillity may be happily pro¬ moted in the globe. Why have the qua¬ lities of humanity and benevolence been implanted in our breafts r why have they been taught to us as pre-eminent vir¬ tues ? Surely not that we fhouid ufe our endeavour to Another them. You know the army was never my choice; indeed, you know alfo that my father made me underftand that younger fons have no right of choice : I had no alternative, but my profeffion, or being caft off by him : he is now no more, and when peace fliall be granted us, I ihall immediately fell out. You cannot imagine the fenfations attend¬ ing upon the expedation of day-break, when vve know that the fun is to rife upon a field of flaughter : Good God! what have been my feelings, when ftretched upon the floor of my tent, unable to fleep, I have refleded that on the following morning I muft give an order to kill my fellow-crea¬ tures,
5 tures, or be itigmatized with the brand of infamy in my native country ; nay, that I muit myfelf raife a fword againft their lives! I have often tried to perfuade mvfelf, that it was in m v own defence in which I was compelled thus to ad ; but confeience al¬ ways ftarted up to enquire, whether I had not voluntarily entered upon the mode of life in vvhich this condud was neceffary? One idea only afforded me confolation ; it was this : " If I die to-morrow," I faid, " I forgive my murderer, for he will not attack me as an individual : if my fword give death to an enemy, may the forgive¬ nefs with which I had prepared myfelf to meet the blow from him, plead my par¬ don on high !" If I had any thing elfe than my own thoughts to entertain you with, I would not obtrude upon you thefe refledions ; but of what is pafling here you probably know more particulars than myfelf Write to me as foon as you ihali receive this, and dired for me at General R ------ 's, and I think I can enfiare its not mifcarrying. ? 3 Fare-
6 Farewel, dear Charles, I have not time to write long letters. I need not repeat, that to hear you are well and happy is al¬ ways the greateft pieafure of, Yours fincere ty, &c. George Seymour. LETTER II. Charles Melford\ Efq. to Major Seymour. MY DEAR GEORGE, A Mel lord-houfe, Rutlandihiie. Friend alone can conceive the delight with which I yefterday received your Jet¬ ter dated from Albany. Not a day, nay hardly an hour, has lately paffed in which I have not been endeavouring to gain fome intelligence of you ; and though I have found fo many others in my fituation of ignorance relative to their friends, I have ever trembled to examine the returns of battle. Accuftomed to lay my heart before you
7 you in full and open confidence, I have felt a want of zeit for my pleafures, and a vacancy in every circumflance w 7 hich has occurred to me, for want of being able to impart it to you ; but knowing you to be ftill in exiftence, I again feel reaffured and happy. Oh, Seymour, I liave never flood in fo great need of the bofom of friendfliip to repofe my fecrets upon as I have done * during the interval of filence wdiich has, from neceflity, fubfifted between us. The ftrangeft and happieft of adventures has occurred to me. I have a long ftory to unfold to you, and the inftant I know where to addrefs you, I cannot forbear beginning it. Seymour, I have feen the woman vvith whom the future deitiny of my life is woven ;—I have feen the woman with whom, were all my dependance in life placed in mvfelf only, I would conned myfelf to-morrow, nor doubt that every happinefs vvhich can blefs the married ftate would crown our union. An op¬ portunity like the prefent of addreffing you may not readily prefent itfelf again; J* 4 I will
8 I will therefore ufe the one in my powes to give you a full detail of circumflances ; of which I need not admoniih you to give me your candid opinion. Before I come to a relation of fads, fuffer mc to dwell a fliort time on a few confiderations which ought firft to be made clear to you, and without keeping which in view, you will not fee and feel exadly as I have done, and of courfe will not be fo well able to decide with juftice and accuracy upon the point in queftion. You know that I am an only fon : and that fince my leaving Cambridge, I have lived, agreeably to his wifh, with my father, Sir Edmund Mel¬ ford, who is a widower at the advanced age of feventy-two. Of Sir Edmund you have feen but little, and then only on the terms of formal acquaintance as my friend, or in mixed company : thofe are not the times to lenrn a man's charader ; Sir Ed¬ mund's hand and joke are then ready for every one—he is the pleafant companion, and Ids age gains him refped ; it is in private iu his own family that a man muft be
9 be feen to be thoroughly underftood ; and here Sir Edmund is more fevere, more con- traded in his opinions than I am often willing to believe it can be in the nature of my father to be. I feel my own heart open and benevolent towards all mankind í fome· I particularly feled as I judge them mofl worthy my efteem, but I defpife none. My father refpeds only as he efteems the rank of thofe he refpeds deferving his approbation, acknowledges no virtue fo great as primogeniture, and confiders ex* cellence in poverty the mofl contemptible of vices. He was himfelf an elder fon, and inherited the title which I am one day to bear before he became of age ; his mother was the widow of a bifliop, with whom his father fell in love ; ihe Imd her· felf been educated in all the formal arifto« craey of the old fchool, and being left the fole manager of her fon by the fudden death of her hufband, ihe fucceeded in giving him the fame ideas under which the had herfelf been brought up. My* father, thus inilruded, had been particularly ? 5 cautioned
io cautioned by my grandmother never to marry, till he could conned himfelf with a woman of rank : he did not marry till late in life : my mother was the youngeft daughter of a duke; fhe brought him a very flender fortune, and gave birth to myfelf before the expiration of the firft year after their marriage, and at the con¬ clufion of the fécond flie died. Sir Ed¬ mund has fince that time made no attempt to alter his fituation, and the greateft objed of his prefent pride and attention is a rich bifeded monument ereded in the church which ftands on his eftate; one -fide of it contains the genealogy of my deceafed mother, the other his own, blank fpaces being left in the flab to be filled up with his age and the date of his death. In thefe ideas my father has endeavoured to educate me : I do not blame him for it, becaufe cuftom has taught him to believe them confi ft ent with my fituation; but I am extremely thankful for the powers nature has given me, of discriminating with greater accuracy between the various fliades of
π of merit than the fteps of birth. My years of boyhood were tinted with this ariftocratic fpirit, which fo violently fer¬ ments the blood of Sir Edmund ; and it was no matter of furprife that I then felt as he did, becaufe I was taught by him to look up to no one elfe as having authority over me, and İt was but natural at thofe years for me to imagine, that the poflefling of authority, and the right of poifeffing it, were the fame thing, 1 had then very few acquaintance, indeed no intimate ones, for almoft every body I knew was defcribed to me as beneath my friendfliip : my mind was adive, and of courfe diilatisfied that almoft every pieafure 1 enjoyed was corpo¬ real ; and haviug no one to converfe with, 1 began to acquire a liking for reading ; and happily for me, my father had a good library, though he was little in the habit of difturbing its order himfelf. After I had fome time acquired this tafte, I gained the happier quality of refleding. The firft idea which told me that I thought at all, was a wifli to learn the hiftories of ? ? thofe
n thofe men whofe works beft pleafed me. Many of the books I had already read had taught me the infignificancy of human gxeatnefs, and the ineflfinable worth of virtue and knowledge ; and when I began my biographical reading and found that mofl, nay almoft all of thofe men whofe works held the firft place in my opinion, were fuch as my father would have de¬ fpifed as his inferiors both in fortune and rank, I could not forbear immediately re¬ fleding what exquifite folly it was for any one to pride himfelf on poflefling a name of grandeur, and a certain portion of land, and to confider himfelf fuperior to thofe men who poffeffed abilities forinftruding him how to bear them to his own advantage in the world. At this firft dawning of my fenfe I was twelve years old ; my father had till this period inilruded me himfelf in the firft branches of common knowledge, and I was in the fucceflive year fent to Winchefter. Here, Seymour, commenced my friendfliip with you, which I hope neither time nor circumflance will ever be able
13 able to diffolve. When you entered the army I became a ftudent at Cambridge ; I have now left the univerficy three years, and I am not confcious of having once offended my father by oppofing to his ideas of birth my principles of common fenfe. Infirmities—for there are fuch of the judg¬ ment as well as of the body, and I wifli to call my father's prejudice in favour of rank by no leverer name—ftrengthen with the years of thofe whofe minds they inha¬ bit ; and the temper of Sir Edmund being thus explained, if I were to marry during his life-time, what muft the woman be with whom I ihould have his confent to conned myfelf? I anfwer that the woman herfelf would not be confidered by him at all; the eligibility of the union would with him depend upon what title her grand¬ father had handed down to her progenitor. What would be the woman whom Charles Melford would feleft to blefs his marriage bed ? A woman who would love him as a man, not as a baronet : in that fentence, Seymour, I think I convey to you the whole of
14- of my heart ; you doubtlefs fee in it, attri¬ buted to the woman whom I could love, the truth of innocence playing about eyes whofe gentle fire is lighted at a heart fecure in itfelf from the want of defign wdiich marks its own· actions, and embellifhed by the rofes of a face exquifite in feeling fim¬ plicity. Such a woman I have feen ; the love of fuch a woman, as the reward of my endeavouring to merit it, I look for¬ ward to receive from Heaven as the bleifing of my prefent life, and earneft of my blifs in futurity ; for, oh, Seymour, he who has- been once bleffed with the charms of this divine girl, muft tafte eternal felicity ; for, once conneded with her, the angelic purity of her heart muft defend him from the com- miffion of any ad by which it might be forfeited. Oh, furely, if there is a middle ftate between the cares of this life and future happinefs, I fhall bafk in it when united to Margaretta, for to poffefs her charms muft be a fuperior pieafure to any one this world can beftow, Margaretta! You have her name, but oh it İs an indiitind idea
15 idea of what fhe ís, unworthy of the form that bears it. I do not yet call her my Margaretta, for flie knows me only yet as her friend, nor fliall do till—I have no one to queftion my right of making her mine. My heart is firm towards her—immoveable from Margaretta ; but fo many unforefeen occurrences fpring up t> thwart our favou¬ rite fchemes, that 1 have refolved not to declare what I feel for her till I have the liberty of offering her my hand without offence to him whom I ffiall ever confider İt my duty not to infult by a difregard of what he efteems fo facred an obfervation. Margaretta is but a poor cottager's daugh¬ ter, uneducated, but in virtue ; unadorned, but by the interefting fimplicity of uncon- fcious beauty. Oh ! with what pieafure ihall I cultivate the mind of innocence into the pradice of thofe virtues which now lie dormant in her heart—draw into perfec¬ tion thofe feeds of .knowledge which yet want the ripening fun of inftrudion ! Oh ! what feenes of future happinefs have I pic¬ tured to myfelf in the friendfliip of my Sey¬ mour,
16 mour, and the love of Margaretta I But I have not yet told you by what mean's I know her; my paper is full, another fheet fliaJl be dedicated to the relation. Adieu, yours, Sec. Charles Melford.
LETTER III. Charles ? Ieif ord, E fif. hi eon tinaa ihn. XT is now about feven months fince, as I was one day following the hounds, the ftrap of one of my flirrups happening to fnap, í was obliged to flop my horfe and difmount in order to endeavour to repair it; this I after fome time contrived to do, but the dogs and my companions were out of fight before I had effected it : í again mounted my horfe, and while riding about in the hope of rejoining them, I met in a. crofs lane, which divides two high roads— I met Margaretta ; in one hand flie held that of a little boy, and in the other a bafket
17 bafket of fruit; a large ftraw hat con¬ cealed her face, and I faw not her beauty^ till enquiring of her, " Whether flie had feen the hounds ?" fhe fixed upon me, as ihe an¬ fwered me, a pair of eyes which pierced to my very foul. " I have not feen them, fir," was her anfwer, and flie walked on. í had flopped my horfe, and I remained fome minutes looking after her without re¬ membering why I had flopped it, only re- coiledmg that I had feen her countenance. Without being refolved to follow her, I walked my horfe after her : fhe had croffed another lane, and was juft arrived on a little green, fkirted with cottages, when I came within fight of her; flie entered a neat dwelling, which flood about one hun¬ dred yards diftant from the reft : I advanced towards it, flopped oppofite to it, and at that inftant I heard the cry of the dogs ; ï know not why, but I immediately rode to them. I returned home ; I thought of little elfe but this beautiful ruftic : purity of heart was flam ped on her countenance : fedudion I had ever abhorred, as the mofl criminal
criminal and meaneft of vices, and yet î refolved to fee her again. The green on which the houfe ftands that I had feen her enter is about fixteen miles from hence. A few days after, í mounted my fhoot- ing poney, took my dogs and gun, and went out with the rifinir of the fun. I killed a few birds, put them into my bag, and immediately rode towards the green : arrived there, I went lirait to the cottage, and knocked with my whip upon the door; it was opened by an old man, who, wdth a courteous nod, enquired my bufinefs ; I told him, that I requefted the favour of being fliovvn a houfe where I could get fome bread and cheefe and ale, or if ho would give me a draught that I would pay him for it : he anfwered me civilly, that I was welcome to fuch as he had, and afked me to alight and walk in : to.this I wanted little perfuafion, and diredly followed him into a neat kitchen ; he defired me to fit by the fire while he went to draw the ale. When alone, I looked round for Marga¬ retta : a door, the upper half of which was a win*
w a window, opened at one end of the kitchen into a fmall room ; I walked towards it, in the hope of there feeing Margaretta: the old man returned while I ftood before it : ** I would have fliovvn jou in there, fir," faid he, " but there is no fire." I feated my¬ felf by the chimney, and my firft draught was juft ended, when Margaretta came in from a little garden behind the houfe ; flie courtfeyed to me, and I believe I felt at that moment more aukward than I ever did in a drawing-room. " This is the gentleman, father," faid Margaretta, " that aiked me, lafl Monday morning, if I had feen the hounds—Did you find them, pray, fir?" I anfwered, " Yes, I am very much obliged to you." This w T as a very fooliih anfwer, a^ you perceive : Margaretta returned it with a fmile, which I thought feemed to fay, " How are you obliged to me for it ?" The old man looked firft at me, then at her. I foon learnt that the divine girl's name was Margaretta, and that of the old man Hayton. After fome converfation,weftrained indeed
ÄO indeed by my confufion, and the ignorance of thofe with whom I converfed concern¬ ing me, I arofe to depart, prefented Mar¬ garetta with fome birds from my bag, and offered to make Hayton a compenfa tion for my ale; this he refufed to take, and I in¬ vited myfelf to come a fécond time, faying, that as I increafed my expence, he might become willing to accept a return from me. I often repeated my vifit, and found old Hayton cool, though civil, and Margaretta apparently referved through reftraint. I learnt that the old man had rented a fmall farm fome years ago in the village in which he flill lived, and that his onlv fon's extra- vagance had driven him to difficulties; that this fon had fmce gone, in a very low capa¬ city, into the army; and that Hayton, at the expiration of the leafe of his farm, which had been ended about four years, had refufed to renew it, being rendered unable by the forrows that had oppreffed him for undergoing the requifite labour of fuperintending it, and that he had accord¬ ingly
21
ingly fold off his flock, and retired with Margaretta upon the fmall remains of pro¬ perty he poffeffed. About two months after my firfl vifit— and I never ventured to call above once in a fortnight—I went one day and happened to find Margaretta at home alone : I had long carried about w r irh me a trinket of value, which I wifhed to prefent to her, but had hefitated on what plea to do it ; and now, on our being alone, I took ît from my pocket, and aiked her to wear it for my fake. " What am I to call it," faid fhe, " to my father ?" I anfwered, ei The gift of a friend, who confiders himfelf under obligations to you and your father, which he knows not how otherwife to re¬ pay." She courtfeyed with a fmile, and hung it round her neck. 1 fat that dav at the cottage longer than I had ever done before, and at parting fliook hands with Margaretta for the firft time. Havincr touched the hand of Margaretta, I felt the glow oi her palm upon mine i my fingers ftill tingled as if her's were tenderly draw¬ ing
(È* A/M îng over them in the parting of our hands, and the fire of love burnt ftronger than ever in my breaft. The next time I went, Hayton was alone in the kitchen, from accident I fuppofed on entering, but the gravenefs of his deportment feemed in a very few moments to explain to me that it was from defign Margaretta was not pre¬ fent, I foon enquired for her, and the old man anfwered, <c She is very well ; I have a meffage to you, fir, from her; ihe re- quefts that you will do her the favour of taking back this trinket, with which you prefented her laft week." I flared as he held it out to me, undetermined what I ought to fay ; he continued, on feeing me filent, " Do not think it any difrefped, fir, of Margaretta, that flie does not wear it ; it was I who requefted that flie would not."—" What could be your reafon ?" I aiked. " Sir," replied Hayton, < f the dif¬ tance at which Margaretta ftands from you in point of fituation—for I know you, fir— muft make her appear either fooliflily arro¬ gant or mercenarily weak while flie wears this ;
/U ij this ; flie received it unguardedly, and de¬ fired I would point out to you her convic¬ tion of the error flie had committed."— " Indeed," I returned, confcious of my own juftifiable intentions, yet feeling it incon- fiftent with the plan I had laid down for my condu6t during the life of my father to explain them, ff indeed it was no error." Hayton looked at me as uncertain of what I meant, then faid, " There can be no er¬ ror in her not wearing it." I found he looked upon me with fufpicion, yet ftrove to be delicate in expreffmg that he faw my condud in an improper light, whilft he feemed to confider it right in himfelf to give me a hint that diihonourablc inten¬ tions would not be encouraged by him, and that he had no thought of my entertaining any other. " Is Margaretta going to be married?" I faid, after a paufe. f% I wiih flie was well married," replied Hayton, ftill continuing his voice of diftruft towards me. " I wiih ihe was from my foul !" exclaimed I; and, ftarting up, wifhed Hayton good- morning, and left the houfe ; I could not bear
S·* bear to flay longer, after my feelings had thus been put to the teft. Days and nights after this converfation I paffed in refledion and irrefolution what fteps to take in order to fecure Margaretta as mine, and ftill avoid wounding the proud heart of my father. For one whole month uncertainty how to ad kept me front vifit¬ ing Hayton's cottage ; at the expiration of that time I went : I fonnd the door locked ; I knocked with my whip, the little boy whom Margaretta had held by the hand the firft time of my feeing her opened the door, and having called out, " Nobody at home," fliut it again, witiiout waiting my reply. I rode up to the window, nobody -was to be feen ; a field encircled the little garden, and I could not gain a view of İt from the road. A debate arofe in my mind whether what the child faid was the truth or a polite way of refufing me admittance : I could not forbear deciding on the latter : 1 refolved, however, to make another ex¬ periment before I drew my ultimate con¬ clufion. I accordingly, after fome days, went
went again, but not without fuffering the time which had ufualiy paffed between my vifits to have elapfed ; I knocked at the door as before, but a repeated fummons brought no one to anfwer it. I confidered, as I fat upon my horfe before it, that it was poffible they might both be from home j but ftill I could not help fearing that was not the Caufe of my being kept on the outfide. After fome time I rode dejededly away : I was too much abforbed in difagreeable thought to guide my horfe, and I didnot per¬ ceive that he had flrayed out of the road, till a gate which opened into a field flopping him, roufed me to recolledion, and fhovved me where I was. I looked round me, and per¬ ceiving the village ileeple at a little dif¬ tance, I inftantly knew whither I had ftray- ed» and turned round my horfe's head, i had the green to crofs in order to gain the right road, and as I came upon it I faw Margaretta about a hundred yards from Hayton's dwelling. I rode up to her in an inftant : « How do you do, Margaretta ?" I faid ; i( I hope you are very well : 1 have vol, τ. ν been ·
been unfortunate in not finding you or ??? father at home the two lafl times I have called."—* c No, we were not at home," replied Margaretta, and continued to move towards the cottage. " Shall 1 find your father at home now ?" I afked. " No, fir," flie anfwered, and accelerated her pace. Σ continued to ride by her fide : " I fuppofe you mean, that he had rather I did not come to his houfe," I returned. She was unprepared for this remark, indeed fhe feemed to have been agitated by our meet¬ ing, and faid, " Much rather, fir."—" Good God, Margaretta !" I faid, " what fears can he have on my account ?" She quickened her walk into a run. I ftill continued by her fide, and added, cf Pray tell me, if you know, what fears he has on my account." " They are not," fhe faid, tt on your ------" and then, from want of breath or a fudden recolledion, flie ftopped, iC Not on what?" I aiked. A blufli which rofe on her cheeks anfwered for her, that they were on her account ; and, as if mortified by this filent confeffion, of which flie was fully confcious, yet
27
vet had not been able to avoid making, flie cried, tC Pray, fir, do not follow me." I doubt I fliould not have obeyed her, liad not chance worked in favour of my com- pliance ; a bird at that moment flew from the hedge, my horfe was furprifed by it, and ftarted out of the road ; while I was regaining it, Margaretta had entered the cottage. í duril not follow her ; I felt a reverence for her virtues and the anxiety of ihe old man, vvhich told me 1 was not au¬ thorifed to difturb their peace by my pre¬ fence, till I thought myfelf at liberty' to fpeak freely to them of my intentions. Perhaps it was the impreflion that Marga- retta's confufion haci on me, that rendered me thus conliderate at that moment ; or it might be fonie one other of the inexpli¬ cable impulfes to vvhich man is fubjed, that rendered me fo entirely placid and fa¬ tisfied ; for I returned home with as great compofure as if I had been received at the houfe of old Hayton in the quality of h U daughter's intended hufband, and that no earthly power could have forbad .our union. ? 2 I be-
528 I believe—and it is an extreme pieafure to me to believe-—that my fenfations arofe from the additional certainty her innocent timi¬ dity had given me, at our accidental meet¬ ing, of her virtue. But thefe fenfations, ftrong and pleafant as they for fome time were, gave way at length to the defire of feeing Margaretta : í had numberlefis an¬ xieties on her account, and as many on the fcore of my own happinefs ; I feared parti¬ cularly that Margaretta, ignorant of my in¬ tentions, fhouid form any connedion which might for ever cut me off from being bleff¬ ed by poflefling her. Still I could not per¬ fuade myfelf that I fliould be ading as it became me to ad during the lifetime of Sir Edmund, if 1 now avowed my heart to Manraretta; nor was l t ntirelv free from apprehenfion that if I did fo, and the know¬ ledge of what í h' d done reached the ears of my father, he would not nnd fome means of depriving me for ever of my dear- eft wiih in life. For the two fucceeding months I conftrained m\felf not to ap¬ proach the green : I accidentally met with a far-
'J4
mer in the courfe of the time, who confirm¬ ed to me the little hiftory of Hayton, which i had before heard from himfelf, and eafed me on another point vvhich had caufed me fonie thought—(for of what, concerning the woman he loves, will not a man fituated as I am think?; —that the boy whom i had feen with Margaretta was the child of a poor widow in rhe neighbourhood, lo whom ihe was extremely kind: indeed, his account of her univerfal benevolence, as far as her means extended, was fuch as could not fail to give her charader weight with thofe who were moft indifferent to her. Lafl week 1 rode over the green, I paffed clofe to the houfe, but had not courage to afk admittance, and I faw neither Margaretta nor her fatber. Thus iland my affairs at this moment : am not I ri srh t in refolvinír that Margen etta ihall be my wife r Virtue ? falfe, or Margaretta m u it make me hap¬ py ; but the fear alone of lofing her, if I fliall ever have caufe for fuch fear, ihall tempt me to conceal my fentiments while Sir Edmund lives. Now tell me, my friend, c j have
30 have I not determined to ad with juftice to myfelf; and to my father with the coniide¬ ration due from a fon to his parent ? I long to hear from you ; the approbation of tlie friend we efteem, adds an ineft finable weight to whatever we have propofed to ourfelves as the right. 1 pity jour fituation, and fincerely wifli you were releafed from it ; but I commend you extremely for remaining in İr, diffonant as it is to your feelings, till you can be freed fiom it with honour to joui felf in the opi¬ nion of the world. How vaft a trad of fea divides usi A rumour of approaching peace has been fome time whifpered about ; may it prove true, that I mav once more enjoy the convcrfa- tion of my Seymour ! How much could I fay if prefent with you, which the confined intercourfe of paper will not allow to be faid ! yet I will not repine ; 1 am infinitely thankful for the invention which permits us to hold intercourfe at all ; without it, we were dead to each other. Write as long a letter as your time wili allow you to do ; give
nive vour opinion freely ; be in this point a-> you have often proved yourfelf on many other occafions, the true friend oi, Yours, moil fincerely, &c. Charles Melford.
LETTER IV. Major Seymour to Charles Me f ord, Ejìjuirc. MY DEAR CHARLES, S Albany. ÍNCE I wrote to you laft, I have been abfent from this place on feveral excurfions. To-day, on my return to it, it gave me in¬ finite fatisfadion to find that a letter, the fuperfcription of which I knew to be your hand-writing, was awaiting mv arrival ; it had however lain at General R——'s only fmce yefterday morning. I have read your account with the atten¬ tion which the fubjed requires: I think you, Charles, indubitably right in deter- c 4 mining
on
mining to fcìcQ. the partner of your life for the quali tics which flie may poffefs for making you happy, -rather than for making you great. I alfo much approve the condud you have marked out to yourfelf to fuftain towards your father: he is defcending fail into the vale of life ; and it becomes vou, as far as you are able without injuring the peace of * your own mind, to make his few r remaining years thofe of tranquillity. Nothing could give me more pieafure than to hear that vou had refolved never to marrv from inte- m/ m refted views ; it is a rock on wbich happi¬ nefs is ufualiy wrecked : but forget not, at the fame time, that it is very poflible for romantic attachments to abate in their ardour, for marriage to open the eyes which love has blinded, and for clouds to darken the Arcadian profped of unions founded only on perfonal attachments. You as yet feem to know but little of Margarctta your¬ felf; I can know ftill lefs ; you muft, there¬ fore, not be difpleafed at my warning you to be certain that flie poffeffes the qualities you require to find in her, before you make advances
S3 advanees to her heart, from which you might think yourfelf not juflified to recede, if ever you found your expectations..de¬ ceived. Charles, I have often admonifhed you on one point in your condud, which I muft here repeat : your heart is good, per¬ fectly free from intentional error, and often the promoter of material benefit ; but ??? are-always .too fanguine in. your expecta¬ tions, too enthufiaftic in your approbations, and too certain of events turning ■ out/, as you have formed them in your own mind : yonr difpofition alio is rather volatile ; I do not mean to acctife you of changing your opinion írom wilful caprice, but too often 5 if the contrary.of any idea, in, fupport of vvhich you have before been ftreiiiious, ap¬ pears to you for a moment in a pleafing light, tlie quick compofition of your mind caufes you immediately to fee it with ap¬ probation, and adopt it with enthufiafm^ as the right. Your undcrftandin« is too good to require of me to point put'to-you how your temper, thus confidered, might become the enemy of your heart, in-your 'c- 5 plan
34 plan of future happinefs. This only foible of your mind--*4his too great quicknefs ot determination, I faw with pieafure had be¬ gun to abate when we parted ; I wifh the time I have been abfent from you may have entirely removed it. Let me advife you to confidef again and again, before ??? determine, at leaft in the knowledge ot any one but your own heart, to make Marga¬ retta your wife. If you propofe to your¬ felf a domeftic life of retirement, you are to confider whether flie, whofe education cannot have been equally liberal with your own, will, even with the inftrudions you may be able to give her, become the com¬ panion you would feled for fuch retire¬ ment If you purpofe introducing her into the gay circles of polifhed life, you fliould equally confider whether flie is calculated -to appear in the light it would pleafe you to have Sir Charles Meiford's lady confidered. I look upon the facrifices made to rank with as much contempt as you can do : inequa¬ lity of birth is certainly immaterial to the happinefs of the man who has fufficient ftrength
O l
irength of mind to place his hapfmiefs on me fole objed who is capable of affording it to him, and to difregard the fleers of the world ; but if he is not prepared to do that, then I recommend an equality of ftations to thofe who join in the marriage ftate, for the world is always moft ready to attempt wounding the feelings of thofe whom it ought moil to proted. They at whom the world fneer, are always the eminent in per¬ fon or virtue, and particularly tlie pofleflors of a pleafing, artlefs iimpliciiy ; becaufe it cannot bear to fee its afled a tion of amiable qualities unconfcioufly outdone by nature. ReKc'l well on ail thefe points; and when you have refleded upon them, di fin i fs them for a few months from jour thoughts; and on refuming them at the expiration of auy fixed period, examine attentively whether you think exadly the finne upon them as you did when you firft began to confider them ; and then let the reply of your con¬ feience determine vou how to ad with Margaretta, It gives me great pieafure to learn that ? 6 you
86 you werf ???> it would afford me a great¬ er fatisfadion to }cnow that you were happy in the w$y you defire to be, but caution alone can promote your wifh with any cer¬ tainty of its permanency. Farewel, my dear Charles, prefent my refpeds to Sir Edmund Melford, and beliçve me, with unfeigned truth, Yours, &c. George Seymour. LETTER V, Charles Melford, E fquire s to Major Seymour. IMelrord-hoüfc. Again write, my dear friend, without waiting for your anfwer to my lafl ; I have fo much to tell you, that I cannot be filent. Margaretta, the divine Margaretta, is — but you fliall hear it regularly. When I wrote to you lafl, I had not feen Margaretta for two months; the heart
37 heart of love is not formed to endure a voluntary abfence ; and rather than live without feeing her,, I refolved to go and impart in fecrecy to her father my intention of making her my wife at the death of Sir Edmund. What particularly urged me to this refolution, was my fear of her forming any engagement which might utterly de¬ ftroy my hopes ; and I dürft not hazard the employing of any fpy upon her condud, left a fufpicion of my own, ihould be carried to my father. The .weather was too fultry towards the end of the hot month of Auguft to admit of long rponiin 0 rides, accordingly, knowing my father to be very fhortly going on a vifit of two days and a night to a neighbouring baronet, í intended to wait the opportunity of his abfence for riding to the green. When the time came for Sir Edmund's departure, I feigned a flight indifpofition, which excuf- ed me from accompanying him : late in the afternoon I mounted my horfe, and foon arived before the cottage of old Hay- ton i the door w r as partly open, Z dif- moimted,
3$ mouhted, hung my 1 bridle over fome rails which encircled a little garden in front of the cottage, and went in. There was nobodyin the kitchen ; nobody to be feen through the glafs door of the liftle parlour ; I lifted the latch tö gò into the garden, a gentle ftep founded at that inftant over my head, and the voice of Margaretta aiked from the top of the flairs, " Who is thete ?" I told her'; fhe advanced in filence almoft to the bottom of the flairs, then faid, "'Pray, fir, gó away, my father'rs very ill." Her eyes were fwelled vvith weeping. if Very ill, Margaretta ! " I exclaimed. " Very ill—dying," flie anfwered, and her tears burft forth afre fli. t( I conjure you to let me fee him," I faid with an earneft nefs that feemed to furprife her. t( indeed, fir, you muft not l' flie replied— " you cannot fee him."—** 1 befeech you to entreat that I may fee him, if it be but fox one inftant." í moved towards the flairs, and flie receded, apparently more to avoid me, than for the purpofe of delivering my meffage. She difappeared for a few mi¬ nutes,
39 ñutes, then returned writh thefe words: " My father, fir, fays, your former vifits were againft his inclination, and that he be^s you will not difturb him at this mo¬ ment.''-" Tell him," I cried, " that I come to atone for whatever may have ap¬ peared impropriety in my condud, and that if the power of making a fellow-crea¬ ture happy can footh his hour of diffolu- tion, he will not refufe to fee me," Mar¬ garetta hefitated what to do ; 1 relieved her by exclaiming, " For God's fake tell him fo ?" She returned to the chamber. Scarce¬ ly had fhe entered it, before flie ihrieked, and I could no longer refrain from running up flairs. ** What—is the matter ?" I would have faid, but Margaretta under¬ ftood my queftion, and interrupted me by crying out, " One of his fits is come on again, he may now be in the agonies of death."—" Have you no afliftance at hand?" I afked. u The furgeon was to have called about this time," fhe anfwered ; and turning her face to die bed, continued, " Oh my father is dying ! I'll run and fetch him ;"
40 him :"—the furgeon 1 fuppofe fhe meant. and ran down flairs with a precipitancy expreifive of her painful feelings. I ad¬ vanced towards the bed ; in it lay Hayton with his eyes Clofed, and his jaws expanded, while inward convulfions w r ere writhing every part of his frame. I ftood by hih Ude for fome moments ignorant how to ad, and Wondering at my own peculiar fitua¬ tion. Prefently, with an effort appai ently made to gain breath, he raifed h imk if nafti ly ln the bed, and as haftily funk down again upon his pillow ; his eyes opened flow ìy, and he turned them towards me; fenfe w?s not entirely fled, for fomething like ftHpr.fe darted into them when* he beheld n*v. I threw myfelf almoft immediately upon my knees, and fiiid;, ct í beg of you to hear me with compofure." lie endeavoured to fpeak, but his utterance was indiitind. I id interrupted him in what I could not under¬ ftand by faying, " I come to entreat of you the lovely Margaretta for niy wife ; oh tell me I have your permiflion to make her mine ?" Hayton ufed a violent exeition to anfwer
41 anfwer me, but could not articulate a fin- ^le found. tf If you cannot fpeak, fignify ;to me that I have your confent," I cried : Hayton's eyes no longer locked on me, they were fixed, and he lay motionlefs. Marga- retta's returning ftep was now on the flairs ; almoft brcathlefs flie entered the chamber, and flew towards the bed. " The furgeon is not at home," flie faid, and leant for Tupport againft one of the polls. About a minute paffed in filence, during which Margaretta faw I was kneeling, but did not fpeak. Hayton made another effort to raife himfelf in the bed, and with a groan funk down to rife no more ; his fpirit fled within a few moments. Margaretta fell fenfelefs upon the corpfe. What a time was this for a man who felt as 1 did ! reverence, pity, and joy, mingled fo ftrangely in my heart that they deprived røe of ali power. When Margaretta began to revive, it firft occurred to me to offer her fome water which ftood upon the table ; fhe drank of ir, and her tears again flowed. " Have you no female friend," 1 faid, " whom you can
4í can call in to your affiftance?"—" Yes," flie replied, tS there is a poor woman at the next cottage; ihe had but juft left me, when you came in."— " I'll fetch her to you," I anfwered. A decent looking wo¬ man, who was the perfon that flie had fpoken of, and the widow whom I men¬ tioned to you in one of my letters, came in at that inftant. A mournful filence again enfued; I broke it by faying, <t Have j=ou no friends or relations to go to ? you muft leave this houfe."— <e No, no," flie replied, " not while------" and flie fixed her eyes on the dead body. I repeated the queftion 1 had advanced to Margaretta to the woman, and found that flie knew no one, upon whom fhe had claims either of affinity or friendfliip. * ( She has nobody at all be* longing to her that I know of," faid the woman, " but her brother, and he's a fol¬ dier, and gone nobody knows whither."—* ** She has one friend prefent," cried I, " who will never defert her : will not you acknowledge me as your friend, Marga¬ retta?" I afked. " Sir," faid íbe, refum¬ ing
43 ing a little compofure as fhe fpoke, " I am very able to fupport myfelf; I am ftrong, and can, and will work, rather than dif- obey him who can no longer advife me for my good : he has already warned me acrainft receiving any favours from you." — tC He did not know me then," I replied, " in the light I ought to have ihewn myfelf to him long ago, but he did before he died, for 1 have promifed myfelf to him as your moil facred friend. Permit me," I conti¬ nued, <c to find you an afylum poflefling the comforts, and free from the cares of life."—" Oh !" cried Margaretta, iC before the body of my poor father is cold in death, I already find myfelf expofed to thofe fnares to vvhich he forefaw my unproteded ftate would leave me open !" She again funk upon the bed, and the tears ftreamed down her cheeks. " By Heaven !" I exclaimed, taking her hand, and preffing it in the energy of my feelings both for her and my¬ felf, " you do me injuftice in your opinion of my heart ; 1 fwear by my hopes of eter¬ nal happinefs, that I with only to fupply to
44 to you the place-of him who is no longer able to proted you -,—ίο become your friend." Had I faid huiband, Seymour, you may imagine I had more eafily con¬ vinced her of my honour, but I feared, as flic knew my rank in life, that it might only add to her diftruft of me ; and another rea¬ fon for mv not declarincr mvfelf was the prefence of the woman : flie turned from me I thought—I hoped, half convinced of my integrity. After fome time, I perfuad¬ ed her to leave the body of her father, and flie did not withdraw her arm as I placed it through mine to lead her down the ftairs. On the firft agony of her grief beginning to fubfide, í again urged her to the acceptance of my protedion: fhe feemed to dread equally the being caft unproteded upon the w'orld, and the relying for defence Irom it upon the man whofe unexplained condud had made him fall under the fuf¬ picion of her father. ct How can í believe you are really my friend t" flie faid ; Ct I fee no motive by which you can have been aduated to become fo io one who was a few
45 few months ago an utter ftranger to you.*'—- α Has your youth/' I returned, <t even in the feciufion in which you have lived, al¬ ready formed fo bad an opinion of men, that you think no heart warmed by huma¬ nity is to be found in the world?"—" I have learnt enough," ihe replied, " to know that fome men are treacherous."— " But it muft be unjuft in you," I faid, u to condemn all upon that knowledge." She did not anfwer me. u Come to my cottage for the night and deep there, pray do," faid the woman. Margaretia refufed to leave the houfe that contained her fa¬ ther. I could only rétied upon Marga- retta, not what were beft to be done for her, while in her prefence, and 1 therefore went out upon the green. I walked forne time but could form no plan that pleafed me; I called out the woman, and queftioned her ??? i n whether ihe did not know of any friend, any acquaintance, that old Hayfon had poffeffed. She told me- that nobody had ever come to his cottage except a Mrs. Wallace who lived about four miles off. The
46 The acquaintance of old Hayton with Mrs. W 7 allace was very fatisfadory to me. Mrs. Wallace is the widow of a farmer who had rented land of my father; at her huf¬ band's death fhe retired from bufinefs, and now lives in a comfortable houfe which had been built for her by Mr. Wallace. As Sir Edmund was to return on the following day to Melford-houfe, I confidered that I ought to lofe no time in placing Margaretta in a fatisfadory fituation ; I accordingly mounted my horfe, and did not flop till J reached the houfe of Mrs. Wallace. The evening was far advanced, and I found her at fupper; flic rofe to receive me, and, ?? was ufual with her, expreffed much piea¬ fure at feeing me. I had alwajs been much more intimate at the houfe of Airs. Wallace than my father would have fuffered me ίο be, had he known it : fhe was the mother of an only fon, who was very often in my youth the companion of my fports in the field ; at his father's death he went into the army, and is now in America. 1 i mme- diately afked her if flie knew Hayton ; flie anfwered
47 me that he was an old friend of her de· ceafed huiband, and that ihe refpeded him as an honeft man who had been unfortunate in the world. I informed her that accident had introduced me to him and his daughter when I was one day out fhooting, and had flopped at their cottage to requeft a draught of ale : I then proceeded to tell her the occurrence of the prefent evening; and flie did not give me time to mention in y compaflion for the orphan Margaretta, for on hearing of Hayton's death, flie diredly exclaimed, " Wbat will become of his girl, poor helplefs creature !" Perceiving the heart of Mrs. Wallace already touched with pity, I without hefitation informed her that i meant to become the friend of Margaretta. " Blefs you for a good crea¬ ture l* fhe exclaimed ; " you have twice the goodnefs of Sir Edmund, I muft fay it, and all the'humility of an angel to fweeten i* with." I was pleafed only with this com¬ pliment at the expence of my father fo far as í imagined that by ihowing Mrs. Wal¬ lace's approbation of my pity for Marga¬ retta,
??? retta, it alfo indicated that fhe would affift me in any plan for promoting her comfort. Not to dwell upon unneceffary particulars, a very gentle hint from me, that I wifhed the houfe of Mrs. Wallace to become her afylum, drew from the old woman a whole train of arrangements for her future happi¬ nefs. Oh, Seymour, at the moment when the heart of the worthy Mrs. Wallace was expanded Ín good-wull towards Margaretta, and the tears of compaffion flood in her eyes, I knew not whether it would be cul¬ pable or meritorious in me to applaud her exquifite feelings ; my own heart whifpered to me at that moment, and I chilled upon the refledion, this poor wddow, with no more than a fufficiency for herfelf, is will¬ ing to íhare what fhe does poffefs with the child of diftrefs ; how differently would my father, deluged in wealth, ad towards this humble-born child of virtue ! I did not chill upon this part of my refledion, but I did, when the prefent brought into my mind the hereafter f I repeated to Mrs. Wallace, again and again, that wherever Marga-
40 Margaretta was placed, her neceflities and comforts were alike to be fupplied from niy purfe : but to this aífurance Mrs. Wal¬ lace feemed quite inattentive; it was to foothing the immediate diftrefs of the poor child, as flie termed Margaretta, that all her thoughts were turned. It was at length agreed between us, that I ihould return home for that night, and call again upon Mrs. Wallace the next morning by fix o'clock, againft which time flie promifed the would have her little cart ready, and ride with me to the green. I went to bed but for a very few hours, and flept fcarce¬ ly one. Earlier than the appointed hour 1 reached the houfe of Mrs. Wallace ; flie was, however, prepared to receive me, and we fet out together. We found Marga¬ retta juft rifen, and, as her heavy eyes be¬ fpoke, from a ileeplefs bed ; they fparkled faintly with pieafure on beholding Mrs. Wal¬ lace : the good woman embraced her, fat down by her, took her hand in her's, and began to fouth her. Mrs. Wallace had been cfteemed by Hay ton, and Mrs, Wal- vol. i. a lace
lace now fpoke of me to Margaretta h: terms of the higheft refped ; flie heard, antl her doubts refpeding me immediately ap¬ peared to vanifli : was not this a proof ol an excellent, a feeling heart? When flie faw me efteemed by her deceafed father's friend, flie ceafed to fear me. I perceive my paper is nearly full, fuffice it then for me to add, that, upon Marga- retta's refuting to leave the body of her fa¬ ther till after his interment, Mrs. Wallace confented to remain with her till that cere¬ mony had taken place ; that I vifited her as frequently as I could leave my father's houfe without giving any fufpicion of my having an engagement of the moment I really had; and that, when old Hayton was buried, Margaretta went home with Mrs. « Wallace, thankful for the protedrefs ihe had found in her: flie removed to the houfe of Mrs. Wallace onlv yefterday, thus I have not feen her fince ihe has been there, i fliall write to you again Immediately on mv receiving a letter from j r ou. Oh, how i biefs Heaven for the protedion it has en¬ abled
5\ ablcd me to fliow to this tender bîoflbm of innocence and virtue î Adieu : envy me I am fure you will not ; feel therefore with your moil fincere friend, &:c. Cmarlls Melford.
LETTER VI. Charles Melford, E fquire, to Major Seymour. MY DEAR FRIEND, ?* y Aíclíutd-houfc. \ OUR letter dated from Albany, and received yefterday evening, now lies before me. Seymour, 1 have followed the advice it contains before I knew you had given it io me; I have refolved, in juftice to ????- garetta, not to let her know me in any oilier charader than that of friend. It is not that I doubt the liability of my own mind to the fupreme happinefs which an honourable union with her promifes me; on this point 1 can never change; it is on the u '2 follow-
, ? >?
following confiderations that'I refolve to keep my intentions itili fecret from her and Mrs. Wallace.—Margaretta has already be¬ gun to think me really her friend, and to efteem me as fuch : Mrs. Wallace, whilft flie believes me only aduated by a bene¬ volent heart in my condud towards Mar¬ garetta, will not fuffer Sir Edmund to gain a knowledge of my charity, left he fliould prevent its continuance ; and, perhaps, if ihe knew that I meant to make her here¬ after the partner of my fortunes, flie might not think herfelf juftified in being a party concerned in hiding my condud fiom th« eyes of Sir Edmund. Befides, I promife myfelf ultimately an exceflive pieafure from keeping my real intentions fecret, till I cannot infult any one by their open decla¬ ration. Margaretta has already begun to (how herfelf grateful : is it not poffible, George, nay very probable, that a heart already thus foftened towards one particu¬ lar objedj may, as the attentions of that objed increafe, feel for him a tenderer paf¬ fion than gratitude ? : If fhe does, her obli¬ gations
gations to hhn, her knowledge of his rank in the world, and her own inferiority qi birth, will doubtlefs confine it a prifoner to her breaft : but then how will it rankle in its captive fiate ! My own heart tells me how it will prove the tyrant of its prifon; and my own heart inftrucls me by anticipa¬ tion, what will be the extatic tranfport of mutual confeffion. I argue too from this imprifonment of love, a happy as vvell as a delightful end : cuftom will have taught it to revere the fpot of its confinement, and it will never totally defert the hearts vvhcre it has been bred and nouriflied. 1 have begun to lend Margaretta books, and to inftruct her how to read with ad¬ vantage to herfelf; and flie proves to mc more forciblv every dav, tliat I was not deceived in thinking, that eyes hke hers muft hold intelligence with a mind of ex- treme capability. Mrs. Wallace it delighted with the fo¬ ciety Margaretta affords her: vvith what CKquifitc delicacy does flie perform every litt|e attention towards her boiiofs, that n 3 may
Λ 4 rua ν ί», iì^y way befpcak her thaiikfuhieh ?c>r her protvéìion ' fiav ton fubiifled on a ilender annuity, d;ri\ecl to him from a fum of money he had funk on becoming in¬ capable of attending to bufinefs; it, of couife, dies vvith him, and a few guinea* are all the world! ν ???????? of Mai garet ta. A letter, or rather a fmall packet, ha^ been found in a drawer fince his deceafe, dired¬ ed, it To be given to his fon by Margarctta, if flie fliould ever fee him again ; and, in cafe of her learning his death, to be opened by herfelf." Margaretta imagines it to be the title-deeds relating to two acres of land which were once dïfputed for in law by old Hayton, in light of his wife, who he thought was the heir to them, and which could not, as flic fays, be decided till a man who has been fome years gone to the Eaft indies, and not heard of fince, can be found. Mai'iiaiMta knows not vvhcre to addrefs her brother Thomas: his tlifpoiuion was from his boyhood wild and extrava¬ gant ; he boie his father's checks upon luh idlcnefs with ill-humour, and without a- mendment ;
?) j mend ment; andat laft^ in confequence of a difpute between them, he cnlifled into a marching regiment then recruiting at Oak¬ ham, whither he w a Iked for the purpofe : Iih father did not know for fo.ne days what was become of him, and when he learnt this intelligence, he could not find out the number of the regiment, nor the name of the fergeant who had enliftcd him. The recruiting party came to the town for the day of the fair only. It is now five years ago, and he has never been heard of by them fince. If he continues worthlefs, he is better at a diftance from his fifter ; if he ever returns reclaimed, his fituation ihall be rendered comfortable to him. Mrs. Waiiace warns me, to fpeak in her language, " not to give Margaretta too much learning, as there is no knowinir what flie mav eome lo, if anv thin«; ihould happen to me." I anfwer her, ~ that a good education cannot be an ill flore in any condition of life." She replies, " I dare fay your honour will do all for the heft." I do not tell Mrs. Wallace or Mar- n 4 garetta
·>ο gare«ta io, but 1 have done nil ¡or the heft, as f«>r as lies in my ability; for, in cafe of my death happening the next moment to this ín which I am now writing, I have placed the object of my love far above want. í often read with her: how exqui¬ tte is it to fee the comprehension of fub~ jedb, whofc truth and force flie feels on having them explained to her, firft beam on her mind î Seymour, flie poflefles the ftrongeft proof of fenfe : the knowledge flie acquires gives her neither felfconceit nor vanity upon the parts flie poflefles ; ihe is pleafed and thankful that every day is made to add to her flore of knowledge: but flie fees that the more flie learns, the more is ftili left for her to acquire. She approaches me with an opennefs and modeft confidence of manner, which be fpeak her alike pleafed with my friendfliip, grateful for my bene¬ fits, and at the fame lime confcious that flic fliould difplcafe me by humiliating herfelf before me. When a few moments alone with her the other day, I took an opportu¬ nity to fay, " Are you not now convinced, Alarga-
?/
Margaretta, that I never had an evil defign towards you ?" She hefitated an inîlant, and then replied, " Should you have con¬ ceived fo well of mc, as I believe you now do, if I had trufted myfelf without caution to a young ftranger like yourfelf?" I could only fmile approbation to her queftion ; if I had fpoken, 1 had betrayed myfelf. She has now been two months in habits of growing intimacy with me, but I cannot bring her to throw off a certain degree of refped, with which flic uniformly treats me : I aik her to call me Charles ; fhe in- fifts on giving me no other appellation than Mr. Melford. I enquired of her this morn¬ ing, " why fhe continued refolute in giving me this formal title ?" She anfwered me, l< that, in her opinion, the difference of our fituations required it of her."—" Have you forgot," I replied, " what I have faid to you on the natural equality of all worthy members of the community ?"—" There is a cafual dîftindion between us," flie return^ ed, « for which my heart points out to me ρ 5 that
58 that refped is due : I owe you the fub¬ miflion of gratitude." After thefe proofs of excellence, Seymour, can 1 be deceived in my choice of happinefs ?—Blufli, ye cold minds of refinement, at the natural fenfe, not only felt but exercifed, by this heart of ruftic virtue !—I am warm myfelf upon the fubjed on which I am writing, and run out into a firing of examples of the worth of my Margaretta, without confider¬ ing that you cannot read, as 1 write them, with a foul on fire. Sir Edmund afked me the other daj% 01 Why I did not marry?" 1 evaded" the queftion; and he returned, tliat ' s he fup¬ pofed I was wife enough to fee there was- hardly any match in the kingdom worth my "feeking after." 1 bowed in return to what I knew I fliould pleafe him by ap¬ pealing to confider as a compliment paid to me by him, and the fubjed dropped. He defires me to return you his compli¬ ments, and to prefent jou with his good wiflies for jvur fafe return to Engrand ; in which
59 which hope I truft you will not doubt his being fervently joined by yours, with the mofl affedionate regard, &c. Charles Melhird.
LETTER VII. Major Seymour to Charles Melford, E/i¡. PEAR CHARLES, I New York. HAVE now two letters of j T ours unan- fvvered : a wound in the fword arm has prevented me the ability of writing to you ; and I was confcious that to employ a third perfon in our conefpondence would, on the contrary to being a fatisfadion to you, only unneceffarily raife your apprehenfions for me. As I am now again able to write to you, I need not fay that I am faft recover¬ ing from my wound ; my health has been impaired from the confinement occafioned n 6 me
60 me by the pain of my arm ; but that alfo is beginning now to improve fail. I think, whilft you have the feelings of a lover for Margaretta, you have aded to¬ wards her the part becoming a man who poffeffes your ability for befriending the un¬ proteded orphan. The infenfibility to dif¬ trefs in many of your rank of life, is not Jefs a refledion upon themfelves than upon the humanity of the country in which they live ; and thus confidered, as a flur which may fall generally upon the charader of íhe people, it becomes a juftice to himfelf, 'm every individual, to reprobate this hard- nefs of heart. There arc fome families of the firft eminence in England, I with piea¬ fure acknowledge, who make the children of afllidion their peculiar care ; amongft the number of thofe who are praifeworthy, it is but right to name you very particu¬ larly : I know the univerfal benevolence of jour heait, and upon that I applaud you; your condud towards Margaretta, fingiy confidered, had not drawn this eulogium from roe, becaufe, in that particular cafe, the
61 the end of ferving a fellow-creature is your own private happinefs. I am glad the light in which you now Hand to Margaretta will leave open to you fo good an opportunity for thoroughly invef- tigating your own heart: remember that you have promifed me you will ufe it; let not an unguarded moment cheat you out of your determination ; confider how dif¬ ferently, how uncomfortable jou would feel, if any hafty declaration were made by you, only to be repented, and the cold law of honour were to hold the place of your prefent rapturous feelings. There have been many men in the world hefore your time, and no doubt will conti¬ nue to be while the world exifts, who have poffefled changeable difpofitions, with lefs enthufiaftic tempers than yours ; but with the fanguine temper you poffefs, İt becomes you to be particularly careful in jthe forma¬ tion of engagements, becaufe what appears fo very exquifite to the firft fight, may not always have been very accurately confider¬ ed ; thus, on cool examination, it may be very
6 { 1 very likely to fall fliort of what it had pro* mifed to prove, as many objeds which, on being firfl viewed, promife little, on clofer examination rife in our efteem. While you are ading openly only the part of the friend, your condud will be right and honourable; but beware of fliow- ing yourfelf too foon to be the lover. If I have repeated to you any admonition wdiich my laft letter contained, impute it to my defire of your welfare: if I have faid too freely, that I have feen j'our mind ca¬ pable of being turned from its firmelt de¬ terminations, it is only in the hope that you will in future banifli inftability of fen¬ timent from your heart : you have good fenfe and good morals, and I do not wifli the world to have it in its power to judge of you as they are too apt to do in general— that thofe are defedive, where the parlions are volatile. I am fure you would not wil¬ lingly commit an error, therefore guard againft the appearance of it. My arm will not permit me to write any longer: farewel: if I have faid too much, which
63 which I hope I have not, impute it to the friendfliip of him who is really your moft fincere weli-wiflier, &x\ P. S. A letter direded Amply for me in this place, will I truft reach me, as my confinement caufes my ftation to be very generally know r n.
LETTER VHI, (War: es Mel/brd, E/Î/. to Major Seymour. ÍMeh'uid-huufe» MPOSSIBLE! my dear George, impof- fible ! that I fliould be difpleafed at the candour of your advice ; I am fenfible of tlie defeds in my temper of which you fpeak, but my attachment to Margaretta í truft wdll prove an infallible precedent for ?? adhering in future to my refolutions, or rather my not ading without due confide- ration. The impulfe of the moment ? allow
64 allow has often had too great weight w iti me, but in the time to come I will be more wary ; it is however no inconfiderable fatisfadion to me, that my faults have not been criminal, I have at leaft preferved my heart from felf-reproach; gallantry has been amongft my gentle errors, but al¬ though the fex have had extreme charms for me, I have never injured the hufband, nor infulted the ears of modefty. I have nothing new to tell you of Margaretta, but that flie improves in my efteem and in her own qualifications. I have lately been much lefs fond of company than I ufed to be, and have dedi¬ cated more than ever of my time to read¬ ing. I have begun, Seymour, to fee an error in my education, which has often oc¬ curred to me as being fuch, but which I have only within thefe few days been con¬ vinced to be fo : whatever I h .ve learnt of any country but my own, has been froirk books ; an education cannot be truly finiih¬ ed, nor all our ideas perfedly exact and liberal, unlefs they are formed from occular and
6:> and auricular obíervations on thofe fpots which give rife to them : I may know Paris is a large city, I may know tlie Apennines are a long trad of mountains covered vvith fnow ; but what more jufl ideas can I form of them, from the defcription of a perfon in whom it would liave amounted almoft a miracle for him to have beheld them with the fame feelings and under the fame im¬ preffion that I ihould do? Still more de· fedive muft be my opinions of the cuftoms, manners, and charaders of fuch men as I have not converfed with. I have always felt a kind of reverence for Italy, and longed to view its magnificent feenes of de¬ cayed fplendor, and prefent inimitable arti and I have now refolved, if my inclination is not thwarted by my father, to vifir it. Per¬ haps you will think this fudden refolution an example of the temper of whieli you complain, but I am fure you muft agree with me, that the inclination is a natural one, and that the life-time of my father muft be the moil eligible period for me to leave Margaretia. ' Yes, Seymour, I am refolved
66 refolved to impart to him my wifli, and at all events if his inclination is averfe to parting from me, I can but conform to it. No time is therefore tobe loft in my applica¬ tion; I wiih the idea had occurred to me foon¬ er ; 1 cannot recai the pail time, my only care therefore muft be not to let the future efcape me alfo. Sir Edmund is now alone in his room; I will go to him and learn the event of my inclination: wifh me fuccefs, I fliall, if I obtain his permiffion to fee this country of which I have formed fo high an upinion, wifli myfelf back againft your arrival here, if it is even before I have kiffed his holinefs's toe. I ihall continue my letter when I return from my father. Adieu for a while. Six o'dock ia the etenin^. ??, Seymour ! Sir Edmund is I fear now lying on the bed of death: I have expe¬ rienced a great fhock. Full of my project I went this morning to his dreffimg-room, where within thefe few years he has ufualiy fat alone till the hour of dinner ; conceive my
67 ?? furprife vvlien, on opening the door, the firil objed vvhich prefented itfelf to my fi#hr, was mv father fallen from his chair upon lhe floor, and his head retted on the marble hearth i I went to him, and endea- \oured to raife h*m ; he was unable himfelf 10 aifiil my effort : I rang the bell, his fer¬ vant obeyed tlu* fummons, and oar united ftrength lifted him from tlie ground, and laid him upon his bed. A paralytic ffroke had benumbed his limbs and deprived him of his fpeech. I immediately fent for the phyfician who has before attended him : on his arrival he did not hefitate to give me very flender hopes of his recovery. By the phyfician's order he was undrefled, and put into bed. No vifible alteration has taken piace in him fincc the firft of his attack : he is unable to f wallow, or at Jeail re fu fes to receive any nourifhment huo his throat. I fear much mvfilf for his recovei y, as this is the fécond ft roke he has fuffered. The letter I am writing muft be in Lon- don the day alter to-morrow, ï will how¬ ever
OS ever leave it unfealed till the morning, in cafe any change fliould take place. Morning. Sir Edmund continues exaOly the fame, motionlefs, and apparently infenfible ; the phyfician has ordered a blifter to be placed on his throat, as the laft refource. fare¬ wel : depend on being informed by me of any material alteration, and believe me Yours fincerely, &c, Charles Mel ford.
LETTER IX. Sir Charles Jl /vif ord to Major Seymour, DEAR GEORGE, SMdford-htTuft 1 IR Edmund is no more ! He expired on the following day to that on vvhich I latt addreffed you, and his remains were ycfler- day depofited in the family vault. I fliould have written to you earlier this account, but 1 was informed that no American mail would
69 would leave London till to-morrow at the foonelt. I cannot accufe my father of ever having been defedive to me in fuch condud as he thought conducive to my happinefs, within the pale of thofe ariftocratic principles by which alone, in his opinion, our rank in life could be fu ftained ; I therefore now forget his errors, and remember only his good qualities. Well, I am now Sir Charles Melford, Baronet, in the mouth of the world ; in my own appellation, a free agent. Do not you think, Seymour, that my firft concern will now be to make iMarq-a retta mv w ife ? I am not yet determined whether it will or not, hut I think it wdll not. Do not, 1 charge you, imagine that it has been poflible for any power in heaven or on earth to weaken my love for Margaretta; it is only that, when 1 once tafte the happinefs which is able to re ful t to me from her love, 1 may tafte it in perfedion and without interruption, if I fuffer the ardour of the attachment which I feel for Margaretta to fu per fede every other
70 other paffon at (his moment, and imn.cdi ately marry, think you not that it is ven poflible 1 fhall, after a time, become diffa- tisfied that I had not, before I married her, vifited thofe countries to fee which my in¬ clination fo ftrongly bends at this time ? Shall I not then, perhaps, flill wifli to go, and yet feel a reludancy to leave Marga¬ retta as my wife ? when to part from her for a time, while flie knows me only as a friend, would require but a comparatively flender effort. 1 lay down my pen for a while, to reflect again upon thi« perplexing topic of thought. Keen. Ir I wait ior your advice upon this fub¬ jed, 1 muft at leaft fu fler three months to pafb unoccupied in waiting its arrival ; in fix months half my curiofity would doubt¬ lefs be fatisfied, and in as many more J may be the happy huiband of Margaretta. Two weighty reafons at this moment pre fent themfelves to my imagination in fav ou: of my making my writhed-for tour : the firfi is, that, if Sir Edmund had lived a few monthb
TI months longer, I fliould doubtlefi» have gone abroad ; then why fhouid I now be prevent¬ ed the high gratification I promife myfelf that the journey will afford me, as the ob- ftacle to it exifts only in my own mind, Margaretta being ignorant of my intentions towards her ? The fécond reafon is ftiil more authoritative ; I mean the regard to decency, vvhich muft unavoidably delay my marriage at leaft half a year, were I to re¬ main the entire time in the kingdom. I anticipate much from the pleafures of refledion, if I make this agitated journey; I fliall then, Seymour, wlien we meet, have my ftory to tell, in balance to yours, of the novel feenes in which v/e have both been actors. Another inducement ftarts up at this moment ; againft my return you may be in England to witnefs my nuptials, you mav be the matrimonal father of my Mar- garetta. You fmile, methinks, and fay-, 4 * How eafilv arguments are found to 'srive colour to the point on which we are bent !" You fay too, ** This is his fanguine temper, his enthufiaftic fpirit has again broken out/' Do
7° Do not blame me yet, my friend ; if I do go, wait my return to chide mc : if my plan has unfcttled me, accufe me, hate me, place, if poflible, a bar to my ever poffeff· ing Margaretta ; but it will be my pride to compel you, by my fettled condud» to a confeffion of the good that has accrued to me, from juftifying my thirft of obtain¬ ing perfonal knowledge of a country whofc pail fame and prefent beauty has excited me to vifit it. I am determined that you fliall not aliege againft me want of confi- deration in the prefent inftance ; I will there¬ fore vifit Margaretta, and afterwards give it a couple of hours more thought in a walk through the wood. Seven o'clock. I au refolved : I go to Italy. Marga¬ retta has refolved me. I mentioned to her juft now my idea of travelling; and fhe anfwered me, " I judge by your manner of fpeaking it would give you a great deal of pieafure."—*' Yes, it would/' I faid.— ** Then I am fure you ought to go/* flie replied; * t you have a great right to allow yourfelf
7:i
yourfelf indulgences." I fuppofe flie meant as a recompenfe for what I had done for her : little did flie imagine how great a recompenfe I promife myfelf. As I have refolved to go, the fooner I fet out the better. How infinitely happy I now feel that I have ftudied the French and Italian languages with the attention which I have given to them. This will be the lafl letter I fliall write to you before I leave England: I fliall bo detained fome days upon bufinefs I have ?? tran fact with my fteward. If you think me wrong, be lenient to me in your reproof·. : remember jou have af¬ ferted yourfelf of me, that you believe my head and not my heart to be in fault, when I ad too haftily ; and remember, that this determination has not been taken without coniideration. 1 cannot be wronging Mar¬ garetta in leaving her for a time, becaufs fhe is unconfeious that flie poffeffes any other hold upon my heart than what is claimed by her friendlefs fituation ; and ab. fence will eventually be her friend, in add- vol. i. e ino·
74
ing, if poffible, to the paflion I already feci for her, againft my return. Oh, with what delight I anticipate our meeting, when Margaretta is —— But I fhall weary you with dwelling on the fame theme. Fare¬ wel, dear George. Dired your firft letter for me hither; my fteward will be ac¬ quainted whither to fend it after me. í fincerely hope this letter may find you per¬ fedly recovered from your wound. Once more farewel ; and believe me, Your affedionate friend, 8¿c. Charles Mejlford.
LETTER X. Sir Charles Melford to Major Seymour. T Calais. HE firft moment that is my own, after croffing the Channel, I dedicate to addreff¬ ing my friend. Oh, Seymour, at parting Margaretta dropped a tear ! As ihe wiped it
75
it off her cheek, flie thanked me for the generofity and friendfliip I had fhown to her. This was the meaning vvhich fhe gave it ; I could not forbear hoping it bore an¬ other, a tenderer one, and kiffed her cheek when I left her. Do you think flie faw what were my feelings ? I will not think upon it till a future timo. I have had a comfortable paffage from Dover : I fliall travel vvith comfort to my¬ felf, but without parade; one confidential fervant is the whole of my retinue. My landlord has juft been into my room, to atk me a great many unneceffary queftions, in a very polite and cringing tone; and he informs me, that the preliminaries of peace are faid to be adually figned. I muft have better authority for this intelligence, before I flat- ter myfelf that you are near obtaining per¬ miflion for returning to England. I con- ? ? fider it a tribute due to your friendfliip to inform you immediately of my arrival in this kingdom; but you mufl not exped me to protrad my letter to any great length. I have fcarcely flept íince I left Meltord- £ 2 houfe;
76* houfe; it is now midnight, and I have paffed the better half of the pail day on board the packet, in no very enviable ftate of health ; can you be furprifed then that the idea of my bed is inviting? Gooff night, dear George, and believe me with fincerity, Your, 8zc. Charles Mel korb. P. S. The report of peace is very preva¬ lent, and feems to gain univerfal credit ; a French officer juft now told me, that he had no doubt of its being confirmed. I congratulate you moil fincerely upon the event. I ihall calculate on my pillow which of us two is the more likely to receive,, the other in England. I had forgot to telPyou to dired your letters for me, in future, at the houfe of Monfieur l'Eftrance. who is my banker in Paris.
LETTER
77
LETTER Xl. Sir Charle* Met/ord to Major Seymour. MY DEAR FRIEND, I Paris. Have now been fix weeks abfent from, England, and yet I have only once addreffed you : fliall I tell you my reafon?—Indeed I think it will appear to you very plainly, without my writing it, that countries· which have been fo often defcribed, by fo much more able pens than mine, ean gain nothing by my repetition. When any fcene or anecdote occurs which I think worthy of relation, you may depend on my tranfmit- ting it to you. As the preliminaries'of peace are adually figned, and that it is faid orders arc already failed from England to call home the troops, it is doubtful to me whe í lie r you will receive this letter, whieh İ fhall dired for you at New York; accordingly, that, in cafe you ihould pafs it at fea, I mav not be deemed netled ful hy you, I fend a duplicate of it to await ? 3 your
7? your arrival in London, at your brother Sir Oliver's. I fet out to-morrow for Geneva, from thence I fliall crofs the Alps to Turin, and fo on to Venice ; thus far of my route I have only determined upon at prefent : you will fee that is marked out by my own in¬ clination, and not in example of any emi¬ nent traveller who has gone before me. When I have any thin? worthy relation vou fliail have a longer letter from me, till then adieu. Margaretia is, at my defire, to write to me ; when I receive one of her letters, I will inclofe it to you, as a proof of her powers. Farewel, and believe me what I feel myfelf, your true friend, &c. Charles Melford.
LETTER
7 í)
LETTER XII. M t tj υ r Sej/ moar to Sir Charles Melford. MY DEAR CHARLES, -—■ -j- London· 1 OU will be furprifed, I doubt not, at receiving a letter from me, already in Eng¬ land, when the news of peace has hardly yet reached America ; but I have procured leave of abfence through the favour of General R : ------, on account of my inability to life my right arm in my profeflion. I arrived two days ago at my brother's, in Grofvcnor-fquare, where 1 learn that Sir Edmund is dead ; and, to my infinite fur¬ prife, find a letter from you, dared at Pa¬ ris, the middle of laft month ! — Why, Charles, what can have induced you to leave England?—Is Margaretta falfe ?—Are you married ?-—or, are you tired of one an¬ other?——I am interrupted ; but will re- fume my pen immediately. I this inftant receive, by means of an officer who left N^vv York a few days e 4 after
80 after myfelf, your two letters vvhich con¬ tain an account of your father's illnefis and death, and your reafons for being now in France. Well, Charles, I have read your arguments twice over, and am not in this inftance difpofeci to think them with¬ out weight: I applaud the liberal fpirit of enquiry which has invited you abroad ; and 1 think as you do, tliat you will re- tarn· much the happier for your tour, if, while you inveftigate the manners of others, you refolve to keep a tight rein over your¬ felf. The whole track of an ufual tourift, particularly through France and Italy, is planted fo thick with fnares, that it re¬ quires the utmoft caution to avoid being caught in fome of them : many hundreds of every country live upon the ftrangers who vifit them: be cautious in forming acquaintance, and be ftill more ftudious to avoid play and gallantry. ? ? ??? I ftrongly recommend to you not to lofe fight for a moment, if poffible, of the engagement which fubfifls in your heart towards Mar- caretta; it may prove your guardian from many
81 many unpleafant fituations. Confider your¬ felf, whilft a traveller, in purfuit of inftruc- tion, not pieafure ; it is a maxim I have heard recommended, and declared to be the fure means of obtaining both know¬ ledge and amufement, with fafety to your¬ felf. I truft now I am fo much nearer to you than you imagined me to be when you wrote your laft, that you will give a little more extended account of what be¬ falls you than you declared it your inten¬ tion to do : though I cannot hold my pen long together, you have not the fame ex¬ cufe, fo pray indulge me with fome of your remarks. I feel in extreme fpirits at being once more in England, but a great part of my anticipated pieafure is curtailed by your abfence. Farewel ; write foon to, Yours moil truly, &c. Geroge Seymour,
e 5 LETTER
82
LETTER XIII. Sir Charles Melford to Major Sei/moar. Y Turín. OUR unexpeded letter from England, my dear Seymour, reached me as I was on the point of quitting Geneva, and I am now anfwering it immediately on my arri¬ val at Turin, after a laborious yet heavenly journey over the fnow-crefted Alps. Little did I imagine when I opened your letter thatyou were already in London; I congratu¬ late you upon a return vvhich I know gives you pieafure. I fliall not remain in this place above a few days ; I have no letter to any of its inhabitants. My Paris banker has furniihed me with an introdudion to a nobleman at Venice, to whom he fays my fociety, as being an Englifliman, will be very pleafing, and that he will procure me a general acquaintance amongft the firft families. I am entirely of your opinion that I ought to know no one to whom 1 have
have not been properly recommended. I am informed that a month may be fpent by me to advantage at Venice, I fliall not con¬ clude this letter till I arrive there. I intend in future, as you wifli to hear how I am employed, to write a paragraph of my letter as the matter which forms it occurs, and to fend off my flieet when it is full. Venice, Moriiby. I have been rather more than two hours on that fpot which my imagination has always painted to my fancy in the moil ftriking colours, and I can hardly yet de¬ termine whether my ideas are furpaffed, equalled, or difappointed. One reafon for my being unable cafilv to decide mav poflibly be, that it is fo entirely diflerent a place from any 1 have ever before feen, that companion can give me no affiftance in forming my opinion. The approach to Venice, of which we have read fo wonder¬ ful accounts, certainly loft upon me by anticipation ; perhaps too, the approach¬ ing twilight may have been unfavourable to t 6 the
84 the view, for I have remarked that travel¬ lers generally give their defcription of it when glittered upon by the fun. Saint Mark's-place has far exceeded my ideas: when I was firft conduded to my hotel, which ftands in the fquare, I imagined the city was illuminated, and a concourfe of people were aflembled in the ftreets to view it; my miftake, how r ever, was foon explained to me, and I found that this fpot was the evening walk of almoft all ranks, and that the glare of light was no more than ufual at that hour, and proceeded from the fhops and caflinos round about. The mufic in the middle of the fquare invites me to go down, and liften to it. Ten o'clock. Oh, Sevmour, what an enchanting place is the promenade of Saint Mark's- place ! laugh, dance, fong, and mufic, arreft your attention at every ftep, iffuing from the caflinos, while your eye is feafted with the mofl elegant figures of both fexes, walking, fome in parties, fome fingiy up and
85 and down the fquare. But this fcens would not be captivating in our denfe and uncertain northern atmofphere ; it is the clear, warm Italian iky, that muft give a zeñ to thefe pieafure s : beneath the azure ilar-ftudded canopy that impends the revels of an Italian evening, every unmaiked woman appears a lefler divinity, and every one whofe face is covered ilrikes you with the idea of her being the favourite goddefs of this earthly paradife, who muft be courted to crown the fplendour of the fcene with the radiance of her countenance.------ Do not imagine, Seymour, that becaufe I avow myfelf not infenfible to the luxuries of this place, I am going to relapfe into my former habits of gallantry ; no, indeed, I ani not ; I am firm to Margaretta ; I confider myfelf as much bound to her, as if we were already married. But I may look, I may gaze upon beauty without coveting it. I intend when any objed here particularly al¬ lures my fight, to turn my eyes inward, to take a view of Margaretta engraved upon my heart ; and Ianticipate the triumph of re¬ turning
86 turning them again to others of the fex, convinced of her fuperiority. I have writ¬ ten to her twice, and exped now to hear from her in a few days. To-morrow I fliall carry my recommenda¬ tory letter to the Marchefe di Marvaldi, and when I have feen him I will continue my letter. Tuefday. I have been received b ν the Marchefe di Marvaldi in a manner not lefs flattering to myfelf as an individual than to the coun¬ try of which I am a native. The Marchefe has once, in his early youth, vifited Eng¬ land ; fpeaks in the higheft terms of the civilities he received there ; and fays, that to enjoy the fociety of an Englifliman, and to repay the debt of politenefs vvhich he owes to the country, are amongft his great¬ eft pleafures. The Marchefe appears to be about forty, with, a hale conftitution, and an expreffive fet of features ; his under¬ ftanding is good, his education has been finiihed, and his judgement would be with¬ out
?7 out a fault, were it free from prejudice in favour of birth—a foible which experience has taught me eafily to diftinguifli, and I believe to treat with as great lenity as moil men would do, who do not feel it themfelves. One daughter is the only child of the Marchefe ; he introduced me to her this morning : flie is a beautiful girl between fixteen and feventeen ; indeed, as far as regularity of features conftitute per* fed beauty, íhe poffeffes it: her figure too, though not tall, is of the moil elegant fymmerry, but her countenance wants that intereft which can alone make a wo¬ man charming in my eyes :—flie is a girl whom moft men would I am fure call a divinity, but her beauty wants that fire without which my heart can never be touched. The houfe of the Marchefe di Marvaldi is, indeed, as my diredor to it called it to me, a palace ; the rooms are extremely fumptuous, the fervants nume¬ rous, and, in ihort, rank and fortune are itamped on every part of his eftabliihment. The Marchefe apologifed for his lady's not appearing
appearing this morning : I am*lp dine \?\\ him to morrow; then, he told ?? \ fliouk fee her. 'Every offer of civility has beer made to me by the Marçhefe ; amongíi which I am beft pleafed by a general invi- tation to his houfe, as I think him a man whofe fociety, on our becoming a little lefs format acquaintance, I fliall be much pleafed with ; and by his promife of intro¬ ducing .me at his dinner to-morrow to fpme of thenobleffe, as he ftyies them, for I am uncomfortable in any place where I have no acquaintance. An inftrument flood in the room where I was received ; 1 hap¬ pened to notice it, and Paulina was imme* diately defired by her father to play and fing to me : you* know I am no çonnojffèur in thefe matters, but I really fpoke- the truth when I declared myfelf pleafed by her per¬ formance : flic warbfed an Italian air with fo great fweetnefs that I abfolutely thought myfelf in a caftle of enchantment white ihe was finging. I have not been here long enough yet to regard thofe points in which this place differs
$9 differs from others, or excels them, as any. other than the works of romance. I am going to the opera to-night. Adieu : I ihall now fend off my letter, left you fliould think me negledfiil, «nd hefitate whether to believe me Your fincere friend, &c. Charles Melford.
LETTER XIV. Sir Citarles Melford to Major Seymour. « DEAR SEYMOVR, A Vrnite, Tburfday. S you fo particularly defired me to give, you intelligence how I paffed my time, I begin writing to you again, though only a day has paffed fince I put my lafl letter to you into the poll. I dined yefterday, according to my ap¬ pointment, at the Paliazo di Marvaldi* The Marchefe grow i ftiil ploafanter than 1 even
90 I even at firft found him ; every additional hour his fociety is enjoyed. The Marchefa is a moil lovely woman : flie poffeffes all that intereft of face which fo far exceeds regular beauty ; an eafy carriage, which difpiays well-turned limbs to delicate ad¬ vantage; and there is a fafcination in her voice, which makes every thing flie fays appear worth attending to : indeed, what flie docs fay is not only a proof of an intel¬ ligent mind, but of a pure heart. Our party was fmall, and all men except the bewitching Marchefa and her daughter : I had the good fortune of fitting between them at dinner. In the evening it was propofed by the Marchefe, that we fliould vifit one of the theatres, and then take our tea in his private caflino in St. Mark's-place. We no fooner entered the Opcra-houfe than a crowd of admirer« flocked round Paulina ; and indeed it did not furprife me ; for to almoft every man but myfelf, 1 think, flie muft be very fafcinating, as flie is very hand¬ fome, though not in my ftyle of beauty. While our attention was difengaged from the
91 the flage, I converfed with the Marchefa : her converfation poffeffed all the lively vi¬ vacity of the French woman, but at the fame time it was regulated by the moil fcrupulous modefty of an Engliih matron. in our walk to the caffmo—for, on account of the finenefs of the evening, walking was preferred—I had the honour of her arm : the eafe, and even pieafure, with which the Marchefe faw her flide it through mine, I own appeared ftrange to me as an Englïfli- man ; but when I confidered myfelf merely in the light of an individual being, it brought to my mind a convidion of the im¬ plicit confidence with which he beheld her, and raifed both huiband and wife flill higher in my opinion. Almofl all the young no¬ blemen who had been fluttering round Pau¬ lina at the opera efcorted her to the caffmo ; fome left the party when we entered it, others remained to pay their devoirs when oppofition became lefs violent. 1 found all my new acquaintance ex¬ tremely polite, and many of them very agreeable : a young Frenchman, the Mar¬ quis
9Î quis de Belleterre, particularly pleafes me; he is one of the warmeft votaries at the flirine of Paulina. Eleven o'clock at night, I was this morning in doubt about a matter which has turned out to my wiflies ; X did not know whether to exped a fami¬ liar addrefs to-day from thofe men who joined our party yefterday evening, at the opera, as I only converfed with, but was not formally introduced to them : on meet¬ ing to-day in the public walk, they diredly challenged my acquaintance. It would be much to the advantage of ftrangers, me¬ thinks, and' the reputation of the counts, if that fafhion were introduced a little more generally into England. As I paffed the caflino of the Marchefe di Marvakli this evening I faw them affem¬ bled in it, and of courfe ftepped in to make my bow to them : the Marchefa invited me to join the party i and, in faith, George, tiiere was no faying nay to her, frqn> a young fellow^ like me, who dares not give a moment's thought to the girls, and confe- qucntly
93 quently muft look up to the s grave r uge 'for pafling his time here pleafantly. The Mar¬ chefa di Marvaldi charms as much by her exquiifife modefty -as fome women do by ihowing it is poflible for them to lay it afide. If anv woman whom I have feen fince I left England could tempt me to be falfe to Margaretta, even fora moment of dalliance, it muft: be the Marchefa di Marvaldi ; fo . congratulate me, George, upon my unilain· , ed love : for it would be irréligion to fuf¬ ped that flie would liflen even to the figh that breathed impurity. 1 am fafe; no other woman whom this city of love con¬ tains has made the flighteft impreffion on my heart ; and in feeling fomething like af¬ ledion for the Marchefa di Marvaldi, as 1 witnefs the happinefs of her married ftate, nnd as 1 refled upon her purity/ I learn to value conftancv. At brcakfa-fl-, Friday. The Marchefe di Marvaldi and his family are to-morrow engaged at a dining party% whither I cannot accompany them on ac¬ count of an engagement I have made to vifit
94 vifit the Marquis de Belleterre on that day he lives in the fame hôtel with myfelf, ant we are become intimate ; he appears at amiable young man. He informs me tha he is of a good family, but that his fortune is fmall : his love for Paulina has detainee him now fome months in Venice; he thinks himfelf poffefled of her affections, but fears to; make a confeffion of his paffion to her father, on account of his inability to fup¬ port her in the ftyle of elegance in which fhe now lives. " How would an Englifli¬ man reconcile this difficulty ?" faid he to me ; " how would you ad under my cir- cumftances ?"—" If Paulina's father were feventy, inftead of forty," I replied, " i could counfel you ; as it is, I know not what advice to give you." The gay young Frenchman fighed ; and the next moment joined in the tune which a girl in the ftreet was playing on her guitar. How charac- teriftic of his country !—a Frenchman al¬ ways flrives to keep the air gai predomi¬ nant. The Marquis is now in my room, tells me he is going to call upon the Mar¬ chefc
95 chefe di Marvaldi, and invites me to walk with him, fo I lay dow r n my pen. Nine in the evening. When we arrived a.t the Paliazo di Mar¬ valdi this morning, we were told that the Marchefe was juft then particularly en¬ gaged, but would come to us in a few mi¬ nutes. While we were waiting his coming, the Marquis de Belleterre ftood mufing over a fong which lay open upon the piano-forte, and which I fuppofe Paulina had been playing. I had never been in the room into which we had now been Ακηνη fince my firft call, and was looking round at the pic¬ tures : over the chimney-piece hung the portrait of the Marchefa ; as I ftood with my eyes fixed upon it, " What an enchant¬ ing woman !" accidentally fell from my lips. The major-domo was at this moment crofl¬ ing the room unfeen by mc, and on my fpeaking he replied, " Aye, truly flie is, fignor." I turned round and flared on be¬ ing addreffed by him; he fmiled, bowed, and left the room. " Bernardo is very familiar," faid í to the Marquis on our being again left
96 left alone. ' e He lived with the father oi the Marchefa Laura di Marvaldi, and is very much attached to the family," anfwci- ed the Marquis. The Marchefe now en¬ tered, and our remarks were confequently at an end. I fliould not have mentioned this trivial occurrence, had it not appeared fo ftrange to me that the major-domo, in a houfe whofe owner fets fo high an eftimate on the due regard being paid to rank, fhouid join in converfation with his mafter'b guefts : I queried to myfelf, whether the old man had not a mind to afcerlain if the Engliih were equally tenaeioib of their rank as his Italian mailer. Mt\en ? c'ock. I have been walking an hour in Saint Mark's-place, and have withftood a moil flattering temptation. The Marquis de Belleterre and myfelf had juft parted from a group of Italian gentlemen, and were recommencing our ftroll, when an elegant mafked female figure who met us faid, " Signor Inglefe ;" and as fhe fpoke fhe .faltered in her pace, which had befoic been
97 been flow. I wifhed her good-night in her own language, and was walking on : the Marquis whifpered me, " If you will not take a turn with the lady, I'll be your fub- ftitute." He immediately drew his arm out of mine, and turned round upon her, for flie had flopped to obferve us; ihe imme¬ diately fled on perceiving that it was the Marquis who was approaching her, and | became loft in the croud before he could overtake her. On returning to me, the I Marquis complimented me upon the attrac¬ tions of my Englifh perfon, and our adven¬ ture paffed off with a laugh, for we faw the unknown no more, though we took feveral turns of the fquare. Give me cre¬ dit, George, for my forbearance, when fo fiattering an appeal was made to my va¬ nity ; confefs that I fliould not have aded thus before I became acquainted with Mar¬ garetta. Monday. You will perceive that for the two lafl days I have not written a line.—Forgive me, George, but for the firfl time fince we vol. x, f have
have called each -other friend, I have hefi¬ tated whether or not to impart to you an accident that has befallen me. It is a ftrange, it is an unaccountable, and you, I fear, will think it an evil occurrence which I have to communicate to you,— But confider the matter coolly, reflect how I was circumflanced, and then be lenient in your judgement. You recoiled that I told you that tlie Marchefc and Marchefa di Marvaldi, with their daughter, were the day before yefterday engaged at a party, whither I was prevented from accompany¬ ing them bv an engagement 1 was under to the Marquib de Holléteire. The noble¬ man whom thev went to v ifit Jives at fome lit- tie d'ftance from the city, and 1 1?? were not to return till late in the evening. I dined, according to my appointment, with the Marquis ; after dinner we looked, in at two or three of the theatres, and after that we returned to Saint MarkVplaee. When we reached the door of our hotel, the young Marquis cxeufed himfelf from walking any longer, by faying he had letta s to write, and
99 and went în: the evening was uncommonly fine, a bright moon-light added to the fplen¬ dor of the fcene, and dete; mined me to re¬ main fome time longer in the air, í was taking my fécond turn of the fquare, and pafling a fpot where the íhade of the houfes darkened a few yards of ground in their front, when the fame female who had ad¬ drefled me the night before again accofted me in the fame words. I w r as repb ing to her with the fame indifference 1 had already done, and walking forward, when ihe caught hold of my coat, and, in a voice of whkh it immediately ftiuck n.e that I had fowæ kind of recolledion, bested me tc to flou a finele inftant." As í turn*. d round on hearing thefe words, or rather to difengage myfelf from her hold, flie raifed her maik, and, oh, Sevmour' w!u,fe features do vou think 1 difii icily belield ?—thofe of the en¬ chanting Marchufa dt Marvakii!— Ì invo¬ luntarily ftarted on behold in» lier, She di- redly replaced her maik, and faid, " Signor, I have fonunhing of the utmofi confequence to impari ίο you ; pray ftep in he:e a few f ¿ minutes."
100 « minutes." I was not half a ¿özen yards from the caffmo of the Marchcfe di Mar¬ valdi when flie firft addrefled me ; I walked half the way towards it in liftening to her iaít petition, and at the conclufion of it flie was already in the caflino. I had here a moment to refled, that it was very odd what the Marchefa could have to fay in private to me, and alfo to confider that it would be very rude in mc to refufe her a hearing. As foon as I was in the caflino flie de¬ fired me, in a lively voice, to fliut the door and come with her into the fécond apart¬ ment. I followed her into a fmall room, which received all its light from a candle burning on a table in the firft apartment. The light was juft fufficient for me to fee her fit down upon a fofa, and for me to place myfelf by her without ftumbling. Her maik covered only the upper half of her face, and I could jufl difcern that flie had not taken it off. As foon as I was feated, fhe began fpeaking : " Signor," flie faid, " you doubtlcfs wqnder at the invita¬ tion
101 tion I have given you ; indeed, except that I am now here with vou," —and as flie fpoke flie placed her hand on mine,—" I could hardly give myfelf credit for its having pafled my lips. — Signor," flie continued, after a moment's paufe, " you bewitching young Englifhmen are the admiration of all our Italian women: fome can feel in filence, and be content to view perfedion ; my feelings are too candid, too warm, not to avow themfelves to their infpirer." As ihe ceafed fpeaking, her hand, which had been before laid upon the back of mine» flid gently down to my fingers, wdiich I had encircled round my knee, and main¬ tained its fituation by a flight preffure.— Seymour, could you have drawn away your hand from the foft touch of inviting beau¬ tv?-—-I confefs that I could not, though at that very moment I recolleded the firft time of my fhaking hands with Margaretta.— " I fuppofe," flie went on, i( that you ima¬ gined me gone with the Marchefe and my daughter to the Count di Ρ ------ 's ; I feign¬ ed indifpofition as an excufe for my remain- F 3 ing
JOC irig in Venice, that I might fee you here ;— feigned indifpofition, did I fay ?—oh, no I adually felt it: 1 feel it flill—every mo ment increafes it ; for, till 1 found you, i itckened with the fear of not meeting you; and now T , 1 know not whether to conclude vour filence furprife, or tliat vou return my afledion for you with hatred/' In feating myfelf on the fofa, i had accidentally thrown one of niy arms on its back., and on that the Mart heia now leaned, wiih lier check almoft touching mine. I could not yet fpeak; my feclmgs were at enmity, and 1 durft not confide them io mv tongue: ton- feien ce pleaded in fa' our of Margaretta ; paiììon leaned to the fide of the Marchefa. ** í fee you hate me," flic cried, in accents that befpoke her ftifling her tcarb :—-" oh, how have I been deceived in }ou! í thought jour heart warm, conipaflìonate, tender! Oh, how viitkv.d of vou, bel fignorInglefc, to wear fuch fafcinating funics with fo hard a heart ! furely, though you have life, your heart muft be cold and dead ; 1 cannot think that it heats." As flie faid this, fhe pafled
i υ:ί pafled her hand from its former fituation upon mine to my breaft. ¿í Yes," flie faid vvith a figh, " it does beat indeed !"—flie preffed upon it ftill harder, in order to feel in tlnobbing the plainer; and the proffare of her hand on fo fufceptible a part, com¬ municated a fire to' my pulfes, wliieh agi¬ tated them beyond mv reafon, and I glued mv lips upon hers ; flic withdrew her fdvs from its union with mine, with a ten lernef» that inftead of difcouraging provoked me to rejoin them. I was now too far advanc¬ ed in the path of pieafure to be able to retrace my fteps, and the fucceeding mo¬ ments were moments of exquifite blifs. . . ........ When we awoke from our mutual intoxication of paffion, the Mar¬ chefa thus addreffed me : " Ah, fignor, what muft now be your opinion of me?—Oh, how weak is our fex !—how much weaker than any other of it am I !—By man alone we know happinefs, and from man alone we experience mifery!—How eagerly do you all encourage us in our foibles, and f 4 then
104 then how ready are ye to laugh at our weaknefs !—But indeed I believe you, fignor Carlo, too noble, too generous, to be fuch a deceiver," It was impoflible, after what had paffed between us, for me to do any otherwife than declare I merited her high¬ eft opinion of my honour. She continued: " Signor, I am not fo loft, fo profligate, as my condud may have led you to imagine ; it is true I faw you, from the firft moment of my beholding you, with the eye of pre¬ ference ; but I have other, weightier rea¬ fons for the humiliation to which I have ftooped.—I am diftraded, my thoughts are bewildered—1 would fav a great deal, yet know not where to begin, and almoft fear to fpeak at all.—You do not pity, me ;—I cannot exped jou fliould." Thefe words were fo feelingly marked by the diftrefs of her mind, that I really did feel compaflion for her, and I told her fo in accents that feemed to reaffure her. She threw her arms round my neck, and while flie held me 'in ftrid embrace, faid, c * Oh, fignor, you know not to what mifery my imprudence has re¬ duced
10i duced me, and you alone have it in your power to give eafe to my miferable heart : in the name of God, I entreat you to fwean what I fliall require of you," This was Sk ftrange demand, and I replied, " that í muft defire to know to what I was going tot fwear, before I bound myfelf by an oath." —" I am fure you will not hefitate to take it," fhe returned, u when you fliall know what is the fubflance of it. From many reafons which are no doubt apparent to you, and from flill more whioh I alone know, you muft perceive how 'neceffary it is that the condud of us both ihould be mofl fcrupulous in concealing that we have this evening met." With- this affertion í readily agreed. The Marchefa continued : " This point granted, how cautioufly ought vve to avoid betraying ourfelves by any nod, wink, or fmile, which the recolledion of paft pleafures might tempt us to ufe ? towards each other on any future meeting : yejt, fignor, I do not fear being thrown off ?? guard ; I have reafons that compel me to keep my every word, gefture, andmufo|e/- F 5 under
106 under fubjcdion, to the appearance of ex¬ treme propriety ; but you are differently fituated to myfelf, and in a moment when you leaft-fufped it, when you think your¬ felf and me mofl fecure, you might betray us both to certain deftrudion. This may be avoided by the means I fliall propofe, and I think, for my fake, you will not re¬ fufe to ufe them.—Swear, that whenever we fhall fee each other, in whatfoever place, in company, or entirely .alone, whether up¬ on the fquare, or in the houfe of the Mar¬ chefe di Marvaldi ; or ifit were poffible for us to meet on fome heath where our eyes could take in the extent of leagues without beholding one human being—fwear, that not even there, either by the flighteft infi¬ nuation given by look, word, or gefture, you will recur to what has this hour paffed between us " This requeft appeared to me but a natural confequence of the con¬ dud which had preceded it, and I bound myfelf without hefitation to follow her rules for my behaviour. In a few minutes flie again went on : " I low infinitely depraved muft
?? muft I appear to you ! yet, fignor, on my truth, I am not fo much to blame in the ftep I have taken as you may imagine me tobe: I am, perhaps, the moft miferable woman who exifts. I am not attempting entirely to exculpate my prefent condud ; I would only fay (in fpite of me the words compel my tongue to utter them}, that if 1 poffefled the afledion of the Marchefe di Marvaldi, I fliould be all I ought to be : if any defires beyond thofe for which it would he lawful for me to feek gratification, with his knowledge, then obtruded themfelves into my thoughts, I would banifli them from rny heart, from my head, as decided vices ; but I am not that happy woman, the Mar¬ chete di Marvaldi hates me : oh, ungene- rou?, cruel, vile man ! dcftroyer of my peace ! fubverter of my virtue ί" \\ hat an extra¬ ordinary declaration did this appear to me, after the many apparent proofs of mutual afledion which I had witnefled between the Marchefa and her hufband ; and I im¬ mediately mentioned to her my thoughts. " Are there no men in the world, think F Ó VOU»'*
108 you," fhe anfwered, " whofe deceitful con¬ dud gains for them their defired ends r"~~ She fighed, and ftopped. I recolleded the complacency with which the Marchefe had feen her hang on my arm, in our walk from the theatre to his caflino, and I now thought differently of his condud than I, had before done ; " his indifference about being him¬ felf her protedor," I now thought, " plainly argues how little tendernefs he feels for her." Thus are our ideas on an undecided fubjed always regulated by the plaufibility of the laft adion, or obfervation referring to it. " What are his reafons for this con¬ dud ?" I afked : " did he marry you under this difiiké which you exprefs hira to feel for you, or has any recent circumilance caufed him to contrad it ?"—" Signor," flie replied, " he hated me long, long before he became a huiband."—" Why then did he marry ?" I returned, " Do not aik me that," fhe replied, ftifling her tears. " Ob, Albert," flie continued, after a momentary filence, " had you but loved me as 1 do you !"—again fhe ftopped, " Love him l' I ex-
109 I exclaimed; " is İt poffible you do love. him ?"—" Witnefs Heaven, how very, very tenderly I love him !" flie cried, and again funk upon my neck. Si What ftrange con- tradidions meet in this woman's mind," I could hardly help uttering. Preffing both my hands in hers with an energy fuperior to any flie had before appeared to feel, flie faid, " My extréméit humiliation is not yet confeffed to you :—oh, fignor, pity me î I conjure you pity a woman diftreffed as yon behold me ! do not let contempt for me fucceed the moments juft paffed; do not now defpife her whom you have juft before clafped to your heart! Signor —oh, would to Heaven the hard talk could be fpared me î — Signor, I entreat you to give me— You will hate me if I fpeak it," fhe cried» " and I have not fortitude to draw upon myfelf your difpleafure." I befought her to fpeak without referve. " You will par¬ don me then," fhe faid, c< if even you re¬ fufe to grant me what I aik you." Re¬ turning the preffure which her hand chal¬ lenged from mine, " Tell me," I replied» " what
?? " what is it ?"—« Your—·" flie anfwered, and once more hefitated. " Name it," í faid. With difficulty flie faltered out, Ci your purfe." — On this declaration a thoufand conjedures, which I had not at that mo¬ ment time to inveftigate, floated in my brain, and I put my purfe, containing about twenty Englifh pounds in Italian money, into her hand. " 1 can only thank you— God reward you," flie faid, as flie received it: " oh, what a life of anxiety, difguft, mnTtirieation, and fufpenfe, lias been, is, and ever wiil be mine !-—Do not I, fi<rnor, appear to jou a moil incomprehcnfible be¬ ing ?" I confeffed I thought her limiteri¬ ons. " I am myflerious," ihe replied; <v but the time may come— may conic !" flie re¬ peated with emphafis, " it Ihall come, when J fhall ftand explained to you and the world ; meanwhile, believe me, í ihall alwavs, what¬ ever may be our feparate fate, think moil of you." — <v it was," ihe again went on, ** with the mofl extreme difficulty that I yefterday evening contrived to walk out alone ; it is at a ftill greater hazard that I anj
Ill am now from home : I have one friend ín the houfe of the Marchefe di Marvaldi;—but no matter, a word of explanation ruins me for ever.—I talk of ruin, and forget the danger that may now be impending me : the Marchefe and his daughter may be al¬ ready returned from the Count di Ρ ------- 's : you muft leave me.—Shall we ever meet again ?"—" I dine with you to-morrow by appointment/' I replied. " That is not meeting/' flie returned ; " it is only being together without enioving each other's fo- ciety : will you ever pafs another hour in private with me, if opportunity fliould fa¬ vour us ?" Impelled bj' curiofity—for, be¬ lieve me, Seymour, that paflion had almoft entirely fubdued the one which had a ihort time before poffeffed me — I anfwered, tc Yours muff be the determination."— " Let this anfwer you," ihe faid, and kiffed my cheek. " Let our agreement be mu¬ tually figned," 1 cried, and prefled my lips upon hers. She then rofe and faid, tt With reludance 1 bid you go ; remember vour vow, all that is dear to me hangs upon your obferv-
112 obfervance of that folemn promife."— " I remember and repeat it," I anfwered. u I conjure you, by Heaven, to repeat it for¬ mally," fhe faid. " Do you doubt me, Marchefa?" I aiked. " No, not doubt you," flie anfwered ; *' but it would be an extreme fatisfadion to me to hear that you remember all its points." I then faid, " I fwear, by Heaven, that whenever we fliall fee each other, in whatever place, whether in company or entirely alone, whether upon the fquare in an evening, or in the houfe of the Marchefe di Marvaldi ; or if it were poffible for us to meet on fome heath where our eyes could take in the extent of leagues without beholding one human being — I fwear, that not even there, by the flighteft in¬ finuation, given by look, word, or gefture, I will recur to what has paffed between us." —" For on that heath," cried flie, taking up my words and the voice in which I had ut¬ tered them— u nay, even were vve two upon the fea in an open boat, without a fpeck of aught but w ? ater in our view—deftrudion might follow to us both from your being the
113 the firft to fpeak upon this fad j r et exquifite theme." My furprife increafed, but, by continuing to fpeak, ihe prevented me from expreffmg it. if Now leave me," flie faid, " but go not to-night to the Marchefe di Marvaldi's, nor, I conjure you, forget fome¬ times to think of me." She had, during thefe words, led me to the door of the caf¬ lino, and I ruflied out almoft as infenfibly as I had walked in. I immediately went to the hotel, entered my room, and threw myfelf into a chair, that í might refled on what appeared to me almoft a dream. The beautiful, the ac¬ compliflied, the apparently moil modeft and mofl virtuous MarchefadiMarvaldi; the only- woman who had in the leaft touched my heart fince my leaving England ; the woman. who, of all others, had appeared moft un- îikelv tobe falfe to a man whofeemed the beft of hufbands, had voluntarily thrown herfelf into my arms s had declared that her hufband hated her, that he had hated her before they were married, and ftill had made her his wife ; that flie, notwithftanding, loved him
114 nim moft affedionately, but yet fought for pieafure in the fociety of another man, and then ftooped to ail; his purfe ?? her reward! — How coukl 1 unriddle thh unaccountable conduct ?—Sometimes I thought the Mar¬ chcfe compelled her to increafe his income by fubmitting bei felf to the pieafure of ftrangers: this idea was refuted by the ar¬ dor with which ihe had folicitcd my atten¬ tion; becaufe, to anv man whofe heart was not, Hke mv own, engaged to another ob¬ jed, little foliei tation, on fo tender a point, would doubtlefs have been neceffary from the Marchefa Laura. She faid, " fhe had one friend in the houfe of the Marchefe di Marvaldi ;" this feemed alfo to imply that flie had but one ; and that one, after the words which had fallen from the major- domo Bernardo, and the Marquis de Belle- terre's affertion of his being attached to the family of the Marchefa, I could not doubt to be him. I began to confider whether the attentions of the Marchefe to me, and the high terms in which he always fpoke of the Englifh, might not be intended as blinds
115 blinds to make me a prey to his wife, with¬ out fufpicion falling upon himfelf: but then «gain, the known refpedability of my Paris hanker, who had triven me the letter which had introduced me to the Marchcfe, fpoke llrongly againft his being a man of the na¬ ture i had for a moment imagined he m i çht bc ; befides, his eftablUhment, and repute ¡ of wealth, appeared fuch great contradic¬ tions of his itanding in need of the paltry fum which his wife had received from me with fo great apparent thankfulnefs, that the idea of mv being intended to be made rf ? a dupe to his convenience foon vanifhed from my thoughts. Again 1 imagined that if the Marchefc really hated the Marchefa, and had married her, as it was natural for me to believe from her words, from motives of intereft, he might, perhaps, from his dif¬ iiké of her, refufe her an allowance fui ted to her flat ion, and compel her thus, un¬ known to him, to provide herfelf with the means of procuring many articles which former cuftom had taught her now to con¬ fider as comforts : there are manv things of which
116' which we db not feel the value till we are deprived of them ; and this might be the prefent cafe of the Marchefa, who, by her own confeffion, was fuffering under the ha¬ tred of the Marchefe, and yet conftrained to appear fully fatisfied with her fitualion. That flie is involved in a myftery, flie her¬ felf acknowledges ; it alfo appears that flic wiflies to reveal it, but that flie is bound to fecrecy by fome tie which fhe has not cou¬ rage tö break through. What can it be : And then, the moft extraordinary of all, whence can arife the folemn inj und ion. hy which flie has obliged me never to mention to her what flie calls <c the fad but exqui¬ fite theme," though convinced that we arc neither feen nor heard by mortal eye or ear, and though flie has promifed to find an opportunity of renewing it herfelf? — Per¬ haps, if I really have any influence over her heart, it is, that flie fears my betraying her, at fome unguarded moment, into the confeffion of the fecret which is ftruggling within her ; and that, if the feafon of our private conferences be left entirely to her¬ felf,
117 felf, flie may have an opportunity of feled- ing fuch moments as ihe feels herfelf able to refiil my enquiries.—To ceafe conjeftur- ing myfelf I cannot at the times when I ¡am alone, but it matters little writing to you all my furmifes, as they are probably none of them exad. Well, George, now let me fay a few words of Margaretta. Perhaps you will think it a bold affertion, but I do not be¬ lieve that the voice of purity 'itfelf could fay, I have wronged her : my love for her is as ardent, as it was before, and it is as pure ; for love had no concern in my affair with the Marchefa Laura, with her they were merely corporeal feelings which ex¬ perienced a momentary union ; but my mental feelings muft be knit with thofe of Margaretta to produce the pure happinefs 1 anticipate iu calling her wife. I think a good deal of the Marchefa to be fure, but I think of her as I might do of a new horfe, houfe, or book—as an objed which will afford me pieafure for the time when¬ ever opportunity ferves me to receive it. To
?? ?? Margaretta I look up as the reft from every care, as the being whofe endear¬ ments fliall throw into fliade and oblivion every pail and futile enjoyment, and who, when I am thus perfedcd, fhall wing her way with me to blifs, even fuperior to that I have tafted with her on earth. I know you will be anxious to Jearn whether I have feen the Marchefa fince the evening I have defcribed in this letter : I dined on the following day at the paliazo ; the party w l as feléét; flie entered the room after I arrived, and fpoke to me the firft of the guefts : flic does not paint, and yet not a drop of blood mounted into her cheeks, or faded from them when her complaifant eyes refted on mine.—Wbat am í to think ? —-I wonder what flie thought, when ihe firft looked at me, for I felt my face burn, and immediately after I had fpoken, 'i re¬ colleded that I had anfwered, tc Very fultry indeed," to her enquiry after my health.—· I have generally attached myfelf in conver¬ fation more to the Marchefa than to her huiband; yefterday I felt inefiftibly drawn to
119 to converfe moft with him. When vve en¬ tered the dining-room, the Marchefa called me to fit by her; I thought this rather an extraordinary attention juft at the prefent time, but received the invitation with a bow, and took my place : fome little hefi¬ tation enfued about fearing the reft of the company, and the only other lady prefent having placed herfelf on the other fide of the table, the Marchefe told his daughter <c to Gro and fit next his Englilh friend." Paulina obeyed : the Marquis de Belleterre looked irrefolute whether he might be per¬ mitted to become her other neighbour ; and whilfl he hefitated where to place himfelf, a German baron, Jefs troubled with dilli- denee than the well-bred young French¬ man, placed himfelf on her other fide.—· Darin«: dinner, I talked much more to Paulinathan to the Marchefa: the Mar- chefe fiequently joined in our topics, and feemed more pleafed and in better fpirits than I had ever feen him : the Marchefa often fpoke to me, and í endeavoured to addrefs her exadly as I had clone previous to
1*20 to our private meeting, always fearing î was too forward, or too referved. The re¬ mainder of the day paffed without any ma¬ terial occurrence. This day I have feen no one of the family. Write to me, my dear Seymour, as foon as you receive this : admoniih me, but not with feverity ; I do not condemn myfelf, and yet I fear not to he approved by you. This is a long letter indeed, I have filled five fheets without knowing I had written a page.—Adieu, and believe me fincerely your devoted friend, Sec. Charles Melford.
/
LEITER
İÇİ
LETTER XV. Margaretta Hayton to Sir Charles Melford. IRofe -???? cottage. N w 7 hat language fliall the orphan of his bounty venture to addrefs her bene¬ fador?—Or upon what fubjed will her heart allow her to fpeak, but upon the gratitude which flie owes to his generous protedion ? When prefent with her, it has been his conftant command that fhe fliould never exprefs to him thofe feelings with which her heart overflows ; in every parti¬ cular it is her wifli, as flie feels it her duty, to obey him ; but now, in his abfence from her, while every comfort which flic is enjoy¬ ing conftantiy reminds her from whom flie derives it, and flie has no other means than words left her of fhowing him that the is not infenfible to the tacit admonitors around her, flie cannot forbear flightly hazarding his difpleafure, by letting her thanks fall from her pen, if they are only allowed to fay with wdiat pieafure ihe has received in- vox,, i, a formation
102
formation of his welfare and happinefs from the two letters with which he has honoured her during his abfence from England. You defire me, Sir Charles, to tell you how I am employed : my hours are princi¬ pally paffed in purfuing, to the beft of my abilities, thofe ftudies upon which you had placed me before your departure ; but I fear I am a bad pupil, and give little cre¬ dit to the pains of an able mafter; for now alone, I am often at a lofs how to proceed in many points to the advantage I think I ihould be able to do if you were here to refolve me queftions that I am frequently obliged to repre fs when they rife in nu¬ mind, becaufe I have no one to whom 1 can addrefs them. You have feveral times requefted me to write to you, and I at length have com¬ plied, becaufe I regard this fubmiflion to ^your wiflies the only return I can make to you for your generous prevention of my wants; no other coniideration fliould have induced me to hazard expofing my little competency to the taik, after the many houi^
V23
hours you have liberally fpent in endeavour¬ ing to fit me for its performance, and more cfpecially to addrefs on the terms of famili¬ arity, which a correspondence unavoidably feems to lay to the charge of thofe who main¬ tain it, one whom, notwithftanding his ex¬ treme condefcenfion and kindnefs to me, I can never confider but as a being placed in fo very different a fituation in life to myfelf. —Indeed I am almoit affiamoti of myfelf for having granted you this requeft, nor could I permit this flieet to reach you, but that I could not explain to you my motive for not complying with your wifli, and that 1 defpair of executing one more to my own fatisfadion, little as thefe lines exprefs the fenfations with which it is my defire to prove to you that they were written. Mrs. Wallace defires me to prefent her mofl refpedful compliments to you, and begs me to tell you, that her fon Edward is on his voyage from America, and ex- peded very fliort ly to arrive in this country. 1 hope you are experiencing every piea¬ fure vvhich you anticipated from your pre- c 2 fent
fent journey ; that every earthly blifs may attend you wherever you go, is the fincere prayer of her whom your goodnefs has left no wifli but the happinefs of him who has conflituted that of his devoted fervant. Margaretta Hayton.
LETTER XVI. Sir Charles Melford to Major Seymour. DEAR SEYMOUR, I Venice. DO not wait your anfwer to my Jail epiftle before 1 write again to you, in order to keep a promife I made you fome time ago, ff fending to you the firft letter 1 fliould have from Margaretta ; the inciofed 1 yefterday evening received ; read it, and then judge whether I am not juftified in loving fuch a girl ! With what extacy have I perufed the lines it contains ! with what
125
what tranfports read her firft efforts at ad- d re fling a man whom her innocence has hi¬ therto taught her to know only as a bene¬ fador, and to revere only for the warmth of his feelings towards her diftrefs î —Oh, Seymour, how extremely am I deceived, or with what happy eafe may love be planted amidft the foft paflions which now fill her heart '—Adieu, I am but juft in time for the poil : nothing material has occurred here fince I wrote laft ; when any thing does fpring up, depend on hearing from me, and believe me, Yours fincerely, &c. Charles Melford,
g 3 LETTER
126
LETTER XVII. Sir Charles Met f e ni to Major Seymcicr. PEAR GEORGZ, A Venice. S feveral days have pafl fince I wrote to you lafl, and 1 have yet received no anfwer from you, I again refumc my pen. :— y^eiU Seymour, the Marchefa fpoke the truth when ihe affirmed that flie would neirher by gefture or mufele revert to the pafl in publics and in private I have not feen her fmce that notable evening.— Her firmnefs too has given me courage, for I do not now fee her with thofe nicxpreifible feelings with which I beheld her the lail time of my dining with her at the paliazo, which was the day after our private ren¬ contre. I have taken fome pains whenever op¬ portunity has prefented itfelf for enquiring, as much as the pretence of accidental dif¬ courfe would allow mc to do, into the circum-
, 1?7 circumfiances of the Marchefe, în order to learn whether I could find any ground for the condud of his wife.—I had yefterday a party of young men at my hôtel ; a vio¬ lent cold prevented the Alarquis de Belle¬ terre from making one of the party ; asjie was abfent, I ventured to fpeak of Pau¬ lina, as an introdudion to her father; the converfation was thus begun : after dinner, when the fociety became rather livelv, a young Italian of fafliion, the Count di Rebini, faid, " I would marry to-morrow if I could meet with a pretty girl and a handfome fortune."------" Then, Signor," faid I, " I fliould fuppofe the daughter of the Marchcfe di Marvakli the very girl to your tafte." — u She is certainly a very handfome woman, and her father's pro¬ perty very large," anfwered the Italian gravely. " Since you think fo," I returned, " give me leave to announce her to the company as your toaft." He fmiled, but did not anfwer ; and one of his intimate acquaintance at table, hearing what I had faid, immediately began contradiding my g 4 miftake,
mîihke,, as he called it, by informing me oí a famous opera girl who at that time received the favours of the Count di Rebi¬ ni ; all tongues cow began to found the prai fes of the dancer, to the no fmall pieafure, as I perceived, of the young Italian, and I had no fécond opportunity ot mentlonino· Paulina or her familv. When my gnefís were gone, I could not forbear refiefting on the words of the Count; he had faid, that he wifhed to marry a handfome woman with a good fortune; he had allowed Paulina to be poffeffed both of beauty and fortune, and he had fpoke n his avowal in a tone which had evidently implied that, notwithftand¬ ing the double charm, he would not be¬ come her hufband.—-The more I thought upon his expreffion, and his tone of voice at the time he made it, the more I was convinced that fome fecret meaning lurk¬ ed beneath his words, but I was unable to define what it niiiht be.
İ HAVE
129
Tuefday ????,:?.^, I have jufl been walking on the fquare: the Count de Rebini joined me ; he took my arm, and after we had made three or four turns, he faid, " You bantered me yefterday, Signor Carlo, about the daugh¬ ter of the Marchefe di Marvaldi ; you were cunning, you had an inclination, I fuppofe, to hear my fentiments." I knew not what his words meant, and wifhed him to explain them to me. " Come, come," faid he after fome time, " confefs candidly at once ; I have heard from more than one to-day, that you are the deftined hufband. of Paulina di Marvaldi." —" Upon my ho¬ nour/' I replied, " your information is ui> true: whence could you derive it?" — " From common report," he anfwered.. I now thought him joking, and faid with a- fmile, " That common report gave me an. honour I was undefcrving of."—" Are vou really ferious?" he returned, in a tone of furprife ; " for, fetting badinage and com¬ mon report afide, I have adually heard to- day,, from two different perfons, that you. ο ς ??? ?
1:30 are about to marry the daughter of the Marchcfe di Marvaldi ; nay, one of them afferted that he had heard the Marchefc himfelf fay, that it would give him exqui¬ fite pieafure to fee his daughter the wife of his Engliffi friend, as he often calls you."— " I am obliged to him for his good opi¬ nion," I replied ; " but upon my word, as 1 am entirely ignorant myfelf about this af¬ fair, I muft be rather incredulous as to this fpecch of the Marchcfe."—" I did not hear him fay fo," anfwered Count Rebini, " and Venice is no more free from the creators of news than other places ; but tell me, Signor Carlo, are you really indifferent to Paulina?"-—" in the point of the heart, 1 am totally lb," f replied. (s Do not de¬ ceive mc," faid Count Rebini, " for 1 wiih to he your friend."—" 1 have fpoken t lie truth." I returned. " Then let me ft roiuri v advife you," îejoincd he, cí whilft you con¬ tinue an intimate at her father's houfe, to flee! your heart refoiutely againft entertain¬ ing a paffion for her r — tc I have a private reafon," 1 reph'ed fmiling, u vvhich will fe¬ cure
131 cure me from any fuch paffion; but why this caution, fignor?"—" After what I have faid to you," he anfwered, " I think yoU muft be fo fufficiently convinced that I have meant well to you, as to enfure j T our not; repeating what I confide to you." — " De¬ pend on me," I returned. " The daughter of the Marchefe di Marvaldi, I grant," faid he, ce is a woman whom every man would not be permitted by her father to marry ; but, fignor, flie is notwithftanding a wo¬ man whom every man would not marry."— tf I am curious for your explanation of thefe l?ìttì, ,, cried J. " In the firft place------" he rejoined, and fuddenly becoming filent, he nipped my arm as a fign to prevent my fpeaking ; I immediately looked round to find out the caufe of his breaking off, and faw the Marchefe di Marvaldi approaching us. í felt disappointed that he had joined us, though the fubject which the Count di Rebini and I.had been converting upon had more excited my curiofity than intereft. The Marchefe diredlv joined in our walk, and in courfe a fre ih topic of. convcrflition ? 6 vvas
in was introduced. In the courfe of our ftroll he invited us both to dine at his houfe to¬ morrow, which invitation we both accept¬ ed ; I was then in momentary ex ped at ion of his leaving us, but, to my difappoint¬ ment, an acquaintance of the Count's com¬ ing up and whifpering him, he immediate¬ ly wiflied us a good night, and left the fquare. " Have you known the Count di Rebini long?" aiked the Marchefc " I was introduced to him," I replied, u the firft time I had the honour of dining at your houfe."— cf Oh, 1 recoiled," faid the Marchefc; tw he is an agreeable companion, but a dangerous friend : not that he intends bavin to any one, but his fpirits give him a volubility of tongue which renders him unable to conceal whatever he knows, and often leads him to paint what he does know in higher colours than it has been repre- fented to him : one who talks continually muil have ïccourfe to fcandal to pleafe ah wiiii whom he convei fes; and the embel- JifhiYH-nis of a fecond reciter upon any faci sie often difiig rcenble in iheir conferences, t«.
İt"» ¿? OJ to the innocent flater of it. I merely men¬ tion this in confidence to you, that your in¬ genuous difpofition may not bring you into any dilemmathrough themeans of a man who does not-think before he fpeaks ; I m-ean to ίο fay nothing more fevere of the Count di Rebini, as I believe him in heart to be well principled, but too quick and unguarded in his communications and obfervations." We now parted, and I returned to my hôtel. What am I to think of all this? —Am I to fet it down as the effe d of chance or defi sm ? What could the Count di Rebini ? he coin £ to tell me of the Marchefe or his. daughter ? Is it poflible he can know any thing of the private condud of the Mar¬ chefa: and, if he did, how does this affed her daughter ?—Or, what intereft can this. man have in wiihing me not to marrv her? for, as we have feen each other but a few times, his anxiety furely cannot be on my account. Neither certainly can the Mar¬ chcfe have faid, that he wiflied me to be his fon-in-lavv ; it cannot be : if even he had entertained fuch a wifh, which I do not
134· not believe he has, he would beyond all doubt have hinted it to me before he men¬ tioned it to the world. Perhaps the Count is, as the Marchefe reprefented him to me, a walking chronicle of fcandal ; if fo, what fignifies what he fays ? However, I am de¬ termined, if I can get him alone to-morrow, to hear the conclufion of his fiorv, be it what it may. How often does one perfon of known improper condud caufe thofe with whom' he is conneded to fall under like fufpicion ? I have had proof that the Mar¬ chefa can conquer fcruples ; is it not pofli¬ ble that her hufband may be of an equally ccmplaifant confeience ? and perhaps, as I before thought, in league with her r per¬ haps with the Count di Rebini ! but to what end I cannot think ; thefe cannot be the means for inftigating me to make an ofler of marriage to his daughter. I cannot think —at leaft I cannot write my thoughts any longer to-night.
As
to- í JJ
We<I¡:ef<by. As foon as I rife this m ornino: I find an epifìle from you, containing, as I fuppofe, an acknowledgment of the receipt of the little volume vvhich I fent off to you fome time <{go. I know the ftri&nefs with which vou regulate your own condud, and the juftice vvith which you cenfure any devia¬ tion from the ftraight path of morality, to wander in the enticing groves of pieafure ; and from thefe confiderations I almoft fear to pcrufe the fheet now before me, with the feal jufl broken, I have fome-where read, " that the truly good and wife man views with an eve of candour the frailties of his lefs peifefct fellow-creature, and that it is only from the arrogant pretender to exalted qualities that rigid cenfure ever falls on lenient errors ;" vvith this fentence in my recolledion, I cannot be fo unjuft to my friend as another inftant to defer per- ufing his letter without fear. But it fliall be on a frefii fheet of paper that I acknow¬ ledge the truth of the arguments which I nm well aware your tacit, but eloquent, re¬ presentative
?36 prefcntative îs about to gîv'e to my coniide¬ ration ; fo for the prefent adieu. Yours, &c. Charles Melford.
LETTER XVIIL Major Seymour to Sir Charles Melford. MY PEAR CHARLES, Í London. Am not twelve months older than your¬ felf, nor ís my difpofition of a very much graver caft than your own, and yet I begin to apprehend that you will difclaim all fu¬ ture correfpondence with me, and give me the title of a furly ad mon i flier againft the pleafures of life, becaufe I may myfelf hap¬ pen to have no tafte for their enjoyment.— But if you do this, you are miflaken in your opinion of me ; no man meets pieafure with more eagernefs than I do, but then I meet her where the road to her is clear, and I liridly
1?7 îlrîciJv avoid all intercourfe with her in t hoie crofb paths of temptation wdfich, when entered, are hung with rofes, but which muft be retraced over the thorns left vifible by the withering of the flowers. Thit> lite ii not the infignificant trifle which many wiih to make i í appear : it is no doubt con¬ venient to fuch whole minds are not fuffici¬ ently refined to feel that fuperlativc happi¬ nefs is in fuperlativc virtue to fay, that it is immaterial whether we ad our part in it well or 'ill; and this is the real caufe of numerous vices being dreffed in fpeci¬ ous names, put on them by evil-intended men, and received with avidity as their true meanings by that part of the multitude who have not fuflicient fenfe to look farther than the name, or fuflicient fortitude to corred their own evii and delu fi veiy plea¬ fant adions. You have ftudied mankind ; have you never ftudied that mofl fubtle ûf its machinations, that conftant moral abufc of terms, which glofles over bad adions with foft titles? What is the man who kills his antagonift in a duel ;-— a murderer. What
158 What is he who takes the life of his fel¬ low-creature on the hicrh-road?—a murderer. Bolh thefe men are equally amenable to the laws of ihrir country ; yet the one Hies from juftice b\ fly ir g his country, and lives ap¬ plauded bv the majority ; the other, when dying by tlie hand of the executioner, ii thought to receive only his due punifliment. And why are thefe two opinions thus fup¬ ported r —Becaufe the firft murder is called a point of honnir: —honour ranks on the fide of good ; the perpetrator, therefore, of this good deed muil gain applaufe from all good men. The fécond is called a viilan- ous action :— villany ranks on the fide of evil; the perpetrator, therefore, of this evil deed muft be execrated by all but evil men. And vet there is not a ihadow of difference in the immorality of the conduct of thefe two men ; the only difference lies in the ñames given by the world to their adions. Thus has everv vice been foftened hv fa- fliion, or cuilom, which ís the fame thing, till the moil heinous offences againft mo¬ rality are hardly confidcred deviations from the
1 'Λ the ftnii^ht rule of virtue. Or* war vou have already had my opinion. The ambi- ibus and intemperate man, whofe doors ure thrown upen to a tribe of profligate fy- cophanls, and whofe tables groan beneath the equal fplendor and luxury of his feaft, let it be procured at the expence of unpaid and perhaps ftarving tradefmen ; at the ex¬ pence of his children's future welfare ; at the expence of fome unhappy orphan, vvith whofc guardianiLip and property a deceived parent has entrufled him ; or by any means even more nefarious than thefe (and black¬ er arts are pradifed for fuch ends), is ho<- noured with the name of generous and hof- pitable. The unfixed mind, vvhich dips alternately, and without a preference of its own, into ihe petty immoralities vvhich dif¬ grace even the heroiini of error, is applaud¬ ed for its good-nature ; and the unformed mind, vvhich, confufed between falfe ideas ot principle and the alluring temptations of vice, endeavours to trample down the bar¬ riers of religion, and eftabliih a code of mo¬ rality fuited to iis own difpofirion, gains the praife
Ilo praife of manly fpirit. The moil turpíd violators of honefty, honour, and that faith whieli ought to fubfiil between man and man, are dignified with the appellation of induftiious endeavours to thrive. And to feduce the wife of a friend, or to meet ht r half-way when lier conduct befpeaks her willing to break thron çh the folemn vows of fidelity wliieh flic has fworn to her huf¬ band, is an abufc of moral virtue under the gentle name oi gallantry : it is a vice ren¬ dered fo fpecious by being too much con¬ nived at by the world in general, that even the virtuoufly inclined may fall into the crime without confidering the extent of their error. Their eyes may not be imme¬ diately open to the exceflive domeftic infe¬ licity, perfonal turpitude, remorfe of con¬ feience, and even injury to the unconnected in it, which fuch condud may produce; they may not, in their firfl warmth of paf¬ fion, perceive that, whatever the name, the vice remains the fame ; that however they may for a while colour the profpeds before them with the vivid 4mts of pieafure, if that pie aiiice
141 pieafure be immoral, the time will come when the fparkling lights will fade, and truth only will be left them for refledion. One coniideration, above all, on what I have written, gives me fatisfadion; it is, that although a man of fenfe may err once from warmth of paflion or want of juft coniider¬ ation at any particular moment, his error being once pointed out to him by the re- dawning of his reafon, he will not repeat an adion which confeience whifpers him is an equal degradation of the powers of his head and his heart. 1 think that, ere this paner reaches you, the month which you thought would anfwer your purpofe at Venice will be expired. Adieu ; I fliall be happy in receiving a letter from you dated from fome new refidence. Yours fincerely, George Seymour,
LETTER
142
LETTER XIX. Major Seif moar îo Sir Charles Me/fora. ^ London. 1 Wrote to you, my dear Charles, only four days ago ; but having within the 8 lafl hour received the flieet which brings me the firft confirmation I gain of your Marga- retta's w T orth from any channel of commu¬ nication but your own pen, í cannot for¬ bear fitting down to afk you, how, with virtuous happinefs thus in your power, you you could ever for a moment trifle with the fliadow of felicity refleded on your dazzled fenfes by wanton pieafure ? That you are not infenfible to the worth of Margarctta, is no matter of furprife to me ; that you can for a moment have fuffered her to lofe her hold upon your heart, does afton i Ìli me, When I fay this, I do not mean to vouch for her perfonal charms, becaufe I have re¬ ceived a proof of her good fenfe ; of thofe I can know nothing but from your account of
Í4:j of them : I only wiih to lead you back to refledions which you have yourfelf taught me once filled your breaft ; refledions oi the virtuous felicity you may, wlien you pleafe, enjoy in an union with Margaretta. It is true, that your love for her is yet a fecret to all but yourfelf and me ; fo is your adventure with the Marchefa di Marvaldi ; and 1 allow that this adventure does not «dually injure Margaretta: but ftill would you, if you were to-morrow to offer your hand to her, and to lay open to her what had for fome time pait been the ftafe of vour heart with resrard to her—would vou inform her of this occurrence? Would yon avow to her that, at the moment in which you w 7 ere looking forward to the cxpeda- tion of obtaining the honourable poftefiion of her perfon, in addition to the confidence of her excellent heart, vou had hurnbkd your feelings to the receiving gratification from the preference of a woman delibe¬ rately wanton, in thofe very points whieh you particularly efteem. Margaretta for re¬ garding with the mofl rigorous nicety ?—- Then
144 Then confider again, that though ihe doer not know the paffion you entertain for her, you know it yourfelf, and thus ought equal¬ ly to ad in conformity to its fupport as if it were known to all the world. If a man docs not maintain a ftrid confiftency in his private condud, he can never be happy within himfelf ; and there is a fear that in¬ ward feelings of mutability will communi¬ cate themfelves to his outward adions, and render him in the eyes of the world lefs refpedable than he might otherwife ap¬ pear. Charles, I did not intend to have ex¬ preffed myfentimentswith thewarmth which I find, on revi fing my letter, 1 have done ; but 1 will not, now it is once penned, ef¬ face what 1 have written : receive it, as it truly is, the admonition of my " heart's care," when warmed by the exquifite inno¬ cence of your Margaretta's letter. And now, what fliould you think, if I were to fay, that I believe myfelf much nearer a ftate of married happinefs than you are? I have nei know r n my miftrefs fo Jong as you
i 45 vou have vours, it is true : but I have known her a fuflicient time to have learnt that I can be happy with her, and to have difcovered that flie has no objection to taking her chance for being fo with me : nothing is wanting to make our union ccr- tain, but the content and approbation of my Emma's mother ; and, without her fandion, the amiable girl ref u fes to give me her hand. Mrs. Hughford h a widow, at a very advanced age, and refides at an old family manfion in Cumberland, in the vicinity of the lakes: Emma is at tliis time on a vi lit to a friend of her's, who is nearly related to my brother Sir Olivers wife, and thus the frequent intercourfe of ¿he fami¬ lies has given us the opportunity of efta- bliíhing an intimacy vvhich prcmlfes every happinefs. Mrs, Hughiord has not for ma¬ ny years travelled beyond the borders of .her own citate; and as Emma, with proprie- tv, infills on not entering into an indiffolublc encasement with a man unknown to her narent, Mr. and Mrs. A inherit, at whofe houfe flie now is, are to carry her down VOL. I, И İntO
146 into Cumberland, and I have her permilfior, to follow them to lodgings in the village ot Kirton, in which Mrs. Hughford refidcv Emma and her party fet out to-morrow ; ] ihall begin my journey on the fucceeding day, fo let your next letter be directed for me in Cumberland. Adieu, dear Charlei-, and believe me, Yours fincerely, George Seymour.
LETTER XX. Sir ? hurim M Jjord to Majer Stympar. ? cíiice, WcducftLty. I Know, my dc nr Seymour, that the date of this letter will not raife me in your opi¬ nion ; but do not judge too haftily ; hear my reafon for being flill on this fpot before you condemn me. Is it not more praife- worthy to remain here, and to fbew my¬ felf able to withftand the temptations into which
147 which you fear I fliould fall, than, by imme¬ diately leaving the place, to avow that my nature is too feeble to refift the adulation of pleafurable fedudion ? Indeed, from this re¬ fledion, I have perfuaded myfelf that It will be a moil excellent leffon of forbearance for my future life, that I fliould continue here fome time longer, and at the fame time regulate my adions by the Aride íl rules of virtue. I am in earneft, George, with regard to the regulation of my condud ; I can in one fentence convince you that I am fo : — mark thefe words: — Margaretta is as dear to me as ever. I have had ro pri¬ vate invitation again from the Marchefa, and the affair begins to lofe its hold on my recolledion. I intended, as you may re¬ member that I wrote νυιι, to have found an opportunity of talking apart with the Count di Rebini, the lati time of my dining in company with him at the Palazzo di Marvaldi. The common curiofity of any ilranger, when it had been raifed as the Count had excited mine by his ill-omened hints relative to the Marvaldi family, I h 2 thought,
148 thought, authorifed me to this, notwith* Handing I felt the full force-of the argu¬ ments contained in your letters ; but, how¬ ever, I had not the opportunity given me, for the Count had been fuddenly called to vifit fome of his eftates in Tufcany, and had apoiogifed for not keeping his appoint¬ ment. My time has lately paffed very pleafantly, though unmarked by any occurrence wor¬ thy of being written to you. I cannot fometimes forbear wandering what it could be that the Count was on the point of dif¬ clofing to me ; and furely you will not condemn me for amufing myfelf with my thoughts, fo long as I confine myfelf to thofe ; and yet, perhaps, you may fay, they are the foite rers of many improprieties, which would never be committed if we compelled ourfelves to hold the feat of re¬ fledion occupied only by pure ideas ; at leaft, trtat if any others by chance obtruded themfelves, we oppofed to them a power of argument calculated to difpel their in¬ fluence :—this, I dare fay, you think, and thus
U.9 thus far, I dare fay, you confider the giving of our thoughts too wide a licence, a moral irregularity. Well, George, I know you are generally in the right, and as I cannot help imagining this to be your opinion, I endeavour to make it operate as a com¬ mand from you on my refledion, when too warm in bringing to my remembrance that I have enjoyed pieafure in the private foci¬ ety of the Marchefa Laura. Sunday. Well, George, my pen you perceive has been idle for the three laft days ; and indeed it needs having had reft to render it adequate to the talk which it is now going to undertake.------More enigmas have ftarted up in the Paliazo di Marvaldi, and I feel my heart flout to relate them to you, as I have, I am fure, aded in them with honour.—The Marchefe di Marvaldi has a remarkably fine editrøn of Taffo in the original language, enriched with many beautiful plates; he mentioned it to me fome time ago by accident ; I expreffed a h 3 wifh
150 wifli to fee it, and he invited me to come on any morning which fuitcd my own pieafure, and look over it at my kifuie, in his library. Yefterday morning accord¬ ingly I went to the paliazo for this put- pofe : the Marchefc was not at home when I arrived there ; and the major-domo, old Bernardo, learning the errand of tny calk conduded mc into tho library.—It ís a large and elegant room, witli books ranged on either fide, and terminating in a glafs bow, or oratory, looking upon the water; in this are fofas and tables for the convenience of readers : and it is likewife divided from the other part oí the room by folding curtains of filk ; hither in general the Marchefc retires to take his fiefto. I took the book 1 came to perufe from its ili elf, and fat down by accident on a fofa hefore which part of the curtain was drawn. I had not been many minutes feated, be¬ fore a light ftep in the room drew my at- tention from the book ;—the Marchefa it was, and lhe entered the oratory : on fee¬ ing me, flie ftarted, and faid, tt Ah, Sig¬ nor
io i nor Carlo, is it vou? good-morning to you, i thought my hufband had been here."—· i returned her falul e, and rofe, as Ì fpoke, from mv feat.—" Prav fit frill, and amufe \ourfelf/' flie returned, " I am not coming to interrupt you, í want tf) find the Mar¬ chefc /' with a courteous inclination of the head flic left mc, and í refumed my feat. She had fcarcely reached the door of tho library, when I heard the voice of the Marchefe in the gallery ; he was coming towards the library ; the Marchefa flack- encd her ftep, and methim at the door: a Albert," flie faid, " have you thought on the petition which I mentioned to you this morning ?" — ct My love," he re¬ plied, " you know my purfe is at your difpoial ; do as you think,proper; 1 defir¬ ed you would before." — <c I ihould not wiih to give more," flic anfwered, " than you would approve."— t - 1 don't doubt," he returned, " but your own judgement will dired you better than my advice can do; you are always too tlelicate in uling what h mine ; I llrill foon be obliged to u 4 force
Uí3 force money upon you, left from accuftom- ing yourfelf to petition me as if I reftrain- ed your expences, you fliould from habit adually believe I do :—don't fay a word more about it." The Marchefa obeyed, and I heard Lr foot fteps die away along the gallery. Thought immediately quef¬ tioned me, f How does tliis agree with the Marchcfits account of her huiband, and her begging a ftranger's purfe ?" and I had fcarcely time to anfwer that İt was an enigma too hard for my brain to folve, before the Marchefe came up to the fpot where I was fitting.— " Good-morning," he immediately faid, u I am glad you did not iland upon the ceremony of my being at home, but purfued the intention of yonr vifit." — " You are very kind," I returned ; *' I knew you would wiih me to ad as i have done, and I had not fufli¬ cient refolution to debar myfelf the treat before me becaufe vou were not prefent to prefs me to fit down to it, after you had once given me the invitation." — " That founds fomctl ing like an apology, fignor,"
153 fignor," he rejoined, " and I do not like to hear a word of that nature from an equal and a friend ; I am fure you are a man of that politenefs that you would never do any thing in my houfe which you would not be happy to fee me do in your's ; I ihall come to England one of thefe days, and make as free with your Milton·"—« I am aftoniflied," faid I, " that the partiality you conftantiy do my country and countrymen the honour of profeffing > for them, has never induced you to make a fécond vifit to that kingdom."—" Why," he replied, * e I was once under a promife of paying a vifit to an Engliih nobleman«— but I prevent your reading, we will talk of this fome other time." — " Upon my word you do not," I anfwered ; " my prefent amufement is the excellent plates with which thefe volumes abound ; I can look at thofe, without being inattentive to what you may fay : pray gratify me by proceeding : what nobleman was it ? I moll probably know him."— u He is now dead," was the reply. " His death then, I fup- H 5 pofe,
154 pofe, prevented your vifit," I anfwered. " No," returned the Marchefe; " no, he did not die till two or three years after the time I was to have vifited him.— Hapaufed* then continued, <c 1 have unguardedly begun a fubjed, upon which I did not mean to enter ; favour me, Signor, by not queftioning me upon it : thus much I will tell you of the circumflance, ι hough I fhall forbear to mention his name ; the gentleman I refer to, pafled fome months in this city with his fifter for the recovery of her health ; I paid lo him many civili¬ ties, as it is my pieafure to do to ftrangers, paiticularly to Engiiihmen, and on his departure í gave him m v promife to vifit him in his own countrv ? but before he had left this city a fori night I learnt that the honour of my family had fullered by his acquaintance with it, of courfe I de¬ termined never to fee him again ;—but I imbibed no prejudice againft his nation, from the aft of an individual; I only re- folve J not to make that individual my hoft ia a country of whofe natives, in general, I had
155 f had formed an exalted opinion."------As the Marchefe concluded theie words he walked into the librarv, and the curtain fhaded me from his obfervation;—my book Hipped from my hand, and my head fell in refledion upon mv arm. The Count di Rebini had told me, cc that though Paulina was a very fine girl, and her rather poffeffed of a large property, vet the was not a girl whom every man would marrv."—What could this affertion mean, but that fome fi i« ma had attached itfelf to her charader, either diredly, from mifcondud of her own, or indirediy, from ???? vvron?· action committed bv one or hoth of her parents ? The Marchefe af- 'Irmed; " that the Erglilh nobleman had infulted the honour of hib familv" Pio· habilitv feemed to deck.re Paulina too votino· to have fufleied any delnfion of the heart, and poflibiliîv immediatelv whifpered in my • ar, that not tlie Marchete, but tlie Engliih nobleman, might be tie fatner of Pauìina ; that this might be the fecret vvhich the Count di Rebinİ had been on the point of ? ? difclofitií?
156 difclofing to me. The Marchefa's condud towards myfelf confirmed me in my fufpici¬ ons : " You bewitching young Englijirmen /" flie had faid ; mark that, George—" Eng- li/hmen;" an indired confeffion that I was not the only one who had poffefled charms for her. From my foul I pitied and ho¬ noured the Marchefe ; 1 confidered him a man whofe humane feelings would not permit him to difcard from his protedion a woman to ν horn he had once promifed it, though flie had caft afide the virtues which entitled her to poffefs it. Yet this was a weaknefs ; but it was a weaknefs on the fide of charity and mercy, and I continued to applaud him for endeavouring to work repentance in a diffolute heart, by tender¬ nefs and lenity towards its faults. What a vfllanous hypocrite is the Marchefa Lau- ra'1 w T as the next idea that ftarted up in my brain : great God ! how is it poffible for a woman of her mercenary and voluptu¬ ous difpofition to allume that exquifite grace of modefty, which gives enchantment to all her open adions ! " The Marchefe ihall come
157 come and vifit me in England," I inwardly faid ; " diverfity of fcene will difpel his forrows, and I owe to him the invitation in return for his numerous civilities to me." I w r as on the point of fpringing up from my feat and going to him, to entreat that he would fix a time for coming to Melford- houfe, when confeience—yes, Seymour,. confeience—^kept me immoveable on the fofa. The Marchefe had refufed to vifit his former Engliih friend, becaufe he had difcovered in him the infulter of his houfe's- honour : was I lefs culpable than he had been ? The Marchefe is ignorant, at leaft 1 fuppofe he is ignorant, that my cafe is a fimilar one ; but yet confeience made me a coward, I durft not aik him to come to England to vifit me. Thought had pro¬ ceeded thus far uninterrupted, when the found of the Marchefe di Marvaldls fteps, returning to the oratory, made me fnatch up my book ; it opened by accident at the epifode of Orlando and Seraphina : the Marchefe, in pafling me, call a glance over my fhoulder, and faid with a fmile, " Ah, this
1J8 this is the favourite love-tale of all you young men ; indeed I am not too old to like it myfelf: long as my Laura and I have been united, I feel all the warm affec¬ tion for her of an Orlando ; yet not more than fhe deferves of mc. I think it cannot have efcaped your obfervation, fignor, that the Marchefa is one of the moll exemplary and tender of wives nnd mothers." 1 felt at that moment as if I had been itanding at the bar of an inquifition :— í know I fmiled, though I felt very ferions ; and I with difficulty ffammered ont a fhort com¬ pliment on the fuperlativenefo of the Mar- chefe's connubial felicity. He went on by fav ïn<r " Signor Carlo, it is not mvwife that í fo particulaiIv wdfli to írive vou a high opinion of, by fetting forth to you her virtues and amiable condud, for 1 perceiv¬ ed tliat you fmilccl at my lait fpeet ii ; what í fo earneftly defire is—pardon what 1 am going to fay : I know I fpeak to a m;.n of honour, and that it would be fupcrfluous to afk his fecrecy on a point wdiich his own feelings will point out to him is only for the
15.9 the private ear of friendfliip/' I bowed in return to bis compliment ; he paufed a few moments, then continued— ee Do not vou think that, with fhch an example as that of the Marchefa Laura to regulate her tender and innocent years, my daughter Paulina could make happy the man who fliould receive her hand ?" The prophetic words of the Count di Rebini, that the Marchefc wiflied to fee me the hufband of his daughter, immediately returned with force to my memory. I anfwered, " that Paulína, in my opinion, poffefled every per¬ fonal charm, every mental virtue, and every polite accomplifliment, that could render a woman valuable to the man who fliould feek to unite himfelf with her for life ?" Pieafure gliflened in the eyes of the Mar¬ chefc as I fpoke thefe words ; he caught niy hand, and fcarcely allowing me to conclude my fentence, exclaimed, α Do you indeed fee my daughter Paulina in this point of view ?"—" Certainly," I anfwered ; "I never avow efteem which I do not feel." —" Do not laugh at a fond father," faid* he 5
? lie ; " but I wiih you had faid love ; you know not what happinefs it would give me to fee my Paulina your wife." The Mar- chefe fpoke this as confcious himfelf that he had fpoken no impropriety, yet fearful that the perfon to whom it was addreffed fliould conceive it fuch. 1 endeavoured to reply in a tone of voice which fliould fhow that I was fenfible of a compliment having been paid to me, yet that I was refolute in not accepting it : I faid, " The high opinion which you have juft given me proof that you entertain of me, merits my warmeft thanks, and ftiall ever be marked on that fide of my heart where gratitude is written; but my affedions are not my own to be- ftow, my heart is already given to another." —" Are you already married ?" he afked. " ín fentiment," I replied, " though not by law."—" Paulina knows nothing of what I have now faid to you," he returned; " and I truft flie never will." He paufed, and fixed his eyes on mine. " I fliall never fpeak of it," I replied. f€ You have a no¬ ble and worthy heart, the charaderiftic of your
loi your countrymen," he faid, prefling my hand between his with the ftridnefs of a- nimation arifino- from contendins: feelinsrs. I was fit to tear away my hand from his : to fuffer him to prefs it was tacitly avowing myfelf poffeffed />f the noble and worthy heart on which he had complimented me, and I felt myfelf all the while a ferpent to his peace. He proceeded thus: c< Signer, how ftrangely muft you think of me for the offer of my daughter, which I have jull made to you : a man of warm feelingh is hurried on by the defire of feeing hhs fa¬ vourite wifh accompliflied, as is a man m love, by his anxiety to enjoy the favourite objed of his paflion while it is in view ; his eyes are fhut to the extravagancies which he ufes to obtain it, and difappoint¬ ment only opens them to refledion on the means he has purfued." I replied, " I am fure, Marchefe, you w i ili the happinefs of your daughter-----?'* —" Witnefs Heaven!" he interrupted ne by exclaiming. " The means are then in your power," I conti¬ nued ; " the amiable Paulina loves the Marquis
i&j: Marquis de -Belleterre, and i believe him worthy of her afledion."—" No," anfwer¬ ed die Marchcfe, " no, that muft never be; the Marqt.is is, í believe, a tolerably grod young man as the times go, and í doub* not, as far as lies in the power of his heart, would contribute towards the happinefs oi my daughter, if flic were wedded to him ; but, though poffeffed of a title, his eftate in France, which is his all, and that by no means extenfive, is already fo much en¬ cumbered, that he can barely fubfiil as a Angle man ; how then could my daughter be maintained by him with that degree of comfort, I may fay elegance, in which flie has been brought up ? A father does not like to make another family by marrying his daughter into it, when her accomplifli¬ ments and fortune are fuch as ihould claim her an alliance to aggrandize herfelf: Pau¬ lina's hufband muff not be the Marquis de Belleterre; I know nothing moie asrainft the union than what 1 have mentioned tov ou, except that I cannot think of him without drawing comparions vvhich always throw him
ìfyj him into the dai ? iliade." — " Endeavour," faid f, " to place him in the foreground."— i£ Two prominent figures in a painting," he replied, trying to force a fmile, " if they do not utterly ruin tlie effect of the piece, are at leaft incompatible with each other." Tiie Marchefe, while fpeaking, had feated hiuffelf bv me ; a filence for fome minutes followed his lall fentence : he then fighed, rofe, took my hand, preffed it in his, look¬ ed at me with eyes gliflened by a tear, which partook the double nature of piea¬ fure and forrow, replaced Taffo before me on the table, and then walked flowly out of the library. What am I to think of all this ? I have conjedured fo much about what can be the motives which aduate this family, and alfo whether they are influenced in their—to me unaccountable—condud by various motives, or whether they are ading under the fame impulfe, that my imagination is for the pre¬ fent entirely drained ; I fliall therefore leave } ou tu think for yourfelf, and only fay, that your
164 your opinion upon thefe extraordinary oc¬ currences will give much fatisfadion to, Your fincere friend, Charles Meliord. P.S. Pardon me that felf has been fo predominant with me, that it is in the poit- fcript of my letter only that 1 recur to your intended marriage ; let the ftate of my mind plead my excufe, and accept from me the moft fervent prayers of true friend¬ fliip, for the fliowering down of every hap¬ pinefs upon your wedded life.
LETTER
16 j
LETTER XXI. Sir Charles Melford to Major Seymour. DEAR GEORGE, I Venice. Have left Venice ;—at leaft I fliall have done fo before this letter commences its journey to England. It is now nearly a week fince the con¬ verfation which I tranfmitted to you in my lafl paffed between the Marchefe and my¬ felf. I have been uncomfortable ever fince; í have felt myfelf living in the midit of an cxifting enigma, the folution of which is ever dancing in my brain, and yet never promifes accomplifliment. I have been twice this week at the Pal¬ iazo di Marvaldi, and have met them every other night at the opera. I cannot help feeling a reftraint in the prefence of the Marchefc which I never knew before in his fociety : his condud too is that of a man who appears to feel that he has leffened himfelf
166 himfelf in the opinion of another. The Marchefa Laura looks ftill as flie always. has done, all that is amiable ; and her mo¬ dell gaiety, to an maccurate obferver, ap¬ pears the fame that it has ever been ; but I am not an inaccurate obferver of her fea¬ tures, and I perceive a light tint of chagrin, which fine is conftantiy ftruggling to repel, ftealing over her bewitching countenance. Laft night, when the attention of almoft every one in the theatre was fixed upon the princi¬ pal charader in a new ballet, I faw, while I pretended not to perceive it, that though her face w^as turned towards the flage, the orbs of her eyes were obliquely glancing to¬ wards the fpot where I flood. W'hen the plaudits began at the conclufion pf the dance, flie feemed to wake from her reve¬ rie, and, as they ceafed, I heard a gentle figh ileal from her bofom. Did flic im h becaufe I had that morning informed hei that I fliould leave Venice to-day ? or did flie fear that I might change my inclination, and marry Paulina ?—impoflible î She could not fuppofe me fo bafe, though, lured by her
IÖ7 her wiles, f had funk vvith her into the fin of rendering an innocent huiband defpica* ble !—Oh that vow, why did I bind myfelf by it !— f could yet wifh before I leave this place------Margarctta ! Margaretia ! pardon mc that I have written the name upon this paper, but I felt myfelf relaxing into folly, and placed that name in the fentence I was writing as a check upon my feelings.—I know I am talking fooliflily and incoherentlv;—I do not Üke the mo- ment of leaving Venice, though I have refolved that l will leave it.------Of how llrange, of how unaccountable occurrences to me, has this place been the fcene! and how often have 1 repeated this fentence to vou i—igo to bid adieu to the Marvaldi familv, and then farewel to Venice for ml * v->er. Noon. It is done ; I have feen the Marchefa lor the lall time; flie was alone in the breakfaft apartment, when I was fliovvn into it. I announced the occafion of my vifit,
16S vifit, by faying I was come on the moil unpleafant errand which had ever brought me into the Paliazo di Marvaldi. She made me fome general compliment in re¬ turn. She was at work by a table; I took a chair, drew it to the table, and placed myfelf immediately oppofite to her : I fat fome moments in filence, with my eyes neither diredly fixed upon her, nor yet fufficiently averted to be looking from her; I held them in fuch a diredion, that had flie raifed her's, their ravs muft inevi- tably have met.—Her's remained ftili fixed upon her work. — I fuffered a haif-fmo- thered figh to efcape me.—Have patience with me, George, confider it was the lail rime that I was ever to fee her, and confider alfo how intimately vve knew each other and yet how diftantly I was permitted to addrefs her, though it was for the hi ft time I was ever to fee her. I wiflied t'- iake a tenderer farewel than that to which my oath bound me ; and for this defire you cannot blame me : every man who is not very bafe indeed, muft have fome efteem
169 efteem for a woman who has yielded fo much to him.-----My figh did not waft itfelf to the heart of the Marchefa Laura, at leaft neither her countenance nor atti¬ tude underwent the flighteft change.—I fat a few moments longer in filence ; I then caft my eyes round the apartment to be aflured there was no one in İt but ourfelves, nnd almoft determined to fpeak on the forbidden fubjed.—My lips moved twice in the form which would have produced t Laura,* if I had felt fufficient courage to have given found to their motion ; at the inftant I had refolved to fpeak ît, flie threw afide her work, and pufliing her chair back from the table, faid, " Signor, why fo melancholy ?" ----- (ς I leave Venice to-day," was all I could reply. " And m a contour of face," flie returned, iC which is a moil eloquent compliment to the fo¬ ciety it contains." — £Ç Indeed," I faid, " it is not a compliment, for I never left any place with more fincere regret.*'— tr You are of a country and an education," ihe anfwered, <c which muft render every vol. ι. ι fociety
17Ö fociety equally defirous of making itfelf pleafant to you ; it is not poflible that in any place to which you may happen to travel, if in that place there be any indi¬ viduals who are civiiifed, you can live unnoticed."—" But every individual," re¬ plied I, " who may poffefs the defire of becoming intimate with a ftranger, may not poffefs the exquifite art of rendering that intimacy interefting to his feelings."— I fpoke this fentence with a foft but due emphafis, and, while fpeaking it, I endea¬ voured to communicate to my eye the feelings of my heart. The Marchefa fmil¬ ed while í was fpeaking, and when I ftop¬ ped fhe faid, " I wifli my hufband and Paulina had been prefent to have, received their filare of this very elegant compliment ; I'll endeavour not to let it lofe any of its force by my repetition." George, had I not heard her pronounce thefe words, and beheld her countenance while flie delivered them, I could not have believed it poffible for a woman who had once given indulg¬ ence to her paffions as the Marchefa Lau¬ ra
ra had done, to have addreffed the very man with wdiom flie had gone affray in the voice of innocent fweetnefs, accompa¬ nied by the look of chilling modefty, with which flic fpoke thefe words to me. í have often bkiflied, I know not why, in the fociety of a knoren modeft woman; but had any one ever told me, that it were poflible for the affeded modefty of a wo¬ man of whofe levity I had had proof to have made me feel awkward for a fingle moment, I believe 1 fliould have challenged htm as an infulter of my manhood ; how¬ ever, fo it was; f he affumed modefty of this woman adually cowed me, and before i could recover myfelf to fpeak to her again, the Marchefe and his daughter came into the room together. The moment I faw them enter, I could not forbear afking my¬ felf, whether it had been by accident or defign that the Marchefa had received me alone r —if by defign, flie had made bad ufe of the time vvhich I had paffed alone with her ; perhaps I ought to have made her fome prefent !—if ihe had received me i s alone
1/2
alone by accident, how weil had flie adher¬ ed to the condud to vvhich flie had told me fhe fliould ever ad up when neceffary in my prefence. Doubtlefs it was neceffary then that flie ihould have been upon her guard, only I was not acquainted why it was neceffary ; furely had this not been the cafe, as we were never to fee each other again------but I will not conjedure any farther about wdiat can now never be elucidated; fuffice it to fay, that I kiffed a hand of her and Paulina at parting, and fliook both thofe of the Marchefe ; he gave mine the preffure of warm friendfliip ; my heart was too honeft to return it, but it offered up a fervent prayer for his hap¬ pinefs, as I ran down the fteps of his man¬ fion. My lafl enigmatical tafk is performed, and I feel happier than I have done for Ionie time. The Marquis de Belleterre is waiting to fee me depart ; he is an excel¬ lent young man, and 1 wifli Paulina were his; he is fighing over her name, and I have not the courage to tell him that I fear the
1 '•"I 1 / ? the fighs he now breathes are not the hea- vieft he will ever chaw on pronouncing that word* Adieu ! I intend journeying to¬ wards Rome. I hope you will allow me a little merit (I give myfelf a great deal of credit)., for having taken my lait walks in the ftreets of Venice. Do not laugh at me ; make fome allowance for the variety of difpofitions ; recoiled that you have ever, from a boy, been the uniform and fteady George Seymour ; I the volatile, though honeft, Charles Melford.
i 3 LETTER
174
LETTER XXII. Sir Charles Melford to Major Seymour. DEAR GEORGE, ? ΓοίΙ -lioufe at M ------ , 1 Am not more than feven leagues re¬ moved from Venice, nor is it above as many hours fince I concluded a long epiftle to you ; ^and yet I no fooner leave my car¬ riage to change horfes than I call for pen, ink, and paper, to addrefs you again.— Some new wonder, you doubtlefs ima¬ gine, occafions this hafty waiting : if I had not almoft ceafed to cail any occurrence by that name, I fliould fay this were one.—■ Juft as I was ftepping into my carriage at the door of the hôtel in St. Mark's-fquare, a male figure mafked came up to me, and put into my hand a note, which I here tran- fcribc : tf Oh that I knew a name fuffi¬ ciently tender by vvhich to bid farewel to my dear Signor Carlo !—oh what a tortur¬ ing reftraint have my feelings undergone when
175 when I have fo repeatedly been in j r our fo¬ ciety, and yet have only dared to acknow¬ ledge the approbation with wliieh my heart beheld you through the cold medium of politenefs !—then, too, to be conftrained at parting, though alone with you, to bid you adieu onlv in the chilling and common- place terms of civility !—oh ! it was a great¬ er violence to my feelings than my foul is capable of bearing up under, without the alleviation of telling you, by the means of this paper, that there is a heart in Venice, from which your image will never be ef¬ faced till the cold hand of death flops the vibration of thofe pulfes which nourilh your idea. Signor, I have ever appeared to you a myftery, in all but love ; in that my heart has challenged your's with franknefs : fhame would overpower me while I make this confeffion under my hand-writing, had I not two fupporters amidft all my difficul¬ ties, my agonies, and my difappointments, on which I do and ever will rely for confo¬ lation ; the one is jour honour, the other a fecret impulfe ; an impulfe which I dare ι 4 not,
17b not, cannot confefs, but under which 1 muft ad; which, if explained to you, would free me from that grofs violation of honour under which my charader muft appear to you to lie, if ever you have confidered that charader, if it may be called one, impar¬ tially. Oh that 1 durft fhow myfelf to you as I am, as I would wifli to be !—but, if í did, inevitable perdition muft be the confe¬ quence : let me drive the idea from my head, and let me proceed to humble my¬ felf ftill more before you than I have ah ready done —I cannot write what I would fay— ? holy virgin ! why was I born to feel the conflids that rend my heart !—Pity me, I muft fpeak ; I once aiked your purfe— underftand me—do not oblige me to fay more.—-My heart would break if I did not refolve that it ihould live to pray for Carlo. How much do I envy this paper! your eyes are fixed on it—I fliall meet them no more ! —Adieu ; may you be far, far happier than Laura."
Extra-
177 Extraordinary woman !—how can fhe be aduated ! what can be the impulfe under which flie ads?—I hefitated a moment what to do ; then returned into a room of the hôtel, took a flieet of paper, and having written in its centre, ff May thefe contri¬ bute to your happinefs," I fealed up ín it fifty zechins, called for the maik, and afked him if he knew to whom to carry it? He bow T ed, in fignal that he did ; I accordingly gave it into his hand without a diredion, leaped into my carriage, and fell into a re¬ verie, from which I fcarcely awoke till I arrived at this fpot I am more furprifed than ever in my conjedures about this family, particularly the Marchefa : if her defigns upon me had folely been gain, furely flie w r ouJd not have been contented with the two trifling fums fhe has obtained from me ; and at how dear a rate, if I was inclined to boaft of a lady's partiality, has flie obtained them I —She doubtlefs labours under fome fecret forrow : I have ever felt myfelf the friend of mankind, and wifh from my heart I ι 5 coukl
17? could alleviate, if but in part, the pangs of fo exquifitely interefting a woman. Oh, Sej mour, conceive what a woman flie muft be, who can one moment, by her modefty, freeze the pulfe of the fame heart, which flie can, in another moment, render unable to refufe accompanying her's through the mofl unbounded ranges of pieafure. At the conclufion of my Jaft fentence I meant to have fealed up my letter ; but it was fated not to fet off without a little more intelligence. My fervant has juft been in my room, aiking me whether I knew the maik who put the note into my hand as I was leaving Venice ? This queftion I im¬ mediately concluded to be the preface to fome information he was going to give me, and my anfwer was an enquiry whether the maik was known to him ? He replied, that in ftooping down to lift one of my trunks into the carriage, he had caught a glimpfe of the face which the maik had been meant to conceal, and had difcovered it to be that of old Bernardo, the major-domo of the Marchefe di Marvaldi. On the evening that
179 hat I met the Marchefa alone in the caffi- 10 flie told me that flie had one friend in the Paliazo di Marvakli ; this friend I had before conjedured to be the major-domo, from the remark he had made to me wdien I was examining the portrait of the Marchefa over the chimney in the mufic-room ; what my fervant has juft told me confirms my fufpicion. For Heaven's fake write to me foon ; confider I have no confident near me, ami want fomething very much to communicate with in addition to my own thoughts. The Pope is the father of myfteries ; I wonder whether he w-ould be able to ex¬ plain the one in vvhich I am involved : I fhall confider about calling upon him when I arrive at Rome, to afk his afliftance. Farewel, and believe mc your fincere friend, Charles Melporeu
ι 6 LETTER
180
LETTER XXIII. Major Sej/moar to Sir Charles Melford. _ Kirton. W ELL, my dear Charles, the fummit of my earthly wiihes is accompliflied ; the lovely Emma Hughford has confented to become the wife of your friend, and the nuptials are to be foiemnifed in the courfe of fix weeks : but Mrs. Hughford, as par¬ ticular as warm in her affection to her daughter, does not permit us to have any other refidence than her houfe; and though I have not much opinion of the great hap¬ pinefs which can refuît to either party from parents and children inhabiting the fame dwelling, yet I think Mrs. Hughford will afford an exception to my general opinion. She is amiable, well-informed, and liberal in her judgements ; equally adapted and equally willing to be the friend and com¬ panion of youth : ihe poflefles thofe engag¬ ing manners from which advice comes apo¬ logifed
181 logifed for, by the very evident excellence of the difpofition which delivers it, and from whofe lips cenfure iffues in fo gentle terms, that it carries convidion of her juft difcernment to the heart of thofe to whom it is addreffed. Mrs. Hughford is, in the exad acceptation of the phrafe, an old Engliih gentlewoman. Her manners poffefs eafe without flippancy; her deportment and drefs favour of the old court, but they give her rather an interefting than a rifible peculiarity. Her manfion, like herfelf, is ancient and venerable, and bears the marks of much beauty, infi iling upon notice, a- midft the gradual decay of the whole. Her fervants are old, and carry in their counte¬ nances a demand upon thofe privileges which fidelity has given them: nay, the old rna ili ff who guards the entrance appears by a growl, which he accompanies by a wag of his tail, to be enforcing his claim upon your refped, on the ftrength of a like pre¬ rogative. My Emma alone is in the glow of prefent perfedion; and the wiliing at¬ tention which flic pays to the unities of the parent
??, parent fcene around her, renders her, to my partial eyes, the goddefs of animation to the fpot on which flic fmiles. The en¬ tire village of Kirton is Mrs. Hughford's, and fhe is the mother of thofe who breathe in it : babes lifp her name, and their an- ceftors proudly tell you, that the Man of Rofs has an equal in a woman !—Oh, how wrong, how ignorant are thofe who confi¬ der the inferior claffes of fociety as animals devoid of the feelings which endear man to man, and as deftiture of the virtues:—- when they are [o, depend upon if, Charles,. it is the fuperior wdio has cruelly hardened their nearts into depravity. Beneficence ex¬ ercifed towards the poor never fails to be¬ get their gratitude ; their minds are not born humble with their conditions; their hearts are naturally as foft to the impref- fions of virtue as thofe of their fuperiors. How exceffively then does the fuperior err, when he drives them to the neceflity of hardening their minds to feed their hunger, and when he, by his own example, freezes into want of feeling their before gentle hearts,
I S3 hearts. Mrs. Hughford's plantations are not cut down in the winter, nor her wood- ftacks robbed ; for flie fuffers no peafant to want a blazing faggot on his hearth, whilft flie herfelf enjoys the glowing coals. Mrs* Hughford has game in plenty; for flie tempts no poor peafant to turn poacher, by fuffering his family to want thofe necef- fities of which flie is enjoying a fuperfluity. Mrs. Hughford fears no thieves by night, for, when merit applies for charity, flie ne¬ ver fliuts her ear againft its prayer, nor clofes her hand againft the impulfe of her heart. Oh, Charles, I am, for the firft time of my life, in raptures !—What a ftate of enviable happinefs ihall I enjoy, in endea¬ vouring to ad fo as to be thought worthy of fucceeding Mrs. Hughford, jointly with my Emma, in her hold upon the hearts of thefe poor villagers. How contemptible a tvrant, or how ignorant a reafoner muft that man be, who defpifes the good opinion of the poor man! a good opinion .rom the mouth of jhe poor man, is the moil meri¬ torious praife the rich man can be titled with :
im with: to have done an adion which begets us the gratitude of him upon whom it is performed, when he is one from whom no return can be expeded, is the nobleft teft of the goodnefs of his heart by whom it was conferred. . Come, Charles, come to England ; make Margarctta the miftrefs of your hand, as fhe is already of your heart, Leave the delufions of Itaty, which can only titúlate your paflions, without touching your mind, and return to the fiable enjoyments which your union with the woman to whom you are fo wifely attached can alone enfure you; Jet us both commence the married ftate at as near a period to each other as we are able; let us make it our pieafure to emu¬ late each other's happinefs, while we make it our boaft that there is no preponderance in the felicity of either, to be envied by the other. I do not fay that I hope you have left Venice, becaufe I truft you have done fo long ago. í forbear comments on your laft letters ; the fubjects tliat they treat of are fuch, pardon me, as deferve only to be known
185 known that they may be forgotten ; give me a fubjeet worthy to be engraven on my memory; tell mc that you are on the point of returning to England, and calling Mar¬ garetta wife : this intelligence would give infinite fatisfadion to him who is ever your fincere friend, George Skymcur,
LETTER XXIV. Sir Charles Melford to Major Seymour* DEAR GEORGE, H Poft-houfe at Q—. A VING now left Venice a fortnight, my curiofity relative to the ftrange occur¬ rences which paffed while I was refident in that place become enfeebled, and I begin now again to take pieafure in thofe matters of refearch which brought me hither: and where, think you, I am now moralizing and writing to you r —in a miferable hovel, dignified
dignified by the name of inn, and in which I fee no apartment fet afide for the ufe of ftrangers, except the chamber in which í am now fitting, and which contains two very uninviting beds, defigned to be occu¬ pied by myfelf and my fervant. If my fupper-fare anfwers the appearance of my apartment, it will not be very tempting ; and my lamp is fo dim that I lay down my pen at the end of every line I write, to trim İt ; and to very little purpofe do I exert my endeavours. Well, there is a happinefs in not having a difpofition which leads us to imbibe faftidious ideas in our youth ; they are the continual bane to the happinefs through life of thofe who have inhaled them. How many a man with the three letters prefixed to his chriftian name, which precede mine, would imagine, for inftance, that the burning of oil affeded his olfadory nerves, and conceive himfelf ill for a month afterwards ; nor indeed are thefe delicate habits now-a-days confined entirely to thofe who have titles as their apologies, they take a far wider limit, and bind
187 hind themfelves to thofe whofe education has been negleded, or, what is worfe, the purpofes of it perverted by affectation. By education having been negleded, I do not mean to in fiance a mind which has not been inilruded in the various languages, arts, fciences, and accomplifliments; I mean that heart which has not been taught alone ihe theory, but the pradice, of moral du¬ ties, focial and particular ; which has not learnt that the man of letters is not a wife man, unlefs he fuffers common fenfe and received opinion to be the rule of his ac¬ tions; and who is not convinced, that to be univerfally contented with the accidents of life, is a much happier trait in his charader than is the affedation of feelings too refined to bear with eafe the cafualties of an im- pcrfed ftate. Man is made after the Imagfc of God ; and if that image, when called a ploughman, be content and feel happy to ufe the favours with which nature has en-· (lowed it, unadulterated by affedation, it is a truer refemblance of the original from vvhich it is copied, than that image with any
188 any other name which twifts its abilities in¬ to perverted channels. A rap at my door— t Come in'-—my hoften enters, and with a fmile and a eourtfey'tcJis me, t flie has a favour to beg of me, which flie is fure I will not refufe her." French and Italian women, I have remarked, al- ways compliment a man of whom they are going to make a requeft, upon the benig¬ nity of his features— u What is your de¬ mand ?" faid I. " A carriage," fhe replied, " with only one gentleman in it, has juft flopped at my door; the horfes are too much fatigued to proceed on their journey to-night ; I have no room in my houfe but this, and my kitchen below, and fhouid efteem it as a great favour done to me, if you would permit the gentleman to fliare your room and fupper with you, and occu- py one of the two beds which this apart¬ ment affords, 1'li give your fervant half a bed with my fon in the hay-loft."— " If it had been a lady inftead or a gentleman," faid I, fmiling in my hoftefs' face—" You are a gentleman yourfelf, fignor," flie an¬ fwered,
189 fwered, " and it might have been your fate to have arrived laft yourfelf." She fpoke thefe words with an archnefs that pleafed me ; and I defired her, as I had from the firft moment of my learning what was her requeft intended to do, to fhow the gentleman up flairs. I hear my hoftefs and the ftranger ap¬ proaching;—ought 1 to lay down my pen to receive him or not ?—no, certainly not ; he comes to occupy the half-room vvhich my hoflefs lets to him, and not to vifit me ; if there had been another apartment in the houfe, I fliould not have feen his face.— iC Firft come, firft ferved," is an old pro¬ verb ; I fometimes feel a refped for thofe old good fayings, and a defire to enforce the truth : I have left my co-lodger the bed neareft to the door.—They are coming up flairs;—my hoftefs enquires if he has no fervant with him or upon the road ?—a faint voice anfwers, " No." She bids him beware he does not Humble, for the flairs were very bad—note this miracle, George a hoftefs can fpeak truth. They
190 They enter :—a long roquelaure conceaL the figure of the ftranger, í can only per¬ ceive that he is low of flature :—he takes no notice of me, fo I continue writing.—The hoflefs has affifted him in taking off his ro¬ quelaure :—his proportions are thin and effeminate ; he fpeaks fo low, and in an¬ fwers of monofyllables to the queftions of the hoflefs, that I cannot difcover whether his voice refembles his perfon in its delica¬ cy ; the dufkinefs of the room and the large hat which the ftranger wears, pre¬ vent me from feeing his face :—he has plac¬ ed himfelf in a chair ; my hoftefè puts a table before him to reft the lamp upon, which is allotted to him :—with a glance at each of us, as much as to fay, il How much more comfortable you might be, if you would become acquainted, gentlemen," fhe now leaves the room. How awkwardly Englifhmen feel in the prefence of utter ftrangers when compar¬ ed with any other nation 1—I could like to break the filence, vet cannot refolve what to fay :—the youth, for fuch he ap¬ pears
pears, fighs — he rifes and approaches a few fleps towards the fpot where I am fitting.— Great God ! he calls me c Carlo/ în a tone of voice which thrills my heart.—Oh, heavens! it is !—it is the Marchefa Laura in difguife 1 I can write no more now. ? Tbree in the morning. ??, Seymour, I know not how to ad¬ drefs you, what to tell you, or wdiat to conceal from you ;—conceal is an ugly term, when ufed to a friend, yet if I fpeak out, I know you will think me cenfurable— culpable ; but indeed I am not ; events cannot always be defcribed exadly as they happened, however defirous may be the inclination of him who writes them, to give them with accuracy. It was the Marchefa Laura, in the habit of a youth : don't blame her condud, flie has fome fecret caufe for mifery which prej's upon her heart, to atone for her frailties« How was I ftartled by feeing her before me, on the fpot where fhe then ftood!—I was however
1<32 however on my guard ; I rofe from my feat, and bowed refpedfully to her in filence. She extended her hand towards me, and as I took it in mine, flie faid, tc We are fafe, my dear Carlo, we have nothing to fear at the prefent moment, we may fpeak without reftraint;" Her voice appeared fo rough to what I had ever before heard it, that it ftartled me, and almoft undecided whether it was flie or not ; I ftill continued filent. — * t Don't you know me, Carlo?" flie afked in a foftened voice, while a ten¬ der fmile fpread itfelf over her features. if That fmile," I replied, " confirms that you are the Marchefa Laura." — "I fear¬ ed," faid flie, " tliat you were forry to fee me here ; I trembled to behold vour uncer- tainty; I miftook it for your hefitation whe¬ ther or not to acknowledge one fallen like myfelf."—" Fallen !" I exclaimed. fC Sit down," fhe returned, " I cannot ftand, I am weak, faint, and haraffed beyond the ftrength of my poor heart." We fat down, and flie continued by faying, " Oh, God, that I fliould meet you here ! and yet if you caft
i í) J eaft me from you, I am the moft miferable outcaft on this wretched earth." She plac- | ed one hand before her eyes, and her bo- 'fom rofe and fell in quick ftiatches produc¬ ed by mental agony. b£ For God's fake,'* faid I, moved to compaflion by her forrows, " what has befallen you?—why do I fee you here and in this difguife?—-why are the firft founds with which you accoft me thofe of defpondency and afllidion r" Her Uars increafed, but flie fpoke not. " Teii me, I entreat you tell me, what affl ids you," I faid, prefling her hand in mine; " have con¬ fidence in me, and lay open your heart to me."—" Never," flie replied vvith empha¬ fis, iC never; it muli not, cannot he:" lhe paufed a few moments, then went on : _ u at leaft not for the prefent ; a time may come ------yet, that cannot be, for we (hall never meet again, never more fee each other after this night : had I known that this houfe contained you, Signor Carlo, I had not entered it.— Oh, why do I meet vou again, where vve are free from the ob fer¬ vi tion of all eyes but our own!—Oh that vot. ι. ? it
İ94 it had not happened ! and jet my fool i fli, nry traitorous heart felt joy at firft beholding you." There was fuch a contradidion in this declaration of her forrow at our having met, and her ialutation of pieafure on firft beholding me, that I felt unable to anfwer her. While I was refleding in what words to addrefs her, fhe rofe haftily from her feat, threw her arms about my neck, kiffed my cheek with fervor, and then darting from me towards the door, exclaimed, u Farewel, for ever !" I ran to her, and took her hand to draw her back. " Why- do you fly me thus ?" I cried. " Becaufe I know your heart," flie replied. " How ' what know you of it ?" I afked. " That it is a heart," flic anfwered, tt warm in fvmpathy tovv&r's the wretched, and that I liave already trefpaffed too much on h> fvi*ïinsrs ; all the return I can make to vou is to fly to fome fpot where the ability will * not be left me of making farther encroach- ments on its goodnefs : farewel, endeavour to foiget me:—if you fliould remember me, all 1 beg of you is, not to hate my ill- fated
i.'). í fated memory for intruding unbidden upon \otir happy moments."— tt You fliall not go without giving mc fome explanation of umr fituation and caufe of miferv," I cried. " I would fooner die, than give it to you," ¡lie replied : " oh, Carlo, it is the only thing I coukl refufe you," She paufed a few moments, and our eyes met in tender, though filent, eloquence. With a heart- drawn figh fhe then faid, tí For the holy Jefus' fake, I entreat you to let me <gol — k< Whither," 1 allied, " whither would you go? and why defire to fly me?"— 4i Why, I have already told you," flie re¬ plied ; iC whither, is a queftion 1 cannot fo readily anfwer,"—" Where is the Mar¬ chcfe ?" I afked. " In Venice," fhe re¬ turned. " And you here alone ?" faid I. u I have left the Marchcfe for ever," flie returned. (i I eft him ' " I exclaimed. v£ 1 am feparated for ever from him and from mv daughter," flie anfwered in a tone of disn ified firm nefs mixed with a ? ibrrow which flie appeared to wifli to con- ·. cah f< 1 told vou, Signor Carlo, that the ? 2 " Mai cht. fe
?? Marchefe di Marvaldi never loved me, but oh, fignor, I could not tell you how I loved, how I adored him ; how little fliould I have thought it, to have facrificed honour, fame, life, to the happinefs of that un¬ grateful man : and oh, how has he requit¬ ed me í Signor Carlo, I have not folded my child to my bofom fince the firft day of her entrance into this w r orld : fee how the mother's pangs have been recompenfcd to me. Judge how my heart has------ " flie flarted : " but I am betraying myfelf, and invoking on my own wretched head a mifery greater even than that which I now fuffer, and which my death alone can end." —" But the Marchefe has fettled a provifion upon you for life ?" I faid. " Fíe has fet¬ tled upon mc," fhe replied, " that only oi which he coukl not deprive me ;—the wide globe to feek a hard maintenance upon."-— " And do you feek no redrefs from the laws of your country ?" I faid. u They would grant me none," flie anfwered. " What have you done to forfeit their protedion ?" I aiked. " Nothing," was her anfwer. « Of
1.97 ' t Of what, then, would the Marchefe accufe you ? " w r as my next queftion. " Nothing," flie replied ; " he would de¬ fend mc in π court of juftice."—" And yet drives you from his own houfe ?" I return¬ ed. " He would rather fee me dead than living under the roof of his manfion," flie anfwered. Again flie ftruggled to free her¬ felf from my hand, and gain the door. I felt an intereft in the fituation of a woman caft thus friendlefs, and thus myfierioufly upon the world, which would not permit me to fuffer her to leave me till I had ufed more perfuafions for endeavouring to pre¬ vail with her to tell me how I might alle¬ viate her condition. I befought her if flie had refolved that wc ihould never meet after this ni srh t, at leaft to çrant me a few hours' •?' ? converfation while we were together. To this ihe with difficulty confented, and I had jufl led her back to her feat when the entrance of the bufy hoftefs with our fup¬ per obliged us to remain filent, or to fpeak only on forced fubjeds, till the eon- ? 3 cîufioti
Ι.9δ clufion of our meal gave her no lonsrcr , plea ior reuiaining in our apartment. On our beiiiir at length left alone, I th'.. addrefled her: " On jour firft finding ?.: in this apartment, Marchefa, you faid that vve were free to fpeak without reftraint, yoa doubtlefs meant on any fubjed?" Sh, reddened extrémek, , and faid in a quh.r- and tremulous voice, iC On any fubjed bth one, remember vour oath."— iC Docs it bind ?? here ?" I afked. She raifed her hands in .uu^attitude of entreaty, and fixing upon me her piercing eyes full of fupplication, faid in .a low accent, ci For the love of God, do not fvverve from what you have fworn." I wa* compelled not to fpeak on the fubjed upon which alone I wiflied to converfe, thm continued filent for fome minutes. The Marchefa refted her head upon the pahi: of her hand, and continued alfo withoir j fpeaking. i looked towards her, but K.' 1 eyes were hid by her hand. I fighed to a'- | trad her attention, as I was undecided, ii ι I fpoke, wdiat to fay. She echoed my figh, and raifed herfelf from the poft ure ui refledion
IfJÚ refledion in which lhe had been fitting ; flie then faid, " You requefted me, Signor Carlo, to grant you a few hours' converfa¬ tion, I am prepared lo hear you."— li What can I fay to you?" 1 afked, rifirg in agita¬ tion from my feat. Slie tinderftood my queftion, íhe perc« íved that í vvas glancing at the interdided fubjed, and anfwered; " .Signor, vvas not I right in prefling you to fuffer me to be gone from hence forno time ago ?*'— <c Your reafbn for flopping at this houfe, f underfiooJ, before I faw you, was vour inability to travel farther to-niiriit; how then," I returned, tf can I, now 1 do know who the traveller is, permit h.cr to undergo any inconvenience, to whicii the is en en defirous of fubmitting herfelf?" She fmiled vvith half a figli, but did not fpeak. I took Hvo or three turns of tlie room İn filence, hoping flie would give me a hint for my converfation ; for fmce the admoni¬ tion vvhich ihe had ffiven me in an under· ? voice, 1 began to imagine abfurditics with¬ out any iixed ideas; and to fear, with ust knu '? ii -g of what 1 vvas alarmed. A few ? 4 moments
200 moments of cool refledion, however, rid rny mind of thefe unpleafant fenfations, but not of wonder ; I began to be confirmed that whatever caufe for myftery there was about the Marchefa, if there really were caufe for any, muft lie in herfelf, as flie had come alone to the inn ; and was certainly not known by any one in it, as flie paffed upon its inhabitants for a male. Thofe enigmas which appear the nioft complex are often the moft fimple when folved, and cautions which feem very unneceffary to thofe unacquainted with the reafons why they are taken, frequently prove mofl ju¬ dicious when explained: this conclufion I next drew, and it contented me to con¬ tinue for the prefent paffive in the aflairs of the Marchefa. I returned to her, took her hand, and held it for fome moments between the palms of mine ; I then faid, ** You have travelled too far to-day, you are very much fatigued."—" 1 am indeed weary," flie " anfwered ; " my fpirits, and my ftrength are alike exhaufted."—" Re¬ tire to bed," I returned, u I fliall," flie re¬ plied ;
201 plied ; " I want the refreíhment of fleep :" fhe drew her hand out of mine, rofe, went to the door, opened it, and called for the hoflefs. c < What do you want?" faid I; " why did you not fend me for whatever you may require ?"—" I could not com* miffion you," flie anfwered ; " I muft fee the hoflefs myfelf: flie is coming; do me the favour to remain at the other end of the room till I have fpoken to her." I obeyed by placing myfelf before the win¬ dow, though the darknefs was fo thick that it was impoflible for me to difcern objeds through it. The hoflefs and the Marchefa whifpered together fome mo¬ ments ; the hoflefs then went down the firft flair and flopped. The Marchefa turned towards me, and faid in the fame tone of affeded roughnefs in which fhe had before fpoken when the hoflefs was prefent, <f Signor, pray go to bed, I filali be gone fome time." She then followed the hoflefs down the flairs, and when the arrived where her head only was vifible to me, as I ftood in the chamber, flie gave ? 5 me
20í2 me a fmile, which played round my hean like a liquid ñre, and which my heated fenfes told me I could not fail to interpret right. It appeared ftrange to me that flic ihould thus quit the apartment, and flill more un¬ accountable that there fliould be any mat¬ ter which, in her prefent charader of ? male, fhe could want to confide to the hoff ifs, and at the fame time to have me re¬ main unacquainted ivith : however, I had refleded fo much to no purpofe on tht charader of the Marchefa, that I refolvx' • to admit no more though ís at the prefeiu time, except the anticipation of her retui f >r the night. For the firft few minutes after flie wa¬ gon e ] con ι in ned bleifing the ace iden wìiich had caufvd us to meet İn this ftrang luiiiiii'T. Heie, George, I know vou wik t λ? -ai >v . \iol-eiuly againft my condi. d ; pei- l ??? thiavv down ?? letter, and fwear ?,? v/ì'J newr ro» d another fine of my pennin», but lune pinenet, ard hear n.\ dih'U' Your an 0 ei would, í gr^nt, be jjftifubV*
eoa if, with my purer affeélions privately pledg¬ ed to Margaretta, I had been fufficiently bafe to have fouqjit this interview with the Marchefa di Marvaldi : but indeed you are unjuft to me if you accufe me of any thing hariher than an incorrcdnefs in my morals, from not having flown from the peculiar fituation in whLh chance had placed me. " Go to bed/' flic had faid : I fuppofed that there was probably fomc concealed meaning in thefe words, and it was my part to obey them; at all events, I confi¬ dered that it would be the bcft fafeguard pgainft fufpicion of the truth iclating to us, if 1 pretended to be faft afleep when the hoftefs ihould light her back to the cham¬ ber : I accordingly undrefled mj felf, and got into the bed neareft the door ;—the cafe was altered fmce my firft refolution. I had no occafion to make ufe of any efforts to keep my felt awake: İt would have re¬ quired fomc art, I conivdiï, for ine tc» have lulled myfelf to fleep. The Marchefa iL cin¬ ed to me a \\.ry long w! ile i,, rotun ing; but I attributed at firft the apparent length ? 6 uì
204 of time to my impatience for her coming. Half an hour, by the fliorteft calculation I could perfuade myfelf to make, flie had been gone: I got up and looked at my watch ; I found that I had been in bed five minutes above that time. I liftened at my chamber door. I heard voices be¬ low in converfation, but could not difcover whether her's was of the number. I durft not open the door, and I began to confider. that it was equally unguarded to keep my lamp burning : I put it out, and again got into bed. After about ten minutes more, I heard a foot begin to afcend the flairs, and immediately after the hoftefs, compli¬ menting herfelf on the pains fhe alwajs beftowed on the airing of her beds. I flid down into my bed, and began to affed the hard breathing of fleep. The door opened, my hoflefs bade good-night to her gueft, and departed. The chamber door was imme¬ diately fliut and bolted. Neither the feet nor tongue of the hoflefs were now any Jonger audible, and I thought it time to throw off the fliadow of fleep : while I was raifing
205 raifing my head from the pillow, footfteps were approaching the fide of my bed ; I pulled back the curtain, and met the face of my own fervant. " What do you want ? what brings you here ?" faid I haftily, in a tone of voice between anger and difap¬ pointment. s< I am come to bed, fir," he returned. " You are not to fleep here," I replied : " I know the bed in this room was intended for you at firft ; but the hoftefs has fince given it to the gentleman who ar¬ rived here fome time after us."—" You for¬ get, fir, that he altered his intention, and that he is gone again," rejoined my fervant. " Gone!" I could only repeat as I ftarted up in the bed ; ** gone ?" 1 believe John thought me as great an enigma as 1 did the Marchefa ; he anfwered, " Yes, fir," in a tone of voice from vvhich it might be ga¬ thered that he concluded his fentence men¬ tally with, " What can that fignify to your" — tc Gone!" I again vociferated; " III follow her inftantly by all that------" As I fpoke I fprang from the bed, and was running to¬ wards the door ; John ran faiter than I did, and
ZOG and placed hk back againft it : ' v For ? K i.- vcn's fake," he cried, <c what is the matti - with you, fir ! are you not well ?" ? paufed a moment in filence ; I faw the folly of mv condud : (i Better in health, John/' 1 re¬ turned, £r than in reafon." John's counte¬ nance anfwered as intelligibly as }π ς tongue could have fpoken it, that it was tlie very thing he feared. I walked flowly bat ? to the bed ; ftiil lie flood with hk back againft the door. (i Come away from the door," faid I ; t4 1 fliall not attempt to leave the room."—" I hope not, fir," he replied in a doubtful tone. líeis a faithful fenani, w ho ??? lived with me for the fe dozen years pafl ; lie is, I am perfuaded, attached to me and my intcrcus, and I did not like to render him uncafj about me, by fuflering any incoherent ftart of mine, like the one he had juft witnefled, to remain unexplain¬ ed; 1 tiiere ??? fail, tc 1 was a great fix: juft now, J úíli ; jou mİLjht well thir.k me mad when 1 tal!. cd oi pui filing ¡he gentle¬ man, and caked him her, into the bargain ; bul İl was ind cd a ieiuiilj whom ι had feen
G07 fccn before in Venice, and whom I did not exped would have left me before the morn¬ ing." John appeared fatisfied with my ex¬ planation. (i How did you know flie was gone?" 1 next afked. " The hoflefs, fir," he anfwered, e ' told me about half an hour ?20, that the gentleman who was to have occupied the fécond bed in my mailer's- room had perfuaded his poftiiiion to take him another ftagc ίο -night, and iha t 1 might now ufe tlie bed." John went to bed, mu\ immediately to fleep : í could not fleep, even after ha> ing courted the drowfy god for above two hovrs, fo I rofe to write this. Nov/ I ha\e imparted ίο you what has hap¬ pened to me, I think lefs feriouily of it. Twilight is beginning to appear, I'll lie down and trv airain to take a few houiV fleep, beiore í continue mv journev. Ni ic o'clock. Ì ? ? vk had fo manv w ak hi'r and fhe ρ- , ing dreams tini, on reil /ting upon them, í hardly know how to divide íbera. I hik¬ ed my beliefs, as ioon as i faw her ih/s morning,
208 morning, " what was the reafon that the fignor had left her houfe at fo late an hour laft night ?"— <f He gave no reafon," fhe replied ; t< but I have fet him down in my mind for a poor youth that is croffed in love."— u Which way did he travel r" I next enquired. " I do not know," flie an¬ fwered ; " my fon went with him to the fta~ ble, and I did not hear him fay which way the carriage took : I could have afked him, but he has been gone out to work thefe two hours." I wonder whether the Marchefa is gone to Rome : but I will endeavour not to think about her at all. It is an age fince I have heard from you ; I exped to find an im- menfe packet at Rome. Farewel, George, and believe me your fincere friend, Charles Melford. P.S. On reviewing what I have penned, I find that I have written almoft a volume, inftead of a letter : follow the example I fet to you, and do not fend me a letter half filled. ' LETTER
coa
LETTUR XXV. b. Major Seymour lo Sir diaries MeİforiL DEAR GEORGE, TKirtcm. HOUGH I have not heard from you in the courfe of the laft fortnight, yet i doubt not but there is a letter from you on its journey to me, fo that í do not take pique, but write at my accuftomed time. In my L ft I defcribed to you the happi¬ nefs that re'gns in the village where the parent of my Emma is the mother of all who dwell in it. I had already learned to prize íh¿ feene on which I lived; I have now been taught to adore the means which keep it inunifoii and felicity. Nothing ftrikes the human bread fo forcibly vvith the con¬ viction of any truth, as its con traft being laid open before the eyes. This has within the few laft days been rny cafe ; 1 have witnefled how unprincipled a tyrant the man can be, who has a little accidental authority
ÜİO authority given him over his fellow-crea¬ tures. Oh, Charles, how peculiarly is it the bufinefs of thofe who have the povver, to employ themfelves in d ifi r i but ing happi¬ nefs to thofe who have not the means ot procuring it for themfelves. Caii not him the man of virtue who expends his thou·» finds in decorating with fumptuous furni¬ ture a church, und then deems himfelf a man of God, becaufe he rolls to it in his coach and four ; nor him who gives a fcanty pittance to the labourers on his citate upon whicii they muft ft arve, for they cannot live, and then imprifons them if they dare, in order to appeafe kunger, take from the common bed of nature a meagre mouthful, called a hare, or a partridge, vvhich he af¬ fért s to be the propertv of a few, and which the great Defigner of all made for the ufe of all ;—-no ; h j is the man of virtue who enables the poor to live in comfort without difcouraging them from induftry; who hears their little tales of grief and joy, and, when he does hear them, enters into their feel¬ ings, S)mpaLhy is us dear to the heart of nat uic
'J! ι nature as to the heart of education ; it is the equal right of both, and it is a feeling for which, if the great lend it to the litri.'\, the Httie will never fail to join their int. reft in the fupport or him who has given it to them, if ever accident fliould render hi η in need of bein? upbeîd bv them. is'ow, to what I was going to r.hú/ to you :-—- Emma and ï were out the o'.her ? vei¬ ing on horfeback ; we flrayed beyond the bounds of Mrs. Hughford's manor, into an adjoining village. As we were pafling a clump of trees vvhich overhangs the border of a finali lake, the voice of a fon.cftr-ffs caught our cars : we flopped our hurles to liften to lier: her tones were exuuifitelv fine and melancholy ; the words ihe was im& m o wc could not diftinguifli, nor could we fee her : al the defire of Emma vve ap¬ proached nearer to the tree? : at the foot of one of them knell a female for. η ; her face was pale, but beautiful ; her hair hung diflievelled clown her back, her eyes were turned upwards and fixed, her hands were clafped aud extended towards Heavan, her drefs
? \?
drefs was a plain ruflet gown, and a white handkerchief which hung loofely round her neck. By her fide flood an old man, clad in all the forrow of poverty and age, fup- porting himfelf upon a flick, upon the top of which his palfied hands were crofted. Neither of them appeared to notice our approach, and the female continued fing- inrr ·—. " Oh had I gone with my ttue love» Too happy had I been ! Oh let me fee him once again, Let me be Henry's queen ! Cruel war ! oh fpare my true love, Shield him in the batrle's heat : Abs î if he fliould fall in warfare, Sufan'a heart would ceafe to beat." She flopped finging with a figh that was drawn from the bottom of her heart, but ftill continued in the attitude in which .vve had firft feen her. Emma entreated that I would fpeak to her. We both difmount- ed, gave our horfes to the fervant, and went up to the melancholy pair. " Who is
213 is Henry, pretty maid ?" faid I. " If you want to kill him too," anfwered flie, " you cannot get at him ; for I have hid him quite low and deep under the green turf." As flie fpoke flie turned her eyes upon us, and they bore in them a convidion that her words were thofe of infanity. u Oh, pretty lady," flie continued, turning to Emma, " do not fall in love with a foldier, for the cruel men wdio make poor foldiers fight will kill your Henry too, and break your heart, as thev have mine/'—" Poor Sufan is out of her wits, my lady," faid the old man, without raifing his head. (i is flie your daughter ? " I afked. " Yes, poor child, flie is mine, my lady," he replied : " you muft excufe me if I call you by wrong names, for "I have been blind this many a year." What think you, Charles, of this pidure of human mifery? — old, decrepid, poor, blind, and the father of a diftraded child ! My blood ran cold ; the tears ftole down Emma's cheeks; the maniac obferved them : " Oh, I with 1 could weep like you," ihe faid ;
214 fáid ; " but my heart is fo hot,- that ii drinks up all my tears."—" She does no¬ thing but wander abroad all day, and talk in this fad manner," rejoined the old man. " Who takes care of her ?" 1 afked. "' I do," replied the father. " How can you guide yourfelf?" I faid ; il flie is incapable of afluring you."—" I know every inch of ground in this part of the country as well as if I could fee it," he returned. Sufan rofe haftily, beckoned to Emma, and faid, " Come here, lady, make hafte, and I'll fliow j r ou where 1 buried him ; but do not tell the cruel men where I have hid him."—" You may truft yourfelf with her," faid the old man, " if you have any curio¬ fity to fee the grave flie has railed to his memory." Emma followed her ; Ì walked by the fide of the old man. " The Henry fhe fpeaks of," faid I, " was doubtlefs her lover."—" Her hufband," anfwered the fa¬ ther. "Was he killed in battle ?"— t£ No, fir, not juft in battle, as I may fay : it is a very fad ftory, fir." A few paces brought us to a lump of turf, cut in the fliape of a grave, it ???
215 fl ??? round with boughs of trees, and ftrewed vvith flowers. When we came up to the fpot, Sufan was holding Emma with one hand, and pointing with the forefinger of her other hand to the grave : " Stand you flill," flie then faid, s£ and I will tell him that he is fafe ; that there İs nobodj' here to hurt him." She then flew to the grave, threw herfelf upon it, and preffed her bofom to the tuif, while a momentary pieafure gliflened in her eye, and her lips moved as if ihe were fpeaking. (i Her haf¬ band is not buried there," faid the old man to me ; " ihe only pleafes herfelf vvith think- in£ that flic has hid him there from his enemies : indeed, her whole taik now is, as if fhe thought him ftill alive ; and more¬ over, flie is alvvajb finging a fong which flie made about him wlien he firft cnlifled for a foldier. in a few moijnents ihe rofe, and returned to us, pointing to the grave with an archnefs marked upon her countenance» which was the effect of fome inward feel¬ ing unknown to us, and finging—
u Then
216
* f Then Henry faid, Dear Safan telí, Oh, when wilt thou be mine? I lov'd the youth, fo anfwer'd lirait, I am, clear Henry, thine. She finifhed her fong with a forrowfful ca¬ dence, that touched our hearts ; a momen¬ tary filence enfued ; her eyes then became wild, flie ftarted, gave a faint fliriek, "Hark!" flie cried, " it is the drum that beats !—oh, hide my eyes ; don't let me fee them tear him away !" She ran to her father and fell upon his neck ; the old man threw down his flick, took hold of her arms, and lower¬ ed her by them to the turf: flie Jay without motion, her eyes almoft clofed, and nature apparently exhaufted. " This often hap¬ pens," faid the old man ; " ihe will lie thus fome minutes, then wake fliivering, and afk me to go home with her ; for little as this exertion may have appeared, it is more than flie has ftrength for." It happened juft as the old man had fore¬ told ; flie prefently opened her eyes, began to tremble violently, raifed herfelf upon her feet,
217 feet, put. her left arm through his, then clafped her hands together, and fo hung upon him : he ftooped down to pick up his flick, and when flie perceived that he had taken it up, flie faid, " Come, father, let us go home j I have bid Henry good¬ night." The old man bowed us his farewel ; Su¬ fan did not appear to notice us : they paffed on, and we faw them enter a low cabin at the diftance of about half a furlong from the fpot where we had met. I would immediately have followed them, to have learnt the ftory of their woes ; but the fun was already fet, and Emma requeft¬ ed me to ride home, and return to their cot on the following morning. About eleven the next day we arrived near the fpot where we had feen the wretched pair on the foregoing evening ; we left our horfes at fome diftance from the cottage, and walked up to it ; the door was open, and the old man was fitting on the thrcfliold, in order to warm himfelf in the rays of the fun. We explained to him vol. i. h who
218 who we were, and he rofe : we enquired for Sufan ; he pointed towards a dark cor¬ ner of the hut, " There flie lies, poor fuf¬ ferer," he faid ; " flie generally fleeps about this time of the morning, for there is no keeping her in bed at night, efpecially thefe moon-light nights, for flie then thinks every iliade flie fees is Henry, and flie runs about trying to catch fiift one fliadow, then an¬ other."—" You faid the ftory of her Henryks death was a very fad one ; have you any objedion to repeat it to us ?" I aiked. " No, fir; why fliould I?" he replied; " none of the blame lies with me ; and it is my maxim, fir, that none need be a* fhamed, but thofe who have not clear con¬ fidences." My heart glowed as he repeated that fentence; I then underftood how exejui- fitely happy the virtuous poor can he, even in defpite of their vicious oppreffors : they will dare to hold up their heads before that tribunal where the rich man will, perhaps, hang down his in trembling, "-Come," faid I, " let us hear jour ftory; refume your
£i9 your feat, and we will take ours upon this bench."—" As your honour gives leave," replied he* " I will fit down ; for, in good truth, I am not very able to ftand : you are very kind to let me fit down while I am difcourfmg with you." Oh, Charles/are not thefe fad rules of fociety, that a man of upwards of three fcore years, palfied, blind, bent to the ground with care, fliould have had his ideas about his particular right to the privileges of na¬ ture fo cramped, as to think it very kind of a man not thirty, full of health, happinefs, and enjoyment of his faculties, to let him place his own limbs in that pofition which contributed moft to his own eafe, under the roof of his own hovel ! Thefe arc the dif¬ tindions, thefe diftindions of comfort, which ought to be driven out of fociety. " Shall I begin now?" aftted the old man. tí Wc are ready to hear you," I an* fwered. <c My father, fir," he began by. faying, " was a hard-working, labouring man in this village, and my mother was as good a L ? woman
, Í^O
woman as any in the place. When I was feven years old, a fad fever raged all about the country ; my father and mother both fell ill of it, fo did my eldeft brother, and it carried off every one of the family except one fifter and myfelf: we had not one friend that would do any thing to help us, and fo, as you may fuppofe, we both came to the parifli. Well, fir, we did our duty and worked hard ; God profpered us, two help¬ lefs orphans as we were, and in time we hoth of us got, as I may fay, to ftand upon our own legs ; that is, 1 went to day-labour, and my fifter let herfelf out to take care of a farmer's cows. In the courfe of time we both married ; I came and Jived in this cot where I am now fitting, and my fifter and her hufband dwelt in that- cabin yonder that you may fee upon the margin of the Jake. We had each one child, and only one a-piece ; ours was poor Sufan, and my fifleris was the Henry that you hear Sufan talk and fing about. So you fee, my lady, they were coufins before thev were fvveet- hearts. My filter's hufband died when Henry
OO 1 j- *- 1 Henry vvas about fixteen ; he worked hard, poor lach rxnd maintained his mother when ihe was a widow, 'both honcfllv and de-~ cently ; but lhe did not live long to vainc the bleifing ìÌìc had in her fon, flie died on the very day that Henry was twenty vears old. My Sufan and he liad been as fond as two doves ever fince they had known what fondnefs was ; and, now Henry was hit alone, he, preffed me very much to Jet them be married directly, and live in the cottage where his mother had dwelt. I held out for a good ? hile, faying they were both too young to marry yet a while; but they got the better of me, and in lefs than a twelvemonth ihey were man and wife. All. went on VQiy well for the firft fix nio'iths ; Henry woik.-cl like a horfe, and made Su 'an as good a huiband as could be -, they were as happy as the ??? was long, and my old dame and l wvrc not a little pleafed to fee them fo ; and 1 believe vve all lived as comfortably as moil poor folks like us, that are forced to fuit their wants L 3 tO
£02 to their means, can do. But now, fir, comes the beginning of all our troubles. Yoa muft know that our ?>?<] of the manor was a finglc gentleman, fo he had no children of Ins own-; but he had a nephevv that lived in tì)C houfe with him, and that many folks whifpered about was his baftard fon ; Hea* ven 'knows whether ihey fpoke true or falfe, I can't take upon me to fay, I am not his judge, though he has been mine and my children's oppreffor. Ihis young man was fuch a favourite with his uncle, that he had as much authority over him, andcould make him do jufl what he pleafed, for all the world as though his uncle had been beholden to him, inftead of he itanding in debt to his uncle; for every body faid, that, whoever the young 'fquire was, he had not a fix- pence in the world but what came from our old lord. The old gentleman, I do be¬ lieve—Heaven reft his foul in death fay I— would have been a friend to the poor if he had followed his- own will ; but his nephevv fet him againft ail people in want, for fear the
/
the relieving of their neccffuics fliould cut him fhort of the means to buy his extrava¬ gant pleafures, " Six months Henrv and Sufan had been married, when one evening, as Henry vvas coming home from his daily labour, his road happening to lie paft the alehoufe, who ihould be fitting on a bench before lhe door but one Phiiip Rofe, that had once been fervant to the young 'fquire, as vve always called our old lord's nephevv. Henry and he had been well acquainted when Philip lived in our village, fo when Philip faw him coming by, he fprang up and fhook him by the hand, and told him he was verv Had to fee him, and afked him to drink part of a mug of ale. Thio Rofe had never been a man whofe conduct was much to my liking, but as í had no particular reifm for my opinion, í had never done the uncharitable p'irt by him of fpeaking my mind about him : but what I am now going to tell you, will prove that I was right iu what I thought of him. They fat down on the bench before the L 4 door,
'J'J 4 door, the ale was brought out, and ihey began urenter into talk; Henry firft of all ¿iked hnn, * V* hai had brought him back to our ullage, and how he had gained a livelihood iinee he had left the young 'Íqnin-V, fenice- r' So Philip made anfwer th.it it was a iaî'e notion widi people, that he had Lit the Vquire's fervice, for tliat he had beeu in his pay all the thr.e he had been gone from oar village; * You mult know/ faid he, ' that n.y unifier is raifing a regiment, and I have the honour to be his recruiting fergeant,' Henry thought at firft that Rofe had been joking with him, but when he came to Joo"k at his great coat, he faw that it had a red cape, and moreover that he had fpatterdaflies on his legs. Philip fmiled to fee how unbelieving Flenry was, and faid, t Why thefe two young men that are fitting by us, are my drum and ñfc :' fo, on faying thefe words, he pulled a drum out from under the bench, and fet it between his knees, and began plaj ing upon it with his knuckles. * Do you like a foldier's lifer' faifl Henry. * Nothing
oaz
t Nothingfowell/ replied Philip; * fliould not you like to be one of us gay fellows ?' < Not at all,' faid Henry, « for I am married to Sufan now : if I were to turn foldier, I muft go away and leave her ; and I think it a man's firft duty to flay at home with thofe to whom he has bound himfelf as a protedor.'—* Every one to his tafte/ anfwered Philip ; ' but if you knew what a foldier's life was, perhaps you would not think as you do now.'— c And per¬ haps/ returned Henry, t if you knew the joys of peace and contentment at home with a wife that loves you, you would not be fo fond of roving about.' Rofe then called for another mug of ale, and their difcourfe took a different turn r pre¬ fently Rofe faid, putting his hand into his pocket as he fpoke, c Do not von remember, Henry, that I am five íhillinçs. in your debt?'—' Yes, I do/ returned Henry. < Why did not you aik me for it?' replied he. * Becaufe/ anfwered Henry, < I could do without it, and I did not wifli to diilrefs you ? pay it.' L· 5 —* Oh!'
'226 —* Oh l exclaimed Rofe, ' I am rich enough now, thank you, , and there are two half crowns/ Henry held out his hand and took them. 4 Stop/ cried Philip Rofe, f here is another fhilling/— * For what ?' aiked Henry, ζ you owed me only ñve*'— ( For intereil to be fure/ returned Rofe. * I do not wifli for any intereft for having ferved a friend/ replied Henry. r Phoo, nonfenfe, how you talk 1' fays Rofe; * why it is always our way to throw 7 in a fhilling ; an't it, my boys ?' con¬ tinued he, turning to the drummer and fife. ' Oh, yes, always/ replied they. Henry looked uncertain, whether or not. it was his right to take it. Rofe again fpoke, * Why take it, man/ cried he, c do not think it will hurt me, it is not out of my pocket ; it is the king's money, it is a pre¬ fent his m aje fly makes you, for having lent a trifle to one of his men ; I am his man now you know, come do not .affront the king when he offers you money ; come take up the fhilling/ continued he, throw¬ ing one upon the drum-head, which he ftiil
?7 ftill held between his knees. Henry hefi¬ tated what to do. ( Lord help you!' exclaimed Rofe, ( there's a man unwilling to take money ! do you think Τ fliould have made my fortune, if I had done fo ? I only wifh his majefty, god blefs him, was here to fee you ftand ihilly flially about it, that's all I wifli ; I cannot help laughing at you myfelf.' Rofe laughed, the drum¬ mer and fifer did the fame, poor Henry thought he was doing wrong not to accept his pretended friend's .offer, and took the fliilling off the drum-head. " No fooner had Henry taken the fatal fliilling, than they all fliook hands with him, told him that he was now one of the king's fervants like themfelves, and that he muft: go before our lord of the manor, for he was alfo a juftice of the peace, to be fworn. " Henry, who was unacquainted with the nefarious tricks that are pradifed in the world, hardlv underftood even now the deceit that had been pradifed upon him ; he faid, that they were impofing upon him, h 6 that
Í!Ö8
that he was no foldier, and that he would not go before the juftice. They would not liften to what he faid, but began to lead him by force towards the manor-houfe ; in their way thither they met poor Sufan ; flie, as you may fuppofe, was frightened enough at feeing Henry dragged along towards our old lord's ; and when the children and people who were following told her that Henry had enliftcd for a foldier, Sufan cried as if her heart would have burft : flie came running ftraitway to me, told me what fhe had feen, and befought me to go with her to the manor-houfe; flie ran for¬ ward, and I hobbled after her as faft as mv tottering old limbs could carry me ; but w hen we got there the deed was done, İ lenry had been over-ruled into taking the oath, and our old lord, 1- fuppofe by the defire of his nephew, who might be afraid of lofing Henry, as he was in a hurry to complete the number of his regiment—our old lord refufed to fee us. —Sufan could not crv then, flie flood hke a dumb ftatue. b ' Well, fir, it tends nothing to my ftory to
229 to repeat to you all poor Henry's upbraid¬ ings of his falfe friend, his bewailings at his ignorance of the cuftoms of this bad world, and his grief at his being obliged to leave- his Sufan ; it is enough to faj', that he was forced to put on a red coat. Their parting too, after what I have told you, you can imagine as well as I could de¬ fcribe to you. The Tquire's regiment was-ordered to fome place near London, w T here it was to lie, till its turn came to fail for America, for thither it w T as going to fight; and in three weeks' time after the villanous trick of entrapping him to be a foldier had been played him, poor Flenry was torn from his native village. ti Oh, fir!" exclaimed the old man, " I have always endeavoured to be a good chriftian, and never to let the misfortunes of this world caufe me to murmur againft God; not even this trial did I fuffer to weaken my religion : but I cannot fome¬ times help wondering why fuch things are !" - " They are," anfwered I, " probations of
230 of human fortitude ; misfortune is the touchftone of the heart, and he who en¬ deavours to feel that he is not aggrieved when mofl finned againft by man, will doubtlefs rank higheft where the power of man will have no avail.'* " Your words, fir," he anfwered, " are comfort, for they exprefs what I have often thought myfelf, only I did not fo wellknow how to explain my feelings." He then proceeded in his narrative by faying : " No fooner was Henry gone, than poor Sufan began to go off* in a me¬ lancholy way, that made her unfit for the labour that ihe had cheerfully gone through with while Henrv was with her; all flie would do now, was to fit and mope whole hours, and when flie had made the fong you heard her finging lafl: night, flie did nothing but repeat it the whole day long: we took her home to our cottage, and did all we could to keep up her fpirits, but it would not do : flie was fix months gone with child when Henry went away, and at the end of four weeks flie was taken in her
231 her labour, and fuffered more like a fumer, than a faint as fhe was, in bringing forth a dead child." The old man paufed, wiped away the tear that was ftealing down his cheek, then faid, " God's will be done ! if he punifhes here, he will reward hereafter j—God's will be done !" " Oh," cried I, ** how eminently are fuch minds of religious tranquillity bleffed, above thofe whofe purfuits in this life leave them no time to think of the future ftate ; or if its recollection does obtrude upon their fenfes, comes to them in the awful garb of a fcene of retribution !" The old man bowed affent to my affer¬ tion, then continued fpeaking thus : "Fret¬ ting and anxiety had brought on Sufan's O J íl pains, and my poor dame little tliought that ihe would long furvive her intuì. t ; ín a few days after the birth of her child, flie herfelf began to imagine that her end was faft approaching, flie told us fo, and we thought it our duty not to gi.e lier hopes that we did not believe in otrfelves : flie fald
faid fhe was refigned to die, and that alî flie wiflied and defired was to fee Henry once more. For three whole days flie did nothing but befeech her mother and myfelf to let Henry know her fituation, and to afk him, if it was poffible for him to get a few days' furlough, to come and bid her his lafl farewel. At length, after much en¬ treating, I confented to get our clerk to write all that had happened to Henry : and when flie knew that the letter was gone to him, flie appeared better in fpirits, but her health did not mend. " A week wore away, and we got no anfwer from Henry : I began to think that the letter had not reached him : but how¬ ever, in the dufk of the evening of the tenth day, never fliall I forget the moment, the latch moved Up, the door opened, and Henry came in. Sufan was lying on the outfide of the bed, for flie was unable to iìt up ; flie ihrieked out his name ; he ran to her, clafped her in his arms, fixed his eyes upon V ?, as much as to fay, ' is this the Sulan I left feven weeks ago?* fliook
fliook his hend, then cried, ( Dear Sufan, I am come to clic vvith vou!* —' I think \ fliall not die myfelf, now í fee you again/ riie faid in a faint voice. s Oh,' return¬ ed he, 4 k t us refolve to die together.' -—* Let us live together/ replied Sufan gathering ftrength from Iris piefence—· * 'lh it cai.not be/ he fiiid, ' I mufl die'— ( J '"-'.' \vhc\-\fore, Ifcnrj r' íbe níLed, h'.r lips qifiv^rin^ ;,? fhe fpoke. il^ look¬ ed up ,n her in iing .ith ; fiill he appeared ftruggling to fpeak, then ftriving to keep in the words that feemed to be forcing themfelves upon his tongue. Sufan re¬ peated her queftion, t Wherefore mufl you die, Henry V It was contrary to his nature to refufe anfwering a queftion vvhich Sufan afked, hib reafon was thrown off iu guard, and he replied in a voice which I ihall ever leiMt.nber, ' I have dc felted l ** Sufaa's heart-blood chilled, and flic funk back upon the bed ; Henry clafped hi, hands, and fixed his eyes upon the lloob" The
The old man's utterr.nce became choak- od, he ceafed fpeaking, 'and an uninter¬ rupted fik nee reigned for fome minutes; at his own time the old man thus went on : <c When I became able to fpeak, I enquired of Henry an explanation of what: he had faid, and lie tolti us, that on his receiving the leiter I had fent to him, flaling his wife's ill heakh, and wifli to fee him, he had gone to the young 'fquire, who was his captain, and befought that he would «rant him leave of abfence from ? his regiment'onlv for a few davs, that he might once more fee his Sufan alive; his requeft was denied, and he inftantly formed the refolution of deferring, rejoicing as he faid, that his life would thus be very little Jonger, if fo Jong as her's. (i Oh, fir, it w?s love for his poor wife, and the cruelty of thofe tirat would have kept him from feeing her on her death¬ bed, as we then all thought her, that made him take this defperate refolution of facrifieincr his own life to fee her once again. " I be-
"·* I befought them to take comfort; I told them that, as thhiirs were come to this fad pafs, we would all move í lire M ly to another part of the country, without telling any or our neighbours whither we were going, or that Henry was wiih us, and that perhaps fortune might favour ικ, and thefe means preferve the dear bov 's life. They agreed to my plan with much j^y, and i told Henry tliat he had better fet out that very night in the diredion I ihould point out to him, and fo endeavour to prevent any one in our villatre knowing he had been home at all. About midnight he left our cottage, and h was for the laft time ; he had not got the length of a furlong from this fpot, be¬ fore he was met by a party of thofe that were fent in purfuit of him, and made their prifoner. Evil news always traveb faft, as they fay, and fo it was vvith poor Henry's misfortune ; before dav-hreak a neighbour's daughter, that lived clofe bv tlie place where it happened, a filly, unguarded girl, came to tell us of it : flie meant to do well, but flie was inconfiderate; ihe told it to us in the
236 the hearing of Sufan, and from that mo¬ ment Sufan's fenfes forfook her." Again the old man paufed, then again continued thus : cc I went to our lord of the manor, threw myfelf on my knees be¬ fore birri, explained to Iiim the fituation of my daughter, and that the reafon oï Henry's deferring was to fee her once again before flie. died. í moved our old lord with com¬ paffion for our miferies, and he promifed me to write to his nephevv, and befeech of him to pardon Henry. The old gentleman was as good as his word ; but the* young 'fquire proved deaf to his petition, and we heard that Henry was doomed to undergo the punifhment of a deferter. Sufan was at this time quite mad, fo knew nothing of what was going on. My poor old dame funk under .the woes that were falling upon her children, and in lefs than a month I followed her to the grave, almoft bowed down into the earth with mifery myfelf. Every day I s \vas now expeding to hear thai Henry had paid the debt of thaf life which the cruel'laws of man had made hm t fotr íeit
£37 feit for having come to'fee the mother of his child on her death-bed ; at laft I heard, that as it was a time when every foldier's life was of confequence, he had fuffered five hundred laflies at the halberd. Poor Henry ! little did he think, when he led my girl from church, that he fliould ever fuffer five hundred laflies from the hands of unfeeling ftrangers, on that back which had borne fo many burdens without a murmur to earn her an honeft fubfiftence, only becaufe he had come to fee ,her once again on her death-bed !" The old man wept, and it muft have been a heart of ftone that could have refufed him the fympathy of a tear· In a few moments he continued : " Not a week after I had heard this, worfe tidings reached me : only three days after Henry's punifhment, his regiment was ordered to embark, and, notwithftanding the flate he was in, he was taken out of his bed to be carried on fhip-board : a cold fettled in his wound, a mortification enfued, and he died in undefcribable agonies ! Oh, how the poor fad muft have wiflied to have been in hîs
238 his own cabin, with his dear Sufan ! But he had one confolation, he had nothing to reproach himfelf with ; for his own incli¬ nation would have kept him contented at home in his own cabin, with his own dear Sufán; and furely, though it was a crime in the law of man, it could be no vice in the eye of God for him to have come to fee his Sufan once again on her death¬ bed !" The old man then concluded his ftory in a few broken fentcnces: he faid, that when his daughter's malady had turned upon her brain, her health, though in a fad ftate, had ??! grown worfe ; that it was now almoft five years fmce the death of Henry ; that he himfelf had been deprived of his fight for the laft three years ; and that thev fub- fined on a fmall w r eekly fum allowed to them by the parifli in which they lived : farther, that their lord of the manor had at firft been their friend, but that he had not many months furvived Henry; and that his nephew, their enemy, although heir to his uncle's eftates, had not been to the village fincc
Q$9 fmce Henry's death, but was feeking pro¬ motion in the army. * c You fliall go and live at the next vil¬ lage, and partake of the bounties of my mother, Mrs. Hughford," faid Emma. " Heaven blefs her ! " replied the old man ; " I know her name for a wor¬ thy one, but I cannot go away from this fpot." " What is your reafon ?" afked Emma. " My poor girl," he anfwered, " would not be fo happy any-where as here: if vve were to go an hundred miles off, flie would find her way back to the turf where flie thinks flie has hid Henry ; and I cannot find in my heart to deny her the only piea¬ fure flie can enjoy." cc You fliall live here, then," faid Emma, " under my care, and you fliall once again tafle thofe comforts wdiich jour age and fituation require." t! God will reward you," returned he : " indeed vve find it hard enough to live,- few as our wants are." " How much," afked I, <f are you allow¬ ed
54α ed a week for the maintenance of yourfelf and your daughter?" " Only eighteen-pence, fir," he anfwered. <t Only eighteen-pence ! " I exclaimed, Ci for the maintenance of two fouls during feven days, when I give as much for a fmgle 'røeal for the dog that points out to me a hare or a partridge !" Emma fhook her head at me as I pro¬ nounced the fentence : I turned from her, and made a filent vow never to take up a gun again. Λ long and deep figh drew my attention from the fubjed to which my thoughts were immediately given : I looked to the fpot from whence it came, and faw the poor maniac raifing herfelf upon her bed. - She did not regard us, but took a bunch of flraw from behind her pillow, and began weaving it into a garland ; in a few minutes flic fix¬ ed her eyes upon it, and fang— u They have torn thee from me, Henry i But ftill Til think on thee : And in thy abfence, truc love, This crown my nute ihall be.'* As
S41 As flie concluded thefe lines, flie raifed her eyes towards heaven, with another deep figh, and preffed the ftraw to her bofom, while the tears trickled down her cheeks. After what w r e had been liftening to from the old man, our feelings wereül calculated to witnefs any more of the fcene before us: we each put half a guinea into the liane of the father, promifed to fee him again, and departed. He did not thank us in words ; but he put forth his hands m an attitude of filent benedidion, that drew from my eyes the tears I had hitherto with difficulty fuppreffed. Make your own comments, I ihall offer none on this touching fcene of nature : adieu ; and believe me truly, Yours, George Seymour»
vol. u m LETTER
24s:
LETTER XXVI. Major Seymour to Sir Charles Melford. MY DEAR CHARLES, IKÎrton. Have for thefe laft feven days been filently murmuring at not having heard from you, and I now find that the error lay not ín you, but in tiie perfon in London whom I had commiffioned to forward my letters to this place ; for I this morning re¬ ceived a packet containing four epiftles from you, and with fuch contents as, in rny opinion, are better calculated to adorn a romance, than to make a part of the hif¬ tory of an cxifting man. Why, what a far¬ rago of adventure has befallen you i You are almoft the Quixote of your day, and I fliall exped to hear that you have fet up to rival that famous knight-errant. But enough of jefting ; this is a fubjed on which mv intereil in your welfare will not fuffer me long to be pleafant. Charles, can you want
243 want me to point out to you, that the Mar- valdi family have determined upon jou as their prey r The wife affails you with her pretended fecret favours, and the huiband plots to draw you into a marriage with his daughter. The Count di Rebini, who ii on the fpot with them, has long ago given you a warning, that all within the Paliazo di Marvakli is not as it fliould be, and yet you want admonitions to fave jou from fall¬ ing the dupe of thofe that it contains. If you have not entirely loft that good fenfe which you once poffeffed, and, what is more material in the prefent cafe, if you will perfuade yourfelf to vievv the tranfac- tions of vvhich you have written me an ac¬ count with your eyes open, you cannot but perceive, and very plainly too, that there is a league formed to draw you into fome fnare, which is to benefit the Marvakli fa¬ mily, and that the fuccefs of it depends upon your believing that the actions of the huf¬ band and wife are unconneded. Oh, my dear friend, how fevcrely would you have cenfured a man who had aded as you have m 2 } ourfcl f
24* vourfelf done, if you had been a cool looker- on upon his condud : why will you be more blind to what concerns yourfelf, than you would be to the intereft of another ? What, if you confider the matter with ycavr fenfes unbiaffed by any momentary titilla¬ tion of falfe paflion, can be the motive- of that man who offers his daughter to a rich ftranger, in preference to giving her hand to a man whom flie knows and loves, with a decent competency ? and, ftill morb, of the woman who, under the outward garb of modefty and virtue, voluntarily facrifices her honour in private, and aiks a few pieces of gold in recompence for its lofs ? What can you decide, but that both muft be mer¬ cenary and defpicable ? í could adduce a long firing of arguments in fupport of what I have advanced ; but I am certain that, it you will but relied for only ñve minutos, danger muilfo forcibly flare you in the fa£e, that you cannot want fafthfer pfcrfuafion to leave Italy while you afe fafe; I mean, while your hand and fortune are ffiil your own. Depend upon it, there is fome deeply planned
planned fchemç hanging upon the Mar¬ chefa Laura's appearance at the inn upon theïQad: for Gocls fake avoid her as you wcmdd de^rmined ruin. Her looks ineAt have affifted her words in pleading tw vou m her intereft; for her words., at leaft as ï coolly read them over, as written by you, appear to mg only purpofely enigmatic a!, that ??? eagernefs for the fohuion of the riddle which is wrapped ift them, may make you continue to believe voqrfelf pleaf¬ ed with her foçiety, till foçne- view which íhe doubtlefs has upon you is sccompîiihed. Perhíips, when you will receive this pap?r, th^ truth pf my çonjeduie wifl already haye appeared to you : pray Heaven my furmife may only lean to the fide of fear, as [t is inclined by my intereft in your tappİPrö» and that ?? furmife may prove fillfe. Fsydofí ??, ?? dßar fellow, but I much feçur that the motive ft -?? which you fiifl pi"of<?fffd to vifjt the continent, that of cuff¬ ing ths fİQWC F P of knowledge which jou (UwH ? a4oraing a fqreigp foji, has been m 3 nearly,
£4f) nearly, if not wholly, abforbed in your at¬ tention to fuch pleafures as both weaken the mind, and render the underftanding lefs avid than it otherwife would be after more fu bilan tia J enjoyo. ents. Recoiled, Charles, that, at fetting out, you faid, your adventures were to be told alternately with the occurrences that had befallen me fince our laft feparation, as we fhouid fit round a winter fire with our wives: will the recital of how your time faas been paffed, think you, furniih pro¬ per entertainment for the ears of my Emma and your Margaretta ? Oh, my dear friend, reflcd before it is too late : I only afk you to confider your own happinefs : believe me, you can never permanently find it in thofe tinfled pleafures which only touch the fenfes : it is ίο be met with, in perfec¬ tion, in thofe joys alone which fink into the mind. Remember, that an adion which will not bear refleding upon, and which does not charm as much in the retrofped as it did in its beginning, cannot be a por¬ tion of true happinefs. Do not think lightly of
247 of what I have faid : I have always called myfelf, and I think the exigency of the moment now calls upon me to prove, as far words can convince you, that / am. Your friend, George Seymour, P.S. Dired your letters for me immudi« diately to this place.
m 4 LETTER
£4S
LETTER XXVII'. Mrs. Wallace to Sir Charles Melford. HONOURED SIR, TRofehiïî, Rutland/hire HE occafion of my making fo free as to trouble you with this fcrawl, is in the behalf of my fon Edward, whom you ufed to be fo condefcending as to notice when your honour and he were both boys. He has a petition to make to you, and he has perfuaded me that it will come better to you from me, than it would do from him, he not having feen your honour of many years. You muft recoiled, fir, that Ed¬ ward always had a turn for a foldier's life, and that, much againft my confent, he went out to America as a corporal in a marching regiment at the beginning of the war. It has now, as your honour muft certainly have heard, pleafed Almighty God to be good to us, and fend us a peace : the com¬ pany that my fon Edward belongs to is come home,
Kome, and he with it, Heaven be thanked, alive and well, and promoted to be an en- fign. Edward, fir, has now been.home a.t my cottage this month and more ; he has done his duty in the profeffion that he firft took a liking to, and now he wiflies to fettle for the remainder of his life in fome honeft occupation in his own country. His father was a farmer, and he inclines to be¬ come one-alfo. I have fomc money, fir, as you know ; the fide of Edward's commif¬ lion will raife iome little more ; and it fhall be laid out in the way he beft likes, for he is a worthy lad, and deferves all I can do fbr him. Now, fir, farmer lurr-nv tells me, that he has had fome land left him in a diftant countv, and that on this account he would be very glad to give up his leafe of your Briar-bank farm next quarter-day, if it was agreeable to you to make it ov.er to another tenant. I have fpqkfcn. to your fteward about it, and And from ?? that farmer Furrow has juft begun a fourteen years* leafe upon it ; and, fir, if it might but meet your will to transfer this leafe m 5 t&
250 to Edward, you would bind his heart in gratitude to you for ever. I know your goodnefs too well to fear that you fliould not pardon me for the liberty I have taken in addreffing you, whether you grant me the favour I afk of you or not. I fliould not have written to you while you were at Tuch a diftance from home, only I was afraid fomebody elfe might hear of farmer Fur¬ row's wifli to quit, and be beforehand with me in an application to you, knowing what fine land Briar-bank farm is, and moreover how kind a landlord is your honour. The fweet girl whom your humanity and goodnefs placed under my care is as happy as a comfortable plenty and a heart free from anxiety or felf-reproach can make her: flie always was very handfome, as your honour knows ; but her attentive be¬ haviour to me, and the gratitude flie ex- preffes for your kindnefs to her, make me think her almoft as beautiful as an angel : I hope it is np fin in me to compare her to an angel, for indeed, fir, flie is quite good enough to be one. She knows that I am writing
5? writing to you, and defires I will mentior* her thanks and remembrances to you in the moil refpedful manner I am able.. Ed¬ ward begs to join with me in duty to your honour ; and, hoping you will oblige us with a few lines in anfwer to this, I beg leave to fubfcribe myíelf, with all refped, Your honour's moil obliged and humble fervant, Ehz-Abeth. Wal-lace- P.S. Your fteward, fir, has been fo kind ?? to undertake to fend this letter fafe ;, for I did not know where to dired to you*
? ? LETTER
■sta
LETTER XXVIII. Sir Charles Melford ίο Mrs. Wallace. I Rome. Am forry, Mrs. Wallace, th&t you iliould addrefs rné in à tìyle of obligation upon a petition by which you are in reality confer¬ ring ail honour Upon me ; there is not any circumflance from which a man derives móre credit, and upon winch tie hasa right tò feêl ίο proud, as when his refpedable ïieighhours declare a Willi to become his tenants. It has ever been my maxim, Mrs. Wallace, that though the landlord is necef¬ fary to his tenants, the tenants are far more neceffary to the landlord. Teil your fon Edward, that whenever farmer Furrow thinks good to give up his leafe of Briar- bank farm, it will give me much pieafure to have him tenant it, and that I ihall im¬ mediately give orders to my fteward to that effed : and, ray good friend, take this hint to yourfelf, that what you faid about your own
9,53 own money matters, and the fate of Ed¬ ward's commiflion, was the only part of your letter which f do not choofe to pardon you for having written. I have called your fon my friend in my boyifh days, and I ihall «ot turn ufurer upon his property or your's, now I am arrived at years of judgement. Your fon fliall find the farm ready flocked, and when I want money, we will talk about the means by which he is to repay me; and, tiU I do this, do not mention any thing to me about the fubjed, as you v ahi e my friend íhip. You arc a woman of fenfe, and as fuch, I dare fay, Tike a reafoö for every thing which is faid m done -, as, therefore, I ftippofe you will not be fatisfied without my afrigning $yme motive for the command I have jufl: laid upon yotb 1*11 give it you now, that I may prevent ???* fpeaking upon the fubjed: when we -meet : weill, then, m ρ*οά trutík, to confefs things as they are, -my 'motive te, what í dare fay you little cxpe&ed tø hear, a very fdfiih one, and teft you fhouid not fieîieve me, now I have declared it to you, I win cuplam it : ff a latidford upholds his tenants,
254 ■ tenants, I am perfuaded they will never de¬ fert him. So you fee, inftead, as you might perhaps imagine, my conferring a favour on your fon, I am in reality only piling up a mafs of intereft for myfelf. Let this true ftate of the cafe filence your fcruples^ if you had any before I had thus clearly pointed out to you ray motive, and tell Edward, that if he offers me one penny of rent before he has gathered in the crops of fourteen fum¬ mers, I fliall turn him off at a minute's warning both from my land and my heart. Tell him alfo, that I am much pleafed with the idea of his coming to be my neighbour; that I fliall certainly be in England next autumn ; and that we will then together vifit the old haunts where we have before put up many a hare and partridge. Your affurance of Margaretta Hayton's health and happinefs gave me much fatif- fadion : remember tha^ during my abfence, you are my proxy, and do not (I now re¬ peat to you what I urged to you on my leaving England) fuffer her too great deli¬ cacy, and too nice fenfe of what fhe thinks high
2L55 high obligations on her part to me, to cur¬ tail her of any additional means of com¬ fort or happinefs which flie would take, if the power of procuring them were her own. Farewel, my good friend : remember me with kindnefs to Margaretta, and with friendfliip to your fon ; and believe me truly, Yours, Charles Melford*
LETTER
me
LETTER XXIX. Är Charles Melford to'Major Seymour. PEAR ??0??£, Rome. I Was juft fitting down to make you my acknowledgments for the pathetic tale of Henry and Sufan which you fent to me,. wfceo ? ?????? ktter from you, on a fub¬ jed more immediately interefting to my feelings, was brought to me. Why, my dear friend, what gloomy etf can have taken pofleffion of your ideas while you were writing to me, to have made it poffible for you to have appeared fo fully perfuaded, that, becaufe a man had happened to have offered me his daughter in marriage, his wife to have feleded me as the' objed- of her private amufements, and that wife and huiband afterwards to quarrel, that there muft undoubtedly be a plan formed be¬ tween them for the undoing of that third; perfon, to whom they had before been thus parti?
£57 particular in their attentions; and, more¬ over, that there muft be fome tale hanging by a woman's flying from her huiband iu difguife ? and this part of the ftory I be¬ lieved to be fo common an event now-a- days, that not even you would have thought it particular enough to comment upon. Well, my dear George, I thank you mofl fincerely, however, for the intereft which I am fure you take in my fate, and the true friendfliip and concern with which you de¬ liver your admonitions to me : believe me, I refped them ; but I muft alfo fay, in my own vindication, that I do not feel myfelf under the ftrid neceflity of attending to them that you feem to imagine me. I am not the firft man wdio has received the fa¬ vours of a married woman, nor who has had a young girl offered to him in marriage by her father: others have efcaped fafely from thefe accidents which you feem to eilimate great dangers, and why ihould not I ? Nay, I have already efcaped ; I have left the Miirchefe and his daughter by leav¬ ing Venice, and the Marchefa voluntarily torp
?5 8
tore herfelf away from me, when we met by accident upon the road. So, George, do as I do, think no more of this ftrange complication of adventures: for it is al¬ moft a thoufand to one, whether I ever again fee any one of the Marvaldi family : and if 1 fliould, depend upon it, that I am fortified, both by my own refolutions and your admonitions, againft any evil which might accrue to me from tbc ren* contre. Rely on this, George, that though I may accidentally dip into tranfitory plea¬ fures, I will never fuffer them to take fufficient root in my mind to undermine the foundation of that lafting happinefs whkh I promife myfelf in my union with Mar¬ garctta. I learnt two days fmce by a letter vvhich Mrs. Wallace wrote to me relative to fome land of mine, that Margaretta was well and happy ; the affurance of her being fo, and particularly of her being fo through my means, communicated a glow of piea¬ fure to my heart, which convinced me fhe had not loft her hold on my affedions. I have
ÍŽ50 I have now been four days in Rome, and have feen mofl of the w r onders it contains, both antique and modern: but I fliall not defcribe to you what I have feen, at leaft í ffiall fave it to furniih matter of converfa¬ tion when we meet, for were I to write if, I could only relate to you in other words what you have already often read from the pens of men more able to give the account with accuracy than myfelf. I think the time at vvhich you hinted that your nuptiais were to be foiemnifed muft be near at hand ; may you, when the defired event has taken place, enjoy, unin¬ terrupted, every bleffmg which a man like yourfelf cannot well fail to poffefs when united to the woman whom fimilarity of mind has led hhn to choofe as the partner of his journey through life. If, on the prcfumption of my friendfliip with you, 1 may already be allowed· to hold commu¬ nication with your Emma, tell her that there is a man in tlie world anxioufly defir¬ ing to have an opportunity of perfonally con- gratu-
£60 gratulatİng her on becoming the wife ot his friend. Farewel ; and believe me truly, Yours, Charles Melford.
????0??? ?~? li n í' i'l LETTER XXX, Major Seymour ta Sir Cfmrbs Melford. S Kuten. INCE I wrote to you feft, my dear Charles, I have acquired an importance in the world, of which every man ought to be prQud-~-I am become the lawful pro¬ tedor of a virtuous woman, and call my¬ felf hufband» The third morning from my prefent date gave m« the hand c>f my Emma ; and the fimple folemnity of rural „ refped whkh accompanied the religiou* rites of tht* occafion, bave Itamped a re¬ fledion
26 i fledion of gratitude towards the villagers upon my heart, which I can never forbear contemplating with pieafure when my ideas return back to the feenes of that happy day. You muft indulge hie i a repeating to you what has fõ interfiled my feelings. I have already told j r ou that the manners of Mrs. Hughford ??? thofe of former days : our marriage, flie has honoured me by faying, was the moft pleafing event fhe ever had anticipated ; thus of courfe it was determined by her long before it took place, that it ihould be celebrated with all the cuftoms of old Englifh refped and hof- pitality. Ycu will underftand by this, Charles, that I was not to make my ap¬ pearance on the wadding morning whh my clothes dragged on by chance, my hair uncombed, and my boots on my legs, to meet my bride in a cloth habit and a whip in her hand ; to throw ourfelves into a poft-chaife the moment the ceremony "bad taken place ; ride all day as faft as four horfes were able to carry us *, wear away the hours in yawning and dofing, ? bea in counting
262 counting mileftones ; reach a folitary inn by the'roadfide at dark, and. pafs the even¬ ing in a hum-drum tête-à-tête; as Jias lately been the fafliionable method of alh ooyples fpending the firft- twelve hours after their becoming infeparable. ;, This was;a· me¬ thod of doing things which Airs. Hughford would .have î thought a-prophanarion of the day, and a difgrace to the parties moft concerned in the «events of it. In cor ( re- fpondënce with what I knew; to be her wifli, the fuît l· wore 'was new ; limma was habited entirely in white, her drefs was of the'richeft materials, and prefented to her hy her mother; Mrs. Hughford was alfo in white, : fo were Mrs; Amherft , and *, two young: ladies ,of the neighbourhood, who had been invited to ofliciate as bride-maids. On oue firft appearance jn the morning Mrs.' Hughford me.t,us, g^ye /t us. fome ma¬ ternal admonitions^ »upon the - flate into which:we were going tp^nt^r^ and f when thefe.were cnded^ lhe addreffed*me by fay¬ ing:; u rAt py death,. Mr; .Seymour,;,ypu will^ecome Jord çf this manor 5 J haye ever been
2Ö3 been refpeded myfelf hy thofe who live upon it, an<J I wifh the fame efteem to at¬ tach ^o you ; as therefore I think that no¬ thing fooner begets the bve of thofe we live amongft, than fuffering tue., \. witnefs us in fuch feenes as that which is this day about to take place, and to enjoy with us the feftivity which ought to accompany fuch an occafion, I hope you will not ob¬ jed to walking to the village church this morning, and afterwards to meeting my tenantry at dinner in the great hall."- I could ftart no objedion to this propofition, indeed I felt none, for I had caught the glow of univerfal hofpîtality and good-will, which was playing about the heart of the old lady, and giving fire to her eye and colour to her cheek. I next underftood that our walk was to be .in proceffion. When we .were to fet out, all the fervants appeared prepared to attend us, the »men with immenfe white favours in their hats, the women wearing them pinned on .their breafls. Emma headed the proceffion ac¬ companied by Mr· Amherft, who had taben Upon
2?4 upon him fhe office of her father for the day; Mrs. Hughford, who L· unable to walk, came next rolled along in her garden chair, Mrs. Amherft and myfelf moving by her fide ; next followed the bride's maids and men in pairs ; jmd the fervants walked at aproper diftance behind. When we arrived at the park-gate, which ftand« not above a couple of hundred yards diftant from the village church, we were met by twelve little girls, cottagers' child¬ ren, neatly clad, with white ribbands~tied in their hair, and with each a fmall bafket of flowers hung on her left arm ; they headed our proceffion, ffrewmg their flowers in our path. The church-yard was croud- ed with fpedators, who bowed refpedfully to us as we paffed along. At the church door the little girls left us ; and when we had entered the church, and were advanc¬ ing towards the altar, all the perfons whom we had feen in the church-yard came in to witnefs the performance of fhe cere¬ mony. The clergyman is aTefpeftable old man, whöfe voice is calculated to give weight
26ó weight to the words he uttered. On the ceremony being ended, while we were receiving the congratulations of thofe a- round us, all the bells which Kirton ileeple can boaft (only three) fct out the merry jingle which was to announce, as far as their found extended, that " the deed w j as done." W r e then placed ourfelves in or¬ der, to return to the hall, with this only difference, that Emma and I now headed the proceffion. At the door of the church the little girls again met us, and having prefented us each with a nofegsy of rofes and myrtle, received a prefent from Emma, and retired. We pafled through the church¬ yard amidit the bleflings and congratula¬ tions of thofe affembled in it ; and on our return home we were both embraced by Mrs. Hughford, received her bleffing, and had our hands again joined by her. Againft our return a ftimptuous break- fail, of which wedding-cake made no in- con fidcrable part, was prepared .* chocolate had been handed to us before our going to church, fo tea and coffee were the liquids vor., ι. χ of
Q66 of the prefent meal. Breakfaft had not been ended half an hour, before the te¬ nants who were invited to dinner came dropping in, in knots, to pay their con¬ gratulations to the bride and myfelf: Mrs. Hughford received them in her beft draw¬ ing-room hung with the fi;mily portraits : a door opens from it upon the lawn be¬ fore the hall, and the time till dinner was pafled in walking upon it, fome of the parties retiring to the drawing-room at intervals, to regale themfelves with a fiice of cake, and a glafs of Cape wine. Dinner was fpread on two long tables in the hall : at the head of one fat Mrs. Hughford, with Emma on her left and myfelf on her right h nnd ; at the fécond table, where the minor tenants were re¬ galed, Mrs. Hughford's fteward prended. After the cloth was removed, our healths, as y r ou may conclude, were drank in bump¬ ers. Singing was the next entertainment reforted to; and a variety of old ditties, fuch as, " Hafte to the wedding," &c. were then chauuted, both by thofe who had
£Ó7
had voices and thofe who had not : fome of them however, confidering they were delivered by the pupils of nature, were not ill fung. One air in particular pleafed me , it was a duet fung by the two girls who officiated as bride's maids, one was the daughter of a farmer in the village, the other his niece ; the lines had been com * pofed by them for the occafion, and adapt¬ ed to fome old mufic, and I think, confi¬ dering them to have been written by two girls whofe education cannot be fuppofed to have been much attended to in the nicer parts of inftrudion, they are not unwonhy of being transcribed by me, or read by you. Thefe are they : Arcadia n íhepherds to Love's altar bring The choiceii: ol früh*-, and the flcnvVs of the Spring, Advancing towards ir, the)* merrily fing ï Saft moments of love, The God's choice ft gift í Sweet pleafures of lovt, Why íly ye fo fwih ? Oh tarry, oh tarry, and lengthen our ??? î The» from his foft bed f fee tlie God of love rife, While fire tliat burns hearts fparkles bright in hib f\cs; And thus to his vot'rits he courteous replies. n z Thofe
<26% Thofe moments of love, The gift of the ikies ! Thofe pleafures of love, You fo highly prize ; *Tis Hymen's bright torch that muft lengthen their blifs î Then hither, Love, tranfport thy bow'r ; Hither, oh Hymen, bring thy pow'r : Sincerer hearts thou ne'er didit fee Upon thine altar blaze Than thofe to-day in wedlock joined ; Ah, guide them through love's maze. If when you have read thefe lines you begin to criticife upon them, you are not the man of fenfe I imagine you to be ; re¬ member that they are the efforts of thofe who ought to be commended for their endeavours, and not defpifed becaufe their attempts have not reached perfedion: the truly fenfible man will never condemn the humble flights of genius ; ît is only thofe who are more ignorant themfelves, than the perfons they attempt to ridicule, who fall into this mean error. Oh, would but thefe railers confider how very difficult to fafhion is the moft trifling compofition, and how ve r y far fliort they themfelves would in
'269 in all probability fall, even of what they condemn, were they to take up the pen, I think none but the decidedly ill-natured, the envious, or the incorrigibly ignorant, would continue the pitiful pradice, of fa- tirifing the produdions of another's brain. But I am ftepping afide from the defcrip¬ tion which I fet out with giving you. While the tables were removing from the hall, we had tea made for us in the antique drawing-room; we then returned to ihe hall, and a fprightly dance, in which we were joined by the tenantry, followed by fuitable re fre fli ments, concluded the amufe¬ ments of the day ; and a happy day it was, Charles, not only becaufe it gave me the hand of my Emma, but I alfo ? njo ved mixing with the children of na¬ ture, and feeing them refpeding the worth of her who was the mother of the entire group. I now feel myfelf completely hk (fed : may you ere it is long tafte that ferene felicity which now fmiles on me in an amiable wife, and a heart contented to n 3 feek
i' 70 feek pieafure in the circle of its domef¬ tic connexions! Farewel; and believe me, Yours affedionatelv, Georg L Seym or n.
LETTER XXXI. Sir Charle Mi ij ord to Major Seymour. IRöir.e. Muft write again, my dear Seymour, upon the old fubjed, and I am well aware that you will again condemn me. Indeed, I am almoft beginning to think myfelf, that I feem born for adventure ; but be that as the fates liave ordained it : and do you blame me, if you are cold-hearted enough not to feel fentiments fimilar to mine ; for I carmotfummonfurficient refolution— infamy, I was going lo fay— to defert any woman in diilrefs, much lefs a woman whom 1 have fo intimately known as the Marchefa Laura. But I am fpeaking in an incoherent ftyle, which you cannot at prefent under iland : I muil
t i7l . muft colled my ideas, and relate to you the paft occurrences as they happened to me. Two evenings ago, about the hour of twilight, f was walking in one of the moil public ftreets of this city ; as 1 turned the corner of a fquare, I obferved, at about the diftance of fiity yards before me, a woman tawdrily dreit, whofe pace was irregular, and who appeared uncertain whether to proceed in the diredion flie was moving, or to return back. I had followed her about five minutes, and my eyes were now turned to fome other objed, when a fliriek in the diredion in which ihe was walking called my eyes back to her, and I obferved her juft in time to fee her fall down upon the pavement. I quickened my ftep towards the fpot where ihe was lying ; feveral per¬ fons were already gathered about her when I arrived at it, and from fomc of thofe who had been neareft to her when fhe fell I underftood that fhe was in a fit. The wo¬ man who excited our attention groaned, and appeared in violent agony; in a few moments a man brought out a light from N 4 the
?/?.
the ihop before the door of which flie had fallen, a byftandcr took it at his hand, and held it to the face of the female on the ground: guefs my aftoniihment, Seymour- it was the Marchefa Laura ! pale, etvmial- ed, ftretched on the public flreet in a fit ! When my furprife fufficiently abated to re¬ turn me the povver of adion, I ran into the fliop, befought the people in it to fetch her into their houfe, and to endeavour to dif- perfe the crowd. They thought her, no doubt, other than flie was, and appeared at firfl unwilling to oblige me: I offered to make them any recompence they fliould re¬ quire, if they would but perform what 1 required of them : they now confented, the Marchefa was brought into the fliop appa¬ rently lifelefs, and the door clofed upon the inquifitive fpedators who were gather¬ ed round it. Water was fprinkled in her face, and fcents held to her noftrils by the people of the houfe, but for a confiderable time no figns of returning life appeared ; at length, with a fudden motion, ihe raifed one of her hands to her mouth, and at¬ tempted
¿73
tempted to bite it, but her fl rengt h failed, and it again dropped down : the rim of a glafs filled with water was now inferted be¬ tween her Jips ; flie fixed her teeth againft it, fwallowed a little of the liquid it con¬ tained, then opened her eyes languidly, caft them round with a look of enquiry, folded her hands upon her breaft, and groaned. I moved oppofite to her, and fpoke a few words to her in the gentleft accent I could command : flie did not feem to recollect my perfon, but on hearing my voice flie utter¬ ed a faint fli riek, and again funk lifelefs into the arms of the woman who was fu ppor ? - íng her. The people of the fliop faid, that as my prefence feemed to agitate her, I had better retire from· her fight till íhe was fome¬ what more recovered than fhe had been when I had addreffed her. I took their ad¬ vice and went into a diftant part of the fbopj where I could be witnefs to what pafled without being feen by her. She· was longer in reviving this time than, flie had been be¬ fore; at length fhe again opened· her eyes,. iMvered violenti)'', caught the glafs of wa- n 5 ter
â74 ter from the hand of the perfon who was holdkig it, and drank greedily for a few féconds ; then flopping fuddenly, flie burft into tears, and faid, " For pity's fake give me a morfei of bread, I have not eaten thefe two day*»." Some refreíhment vvas brought to her, flie eat a few mouthfuls, then fickened from the weak ftate to which ihe had been re¬ duced by abftinence, and refufed to take any more : again flie drank of the water that had been placed by her, again gave» vent to her tears, and her ftrength and fpi¬ rits then appearing in fome fmall degice renovated, fhe enquired whether ihe had not within thefe few laft minute« feen an Engliih gentleman near her. I came for- vvanl to anfwer her queftion myfelf: on my approaching her, ihe took my hand, killed it with emotion, and fr.id, ** God be pra i fed that í have one iriend near me to clofe my eyes !"— i( Why are you here in this mife¬ rable fituation ?" 1 afced, hardly fenfible of what 1 íaid ; " on what account are you birre alone ? "—·" To die'" ihe anfwered in a tone
27/>
a tone that thrilled my heart. I was not able immediately to reply, and fhe went on faying, " I am able to walk home now, if you will lend me your arm."—" You are not yet fufficiently recovered," I returned. * c Oh yes, I am," flie replied ; " and you will much oblige me if you will be my fafe¬ guard : I am fo weak, I dare not truft my¬ felf to walk alone." I again befouffht her ? ? not to venture abroad till her ftrength was better reftored, but fhe perfiftcd in going ; I accordingly recompenced the people of the houfe as I had promifed to do, held out my arm to the Marchefa, and when flie had put her's through İt wc went out into the ftreet. " You muft dired me," I find ; " where do jou live ?"— " 141 fliow you," flie anfwered ; " but pray do not oblige me to talk, or walk faft, for my very heart- ftrinss ache with the leaft exertion." We proceeded in filence down a back-ftreet, and from thence into a narrow alley ; flie flopped oppofite to a very mean houfe, and faid, " Knock at that door.** I followed her requeft, and the door was opened by a n 6 decrepid
Q76 decrepid old woman, whofe appearance, as well as that of the houfe, was extreme poverty. ct Which is this lady's room ?" I aiked. " Up ftairs," faid the woman: I took a light from the table, and led the way up the flairs, which fronted the door, into a chamber of as miferable appearance as the room below : the Marchefa followed me, ftaggered to the bed, and funk upon it. c * You muft have a phyfician," I faid. " Oh, in pity," flie replied, " do not at¬ tempt to prolong the exiftence of a wretch¬ ed outcaft like myfelf."—" Do not talk thus," I rejoined ; " circumflance may have reduced your health, and darkened for a while your profpeds of happinefs in life, but you muft not therefore defpond." — <f Oh, that I were already dead!" flie cried, and burft into tears. The woman of the houfe now came into the apartment, and I told her to go ;md fetch fomc medical aid to her lodger ; the woman replied, that flie believed kitch¬ en phyfic would be her belt lemedy, for poverty was her difeafe. J gave her mo¬ ney.
277 ney, and told her to buy and prepare what¬ ever could contribute to the comfort of the Marchefa ; flie went out to do as I had defired her, and I remained meanwhile watching by the bed-fide of the Marchefa, but unable to perfuade her to enter into a converfation upon her prefent fituation, or the cîrcum flanees which had reduced her to it; indeed her very weak flate ren¬ dered moil of the words flie did fpeak in¬ articulate. When the woman returned, the Marchefa faid, " Since you fay that I muft not die, I w r ill try to take a little food, and then endeavour to fleep; but pray leave me for to-night, I feci that I have not ftrength to fupport a converfation, even five minutes longer." I was ftandíng by her, ihe once more took my hand, kiffed ir, her tears falling upon it as fhe held it; then added, " May heaven, biefs you, ge¬ nerous Engliihman, dear, worthy Carlo I" I then left her, having obtained her per¬ miflion to call again in the morning, but t did not quit the houfe tilllhad commanded the woman who kept ît to omit no en¬ deavour.»
278 deavours for reftoring the health of her lodger. After I had left the houfe* I wandered for fome time about the ftreets ín thought, and then returned home to my lodgings to pafs a night of conjedure rather than fleep. It would be ufelefs to repeat to you all the ideas that floated in my brain ; 1 fliall therefore now give you an account of what paffed between the Marchefa and myfelf on the following morning. On entering the houfe, I enquired of the old woman, whom I met below, how the lady up flairs did ?—" Bad enough, door foul," flie returned ; " Maria help her!"— iS You think her worfe then ?" faid I. " Not better I am fure," the woman anfwered. " Then," replied 1, " go di¬ redlv and bring to her fome medical af- fiftance ; but firft enquire of her, whether lhe wili fee mc this morning?"— i( Pray walk up," faid the woman, tt flie defired that when vou called 1 would admit yon." I went up flairs and found her in bed ; but, good God ! how altered a countenance did flie
¡279 flie wear to that which I had been F.ccuf- fomed to fee grace the Marchefa di Mar¬ valdi ! ihe was very pale, and much thin¬ ner than when I had parted from her în Venice, and her features appeared to me already extended by approaching death. I moved towards the bed ; flic held out her hand, and I gave her mine ; flie motioned for me to fit down by the bed ; í complied with her fignal. tv Oh, Carlo," flie then faid, " I know not whether to thank you, tor having faved me laft night from death ; I muft have died but for your interpofition, nnd I almoft believe it had been the hap¬ pieft thing that could have befallen me," —" Endeavour," I returned, " to keep up your fpirits, your malady appears mofl to prefs upon them ; I have fent for a phy¬ fician to attend vou ; but J entreat vou to tell me, vvh&t caufe has reduced you to this fad fituation, thar I may the better underftand how to ad in your behalf?'— 41 That caufe," faid the, ** 1 have already repeatedly toid you, i d re i:o k divulge; its revelation would be a cruie for which my foul
280 foul muil atone : you cannot, I am fure, now I have faid thus much, wiih me to difclofe it."—« What am I to think," I afked, " of the fituation in which I lafl night found you ?—of feeing you the tenant of this WTetched chamber ?"—" Think and believe," flie returned, * c that even this place to reft my aching head upon is a comfort beyond what I have the means of longer procuring for myfelf: driven from Venice, 1 fled for an afylum to this city ; I hired this room, and for many days kept myfelf its prifoner, tafting only what the neceflities of life required ; at length the little I poffeffed, although thus frugally ufed, was gone : for the tw r o lafl days and nights before you faw me, ray tears and groans were all my nourifhment, all my fociety; ftarving nature at laft obtained' dominion over inclination - r with difguft I dreffed myfelf in the few ornaments I had* remaining, and at the dufk of yefterday evening I ruihed into the ftreets, refolved* to procure the means of appeafmg the pangs of hunger, though I fliould return to
L\S İ lo hate myfelf: my limbs were more friend¬ ly to me than my heart, for they refufed to bear me to my humiliation; an İnde- icribable agony fei fed me, and I fell on the fpot where you found me." What anfwer could I make to this lamentable defcription of her miferies, but a promife of my pro- leciion ? and flie received it with a grati¬ tude that almofl overpowered my feelings, as much as her own. " I have no friend on earth but you/* fhe cried ; t( and Hea¬ ven muft reward you, for I never can !" I was about to reply, when the old woman returned with an adminiftrer of phyfic. After having queftioned his patient and counted her pulfe, he told us that her dif- order principally originated in weaknefs, and agitation of fpirits; that he would give her a medicine to compofe the latter, and advifed that flie fliould take nouriftikg food to recruit her ftrength : he then retired, faying he would call on the following day at the fame hour : I took care to fee that what the phyfician had recommended ihould be attended to, and departed. I called
28í2 called again in the evening, and found the MarchefiVs health already fomewhat im¬ proved hy the good nurfing which had been given her through the day. That flie fliould refufe to confide to me the caufe of her misfortunes, does not ap¬ pear fo ftrange to me as it once did, now ihe has told mc, * that the difclohne would be a crime for which her foul mull atone." She is a Roman catholic, Seymour, and filence has moil probably been impof- ed on her by the church ; it is no matter ôf furprife then, that a woman educated to revere the bleffmgs, and tremble at tlie anathemas, of prîefts, fliould ad'as flie doe.s. However, be it as it may, it is enough for me that I fee her in mifery, and that humanity commands me to be her friend. î fa ?* her \ ? ice yefterday, and found her -j uch inu»r ved ??? in health and fpirits; fi\ í^ nit T d (-fn ous of entering into con¬ vention it h ith my vifits, but I remained with i^r only a few minutes each time, í ,:iuî that the excrâon of talking to me»
mv, which I could not prevail upon her to forbear doing, ihould caufe her to re¬ lapfe. I have been to her once this morning, and find her cheerfulnefs and appearance equally mended ; I fhall call upon her in the afternoon, and requeft that againft İ iee her again flie will have taken into her coniideration by what means 1 can con¬ tribute towards fecuring her future days from the horrid miferies to which her paft life has lately been expofed ; when I have her anfwer to this queftion, you fliall hear from mc again. From what I now write to you, George, I think your fears of any evil being plan¬ ned againft me by the Marvaldi family muft vanifli ; you cannot, I think, pretend to fuppofe that the fufferings which the Mar¬ chefa has lately been enduring can have been feigned for the fake of promoting any end in view ; had you feen her, as İ have done, you muft have caft afide doubt and pitied ?? I did. For the act of humanity I have per- î or med,
£84 formed, all the return I wifli ís your com¬ mendation ; to receive it from you will be the greateft pieafure of, Yours truly, Charles Mel t ori>.
LETTER XXX IL Sir CharL· Mel/brd fo Major Seymuur* 3>EAR GEORGE, Kome. I returned to the Marchefa on the following morning, I afked her, whe¬ ther fhe had given any thought to the point which I had defired her to confider. Her snfwer, as nearly as I can recoiled, was in the following words : " You have defired me to fpeak my fentimems freely : I owe you every thing ; 1 have found you noble, generous, and a mm of honour ; and I am refolved to lay open my heart to jou with nil the frunknefs that lhe tie by which I am
When
285 am bound will permit me to do. I repeat what I have before told you, that I am not unprincipled in heart, though you have known me in a fituation for which virtue muft brand me with eternal infamy. Oh, God ! the agonies that preceded, and the pangs that followed, our private meeting ín the caflino of the Marchefe di Marvaldi !—· never, never can I forget what I that even¬ ing fuffered h— I bound you at that hour by a mylterious vow, of vvhich you cannot have forgotten the import ; you muft remember it, for you have adhered to it, and with the bleflings of a wretched heart I thank you for having obferved it. The unfortunate tranfaftion of that evening— ? holy Maria!" exclaimed fhe, interrupting herfelf, " why am I conftrained to fpeak upon this hateful fubjed ! " She paufed, then continued : " But it muft be for once fpoken upon, that it may hereafter for ever be forgotten : my humiliation of that moment, fignor, will never be repeated :—oh what language did my cruel deftiny then oblige me to ufe to a man whom I had fcarcely feen before î — Believe
28<j Believe not that I felt what I at that hour cxpreífed to you ; I did not feel the (hame¬ iul paflion I pretended to confefs ; you had then touched my heart no more than the moft indifferent being of the creation : but my feelings towards you are now changed ; your honour has long gained my refped, your benevolence has now excited my warmeft gratitude, and from beholding you with coldnefs, I have now learnt to adore you. But do not miftake my words ; í do not mean to fay that I behold you with paffion ; feelings of that nature are dead in mc : I would have you underftand, that I reve¬ rence you for pofleifing a heart that has taught you to pity my miferies. I have told you with how horrid a refolution of pro¬ longing life I ruflied into ihe ftreets on tbat evening when you found me without a friendly arm to reft my burning head upon, or a pitying hand to clofe my dying eyes ; you fnatched mc from the jaws of death !— Ì returned home to pafs a night, not of re¬ pofe, but of refledion ; 1 faw the ex ren t of the fm I had been about to commit, and î re-
2S7 I refolved to meet Death, at whatever mo¬ ment and in however dreadful a form he might fumrnon me, without having done a voluntary crime to atone for hereafter. I am fteady to my word, firm in my refolu¬ tion ; I can meet my fate without alarm : tell me, therefore, before I fay that I will * accept any farther protedion from you, will you promife me, upon the honour of a man, fuch as you have ever appeared to me, that you will banifli from every word and adion of your future life, if poffible from your memory, the recolledion of your ever having known me as any other than the objed of your benevolence ?—will you promife me rhis ?" She affeded me more by the impreffive manner in which flie urged thi» petition than I can defcribe to you. This proof of the „worth of her heart, when under the guidance of her own mind, interefted me more in her misfortunes than i had ever been before, and I immediately anfwered, " By Heaven and my own ho* nour i ara fruui this moment only your friend/' Sie
285 She attempted to fpeak, but her tears prevented her utterance; and, if I had not caught her by her hands and prevented her, flie would have thrown herfelf upon her knees before me in gratitude for my promife. When at length ihe could articulate, flic faid, " Generous, worthy Englifliman !—I will now explain to you by what fingle ad you can render me fervice, and make life tolerable to me."—" Speak it," faid I. « i have already," flie returned, ** trefpaffed fo far upon your benevolence, that I fear what 1 fliall now advance will appear a mean en¬ croachment on your goodnefs :—pardon me, 1 do not mean to infinuate that I think you a man capable of making an offer to raife the defponding hope of wretchednefs, and then ftealing away from your promife ; remember alfo, that what I fay îs but a propofal, and that you are at liberty to come into it, or to crufli ir ? as you pleafe, for I am prepared to meet the worft that can befal me with fortitude :—the onlj terms on which I can receive life at your hands are, that you remove mc from Italy."— " Name,"
£89 " Name," I returned, " where you wifh to be placed."—" I fhouid prefer," fhe replied, u to Jive in England ; the people there are generous and companionate—encouragers of the induftrious : I think I fliould there be the beft able to turn the little talents I poffefs to advantage for procuring me an honeft and humble maintenance."—" Yon fhall go to England," I anfwered. " Jefus biefs you ! " flie returned. *' When will you be able to fet out ?" 1 aiked. ** If I confult my health," faid fhe, " I cannot fet o t t too foon ; for be affured it will not mend while I remain in this hated country."-?· " I have feen enough of Italy," I replied ; " and fliall be ready to fet out whenever you are competent to undertake the jour¬ ney."—" One more petition/* fhe rejoined, " I have to urge ; do not think I impofe on your goodnefs ; indeed I do not : if yoa ? new my unhappy fituation, you would be convinced that I do not." She paufed, and I requefted her to fpeak without referve : flie then faid, " We muft not journey through Italy 5 if we travel through this VOL. L ? COUntry,
290 country, it is more than poflible that all your kind endeavours for my future peace may be fruftrated in one moment, and the reft of my days doomed to heart-rending torments."—" What route," I afked, " do you propofe for us to make our road to England?"— u There are vcffcls continually pafling between Civita Vecchia and Nice ; have you any objedion to our taking our paffa ge in one of thefe ?" I inftantly de¬ termined that there could be no hefitation in preferring a route of fafety to this unfor¬ tunate woman, rather than indulging myfelf in once more crofling the Alps ; I accord* ingly agreed that our route jhould be the one flie had defired it to be, and fliort ly af¬ ter left her overwhelmed with gratitude ; having firfl promifed her to fend a perfon forward to Civita Vecchia'- to-morrow, to enquire when the firfl veffel bound to Nice would leave that port. Evening. My enquiries after a veffel this morning having got abroad, in this place, they have very unexpededly brought to me the cap¬ tain
29? tain of one who is in the trade between Civita Vecchia and Nice, and who informs me that he is ; :> fail for Nice to-morrow evening, if the w r ind permits, I went to the Marchefa, and afked her if flie could fo foon venture to undertake the voyage^ I ihould not have'afked" her the queftion, owing to her weak ftate of health, if I had not been affured that no other veffel would fail in three w T eeks at leaft. She earneftly preffed that w r e fliould embark in the one that now offered : I have accordingly taken our paffage therein, and we are to fet out with the captain for Civita Vecchia early to-morrow morning. I wonder, Seyrnour, what is now your opinion of my condud ; whether or not you cenfure me for this phi¬ lanthropic adion. Perhaps before you de¬ termine upon the propriety of what I have done, you want to know how I intend to difpofe of the Marchefc vyhen f lüget to England : not to let her toil, for a fubiift- ence, as flie has herfelf afferted that fhe will, while I have a fuperfluity, depend upon it, George. I have not yet told her my
??2 ?? intention, but I fhall make her the te* nant of a neat cottage which I have lately built at the extremity of my park : here flie fhall enjoy the comforts and conveni¬ ences of life, which, with my flender know¬ ledge of human nature, I am convinced, muft be the happieft fiate that can be tafted by one who has experienced only misfor¬ tune in a higher fphere of life. Do not write to me any more till I ar¬ rive in England, as I cannot name any place where I could be certain of receiving your letters. I fhall now foon fee Margaretta : with what ecftacy I anticipate our meeting ! Yes, George, I fpeak from my heart ; for be affured, that however you may judge of me, the intereft which I now feel in the fate of the unhappy Marchefa is of a na¬ ture very different to love. Farewel : as foon as 1 land in England I will write to you ; till when, and ever, believe me, with unfeigned regard, your true friend, Charles Melford, end of thf first volume,
■7. Datifin, tcn.hiJy d jh tt/, J'Vtf / -β t ?.
