Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The unknown: or, The Northern gallery: a romance
■чмм^а
тия
U W К ЯГ O f У л.
CHAP. L Say, who Kas roy fathers'
Home;
" I am not mad ; this hair I tear is mine ; 3 am «ot mad ; I would to Heaven I «vere ! For then 'as like I ¿hoald forget myielf 4 Ob, if I could, what jjnft should I forget î I am jwLraad i ¿00,-weU, too well J feci The different plague pf ^açb cßluvoatj" , Kţsa J vh*. İHE -period is now come »at Which it is lieceesary -that we should unfold ohe óf : t f ie Tnysteŕicsin which our tale has-been wrapt, vot<; in. в * г a*id
and detail the serret history of the inno¬ cent su íľercr, Valentine. It has already been mentioned, that by thc will of her father, Lady Blunt was re¬ stricted from the inheritance of Castle Gower, and thc valuable domains annexed to it, except on thc condition of hcr be¬ coming tiic mother ofa son, to whom they miirht, through her, descend ; and to this it must now be added, that the fortune which she separately possessed was very slender, and that Sir Sigismund had been principally induced to give her his hand, by the tempting contingency of becoming the Lord of Castle Gower. Their union being celebrated, a year elapsed, during which, to the ungovernable disquiet of hcr husband, Lady Blunt had given no signs of becoming a mother. Distractedly impatient for an heir, and fearing that one would never be born to him, by frequent and urgent entreaties, joined to thc authority of a husband, Sir Sigismund prevailed on 'his wife to feign herself
herself in the situation in which he had so Ion": and so earncsrlv desired to behold O m' her. In the service of Sir Sigismund had lived, from his youth upwards, Fabian. Himself and an elder brother were the sons of a gentleman of broken fortune, who, from an ill-judged aflection, had bred them t:p only to idleness and pleasure— n false in¬ dulgence, of which the privatioik'proved to them a real misery, when, on their father's death, which happened when Fabian was about sixteen years of age, they r discovered themselves to be left almost without thc means of subsistence. This unexpected disappointment pro¬ duced the very worst effect on thcir minds. Instead of giving aturn to their ideas, and reclaiming them to thc paths of credit and propriety, thcy only considered how thcy might continue to procure those gratifica¬ tions to which thcy had been accustomed ; rnd no plan of so rea d ν a nature presenting itaclťto thcir imagination, as that of render¬ li 2 inj
ing themselves useful tò men who had the ability of rewarding handsomely their ser¬ vices, and rewards being naturally great in proportion to services performed, they were led on insensibly along the paths of vice, till every service had with them its price. Sir Sigismund Hlunt had not alwavs been « mt the immaculate character which he has ap¬ peared since thc period of our acquaint¬ ance with him, iñ thc preceding pages of this history. Previously to his marriage with Lady Elizabeth Talboyse, his intrigues луеге numerous and daring ; and he was frequently involved in many affairs of an ambiíľiious nature, in the conduct of which he found an able second extremely neces¬ sary ; and Fabian, havirŕg upon more than one occasion proved himself suited to his purposes, was made thc confidential ally of his plans. : Fabian 4vas accordingly selected by Sir Sigismund for the important office of in¬ troducing into Castle Gower a child, who might
mkht bv the world be accounted its law- ful heir.- For thc effecting of this purpose, it was necessary that a male child should either bc purchased or stolen. It was left to Fabian to proceed according to his own judgnient; and he, with very little hesita¬ tion, determined upon the theft of an. in¬ fant. He considered, that if he were to offer to purchase the ofïspring of any indigent pa¬ rents, although their necessities might in¬ duce thern to accede to his proposal, that the fact itself must create in their breasts, a suspicion of some extraordinary transaction being on foot ; that the natural affection of parents for their children might lead them. to endeavour to discover whither their child had been conveyed; that a coincidence.of circumstances might disclose this to them;; and that this knowledge, being once ob¬ tained, it might become impossible to with¬ hold the illegality-of Castle Go wer 's pre¬ tended heir, from those.intcrested in setting aside bis inheritance. вЗ To
spring of any porson but of her who pro¬ fessed herself ii*- mother, w;is entertained by ¿iny individiini being, except it were fhe physician, who was summoned under pre¬ tence of ushering it into existence, and wbo, en his arrival, found fhat thc child was already born ; but a diamotid ring of great value, which Sir Sigismund put into his hand, as thc reward of his attendance, silenced his enquiries, ifit did not prevent his suspicions. He was a man who had oflen experienced a friend in Sir Sigis¬ mund, and who owed to him manv favours. Sir Sigismund therefore was not very ap- prchensiif of their being requited on the part ofthe physician, by thc circulation of anv unpleasant rumour ; and in thc course ofa vear his fear«, if hehad any on this account, were entirely hushed, by the physician's death. Not even I.:.c>v Limit herself was en¬ trusted with a knowledge oí whose child it was, or from wh.cn с с it had been stolen.— Tiiis was л secret known only to Fabian and
Är.d Sir Sigismund. The child was chris¬ tened bv thc name of Valentine ; and when a due period had been given to thc pre¬ tended reco vorv of Lady Blunt, thev rc- ml -' · moved into Northamptonshire, according to the permission which thc laic Sir Allen's wul now granted them. Scarce! v had thev fixed thcir residence at m- J Castle Gower, ere n discovery of a most perplexing nnd unpleasant nature took place. Lady Blunt found herself about to become a mother fi If a male child were born to him, what," Sir Sigismund considered, u would be the event of thc fallacy which hc bad practised? thit a stranger might step into the inheritance which was justly his own son's/' Thc idea distressed and tormented him ; and he held many consultations on thc in¬ tricate subject vvith his wife. To revert to thc past was useless. Lady Blunt accordingly said nothing of the manv and serious arguments which she had ι* 5 urged
urged against the unfair conduct of which her^busband had been guilty ;* she only repeated, " that as it was impossible for Valentine to be restored to his parents, without subjecting Sir Sigismund to their revenge for the injury which they had re¬ ceived at his hands, and which they might cause to fall upon him, from the heavy mandate of the law, that they were bound, in duty and humanity, to protect the child as their own, since they had deprived him of his natural protectors, and that she was resolved ever to conduct herself as a mother towards him ; that if the child then in her womb should prove a son, that Valentine ought still to be regarded as such by them ; that the unborn could not regret a priva¬ tion with which he was unacquainted ; and that, although he would, in this case, suffer a wrong which he did not merit, that still it was a wrong ofan inferior nature to that of which they should be guilty, were they to cast the innocent Valentine out upon the world for a fault of theirs." Sir
Sir Sigismund was won by her argu¬ ments,-and declared himself tsehsible of their propriety ; acknowledged the justice of his bearing the events which he had him¬ self been the means of producing ; and said that he would ever consider Valentine as his child. The period of Lady Blunt's confinement being arrived, their worst apprehensions were realized, by hcr giving birth to a son, whom they named Hildebrand. From the first dawn of reason on their infant minds, tbe dispositions of the two children, the difference of whose ages was only ten months, were of the most oppo¬ site kind—that of Valentine gentle and conciliating; that of Hildebrand impe¬ tuous, overbearing, and fractious. As they grew up, there appeared the same dissimi¬ larity in their abilities for acquiring know¬ ledge, and in their inclinations for so doing as in their tempers. Valentine applied» with pleasure and profit, to tbe lessons of his instructors. Hildebrand frequently в 6 could
conia not be induced to attend to them at all. When he did, it was with evident disinclination and carelessness. The amiability of Valentine's disposition could net fail to interest the. affections of Sir Sigismund and Lady Blunt ; in every respect he rendered himself conformable to their wishes ; by ail who knew him, hc was so universally esteemed, that it ap- reared as if a pitying Providence had in- îcnrionalîv gifted him with thc means of creeping into their hearts; vvhilst it was often the lamentation of their private hours, how deficient thcir own son was in r-vcrv enlacing quali f v. Still, conscious that Hildebrand had fhat undisputed right to their affection and lavou r which Valen¬ tine had not by birth, they could not for¬ bear frequently extending to him unde¬ served indulgences, which hc, regarding as marks of their superior esteem, grew into the habit of arrogating to himself daily iireater liberties and authoritv. Thc spirit of Valentine was too noble to envv
cnvy the liíííe indulgences which v.cve Dartiallv reaped bv his nominal brother; m* » - J he considered them to bc extended towards him bv their parents, in the hope of soften¬ ing thc sıırîv crabhednc>s of his (e n per; and instead of attempting to coun reiat t rhe favour vvhich thcy shewed him. he endea- v oured, bv imitating their conduct, toa>/ist their operation^. But their cííbľís v\ v ere in vain ; the un¬ pleasant manners and unruly ίο:η[^ι· of Hildebrand gained strength:— to thc evil habits of unprovoked race, wanton crue! t v. and idle extravagance, hc novv began to add those of the voting voluptuarv ; and the licentiousness of his conduct was as ge¬ nerally dese ried as was the excellence of Valentine's extolled. Sir Sigismund and Lady Blunt listened in silence to thc opinions of tiie world, who, in the praises which they bestowed on Wa¬ lentine, little imagined that thcy vvere com¬ municating pangs of thc bitterest regret to their hearts, by enforcing the galling truth •i of
of how different a being he was to wliom they had reaiiy given existence. Vv'hen Sir Hildebrand had attained his .sixteenth year, thc time was fast approach- in* 1 * at which tîıe unfortunate Valentine was doomed f о bewail thc unfeeling disposi¬ tion of Sir Sigismuud's son ; aiid Sir Sigis¬ mund himself fated to lament thc perfidy ofthe man in whose breast hc had reposed thc secrets ofhis soul. With eternal dissatisfaction, labour the hearts of men who sell themselves to thc performance of villainous actions ; self-in¬ terest is the spring upon which thcir con¬ duct moves, and they are ever studying ίο add vigour to its progress ; their em¬ ployers are usually in their power, and upon this knowledge their extortions know no bounds. Λ man of this description was Fabian ; he had lately shewn great discon¬ tent at the acknowledgments made ίο him by Sir Sigismund for his services, and being importunate for a further requital, hc ex¬ pressed himself weary of residing in the familv
family of Sir Sigismund, notwithstanding the great indulgences and privileges which were allowed him in it, and demanded thc means of furnishing himself with an esta¬ blishment of his own. Sir Sigismund did not asree to this demand with the readi- ness which he badilone to some others; nor did hc credit thc immediate vengeance which Fabian threatened him with for his non-compliance ; but Fabian suffered iiim¬ self to bc guided by the heat of thc mo¬ ment ; and seeking Hildebrand, whiisr yet in his lit of united anger and disappoint¬ ment, hc disclosed to him that Valentine was not his brother. With impatient steps Hildebrand flew to his father; hc found him in his privat j apartment, and, in the most violent accents, demanded of him whether or not Mr. Fabian had deceived him in the communi¬ cation which he had just made to him ? Sir Sigismund was overpowered by thc surprise with which his senses were assailed ; the frulli fell from his lips, and hc threw himself
himself upon thc mercy of his son— ofthat son, in whose breast not one generous feel¬ ing, not one spark of filial affection had place. The door of the apartment opened, and a third person fortunately entered, in some measure to assuage the horror of a scene where a father was bowed down by the consciousness of a crime, before a son whose ferocious disposition led him only to triumph in the advantage he had oblnined. This person was Fabian. A few moments of cool reflection having communicated to his feelings some degree of remorse for the rashness of which he had been o-uilty, and thc exposure he had made ofhis patron's guilt—for sparks of feeling animate thc worst of hearts—he followed Hildebrand, in order to endeavour to ame¬ liorate the mischief which hc had created. However great thc wrath of Sir Sigis¬ mund's heart asrainst Fabian, hc durst not Cj venture to express it, and greeted his en¬ trance with a look which implored for com¬ passion. Fabian attempted to speak ; but thc
tbc ravings of Hildebrand for redress pre¬ vented any one but himself from being beard. He demanded that Valentine should be instantly cast out from his father's house, and dishonoured. In vain was it that Fabian attempted to explain to him, that with a step of this rash nature, his father's dishonour must be inevitably united. <( Is it my fault," he exclaimed in return, (C that my father has committed a crime, and that my redress demands an exposure ofhis guilt?" Several hours were passed in unsuccess¬ ful attempts to bring the impetuous vouth to some degree of reason. At length he was induced to listen to a plan, projected bv Fabian, for his redress, and ultimately prevailed onto accede to its being put into execution. The infamous strnía^em which the con- K' cealment of crime rendered necessary was this:—At the period of the rupture just stated, the unfortunate Valentine was con¬ fined by a severe illness to his bed ; and the
the scheme concerted against his peace was, thai it should be reported to the world that his rfü'.fu had Mificrcd from the in- ílueľice of the n*, ú Lid y under which he had laboured ; that it was no longer safe for him to n ix witii society ; and that he bhouJil, r :oivt that day, bc confined to cer¬ tain apartments in one ofthe towers ofthe castle, where it shoidd become the exclu¬ sive business of Fabian to attend upon hiin. Ľy him ?.nd Sir Sigismund h was satisfac¬ torily explained to Hildebrand, that Valen¬ tine's supposed insanity would effectually set aside, in the judgment ofthe law, all pretensions on his part to that inheritance which he miçht otherwise have claimed, as being believed to be the eldest son of Lady Blunt; and upon this conviction his per¬ turbed soul became more calm, This cruelty was accordingly put into execution without delav. The unerring Valentine was conveyed to his prison, to shed those bitter drops of anguish, which his wretched situation drew from his heart into
into his eyes; and to question in vain why- he was subjected to a fate so undeserved and so severe. Tbe actors of f r ;uilt are always at least equally unhappv with ihc>o on wliom their injustice falis ; and /;c family of Sir Sigis¬ mund Blunt was, from the fatal moment of Fabian's broken confidence, a constant scene of anarchv und wretchedness. Kverv hour of LaJy Ί homasinc's existence was passed in bitter repentance, for having -yielded to the authority ofa husband, in a point wbieh nov/ threatened to become an eternal thorn to the peace of herself, and those wilh whom she was connected ;— whilst, for the unhappy sufferer, thc vic¬ tim of her husband's false projects, her heart bled, and hc became the never-for¬ gotten subject of her prayers to Heaven.— Sir Sigismund lived perpetually on thc rack of regret, of suspicion, and of dread ; and Sir Hildebrand, placed by the hand of fate a scourge upon-his erring father, wielded ihe lash of bis impetuosity, his disobe¬ dience,
dience, and his cruelty, without mercy or remorse. At this period of his mental distress, Sir Sitftsmtind could not resist an inclination of imparting the cause of his sufferings to the confidential ear of his nominal son, Fitzrov. Lord Henrv heard his confession m* J with astonishment and horror; but a double motive withheld him from divulging the dark transaction to the world. Fir¿t, the sacredness of his word, by which he had pledged himself to Sir Sigismund, to re¬ tain secret the communication for which he had a¿ked his attention ; and secondly, the respect which he bore the public cha¬ racter of the man who had been the hus¬ band ofhis beloved mother. It is too frequently the weakness of minds ill at ease within themselves to dis¬ close their sufferings, and fhe cause from whence they arise, to the bosom of a friend, when it would be equally a mark of their discernment, and a bar to the increase of their'anxieties, if they were to retain the secret
secret which enfolds their improprieties or their vices, sacred within their own breasts. An example of this nature was Sir Sigis¬ mund : by the confession of existing cir¬ cumstances to Lord Fitzroy, he perceived that he had, in a considerable degree, lost the esteem which that nobleman had before borne him ; that it was from causes very remote from his own deserts, that he for¬ bore to rank openly against him, on the side of the injured \ r alentine ; and tbis knowledge increasing the distress of mind under which Sir Sigismund was already la¬ bouring, drew gradually upon him a ner¬ vously painfol emotion of soul, which fre¬ quently confined him for days together to bis chamber, the victim of despondency, and rendered hiin even more wretched than the unfortunate being w r ho owed to him an exclusion from man's dearest pri¬ vileges, liberty and society. To the afflicted heart of Lady Blunt, the friendship of Lord Fitzroy was tlie greatest of all possible consolations. Ey his judi¬ cious
cious interference and manly reasonings/ thc brutal spirit of Sir Iliidcbrand was not unfrequently softened of its unruly aspe¬ rity, or turned from the execution of its diabolical purposes; and the grateful soul of his unhappy mother regarded Loid Henry as an interposing angel, to rescue her from the distraction of mind into wmich the evii principles of her son might, un¬ checked by his watchful eye, have driven her. But the object who experienced the greatest share of Lord Fitzroy's thoughts was the unfortunate Valentine. As a bov, he had ever admired him, for his open, ge¬ nerous disposition, and the mild manliness : of his temper : his esteem for him had grown with his years ; and the sympathy which he felt for the hapless lot to which cruel destiny had reduced one whom he considered so peculiarly amiable and de- sen ing, resolved him to make it his study to discover the means of restoring him to happiness. This,
This, he perceived, could not be effected by hasty or open means; it must be done silently and cautiously, or irresistible hands would stretch themselves out to ciieck his humane intention. To gain a knowledge of Valentine's origin, was a point of in¬ formation for vvhich he was most anxious ; he had frequently endeavoured to draw it from Sir Sigismund, and likewise from Fa¬ bian, but he had sounded them in vain.— From the lips of the former had once lallen a hint, that his parents were not ofan ob¬ scure rank in life. Further he could learn nothing. Thus passed on four years. Sir Sigismund the agonized victim of his own delusive plans ; Sir Hildebrand, possessed of the secret ofhis father's shame, wanton in his drafts upon his purse, malignant in tyran¬ nizing over his feelings; and the sorrow¬ ing Valentine, a prisoner in thc apartments allotted to his use, and allowed to tasi e the genial breath uf Heaven, oniy at tliose hours when happier mettais slept, and the
joy-inspiring Tays of the sun were with¬ drawn from the chilly bosom of the earth. During this tedious interval, Lord Henry Fitzroy had, with difficulty, twice gained access to the prison of the unjust sufferer, and relieved his tortured mind, as far as friendly promises could grant it relief, by assurances ofhis friendship, and by inform¬ ing him of the plan which bewas agitating in his behalf, else the countenance of no human being, save that of Fabian, had met his sight. The only solace of his afflicted heart was for some time the voice of his af¬ fectionate page Edwin, poured forth in such plaintive notes, as he believed calculated to sooth the malady under which he had been informed that the object of his pity and his love laboured : but being discovered by Sir Hildebrand and Fabian in the exer¬ cise of his charitable office, he was driven from tbe door of the apartment, and com¬ manded, on pain of their heavy displeasure, never to return to it again ; naturally ap¬ prehensive, lest if Valentine could engage the
the page for any time in conversation, he mi^ht find means of convincing him of thc injustice which was practising against him, No longer permitted to visit the door of his masters apartment, Edwin took his sta¬ tion regularly on the steps of the turret, beneath the window of the closet which communicated with Valentine's chamber; and here hc was, without interruption, al¬ lowed to indulge in what was to him an act of duty and gratification. Beyond captivity, no other restraint was placed upon Valentine in his prison. Af thc particular command of Sir Sigismund, every gratification which could be tasted in imprisonment was oiTercd to his accept¬ ance, and Fabian executed the injunctions of his employer with unremitting attention and kindness to his captive—a conduct which, on the part ofa man of his charac¬ ter and disposition, must doubtless appear enigmatical, and therefore requires expla¬ nation. When Fabian devised the artful and nc- VCL. in, ΰ fari ous
fbrioUšplan which was to secure to Sir Hil¬ debrand his legal inheritance, and still con¬ ceal from the world thé atrocious crime of which Sir Sigismund had been gui Ify, in i earing the oflsprihg of other parents as his own. am\ of which he had himself been tlie instrument, it can scarcely want tobe said that a libeial reward repaid the ingenuity of his scheme. With this remuneration, Fabian, for a considerable time, remained f-atìsfì'ed, and would riot probably have raised his ideas beyond accidental rewards of a similar nature, by which he expected to be kept up to the exercise of his trust, had not the devilish spirit, whicli inhabited the heart of Sir Hildebrand, led him to en¬ deavour to seduce Fabian from his fidelity ťo his father.» V/hen Fabian had undertaken to guard Valentine, on the plea of his insanity, from all intercourse with society, Sir Sigismund, distrustful of the cruel and desperate tem¬ per of his son, had implored Fabian, with fhe most solemn entreaties, to defend the life
life of thc unhappy youth, in every cmer- genev, Fabian perfectly understood the fears of his patron, and readily promised (for villains deal in promises to all who tempt them) to screen him from evil, even at lhe peril of encountering it himself. ■"■ Keep this promise/' replied Sir Sigis¬ mund, <*'and trust that it may be regarded on hb'-h in thv favour, to counterbalance some portion of thy past crimes." t( We have been equal sinners," returned Fabian. (C I iiave been thy tempter into evil,*" re¬ joined Sir Sigismund. ŕť But î have received the wages ( guilt/'said Fabian. "Had we no other crime than what rc ^r.i -'Лч Valentine to answer.for," returned Sir Sigismund — ft Oh ! were there no blood which couîd risc up in judgment against 4f Hush i forbear," cried Fabian ; te vvhat can wc gain hy becoming the tcil-talcs of our own i a ¡quit y to the world ? We can í -2 only
only draw upon ourselves its hate or its contempt ; why should we expose our¬ selves to them ? The unsuspected are still the innocent in the opinion of mankind." " But what are they in the eye of Heaven r" breathed forth Sir Sigismund, as he parted from him, with a sigh drawn from the bottom of his heart. The fears of Sir Sigismund were truly prophetic ; two years had not rolled away since the disclosure of Valentine's real his¬ tory had been made to Sir Hildebrand, ere he became distrustful, whether, whilst he were permitted to exist, there were not a possibility of his eventually curtailing him of some good, of which, but for him, the positive possession might be his, and to de¬ vise the means of cutting him off. On the first entrance of this idea into his brain, Sir Hildebrand conceived that no¬ thing could be more easy ıhan to put it into effect. Fabian was the guardian of Valentine ; and he was so well acquainted with thc little reluctance experienced by Fabian
Fabia ητο break a promise, or to commit a crime, that he judged it would only be to hold communion with him upon the time and place, and to perform the deed. But in his calculations, Sir Hildebrand had en¬ tirely forgotten that the key of power, with which his father had not un frequently opened the heart of Fabian to iniquity, was not his ; and on a communication of his wishes to the only man who could as¬ sist in their accomplishment, he found him as ready to declaim against an unjust action, as the most virtuous being could have dis¬ played himself. Now his tempter was one who could offer him little more than pro¬ mises for his remuneration. ITpon this cool reception of his propo¬ sals by Fabian, Sir Hildebrand, forthe first time, felt a villainous inclination rankling in his heart, which there appeared lidie probability of his being very readi I v able to gratify. For the first time, bis impetu¬ osity sunk under the weight of unexpec¬ ted disappointment. But his temper с 3 'quickly
quickly returned to its wonted pitch of violence and energy ; and undaunted by a first repulse, be again and ngain renewed his proposals to Fabian : what money hc could command he poured into his purse, and promised him large sums, to be paid on his becoming the possessor of Castle Gower. But Fabian was not to he moved by his arguments ; he considered it by no means' unlikely that such might be the progress of future events, that Sir Hildebrand might never become the possessor of Castle Gower at all ; and in such case, what re¬ muneration would he have for loading his conscience with the painful burden ofhis adjunction in the murder of a being whom he had already too much injured? Siili, unconscious how convenient he might ona day ii:.d it to accede to Sir HİIdebrand's terms, he did not leave him without hope, fhatafto.T.e future period he might accept his of.tr. In the secret recesses of his own heart, Fabian was brooding over a plan, which
wiiich had- for some years past been nursed there, and whjch the progress of each suc¬ ceeding day now tempted him more antj more strongly to put into effect : and this plan was thc restoration of Valentine to hh real parents. Fabian longed for the enjoyment of in¬ dependence. Useful as he had made the latter years of his life to his patron, Sir Sigismund, he still found it impossible to obtain of him this boon to the extent he desired to possess it. Sir Sigismund had found his services so necessary to his plans of life, that he dreaded notliing so. much as a separation from a being so highly quali¬ fied for tbe -execution o,f daring purposes ; this Fabian perceived, and knew to bc the cause why the independence which he de¬ manded was withheld from him. The per¬ petual imprisonment to which Valentine was doomed, increased Fabian's utility to hh employer, who dreaded to entrust to any being but himself, thc secret ofthe injus· tice which he was exercising against, his с 4 captive.
captive. Thus Fabian's desired inde* pendenee was, by this event, still farther than ever removed from his attainment. ľpon this conviction, the artful mind of Fabian began to reflect, whether it were not probable that the parents of Valentine might be willing to reward him wiih gréait r liberality for restoring their son to thtir arms, than Sir Sigismund now was for re* taming him from them. He gave due deliberation to Ids ph:\ ar.d believed it to be one of promise. Hv trusted, that in the joy of clasping their Icng-lost son to thcir breasts, his parents would forgive him thc crime of whieh he Iiad been guilty, in depriving them of his infant caresses. He considered, hovvever, that the most essential step which he could take towards rendering his plan as fruitful as he desired it ¿hould prove, m::st be to pain the good will of Valentine himself; and accordingly, fiom the moment of bis becoming a prisoner in the turret at Cattle Gower, hc applied himself, by every means, to
togain hh favour; hegave bhn his pity, hi* consolation ; inveighed against the rruelty of which Sir Sigismund v%a^ guilty toward? Ium, and declared that he had only been prevailed upon to accept the onice of hii» keeper, by a belief that it wtmld bc in hb power to render hk lot less painful than any more unfeeling perlon» deputed to the same end, might hate possessed the hu filiation or the honesty torender if. Hut prc\ iously to the period of his ex¬ clusion from society· Valentine had ob¬ served many points which he ha J disliked iu thc character of Fabian, and therefore was slow to believe his professions» or to Ibten to the invectives which he threw out against Sir Sigismund. Still, with thc t vue artofan accom ρ 1 ished villain, Fabian did «ot slacken in his assiduities, because they were Mispieiously retched; and hh per¬ severance procured him gradually a degree of con pîacency on thc part of Valentine, w liich, being once awakened, wr*s ocui- iionally strengthened by many little tir- e 5 amistantes ;
airnsfances ; and, amidst the plaints avhich Valentine poured forth on his unparalleled iot, he would frequently enquire of Fabian who were his real parents, and whether they yet lived ? a subjeet npon which Fa¬ bian never failed to give him encourage¬ ment to proceed, although he did not yet satisfactorily reply to any of thc questions which he advanced. At length, believing bis plan sufficiently ripe for execution, hc informed Valentine that his parents were in existence, and asked of him whether, if he would engage to restore him fo them, he would pledge himself to prevail on them to forget his crime in his present atone¬ ment, am! to provide him with an inde¬ pendence which might release him from tiie servile bondage under which necessity now compelled Lira to live the instrument of Sir Sigismunds will ? In the dreadful situation in which Valen¬ tine was then held, and to which there ap¬ peared no probable termination, but that of death, unless indeed it were produced b by
by the means which Fabian had proposed for its accomplishment, it must appear a self-evident conclusion, that Valentine, not only with joy, but gratitude, pledged him¬ self to exert every nerve for the remunera¬ tion and forgiveness of Fabian, upon thc condition of being restored to his parents. The bond of mutual utility was accord¬ ingly scaled by the most sacred engagement of whicii words were capable. The heart of. Valentine beat with high-raised expecta¬ tion, and he enquired when should be fhe hour of his enlargement ? Fabian replied, that it must of necessity be yet some davs protracted ; that he would provide him with the implements for writing, and that hc wished him to address to his unknown parents, a full account of his present cap¬ tivity and suiîërîngs ; as also of the terms of agreement mto which he had entered ; thathewouldhimself be the bearer of this let¬ ter to them; and that, if thcy received it joy¬ fully, wiiich heepuldjiot doubt they would C G d Oj
do, hc would immediatelv return to Castle Gower, and convey him, without delay, t.i their anxious sight. Valentine urged the inutility of such a leiter, and besought Fabian at once to re¬ lease him from his prison, and to conduct him to his father's abode ; but Fabian could not be moved from his plan ; he was reso¬ lute in securing a gain, before he hazarded a loss, which hc might have experienced in the too hasty enlargement of Valentine ; and his capiive wn* auo/dhigíy compelled ίο submit to his arrangements. The train of future events Icing tìnn laid. Fabii'u requested Sir Sigismund to í ?;,гд h;:a pc: mission to be absent for a few сЬ.}а from the castle—a request vvith which b.r Sigismund feared to exasperate him, if lu· did not comply, and which he therefore j.îankd hím, but with the utmost reluc¬ tance, as he durst not, during his absence, depute any one to fill his station, and would bo consequently obliged fo attend b in
in perlon upon Videntine» whom he hafl not yet seen since the commencement of hh unjust confinement. On ibe moniin·* prêtions to thc depar¬ ture of ГлЫ.ш, Valentine once mure im¬ plored him to ¿«"quaint htm w Hi the name of hi-* parents; but he peremptory re- fiKcd, declaring tint hv had wci^htv rea¬ sons for wiihholding this informatrtm from him tdl lib return. About t'ic hoir r of noon, Fabian set out ; and towards lî -с ilose of <hc evening, Sir Sigismund, t rero¬ uting with the tonsciouMicss #>f^niît. en¬ terctl the apartment of his innocent prisoner. Witentme beheld hím without surprime, for he had been forewarned by Fabia:; who would supply his station during his ab¬ sence: but not without some degiee of astonishment did Sir Sigismund find him¬ self received by him without a single re¬ proach, or a breath of inveirne. The proudly virtuous heart of Valentine scorned the intercourse of converse with a bcimr so le*t
lòít to the feelings and the ^haracte of тъп. as he regarded Sir Sigismund to be ; equally futile did lie consider the attempt of making any impression on the heart of one *ч> steeled in iniquity : he therefore beheld bim enter the apartment with the siient frown of indignity, which was pro- dueed by a comparison of his own spotless beartwith tbe stained bosom of bis relent¬ less persecutor. After an absence of-a few clays, Fabian returned to Castle Gower. With extacy Valentine beheld him enter his prison ; but his joy was converted into grief and despair, by thc conversation which immediately took place between them. "Welcome, welcome/' exclaimed Valen¬ tine, on the appearance of Fabian ; t( you come to relieve my overburthened heart ;. you have seen my parents, and they ac¬ quiesce in the conditions which you have submitted to their consideration/' Fabian did not reply. "What!" continued Valentine; " cart it
it be possible;-that tbe4 r -jseparatioxt fanoni thcir son has so blunted their affection,, that thc idea of beholding him docs not induce fhem ίο subscribe to your terms?'* (t Not so/* answered Fabian ; ({ I have not been abie to see them/' "Are they then no more?" asked Va¬ lentine. <c You must reconcile yourself to an un¬ pleasant truth," returned Fabian ; u they arc not dead, but lost forever to yon/* ťf For Heavens sake, explain your words/'cried the unhappy youth. " No, I cannot do that," replied Fabian ; " it eould afford you no real satisfaction, and might eventually bring injury upon me, were I to-make such a confession to vou/* ml . *' And am I then no longer to expect from you my restoration to liberty, and to the rights of my birth?" rejoined Valentine. " I will not ikütev yon with labe hopes," answered Fabian ; *· it is no longer in thc power of those to whom you are allied to grant
grant me an independence for my future days, or to procure me pardon for my past crime. I must therefore remain satisfied to owe my means fo Sir Sigismund, and you must be content to continue his prisoner." With a sigh that proceeded from thc bottom of hii heart, Valentine threw him¬ self in despair upon his couch, and Fabian retired, in silent sullenncss, to his own apart¬ ment. Agonising feelings, amounting in their keenness almost to real distraction, now rent the heart of thc unjust stillerer, Valen¬ tine. To no single question which he now proposed to Fabian, relative to his own history, could he obtain the slightest answer—who were his parents, what the cause by which they were withheld from subscribing to the proposals which Fabian had borne to them for again folding their lost son to their breasts, and whither hc had been to seek them, were alike main¬ tained by him inv iolable secrets. The
The crafty Fabian watchetl his prisoner closely» and observed that the force of dis¬ appointment had operateti so strongly upon lii-s feelings* as to render him not onlv İn- d liferent to such comforts as vvere offered to him in his captivity, but even apparently careless about the preservation of his being. It was now with extreme diillculty that hc could persuade him to taste the air in an evening» as had before been his usual habit. Fabian, however, prevailed on him to tak« the exercise to which he had been accus¬ tomed, Iill he received an alarm from the conduct of Valentine, which rendered him apprehensive of again trusting him in the gardens, attended only by himself. Thte was an attempt, on the pari of Valentine, to putan end to his misery, by precipitat¬ ing himself from the bank at the foot of the garden into the river» which ran along i ís side—an oí currence of which we have already been informed, that chance made Eleonoraan unobserved witness, and which took
took place about a weck after the return of Fabian from bis unsuccessful journey. Suicide, on the part of Valentine, was an act xvhich of all others Fabian desired to prevent hini from committing. It was far from his ρΪΓ,η that the cares ofhis prisoner should terminate cither in liberty or death, without his .being a .considerable gainer by the event; he therefore removed from his person every instrument vvith which it was possible for him to effect the termination of his existence, ¿md resolved no more to suf¬ fer his rwgbtly wanderings jn the gardens of the casflc. But .these were precautions xvhich Fabian need not have taken ; for although Lhe greatness of the unhappy youth's sufferings had once, for an instant, disarmed his reason of its powers, repent¬ ance bad been the .event of thc rashness which he had attempted, and gratitude to Heaven, for the preservation from sin, •which it had aíľorded him, thé predominant sensation of Jiis soul. leaving informed himself, during' his late absence
(ibscnce from Castle Gower, that he hüd nothing to expect from ihe parents of Va- Jcntine, Fabian considered that his onJy hope of privale advantage now resi ed vvith Sir Flildebrand, whom he perceived to be more than ever bent upon the destruction of his nominal brother. Sir Hildebrand v/as well acquainieü, that fhe moment his father was no mere, be could, both with ease and certainty, disprove л relationship between himself and Valentine, and b v m> this step effectually secure to himseif his just inheritances but with this knowledge his fiend-like cljeposition was net fo be sa¬ tisfied. It was bis wish to prevent even the possibility of an injury accruing to hiin from the existence of Valentine, aud not Less the desire of his diabolical spirit to revenge the injustice whicii he considered himself to have sustained from the in'rj- ducticn of Valentine at ail into his fa .tne. -'i» family, even upon the innocent object wiv.x was an infinitely greater sufferer than hi»· -. sejf, from the same cause. Agii
Again he sought opportunities of con¬ versing in private with Fabian, and re¬ joiced to find him more at cordant to his design than he had yet shewn himself.—He now perceived that nothing was wanting to render Fabian entirely subservient to his villainous purpose, buta bribe equal to the price at whiih Fabian rated his services. In this state were affairs at thc period of Saint Ethelberľs arrival at Castle Gower ; which event was followed by Lord Fitz¬ roy's invention to Sir »Sigismund Blunt and his guests, to pas* over into Sufi oik, and visit him at his castle of Framlingham. In this invitation Lord Fitzroy had included Valentine ; he had formed a hope, that during Valentine's residence at his castle, he might bc able to gain a clue to his pri¬ vate history, and perhaps to render him some essential service — an inclination which had never been absent from his mind, since the first hour of his becoming acquainted with his unjust privation of his natural rights; and from pursuing elec¬ tive
tive methods of restoring him to which, he had only been withheld, as has already been stated, by his charity for the reputation and feelings ofhis beloved mother's husband. With the greatest satisfaction, Sir Sigis¬ mund acceded to the invitation which he had received for Valentine. His ac¬ quaintance with thc violent pasvions of Sir HİIdebrand's tumultuous soul kept his fears ever awake for Valentine's safety* It was true that Fabian had promised to protect the youth ; but he had seen Fabian guilty of many crimes so much more heinous than that of forfeiting his word, in thc progress of services in which he had been engaged for him, that he was withheld by this know¬ ledge from placing much faith upon the promise which he had received from him, and had dreaded, in the privacy ofhis heart, the period of his intended absence from his castle ; and it was the most fervent wish of his soul that life should be spared to the unhappy being whom he had been the means of depriving of liberty. The
The moment Sir Hildebrand heard a dav appointed for the commencement of Sir Sigismund and his family's journey into Suffolk, he declared that it was not his in¬ tention tţ) visit Framlingham Castle, tiil a week after thc time proposed by them for so doing. Sir Sigismund eyed him closelv, wliikt he pronounced the^c words ; and in the malignant and devilish sniilc which he saw creeping over hi. features, he гс?л\ the purpose ofhis heart, wiiich was to use the period of thcir absence from Castle Gower for the destruction ofhis nominal brother. In consequence of these well-founded sus¬ picions, ' ir Sigismund resolved to act with a degree of caution, vvhich he trusted would counteract the villainous design of his son. Sir Sigismund had resolved to defer im¬ parting to any one, till the latest moment, fhat it was his intention that Valentine should follow him to Framlingham Castle, and his secrecy was recompensed by ihe event. Chance so fated it, that on the d.-y
dav previous to Sir Sîgismund's setring ouf, Sir Hildebrand went to íly his hawks on rhe estafe of a neighbouring knight, bom w hence he was not to return till the ev en "ng of the 4,rcccding dav, . Q Í;· Sigismund saw him depart wbh *a*isfari:o:i ; nr-d, when he un, о one, he called to him ï-Vbi-ei. ::nd arra η τι d 'lie plan for Valentine's jot.r* ey ; ap' % o'ri:ng at the sa*r.e time two oí his тел* trusty ervan N to guard thc vtV<L in which it wasimended that hcsnould travel. Thc intelligence of his de/i^n v.as rc- ci iv cri v/ith compbccncv bv I abia*i, who cared not to how disant a period the com- jï'etion of Sir Hildebrands vÜlainv v.asde- f. 4 rred, a » ewrv i!ay that it was protrai fed added soineihin; to the wvaith which he vs:b collecting fiom his puise : and Valen¬ tine, if it were possible for anv event to (ast a gleam of satisfaction over his des¬ ponding mind, experienced it in tho in- foii^Dth :i that he was destined to passa L^ weeks within ihc castle of one, of w h.'.sc friendship, and kind intentions to¬ vs ards
wards him, he had received an assurance from his own lips. Valentine, Fabian, and thcir guards, ac¬ cordingly pursued, at the distance of about a couple of leagues, the track of thc caval¬ cade which escorted Sir Sigismund and his companions into Suffolk: that Sir Sigis¬ mund could not, without the most painful emotions, behold the unhappy sufferer in company with them, may be easily con¬ ceived On the return of Sir Hildebrand to Castle Gower, it afforded him no incon¬ siderable surprise to find that Valentine had quitted its walls; and having no longer anv inducement for remaining within them m' CJ himself, he immediately set ouf for Fram¬ lingham Castle, where it will be remem¬ bered that he arrived a week sooner than his coming had been expected. Contrary to the ideas which Sir Sigis¬ mund had formed, Valentine was not pro¬ tected from the machinations of Sir flilde¬ brand, by having become an inmate of the walls
walls of Lord Fitzroy 's castle. Fabian was still attacked by him at every turn, with increasing temptations to yield to his wishes ; for hc was novv spurred on to thc immediate perpetration of thc villainous act, over vvhich his mind had long been brooding, by his impatience to display himself to Eleonora as his father's heir. Fabian continued to receive his bribes ; and it was not without considerable en¬ couragement on his part that Sir Hilde¬ brand met him on the terrace by night, in his vvay to the tower, wdiich comprised the apartments allotted to the use of his pri¬ soner. Why Fabian compelled his tempter fo cpiit him, without suffering him to eifect his purpose, remains still to be explained. ît has already been said, that thc point which Fabian was desirous of accomplishing was that of procuring an independence for his future life: this Sir Iliidcbrand had it not in his ability immediately to bestow on him ; nnd Fabian, acquainted with this bet, had demanded of him, as the closing voi., ur. » remunera-
remuneration of his services, a bond for five hundred pieces of gold, tobe paid him on the death of Sir Sigismund, and his ac¬ cession to his wealth. This grant Sir Hildebrand was unwilling fo make him ; and Fabian, not doubting that by a s'ujw of obstinacy on hh part, he should ultimately draw it from him, as¬ sumed every appearance of intending to rejst his -iíicmpls at gaining access to the '.p'iriincuts of Valentint 4 ; which displav Vi hrlghkncd, by adding to the arms which ".i* ibiudh wore ilie pistol, of the power 'j\ which hc was seen, by Eleonora and Lord F't/ro- , to make experiment on the rmipait . ; a id thus passed on several davs of 4iKp( ic e. Matters oí lhe nearest import to Lord Tii/rov'» feelings, connected with his love \'чг Lleonora, and his friendship for ihc ι oval Fdward, had hitherto withheld him from veiling Valentine since his arrival at i'Vamlingham Cabile. At length an hour ufleisiire presenting ir-clf to him, he pro¬ ceeded
©ceded towards the apartments occupied by the injured captive, and of which he was, equally with Fabian, possessed of a key. Ashe approached the door, he was sur¬ prised by the sudden report оГ fire-arms ; he entered the apartment, and beheld Va¬ lentine, who had just started ,цр from a couch on which hc had been reposing, wilh marks of thc liveliest trepidation and alarm depicted on his countenance. He encpiired the cause, and was immediately informed by Valentine that a pistol, of which he had heard the report, had been tired at him ; that startled by thc sound, he had cast his eyes towards the spot from whence it had proceeded, and had beheld, through the trellis-work on the outside of the apartment, a hand iu which a pistol wus» contained, at the moment in the act ot withdrawing itself; that from this partial view, he could not positively assert who had been the person by whom this villainous attempt at his life had been ma le, but th-t
he believed himself to have recognised on the hand a ring: of Sir HİIdebrand's. which was known to him. Lord Fitzroy passed a considerable time in conversation with the unhappy sufferer; and it was at this critical juncture that Eleonora, advancing, accompanied by Ed¬ win, towards the apartments of the cap¬ tive, on hcr second visit to him, overheard those unconnected sentences between Va¬ lentine and Lord Fitzroy, which convinced hcr that Lord Henry was his friend. It will also be remembered, that she heard Lord Fitzrov invite Valentine to follow him, and that the sound of their voices did not then nny more return. Utterly undecided what effective steps it became him to pursue, in the cause ofthe hapless Valentine, and believing that his present safety was the most material consi¬ deration, Lord Fitzroy conducted him to a suit of apartments more closely connected with those inhabited by the other members of his household, than thc tower where his abode
abode had hitherto been ; and which, from their situation, he judged would aiford him security against the open attacks of Sir Hil¬ debrand. Having led him to them, hc gave a pause to reflection ; and when he quitted Valentine, he left with him the con¬ solatory hope of being quickly restored to his natural rights; for the reflection \\hich Lord Fitzroy had held with his own mind, had determined him to reveal to the royal Edward, immediately on his restoration to the throne, the peculiar situation of thc unhappy sufferer; and to entreat him to procure the secret of his birth from Sir Sigismund, on promise of his receiving pardon for the offence of having stolen him from the arms ofhis parents. The unfortunate Valentine had no alter¬ native to submitting to the measures pro¬ posed for his eventual redress, by the only being who professed himself his friend ; and after a considerable time passed in his society, Lord Fitzroy proceeded to seek Fabian, and inform him where to find the n '3 object
object of his care. Fabian heard, with sur¬ prise, that Valentine had changed his apart¬ ments; and Lord Fitzroy, not doubting, from the confidence which he beheld Sir Sigismund to place in him, that he was faithful to his trubt of guarding Valentine, openly confessed to him the cause of his having removed him from the tower; and а?; openly expressing hh suspicions of the infamy of .Sir HİIdebrand's heart, put info bis hand a piece of gold, and cautioned him to be more than ever vigilant over the iidc-ty of Ids prisoner. Fabian promised that he would be so ; and he spoke the real sentiments of his heart ; for in the intelligence which he had just received from Lord Fitzroy, ofthe danger to which Valentine had been ex¬ posed, he perceived that Sir Hildebrand, unwilling to grant him the bond for íive hundred pieces of gold, which he had fixed as the price of his admission to his destined victim, had attempted to perpetrate the deed on which his soul was bent, without becoming
becoming indebted to him for his assistance in the business ; and this attempt, on his part, Fabian resolved to revenge upon him, by acting religiously up to the injunctions which he had received from Lord Fitzroy. But Sir Hildebrand, rendered desperate by the protraction of his inclination, and panting more eagerly fhan ever to displav himself the undisputed heir of Castle Gower to Eleonora, whom he had perceived to conduct herself towards Lord Fitzroy with a complacency of conduct which she did not extend towards him ; and fearing, not alone from this observation, but equallv from the admiration with v/hich be had heard that nobleman express himself of hcr charms r.nd her virtues, that he might 'w - deed be the rival of bis love, and thaï therefore his only chance of possessing her rested on his making to hcv an open decla¬ ration ofhis passion, in his real character of Sir Sigismund Blunt's only son, he pre¬ pared the bond for five hundred pieces of gold, which Fabian had demanded of him ; d Ί and
and fifty additional piecesw T ere poured into tiie hand of Fabian from Sir HİIdebrand's purse, as a demonstration of his jov and gratitude that the agreement was finally closed between them. This Inst act of Sir HİIdebrand's villain¬ ous and interested generosity took place in the hall ofthe castle, and in thc hearing of Edwin, as has already been detailed ; ηνά at the same moment was fixed between them the hour af which, their victim was to fall beneath the injurious plan formed for his destruction. At the beating of the midnight clock, Fabian promised to quit the chamber of Valentine ; at the same signal Sir Hildebrand was to enter it. It h.ns already been seen that they were each true fo their appointment. The fate of Valentine must, for a while, be wrapt in obscuri t v.
(TIAP-
CIIAP. IL « What stronger breast-plate than a heart untainted ? Tlitice ia be armefl, that bath bis quarrel just ¡ Antl he but naked (though lock'd up in steel), Whose conscience with injustice is corrupted." Shakespeare, ------- ..— ----- << Let tbe earth hide thee ï Thy bones are marrowiess, tby blood is cold ; Thou hast no speculation in those eyes, Which thou dost glare wiih." Macbeth. Lord Henry Fitzroy sought repose no more that night ; he retired to his cham¬ ber, and casting himself upon a couch, sat meditating on thc singular events of which he had, within the last two hours, been witness. He was equally at a loss to what » ~) cause
tause to attribute the inability which pre¬ vailed of discovering Valentine, as to con¬ jecture by what motive Eleonora could have been led, in thc dead of night, to his chamber, in which he had found her bleed¬ ing beneath the unfeeling arm of the ruth¬ less Hildebrand. Of her it was at present impossible to obtain a reply to any enquiry. ihe raging pain which rankled ín her wound had almost driven her reason from 'ts seal; and the only relief which she t.-.ïted was the swoons of insensibility, into w inch she frequently sunk, exhausted by ihe anguish she was enduring. That Eleo¬ nora had received her wound from the hand of Sir Hildebrand, Lord Henry had rdieady learnt from hisown lips; and from what be had previously known of his con¬ duct towards the unfortunate Valentine, and the hatred which he bore him, added to the information which he had that night received from the watchful page, Edwin, hc could not hesitate a moment in decid¬ ing the purpose of his having entered the apart-
apartments of Valentine, to have been that of his death. Thus, assured of his commis¬ sion of one crime, in the case of Eleonora. and ofhis intention at least of having per¬ petrated a second upon Valentine, whose mvstcrions absence rendered it a doubt whether or not the deed of tleath had not actually been done, he addressed to him an epistle, which we transcribe, as of itself hilly explaining the sentiments ofhis heart, and the cond net by whieh he had resolved to be guided in the present emergency. ** Lord Henry Fitzroy addresses Sir Hil¬ debrand Gower :—Lord Henry informs him that the heinousness of those actions which he has relentlessly perpetrated, render the idea of a verbal communication with him ьо repellent to hb feelings, that he makes this paper the conveyer ofhis opinions und of his intention;. Sir Hildebrand hrs sinned against the feelings ofa man, and of a Christian. In the first insìanee, he hr,?, with the unfeeling insensibility ofa savage, n i mïlkted
inflicted a wound (the angels of Heaven, who hover over innocence for its preserva¬ tion, grant it prove not her destruction !) on the most lovely, the most gentle, the most deserving of her race; one whose sex. whose smile, whose voice must have turned even the savage, to whom Sir Hildebrand has already, on this paper, been compared, from his determined purpose. Thus has he sinned against the feelings of a man. In thc second instance, more than one arc the proofs, that Sir Hildebrand has aimed, ere this night, at cutting oif the existence of an unfortunate youth, far, far more wretched in being that heis, than a is pos¬ sible Sir Hildebrand can ever have been to have hi held him so. Thus hai he sinned aiTiJiist the fccltne.s ofa Christian. At the dead and murderous hour of midnight did Sir Hildebrand enter the apartments of that unhappy being, who has so long lived sub¬ ject to his liveliest hate; hc entered them armed, and IVom that moment the destiny t^f this ill-fated youth cannot be traced, nor the spot of his retreat discovered. By whom
whom can he bc suspected of being with held from the eye of man, but by Sir Hilde¬ brand ? The conclusion ïs natural—the conclusion is just. These crimes have been committed within the castle of I.oat fitz¬ roy. Should he therefore Miller the per¬ petrator of them to pass tuircprot cd. tin- judged, and unrequited, deservedly on him would fall a share ofthe slain whieh marks the guilty ; on his walls woultl descend a portion of the infamy attached to thc foul deeds which, within them, have lo t »ud an actor. Lord Henrv l*'ii/ioy ι oibequenllv cannot permit Hr Ibldebtaiul to quit the apartments now dedicateti to hi* u*e in Framlingham Capite, till the lovely Eleo¬ nora shall be pronounced free fi*>m danger; and the veil ol conrcafuierr.t, which now obscures the fate of Valentine, be saíisíao torily removed. It *к a ιιημμι.ό to which he is prompted b) a scuse of justice and religion, and which hc wiil not hesitate to answer to the laws of hi·* country/* The bright beam> ef morning were al¬ ready
ready in the Heavens, ere Lord Henry had concluded his scroll ; he then summoned to him one of thc leaders of his soldiery, and commanded him to station a guard at thc door of entrance into Sir Hildebrands apartments ; and when he was informed that it had been placed, he sent a page to bear to him his epistle. Various causes, but principally thc force of habit and intercourse, inclined Lord Fitz¬ roy to lean, with a degree of partiality, to¬ wards all who bore any connection to thc husband of his beloved mother; it was therefore, notwithstanding the proofs which he had received of the enormities of Sir HİIdebrand's disposition, not without a considerable effort, that he had brought himself to the resolution of pursuing the plan which we have just stated him to have followed ; but Sir Hildebrand himself bore a slender share indeed in the concern which Lord Henry experienced at the ne¬ cessity to which circumstances had reduced him. Thc sorrow with which Lady Bluat would
would contemplate the enforcement of a measure which, as the mother of an only «on, she would \îew through the eye uf afiertion, and not through that of justice, caused him considerable pain : he w^s scn- úhle of her worth ; he remembered the sufferings which she had already been doomed to endure, from events of the crudest nature» which she had herself been innocent of producing ; and hcrsoiTíiwmig image would probably have had weight to withhold him from the step hc had taken. had not the vision of the suffering Kleonora and the ill- lated Valentine, pointed out to him ач objects of redress by the finger of Justice herself, presented an appeal to bis feelings, whieh a sensitive heart could not resist. When the rays of the sun had filled the KaU with their golden influence, Lord Henry proceeded towards an apartment, which communicated, by means of an ora¬ tory, with the chamber of Eleonora, anxious to learn what change the interval of
of an hour, which was the period that had elapad since he had received any tidings from her sick-bed, might have produced. On entering it, the first object which he beheld was Lady Blunt, placed opposite to a casement, of which a compartment had been thrown open, in the hope of thc air, which it admitted, preserving her spirit from a temporary desertion of her languid frame, which was worn down to a trembling debility, with weakness, anxiety, and anti¬ cipation. On perceiving Lord Henry, she burst into a flood of tears ; they were drops from the source of agony, but they admi¬ nistered a salutary relief to her overbur¬ dened heart, which, almost bursting with its weight of woe, had hitherto been unable to distil its grief in tears. Becoming, in a slight degree, composed, by the relief she was experiencing, she waved hcr hand to her attendants to depart; and on being left alone with Lord Henry, she caught his hand i u her's, carried it to her lips, pressed them convulsively upon it.
ir rtîïd *ard~" f am almost mad. Afier the ιπΜΐν triih which I have patiently and cahnly endured, f did not believe that any event »*o»1d Iiave rendered me the wretch í feel in ι se S Γ at this instant. Oh Lord ľit/ioy, ι!η* cruelty and injuM:ce excrcbed a^ari î f.!:c bt loved mona(4 v h. thc urett îıcd death ofthe pitiable Géraldine, the suller- in«s of mv poor llleonor.i. the disgrace of ni) >οιι, ka\c ail fallowed upon each other in such quick sticce^ion, that I am almost bereft of icn»e» and fain would tempt impelí I have but dreamt an oft-renewed and painful dream/ 1 She paused ; Lord Fitzroy felt himself unable to reply, and preyed her hand af¬ fectionately in hh in silence. " Oh Fit/roy, revered youth ľ* she pro¬ ceeded, ťi in possessing thy friendship, I Mill eujoy one charm against despair : how often has thy ki mines«, thy affection, al¬ rcadv soothed mv heart, when swelled with agony ϊ Fate hasplaced the scourge which justice raises over the head of my son in tby
thy hand. Oh best of men !— Oh remem¬ ber that Hildebrand is the non ofa mother, who, like the mother thou reverest, gave birth to only one—he is my all—he is^— Oh, I confess that he is guilty, greatly guilty, but I am his mother still/' Again she pressed hcr lips upon the hand of Lord Fitzroy, whilst thc agitation ofher mind produced a cessation of her powers, and she sunk senseless into his arms» Lord Henry was now compelled to re¬ call her attendants ; and on reviving, she was induced, by the persuasions of Father Sylvester, to retire to her chamber, and endeavour to restore nature, bv a few hours of repose. " Who will attend upon thc suffering Eleonora ?" she enquired, in faint accents, expressive of her inability to pursue thc task herself. "Saint Ethelbert/' replied Father Sil¬ vester, *' has already declared that he will not quit the chamber of Eleonora, whether vou årepresent there or absent from it/' tf What
tr \\ hat are we to слрегЧ her fate will ber" asked Lord i'itzroy of the father, trembling wiïh anxiety as he ьроке. *· Her woimd is not of io threatening a nature as t4c \ soFnt emotion of her mind,** •wai his reţ»iy : ** gusts of apparent distrac¬ tion rend hcr brain» and pro liste an irri¬ tation in her bloud, most inimical to her speedy amendment." * f What must be thc torture of her feel- inp*!" exclaimed Lord Fitzroy.—* r Look down upon her, gracious Providence, with thy all-saving power!" Lady Blunt clasped her hands, and raised them toward* Heaven; her lips moved, but her prayer was inarticulate.— Arrived at the door of her chamber, she drew Lord Fitzroy aside from those who were attending her.—■*· Oh remember/* she whispcringly repeated, " that Hilde¬ brand is my only child..** and rushed into her apartment. Six days passed, without change, over thc lurad* of thc wretched inhabitants of Fram* ¡tngbani
lingham Castle : the morning of the last of these had been appointed for the inter¬ ment of the ill-starred Lady Godolphin, and the morning arose in gloomy clouds, congenial to the feelings of all connected with her, snve the crafty Sìr Percival ; but true to the admonitions of the treacherous spirit which he nourished, loud and heavy were his plaint» for her loss; and, by Saint Ethelbert and Lord Fitzroy, he was judged a real mourner for her fate, as they listened to the regret which hc expressed at being withheld by his present destiny from fol¬ lowing her to the tomb. The suspicion which had been propa¬ gated by Father Sylvester at the hour of her death, that she had died by poison, had now been entirely removed from the minds of those who had at first given belief to the idea, by an investigation of every circumstance relative to Lady Geraldine's conduct since her arrival at Framlingham Castle ; and from the unhesitating replies of a female servant, who had been in her confidence,
confidence, from the hour of her marriage with Sir Percival, to every question pro¬ posed to her concerning the actions of her mistress, it appeared immediately in op¬ position to her opinions, to have enter¬ tained the wish of putting a period to lier existence, and still more improbable that she could have been in possession of a drug gifted with the power of death, if it had even been hcr inclination to have com¬ mitted the crime of swallowing it. The black and livid spots which had ap¬ peared upon her skin, immediately after her death, remained visible to the hour of her interment, but did not increase in size or colour; and Father Sylvester, having listened to every argument used to com¬ bat iiis first suspicion, concluded that hcr dreadful appearance must have arisen, like her death, from some inward cause, which the art of medicine had not been able to reach, nor which thc skill ofthe physician could analyze. Accordingly, at the appointed hour, Geraldine
Geraldine was committed to the rest of the grave ; and the earth which filled her tomb concealed the present deformity of her once lovely person : but in the same tomb was not buried the sin which had so cruelly snapt thc blooming rose of earthly beauty from its stem. The retribution of Heaven may appear to sleep, but it still wakes, un¬ seen by man : thc villain may appear to prosper in his crimes, but growing hardy i.ı success, hc only approaches with thc greater certainty towards hi> own eventual destruction. It is the dispensation of an .-/'-wise Providence, 'that thc clue which is ultimately to lead tothe detection of guilt, shall be placed in a breast of innocence, that the spotlessness of thc accuser may leave no doubt to thc world of the с rimi* nality of the accused. In the breast of Eleonora was placed that elee which was to open a path to thc redress of the iniquities which had been practised against the fallen <icraîdine. But at this time, the wrong*, thc sufferings of Kleonora herself, had im¬ pai retí
paired her reason, and rendered her wholly inadequate to thc task of explanation. A burning fever drank her blood, and» under its Íníluence, her ravings were excessive. " Agatha, friend/* she would exclaim. tf wilt thou too dercfoc mc ? Thou who didst promise to watch over me, where art thou now ?—Why art thou not here > — I need a friend indeed :—-he to whom I gave my heart is a murderer.—Oh ϊ Oh î Oh ! wretched, yet most happy Geraldine ? Q *ha»e thv tomb with mc, sweet Geraldine * Father, mother, whec- are ye now } 1 should have trusted yoi: ;--now you aban¬ don me!—Ah, sec!—thcy íly to Heaven. and leave me mi tiering here on earth Î— Ik-loved father, stay, and disclose t^> me the mystery connected with your child :-—Tell it— О tell it> and forgive me " * Ask Godolphin/ he replies.-—Oh î mock me not, my father!—he disdains my prayer í the clouds of Heaven close him from m v ;*tght !—he is gone for ever !"* * imilar sentences to these, and iVeqiu -:it- \\
ly accompanied by thc name of Valentine, did Eleonora utter at those periods, when thc draughts of oblivion, administered to her by Father Sylvester, had exhausted their power of calming her perturbed spirit, and oppressed nature vented forth its pangs in thc incoherent ravings of phrenzy. It has already been said, that on thc morning of thc day appointed for the in¬ terment ofthe fair Geraldine, an universal gloom overspread the face of nature. As the evening approached, dark thunder¬ clouds hung threatening in the sky ; the distant lightning quivered over the conic tops of the mountains, and a thick and misty rain, which began to descend to the earth, drove Lord Henry Fitzroy from thc battlements, where he had been wandering for air, to seek shelter within the walls of his castle. The mind, which is ill at ease within it¬ self, cannot derive amusement from those sources whence it regularly flows to it in 5 the
the hours of pfcace and tranquillity; h seeks in vain for an oblivious antidote, to quell the recollection of the point which obstinately fixes itself upon its seat of thought ; and, in its attempts to fiy from memory, change of scene, and busied ac¬ tion, are its first resources. Thus actuated, Lord Fitzroy did not, on entering his castle, retire to an apartment, but began to traverse the lofty hall. Here he continued .to wander for a considerable time ; and as the veil of night fell in folds of darkness over the face ofthe earth, the red lightning, which gained fierceness from the growing obscurity, frequently attracted his regards, os it darted, in blazing flashes, across the tall and spiral windows. The sublimity of the scene was calculated rather to raise than to depress a mind of energy like Lord Fitzroy's; and he continued his wander¬ ings in the castle hall. With the sounding ofthe ninth hour, he perceived his domestics passing and re¬ passing in various paris-of the edifice, for vol. пь e the
the purpose of placing the lamps for the night. As two of them were moving through a corridor, which ran across the lower extremity of the hall, he was sur¬ prised by hearing one of them exclaim— "See there!—Holy Virgin protect us!— What is that ? ff Where, where ?" cried the second. In reply to thisquestion, thc first pointed, with a trembling hand, to Lord Henry. ft Oh no, that is not the ghost," answered the second ; " it is our Lord himself, Heaven be praised," and away they both hastened. Whilst Lord Henry stood reflecting on the strange expressions which he had just heard, his eyes still wandering to various parts of the hall, he observed that no single individual was any where to be seen, but that all his domestics were moving at lea't in pairs, and some in clusters; his surprise increased ; for the lighting of the lamps was usually performed by a certain number of domestics, to whom that office was al¬ lotted,
lotted, who had each his distinct portion of the castle to illumine, and was ever wont to go singly about his task, whilst, on the pre¬ sent evening, each had at least one compa¬ nion, and some more. He observed also, that the actions of most of them were hur¬ ried, like those of persons in alarm ; and the words which had just met his ear led him to believe his suspicions just. Re¬ solved to enquire into the apparent mys¬ tery, he entered an apartment, and sum¬ moned to him one of his servants, whose peculiar province it was to attend upon his person. (: Gilbert," said Lord Fitzroy, on his en¬ trance, " am I mistaken in supposing that some superstitious apprehension this night agitates the minds of mv domestics?" " Is it possible," replied Gilbert, C( that your Lordship does not recollect this to be the twenty-first of June, the very day, or rather 1 should say, the very night on which the restless spirit of the villainous Beuick glides through the halls?" t 2 Λ smile
A smile Of recollection passed over Lord Fitžroy's countenance. " And the funeral of Lady Godolphin having taken place on this very day, my Lord," continued Gilbert, " why the idea of a spectre's appearing in the castle just sit this gloomy time, seems tö make every body dreä'i its coining more í hah ever." ** Bnt even tf I were to admit that there were any truth in the tradition of this spectre appearing Within these walls once in every seven years, on the twenty-first of this month/* rejoined Lord Fitžroy, if as it has never done injury to any one at its Visits, why should it be thus dreadfully feared ?" " Oh, my Lord/' returned Gilbert, re¬ plying only to the first part of his Lord's remark, " that it does appear is but too cer¬ tain : your Lordship cannot have forgotten the sWoon into which the sight of it threw the old butler Robert, on this very day seven years, nor disbelieve the history which Dame Winifred Viner, who was su¬ perin-
perintendant öf the pantries in your royal father's lifetime, relates of the noise at midnight near her window, which fronts the western rampart, and her getting up, and seeing ----- -/' With a second smile, Lord Fitzroy in¬ terrupted his loquacious attendant— " I do recollect," he said ; " and. I also remem¬ ber that it is a part of this memorable tra¬ dition, that the appalling spectre makes iti visit exactly at midnight ; ye cannot there¬ fore all of you do more wisely than to re¬ tire to your chambers before that bour, and seek for safety in yourbeds[. u " It is my way, my Lord," answered Gilbert, taking the admonition seriously; ,f and I always add to my security, on such occasions, by covering my head up in the bed-cloaths ; but all will not be counselled to use these precautions against evil spirits, let me exhort them as I may." Gilbert was now directed to retire ; and tho thpughts of Lord Fitzroy were, during the- ramajnder of the evening, directed ţo e 3 subjects
subjects of much greater importance, İn his estimation, than the spectre of Berick but as the history of that wandering spirit, " doomed for a certain time to walk the night," is connected with events contained in these pages, wc shall transcribe a scroll of the tradition, which, at that period, held a place in the library of Framlingham Castle, It was thus entitled :—
" A Record ofthe Penance qf Berick. the vicious Falconer. fe In the year of our blessed Lord and »Saviour, 870, the following extraordinary occurrence took place :—It so chanced, that in the midst of a violent storm, which blew upon the eastern coast of England, in the middle of the month of March, a little bark, containing only one soul, was stranded upon the shore of Norfolk : his situation being observed by some fishermen at a short distance from the spot, they went out
out to his rescue, and succeeded in preserv¬ ing his life. Upon enquiry of the stranger who he was, they learnt that his name was Lothbrok ; that he was a Dane, and allied to thc royal blood of Denmark ; that he had entered his little boat on the preceding day, at a certain point on the Da ľ· ish coast, intending to proceed in it a few leagues up the shore, when, being overtaken by an adverse wind, hc had been blown across the sea, and at length providentially preserved in the manner they beheld. " The great and magnificent Edmund was at this period the King of the East- Angles; and Lothbrok was conducted to his court at Pendlcsham. The King gave him a most gracious welcome; and per¬ ceiving a hawk perched upon his arm, en¬ quired of him whether it had been the com¬ panion of his voyage ? Lothbrok replied in the affirmative, adding, that hawking was his favourite amusement ; that he had been on his way to join a party of falconers, when driven off the Danish coast by the « i violence
violence of the wind ; and that throughout the storm, his hawk had kept itself fastly perched upon his shoulder. " The king, in return, informed him, that he himself was extremely attached to the sport, atid invited him to remain a few days at his court, and enjoy it with him.—· Lothbrok consented, and for several suc¬ cessive days they flew their hawks together. " Now Edmund and his courtiers per¬ ceived Lothbrok to practise the art with greater skill than any one whom they had vet seen ; and their commendation» of his excellence were proportionably warm, till the constant repetition of his praises en- flamed against him to the highest pitch, the envy of an attendant on the king, named Berick, who had heretofore been his most favourite falconer. ** Envy having once taken possession of this man's breast, the next evil passion which followed it was a desire of revenge upon the person of whom he was unjustly jealous ; and he formed the wicked inten¬ tion
tion of putting a period to his existence.—» To this end, he early one morning invited Lothbrok to accompany him on a walk, and having enticed hiin into a solitary wood, he drew a dagger from his vest, and plunged it into the heart of the unsuspecting Dane. " But the perpetration of this villainous deed was doomed to be known ; for a lad, who was gathering wood-apples, beheld the transaction from fhe top of a tree, and went directly and made exposure of it. " The king was violently incensed at the villainy and perfidy of Berick, and he pro¬ nounced upon him as his sentence— f That when a storm should blow off the English coast, he should be put to sea in Lothbrok's boat, and sent to make trial whether the winds and waves would be as merciful to him as they had been to tha unfortunate, man whom he had murdered/ " A storm, suited to the king's purpose, arose in a very few days after, and Berick wai put into Lotbbrok'f boat, and launched out to sea. " After struggling for two days and 1 5 nights
nights in the very gulph of death, it was so fated that Berick and his boat were driven upon the Banish coast ; and the first per¬ sons who came to his assistance were two young men, named Hunguar and Hubba, the sons of that Lothbrok who owed to him his death. " Fearful of confessing the real cause of his situation, and equally desirous of re¬ venging himself upon the king, he in¬ formed the young men that their father had been treacherously put to death by the command of King Edmund; and that, struck by the atrocity of the deed, he had ventured from England at the peril of his Hfe, to give Lothbrok's relatives informa¬ tion of the bloody transaction. " Hunguar and Hubba, exasperated by this account of their father's murder, ga¬ thered an innumerable army of Danes, and invading the territories of the king of the East Angles in different parts, sent to Ed¬ mund, then in the city ofThefford, a he¬ rald, bearing this message :<—- ' Hunguar and Hubba, sons of the murdered
murdered Lothbrok, command Edmund, in reparation of his inhumanity to their fa¬ ther, to divide with them his treasures, and to submit to their future rule : if he refuse these terms, too lenient for the crime of which hc has been guilty, thcy are pro vided with an army sufficiently strong to take his kingdom and his life/ Sf The king, not a little astonished at this threat, and the falsehood of the asser¬ tion, called round him his council, and held debate on what steps were best to be taken in the present alarming crisis. " Saint Humbert, the Вь'юр of Elm- ham, was at this time the king's secretary, and being an old man, and extremely at¬ tached to his sovereign, exhorted him to agree to the proposals, and thus to pre¬ serve his life ; but Edmund, rendered in¬ trepid by conscious innocence, sent this reply ;— * Edmund, a Christian King, will not submit to bend beneath a Pagan yoke. If Hunguar and Hubba will consent to be¬ come Christians, upon these terms, and an t (i no
no other, will Edmund acquiesce in their proposals/ ,f The brothers, indignant at his hesita¬ tion, immediately besieged the city, and sacked it ; and the king, after a most bloody engagement, fled for safety to his castle of Framlingham, in Suffolk. Thi¬ ther, however, the Danish force followed him, and within its walls he was again be¬ sieged and conquered ; and perceiving that a desperate effort could alone save him from their vengeance, he attempted to make his escape privately—but in the act of flying, he fell into the hands of the Pagans, " Having obtained possession of his per¬ son, they informed him that the only means of his preserving his life was in¬ stantly to renounce the Christian faith.·— This he decidedly refused to do ; and the barbarians, still hoping to accomplish their wish, beat him with stakes, in the expec¬ tation of the pain which he suffered draw¬ ing from him his consent; but he still called alone upon the name of the Saviour á of
of the workl, which so exasperated the Pa¬ gans, that fhey bound him to a tree, and pierced him to death with arrows. " V/hen the Danes were departed, his own subjects took his mangled corpse, and interred it in that tovvn in Suffolk, which has ever since been called Saint Edmund's Bury, on account of his having been buried at that place. (t Now the wounds on the body of this unfortunate king amounted to nearly six hundred ; and the villainous Beriel , having been the wicked instrument of his destruc¬ tion, was, at his death, which occurred on the succeeding day after that of the good Edmund, condemned by Heaven to repair his crime, by remaining in a state of pur¬ gatory, until, by having appeared on earth once in every seven years, in the night of the day on which he had committed his foul murder, he should have revisited the scene of King Edmund's death, as often times as that monarch had wounds inflicted on his body. " Once in every seventh year according- iy.
THF.
Jy, on the twenty-first of Jline, does the shade of the murderer Berick glide through the halls of Framlinçham Castle; an at- tested proof of Heaven's retribution, to open the eyes of the sinner to repentance. f< This scroll was edited by a man of divine profession, immediately after the first appearance of the tortured spirit of Berick ; and it is recommended to bc for ever preserved in thc library of Fram¬ lingham Castle, as a true and laithful me¬ morial of God's judgment upon sinful men." Such were thc contents of thc scroll, which still held possession of the spot where its divine writer had requested it ever to be retained. With substantiated facts it joined a tale, to which superstition appeared to have given birth ; but it was a tale which the equally superstitious dispo¬ sition of after ages did not sufler to die away ; and the ghost of Berick was, at the present day, as much dreaded by the inha¬ bitants of Framlingham Castle, as it could have
\л\'с Ьссь by those who bad existetl at lhe period of the perpetration of the crime* which had given birth to the idea of the perturbed spirit of its act«. r being doomed, İn part of his punishment, to revisit sep- tenially thc haunts of men. Thc form in which this, spectre wav said to appear, was that of an extremely tutl man, whose countenance and hands were of an ashy paleness ; his garb of a pale grey, like those supposed to have been worn by falconers in his time, and a loose white vestment resembling a shroud, light¬ ly gathered oxer his limbs, upon the folds of which fell drops of blood, from a dagger which he held in his right hand. He was reported to become visible in that chamber, from a window of which Edmund had attempted in vain to make his escape from the castle, thence to pursue the direction by which the unfortunate king had been dragged to the tree without the ramparts, where his sufferings had met an end in death, and there to vanish with thc
the heaviest of groans: but the terrois of various members of the household had at di Herent times lcd them to assert, that it •wandered wide of these prescribed limits ; whilst the courageous few affirmed that İt never wandered at all ; each violently te¬ nacious of their own opinions, and the for¬ mer infinitely tbe stronger party. At bis usual hour of retiring to rest, Lord Henry Fil/.roy entered hk chamber; Gilbert attended him ; but thc reproofs which his Lord had already th * evening given to his timidity, curbed the inclina* tion which he felt to speak of the spectre ; and when dismissed from his masters cham· ber, he immediately retired to one adjoin¬ ing to it, appropriated to his own us>e, where he lost no time in getting into bed« and putting into eflect his precaution against observing spirits in thc ni^ht. Amongst thc domestics of the castle, it may naturally be ¡magined that the ex¬ pected visit from the shade of Berick had, for the few last days, funi bhed a most fruit« ful
ful topic of conversation. Those who had long been residents on the spot were the relaters of the dreadful tale (which was told in so many varieties, that it almost might have been taken for a different his¬ tory from every tongue which spoke of it), and those who were visitors at the castle were the auditors of thc wonders.— Of the latter number were Gillian una Joel ; and as thc subject was one day discussing in their hearing—·* Don't you remember» Joel/* said Gillian, ** our walking about a ruin onee, m we were travelling to this castle* and the rain emme on, yo» know ? »nd my poor deur lady, that is now ill Iti bed, came up to us» and you told her tome« thing about a murder that had happened there» and about Black ------. What Black wasit?*' ° Black Brian the warrener," answered Joel. '*Oh aye, M returned Gillian, M ao it wa·; and the murdered ЫуЧ epimkm$i<m walked there, too, you told us: mercy upon
upon me, it is quite terrible to think what a number of fiighlful dead things stalk about in a night. I am sure, as the pro¬ verb says -----/· She was interrupted by one of Lord Fitz- roy's pages, who. striking with the true air of a braggart his hand upon the hilt of his sword, cried—*' Ghosts indeed !-—I am not such a coward as to fear them !" ·* Why, do you think your sword could stand you in stead to fight an apparition, which is made up only of air, you silly urchin ?" cried an old dame in the chim¬ ney corner,—** I maintain that the kind of awe one stands in of a spirit has nothing to do with cowardice; for I ahvays feel it; and I never was afraid of flesh and blood in my life/* Now Dame Barbara, wiiich wa* the name of the speaker, was n remarkably thin and bony female ; and the page, not mightily pleased with her tfissention from him in opinion, and being not a little addicted to pertne ss, replied*—** Truly* flesh and* blood don't
don't seem to have thc same sentiments vuth regard to you, for they keep at a most awful distance from your person." " Thou art an impertinent varlet/* re¬ turned Dame Barbara ; * e and I wish for thy punishment, that it were in my power to lock thee tip, for fhe day and night of the twenty «first of this month, in the green velvet chamber, where it is said that the ghost first becomes visible, and put thy courage to the test, thou capering chit/* " And why does it appear particularly in fhe room you mention ?" asked Joel. «' Because/' returned Dame Barbara, ** in the green velvet chamber it was where the Pagans, instigated to their wickedness by the deceitful Bériek, first insulted the person of King Hámund, after they had vanquished his castle. Oh war is a cruel calamity ! I tremble at thc thoughts of what may be coming to pass, every time I see my Lord exercising his soldiery in the park. War is a keen rav isher : and when he is once jet looseuponus, none can tell what
what change they may live to expe¬ rience." " Keen as hc is," replied the page, " you may rest satisfied that you would have no change to apprehend from his being let loose upon ns," This remark threw the old dame ¡nto a fit of sulky silence, and the conversation returned to Berick's ghost. " Well/' cried Gillian, ff I am sure, ifl saw a real walking spirit, I should fall down¬ right into an tmvlskm. —I know it very well, because I once fell into one at Wor¬ cester Castle« when I thought such a thing passed before my eyes, But I should Hke vastly to have a peep at the room where a Spirit appears. Could not you let me see Ле green velvet chamber, Dorothy ?" м О dear, no," cried Dorothy; " Icould at any other time, but just now it is im¬ possible; there is no way into it but through the chamber where Sir Hildebrand Gower İs kept prisoner. There once wa» another way to iu up a back stai rea·*: through
through one of the towers ; but the door into it is locked tip, and it has not been used, as I have heard, for many years, be¬ cause they say t hestairs are all broken down, and nobody that has lived in the castle has thought ¡t worth while to repair them." *· So near Sir Hildebrand is Ihe ghost ?"· replied Gillian.—" Birds of a feather should Hock together, as the proverb says; and, for my part, I vfkh it may terrify him to death ; he must be wicked and abomi¬ nable, to have drawn blood of røy «ear sweet lady—a suffering angel* Heaven unly knows whether she ever will recover." Dame Barbara now reminded Gillian that a refreshment, which she had come down to fetch for her mistress, had been some time prepared, and that it wouhl better be· come her to carry it for her relief, than to remain chattering where she was; und Gillian, whose only fault was simpleness, and who therefore never wanted more than a hint to do what was right, instantly re¬ paired to Eleonora's chamber. CIIAP.
СПЛР. Ill *« ----- — ' ■ ■ ...... ■!■ " ■ » . π—ή ■ гсатЬге A ^tı t am of U%ht w*§ seen tø &Uéc. .Mitkmp a poniani, fftmt. n-tljtJ ; 7 he Ьга\«ч *aul «iight kut bm. î * • •»•»••••t " And ut! J ami frantic w«í liti m^fì, j>ratil Etg)H nf тш ^howirg." *' Kt', ıh™ nnn iu» »ngd c«n dörttü I lypocri^ir, Ih? mdy evil ib« wäíis Invisible, txítpt to Ood »loor.** Mut к н. We have already said, that Lortl Henry Fitzroy retired to rest at his usual hour, on the evening recorded by tradition to be the
the period of thc spectre's return» which was, for a certaili term of years, condemned to revİMt the glimpses ofthe moon. His repose was restless, and his interval of sleep fhort ; but thus had passed every night with him мпее that fatal one in which he had discovered Eleonora bleeding be¬ neath the poniard of the vile Sir Hilde¬ brand. Within the castle walls he heard no sound to keep him waking ; without, the hoarve voice of tht* ihun.1er roliet! ¡n appalling Ьиы* thmtgli thv >ky— a db« ord of lhe elements, which the towering fate of the Heavens, at the time of hh cpiittiirg the battlements i» the evening, had led him to expect As the morning ari*sc\ the agitated bosom of nature returned to the softest tranquillity, and the exhilarating beams of the sun kissed from the rose the tears ^hed upon it hy the storm, ; Invited front" his couch by the lively notes of innumerable birds, which ap¬ peared to be rejoicing in the triumph of the sun over the cheerless rain, Lord Henry left
left his bed, and threw open one of the casements of hk chamber, in order to taste the refreshing air of the morning. Scarce¬ ly had he done so, ere a gentle tap upon ihe door of the apartment asked for admis¬ sion. Lord Henry did not suppose any one but himself to have been yet risen, and opened the door, entirely at a loss whom to suppose that he should behold. The claimant for entrance was Gilbert; he wore a countenance full of intelligence, and said—" Your pardon, my Lord, for this interruption ; but hearing you leave your bed, I could not forbear VOmtug to tell you ------ ." He hesitated. ff To teU me what ?" asked Lord Ftooy, impatiently. ,f I assure you, my Lord, by my faith in the blessed Virgin/' {and he crossed him¬ self as he spoke ), « that what I shall tell you is a truth/* relied Gilbert ; " *he ghwst of Berick did pass through the castle last night/* "Did
·' Did vou vourself behold İt r" asked mV Ψ * Lord Henry with a smile. " Mc ! Oh no, my Lord/* was the reply. " Can you name to tne any one with more courage than a lark, who akí see it }** enquired Lord Henry. ** Yes, my Lortl, indeed I can/* an¬ swered Gilbert; " one whose courage, I am sure, your Lordship never do ibted.— Armstrong, the thief leader of your Lord¬ ships vasals, was one of tliose to whom it appeared/* *· Armstrong**' repeated Lord Henry, in a tone of voice which implied the name to give a degree of < vedit, in hi* opinion, to the assertion \...l :i was coupled with it, " Armstrong?"* *' Yes, indeed, my Lonl/' returned Gil¬ bert ; " if your Lordship gives me your permission, I vviil relate to you the whole circumstance.—I rose the moment it was day, to make enquiries if thc spirit had ap¬ peared in the night ; and the fiist person vol. in. f whom
•whòrn î met, early as it was, was Dame Bar¬ bara ; so said tbe dame to me—*—." " I wish to bear only of what relates to Armstrong," Lord Fitzroy interrupted bim by r saying, <f therefore send him to me in the library." Gilbert durst not express bis disappoint¬ ment at not being allowed to relate the talc of wonder himself, and retired to obey bis Lord's commands. In tbe course of a few minutes, Lord Fitzroy proceeded to the library, and found Armstrong already there, awaiting bis coming. Armstrong was a man of nearly fifty years of age, and ofa stout ath¬ letic form, joined to a heart which had ever displayed itself possessed of the strongest resolution. He was a man whom Lord Fitzroy was well convinced would not be shaken by those idle fears which fill with terror the breasts of tbe weaker minded. 4t Can it be/' Lord Fitzroy addressed him by saying, " that you believe yourself to have
have witnessed a supernatural appearance within tbese walls ?" " It is even so, my Lord/' replied Arm¬ strong. " And was the appearance which you лу^евт!," enquired Lord Henry, <{ such as corresponels with the description given of the spirit of Berick, in the scroll which records his crime, aiul its consequences?" tc In every particular, my Lord," an¬ swered Armstrong, ct It appears a most extraordinary fact/* replied Lord Henry ; " and I believe. Arm¬ strong, that your disposition is such, that vou have hitherto been as incredulous of the existence of supernatural beings as mv¬ self." <e Nothing but the proof vviiich I havei received could have changed mv sentí- C* m' ments, my Lord," was fhe reply on the part ofthe leader. <c Your sentiments arc then changed, by what you last night beheld?" said Lord Henry. p 2 « Iam
rí I am certain, my Lord," returned Arm¬ strong, " that I was neither under thc in¬ fluence of fear, of wine, nor of sleep : but I will relate to you the circumstance as it occurred.—It was last night my turn to place the guard at the door of Sir Hilde¬ brand Gower's apartment : your Lordship is acquainted that the guard is relieved at the expiration ofevery fourth hour; twelve o'clock is therefore one of the periods of change, and it was at that hour my office to place the fresh centinels :—my life-has been principally spent in this castle ; the tradi¬ tion of Berick's spectre appearing within its walls once in seven years, on the twen¬ ty-first of June, has therefore been familiar to me from my youth ; but I had always treated it as an idle tale, to which ignorance and the greatest superstition had given birth. (< On arriving at the door of Sir Hilde¬ brands apartment with the guard, I per- ceived the utmost joy depicted on the coun ter anees of those centinels who had held
held the watch for the last four hours, at their release from their post ; and equally strong symptoms of fear and dislike dis¬ playing themselves in the eyesof those who were to hold the station for the four suc¬ cessive ones. Well acquainted that the dread of beholding the apparition was the cause of their agitation, I rallied them on the weakness of their feelings. They re¬ plied, that they were surprised that I could expect them to be otherwise than under alarm, when the very door at which they were constrained to remain was that which led fo the apartment where the spirit was reported to rise. f Perhaps/said I, *" the presence of a man who does not fear this spirit, nor give credit to its existence, may be a consolation to you—such a one am I ; shall I pass your hours of watching with vou ?' " They accepted my proposal with the greatest thankfulness, and I remained their companion. " The night was extremely tempestuous, f 3 and
and the roaring of the thunder was fre¬ quently mistaken by thc centinels for the nuirrmirings of avoice,which they supposed to be the voice of Berick's spirit pouring forth lamentations over the spot of its pe¬ nance. The time moved on, and I received no cause myself foralarm, till the first hour ofthe morning was quickly approaching." Lord Fitzroy moved a few paces nearer to Armstrong, and increased the attention with which he had alreadv been listening to his recital. The leader continued thus:— " Suddenly an explosion, resembling the discharge of a fire-arm, burst upon my senses ; a second almost immediately followed it ; and, with equal rapidity, a third. The sounds evi¬ dently proceeded from the interior of those apartments said to oe the haunt of the spirit, and of which Sir Hildebrand Gower occupies the first. Terror appeared to de¬ prive my companions of animation ; their arms fell from their hands; they stood silent effigies of senseless fear." fr Proceed,"
*■ Proceed/' said Lord Henry eagerly. t{ In the course of a minute after the third of those sounds which 1 have just described to you, my Lord/' continued Armstrong, " with a violent crash the door of the apartment iiew open, and issuing through the portal, appeared a figure ia every particular answerable to the descrip¬ tion given ia the record of Berick's ghost. Its form was tall ; its countenance wan and dreadful ; its garments were a falconer's habit of a light grey, over which loosely flowed a milk-white shroud. In one hand it bore a sepulchral lamp, of which the blue flame gleamed on its sallow visage; in the other a dagger, from which a stain of blood had fallen upon the shroud. With its eyes bent to the earth, and heavy sighs proceed¬ ing from its lips, it glided along the gallery, and disappeared from my sight in its de¬ scent down the staircase which leads into the great hall of the castle." " This fact/' said Lord Henry, " appears to produce a most unequivocal proof that f 4 the
the murderer does not find rest even in fhe grave. Did you pursue it ?" he enquired, after a moment's pause. " No, my Lord," returned Armstrong ; " I do not hesitate to confess that surprise almost deprived me of the powers of action or refiection." " You know not then," rejoined Lord Fitzroy, "howfar it bent its wanderings?" " It appears certain, my Lord," was Armstrong's reply, " fhat it passed the castle gate leading into the outer court, as it was this morning found by the porter unlocked, and the bolts withdrawn." " But," said Lord Fitzroy, " does not the tradition affirm it to proceed to that spot on the outer ramparts where the good King Edmund, who owed to him his doom, breathed his last sigh?" " And it did visit that spot, my Lord," replied Armstrong, " exactly at the sound¬ ing ofthe first hour of the morning, which can only have been a few minutes after I observed the spectre ; it glided upon the sight
sight of Adam Faulkner nnd Charles Guinett, who were the centinels of that hour at the foot of the drawbridge. Im¬ mediately on beholding it, they fell upon the earth, and buried their faces, through terror, in their hands. Whilst they hy thus trembling, they heard the drawbridge lowered, and could not doubt that thc spectre passed over it, on its way to the spot where it is reported to vanish, as on again raising thcir heads, and opening their eves, it was no longer visible to them." ■J * О After some farther converiation with Armstrong, Lord Fitzroy proceeded to question Adam Faulkner and Charles Guinett, thc centinels ; he found them, al¬ though not men possessed of hearts cqr.aily stout with that of Armstrong, siili by no means belonging to the lowest rank of cowards; and their account of the spectre tallied in every particular so exactly vith the description given of it by Armstrong, that the fact of its appearance was substan¬ tiated in his belief. r 5 In
In its progress from thc green velvet chamber to the gallery, thc spirit of Berick must neccssarilv have passed through the apartments of Sir Hildebrand ; a:ul Lord Filzroy v.as not without a wibh to know whether it had been observed bv Ium, or wliether hc had been locked in sleep at thc minute of its passage. Eut it appeared probable that the loud reports, n^cmbling tbc disc barge oi' fire-arms, vvhich Armstrong lad said preceded its appearance in the gallcrv, must have awakened thc most ï,ouudiv sleeping ; and he was equally in¬ competent to decide whether, if Sir Hilde¬ brand had observed it, his hardened dispo¬ sition would have received any sensitive impression from beholding it ; or if he had felt a sensation of an unusual kind, wliether the firmness of hk temper would allow him to confess that such had been fhe case, or even to mention the occurrence at all. Whilst his mind was occupied with these reflections, one of the domestics, to whom 4 he
he had in particular assigne J the оШсе of persona! attendance upon Sir Hildebrand, burst hazily into his presence,— " My Lord," he extlauncd, " Sir Hildebrand —/* He paused. i( What of him I " enquired Lord Henry, eagerlv. '* lias escaped from his imprisonment, my Lord," rephed Lawrence.-—*'A few mi- nule.sago Iwei.i to prepare Iiim his morn¬ ing repast, and not (¡nding him in that apart · •»nen t where he usually passes the day, I sought him in every other, but iu vain : hc has too surely fied," " Impossible !" exclaimed hord Henry; " the casements are bevond his reach, and the door has not, for an instant, been left unguarded by my centinels/' Lawrence could only repeat what hc be¬ lieved to be thc fact ; and Lord Henry ac¬ companied him to Sir Hildebrands apart¬ ments, in order to investigate theio him- Kclf. The outer door was still surrounded by r о the
the guard : with a hasty step Lord Henry entered thc first apartment ; no object at¬ tracted his attention sufficiently to stay his steps within it, and he proceeded to the second ; in this his eyes fell upon a couch, on which lay in disorder Sir HİIdebrand's accustomary vestments; the suit was the same which he had worn on the very night on which Lord Henry had last beheld him. Turning to Lawrence, he enquired of him " Whether Sir Hildebrand had been habited in that suit on the preceding day ?" Without an instant's hesitation, Lawrence replied— tc That hc perfectly well remem¬ bered that Sir Hildebrand had not been habited in any other since the commence¬ ment of his imprisonment." " Does not this appear to imply that he has found means to escape from the castle in disguise ?" exclaimed Lord Henry. Armstrong had followed Lord Henry into tbe apartments, and was at this moment busied in examining a pistol, which hc had taken from a table near the couch, and by the
the side of which lay a half-emptied powder horn. ť< What are vou looking at ?" asked * mJ Lord Henrv. " This pistol, my Lord," replied Arm¬ strong ; " and I am reflecting, that from its size I judge that its report would be nearly equal to the sound which thrice last night struck my ear from these apart¬ ments." Lord Henry fixed his eyes in silence, for a lew moments, on Armstrong, and then exclaimed— " I read your thoughts ; you conceive it possible that Sir Hildebrand assumed the appearance ofthe traditionary spectre to effect his escape from the cas¬ tle, and that thc pistol was discharged by him, to prepare the minds of those who should behold him for an object of terror." " Your Lordship may deem my suspi¬ cion romantic," answered Armstrong;— " but I confess that I entertain it." {i You are right, you are too surely right in your judgment," pronounced Lord Henry,
Henrv, aftera short pause of refìection ; u proofs ever arise to convince men that there are no evil spirits permitted to wander the earth, but sındı as have never been 'aid within the confines of the grave. Thc craft of tiie villain is ever equal to his guilt. Armstrong, I believe it to have been Sir Hildebrand whom thou and thy fellows beheld." In disappointment, in reflection, and not without sonic degree of doubt, Lord Henry returned into the gallery. Calling ίο Arm¬ ftrong to follow his steps, he entered an apartment,—** Armstrong," he said, *· if ¿sir Hildebrand has effected his escape, as it now appears suspicious to us that he has done, he must have possessed an accomplice in his plan ; and it shall be my immediate concern to discover, either by threats or promises, who his associate was." As he spoke, he turned his eyes towards a window, which commanded a view of the inner court of the castle, and beheld a con¬ siderable number of the domestics of his household
household collected round a couple of female peasants, who were displav ing to their observation what appeared ťo Lord Fitzrov a long garment of white cloth. The int< rest expressed on the counte¬ nances of the group before him, convinced bim that no common circumstance had as¬ sembled thi m, and he immediately directed ihat enquiry should be made into the cause. The reply returned to him was, that the ί'ΛΟ peasants were females in the daily hí.bit cf supplying the inhabitants of the caótlc with milk ; thai they were the fitst persons who had that morning entered thc walls; and that near the gate of entrance, in the outer rampart, they had found a while garment stained with blood, a dagger, and a lamp; these the reporter of this intelli¬ gence had brought with him, for the in¬ spection ofhis Lord. That these artilles had formed a part of the disguise of the pretended spirit of Berick, there remained no doubt to the minds
minds of Lord Henry and Armstrong ; on the very spot where the spectre was said to vanish, had they been found ; it was there¬ fore rational to conclude that they had there become useless to thc person who had borne them, and that he bad accord¬ ingly cast them from him ; and this proof ofthe fallacy of the aerial being ofthe sup¬ posed spirit convinced them of their sus¬ picion, that Sir Hildebrand had assumed the appearance of the dreaded phantom for eflecting his escape from Framlingham Castle. " Sir Hildebrand is then guilty," re¬ flected Lord Henry : " the fate of Valen¬ tine, whatever that fate may be, is charge¬ able upon him, and he dreads to await its exposure : if he were innocent, he would not have fled." It was now, he considered, in vain to at¬ tempt to trace his steps ; he had already the advance of nearly eight hours flight over those whom he might send to pursue him. At
At the morning repast, Lord Henry was joined by Saint Ethelbert, whose opinions relative to Sir Hildebrand coincided with his own. " There is only one step, my son/' said the holy father, " which I wish you to pur¬ aque on thc present occasion, and that is, to use every exertion to discover who, withtn your walls, has been so unjust to the fide¬ lity which he owes to you as his Lord, as to have become the abettor of one who had fallen under your just chastisement : I en¬ courage you to strain every nerve for the accomplishment of this discovery, and upon this principle—he who will act de¬ ceitfully in one respect, will not hesitate to do so in any other. Remember the king, remember Godolphin, remember the cri¬ tical position in which the affairs of your castle stand at this period ; it is of the first importance to your own happiness, and to the welfare of the realm, that you should not have a dishonest heart within your wails." " Your
' ť Your arguments ave just," replied Lord Henry ; (( and that Sir Hildebrand possessed the assistance of some member of my household, appears from the disguise in which he fled ; ofthat hecould not himself have been possessed ; it must have been conveyed to him." For the purpose of making the investiga¬ tion upon which he had determined, Lord Henry commanded all the members of his castle to be directed to assemble in the great hall, and wait his coming. As he proceeded towards it, he was met by Lady Blunt ; a faint smile of pleasure beamed in her eye ; the escape of Sir Hildebrand had been communicated to her, and she felt as a mother. " Lord Henry," she said, u I cannot disguise the satisfaction with which my heart beats, at an event which I need not explain to you ; but I wish to tell you, that by the truth of a mother's fondness, my ignorance of such a proceeding was nol less than your own." « Even
*" Even before you mnde this assertion, I suspected you not, my dearest Lady Tho¬ masine," replied Lord Henry ; " you were, believe me, the last in my suspicions, and the first whom I couid have pardoned for the act." Lady BiuntV reply vvas prevented by the approach of Lawrence, who appeared im- ■p^ient to be allowed to speak. Lord Lenry turned towards him, and he pre¬ sented him with a scrap of writing, which he said he had just found in one of Sir Hildebiamľs apartments : it contained only a couple of lines, and appeared to have been rent from the bottom of a scroll.-— The words were these :— " Let it down from your window at midnight, and you shal] receive fastened to it whatever you may require — Fabjan " Lady Blunt had departed at the approach of Lawrence; she did not therefore learn the purport ofhis business with his Lord. A second time Lord Fiuroy perused the writing.— í; Tabian then/' ho exclaimed, '' has been the counter-actor of mv just design ;
design ; let him instantly be summoned to my presence." Lawrence departed to obey this order, and shortly after returning, informed Lord Fitzroy that Fabian was not in the castle; that the centinél, who had held the watch at the foot of the drawbridge at the first dawning of day, affirmed him to have passed over it, on one of Sir HİIdebrand's fa¬ vourite coursers. From this account Lord Fitzroy could not doubt that a place of meeting had been fixed upon between them; and tbat Sir HİIdebrand's steed had long ere this been crossed by its master. He was not surprised at this treachery on tbe part of Fabian, for he had ever believed him to be a man whose friendship any one migbt purchase ; he was only at a loss to comprehend what means of correspondence Sir Hildebrand could have found with him : but could he have unravelled the mystery, it would now have been of no avail; Sir Hildebrand was gone, probably for ever ; and
and it appeared also very unlikely that Fabian should ever dare to return to Fram¬ lingham Castle, after the conduct which he had pursued within its walls: it was not, however, unlikely, he considered, that he might proceed for refuge to Castle Gower, and resolved that he should not be received there by Sir Sigismund Blunt, whom he supposed already to have reached that spot, without his being made acquainted with the cause ofhis having quitted Suffolk, he addressed to him a full account of every transaction which had taken place at Fram¬ lingham Castle since his departure from it ; and concluded his epistle with an expression ofthe deep regret which he experienced at the fate of the unhappy Valentine, a sentiment which he desired should sink deeply into the heart of him to whom that unfortunate youth owed every calamity which he had experienced in life. Having dispatched a courier with his epistle to Sir Sigismund Blunt, Lord Henry Fitzroy endeavoured to turn his thoughts frorø
from the villanous Sir Hildebrand, and the wrongs of Valentine, to the most import¬ ant subject which could at that moment occupy them—fhe restoration ofthe royal Edward to his sceptre. Within the few last davs, a greater promise of a return to convalescence had appeared in flic youth¬ ful monarch than had yet been witnessed in him since his residence at Framlingham Castle ; and those who were acquainted with his existence, now iooked forward vvith a finii hope towards the period of his bein/r reseated on the throne of Kngland. On the fifteenth day after the departure of Sir Sigismund Blunt, it bad been ap¬ pointed for Sir Percival Godolphin once rnorc to quit Framlingham Castle, and pro¬ ceed to assemble those hundred men whom he had promised the adherents of the im¬ pending cause to bring to its support. A month was allowed him for the execution of this purpose; on a certain day, at tbe expiration of which term, an arrangement had been madefor a union of forces. At an
an agreed spot in Cambridgeshire were on that day to assemble with thcir respective men in arms, Sir Si^İMvumd Blunt, Sir Thomas Statford, Lord Ilcnrv Grev, and Sir Percival Godolphin ; and being conso¬ lidated into оле body, thev- were (hence to proceed to London, and there proclaim the existence of Edward. Lord Henry Fitzroy, in the mean while, was to remain stationary at his castle ; fo use every means of increasing the number of his men in arms; and to train those whom he already possessed to a ready exe¬ cution of the duties of their profession, in order that, if through the influence of fhe present queen, the intelligence of the king's existence should be coldlv received throughout thc kingdom, and a spot of se¬ curity become necessary to his personal safety, such a one might be afforded him in Framlingham Castle. Accordingly, on the fifteenth day after Sir Sigismunds departure, Godolphin set cut, accompanied by six horsemen, pro¬ vided
Eleonora gradually return to thc exercise of their wonted powers. Again possessed ofher recollective faculties, e\ery c\ent of her life passed in review before her me¬ mory ; and the image ofthe past appeared to her like thc remembrance of a highly- wrought dream. But the most prominent idea amongst those which crowded her aching brain, was the utter subversion which those prospects of future blis.s, that she had once entertained, had experienced in the exposure of the name and character of him to whom her heart had been de¬ voted. Honid, dreadful reflection ! the cherished unknown, for whose safety, for whose preservation her every pulse had beat with the warmest anxiety—in uniting her fate with whom, she had anticipated a rew r ard for all her sufferings, a guardian to repair to her the loss of her natural pro¬ tector—was a murderer ! "Blessed Provide! с j!" she exclaimed, "accept my thanksgiving, that thy benig¬ nant interposition has preserved me from connecting
connecting mvself with one who has vio- lated thy divine commandments ! Oh, Ge¬ raldine/* she added, If sad was thy hour of death ; but happy art thou, in being no longer subject to the tyranny ofa monster like Godolphin ! " In how strange, how unaccountable a manner/' she considered, "had the disclo¬ sure of his villany been made to her ï — and was it not," she reflected, " a part of her duty, whilst she poured forth the gra¬ titude ofher soul to Heaven for the deli¬ verance which it had vouchsafed to grant her, to disclose the perfidy of the assassin, and procure the deceased Geraldine the retribution of just revenge upon her mur¬ derer ? Fabian, too, the vile and inexpli¬ cable associate of his crime, could it be justifiable iu her to sulfer him to escape unpunished ? In her breast had Providence lodged the knowledge of their guilt; did she not therefore appear to be made the agent of Providence for the redress of the injured ? Upon this question she paused с 2 for
for â few mtímeuts, and her conclusion was, <( tfcát to conceal the crime of another, she could not herself be accounted perfectly innocent/" Still she did not immediately resobe upon any one line of conduct. She had given to the unknown her solemn promise, under whatever circumstances they might meet, nc^ef to divulge that they had ever met before; and upon this recollection she doubted how far she was authorised, by the dictates of truth and honour, to pub¬ lish a ch cumstance relative to him, with whom she had made this engagement, that must inevitably avow tl>e existence of % fact which she had prcirously bound herself to conceal. From the knowledge which we already possessof the purity of Eleonora's mind, if «an scarcely be necessary to remark, that all thc softer feelings with which her breast bad once gfowed towards the unknown, were now rooted out from it. Her's was a heart capable only of love, while virtue gave
gave the object beloved au honourable elaim to her affection. Uer indecieion, tlie re fore, arose from no combat between the struggles of virtue and those of any weaker passion ; shx? .hesitated solely from a desire of pursuing that path whicii Heaven would most approve. After many deljsîe«» with hcr own mind, Eleonora resolved Ίο subrak her conduct to the guid an ceo f the holy Saint Ethelbert. The father's deportment towards her, from the hour of her introduction to his ac¬ quaintance, had been of the most concili¬ ating nature ; his first address to her in the dining-hali at Castle Gower had displayed the liberality of his religious sentiments; and the resemblance which he bad ex~ pressed himself to hehohi ia her to hi» de¬ ceased sister, and which he had t declared io her that it gave him pleasure lo contem¬ plate, added to the friendly concern which he had shewn for her recovery ¿uring her late illness, all inspired her with сшгйаеохе to discJose to him the subject which occu- o 3 pied
pied and distressed her mind. Availing herself accordingly of the first opportu¬ nity which presented itself for conversing with him in private, and imploring his at¬ tention toa point upon which she was de¬ sirous of soliciting his counsel— ťt lam cer¬ tain, most revered father/ 1 she said, <f that although the tenets of our faith are dissi¬ milar, the liberality of your heart is too great to withhold you, on that account, from bestowing your religious advice on an unfortunate being, who knows no one else of whom to seek such salutary admo¬ nition/' The father raised his cowl upon this ad¬ dress to his sympathy, the better, as it ap¬ peared, to enable him to contemplate the countenance of the fair suppliant; her eyes were suffused with tears, and quick were the heavings of her bosom, which trembled with the agitation communicated to it by her mind. Eleonora encountered the father's gaze ; the characteristic of his wonted aspect was affliction
affliction softened by piety into a placid resignation ; that expression she now be¬ held mingled with a still more tender emo¬ tion ; a tear was stealing down his cheek, and his lip quivered as he replied to her so¬ licitation.—"Speak, oh, speak freely, dear daughter," he returned; "virtuelike thine claims the regard of every sect ; pour thy secret afflictions with confidence into my breast ; and believe that I shall listen to the detail with the tenderness of a pa¬ rent." The voice of compassion produces a sen¬ sation on the mind of suffering, which the heart of sensibility cannot subdue. Eleo¬ nora fell at the feet ofthe benevolent man, and imprinted a kiss on his hanel, which her teaiù at the same instant bedewed. His own tears now burst freely forth ; he raised her from the earth, pressed her afiectionately to his breast, and, as he did so, hc exclaimed— <c Heaven bless and pro¬ tect thee, dearest Eleonora! shield thee о 4 from
from grief, and recompense thy virtues with felicity." The violent emotion which the father betrayed, as he pronounced these words, at the moment almost alarmed Eleonora ; but his manners quickly returned to their usual placidity ; and placing her on a seat by his «ide, whilst he retained her hand in his, he tinged her to beo in the communication for wiiich she had been preparing his attention. The last half hour wiiich she had passed in his society had given her still greater confidence in the benevolence of his heart than she had even before entertained ; and without hesitation, «he informed him that she bad, at a distant period of time, bound herself by a promise to one whom «he had since discovered to be an unworthy object; that her adherence to this promise withheld oer from subjecting bim with whom she îıad entered into it, to the contempt and ■punishment of wiiich he was deserving ; and finally requested the father ίο resolve lill ,
her, whether she should, „under \hç№ citrr cumstances, sin against the laws of religion, if she were to swerve from her pljghfed word ? With scarcely a moment's hesitation* Saint Eihelbert replied—" The chief busi¬ ness of our mortal life ie to do goAd.™ Whatever means, therefore, lead to its-per¬ formance, cannot fail to be creditable tp those who pursue them. The chastise ra^en,t of the wicked is necessary to the dcjtfirring of those from e\il, who, without the rod of terror, which they see falling on the guilty, being held in threaten iflg oyer their own heads, «mi^ht step into their very crimes, and swell the lisi of those enormities which draw down Hea\en's eventual л;еп- * gee nee on the «cms of wen. If, ths nef ore, thou art in possessio« of any secret, of which the disclosure may «e\c4ge li^e cause of the innocent, or warn the uosus- peot4ng against tiie eo$i<ceakd »villain, fear «iot, {hot ţo depart from ao £ngftgerçumt into which 4hou gayest have^frtered &Ш\ g 5 a worth-
a worthless character, should draw down upon thee the displeasure of Omnipo¬ tence." Thus encouraged, Eleonora immediately laid before the holy father a detail ofevery circumstance which had occurred between herself and Sir Percival Godolphin. He listened to her words with the most vivid interest, both of countenance and manner ; and when she had related the conversation, of which a fortunate and Heaven-directed chance had made her an auditor, between Godolphin and Fabian, and fromr the evi¬ dence of which there could remain no doubt of the unfair death of the ill-starred Geraldine, Saint Ethelbert, clasping his hands together with the wildest emotion, exclaimed— ec Almighty powers, is it pos¬ sible that the earth should contain a second monster, equal in crime to him from whom ------." Suddenly checking himself in his exclamation, he added—" Pardon me, daughter, I am wandering from the subject we are discussing, and drawing a comparison,
comparison, which I cannot explain to you." He paused a moment, as if strug¬ gling with contending feelings, and then proceeded thus:—" Praised be that Pro¬ vidence which has preserved yqu from uniting your fate with that of the villain who had wound himself, serpent-like, into your unsuspecting heart: In exposing his guilt, you have performed an act, for which the smile of Heaven will shine upon you ; and blest, oh ever blest be that Heaven, for your preservation 1" Again he pressed Eleonora with the most affectionate ardor to his breast, and again the extreme interest, which he appeared to take in her happiness, excited equally her surprise and gratitude. Laving continued to comerse with her for a considerable time, and admini¬ stered to her every consolation òf vvhich words were capable, thc father, reminding her, in the strongest teims, of the great friendship which she had experienced from Lady Blunt and Lord Henry Fitzroy, repre- « G sented
sented to her the propriety of immediately extending to them the confidence whieh she had reposed in him. To this propo¬ sition Kleonora could advance no objec¬ tion ; and at hcr request he took upon himself the task of communicating to ihem those facts, for a repetition of which her own feelings were ill adapted. With equal horror and disgust they at¬ tended to his narrative ; and the fervencv of affection with which the heart of Lord Henry beat towards Eleonora, rais?d a lion's wrath in his breast against the inhuman blood-stained Godolphin ; whilst the asto¬ nished and affected Lady Thomasine shed tears equally f о the fate of her unhappy niece, and to the wronged, the insulted Eleonora ; and with the charitable inten¬ tion of pouring consolation through the voice'of tenderness and friendship, upon her wounded peace, she instantlv sought her—but her efforts were ineffectual ; the sensibility of her heart refused to display itself through any channel but her tears % her 4
her bead чп\к upon Eleonora's bosom, and she mingled her si^hs with her'«. It was not till die following morning that Eleonora again beheld the benevolent fa¬ ther Saint Ethelbert. lie then visited her in her private apartment.— u She must flíHĺbtle»·.'* he said, " be anxious to learn what had been the result of his jrnd Lord ! ; itzroyVi communications upon thc villan- oiîs conduct of Mr Percival Godolphin :<— a most per\ lo/ng deliberation," he pro¬ ceeded to ?ay, ·* had kept them in conver- irvtion duri η ι·, thc ^ï'twicv part ofthe night : ft.at (he guilt of Sir Percival merited the most absolute retribution, there coukl not exist a doubt in the most uninterested mind ; consequently in theirs, so closely allied by friendship and esteem to those objects upon whom hc had exerciticd his inhumanity and baseness, eventual punish¬ ment from thc hand of the Jaw must unhe¬ sitatingly be decreed to him ; hm a doubt had arisen to them, wliether it became them to drawdown immédiate vengeance an his guilty
guilty head ; or, ere they should arraign him at the Lar of justice, suffer him to per¬ form that part vvhich he had undertaken to act, in the revolution to which they were looking forward in the affairs of ihe king¬ dom, " Without the restoration of the royal Edward ίο the sceptre of England," con¬ tinued the holy man, ťf the lowering clouds which were now hanging in tremendous blackness over the head of Latimer, could not, he feared, be dispelled ; and eagerly as the soul of Lord Henry panted to replace the son ofhis beloved father on that throne from vvhich the hand of iniquity had driven him, still this desire had a rival İn his heart, which was the happiness of Eleonora.- — Thus doubly urged to sufter no impedi¬ ment to arise on his part to the completion of those events to which his soul leant for¬ ward vvith an aching anticipation of bliss^ he had resolved not to accuse Godolphin, till a struggle of more importance than his punishment to the happiness of those in whose
whose bliss he could himself alone know felicity, was eitker crowned vvith victory, orsiinkin disappointment/' And the holy father also added—" That had Lord Fitzroy, unbiassed by other cir¬ cumstances, resolved on the immediate ex¬ posure of Sir Percival's guilt, he could not, at the present hour, have taken any effec¬ tive measures for his punishment, as he was utterly unacquainted whither he had bent his course, on his quitting Framlingham Castle." Frequent were the hours which were now passed by Eleonora and her excellent friends, in conversing on the extraordinary events which had been interwoven with the web ofher past life. To them it appeared evident, that at the moment of Eleonora 's iirst introduction to Godolphin, he had been flying from the pursuit of justice, as the period at which she informed them that she had beheld him drinking the water of the rivulet from his cap, in.the little wood adjoining to Worcester Castle, had been but
but a few days after the time ofhis escape from the Tower ofLonâon, At every revisai of his conduct, the craft and viHany which all his actions had dis¬ played, excited more and more strongly against hin thcir contempt and indigna¬ tion ; but nife master-piece of art appeared in his havina joined thc royal band, who had come in pursuit of him, to Worcester Castle, and having escaped their toils, by professing himself an adherent of their cause. " Hew little did I, at that moment, sup¬ pose him to be Sir Percival Godolphin!" exclaimed Eleonora. t( My dear thiid," replietl Lady Blunt, ·** bitter lias been the cıra tight which you have been compelled to drink from the cup of experience ; but great is the blessing •which Providence has extended to you, in <your eventual preservation from the arts of an «tmprineipied ma«. You ar« religiously grateftrf for its befiign interposition la yeor favour ; aed ï doubt oot Ъщ that к has
•has a rich rcwaicl in store for the unjust birfferings whieh you have experienced/' As she pronounced these words, her eyee were directed, with a calm expression oi pleasure, towaids Lord Henry Fitzroy, and replied to with a smile of hope on his part, of which it was impossible for Eleonora ¡oot to comprehend the meanmg. A silence of a few momente ensued, whieh was broken by a summons received by Lord Henry to visit the soldiery, who we**e ex*· ercisiug on the raraparts of íhe castle. Fiither fetint Ettóbert had not been pre¬ sent at the conversation just recited ; by the retiring of Lord Henry, Eleonora was consequently left aJoaewiih iiidy Bhiat. Thc countenance of Lady Thomasine ţwepared Eleonora for the words which she was about to utter : in tht -most tender and affectionate -manner she represented to her the uninterested and pure arfection which Lord Fitzroy had professed for her, before he had been acquainted tbnt her heart was subject to any ргеро&ьсвчоп. The impres¬ sion
sion which had then filled it, was now for ever removed ; and so effectually removed, that it was impossible any lingering affec¬ tion, for the object who had once created it, could be still lurking in her bosom.— Eleonora had professed the greatest esteem for Lord Fitzroy ; she had spoken of him by the epiihets of kind, no ble- hearted, and generous ; she was acquainted with the zealous interest which he took in the fate of her unhappy father ; she had been in¬ structed that the restoration of Latimer to his family would be the first act towards which he would lead the heart of the royal Edward, if it were granted him once more to sit upon the throne of England. Upon these arguments, upon these considerations, Lady Thomasine besought her to accept the hand of one whose love thc honourable disposition of his heart would render un¬ alterable—who would in himself unite to¬ wards her the friend, the father, and the husband. Of a steady and vigorous friend {with agony was it that she confessed her senti-
sentiments to be what they were, on a sub¬ ject so intimately connected v/ith her own son), the daring temper of Sir Hildebrand might place her in need. Of a father's protection—not less sorrowful was this re¬ flection to her mind than that which she had just before expressed, the law of fate might too soon bereave her; against these evils, every solace presented itself to her, iü her union with an amiable and affec· tionate husband." Eleonora's head fell upon hcr bosom, and she did not attempt a reply. We are already acquainted that her sentiments, with regard to Lord Fitzroy, were of so favour¬ able a nature, that had she not been infa¬ tuated by the arts of him who had stolen, like the deceitful serpent of old, into the paradise of hçr heart, to dispel from thence the quietude of innocent placidity and joy, on him, before all others of his sex, would her choice and love have fallen. The ge¬ nerosity which now displayed itself in his disposition.
disposition, through the present renewal of hrseuit, which he had employed Lady Blunt to make to her, raised him,, in her opinion, far above the levei of his race; it was a tacit declaration, that he remembered only the virtues of whieh she was possessed, and forgot those foibles by which the eye of censure or sternness might have beheld tfi ein disfigured or disgraced. Perceiving her silent, Lady Liant con¬ tinued thus ;— " I regard myself, at this iiv ßtant, as your mother ; I consider only your happmess, in the advice which I be*· «tow on you ; î am tberefore more free in my -adm on i tí ous than a «len derer share of interest i« your fate, than that which I experience, would perhaps aîïow me to dbpføy. Believe me, my dear Eleonora, that every dictate of reason, every promise which fhe «mile of beckoning joy can hold out to the acceptance of innocence and merit, unite in urging you to bestow your hand on Lord Fitzrov." Still
Still the agitation of Eleonora's mind de¬ nied her the powersofutterance,hadsheeven been able to arrange her ideas for speech. cc Pure as are the sentiments of your heart," continued Lady Blunt, " it cannot be that Godolphin holds any share amidst those tender affections of yonr soul, where 'he once so undeservedly reigned r" ^Oh, no, my dearest lady, no,'' replied Eleonora, with energy; " stripped of those virtues which- can alone render personal aceomplishmentstruľy graceful, fhe tempter createsi« my mind an abhorrence more than equal to the happiness with which î once admitted him an inmate of røy heart." u Although many years have passed over our heads without intercourse, your fa¬ ther's disposition is too well known to me," returned Lady Thomasine, ec to doubt that )\e woukl oppose the union which» blessed chance places in yoirr acceptance. The Hberality of his religious sentiments is such, that the virtuous man of every sect is
is accounted by him alike deserving of esteem, and capable of diffusing happiness to those around him." " Never was there a more just estimate of any character than that which you have drawn of my dear father," answered Eleo¬ nora ; <f and for myself, each day of my past life has furnished me with some proof * that my happiness was the first wish of his exalted soul." " Would not then his approbation, ifit were, under the present circumstances, pos¬ sible to gain access to his person, and re¬ quest it of him, sanction the union to which you are invited ?" asked Lady Blunt. " I dare believe it woukl," replicii Eleonora. " And every idea, every recollection with which you unite the image of Lord Fitz¬ roy," returned Lady Blunt, emphatically, i( must aflbrd you unequivocal evidence of the ailection with which his heart glows for you." With
With a crimson blibh overspreading her cheeks Kleonora faintly assented to Laciy Blu m 4 assertion. "* We have novv* a conclusive proof, my deartst Kleonora," I^atly Blunt re»unie;Ì. ** that 1%1ыЬ»пь joy, and virtue, raisK on the side of your arc|iiic&t*in·* in the &uii i>f Lord Fit/roy ; that in attaching to } ourself a de¬ serv ing protector, vow v%ill communicate felicity to the heart of your father, and re¬ flect honour on your own jtidrgrni*nt: сш İt now then be possible that Kleonora hesi¬ tates to smile upon the choice of him vvhove every thought is active for her bhSsr** ** I have only one fear/" replied Eleo¬ nora, in a tremulous voice, k * one only fear in accepting an honour and a happiness to wiiich my merits, hovvever exerted so de¬ serve them, must still be inferior. I blush to bestow on the noble Lord Fit/roy a heart, of which he has not been the Iirst and sole object.** " Banish, my love, that vain apprehen¬ sion, "
sations, could reply to his tenderness only with that smile which bespeaks the compie* tion of its wishes to the heart of love. When the hour of retiring to rc*l arrived, Lord Fitzrov sunk to repoţe amonit rhe golden visions of future and eternal joy — Eleonora pressed her pillow with a brain bewildered with perplexing reflections^— " Was it not possible/* she considered, "from the words whi.h she had «ncrheard Latimer pronounce on the evening pre¬ vious to his depaiture from Worcester Castle, relative to the nuNteiiotisrirri.m- stancc connected with hh Eleonora, that he might not be her parent?" Thc secret whit h hatl been imparted to her by Sir Mgfcmuttd Blunt, ofthe near rc· latienship in which she &tood to the titifor* tunate Valentine, appeared to corro! urate this suspicion If not the daughter of La¬ timer, and some futuie period Hiould make discovery ofher uul origin, might not ^eh an event be attended with cir« umstances calculated to draw down upou hcr the just indignation
indignation of Lon! Fit/roy, for having concealed from him a l nov* ledge which she had po*scv»ed ?—" II lie were destined to become her husband/* she farther reflected, " it must bea part of her duty, as his wife» to have no secrets from him. It therefore undoubtedly became her to impart to him her suspicions, ^nd io give him thc liberty í f acting upon them as his own judgment and inclination ishotdtl direct him to do.— Ii was true that r*he had pledged her solemn promise tw Sir Sigitminid Ulunt, not to rf- pe.tWoanv individu»! (he с on kw on which lie had made to her, of Valentine being her brother : but ■she coiibitleml it as, uo breach of ты ta divide her »cm·is with the man with wlmm she was about to share hcr heart ; and she likewise judged some explicit rea¬ son песедоп tt* be rendemi to Luni Fiu- ro}\ for his having found ker in the cham¬ ber of Valentine» onthat night when she had sunk bent ath the poniani ofthe vil- hiiujts HìldebraiuL Une difhculty alone ãros>e to combat her intention. Should и 2 Lord
Lord Fitzroy, on the confession which she was about to make to him, receive anv cause to retract from the engagement vviiich he had entered into with her, she would then have been guilty of an unpardonable error, as she would then have disclosed con¬ fidential circumstances reposed in her keep¬ ing by another, to one who would never posse» that title, under the idea of his being about to possess which, she would have imparted them to him. After many hours of painful delibera¬ tion with her own mind, her ultimate con¬ clusion was this—** I cannot, t will not be guilty of any action which may be con¬ strued into either neglect or deceit, to¬ wards him whose uninterested conduct, with regard to myself, claims from me every ho¬ mage, every sacrifice. Should the disclo¬ sure which I am about to make to him, produce any change in his present engage¬ ment with mc, I feel convinced that such a change will proceed only from the impulse of necessity, or the dictates of honour ; and
and the same honour will be my safeguard for his retaining my confession sacred within the limits of his own breast." Thus impressed, and thus resolved, she seized upon the first opportunity which presented itself to her on the following morning, for conversing in private wkb Lord Fitzroy, to impart to him the secret with which her bosom laboured. With not less gratitude than admiration, he listened to her detail ; and when she had concluded it» clasping her, as he spoke, to his breast« be exclaimed — " Exquisite, generous Eleonora, I did not believe it possible for fate to have raised thee in my esteem or love ; but the last few moments of my life have convinced me of the fallacy of my opinion ; I perceive that thou art every hour capable of superseding the last in thy display of virtue ï —Were I, with such α heart as thou possessest, to seek thy hand from any consideration but that of the love I bear thee for thyself alone, I were un¬ worthy e'en of thy contempt. Whoe'er и 3 thy
thy parents, thou wilt still be Eleonora ; Fitzroy asks no more !" The heart of Eleonora now glowed with the same satisfaction which had before ani¬ mo ted that of her noble lover; all her doubts had novv vanished, and, with their lemoval, all her senses bent in adoration to the perfect being with whose future des¬ tiny her own would quickly be entwined. , Lord Fitzroy, we have already seen, was utterly unacquainted with the origin ofthe unhappy Valentine; and although the con¬ fession which Eleonora had just made to him gave him some clue for surmise, he knew not whether to believe him the off¬ spring of Latimer, or Eleonora the child of other parents. Already interested by the sensibility of his own heart, in the cause of the unfor¬ tunate youth, the knowledge of his being the brother of his Eleonora greatly in¬ creased the honourable sensations with which his hard fate had before inspired Lord Fitzroy; and, in the energy of his feelings,
feelings, he breathed a prayer fo Heaven, entreating it to discover to him Valentine's present retreat, and to grant him its divine assistance in redressing his wrongs. f< Ilis retreat !" repented Eleonora; for no breath had yet met her ear concerning his disappearance from Framlingham Castle, or the escape which had been effected from thence by Sir Hildebrand Gower. From the lips of Lord Henry she now listened to a full detail of every circum¬ stance with which he was acquainted, con¬ nected with the eventful and wretched life of the sufferer Valentine, and which he concluded bya recital of such occurrences as had taken place in Framlingham Castle, since that fatal night in which the murder ofthe Lady Godolphin had been so provi¬ dentially disclosed to her. Between the fate of her beloved father and Valentine, were the only anxieties which now had place in the mind of Eleo¬ nora divided; and with the utmost impa¬ tience did she look forward to tbat period и 4 nt
at which the struggle was to be made for tlie restoration of the youthful Edward to his sovereignty-—a period which was to realize or crush all her hopes relative to the worthy Latimer. No communication now reached Lord Fitzroy, either from London or from any of fhe adherents of that cause wherein he was himself so warmly interested ; and Eleonora received no farther intelligence from Cyprian ; the two months, at thc ex¬ piration of which he had informed her, in his epistle, that the final examination of the venerable prelate (an hour at which his doom would doubtless be pronounced) was appointed to take place, were nearly expired ; and ever dwelling on her appre¬ hensions, hcr sufferings were little short of the agony which she would have expe¬ rienced, in knowing the voice of his accu¬ sers to have decreed his earthly destiny. Soothing her, by his unremitting atten¬ tions and affection, Lord Fitzroy never, for an instant, quitted Eleonora, except at those
those hours when his presence was required at the daily exercise of the soldiery of his castle, or when the royal Edward enjoyed a sufficient portion of strength and conva¬ lescence to enable him to join in conver¬ sation with that brother who was so warmly devoted to his re-establishment on thc throne of their lamented father : but those hours which were passed by Lord Henry in his society were to him hours of regret; in the youthful monarch, either malady, or the effects of the injustice which had been exercised against him, had produced л change, which could not fail to affect those by whom he was beloved with the deepest concern ; not only his bodily powers, but his mental faculties, appeared to have lost that vigour which they had once possessed. His conceptions were now dull, his me¬ mory defecti\e, and his spirits depressed ; the outward features alone of what Edward had been, whilst a king, were remaining to him. During the occasional absences of Lord и 5 Fitzroy
Fitzroy from Eleonora, the affectionate Lady Blunt and the holy Father Ethelbert were her companions. The mild benevo¬ lence ofthe former, ever studying to con¬ ceal her griefs, was the same as Eleonora had always beheld it; but she believed that she could perceive a change in the dis¬ position of the venerable father; that even placidity, which had heretofore been the constant expression ofhis countenance, was now enveloped in a gloomy silence.— She heard him also sigh frequently ; and it was now not unusual for him to be lost in trances of thought, from which he would wake with sudden starts, and immediately fly from the presence of those who might chance to be with him at the time, as if oppressed by some secret grief, which he wished, but found himself unable to con¬ ceal. The father was revered by Eleonora, and she spoke with real concern of the obser¬ vations which she had made to Lady Blunt and Lord Henry ; by them she learned that his
his conduct had likewise been remarked ; but they treated it only as the effect of some recollection relative to his past life, which might have a temporary inPuence upon his spirits, and were equally of opi¬ nion that it were best to let it pass un¬ noticed. Nearlv a month had now rolled away since Godolphin had quitted Framlingham Castle; and the period was fast approach¬ ing at wiiich it uas possible that Lord Fitz¬ roy might be called noon to quit his castle, and exert his active services in the cause of the royal Edward ; he therefore im- plored of Eleonora tliat she would consent to the solemnization of their union, in order, that whithersoever his doom miofit call him, he might bear about with him the happy and consolatory reíleí tion, that thc icy bolt of death cot.Id alone separate him from her in whom his ailections were centered. Situated as Eleonora was, futile and ill- advised must have been every argument » ß which
which she could have opposed to this re¬ quest; her modest assent was the only reward which she could bestow on Lord Fitzroy for thc honourable station to which he was about to raise her. A day was ac¬ cordingly fixed upon for their marriage, and ihc ceremony appointed to take place in the chaoel of the castle. л In the evening previous to the rising of that sun whose golden beams were destined to hail the union of Lord Fitzroy vvith his Eleonora, the happy pair were wandering, chance;directed, on that very terrace where lord Henry had breathed the first accents ofhis passion in her ear: with a smile of joy, he contrasted his feelings, at that hour, with those which he was at the present mo¬ ment experiencing ; and Eleonora, awak¬ ened by the generous and noble conduct of Lord Henry to a sense of the superiority of h is affection, whose professions were un¬ clouded by the veil of mystery, to that of the being who, in the distrustful guise of concealment, had first won the partiality of 4 her
her innocent and unsuspecting heart, con¬ fessed those sentiments towards her future Lord, which raised his bliss to the very acme of human joy. *' О my Eleonora," he cried, " there is not that treasure on earth which could bribe me to barter one of thy smiles for its possession ; nor would the enchant¬ ment recorded of past ages have sufficient power to turn me from the magnet of thy charms. I have known the pangs and the blessings of existence, but never yet was I, as at this moment, enabled to exclaim— ' f To-morrow grants me every bliss that life can lavish on desiring man, and robs me of the very power of wishing." € ' And to-morrow," replied Eleonora, ' ť places me in a situation, where, ifl prove deserving of thc enviable good, for myself I have nothing left to ask of Heaven." Lord Fit/roy answered her with a sigh of rapture, and a pressure of aflection more eloquent than all the tropes of speech com¬ bined. Soft
Soft and delightful v/as 'the breeze vvhich blew across the ramparts, and they continued to inhale its refreshening sweets till the relieving ofthe guard ar the draw¬ bridge warning them that the ninth hour had sounded, thev entered the castle, and were joined at the evening repast by Lady Blunt onlv ; Saint Ethelbert, as was fre- quently his custom, having retired to his private apartment. At length arrived the hour of rest, and Lady Blunt and Eleonora rose to repair to their chambers. Lord Henry accompanied the latter to the door of her apartments, and, as he parted from her, he said— (i Angels bless thv slumbers, Eleonora ;" and in a softer tone he added—* f To-mor¬ row's dawn will quickly rise." Smiling through her blushes, Eleonora. returned his blessing, and he departed. Lady Blunt led her to her chamber, and then embracing her with a mother's affec-, tion, recommended her to the protection of Omnipotence, and left her. Eleonora immediately
immediately dismissed her attendant, and, after she had passed an hourin prayer, en¬ tered her bed, and sunk into one of those gentle slumbers which ever steep the tran¬ quil senses of innocence in oblivion. Lord Henry Fitzroy also retired to his chamber, almost immediately after he had bade good night tu Eleonora. Like her, he dismissed his attendant, preferring to indulge his reflections in solitude. The anticipation of joy communicates a rest¬ lessness to the spirits, which is at least equal to that created by the apprehension of pain ; and disinclined to sleep, Lord Fitz¬ roy wandered about his apartment, alter¬ nately absorbed in his own ideas, and con¬ templating the prospect which bis window commanded. The moon was rising over a distant wood, and, in its ascent, gradually disclosing the beauties of the surrounding country. Now its partial light shone on the sloping hills, and silvered the trees which grew upon their sides with its daz¬ zling
AÎing Íníluence; ihen it danced in flicker¬ ing circles on thc lucid waters of the mean¬ dering river. Now it rested on the pro¬ jecting bâillements, whilst the rest of thc edilire remained buried in the deepest bhade ; then a floating vapour pas 4 ed over its face, anil the dimness of its light cast a veil of indistinctness and uncertainty over everv obiect. It was a scene whiih ele- vatcd to enthusiasm a breast swelled, as was Lord Henrv 's, at that moment, by the most tender feelings. Whilst he stood observ¬ ing these changes, the castle clock beat the midnight hour. "The hour of anticipation is past !" he exclaimed ; " the morn that makes mc blessed is already come !" He shortly after cast his eyes around his apartment, and observing that his lump was waning in its socket; he entered his bed. With imperceptible advances sleep stole upon him, and the busy scene» of life had vanished from his brain, when he was re¬ called
called to a sense of recollection by a voice uhich repeated his name—" Fitzroy ! Fitz¬ roy !" it solemnly pronounced. Lord Henry started from his pillow, and cast his eyes enquiringly around. The beams of the moon, which darted through the casement, fell upon a female figure, which wa»standing at the distance of a few paces from his bed. " Who art thou ?" hc exckimed. " Thy mother/* replied the form; «nd advancing, ae it spoke, towards the bed, Lord Henry observed that it was clad in « loose white garment, in every respect ex¬ actly similar to that in which the portrait of the Lady Elizabeth Talboyse, which was suspended by the side of her royal para¬ mour in the gallery of the castle, was habited. As it approached, the countenance be¬ came visible ; it was pale, wan, and livid, as that of a spectre. The powers of Lord Henry were now bound up in awe and astonish-
astonishment, and he no longer retained the ability of utterance. The spectre continued to advance. " My son," it said, " my spirit has been permitted to burst the ccarmcnts of the tomb, forthe purpose of admonishing thee agaim* the commission ofa crime, towards which thou art unconsciously rushing !" The moon, at this instant, darted a stronger light than it had before done on the countenance of the aerial being ; and Lord Fitzroy beheld it violently agitated, and deeply expressive of grief. After a moment's pause, it continued to speak thus:—" The object of my appear¬ ance here is to forbid thy union with her in whom thy affections are centred.·—Fitz¬ roy, thou must not wed Eleonora ; the laws of Heaven and of earth oppose the deed—She is thy sister!" A bolt of ice, shot at the heart of Lord Fitzroy, could not have produced a more sensitive effect on his curdling blood, than the sounds f о vvhich he had then listened. « My
" My sister !" he in vain endeavoured to articulate; (f my sister!"—A deep groan burst from his lips ; his eyes almost lost their power of vision ; at length he spoke.— ,f Oh, if thou be my mother, as I cannot doubt thou art, Oh unfold this per¬ plexing mystery to thy son !" As he pronounced these words, he raised his eyes towards the spot where the awful vision had a few moments before been stationed; it was now no longer visible: the moon was receding behind a veil of clouds, and darkness and silence filled the chamber.
СНЛР.
CHAP. V.
" Now Lord cf buttles, j^in thy puwerful«rm! Asien the cause ol righteousness." Mallit*
-«'SomJrtíylgrtíat
Illustrious spin:s have converse with woe, (Tht pride of ath erse fate), as arc enough To consecrate d.stresSj and make even death Ambition." Thomson. Full of horror, agony, and despair, yet not unmingled with sensations of gratitude for his preservation from an innocent crime, passed the night to Lord Henry Fitz¬ roy.— if Eleonora his sister! Strange, in¬ explicable intelligence ! Whence could their
their relationship spring ? His mother had never borne any other child than himself! Was it possible that Eleonora was, like him, an offspring of the ro)al Henry ? and if she were so, who was Valentine?—Valen¬ tine, whom Sir Sigismund Blunt had like¬ wise pronounced to be her brother! H indeed her brother, in the same degree of consanguinity must he stand towards him." Mysterious beyond the depth of human comprehension appeared to him the va¬ rious facts which had lately been commu¬ nicated, by means not less mystic than. themselves, to his bewildered senses. " Oh, Eleonora !" he exclaimed, " the love wdiich I bear thee is so deeply rooted in my heart, so pure, so eternal i îi its na¬ ture, that in whatever relative situation thou mayest be placed towards me, I can never cease to cherish, to love, to adore thee ; but cold and unsatisfactory is the name of brother, compared with that of an ardent, devoted husband !" With the early dawn Lord Henry left his couch,
couch, and wandered about his chambef with a hurried step, expressive of the per¬ turbed state of hľs mind. The hour was fast approaching which had been appointed for his marriage with her, against his union with whom the voice of Heaven had planted an irremoveable bar ; he had therefore no time before him for delay or deliberation, in laying open to Eleonora an explanation of the evenls of the past night. He be¬ lieved that she was too well convinced of the honour of his heart, and of the fervor ofhis affection for her, to admit the idea of his having adopted any subterfuge for freeing himself from the engagement into which he had entered with her ; bur stiil there existed a possibility of such an opi¬ nion seizing upon her mind; it was pos¬ sible that she might judge him to have been alienated from her in aflection, by reflecting on those mysterious circum¬ stances which she had confessed to him to be connected with her fate ; and to be¬ lie** c, that unwilling to toilless his real scn- timents,
timents, he had fabricated an objection, against a submission to which no human arguments could venture to oppose them¬ selves. Not less wretched than unsettled İn mind, Lord Fitzroy awaited, with impatience, the hour at which he supposed Saint Ethelbert and Lady Blunt to be risen, and proceed¬ ing to the library, sent messengers to their respective chambers, requesting them both to meet him there. They complied with his summons, and entered the apartment neariy at the same moment. Words were unnecessary to in¬ form them that he was violently agitated ; and they eagerly begged of him to unfold the cause ofthat emotion under whicii tliey perceived him ready to sink. "Oh, my friends. !" he exclaimed, <( the promised cup of bliss is dashed for ever from my lips; the thirst of happiness is for ever decreed to mc ! Eleonora cannot be mine !" " Fitzroy,"
" Fitzroy," replied Lady Blunt, ff how sayest thou !—-cannot be thine !" sc Never, never!" returned the despond¬ ing Fitzroy ; " my mother's mandate has forbid our union." " Thy mother's !" replied Lady Blunt. ( ' Her spirit has this night appeared to me," pronounced Lord Henry, in a tone of voice so fully expressive of the force with whieh the recollection of her appearance still kept possession of his memory, as to> leave in his hearers no doubt of the sanity of his mind, and the truth of hk declara¬ tion. Father Saint Ethelbert sunk upon a chair, and buried his face in his hands ; the re¬ turn of his beloved sister's form to that world, from the confines of which hcr earthly substance had long been retired, appeared to create in him sensations of a most painful nature. Lady Blunts more composed than the venerable man, be¬ sought Lord Henry to grant them an ex¬ plicit
plicit recital of the circumstance, relative to n hich he had awakened their curiosity and astonishment. Summoning, for the task, a degree of fortitude foreign to his feelings, he repeated to them his mother's injunctions, and en¬ quired if thev were able to furnish him with any clue for thc development of the mystery contained in his fraternal relation¬ ship to Eleonora ? Not a breath of intelligence, which could ca-it even the slightest ray of light upon the existing enigma, was fo be gained from either of them. Impenetrable ap¬ peared thc secret that night disclosed, by the spirit of Lady Talboyse to her son. u Great as is the disappointment upon which my soul now sickens," ejaculated Lord Henry, " I have still a suflicicne sense of Heaven's benevolence, in rescuing me from the commission of unconscious guilt, fo glorify and venerate its interpo¬ sition." —With a heart-drawn sig'i he then added, " Which of you, my friends, will vor,, πι. ι prepare
prepare Eleonora to receive me as her brother ?" His eyes, whilst he spoke, had been fixed upon Saint Ethelbert. Thc holy man rose hastily from his seat, approached a window, opposite to which hc placed himself, as if to avoid the regards of those who were present, and wiping away a tear which was trickling down his furrowed cheek— if 1 cannot, ƒ cannot !" he cried ; " be it thy task, daughter," he added, after a momen¬ tary pause, and addressing himself to Lady Blunt·—" the tones which proceed from a woman's heart have most weight in sooth¬ ing the sorrows of her own sex."—The tears now burst freely from his eyes, and thfe emotion of voice and countenance, by which they were accompanied, created not only the sympathy, but also the surprise of Lady Blunt. To Lord Henry, every object but the subject of his own thoughts, passed unheeded.— <( To you then, dearest Wa¬ dam," he «aid, " I depute the charitable office of visiting Eleonora in my stead." " Doubt
" Doubt not," returned Lady Thoma¬ sine, ** thaï she will quickly be prepared tt*» receive the intelligence from your owti lips. The heart оГ Eleonora is the seat cf delicacy, virtue, and religion ; she will never murmur at the dispensations of an unerring Providence, nor despair of its protection, whilst she bchds in humility to its all-wise decrees." " Tell her/* ejaculated Lord Henry, " Oh tell her, that the adoration whh h ï bear her, no adverse stroke of fate can ever be Miilicicntiy powerful to banish from my heart ; tell her, that to me the name of lur brother is superior to every other title; and that I am iv .olved never to render it a secondary one, by a union w*ith any other of her sew" Lady Blunt quitted the library, and Lord Henry, turning towards Saint Ethelbert, now first beheld that the trembling rears were chasing each other down his pallid cheeks ; he approached him, and takirg his hand in his— u Oh revered father," he 1 2 said,
haid, *' thou who art, beside myself, the only representative on earth of my tainted mother—thou, whose emotion at this in¬ stant declares thee as neatly allied in the noble feelings of the heart as in the tic» of blood, to her whose memory wc adore— Oh, if thou possessed any secret or institu¬ tive knowledge, that may ca*t but a single ray of elucidation on thc mystery wiiich at this moment envelopes me, by thc exces¬ sive fondness ofa mother, whoqt.iited the tomb to rescue her son from error, I entreat thee to unfold it to my aching senses/' At this address, on thc pai t of thc Lord iilzroy, thc emotion of thc ludy father ap¬ peared to increase, ami returning Lortl Henrv's pressure of aflection, in accents scarcely articulate, hc replied— 1 * Be as¬ sured, my son, that the love í bear thee к not inferior to that experienced tor thee by thy mother." "I doubt it not/* returned Lord Ucm\ ; *' but this replies not to my entreaty/" (t I am unwell/* returned Saint Ethel· bert,
bert, ** and must seek amendment tn the ^olititele of my chamber/* Λ«ϊ he spokr, head\anectl. ν İth totfer* ïng чгр*, t^v^antv the door of the library ; and heaving a defp >i«h as he reached it» quilted thc pu^ence of his ueplicnv. When the mind is tossing in a Mate of untei tainty, it imagines every action ami every* word of tho&e by whom it r>sur- rouiHed, to be connected with the mystery which it is itself eager to solve. Thus im- prc***cd was Lord Henry, by the conduct of the holy Saint Ethelbert ; hc believed his emotion to ariie from some secret cause, and that cause he could not forbear sup* posing to be connected with the enigma which encompassed himself; and unable to suppress his suspicions and anxieties, he resolvetl to follow the father, and once more implore him to grant hin* the relief of admitting him to his confidence. Hastily passing through the door of the library, he was pursuing the father's» steps, when his progrc&s was arrested by Arm- 1 3 strong
ftrong his leader, wbo, witb a countenance full of trepidation and surprise, acquainted him fhat the centinél in the watch-tower had directed him to be informed, that he beheld an immense body of armed men advancing over the diafani plain. Intelligence of this unexpected and ex¬ traordinary nature could not do otherwise than turn tbe thoughts of Lord Henry, for a while, from the subject on whicb they had before been bent. An armed force approaching towards his castle ! Could it be possible, that for some reason unknown to him, Sir Sigismund Blunt, or any of the adherents* to the impending cause, were marching with their troops to Framlingham Castle, before they led them towards the metropolis, where the grand struggle for the restoration of the injured Edward to his rights was destined to take place? Could İt be Godolphin, whose route it was possible might lay through Suffolk, on his return from assembling the aid which he bad promised to bring into the field ? Or> coulcl
could it be a personal enemy, who was ap¬ proaching to wage hostilities upon his castle ? Directing Armstrong to follow him, hc proceeded to the watch-tower, for thc purpose, of forming his own opinion, ofthe advancing force. On quitting the library, Lady Blunt had instantly proceeded to the chamber of Eleonora ; she entered it through a closet communicating with it from one of the galleries, and advancing unperceived hy the lovely maid, beheld her in the per¬ formance of her morning devotions. She was already habited in those vestments which she had selected as appropriate to the ceremony which had been appointed for that day. They were composed ofa suit of garments ofthe whitest silk, which, flowing down her limbs in a loose but graceful shape, difplayed to the finest ad¬ vantage the excellence ofher symmetry.— Her luxuriant tresses descended, uncon¬ fined, on her fair bosom ; a band of pearls was mingled v/ith thc plaits of her hair, and 1 4, ase-
a second encircled her neck ; ether orna¬ ments she had none, except those wldch had been so lav ishly bestowed on her by the adorning hand of nature. On closing her volume, she perceived Lady Blunt standing near her, and received her, as she was ever wont to do, with a smile of grateful complacency. Lady Thoma¬ sine addressed her ; and Eleonora perceived an agitation in her voice, a peculiar ex¬ pression on her countenance, which led her instantly to enquire from what cause they proceeded. Thus questioned, the task of explanation becamccomparatively easy, and "Lady Blunt, in a few minutes, rendered Eleonora acquainted with that disclosure which the miraculous powers of Heaven had on the preceding night communicated to Lord Fitzroy. As Eleonora listened to the words of her affectionate friend, the recital bound up her faculties in silence ; but it was not thc silence of disappointment, it was inspired by the religious awe which filled her mind, as
as she reflected on the sublimity of the means vvhich had been used to rescue her¬ self and Lord Henry from future sorrow and repentance. Of regret, not the most fleeting shadow passed over her senses.— True it was, that she loved Lord Henry. with the purest aifeetion ; but it had ever been thc affection rather ofa sister than of a mistress; it had originally grown out o£\ esteem and gratitude ; and the most power¬ ful motive from which she had consented to accept his hand, had been that of allying to herself a being of whose excellence she» had received so many undoubted proofs, as an eternal friend and protector. Thus, al¬ though now fated never to become her hus- . band, still as her brother, a heart of good¬ ness such as he possessed, could not fail to ■ constitute him to wards her the eternal friend and protector, which it was her first wish to behold him ; and she was not only re¬ signed, but satisfied. "How mysterious," she reflected, "are the ways of Heaven ! I, who believed >my- i ΰ self,
self to stand an unconnected being on the earth, am become possessed of two bro¬ thers, who appear to vie with each other, only in the amiability of thcir dispositions. Perhaps, parents equally deserving of my esteem may eventually bc disclosed to me V' —For knowing herself tc be the sister of Lord Henry Fitzroy, she could no longer suppose that she owed her being to the venerable Bishop Latimer, and the kind Lady Benigna, as there existed the clearest evidence that Lord Fitzroy was not a son of theirs. Scarcely had Eleonora communicated to Lady Blunt the placidity with which hcr· feelings met the change that had so unex¬ pectedly taken place in her future pros¬ pects, than they were startled by the loud blast ofa trumpet at the foot ofthe draw¬ bridge, which was replied to by the warden of the watch-tower, and an instant confu¬ sion prevailed in the castle, which excited alike their astonishment and alarm. In order to explain the cause from which 3 this
this disorder arose, we must return to Lord Henry Fitzroy. On his ascending into the watch-tower, whither we last left, him hastening, he beheld the force of which intelligence had been brought to him, at the distance cf scarcely a couple of fur¬ longs from the outer ramparts ofhis castle. ITc conici distinguish that it consisted both of hor e and foot, and he estimated its num¬ bers at nearly three thousand men. He could not believe that any of theúd- berents to thc cause of the royal Edward were abie to bring a force of so great strength into the lield, and was therefore· utterly at a loss what to decide them. That his castle was the spot towards which thcy were matching, was clearly obvious. They still continued to advance; and,, after a short interval of time, a horseman was seen to pass the gate in the outer wall of the fortifications. His having gained admission from the centinels was a proof oî his being either a friend or the herald of an enemy; and as he approached the ι 0 castle,,
castle, it was quickly apparent that he was the latter, as the crimson bannerol, which depended from his trumpet, denoted him to be in the service of thc queen. At this discovery, thc agitation and sur- prise of Lord Henry increased, and hedes-. cended into the outer court of his castle, accompanied by his leaders, in ortler that the report of the herald's embassy might be communicated to him without delay. At length the herald's trumpet was blown at thc foot of the drawbridge, to demand a hearing, and having been replied to by that of the warden in the watch-tower, which signal was used as an affirmative to his request, Armstrong was sent out to commune with him. Being requested to explain his business, the herald spoke thus :— ff Mary, the gra¬ cious and well-beloved Queen of England, commands her subject, Henry Fitzroy, to deliver up, to her just punishment, the youth now training within his walls, to the traitorous purpose of representing the de¬ ceased
ceased Edward. If he refuse to comply with this her royal mandate, on him shall fall her vengeance. Her troops are sur¬ rounding his castle, prepared to revenge his disobedience, by its destruction, and by loading himself and his adherents with. thc chains of criminals." The indignation with which the breast of Lord Fitzroy was fired, as hc listened to the haughty terms of Mary, may be easily imagined ; it engrossed every faculty ofhis soul, and swallowed up every other consi¬ deration ; it left him no coolness to reflect Ъу what means the queen had gained intel¬ ligence of the existence of her predecessor on thc throne, and of his having found shelter within the wails of Framlingham. Castle. He could attend only to the in¬ sulting menace in which she had dressed thc venom of her heart, and without hesi¬ tation, replied to her demand in these words:— if Henry Fit/roy informs Mary of England, that it would afford him more de¬ light to die amidst the ruins of his castle, in
in the protection of his beloved brother, than to shine thc most brilliant star of her favour; and that the chains with which the chance of war may enable hcr to load him, would bc worn by him with pride and glory, in the support of a cause, to ihc espousal of which, virtue, affection, and justice, inspire his heart." These words were delivered by Arm¬ strong to the herald, who immediately de¬ parted ; and every preparation was made, without delay, for defending the castle from the attack,-which there could be little doubt that the queen's troops had been directed f о make upon it, in the event of Lord Henrys non-compliance with her demand. The cry of i{ To arms! to arms!" ran from centinél to centinél along the ram¬ parts; and Eord Henry's leaders gathered round him in the castle-court, to receive his instructions for their proceedings. The number of armed men contained in Framlingham Castle did not exceed four hundred,
hundred, whilst that of the enemy was reckoned at nearly ns many thousand. In any situation, therefore, but in tîıe defence ofa fortress of strength, like this edifice, ίο have hazarded an encounter at all with so unequal a force, must have appeared the eiiect of madness or of folly ; but with the protection of thcir fortifications it was not deemed so, either by Lord Henry or his loaders ; and in order to act with as power¬ ful a resisi'tnee as it was possible for them to oppose to the enemy, it v.as resolved lo withdraw every soldier from the outer wrrks, and to plant thcir whole force around the main body of ihe castle. Abri as were the actions of Lord Fitz¬ roy's soldiery, every тяп had scarcely buckled on his armour, crc thc enemy, who bad made themselves an entrance towards the moat, by forcing a breach in the outer- wall, were seen approaching with hasty movements: But a few moments could now intervene ere the exertions ofthe de¬ fenders would be called upon ; and Lord Henry,
Henry, stepping into the midst of his as* 3embled vassals, thus addressed them :— " My friends, and fellow-soldiers, the pre¬ sent occasion admits not of delay ; brief, therefore, must b- my words. I do not be¬ lieve that there is one amongst you vvho requires*a spur to bravery. Thus im¬ pressed, I do not speak to rouse your spirit, but to present you with a glorious hope, to- which ye may look forward as the reward of your exertions, Ye know that Mary and mvself are the children of one father ; and ye know how unsisterly she hath conducted herself towards me, her brother ; ye are acquainted, likewise, that our late monarch, Edward, descended from the same parent, was ever not less kind and affectionate to¬ wards mc, than she has been unjust and cruel. In my triumph ye woidd triumph also ; in my happiness there is not one here who knows me, that can doubt to obtain Ы& share. Then mark me—Edward lives !-— These walls contain him ! basely hurled from his throne, and ignominiously buried from
from the world : it is him, therefore, your lawful monarch, that ye are, at the present hour, called upon to defend. What will not be your reward, if victory rest upon his head ! What ihc glory that will for ever unite itself with your names, if ye become the instruments of his restoration ! Now then to the onset : Justice and King Edward be your excitements to valour !" Great and universal as was the love borne to Lord Fitzroy by his vassals, and ready as ever were their hands and hearts to second auy purpose towards which he directed their exertions, the fact which he had just communicated to them, of the royal Ed¬ ward's existence, and of his being at that very hour sheltered within the walls of Framlingham Castle, acted upon them like an electrical spur to bravery ; and waving their caps in the air, with repeated excla¬ mations of " Long live King Edward !— Heaven prosper our rightful monarch !" they hastened to their posts of duty. Not Jess brave of spiri t ihan desirous of animating
animating his men, by beholding him a sharer in their toils and danger, Lord Fitz¬ roy had resolved not to quit the scene of action whilst the evcntfuj hazard of war hung impending over himself and his castle; but whibt he could yet call the fleet¬ ing moments his own, he flew to ascertain that Eleonora was in a spot of safety. The suite of apartments, appropriated to the use of the royal Edward,, situated in the interior of the castle, were those which had ever been accustomed to be the refuge of the female inhabitants of the place in sea¬ sons of danger ' ke the present, and to one of these Armstrong had already conducted Eleonora, Lady Blunt, and the father Saint Ethelbert. In despondency, in alarm, and in prayer, did Lord Fitzroy find them ; they started at his entrance ; for to their agitated minds every sound appeared to announce danger. For an instant, Lord Henry stood fixed in silent contemplation ; it was the first rime of his beholding Fleo- nora since the voice of faí¿ had interdicted to
to him the rapturous bbss of naming her his wife. Li this reflection, the spirit of the soldier died away, andali the man lou- fessed itself in his brimful eye. Faint Ethelbert advanced towards him, and taking him by the hand, hd him to Eleonora ; she raised her eyes, fcr an in¬ stant, to his, then throwing herself upon his neck, in faint accents she pronounced, <f The God of mercy shield thee in the battle's heat—shield and defend thee to protect thy sister !" " The guardian spirits of innocence breathe forth thy prayer in accents irresist- less at the throne of grace Î" exclaimed Saint Ethelbert, extending his hands to Iieaven, and bending his head over them as hc spoke. Lord Henry could not articulate; again and again he pressed Eleonora to his breast, and their tears mingled, as their faces met. The interest of their feelings gave wing totime; and they did not themselves be¬ lieve that they had pissed a moment in each.
each others presence, when Armstrong ap¬ peared to inform his Lord, that the horse¬ men of the enemy were drawn up on onu side of the moat, and preparing to dis¬ charge a fire of musquetry at the walls. Lord Henry's recollection returned at the sound.— ff Farewell,beloved Eleonora," he cried ; tc did I love thee less, I shoukl be less brave than 1 at this moment feel myself/* and casting upon hera look of eloquence unutterable, he darted from the apartment. The head cf Eleonora sunk upon the bosom of Lady Blunt; and the holy fa¬ ther, up-raising towards Heaven the cru¬ cifix which he wore suspended from his girdle, fell upon his knees, and continued unmoved in silent prayer. An awful stillness, for some time, pre¬ vailed ; it was at length broken by the ra¬ pid discharge of the enemy's musquetry, and replied to by those of the besieged.— Af the first sound, Eleonora uttered a piercing shriek; but as these sounds be¬ came
came frequently repeated, her sudden starts were converted into a trembling and con¬ vulsive agitation, which appeared to reach her very heart. The present struggle comprised the hap¬ piness, nay, perhaps, thevery lives of all on earth who were dear to her—her bro¬ ther, her father, for as ^nch she could not forbear still to love and revere the vene¬ rable Latimer, and tiiat sovereign, to whose restoration she had looked forward as the period which was to terminate their woes, hcrown sufferings, and the injustice to which the w retched Valentine had so long lived subject, in one general joy.— Over this golden horizon of hope, the black clouds of desnair were now gather¬ ing in awful thí¿a*ening. Apprehension com mun ieared ю hcr feelings all thc pangs of reality ; the lingering moments of sus¬ pense were laden with inexplicable tor¬ tures. By the pangs of existence she was alone sensible of life. Continual messengers, who had been com missioned
commissioned by Lord Fitzroy to this of¬ fice, brought to them the intcdligence of the bloody contest. The hope which one raised, the tale of a second utterly de¬ stro} ed; a third woukl again appear to cheer their despondency of soul ; and a fourth present them with a prospect of the blackest despair. Still Lord Fitzroy was safe, and Eleonora comparatively blest in knowing so. For nearly two hours had the besieg-ed now undruntedly borne the fury of the enemy ; the loss on the side of the de¬ fenders of the castle was comparatively small, and their bravery had suffered no diminution. The plain occupied by the invaders was strewed with slain, and dyed with blood; for the exalted situation of ine besieged carried vvith it the advantage of enabling them to aim their destructive weapons at the enemy with a greater cer¬ tainty of annoyance than it was passible for the foe, who were placed below, to di¬ rect theirs with in return : but still the queen's
queen's forces were decidedly the more successful party ; they had made conside¬ rable progress towards the castle, and a very short period of time, if their efforts were not greatly obstructed, would enable them to casta temporary bridge across the moat, from which thcy would be enabled to scale the walls. With every moment the tumult of the war increased ; and a sudden shout, on thc part of the enemy, appeared to declare them victorious. At the sound, Eleonora and her companions fixed on each other their sorrowing and enquiring eyes. A few minutes passed, and no intelligence reached them from the ramparts : at length a messenger entered ; he approached them, but hesitated to speak. Lady Blunt com¬ manded him to inform them ofthe worst, without reserve. Ilis confession was, that Lord Fitzroy had been wounded in the shoulder by an arrow. Dreadful was the expression of despair now depicted on the countenance of lileo- nora ;
nora; stiH she spoke not; it appeared as if her tortured heart had endured all of suffering that it was capable of enduring, and had no words to express the additional load of agony which oppressed it. With the eagerest trepidation, Saint Ethelbert enquired the nature of Lord Henry's wound ? The messenger replied, that it was nei¬ ther deep nor mortal ; and that the arrow wifh which it had been inflicted appeared to have been shot, not so much with the intention of committing destruction, as of comcying information of a taunting and mortifying nature to the inhabitants of d.e castle. Lady Blunt directed him to explain his meaning ; and he proceeded to say, " That fastened to the shaft ofthe a: row had been a scroll, containing these words :—* Sir Hildebrand Gower greets Lord Henry Fitz¬ roy : the last time of their meeting, which Lord Henry will recollect to have been in the chamber of Valentine, S»r Hildebrand pronounced
pronounced these words:—' í have re¬ venge in my power, and I will use it ; I will expose to public infamy and disgrace, yourself and those amiable parents of mine, whose champion you stand so nobly forth. If I do not this, may I myself perish, blasted by ignominy !' Sir Hildebrand has kept his word ; he has been the queen's informer ofthe impostor (for he is an impostor), whom Lord Fitzroy is nourishing, with the hope of supplanting her on the throne.— Sir HİIdebrand's reward is the command of those troops vvhich are at this moment as¬ saulting Framlingham Castle ; his triumph will be to level its walls with the dust, and to drag Lord Fitzroy in chains to the feet of his insulted sovereign/ ťí Merciful God !" exclaimed Lady Blunt, clasping together her hands, in the agony of her soul, " can it be possible that the malice of HİIdebrand's heart has led him to conspire against the plans of those beings to whom he owes his existence—of thc s 2 friends to whom his interests have, from vol. in. к bis
his birth, been allied !"■—As she spoke,, her eyes were directed towards the messenger, who replied to her exclamation by inform¬ ing her, that long ere the scroll, which contained the declaration of Sir HİIde¬ brand's perfidy, had been shot within tiie walls, he had been descried in the act of commanding the troops. i{ Oh mysterious Providence !" pro¬ nounced Eleonora, " why do (he merciless triumph ? Why was that shaft fated to pierce the god-like Fitzroy ŕ" í( Hildebrand our enemy !" in frantic accents ejaculated Lady Blunt ; " the son turned against his parents, his friend, his brother! Oh unnatural, dreadful truth! — Oh, if there be one spark of feeling still remaining in his hardened breast, surely hc may be reclaimed from this horrid ven¬ geance ! Of stone must be his soul, if he is deaf to the cries for mercy ofher who bore him.''—Advancing, with a ha ty step, to¬ wards the door of the apartment, she called upon the messenger to precede her to the ramparts,
ramparts, and point out to her from what spot she might behold her son. The messenger obeyed, and the wretched mother followed his steps. In vain was it that Eleonora called upon her, imploring her not to expose herself to the danger of the Avar ; she heard her not ; her soul was alone conscious of its purpose, of prevail¬ ing, by the voice ofa mother's entreaty, on her son, to desist from the hostilities which he was waging against his own blood. Unable to arrest her progress, Eleonora, with trembling knees, attempted to pursue her. As she receded from her late retreat, the clamour of the war burst in louder tones upon her senses. In the confusion of her mind, she deviated from the path in which Lady Blunt had proceeded, and en¬ tered the castle hall ; here, extended on a couch, she perceived Lord Henry Fitzroy, to whose wound Father Sylvester was ap¬ plying styptics. The ashy paleness of his cheeks, the current of blood which had stained his vestments, were objects too к 2 painful
painfuíf for her faltering senses to behold unmoved ; sbe uttered a faint shriek, stag- gcred a, few paces, and sunk to the earth. With a false strength, communicated to bet*, limbs by the frenzy of her mind, Lady JŞJunt reachedt the ramparts. The bloody tide, which stained every object around,. did, not appal her sight, nor unnerve her resolution. The scene was less horrid than the. reflection, of a son about to sacrifice the stem of his existence to the infuriate ven¬ geance ofhis malicious spirit. The enemy were already beginning to scale the walls, and the battering rams were hurling destruction amidst the defenders oLthe castle. At her entreaty, her con¬ ductor ascended a projecting buttress.— e$ Where is,Sir. Hildebrand?" she anxiously exclaimed ; ** can you behold him ?" The· reply was, " That he was at a con¬ siderable distance, leading on a.fresh body of mujşqueieers to reinforce the attack/' ** Ро*Э he not approach?" again and again enquired the distracted mother.^—At length
length her conductor ia formed her that Sir Hildebrand was galloping towards the bridge which had been thrown across the moat. " Now then second my prayers, Oh Heaven !" she cried. The eminence ap¬ peared no obstacle to her, in accomplishing her purpose—she climbed its height.— tf Point out to me where is Hildebrand/* were her words ; " he is my child ; he can¬ not refuse to listen to the cries of her who gave him birth.** Frantic she waved her searf in the air.«— " He sees me—he recognizes ifte>^he ad¬ vances!" she exclaimed, ih accents of mingled agony and hope :—" On my knees I will address him ; the prayers of a kneel¬ ing mother he cannot refuse."—Trembling, she bent her feeble frame to the earth ; her knees sunk heedlessly upon the pointed flints; the instanrt of humiliation was her last—a bursting shell cast her a bleeding corpse upon the walls.
к 3
CHAP.
CIIAP. VL
■" This is an act so newly honid,
So ghastly a contrivance of revenge, That fiends themselves would start at the proposal." N. Lek,
" Come, you spirite,
That tend on mortal thoughts, ——— Fill me from the crown to the toe, top-full Of direst cruelty ! make thick my blood, Stop up the access and passage to remorse, That no compunctious visitings of nature Shake my fell purpose." M*cbeth»
The melancholy event of Lady Blunt's death was almost immediately followed by the conquest of the castle; and the shouts of triumph, which were uttered by the vic¬ torious
torious party, as they rushed through the vanquished edifice, sounded even more dreadfully than had before done thc awful voice of the war. Xot less horrible than the portrait which the love-devoted maid draws ofthe merci¬ less God of battle, when the object of her affection is called to the field, strode Sir Hildebrand Gower into the castle hall :— his visor was raised ; with the wonted sa¬ vage expression of his countenance was now mingled a ferocious smile of exulta¬ tion. His cloak of leopard's skin, disen¬ gaged from one of the clasps by which it had been fastened upon his shoulders, flew loosely with the wind, and displayed his coat of mail beneath, streaked with the blood of those whose tide of life had rushed forth obedient to the blade which bestill carried, reeking with human gore. In a state of insensibility, Eleonora had already been conveyed away from the scene of tumult, by some ofthe domestics ofthe castle. к 4 Lord
Lord Fitzroy himself having impatiently submitted to the dressing of his wound, had once more seized his staff of command, and was rushing towards the ramparts, again to animate his soldiers by his presence, when the entrance of Sir Hildebrand announced to him that the struggle was past. At the appearance of his unjust enemy, his spirit did not sink ; his courage roşe with the pe¬ culiarity of his situation. The instant Sir Hildebrands eye fell upon Lord Henry, " Behold the traitor/' he cried ; " load him with your chains !" His myrmidons flew to execute his com¬ mands, and Lord Fitzroy felt himself bound with the manacles of a captive. It was ¡% moment for the soul of fortitude and greatness to display itself.—" Treacherous and unjust man/' he exclaimed, " if aught can make thee shrink within thyself, dost thou not experience the sensation at wit¬ nessing the superiority of my feelings at this hour over thine own ? In the very moment of thy success, thy infuriate soul İİ
is a tumult of raging passions too violent for joy ; whilst my heart ¡s still calm at its first acquaintance with adversity, and looks within upon itself (a bliss unknown to thee) for consolation." Sir Hildebrand was beginning to reply. when his attention wai drawn to a bier, borne by several of the soldiers; he started, and even receded a few paces at the sight —for it contained the mangled body of his mother. *' llow h ibi*?" he pr*»~ nounced, in a tone greatly abating of his usual violence of speech ; *· do I behold my mother dead ?" The astonishment and grief of Lord Fiuroy expressed themselves nearly in thc same terms; and the messenger, who had pointed out to Lady Blunt the way to the ramparts, explained to them the circum¬ stances of her death. Those tears, which his own fallen state had not been able to draw into hh eyes, Lord Henry now shed freely to the un¬ happy fate of the venerable Lady Blunt; К il i*ùd
and sinking on his knees by the side of the bier, continued gazing on the bleeding corpse. Sir Hildebrand likewise advanced to¬ wards it; but the momentary sensibility which he had displayed, at beholding the wretched spectacle of her disfigured corpse, was again eclipsed in the natural ferocity and selfishness of his disposition.— " How weak is woman Í" he exclaimed ; if could she believe that her voice would turn me from my purpose î Such obedience she might have expected from her cherished Valentine—presumption's self could hardly ask it of a son to whom-she had exercised injustice before bis birth !"—Fie paused a inoment—then added— " Her punishment has been severe, I grant it has ; for I can¬ not regard her present state as any other than a retribution assigned to her by the báni of fate !"—Turning to his followers, he continued — iC See she be interred as becomes ray mother ; the tears to deck the marble uro, in which her ashes are inclosed, will
will be, no doubt, supplied by Valentine." Then casting another lingering gaze, in which it appeared as if hfs tongue had ex¬ pressed harsher sentiments than his heart had given birth to, he quitted the hall. Lord Fitzroy heard him with the blood of indignation 'and horror curdling at his heart ; but pride and contempt alike with¬ held him from replying to his unfeeling language.— " Happy art thou, sainted corpse," he mentally pronounced, " in being preserved from those scenes of grief and tumult, which too surely await on thy survivors."— Λ guard of the enemy cor.· tinned f о surround him, but diel not at¬ tempt to lead him away from the castle halí ; and too proud of spirit to express ' any impatience for a knowleelge of hľs fate, he advanced no questions relative to his desiinv. From one ofhis own attend- ants, he learnt that the venerable father Saint Ethelbert, and Eleonora, were not galled with chains like himself bnť were secured by a guard, stationed at the door к G of
t of their apartments ; and, front the com¬ parative lenity whjch was exercised to¬ wards them by the conqueror, a slight de¬ gree of satisfaction was communicated to his own heart. The fathers Sylvester aqd Augţistin had been permitted to attend th,e corpse of Lady Blunt to the chapel of the castle ; and some time had passed since it had been conveyed thither, when Sir Hildebrand once more returned into the hall; he en¬ tered it with hasty steps, and was followed by a numerous train of his adherents ;— rushing towards a couch, which was placed aţ one of its extremities, and springing upon it, in order to elevate himself above the rest, he called to the guard which sur¬ rounded Lord Fitzroy, commanding them to lead him forward. With a resolute step, and a countenance devoid of fear or anxiety, Lord Henry placed himself opposite to the couch. " I am about to convince you," said Sir Hildebrand, addressing him, " that the falsehood,
falsehood, of which you have stood forth the prime champion, has been exposed to me ; I am not, at this moment, compelled to impart to you of my knowledge, but it is my pleasure so to do."—Turning to his soldiers, in a louder voice, he cried, " Bring forth the impostor." Lcrd Fitzroy raised his eyes towards the entrance into the hall, and beheld the youth, from whose brow he believed the croyvn of England to have been wrested by the hand of injustice, led forward by a body ofthe soldiery, and bending beneath the, weight of those fetters which bound his faint and aching limbs. It was a sight which pierced hisheart—he could have ut¬ tered curses on the inhumanity of the, brutal conqueror. The youth being placed in the midst, Sir Hildebrand thus addressed his leaders;— * f I think there are amongst уод not.a few who bore arms under the Eighth Henry of England, who knew the Prince his son, and wjho, can witness, that, Edwarţl, when a boy, 4 snatching
snatching his royal father's sabre from its sheath, drew it unguardedly across his arm, and made a wound, of which the scar was visible unto his death." The circumstance was vivid in fhe recol¬ lection of Lord Fitzroy himself; and he was now silcntlv astonished that it had not recurred to him, on the youth's first intro¬ duction into Framlingham Castle bv Sir Percival Godolphin, to examine his arm in search of that proof, which, had he found him possessed of it, must incontrovertibly have substantiated his claim to the throne. Several of Sir HİIdebrand's captains im¬ mediately answered in the affirmative to his demand, by saying that they had beheld the scar, which was on thc right arm, a little above the wrist. Thc heart of Lord Henry acknowledged the justice of this reply ; the scar with which the arm ofhis brother was disfigured, was exactly in the situation where they had described it to be. Sir Hildebrand now commanded the youths
youth's arm to be bared, and submitted to inspection ; the sleeve of his vest was ac¬ cordingly drawn off; the skin beneath was smooth and even, unmarked by any scar. The soul of Lord Fitzroy sunk within him. Could it be that Godolphin had wil¬ fully deceived him, or that he had himself been thc dupe of imposition ? This was, however, an immaterial consideration ; he had himself been falsely beguiled into the adoption of measures which must condemn him as a traitor in the eye ofthe law, how¬ ever innocent he might know himself of such a crime. The reflection was dread¬ ful, agonizing, overpowering. The malig¬ nant and triumphant smile of Sir Hilde¬ brand increased the torture of his feelings; had he alone been present. Lord Henry would have disdained to utter a syllable in exculpation of himself, but several ofhis adherents were nobles of the realm, and he trusted that they might not all be preju¬ diced to his undoing, like Sir Hildebrand ; he therefore said— (( I have been deceived ; leali
I call the blessed Redeemer of man to wit¬ ness the truth of my assertion ; and having done this, into his hands I resignedly com¬ mit my fate." The disclosure of his falsehood beinir made, the trembling youth, unbacked by a single friend to communicate to him either hope or courage, sunk on his knees before Sir Hildebrand, and, in accents of the most piteous nature, expressive of the imbeci¬ lity of his mind, implored for mercy. "Who was thy instructor in the part of villany which thou hast played?" demanded Sir Hildebrand. "Sır Percival Godolphin and his friends," stamrøerecl out. the youth. "His friends! Who are those friends?" enquired Sir Hildebrand. '** They are," he replied—" in truth I know not myself who they are. Black Brian can explain alt to yoo." " Black. Brian !" repeated several of those present who were acquainted, from the tongue of common fame, with the story
story of a man so named, who had pro¬ fessed himself to be a warrener, haying in¬ habited a ruin situated on a heath upon tjie borders of Suffolk, whom, together with another man, his confederate, as it had ap-? peared, two travellers, taking shelter within the dilapidated walls, had many years ago discovered in the ¿et of offering violence to a female, and vyho had, since that pe¬ riod, never \>een heard of, an anecdote which, it will he recollected^ that jQel re¬ lated to Щеодога, on the very spot where it had occurred, when, on her journey from Northamptonshire to Framlingham Castle, the inclemency of the weather hud obliged fyer and her companions to seel*, refuge, within the mouldering structure. " Who iş the man of whom you sneajk, and where may he be found ?" exclaimed Sir Hildebrand. At the instant of this question, a voice ■was heard, speaking in a distant part of the bail ; it was that of the nefarious Fabian. Bowing to Sir Hildebrand, aş he advanced towards
towards him, and with an expression of counter ince which denoted him inwardly secure oí the favour of him whom he was addressing, he said·—" He is my brother, of whom I have already spoken to you, and now w ithin the walls of this castle. Lured by the arts and persuasions of Sir Percival Godolphin, he consented to personate the deaf and dumb jailer of this fab? youth : more cannot be laid to his charge, in the villanous plan which, for the safety of the realm, has been thus providentially brought to light ; and he is prepared to answer for his conduct." " To any accomplice, who will become the friend of the queen, in an exposure of the guilt of his confederates, I have her gracious authority to extend pardon for his past misdeeds," replied Sir Hildebrand : " let this be signified to him. His confes¬ sion, and this guilty youth's further exami¬ nation, must be deferred till they appear before the tribunal of their country." Again the youth implored for mercy ; but
but Sir Hildebrand replied only to his en¬ treaties, by commanding him to be taken away from his presence, and held in close custody. The mind of Lord Henry sunk into a trance of thought unutterable; the actual triumph which he beheld, ofthe machina¬ tions of thc guilty over thc peace and fame of thc truly virtuous, raised his ideas, from the soul-dispiriting gloom of sublunary- events, to the bright visions of futurity.
CHAP.
CHAP. VIL '< O, wb*t »mb«fity ani fkew of ímtfc, Срц »пише; «n cover ¡t*elf wiíhal !" SHAKÍir*A!Ht.
* * * * " Play not thus with thunder, Lest it should blast thee too." N. Lit. We must now dedicate a few pages to the exposure of certain acts of villany, perpe¬ trated by the crafty Godolphin, of which an explicit detail is necessary to the subse¬ quent events of our history. We have al¬ ready deduced the adventurous circum¬ stances of his life down to the hour of his escape
escape from the Tower of London : ťo that period, therefore, we must now return. Having passed the walls of London in safety, Godolphin's first purpose was to procure himself a disguise : to this end, accordingly, was expended by him a small sum of money, which he possessed ; and equipped in a garb somewhat resembling that of a huntsman's, drawn over an ancient and battered coat of mail, he bent his course towards the middle counties, where he hoped to find the best security, during the period that he should doubtless be sought throughout the kingdom ; and intending, when the heat of the search was abated, to proceed to the coast; and seize upon the first opportunity of embarking for France, whither, he doubted not, that the relations ofhis wife would transmitió him the means of existence ; every possession of his own having been forfeited by the act of treason, for which he had been condemned to suffer death. The
The only trinkets of value which he happened to have upon him at the moment of his flight from prison, were, as we have already learnt from the lips of the deceased Geraldine, her miniature resemblance, en¬ compassed by a circle of diamonds, and a ring of rubies : the latter pressing necessity quickly obliged him to offer to sale, and upon its produce he was subsisting, when a chance-directed wanderer on the face of the kingdom, he knelt to slack his thirst at that rhulct,, bv the side of which Eleonora first beheld him. In the expression ofher mild and bene¬ volent eye, he read the sensibility of her heart, and, actuated by a momentary im¬ pulse, disclosed to her his necessitous state, and implored relief at her hands; and he did not exaggerate his necessities in the account which he gave her of them ; for although he was not destitute of the price of such comforts as he needed, various cir¬ cumstances frequently deterred him from entering
entering the habitations of men -to seek them ; and such an untoward fate had ruled the two last days of his existence. We are acquainted that the sovereign passion of Godolphin's heart was the con¬ templation of female beauty ; and even in the moments of his present adversity, it rose in his breast superior to every other feeling. Eleonora bestowed on him the relief which he had supplicated, and with the proof which he then, obtained ofher friend¬ ship, a violent adoration of her person took possession of his so id. Life, even on the terms upon which he possessed it, was, from various considcra.- tions, dear to him ; and the danger of dis¬ covery which might await bim, if he then remained with her, struck him in a forcible light ; but hť cherished the hope of be¬ holding her again, at some period of greater security to himself; and having obviated, as far as lay in his ability, the arising of any unfavourable accident, from a repe-
a repetition, on her part, of the events of the morning, by binding her, in a pro¬ mise of not divulging to any individual being' tríaťslie had stretched out to him the hand of charity, or even of acknowledging that she had ever betìeld himi with the ut- iTÍost reluctance he quitted her, a prey to thVmost devouring passion. Concealing himself by day in the cavi¬ ties of hills, and when the shades of night wore drawn oxer the earth, continuing Кф unsettled course, the evening after his first interview with Eleonora brought him to a forest, in which he for some time lost his way. Wearied with exercise, he threw himself on a bank for repose, and had re¬ mained there only a few moments, when he heard voices near'him'in con versation ; the persons theiristelves were concealed from him by the duskiness of the evening, and the'intërvening foliage. From their dis¬ course, he quickly gathered that they were freebooters ; and he heard them lamenting thelittle spoil which had lately fallen into their
their hands, and wishing for an increase of their numbers, which would enable them to take richer booty. A situation amongst them appeared to him the most desirable one on earth, under his present circumstances. As a member of their band, he should continue in the kingdom, which the recollection of Eleo- nora rendered him now unwilling to quit. In the character of a robber, he would be farther removed from suspicion than he conici be ín any other; and he should pro¬ babl) find it a state capable of producing him, in аЛе -Icrable degree, tiiose indulgen¬ ces which long and unrestrained habit had rendered necessary to his existence». He accordingly darted boldly forward, and ofìcred himself ίο become their comrade.—- Нь address at fir t surprised them ; hut tîıe arguments which he advanced of hi.s needy situation were persuasive, and thcy con¬ sented to take him with them to their cavo in the heart ol ые forest. Utterly a stranger to the freebooters, for vol. m, ĺ he
he feared to entrust them with his name, lest they should bc tempted to sacrifice him to the reward offered for his appre¬ hension by ihe queen, ihey imposed on him a restraint, usual with them in such cases, of not quitting the limits of thcir haunt forthe first two months after his be¬ coming their companion ; a ready and prompt servitude during which period was to entitle him to become a broiher of the fraternity, and a sharer in thcir future spoils. The weeks of Godolphin's involuntary banishment from the lace of day were passed by him iu reflection on Eleonora, which fanned the Hame of desire, already lighted in his breast. Ardently did he pant for thc enjoyment of liberty, that he might fly to the snot which she inhabited, and attempt to behold her again, at any hazard to himself. At length arrived the happy period of his enlargement ; and having, in repeated attacks on way-laid travellers, displayed equally
equally his courage and his fidelity to the band, he was, in a short time, permitted to prowl singly. No sooner was this per¬ mission granted him, than he u^ed it for retracing his road towards Worcester Castle : an evening and half a night brought him once more to the wood where hehad first beheld the object ofhis present passion ; and whilst he was debating with bis own mind by what means he shoulcl en¬ deavour to gain access to her presence, to his unutterable joy he beheld her seated by the window of Agatha's hermitage. With an exclamation expressive of the rapturous sensation of his soul, hc advanced towards her; but warned bv Eleonora that there was danger in his continuili»; to converse with her at that moment, he besought her to meet him at the pass а с rt ss the rivulet, at thc hour of eight on any one ofthe three succeeding evenings. It will bc recollected that Eleonora, ut¬ terly undecided whether or not it became her to comply with his request, was com- L "i peilcd,
pelled, by a mandate of Latimer's, for her to visit the recluse, to pass near the spot of appointment on the evening, and that she was alarmed by the sudden appearance of several men, in fhe rough garb of peasants, who besought her to pass oi. without fear, as they intended her no harm, but were in search of a person, whom they believed to have concealed himself in that wood. These men were no other than some of the members of the band of robbers into which Godolphin had entered ; they had perceived his anxiety to go out singly from their cave, and suspecting that he might intend to betray them into the hands of piştice, they had resolved to pursue him. With little difficulty they traced his steps towards Worcester Castle ; and scarcely had Eleonora parted from them in the wood, ere Godolphin, proceeding to his appointment, appeared in sight. At the first glance which he caught of them, un¬ conscious that they were his comrades whom he beheld, and dreading that they might
might be emissaries sent in pursuit of him by the queen, he iled from them : near the pass over the rivulet he was overtaken by them, and, in the scuffle which ensued, his cap was thrown oil", his ruíľ torn from his neck, and the blood drawn from his hand, by a blow struck on it by one of bis pur¬ suers. No sooner did he recognise their coun¬ tenances, than he enquired why he was thus treated ? and they, in return, informed him of the apprehension under which they had pursued him. Godolphin smiled at their suspicion, and explained to them the real cause of his lurking in that wood.— They appeared to give little credit to his tale, and would probably have decided it an imposition, had not Sir Percival, a few seconds after, perceived, through an open¬ ing amidst the branches of the trees, Eleo¬ nora, on her return from the hcrmiťs cell. " She whom I love," he hastily ex¬ claimed, " approaches; conceal yourselves ĺ 3 * till
till I have obtained an interview with her; and when she quits me, if í return not back with willingness and fidelity to your band, bc my blood the revenge which you take upon me." The robbers were won to his entreaty ; and he conducted them to a retreat, with vvhich he was acquainted, behind a knot of spreading shrubs, from whence they could behold him, unobserved by Eleonora, dur¬ ing his conversation with her. Eleonora advanced towards the path across the rivulet, and perceiving the blood on the grass, the torn ruff, and the cap, which she recognised to be Godolphin's, uttered that exclamation of hope for his safety, which confirmed him in the opinion vvhich he had adopted, that the sentiments with which her heart bent towards him were not only friendly but affectionate. On the departure of Eleonora, Godol¬ phin, according to his promise, joined the members of the dishonest band, with which he was now connected ; but it was with the utmost
utmost difficulty that he wore a smile of satisfaction on his countenance. The words with which Eleonora had quitted him bad b?on— if Throw off* fîıe mystery in which you arc enveloped, and make thc hour of your beholding me again vour own /' and great as was the natural si/ot-ltv of his heart, it was an injunction which it per¬ plexed him equally to obey or to evade. On thcir return to the freebooters' abode, the cause of Godolphin's absence was re¬ lated to tbe fraternity, and the spot men¬ tioned where his pursuers had overtaken him. Whilst the subject was dişçimin«*. one of the robbers, addressing a comrade who sat next to him, said— <f Near Wor¬ cester, wasit ? In the vicinity of that city, you, Branville, have more than once hinted that you could, if it suited your inclina¬ tion, lead us to a rich spoil." " The hour may come," replied Bran¬ ville, with a smile, and the topic was at that time dropped ; but a few nights after it was resumed by the captain of the gang, L Ί who
who checked Branville, as being n n iin- worihy member of their society, since he confessed 'mself acquainted with a trea¬ sure, towards an attack upon which he ap¬ peared reluctant to lead them. After a pause of reflection, Branville spoke thus:— " Why look'je, captain, 1 was a fool ever to mention that I was pos¬ sessed of the knowledge which I am., be¬ cause honour now compels me to explain my knowledge to those to whom 1 have sworn an oath of partnership and allegi¬ ance, whilst gratitude ought to have with¬ held me from making any confession which could tend to injure him to whom that wealth, to which ye have heard me allude, belongs."—He then proceeded to say, that he had once been a servant to the Earl of Worcester ; that in order to pay a gamb¬ ling debt, which he had contracted to one of his fellow-servants, he had robbed his master ofhis purse; that the Earl had de¬ tected the theft, but instead of bringing him to public justice, had only severely ** repri-
reprimanded him, and dismissed him from his service. fr And did he take back the purse ?" en¬ quired one of the band. "Yes, and the coin it contained," re¬ plied Branville. "Then what gratitude can you owe to a parsimonious rascal like that ?" cried another. " О bctiav him—betray, betray bim," exclaimed one and all. Brain ¡lie's boasted gratitude was swal¬ lowed up in the persuasions of his com- iade*, and he informed them * f that the Lail of Worcester was in the habii of pass¬ ing a considerable portion of his time in visiting foreign countries; that he knew him, at that verv period, to bc absent in France; that when he quitted his castle, it was his custom to lock up his valuable possessions in certain chambers in the Northern gallerv ; to this gallery he was <~ * О ml acquainted with a subterraneous passage, from a particular spot in the dilapidated ĺ 5 ramparts
ramparts which surrounded the edifice;— he believed this passage ίο be unknown to every other individual, even to Lord Wor¬ cester himself, as he had never heard it spoken of by any one ofthe members of his household ; and that, if his comrades would place themselves under liis guidance, he would point out to them the way to the Earl's wealth." Anight was fixed upon for the attempt; and a certain number of the freebooters, of which Godolphin was one, were selected for the enterprize. From the limited intercourse whicii the freebooters had with the inhabitants of the kingdom, little, indeed, of what was pass¬ ing in it, was known to them ; and it was by the greatest accident that Branville had become acquainted with the absence of the Earl of Worcester from England : but to Godolphin, who, in the days of his pros¬ perity, had lived in the habit of listening, from the tongue of common fame, to all the transactions of persons in his own sphere
sphere of life, it was well known that the family of Latimer had obtained permission to reside in Worcester Cattle, during the period that was to be employed İn rebuild¬ ing the mansion attached to his sec; and also that they were interdicted thc use of thc Northern gallery, on account of its being the repository of the Larl's plate, and other valuable articles. With this interdicted gallery the active mind of Godolphin immediately connected an undefined hope of being able to obtain con-taut intercourse with the object of his passion, 'i he attempt, which was agitating by the banditti, must be the preparatory siep towards thc accomplishment of sucha hope, but he could not readily decide in what manner to turn it to the advancement of his wishes. The robbers believed Worcester Castle to be without inhabitants, except per chance a few domestics left in it by thc Earl. Those of the gang who had seen Eleonora in conversation with Sir Percival, supposed ĺ (i her,
ber^ from thc simplicity ofher dress, f o be no more than a peasant maid. Acquainted with these circumstances, Godolphin's first idea was to conceal himself in some nook of the castle, whilst his comrades were em¬ ployed in securing their booty ; judging, that as the attraction which allied him to the-spot was unknown to them, thcy would., on discovering his absence, imagine him to have lost his way in thc intricacies ofthe bui Id i n «r, but would not dare to retrace O' their steps in search of him, however thcy might lament his loss. Hut a more pro¬ mising plan presented itself before him, when Branville, and the eleven other asso¬ ciates of his enterprize, met to arrange their proceedings. After much delibera- tioR, it was concluded that they should lurk amongst some sheltering hills in thc neighbourhood of Worcester, till the dead of night, at which hour Branville was to conduct them to the entrance from the ramparts of the castle into the subterra¬ neous passage; that when they had gained 4 this
this spor, len of them should remain near it, whilst Bra mi íle, and one single compa¬ nion, should proceed to investigate whe¬ ther any danger threatened the enferprize, and whether the secret door, into one ofthe chambers i)f thc Northern gallery, were siili in existence. This arrangement being made, thcy epiitted fhcirhaunt. As they proceeded on th'eir journev, Godolphin contrived to ilrawiihidc Branville.—* r I have a favour to ask of vou," hesnid ; " I should like to in¬ gratiate myself vvith our captain, by stand¬ ing forward in this enterprize next to vourself; let, therefore, your choice fall on mc as your companion, in exploring the subterraneous passage, and I will re¬ ward you with a trinket of value, which I possess." " What is it ?" enquired Branville; <f let me behold it." Godolphin drew from the folds of his vest thc miniature resemblance ofhis wife, encompassed with diamonds. Branville knew
knew their value ; and the bargain was ra¬ tified, by its parsing into his possession. Between the eleventh and twelfth hours of the night, Branville and his associates congratulated each other, on having en- fered the secret passage without observa¬ tion ; and Branville, having lighted thc lamp in his lanthorn, and selected Godol¬ phin as his companion, for his voice, us thc leader ofthe enterprize, was decisive, prepared to set fonvard.— iC When you hear mc blow my whistle/ 5 said Branville to those who were not to accompany him, i m' J " remember to advance/' tr And do you remember to blow it twice, if there bc danger, that we may avoid it, as was agreed upon before wc quitted our cave," returned one of fhe robbers. "I'll not deceive you/' answered Bran¬ ville, and proceeded, followed by Sir Per¬ cival. Λ dark and intricate way, cut from thc bow r els of thc earth, led them to a steep and rugged staircase.·—^ Wc arc right/* said
said Branville, observing it : " there's thc loop-hole that thev used to creep out at in time of war," he added, pointing to the door at the top of ihc stairs. " By vvhat means is th's place so well known to you ?" asked Godolphin. " It was pointed out to mc by an old servant of thet castle," replied Branville, tc when I was a boy ; one who is since /cad, and wiiose character I cannot there¬ iore injure, by in form ing you that hc was not a whit honester than cither of us. I was his jackall." tc You had your end in it, I doubt not," returned Godolphin. (( I received bribes from his purse, anel instructions from his example," replied Branville, with a careless smile ; and this conversation brought them to thc top of the stairs. Branville was some time in opening the door, for tho spring had con¬ tracted rust, and was disobedient to thc pressure of his finger. At length it flew open, and thcy entered.— " Here wc are, in
in a chamber of the Northern gallery/' sii.l Branville.—He advanced a few paces, and added, " All is as still as thc grave." " Prophetic are thy words," exclaimed Godolphin ; £ť this is thy grave."—He seized the astonished man by the collar as he spoke, and casting him down upon a bed, near which lie was standing, drew his sword from its sheath, and pierced him in thc breast. " Oh, in mercy, what mean'st thou ?" cried Branville.— " Hold ! hold !" and exerting thc last etlbrt of h »s strength, he sprung from the bed, and attempted to defend his life ; but two other wounds from the sword of Godolphin cast him fainting on the ground, to rise no more. The fate of Branville thus scaled in death, Godolphin snatched his whistle from his neck, and hastening down the steps into the subterraneous passage, blew it twice, with a shrillness which he doubted not would cause the banditti, stationed at its entrance, to make a precipitate retreat,— This
This done, lie hoped to remain an undis¬ turbed jccupier of thc Northern gallery ; but lest any one, drawn to the spot by thc cricì ci Branville, should arrive to investi¬ gate the cause írom whence they had pro¬ ceeded, he once more closed the secret door, and placed himself on its outside, to await the event. It is already known to us, that a part of Branville's exclamation was heard by Ben¬ nett the gardener ; and his subsequent groans likewise by Bennett's companions, Cyprian and Egbert. We are also ac¬ quainted with every occurrence which took place in Worcester Castle subsequent to that night of alarm to Latimer's household, and have therefore only to speak of what relates to Godolphin himself. In his hiding place, every word vvhich was spoken in the chamber that contained the body of the deceased Branville, was au¬ dible to him; and it was with no inconsi¬ derable degree of mortification that he heard Latimer command a constant watch to
to be held in it till the body was interred, He determined, however, to persevere in hispían, and not to leave the place. In disappointment and irritation he passed his days ; and, when the twilight gave a degree of security to his actions, he quitted his re¬ treat, in search of thc necessaries oflife. In describing the chamber where the coffin, containing the body of Branville, was placed, we mentioned a cabinet, which was fixed opposite to one of the mirrors that intersected the windows ; this appa¬ rent cabinet was a deception, and was, in reality, the door of access to the Northern gallery from the subterraneous passage ; and being mistaken by Latimer and his ser¬ vants for the article of furniture which it represented, was passed over by them in their search of an outlet. Through various slender crevices, which the decay of time had produced in this door, Godolphin was enabled to catch acci¬ dental glances of what was passing in the chamber ; and on seeing Eleonora enter it alone
alone on that afternoon when she had re¬ solved to behold thc countenance of the deceased, he immediately pressed upon the spring; the action of which, it will be re¬ collected, created a sound that occasioned her to start ; and raising hcr eyes, she be¬ held in the mirror, opposite to vvhich she was standing, thc armed head and shoulders of a man. It was Godolphin himself; a suit of armour, beneath an upper vestment, was the protecting habit of the freebooters, in their hours of prey ; and Sir Percival happened, at the moment, to have thrown. off the encumbrance of his surcoat. His heart beat with extacy, as he entered her presence; but no sooner had he issued from his concealment, than the scream of Gillian, warning him that danger was at hand, he retired again with the utmost pre¬ cipitancy, unable to explain to Eleonora a circumstance which he was conscious she must regard with a mysterious awe. The corpse of Branville being interred, no obstacle now presented itself to Godol¬ phin's
phin's boldly exploring every part of the Northern gallery ; he found the doors of communication between that and the other parts of the castle so stronglv fastened, that it was not in his power to open them ; and had he even been able to pass them, it was a doubt to himself whether he durst have ha¬ zarded the consequences which might have attended such an act. He now began to perceive that he had rashly stepped through blood into a mea¬ sure which could afford little advantage to his hopes ; and he repented that he had indiscreetly bought Branville's adjunc¬ tion to the first step of his plan, by the only article of value which he had pos¬ sessed, capable of relieving those wants which he now felt pressing upon him. Again and again did he at eve, and early morn, traverse the little wood where he had first beheld Eleonora, but she did not appear; and patience-worn, he almost re¬ solved to return to the banditti, and fabri¬ cate a tale of Branville's death, and his own detention
detention by the inhabitants of the castle, calculated to restore him to their favour. Without the means of purchasing suste¬ nance—fearful of begging, lest his appear¬ ance should create a suspicion of his real character, and frequently compelled to play the petty robber in the cause of hunger, he had one evening strayed to a considerable distance from Worcester Castle. In thc midst of an open plain, hc descried a mean cottage, unsheltered by vegetation ; he approached it ; forms, but scarcely countenances, were discernible, by the waning light of day ; and profess- in«r himself a wearv traveller, uho had lost his way, he entreaicd hospitality of a \ouih who was seated on a sud of grass near the door. Thc youth hesitated to reply ; andas Sir Percival was repealing his entreaty, a man appeared upon thc threshold of the cottage, who, fixing upon him his regards, ex¬ claimed— <c That voice, that figure—I can¬ not be mistaken ;—it is Godolphin/' Animated
Animated alone by a sense of danger, Sir Percival laid his hand upon the hilt of his sword, which the man observing, added— * r Nay, nay, you are amongst friends; what is it that you fear ? Do you not recognise Oliverde Vale?" Sir Percival echoed his ivords; their hands instantly met in the grasp of friend¬ ship, and they entered thc cottage together. A few words are now necessary relative to Oliver de Vale. Fabian, the adherent of Sir Sigismund Blunt, and an elder bro¬ ther, we have already said, Vİere left unex¬ pectedly destitute, by the death of thcir fat her ; a n d t h a t th e bro t h ers, u n w i 1 i i n st t о forego the indulgences to which they had been accustomed, during the life of their parent, became, from that moment, the agents of great mens' vices, as a certain means of securing to themselves favour and independence; and that elder brother of Fabian's was the Oliver de Vale, to whom our readers have just been introduced. It was some time since Sir Percival and Oliver
Oliver had met ; but they were too well acquainted with each others secrets for either of them to doubt the other's friend¬ ship, and both well pleased at the ren¬ contre. Various enquiries, natural to two men who met in circumstances exactly the re¬ verse of those in which they had been ac¬ customed to see each other, passed between them ; and as Oliver placed refreshments before his guest, he said—" It is a strange chance which has brought you hither to¬ night ; would it not surprise you if it vvere the means of restoring us both to better fortune ?" " Explain to me your meaning?" re¬ turned Sir Percival ; and Oliver was on the point of replying, when three knocks being sounded on a door opposite to that by vvhich Sir Percival had entered the cot¬ tage, Oliver hastily said— ir Run up those steps into the chamber above, and bc silent when you are there ; I will call you down in less than five minutes." Godolphin
Godolphin obeyed, and had no sooner entered the chamber, than he heard nume¬ rous voices and footsteps below, A glim¬ mering light, reflected on a narrow case¬ ment, drew him towards it; he perceived that it proceeded from a lanthorn in the hand of the youth to whom he had first preferred his petition for hospitality ; and directly about thirty men, in various un¬ couth habits, issued from the cottage, who, dividing into groupes of about eight or ten, took difíeifut roads, and separated without uttering a syllable, except it were in tones too low to reach liis ear. lie now heard the door closed, and îe- ceived a summons from Oliver to descend. Oliver placed him a seat, and directed the lad to go to bed, and set his light in the window of the chamber, lest any of their friends bhould return. The youth obeyed ; and on Godolphin being left alone with Oliver, he enquired '* Who were the men whom he had seen leave the cottage ?" ( ' They arc your slaves, if so stands your inclination/'
inclination," replied Oliver. Godolphin s surprise increased, and De Vale began the following explanation :— ef Beneath the cottage in which we are sitting," he said, ff is a range of caverns, which have, for nearly a century past, been the residence of a most formidable banditti. The number who here hold their abode is about forty, and they are in alliance with sixty others, whose haunt is beneath an ancient ruin on the borders of the county of Suffolk. At what exact period, or by what daring spirit this band was formed, is uncertain ; but the regulations by which they are governed, and which are supposed to have descended from the original founder, are these :— That the community should in all consist of one hundred ; that as any of the mem¬ bers were cut off by the hand of accident, or natural death, means should be imme¬ diately used for replacing them with new subjects; that they should live divided into two bodies, one in the county of Worces¬ ter, and the other in that of Suffolk, for the vol. in. m benefit
benefit of enjoying a more extensive field for depredation than they eould do, if they were all assembled upon one spot ; that they should be governed by only one head, who should reside alternately in each place ; that every booty should be equally divided, with the exception of two shares, which should be given fo their chief, who •was never to be called upon to join in their excursions for booty, but to remain the director of their enterprizes, the com¬ poser of their disputes, and the law-giver of their proceedings; and that, on the death of their chief, his successor should be chosen by a majority of voices/* Godolphin listened to his account with the greatest attention, and Oliver pro¬ ceeded thus :—" I am myself, as you must naturally conclude, from beholding me in this situation, one of the community ; to explain to you the particular circumstan¬ ces attendant on my having become so, would be superfluous. Suffice it briefly to say, that at a moment of exigency, chance threw
threw me in theway of one ofthe members of the gang, whom I had before known, and who procured my admission into it.— The station in which I was placed by our chief, was the easy office of residing in the quality of a centinél, in the ruins which conceal the entrance to the abode of those of our fraternity whose haunt is in Sulfolk ; and in the disguise and character of a war¬ rener, I bought their provisions, and per¬ formed for them many other services. *' All the members of our fraternity have changed their names for assumed appella¬ tions ; and that by which I have been known, from the moment of my connec¬ tion with them, is Black Brian. " I had not been in their society above a year, when a circumstance took place which caused me to wish to change my residence. Our chief complied with my request; I 4 was removed hither; and have ever sim e lived the apparently harmless inhabitant of this solitary cottage. But enough of my own history ; I now proceed to matters of m 2 greater
greater importance. Our last chief has paid the debtof life about ten days ; he was adjudged to death by the com muni tv, and fell beneath their swords ; he was detected in an attempt at betraying us into the hands of justice, in order to enrich himself by the reward, which he was acquainted that the crown would bestow on his*pcr- fidy. u No new chief,'* proceeded Oliver, " has yet been chosen ; the band do not wish to select one from amongst themselves ; they are desirous of being governed by some man of eminence ; and their greatest satis¬ faction would consist in knowing him to be at enmity with the majesty of the kingdom, in order that his own safety might be their surety for his not adventuring upon the treacherous conduct, in the exercise of which it was their misfortune to detect him by whom they were last governed. Incre¬ dible as you may believe tbe fact, you vourself have been named bv them as one beneath whose rule it would be their pride to
to live; they have expressed the most ardent desire to learn your retreat ; and they have lamented the impossibility of discovering you, and communicating to you their sentiments. The hand of fate has propitiously led you hither ; a happy destiny awaits you." A soul of vanity like Godolphin's, which had, till that moment, been sunk in the despondency of desertion, gazed with ex¬ tacy on the prospect which Oliver's decla¬ ration had opened to his view; and he waited, with the impatience of mingled pride and exultation, for the moment of his introduction to the ravaging horde, over whom there appeared little doubt of his being appointed to sway the sceptre of authority. His delighted expectations could not brook delay ; and Oliver, having petitioned him to seek that repose, of which his exhausted frame stood so much in need, during the absence of the free¬ booters from their haunt, promised to pre¬ sent him before them on the following λί 3 morning ;
morning ; and Godolphin, having pledged his word to raise his friend Oliver to a station of greater eminence than he already heldin the gang, provided hc were himself accepted as their leader, retired to, a conch in the chamber, not to sleep, but to gloat on the visions of his future sovereignty. At length arrived the hour at which he was to be ushered into the presence of the freebooters; several of them vvere ac¬ quainted with his person, and, from the lips of these> a general conviction of his being indeed Godolphin was imparted to the community. He was honoured by them with a shout of welcome, and imme¬ diately hailed as their future chief. That his professions of service were not inferior to their demonstrations of joy may be easily imagined ; and it was agreed that he should that evening set out, accompanied by a chosen number of the fraternity, for their haunt in Suffolk, where the sentiments of their colleagues were too well known to them, for the least doubt to bc entertained of
of his meeting a reception equally flatter¬ ing, as had been that which he had expe¬ rienced from those of his future subjects, by whom he was already acknowledged^as thcir leader. Numerous were the resting-places ap¬ propriated to the use of the banditti, in the extent of country which intervened between their haunts; and by sheltering themselves, as occasion required, in these, and with the aid of different disguises, Godolphin and his conductors reached the ruin on the confines of the county of Suffolk, in the most perfect safety. The reception which Sir Percival here experienced was similar to that which he had met with in the county of Worcester; and he pronounced, with undisguised de¬ light, those oaths which bound him the sovereign ofthe band; and in return re¬ ceived from them the vows of allegiance, for a sacred obedience to which their lives were held answerable. How unexpected a change had the for- M 4 tunes
tunes of Godolphin now experienced !—- Glory usurped his mind ; and, for a while, even the impression of love was forgotten; but his passion for Eleonora quickly re¬ turned with redoubled ardour, and he se¬ cretly lamented the distance at which his destiny had placed him from her; as he was bound, by the regulations to which he was now subject, to continue for the three suc¬ ceeding months in Suffolk, When this period was expired, and Godolphin once more removed into Wor¬ cestershire, his opportunities of conversing in private with Oliver de Vale were fre¬ quent: he imparted to him the intimacy which subsisted between himself and the daughter of Latimer, and besought him to devise some means of intercourse between them Oliver, in his character of purveyor to the fraternity, was in the constant habit of visiting Worcester; and, in compliance with Godolphin's wish, entered into con¬ versation with different persons concerning Latimer's
Latimer's family ; and, amongst other par¬ ticulars, he learnt, that on the Christmas morn it was the Bishop's custom to oblige every individual of his household to attend divine service, and to leave his mansion during the hours of worship, without a, single inhabitant. As Godolphin was not yet prepared to elucidate the mystery in which he was en¬ veloped, and which Eleonora had directed him to hold himself ready to unfold to her, at their next meeting, it was not so much- his desire to behold her¿ as to inform her that his passion for her was still as fervid as it had ever been, and to entreat her still to think of him with affection. Of the Christ¬ mas morning, accordingly, he resolved to avail himself, for convevinff some commu- nication into the castle, which might con¬ vince Eleonora that he w r as faithful to those professions of love which he had made to^ her. He confided to Oliver the knowledge which he possessed of the entrance from the ramparts into the Northern gallery, and m 5 prevailed;
prevailed upon him to enter thc subterra¬ neous passage with him at the first dawn of the day, in order that they might be pre¬ pared to emerge from their retreat as soon as the castle was left in solitude. They provided themselves with an in¬ strument for forcing the lock on the fold¬ ing doors of the Northern gallery, and, at the hour when they doubted not that safety would attend their steps, they proceeded into the inhabited parts of the castle.— Eleonora's chamber was quickly discovered to Godolphin, by his recognising a suit of garments, which he had seen her wear, spread upon a couch within it ; and judg¬ ing that he could not deposit thc epistle, which he had addressed to her, in any place where it appeared so likely to be discovered by herself only-, as in the volume of pray¬ ers, he laid it between those leaves which contained the private devotions appointed fur the evening of that day. As he was again quitting the chamber, his eye fell on a volume of ancient ro¬ mances ;
mances; these legends he was well ac¬ quainted with, for they were the popular reading of the age, and he could not resist an impulse which he felt, tc- inscribe a few lines at the end of one which was distin¬ guished by the title of" The Maid and the Stranger/' to inform Eleonora that her confidence in him should not be abused, as was that of the unfortunate heroine of the tale. Unprovided with the implements for writing, for his epistle had been prepared by him before he had quitted the free¬ booters' cavern, hc suddenly conceiveel the idea of tracing the characters he wished to describe, in blood : for this purpose, hc made a slight incision in the palm of his hand, and dipping the point ofhis dagger in the purple drops which flowed from if, wrote vvith it those words which, at a future period, so forcibly e xci teel the astonish¬ ment of Eleonora. Godolphin and his friend now- returned to the Northern gallery; the instrument m G which
which they had brought with them enabled them to lock the doors ; but to replace the seal, which had been fixed upon them, was not in their ability ; and it will be recol¬ lected, that its having been broken through created no inconsiderable consternation in the castle. Believing that he might, at certain times, desire to possess the power of informing Eleonora that she lived in his thoughts, he appointed to her the signal, which we are already acquainted that his letter informed her would ever announce him to her, when chance fated him to be near her; but near- Iv three months passed without his putting it into effect : he durst not disclose to her either «his real character or his assumed one, and therefore he feared to sec hcr. But m the period at which he was to leave Worcestershire drew near, unable to en¬ dure the idea of quitting it without be¬ holding her, he selected a night for once more visiting the subterraneous passage, without any fixed plan relative to the ad¬ vantage
vantage which he was to reap from so doing. The night chanced to bc that very one on which Sir Eldred Pemberton and his detachment of guards arrived at the castle ; and the bustle and confusion, which prevailed throughout the edifice, grcatlv surprised Godolphin, and withheld him from emerging from bis hiding-place. About an hour after the dawn of day, hc beheld, from the entrance to his retreat, thc departure of the cavalcade which escorted Latimer ; and fearing that Eleonora was included in the number of travellers, he v.as about to return to the residence ofthe bandiiti, when, as he was quiting thc sub¬ terraneous passage, her voice, proceeding from a window in the castle, immediately above the spot from whence he was issuing, struck his ear ; and although he durst not then address her, he assumed courage to give the signal for which he had prepared her. Thc day previous to that appointed for his departure into Suffolk arrived, without 'mì his
bis having been able to gain an opportu¬ nity of revisiting Worcester Castle ; re¬ solved, at any hazard, to attempt to be¬ hold her on whom his soul doated, he once more, at eve, quitted the residence of the banditti for that purpose ; hc had disguised himself in-the garb of a peasant, and, on his wav to thc castle, to his infinite terror, m· ' chance so fated it, that hc was overtaken by a body of guards, sent in pursuit of him by the queen, and accompanied by a troop of hinds, who, either from curiosity or loyalty, had joined them. What steps could he pursue ? None ap¬ peared to him so promising as that of pro¬ fessing himself a friend to their cause, and joining in their search; and we have seen with what success he, by this stratagem, pre¬ vented their recognising his person, and by the same means procured a momentary sight of Eleonora. A few words are necessary to explain on what account Worcester Castle had been suspected by the crown of concealing the rebel
rebel Godolphin. A chain of accidental circumstances had informed the robbers with whom Godolphin had leagued pre¬ viously to the time of his murdering Bran¬ ville, of the rank and name of their new comrade ; and as he had not returned to them since that time, believing it possible that he might be lying concealed in some part of the building, it was, at their insti¬ gation, that the royal guards had been sent to inspect the recesses of the castle; but the informers were disappointed ofthe re¬ ward, which thcy had buoyed themselves up vvith the expectation of receiving, on his apprehension. When the royal guards, and those who were accompanying them, had quitted Worcester Castle, the earth was already wrapt in the darkness of night, and Godol¬ phin, profiting by the obscurity of the hour, fled, with precipitancy, to the safety ofhis own residence. But whilst we unfold Sir Percival's pro¬ ceedings, relative to his passion for Eleo¬ nora,
nora, wc must not omit to detail otlier plans, which at the same time occupied his imagination. We have already mentioned a youth, who was seated at the door of the collage on the heath, on the evening on wlueh Godol¬ phin first approached it. This youth, who- e name was William Fetherstone, was thc nephew of one of the band, now dead. At the time ofhis uncle's becoming a member of the fraternity, the boy. having no other protector, was received into the eommu- nifv as a servant : he was a youth ofa weak and imbecile mind, ofa wan countenance, and sickly constitution ; and as Godolphin grew in intimacy with his features, he be¬ held in him a striking resemblance of the late King Edward. He imparted his opinion to-his associates, and all of those who had ever beheld the king, acknowledged the justness of the observation. Over this resemblance the active mind of Sir Percival brooded; it was the temper of his soul to hazard any danger,,
danger, in the attempt of securing a gain which was worth possessing : and he pro¬ posed to the fraternity the bokl essay of producing this youth to the people oí England, as their deceased monarch r their dispositions were similar to his own ; they rated not what villany they engaged in. so it promi cd them an amendment of their fortunes,—and they willingly acquiesced in Uh proposal. On returning into Suffolk» Sir Percival found thc same spirit to animate the hearts of those ofthe fraternity who there held their abode; and Godolphin and his friends immediately began to sketch out the plan of iheir fixture proceedings and to tutor the youth for the character that he vvas to assume. The joy of Kir Pcrcivaľi soul wa^ almost uncontrollable : could he succeed in plac¬ ing thc i m рои or upon the throne, he should, in every respect but the name, be kin« himself. What a triumph for one in his present
present fallen state !—But ashc was sensible that he required able adherents to bring his scheme to maturity, and consciotts, fcj-m ã review of past circumstances, that no ï could be regarded as a more steady friend to the late monarch than Lord Henry Fitz¬ roy, he resolved to appoint a meeting with bim. Having conveyed to him, by one of his freebooters, that epistle, of which the con* tents have already been laid before our readers, he proceeded to Fecknam Ileath ; and having secreted himself in the hollow trunk of a tree, where he remained con¬ cealed till he was convinced that no one but Lord Fitzroy himself was near* he came forth, and having made himself known to that nobleman, related to him the talc ivhich had been fabricated for the purpose, by himself and his associates. With the interest which Lord Henry's feelings expe¬ rienced in the detail, we are already ac¬ quainted; and Godolphin returned in triumph,
triumph, to inform the ravaging horde of the success which had attended the inter¬ view. In o»dcr to obviate, as much as possible, all questions which might lead to a detec¬ tion of tbe falsehood, thc youth Fether¬ stone was tutored to profess htmself in ex¬ treme ill health and weakness, and to pre¬ tend that the sufferings which he had en¬ dured had impaired his faculties ; for the same reason, it was judged prudent to as· sign him a pretendcdly deaf and dumb jailer ; which character Oliver de Vale took upon htmself to support ; and the decep¬ tion was rendered still stronger, by a trivial accident ; which was, that one of the mem¬ bers of the ravaging band chanced to be the \ery jeweller who had made a ring, that had been presented by Lord Fitzroy as a pre¬ sent of ailection to his brother Edward, and which this man undertook so exactly to imitate, that it could not bc known from thc real one, even upon comparison ; and he did not promise more than he was ab le to
to perform ; for it will be remembered, that when Godolphin, on arriving at Fram-. lingham Castle with Oliver de Vale, Wil¬ liam Fetherstone, and a few others of his adherents,sent this ring to Lord Fitzroy as a token of friendship, from the strangers who demanded admittance, Lord Henry re¬ ceived it as the very trinket which had been the gift of his fraternal love, and flew to give them welcome. It can scarcely require to be said, that the ruin, at which Eleonora and her friends took shelter from the rain, on the last day of their journey from Northamptonshire to Framlingham Castle, was the entrance to one ofthe haunts of Godolphin's asso¬ ciates, who was, at that very hour, engaged in admonishing them not to profess them¬ selves the adherents of his plan at its birth, unless they were resolved stoutly lo sup¬ port him through it ; and the exclamation of <( Beware í beware !" which she overheard in the second chamber, was a part of the caution which he was delivering to them. The
The daring and inventive spirit, wdiich animated Fabian's heart, caused him to be admitted to ihe secret of the supposed Ed¬ ward's existence, by Sir Sigismund Blunt and Lord Henry Fitzroy, as an ally of uti¬ lity ; by him accordingly were Godolphin iind his companions beheld after their intro¬ duction into Framlingham Castle; andin the deaf and dumb jailer, Fabian, tu his surprise, recognised his brother Oliver; but conscious that this brother was not known to any one in the castle, except it were Godolphin, and being immediately convinced that some act of deception was practising, he forbore to acknowledge him; but awaiting an opportunity for see¬ ing him alone, learnt from him every par¬ ticular of thc existing imposition. The similarity of disposition which ex¬ isted in Sir Percival and in Fabian, had rendered them intimates in their vouth ; m> * and this intimacy was now not only re¬ newed, but strengthened ; for Godolphin, aware that Fabian could not do otherwise than
than recollect Oliver, although some years had elapsed since they had beheld each other, admitted him to his confidence, to ensure, as he hoped, his friendship nnd silence. With chagrin did Sir Percival receive the intelligence of Geraldine's arrival at Fram¬ lingham Castle ; so far from desiring to see her, he wished her for ever removed from his sight. In the fulness and anxiety of his heart, h с disclosed his feelings to Fabian, who, by being appointed to attend upon him, had constant access to his apart¬ ment ; and when he breathed forth the name of Eleonora, in a sigh of passion, great was his astonishment at learning, that the same roof, beneath which he was at that inoment residing, sheltered her also. Immediately he resolved, at any hazard, to behold her. Fabian, the useful Fabian, accordingly pointed out to him, at midnight, the terrace beneath her window. Eleonora complied with his signal, and descended at thesound. He found herscntimcntsconcern- ing
ing him unchanged ; and he informed her, that the veil of mystery, vvhich had hitherto obscured his conduct, would be quickly withdrawn. He might have asserted that her conduct appeared equally mysterious to him, as his was regarded by her ; for the favour which she, at that interview, be¬ sought him to extend to the rebel Godol¬ phin, was an enigma beyond his powers of solution. He now determined upon the re¬ moval of the unfortunate and innocent Geraldine from earth ; he considered not, that a mind of delicacy like Eleonora's, on the disclosure of his name, must abhor him, for the professions of arfection which he had made to her during the existence of an amiable being, who had a sole claim on his love, if she did not even suspect villany to have been connected with her death.— Passion and vanity blinded him to every consideration, but that of opening a path for the accomplishment of his desires. During the period that Sir Percival had lived
lived the chief of the freebooters, he had become the possessor of considerable wealth, and, with a liberal portion of this, he bribed the heart of Fabian, which was ever susceptible to the touch of gold, to become his confederate in his villanous plan. To this end, he directed Fabian to procure him a poison, of a slow but certain effect : and the unrelenting husband, hav¬ ing infused its subtle powers into some fruit, placed it on a table in his apartment, against an hour at which he knew that Lady Godolphin would visit him. He was too well acquainted with the de¬ light with which she always received any little attention from him, to fear that she should refuse to partake of the fruit, at his invitation. The event was answerable to bis guilty wishes; Geraldine eat, and died. Lady Godolphin having ceased to breathe, Fabian bore to her husband in¬ formation of the issue of his villany ; joy and triumph glowed in his diabolical heart; and scarcely able to credit the fact of her no
no longer existing a restraint upon hh future plans, he besought Fabian to find the means of suffering him to behold her. Fabian consented to conduct him at mid¬ night by a private way to her chamber ; and scarcely was Godolphin convinced that tiie sleep of death sealed her eyes, ere the shriek of Eleonora caused him and his nefarious associate to fly from thc chamber. Fabian conducted Godolphin back to his own apartment, and, from that hour, beheld him no more ; his future moments being entirely occupied in the service of Sir Hildebrand. Between Sir Hildebrand and Fabian it had been agreed, that the latter should leave him ïr^c access to the apartments of Valentine, at the hour when he went to conduct Godolphin to the funeral, chamber of Geraldine. The events of that nmht we О are already acquainted with. Although Sir Hildebrand was, from this time, held a prisoner by the command of Lord Fitzroy, in his apartments, Fabian was VOL. III. il not
not restrained from attending upon him.*— It was with some difficulty that Sir Hilde¬ brand was able to convince him that hc was ignorant of the fate of Valentine. Having at length, by the earnestness of his decla¬ rations, obtained Fabian's belief to the fact, Sir Hildebrand besought him, in the most vehement terms, to assist him in the execution of some act of revenge upon those at whose hands he conceived himself to have received injuries that demanded redress. Thus urged, Fabian began to reflect iu v*hat manner he might once more serve himself, by serving Sir Hildebrand. After a considerable debate with his own mind, the plan which he formed was this :—To impart to Sir Hildebrand that the pretended Fdward was an impostor; to urge him to proceed to London, and lay information of what was passing within the walls of Fram¬ lingham Castle before the queen, and to bind Sir flildebrand in an agreement, to present him to the queen, as the discovcrtr of
ofthe treason ; a service for which he did not doubt that he shoukl be rewarded, with that independence which it had been so long the desire of his soul to possess. With the rapture of an enraged spirit, Sir Hildebrand listened to Fabian's words, and, without hesitation, acceded to his terms. Nothing, therefore, now remained but to efiect Sir HİIdebrand's escape from his present captivity. Again the fertile imagination of Fabian was called iioon to exert itself; the night was СлЫ approach¬ ing on which ancient tradition related that the spirit of Berick traversed the cnstlehalls; Sir HİIdebrand's prison was in the very suite of chambers where it was said to be¬ come visible ; to provide Sir Hildebrand, therefore, vvith a suit of vestments similar tt) those in vvhich thc spectre was reported to appear, seemed to promise him an easy egress from thc castle. At every haz arel, the attempt was resolved to be made ;— and Fabian, under pretence of bearing to Sir Hildebrand a change of apparel, con- N - veved
veyed to him a disguise, adapted to their purpose. This circumstance took place on the morningof the twenty-first of June; and it had been agreed between them, that they were to meet no more within the castle walls: but Sir Hildebrand, on examining Fabian's parcel, found that he had omitted the lamp and dagger ; he accordingly wrote a few words to inform him of his neglect, and dispatched them to him by one of his attendants. The hour was already late ; and Fabian, fearful of again visiting Sir HİIdebrand's apartments, lest suspicion should attend his entering them at a time at which he had never before been accus¬ tomed todo so, wrote to him a few lines in return, directing him, as soon as it was dark, to let down a string from one of his casements, and promising him, that what¬ ever he required, he should receive fas¬ tened to it. Sir Hildebrand followed his directions, and thus obtained the remainder of his equipment; and a part of the rent note,
note, which he had received from Fabian, was the scrap of paper found by Lawrence in his apartment on the following morning, and from which Lord Henry learnt who had been his accomplice in his escape. We are already acquainted with the suc¬ cess which attended thc plan of these asso¬ ciates in villany ; suffice it therefore to add, that having met, as they had appointed, on a spot at the distance of a league from Framlingham Castle, they proceeded, with the greatest speed, to London, where they found little difficulty in obtaining an inter¬ view ofthe queen. The haughty soul of Mary, it may rea¬ dily be imagined, w T as not more inflamed by the act of treason, which had been plan¬ ning against her sovereignty, than in the secret recesses of her heart she was de¬ lighted, that the same circumstance pre¬ sented her with an opportunity for shower¬ ing down her long-cherished ire upon Lord Henry Fitzroy; and, as a reward for Sir HİIdebrand's conduct, she immediately n 3 invested
invested him with thc command of those troops, which were destined to lead the of¬ fenders against her majesty in chains to her feet ; whilst, to Fabian, td\e presented a remuneration more than equal to his high¬ ly-raised hopes. The forces destined for this expedition were assembled with all possible alacrity ; and their union being formed, their march towards Framlingham Castle was immedi¬ ately commenced. We have seen the event of their attack upon its venerable walls, and may now proceed to the conse¬ quences of that day's victory.
CHAR
CHAP. VUL « Avaunt, tlıou dreadful minister of hell !" RtcMAftD τ« к Thuo,
" — — ■ - « ■-. ..... Men that make Envy and cţooked sudice nourishment, Bare bhe tbt avsl." IUnry the Eighth, Sad is the hour of captivity, and more heart-rending is it to the soul of feeling to know those whom it loves, subject to the conqueror's tyrant nod, than to behold its own limbs bound by the fetters of slavery. Such were the sensations experienced by Lord Henry Fitzroy, Saint Ethelbert, and LIconora., on their sonowful journey Ιό¬ ν 4 wards
wards the metropolis—a journey in which Eleonora was a voluntary captive. When the riot of conquest had subsided, and the awful silence which succeeded the shouts of victory, admitted of Eleonora's indulging in reflections more agonizing to her heart than the tumult of the war, which had almost turned her sense to madness— whilst her tears were yet flowing, in the anguish of real affection, for the fate of her beloved protectress, Lady Blunt, Sir Hildebrand burst into her apartment. She started, nay, even shrieked at his entrance ; ten thousand various horrors appeared to unite in his person. Regardless of her emotion, he exclaimed—" Well, Lady, I am become a more gallant man fhan when we last discoursed together on the subject of love. I have learnt to adapt myself to a lady's fancies. I am come to lay the laurels of my victory atwour feet." Eleonora did not djáfgn to reply ; she turned upon him p/look of the keenest eloquence. " Nay,
ft Nay, come, come," he added, appear¬ ing perfectly to comprehend her feelings, f( away vvith affectation ; vanity is every woman's ruling passion ; you will only display the distinguishing characteristic о л your sex, by indulging in İt; therefore no more of these idle grimaces, but deck yourself in the smiles and apparel vvhich become a conqueror's bride ; for as such it is my intention to present you to the queen, whose brightest favour shines upon me." (< Rather," returned Eleonora, empha¬ tically, " let us assume the sable weeds of lamentation, and bewail the death of her whose living virtues we shall never equal." With a smile between remorse and con¬ tempt, he replied—* f What ! is it your philosophy, that such as live should pass a life of weeping lethargy for those who have preceded them to the grave ? 'Tis well to deck their tombs with marble statues, to represent our woes for us ; but the warm heart of man, which nature sways, seeks n 5 love
love and joy amidst the living, not the dead ; therefore come, my bride—on with your brave apparel." " Sir Hildebrand," pronounced Eleonora firmly, fc the effrontery with which you, beneath whose relentless poniard I have bled, venture to address me, is not more astonishing to my senses than is the brutal language in which you utter yonr disgrace¬ ful sentiments, abhorrent to my feelings. To your suit, you have long since had my reply. Since that hour, so many enormi¬ ties have swelled the catalogue of your crimes, that were I adjudged to suffer death upon the rack, and from that agony, no act could save me, but the union of my hand vvith your's, I'd fly for refuge to the tor¬ turing wheel, and name it mercy, when compared with your embrace." A frown ofthe deadliest rage overspread the features of Sir Hildebrand, and he cried—" Now mark me. imperious lady—. in my heart, love and pride are equal passions; if you will not yield to the first, 4 the
the second, willing or not, you shall gra¬ tify. Thus, since you refuse to ascend with me my triumphal chariot as my ac- knowleoged wife, bound in the fetters of slavery, your charms shall aeld a grace to swell the glory of my xontpjest. Hear you that, Jady?" " I hear, and .bend submissive to the will «xf Heaven," answered Eleonora ; c< without itssanotion,your resolution would be vain." " With to-morrow's dawn you .will re¬ lent," exclaimed Sir Hildebrand, "Never," replied .Eleonora. Ά half smothered .exclamation, between .disappointment and .passion, burst from ■his lips, and he darted out of the apart¬ ment. Sleepless and wretched passed thc night with Eleonora, attended only by Sir HİIde¬ brand's dependants, and unable to gain any intelligence of Lord Fitzroy. Scarcely did the night appear to hcr to have assumed ¡is sablcst form, ere the confused sounds, which issued drom слегу part of the build- -Л tí İng,
ing, announced to her that the dawn, with which Sir Hildebrand had threatened her, was near breaking. In order to augment the pride of his . triumph, Sir Hildebrand ' had resolved to lead in chains every adherent of Lord Fitz¬ roy's who had survived the siege; and lit¬ ters were provided for the wounded, that the number might not be diminished by their absence. When the order for march¬ ing was given, the captives w T ere stationed in the midst of the victorious forces ; no greater indulgence was shewn to Lord Fitzroy than to his soldiers ; the favour of the victor was extended to none, except to Eleonora and the father Saint Ethelbert ; to them the indulgence of horses was per¬ mitted, whilst their fellow-sufferers were constrained to perform their journey on foot ; but they were informed, that on reaching the л icinîty of London, they would be compelled to undergo the same humiliating fate. Every severity, which the unfeeling heart
heart of a tyrant could lead him to exer¬ cise upon the unhappy beings whom the fate of war had bowed under the yoke of his subjugation, d*d his captives experience from Sir Hildebrand. Impatient to pre¬ sent himself a conqueror at the feet of the queen, he permitted no delay to take place in their progress; and the fatigue of exercise, added to the extreme heat of the weather, oppressed with debility even such as were in health ; whilst the agony of those who were suffering from their wounds, was increased to an almost intole¬ rable degree. Of this number was Lord Fitzroy; the wound which had been inflicted on his shoulder by the arrow, and which would, in all probability, have yielded, with the utmost readiness, to the skill of surgery, by the omission of such attendance as was requisite to its cure, added to the irritation produced by constant exercise, rankled wiih an agony scarcely endurable, and threatened consequences of a fatal nature. But
But too proud to sue for relief or mercy to fhe unfe ей ag conqueror, Lord 'Henry bore the smart with a fortitude which appeared to bid defiance to the tyrant, and drew the tears of mingled praise and pity into the eyes of his compassionating soldiers. Fortunately forthe feelings of Eleonora, she was constrained to move at so great a distance from Lord Henry, that she knew not of his stŕrferings, and consoled herself wkh an accidental glimpse, which the wind¬ ing' of the road sometimes enabled her to catch ofhis form. The provisions distributed to the captives were not better than the treatment which they in other respects experienced ; and with these they were only supplied at early mom, and once again at eve. By night thev were compelled to snatch a short and unrefťesbing slumber on the damp earth, tmcntiopicd from the falling dews, which were equally inimical to ihe restoration of the wounded to health, as were the scorch¬ ing ¡rays of the sun by day. The conqueror reposed
reposed in his tent ; and tbe indulgence of a covering from the air was permitted by bim to Eleonora and her venerable com¬ panion. They had now travelled five days, their road having lain almost constantly across naked heaths, where few springs had pre¬ sented themselves, and the greatest misery of the captives had arisen from the scanty portions of water allowed them, when, to¬ wards thc hour of noon, on the sixth dav, m' thera} s of the sun, darting fire upon their unsheltered heads, Lord Fitzroy, from whose lips the hardness of his fate had not yet drawn one single murmur, in faint and broken accents, exclaimed— " If a draught of water be not given to mc, I shall sink." His tones were fully expressive of ihe truth of his declaration ; and one of his guards, by whom his words had been overheard, touched with the impulse of humanity, drew a small flask from his pouch, and pre¬ sented it to him, saying—■'·" I wish this vessel
vessel contained more ; what is remaining in it is at your service." With gratitude Lord Henry received İt, and was hastily carrying it to his lips, when, at the moment that the cooling- draught was about to moisten his parched tongue, his eye fell upon one of his own leaders, who was borne on a litter by his side. The unfortunate man was su Aerina: under three gun-shot wounds, from which it was imagmed fhat he could not recover; his groans, for the few last hours, had been of the most dreadful nature ; and, at the moment that Lord Fitzroy observed him, he had raised himself upon his side—his trembling hands were clasped together, and his starting orbs fixed in the wildness of desire, upon the flask which contained the water. It was an appeal to the feelings, which a heart of sensibility, like Lord Fitzroy's, could not resist. Without tasting its con¬ tents, he put the flask hito the hand of the suppliant.
suppliant. Scarcely able to articulate, the object of his compassion falteringìy pro¬ nounced— iC No, no, this is too kind—too good ; I will not laste it till the thirst of my commander be allayed." Lord Henry believed the necessities of the leader to bc more painful even than his own. The soldier vvho had given him the flask had informed him that it contained very Yittle ; that little divided might not be of service to either. Thus impressed, he put the vessel to his lips, and pretended to partake of the water which it held ; but without having diminished it one drop, he returned it into the hand of the sufferer by his side. With the wildest avidity, the wounded leader swallowed the single mouthful which it contained.— (f God reward you," he ex¬ claimed, addressing Lord Fitzroy ; " you have saved my life !" if If it be at the expence of my own," reflected Lord Henry, {t I have received a gratification to sweeten death/' Towards
Towards the approach of evening, the narrow arın ofa river crossing their path, an order was issued for making its banks their resting-place for the ensuing night. Free access to the water was an indulgence which the sufferers from thirst knew not how to temper-—it was a joy leading to de¬ struction. But a few moments had elapsed, after Lord Henry had assuaged the burning fever of his lungs, ere a trembling chill seized his limbs, and internal pains racked his writhing frame. These symptom« having continued for nearly three hours, with scarcely an inter¬ val of ease, the senses of the sufferer be¬ came affected, and incoherent expressions^. natural to a bewildered brain» flowed from his tongue. It was now deemed requisite by his guard to inform Sir flildebrand of the situ¬ ation ofhis prisoner; and Sir Hildebrand, judging that bis triumphal entry into London with the rebels, at the anticipation of which event his feelings dilated to rap¬ ture,
ture, would be imperfect, without the living Fitzroy, bowed down by chains, were seen amidst the captive band, directed him tobe bôrne to a tent, and every measure to be pursued which could tend to his recovery. Scarcely had his orders to this effect been observed, ere a centinél, at one of the outposts, gave information that he beheld a considerable force advancing. Immedi¬ ate steps were taken to learn whither they were marching, and by whom led ; and through Fabian, who was acquainted with the proceedings of the party which he had so villanously deserted, they were dis¬ covered to bc Godolphin, Sic Thomas Staf¬ ford, and their adherents, on their way to London ; from which city they were, at that time, not above ten miles distant. Sir Hildebrand instantly sent out a he¬ rald, to acquaint them with the events which had taken place since Godolphin had quitted Framlingham Castle, and to require of ihem to surrender themselves into his hands. To this humiliation thcy pcrcmptorily
peremptorily refused to submit ; and Sir Hildebrand, having resolved to attack them at the dawn of thc following day, placed his horse, to prevent their crossing the arm of the river which intersected their path. Godolphin and his adherents, not less de¬ termined on battle than Sir Iliidcbrand, judging, that if they were able to over¬ come the force then opposed to them, they might turn the tide of public affairs in favour of their cause, hav ing stationed a guard to warn them of the enemy's pro¬ ceedings, composed themselves for thc night. The number of men led by Sir Per¬ cival Godolphin and Sir Thomas Stafford, was at most seven hundred ; the chances were therefore decidedly against them, in their intended contest with the forces under the command of Sir Hildebrand ; but they still resolved to adventure the struggle, as they trusted that Sir Sigismund Blunt and Lord Henry Grey, who v%erc following their steps with twice their number of men, would
would arrive in fisne to reinf«irce their strength. Accordingly, with the ensuing dawn, the din of tvar attain soiimlecl thron *h the skv. and the fide of НГс !1оч%еЛ к reeking over the &and) plain. The ι en к in one of which sat the trembling Ficoimra, were deserted, sive by a few domc>ti<.s ;:nd cen¬ tinels.—When the battle had гз$;Н for nearly three hours, the conversation of two of these men» from whom she was. divided only by the intcn ening гапгач of wbkh the tent was formed» roinmiintcated to her the sufferings of Lortl Henry Fit/rot.— Mingled horror and affection, almost wound tophreoľv, seized upon her senses. ** Father, blefied father ľ" she exclaimed. addressing »Saint Fthelbert, by whom the words of the attendants had likewise been overheard, ,ť let ns eudeavoyr tt» sec him, and console him ; we can but fait in our attempt ;—it is a cruelty not to essay it."—-Asshe spoke, she flew tti the entrance of the tent ; the centtnel withheld her from passing
passing through İl.— " For thc love of mercy/* she cried, " deny not my petition ; procúreme a guide to Lonl Fitzroy, and i will reward both yon and him, beyond the merit of your service !" Hcr dress was 4tH thc same as she had worn on the morning destined for her nuptials; the pearls whh h weie entwined with the plaits of her luir, had, fill this moment, been forgotten by her ; thcy now hippi! ν recti r red to her memory ; she tore them from her head, and presented them b» the <:azc of the centinél ; he kr.cw thei: value; thc temptation was too Mrong for resistance, and he became himself her guide to thc tent of the rovai prisoner ;- * the feeble Saint Ethelbert following hcr with trembling steps. Prostrate on the earth, upon which he had thrown himself from a rough couch, which had been intended lor his bed, did Kleonora behold the brother of her aflec¬ tion.—Casting herself by his side, and pressing her hand on hir, she cried—*' Oh, my
my Fitzroy. dost t hu ι« not recognise thy Eleonora ? О look up> and behold who it isthat addresses thee/* Truly was the present a moment of af¬ fliction and of horror. The film of death veiled hk eyes; his thread of life was al¬ most drawn to its extremity ! Having gazed upon her. for a few in¬ stants, în silence, w»tb the wildest emotion of countenance— ** Yes, yes, it must be¬ st»/" he saut ; ** I have passed thc gulph of dcith, and meet my love again in Heaven here are no wars, no fiend«, to interrupt «ur peace ; all here is joy, and we will nt τ er— never part again/* The burnin.; tears rolled down his fe¬ vered cheeks ; he continued to gaze upon her, but his sense seemed imperfect, and gradually to fade, as hc contemplated hcr. " Thou art my sister— Ά las ! my sister/" he, in faint accents, pronor.nced.—At this moment a burst of musquetry, from the field of war, reverberated through the air ; he started at-the sound.— tf Hark !** he ex¬ claimed,
claimed, ec the foe approaches ; it is the king's life they aim at.—Give me my buckler—quick, quick—is hc not my brother?—My sword, too—to the fight— to the nght—I fall or conquer for the king and Eleo ------." The sentence died upon his tongue; hc sunk into the arms of his attendants, and, in a sigh of agony, wafted bis soul to Heaven. " He dies! —he dies!" exclaimed the frantic Eleonora. —" О save him, ye powers of mercy—save him—save him !" " Dead ! Can he be dead ?" pronounced Saint Ethelbert, in a tone of horror, which appeared to touch even the hearts ofthe attendant soldiers.—" Has he died without knowing me ?—Oh, why did I not disclose myself to tliee, my beloved son ?" And, as he uttered these words, he cast himself upon the corpse, with sighs expressive of the deepest misery. A solemn silence now prevailed in the tent ; the father did not speak ; nor did he raise his face from the bosom of the de¬ ceased
ceased Lord Henry. Fdeonora, leaning for support ίο her trembling limbs upon the couch> stood a silent effigy of despair and astonishment ; with which latter sensation the words of Saint Eihelbert had inspired hcr. What could he have meant, by ex¬ pressing his repentance that Lord Fitzroy had died without knowing him, and by naming him his son ? Eminently as Eleonora herself stood in need of consolation, she still endeavoured to administer the offices of friendship to the apparently still more wretched Saint Ethelbert ; but it was, for a considerable time, in vain that she endeavoured to awaken his attention,—At length he spoke. ·* Thou art in Iieaven, my child," hc said ; " thy abode is now amidst thc saints, my adored son!" and, as hc uttered these words, he turned his eyes upon Eleonora. " Your son r —vour child ?" stammered forth Eleonora, in a tone of enquiry. "Yes, my son," replied the holy man ; ·* I am his parent, and your's also; ye are voi., m. о alike
^like the children of my blood and my af- 'fection ; I behold one of you, ignorant of ¿iny existence, locked in the embrace of death : to the other, I can no longer for- bear to acknowledge myself—View me— gaze upon me ; do you not, beneath this disguise, recollect the features of Agatha? It is Agatha who addresses you ; Agatha, and your mother !" Eleonora fell into her extended arms, and, as she pressed her to her bosom, and bedewed her face with her tears, the asto¬ nished maid exclaimed— ft If you are in¬ deed my mother, and a sensation of thril¬ ling joy, unknown before, informs methat you are, why have I thus long been kept in ignorance of my birth ?—What mystery has occasioned this concealment ?" Ere Agatha eould reply, the dreadful clamour of the war increased suddenly to a soul-appalling height, and evidently ap¬ proached towards them. From the soldiers who surrounded the tent, they learnt that Lord Henry Grey and Sir Sigismund Blunt, with
with their forces, had joined the battle, ac¬ cording to Godolphin's expectations, and that the equal strength of the contending parties rendered the fight bloody beyoud parallel. " Sir Sigismund in the field ! " exclaimed Eleonora ) " how dreadful is the idea ofa son and a father opposed thus to each other ! How abandoned to guilt—how fiend-like must be the heart of Sir Hilde¬ brand !" tc Not blacker in depravity than his fa¬ ther's," replied Agatha ; ft the justice of Heaven has placed the son a scourge upon the parent's crimes. Sir Sigismund him¬ self is a monster of iniquity !" Still the report of the fire-arms, the shouts of the assailants, the sniieks of the wounded» resounded through the air, and with awe thcy listened to the mingled clangor, till footsteps, entering the fent, attracted their attention, and, in the midst ofa body of guards, they beheld Sir Sigis- o '2 mund
mund Blunt, Jaden with chains, a prisoner of war. He fixed his eyes alternately on Eleo¬ nora, on the dead body of Lord Henry, and on the supposed Saint Ethelbert ; then casting himself upon a couch, be raised his clasped hands in silence towards Heaven. " This is indeed a dreadful hour," said Agatha, addressing him ; "and happy is it fcr those who dare to lift their thoughts, as well as hands, towards Heaven. Are you one of those ?" " I cannot doubt the mercy of Omnipo¬ tence/' replied Sir Sigismund. " But have you no despair of obtaining it, produced by the consciousness of your own demerits ?" asked the recluse ; " have vou no recollection of past offences, which embitters your present fate? Perhaps the tumult of your mind does not allow you, at this moment, to remember the aguish fear, which shook your limbs, when you were
were once entreated to seek shelter be¬ neath a ruin where------." " I know what you would say," returned Sir Sigismund ; fr and I confess the weak¬ ness of my nature. But why, at this im¬ portant moment, revert to that occur¬ rence ?" " I would ask," replied Agatha, *' whe¬ ther to enter that ruin were not a task of greater horror to yourself, than to oppose your breast to an enemy's sword ?" i( Such I grant to be the prejudice by which my feelings are swayed," was the reply. " And whence does the sensation, which you call prejudice, arise r" demanded Agatha; " from conscious guilt, which dares not contemplate the spot which it has blackened with its crimes ; that ruin was the scene of your's; within those mouldering Avails you instigated your sub¬ servient fiends to murder !" A dreadful expression overspread Sir o ¿i Sigis-
Sigismundo countenance.— *' f Who/' he ex¬ claimed, " has betrayed------1 would say, who has propagated to you this falsehood relative to your sister ?" €i My sister, say you ?" returned Agatha ; " you connect, with inconceivable aptness for an innocent man, the name of Ladv Elizabeth Talboyse with the idea of murder. Fabian and Oliver de Vale have been more cautious not to betray themselves for the instruments of your crime." A deep groan burst from the lips of Sir Sigismund, and the convulsive emotion of hii- features increased. i( Well mayest thou groan, thou double murderer," continued Agaihn ; " for at the moment tby relentless voice raised the steel against hcr life, she bore within her the offspring of thy blood; thou standst accursed, therefore, as the murderer of thy wife and child !" tc Merciful God ! my child !" pro¬ nounced Sir Sigismund. —Then addressing Agatha,
Agatha, he added— C( Thy proof of this, or, by my soul, thy life shall answer for the falseness of thine accusation/* " That proof exists/' replied Agatha, (( in all the purity of angel-innocence ; a, charm combined from every virtue ; a lustre reflected from each perfection—— behold it here in Eleonora— she is— thy CHIID !" The blood fled from his lips,; his eyes sunk into their sockets; he buried his face in the palms of his hands. A lengthened gasp granted him the powes-4>f utterance, and he said— " It is, it must be so— Eleo¬ nora cannot have forgotten the emotion with which I first beheld hcr in the chapel at Castle Gower: I traced, at that moment, a resemblance in her features to those of her mother, but believed it impossible that any connection in blood could exist be¬ tween them."—Casting himself upon his- knees by the side of Eleonora, he continued speaking thus:— <r О perfect and angelic being, if thou be indeed my child, acknow- o 4 ledge
ledge me thy father, by uniting thy prayers with mine, to obtain thc intercession of thy mother's spirit for the remission of my sins at the throne of crace !" Agatha spoke.— (t The act of murder, and the intention of committing it, are, in their heinousness, the same; thou deservest, therefore, to expiate thy crime in death ; and I could substantiate facts that would lead thee to the scaffold, without a single eye to weep at the retribution which thy guilt would suffer; but thou art humbled; thy heart is writhing with misery and re¬ morse : for her own peace of mind, the injured Elizabeth has therefore taken suf¬ ficient vengeance on thee !" Cm? " Elizabeth ! sayst thou ?" breathed forth Sir Sigismund. " Elizabeth !" was the reply.— " If the tones of her voice are no longer familiar to thine car, perhaps the lineaments of her coimtenance may still be recognizable to thine eye. See, and behold them !" and, as the supposed Saint Ethelbert uttered theso
these w'ordsj she threw back her cowl, and casting off the fleecy locks and snowy beard, which had hitherto swept herbosom r displayed a feminine countenance of equal majesty and beauty. To Eleonora she stood confessed, the recluse Agatha ; to Sir Sigis¬ mund, the once gay and fascinating Lady Elizabeth Talboyse. te it is she ! it is Elizabeth !" in frantic accents exclaimed Sir Sigismund. — ŕ£ Oh God of mercy, accept the thanksgiving of a repentant heart, for thy frustration of its guilty purpose !"—Then addressing Lady Talboyse, he added—" О most revered, most injured being, since thou hast at length deigned to confess to me thy ex¬ istence, why hast thou thus long concealed it from me ?" " Could I assume the courage, or enter¬ tain the inclination," replied Lady Eliza¬ beth, "of returning to him who had at¬ tempted to deprive me of life? For seve¬ ral months after my escape from yonr as о 5 saisin 4 .
sassìns, my sufferings in mind and health were equal. During that period, I gave birth to this innocent bein£. When amendment visited me, and I began to en¬ joy sufficient recollection to turn my thoughts towards the retribution of wdiich your conduct was deserving, I learnt that you had given your hand to the amiable, the virtuous Lady Thomasine Gower.— Myself a sufľerer, I was capable of feeling for others ; and no advantage of my own could have bribed me to the wanton cruelty of unfolding to her that she had taken a criminal and lawless husband to her arms. She nov/ resis in the peaceful sleep of death : without hesitation, therefore, I now appear to goad your soul, by presenting to your guiiiy view the child at whose exist¬ ence you had aimed a blow, ere it had yet seen the light of day !" " Leiwe me—quit me—Oh in mercy abandon me !" cried Sir Sigismund ; "con¬ science supplies thc curses which your lips withhold.
withhold. You are revenged—there is no torture keener than the pangs which rend. my heart !" At this instant a sudden clamor from the field of war swallowed up every other sound; and the loudness ofthe musquetry bespoke the combatants to be approaching. The. tent was almost immediately entered by some of HİIdebrand's guards, who, inform*· ing them that Godolphin's party was at that. moment victorious, and pouring down upon their camp, hurried them away, for/ safety, to a distant quarter. Eleonora, whose senses were bewildered, by the late events of her life, neither com¬ plied with their arrangement, nor objected- to it, but almost void of recolleciion, suf¬ fered herself to be borne away by them ;. whilst Lady Elizabeth, having snatched one- sad, one mournful kiss from the lips ofher lamented son, fiew, to uphold with her presence that daughter who now possessed. her undivided anxiety and love. Scarcely had they reached the. spot of о 6 security-
security to which the guards had conducted them, ere the forces under Sir Hildebrand, having made a successful stand against thc enemy, the fortune of the day appeared again to lean towards the friends of the queen ; and they had no sooner gained this advantage, than a command was issued for throwing aside their fire-arms, and hav¬ ing recourse to their swords and pikes.— The foe met their charge with equal wea¬ pons, and slaughter, in its bloodiest form, now stalked amidst the ranks. At length the die of fate was cast ; Sir Hildebrand obtained a second victory ; and Godolphin and his surviving adherents were thrown into chains.
CHAP.
CHAP. IX. " As, by degrees, ftom long, though gcnt'e rains, Great floods arise, and overflow the plains ; So men from little faults to great proceed, Guilt grows on guilt, and crimes do crimes succeed." Wandesfoao.
" To know my deed,—'twere best not know myself." Macbeth. We must now once more recur to the events of former years. It has already been said, tha* at the time of Sir Sigismund Blunt's union with Lady Elizabeth Tal¬ boyse, he was a young courtier of accom¬ plishments, but slender patrimony, and in¬ duced
duced to give her his hand by the persua¬ sions of the kingj and the dower which he bestowed on her. But a few months had passed over his head in the married state, ere he became re¬ pentant of having entered into it; the society of Lady Elizabeth did not please him ; and he likewise imagined that he might have formed a more advantageous connexion. The ideas which had taken root in the mind of Sir Sigismund he communicated to his bosom friend, Fabian de Vale ; and the crafty Fabian, considering that if it were possible for him to relieve his patron from the discontent vvith which his present mar¬ riage inspired him, he should bind him in an eternal debt of gratitude towards him¬ self/aggravated to him the misfortune of which he complained, and led him, by im¬ perceptible steps, to breathe a wish for the death of his wife. No sooner did Sir Sigismund express those ideas, which his artful friend had in¬ sinuated.
siľiiiatcd into his mind, than Fabian pre¬ tended to start back with honor from his proposal; but he was careful todo itin such a manneras by no means to damp Sir Sigismund's hope of seeing him become the instrument of his release from what he considered his present bondage, and im¬ mediately succeeded in obtaining from him the offer of an immense sum for his ser¬ vices. As we are acquainted that the nefarious act of depriving Lady Elizabeth of life was attempted, it cannot add to the interest of our tale to particularize the gradual steps by vvhich her criminal husband, and his villanous friend, proceeded towards the summit of their guilt. Suffice it to say, that on a journey which Sir Sigismund pre¬ tended to take with his wife, for the benefit of her health, he contrived to ride out with her one evening, attended only by Fabian, and that they directed their course towards the ancient ruin where dwelt Oliver de Vale, the freebooters' purveyor, in hi* 3 character
character of warrener, who had already been apprized by his brother of their com¬ ing, and was to receive a share of Sir Sigis- mund's liberality for his assistance in the deed of guilt. Having en tered thc ruin, Sir Sigismund, unable to witness the act of honor, of which he had instigated the commission, fled to a distant part of the building ;—■ whilst the iniquitous brothers dragged their astonished and terrified victim to the apart¬ ment known by the name of the second chamber. Deaf to her prayers and shrieks, Fabian had already plunged his dagger into her side, when he and Oliver were alarmed by approaching footsteps ; they were those of two gentlemen travelling that way, whom we have already described as having entered the dilapidated edifice for shelter from the inclemency ofthe weather. The iniquitous pair immediately fied from their approach, conveying the bleed¬ ing Lady Elizabeth farther into the intri¬ cacies of the building. Thcy succeeded in baffling
bafiling the pursuit ofthe travellers; but fearful of completing their villany, whilst they w T ere uncertain whether there might not be witnesses of their guilt lurking near them, they took separate paths, and stole cautiously forth, to observe if all danger had disappeared. After a considerable time, they heard the sound of horses feet receding from fhe ruin ; these they could not doubt to be those of the travellers, and they now returned, with determined minds, to the spot where they had left their inno¬ cent prey, but, to their surprise and con¬ fusion, Lady Elizabeth had quitted it.— They immediately sought herin every nook about the dilapidated walls, but in vain- Lady Elizabeth was no where to be found. Mortified as were Fabian and his brother at her unaccountable disappearance, they had still suilicient policy to resolve to con¬ ceal the circumstance from the knowledge of Sir Sigismund, lest, deeming the service for vvhich he had hired them unperformed, he should withhold from them their pro¬ mised
mised reward. Fabian was too well ac¬ quainted with Sir Sigismundo disposition, not to be sensible that various feelings, of which the nature may be easily conceived, would restrain him from demanding to be¬ hold the corpse of his wife, and therefore he entertained little fear of his discovering the truth. His opinion was verified by the event ; Sir Sigismund, on being informed that the deed was done, immediately fled from the spot where he believed it to have been perpetrated. A tale of the Lady Eliza¬ beth's sudden death was circulated through¬ out the kingdom ; and a coffin, said to con¬ tain her remains, was brought to Blacka¬ mor, where it was interred with every fu¬ neral honour, and even bedewed with the hypocritical tears ofher false husband. Oliver de Vale, belicv'itür, himself to have been recognised by the travellers, wisely obtained leave of the chief of the plundering band, amongst whom he was living, to exchange his abode to thcir ca¬ verna.
verns in Worcestershire; and was, from that time, no more seen by his brother Fabian, till introduced into Framlingham Castle by Godolphin, in the character of the pretended Edward's deaf and dumb jailer. Fabian continued to reside wilh his patron, and those enquiries, which he privately made, not gaining him any intel¬ ligence of Lady Elizabeth, he conjectured her to have bled to death of the wound which he had given her, in some nook, whither she had fled, fo avoid his brother and htmself. Once more at liberty in the world, Sir Sigismund, a second time, entered into the married state. Views of ambition prompted him to give his hand to Lady Thomasine Gower; and fearing that no heir would be born to him, to secure to his family the wealth which Lady Blunt inherited condi¬ tionally from her father, we have already seen that he again called into service thc talents of Fabian, by employing him to steal
steal a child, who should be brought up to represent his son. We arealso acquainted, that in the dis¬ guise of a mendicant, Fabian succeeded in committing his iniquitous theft at the house of a gentleman, by whom his pretended necessities had been relieved ; and the pe¬ riod is now arrived for explaining who was the benevolent man whose charity was re¬ warded with the loss of his only child.— The injured father was no other than the venerable Bishop Latimer, who had only a few days enjoyed the name of parent, when the beloved object, which conferred on him that happy title was torn from his arms. Fabian conveyed the child, without sus¬ picion, to Castle Gower ; and all the en¬ quiries set on foot by the wretched La¬ timer, after his lost infant, proved in vain. The disposition of Sir Sigismund had ever been nervous and irritable ; and the recollection of the crimes which he had committed,
eommitted, rested upon his mind with a heaviness which at times impelled him to withdraw himself from the world, and pass his hours in seclusion and repentance with¬ in his solitary chamber; whilst the only gratification which he received in life was the exercise of unlimited benevolence to¬ wards every irrational being which ap¬ peared an object of compassion in his eyes—a conduct by which he hoped, in the course ofhis existence, to perform a por¬ tion of good, adequate to the evil which he had committed ; and, by a perseverance in his plan, to lighten to himself the punish¬ ment which he dreaded in a future state.— The performance of one action of this na¬ ture did Eleonora witness, in his protection ofthe fish, on the first evening of her be¬ holding him from the eminence raised upon the bank of the river ; and a second met her observation, in his anxiety for admi¬ nistering comfort to the sick wood-cutter and his family. The solution just given of past events will
wiil sufficiently explain the reason of Sir Sigismund having discontinued those ha¬ bits of intimacy which had once subsisted between the family of Latimer and his own ; his mind was too nervous for vil¬ lany ; he could not encounter the gaze of the man whom he had so materially in¬ jured. Why he felt a reluctance to ac¬ company his friends in their visit to the portrait of Lady Elizabeth, must likewise be evident ; as also the motive of his pri¬ vate penance before it, which was acci¬ dentally witnessed by Eleonora : nor can it scarcely require to be said, that the be¬ lief which he entertained of Eleonora being the daughter of Latimer, caused him to make that confession which he imparted to her in the chapel of Framlingham Castle, when a connexion of circumstances had led him to suppose her heart devoted to the injured Valentine. It now remains to unfold from what cause even Eleonora had considered herself as the child of the worthy prelate. The hand
band of a villain often trembles, when he believes that his heart is firm. Such was the case with Fabian at the moment ofhis raising his arm against the life of Lady Elizabeth ; the wound which his poniard bad inflicted was neither deep nor dan¬ gerous. The space of time occupied by the villanous brothers, in watching thc de¬ parture of the travellers from the ruin, was the period of her salvation. With falter¬ ing steps, and stanching in the best manner she was able, the blootl which flowed from her side, by rending offa part of her vest¬ ments, which she bound upon it, she fled from the apartment in which they had left her; a heaven-directed chance conducted her to an outlet from the ruinous building, and a cavity in a neighbouring valley, which the twilight was just sufficientlv strong for her to observe, afforded ber a hiding-place from their search. Here she remained during the greatir part ofthe night, in a state of mind almost amounting to phrenzy ; with thc grey dawn she issued forth.
forth, anxious to remove herself from the spot which she judged it possible might still contain some of her enemies. Undecided what course to pursue, she bent her steps, as accident directed them. After proceed¬ ing for some time, a faintness, which ap¬ peared to her like the termination of ex¬ istence, oppressed her; and espying an humble cottage, she stopped before it. and implored admittance of its in¬ habitants. They consisted only ofan aged widow and her daughter, who, in the most humane manner, administered to her wants, and who gave hcr their promise not fo be¬ tray her to any one who might pursue her. She was immediately put to bed, and, in the course of a few hours, a violent fever, the joint effect of an agitated mind, and the smart of her wound, seized her. For nearly two months her illness continued ; at the expiration of that time, her senses began to regain their wonted composure ; but the weakness which succeeded her ma¬ lady
lady was so great, as scarcely to allow her to rise from her couch. Sensible of the great humanity and kindness with which the cot¬ tagers had treated her, the first act of her returning health was to bestow on them several trinkets of value, of which she was possessed ; and to these she added expres¬ sions of gratitude, by which their benevo¬ lent hearts appeared by far the best sa¬ tisfied. That Sir Sigismund had been the insti¬ gator of the cruelty with which Fabian and his brother had treated her, and that their purpose had been her death, she could not doubt :—but whether her husband had known that she was about to become a mother, she could not decide. At all events, she judged, that to attempt a re¬ turn to him must be dangerous to her safety, and degrading to her pride. What it beca uk* her to do, she conceived must be to arraign him in a court of justice ; butto the pursuance of this step she felt herself vol. ui. г unable,
unable, till freed by the hand of time from the burden which she now bore. With teprs she besought her entertainers to per¬ mit her fo remain thrir guest till that hour was past ; their coment was given with thc utmost promptness; and beneath the poor widow's humble roof, Eleonora first beheld the light of day. Next to thc benevolence of the cot- ta¿cr*s conduct, the little curiosity whit h they displayed to learn hcr history, \>,is grateful to the feelings of Ladv Elizabeth. They were not tattlers ; and it was seldom indeed that the daughter reported any news on her return from a neighbouring town, whither she was in the habit of gom» lo bey provisions. 1Ш when Eleonora was about three weeks old, the daughter one day brought home intelligence to her mother, that she had met a distant relative, who was on the point of setting out for Essex, having procured aservite in the fa¬ mily of Sir Sigismund Blunt, who had lately
lately increased his establishment, on ac¬ count of his union with a rich heires, named Lady Thomasine Gower. 1лЛу Elizabeth listened İn silence to this information; for the sake ofthe innocent and ttnsnspertins: bady Blunt, she resolved not topuimh the iniquity ofher husband. About her own future fate she wci* care- leks.— *· But what, alas!" she considered» ** would be the lot of her dcfeiicclcvs babe, ber Eleonora ? To convey her to the pro¬ tection ofher father, would bc to confess that her mother lived, and this she was re- ohed never to do. How should she dis¬ pone of herchild and of herself ? " Xo pían hal yrt presented it>etf to her ha::»ed n »ad» wh**n thi? tongue of com- mon fame informed iirr thut the onlv eh.*M и,' liLl.op Latimer iiad been sculeu frein his parení·». The extreme amiability aï»d benevolence of the prelate s disposition were knovui to her, and she iiihtantly r*m- r^ived the idea ol imploring him to rett i\c hx r bùi" to lus atleet ioiv», in the ркле uf г J th. t
that child, of vvhich he had been so un¬ justly deprived. She accordingly pro¬ cured the disguise of a pilgrim, and quit¬ ting thc widow's cottage, proceeded into Leicestershire, where she deposited her babe, with her own hands, at the gate of Latimer's mansion, having placed within the folds of its mantle a paper containing these words :— u The helpless babe before you is the offspring of neither guilt nor poverty ; but thc most heavy calamities have attended its entrance into life : by its wretched and heart-broken mother, your protection is implored for it; admit if, Oh worthy Latimer, to your heart ; teach it to believe that you are its parent; suffer it not to know that it is the offspring of misfortune; and, in reward for your bene¬ volence, may the mercy of Providence ex¬ tend an equally happy fate to your lost son !" The child was found by Cyprian, and immediately conveyed to his master, 'i'he excellent prelate read the petition of the unhappy
unhappy mother with a sympathy which instantly inclined his heart to accept hcr prayer ; and the innocent Eleonora was taught to believe herself the offspring öf her protector and his amiable wife. No second babe blessed their own nuptials ; and the gentle and affectionate disposition of Eleonora more than repaid them for their charitv to her deserted state. With the exception of the Lady Be¬ nigna, Cyprian was thc only person ad¬ mitted to Latimer's full coniidcnce, rela¬ tive to such few particulars as he was him¬ self acquainted with concerning Eleonora; but judging that it might, at some future hour, be of importance to her to know that she was not his child, he had written an ac¬ count of her introduction into his family, and enclosed in it her mother's petition ; andbelie\ing that he might never again behold her, it was this packet which Eleo¬ nora overheard him commit to the care of Cyprian, on the night previous to his de- r 'Ò parture
parture from Worcester Castle for the Tower. The greatest delight filled the heart of Lady Elizabeth, as her watchings informed her that her child had been admitted to the protection of the worthy prelate and his vrife ; and desirous of passing a life of ab¬ solute retirement, vet still to bc enabled to enjoy thc privilege of accidentally behold¬ ing her daughter, she took up her abode in the neglected hermitage, as the inhabitant of which we were first introduced to hcr acquaintance. On the removal of Latimer into Wor¬ cestershire, we have seen that she followed his steps, but still refused to share his habi¬ tation ; she neither felt hcr ideas fitted to thc society of mankind, nor would she sub¬ mit to thc hazard of her real name and his¬ tory being discovered. Knowing her daughter to be happy, her only wish be¬ vond this knowledge was to possess the op¬ portunity, of sometimes enquiring into thf* wel'.-irc
welfare ofher beloved son, Henry Fitzroy. In order to gratify this desire, she provided herself with the habit of a monk, and be¬ neath this disguise sbe frequently travelled to the neighbourhood of his residence ; and having gained intelligence of his health, would again return satisfied to her hermitage—a conduct which explains those occasional absences from her dwellinr, which were noticed in the early part of our history ; and to which we must now add, that the monk, whom Cyprian Informed Eleonora that he had once seen entering her solitary dwelling, was the recluse her¬ self, in her travelling equipment. Nor must we forget to mention, that Fabian de Vale, unconscious who was its inhabitant, actually did pass the door of the hermitage at the moment when Lady Elizabeth was describing to Eleonora the inhumanity Avhich she had experienced at his hands,— The recluse, İt will be recollected,, believed herself only to have beheld a phantom ρ 4 raised
raised to her view by the powers of hcr heated imagination ; whilst Eleonora had no doubt ofa reality having passed before her eyes ; and her belief was just. Fabian was at that moment on his way to make proposals to Latimer, for restoring to him his lost son ; but his plan was defeated, and Valentine's hopes destroyed, by the intelli¬ gence which Fabian gained on reaching Worcester Castle, of the prelate being a state-prisoner, and all access to his регьоп strictly withheld. At length arrived a period which com¬ municated the most sensitive anxiety to the breast of Lady Elizabeth. In consequence of Latimer's arrest, and the Lady Magda¬ lene's death, Eleonora was fated to seek an asylum for her defenceless state in the fa¬ mily of Sir Sigismund Blunt: a prophetic dread seized her, at the idea of her child becoming nn inhabitant of her unnatural father's mansion, and she immediately formed thc design of assuming a disguise and
and character, beneath which she might still hover over her, and, on any emergency, afford her undoubted protection. Feigning herself accordingly that bro¬ ther vvho had many years been consigned to the habitation of the tomb, she became an inmate of the same walls which were giving shelter to her daughter. The per¬ fect amiability of disposition, which she had now an opportunity of observing in Lady Blunt, reconciled her more than ever to her concealment of Sir Sigismund's crime ; but anxious to learn whether he had known her state of pregnancy at the time of his attempting to deprive her of life, she pro¬ posed to Fabian many questions relative to her supposed sister ; as whether she had ever borne a child r whether she had ever displayed the signs of becoming a mother? and similar enquiries, to which no satisfac¬ tory answer was returned ; for Fabian, sus¬ pecting that the apparent father's curiosity might be governed by some latent suspi¬ cion, which he might entertain of his ΐ 5 sister's
sister's fate, forbore to answer him expli¬ citly ; not omitting to relate the conversa- tien which had passed between them to Sir Sigismund; discussing which subject, it will be recollected that Kleonora one evening casually overheard them in thc gardens of Castle Gower. Having thus far deduced our elucidation, thc motives of the pretended Saint Ethcl- bert's subsequent conduct can require little explanation ; they turned upon the active spring of maternal affection ; a powerful instance of which displayed itself, in her en t eri n ir Fd eo n ora 's chamber on thc night of her reposing at the nunnery, on her journey towards Framlingham Castle, in that habit in which Eleonora had been ac¬ customed to behold her, for the purpose of assuring her oí her friendship. The follow¬ ing day was marked by the incident of their seeking shelter from the rain, within those very walls where her guilty husband had instigated his hired assassins to take her life. The stings of conscience, by which
which Sir Sigismund was goaded, on be¬ holding the scene of bis iniquity, pleaded, in some measure, to her feelings in his favour ; but when she contemplated her child, doomed to seek protection as a stranger, of him, from whom every tender¬ ness and care was due to her as his daughter, a full sense ofher injuries returned to her heart, and she could not resist the oppor¬ tunity of probing his. By the supposed existence of the late monarch, Edward, a spark of joy was com¬ municated to her breast : should he again fee seated on the throne, there was little doubt, she believed, of herself and her daughter ranking highly in his favour and esteem. The affectionate manner in which she listened to Eleonora's detail of the perfidy of Godolphin, cannot be forgotten ; with the utmost difficulty was it at that hour that the mother repressed her inclination of confessing herself to her child : But the severest trial which she had yet experienced ρ 6 was
was communicated to her feelings in the vows of love, which, subsequent to this period, she heard pass between Lord Henry Fitzroy and Eleonora ; it was impossible for her to confess to them the relationship which existed between them, without, at the same time, avowing to the already too wretched Lady Blunt the villany of her husband's character. The utmost des¬ pondency seized her mind, and she sought the relief of solitude, where she gave free vent to her tears, and passed her hours in imploring Heaven to grant her its assist¬ ance, in her present moment of perplexity. After many days spent in the torments of irresolution, her final decision was to ap¬ proach her son by night, in the guise of his mother's apparition, and pronounce to him that injunction which she was with¬ held, as a terrestrial being, from communi-] eating to him. In order to render her ap¬ pearance the more impressive, she attired herself in a suit of vestments, exactly re¬ sembling those in which her portrait in the gallery
gallery was habited. With a palpitating breast, she entered Lord Henry s chamber ; but she quitted it with a lightened heart ; her admonitions were received by him to her wish. The melancholy existence of Lady Blunt being terminated, Lady Elizabeth now awaited only an apt moment for revealing herself and her daughter to their unjust husband and father. The awful scene of this disclosure has already been recorded ; and it remains alone to add, that the only happy event which she expected from it was, thatthe heart of the unfeeling Hilde¬ brand might be in some measure softened towards Eleonora, when he knew her to be the offspring of the same parent to whom, he owed his own existence. Having now, with the exception of Va¬ lentine's fate subsequent to the night of his disappearance from his chamber in Framlingham Castle, explained the various mysteries of our tale, we return to Sir HİI¬ debrand's camp. CHAP.
CHAP. X. " Bloody, bold, and resolute." ľvfACDBTfí.
*' Hell holds nene worse in baleful bower below." Thomson. Thr sun was afready sinking into the bo¬ som of the ocean, when the sword of slaughter was returned into its scabbard. Sir Hildebrand, retiring from the scene of blood, cast himself upon a couch in his tent, and lay indulging in those golden joys of triumph by which he was sur¬ rounded. Tbe present moment appeared to him a reparation of all the wrongs which he believed himself to have suffered dur¬ ing
ing the years of his past existence. The father, who had once resolved to transfer his birth-right to a stranger, was now his prisoner of war. Lord Fitzroy, whose su¬ perior rank and accomplishments had e\ci* been to him objects of envy, would, as hc imagined, (for of thc death of that noble- man he was still ignorant) be dragged in chains, a captive at his heels, whilst he him¬ self would be graced with thc highest marks of the existing monarch's favour, and sa¬ luted by the people of England, as the pre¬ server of their queen. His soul was scarce¬ ly capable of containing the tide of extacy uiíh which it was swelled. Thus entranced in glory, a messenger appeared before him, to damp, in sotne measure, the spirit of his joy, by announc¬ ing to him the death of Lord Henry Fitz¬ roy. Ilis heart experienced an actual pang in the knowledge that he should not now enjoy the savage satisfaction of beholding the man, whose virtues he had so ill under-' stood, expire upon a scaffold : a gloomy cloud
cloud lowered on thc smiles ofhis triumph, and he muttered curses against the hand of fate. Whilst the disappointment which this intelligence communicated to his feelings was still ripe in his mind, the clanking of chains drew his eyes towards the entrance of the tent, and he beheld before him his father. With a mixture of surprise, of passion, and of hesitation, depicted on his countenance, Sir Hildebrand sprung from his seat. The features of Sir Sigismund denoted a heart consumed with agony :— Hc spoke thus :— " Chide not my guards that I am here ; I have fled from them : for myself, I care not how you treat me ; I am already sunk too low r in misery, to he capable of suffering more than 1 at this in¬ stant experience; and never probably should we again have met, had I not an in¬ dispensable duty to perform towards an innocent and injured being, in once more addressing you." Sir Hildebrand did not reply ; his breast heaved
heaved with the agitation of contending feelings ; and he again cast himself upon his couch, his eyes fixed in silent expecta¬ tion upon his father. " Were I not myself too guilty for re¬ proach to proceed from my lips," con¬ tinued Sir Sigismund, " I might curse thee by the name of matricide, for thy sainted mother's fate is known to me. Sufficient are the crimes which already load my heart ; the concealment of that fact, which i am about to reveal to thee, might increase their enormity: it is for my own sake, thereiore, that I charge ihee not to swell thy sum of guilt, by cruelty to thy sister— for such is the injured Eleonora !" There are degrees of feeling even in the most hardened dispositions : tbe heart of Sir Hildebrand was, in some measure, touched by this avowal. " Heaven is witness to the truth of my assertion," continued Sir Sigismund ;— tf conduct mc to the punishment that awaits a rebel : death, from the hand of the exc* cutioner*
cutioner, in a cause where I have innocent¬ ly sinned, may, by the grace ofa merciful Providence, be permitted to absolve me from those guilty actions which I have wilfullv committed : but Eleonora has not m' injured thee; spare her, I charge thee; spare her, or Heaven will rack thee with eternal torture, in retribution for thy in¬ humanity to its sainted image." After a moment's pause, Sir Sigismund added— " As son and father, we can meet no more : the example of crime proceeded from me ; so much the more heinous is my guilt than thine ; but thou hast still most inhumanely used the ad\ antage which my errors first gave thee over me.—Oh reflect; it is not yet too late for thee to do so ;— reflect ana save thyself, by repentance, from the pangs which I now endure."— Having uttered these words, he returned to his guards, who had followed him to the entrance of the tent, and retired beneath their guidance to the spot appointed for his prison, in thc camp. Sir
Sir Hildebrand did not attempt to arrest his father's steps ; sensations, unknown be¬ fore, oppressed him, and he endeavoured, in vain, to raise his spirits to the same warmth of exultation with which they had a short time before glowed. The con¬ sciousness of mingled victory and revenge, in the full enjoyment of which he was at that moment placed, had not the power to chase from his mind a depressive heaviness, with which it was weighed down. The light of day had now quitted the skv. and the duskv twilight communicated its gloomy influence to his senses. He commanded torches to be illumined in his tent ; but their blaze aíľorded no relief fo his feelings ; the depression of his spirits did not decrease under thcir íníluence. An universal silence now prevailed in the camp ; the victors and the vanquished were alike seeking repose, after the toils ofthe day, in thc lethargic arms of sleep; and no sounds were audible but the hollow footsteps of the weary centinels, pacing thcir
their allotted portions of ground, and the dismal screams of birds of prey, attracted to the graves of those who had fallen in the bloody contest. The night continued to advance ; com¬ posed sleep fled the couch of Sir Hilde¬ brand ; extreme fatigue produced occa¬ sional slumbers, during which, appalling dreams racked his imagination, and from which he started into waking, oppressed by alarm and uncertainty. He heard thc midnight watch relieved, and shortly after sunk into a restless doze. A sudden sound awoke him ; he cast his cv es hastily around ; the torches now emitted feeble rays, and he could only ob¬ serve a human figure advancing towards him ; in a few moments he distinguished it to be Godolphin ; his look was wild, but resolute ; his vestments were disordered ; and in his bloody hand he bore a naked dagger, dripping with gore. i( What wouidst thou here?" exclaimed Sir Hildebrand. ff Thy
ť ' Thy patient hearing/' replied Sir Per- eival ; " deny it to me, and this instant is thy last.—The discharge of this tube," he added, pointing, as he spoke, to a pistol, of which he had two sticking in his girdle, * f will be more rapid than the advance of your attendants/* Awed, for the first time, by the voice of man, Sir Hildebrand hesitated to reply ; bis eye glancing, in expressive silence, at thedaggerin Godolphin's hand. Godolphin read in his countenance what was passing in his mind, and casting the dagger from his hand as he spoke, said— * c This has done its duty ; I had no means of gaining access to your presence but by piercing that poniard to the heart of thc centinél who refused me admittance into your tent. But to the point on which I appear before you—my death will be the event of the treason which I have practised. Answer me—Wiil it not be so ?" " Canst thou require to be told that the law
law points its vengeance against a rebel î" returned Sir Hildebrand. " And the crown," rejoined Sir Percival, (l lavishes its choicest favours on those who expose to punishment the machinations of the enemies against its majesty ?" " Is it not a mark of its wisdom to re¬ quite the love and obedience of its loyal subjects?" demanded Sir Hildebrand. i( Upon this conclusion," returned Sir Percival, f ' our characters, at this instant, furnish thc greatest contrast in existence. Vou will be raised to the eminence of fame on earth, *w hilst I shall sink into thc abyss of disgrace. Perhaps the contrast, too, may hold hereafter. Godolphin has been criminal, but he may still aspire to Heaven : an informer, such as thou hast been, adding to guilt the vilest meanness which can stain the breast of man, will bc received wilh obloquv, e'en in those regions to which thy infamy cannot fail to hurl thee; thi¬ ther thou wilt descend, execrated by man, abandoned fi
abandoned by thy God, despised by the very demons." The blood of Sir Hildebrand, inflamed by fury, ran boiling through his veins; but hc was unarmed; and too certain did hc feel the truth of Godolphin's threat, that did he call for assistance, thc discharge of Godolphin's pistol must bc more rapid than thc approach of his guard. <4 1 can guess the opprobrious language whicb a disappointed captive must leel a pitiful satisfaction in casting at his con¬ queror," replied Sir Hildebrand ; '· thou mayst spare thyself the sequel of thine in- elìciti ve curse." * ť Call it my prophecy, and not my curse,*' cried Godolphin; if for niy pro¬ phecy it is; and now to prove it just.—- Thinkest thou Godolphin will grant an' euemy, determined on his life, a moment to repent the deed, when hc himself has paid the debt of existence upon a scaffold? Oh, no, no !—Hell is now thy portion— repentance shall not preserve thee from its ilanı ev—
flames—thy fate is scaled !—and when the fiends receive thee at their gates of fire, tell them Godolphin sent thcc thither!" As he spoke these words, hc drew one of the pistols from his girdle, and, with the rapidity of the lightning's flash, blew its contents through his enemy's brain. A number of soldiers, whom the report of thc pistol had reached, rushed into the tent, and beholding Godolphin at liberty, and standing over the dead body of Sir Hildebrand, with a countenance of exulta¬ tion, immediately seized him : by an effort of more than natural strength, he released himself from thcir hold.— tC A word before we go," he cried ; tc you believe me the murderer of him who lies bleeding before you; ye arc right; lain his murderer,—- Lately hc was thc hero of the day; that now am I ; and when ye report me say, that Godolphin's was the real triumph, who neither suffered his conqueror to live for thc enjoyment of his honours, nor sub¬ mitted himself to the disgrace of death upou
upon a scaffold !—And to the question, * llow he died ?' behold ! this is the re¬ ply,"—and drawing the second pistol has¬ tily from his girdle, he placed the tube opposite to his heart, and the discharge cast him a lifeless being on the earth. Thus fell two men, whose course through life had been equally marked by guilt, pud vh\i«i a chain of Heaven-directed events led to become the scourge of each other, and to die the victims of their own ciiu*- initiis. Wc may follow them to the tomb, as warning marks tví curb the free indulgen«, j of the vicious passions ; we may contem¬ plate them shrouded in thc earth, as mouldering monuments of human nature, in its most awful íorm; but reflection grows tw horror, when we pursue it be\ ond the confines of ihe grave, and follow, ..hh our imagiiKiiioiK the- flight ofa niuidcicr's spirit into th.e regions of futurity !— ю the repentant, nu*i\y h.as been promiel voi, ¡π, о. from
from on high. To those who die in wilful guilt, blank is the prospect of a second life; with them exists not even hope!— May the example of Godolphin and Sir Hildebrand teach the inability of such ad* vantages and enjoyments, as are procured by vicious means, to confer real happiness on man :—May it adduce proof, that the most exalted of human felicity is the possession ol a heart free from self-re¬ proach.
CHAP.
CHAP. XL " Farewell, a long faicwcH— my hopes in He»vcnda dwell.** Hlkkt THt EîuittK.
tt ^,«»«^.—««» Lau scene oí ali, That cnJs this »trance eventful histoiy." SHAKCsťs.tas. Fkom the scene of horror just described, with how great satisfaction do wc turn to the contemplation oi' л perfect character awaiting the approach of death, with a tranquillity of soul almost amounting to joy. An instance of this exalted nature* was the venerable Latimer; — composed under the sentence ofa death of torture.
which had been passed upon him ; forget* ful of thc pangs through which hc waă doomed to pass into eternity ; and remem¬ bering onlv the reward, which he felt con- scious of meriting at the hands of his Creator, after his endurances on earth were past. According to the rule by which we men¬ tioned, at the commencement of our his¬ tory, that we should be guided, of not making a book of entertainment a vehicle for religious controversy, we shall pass over the particulars of Latimer's arraign¬ ment, and merely state, that neither threats, persuasions, nor promises, having any weight to shake him from that doctrine which he believed to bo the true and ac¬ ceptable religion in the eyes of Omnipo¬ tence, he was, by lhe enemies of his faith, condemned to expire amidst the flames, at the expiration of twenty-four hours after sentence had been pronounced upon him. The sentence of his earthly fate being paised on Latiraer, access was no longer denied
denied to his person ; and the first to throw bimsclfat the feet of the venerable prelate was the faithful and aged Cyprian. But a short time had he mingled bis tears of friendship and sympathy ¿vith those of the heart-broken Lady Benigna, when an at¬ tendant belonging to the Tower announced a youth who refused to dechre his name, but demanded admittance to Latimer; and scarcely had he delivered his message, ere a young man, of an expressive but agi¬ tated countenance, rushed into the apart¬ ment. He moved hastily up to the pre¬ late, and, in the tremulous accents of an oppressed mind, he said— tf You know me not; but an infallible instinct draws me towards you :—my father ! Oh, my fa¬ ther !" he added, casting himself upon Latimer's neck as he spoke ; <f I am thy long-lost son !" Thc youth was Valentine. The Bishop fixed upon him a gaze of hope, of uncertainty, of astonishment.— о 3 Of
Of ti'C powers of utterance he seemed incapable. ' My son restored to us, and at this mo¬ ment of aflliction!" exclaimed I ady Be¬ nigna : '· the merry of Heaven liassent him hither, to console, with His presence, the agotuts of his mother's heart/'—With ex¬ tended arms she attempted to approach him ; but tbe sudden emotion which had been communicated to her feelings, had overpowered her strength, and she sunk, fainting, upon Cyprian. Withdrawing himself from the embrace oí Valentine, Latimer cast himself upon hi* knees, and raising his clasped hands to- ,wards Heaven, in a voice of solemnity and с om posure he said— <f Blessed Providence, tac privation of my ouly child, which thy will doomed me to suffer, has never drawn и mun.iur from my lips against the justice «<: ihv div it.e ordinances. My forbearance ь now rewarded ; the offspring of my biood will receive the dying breath of h\* father.
t
father. Accept, Oh Providence, a parents thanksgiving !" Then turning to Valentine he added—■" But oh, deceive me not— fiat- ter mc not with fhe joyful idea, unless thou canst bring proof to substantiate the truth of thine assertion ; for I am uncertain whe¬ ther I could support a failure of the bliss¬ ful hope which \on have rai*vd withtn my breast, vvith the fortitude of a mar. and л Christian/* Again Valentine threw* himself unen the prelate's neck, and a «rain he exeh'incd - - " Yes, yes—J am-—I am y ju- r ien; -lost î*on ; I can produce the inccntrovemble proof which you require.»- О father, tuke me to your heart/* The tears started into the prelate's eyes ; the quiverings of joy trembled on bis lips. 4 My child—my son," he pronounced, in thc broken accents of extacy, and clasped him with the fervour of an entranced pa¬ rent's atfection, to that breast, against which he had not been pressed since the long-past hours of his early infancy. q 4 A silence
A silence of some minutes, more expres¬ sive than all the tones of rhetoric, ensued. Latimer broke it — 4< Yes, yes," he cried. ft my heart leaps towards thine ; there can¬ not be deceit in these sensations:—ail- powerful nature stamps thc seal of convic¬ tion on thy tale ; I feel myself a father ι u thy arms." The Lady Benigna, recalled to life by the exertions of Cyprian, now flew to share thc embraces of her son ; thc fond pres¬ sure to a mother's bosom awakened, in the Lean of Valentine, feelings too grateful for restraint ; their fervour was apparent, jn the tears which chased each other down his cheeks. The scene which ensued baf- jîes all thc powers of description ; it was acted by the feelings, and can only be con¬ ceived by thc heart of sensibility. When some degree of composure had returned to thcir minds, the Lady Benigna said — 4f I must not engross thy caresses ,¬ ι hey will be mine when thy revered father is no longer here to share them wilh me ; turn.
turn, for the present, all thy thoughts t» him." " Oh agonizing refiection !" exclaimed Valenline ; *'so long separated as we have been, to meet again at an hour when fate decrees that we must so soon part ! X)h, there is more grief and horror in the idea than expression can convey.'* * f Check, check, my son, these murmur- ings," said Latimer ; " do not bewail my near approach to my reward in a i uture state : hadst thou been ever witl|jme, it had been my chiefest pleasure to have in¬ structed thee how to live: it will still be permitted mc to teach thee that death is capable of producing no terror in the minds of those who meet him with a heart unconscious of crime/* Having spoken these words, he forbade both his wife and son to revert a^ain to his о fate, and commanded Valentine to explain to him the mystery of thcir separation.— " I have leisure to listen to your tale," he caid ; íť I have ever held my mind pre q 5 pared
pared for death, and have therefore no hasty preparation to make for its ap¬ proach/' Thus urged, Valentine complied with his father's request, by relating such parti¬ culars as he w r as acquainted with concern¬ ing hisown history ; and closed his account* with an incontrovertible proof, which he had received ofhis origin, and which still remains to be laid before our readers. Previously to Fabian's quitting Castle Gower, for the purpose of proposing to hatimer thc restoration of his son to his arms, on certain conditions, which he had resolved to demand of the prelate, in re¬ quital for this benefit, he refused to set out on this important business to the happiness of Valentine, till that ill-fated youth had placed his signature to a written declara¬ tion of Fabian's having ever treated him with the utmost kindness and benevolence, and a wish that he should be greatly rc. warded for his humanity. This writing ľabian had resolved to send Latimer for his
his perusal, in the event of any untoward circumstance arising to cause him to be denied admittance to his presence; and thus determined, he had superscribed it with the prelate's address. On bis return from his unsuccessful jour¬ ney, Fabian neglected to destroy the use¬ less letter; and, during his residence at Framlingham Castle with his prisoner, one evening, searching hastily in his pockets for some article which they contained, he unconsciously drew it forth, and, unob¬ served by him, it fell at Valentine's feet. Λ few minutes after, Fabian quitted the apartment ; and Valentine, in whose for¬ lorn state e\ ory gratification of an inqui¬ sitive feeling was pardonable, examined the paper, and gained from it the discovery ofhis father's name. It was no inconsi¬ derable consolation to him to know who were his parents, although İt might never be his fate to behold them ; and he in¬ stantly committed the letter, from which he had derived the information, to the о. ő flames,
flames, that Fabian might not suspect him ofthe knowledge. Hitherto, had he been able to have eluded the vigilance of thc tyrants of his fate, a deserled being on the face of thc earth, be had not known whither to direct his steps: now, the possibility of effecting his escape, and flying to those with whom he was connected, by thc nearest tics of blood, alone occupied his mind. At length one of those chances, which, by the direction ofa watchful Providence, repair to men the wrongs thcy have experienced at the hands of their oppressors, favoured the wish of his agonized soul ;. and thus it occurred:—The very night on which Fa¬ bian had promised to conduct Godolphin to the chamber of his deceased wife, was that on which he had pledged himself to Sir Hildebrand to grant him access to his innocent prisoner. For this purpose, ac¬ cordingly, en his quitting Valentine's apartments to seek Godolphin, he did not, as usual, lock thc door at his departure;
thc circumstance was observed by Valen¬ tine, who did not sleep, although Fabiin, on leaving bis chamber, had beíicvcd i/m to do so. No sooner, therefore, hr.d Fa¬ bian's steps died away on his car, than springing from his bed, Valentine drew on bis cloaths, and issued boldly forth, deter¬ mined on making that attempt which his mind had been so long agitating. Tiie castle was locked in sleep; and, with thc assistance of a lamp, which he had take n from the table in his chamber, he reached, without observation, a door which opened upon the ramparts ; he passed through it, and approaching the drawbridge, feared that the centinél at its foot would prove the m Odt formidable obstacle to his hrgbly- raised hopes; — the soldier, hou ever, placed there only to deny entrance into the castle, not to prevent egre>s from it, and probably supposing Valentine to be one of the strangers connected with the mysterious party whicli Godolphin had lately
lately introduced within the walls, imme¬ diately lowered fo him the bridge. When Eleonora visited Valentine in his prison, he had enquired who she was of the page Edwin, who had conducted her to if, and from him he had learnt her.to be the daughter of the Bishop Latimer, at that time a prisoner in the Tower of London.— Thus acquainted where to seek his father, on the discovery of the author of his being, he bent his course, with all the rapidity he was able, towards the metropolis; but being ignorant of the roads, and destitute of the means of purchasing his subsistence, his progress was consequently slow and difficult. At length, however, he reached the end of his journey, and a severe damp was communicated to his spirits, by being informed that it was not permitted him cither to visit his father, or to convey to him a letter. Still unable to tear himself from the spot which contained his parents, he lingered İn the vicinity of the Tower, and
and lhe hour which decided Latimer's fate being arrived, his son was no longer with¬ held from casting himself at his feet. When Valentine had concluded his rela¬ tion, Latimer said—" I doubt not that he who commanded thee to be stolen from me has experienced a heart-ache, at the recollection of his crime, at least equal to that which 1 have suffered for thy loss.— May the pangs which he has endured on earth be his only punishment ! forgive him, Heaven, as I forgive him now !*' Λ short silence ensued ; Latimer broke it.—·" I have all around mc," he said, ' f whom I at the present moment desire to behold with me, except my Eleonora ; were she here, I had not a vvish unsatis¬ fied." " Can she not be summoned ? is it not possible to convey her hither to vour last embrace?" cried Valentine; " a heart of excellence and susceptibility like hers w ill experience a severe pang, in not having administered
5
administered its share of comfort to a fa¬ ther's dying moments." f< You speak of her as if you knew her," Latimer returned. Valentine explained where he had seen her, and the charitable purpose which had brought her to his prison. "In me she will lose a protectorof a most essential nature," rejoined the pre¬ late; " divide between her and thy mo¬ ther all thy cares and affections; consider her ever, I charge thee, as thy sister ; al¬ though it is a justice now required of me to impart to thee that she is not allied to thee in blood." t( Kot my sister !" exclaimed Valentine, and his tone was far otherwise than that of disappointment; for the first moment of his beholding the exquisite and feeling maid, who, led by sympathy to his wretched fate, to endeavour to alleviate his suffer¬ ings, by the soft melody of her voice, added to the plaintive harmony which she drew from the strings of her lute, had in¬ spired
spired him with sensations of that nature which ill accorded with the name of bro¬ ther, and which revived on the disclos'ire now made to him by his father. Scarcely had the venerable man re¬ counted to Valentine thc circumstances which had induced him to rear Eleonora as his own child, ere the door of the apart¬ ment was hastily thrown open ; the excla¬ mation of— <f My friend, my protector, niy father!" burst upon the prelate's ear ; and, in the next instant, the arms of Eleo¬ nora were clasped round his neck. Thc cold hand of death hiving put a pe¬ riod to the career of Sir HİIdebrand's un¬ principled existence, the surviving leaders ofthe queen's forces, either touched with humanity for the sex of Eleonora and the Lady Elizabeth, or judging themselves not justified in plating any restraint upon thcir persons, had released them from their cap¬ tivity. Of ihe number of those to whom the subcidinatc command of thc queen's troops
troops had been given, under Sir Hilde¬ brand, was the Sir Oswin Bolton, who has already been mentioned as a friend of La¬ timer's;— to him Eleonora was known, and, in reply to her questions concerning him, he had found it impossible to conceal from her the prelate's real fate, or to resist her prayers to be once more conducted to his presence. Accompanied, therefore, by that friend and her mother, whose anxiety once more to behold the protector of her daughter, was not inferior to her own, she arrived at Latimer's prison at the moment just described. Advancing to Latimer's side, Larly Eliza¬ beth exclaimed—<* r Am I not known to you? Do you not recollect Agatha ?"— Then casting herself on her knees, and clasping his hand, which she bedewed with her tears, whilst she imprinted on it her kisses, she continued thus:—" To thee, О morc than mortal being, I bend in the sub¬ mission of gratitude ; it is no common debtor
debtor to thy benevolence, who pours forth her full heart before thee ; she who addresses thee is the mother of Eleonora !" The prelate raised her from the earth to his breast ; from hk embrace she turned to that of the Lady Benigna, and said— " Excellent lady, vvho have so tenderiy performed the part of a parent to the friendless and deserted, fear not to meet thy reward from tbe Parent of all good." As the prelate was resolute in passing the night in waking and in prayer, his friends could not be prevailed on to quit him, for rhe purpose of tasting repose themselves; and those intervals of time, w>ich were not passed in addressing Ilea ven, were spent in a recapitulation of the extraordinary events which had marked the life of Ladv Elizabeth, and of such as had occurred to her daughter since her privation of Latimer's protection. ff lhave ever loved Eleonora," remarked Latimer, f " with a fervency of affection which couid not have been exceeded, had she really
really been mine ; and if there were an act which could add satisfaction to the compo¬ sure which my mind ai this moment expe¬ riences, it would he thc knowledge that she would, at aomc future period, bc entitled to name me hi/hfl her father."— Taling Valentine by the hand, he led him towards her, and add* d---" My protection, Eleo¬ nora, thou canst no longer enjoy ; wilt thou accept at my hand thc son of thy sup¬ posed father, as the friend and protector of thy future days r'* Lady Eî'/abeih read the feelings of Va¬ leni ine in his eyes.—" Receive bim, my child," she exclaimed, " as a treasure of the richest value ; the son of such a father must possess a heart combining every noLlc quality/* Latimer placed Eleonora's hand in iha-f of Valentine; and, as he did so, he said-- '· Л. т пу every bliss cement the union which 1 have begun ,* and mav the smiles of ел\еп shine upon you in peace, in inno¬ cence, and joy." The
The mothers silently seconded Latimer's pravcr ; their eyes were икса upon their children, their hands upraised to Iieaven. Thc head of Eleonora was bowed down upon hcr bosom, whilst the trembling tear stole along her cheek. The countenance of Valentine expressed a manly satisfac¬ tion, originating in the sense which his heart experienced of the benevolence of a supreme power. The morning was already risen, and the succeeding hours were passed in silence, and in pravcr. At length arrived the awful moment at which the doors of the apartment were thrown open, and the officers of thc Tower demanded the person of Latimer. He im¬ mediately arose to attend them ; and ad¬ dressing his wife, whose arms were clasped around him, to detain him, hc said—" J do but procede you to those regions of bliss, whither you will quickly follow me; let the idea of our reunion support you till that happy period arrives. God bless vou, and
and shower down upon you his grace/* he added, as he, for the last time, pressed her to his bosom; and, as he withdrew himself from her arms, she ceased to feel actual pain in a temporary cessation of fac ul tv. m' He next turned to Lady Elizabeth ; she compelled herself to restrain her own feel¬ ings, that they might not unnerve his : but it was with difficulty that he could repress the rising emotion with which his heart was swollen, when his son and Eleonora hung weeping on him, and poured forth the plaints of their mingled affection and woe. <( What is it that you mourn ?" he cried ; iC do I not leave ye consolation in each other?" Again he joined their hands, and snatching a hasty embrace from each— e< May the God, who inspires my heart with composure, of his mercy impart the same equanimity to yours!" he exclaimed, and advancing towards those who awaited him, quitted the apartment with a firm step. His relatives were not permitted to at¬ tend
tend him to the execution of his sentence; and, in that agonizing suspense, which his dreadful situation inspired, they sat gazing, heart-broken, upon each other, and impa¬ tiently awaiting the intelligence of his earthly sufferings being past. Sympathy lengthened each moment into an age, and anxiety was almost worked to phrenzy, when Sir Oswin Bolton appeared before them. He had found means of becoming one of Latimer's guards to the spot of his destiny, in order that he might extend to¬ wards him the support of his friendship ; but Latimer had not needed any support, but that which he had received from thc consciousness of an unspotted heart ; not even the agony of the flames had been able to disturb the tranquillity of his settled mind. He had died, as he had lived, in the pure serenity of a Christian. The fondest tie which had linked her to a love of existence being broken, tbe af¬ iiicted Lady Benigna, conducted by her son and the faithful Cyprian, retired into Leicester-
Leicestershire, to that romantic and se¬ questered habitation where she had resided with her lamented husband previously to his elevation to the See of Worcester, and which had been bequeathed lo hcr by the Lady Magdalene Latimer. Eleonora and her molher bent their course into Su (Tolk, and paid the last me¬ lancholy proof of their aifertmn to a son and a brother, by attending to thc.grave thc remains of thc noble Lord Henry Fit/.- roy ; and having shed the tears of unavail¬ ing heart-consuming grief over bis tomi). thcy proceeded to thc abode of the Ladv Benigna, vvhere the dibits of friendship, by which the collected group endeavoured tu assuage each other's aflliction, produceţi thc happy consequence of bereaving sor¬ row gradually of its stins*;. The leaders of the rebels, of which num¬ ber was Sir Sigismund Blunt, were con¬ demned to lose their headî» on the Tower- hill; whilst thc freebooters, wha had united in their caire, were adjudged ti» captate
expiate their double crime by a meaner punishment, at the gallows of Tyburn ; which sentence was likewise passed on the deluded William Fetherstone, who had con¬ sented to represent the royal Edward. Fabian's friend, Sir Hildebrand, being no more, his own interest was so conside¬ rably weakened, that it was not in his power to rescue his brother Oliver from sharing the fate of the robbers with whom he had been connected ; and on learning the existence of Lady Elizabeth, hc fled from thc retribution, of which he knew himself deserving, into the northern parìe of Scot¬ land, vvhere he joined a ravaging band, with which hc shortly fell, in an attempt made by them upon a castle, where thc strength of the defenders proved superior to their own. At thc appointed hour, the sentence of the rebels was duly executed; but Sir Sigismund was spared the disgrace of a public execution ; he died in prison» the victim of his corroding reflections. vol. nu r The
. The affectionate page Edwin was imme¬ diately taken into the service of Valentine, and Gillian restored to that of her beloved mistress; and when some months had passed away, after the death of Latimer, Lady Elizabeth, unequal to the toil of in¬ tercourse with the world, retired to a con¬ vent in the neighbourhood of the Lady Benign a's mansion, where she could enjoy the healing balm of solitude, and where it was permitted her occasionally to receive the visits of her daughter Eleonora, and her son Valentine ; for the wish which Latimer had expressed for their union, seconded by the inclination of their own hearts, and the advice of their surviving relatives, ulti¬ mately led to the cementing of their affec¬ tions in marriage; an event which pro¬ duced them a reward for all their su Herings, and opened to them a prospect of future felicity, which their virtues and their daily- growing love rendered not only durable, bnt perfect, finis.
Une, Palling, ud Co. UiføihtlWiUtt ι.
