Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Munster Abbey: a romance: interspersed with reflections on virtue and morality: written by Sir Samuel Egerton Leigh
MUNSTER ABBEY.
CHAP. I. JNcLr Belford was a man happily possessed of a fortune, ample as his wishes, and inde¬ pendent as his spirit. Munster Abbey fell to him by inheritance, and was delightfully situated on the romantic banks of the river Ex in the county of Devon. He inherited, too, the virtues of his Ancestors : in him they were all combined ; and that they might be perpetuated by an honourable connection, was the unceasing wish of his true friends.
Munster Abbey and its environs a- bounded in beauties : on one' hand,, an ex¬ pansive and richly cultivated country, rais¬ ed the admiration of every behojder ; and the flourishing state of its commercial terri¬ tories was an unfailing object of pleasure. On the other riandatile distant hamlet,—the village spire,—the rustic minstrels,—and rural gambols, all united their advantages to em¬ bellish the scene, while its majestic head aspired to the skies, and seemed to hail a kindred Faradise ! It had borne the appel¬ lation of Munster, time out of mind ; and from tradition was so called, in honour of ? ome part of Belford's family who were its founders : Much taste was displayed in its structure, and judgment in its site. The charms by " Nature's own sweet and cunning hand laid on," left scarcely an improve¬ ment to bestow,—yet all was tried to make it peerless, and tried with so much skill, that a judicious observer might have been deceived, and kive given Nature credit for the offspring of Art, in points that were no inconsiderable steps towards perfection. The u inding river,—the variegated foliage,—the scattered cottages,—and their unruffled te«
nants, were grateful objects to the mind of the Philosopher and Moralist :—the Poet too, might there have fixed ¡m temple, a re¬ treat the muses must have gloried in :— there might every rapturous flight have been indulged, extended, and improved. Belford invariably visited Exeter at one season of the year, having many friends who resided in that quarter ; but so much was he in estimation with his own villagers, that lie never left them, if but for a few days, that they did not mark his absence with unfeign¬ ed testimonies of regret, and nev^r failed to welcome his return, by the most lively and heartfelt rejoicings and gratulations. Such are the flattering attentions to which the virtuous man is entitled : and to be en¬ titled to sucJi is sure as great a blessing a& we can hope for in a world of tumult. His absence from Munster Abbev, at one particular period about to be described, was^ stamped with something more than ordinary. He had promised to sojourn forborne little time at Exeter with a friend, the perform-
ance of which formed the most memorable event in his life, A young lady, of extreme beauty and ac¬ complishments, happened at that particular time to be on a visit in the same house. The delicacy of Miss Melville's manners conspicuously shone in proportion as she ap¬ peared unconscious of them ; and an heart, far less susceptible of female merit than was Belford's, might have confessed her power, without hazarding the imputation of weak¬ ness. She was amiable in the eyes of all : but in his she had no rival, and there needed but little penetration to discover, that the passion he had so early imbibed, was grate¬ ful to her heart, and repaid with all its ener¬ gy. This Belford anticipated with unspeak¬ able satisfaction, notwithstanding a degree of reserve her sex and situation compelled her to adopt. It was clear she loved him, though she strove to hide it : Love teaches cunning even to innocence ; but when it once has fixed upon the heart, 'tis sure at intervals 'to breathe its passion*
Out of ail the fashionable adventurers whose attentions she had really iixed, not one had been so fortunate as to be well re¬ ceived, at least beyond what good ¡Ijreed ing and civility warranted. How flattering this to a man, whose whole soul was center¬ ed in the possession of so estimable an ob¬ ject ! to what transporting prospects did the thought give birth ! Miss Melville was a descendant of re¬ spectable parents; but her father dying" during her infancy, in rather contracted cir¬ cumstances, he bequeathed her no more than the scanty pittance of one thousand pounds to her fortune. Of this Belford was ap¬ prized ; but fortune not being his object, as too contemptible to be placed in competi¬ tion with the exquisite delights resulting· from a sentimental connection, he suffered it not to have any influence over his actions : and a system of integrity which had invari¬ ably directed his conduct, forbid his admit¬ ting it, even as the most distant considera- tion : For, however indispensible to a certain degree, an attention to indépendance may appear, as a great step towards the comforts
of life ; yet, happily enjoying such himself^ the want of it formed no obstacle to his ad¬ dresses where his affections were honourably and judiciously placed ^ and he viewed mar¬ riage in too serious a light, to make a traffic of his person, and barter the substantial blessings of domestic felicity, for the fleet¬ ing gratifications which money can procure. Oh ! that this sacred system of proceeding was more universal :—that the brows of my fair country-women might for ever be adorn¬ ed with smiles, and the registers of libertin¬ ism sink into oblivion for want of victims to. swell its^ pages. An eminent writer asserts, " that every woman is at heart a rake." It was a bold assertion :—but did he examine the causes that too- often give rise * to it,—did he con* sider the frequent slights that prompt them to resources they could never have flown to¡ had home been the scene of peace they had reason to expect it would ? Could a woman of delicacy have recourse to a gaming table, and all the fashionable etceteras of the pre¬ sent age, for relaxation, was not her time rendered irksome by disappointments, and
Münster abbey. ? 1 her prospects darkened by continued marks of indifference ? For if youth and beauty en^ sure not the comforts they are calculated to - invite, little can be hoped for, when those attractions are passed. This it is that fills our daily prints with paragraphs that are a scandal to the promoters of them, horror to every reader, and the dread of those whom it is not impossible but chance may lead in¬ to the same calamity.. Belford was a man of superior understanding and mature judg¬ ment ; his ideas of happiness decisive ; for it had been the business of his life to fix them on a firm basis. The possession of a virtu¬ ous wife constituted the summit of his ??? bition : in Miss Melville, he beheld all his warmest hopes could aspire to. ** She was her sex's pride ? " Nor think my tongue too lavish, if I speak her " Fair as the fame of virtue, and yet chaste " As its cold precepts, wise.beyond her sex, ** And blooming youth, soft as forgiving mercy.·* Miss Melville was a stranger to the little arts so injudiciously practised by her sex on the passions of ours : She had early learnt the mfallible attraction of candour : Indeed, if
she had a- fault, it was, that she too readily confessed the dictates of an unsuspecting heart. Fortunately, however, she was never exposed to situations that doomed her the sport of malice and hypocrisy, though a lit¬ tle caution with a prowling world is ever commendable.—She traced the heart of Bel¬ ford in his face ; and in it, all that was ami¬ able, affectionate, and ingenuous; nor check¬ ed the passion which from virtuous and pru- , dential motives she strove to conceal. Her fortune was small, and though the generous mind is ever proud of an opportunity to e- vince its disinterestedness and interest, she was persuaded it could never actuate the advances of Belford ; yet she was ambitious of every advantage that could enable her to contribute to the happiness of one whose worth she considered far above every earth¬ ly reward. Much time· had passed in distant sighs, and looks of eloquence,—uncertainty on his side, and suspence on hers,—before he could summon sufficient fortitude to hazard the possibility of a refusal. Miss Melville knew nut to disguise : yet t in opposition to her
fondest inclinations, she hesitated not to de¬ clare, that she at present aspired to no change in her situation : that her reasons were such as no arguments could remove : that she respected him,—that she esteemed him, but that circumstances were unfortu¬ nately such, as to make her marriage with him improper. Her pecuniary deficiency was the principal objection she could state- indeed the only one, for she had expressed no disapprobation of himself, and it was not difficult to read what passed in her mind : but her answer appeared so decisive, jmd she quitted the apartment so abruptly, that it was a doubt with him, whether he was au¬ thorised in resuming the subject on a future occasion : but as his whole prospects of com¬ fort depended on it,—it was worth the trial ; yet the chance of again meeting a repulse, almost amounted to distraction. Letter after letter was written, and letter after letter con¬ sumed. A thousand schemes were formed, and not one carried into execution. True love is ever timid, ever fearful of of¬ fending : There is a delicacy in its proce^
dures peculiar to itself; it is circumspect and unassuming. His next interview, however, he resolved should determine bis fate, no longer able to support a state of mind labouring under in¬ certitude, which the contradiction of her actions and looks hud thus affected. She frequently strolled at an early hour of the morning about the garden, with some favourite author: Belford had sometimes been her companion in these rambles : He panted for the morning on which he was bent once more to make known his wishes— It arrived, and he perceived her from his window unusually pensive. He seized the opportunity, and, before any of the house were yet stirring, he joined her in her walk. There was a mutual embarrassment in this rencontre not to be described. She knew his intentions—was not displeased—yet dared not encourage them. A few minutes were employed in common-place observations on the weather, and the beauties of the morn¬ ing, but they were too puerile to last, parti¬ cularly when the mind of each was occupi-
, Ι ed by a concern of so much importance as I already mentioned* To be brief, he renew- | ed the propositionsofa former meeting with [ augmented ardour and generosity,—entreat¬ ed her, as she valued his peace of mind,'ne_ [ ver to name as a misfortune what he consi¬ dered a blessing, since it gave him the power of convincing her that he loved her for hei% \ self alone. Filled with gratitude that flowed ! from her eyes, she could make no reply ; but many days did not elapse before the confession he wished fell from lier lips. !" Oh Belford," she exclaimed, " the libe¬ rality that has appeared in you, has been my joy and admiration. My heart, from your first declaration, has throbbed with ' mingled and indescribable s.ensations to¬ wards you, and it has been with much dif¬ ficulty that I have restrained the trans¬ ports the frankness of your conduct has inspired. 1 have asked myself a thousand times, whether a precipitate decision is not less faulty than too much precaution with a man of sentiments so noble :— It surely h —No longer will I then suspend the mo¬ ment, but, waving further ceremony, de-
clare, that if you can esteem me worthy of an affection I am but too proud to pos¬ sess, my hand and heart are youts ; and be assured that my happiness, not less than youts, depends on your acceptance of them." Belford pressed it to his lips— their hopes and wishes beat in unison,—and heaven seemed to sanction the contract. The impatience of Belford was not to be subdued :—He suggested an immediate per¬ formance of the enviable rite, which, how¬ ever congenial to her own desire, she resisted with all the prudence that duty prompted ; and, notwithstanding she had already com¬ pleted her one-and-twentieth year, yet the same sacred impulse of affection, which invariably directed her actions, failed not to influence her in the most important period of her life. The conduct of Mrs Melville had been ever stampt with tenderness ; and there are very few instances when a child will deviate from- the principles imbibed in its infancy. Filial fondness is implanted by Nature, improved by education, and, when strengthened by gratitude, is immoveable. Miss Melville wished to acquaint her mo-
ther of the step she was about to take, fear¬ ing that, if adopted rashly, it might cause an indifference and coolness in the two fa¬ milies, than which nothing can be more grating or mortifying. Belford listened attentively, and was en¬ chanted at her ingenuousness and generosi¬ ty ; but he remarked, that her writing might procrastinate his wishes, and that procrasti¬ nation be accompanied by some unpropi¬ tious circumstance. He entreated her not to create or entertain any painful appre¬ hensions on the score of silence for the pre¬ sent,—assuring her he would hereafter un¬ dertake to correct every apparent impro¬ priety, and render every objection her fears had formed, too unimportant to cause seri¬ ous consequences : He therefore begged she would permit him to procure the licence, and adjust matters as expeditiously as pos¬ sible, selecting a few friends to attend the celebration. Miss Melville, equally ambi¬ tious to conclude the treaty, needed no far¬ ther persuasion, and, scarcely investigating the weight of his argument, assented to the event on which hung all her hopes. Bel- Vol. L ?
ford lost not an instant, (her consent once obtained) and a very few days saw him pos¬ sessed of all that was dear to him on earth, to the infinite satisfaction of those who wit¬ nessed the ceremony. Belford was at this time in his twenty ninth year—a man of majestic appearance, and fascinating address, with a command¬ ing and expressive countenance, the perfect picture of an heart fashioned by nature for the tender offices of friendship and benevo¬ lence. Mrs Belford needed only to be seen, to be admired. A kind of sympathy in their dispositions bespoke that they were formed for each other, and every thing seemed to promise the fairest extreme of that state that never admits a medium. Messengers having been previously dispatched to Mun¬ ster Abbey, in order to regulate the enter¬ tainment of the day, and prepare the do¬ mestics for the reception of their inestimable lady,—the new married couple immediate¬ ly after breakfast, with their party, repaired to tint happy mansion, so perfectly calcu-
lated to promote the soft delights depend¬ ant on domestic retirement. Mrs Belford proved not the sprightly com¬ panion on her journey, she generally ap¬ peared on most occasions, though every pace was an advancement to the period of all others the most enviable ;—nor was she in¬ sensible of it,—but every idea was pressing on her mind,—it was an awful moment,— and, though she had no fears, yet the change of situation warranted every emotion. As each hour assisted in familiarizing Mrs Belford to her new situation, she gradually became more composed and collected ; and, towards the conclusion of the journey, re¬ sumed her wonted vivacity. The heart of Belford'was proportionably elated, and, with all the ardour unfeigned affection inspires, anticipated those days of domestic felicity, without which existence is scarcely worth the toil of supporting, and with which the adverse shafts of fate are pointless. The augur was universal, and those who saw them joined, were conscious they should see them happy. ?.?
At length, the peaceful village of Mun¬ ster dawned on the sight,—soft scene of har¬ mony and repose,—the sun shone with un¬ usual lustre,~the trees had gained new beau¬ ties,—the verdure additional charms,—the very birds, with more than common min¬ strelsy, welcomed the happy pair.—Perhaps it was not so: but the mind, attuned to plea- fure, will find joy in every thing. Need it be said, 'twas thus they were influenced :— Then why did a gentle tear steal down the cheek of the amiable bride ?—The sublimi¬ ty of the scene had rendered her sensations two exquisite :—'twas notwithstanding a gratifying moment, and who would have checked it—" Sure," she exclaimed, (and hardly knowing that the spoke,) " this place was formed by Heaven, to crown an attach¬ ment directed by its own unerring hand I Oh Belford, what boundless transports break on my mind, as I contemplate this fairy spot :—In what language shall I describe the joys that seem to spring from the event of this day ?—Never sure till now had I yet formed any thing like an adequate concep¬ tion of what true happiness consisted ;—but in you, Belford, my every hope is centered,
nor is it in my power to express half wha I feel." He embraced her with the since¬ rity of a fond husband, conscious of her ex¬ cellent qualities, and wanting terms to im¬ part some share of the gratitude with which his heart was loaded, for the confidence she had reposed in him, by bestowing her inva¬ luable self upon him. As they approached the Abbey, whose sweet sequestered bounds shone like the smiling seat of calm content, they were welcomed by the greetings of the village bells, that echoed through the venerable roof with awful cadence, adding a charm to every peal,—the little spire from whence they issued was bent withal!, and seemed ambitious to unite some token of joy, at the wished for arrival of the virtuous pair. As soon as they reached the majestic gate, they discovered the poor assembled from many miles around, prepared to con¬ gratulate them in their stile of uncultivated sincerity :—there wanted not Xhe blandish¬ ment of words to evince their raptures :— the language of the heart is simple,—and
flattery, which too universally pervades the bosom of the. worldling, is a stranger to the honest bosom of the unlettered peasant.— Belford was the first that alighted from the , carriage.—It was in vain that he attempted tc enter the gate ; —for the multitude that encompassed him would not suffer him to. pass, until each of them, upon their knees, s had kissed the hand that had so frequently been extended to their succour. Who, in so exulting a moment, could deny that vir¬ tue and benevolence are their own reward ! All Nature bore the face of triumph.— The very infant offspring of the grateful throng, struggled with officiousness to quit their leading strings, that they might bend to their benefactor, as if by intuition taught that each had individually experienced their bounty. Mrs Belford's eyes were rivetted ©n the scene with rapture and admiration : As an indifferent spectator she must have been charmed,—then, what must have been her sensations to behold the man, on whom her fate depended, so idolized ! Nor were theirendearments confined to him,—for, in¬ dépendant of her own merits, which were
easily discovered, she was entitled to their love, they warmly protested, as the wife of their adored patron ;—nor would they allow her progress through the haH, without en¬ treating to impress on her hand the same tribute of respect they had shewn her hus¬ band. The request was too flattering to be denied :—She granted it w 7 ith an air of affability and condescension, which at once evinced the exalted character of her spot¬ less mind ; and, in a manner truly bewitch¬ ing, assured them they were conferring their favours on one, who really considered herself unworthy,—but added, it was not less pleasing, and that her endeavours should at least make them not repent their atten- tions. They followed her through the Ab¬ bey hall, and in one voice exclaimed, ** Oh happy, happy young lady, if there be a Heaven on earth, you will find it here, and the God of it is Mr Belford." How flattering was the salutation to her ear !—how promising her prospects !—what music could have been so sweet, as the heartfelt greetings of a grateful multitude : They vibrated through the vaulted arch
with accumulated effect.—It was the pride of Belford to preserve from decay the gran¬ deur of his ancestors ; which, independent of the respect he bore its former owners, was more gratifying to him than the in¬ significant baubles of a modern date. When Mrs Belford reached the great hall, she frequently paused to examine and admire the ancient appearance of the fur¬ niture, particularly the unwieldy structure of the chairs, the curious carvings of which could not but excite admiration,—and the weighty workmanship declared their origin to have been in those days, when quantity, as well as quality, was a consideration,— when every idea was not absorbed in the present gratification,—but when the re¬ flection of those who were to succeed, had some influence in every concern. All, how¬ ever, in this abode was valuable, and so substantial, that even time had scarcely yet committed any depredations. Music, and every denomination of festivity and mirth, was in readiness for their arrival :—The band struck up as they entered,—and a sump¬ tuous repast, in the true style of old English..
hospitality, was a desirable object to our weary travellers, to which they very soon sat down :—Pleasure presided at the board, and Good Humour was a general guest. The poor were not forgotten :—and, ac¬ cording to ancient custom, a roasted ox was provided for them, which, with a lavish quantity of strong beer, was impartially dis¬ tributed : Every description of pastime, too, was invented to complete the hilarity of the evening. Thus did it conclude to the satisfaction of all :—The crowd dispersed, after the usual ceremonies were observed, and, dictated to by Nature, yielded to the arms of sleep.
MUNSTER ABBEY.
CHAP. II. J. he party arose early next morning, and, after taking leave of the new married cou¬ ple, returned to Exeter, where, from a prior engagement, their presence on that day was indispensibly necessary. Mrs Belford could not, by any effort, disguise the pain of mind she laboured un¬ der at the reflection of having embraced a situation, (though in every respect con¬ genial to her wishes,) without first con¬ sulting her parent. She accused herself of want of confidence : and self accusa¬ tions never fail to be the most poignant. On every occasion she had found her in¬ dulgent, kind, and considerate : there need¬ ed no reserve with a mother whose happi¬ ness was built on the welfare of her child-
ren —who had studied through life to pro¬ mote it :—This, and a thousand such re¬ proaches, harrassed her for hours ; she* had no alternative but to write, and offer all that an offending daughter could.—Apology is too lame a term to a mother—exculpation she could not advance—she candidly con¬ fessed she had done wrong, and depended on her usual goodness for pardon. The agi¬ tation she experienced, after the departure of the letter, could only be equalled by Mrs Melville's, on the receipt of it ;—and every syllable, traced in extenuation of her con¬ duct, but aggravated it ; nor did she doubt the connection's proving a disgrace to her fa¬ mily, and destruction to herself:—She con¬ ceived she could have no other motive for concealing it ; as a worthy character posses¬ sing her heart was certain of her permis¬ sion to receive her hand,-r-and of this she ought to have been convinced :— thè impu¬ tation of ingratitude fell heavily upon her.~ Julia, her second daughter, who was uni¬ versally admired for the sweetness of her disposition, and the exquisite refinement of her understanding, w r as affectionately sedu¬ lous in her endeavours to appease the dis-
pleasure of her mother, declaring that she thought it impossible her sister could adopt any imprudent measures, however she might be induced to act without her concurrence ; and therefore seriously trusted that she would moderate her resentment, and sus¬ pend every unfavourable conjecture, until òhe could learn the true state of circum¬ stances ; as the very subject which now ex- cited her indignation, might, on a farther examination, prove a subject to rejoice at. Mrs Melville was passionately attached to the incomparable Julia : indeed, her quali¬ fications were such as to entitle her not on¬ ly to a mother's tenderness, but the love and esteem of every one ; and, valuing her opinion and advice as Mrs Melville did, she would certainly have adhered to them, had she not, in this instance,felt persuaded there was something mysterious in the procedure, by her not having been consulted at an ear¬ lier period relative to so momentous a né¬ gociation : She concluded the connection widely differed from what the letter expres¬ sed, and was convinced that her daughter acted under the impulse of guilt, by her not having given her an opportunity of
making those enquiries, which were at least natural, if not necessary, before ari engagement was decided, which was to determine the prosperity, or insure the felicity of one, for whom she cherished the fondest interest.—Every argument but tended to augment her sense of sorrdw.- i ^- The virtuous Julia for once pleaded in vain :~Mrs Melville was proof against comfort :—-she conceived herself injured,— and the feelings of a parent once irritated, are never easily assuaged,—She resolved oft pursuing them, and of being satisfied of her daughter's innocence^or justifying her own suspicions : Without farther hesi¬ tation, she ordered a chaise, and, after fort- ing w few articles necessary for thé jour¬ ney, set off, accompanied by Julia, for Munster Abbéyr— which she had too pre¬ cipitately fancied Was somé contemptible habitation—tenanted by an impòstory-^- but pompously entitled an Abbey,**—fòr thb the purpose of misleading and dehidihg the credulous and thoughtless advehtuter;#hom chance might direct that way.
Stung by thsse mortifying suppositions, -^-she resolves to punish her daughter's seeming duplicity,—by banishing her for¬ ever from the bosom where she had ever till then held an enviable seatj—and the loss of which, scarcely the arms of a be¬ loved husband could in. any degree com¬ pensate. The state of poor JuhVs mind is not to be described,-~-it pitied a sister,—but it suffered too for a mother. During this interval, Mrs Belford fre¬ quently expressed her uneasiness at the va¬ riety of conjectures she could not but form, —respecting the result of her letter,—with what impression it would be read,—and how Mrs Melville would be disposed to meet her. Belford omitted no opportunity of relieving her anxiety ;—and, if repeated assurances that all would end well, could have relieved her pain,—ihe would not long have suftered :—but it is impossible to command our feelings : and though we of¬ ten depend upon that w r hich we desire, yet we sometimes, (perhaps too frequently)
anticipate the evtl we dread. The perse¬ verance of Belford, however, in some mea¬ sure, weakened the acuteness of her grief,— and she promised to exert her own efforts to conquer it entirely. After a journey of five days,—the lovely Julia and her mother arrived at the roman¬ tic village of Ivy Bridge. As soon as the chaise drew up to the door of the inn, where they proposed refreshing the horses, Mrs Melville accosted the landlord as he received them, by asking whether he knew a Mr Belford, who lived at some little dis¬ tance ? " What," said the landlord, " Squire Belford of Munster Abbey ?"—" The same " she returned. " Alas Ï" sighed he, " too well, good lady Ï —would to heaven I had never even beheld him !" Convic- tioi\ at these words, darted with all its stings on the tortured mind of Mrs Mel- \ille :—The opinion she had already formed of Belford, was unfavourable, and there needed only th:¿ to confirm her in t&e just¬ ness cf it.
in one moment she viewed her daughter deceived,—and the unfortunate man who addressed her,—the victim of his villainy. Few are the degrees of guilt beyond that of defrauding the industrious of their dear earned comforts ;—and such was the idea that possessed her, respecting his conduct to the landlord. Even Julia began to apprehend her jus¬ tification premature :—A silent tear, she could not suppress, betrayed her fears, and Mrs Melville was equally affected. The landlord would have imparted con- solation,—had it been in his power :—-he begged, however, permission to relate some circumstances that pressed heavily on his mind :—They bowed assent to his request, —the subject was too interesting to be dispensed with,—it might lead to discove¬ ries that would prove the best guide to their proceedings. After conducting the ladies toa private apartment, he began l\k narrative as follows ;
??
ί1 I was the only son of an humble cu* iaîc, v» lio resided within twenty miles ot ilik peaceful spot. Divested of every par¬ tiality with which nature endows us, 1 can eafely say he was, in the true sense of the word j a good ???. His language, without being refined, was salutary,—his arguments persuasive, though uuimbellished,—and he praeliicd his own precepts, which is more than the rigid moralist can always boast. Those hours that did not infringe on the a- vocations of his profession, he devoted to the pious purpose of radicating those prin¬ ciples into my mind, without which there İ3 little prospect of happiness. Instruction und advice are breathed with double force from the mouth of those we respect :—it prompts inclination, and we feel proud to deserve the approbation of the worthy. '· Kis efforts in the cultivation of my mind appeared to him successful, and added to fjis comfort. If ever he felt a* regret at his contracted pittance, it was that the incon¬ venience would fall on me :*—liirnsclf had ?:ierc:<.ed' frugality, and he taught me the superior blessing of moderating my wishes,
Economy was a leading feature in his cha¬ racter ; but the small stipend which he en^ Joyed, only lasted during his life, and it was necessary to trace out some line of conduct by which I could live with credit, and adopt a certain method of supporting myself with comfort, when time or chance should rob me of his protection. It was not until I had entered my fifteenth year, that I was des¬ tined to leave my father. He engaged me for seven years with a Captain in the West India trade. 1 felt the parting pang almost too powerfully ; but the laws of necessity are imperious, and my feelings soon became regulated to the separation, though no time could ever reconcile it. The hope of again seeing him, and qualified to administer con¬ solation to his drooping years, urged me to my duty with diligence and activity. I fre¬ quently wrote, and as frequently heard from him. His letters generally contained tender admonitions, which I never read but with an hílectionate impatience, and ambitious resolutions to pursue, " At the commencement of the fourth year, I found my health rapidly declining;—·
my constitution debilitated and impaired by the intense heat ofthat destructive climate, so fatal to Europeans, and the insatiate grave of youth. " The Captain, to his honour, possessed a delicacy of feeling, and, to his credit, a su¬ periority of commiseration,—He had been a father himself,—had lost an only child,— and the agonizing traces were not yet ob¬ literated from his memory.—He marked, with regret, the ravages that sickness had made on my countenance :—he made me an offer, the generosity of which could only be equalled by the manner.—It was, to accept the residue of the time, to which he was en¬ titled to my services. The tender of a kindness is never so ill requited, as when rejected ; Every thing combined to make me embrace it,—and I could only thank him by my obvious want of words. He fur¬ nished me with the means, and my anxiety admitted of no delay. I procured a passage in the first vessel bound for England : and if the prospect of seeing my dear father'was embittered, it was in the idea that I was
leaving a man, wliose friendship towards me had been as soothing as disinterested. " My passage was expeditious, but melan¬ choly : By intuition, I anticipated the shock my arrival would sustain, and almost dread¬ ed to reach the spot I panted to behold. " I longed to press my much loved parent to my heart, but, instead of meeting him,— a man, his wife, and four children, had taken possession of the abode : They told me, with little ceremony, not knowing to whom they were detailing the unwelcomed news, that my poor father had three months past oc¬ cupied a tranquil place in the earth's cold bosom. " I fell to the ground, motionless and ab¬ sorbed :—I could have wished for annihila¬ tion,—but the virtues of my father, like di¬ vine inspiration, thrilled on my bosom : He never sunk beneath the pressure of misfor- tune,—and to emulate hira, was to be as perfect as Nature can be. Ï gradually be¬ came more composed, and was ashamed at having for a moment yielded to such emo-
tions. I could frame but one excuse for my weakness, which was the sudden infor¬ mation : for, though prepared to hear it, I was not prepared to support it. " I employed a space of time in contem¬ plating the indispensible necessity of exer- cising the reason and philosophy recom¬ mended by him, which the grave had now placed an insuperable bar to ever more be¬ ing repeated. I called up every sentiment for which I was his debtor, to bear me through this painful trial :—They were now doubly dear to me, like the portrait of an esteemed friend, after the dissolution of its original. As soon as I became sufficiently collected, I went with one of the fami¬ ly, who had voluntarily undertaken the gloomy office of pointing out the spot that encompassed his poor remains :—It was sim¬ ple and unadorned : No marble urn, or chisseled inscription, decked the quiet haunt, or told his virtues, to consecrate it ! —it was enough tliat he was named, to hail it sacred : The fatherless,—the widow,—and the poor, were testimonies of his .merits Ï — he had raised their sinking spirits,*—he had
dispelled the clouds from their dwellings,— and changed the current of their affliction. ♦' A kind of awe struck me, as I ap¬ proached the place :—I shall never forget it !—and I hardly wished to suppress the e- motions that seized me : Involuntarily I fell on my knees, as if inspired by the sainted sanctuary ; and, after bathing the sod with iny tears, raised my eyes to Heaven,—for there he surely was to be found,—and breathed a fervent prayer, that his virtues might live in me ; for in such hope alone could I ever expect to join him. The melancholy, yet pleasing task performed, I returned to the cottage :—It's tenants wept by sympathy ;—and, if not completely inca¬ pacitated to admit alleviation, it was entire¬ ly from the charitable assiduity of those who kindly shared my pain. " They begged me to partake of their house and fare, until I could accommodate myself to my wishes,·—and used every means to dissipate the grief which such an event could not but at first create. My gratitude was immeasureable :~I wanted words to ex·.
Miernu ι
press it ;—but each attempt was ineffectual. Tears stole down my cheeks, as I contem¬ plated the goodness of Providence in re¬ commending me to such friends, in so di¬ sastrous a situation :—yet every spot w r as a subject for melancholy,—for my father had trod it,—he had cultivated it,—had fashion¬ ed it,—he had enjoyed its produce !—Eve¬ ry tree, that with his own hands he had set, reminded me of him.—I could have blamed them for not withering when he died :— and the birds had a portion of my upbraid¬ ing, for ringing when he was no more :— 41 Trifles light as air," are ponderous to a wounded mind ; and the more I saw, the more pungently did I lament and mourn the days that never could return. 4i To condole with me was to distract me ; for it was contracting the superlative comfort of my former state to the pitiable present ;—and such was I doomed to bear» from mistaken 2eal of the neighbours, who made it a point to enumerate his virtues, as a proof of their sincere sense of regret, with¬ out reflecting, that it was as often rousing the severe pangs that I, who was doubly
sensible o£ his merits, had sustained. I did not long intrude on the liberality of my worthy host, though his conduct clearly con¬ vinced me he cherished me as one of his own flock : He omitted no opportunity to assure me, that every additional moment I continued with him, urged him to consider himself my still greater debtor. This was, in my humble opinion, the true method of displaying the principles of charity and be¬ nevolence ; and the only system we ought to adopt, in relieving those of our fellows, whose misfortunes entitle them to our par¬ ticular attention and assistance. " Delicacy, at the time I was in indigent circumstances, checked me from offering my opinion freely on this subject*: I therefore contented myself in the silent reflection on the justice of so pure a proceeding :—Pro¬ bably had I then given my real sentiments» many would have censured me for hypocri¬ sy, imagining that I spoke as a person dis¬ tressed, and like one, who, being supported by the bounty of others, made such remarks, to dispel the obligations they might consider me laying under to my benefactors. Such
a precaution would perhaps have never oc¬ curred to my mind, could I have reflected, that I breathed in an atmosphere where e- very waft of the human heart was a new struggle to promote charity and benevolence to its full extent. But alas î to my sorrow 1 speak it,—I could not think so ':—A very few years experience deprived me of an o- pinion so favourable towards mankind,— although I was particularly fortunate in meeting with a few kind and disinterested friends ; yet, when I gazed on the general mass, nothing but horror presented itself to my imagination. In those moments of re¬ flection I could have despised my own na¬ ture, but that I recollected our imperfec¬ tions were occasioned by our own intemper¬ ance and misconduct:—that the heart of man, though depraved, could doubtless by perse¬ verance be made perfect*, otherways the pros¬ pect of lasting happiness, which with firm¬ ness I confided in, and for the attainment of which I only wished to live, could but be vain and imaginary. " As I am now, by the assistance of my friends and the bounty of Providence, raised
raised above the common frowns of society, —I cannot object to offer those sentiments of a system of charity, which a state of pe¬ nury once induced me to conceal from pub-* lie knowledge. It will appear certain that I can have now no motive for my observa¬ tions, but to benefit those whom the adverse shafts of fortune have loaded with grief and oppression. When we administer comfort to those who labour under adversity, we are certainly conferring an obligation, which, however, only requires, for return, a grate¬ ful recollection that we have stood forward in the cause of humanity, and exerted our* selves to establish tranquillity in those bo¬ soms, where misfortune had directed misery to take its seat* " When a man perfqrms an act of com¬ mon kindness, he becomes the greatest debt¬ or himself:—the reflection that he has so far gained the confidence of an individual, as to obtain permission to grant a necessary re¬ lief,—is sufficiently gratifying of itself, to reward him tenfold for any service he is ca¬ pable of rendering. The thought, that, by his exertions, he has wiped away the tear of
sorrow from the cheek, where penury ami want had long formed a dismal channel to favour the progress of the stream of wretch¬ edness, is too flattering,—too much to dwell on,—and yet to dwell upon it might be use- ful, —it might urge us to exert ourselves more generally, and more frequently, in be¬ half of those wliose torturing pangs demand our strict attention, " The pleasure a man receives in dispel¬ ling the troubles of another, connected with the peculiar compliment he is paid by the individual who accepts his services, constitutes him the greatest debtor of the two :—The acceptor has only to be grate¬ ful for the benefit he receives,—and to study, by an uniform line of conduct, to merit continued attention ;—but the giver experiences a lasting and indescribable de¬ gree of rapture,—which he never could have enjoyed, but by permission of the in* d igent." Here Mrs Melville interrupted htm, de¬ claring herself charmed at the dehcacy of his sentiments :—The eyes of Julia describ-
ed the tender emotions of her soul,— words were rendered unnecessary to give proof o^f her approbation. The worthy landlord bowed respectfully, and continued. " A letter," he resumed, " which my good master the Captain gave me to pre¬ sent to my father on my arrival, proved a principal step tewards my present state of comfort :—As it contained favourable ac¬ counts of my conduct, I soon obtained friends who attached themselves to me, and whose ardour to serve me was encreas¬ ed by a recollection of my poor parent,—. whose remembrance was held in general veneration. A subscription was set on foot for my support, and two hundred pounds were in a very short time collected. With this, by advice of the principal gentleman, who patronized me, and who promised me his future countenance,— í engaged a small house in this village, and commenced bu¬ siness in the line of a publican ;— α line which, from choice, I should never have pursued, as it by no means accorded 'with ¿
my wishes, or the life I had before been accustomed to lead ;—but it being repre¬ sented to me, as the readiest way to turn such a property to immediate account,—I preferred adhering to the recommendation of those friends who had interested them¬ selves so earnestly in my behalf,—to risk¬ ing it in other attempts more agreeable to my own desires, which, however, from being contrary to the instructions given me, might have created their displeasure. " In this situation, favoured by a resto¬ ration of health, I continued several years, —unruffled by misfortune,—and toleiably successful in my dealings. About the close of the third year after my establishment in business, I connected mysel£ in marriage with the daughter of a respectable farmer* —whom heaven has been pleased to pre¬ serve, to be a comfort to me, even to the . present day. By this alliance, I became possessed pf one hundred pounds more,— which enabled me to extend my trade, and make spme itøpro vements on my teno ment.— "
Here he was again interrupted by Mrs Melville, who grew anxious to hear the part of his narrative relating to Mr Belford. But the good landlord, although not de¬ ficient in literary knowledge, which he had acquired in his early days by the tuition of his father,—still he had but one way of telling his story,—and, objecting to begin the tale at the wrong end, begged permis¬ sion to proceed, promising he would soon conclude, and, he trusted, to her satisfac¬ tion :—She apologized for interrupting him, and, bowing assent, he continued, " As troubles," said he, " generally surrounded us when least expected, so they befel me, four years since. " I never, to my know ledge, was guilty ef more than oné piece of imprudence that might be stiled considerable ;—it was, in risking my little property uninsured ; how¬ ever, 1 suffered for my negleoi, which is* the general w'ay in which folly is reward¬ ed. " My wife, on a certain evening, having occasion to visit the cellar for the purpose
of gathering wood, and other articles for the service of the house, descended with a candle, to favour her progress down the dark steps :■—an unfortunate spark lit upon some straw, and instantly kindled a fire, which burnt with such velocity» that, be¬ fore any assistance could be procured, my little cot,—containing all my wealth,—was totally consumed. " The only comfort afforded me in this melancholy disaster, was in saving my three infants, who were reposing in bed at the awful moment, but whom I hastily snatched from the arms of rest, and, with the hurried steps of anxious affection, conveyed safely into the road :—the breath of open air, which I had before been accustomed cau¬ tiously to cloak them from/now proved for a moment the most desirable element. " Thus was I, from a life of tranquillity and domestic happiness, suddenly launched upon the world, with my tender offspring and loving wife, with nothing but prospects of misery and want constantly presenting themselves to my imagiiVition. Not a roof
could I now boast to shelter us from the in¬ clemency of rigid seasons. The leaves of the trees were all I could lay claim to as a covering ; and they could but be tempora¬ ry, as the approaching fall would not fail to rob me of their services : but as the kind hand of Providence is ever prepared to ex¬ tend itself to the rehef of the poor and help* less, who never despair of its bounty, so was it pointed towards my service, when I as ht¬ tle expected a change so happy, as I before imagined I was on the verge of encounter¬ ing a misfortune of so trying a nature. " The melancholy account of my mise¬ rable state, soon reached the ears of Squire Belford,—a man who knows no happiness equal to the alleviation of the wretched." Here the aspect of Mrs Melville visibly brightened.—The serene and lovely smile of Julia, decked by a tender tear of sensi¬ bility, which trembled down her cheek, were certain proofs of her excessive joy. " He, then," continued the landlord, " made every assiduous enquiry respecting
the nature of my misfortune :—his anxiety to administer comfort, would not suffer hiirr to admit of the delay of a moment. u As soon as he became acquainted with every particular circumstance, and learnt that my character had never been disap¬ proved in the neighbourhood, he hurried to this village in quest of me ;—even though the rain poured in torrents from the Hea¬ vens !—Ah ! good ladies," he exclaimed,—» with a deep sigh, accompanied by a tear of gratitude, " I shall remember the day well, —who could forget it ! " Ï was at this time in the house of α neighbour, who kindly offered me an asy¬ lum for a few days, until I could devise some means of seeking a future support for my¬ self and little family. The father of my wife having been some time dead, arid from misfortune, towards the ktter end of life, deprived of his property, which rendered him insolvent, I had no friend to claim, or look up to for succour. Those who had ex¬ ercised their influence in promoting my for¬ mer prosperity, were now become either in-
habitants of the grave, or dispersed to some other quarter of the world : and indeed, had they been present, conscience would have checked me from intruding on their libera¬ lity, by involving them in new agonies at my state of wretchedness, which they had once amply guarded me against the danger of encountering. As soon as I was present¬ ed to Mr Belford, he requested that I would immediately repair, with all my family, to Munster Abbey, there to remain until some line, could be struck out for my future maintenance. Judge what I must have felt when I discovered my friend in a man whom report had long told me was ido¬ lized !—I could not avoid seriously reflect¬ ing on the various times I had seen him pass my door, and how frequently I thought within myself, how little was the chance I had of ever claiming him for my pa¬ tron, when I viewed the obscurity of my humble situation :—much less did I imagine that misfortune would have directed me to his notice : for, in the days of trouble, I have generally observed, that, instead of forming new friends and connections, we losee tlios who had long professed á sinccie
regard for us, wliilst the countenance of prosperity beamed upon our habitation :— Such is the flimsy substance of worldly at¬ tachment,—and, as such, it becomes ob¬ noxious to those who have once experien¬ ced it's baneful effects. " When we arrived within the walls of the hospitable mansion, Mr Belford expressed a wish to be informed, at what I computed the whole of my loss :—I replied, that, to the best of my calculation, and without deviat¬ ing from the truth, I considered the amount to be ñxe hundred and forty pounds.—" Poor man" he exclaimed dropping a tear as he spoke, " what a serious loss." As he con¬ cluded this sentence he left the room, to recover, as I imagined, the grief that pressed heavily on his heart ;—but I had scarcely time to form many conjectures, before he returned, decked with a countenance de¬ scriptive of a benevolent soul ; and, without any superfluous expressions to preface his kindness, presented me with a draft for the whole sum·
u Oh heaven !" exclaimed Mrs Melville, in rapture and amazement, " what a sin¬ gular act of kindness !" " Ah ! kindness, indeed," returned the landlord, " I staggered with astonish¬ ment,—and, reflecting how little real cha¬ rity was ever exercised in this iniquitous world, I retreated several paces back, with a kind of apprehension that he was ridi* culing my situation, and mocking me in distress. " Such was the power of imagination for a moment, notwithstanding the amiable character I ha.d ever heard blended with his name. " Ah ! good ladies, 1 soon discovered how unjustly I had censured my bene¬ factor iu secret thought :—He advanc¬ ed,—and, again presenting me with the draught, said, " Take it, and may it prove a compensation for your late misfortune !" 1 exclaimed in rapture, as I received the paper, " Can this be real ?—and am I in¬ deed not deceived !"
" You will not find yourself deceived/* he returned : " why this astonishment ?—I have exercised no more than what I should expect from others in a similar situation Ï— · 'tis but a simple duty,—therefore where is the cause for wonder ?" " At this we all fell on our knees, and casting our eyes to¬ wards the heavens, breathed a fervent pray¬ er of gratitude to the Deity. This duty performed, we attempted by words to ex¬ press our thanks to Mr Belford ;—but he would not suffer us to address him on such terms ;—he was pleased to be a witness of our ardour in praising Him who bestows all our benefits upon us,—and would not interrupt us in devotions so properly di¬ rected. Our ejaculations concluded» he raised us from the ground, when, present¬ ing me with a \ey t observing that it would favour my entrance into a certain -house in this village, which happened at that time to be untenanted, and which, from having no claimant but himself, he had the power of disposing agreeable to his own inclina¬ tions,—he assured me I had his full autho¬ rity to reside in it, rent-free, until I could
boast of a property adequate to the value of five thousand pounds. " Oh í to describe the sensations I felt in that moment, when I witnessed so sin¬ gular an act of benevolence, is impossible. 1 have often reflected on it,—but could ne¬ ver discover words to favour the description it merited. This, ladies, is the identical habitation in which I have the honour to relate to you my narrative. " I immediately resumed my former bu- 44 siness,—and, from indefatigable exertions, connected with the countenance and as¬ sistance of that truly amiable character, Mr Belford,—to whom 1 am indebted for all my present comforts, I have the satisfaction to reflect, that, at the summing up of each year's account, I have derived advantages and benefits exceeding my most sanguine hopes and expectations. This concludes the story I so earnestly wished you to hear, and I hope it has afforded you no cause to regret the delay its relation has occasioned."
^"->"- ■
2E
" Most certainly it has not," returned Mrs Melville, " I am enchanted with your account,—and doubt not but my daughter has with equal satisfaction partaken of the pleasure :—There is, however, one mys¬ tery I could wish to have unfolded,— which is,—why you should regret ever hav¬ ing seen the face of him who was your be¬ nefactor and deliverer." ** Because," re¬ plied the landlord, " I am yet unable to make an adequate return for his kindness, —which creates many an hour's uneasi¬ ness,—lest it should he imagined I am backward in repaying, in the days of pros¬ perity,—that which u as humanely tender¬ ed to me in the moments of amic tion." " My good friend," rejoined Mrs Mel¬ ville, " I will instantly dispel from your mind its present oppression ;—*-and it shall be accomplished by observations corre¬ sponding with your own sentiments, which seem at this time to have forsaken you.— If Mr Belford is the amiable character you cnnceive him,—which, from the account vou have just concluded, there can be lit- tie or no dcubt of,—you may rest satisfied
within your own bosom, that he feels happy, and even obliged to you, for having permit¬ ted him to alleviate the pangs you suffered in adversity ; consequently, was he apprised that you encouraged reflections so very, I may say, unpropitious, you would doubt¬ less create his displeasure. " I cannot accuse you of a misconception of either the proper method of conferring or receiving a favour ; your observations, previous to your last remark, convinced me you were in this respect at no loss ;—but a^ nother degree of philosophy, attached to that which you already possess, would not, in my opinion, be in any way injurious or detrimental,—but, on the contrary, conge¬ nial towards the establishment of your do¬ mestic comfort and happiness. " If you object not to the counsel of one who feels inclined to offer disinterested ad¬ vice, you will readily accept mine ; in which case, you will content yourself with the sa¬ tisfactory reflection, that when a state of in¬ dependence, sufficiently ample, affords you the means of more particularly proving your ???? ......... Γι Ά
gratitude for favours past, you will not be remiss in steping forward, in testimony of your intentions." The landlord expressed his warmest ap¬ probation and thanks, for the consolatory opinion she had given on the occasion ;— but still some degree of uneasiness hung up¬ on his mind, from an apprehension that the world, which he considered censorious, would devise various projects to circulate unfavourable reports and conjectures of his conduct and inclinations. Mrs Melville admitted his assertion to be true, that the world was censorious ;—and added, that vanity and scandal were like¬ wise glaring imperfections of mankind ; and these, she justly observed, were the peculiar reasons why he should disregard the com¬ mon opinion of the world. " If the world," said she, " was replete with virtue, we should then be justified in studying to please it on every occasion, as we should evidently act in opposition to what is right, if we merited the disapproba*
tion of a race, whose pure and unblemished conduct had raised them to the summit of of perfection : but as iniquity seems to have ascendency over this mortal and vitiated globe, conscience will better direct us, than the vain and faithless tongues of idle men. Individuals we may occasionally meet with, whose inestimable qualities and virtues may incline us to court an intimacy in their so¬ ciety y —but we should steer from the cor¬ rupt mass with as much caution, as would the mariner his vessel from the gaping jaws of a destructive quicksand. " In short, virtue ought to be our guide in every plan we propose, and every step we pursue. So fortified and bent, we should scarcely ever bestow a reflection on the scurrility of man, unless it were in pity at their moral deficiency. To discompose a truly moral heart, is past the power of any earthly being. The frowns of those, whose smiles are not worth obtaining, can never sting the chaste and unpolluted bosom. The anticipation, my good friend, of a hap¬ py termination of events, cannot fail to counteract every ? that may befall us in
this transitory life : and, under so enviable a regulation, those troubles will doubtless ap¬ pear trivial, that otherways might prove se¬ vere." The landlord, with tears in his eyes, ex¬ pressed, in striking terms, his perfect ap¬ probation of the excellence of her argument, which, he could not help declaring, had much relieved his mind. It w r as a lesson of morality too valuable to be passed over in silence ; and, as it had conveyed a conside¬ rable degree of comfort to his heart, in the same moments that it had impressed him with a most favourable opinion of his coun¬ sellor, he promised strictly to adhere to her advice, which had already furnished him With many pleasing hopes and reflections. Mrs Melville and Julia, anxious for the meeting they at length believed would be the occafion of much felicity, now took their leave of the good man, and, entering their chaise, proceeded on towards Munster Ab¬ bey.
VO
MÜNSTER ABBEY.
CHAP. III. As they drove from the door, the lovely Julia elated with joy at the intelligence given by the landlord of the inn, embraced her mother with a degree of ardour, descriptive of a mind raised to the summit of bliss. Mrs Melville, equally elevated, and anxious to give a proof of her approbation, at once declared that her former rage was totally subdued,—that her meeting would be at¬ tended with different circumstances from what she had before anticipated and intend¬ ed ;—but that still she could not help feel¬ ing her mind in some degree wounded, írom her not having been consulted, previous to her daughter's nuptials taking place ; though it was her intention, as matters bore so fa-
vourable an aspect, to endeavour to con¬ ceal from observation, at least for the pre¬ sent, the pain that lingered about her heart. Their conversation, during the rest of the journey, consisted of innumerable pleasing reflections, on the prospect of happiness their imagination had pictured to them in a va¬ riety of forms. Arriving in sight of the Abbey, which the post-boy, in obedience to the instruction given him, pointed out to them :—." Bless me !" exclaimed Mrs Melville with an air of astonishment, " with what injustice did I stile this noble mansion an inconsiderable cottage !" The delighted Julia, exultingly returned, " and I trust my dear madam, you will find equal cause to chide yourself for having styled the owner an impostor, when you become better acquainted with his merits." " Justly replied," rejoined Mrs Melville : " your opinion, my dear, I ever admitted to be valuable, and had I on this occasion paid more attention to it, I should not have en-
countered so great a degree of uneasiness ; 'twill however be a lesson to me not to be too precipitate in future decisions." The Abbey was now in an instant lost to their view, by the winding of the road, as¬ sisted by fine groves of tall and stately trees, the rural monuments of long past years. Another turn, formed by the artless taste of nature, suddenly brought them to the Gothic structure, towards the great gate of which the post-boy speedily directed his course, and another minute favoured their arrival. The falling of the waters of the Ex, Pattering in gentle cadence down the rocks, Which, with Aurora's purple tinted rays, Cast a mild lustre oer the vernal space, Tun'd every heart to liberty and love, And, as the villagers in truth exprest, HailM Mun&ter Grove a Paradise on Earth, 'Twas a bewitching, yet an awful mo¬ ment :—The stillness of the scene bespoke a tranquil spot of calm content,—no traces of human progress were discovered, except by the rutted road where carriages had passed,
—the birds warbled through the trees, fear¬ less of interruption, and every thing seemed united to hail it the seat of quiet.—Having rung the great bell, the solemn sound of which echoed in hollow tones through all the avennes, a servant appeared, to whom Mrs Melville addressed herself, demanding whether Mr and Mrs Belford were at home. He replied, they were then in the garden, and with permission he would couduct her to the spot.—She hastily alighted, attended by Julia, and in a state of anxious glee, fol¬ lowed the guide. As they proceeded through the different courts, the roofs of which were richly carved and worked, and whose supporters were of stately pillars, embellished with the ancient order of Corinth, they gazed with astonish¬ ment,—and expressed much satisfaction at the antiquity of the buildings, and the va¬ riety of pleasure each scene afforded. At length, arriving at the garden-gate, which, with equal precipitation, they en¬ tered, Mrs Belford, who was seated on a bench by her husband, at the foot of a
sheet of water which parted them from the house, suddenly beheld her mother. Elated with joy at the unexpected visit, which hurried innumerable hopes and re¬ flections over her tender mind in an instant, and forgetting all thought but that of fly¬ ing swiftly to the embraces of a beloved pa¬ rent, she rushed directly forward, pursuing, as she fancied at the time, from the straight- ness of her course, the readiest road ; and with her eyes fixed on Mrs Melville, whose appearance had thrown aside the usual cau¬ tion of her footsteps, she plunged into the centre of the pond. Oh, Heavens Ï —what a moment !—Belford attempted to fly to her assistance ; but he had not proceeded many steps before horror overwhelmed him, and he fell senseless to the ground : Mrs Mel¬ ville and Julia, swooned in the same state of insensibility. The servant, unacquainted with the art of swimming, and apprehensive of his own fate, should he venture into water of such con¬ siderable depth, hurried with all imaginable swiftness to the house for assistance. What Vol. I. F
an awful moment was this !—what was to be hoped !—all aid for a time suspended, and yet not an instant to be lost !—The mind prone to vice would have despaired : but the soul endowed with morality and con¬ fidence in the mercy of Him, whom we are justified in believing is all-merciful, can never cherish hopeless reflections. All help was still suspended—the struggling fair, unable any longer to contend for life, yielded to her fate with that composure, which the virtu¬ ous only can experience in the moments of departing life.—She cast her eyes towards Heaven, where her mind and soul surely were directed. In this moment of serious meditation, she was perfectly sensible of her danger, but the blessings of a pure con¬ science constituted her a stranger to every fear ; and, when she had reason to believe her dissolution was near at hand, it was with pleasure she reflected that soon she would be relieved from her dying agonies. At length, when on the verge of closing her eyes from the dim light of this world, to open them in a pure and perfect atmo¬ sphere, the kind and liberal hand of Provi-
dence waved its influence o'er the dismal scene, and cast away the gloom. How was it contrived ?—Next to a mira¬ cle were the means by which the amiable Mrs Belford was restored to her distracted and disconsolate friends. Faithful Munster, an old favourite New¬ foundland dog of Belford's, named after the place, was the welcomed instrument of de¬ liverance. Approaching the pond in the critical mo¬ ment, and viewing his mistress helpless in the humid space, he sagaciously plunged in¬ to the pool, and, seizing the end of her sash which floated,drew her cautiously to the side of the bank, where he contrived to raise her head above the surface of the water, by quitting the sash, and with anxious care hold¬ ing her hat in his teeth, until more assist¬ ance could be procured. What lessons of humanity do the brute creation frequently afford for contemplation! F ?
MUNSTER ????1?. How much happier would our lives be rendered, did we but exert ourselves as stre¬ nuously in the service of our neighbours, as in seeking our own comfort and indépend¬ ance. The servants were by this time all assem¬ bled in the garden,—and, hastening to the spot, to look for, as they feared, the corpse of their poor mistress, found faithful Mun¬ ster warily preserving his invaluable charge from the danger which threatened its anni¬ hilation. With unexampled glee he loosed his hold, when he discovered assistants more potent than himself, who lost not a moment in snatching Mrs Belford from the jaws of death. What an awful scene was this ! How near was the peace and comfort of a family be¬ ing forever destroyed, when but a moment before they had every hope of happiness and bliss.
To what uncertainties are we exposed in this transitory life, where all alike are sub¬ ject to misfortune !—None are secure.— Though, by a state of wealth, some few are flattered, still they are not exempt from those troubles to which the poorest indivi¬ dual on the earth is subject. Wealth only ensures us the smiles, and protects us from the insults of the narrow mind, whose no¬ tions, contracted from habit, and a neglect of education, conceives that virtue and me¬ rit literally consist in extensive possessions, riches, and power. And where, then, is the joy in wealth ? If it but purchases man's paltry smiles, it proves a curse, and tempts us to destruction. Sickness will in¬ fest the poor man's cot ; so will it invade the haunts of pride, and check their hosts in all their wild career. Death will, with equal power, enter there, a faithful emissa¬ ry, proving no wealth can baffle his designs. All are born to trouble :—we often vainly think ourselves exempt ; but there is one secure foundation for true bliss, and virtue- is its only basis. F3
Mrs Belford was immediately conveyed into the house, and every plan adopted to favour her speedy recovery. Belford quick¬ ly gained new spirits, on hearing the joyful tidings of the safety of his beloved partner. Mrs Melville and Julia, by the same intel¬ ligence, were likewise much revived. As¬ sisted by the servants, they proceeded to- ^-4irds the house with as much expedition as die feebleness of their state would admit. Their anxiety to embrace the once lost Mrs Eelford, which the slowness of their pace failed not to encrease, could only be com¬ pared to the agonies we experience in dreams of horror, when pursued by a fright¬ ful something which haunts the imagina¬ tion, and from which, for want of strength to favour our progress, we arc unable to fly. At length, arriving at the much wished for apartment, to their inexpressible joy they found her rapidly recovering. Belford was too eager to wait for the sound of her voice :—he saw she lived, and he quickly embraced her ;—he then breath¬ ed a grateful prayer of thanks for her hap-
py restoration. She at once proved her power of articulation ; for, addressing Mrs Melville, who seemed yet involved in fears, she said : " Ah, my dear mother, be not a- larmed, all will be well :" Then, raising her eyes to heaven, with a look of confidence and benignity, diffused around her those pleasureable sensations of hope, alas ! one of the very few blessings allotted to the wretched. A sympathetic ejaculation e- scaped the lips of all,—and serenity once more penaded the aülicted circle. From the assiduity of those who attended Mrs Belford in her indisposition, she became suf¬ ficiently recovered to join her friends at tea, and at supper took her seat, and resumed her wonted chearfuiness and vivacity, to the joy and comfort of the whole family. Thus was the hospitable Abbey,—over whose roof a temporary gloom liad been cast,—happily restored to true felicity.— All things again looked gay :—no longer did the weeping eye cast dewy clouds o'er Munster's tranquil bounds :—the peasants danced,—and in loud songs of joy their voices raised,—and rent the trembling air ; —the ancient village bells in concert join-
ed. —The smile serene which decked each countenance,—added new life and trans¬ port to the scene. Mrs Belford now attempted to renew her apologies to her mother for her mis¬ conduct in not having apprised her of her intentions, previous to the event of her marriage taking place ; but Mrs Mel* ville, unwilling to afford her any cause for uneasiness, and anxious to promote as much cheerfulness as possible, as the best method to dispel from her mind the serious recollection of the late disaster, concealed the original cause of her jour¬ ney, by declaring she made it to congra¬ tulate her in person on the happy occa¬ sion. This declaration concluded, she arose from her seat,—and, in a style descriptive of an affectionate parent,—clasped her to her bosom :—She then, in a manner pecu¬ liarly delicate, acknowledged Belford as her son-in-law,—expressing much gratifica¬ tion at being nearly allied to a man, whom she conceived merited her warmest esteem and regard. The compliment was too flat-
tering and unexpected to be replied to in¬ stantly by words. The looks of Belford afforded sufficient testimony of his grati¬ tude, to render any other attempt neces¬ sary to offer a description. The lovely Julia was not exempt from reflecting with pleasure on the beauties of this scene :—The trembling tear of tender¬ ness,—which in its usual form tottered down her cheek, evinced the soft emotion of her spotless mind. The evening was spent in a manner tru¬ ly chearful and happy. Faithful Munster the dog passed - not unnoticed,—he received a hearty welcome into the parlour,—and was rewarded with many caresses for the important service he had rendered. 'T was singular to remark,—he frequently during the evening placed his head in the lap of his adored mistress,— wo uld fix his eyes upon her countenance,—and, as if by instinct, told he had delivered her from
death :■—The circumstance was strange,., as he had never before been seen in that po¬ sition, unless with those who were his con¬ stant play-mates.—'Twas worthy of obser¬ vation :—*Twas a picture of tenderness that reflected on human deficiency. She cheer¬ fully acknowledged his kindness, by fre¬ quent pats on the head, expressive of her approbation ; which he received with ap¬ parent gratification at the notice bestowed upon him. From the necessity of reposing early, af¬ ter the fatigus of so bustling a day, the a- partments allotted to Mrs Melville and Ju¬ lia were ordered to be prepared for their reception, immediately at the conclusion of supper—soon after which \hey conclud¬ ed the evening's pleasure with a general embrace of ardent affection,—when they re¬ tired for the night, to experience, in the peaceful arms of Morpheus, that rest, which prepares and invigorates us to encounter the toils of a succeeding day.
MUNSTER ABBEY.
CHAP. IV. 1 he next morning, at an early hour, the happy party repaired to the garden grove, imder whose rural shade the hospitable breakfast waited their arrival. As they proceeded by the side of the pond which had so nearly proved the watery grave of Mrs Belford,—each, in a sympathetic mood, dropped a soft tear of sensibility. Harmo¬ ny prevailed throughout the day. Amongst a variety of occurrences, the narrative which the landlord of the inn at Ivy Bridge had given, was introduced. Some compliments in favour of Belford were offered on the occasion,—but his ap¬ parent disapprobation checked any enlarge¬ ment on the subject. His ambition extend-
ed not to the search of public praise. The only reward he ever desired for his actions, was that which he never failed to expe¬ rience,—a serenity of mind, cheered with transporting hopes of joining, at some future period, in scenes of unceasing rapture. What extatic sensations must such hopes convey to the heart ï —How superior must the joy of such a bosom be, to that which the foul usurer experiences, whose mind is engross¬ ed by a thirst after lucre, and who, like the heathens of whom we have read, worships, as his god,—a molten image, a corrupt mass of gold. Mrs Melville, having passed several days ut Munster Abbey, during which period ex¬ perience convinced her that her amiable daughter Mrs Belford, was in the road of true innocence leading to permanent hap¬ piness, she, after encountering some difficul¬ ty of parting, took her leave, and, accompa¬ nied by her dutiful Julia, returned to Shrews¬ bury, where she failed not to receive the gratulations of all her friends, as soon as they became acquainted with the success of her expedition.
How different were the sensations they experienced in this journey, to the pain of mind they laboured under in the preced¬ ing : The contrast w 7 as indeed evidently great. Tears of lasting wretchedness cast gloomy clouds over the one, which obscured from observation the natural beauties of a fertile country, whilst, in the latter, the brighten¬ ing rays of hope, decked with the cheering prospects of prosperity, blazed from the soul, and in conjunction with the grand and daz¬ zling beams of Sol, darted a lustre over the groves and meads, adding a richness to ter¬ restrial scenes, already bounteously adorned by heaven. The amiable couple were now left to themselves, in their little paradise, to expe¬ rience those enviable joys and blessings, which the silken state of connubiality af¬ fords to those who fail not to reverence its sacred laws. In conformity to the duties practised by the virtuous, Belford made it his daily study to encrease the happiness of his partner, by
every tender exercise of kindness, with which he was inspired from the possession of true and unpolluted love and affection. The task proved in no way difficult ; for one of the greatest traits in the character of Mrs Belford, was that of being content even in an humble situation, when she reflected that the endeavours of her friends were sincere¬ ly with a view to promote her happiness.— The result of an event never proved a guide to her feelings :—'twas the intention that e- ver held the reins of her heart ; and whe¬ ther matters terminated propitiously or un¬ successfully, she was equally awake to a just sense of gratitude, which her delicate feelings urged her on all occasions to disco¬ ver, where the debt of gratitude was due. In these moments of bliss, however, Bel¬ ford could not avoid casting a temporary damp on her tranquillity, by the relation of a moving tale, which conscience now in¬ duced him to believe he would be unjusti¬ fied in concealing. It was a hard and cruel tusk for an affectionate husband to be the instrument to wound 'for a moment those feelings, he was ardently bent on tranquil¬ lizing ; but it could not be dispensed with—
the more he reflected, the more clearly he perceived the necessity of making known to her a circumstance, which, from his alliance, could not fail to intereit her equally with himself. In order to prepare her mind to receive a shock, which the feeling and bene volen tr heart only can experience, he frequently, in a delicate and distant manner, threw out hints, insinuating his wishes to unfold a moving narrative.—He continued this judi¬ cious plan for a number of days, to habitu¬ ate her to expect a doleful account, that the unwelcomed intelligence might be received with more composure than a precipitate and apbrupt recital nuuid naturally occafion. At length she expressed much uneasiness at being so long kept in suspence, and en¬ treated he would not further hesitate, but at once describe the particulars of all that pres¬ sed so heavily on his mind,—" Perhaps," said she with a bewitching softness of ex¬ pression, enticing him to begin the narra¬ tive, " your trouble may, in some degree, abate, when I am constituted a partaker or
the pain : and should my becoming a shar¬ er of your affliction, assist in the smallest de¬ gree to dissipate your dejection, I will chear- fully submit to any suffering, that may be the cause of producing effects so salutary and congenial to my desires ; and the for¬ titude with which I will conduct myself through the trial, shall prove an additional effort to dispel the gloom which hangs on your oppressed bosom. " Oh ! my love !" exclaimed Belford in rapture, " and can you then, for my sake, summon a sufficient degree of fortitude, to hear with patience a very moving narra- '*?*' Ah Belford,** she rejoined, u I feel that i, *r sake I can prepare myself for an eve jf the most tragical texture, therefore suffer not your reluctance to give me pain, to be any longer the instrument of retard¬ ing an account, which conscience seems to justify your unfolding. My mind is indeed fortified ; and as I am happy to join with you in bliss, so am I equally desirous of sympathizing with you in affliction." A hasty embrace of affection evinced the e-
motions created in the bosom of Belford, at the tender refinement he continued to dis¬ cover in every sentiment she breathed forth. Finding her so well prepared for his re¬ cital, he led her into the garden, as being, in hi&ï Opinion, from its retired-state, the fit¬ test st>ot to favour the description of a mournful story, which, doubtless, would create reflections too serious and important, to render any event defireable, that might disturb or intrude on their contemplation. Hie * evening was serene,—the whistiing breeze of Boreas was no longer heard,—and the cheering beams of Sol cast b^t another glow of warmth upon \he earth, when the stupendous western mountains obscured it from farther observation, and detain^ 1 ** for a while, only fhosc golden streaks in the Heavens, which inform mankind of the sun's recent departure. The birds liad ceased to sing, and, rustling their little bo¬ dies in the trees, were hopping to the rural abodes, alîoted by Nature to favour their re¬ pose. G 3
Thus was every thing combined to pro¬ mote quiet, when, seating themselves in the tranquil grove, Belford, in a pathetic tone of voice, began as follows : " Alas, my love, it is with the deepest sense of sorrow I make known to you I have a brother :—My regret at the recollection of so near a relative, is occasioned by a long course of misconduct on his part, which has deprived him of the esteem of the worthy, and banished him from those societies, where men are only respected for their virtues, and where the profligate would prove but an un* welcome guest. Ah ! my dear, you should have, ere thÍ9, heard of him, could I have tendered any report in his favour, without involving my own conscience in the guilt of a false affir¬ mation :—but too pungent were my reflec¬ tions,—every thought directed on his past actions, served but the stronger to impress me with the heinousness of his offences, and to court me, by silence, to spare him the censure a mention of him would occasion."
A deep sigh, at the conclusion of this sentence, escaped Mrs Belford ;—a starting tear, from hex lovely eyes, fell in evidence of her pain of mind. Belford could have wished to have deferred the remainder of this doleful account to another period ;— but her entreaties, not to be left in sus¬ pense, obliged him to continue. 44 I am concerned, indeed, for your un¬ easiness, my love," rejoined Belford, 44 and lament that it is not in my power to preface my narrative with expressions of a more fa¬ vourable nature, 44 As I could not mention any circum¬ stances relative to my brother, that could afford him any claim to merit, I reflected, that, previous to our marriage, to have ex¬ posed his failings, would have been taking a step of injustice, from a conviction that it is ever adviseable to suffer news of an un¬ favourable texture to remain ín obscurity, unless advantages can be derived by bring¬ ing it to light : but as, by our union, my love, your are nearly allied to this unfortu¬ nate young man, I conceive it a duty in-
cumbent upon me, to unfold every particu¬ lar relative to his miserable situation," " Oh Heaven ! miserable situation !" ex¬ claimed Mrs Belford, " can a Belford be miserable r'* Ah ! miserable, indeed,"—he returned,—** if still he lives, and if he ?? longer exists on earth. I cannot venture to reflect on what he may encounter,— but I will not encourage a suspicion so unfa¬ vourable ; had the well constructed organs of life ceafed to play within his callous bo¬ som, and had his heart, which never flut¬ tered with compassion, yielded its long ex¬ erted pulse to the chill embraces of death, I should, doubtless, through some channel, have been apprised of the event. The de¬ pression which at intervals weighs on my mind, is occasioned solely by my reflec¬ tions on my brother's self created suffer* ings,—the pangs I sometimes fancy he sus¬ tains, are pictured by my imagination in such hideous shapes, that I could almost wish to share them with him :—what must such pains be realized ?—When imaginary sufferings act so emphatically on the hu¬ man frame. Poor fellow,—the twentieth
day ôf next month—will introduce him to his twenty seventh year :—He was born." " Born !" exclaimed Mrs Belford, in great agitation, " where was he born, my love, not at Munster ?" " No, my life, he was not born at Mun¬ ster ;" returned Belford. " Ah, no, I am sure he was not," rejoined the incompara¬ ble Mrs Belford, exultingly : " for Munster ne'er gave birth to any one to pine in wretchedness : the offspring of this peace¬ ful place were reared for better fate." " Your observation," said Belford, as he heaved a sigh, " forcibly strikes me with a superstitious kind of idea, that my unhap¬ py brother, Charles, was doomed to misery from his birth : for my mother being on a journey at the time she discovered symp¬ toms threatening his appearance into the world, used every exertion to expedite her arrival at Munster, —from a conviction that home was the place best adapted to afford necessary comforts for an invalid,^—but her indisposition encreased with such rapidity,
when she approached within twenty miles of this our happy seat of retirement, that it was deemed dangerous for her to proceed further ; uud, after the delay of another day, she was delivered of this unfortunate votary to prodigality. Thus was he ex¬ cluded from theplub'mg reflection of look¬ ing on Munster as his native place,—which appeared ominous, as if, from his creation, he had been marked to experience a life of woe and wretchedness."—Here Belford mu¬ sed a while ; the extreme of agitation which pervaded his whole frame impeded fof a few moments his utterance.—His amiable wife, leaning on his bosom, shared with him ¡n silent reflection,—and partook of every emotion which awakes the virtuous mind to tenderness, pity, and compassion. When he recovered from his pensiveness, he exclaimed, in a voice truly pathetic and affecting,—" Ah Î cruel remembrance,— how oft I've heard my tender mother say, that at the time unhappy Charles was born, the sullen gloom of lowering clouds darken¬ ed the country for many miles around ; and, very strange to tell, that in the moment when the boy wafted his first .breath upon
the atmosphere, from the high vaulted hea¬ vens issued, in awful peals, claps of tremen¬ dous thunder, such as the oldest shepherd in the county, who with his flock had often been exposed to tempests, ne'er before had heard j —and the lightnings which ensued, flashed so vehemently from the skies, that many hapless beings were deprived of sight : —the rain İn torrents poured upon the earth, and, joined by powerful northern blasts of Boreas, laid waste innumerable fields and mounds, whence the industrious farmers had hoped to reap a liberal harvest, as a reward and tribute for their labours. Thus seemed the elements combined, as if in anger roused to execrate the birth of one, whose foreseen vices and pursuits would kindle the just resent¬ ment of the Deity. The scene, I've frequent¬ ly been told, : —was marked with every cast and sign of horror.—It is reported, e*en to the present day, that not a bosomed heart was known throughout the land that still could exercise its throb, but worked a double tide of pulse,—and every hand shook like the trembling aspin leef :—not even those escaped, whose owners long had boasted of strong nenies.
** Ah, my love, my poor mother often heaved a sigh, when she reflected on that awful day:—'twas an event which doubtless expedited her dissolution ; for though she lasted many years after, and made her fami¬ ly happy in her endearing society, yet she at best but lingered :—Her frequent sighs failed not to impair her constitution, which led her into a gradual decline of health, when at length, exhausted nature, too feeble any longer to keep in play the organs, which when motionless, deprive the body of life, sunk into a sleep, when, fearless embracing death, with a serene smile on her counte¬ nance, descriptive of her composure, she yielded every earthly claim, to seek in purer climes an happier fare." Here the lovely wife of Belford, whose mind had never received so severe a shock as this dismal account had given her, dis¬ covered much agitation and uneasiness ; but the tender expressions of Belford, calculated to soften the most poignant grief,—soon shook oppression from her mind in- a great degree, and, when he reminded her of her promised fortitude, every unpleasing refíec-
tion seemed at once dispelled, and she re¬ sumed an air of perfect composure,—and urged him to continue. " It is with deep concern (said "Belford) re¬ suming the account of iiis brother, that I in¬ form you, Charles from his infancy discover¬ ed a roving disposition, and, as he ripened 'in years, so did his mind strengthen in those desires of dissipation, which, while they im¬ pair the health, deprive man of those senti¬ ments of honour which render him more obnoxious than the meanest reptile. His almost unparallelled extravagance involved him in innumerable labyrinths of trouble, and, when he arrived at the age of one and twenty, instead of inheriting a fortune of five hundred pounds per annum, bequeath¬ ed him by an uncle, who little suspected what he had amassed by a life of industry and labour, would have been lavished away in a day of thoughtlessness,—he was com¬ pelled to surrender all for the benefit of his creditors ; and, as his prodigality had over¬ reached the limits of his property, every de¬ mand could not be discharged in full ; but his creditors, who were all men of liberality, Vol. Ι. H
spared him the pain of imprisonment, by submitting to the loss occasioned by his de- ñueney, and setting him at large. " When he perceived himself destitute even of common necessaries, he began to icflect on tbc impropriety of his conduct» The cravings of nature only could rouze him to meditation :—honour occupied no space within his bosom ; he was a stranger to the principles of it, and knew it only by name.—As cunning, however, had .taken a deep root in his heart, he at length applied to me for countenance : His apparent con¬ trition aflbrded me great hopes of his refor¬ mation, and, anxious to retrcive so near and dear a relation as a brother, ke found me as arduous in his interest as he could wish.—·* In order, if possible, to protect and save him from future difficulties, I received him at my house with fraternal cordiality, and as¬ sured him Munster Abbey should in future boast of two masters possessed with equal power, if he would but exert himself to constitute it a mansion so happily governed. He assured nie, with tears streaming fast from his eyes, no temptation whatever could
Ugain mislead him : that the countenance of a brother he dearjy loved, proved the sum¬ mit oï his desires ; and that every other en¬ joyment in life appeared trivial, and not worth seeking, when compared to the envi¬ able blessings of fraternal tenderness and affection:-—he hoped, therefore, I would once more give him my confidence, and trusted I should not find myself deceived. " His peculiar style of argument worked so emphatically upon me ; his expressions ap¬ peared so just, and his sentiments so refined and persuasive, that I began indeed to think the principles of virtue had influenced his mind ; and a few observations further con¬ firmed me in a belief, that the shafts of treachery were erased from his bosom, and that integrity had fixed her throne upon his heart. Oh ! my rapture at this happy change, was indescribable : I almost needed fortitude to bear such extremes of joy :—The restora¬ tion of a brother!—and an only brother too! Oh, 'twas too much joy to dwell on,—'twas the summit of bliss !—'twas exstacy,—more than I ever conceived an earthly event could occasion!—'Twas certainly leading the mind H 2
into an humble conception of paradise !— n for *twas a pleasure I could almost fancy something above what mortals were ever intended to experience. His conduct, for the space of three months, so well accorded with his late professions, that I really con¬ sidered him a strict convert, and my mind in consequence became tranquilized ;—but alas î my love, I was but for a while, flatter¬ ed to experience grief with double energy. In the commencement of the fourth month, a cruel desire to ramble again pervaded his unfeeling mind,—and, without offering any observations or hints that might have led to a.suspicion of his intentions, he rose at an early hour in the morning, when scarcely the servants were all awakened from their f Jumbers, and, having forced the lock of a t nest, which he stripped of the plate and cash İt contained, he precipitately departed from the house which had sheltered him in liis misery, to seek another asylum he knew not where, and to launch into, he knew not * what. My astonishment, when I became acquainted with this unparallelled step of profligacy, may perhaps be conceived ; but I feel inadequate to the task of giving the
description. My uneasiness threw me into that state of grief, which, to bear up a- gainst, required the summons of every de¬ gree of fortitude with which the strict reli¬ gionist is endowed. " A consciousness of my own deficiency in this point, led me to believe 1 could not encounter the test of an event so bitterly afflicting. I shuddered, when I reflected that I had harboured and cherished Charles, with all the tenderness and affection natural from one brother towards another, and that he sould have acted a part that would have even staggered the intrepidity of an assas¬ sin—was too much-**too cruel.—As I me¬ ditated deeply on the perfidy of his con¬ duct, brotherly affection seemed to weaken, and I began to think him unworthy of my future notice. Loaded with disgust at the recollection of his vile pursuits—I fell sud-, denly on my knees to make a vow never more to see him. The sacred oath was on the point of ushering from my bosom in e- nergetic strains—when my mind swiftly re¬ coiled at the rash endeavour ;—and the re¬ collection that he was my brother, seemed
to wring so forcibly from my heart—that a suspension of rage ensued—and, at length, an abatement of wrath glowed through my frame, as a mild substitute for the solemn appeal the extreme of anger had nearly urged me to breath forth. I indulged for a while silent contemplation ; but the shock I had sustained proved too violent and pe¬ netrating, to suffer me yet to enjoy the bles¬ sing of one tranquil moment.—The state of the chest, the plate, and money, crouded fast on my imagination, and overwhelmed me with terror.—I reflected that he could not always commit his depredations beneath a brother's roof, and that others would, doubtless, for such attempts, bring him to serious account, which might terminate in an ignominious end. *' Oh, Charles I (I exclaimed, as I tra¬ versed the room in agitation, where stood the open chest in evidence of his perpetra¬ tion) what spirit could have prompted you to this foul act, when an open declaration of necessity \vc\uld have sufficed to have en- " surcd success tá your desires? \
" But no ; he was too reserved—and, like lhe guilty man, doubted the verity of the professions of his friends, judging of them by his own duplicity, and suspecting that they, like him, would speak in terms of vir¬ tue, but practise secretly the blackest vice." This observation of Belford proved him a man of discernment, though his benevolence of soul inclined him to submit to many im* positions, and his forgiving temper frequent¬ ly constituted him a dupe to the artifices of mankind. Certain it is, that men judge of others by themselves : for what can be more natural, than for us to suppose our neigh¬ bours capable of committing those acts which we ourselves hesitate not to perform : —and what would be more natural than for us to imagine they could be guilty of orlences that wc would shudder at and ab¬ hor ? Thus it is that the innocent, in general, are in this life the greatest sufferers—for, conscious of their own abhorrence of vice, they can have no conception of t he/ 1 ricks practiced by the fraudulent—and/being,
from an openness and purity of conscience, unarmed, and disqualified to encounter the cheats of the profligate, so as by an early discovery to frustrate his deep laid schemes ; they are, from a natural credulity, occasion¬ ed by their own sincerity and uprightness, victims, in general, to the greatest imposi¬ tions. I may be wrong in my judgment ; but a suspicious man, in my opinion, ought never to be trusted. I mean not to infer, by this remark, that men ought to lay themselves open to imposition ; and, because they would on no account defraud others of their mer¬ chandize, trust their whole stock of wealth into any hands that offered.—A little cau¬ tion, with a prowling world, is absolutely necessary. The frequent depredations committed in society afford us proof that frauds are daily practised, which the principles of integrity on our part, incline our nature to recoil at. —It is the individual, only, I wish to screen from our fears and apprehensions, of whom we yet have no reason to be afraid, and
whom we have no right to "suspect would be guilty of thofe acts which impair the ho¬ nour and dignity of man. Collect the world into one great mass, and I will not hesitate to pronounce and consider it a body of corruption ;—but in¬ troduce the inhabitants of the universe to me individually, and 1 will receive each with neighbourly love and cordiality, never harbouring, from looks alone, a mistrustful thought of any. " I traversed the room again " continued Belford, " when a broken pane of glass in the bureau suddenly attracted my wander¬ ing eyes, which were now become swoln with grief. The portrait of my mother first occupied my thoughts :—it was there I had deposited it,—and I prized it more than all other possessions : for the tender enjoyment oí the original death had long e'er then de¬ prived me of. I flew to seek it in the little drawer, which had for years been rendered invaluable by its possession. Not having the key about me, and anxious for relief from the fears and torturing suspense under
which I laboured, I widened the breach in the glass, which afforded me easier access to the place where my attention was wholly fixed, but which, to my sorrow, soon gave proof that the breach between Charles and myself was likewise greatly extended:— 'Twas gone,—and the diamonds, of a pecu¬ liar size and brilliancy, which surrounded it, tempted him to this unparallelled act of cruelty. " Oli ! my love ! this crowned all my mi¬ sery :—To be deprived of the resemblance* of one, whose parental tenderness, from the earliest period of my life, claimed my warm¬ est afíection and veneration,—was too much wretchedness,—too piercing to my afflicted heart, already overcharged with misery and sorrow ! " I censured the moment the picture was encompassed by such gaudy attire :—I saw too late, with a dejected eye, the folly of a- dorning an object which needed. no deco¬ rations to excite the gazer's admiration. Surely the countenance of benignity was enough tø charm every beholder,—and sucb
the skilful painter had justly afforded her, descriptive of herself, a truJy pious woman. This additional act of unexemplified barba¬ rity invigorated my grief, and I almost doubted whether my excessive rage would ever be subdued. I viewed Charles now in too despicable a light, to consider him entitled to my future notice :—his atrocious conduct had for a moment suspended my affection, and weaned me from the most dis¬ tant glimmer of brotherly tenderness. Thus armed against him with disgust, I hurried my steps to command the servants to shut ??? doors upon him, should he make any attempt to return :—but, as I was on the point of advancing the rigid order, I felt, contrary to my late imagination, that still a faint spark of fraternal affection lingered a- bout my heart, which instantly roused me to tenderness, &nd overpowered my indig¬ nation. " I reflected,—I contemplated,—I argu¬ ed with myself, saying,—4is true, Charles has treated me with inhumanity unparallel- led :—he has robbed me of property, and of that which he knew was most dear to
me :—I cherished him with tenderness,— I relieved him in distress,—I received him in my house, when no other roof would shel¬ ter him,—in short, I surrounded him with comforts, when misery and bondage seemed to threaten as his doom. " He rewarded these attentions with in¬ gratitude, and even acted the part of a vil¬ lain :—Still,—still he is my brother ;—and though gloomy and dreary as the present prospect appears, yet,—yet he lives, which spares me the pain of reflecting that hope is sacrificed, and his fate determined. Ma¬ ny men, thus situated, would discard him ; —but this I cannot do ; —for, should he at any future period return and declare him¬ self a penitent, in terms expressive of the utmost sorrow for his misconduct, I could not reject him ;—if I did, I should consider myself accessary to any step of imprudence . he might in future take, by leaving him in a situation incapable of supporting himself, - which desperate state would urge him to commit other acts of injustice, in order to satisfy the cravings of an exhausting nature* No, I cannot leave him destitute—he is my
brother ;—and though, for the enormity of his crimes, he merits condign punishment, still those acts of vice are past, and future time may furnish him with reflection, and incline him to penitence ;—then, indeed, shall I have reason to rejoice, if, through a- ny attention or countenance on my part, he is led into the path of reformation, which yet may be the case, but which can never be accomplished, should I leave him to the mercy of the world, in those particular hours when he stands most in need of a brother's assistance. " To condemn him for his offences, would be at once declaring hostilities against those principles which my instructors ardently strove to imprint upon my heart. As they took pains to sow the seeds of charity with¬ in my bosom, it is undubitably my duty to be as ardent in my endeavours to cherish and bring them to perfection,—not ifrom selfish desires alone to derive ensuing bene¬ fits, but that I may at a future period, should I be blessed with a family of my own, graft sprigs of the tree I have carefully nurtured upon the hearts of my offspring, who shall
ever gratefully acknowledge the bounteous prize obtained through the piety of their ancestors, and who may as liberally tender branches of the invaluable plant to others, who, with equal caution and perseverance, may be the instruments of establishing groves of rectitude, from one pure seed of mercy and benevolence. These reflections, my love, abated my rage, and inclined me to act with kindness towards Charles, when* ever he might afford me the opportunity, by returning and proving his contrition, by adopting a rational hne of conduct, " I lingered three long months in a state of cruel suspense, anxious to hear of him, and yet fearing lest I might learn, that, through some iniquitous act, he was ap¬ proaching quickly to an ignominious end, I was, however, soon after this period, re¬ lieved from these unhappy conjectures ;— for, before the conclusion of another week, I received a letter from him, written on such paper as at once proved the wretched¬ ness of his situation. Poor fellow í —he scarcely knew what to say, to assure me of his sorrow for his guilt ;—heinous as I knew
his crimes,to be, yet could I not bear to see with what humility he expressed himselfi " Why, said I to myself, should he be humble to me ? I was created but a little before him, and there can surely be no me¬ rit in what only was the effect of chance ? Oh, my love ! judge of mý rejoicings when I turned over the leaf of his letter, and learnt that he was within a mile of me ?— I forgot all his faults in a moment ; my hap¬ piness was so great, and my mind so eleva¬ ted with bliss, in recovering an only bro¬ ther, and in reflecting I had another chance of restoring him to society, and a life of prudence. I flew to the spot whither the letter directed me, eager to embrace him,— but, ^on my approach, his appearance im- pressed me with such a degree of terror, mingled witl^ grief, that my strength for a moment failed, my legs trembled under me, weakened with agitation and horror, and my body, whose pressure proved too potent 'for the feeble state of its supporters, fell to the ground. Charles approached, apparent- ly equally agitated with myself:—he strug¬ gled for utterance,—and some considerable
time elapseóLbefore he could breathe forth an expression :—At length he commenced apologizing,—but I immediately checked him in the attempt. " Make no apologies, said I, Charles, far what you could only remedy by one step, and that you have taken. How ? he re¬ turned,—how have I remedied for all the evijs that weigh so heavily upon me ?~By returning to your brother, I replied, and seeking comfort under his roof,—which, by an acknowledgement of past errors, you are sure to obtain. Oh Heaven !—he exclaim¬ ed, and can you then forgive me ? What shall I say, to enforce my thanks and gra¬ titude for such kindness? Nothing, I re¬ joined, the subject needs no.enlargement; —believe me, when I tell you, I freely for¬ give you ;—a repetition of past imprudent cies is needless ;—your business, now 4 is to retrieve your character by an amendment of life, strictly pursuing a virtuous course,. to which you have hitherto been a stranger. " This, my love, proved the chief of our conversation, on the spot where we met.
" Immediately on recovering my strength, I raised myself from the ground, and hav¬ ing embraced Charles with my usual affec¬ tion, which he received with a flood of tears gushing from his eyes, we bent our course towards home. The severe shock my mind had received ♦ in viewing him in so wretched a condition, checked the progress of my footsteps, and I found considerable difficulty in proceed¬ ing on the way. I could scarcely believe, that within so short a period of time, an al¬ teration so material could have been made —but too pointedly the possibility was pro¬ ved. When he departed from this peace¬ ful place, he could boast of health, and was, as you may imagine, equipped like a gen¬ tleman. He appeared now, ragged from head to foot, and even about his neck hung an old stocking as a substitute for a neck¬ cloth. His face, which before had borne the afpect of gaiety, was now reduced to a -pale and dejected cast. In shctt t his fìgun: altogether was such as must have excited the commisse ration of every person that be -
held him, whose bosom was not a stranger to the feelings of humanity. " I pitied him sincerely from my heart— and thought, from thefe observations, the. distress he must have encountered was a sufficient punishment for his follies.—I de¬ termined, therefore, within, myself» not ta rebuke him, but to treat him- with all the attention and kindness in my power. *' My determination on this point was not made solely on account of the troubles he had encountered ;—but from a hope that tender treatment would prove a successful effort towards his reformation." This admirable idea of Belford's shone in* testimony of his unbounded benevolence, in the same moment that it proved him a man, possessed of great wisdom : for what can be more unjustifiable, cruel, and' even brutish, than for us, when we attempt to shelter ñail relatjyes from impending ruin, to a*. dopt the plan of constantly upbraiding them fbr their past faults and follies ?—Yet, &- la.s ! I mîtch fear this uncharitable method
of reforming, is but too frequently practis¬ ed. 'Tis a pity we cannot all discern the danger of such a proceeding, as well as the injustice.—I shall, however, make an at¬ tempt to, point out bath. When ? man receives« a frail relation in¬ to his house, who comes to implore forgive¬ ness under the influence of penitence, and takes various opportunities of chiding him for offences, which, being passed, can never be recalled ; he pursues the very system to frustrate every good design, and even in¬ volves the unhappy person in miseries still greater than before ;—for, by constantly jarring in his ears repetitions of his late misconduct, which, in his penitential hours, he reflects on with horror, he at length feels insulted and deeply disgraced ; and, con.. ceiving it impossible to reside happily un¬ der a roof where his late imprudencies are as much talked of, as if he continued daily committing every species of depredation and fraud ;, he flies disgusted from the un¬ charitable mansion, where his ears witnes¬ sed nothing but reproaches, to take his chance in a wide extended world of iniquL
fy, whose inhabitants could not treat him hatdtír, or render his life more irksome ; and, thus determined never to return, he plunges into an irrecoverable state of wretchedness.—Oh ! cruel sacrifice this !~ with what guilt do we not load ourselves for such barbarity ! If we would but, on these important oc- casions;devote a little of our time to religious reflection* we should at once discern that ? faulty relative, who returns to us with an heart inspired with penitence, is more de¬ serving of our attention, than if he had never given us cause to be offended ; and, instead öf reproaching him with a recollection of what he now despises himself for, we should take every delicate precaution to dispel from his mind a remembrance of such hor¬ rors, and by every effort of kindness and at¬ tention, we should incline him to believe he had gained that confidence to which a pe¬ nitent is ever entitled. Thus happily rein¬ stated in the esteem of his friends, he would experience too much bliss in having em¬ braced a virtuous course of life, to feel in¬ clined ever to pursue those plans again,
which might tend to blemish or impair his character. When such happy effects can be produced by a simple act of kindness,— what a pity it is, we are not all sufficiently aware of our duty, to be as ready on every occasion to shew mercy, as to receive it. α When newly apparelled," continued Belford, " I was happy in again embracing a brother, whose appearance was now only altered by a dejected and pale visage, which however, with a httle attention, was soon restored to its former vivacity and healthful look. His behaviour now, marked with propriety and correctness, flattered me with great hopes he would in future adopt a ra¬ tional system ; and, notwithstanding the im¬ pression his late conduct had made on my mind, yet, when he declared himself con¬ trite, and seemed to act in conformity to his professions, I could not suffer myself to doubt him. He afforded me one striking proof that he was not totally destitute of feeling, though very deficient :—He returned me the portrait of my mother, which he had stripped of its diamonds, but which he had carefully reserved, with an intention of send*
kig by some opportunity, from a recollection of my attachment to it. " I received it, my love, as you may well imagine, with tears expressive of the sum¬ mit of joy :—it shone with more briffiancy before me in its humble state, than ever it had when surrounded by alî its late splendid ornaments. Like a sincere and much loved bosom friend, saved from the flames of a consuming mansion, I embraced it with re¬ doubled ardour, viewing all its beauties which crouded fast on my imagination, and filled my heart with that extreme of bliss, which is diffused in the mind by a recol¬ lection of parental tenderness, which never fails to inspire filial affection. " I gazed on the restored object, as often as I was able, but it was frequently obscur¬ ed from my sight by floods of tears which streamed from my eyes, and left a watery cloud before me. In haste I wiped away the dewy shade, and every prospect of the portrait invigorated my spirits, and served as a comforting balm to heal the wounds of a once dejected mind. Thus I recovered
session of which I am stiU happy enough to boast of, and which I trust will never more [ by any artifice be torn from me. ** My anxiety now was to learn, what af¬ fliction Charles had experienced during his absence ; b^t I would not venture to urge the questionatili he was restored to health ; as the recollection of his misfortunes might have depressed his spirits, and prolonged his indisposition. At length, finding him suffi¬ ciently recovered, I entreated him to relate all that had occurred, assuring him, nothing would waver my affection, and that curio¬ sity, connected with my interest in his wel¬ fare, prompted mc to make the enquiry,— His narrative proved not tedious, though in, every degree affecting.—He informed me, that, on his departure from Munster, he hir¬ ed a chaise, and bent his course immediately towards London, never delaying but for a necessary change of horses, and occasional refreshment. " As soon as he reached the metropolis, he repaired to the house of a goldsmith, and ^disposed of the plate and jewels then in his
possession, which, with the money hTs pock¬ ets contained; furnished him with the sum of two hundred and forty pounds, '* With this he repaired, at an hour when all rational beings were reposing, to a gam¬ ing house in St James's Street, which he yet knew only by report, but where it seemed his mind had been unfortunately long di¬ rected. As he hastened his steps through the streets that directed him towards this edifice of iniquity, a thousand transient pic¬ tures of imaginary approaching wealth, ran on his mind, and hurried him into the flames, to be the instrument of his own destruction. " Ah Charles í I exclaimed, fancy me not capable of imposing on your liberality, for obliging me with so candid a confession ; but I cannot help observing, that in gene¬ ral there is but one way of terminating life, for those who pursue a system so depraved, and so unjustifiable. " His hopes were soon destroyed, and the pile of riches which imagination had built on his mind, exceeding in height the pre-
sumptuous structure, raised by the Babylo¬ nian tribe, when their desire to pry into ce¬ lestial secrets, withheld from mortal know¬ ledge, urged them to prophane attempts, meriting the wrath of Heaven, suddenly fell to the foundation ; and, like every erTort which extends beyond the limits of justice, soon was consumed by its own materials : For, within three hours, the whole of his ill-gained property forsook him, and left him destitute and pennyless. u The landlord, with apparent kindness, and a degree of courtesy familiar to men of his profession, begged leave to canduct him to the supper room, hoping, by this atten¬ tion and civility, to insinuate himself in his good graces, in order to ensure his future custom : But Charles was too deeply in¬ volved in grief, to feel any inclination to partake of the repast he had so dearly earn¬ ed : He hurried from the despicable man¬ sion, within whose doors many a light heart had entered, but out of which many a hea¬ vy one came,—and, wandering through the streets, in a state bordering on distraction, he endeavoured to trace out some plan to ??? ........ ? ¿tf- L ?
reimburse himself. Fortunately for him, he adopted a scheme that in all probability sa¬ ved him from an ignominious end ; for, by the step he took, he constituted his appear- ance so contemptible, as to render it impos¬ sible for him to attempt, by any art, to ne¬ gociate with persons of respectability, as none would credit him, who for a moment viewed the wretchedness of his situation. Had he supported the aspect of a gentle¬ man, he might again, perhaps, have impos¬ ed on the unwairy and credulous· These reflections, however, never occurred to his mind ; and, like a man deeply plunged in guilt, he set a trap, and was the first en* snared in it. *' Having pondered a considerable time on the misery of his condition, he strolled from street to street in search of a house, where he might vend or purchase ready made apparel. " Such a place as this he at length dis¬ covered in an obscure quarter of the town, —«and though the latest hour usual for ne¬ gotiating business hiid been long since past,
yet the landlord, who answered his knock at the door from his bed-room window, soon obliged him with admission, when he learnt the cause of his untimely visit, not doubt¬ ing but he should be amply rewarded for any trouble he might incur on the occa¬ sion. As his plan was now to muster to¬ gether all the cash he could become master of, to make, what he termed, one grand push, he disposed of the clothes he had on, for the sum of three guineas, one of which be returned for the payment of a ragged dress with which he equipped himself. " Thus disgraced, he sallied forth in search of new horrors ;—and, though the cravings of nature reminded him that many hours had elapsed since he received any nu¬ triment, yet his mind was so bent towards ene scene of destruction, that he would not bestow as much of his pittance for his. own support, as would have been adequate to the value of a morsel of bread. " Again he hurried his steps towards that labyrinth of iniquity, that flattering edifice of wretchedness, the gaming-house ;—but,
on approaching the spot, a thought sudden¬ ly occurred, that at once impeded his pro¬ gress, and, to his sorrow, frustrated his de¬ sign. *' As he contemplated on the magnifi¬ cence of the mansion then before him, he saw immediately the impropriety of his at¬ tempting to enter such a house, in a habit scarcely superior to that of a common beg¬ gar. He paused—when, surveying himself, and then, casting another wishful look on the odious house of ruin, he felt convinced, that, within the unhospitable walls of such a structure, he would have been considered but an unwelcomed guest. This disap¬ pointing reflection brought him to tears ;— and, turning suddenly from the mansion of his misfortune, he strolled, he knew not which way, nearly constituted a victim to despair. 41 At length recovering, in some degree, from this new made misery, he employed himself in studying some other method to risk his pittance of money, for the chance of profit.—A very little study is necessary,
if we are bent on our own ruin ; and so it proved with Charles :—for, after a short consideration, he began to fancy there were other houses inferior to that which he had lately visited, where similar robberies were committed, and whose proprietors were not above admitting as a, customer one of his mean appearance, " Flattered with this new idea, he ques¬ tioned the first man he met, who, happen¬ ing to be one of the sable hearted tribe, who had drained many a poor man's pock¬ et, soon conducted him to a place where the difference of one half hour rendered him literally destitute and pennyless. —Poor * fellow Î it even grieves me now, when I re¬ flect on the miseries he must have encoun¬ tered. He then solicited the people of the house to lend him one shilling to pay for his nights lodging : but they abruptly answer¬ ed him in the negative ; and as he renew¬ ed his entreaties, declaring he had no friends. to fly to for succomy they turned him in¬ stantly out of doors, one of the iron hearted gang at the same time exclaiming, " Go. to*
those who are friends to the poor ; we have no call for needy people here." 44 Poor Charles thought by his lamenta-¿ tions to excite their pity, but his confession of indigence only rouzed their indignation. —Had he been aware that he petitioned a race, whose profession it was to be merci¬ less, he might have spared himself much pains, and have escaped being insulted and exposed." 44 Unfortunate creatu * !" exclaimed the patient wife of Belford how could he be 30 imprudent ?" Φ " '. 44 Ah, my love !" returned Belford, sigh¬ ing, 4t I would this had been all the impru¬ dence I could accuse him of. * 4 He was compelled to wander the re¬ mainder of the night from street to street, ¿and, I doubt not, but in those hours of solita¬ ry reflection, his conscience must have stung him to the coul. He had now no means of existing but by begging, which he conti¬ nued with sufficient success, to defray his
expences down to this place, which, after much difficulty and delay, he accomplish¬ ed, by making the journey on foot. " This was the account he gave me of the occurrences during his absence ; and, as it contained nothing that reflected any cre¬ dit to himself, I felt no inclination to doubt the truth of his assertions,—Oh î that this were all I could report against him ; but, a little more patience, and I will inform you how he treated me at last." " Oh, Heaven 1" exclaimed the lovely Mrs Belford, " and could he, after all this, treat you unkindly ?" ** Ah ! too unkindly, too cruelly," re¬ turned Belford : " the manner in which he rewarded me for the pains I took in seeking to make him happy, was barbarous in the extreme,—it was unparalleled»—He conti¬ nued with me six months after his return ; and the uniform decorum with which he conducted himself during that period, fur¬ nished me with great hopes that he reflect¬ ed ?? his past vices with horror, and that
he clearly discerned the secret blessings which a pure conscience inspires. I con* fess, I felt at times timid, as he had once before deceived me ; but whenever I re¬ flected on his restoring the portrait of my mother, because he knew I prized it, I could not but believe a spark of humanity stiU lingered about his heart, which I fre¬ quently hoped and trusted would some time or other kindle a powerful flame of virtue· in his bosom, that would erase and annihi¬ late every unjust and disgraceful senti¬ ment.—But, alas ! he deprived me at length of this flattering hope for a time. In the beginning of the seventh month, he rose on a certain morning as before, and having again robbed the same chest of of some new plate that had been deposited in it,—he precipitately left the house. ** This cruel event drove me nearly to- distraction : I made a diligent search after him, but he could no where be found,—I feared I should never have recovered the shock. My rage now encreased to a higher pitch, if possible, than when he before de- eejved me. I again flew to command the
servants to shut my doors against him should he attempt to return, when I discovered fraternal affection was not yet erased from my bosom. The same degree of weakness that before checked me in this rash endea¬ vour, trembled again over my frame and sunk me to reflection ; when, after seriously meditating, I found it impossible to brook the thought of shunning him for ever. It is true nothing but the most contrite penitence can save him ; but as the most vitiated inha¬ bitant of this mortal globe has the pow r er of reforming, I will not discard him, but, should he ever return, my arms shall be extended to receive him ; and I trust I may yet be the chief instrument of restoring him to reason, and society. Heaven knows where he is, how he hves, or, cruel doubt ! whether he stills exists. " It is now four years since he abandon¬ ed this peaceful habitation, and I have never received any intelligence of him since his departure, I will not however indulge de¬ spair ; as well as being a vice, it plunges in¬ to misery those who encourage it. Hope is a pleasing virtue, which softens pain, heals
14^ MONSTER ABBEY. the afflicted hearts and leads it to happi¬ ness." \ Oh my soul! ekclaimed Mrs Belford, whose eyes streamed with tears as she spoke, what cruel tortures ydu have sustained, Oh í that heaven had permitted me to have shared in all your afflictions. \ The account you have Viven me of your unhappy brother has indeed cast a tempo¬ rary dejection on my spirits ? but I will exert myself for your sake to dispel every un¬ pleasing reflection. I sincereW unite with you in pity for poor Charles, arid entertain an equal hope that he will yet Veturn and seek refuge under the tranquil roof of Mun¬ ster Abbey. Believe me, I shouH delight in assisting you, by every tender effort, to lead him into virtue's amiable paths,\ where all her votaries are established in peaèe and happiness. Belford embraced his beloved partner, ??- chanted more than ever at the tenderness of her benevolent mind.
MUNSTER ABBEY. I43
The ancient clock of Munster's church struck the hour of eight ; and as the dew of Heaven moistened the earth with a chilling damp, they returned from the garden, and soon after retired for the night, in the hope of experiencing a tranquil repose.
MÜNSTER ABBEY.
CHAP. V. JM.R and Mrs Belford continued to enjoy a state of bliss ; and as each day passed over their heads, new sensations of happiness re¬ warded their virtuous exertions. Whilst she was employed in innocent domestic pur¬ suits, he was arduous in his endeavours to relieve those objects of pity, whose penu¬ ry entitled them to the assistance of the wealthy. Independent of the many services he ren¬ dered in various parts of the country, he re¬ served a certain sum regularly out of his in¬ come annually, for the purpose of softening the distresses of those whom he conceived laboured under a load of oppression. One year perhaps he would distribute this little
property amongst the unfortunate widows of those brave men who had lost their lives in the service of their country :—A- nother, he would expend it in the purchase of fuel,—which he would retail impartially 10 the shivering poor, when an inclement fea«on rendered that article scarce and expensive,—the want of which is bitterly distressing to those whose property is in- * sufficient to afford them many comforts. 1 Then again lie would assist individuals a- mongst his neighbours,rr-who, through un¬ foreseen misfortunes, had failed in their pursuits,—and, where their necessities did not extend beyond the power of his purse to alleviate,—he would frequently re-in¬ state and establish them in a profperous line of traffic. Belford w r as peculiarly attentive to the distresses of all who came within his reach : —his tender heart commiserated for their troubles ;—and his hand was ever prepared to be liberally extended,—in obedience to the virtuous commands of his benevolent disposition. As a good man himself,—he was naturally attached to moral characters,
-—but his services were not reserved for the sole benefit of this description of persons. Mercy ever proved a striking feature in his character,—which entitled him to the ap¬ pellation of a truly charitable man ;—con¬ sequently, those who bore not the best name, did not escape his notice, when mi¬ sery infested their bosoms,—and cast a gloom upon their dwellings ;—and to de¬ spise, was an idea far beyond his concep¬ tion. His sentiments were too liberal w incline him to fancy every man a villain,—> whose character would not bear the strict¬ est scrutiny. Indeed he differed in opinion, on this point, from the generality of man¬ kind :—For, instead of shunning those whose misconduct entitled them to cen¬ sure, he considered it the duty of the pow¬ erful and opulent, to pay the strictest at¬ tention to persons labouring under such misfortune,—by endeavouring to strike out some rational method to restore them to reason,—and hurry them from the jaws of impending destruction. He frequently observed, that, by discarding and treating contemptuously such unfortunate beings,— wc adopt the very means to involve them
deeper 'm affliction,—which, on our part, is acting in opposition to those principles which Christianity is intended to diffuse in our minds. Belford made various allowances for dis¬ tress,—and never considered the character of any man so desperate as represented. The world, he justly observed, bent in general towards censure,—and, by the time an unfavourable tale had been three times related,—it was frequently doubled in the enormity of its vice,—and eo on in proportion,—until the unhappy victim, first accused of some trifling frailty, was by the tongue of man condemned as one of the most detestable characters in exist¬ ence. " It is true" said he, as he contemplated on the sufferings of the indigent, " that vice is odious,—and the guilty deserve punish¬ ment ;—but before we arebiassed to exercise severity ;—we should cautiously weigh all circumstances, and make such-allowances
as are reasonable, from the nature of the distresses of the party accused, " For instance, to commit a theft, is both an unjust and a disgraceful act ;—but shall a man, who is destitute of every sup¬ port,—even so destitute as to be at a loss where to procure the next morsel of bread, —having failed of success in begging,— shall he, for taking a crust from a shelf, (unobserved as he imagines) to satisfy the painful wants which hunger has occasion¬ ed him to sufíèr in lingering torments,— be classed among a banditti of common thieves, who wantonly plunder, to heighten and encourage their scenes of dissipation ? and shall he be considered as one meriting the punishment they deserve ?—No :— Nature must be supported. It is possible a man may be thus situated from unfore¬ seen misfortune,—without being entitled to the appellation of a criminal ;—and a state so truly deplorable, instead of being a disgrace to him,—is one of the most se¬ rious reflections on those who surround him ; as it proves them deficient in those principles which ought to be the boast and
pride of all nations." Such were the ideas of this truly worthy character on this head, whose bliss was crowned in being united to one who cherished similar principles ; for such were also the tender sentiments of the amiable Mrs Belford, In addition to the many delights this happy couple experienced in their little pa¬ radise, they were, at the close of the first year after their union, blessed with a lovely daughter, whose countenance at once be¬ spoke her the offspring of so amiable a pair. This joyous event tended immediately to illustrate those virtues possessed by Belford and his partner, characteristic in each, of the tender parent. A new species of affec¬ tion now occupied a space within their bo¬ som,—and the glow of parental love, deck¬ ed with additional graces their accustomed smiles of benignity. The promising infant, our fair heroine, re¬ ceived by the sacred rite of baptism the name of Aurelia. She proved their only child ;— and as she advanced in years, so did her mind
strengthen in those virtues which her parents ardently endeavoured to impress her with a love of. The greatest pains were bestow¬ ed on her education ; her mind was never indebted to a seminary for cultivation ; pro¬ per masters having been appointed to af¬ ford her necessary instructions at home. < She was ever indulged in a knowledge of those pleasmg arts which seemed most to attract her attention. At a very early age she discovered a peculiar attachment to music ;—a science which never fails to dis¬ play innumerable graces and beauties in the mind of a benevolent person, but which but ill accords with a morose or unfeeling disposition. Music hath various powers. In joy it will invigorate felicity, and in trouble it will increase melancholy.-—To the ears of a ty¬ rant, its sweetest note proves the most jar¬ ring,—and very natural this effect ; for in no instance did discord and harmony ever a- micably unite ; while but a simple chord of its enchantment fills the compassionate mind with many pleasureable sensations.
Even in pain a kind of pleasure is expe¬ rienced, in the melancholy it creates ; else why would we so^ often court repetitions of a favourite air, which pleased our once lov¬ ed, though now departed friend ? It is the perfect recollection it affords us of pást joys, that awakens us to court similar sounds to those which our ears witnessed in the mo¬ ments of felicity ; and our tears are enticed by reflecting On the impossibility of such pleasures ever more returning ; but still we are ambitious to indulge the melancholy, because it draws the picture of past de¬ lights, with the nicest accuracy, to the i- magination. In this desirable and interesting art, the lovely Aurelia excelled :—She frequently gratified the ears of her parents with soft- airs on the piano-forte, accompanied by i\ pleasing voice, gifted to her by Nature. How often she pathetically exclaimed, when a tear of sensibility started from lier beau¬ teous eye, " Oh, my dear father, when I hear sweet music, it makes me think of Heaven, and inspires me with a thousand
desires, beyond my abilities, to establish the world in happiness," Ah ! little thought the amiable Aurelia, in these her juvenile days, when she so ar¬ dently hoped to view all Nature in a state of bliss,—and when she would have decked the countenance of every inhabitant of the universe with a descriptive smile of sereni¬ ty and joy, had her power been adequate to her ambition,—that she had to combat against various snares that would be laid a- gainst her, by a corrupt race, who, in return for her pure wishes, would endeavour to de¬ vise means to seek her destruction :—but, too true, the treacherous requital was offer¬ ed, though happily without success. Her mind was artless in the extreme :—She acknowledged the many blessings bestowed on her by Providence, by a just sense of gratitude, connected with her continued exertions in the fair and unpolluted path of virtue. She never discovered anxiety or depression, but when the sufferings of others claimed her* commisseration. The expres¬ sion of her countenance described her inter¬ nal emotions, When she smiled, there was
./
some true cause for her apparent approba¬ tion; and, when an air of gravity gave a check to her vivacity, there were substan¬ tial reasons for her discomposure. In short, at a very early period of life, she promised fairly for approaching as near' to perfection as human nature could aspire. To what extremes of bliss were the heart« of Belford and his beloved wife elevated) when they contemplated on the flattering prospect of long continuedhappiness, which their amiable Aurelia afforded tjfiem reason to hope for. Their felicity* when they viewed their/affectionate daughter, and re« fleeted otyber merits, couid scarcely be e- q\ialledr' In her was deposited their chief hope/of comfort.;—nor were they disappoint- ew\n their anticipation.
/
MUNSTER ABBEY.
CHAP. VI. JL RANQUiLiTY continued to deck the happy village of Munster, and, for the space of fif¬ teen years, the frowns of fortune were un¬ known beneath the Abbey's hospitable roof. Not a circumstance occurred during this period to damp the pleasures of the scene, except the decease of poor Munster the dog, 1&? remembrance of whose faithfiu services called a tear of gratitude from the eye of those whose happiness he had been the means of prolonging. The worldling would have spurned at the idea of descending so low, or displaying such weakness, as he would have termed it, to shed tears for a dog,—a mere brute !—yet, would he not have felt too proud, in any
state of peril, to have accepted the services and assistance of the same animal. How descriptive is this observation of men of the world, who cringe to any thing that will render them a service in the time of necessity,—and yet the moment every pros¬ pect of danger is dispelled, they shun those who relieved them, (if they are not equal in rank and fortune with themselves,) with as much precaution, as if, instead of having res¬ cued them from impending ruin, they had endeavoured by various projects to accom¬ plish their assassination. The family of Belford were differently in¬ structed, ^and differently inclined :—If they received a favour, they were grateful enough to remember it ; and if they professed a feiendship in one place, they were never a- bove acknowledging it in another. Aurelia was now advanced to an age, when thoughts of a more important nature might be expected to occupy her mind, than had hitherto artracted her attention. She was of a middling stature, and her ex-
quisite beauty, combined with an open coun¬ tenance indicative of an heart of benevo¬ lence, created general admiration* Simpli¬ city was ä distinguishing feature in her cha¬ racter, and candour marked all her actions. The summit of her happiness was in seeing others chearful, nor did she at this time ap- pear to havtf formed any ideas of bliss, be¬ yond the enviable joys experienced in do- mestic retirement. One of her chief delights was in 3trolling towards the close of day on the refreshing banks of the Ex, and survey¬ ing the beauties of the country around her, which nature had liberally enriched with a luxuriant tint. She generally pursued the same walk, seldom varying her course. Her mind was not inclined to many changes ; those objects that had once afforded her pleasure, she was grateful enough again to court, without seeking others to outvie them. In one of these pensive strolls, whilst her mind was employed in drawing comparisons between a busy world of dissipation, with which she was acquainted only from descrip¬ tion, and a retired country life, wluch expe¬ rience since her birth had inclined her to Vol, L ?
hope for a continuance of; her tranquillity was suddenly intruded on by a sound which induced her to look with astonishment to¬ wards the quarter whence the noise pro¬ ceeded, when to her surprise she observed a horse approaching in full speed, bearing a man whose signals of agitation convinced her he was in imminent danger; Aurelia's emotions were scarcely to be described : Her heart palpitated with fear, and, but for the support of a tree against which she leaned, she would have sunk to the ground. A dismal groan urged her to look again :—reluctantly with fear she cast her bewildered eyes towards the same quar¬ ter, when she perceived the horse standing within a few yards of her, but the man she had just before seen was no longer a bur¬ then to him. She listened attentively for some mo¬ ments, hoping her ears might witness ano¬ ther groan, which, though doleful and pierc¬ ing to her heart, she considered in some de¬ gree gratifying, as it would prove the un¬ fortunate stranger had not from the unhappy
event been hurried from existence to en¬ counter the difficulty which an unprepared soul necessarily must, to secure in another world a permanent seat of repose. Her patience at length exhausted, and her an¬ xiety to know the fate of the stranger en- creasing, she hurried her steps towards the place whence she conceived the lamentable cry had issued. Grief and horror would have overwhelm¬ ed her, but for the cheering sensations which hope inspired, that she had the chance and probably the power of alleviating the mise¬ ries of another, the flattering expectation of which supported her through the trying scene. The distance of a few yards pre¬ sented to her eyes the body of a man wel¬ tering in blood. u Oh Heaven !" exclaimed Aurelia, as she fell on lier knees, " I cannot support this scene of wretchedness,—despair will predominate over my exertions. Ha !" she exclaimed again, more wretched than be¬ fore, what have I rashly said ? have I peril* diously flown into the face of Heaven, and M2
for a moment encouraged a vice so perni¬ cious as despair ? :a vice which has cost my parents years of labour to urge me to exe¬ crate 1—Oh! what ingratitude have I dis¬ covered ï—forbid it, that same heaven which I have so grossly offended, that I should e- ver again fall into an error so detrimental to the human mind,—and let my fortitude, in the present scene of misery, compensate for the guilt I have brought upon my head." . The body still continued in a state of in¬ sensibility ; and, as she renewed her gaze on it, fresh horrors trembled through her tender frame. At length, fearing the fatal effects of delay, she determined to offer such assistance as she conceived might be of ser¬ vice should the current of life not have ceased to flow :—Accordingly she approach¬ ed the helpless object, and, taking a bottle of salts from her pocket, applied it to his relief; at the same time, with her handker¬ chief wiping the blood from his face, to dis¬ cover, »f possible, who the victim to so dread¬ ful a disaster might be, she recognised the \isage of a young man, but could not trace
the semblance of any person with whom she was acquainted, or whom she had ever before seen. She continued to persevere in her appli¬ cation of the salts, petitioning Heaven to direct some chance friend to the spot, who might be more competent to the task of af¬ fording relief, in such a case, than she, who had never before witnessed a scene so me¬ lancholy and awful. ** Alas !" sighed the amiable fair, as she cast an affecting glance on her lovely hand, now deeply crimsoned with human blood, " how dînèrent must be the sensations of the assassin, who, by his tempered steel, promotes the flow of red¬ dened streams of horror, to those which I experience, who, thus busily employed, am seeking to create an ebb of an wrtknely current." In the midst of these reflections, she look¬ ed around her, hoping to hear the footsteps of some wandering peasant, who might bë regaling in a tranquil walk, after thè fa¬ tigues of a day's labour, exploring the in- ???????? beauties which Nature affords M 3
for observation :—but all was silent :—night was hurrying on apace :—but a faint glim¬ mer of twilight remained ;—and, as she re¬ newed her look around the country, and explored the solemnity of the scene, to which she was a solitary witness, her heart chilled with indescribable sensations, which the gloomy disaster had cast upon her mind. She now encouraged meditation, and began to reflect on the anxiety her parents must labour under to discover the cause of her long absence from home, as she had never before continued her walks to so late an hour. She would have hastened to the Abbey to their relief,—but when she cast her eyes on the piteous, object before her,—she could not brook the thoughts of leaving it to chance,—while there was a possibility of her presence rendering a service, which a moment's neglect, at so critical a period, would probably render useless and unne¬ cessary* From these reflections, she re¬ solved to run every risk,—and persevere in every tender endeavour to restore the un¬ happy mart to- life,—when again wiping from his face the blood that had issued from, his wounds,^—to her inexpressible joy
she discovered symptoms favouring his re¬ storation. He breathed,—and from his heart usher¬ ed forth a languid sigh,—descriptive of the feeble state to which he was reduced. *■ Blessed be the Omnipotent," exclaim¬ ed Aurelia, in a rapturous tone of voice, " whose ears have been open to my sup¬ plications,—and, blessed be the path for ever, that favoured my footsteps to be a witness of this once mournful scene." The light of day, from the lateness of the hour, being extinguished,—she could only view the body at particular periods, fa¬ voured by the beams of the moon,—whicb had risen above the summit of the hills,— but which was frequently obscured by clouds that passed over, and eclipsed it from terrestrial observation. The languid stranger, in this interval of suspence, gain¬ ed new strength,—and, after innumerableL entreaties, from the tender tongue of Au¬ relia, to speak,—he at length, in an accent.
that proved him a native of some foreigii shore,—expressed a wish to obtain water. Aurelia, possessed of a lively apprehen¬ sion,—and ambitious to promote the stran¬ ger's recovery,—immediately recollected having seen the village boys, when over¬ powered by thirst in sultry seasons, dip their hat« in the rivers, and enjoy the re¬ freshing draught with glee descriptive of the summit of luxury,—she determined in consequence to make use of a similar ves¬ sel,—there being nothing more commodi¬ ous within her immediate reach.—Accor¬ dingly, having repeated several times to the stranger assurances that his wants should be immediately supplied,—she has¬ tened to the banks of the Ex,—and, pro¬ curing as much water as she conceived ne¬ cessary,—returned with it as expeditiously as possible,—and, shortly after, having cau¬ tiously administered it,—to her great joy he gained sufficient strength to make ma¬ ny replies, and to give hopes that no se¬ rious consequences 'would ensue from the disastei.
His first observation, after recovering the power of articulation,—was to express his intention of rewarding whoever it might be that seemed so humanely to assist him in his helpless moments of misery ;—a thought uppermost in the minds of those who move in the higher spheres of life, who, from being habituated to a corrupt and dissipated circle,-—seldom witness acts bear¬ ing the semblance of humanity,—unless previously purchased through the medium of pecuniary interest :—But the love¬ ly Aurelia, who was purity itself,—ex¬ claimed, with tears streaming from her eyes, expressive of her gratitude to hea¬ ven.—" Alas î good sir ! I have been some time rewarded for the trifling attention I have shewn you on this occasion,, rewarded even beyond my most sanguine expecta¬ tions." " How ?" replied the stranger, with an air of surprise, " how are you rewarded for all you have done for me ; you have yet received no money," *f Money !" returned Aurelia, with a sig¬ nificant smile, and shaking her head, " Ha î that is but a paltry recompense to a com¬ passionate mind, even when the possession
of it is much needed ; it is the secret grati¬ fication the heart experiences in perform¬ ing an act of benevolence, that proves the grand reward, and the return of pleasure, for having alleviated another's pain, never rails to more than compensate for any trour ble that may be incurred in a case of dis¬ tress." " Indeed !" rejoined the astonish¬ ed stranger, "lama Frenchman, and have never yet made this discovery !" " Per¬ haps," returned Aurelia, who possessed too much delicacy to feel inclined to offer any unfavourable reflections on the foreigner's remark, though she felt greatly disgusted to find him a stranger to the common principles of humanity : " You have never in your own country, sir, witnessed any scenes of dis¬ tress, that called for the assistance of those who had the power of relieving pain, other- ways you would doubtless have discovered many anxious to stand forward, and tender their services.—I can judge only of your na¬ tion from an opinion I have been instruct¬ ed to form of mankind in general ; which is, that some benevolent characters inhabit every quarter of the world ;—that it is not the nation that contaminates an indivi-
dual, but the principles which are imbibed and cherished from the earliest period of life.—Of England I can speak from expe¬ rience, having witnessed many humane acts which stamp the British nation with the fame of chanty.—For my own part, howe¬ ver, I confess myself incompetent to the task of representing the virtues of my coun¬ try :—In me you view but an humble indi¬ vidual, who can boast of no action that can afford any claim to merit ;—the simple du¬ ties natural to our desires in favour of our fellows who are helpless, are all that I have ever exercised, and who could be so deprav¬ ed as to witness a scene of distress without exerting their interest to dispel the misery, and alleviate the sufferer." " Oh ! most exquisite young lady !" returned the fo¬ reigner, " Your sentiments bespeak you the offspring of elevated parents : forgive me for having abruptly offered so gross a return for your tender and invaluable ser¬ vices : it was the darkness of the night, combined with the feeble state to which I was reduced, that deceived me."
At this moment the only clond that was observed floating beneath the heavens, pas- " sed from before the face of the moon, which instantly illuminated the earth, and decked the groves around with silver hue. " Alas ! indeed, young lady," continued the foreigner, as he gazed on Aurelia*s love* ly and benignant countenance, " I have been grossly deceived ; for, by the light which heaven hath granted for our use, I now discern a face descriptive of the senti¬ ments which have been so gratifying to my ears, and a figure corresponding with a per¬ son of exalted birth ; may I presume to ask whether you reside near this place ?"— " Within the distance of a mile,* 1 replied Aurelia, ** my father's habitation is situat¬ ed, whither I shall be happy to conduct you, as soon as you have sufficiently reco¬ vered from the shock sustained by your fall, to feel adequate to the task of proceeding so f a r.—I would instantly repair to seek rea¬ dier assistance that might spare you the trouble of journeying on foot, but that I am unwilling to leave you in the dead of
night, in so solitary a place, lest some other accident unforeseen may befall you." " Oh Ï Angel that thou must be," re¬ joined the foreigner, " your goodness ex¬ ceeds all I have ever witnessed.—Your ob¬ servation is as just as it is charitable ; for I am astonished that we have so long remain¬ ed in this place unmolested by any bandit¬ ti, and unarmed as we are.—I feel much uneasiness on your account, as from the ten¬ derness of your sex you are less calculated to encounter the insults of such a set of men than I, whose profession it is to op¬ pose the enemy." " Banditti !" returned Aurelia, with an air denoting the utmost surprise ; " we are infested with no banditti here !—A robbe¬ ry is an event we seldom hear of, and as for murder, I should as soon expect to see the sun rise in the west, and set in the east, as to be informed of any thing so dreadful.— An attack of a stray dog, or an unfortunate blow from the foot of your own horse, that must be wandering near this place, and might chance to stumble on you, are the Vol. I. N
extent of my apprehensions.—Our conduct in these parts renders it impossible for us to be in fear of any banditti whatever.—The business of the poor with us is to work for the rich ; and the v. ealthy have ever been ready to prove their gratitude towards their inferiors, for the comforts they have enjoy¬ ed from their hands, by protecting them in the moments of danger, and relieving them in the hours of necessity.—When this is the system we adopt, from what quarter can we expect a banditti to subvert our tran¬ quillity ?" " Oh ! from none indeed, sweet lady," rejoined the foreigner, " where jus¬ tice and benevolence are so universally e- spoused.—The favourable account you have given me of your country has elated my heart with the extreme of admiration,— and the safety in which we have remained since I was thi own on this spot, affords a strong proof of the verity of your assertion. —I confess to you I am enchanted at being a witness to so much benevolence, and am happy, as a token of my gratitude, to ac¬ knowledge, that I consider myself, for the first time since my creation, situated in a terrestrial Paradise, and you are the Angel
that has guarded me from the snares of death.—It would have proved a circum¬ stance truly flattering to myself, could I have witnessed a scene of such charity in the country that gave me birth ; but I am sufficiently rewarded for any accident that has befallen me, or any difficulty I may here¬ after encounter in my travels, in having dis¬ covered, on a foreign coast, virtues which do honour to mankind, and which no other nation in the universe can emulate." Aurelia and the stranger continued in conversation, while the Abbey of Munster was thrown into the utmost consternation at her long absence. A thousand conjectures were formed re¬ specting her fate :—one moment, it was feared she had fallen into the river ;—ano¬ ther, that indisposition had deprived her of the power of returning. Every new thought tended but to paint horror on the imagina - tion, in robes more gloomy than before, till at length Belford, nearly frantic with in¬ numerable apprehensions, determined to sally forth in search of her. It was pain« _ N2
ful to him to leave his beloved wife in a state little short of insanity ; but the call was too importunate to be dispensed with, —He desired the house-keeper to remain with her, and endeavour to cheer her spi¬ rit ; when, after encountering some diffi¬ culty in quitting the room, though urged by the disconsolate Mrs Belford not to lose a moment,—he hurried from the Abbey, and pursued the steps of Aurelia's favourite walk. ·* Alas !" he exclaimed in a disconsolate tone, as he hurried over the rustling grass newly moistened by the chilling dew, " if I have lost my poor Aurelia, my days may easily be numbered.— Aurelia,—Aurelia," he cried in an elevated, yet tremulous voice, as he lengthened his course, " if thine ears can witness the lamentable supphcations of thy wretched father, speak, that his heart may be relieved from its oppression, by the cheering music of thy tender tongue." Here he paused to listen with attention, but the stillness of the night was only disturbed at intervals by the gentle wafting of the breeze timt whistled through the groves. The
'fleecy-lambs no.more were heard to bleat ; the feathered throng were likewise lulled to rest ; not even did the unsocial owl intrude upon the awful silence by his uncouth screech. The charms of nature were for a while suspended, and all but Belford seem¬ ed to repose in the peaceful bosom of sleep. " Ah me !" he cried pathetically, as he cast his eyes towards the Heavens, " Alas Ï pale moon ! I fear Aurelia's loss will for the future place me under thy influence and direction, for lunacy must doubtless prove my wretched fate,-—the loss of her is more: than I can bear." *M pray youysir, lean on my arm," said Aurelia, in a supplicating voice, in this in¬ stant, to/the' stranger, who was situated near the spot where Belford was ruminating on his miseries, " I beseech you tö consider me as your servant, for I will exert myself to support you through this difficulty," " Ha ! what do I hear ! said Belford faul- tering, —.". my senses surely are already im¬ paired! for I heard, the voice of Aurelia ^ ; ;..-:..^..- ; v;^^.,r,..!
breathe forth expressions in the strain of love !—and the sounds must certainly have been the effect of wild imagination !— yet they were very plairt, and I feel that I yet know myself,—let me attend again !" " Indeed, Sir, 'twill be better for you," she rejoined, " permit me to conduct you for the present to a more retired spot, where not even the chilling breeze of night can offend or discompose you." " Oh Γ merciful Heaven," sighed Belford in a languid tone, " it is indeed her voice. Her expressions have confounded me, and I am more wretched than ever. The an¬ guish which her dissolution would have cre¬ ated within my bosom, would have proved sensations of delight in comparison to what I now experience. Alas ! I never thought she could have thus deceived me ;—but her tongue gives proof of her perfidiousness, and what clearer testimony need 1 look for,— Oh ! it must be so,—Ah ! my once loved daughter, who from the cradle I reared with the fondest affection, and in whom my e^- -yery hope of joy was centered ;· what hav£
you brought upon yourself by this duplici¬ ty ? and what misery have you in secret [ nurtured for your once joyous but now dis- : tracted parents. Farewell to happiness,— farewell to the long boasted respectability of Munster, whose sweet sequestered bounds, time immemorial, bore the enviable appel¬ lation of the seat of quiet.—Adieu to peace, —the Abbey is polluted from having fos¬ tered an unworthy being, and Munster can no longer boast of virtue. I now to my sor¬ row see the cause of your attachment to this your favourite walk. Artless as I thought you were, to find you involved in all the guilt of cunning, is too much,—too piercing to my afflicted heart,—I can no longer re¬ frain from openly avowing my indignation, —patience is exhausted, and fortitude has forsaken me,—I am no longer armed against the frowns of fate."—As he concluded this sentence, he exclaimed in a loud voice, in¬ dicating rage. " Aurelia, thy father ap¬ proaches, prepare to meet him."— " Oh Ï Heaven Ï my father " breathed Aurelia in extacy as she speedily approach*
tefas^ .
ed : " Oh, my dear sir, what inexpressible joy your presence gives me." " You act it well," returned Belford, cooly and reserved ; much joy I should sup¬ pose this unexpected visit can afford you;— think not, however, base deceitful girl, that you shall longer carry on this cruel farce." " Oh, sir," cried the lovely Aurelia, with tears flowing from her eyes, which bathed his hand, as she tenderly leaned on it ;— " what can you mean by such expressions ? till now, you ever treated me most tender¬ ly ?" " Till now, I ever did indeed, Aure¬ lia," returned her father, " but I have rea¬ son, I think, to change my tone of voice ; and, to be frank, I know a man lies con¬ cealed amongst these woods, conduct me to him instantly." " Oh, sir," she replied, overwhelmed with grief at his observation?, '* You wrong me exceedingly ; 'tis true, beneath yon hedge lies an unfortunate stranger, but why should 1 conceal him ? poor soul, his helpless state has grieved ;ne since I first beheld him, and
for his sake I have prayed heaven to direct some more powerful mortal to his aid than myself, and, when you approached, I did indeed believe my supplications had been heard." " What means all this?" said Belford, with an air of composure, though in secret he upbraided himself, for having too pre¬ cipitately formed an unfavourable opinion of his daughter, whose continued uniformity of conduct had justly entitled her to his confidence : '* let us come to a more con¬ cise explanation." " The stranger," returned the trembling Aurelia, of whom I have just given you in¬ formation, was this evening thrown from his horse, to which unlucky accident I hap¬ pened to be the only witness.—The cause of humanity urged me to fly to his relief, and, from the feeble state to which he was reduced from his wounds, I was induced to remain by him, and lend him what assist¬ ance lay in my power.—I was aware of the uneasiness you and my dear mother would experience at my absence,—but I was like-
wise aware of your desires on all occasions to relieve the distressed ; and concluded, that an act of common benevolence would compensate for all your sufferings, when circumstances were settled, and matters ex¬ plained." Belford leaned on his hand for some mo¬ ments, indulging tears which flowed with rapidity, before he could utter a word in reply to his daughter's vindication :~At length, raising his head, and embracing her with his wonted affection, " Oh, my child !" said he, " most cruelly have I accused you, indeed, I can never pardon my rashness, and as for your forgiveness, I can never merit it.—What vicious bitter minded spi¬ rit could have invaded my bosom, and urged me to suspect my truly virtuous Aurelia ?— Your unexemplified goodness, my child, vi¬ lifies me for such base' conduct, and ren¬ ders me contemptible.—Oh ! to resign for a moment my long reposed confidence in you, and on such weak grounds too, w r as too bad,—'twas worse than bad, 'twas ma¬ lignant,—and that is too mild a term to give it,—it was the very cream of infamy ;
—surely some phrenzy must have over¬ powered my reason, or I could never have yielded to such conjectures." " I entreat you, sir," returned the in¬ comparable Aurelia, as she seized the hand of her father, which she pressed with all the fondness of an aflbctionate and loving daugh¬ ter, " not to indulge these unhappy reflec¬ tions which will not fail to oppress you ;— if you are satisfied with my conduct on this occasion, I am content, and every un¬ pleasing thought is at once dispelled :—let our endeavours to relieve this helpless fo¬ reigner compensate for every misunder¬ standing : the sooner we convey him to the Abbey, the sooner will my dear mother be relieved from all her fears and apprehen¬ sions, which this event doubtless has load¬ ed her with." " Your goodness is too great,*' rejoined her father pathetically : " 1 am at a loss for words to express my thanks and gratitude for this return of kindness ; but let us not delay on this occasion of importance ; con¬ duct me to the stranger that we may devise some means to convey him up to the Abbey,
where we may afford him necessary assist¬ ance to favour his recovery,—and when we will console your yet dejected mother." ** Oh, happy moment !" exclaimed Au¬ relia joyously, as she led her father towards the spot, who, on approaching the foreigner, took him by the hand with a degree of cor¬ diality familiar to men of a compassionate minjl ; and said, " Good stranger, I am sin¬ cerely concerned for your disaster which my daughter has just afforded me a knowledge of, jmt my heart is cheered with some de- greejof satisfaction, and much gratitude to- ????? Providence, for having directed me thisiight to your assistance. As delay in seek§ig a" remedy for so unfortunate an ac¬ cident, might be attended with such conse¬ quences as we are anxious to avoid, let me conjure you to allow me the peculiar plea¬ sure of conducting you. to my house, where every necessary assistance shall be immedi¬ ately procured, and I trust you will experi¬ ence early relief." " Oh, charitable man !" exclaimed the / foreigner, " the kindness I have this night
experienced, must make a lasting impres¬ sion on my mind, never to be eradicated but by the force of death.—The cordial and unreserved style iu which you have offered me a tender of your services, in¬ clines me, without hesitation, to accede to your proposal, by acceding your offer : —but permit me to ask, why you are ambitious to receive a stranger under v6ur/ roof, who may, perhaps, be but an^mpgis- tor." " Oh" returned Belford jmiilrørg, " I am content to run the hazaña of Sizing deceiv¬ ed.—Suppose you weiße a Man cf this de¬ grading stamp—in/deceb/ing me you would greatly deceive ^yoursçK, and, of the the two, you would Wmos^uefrauded. I can nev¬ er be enthied to/censure for any act of in¬ justice you mj-ght commit within the \<\Ah habitation, neither will my conscience ??? /aisturbed or impaired for having received you under my roof; but if! could to see you linger in misfortune, he- use I knew not whether you-where honest impure, I should doubtless merit the ???- Vol. I. ?
cration of man, and the wrath of the divi· nity. It is enough that a man labours under af¬ fliction, to attract my notice ; and in cases exciting pity, I never sufler myself to re¬ flect on the foibLs of an individual, even where I have been previojasly apprised of his failings ; much less should I feel inclin¬ ed to anticipate evils, and picture to my i- magination vices which, perhaps, from hav¬ ing no existence, would bias me against an unfortunate person, I knew not for why ;-?-- but let us not longer tarry in tliis placs/the cold air o£ night will certainly encrease your , paio, and retard your recovery .-^Ijíray you, lean on my arm, and my daughter will sup*. port you on the other side. S <* The foreigner had now recovered suffi- / cient strength to pace gently ; and in this/ state they proceeded towards the Abbey./ What a picture of benevolence I-^how gratifying to the pencil of the arjÉist„£o trace the semblance of an unprotected ioreigner, tottering in pain towards an IxospítabJe man-
/; /
Sion, suppatted by ? tender female and her paren/.*7<And, to bestow an higher colour¬ ing ?? /the scene, to paint distress, which pr^ed the strangers only recommendation, aitate which ç4ver fails to gain the notice /of a British keart, and all the aid a liberal ■ / hand can eaifve.
/
PoorMrs Belford, during this long inter¬ val oØuspence, had yielded to innumerable gloomy apprehensions ; she was reduced to a jftate bordering on distraction :—The ap- »earance of Belford accompanied by Aure¬ lia and the foreigner, at length gave a turn to the tide of affliction, an$ suddenly dis¬ pelling every sable cloud/ the aspect of se¬ renity once more illuminated the venerable Abbey. The servants, which Mrs Belford liad sent to different parts of the village in search of Aurelia, during Belford's absence, were now all collected in the house.-—The next ob¬ ject was to look for necessary medical assis¬ tance, which being quickly obtained, a ser¬ vant was dispatched in search of the fo¬ reigner's horse, with which he shortly after N 2
returned, when the party, resigning the stranger to the care of a trusty nurse, who was appointed to attend him during the night, retired to seek repose, so welcome after the toils encountered by the event of the evening.
MUNSTER ABBEY.
CHAP. VIII. L he next morning, at an early hour, Bel¬ ford repaired to the foreigner's apartment, anxious to enquire into the state of his health, when to his astonishment he found him iu high spirits preparing to meet the family, and decked with a countenance descriptive of the vivacity naturally attached to the natives of France. " I am rejoiced indeed," exclaimed Bel¬ ford, shaking him heartily by the hand, " to* find you so well and cheerful :—the alert¬ ness of your aspect renders it unnecessary for me to propose any question that may re¬ mind you of the late disaster." ** 1 am, in¬ deed," returned the foreigner, " consider¬ ably better than I expected to find myself, 05
after an event which bore every prospect of being attended with serious consequen¬ ces :—but it is to you, Sir, and your amiable daughter, that I am indebted for so speedy a recovery ;—and the anxiety for the mo- * ment to arrive, when I might express my gratitude in the strongest terms I am mas¬ ter of, has been the cause of my never once closing my eyes since you deposited me in this chamber." " I am concerned,'*" said Belford, " that reflections so unnecessary should have, in any degree, deprived you of repose :—but as the ladies are anxiously waiting in the breakfast parlour, to learn the particulars of your present state, permit me to conduct you to them, when I am well assured your unexpected presence will be the occasion of much joy." Belford was not disappointed of the plea- ί ure he anticipated at this meeting ; for, as they entered the room, Aurelia, elated with delight at seeing the foreigner restored, flew immediately towards him, and, taking him îbcerfolly by the hand, in a manner denot-
ing her approbation of his recovery, led him to her mother, when, in an elevated and en¬ thusiastic tone of voice, she said, " Madam,. permit me to present to your notice a late. patient of mine, and tell me whether you do not think I have proved on this occasion, a tolerable good physician ?" Mrs Belford received the stranger with a. degree of cordiality corresponding with the benevolence of Belford and Aurelia, and congratulated him with much sincerity on- his good fortune in escaping bad consequen* ces, which might have attended an event so perilous. " I confess myself greatly agitated," said the foreigner, who now felt anxious to make- himself known, lest it might be suspected he was a person of low birth ; " that I am surrounded by so benevolent a family, and that I have not an opportunity immediate¬ ly of proving my own respectability ; for be assured, it would give me infinite plea- sure' and satisfaction to cultivate a perman* eat acquaintance in this quarter, where the- frøment exercise of virtue would afford mej.
innumerable opportunities of improving the features of my mind, which, in general, stand in need of many repairs :—»but, as a stranger, the most I can hope for, is, tem¬ porary aid, and my recovery will not fail to prove my greatest misfortune, as it will di¬ rect me to withdraw myself from a man¬ sion, under whose roof each hour seems ta glide but as a moment of bliss." Tears escaped him as he concluded this- sentence, and he appeared much agitated. —" Suffer not these unnecessary reflections to oppress you," returned Belford, " we do not stand in need of any further proof of your exalted station in life, than the senti¬ ments that have fallen from your tongue, and the style of elegance you have display¬ ed in our language.—Independent, howe¬ ver, of these testimonies of the liberality of your education, be assured, my good Sir, the ancient roof of Munster Abbey, under which I am now honoured with your pre¬ sence, was never raised for the purpose of sheltering those only who move in a line of prosperity sufficiently ample to afford them shelter in any quarter,—These walls were e~
levated for the reception of the helpless, and for the occasional accommodation 1 of the wealthy, who are sure to experience becom¬ ing politeness and hospitality, when they solicit repose within them. " They boast no superfluous ornaments, which tend only to dazxle the eye, while the heart remains a stranger to the substan¬ tial uses of an asylum to protect the indi¬ gent : They are literally what they appear, well calculated to preserve us from the in¬ clemency of rude weather, and if you feel the least desire to continue experiencing the humble comforts they encompass, it will in¬ deed be your own fault, if we are not long gratified with the pleasure your presence only can afford us." " Oh Heaven! Oh blessed St Benedict !" exclaimed the fo¬ reigner in an extatic tone, " is it possible that still this mortal globe can boast a spot so pure and so unblemished !" The conversation was here disturbed by a knock at the parlour door, given by Philip u faithful rustic domestic of Belford's, and in the same moment the ears of the party
were astonished by the uncouth sound of two mail-coach horns in the passage, which threw them into the utmost consternation, and which echoed through the ancient edi¬ fice, and seemed to shake the venerable walls, whose long repose in tranquillity had never before been disturbed by such offen¬ sive music, H What means this extraordinary bustle ?" said Belford, as he flew out of the room a- stonished, leaving the rest of the party in suspence equally amazed. ** Oh, master, master !" returned Philip in agitation, tak¬ ing him by the coat, and desiring, with an air of authority, the two clowns who stood half frightened in a corner of the hall, with the horns ready to send out another hide¬ ous noise, to cease blowing while he made his speech, " I would not dare to venture into the room before that great and mon¬ strous Lord and Sovereign, that is so conde¬ scending and kind as to break bread with -you." " You seem frantic !" rejoined Bel¬ ford, " in short, it appears to me a scene of madness altogether ! has any thing occurred to terrify you ?" " Oh yes, master, great
wonders ! great things that will amaze you, as well as me, when you know them ! such things as will oblige you to walk differently into the room from what you did coming out ; for you can go back no way but on your knees I assure you." " Indeed !—it must be something very extraordinary really, that shall incline me to a position into which I have hitherto only conceived it necessary to bend, when the exercise of christian duties demanded ray attention." u Oh, sir ! you must indeed bend now then, for the first time, sir, for you must know that great personage who so condescendingly obliges the parlour with the honour of his Majesty's worshipful company, is a Marquis, and I dare say all his brothers and sisters are Emperors, and, for all we know, his father and mother may be a couple of Popes !" Belford, unable to contain himself in con¬ sequence of the drollery which Philip's ex¬ travagant account displayed, burst into a fit of laughter which continued for some time with additional vigour, notwithstanding his
entreaties to moderate himself, lest he should offend t^: great man, whom he fancied had the priver of hanging all the inhabitants of Munster at any moment. At length, re¬ covering the power of articulation, which this curious narration had caused a suspen¬ sion of, he asked through what channel he gained his mtelligence, " Oli sir !" returned Philip, " there is a man now in the kitchen enquiring for the great,—I don't know what, —I suppose he is Lis servant, he calls him the Marquis of something, but I have forgot the name ; indeed he speaks such odd Eng¬ lish, that it is hard to find out what he says at all. Oh, sir í he has got a hat so covered over with gold, that it would dazzle your honour's precious sight to look at it ; and I am sure, if it was to meet the weak eyes of my poor grandmother, it would strike her blind." " But what are these two clowns with the mail-coach horns hei e for ?" said Belford.—" Oh, your honour is joking with me now ; for your honour has been enough used to great company and high things, to. know that people who are monstrous high and rich, are attended by horns like great warriors and fighters;—and so as we had
no brass French horns in the village, I thought it a good make shift to beg Tom Bissett the mail-coach diiver to lend us two of his'n, and so I galloped up to his house at Ivy bridge and got 'em.—My next look out was for two men that could blow them ; and, after searching almost every house in the place, I found a couple of lads belonging to Finch the gardner, that could do it ; but I made them run so hard to make haste, that they cried out a hundred times on the way, they were sure they should have no wind left when they got here to make the horns sound.—Oh, I had a rusty tug of it myself; for to make speed I went on our black filly, Poppet, and in my hurry I forgot the sad¬ dle, so my poor bones have been nicely be- mauled, and I am almost joggled to death." " A very curious piece of business, in¬ deed," rejoined Belford, as he renewed his laugh : " Well, Philip, conduct this dazzling figure into the parlour ; meanwhile, I shall inform the Marquis some enquiries have been made concerning him : As for Mr Finch's two lads, give them a couple of shillings for their loss of breath, and let them retura
home. M I believe, sir, a person enquires for you/' said Belford, addressing the nobleman as he entered the parlour, having by the aid of good breeding dispelled the titter which otherways might have escaped him : " May I be allowed to ask whether you are the Marquis De—De—." " De Ville Neuve is my name," return¬ ed the stranger hastily, anxious to relieve Belford from his embarrassment, " I am re¬ joiced at this intelligence, as I conclude it must be my faithful servant, Henri, who makes the enquiry. He attended me yes¬ terday, previous to the accident that befel me ; but as I concluded he would discover some place for his accommodation, I would not mention him, from my unwillingness to make any addition to your incumbrance." As the Marquis concluded this sentence, Henri entered, who, the moment he observ¬ ed his master in health and spirits, fell oft his face, and exclaimed, in a rapturous tone of voice, " By the holy St Francis thou art safe ! Oh, blessed be the Ave Marias and Pater Nosters I have said for your sake. —Oh, Mon Seigneur ! I have had a cruel
time of it.— The whole night have I wan¬ dered among bushes, briars, and bramble**, overloaded with apprehensions that you were killed : but I wont think of these frights now, I am so rejoiced to see you safe, nothing can be like it." The Marquis appeared much gratified at meeting his domestic, who, after a few ob¬ servations had passed, was remanded to the kitchen, to partake of necessary refresh¬ ment. The party, still anxious to learn the par¬ ticulars of the horns, the harsh tones of which seemed yet to ring through their ears,—Belford described the ludicrous ac¬ count he had received from Philip, which failed not to excite considerable mirth and merriment. The Marquis now, after ma¬ ny entreaties from Belford and his family, to consider the Abbey of Munster as his home, and to continue partaking of the comforts it could afford, promised, as a proof of his approbation and the happiness he ex¬ perienced, to spend some considerable time within the ancient walls.
ENI) OF THE FISRT VOLUME.
