Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Feudal tyrants: or, The Counts of Carlsheim and Sargans: a romance: taken from the German
FEUDAL TYRANTS, «Src. é¡c lie 7art thr first ELIZABETH OF TORRENEjüÄGi LETTERS Conrad, Abbot of Cloister Curwald, to Elizabeth, the Widowed Countess of Torrenburg* YOUR resolution, noble Elizabeth, to remam m doistered sohtude, passing your hours m tears for your husband's
vol ι в loss,
г los»,' anďWpriycís for the repose of his spirit, is dignified and worthy of the illustrious race to which you have the glory to belong! Model of female con¬ stancy 1 though years have elapsed since Frederick died, your tears flow as freely as on the first day of your widowhood ! Unequalled lady ! does there exist a vir¬ tue, whose seeds we oughjt not to de¬ pend on finding in a heart like yours ? Is there a sacrifice so great that a soul like Elizabeth's is incapable of making it?—lit the bloom of life to tear your- sdffrom the pleasures of the world and the eyes of a thousand admirers, that, you may watch away the lonely nighb by the sepulchral urn of an husband far advanced in years; to fly from the charms of sway and grandeur that you may
•9
may humble yourself before the altar, kneeling in the dust, and praying for the repose of the deceased.-one, oh ! what an act of self-denial ! an act, vvhich reiches the summit of magnimimity, by not bdngestablished oa the foundationof love ; for in truth, how could love for the decrepit Frederick find a phce in the heart of the young and blooming Eliza¬ beth, whose wannest sentiment must have been filial respect towards a bene¬ factor ? Oh! Elizabeth, is indeed your state of widowhood your only motive for taking refuge in a convent i
4 Elizabeth to Conrad. Atf expression used in the condusion of your letter fillly explains the senti- ment which I felt, and still feel for the Count of Torrenburg. Yes, Conrad ; Frederick was my benefactor in the strongest sense of the word—and therefore is it, that though years have elapsed since his decease, my tears for his loss still flow as freely as they did on the first day. But whether sorrow for my widowed state was my only motive for burying myself in a doister.... Oh ! Conrad, it was unne¬ cessary for you to use flattery in order to obtain a knowledge of the troth Without
s
Without calling тпе " tlie mudei of female constancy," or dedaiing meto be without an equal, I might have been In¬ duced to confess, that Frederick's death was not the only reason which at first induced me to take refuge in a convent, and which perhaps will induce me never to leave it more. Oh! much, very much lies heavy upon chis heart of mine ! I suffer under the pressure of misfortunes, of which but a small part is known to you; yet even that little must be sufficient to make you comprehend, why I fed compelled to abandon the world, and fly to solitude for relief and comfort. Conrad ! Conrad ! would to Heaven it were true, that there is no sacrifice so great, that I am incapable of making it ! в 3 Alas!
•6 Alas ! I feel but too strongly, that greit •sacrifices are in my power, to which I ■must prepare myself by supplication to Heaven, and the solitude ahd calm ofa utoirter.
7
Conrad to Elizabeth.
I know not to what sacrifices you allude in saying, there exist some which ara too great for you to make. Worldly possessions, I am certain, vxk without value in your «?yes · shoilld then hereafter generosity or a sense óf justice require ofyousometriflmgTenunciation in this respect, could it possibly cost ybu much pain, or would you long de¬ liberate what course you should adopt? In order to be rich and powerful, Lhza- beth needed not to become the heiress -of Torrenburg. fodependent of her husband's attachment, fortune had al¬ ready rendered her mistress of suflìcient В 4 wealth
wealth to make it easy for her to afford posterity an admirable example of self- denial. She who can dispose of castles and villages* without receiving on the one hand any return but ingratitude, and on the ■ other, but hatred and rebd- Boii, may surely bring herself in the cr.urse. of time to restore those posses¬ sions (to which the prepossession ofher fascinated husband could in fact give her . no right) to the forsaken innocent or¬ phans, whose claims have so undeserv¬ edly been set aside. How glorious a re¬ compense hereafter would she earn by
such
9 such an act ! What gratitude, what tranquillity of soul would she obtain at present I what rapturous admiration would she be Viewed with even by the latest posterity I How shining and how distinguished would be the place allotted to her among the illustrious la¬ dies, who derive their blood from the Counts of Carlsheim and Sargans.
B.S
ï(î
Elizabeth to Conrad. Contad, what am I to tíilnk bf you ? — гуои almost adopted hi yoür first let¬ tets to me flie tone of adoration; I wiis a " model of female constancy ;*' I was " an anequalled wotaan." In your last, the secret seems to have escaped you, "that nothing but the prepossession of a fascinated husband could have made me what I am." I guess your "views : you hope to draw from me some decision favorable to the claims of the Damsels of Werden¬ berg ; but in truth I am not arrived at such high excellence in the science of self denial. It is easy, my good Abbot, to
π
to give away half our properly out of рие generosity, even though we meet in return with nothing but ingratitude ; but it is hard, very hard to bestow that same half on those who think they hive a title to it, even though allthe universe should admire and praise us for.... hav¬ ing done our duly. My brother -Oswald, who has arrived here within these few days, «alutcs. you, and recommends himself to your prayers-
12
Conrad to Elizabeth. ¡ 1 4 "' t I was certain, before I readìthé con¬ dusion of your letter, that Count Os¬ wald was not far from you : uninflu¬ enced, never could Elizabeth have suf¬ fered her 1 «md to trace such words ! Go then, ye innocent victims of slander, Oven tram the generous Elizabeth have ye nothing to hope! she terms you " the Damsels of Werdenberg," without recollecting that another name would have bdonged to you, had not fortune robbed you of it iii order to confei it upon ber. Go then, go, thou gentle Constanţii; go too, afflicted and much belied Ida ; increase the namber of the unfortunate
w
unfortunate ladies of Sargans, and hve upon the bounty of me vassals of your forefathers the heiress of Torienburg has nothing to bestow upon you, not even unavailing piţy , of justice I will not speak Urder what disiate of Heaven you now exist,£hzabetbknows not,, ask, not, cares not '
ли
Elizabeth to Conrad. 1 have long remarked one feult in you, tny -good Abbot ; yon gejBeräüy press ydur ţohiţ too eageriy, «nd thus ruin the cause Which yon sopfoft, with those whose natural inclinations would have disposed them otherwise to do wbat you require. Not that this is the rase with me ; to convince you of which, I now entreat you for the present, and only for the present, to be silent on a subject which (from causes as yet un¬ known to you) pains my heart most cruelly. I am not ignorant ofConstantia's abode ; as to Ida.. . yet why should I concern royself about the Damsels of Werdenberg ?
15 Wallenberg ì If (as you assert) I Efve robbed <them of a name which hut br me would have belonged to them, ihn perhaps have deprivai Wie вГ*яв«*»Д which w» more jiticknw «to me than ^ my Ufe; u røme, which wib the kffig- wtóhwi-för gori of тЛву *Mdest hopes; a name, fot which «J would him «x- dttnged <die liigh-eoilndiiig *We of "hplress of Toiŕíerfbwg," God knows how willingly! BnlfWme te '^fcanöAer'iMDJect*' yènséMtito be«weûucquılnted vith the annals of the family with wbich 1 am become connoted by marriage; it is certain at least, that neither in your con¬ versations or lettéïsliavc I ever heard you mention the knights and ladies of th«* houses of Carlshcim and Sargans, without
ιβ without applying to them Sonni striking epithet. Even in your very last epistles, « thç unfortunate belies,"«— " the illus¬ trious ladies of'Sargans,"—v/ere men¬ tioned Who were these remarkable per- susag«s ¡andwhit Were their misfbttunes? Я it lfes in your power to ^ve me any account of them, you wul oblige me by making.them the subject of your future letters. Otherwise I am necessitated to requesta temporary interruption of pur correspondence, ?sl am not desirous of reading more lipon the subject which of late has employedy our pen.
iï
Conrad tà Elizabeth. The annals of the ladies of Sargans are in the possession of the Abbess of Zurich, whose convent you at present inhabit. I can myself do no more than furnish you with a short supplement to this family history, and which 1 will readily transmit to you, whenever you think proper to renew a correspondenci«, which ceases for the present with tlm letter. ι f
Elizabeth to Count Oswald ef March.
I have offended our good old Conrad: the correspondence which I have kept up for so many years with the faithful instructor of my childhood ii at length laid aside; and many a vacant hour as this instructive intercourse has beguiled, I yft must confess, I am not sorry that it has ceased for the present. Conrad latterly began to press me too hard upon a subject, on which (in compliance, dear brother, with your advice) I am deter¬ mined not to comt to any hasty deter¬ mination. Ah! the*point would have been determined long ago, had I not been compelled to hesitate by your friendly
19
friendly representations and the weak ness ofmy own heart ! And yet, dear Oswald, to confess the truth, the latter had moreinfinence with, me than the former. Paint to at« in as brilliant colours as yoa chose the advantage of being sovereign -lady of such an extensive territory ; ah ! cart the empty pride of governing a turbu¬ lent ungrateful people-restore to me the ruined tranquillity of my heart ? My wealth and tower wete even beyond my wishes, unaided by «the liberal be¬ quest of my dear, my partial husband ; and lang ago should Csnstantia have enjoyed those tights iK> «which (so at least they say) her claim is undoubted, were it not that Ida must necessarily bave shared än «the :gucd-fortune'of her sister ;
20 rister·; Ida, who stote from me the heart of Montfort' Ida; who trampled on the fondest wishes Of my soul ' No J that thought is not to be endured ! The wan¬ ton arts Of that· perfidious girl forced me fronvthfe bosom ofmy Henry into the aged arms of the Count of Torrenburg : now then let her enjoy the fruits ofher gopd ι deed! Gratitude taught me to love Frederick, and to forget Henry ; but to reward these traitors for having So, successfully betrayed me ; to enrich them with afl that has been bestowed on mc by the last will of the excdlent pos¬ sessor. .. thisis a pitch of heroic virtue, of which I can die,capable but in a very fewi moments pf romahtic enthusiasm. fo one of those moments, you, dear Oswald, came to my-assistance, rouzed me
roe from шу dream of herobro, dissi¬ pated the vapours which bewildered my senses, and now you mny rest secure that I shall make no rash resolutions I confess, the Abbot helped to give your .»dvice effect, by preaching to me such endless sermons about justice. What then, my good Conrad ? the conferring happiness on those perfidious hypocrites by whom my confidence has been so cruelly abused, this sacrifice which but to think upon makes all my long-inflict¬ ed wounds bleed afresh, all this would be nothing more than an every-day performance of a positive duty ì Is tlüs the way to estimate one of the most difficult tasks, of self-victory that ever was prescribed to the heart of a woman?
Agitated
S3 Agitated as are my present feelings, I : dare not bust myself to be much акте. I seek eveiy Where fer subjects of amuse¬ ment, but find every where ennui. Του; my+kind friend; areat a distance, and my epistolary jcommunieation with. Conrad,, to which I have been so lbng accustomed^ has for the present catseeV entirely. Yet the good Abbot, to whom I am aheady under such obUgations, is also in this instance the cause of niy looking forward to some future means of rescuing myself from this state of tedious indolence. In hopes of leading him away from a topic, which I am at present unwill¬ ing to discuss, I reminded him of the antient histories of the Counts of Carl- sheim and Sargans; and I requested him
23
him' te entoe them the subject ofhis future correspondence—you know', the оМчпап i» generally delighted to find an opportunity or talking over such mat¬ tet«; but just how he Žs too tjiuth oHend- edwitâ me, and too much occupied with a different business, to permit him¬ self to be lured away from his point by this little artifice. He has coldly refer¬ red me for information to the Abbess of Zurich ; and the want of other amuse¬ ment has actually induced me to apply to her on this subject, which, when I first took it up, was mei ely a pretence for relieving myself from the pressure of Conrad's too urgent solicitations. The Abbess as yet has only given me distant hopes that my curiosity shall be indulged; but by dint of repeated pe- ' titions,
24
titions, I trust I shall persuade her to communicate _to me these " important and remarkable writings^'·' as the Abbess calb rthem. Should J succeed, I shall not filili on ! most learned of all knights of the present day · tq r lay ,whatever seems worthy of attention before yqur philosophical eyes.
25
Sigisbert, Bishop of Coirà, to the Abbot Conrad. ч Without attempting further to influence her conduct, let Elizabeth be permitted to act according to her own pleasure : I know her motives ; I know that inthe end we shall have reason to be satisfied with her. I am informed also, that she has already taken some such steps towards settling this important business as will bear but one interpretation. Letters have been received from her by our friend the Senechal, ат^п whose superior for pro¬ bity is not to be found in Zurich ; in these letters Elizabeth explams the vol. i. о whole
26 whole transaction, requests him to act as an impartial judge, and engages to obey his decision blindly. You knov well the venerable Albert Reding, to whose justice the whole coulrfry refers every dispute ef consequence ; think you, he will decide to the disadvantage pf inno¬ cence ? Not that I bave obtained my knowledge of these secret particulars fromAlbett himself,the delicacy of whose opinions on this species of confidence is extreme. In truth, he carries that de¬ licacy so fár, that he anxiously axoids mentioning the disputes between the Countess and her vassals, and endea¬ vours, when others speak of Лет, to listen with a oold indifferent air : but I read plainly on'his serioushrow that he meditates deeply «on the sültjeit ; he j weighs
27 weighs the bequest of Count Frederick, and the situation of the unfortunate sis. ters, and I can prophecy to which side the balance will indine. He, who never yet gaye an unfair judgment ; hn, who has never deserved to haye an appeal made from bis decision, cannot surdy pronounce erroneously upon a business like this. Yràr intention of layiiigliefbre Eliza¬ beth's eyes the whole history of the re- jeeted heiressee of Tonrenburg is well imagined, and may produce a good effect : but what shall I say to you ins¬ pecting youi ¡mpmdense, in advising her (tp»wpe«tith^ private; «lujiidş.&fıthe liPUföiof Şutgans? ' Jyly ¡good btóieçoor siderate friend, are you then ignor«! of the «part wbich ypur. Abbey «plays in с 2 these
28 these memorials of the days of yore f Is it adviseable, think you, to lay before the laity the transgressions of the church? Let us rejoice, that we walk ourselves in the paths of virtue, without endeaypur- ing to make our own merits appear more shining, by contrasting them with the crimes of our predecessors. Yet 1 know well, that so mean a design was far from thé thoughts of my good Conrad, he has only erred through want of consideration. I shall immematdy endeavour, if possible, to repair your fault ; already must letters from me« have reached thé Abbess of Zurich, and I hope that Elizabeth will not be suffered to peruse ϊ single line of the papers. ' ' ι ft isbuţ a »hort rimeisincetliese curious I - Memoirs
29
Memoirs were in my possession ; and I can assure you (if, as Γ take for granted, you are not already consdous ofil) they contain many circumstances-, which for the honour of the Abbey of Curwald, and (with grief I write it) for that of some of my own ancestors, had better remain fot ever unknown.
30
Sliiuibetb to Ceant Oswald. , ln vain do t strive to torn my tHou$its fŕotó MontBrt ; thŕreflecläon * whaf te' to becoine of him" occupies my mind ineéésatitly. 'Alas· 1 there was a time, when I loved him witfy such passion ' when there was nothing which I would not have given to pur¬ chase for him one moment's hap¬ piness ! and now, uli f wh at a change ' she, who once was ready to sacrifice for this Montfort every thing, everf the affection of a warning brother, who saw deeper into the deceiver's heart than herself; she now hesitates, by giving up a few super- fluous miles of territory and some high- „ sounding
31 sounding empty tides, to rescue him from the very abyss of misery and ruin !— and ill this change in her heart is pro¬ duced by the sole reflection, that Mont- tort\ prosperity would now be shared no longer with herself. Oh ! Elizabeth ! Elizabeth ! thou hast a groveling soul ! thy passion for Henry, so falsely called heroic, was nothmg better than mere self-love ! * Chide me not, dear brother, for this want of resolution; I am consdous the expression of such feelings must be little« expected by you after the temper of mind, in which you saw me when we parted : but you know not the dreadful contest between affection and duty, which liss but lately been excited in my hoiom—what ! Henry imprisoned by с 4 his
32 his unde, as a punishment for having bestowed his heart on the portionless Ida ? Henry, commanded by th« in¬ censed Count de Monfort to purchase liberty by offering me his hand ì What then, do I live to see my nuptial bed made the alternative of a dungeon? Oswald ! Oswald 1 oh ! what a humi¬ liation for the proud Elizabeth, let what is required of him be refused or accept¬ ed by Henry I—-as for myself, my reso¬ lution is fixed; but yet, through res· pect for you and your counseb, it ha» not been fixed till after mature delibera¬ tion. I will 'not have tlie appearance of acting eithei from an impulse of едИа. vagant generosity, or from that spirit of refined vengeance, which induces us to crush our enemies under the load of obligations :
S3 obligations : no ; I will do nothmg but my duly. I have submitted the whole affair to the decision of an impartial judge : I will ascertain exactly how much I ought to do for Ле Damsels of Werdenberg, and exactly that much will I do, without desiring to be thanked by any one. What would be my feelings, Oswald... Heaven and Earth L what «. would be my feelings, were I to hear Montfort thank me for having kindly fadlitated his union with his bdoved Ida!
α Sj
s*
Elizabeth tt Osvald.
Kfy brotìier, we wffl in future chnse Other subjects ,for discussion : Mont¬ fort and Ida -ought now to hold a place no longer in my private thoughts, not shiffl their rimes be ever igam traced by Ihy pen. To banish these spectres which haunt my mmd so fearfully, and burythem for ever in oblivion, or at least only to remember them with con¬ tempt, surdy I need but to recall that memorable day, when my dear exaspe¬ rated brother forgave the lovesick-girl's elopement, her elopement with this de¬ ceitful Montfort; when he promised still to acknowledge her as his sister, and condescended
35 condescended to make known to the traitor with his own lips, that Count Os¬ wald would iot disdain to honour and esteem him as his sister's husband-r-ţnd then let me rei lember, how Henry led the proud Uizab-th in triumph to the altar,and how at the veryjpomentthat he prepared to swe« r to her eternal сРПт stancy, the irrpvocaiile uroré refused tp pass his lips, because. .. because among her attendants he (uncovered a fece, whose features seemed to him more lovely than his bride's Ohi when I recollect these rircum- «stances, my brother! the Damsejs pf 'Wkrdenbftrg, the chosen fronda of my Jweom, were invited te pbc; ttø nupy^l. Ruamdı» my buowv «ld the f,ijse«)j>8s ■tare'it io^»e*8,ftpı|jlîamnJ8jlif ufdflT Ί с 6 " tiltil
se their feet. With what a look of horror and aversion did Henry throw away my hand 1 He affected to be suddenly indis¬ posed too ! oh ! 'twas a mere pretence! his midnight flight Lom the Castle, and his consternation at hearing, that those perfidious girls were gone, pught to have left me no doubt ирошЛе subject; yet I suspected nothing till the cruel news arrived, that Ida's fate was as closely cPnnected with Henry's, as I once had flattered myself to have seen my own. Again I repeat it, I will discus's this subject no longer. My prayers had once the power of soothing Oswald's vengeance and saving the offender's life; shall my lamentadons exdte afresh that sleeping vengeance î— No ! I will be
37 be silent !—I thank you, dear Oswald, for all your kindness ; still love Eliza¬ beth, but strive not to avenge her.
ss
Eftxabeih to Oťwali.
1 doubt whether I act wisely in writ¬ ing to you so often ? a less interesting occupation would conduce more to the tianquillity of my besom, and such an occupation am I earnestly endeavouring to procure. A visit to the Abbess, for the puţpose of renewing my entreaties respecting the annals of Sargans, has exalted my curiosity to the very highest pitch. I am sensible, that anxiety to learn the sufferings of those who have been as unfortunate as myself, alleviates the weight ofmy own afflictions. The Abbess appeared to be undedded whether
39 whether she should indulge roe with a right of these writings, which she had already been drawn into an half pro¬ mise to communicate. — ι" My dear lady," said she smding, " had you not rather obtain a personal knowledge of those ladies, who are treat¬ ed of in these motfi-eaten ill-written leaves, aad whose · adventures, or at least as much of them as deserves your attention, I can myself relate to you concisdy?—Look!" she ¿ontinued, at the same tiine removing a silken curtam which extended itsdf øver the whole western side «fher doset; "look! here are the «portraits of the most remark¬ able among those celebrato) iadiiis res¬ pecting whose lives «paw idle psreoii hat wntrived to make you so iaquifiávc. J cenfess,
•Iff
confess, I do possess the writings űr question ; but believr me, daughter, they are buried under siujh a. heap of un¬ interesting papers relating to different matters, that to explore them would be too tedious a task for the leisure of an anchoret or the patience ofa saint." t stood silent, and listened, and look¬ ed ; but in truth the speaking portraits of these females, the most lovdy and ex¬ cellent of their day, and the interesting fragments-of their annals which escaped from the Abbess of Zurich as she pointed diem out to me by name, were by no means likely to cure me of my inclina¬ tion to know more of their adventures. Tou are not the only pne of the fiuni- ly, Oswald, who possesses the talent of persuasion ; your rifter top inherits • some
41 some little portion ofthat for which her brother is so remarkable. I conquered ; and before evening arrived, I had the satisfaction to see brought into my chamber a large iron chest, which con¬ tained materials of sufficient interest to steal me from my own sorrows, and transport me- into a diflerent world from that in which I am existing—oh ! how delightful is it for a wounded heart thut to steal itself away from the theatre of ¡ts afflictions!
42
Elizabeth to Oswald. l ľ v« 1 « o 'lhe morning broke, and found nut still occupied in examining the moth- eat«! parcrmnnta;* selecting those which appeared to bethemost interesting, and separating them from thè rest, which I purposed ip reserve for a future oppor¬ tunity. It was fortunate,-- that 1 did not delay Шз examination till the next day. Scarcely were the nuns returned from matins, when my treasure was redemanded of me. The Abbess came to make excuses in person. She talked of secrets regarding the Convent, and the commands of the Bishop of Cona, though
43
though, as far as I can make out, the great lady (for Such is the appellation , which the nuns give the Domina of Zut¬ rieb) fe totally independent of him. She thlght as well have spartd her apologies; I was angry, and scarcely could prevail Pn myself to anewer her with common politeness. She had broken her word with me ; and therefore I feel but little compunction for having ever-reached her, and kept back several pf the writ¬ ings, which I had previously laid aside. They happen to be exactly those (at least I hope sp) which the right of those'por¬ traits in the Domina'« doset had made tiie most anxious to examine. One parcel consists of the Memoirs of Urania Venosta; she is pale, and a black veil half conceals her features ; yet the
4* the grief which is exprest in her counte¬ nance (the picture represents her in the dedine oí' Kfe) has still left her' charms suffident to make us guess, bow perfect must have been her beauty while yet in the full bloom of youth. Another packet contains some ac¬ count of the unfortunate Adelaide, bdy of the Beacon-Tower; shewas a daughter of the house of Carlshaim, and had reso¬ lution enough to attend upon her unfor¬ tunate husband till his last breath, which he was doomed to breathe out upon the scaffold !" Adelaide only left th« place of execution to lay herself down, imd die. I possess also ihe adventures of two Damsels of Sargans, wha particularly arrested my attention yesterday in the closet of the Domina— The picture re¬ presented
İS -presented them as two solitary pilgrims, both imprest with beauty and innocence in every feature—features, which seemed to be not totally unknown to me, and which even recalled those to my memo¬ ry, which my partial friendship once viewed with such fond admiration, while gazing on Constantia and her per¬ fidious sister !—They were represented, as wandering an а barren mountain co¬ vered with snow, and endeavouring with inexpressible anxiety in different quarters ţo discover an out-let frpm this desolate pass, where they must inevitably perish, unless some higher ppwer should graciously interpose in, their behalf. In Outh, I fancied that I could discover in the back-ground of the picture a faint shadow, which seemed to beckon one of
46 the poor wanderers to advance : pro¬ bably it meant to conve/ the idea of a guardian angel, or a saint, who had descended from Heaven to guide tlie distressed'pUgrims out of this fearful labyrinth. I (Besides these, t have kept hack seve¬ ral other- fragments pf less interest, which I shall not examine, till all tliose which I have mentioned have been gone through, and their contents .communi¬ cated to you, dear Oswald. Into thu/ bargain, the Domina) (in hopes, I sup, pose, of softening my resentment) sent me by 'the Ijsnde of a lay-sister the life of one of her predecessors, who had also belonged to the family of Sargans, end respecting whom she thought, ¿hit what? she had told me respecting her wisdom. and
47 and piety, must need«! have powerfully excited my curiosity. I took the pon¬ derous roll of naichment with many thanks ; I have already ran through it, and returned it, for it contained nothing except that tins worthy Abbess was not only a saipt, but was акр a woman of great learning, that she had sacri¬ ficed tp the Muses at the (ame time with Walter of Vogolfdd, the Counte of Hapsbitrgand Welsh-Neuhurg, the Ab¬ bot of Einsiedţl, and the Bishop of Constance, end had carried offthe prize from those distinguished Authors ; and finally, that she had instituted a' weekly meeting of literati at the house of Rudi¬ ger Manstein, the burgo-master of Zu¬ rich. These particulars possest very few charms
48 charms for me ; and the moment that I was left to myself, X had recourse to my precious stolen treasure, òf which I shall immediately communicate to you as.much, as I have as yet had leisure to peruse. '"Óh ľmy kind Oswald, will you not blame me; when I confess, that even this interesting occupation was insuffident <.o banish Montfort from my mind? Yet to waste another thought on this paragon of human'perfidy is too great * %eaknesS-*-I will return to my parchments, in hopes to collecting from the sorrows of others' resolution enough tc endure my ovrawitk patience.
РАЯТ TUE SEÓDVD
MEMOIRS or URANIA VENOSTA. It affords tlie mind a melancholy pleasure to look back in the evening of life, and contemplate the path which conducted us to that place of shelter, where tranquillity awaits us, and which at length appears in sight. Yet in such a moment we obtain but an imperfect vol. i. d view
so view of the scenes through which we past; and the sensations which we ît the tim« experienced, have aheady lost much of their poignancy. The dullness of approaching night makes us almost forget our suffenngs, while toiling un¬ der the heat of the mid-day sun; and our eye glides easily along the deep vallies in which we feared to lose our way, and over the lofty mountains which it cost us so much labour to ascend—The whole now seems blended toget jer, ahd we perceive scarcely any thing bıiî a levd surface ;. for the distance of those ob¬ jects which we have left behind, and the darkness growing deeper with every moment, delude ouf eyes, àndhide from us almost every thing, which* once in¬ spired us with sucli well-founded f error. ' Alasi
51
Alast the pka t ures of our pilgrimage arc lost to us, as well as its difficulties and its dangers! we no longer see the flowers of the vale, in which weloiercd ; we hat no more the murmur of the brook, whose dear streams refreshed us When fainting with fatigue and thirst ! we retain of the whole but one sensa¬ tion ; that the whole is put /-rand we wonder not a little, when the transient recollection of former events occasionally flits before us, how such trifles could haVe possest the power pf affecting us with violence so extreme. Such are our feelings in the decline of life; feelings which you too, beloved- ones, for whom i trace, theie' unes, which you, my Amalberga, and tjtø »ny gentle Emmdine, will experience at the d 2 appointed
SÛ
appointed hour. Alas ! before that hour arrives, you must wander through a long and painful way, counting many a step of toil ( and many a tear of sor¬ row : 1 feel it to be my duty once more to examine the road by which I have past myself; and by explaining to you the obstades which impeded me b my progress, I hope to enable you to over¬ come those, which may present them¬ selves before you in your own. The spring of my bfe was bright and lovely. I was educated with the most illustrious young women of the age, and numbered the children of so¬ vereigns among-my play-mates. The daughters of the Count of Hapsburg liv¬ ed with me like sisters; and even when Rudolf was elected Emperor, and their father's
ÆS
father's-elevation authorized them to ex¬ pect to share the thrones of the first Sovereigns of Ешоре, still did our friendship continue in full force. What have innocence and inexperienced youth to do with dignity and grandeuri! Things of this nature only furnished us with a subject for mirth ; we past in re view the Princes, both young and old, who solidted the good graces of the Em¬ peror's daughters ; we discussed freely their merits and defects, portioned them out among our sodety, and amused oursdve&with jesting at the unfortunate maiden, to whom the worst lot fell. The number of these illustrious suitors was seven ; and as the Princesses with myself made exactly the same number,! d S · necessarily
s*
necessarily came in for my share in this allotment. Unfortunately, what at first was mere jesting at length became serious. The Duke of Saxony, who at his first arrival seemed to limit all his wishes to the pt». session of the Princess Matilda, (Rudolf's ddest daughter,) began to imagine, that her companion Urania was the superior beauty oftlie two. As it was generally believed (both on account of the unifor, mity which prevailed in our society, and of our never being separated) that I was the sister of my friends, the Duke thought it a matter of very little conse¬ quence, to which of. the Emperor's daughters he paid his addresses, nd he showed his election in my favour so plainly
55 plainly and so publicly, that Rudolf or¬ dered me to quit his court. My remo¬ val was so sudden, that no step could be taken by the Duke in this import¬ ant business : my father had fallen in the late popular commotions at Basle ; I had never known my mother ; I was consigned to the guardianship of an unde, who had purchased considerable possessions in the neighbourhood of the Rhætian Alps, where he resided far from the tumult of the court in freedom and tranquillity. Count Leopold Venosta received me with open arms. Painful as had been my separation from the friends of my childhood, still I was not insensible to the charm of being rdeased from the chains-of court etiquette, even« though «o. * the
56 the chains which I had borne had been so light and easy. The air of liberty fan¬ ned my cheeks at every step I took; the peasants of Rhetia (who had now almost universally shaken off th« fetter&of their lordly masters) celebrated on all sides the-feast, of freedom, and invited tbe neighbouring mhabitants of the Val- teline to participate lin their hap¬ piness. Oh ! what delightful scenes were these for a yourigand feeling heart! —and yet I Jiad not sufficient expe¬ rience to perceive their whole beauty and singularity.—Too often is liberty purchased dearly by the effusion of blood; and joy at obtaining tlicsp lopg wished-for blessing is sullied by melan« choly recollections i«of the means, by which that blessing was obtaineu. ¡:» ι . this
51
this instance, it was the reward of tem¬ perance and industry, which had at length succeeded in their efforts to burst the chains of luxury and oppression. Knights and Monks, the former owners of these possessions, had fong indulged ■without reflection or restraint every caprice of their voluptuous fancies, till they bearne the debtors of their own vassals ; who in the mean while had been advandng silently towards their grand object through diligence in la¬ bour and propriety in morals, and now were able toset at defiance those, whose slaves and victims they had been so fong. The impoverished libertines found themselves without resource; they were obliged to rest contented with bestowing angry looks on their enfran. D 5 chised
58 chised vassals, as often as accident brought them in thdrway, and with indulging their spleen in intemperate raffing at (what Mty termed) the caprice of fortune. But Count Leopold belonged not to the number of these reduced Lords. His opulence grew with every day ; his possessions were increased by the pur¬ chase of those, which the debts ofhis neighbours compelled them to dispose of: Neither had the country reason to la¬ ment, that so much power was concen¬ trated in his hands. He allowed his vassals suffident inde¬ pendence to prevent their sighing after a greater share of freedom ; he parcelled out some of hisestates into small farms, and bestowed them on the most indus¬ trious
59 trious among hb реорю ; he even in¬ duced several of the inhabitants of the Valteline ţo settle upon hii possessions, by allotting to them a portion of va-i luable but hitherto uncultivated land, which liberally replaced to them what ' Uttle they abandoned in their own dis· tracted country. , Oh I believe me, my children, the oc¬ cupation renders us almost bqual to the angds, when we employ our power in bidding ¿ome desart teem with harvest, and making it the habitation pf happy creatures! I have witnessed many of these transformations, which the Princes of the earth could-prtduce so often and so easily, had they but the inclination. It fern thei#pswel· fplcopythejbenevo^ lênce and might pf the Creator; imtt they chine rather to i*nitaia.his chasdsiiig ju»-. ■- d ft tice r
60
tice, to convert the dwellings of men into heaprof stohes, and to pour a de¬ luge of blood over the smiling fruitful vallies, «ι 'Among the Lords of that part of Switzerland, whose chief possessions now belonged to my uncle, the Counts of Carlsheim held the ihost distin¬ guished placej Ethelbert (the only remaining descendant of this family, at least as far as we knew) scarcely inherited from his father the tenth part of that property, which onte belong¬ ed to his forefathers. Grief and vexa¬ tion had bowed the young man to the ground ; he sought to improve his for¬ tune by entering intp the service of foreign princes, failed Jul the attempt, and returned sorrowing to repair the ruined castles which still wete bi» own; and
61
and to collect the fragments of his fallen greatness. He had no reason to re¬ proach himself ал the author of his dis¬ tress; yet the consciousness of his situation aqd the feelings of wound¬ ed pride kept him in a constant state of humiliation, which became,particu¬ larly painful at the sight of those, who had established their prosperity on the ruins of that of the house cf Cari- sheim. Influenced by these sentiments, did Ethelbert most studiously avoid all in¬ tercourse with my unde. On none of those occasions, which usually bring knights and noblemen together, did he ever appear, if there was the slightest probability, of, Count Leopold's being present; and jn spite of all my uncle's endeavours ; to ¿arm an acquaintance , with
62 with this young warrior, (for whom more reasons than one induced him to feel a lively intérest,) still would his ef¬ forts in all likelihood have failed of suc¬ cess, had not a circumstance occurred, which absolutely enjoined their meeting, and which was the first link of a con¬ nexion which... dare I say it?... which should herer have been formed. Yet die ordinations of eternal Wisdom ought not to be censuied: I press my finger on my lip, and am silmt. * In tho bosom of a tranquil valley situated near the Rhine rose the walls of a monastery, which in point of wealth was only inferior to the monks of Saint Basil in Solothurn, and fte theVahiabte endowments and extcrièive^ossrsiSmts bfi the Great Lady of Zurich, enncerilhfe immemorial had this district helohgett ' to
63 to the Lords of Carlsheim ; and they were so consdous of its worth, that when they sold the rest of their estates beyond the power of redemption, they had only partéd with this as a pledge. My unde had already entered without success into various négociations with Count Werner (Ethelbert's father) on this subject; and after the old man's death, he had found his son equally determined never to rdinquish entirely Jiis right to " the jewel of the land," for such was the popular nameofthe Cloister in the Wood. Various means were pro¬ posed to my unde (several by the monks themselves) for subduing the obstinacy of the original possessor : but Leopold's tedder conscience thought some. Unjust, and some unfeeling, and every thing remamed as it was. —"Let
e* —" Let us not," he always answer¬ ed, when prest upon this sutţject, " Ut us not rob this young man of the flatter. ing hope, that by means of his daima on this delightful territory he may one day be enabled to get a ,firm footing in. the land ofhis once opulent inheritance I I will not be the man whp deprives him of it ; far more willingly would I lend him my aid towards realizing his expectations, were 1 assured that heiş r -'ally the character for which ttake Mm* hi the mean while, let him continue to feast his imagination with the hope of one day enjoying the treasures said to be buried in the Abbey of Curwald, and with the rest of those chim¡was which, have been painted to me in such brilliant colours forthe purpose of seducing me to
65
to sátestbat by force ofarms, to whicb without Ethelbert's voluntary agrees ment I can never possess a satisfactory right."— i< И is but too certain, that no means were.'lift untried, whieh-might exaspe¬ rat« ţţiy unde against Ethelbert of Carlsheim; who on hit side suffered many sin interested adviser to assail his ear with similir representations. Things Wei* carried to such a length, that feu¬ dal war would certainly have been de· dared, and the dwellings of tranquillity must have been dduged with an ocean of blood, had not Count Venosta's genero' sity induced him to give way on all pos- sible occasions. TjivMik over Calmly these and tamilar droumstances with Ethelbert in person, such
6β such was my unde*« object ln endea- vouring to threw himself in his way ; and the obstinate are, with which the latter avoided every explanation, might as well· be 1 ascribed to a 6Sňtlnisnt-of feise pride which made him feel-hum!· Eated by Count Venosta'« superior wealth, or to the insinuations of lll-disJ posed adviser«, is to envy, or malignity, or any other bad feature in his charac¬ ter. Count Leopold and myself had al¬ ways made ita rule to consider Ethd¬ bert^ actions in the" most favourable fight. It is true, we had both beeil long the inhabitants of a court, the proper atmosphere of suspicion and mis¬ trust, but on our first arrival among the frank and honest children of Helvetia, we dismissed those enemies of rural peace for
67
for ever, and determined to be open- hearted with those whpse hearts were so open to us. l The circumstance which at length brought my uncle and Count Ethelbert together, was a dispute between fhe monks of Curwald and their Abbot ; and which at last was carried to such a pitch, that it became necessary to refer it to the cloister's Bege-lord. But who was this same liege-lord? was It Leopold, who was in actual possession of the reve¬ nue, ór Ethelbert, m whom the legal right still vested ? The monks appealed from one to the other oVer and over again, and at length it became absolutely necessary that i meeting should take place between them, in order that the business might be finally adjusted. My unde had never forbidden my in. terference
«8
ference in matters, which did not exact. ly fell within 'he province of women ; nor indeed would it have been in my pewer to remain inactive on this occa¬ sion, in which the honour and welfare of those persons who (after my unde) were most dear to me, were very deeply implicated.. Christian, the. persecuted Abbot of Curwald; was my fether-confessor; the Prior Matthias, who shared with Ыт the unmerited hatred of the monks, had been my instructor in botany, one of my most favourite studies, and which the Rhxtian mountains afforded ще every means qf cultivating «{ith success. 1 knew the excellence «of both .these тед, and exerted all the powers of female. persuasion, which consist in tears and entreaties,
69 entreaties, to keep my uncle steady in the interests of my venerable friends. I was too anxious about the issue of this affair to suffer Count Venosta to go alone to the place, which had been ap¬ pointed for the interview between him and his rival. Report had informed me, that Ethelbert appeared disposed to pro¬ tect the persecutors of innocence; I re¬ solved, that he should be made thorough¬ ly aware of the real state of the case ; nor could I suppose, that any thing more could be requisite in order to obtain the decision, which I so ardently desired to hear pronounced. I was still to learn, that it is possible to act in opposition to a principle, of whose justice we are thoroughly convinced. They say, that Female Innocence, for¬ getful
70 gelful of herself while she is occupied with the interests of others, was never known to supplicate without success. My unde had exerted all his powers of argu¬ ment without producing conviction in the bosom of the Count of Carlsheim. He was silent, and I was now permitted to advance a few representations on the subject. I spoke not much-; but I spoke with force and feeling, and I flattered myself, that I could read in Ethelbert's radiant eyes, that what I -said had not totally failed of its effect. He answered not ; but he Cast 'on me я look so full of expression, that I felt my cheeks covered with blushes, hastily let fall my veil, and retreated towards my unde. —« Count Venosta," said Ethelbert at
71 at length, " here is my hand' decide the business according to your own pleasure. So fair and virtuous a Dam¬ sel would never support the «ruse of guilt! the discontented monks shall keep their superior—and if the Abbot wishes to secure their obedience for ever, let him only request his powerful advocate to exert upon them the same powers of persuasion, which she has just now em¬ ployed upon me, and he cannot «tail to obtain his object. Methinks the Man might make himself Lord of the whole universe, would he but use this means, find though loaded with crimes might steal himself mto Paradise, covered by the protecting mantle of such a sainfeui 4. The» compKments seemed to me not less
n
less free than flattering. A look too of my unde's informed pie/ that they were by no mean« to his taste, and I quitted the room embarrassed and un¬ easy. I had the satisfaction to see my friends justified and.reinstated in theu dignities, in defiance of their numerous foes ; but I «had also the mortification to experience some consequences of my well-intended interference, which were by no means agreeable. The first was a very severe remonstrance from Count Venosta res¬ pecting the ardour, or the importunity a%he termed it, with which I had prest my sint upon Ethdbert. —" Had Urania been a simple Alpine shepherdess," said my uncle, " who, con¬ cealed among her native mountains, had never
7? never heard of the insolent expectations, which men ground upon the slight¬ est demonstration of female good-wdl towards them, I might, perhaps, find some excuse for the free tone with which she Spoke to a stranger, and the tender expression which she infused into her supplicating looks; but Urania, educated ip a Court, should have been more, Upon her guard. Handsome as are his features, the Count of Carlsheim's bold and ardent gaze was such as by no msaus gave me a favourable opinion of his delicacy/; and still less was I pleased by the liberty which he took of address¬ ing you in a stramof flattery so undis¬ guised.. Hitherto I have been disposed .to entertain; a favourable opinion of the young inan ; but I confess, what I have vou. u В seen
74 . seen of him to-day has shaken my good¬ will nota little."—· I only answered Count Leopold's warning speech by a respectful silence; and I afterwards reproached, myself for the manner in which I had acted, though I was unconsdous what I had done, for which 1 deserved to be reproached. My heart was innocent; my intention was pure ; the consequences of the step which I had taken, however, soon con¬ vinced jne that I had really committed an errpr. Ethdbert of Carlsheim« he who,during whole years that my unde sought to ob¬ tain his acquaintance, was never to be found; he,who efen now that they were at length known to each other, seemed by no means eager tö cultivate a closer 2 intercourse
15
intercourse with the family of Venosta, from the tiine of our first meeting pie¬ sented'himself before me almost eveiy day. If I sought the neighbouring chureh,it always so happened that he had chosen exactly the sanie how for paying his dcvotions-n-if Ί sat in щу balcony, he was sure to ride past thd Castle—at the rural feasts, for which among our „vassals an excuse was never wanting, and from which I dared ndt absent my¬ sdf through fear of mortifying the good people, Ethelbert's hand was always offered to « conduct! me to' the dance.' 'At length it so 1 chanced,' > that ! ws« under the necessity of coţifossing that ¡It was to him,'that lowed the pre, setvation-ofmy life. One evening as jl> jim prrfceedlng-toward* thei Castle >in> the tvvilight, a procession of villagers, 1 2 tg.'
IS returning from л «redding; «happened to cross my path, accompahied by a variety of instruments which próducedthe most noisy and discordant sounds Jmagi- able.~ The white banhers fluttering before the eyes fof myríalfréy, and the dattering cymbals which- stunned her ears, ¿auSed her to takc«<fright andset off at foil speed; and Jn lall ι pro¬ bability she would.have.dished'with me from' thejibrow of ai neighbour¬ ing pţecgiice,i to which ihe was hasten¬ ing« had hot; Count Ethelbert fortu· n»tely«heard;my-ehrieks.: He-jrescued meffrc*n"m,yllanger, (todin'r/rturn had tb& happiness (as he aOlodJt) .totsccomí рапу me back to the Castle, and*Pök«n öppo^ttmtyjtoieialietiiy «thá гщ/м de- cJaratíonpf the most paisionWeaftction; .e-« fitti- io ι ir ıı - л, \ Ancther -Л - ι
77
Another time, late at night I was aUrrned by a fire breaking out in my ant ¡chamber, altri the flames spread with sufficient rapidity to make me swoon through terror «When I recovered, I found myself supported by Count-Ethd bert, who advised me to save myself by flight from the threatening danger, and seemed perfectly ready tp assist me m putting his advice ώ execution How ever, as I had now regained my presence pf mbi* sufficiently ţo see, that there wal no absolute necessity for taking «uth í step, my flight extended no further than to my unde's chamber, Whither I requested to be conveyed without delay« Leopofd reoeivbd jftiy preserver with marked coldness, «.ahd conduded his expressions « S
expressions of gratitude with enquiring —I й by what strange though fortunate •accident he had arrived theresospéedily and so exactly at the time; wheii his assistance wat most wanted?"—Ethel¬ bert in his answer talked Auch of the -good angebwho watch-aver thé favour¬ ites pf Heaven, which «my unde heard without any great« appearance df satis¬ faction, and as soon as the Count of CarUieim had «taken his departure, I received a viry serious lecture respecting him. My uncle was inclined to believe, that the accident which had lately alarmed my palfrey, add tht fire which had thrown me Under Ethelbert's pro¬ tection, were both devices intended to bind виг to him by the chain» of grati¬ tude. Jt wat at least certam, that no sooner
1θ
sooner had my acddent taken place, than the bridal procession disappeared; and the fire had done no other damage, than consuming part pf the arras with which my antichamber was hung. —'' If the Count pf Carlsheim is anxious to win your aflections," said my unde, * why does he not take the straight road to obtain them ľ why dues be not explain his views respecting you to me? there was a time, when I should not have refused you'to him, and in which I intended to liave done an act of justice by making him once more lord over the possessions Ofhis ancestors, by giving him the hand of Urania, the future heiress of Carlsheim and Sar¬ gans."»— I knew not, what intelligence or what в 4 observations
80 observations could have induced Count Leopold (who was generally so much inclined to think well of every one) so soon to view Ethelbert's actions in-an unfavourable light. As for myself, I gave these accusations by no means implicit confidence.; and I strove to find excuses for the conduct of a inan, who every time that I saw him jmade a stronger impression on my heart, and who daily rendered it more difficult for me to suspect" him of ahy thmg wrong. Ethelbert of Carlsheim was infbvtu- nate, and had been deprived of, the greatest part of those possessions, which ought to h«»ve been his birth right; this alone would have been a suffident reason for my,viewing him with inter¬ est ; but how much was that interest increased
8Í
increased by the discovery, that he employed the little power; which he still possest, m relieving the misfortunes of others, and that by the protection which he granted· the opprest, he had himself incurred the animosity of many powerful foes? what could be more noble and mote generous than such a proceeding, .«nd how was it possible to suppose, that a man who could act thus, could ever deserve the most distant appearance of suspicion ľ' Edith, Countess of Mayenfield, was _ compelled to fly frotó her castle, by her bitter «nemy the ambitious-Abbot of St. Gab : she Was a widow, and there were·· suspicions (and those no slight opes)'that she wait indebted for the retnoval of her husband to a present bf E.S wine.
ss wine from the cellar of this dignified prelate. Willingly would he have also sacrificed the unprotected lady, who was the more dangerous obstade to the enjoyment of his hopes, inasmuch as she was daily expected to produce a child, which (if i. son) would be entitled to the whole possessions of his deceased father. Edith therefore was compelled to seek safety in flight; the time of her delivery was near; she was beset with enemies on all sides; nor could she doubt what would be the fete of herself and her offspring, should he fell into the Abbot's hands. In this dreadful situation she summoned up all her conr.^e,and under the protecting mantle of the uight employed the only means of "
83
pf saving herself from destruction, which the severity of her fate had now left her. Her wearied horses refused to bear her further, and she was still fár distant from the place, in which she hoped to find shdter and assistance. She doubted not, that the Abbot would pursue her ; not a moment was to be lost; she quitted her litter, and resolved' to prosecute her painful way on foot, unaccompanied except by her otphan daughter, the young and lovely Minna. She ordered her attendants to pursue their journey with as much diligence as possible, hoping by this artifice to lead her pursuers astray. As for herself, she determined to concealherself in the depth of the forest, thinking she shpukl find x 6 there
- 8* there somé retired cottage, in which she might recover heiself from amdety and fatigue, and give birth in tranquil secu¬ rity to her Unfortunate fatherless infant. As to being betrayed to her tyrant, she was 'ťóo Wel acquainted with the hortest and benevolent temper of the inhabitants of these mountains to harbour any ap¬ prehensions olì that head. * '' ' "the ¿atlía'aŕtiugh which she wan¬ dered were solitary. At length die trampling pf a steed' was 'heard ; and soon after a' knight, -unaccompanied, presented himtelf before the-unfbftunate lady, who, Supported by the powerless hand df the youthful Minna, was scarcely аЫе to prevent herSelf fróm-sinking on the ground t' 'this solitary knight was Count
iS
Count Ethelbert; he was returning from the chace, and had sent his attendants forward. The Countess of Mayenfield found it unnecessary to" represent to rám^how much her situation required assistance', òr to explain her name and the dangers which still menaced her. Before she had time to request his services, Ethelbert was already occupied in servmg her : his pealing horn soon collected his attend¬ ants round him. 'A slight but easy Btteťwas constructed 1 with all diligence; and 'before an hour elapsed, the fugi¬ tives rejoiced to find themselves withm -the sheltering walls, of a castle, whose strength was capable of defying the malice of their eneniies, in case they should
ее «should attempt to deprive them fordbly of their friendly retreat. It so happened that Count Venosta also had dedicated this same day to the chace: the sport had enticed him to a distance from home. Midnight had king been past ; and I «till sat at my spinning wheel surrounded by my maidens; waitmg with most anxious expectation for -tny uncle's return. A thousand painfoi thoughts and confused images glanced across my imagination, in which, is usual, Count Ethelbert was not forgotten ; suddenly the folding doors pf my chamber were throvm open, and the object of. my thoughts Stood before me, almost breathless through haste .ami anxiety. г/ 4 —r a Dear laiy," said he, « 1 come to ask
87
ask a boon of you. A guest of no mean rank has arrived at my cattle, and there is no female there to bid her welcome : Я litter waits at your door ; suffer me to entreat that you will let it convey you to my residence."— —" Sir Knight, are you in your senses? This extraordinary request.
—" Is the boldest, the most unpar¬ donable, that'fàncy can imagine: but judge by the want of preparation with which I prppose it, how urgent is the necessity for its being gratified without delay.—" The Count of Carlsheim had by no means chosen the most fortunate mo¬ ment for obtaining any favour at,all from m«, much less one of so extraor¬ dinary
CB
dfňary a nature In solkude. I had' reflected calmly-and senously on йу unde's warning tliefrightened palfrey, and the fire so easilyearringuisheüjcame ihto my héádt and 'üıe uneasiness \a which Count VenostaV absence had obhged ine to pass the Jasť héun, by no means indined me to view these circum¬ stances so much to Ethelbert's advan tage as usual at ihat momen*' 1 saw him with my unde's eyes, and of course this proposal appeared to me as nothings But a «fost bare faced attempt on my' lever's pkt to«« betray me. into Щ, power " — "Youâreoffendeo'?* Ы EÜel bert, who read 'displeasure- strongly tarnreďm'íÄiyvíivery 1 reatóte ,° «¡wdl then f I must havii recourse to a more eloquent pleader."— Saymg·
89
Saying this, he hastened into the anti- chamber, and returned with a little beautiful child, whose countenance ex¬ pressed the deepest anxiety and sorrow* and whose blue eyes filled with tear* strcngthcned,the impression, which was made on me by her unexpected appear¬ ance. —"Ah! dear good-lady 1 " said the little mourner, while she sank on her knees before me, and kist my hand, " I entreat you, do what thb knight re¬ quests of you ! Mymother and myself are alone in ,a gloomy castle, where there are none but stern-looking meri, with great beards and heavy swords ; and my mother is so very Ш1 and she asked so anxiously, ' was there no lady who would comfort and assist her in, her
90
her sickness!' and then this knight who, saved us from dying in the forest, an¬ swered, that he knew a lady whom he loved as his sister, and that he .would bring her to my mother, if she could be persuaded to follow him; and then-he took me afong with him, that I might help to prevail on you to come and be kind to my poor mother : ahd now I am here, you villi be prevailed on ; I am sure of it, because you look опте ■о kindly! Come, dear good lady! Come!"— 1 Idst the pretty suppliant withput thoroughly comprehending what it was that she requested me to do, and cast an inquiring look upon Ethelbert. He related his adventure witb the Countess of Mayenfidd in so interesting a manner, that
βι'
that it was impossible for me to hesitate a moment longer, ss to what course I should pursue. Indeed, the history of this unfortunate lady was not unknown to me, when Ethelbert mentioned her name : her misfortunes had for some time been the general subject of con¬ versation, and had already cost me many a sympathising tear, and many an ardent wish to find some means of giving her itsistance. I was deaf to all the suggestions of prudence, and threw mysdf into the Ut ter, wishing that I could have given the horses wings, so eager was I to reach the illustrious sufferer. My nurse accom¬ panied me ; a discreet and benevolent woman, who was likely to be of much more use to the Countess than mysejf. So
- 02 So completely was I occupied by my anxiety for the poor lady, thatl scarcdy paid any attention to Êthelbeffs tènder %xpressionS of gratitude, or to the re¬ presentations of my nurse, who hinted to me with some appearance of discon¬ tent, that I had acted with rather too much rashness in this business; she -assured me, that ber presence at the Castle of Carlsheim would be quite suffident without my giving myself the ffouhle' tčľgo there; and she confest, that she thought Count Venosta would have good reason td be offended át finding Pn his return home, that I had quitted his house durmg hts absence with a young knight, in spite of dark¬ ness and an heavy fell of snow. We reached the Casde; the sight of us
93 us served to give new life to thé ex¬ hausted lady, who surrounded by none. but men had met with but sorry atten¬ dance She embraced me, and called me by the tender name of sister, I soon confided her to the caisjof roy.iuiise, and quitted hter chambei 1 roi the pur¬ pose of making arrangements for hen treatment, and 1 gave my directions, m a tone of as much ewñestncssj.íS had Λ been m my" unde'si castle il Anxiety about the Countess made me take the; whole business upon my own hands', I saw nothing «extraordinary in. what J was doinfe, iUidiCouldiby no means ςοη' cerre, why Count Ethielbert's people ex¬ amined me with.looks of such surprise, nor why he was himself always by mý side, expressing the most excessive dehght
Si
delight and satisfaction at everything that I did, and loading me with sudi a profusion of thanks, that it was utterly impossible for me to ascribe them all to the interest, which he felt about his unfortunate guest» Before day.brtak, Edith became the mother of a boy; and never did any other mother fed. equal rapture with hers, when-for the first time she prest him to her bosom. In this new-born babe die embraced not merely hér child, but the future conqueror of her foés, and the preserver of her family'. Nothing more tháá 'tha- .birth «of this boy was necessary tò destroy every claim of the avaricious Abbot of St. Gall upon Mayenfidd, and reduce him to the condition ¡of a ieydal de, pendent.
95
pendent. Count Ethelbert on hi part neglected not to spread abroad the nswţ of the bir th of a y oung Count of Mayen- field, and to invite through hjs heralds both friends and fots to convince them¬ selves by their eyes vi the existence of this infant nobleman. Count Venosta had experienced no tricing' anxiety on being informed of my midnight excursion, the motive of which no one was able to explain to Ms satisfaction. He determined ţo ex,- amine into die ţeal nature of the tran- SMţripn jhhruejfi ,arojr|Jinghjr Αβ,ιΕΤ« sunbeams saw hitn cţoss the drawbridge of Etíielí*rť» catfk, accpinpaoieid. by Ws whole йазд of hunters, whpm he had ordered^ ¡hflld thenjfîşlvesjpre- Pfijied fo? » saripuş eBg»gemenţ) jn еще the
96
the nature of things should make it necessary to come to hostilities. The Count of Carlsheim was already abioad, employed in ' business which regarded the adventure of the past night. My uride found tae sitting by the bed-side of the newly-delivered Countess, whose ardent thanks for the assistance, which I had afforded her, instantly removed evety trace of anger from his brow ; and the severe lecture which he intended to bestow on me, was softened into a gentle remonstrance againSť'm^áciirig-in géiiéraîwith íöó nftlòh precipitation, u ι' '' ι ¡ι Ethelbert returned;·^* êhked 4vith my unde" and myself the office of pre¬ senting'ihe «ewÍbbiŕi HeiK of Mayen¬ field at the-bäptísífial foüht, ahd we gave the
the duld its · father's, name, Ludolf, i UWtllO Oí ! _ J „íl" ČO i' From motives pf propriety, we were ι ι uf {Tiuiïiiir«T ; 'ι Ί ι all anxious to reinove the' invah«^ (who earnestly entreated me not to abandpn her) to my uncle's castle;, but she was ι ιΊ ι ιΤΠ ri % ι jii| at first top .weak to bear the.journey. «fill'/ 1 fl ,111 1 V l J ,ll»') Iffl and I was under ţhe necessity of sub- bi_ Γ 1)1 íln'lll jii 'Kon OUI Ό mitting for some time longer to act as the mistress of Count Ethelbert's eastta. ance, which, 1 am convinced it,had always bţen my lover's plan ţo give them, Doubtlcbs had bethought proper, he might have contrived to show his fair guest all the duties of hospitality, without any interference of mine : but he eagerly made use of the oppor·, tunity which presented itself, to draw 11 i'1 î inut Ί..«)) Ι ι 11 « Ί I I
98 He' endeavoured to convince me by his reliance on my humanity of 'the esteem which he entertained for my character ; and at the same time he hoped to in¬ spire me with a fevourable opinion of «Ms'own, by malang me а daily witness of the noble treatment whidi he afforded fo a stranger, who had no claim to his protection except «her need of it, and who could make him no other return for hb kindness, except the involving him in her own difficulties and dangers. Fthelbert's plan succeeded with me completely, and even my unde began to view him ín a more favourable fight. Both were equally interested about the Countess, and swore to exert themsdves to the utmost in endeavouring to re¬ instate her and her new-bojrn son in the . rights,
99
rights, which were still detained from them by the Abbot of St. Gall; the similarity of their objects naturally induced a sort of confidence between them; and Ethelbert lost no oppor¬ tunity of turning this confidence to the best account. Perhaps he already reckon¬ ed himsdf on the point of Obtaining that, which had long been the markat which he aimed, though hé had hever acknowledged it in words ; namely, the possession of my hand : but my unde soon gave a fresh proof, that at present he by no means looked forward to, or desired a connection between the fami¬ lies of Carlsheim and Venosta. The history of my nocturnal journey (many gave it th» name of art elope¬ ment,) had not been kept a secret ; the f 2 situation
100 Situation of the^Cguntşşş'Si ι#^ şţade »ţ necessary, for her, ţOf^receivtiriseyejţal ЙРдаг? » %r i#wa)îS.ıÇ)und ιηβ^ frflT sidjvsaw ţhaîjţiţfiţed, as % miftre« pf crfld)J 4I Şoţne apetf editìiat I was aljtfady f»49# d fP Ä lord, of! Cajjsheijrn., surfig stpry ( «s offimdşd my feehngs tq9 t sey^el^ fo admjt of my fepeating It heire.an^iyhjch.^ soppet carne, tp jnyupde's knpwkidgep ţj^n ¡life iesob/ed ^t ajl jţyents^Oj, repoye me, frpjrn tq unusualasjtufţtişn The^nyahdiyaijjipw siifficjeçdy ţecqvşre4 to ţie^jf (Ц fatigue ofjajjoupejr , and aa»boj|em^he^()yse p£ the potest qojnţ ^«npijţa W hkçly
ΙΟΙ
to furnish her both with- mòre 'cPnse- quence and security, than she could expect tb fold at the Castle oť ¿ari· 1 sheim. . · ' ıı о l'i / My uhde and Ethdbert lookedtøloO- imly} 'tny 'heart wai 'heavy J Jhă< Saďŕ 1 the feir Edith of Mayenfield áloiie. fe* pífttíSir «Word*, what no one els« w'an Willing tO' declare tp the other. J u P ч-^'ОЬ 1 «tavenţ« ehe ctóed aťÄtólg töve of 'him.'Whd had till theif-iseeii' İler ŕrtíl^or, While-she' prest т\тШг Etheíbcrt's 1 hands fest together, fetwëen' heŕ n 6wn J « unite' theie two hdblesť sous, with-WhrcK ( y"ou'*eVeí· blèst^UnàJ ntìyVlfhis 1 îs' thé" 'bfeáff^redóm^Äíe for sneh .geheíösity 'SfiíD SWdf'disitfttrfeítedl flfehdjjjiíplíis I'have êafieriéiiceà »ой- ftäm bòtlee'-^ ' Ih» ·«>« »'' 'l' я ■* i r з Edith's
10«
Edith's expressive eyes were directed towards heaven, Ethelbert and myself bhtshed as we gazed on «ach other, without being able to pronounce я syllable. Methought, Ethelbert shtuld have spoken on this occasion ;—but fl« was silent. · < ,_', Th« Countes» was long our gueft, Open feud w» declared between her defţncleri «od the obstinate Abbot of St- flail, 'who WM wonted in every ià^mh wWwat ¿m being entirdy subdued,. The content was carried on for; к considerable time: in the mean vhile my uncle (to whpm age advanced with steps, {№ lingering, that no 9ns (lould.easily hay* guest his, years) dis, tevered, that the charms pf the «fairt widow were still of great power ; yet , j perhaps
юз
perhaps it tm i^ttf wjiom tJbjs ide» gţst «Uggested, itself, tjţat an чп[рп «bgtiy«i»p tjjét&røovld, be productivejpf.tapçuıeış on both sides. I soon observed, «that my hipts were fer from disagreeable todther ftrtţ i and I ejrolted \a tke.hope of »oo» JjehcJding my friend and щ benefeetce unitsdin« a new course of do^ep^c bap^ness. >* ( f WhenlimixutedmydwgnstoCpunt ШФЩш ÍFbo. w?! WW »rfaamt ■флЩ «iţipw t qşţ%) he Şste^,«p, пае with the greatest astonishment,. Ifis •«jjpuntenance at this moment assumed ap expressem, which ţ ОД*^ег,,*еед AWWbefotc. , i)l9e t τ*?, Wy,l" «J4 J^e, « am ţ. ψφ, pr drpamingi-^Au unip^jwţdch ,must td«pri)№ ; |ip» of JW?*-««* expejqaup«·, ui **· «nd
1Ò* ШШ pil WSéb^s-irf'^êSibTÎ bf ШВ&ЗР«-» whirJt'oug«! é-tŕ^Ä* •SvW^steü* итпвг<Ш«*еа^ •y^^^-Cod iot a I eabœdi«l о wííj^i^tfwneu ádTSairEffiiBe«,* ФШЖШЧ tet'^soTfriäŕ'rfól ìn'ftiìfertVWJ w-n'r'-wiict, .aia'^úA -Ш.Ык 'di^Yír 1 tÍťc'-'Iciisŕ^rfe'"-* •dfishnesi m -my character? ¡ГИ ίαψΑ- Ш^ШГиЬ&^&п« lébhsicíéŕiríons ""irlent!? 1 * 8 ^«^ 0 * r AajíOT^ adı ¿u v b'JilH^it'liii'Bfiiiar^wii fe* ¡Ш*"Й»е ^enVV^I^^i *tó'fijiftï'i*apfi'J wm SteadUy, and it was 1еЩ}4еШ Ш <Ш№Аа$№г&' elam ' sdétííiíťfy- io i^ffliriír-jf-ílifleMt «ürraba'èSpliki'fo
IDS
not personally the slightest concern, he cduld only be anxious about my wter¿ est, and he advanced many arguments to prove, that the most noble and gener« ous soul might fed very differently on occasions which regarded his friend, than he would have feltrili affairs, wbch only, related tp himself. I believed every thing that Ethelbert told me, in feet he was soon after complaisant enough to allow, that my îeisons were not entirely withoutweight, and at length even went so far as tp declare that op consideration it appeared to hun very" possible, that an union between the Count Venosta ацс\ Uve widow of Ludolf of Mayenfiekiqpgbt be an advantageous event for all partes He also promised, that as soo^ «is the ι t 5 next
' 106 n«x«;**p»dition against ihe Abbot of «St. Gall ihould have taken place, he Woetd come to my assistance, and use every power of entreaty and persuasion W forward this connection, which I so aideudyderired. , -This expedition was directed «against one of the Castles, which our common ertBmyAwined from itt rightfot owner; «η -the morning appotated for its taking ţftce, out forces set out before day¬ break, in pursuit of a victory of which 'they r eckoitedthiniidvet Secure. My Mend and myself had already «seen our heroes return victorious from theit excurtionstoo often,to так» м ШИ it íteceíssry fo accompany their departure with sigh· and expresión* of anxiety. W* bti eauwdy аищЫигЙ > « the
m
. the rimei when w« might «jrpeet.ţhenţ bods, and had laid apian (withithe at·. eiiunoB.of such warrior«!as; wen« ,left ι behind) for recdving thenvwith ill «he pageantry and honours« of сопфМй. A procesrioh qf knights undladtes wa» intended! toi ¡welcome them, on. tbeir return«, and at tha head of th« joyou» band was to wav* a'banner «dotted* with motte· and emblem·; tbiigøig*~ eus ornament was to be embroidered by our own hands, and our ¿eedk« were plyed with unwearied induStry« iu order fhat it' might be. finkhed tt the appeihted ttaw. :·...: Whue engaged at thi« ddight&J' aad *«*'haliicbmpltwd' taile,¡I fosqueritly iwned!^; lovely Ettek ia jen «my mOir-Wlieíiibíe «altat j" and üt rimaag» > > »ft she
fö»
sH^iefiibrrjlaêred.Ulk» ii"vaant shield tU« 4tòittâ'^iM<UtJ«dfUEtheRíett and íWiiliftjvayí.dtgrow xnurfdİKdurs№tw»kÎ í»tedr«ileriom tUCn.i-She.tMaŕed Ы n\e'hEt< swpťisc.at Ethelbert's persisting ili iTofJjfulilfcly dodaring his love forme, t circumstance! which .bad-long been the«ţ»nstrbf indth'sccret uneasiness-and Curiceity tomysdfi She assured me also, that: she had-no' wish mou, ardent in becoining'Couniesb of Venosta, thin to be4«tbori«d'to insistoii an explanation fttjm the'bashful knight (asIshe called the CoımtOfıCarlsheim,)ıandto become the instrument of accomplishing «his happinesS«ati6 mine.· 'л^чгм , I U v MtiWaífätlthis. DU)in«tlt,itha4a.4udd«o noise İDj|thcl oOürti of !the¡ Castle inten· luptedı «iri work jand -«Por, jdiscouiB«. s«'! <) t We
109
We ípran^ fifoni öUr santet 'the tramp¬ ling of hoftes would have led r us to suppose, that ouf lowers were returned, hud 'so speedy a termination of their business been possible. We bade our maidens hasten to enquire the hews, and flew ourselves to the window in order to learn (if possible), with our own eyes, what had happened, '« ' Instantly the Countess started back with a loud shriek, and fainted ; nor was my own condition much beiter on beholding in the court a single warrior covered with blood, and holding two unmounted horses, whose trappings Spoke " too plainly the fitte of their »Jders«) '■ , ' ι л -if What'has happened?" I cried from the-baWonylba voke hajfchoaked by'anxiety ι > нлл ¡j»
по
—»' Ahí noble, lady !" answered thr messenger," my ford your uncle ..... the Count of Carlsheim too. „.. an am¬ buscade among the mountains.... both taken prisoners.....hdp ! hdp for heaven's sake !"— Our people hastened to assist the soldier, who seemed to be desperatdy wounded, and could scarcely hold him¬ lelf upright through loss of blood; the agony, which this news occasioned me, instead of overpowering me like my friend, gave foe additional strength, and I lost not a moment in hastehing to attempt the rescue of tías knights. I directed the préparations myself, and before an hour had elapsed, idi the warriors whom my uncle hud left be¬ hind to protect the. Castle, Weie com¬ pletely armed, and ready to set out. I de-
111 determined to head them myself; and being accoutred in alight sujl of armour, I hastened tp bid ferewdl to my afflicted friend (whom I had committed to the care of her women), and to comfort her with the hope of my returning crowned with success. —" What, Urania ?" exclaimed Edith wringing her hands ; " and do you too leave me ?—Heavenly mercy! what will become of me! take me with you, Urania, or stab me before you got foreboding terrors weigh down my heart I dreadful as my sufferings have been already, I fed that I have still much more to endure ! Urania, we shall neves meet again*."— I prest my trembling friend to my heart with affection, recommended her to
112 the kindness ofher attendants, and then hastened, where I was fer less invited by courage and'resolution than by urgent necessity and despair. ( We ' gave the rems 'to ounxoursers, flew over the plam, and soon reached the winding pass through the mountains, where our brave friends -tóid been subdued -by treachery and malice, t Ah 1 what a dreadful sight! .the (dace of combat floated with blood! various were the occasions presented to induce our pity to stop, in the hope of rescuing from death spme of hit yet lingering victims: btit stilli more weighty considerations compelled us to dose ouf ears against the aies of suffering huťťanity, and pursue our progress without delay. However, I failed wit to leave some of my
«ria ieopìe behinti to'tiiscliargë those offices' 1 , wmcrrwóuU 1 so much tťibre gladTý have' fuffiUéå myselr, and l charged №ehi ¡jui case aný äing· w 'importance could bè^learned^írom those'who ¿till '■ 1 a Ί Ж . l'j HI.. ılı. .sın ι survived) to lose no time m bringing I'l i.o ilsoj'i .. Ι ι 10»! q vCri r me the information. -briobdVÍK İO lif -'"I. 'ÎJ-inî İJİJJ.I It was^from them, that I learned the roid, which the forces оТтпе Abbot ol St. Gail (whose numÉer^tretledouirs) had taken with the captive Knights. It уда bojo*J9u1rø.rtaTj0iWaii}l4dI , was not yet evenfflg, when 1 reached tKe forfress, ·Αίέη ltad "been pointed γ « ¡к Liri w ,υιιβ áhvi «j-iioli,. out to me as tnc prison or my friends. we prepared för stonmng the wafe. adf wunova fo L u α -,ώ' hi vL.« rt* ι Τ possest among my followers several ХЭЗ ¿01 jKÌeSIra ¿I rJU .«ЗОЪг lIl.J(U(f ' experienced warriors, who supplied my want of intelligence in affaiis"bf tnis b KbOttb 'Ji .jUtD'bjv oil,; j' _,-. nature, and Who seemed to derive ' ei >-У JBÎÎ double
ν* double strength, from witnessing my resolution^ the resolution pf a^dùtr^açted jvoman! It was not long, .before we saw a. white flag waved by the besrigedş and soon after (having received our solemn promise for the security of his invaluable person) we beheld on the battlements the robber of my beloved fnencjVthe oppressor of the unprotected Innocent, in short the execrable Abbot ofStGaU. ' ' , I ,1 -ι 1 > 1 ' , I had taken off my helmet to copi my burning chçeks;, and my ringlets still adorned with flowers, which in my haste I had forgotten to remove, stream¬ ed freely, ín the wind of evening: the Abbot .therefore easily 'guest Λ my røt aw} name. , r —" You are welcome, fair damsel of nsi"
и*.
Sargans!" said the monk with а дмДс*, ous simla ; " die friend», of whom уоц are in pursuit, are no longer inmates of these «valk: Uien forbear to persecute the innocenti lay aside that heavy armour, which к» Щ befit* your «ex, and enter to partake with ns, poor monk«, of a friendly though frugal tnte-rtaininent!"-T- m I was auieady preparing to returii the insulter щек ap answer, as his insolent speech de m a n de d ; .but erti l iad tim« to speake-" treachery! trsşsheıy í"— was shrieked in my ears by, an hundred voices. I looked rounds and saw the glittering of hostile swords. -My people -.wert beaten .back, and the ground was strewed with their corses—rthe soldiers of the рег<(сЦодаАЬЬр| bad jsjoleitpppn « us
116 Us through secret passage; had taken «frfj^ followeb Ъу SiÀprise, luid werd IrèwhYg for theniSelvei' a 'way'ltö me vlÏth théh· ftulchiohs ' Terror'tfeprived iris/ bï totf senses' wna'-Wöuld'have tìecòriife áf mê in thiídréadforiňoitient óf cbnWsidÌJ ànd tear ľ тЫ nót, Ш kďh/m^^WkaeJ'bhbi İM foUowed me to bttlTvriaf J Üldauil<éa cotøgeHeei ШШ №$Wh «Й W Í r fÉ; 8 iÍé''cavi^iťme'Tft »neumni-» T№ m'ck iby 1 Héimk WáWťtíasý for«« tõ beíbícnghikéd-bV^ ţialraîîfPfiinflt »ίώ &&Ш 'Ste- «Шей 1 te'xáíqiié-pf aite ßf dèAbta'sdtar.'who'-H,^ рЕйсЗ é 'be 'strilett aWü 1 to in?Wnd biicfeal^a^my fafee wÉí^iť, ihti then wtíjpiiéd iitln «S\ffläíí áiŕ which the АЬШ'а' coat: öf arftó^wáiP èmnlfeòiíed J ŕJ and
•117
»ad WitJffiiivpur of tlıis,,disgwisefjşhe guccf&tk-d taucxfricfttjngimetifrpmthe .tlwopgv andin conducting .m« in »pfe«y towards the side;froBb which the .fipmbat helmed at,tjia.t time ţp be wtirwŕ · ' J recj^e^, mysdf, andiiw^hiffitened ţo ¡segt qursçlv« рд horseback,, Ger- «^iiS9»yini»d mp£that my,pţesei>«e w* 8 "gW i4J"W «WvaUinguaţd that my ìmm «fcwprişpiieţ would; be WHYPAd- able, if J suffered tho; least delay. lit truth, my nerves, hud been too much shaken by this fast dreadful piece of treachery to admit of myigdopfing any othpr resource tijaB,#ighr, the WPmnn's csnstjţnbrgfuge. , „ , The darkness of, the night enabled us ţp,4scape;.and,we arijive4 jn fl safpjty at Л^, Castle, which; (whilp ijnaçquafojed , with
IIB with my own want of streiigth and ability, and the power and perfidy bf the foe with whqrn I had to deal) I had left with Such sanguine hopes of victory. We were -obliged to traverse the narrow pas» through the mountains, where the fetal ambuscade had been stationed in themcnrriing: as I hastened f lirPugh it, methoughť thé groans of dying; meri sounded In'iWf «»f», mă my hair stood erect, add my' blood ran coki, as I listened Woman's weakness re-assumed it's rights; and ¿he«, who so latdy had dared' to trust! herself among hostile faukhtons; riow ttembkd at a sound, at a shadow, which only existed in her over-heated imagination. 1 К reached the Castle more dead than àliveì We found the Castigates closed. We
119
Wé called in 'νϋπ for adfnlttaiičé ; np ingnitì J wk ìtteifdcd ta\ txtbf 'thing' witliin temed' to be sÜênt as the grave: no gUttiToeŕíhg of light was visible in the hìgh-àf chéd casam'ent3, and Wé wete compelled fo paie thé night in i smalt rubied' chapel' at no great distance from the Castle. ' ¿Zmvâicerf, 1 'that notting but the fear ¿rte&g^surpriåed" f>y tKe'etìemy coulá have'induced the Častíe's inhabitanžs to obserte sucb' obstinate discretion, we waited for morning wilh the utmost impatience ariďanxieťy. Perhaps the enemy might pursue the fugitives hither, and make himself master oi the Castle, before our vassals could be summoned f ρ its defence·^ perhaps, it might already '' Jell e I > ' I f. have
bad left ţhe ^ι^,ρ^Ι^^ηβ^^,, α ,?^ ^ÇomWmter 1 israil Wftfel^^iiP.^^lb^^ejşceD^p^ and a few domestics. , 1 ν - m i At break ( of dw we ?j»in approached the extreme darkness of Uie night had before prevented our t discoyering) that the draw-bridge had not been raised I I I a ' 'II II 411 TilJi«.r/ We crost ¡ţ, and on approaching the n φ ľ ι 'ľ T т/ш Mı jfiwqrr« gates had the satisfaction to see them "«огЛпТсчл! /j nl iimuq 7«! ui ¡turn, °№i Ψι f« .■Wffiffi.íí ÄR ft" neschal. Wq were received by ihe weak,old man with, every appearance !» ııtı !(! r (Hi ,,'iiilu, 'ДА Ji, t of alarm : the nrst questions which were
121 were asked on both sides related to our return unaccompanied, and to the ghastly appearance of the old man ; but neither of us could restrain impatience suflidently to give an answer. I hastened into the court yard, anxious to embrace my friend, and consult with her, what pre¬ cautions sliould be taken for our future safety , but the first thing, which met my eyes on entermg, was an heap of bleeding coi ses ! I btaited back in horror, and wished to «isk, what dreadful events had taken place in my absence; but fear and agony choaked my words. Besides, I was soon summoned to the assistance of Gertrude, at whose feet the Seneschal (who probably had exhausted his little remaining strength in opening the gates) had now fallenseitselcss. vol. i. o Yet
122
, Yet while so many scenes of terror are reserved for my pen, why do I dwell with such minuteness on the first? I ' will not describe, how the whole shock¬ ing mystery gradually unfolded itself; I will rather state at once and briefly the total sum ofmy misfortune. The only object which after the loss of Ethelbert and my uncle was still dear to me, my friend, my Edith, she too had been torn from me during my unfor¬ tunate expedition. Scarcely had I quitt- ed her, when a troop of unknown enemies had fordbly gained entrance; had either slain or mortally wounded the few male inhabitants of the Castle ; had confined the women in the-upper apartments; and when they retired after their bloody work, had conveyed away with them the Countess of Mayenfield % and
123 I nid her weeping children! The robbers dosed the doois after them and fled, leaving the Castle in that fearful solitude, which had occasioned me so much anxiety and surprise. The Warder and the Seneschal were the only men, whose wounds, had not already terminated thair existence, but feinting through loss of blood they heard not the signals, which I made to obtain admittance. It was morning, before they were sufficiently lecovered to examine into the circum¬ stances of the former day ; and while the first had dragged his feeble steps towards the Countess's apartment, the other had sought tlie Castle-portal, with ' ;he intention of obtaining assistance тот the neighbouring villagers. The Countess's women, with their с 2 hands
124 hands still f «ttered, now threw them¬ selves at my feet, and enquired, what was become of their beloved mistress, whom I had imprudently left behind under such inadequate protectìon. Grief for hér- loss overpowered our apprehen¬ sions of further danger ¡ and had our foe thought proper to make use- of the present opportunity, he would have found us an easy prey. About mid-day, some peasants in the neighbourhood arrived, and brought with them the young Minna of Mayen¬ field, whom diey had found weeping and bewildered among the mountains. —" Oh! dear,dear lady '" she ex¬ claimed, while she threw herself into my arms " my mother ! oh! what have the villains done with my mother !"— I
125 I could only answer with my tears. Thé child too was in such dreadful agita¬ tion, that it was long before I could obtain from her an explanation of the manner, in which the Countess had been conveyed away: as for herself, the ravishers became weary of her incessant tears and shrieks, and abandoned her among the mountains. How painful must the unhappy mother have felt this parting with her only daughter! nothing could have induced her to submit to it, except the threat of her persecutor to deprive her also of the baby at her bosom. The evening was fer advanced, before I could recover myself sufficiently to take some precautions for our security, and make such enquiries, as appeared g3 to
126 to me highly necessary ; the gates were carefully fastened; the draw-bridge was raised As our strength was unequal to the task of burying the dead, we were obliged to throw the corses into a ruined well, situated in a back-corner in » remote part of the Castle: and this -melancholy duty bemg performed, we employed ourselves in collecting every, • circumstance, which «might assist us tp guess at the authors pf our late misfor¬ tune. The Seneschal, before whose bed the consultation was held, produced many weighty reasons for asserting, that the Abbot of St. Gall (to whose account we were inclined to set down any vvicked- . ness) in the present instance was perfectly innocent. As to the person, at whose doar
Í27
door he was disposed to lay the blame, he obstinately refused to give the least hint; but he made no scfuple of avow¬ ing, that he was not without suspidons. The little Minna, who now never stirred a moment from my side, and to whom we Were not paying the least attention, interrupted us to say,—" that she had never heard the Abbot of St. Gal speak, and that shewas aure, that the voice of the chief robber was not Unknown to her, though she could not recollect where she had heard it. She bud even said as much, while in his power ; but the only reward of her recolkction had been a blow, which struck her senseless at his feet. Shortly after she had been forced from h* mother's arms, and left among the mountains."—— о 4 —« Alas,
128 — " Alas, my child," said I, " you were probably deceived by some fended resemblance '—But what must now be done? where is the messenger, who informed us yesterday of the fetal am¬ buscade ?—Perhaps, he may be able to give us some insight into the author of this second attack."—" —« Ah 1 would to God," answered the old Seneschal," that I had either examined that messenger more circum¬ stantially, or at least had watched him closer ! yet -who Could have imputed treachery to Dietrich, or suspect a man, who seemed-to be at the point of death, of an intention to escape?" γ—" Τα escape'" I exclaimed; ^ has Dietrich fled ? when and how did this take place'"—— —" We were all busy in making pieparations
129
preparations for binding up his wounds, of whose pain he complained bitterly.but which it seems none of us ever Saw. We left him alone fora few moments, and in the meanwhile he disappeared. We sought him long, but he was not to be found ; and we finished by conjecturing. that courage and fidelity hâd induced him to follow you in spite of his wounds, and to endeavour at contributing to his master's rescue ; though we doubted not from his apparently weak condition, that he must have died by the'way."— — K And why should not your соц - jecture have been well-founded? Dietrich m was ever one pf CounrVenosta's most " faithful servants?'— « The Seneschal assured me, that during thé hostile attack which followed close > a 5 on
ISO on the heek of Dietrich's disappearance·, circumstances had occurred, whidrmadc him view the fellow's escape in a very diflerent light« He was proceeding to explain himself more dearly, when the sound of a trumpet threw us.all into the most violent alarm! every one hastened to the place, where duty or indmation called them: the Warder ascended the watch-tower ; my terrified damsels fled to conceal themselves ; in the mean while, I and the little Minna descended to the lower battlements, in order to inform myself at once of fhe > extent of my danger. ' —«' Almighty powers!" J exclaimed, on casting a fearful look on the plam before the fortress, which wa» ni-w •coveted vrith warriors ; " is it ppssiblc ? —my
131 *-my uncle's banner î— Count Ethel¬ bert's soldiers too!—surely this must be a dream !"— Count Venosta now advanced before the rest, in order to answer in person the usual questions, which thé Warder asked'from tl» tower ; but I had not patience enough to wait for the termi¬ nation of this ceremony. Th» Castle- gites were thrown open; the draw¬ bridge was let down; and I already was clasped in tlie arms of my beloved unde, eie I had yet convkuced myself, that his delivery was red. —" Yes 1 my dear child I" exclaimed Count Leopold, as soon as I had re¬ covered myself from the first tumult ef deligit and astonishment; " yea! I am free, and Imowest thou, ro whom we о 6 are
Г82 are both indebted for life and all tbat we possess? 'tis to this hero, whose character I have so long mistaken, and from whom my suspidons have till now with-held the only gift,which is worthy to rewaid his-merits !"— —" What!" I replied—" Count Ethdbert ? he, who was ip«tde prisoner at the same moment with yourself?"—« —" Heayen be thanked, that he esca¬ ped !" interrupted my unde. " While the Abbot's soldiers (after their success¬ ful ambuscade among the mountains) were conveying meto their lord, Count Ethelbert was' employed in collecting his remaining vassals, whom he had left behind to protect his castle : with these he hastened to my succour, and thb morning saw my deliverance effected. l Oh!
133
Oh ! my Urania, hdp me to discharge my debts to this excdlent min ' none but yourself can do it l —~Draw near, Count Ethelbert, and receive the hand -of the sole heiress Qf all those possessions, of which your ancestors formerly were the lords, the haftd of one, who boasts a still Inore predous title, the hand of that beloved-One, whom you have so long adored in secret.—Why advance you not ì stretch forth your hand, and dasp that, which Urania has not hesi¬ tated to extend towards you."— Ethelbert was still silent for amoment: at length he advanced a few steps, hb left hand placed on the hilt of his sword, his right upon his bosom. —'' Çlount Venosta," said he; " have I demanded of y ou the hand of the heiress of Sargansi" --------- —" I
18« —" I understand ; yoa allude to my intended union with tho Countess of Mayenfield.—But fear not, that I need recall my words : when It have restored your paternal possessions, I shall still have enough remaining to confer a' - neh dowry pn my wife."—r- — и í speak not of thafr I only ask, have l eirer mtreated yo» to make me the lovely Urania's husband ?"— —-" No, and I can well guessr the> reason of your silence ί your fortunts are falle»; your heart is proud; you dreaded a. rejection : but surely now there can exist no difference between us. You are my preserver ; I offer yod in gratitude my dearest treasure, and you love Urania with too much passion to reject her hancu"— —« Yes,
f35 —" Yes, Count Venöst»; yes, I lover her!—but my pride requires that all the world shpuld know, that I became your nephew through your own free¬ will; without youi having been moved fo pity by loverick intreatiés, and with¬ out my having been obliged to enter ¡nto humiliating explanations."— *—■" My friend t. my preserver ! why pain me by recollecting at such a time .... but you shall be satisfied!—New then, all the world may know, that I freely offer my neice's hand to the Count of Carlsheim, supplicate him to accept it, uid wait his answei with im¬ pitience."— —"' And ypu, bdy ?" said Ethelbert« "—Urania! pronounce my doom!"— I was ril»»t ; I bhwhed and cast down , Щ
13d my eyes. Oh ! this noble pride, which made him hesitate to accept the hand of the richest heiress in Helvetia, lest he should be suspected of having sought it through interested motives, would have gained him my heart, had it not already long been liis ! my unde was the interpreter of my looks ; 1 did not contradict him; my lover dasped me in his arms for the first time, and I heard myself called by the title, which was dearest to mc in the world. These moments were heavenly ! ålas ! how soon were they interrupted by the most bitter recollections !—my uncle turned from the scene of our htlppiness, and enquired—" where he should find the Counter of Mayenfield !"— Oh Heaven ! what did I suffer at - hearing
187
hearing that question I what did I suf¬ fer, when compelled to answer it! vainly should I attempt to describe Count Venosta's situation, when in¬ formed of the loss pf lus beauteous Edith! Men express grief and resentment in a diflerent manner from us, helpless females, My narrative pf Edith's carry¬ ing off was followed not by idle com¬ plaints, but by active exertions to re¬ cover her. The wearied soldiery again seated themselves on horseback, and were ordered to scour the country round in pursuit of the ravishers. I was myself too much interested in the business tp oppose my unde's orders ; but Gount Ethelbert, who retained more presence of mind than the "rest, en¬ quired,
TSS
quired,whither we should fitst dirt« our cours« in hopes of delivering the Count¬ ess·? —* Doubtless," answered my uncle, " the place most,ninety tfr be converted into her prison must needs be the new¬ est fortress bdonglng to the perfidious Abbot ; no one Cai» doubt, (hit this misfortune is- a work of hi* hand."— / Here t interrupted Ыт by stating, that I had heard the Seneschal Very posi¬ tively contradict this supposition; and I entreated, that before the expedition! set out, the old domestic might be exa¬ mined, as he seemed to possess more information on the subject, than he had yet imparted to me. Unfortunately, we found on enquiry, that shortly after my unde's arrival the Seneschal had expired 4 of
до
of his wounds;, and Count Venosta« (who in the violence of his despair pre¬ ferred acting upon uncertainties to re¬ maining entirely idle) immediately en¬ tered upon his search after the unfortu¬ nate Edith. At the end of several months of fruitless enquiry, we were obliged to abandon all hopes of success. It was during this period of anxiety, which seldom permitted my unde and Ethelbert to lay aside their armour, that I received the name of Countess of Carl· aheim. The ceremony was sad and so¬ lemn, prognosticating the days, which were so soon to follow it. I was now tlie wife of my lover, and enjoyed that sort of happiness, which most women enjoy who 'marry a war- rior-husband; I was the object of a wild tempestuous
ao
tempestuous passion, whos^ expressions were sometimes so fough and violent, that they might have been mistaken for those of hatred. In truth, I had fancied, that the happiness of marriage was some¬ what different ; but alas! what girl does noffency the same, and find at length that she has been deceived Ì Mo information could be obtained respecting the Countess of Mayenfield. The Abbot of St. Gall persevered in asserting his claim to her possessions ; and the deep melancholy, which took possession of my unde, betrayed but too plamly, that his love for the deir lost-one was stronger, than he had dared to ac¬ knowledge either to her, Or to himself. - —" My children," said he one day to me and Ethelbert, " Edith is lost to me, and
- 141 and with her the joys of life! It was folly in me to expect on the brink of the grave, that I should be so singularly fortunate, as to feel my eyes closed by the bani of affection. I liave suffered for that folly ; í fed that my powers of Ufe are hourly growing weaker, feel that the day of death is at hand. The few evening hours which remain, before the night of the grave doses around me, will I dedicate to solitude and repose. All that I possess is now your property, I only reserve for myself the pleasant vale of Munster, and the Castle of Upper Halbstem on the banks of the Rhine. I will hide myself in the distant shades of the first, when opprest by serious me¬ lancholy thoughts, and repair to the second, whenever more lively moments make
142 make me vľulifcr the society and com¬ fort of Ethelbert and his bdoved Urania."— I opposed tliis determination of Gount Leopold ; but my husband did not se¬ cond me. He saw, jthat this arrange¬ ment was greatly to hb advantage ; and I had already foimdon severii occasions, that he was not quite eo incapable of attention to his own interest, as I had formerly supposed. It by no means occurred to him, that Count Venosta proposed to do too much for us; on the contrary, he lost no time in giving solidity to my unde's kind declarations, and only appeared to lament, that the deed of gift had not induded his whole property. The waving shades of the vale pf Munster ud the proud castle on the
HS
the Rhine seemed to have acquired double charms in his eyes, since Leopold dedared his intention of retaining them for himself; and their value was in¬ creased beyond bounds pn Ethelbert's being given to understand, that my uncle did not intend to leave them to us eyen at his death, but destined them for $ bequest to tliat beloved woman, whom he coulfl not resojve to give μρ all hopes of recovering., Count Venosta (that honest open- hearted man, who withheld no senti¬ ment front those, whom he looked on as his children) was amusing himself one day with the youthful Minna, whom thp recollection of her mother rendered in¬ expressibly dear to him. Ethelbert reoiarked, as if by ..acdfhint, t«tøt the child
144 thild-already had acquired the sedate appearance of the station, which she was hereafter to occupy. , —·" What station ?'' asked my Uncle with sUVprize. Minna, who had been accustomed to hear her future lot pronounced by my husband -almost daily, answered with hér accustomed candour— " Whkt other shdter can a poor orphan expect to find, except a cloister Y' — ι -τ-" What ?" exclaimed Count Leo¬ pold, while he pi-eit her still doset to his bosom, " you poor í you an otphan, while Venosta Uves ? No, no, my child, I knew too well,'what I owe to the memory òf your excellent footheï * Ler who will forsake you, never shall you be fobaktm by ine*— «' Count
1«S
Count Ethelbert had never Ъет par¬ tial to the Damsel of Mayenfield; from that day he began to hate her. Minna too on her ride seemed to har¬ bour towards my husband a «ecret aver¬ sion ; whose expressions she would have been unable to restrán, had he not also inspired her with sentiments of the most unbounded terror. —« Ah ! dear Countess !" she said to me one day, when she found me weeping at having made new discoveries of his evil dispositions, discoveries which almost every day afforded ; " you know not yet, what a bad, bad man he is ! Scarcely do I dare to tell it you; but that voice which I heard among my mother' 1 } ravishers.... I am certain, quite certain, that voice was Count Ethelbert's—I had vol. j. и then
1146 ¿Ц» ; nevtoiheaidit speak· buff so gently aed soundly .·. ..·. .-.-But the first time that I heaid. him »age,«·!'recollected it that;instant,' How could Lrhäŕvéibeen deceived ì Oh I I remember too well the terrible sound! But I have been silept.till now, .for" I tremble when I but think of the cruel manner,, in which he used me, when (while, imploring him, to tdsepity on my mother) I letfidl,that I was pure of having heard his voice before."— ' ' , I was how better acquainted vvith the character of the man, whom I had once looked upon as an angel of light ; and I recollected several hints öf the old Sene¬ schal, which seemed to imply a suspicion similar to that of Minna« Yet the fact appeared to дае in a light too dreadful to admit
147 admit of my giving it implicit confi¬ dence ; and I judged it prudent to cdn- tradiet it with my lips, though in my heart I could not help dreading, that the accusation'was but too well-grounded. Alas 1 it was not long, before I was thoroughly convinced, that пту husband Was capable of many a deed, of which during the happy days of my love-sick delusion I would have asserted bis inno¬ cence with an oath, and have suffered thé weight of his guilt to have been charged upon my own conscience ! Alas!« it was not long, before I had but too much reason to confess, that there was no impossibility in his having been concerned in that perfidious act, which his innocent accuser had alledged against him. ' h 2 The
148 Tkepersohs, who had been the origi¬ nal means of bringing me acquainted with the Count of Carlsheim (an ac- quaintance which I already began to consider as a misfortune), the Abbot and Prior of Cloister-Curwald had been maintained in their rights by my good» unde ; and under his powerful protec¬ tion they lived in harmony with thdr monks from ridirne of my interference. However, no sooner had the jurisdiction of this monastery been made over by Count Venosta to my husband, than discontent and rebellion began to re¬ sume their influence over the younger , monte, who felt themsdves opprest by the restraints imposed on them by their virtuous superiors. Often did Abbot Christian, when I knelt before him in his
149
hb confessional, return my confidence by an acknowledgment of his beeret sorrows and explain his melancholy forebodings of what would be his con¬ vent's future fate, in a manner that touched me to the very heart. But I was myself too Weak to assist the vene¬ rable man ; my husband was deaf to my entreaties ; and Count Venosta was at too great a distance to admit of any .good effects being produced by my ap¬ plying to him. It was bng past midnight, that I once happened to besitting alone in my cham¬ ber, expecting roy husband's return from acarousalataneighbouringBaron's; and 1 was endeavouring to prepare my self for the painfoi scenes, whidi seldom failed to follow such entertainments« Sud- H S denly
150 denly Gertrude entered the гоопЧЧгкЬ a terrified countenance, and informed me that having seen from hér window" which overlooked the garden sbme dark-lot>$- ing figures, whose appeaiance was made still mote tďrifit by the contrast of the newly-fallen snow, she had descended to examine what they really were; "and that she had found it necessary to admit into my anti-chamber the persons, who had given her so causeless an alarm. — "Do not be terrified 1 " said she, "" they are only poor afflicted spirits, who hope for relief from your hands."— 1 was too wdl acquainted with the friendly anxiety ofmy faithful attendant to spare mc pain, and prepare' me for unpleasant news by the manner in which she related it, to be deceived by her assurance,
151 assurance, that I had nothing to fear. I waited for the appearance of these strangers wilh a beating heart. What was my surprise at recognizing the ex¬ cellent Abbot of Cloister-Curwaki, the vener -Че Matthias, and several other of the most respectable Wonks, whose evident consternation already seemed lo implore my assistance, befpreitheyýét had time to give their petitton woïâèV " —" Oh! dear good lády,fe e&claiirňÉ the Abbot, " wé ай undone !_ the dreaded storm, has inast, and we must all be the prey of death', unless you can find means of preserving us ! This morn¬ ing while officiating at the altar, we Were seized in the name of our liege-lord, the Count of Carlsheim, and imprisoned in a subterraneous dungeon. Our appeal и 4 to
152 to tlie Bishop of Coirà was treated with derision ; and we collected from some suspicious remarks of our jailor, that our doom would be finally determined, long before our appeal could be made to a superior jurisdiction. Alasi we know but too wdl, what tan be done in con¬ vents! The fore-warnings of approach- teg death presented themselves on all sides,; die noise of revelry resounding from the chamberí above us increased otr anxiety I What had we not to fear from the rag« and malignity Of these intoxicated monks .'—Fortunately, oné ofmy secret friends found means to gain admittance to our dungeon, and explain to us the real and -pressing danger Pf our situation. It seems, that the<enemies of order and of virtue are
не
лге protected by the Count of Carlsheim ; he was himself assisting at the dissolute entertainment;· and probably at this moment we should no longer have been numbered among the living, had not the friend whp brought us this intelli¬ gence, secretly assisted us to escape from the convent, and accompanied ns in our flight. Now then pur life is in your hands; save ve, dear lady, either by softening your husband through youp entreaties, or by pointing out to us «ome place pf concealment, To you дюве could we have recourse; had we sought any other refoge, we must surely have been overtaken .before we could have reached it."— -—" Save ypu by «entreaties !" I ex¬ claimed, while I hastened tp unclose a ι h ď door
Ì5*
dooV conducting to my bathâ ; * en¬ treaties to Count Ethelbert ? Instant flight İ3 yolir only chance for Safety I Follow me f Either 1 ' Follow tfie¿ and lose'not a Iftbhient '"— ' Γ hastened onwards, and conducted thè trembling monks through a long 'subterraneous passage, unknown to all In the Castle except myself and the faithful Gertrude. The outlet was iA the mountains; and here I quitted the fugitives, convinced that they would easily find their way through the intri¬ cate ¡jasses, with which the Prior Mat¬ thias was perfectly well ' acquainted, having fiequently traversed them in his botanical pursuits. . Half of thé'nïght was consumed in this employment. On my return, I 1 ' 2 found
155
found the furious Ethdbert waiting for me in my apartment, and immediately a« tremendous storm of rage burst over my devoted head. Convinced that my friends were now in safety, I attem]pted not to conceal my sliare in the transac¬ tion ; and when he loaded me with insults, I replied to him by reminding him of the promise which he had for¬ merly given me, to-protect the opprest Abbot in the preservation of hb rights, a promise which he had so shamefully broken« Truth and justice were on my side, but power wasion.that of my 1 aď versary. There was no one to hear me; and judge between Count Ethelbert.and myself; he was the strongest, the re* ward of my remonstrances was the most нв« un-
ue
unworthy treatment, aud my ЛагяЬог became my prison. The vassals, who loved me, exclaimed against such an act of violence, as soon is they understood by means of Ger¬ trude, how cruelly I was «treated; but Ethelbert's art soon succeeded in giving another colour to the transaction. He justified hit severity by accusing me-of a shameful intrigue with the banished Abbot of Cloister Curwald. His asser¬ tions were so positive, that they soon produced the desired efiect; and it was without any violent agitatipn, that th· peasants a few days after saw me con- ducted .vway under a strong guard, ns> «ne «knew whither; nothing gave me More pain in this abrupt departure than , 3 being
1Л7
being deprived of the only comfort which was still left me, the society ofmy faithful Gertrude, and of my young friend, the Damsel of Mayenfield One man alone, one" of the most disi- tinguished inhabitants of that quarter, aman who breathed the true spirit of Helvetic courage, and of love of freedom. Hentie Mcltlul alone dared openly to blame the proceedings of my tyrant. He spread his own noble sentiments around him, and communicated his feelings to his companions with a success, which might have rescued me from my bond¬ age, had not Count Ethelbert resolved to withdraw me from public attention without a moment's delay. On the other side of die mountain of ifalsbergj-near the take of Thus, stands an
158 an old Castle belonging to the family of Ravenstein.a umily which has been in« alliance with, the Counts of Carbheiitv and SargaHjjänce time immemorial. At the period of which I ato now treating, it was entirely deserted. The owner re» sided in a remote part of Italy, where he liad lived on terms of intimacy with Ethelbert; andhavinghimselfnoocčasion for this mouldering castle, he consigned the use of it to his friend the Count,of Carlsheim ; the use to which the Count applied it, was the only one for «which ifc now appeared'to be adapted, the com «finement of the innocent. Tedious «and «fearful was the« way which conducted nie to my destined abode; but the place itself,, which I looked« upen as my eternal prison, 'far > exceeded «
150 exceeded all the horrors, which had struck my imagination so forcibly while approaching it. It was an antient fop- treSsy perched high on the brow of a precipice like an eagle's nest, which now receWed' the unfortunate Urania. The peculiar form of its architecture an¬ nounced it to have been raised in the time of Charlemagne ; -and the incessant howling pf the storm, and raging of the billows seemed with every moment to threaten its downfall. I saw it from a distance seemingly suspended on the very-brink ofa steep and barren rode, which overhung the Lake, and I shud¬ dered, when my conductors pointed it Put as my future dwelling J 'Fool that I was ! I flew with rapture into'the arms of Ethelbert, where I ex¬ pected
169 pected to -find an «atthjy paradise and was deceived : with agony, keen as that «f the dying, did I enter Ravennttin f 'astle ...... and was deceived again ! •Mil will short-sighted mortal« «ever succeed in compiehending, that that which opptan, and that which it, but rarely coincider Yet, when wt have experienced these deceptions twice Of ■thrice, the experience makes Us m fptui« calm and resigned; and we acquire from it that indifference which raise« ue above the frowns and smiles of fortune, «nd enables us to repress with equal strength groundless apprehenwas and )№»viuUsg wishes. During the fiist day» of »iy confine¬ ment I was io truth most wretched. Щ -situation w«t rendered almost in¬ supportable
iet
supportable by the want of every con· venience and comfort, and by the tedi- ousness of unbroken solitude, I sighed after spciety of any kind, even though it had betn such as (to judge from Its outward appearance) would have pro¬ mised me but little entertainment. Some days had thus elapsed, when t observed through the bars of my dosdy- grated window, that a Poy apparently between three and four years old, was sometimes suffered to amuse himself hy playing in the neglected garden, which I was myself forbidden to visit. The innocent gaiety of the child made »n impression on me, which frequently, filled my eyes with tears. —«Happy unthinking creature !" I exclaimed, wringing my hands ia the bitterness
I6B
bitterness of grief, " this garden appears to* you a paradise, because you know none better. You are poor, forsaken; perhaps menaced by a thousand dangei* which every moment brings nearer, ■butyou see them not' Regret for the past {-roubles you as Uttle as anxiety for tlio^utur'e-; and. it were difficult for a •monarch with all his power to ihake you more· happy," than you are even now 4 , Oh ! that I were like you. Oh ' that at least I could daspyou in my arms, and learn from youi sweet smile the art of smiling though in prison f'— r My wish to become more intimate with the happy trifler was too ardent to remain concealed, I ent.rea.ted my jailor to gratify me with a nearer sight of him, and after a few difficulties I was ab
vek
at length permitted to rec'eiveithe little Ludolf in my gloomy charbberi ' -J* Ludolff" I exdaimed, when thè child fosïtoW me M*niuneJ-"<Iludolf ? v I repeated still more anxiously, while I •éxamiKëd life features, and fended that ï^coifld' tŕäcfe'a resemblance, which eit- 3éta'höp.eS<kii$y bbsöm so svMet that Itíetñbfeo* fo^ffä4irgedieeii u r ¿ J <WJfciť «hen-fwîjaivmylettiotîon, when the lovely boy convinced me that this was ¿ot the* first time of our meeting, by 'naming is his mother, " Edith of 'Mayenfield i" ¡ Yes! this'dear, this fcSňg-iost friend was like myself an inmate of this place of terror ! İ bťéathed the same air Witb her ; I Was allowed to hope, that evety 'Succeeding day would aflord ще« an op¬ portunity
1β4
poriunlty of beholding her : the pleasure, which I felt from these reflections, was too great to admit ofmy observing, that Count Ethdbert's confining me ia the samt place with a captive, whom he had secured in a manner so treacherous, was д proof that he designed my imprison¬ ment to be eternal. Whatever might have originally been hisirøptivts for treat¬ ing »s with such severity , : ij; was at least certain, that he would not permit either to regain her liberty, lest she ihould dis¬ cover the mystery of his inhuman con- * duct, or take measures for rescuing from his power her companion in misfor¬ tune. Considerations of this kind did npt St first suggest themselves; I félt noming but die joy pf bemg once more united to
165
to my friend, an event which I now- looked forward to with the most eager expectation. Heaven knows, it would have been no trifling, comfort to me, had I met with the most insignificant of created beings, would but that being have listened to me with compassion, and endeavoured to soothe me in the paroxisms of my despair; but to dare to hope that Edith would now be my comforter in this dreary prison, oh t who can express the countless sources of satisfaction, which that ringl» thought contained! But alas! the completion of my hopes was not so easy as I expected. The Countess of Mayenfidd was confined not less closely than myself; and our jailor was not to be prevailed «n to depart
166 depan in one single instance from tbe instructions ofhis inhuman lord. Yet methinks this man was not crud by nature. Perhaps, it grieved him to be compelled to treat us with so much harshness ; but he made it a point of conscience to adhere in themost punc¬ tual manner to the oath, Which (as he frequently assured me,« in answer to my complaints andireproaches) ihe had been compelled to give to the Count of Carlsheim. —« You see," saidhe, f that iyilere- ever it is in my power, I refuse no in¬ dulgence. I received no particular com¬ mand respecting the child's imprison¬ ment, who was delivered to my custody at the samt: time with his mother, and therefore I allow him to enjoy«all those advantages,
167
advantages, from which I am compelled to debar her and yourself. Neither was it forbidden me to furnish the Countess of Mayenfield with such sources of men¬ tal amusement, as might beguile her solitary hours. She has a variety of books, has her spinning-wheel and her embroidery frame; if shechuses it, she may lay these aside, and employ herself with her pen; this indulgence, bdy, shall also be granted to you; and me¬ thinks, it must be almost the same thing, whether what you have to say to each other is imparted in writing, otjj« person." i Here then didout jailor kindly open a door for those communications, for which we had so Jong thirsted ; we re« turned him our most ardent thanks for the
168 the h'mt, and lost no time in making nse of it. We wrote to each other daily ; and as the conscientious feelings of this trusty domestic of my tyrant would not allow him to deliver out letters himself, they were confided to the care of the little Ludolf. The lovely boy soon became attached to me ; he was «yer ready to visit tny narrow chamber ; and besides the information which Edith's letters, contained, I gleaned from him. in conversation many interesting anecdotes, which however serious their subject, frequently assumed so whim¬ sical an appearance through his infintine mode of relating them, that it was im¬ possible either for Ms mother or myself to refrain from smiling. Heavens? we smiled! little did our tyrant imagine; that
1β9
that in the gloomy walls Qf Ravenstein Castle his captives would have ever found cause for mirth ! Edith's letters contained explanations of many circumstances, which till then had appeared to nib quite unaccountable. These predous memorials of. the most sacred friendship are Still in my posses¬ sion. You,my dear cmldren,for whom I write this narrative of my sufferings, will find them after my death, as docu¬ ments serving to corroborate 'the vera¬ city ofmy statements. ' Oh! how will yoa Hush for your ancestor, when you read that: Ethelbert had never been the character, which we (poor «deceived ones!) believed him'to be, and thaf from thet very beginning his whole con¬ duct had been an artifice I ' ; VOL. I. ι Its
ίνα
Its true, .my person at first' was the object of hii desires; butmuchmoreso' were the possessions, which I was ex¬ pected to inherit. Anxiously did he seek to bring, about our union ; but circumstances, jwilh which Judith hwself 1 was unacquainted, forbade the explana' « tion pf his wishes, and compelled him to wait, till my unde should actually force Ιμπι to accept jny hand Fear, lest my' expectations of being raised to power and wealth (on, which hie own depended) should he Overturned by Count Ve¬ nosta's second marriage, induced' him privaţelyito remove the.,dreaded Edith, He hadschosen the time; for carrying her off, admiïablyi well. A| secret under¬ standing with! the Abbot of St. Gall, (whose enemy he profest to be in, public) enabled
ш
«hailed -Ыт at once t» gef rid of Count Vebosta's'vigilance, entice me out of thd fortress, and' thus kave Edith totall)' without protection. If also afforded him an opportunity to establish himself in my Unde's fevout, by rendering hiiii' SO essential a service as the restoring hirt to liberty; a service, which my too grateful unde thought could only be rewarded by the gift of my hand, with¬ out allowing Ethelbert time to solidtit. Alasi my fortitude fails me, while endeavouring 1 to unravel the whole web of artifice and villainy, which our perse¬ cutor had woven to ensnare us with no less cunning than success. He contrived to cheat the Abbot of the prisoner, whom he had first himself betrayed into his power; Count Venosta ofhis possessions, 1 2 his
172
bis ţnistress,,and his niece ; poor Edith of her, liberty,and me of the happiness and tranquUlkyj of my whole (ıfo ! j Never had Count Ethelbert felt for щ one spark of, real affection. Even tlje passion, with «which my person had inspired him, was subordinate to his desjre of becomingj master of iny large possessions. No sooner was this point accomplished, no sooner had the dajly sight of it deprived what Jittle beauty was mine pf the charm of npvelţy, than the continual presence of a yirtuous wife appeared to him a check upon his pleasures. He therefore seized with eagerness the first opportunity of deli¬ vering himself from my presence ; nor did he forget to sully my reputation by mputations so disgraceful, that I ap¬ peared
173
peared to the world unworthy of either relief or pity. Eveh my good uncle Wept, and resigwd me tö my fkte. The Countess of Mayenfield had learned the greatest part of the circum¬ stances, which she related in her letters, from the Wife Of the Castellan of Ravens stein ; this good-hearted matron (who died a few days before my arrival at the Castle) Kad a son in Gount Ethelbert's· service, by whom she was informed of most of his lord's proceedings. The con¬ versation of this compassionate woman' had beguiled many of the heavy hours of Edith's imprisonment ; nor had she ever neglected an opportunity of evading the too conscientious adherence of her husband to his oath, and of furnish¬ ing to the noble captive many allevia- i S tions
m rions, of her sorrows, all of whidi va¬ nished at her death. Oh! had I but found her still in existence on my arrival at Ravenstein, what might we not have hoped from her friendly aid ! what would have been top difficult for three women to accom- plish, of whom the one-possessed power, the second prudence, and the third reso, lution 1 Surdy it would have been easy for us to have obtained our freedom) at least, I should not have been so fong deprived of die happiness of clasping my faithful Edith to my bosom. Often in our epiitolary conversations did we lament over the great loss, which we^had sustained in being deprived of this worthy creature! yet the Countess comforted herself with the pleasure of knowing,
175
knowing, that I was near her and in a place, where she looked upon me as en¬ joying both more happiness and more safety, than would have been my lot in the arms of Count Ethelbert.—As for myself, I wept, and prayed forretter times. And better times arrived ! We had long suspected, that we were not the cnly unfortunates confined at Raven¬ stein ; and in the truth of this suspicion we now were fully confirmed, though «our curiosity was by no means fully satisfied The Castle, as 1 before stated, was built on the summit of a lofty rock, whose point appeared designed as a mark forthe assaults of all the four winds of heaven. Storms here were frequent and tremen· 1 4 dous.
17^ dous. In fhe middle of a tempestuous night, when the whirlwind was raging with its greatest violence, Suddenly a remote wing of the Castle burst into flames ! ihe wind set towards our quar¬ ter ; the sparks flew in at our grated windows; our danger increased with every moment, and every human being seemed to havé~tataUy forgotten us. No one had consideration enough to unlock our dungeons; no one showed the slight¬ est disposition tocóme to our assistance. The general attention was directed to¬ wards the eastern wing of the fortress, which was entirely in flames. Our terror is not to be described ; yet certainly mine was far inferior to that of Edith, who had not to fear for herself alone. The preservation of a life,
177 a life, which was infinitely dearer to her than her own, occupied all her thoughts ; she trembled for the life ofher son ! She was desperate ; she felt, that his destruction was inseparably united with her own, and resolved to dare every thing to preserve him. bi the wall of her dungeon was an opening, barely large enough to suffer the child to pass through; she festened her bed doaths together ; she resolved to let him down by them to the ground, and charged him j as soon as he should have reached it, to release himself and fly, or else to find some hiding place, where he might' re¬ main till the danger was past. The risque was dreadful ; nothing but des¬ pair could have induced her to adopt such a resolution. . 1 5 Edith's
17JB
Edith's endeavours to preserve her little darling were not unsuccessful. He reached the ground in safety; but scarcely had she parted with him, when the increasing heat (for by this time the balconies of the neighbouring buildings Ivere in flames) and the fohiines of smoke, which poured into her chamber, Overpowered her senses, and she sank without animation on the floor. My situation was exactly similar. At the moment when I feinted, theonly thought, which employed my mind, was the hope of an happy meeting with Edith in another better world; .anhope which (I folly believed) was accom¬ plished, when on once more unclosing my eyes, I found myself breathing pure air in a light and spacious chamber, and perceived
179 perceived by my side the friend whom I loved so tenderly, and for whose sight I had so long and so anxiously sighed in vain. —"Oh" Edith!"—«Urania! my Urania '"—we both exdaimed at once, while we sank into each others' arms ; " What has,happened? are we rescued from captivity on earth, or released from tlie fetters of mortality ? Where is it that We meet, in freedom, in cap¬ tivity, or -in tlie Ufe beyond the grave ? "-r- Too soon were our doubts removed: tod soon were we compelled to feel, that , we were rescued from death, but not restored to liberty. The still smoking ruins, which met our eyes from afar, tóid usibut too plainly, that we were still » 16 within
180
within the waus of Ravenstein ; and the unremitting vigilance, -«nth winch we were observed, made us wellaware, that we had reaped no other advantage from the transactions of the night, except die delight -of sering and em¬ bracing a fong lost friend But abs! what cruel reflections embittered Uus delight. Edith sorrowed for her son, and reproached he-self for having suf¬ fered herself to part with him in despair, when had she detained him with her in the dungeon, he would have been pre¬ served» well as his mother. I fdt scarcely less sonow for the loss of the beloved child, than Edith hendí; I would gbdiy have comforted her, but abs! where was comfort to be found? Even should he ham «scaped from the 8 flames,
İM
flames, whicb were raging witb sucb violence at the moment when he quitted. hb mother, how difficult still <fid his pre¬ servation appear ! We failed not on the day after the fire to examine the phce, whence Edith had caused him to de¬ scend The opening was sot situated very high in the tower; but dose to the place, where he mutt have iteached the ground, there yawned a txemendbus precipice¡ the depth of whidi when we vainly endeavoured to measure with out eyes, the flesh crept upon our bones, and cold drops of tenor chased each other down our foreheads. Bitter was our grief, but no on· heeded our lamentations; our guards attended to nothing but ate adventures ef the part, night, ma we collected «írom thet
182
their discourse, that the fire had been kindled by a lady confined in the eastern wing of the Castle. Her object, as they supposed, was to find some means of escaping during the confusion, which her rash action had necessarily produced; she had net only felled in hér design, but had suffered so severely by springing from a lofty window, and by the wounds which she had received from the frag¬ ments of a falling tower, that she was not expectedtoputlive the night. The Castellan too, in his endeavours to prevent the escape of this prisoner (whose confinement seemed to be a greater object of anxiety to him* even than that of Edith aqd myself) had met with a fatal acddent, and Was every moment expected to breathe his 3 last»
183
fast. We desired tp see- him before his death. With a feeble'voice he entreated our pírdon for the injustice, with which he had been compelled to treat us ; but he called Heaven to witness, that the dreadful oaths which had been exacted from htm, had deprived hún of the power of acting differently. Yet did he not thmk jt necessary to enjoin our future jailors to treat us with greater Jenity; and they, being in all probability fettered by the same oaths with himself, esteemed it their duty to retain us in » captivity no less strict than before. All we could obtain from them was, that we should not again be separated ; . and also that we should be permitted to visit that unfortunate lady,'of whose existence in the Castle we were this day informed
184
informed for -the «first time; who had made use of such violent means to ob¬ tain her. liberty ; and who (as our guards assured us) was cn the point of paying with her life, for having dared to com¬ mit so desperate an action. Curiosity, hope; the fear of finding some beloved acquaintance in thie wretched captive, or the desire of giving some alleviation to the sufferings of an, expiring partnei in affliction, which of these motives induced us to make this melancholy visit, I cannot pretend to dedde. When we received the permis¬ sion to enter her dungeon, we were assured, that we should find nothing that would diminish our own distress, and the event justified the assurance«. They conducted us to a wretched pallet,
185
pallet, on which lay a female, whose fea¬ tures were totally unknown to us, but whose appearance excited in us the deepest sentiments of pity; of that pain fiil pity, which knows itself unable to afford relief! On hearing our footstep« she raised with clifficulţy her haHkloscd eyes, and with a smile of anguish ex¬ tended her hand towards ui. We ex¬ erted ourselves to aflbrd her every little alleviation 1 of pain, which ournarrow means could furnish ; and in executing these mournful services, our tears suffi¬ ciently dechred the feelings of our hearts. — " Forgive me ľ' sud she, when after two or three hours our endeavours to relieve her had produced some little effect ; " I wished to rescue myself firom captivity.
136 captivity, and had nearly brought the «ame fate ott you, under iwhich I шп siow groaning! Cut long suffering is the mother pfdespairl"— Shortly after she seemed to be nearly dehritnie; «he icõuht ed the years Which 'ihc hadalready pastln thi» dreary dun- -geoá« andlluase during-which she «xpected to be detained in it Ibyher tyrant; then she raved «bout hefesoa, for, whoie ararratishfilad to langwaitéd Ìn>MÌn^md àie entreated Ыш to haste» to th* rescue of his unfortunate mother! Towards midnight she dedared, that sil pain had entirely left her. With an «appearance of gaiety she thanked us fot cur'attentions, and entreated te know tbtMiiata ef those, to whom she was so .·, much
187
muchindebted, The Countess revealed herself, and the captive in return be¬ stowed upon her a look of interest and compassion. —" Edith of Mayenfield i" repeated the invalid; " ohi I know your story Wdl : you too have suffered much s not so much, its true, as /have suffered, yet enqugh to know w,hat it is to incur a villain'» haţred-T-Anji your яаще, ge«. φ lady î", ţhe sp4tinue<L adáressips heţselfţoflie, *-"J am Urania of Са$Шт »4 Şargiţs," was щу answer. —« Urania of Sargans !" shrieked lhe stranger iu a dreadful voice, whde she clasped her hands violently together ¡j < " Ufrapiail Ethelbert'5 beJpyedUraniaî Qh, Comune, tìiis μow Vw still want¬ ing;
m
ing to make me colApIetely miserable*. —•—Away from' m-jr sight, abandoned woman ' away, and leave me to die ' But with my last breath I swear to be revenged ! Even from my grave will Ι ψ Shriek to Heaven for vengeancet Trem* bléj detested girl ; thou shaft not trit Ыорк ove* my cone unpunished l "-S- I Stood like one petrified near the Hed oftlie sufferer ; astonishment and terror almost deprived'me of my tenses, ahd nothing but the consciousness that she spoke in the heat of frenzy, could have preserved met from sinking on' the earth. -Ья Noble lady," Г Said as souh-asľ could recover myself, at the same time advandhg towards her, and offering to take her hand; " recollect yourself, for pity's.
тя
pit/ş^ake! ,1 nevet ţawyou tül №Ψ* and cap never have oflended you. You surely capnot have heard me aright. I am Urania, the unfortunate Urania Venosta, who rejected by a cruel hus¬ band,, and undeservedly branded with shame, have been condemned in this Castle to wear eternal fetters, which the flames of last night in vain attempted to- br,eak. J '— , , , —"Hal" said the stranger m a gentler, tone, " is lţ so.?—Are you then Ethelbert's rf/«/rrf wife ?—Unfortu. nate, let.me dasp thy hand in mine ρ we are sisters in calamity."«— „ -> Already was I advancing to take the hand which she hekl out, when Edith uttered a loud scream, and hastily drew ще back. She had observed thd cap¬ tive's
İSO
tiwul countenance changclsuddeiHy, ari* we now sawi that she* grasped a^pomlrd till then conöealed in her bosom. (Vom that mbmeüt the MMes'of thè WTCtched stränget 1 were: irrecoverably lost· Her eyes full of rage 'were constantly directs towards rtie j die foamed at the 1 mouth, she loaded me with execrwionsj aiid I was compelled 1 to retire, that she might have a chance of regaining some com-« postte. > ι«· The meaning Of this dreadful'scene was th 'ine an' absolute cnignia. ! I lamented the ¡рШ wretch's condition; though a secret vhbíťoť, whettever I recollected her' Words and' man¬ ner, took «oriiplefté- possession oť my soul.' Inthispiinfulsitiiationdidlpass thè ifl¿htV * the rhòrning had scarcely dawned,
dawned; when the Countess of Mayen¬ field rjsjoiifedtme, and informed me that the urknownlady was nb more. Edith was quite exhausted by the terrible oc¬ currences of the, past night I enquired, whether she had made no discoVeries,i which might! Unnvel these mysterious dtcumstances : but she answeced by an. assurance, that iti was impossible for her to give me any light upon the subject. In mournful silence did, we follow to the grave the cosse of our« wretched partner in captivity. ч She was (interred in'one of thebaok-courts лг our" prison ; and^wo' were 'condu ct«3daiter the« burial into «aglpomy apartment in a quarter of the Castle, which had escaped the vio¬ lence of the fUnles.' Our present dun¬ geon was in no- respect better, than our« ' ' "former
lov¬ former had been; -and thesmtllportion of tfreeddm,.! wbich «we ι hadi enjoyed during fheifewdasf daya,- ¿ow appeared to ourl stermjailors too great an indul¬ gence,·; and we were accordingly de¬ prived of it. r л t, « η 1, ι We heard the door barred on the outside; we sank into each other's arms» and wept bitterly : then we rejoiced, that at least we had been suffered to remain'itogetherj and then we wept again. We endeavoured to escape from present mberiesby recalling former hap¬ piness, and indulging future hopes ; but alas! this resource was but of little avail. Yet among all the agonizing reflections which tormented us, nothing was so painfoi to remember, as the loss of our little darling, «Ludolf! ι · I will
133
I will not pain your gentle he«*ts> my. children, by dwelliťíg bil our sufferings in this forforn «fetation, detìng which our only support *rts the sotrthhig of mutual pity. Á change at length torik place in k, Out we had little reason to expect, that it would turn out! to our advantage 1 Our guards ihformed us one day, that the Count of ØarMieitri had sent a new Castellan to superintend the government of this half ruined for¬ tress ; and they added, we shoulil soon find cause 1 to regret under our itøw overseer that treatment, which we hátf complained of as being so harsh arid! rigid. We trembled; as We Hsténcd ťo' thi» prophecy Aversion and spffc against thu new instrument of CoUftt Ethelbert's vengeance were рШМу ex- vol. ι. к prest -
184
prest in every feature of« out former jailprs, yet did they scared? darb to express their dislike pf Jum aloud : iwhat then had w to expect ? Hpwdreadfol must that man bp,'who cpuld'strike terrpr eyen, into «the Jhnty hearts of these barbarias! 1 1 1 , ,ι Wehad^otrtang been informedrbf his arrival, «when thjs dreaded Castellan« entered pur dungeon, accompanied by several of pur former* guarda. Λ trembjjsd, as we gazed on the gloomy brow of the man, to whose hands Pur ftøwas consigned. Walter Forest, for (so was our jailor called) scarcely deigned ţp honour us wiţhi a Jçpk, «while he informed us, that we must prépare oUr-, sdyjes/a ( quit ItaveflSteiit rtifflidnighjt; the Count of Carlsheim not 'thinking the
195
the Castle safe enough, since the late fire, for the confinement of prisoners of our consequence. We wished to address a feiv words to him, imploring better treatment for the future; but he turned a*iiyfrom u&ruddy, blamed the attend¬ ants for kliving suffered us to remain unfettered»! and having caused heavy shackţes tp be brought immediately, be s^iw them rivetted before he left the dungeon. · < «Tlie doors were festened after him tfi/Ste cautiously, if possible, than before. Yet in spite of his vigilance and positive commands, the former chief of our guards (who seemed to look on his being deprived of his cruel office as an insult) «contrived to gain admission to us privately, and to confirm by his warn- K2 ings
196
¡ngt the dreadful suspicions, with which ' our imaginations were but too strongly imprest already. ■—" I advisé you by every means in your power," said he, " to avoid com¬ mitting yourselves to the power of this intruder! depend opon it, thb removal to a différent place of confinement Is only a pretence to persuade you to follow him without trouble ; and I doubt not, he intends to convey you to seme Soli· tary spot, and put an end at once to your captivity and your Uves. But take my counsel, and you shall be res¬ cued from this danger : Walter is acrome panied but by few attendants, and those« badly armed; our people are treble the number ofhis, and we can easily over¬ power him, if you will but give us the 2 command.
197
command. Call to us for assistance ; we will all be on your ride ; and as we have carefully avoided asking to see our master's orders for giving you in'o . Walter's custody, we can easily make к believed that we took him for an im¬ postor, and thus shall we escape Count Ethdbert'« vengeance, if you will but engage not to betray our secret !"— . The fellow, who hitherto had seldom deigned to hold a parley with u», «aid much more to the same effect. He left ш undecided, what we ought to think of this proposal, and what mode of con¬ duct it would be most prudent for us to pursue: yet after makire deliberation, and having completé)- canvassed the business by ourselves, the consideratipn, that in a situation so desolate as ours, КЗ any
198 any change must be for the>»better, made us resolve to submit quietly to Ethelbert's lately-issued comtftafldsA- New situations might furnish new res¬ sources, perhaps evén an Opportunity for Sight í at all events our present toiidi¬ tion was βσ hapekss, that we could not wish it to continue ; and when at mid¬ night Walter Forest unbarred our« dun¬ geon door, we followed him without a murmur. · , ' ► In all probability the »enemies of our new comptroller had agreèdj that our resistance should'he theiignal for «railing upoh him. We found oikr anti-chamber filled with them ; aU were armed, and the threatening looks, which they ihrew on» our conductor, sufficiently declared their purpose,—But when they saw that
199
that we accompanied him willingly, their courage appeared to fail them Some few indeed unsheathed their swords, and made a faint show of resistance , but Walter s people were neither cow ards nor ignorant of the bse of arms, and we were soon permitted to quit the Castle unimpeded «—" Tremble l' Wé heard Walter exdiinr«, ísnwe Jctöst the threshold, « treihble^rebels, when I lAturti I You shall not have opposed our niastér s will witÉöUiTewardjaiid you shall find, that I am able «to preserve the «office, which Count Ethelbert has thought fit to in trust tò my care I '-— At the entrance ofrthe steep and nar row path, by which we descended the rock on whose brow the fortress was к 4 situated,
αοο situated, stood a doie litter, tp which we were conducted We entered it ; the car¬ riage moved on with rapidity; and now it was, that I ventured to discover to my friend my astonishment, at a circum¬ stance which had just occurred. In quitting the Castle one of Walter's peo. pie had raised the visor pf Ыв casque for я moment, aud had shewn me what seemed to be the countenance of Hemic Meithal ! «My narrative had already made Edith aequamted with the cha¬ racter of this man. In the whole cirde of the ten jurisdictions there existed not a heart more honest or more brave. He had been one of my unde's most faithful vassals; and even when that domain where he resided was-made over to the Count of Carlsheim, Henric still re¬ mained
201
mained most tenderly attached to the interests of Count Venosta and Ms un¬ happy niece. —" Henrit MeMıaî?" ехсЫтеЛ ör« Countess;-" Ohi Urania, if thiáhonest man is among Pur attendants, we are already mor« than half at liberty«—He surely knows not the prisoners whoth he is guarding, and doubtless if we cajá but find an opporturaf у of discovering to him our names and danger, he witì. omit no endeavour«) free lis from our «hains."-«- To confirm herîn these jileashig hopes I was Ы die point of informing her, that when i was forcibly removed ftéitó «he Castle of Sargans, this very J Hemic ■w» the only persen who darted Щ> assert ' k.5 '' int
302
my innocence; when Walter Eorest rode up to the side of the litter. —" Noble ladies," said he, while the moon showed us, that the gloom, which had overspread his countenance, was replaced by the smile of benevolence, and while the tone in which he addrest щ was the most gentle and respectful, '-.'Fearnqthing; yovi aţe. eafe, and here is the persqnv whom yp.u have to thank fçr youţ rescue-."— « , I wţll, not attempt to describe our feelings at hearing these words, whidi were- np .sooner, sppken, than Walter again withdrew. , The Utter was dark ; чуе could not see the person who eutejred it ; but how were оц r doubts converted mtoxaptttre,whc^Mth fe}t, hernede l , endrded
203
endrded by two little arms, and heard, herself called by the name of mother! With one voice we both pronounced the name of the dear lost child, who was now restored to us so unexpectedly. Rapture almost deprived the Countess of speech and recollection ; and I was myself too much bewildered with the joy ot having recovered the little Ludolf and my own liberty at the same üme, to be capable of aflordiiig my friend much assistance.' As soon as we could recollect ourselves, we endeavoured to call Walter to the side of the litter, in« older that he might explain these mys¬ terious transactions; but he paid no attention tous, ι This was'not a fit time for explanations and expressions of gra¬ titude. Not a moment was to be lost, ««¿j η ι K.6 andi
204 and we traversed the Valley with the rapidity of the tempest. Till we were safe on the other side of the mountains, or had crost the lake of Tliun, we were desired not to expect our curiosity to be folly gratified ; in the mean while we were obliged to content ourselves with such circumstances, as we could collect from Ludolf's unconnected account, which however left us no doubt, that we were indebted for our rescue to tlie courage and address of Waker Forest. > Providence had made use of Edith's desperate resolution of dropping her Ettle darling-f'rom the prison-window, to effect our 'deliverance. You see in this an example, my children, 'what in¬ significant trifles furnish the Omnipotent Ruler of ill things with the means »f blessing his creatures ! Our impru¬ dences,
205 dences, nay even our verţ faults «re not without their use in -the great chain of acddents ; and managed by a hand of superior power they often produce con¬ sequences totally different from those, which might naturaUy have been expect¬ ed to follow! In that night of terror Ludolf's better angel had guided him safely through a dangerous path on every side beset with steep precipices and vast tremendous chasms. Weeping and exhausted with fatigue, he was found at the foot of a rock by a peasant from the vale of Fru- tiger. On being informed that he had just made fais escape from' the burning Castle, and was unwilling to return thi¬ ther, the honest countryman conducted him to^he house of Walter Forest, one of the most distinguished inhabitants of those
206 those parts. He received the child with that hospitable kindness, which no true Helvetian ever refuses to the unfortu¬ nate. Walter was indeed a true Hel¬ vetian ; and he felt -double pleasure in giving protection to a child like Lüdolf, who to the beauty of a cherub united the most, unprotected helplessness : suţely there'is no chain more powerful to bind a noble heart. It was Jong, before his new guardian couldicomprehend the meaning of the child's broken narrative ; but the names of hiSiinpther and « -myself (both of whom Ludolf supposed tp have perished ¡ц the coqflagration) and his calling hjmselfibq Count of Mjiyonfield, ţpused W,a|l¡eí'sjiJ;tenition sufficiently to induce· him tp enqqire farther into the business ;. • л J ' ι and
207
and those enquiries M length made him master of the whole truth. The virtuous inhabitants ofthat tran¬ quil valley troubled themsdves but little about what past in the rock-founded Castles of the neighbouring lords. .They looked upon them as the abodes of vice and of injustice, loathed their possessors for .the, pne, and feared them for the other. Thdr ppwer was too weak to permit thdr preventing the commission of thpse crimes, which frequently took place,,!? these fortresses, though the report pf such deeds of horror occasion¬ ally reached.them; therefore their most earnest wisiţ, respecting these dens of robbers, wagtjtp espape,tlje ţiptice-of their owners, who might othetwisehitvekeen 1Ш.Д1 tempted
sos
tempted to №ake them «leo expérience the weight of their oppression. ' ' But Walter Forest (à män, whose sentiments and actions were in every respect far superior to those of his co- temporaries) needed onlytohe informed, jjhat two. tnftappy women stood in need ef his protection, to make him resolve on granting k. By making enquiries cautiously and discreetly ambng i&e- household of «he Count of Carlsheim, he ascertained the truth of what he had collected fiom the child's narration, «nd «leo that thceaptives of whom he spoke had been rescued from «the flames. His resolution was immediately adopted, and swift ands|tcceaafof was tihe execu¬ tion of his design. ' ' ' Henric
soâ
Henric Meithal was an old acquaint, ance and friend of Walter ; and it was td him, that the latter applied for infor¬ mation respecting the history of Edith and myself. That feithfol vassal of Count Venosta had long lamented in secret the fete of Пш former mistress, «nd anxiously wished to discover the place of her confinement. Readily therefore did he enttir ii\to Walter's plan for my deliverance; and in the mean »hue (through feai of losing time) hé dispatched his son in all haste, to give my unde information of every thing that had-taken place- Ihe measures adopted for our rescue by these two honest Hdvetians is easy to be guest from what has been aheady related. Henric >bi ought with him a small
SIO
small band of feithfol friends from the neighbourhood of Sargans, which Wal¬ ter strengthened with some Otthe bravest inhabitants of the vale of «Frutigen They were flaring enough to present themselves? ht Ravenstein, as Envoya from the Gount of'Carlsheim ; and the very rashness of *l.t desigli made it pass Without susp «.he firm and com¬ manding: ta h they assumed; overawed the') numerous soldiers .of R'aVenstein ; our friends were weU aware, that«:their, artifice could not remain long undiscovered, and there¬ fore they lost not a-moment 'in endea¬ vouring to -reap the fruits of it ; they være successful, and the captives were once more free! Edith! Ludolf! dear partners in affliction,
311
affliction, ye were restored with me to liberty l —Walter « Henne I our bene volent deliverers, what thanks could suffice to reward your services'—But the generous men expected neither rewards nor thanks What they had done appeared to them an act so simple 1 , that they rather supposed, we should complam that our rescue had been de¬ layed so long, and they thought it necessary to assure Us a thousand tunes, that .ignorance of our situation and want of power to assist us had unavoid¬ ably prevented their commg sooner to break our chains , excuses, which we (Only awake to sentiments of gratitude andjoy) thought perfectly upsuited to the, occasion These excellent rnen, whohadbravdy hazarded
ΐΐβ
hazarded their lives in/ a manner so perfectly disinterested, belonged to the inferior class of people; they were the sons of labour, and strangers to the refinements of wealth and grandeur. Tet does there really exist an inferior dass ¡among a people, who inhale with every breath of air the »puit of generosity and the love of free¬ dom? .'Ohi robb of Helvetia!, ,4ώ only, among you, that we find that muttur« ;of magnanimity of soul and - uuaffected; simplicity, which attracts to your children so large a portion of our admiration and our love at once J Prevented by distance and by the increasing infirmities of age, Count Venosta had not yet completed his pre¬ parations for attempting our rescue, . when
213
when wet threw ourselves at his feet. Arnold Meithal (Henric's son, whom his father had dispatched with the account of our situation) had assured him, that it WW unnecessary for hinvto collect his forces, ànce wet should certainly be delivered without thtir assistance; but when those we love are concerned, who éter believes; that too tìiahyprecau- tions tan be taken Ì \e news, that Edith stjll 'Ifred, and ! t hii niecé'was innocent;' Bad agiritt <i venerable' warrior'smmdso vidlt 'jat had he been mailer of it, he л ■ ί ave sum·« moned the whole world w our assist¬ ance.' The «matt estate,- 1 -which Count Leo*· pold had alöné reserved for himself out of all thè wide-extended possessions which
214
which his generositiyjihad btstt^ednin my mıgmçfolhU8b»ndi;wajjiioM. perfect upnwiiV «ГОЙ Ш fe* Ýassald wdre alţeidy in ilrnjsHiiI Atuour ' arriţal)tmede -these preparitionsiunhfeœssary foriowrirsseue; it (wa&i deternufiedlthat they should he 4 employed for our.breveiigei« ЪАл ,for Çdith and« myself, i*eoentJM»*ed/(ihftt peace njightbe«presarv«9d( we'implored. my, uncle to mfdllect the ι great superior¬ ity of strengthf and riches, Iwhichj.Qür foes ipossestifj butuhpw difficult ijit to prevail! on! i anı ariüénb, warrior to« lay aside the'Svt'ord li*g ■ accustomedi .to victory! i r 1 « ! ! It 1 n r —" Oh I Edith," he replied to our supplications,;!"; sparp metheseientiteat- i«'·, the .unmanly condnctJi 6i ilyblot tyrant is topbasetobepbrmittedtoipass ¡¡j j · unpunished.
215
Unpunished« Reflect, of ; how many happy years the monster has departed us, which we might "haire разве* toge¬ ther in peace and joy, reflect tof») that he-robbed yoöjtnyi innocent №йн»> of yout good ríanle, and by that tneaile- of the assistance óf yWr test,'your' only friend Fool that f Was/ hdw could I háve been spcredultiiie ia* fobdie^è hia cimAtiťiy ι HrjW aVtfttny! did 'tøe' long côntWv* tofkèep inel^iibíaaV-^fÍiís separation' 1 from 1 yau > ' íirid whèW at lerigth "thè· temor strài ces 4of -¡«énne * Mfekhil, and the ι ries df your faithful Gértnïde, penetrated tu Tiy sohtude, howskilftilly did Ы lull to rest my love and my anxiety by slanderous- tales, tű witfühyOUr ¿tods' (under whose eye you hiu so lohg pafea life of the purest mno cence)
216
«ene«) ought never to have given credit fr- ι ι ι Such being his feelmgs, it was impos¬ sible for ομτ entreaties to make any irtpjrtøwrøo&Ctøm Venosta. Bewas positively determined to punish the Count; of Carleheim, not only for th* crimes which he had committed, but for the error which! (through him) he had himsdf bem ι inducid to commit· Sor thb purpos« he coçdıjcted wţojthe strong Castle of Upper Halbetdn, on * the bapks of the Rhine, which was; situ¬ ated npt fer from the scene, pf action, and consequently was then more con¬ venient for our abode than the distant vale of Munster. Scarcely had we readied tha Castle, when we received a pleasure, ţqtsJly unex.
217 unexpected, but long most anxiously desired. In vrin had we endeavoured to discover, what was become of the youthful Minna of Mayenfield, whom I had been compelled to leave behind in Count Ethelbert's power. My unde assured us, that no sooner had he been informed of my departure from the Castle of Sargans, than in hopes of gaining some consolation for 'my loss,' he had requested the Count of Carlshcim to entrust her to his care. His appli¬ cation however had been unsuccessful ; and the only intelligence which he could gam respecting her was, that on the day after my forcible departure from Sargans, Gertrude had found means to quit the Castle privately, and had been accompanied in her flight by the Damsel - vol.' i. ĺ of
1218 of iMayenfield. Yet wheţi Gertrude made her appearance at Count Venosta's to prevail on him to attempt my deli¬ verance, and was questioned respecting the ^bpţe Tfjpqrt, she dented imy knqw r ' ledge of the place .of Minna's conceal·; ment. Ţhe mystery was now dissolved ; ч on the day after our arrival at the Castle on the Rhine, I had; the pleasure pf being wdcoiped by my feithfol Gertrüde ! ь —" Qh ! my dear ladies !" she ex¬ claimed, whik she threw hersdf at our feet, and prjcst an hand of each alter¬ nately tp her hps, " how much, have I felt for your misfortunes ! how much tf ouble has it cost nie to preserve for, ypu that treasure, which I am now going torestore! I dared not intrust it tp, the custody of the weak and credulous Count
819 Count Venobta , but under your tare our lovely girt can have nothing to apprehend."— Scarcely had Gertrude ceased to speak, when a blooming maiden about sixteen, whose charms perfectly answered the expectation of what was piomised by the childhood of Minna of Mayenfield, rushed into the room, and bedewed with tears of filial affection the bosom of the delighted Edith : it was her beloved, her long lost daughter. Bewildered withjoy, for ' spme time neither the mother nor mysejf could do any thing but, gazeupon and embrace the weeping Minna ; and Gertrude recounted with¬ out being attended to, why she had so obstÜKUdy j dented any knowledge of hpf concealment, and had resolved not L 2 tO
210
to intrust her to the care of my undc, who had suffered himsdf to be so grossly deluded by the slanders of the Count of Carlsheim. It was long, before we could recover ourselves enough to thank the trusty Gertrude, and listen to the Ые of Min¬ na's adventures, of which a detailed account will be found among my papers (as well as a supplement containing what afterwards happened to her) under the title of " Mmna of Homburg." Suffice it to say in brief, that I had no sooner been torn from the arms of the affliaed Minna in order to be conveyed to Ra- venstein, than Gertrude hurried her away from Sargans, and hastened to conceal her in the celebrated convent of Zurich. Their whole wealth ih gold 1 and
221 and jewels was scarcely sufficient to pay for tlieir entrance into this consecrated retreat, which (as is well known) is sddom open but to ladies of the highest rank ; and Gertrude's prudence forbade her announcing her young charge as a daughter of the House of Mayenfield. Here they remained under feigned names quiet and concealed, unknown to, and even scarcely remarked by their hostesbes f he Nuns, till Minna's expand¬ ing beauty began to excite attention. The Abbot of St. Gall, and the Bishop of Coirà were more frequent than usual in their visits to the Domina, and never suffered an opportunity to escape them of bestowing a blessing on the lovely stranger. Gertrude, who had never been observed to judge the actions of * L 3 the
222 the dignitaries of the church too favour¬ ably, suspected that her pupil was no longer safe at Zurich, «md determined to change her abode, which she had the power pf doing without difficulty. This excellent woman had been long courted by a man of no small conse¬ quence in the village of Stein ; he was in every respect deserving of a reciprocal attachment, and she had long since ac¬ knowledged her consciousness, of his merit ; but still the affection which she felt for me, with whom she had lived even from my infancy, was so great, that she could not prevail on heiself to quit me. After the loss of me and Edith, when the young Minna was left entirdy to her care, she was less disposed than ever to think of altering her situation. Aclois|cr
228 A doister seemed to her the only proper retreat for herself andheradopted daugh·: ter ; and she contented herself with only seeing her faithful lover at such few hours, as she could steal from her atten¬ tions to Minna. Then she confided to him her grief for our loss, and her anx¬ iety for the fete of her pupil. He was her only confident and now that the ^ holy walls seeined to afford no longer a secure retreat, Werner Bernsdorf be¬ came more urgent in his entreaties, that Gertrude would exchange her abode at the Convent for an husband's house. Gertrude at length consented to bo- come his wife, and accepted the protec tfon, which he offered for herself and hél lovely charge. She quitted the Convent 1 4 privately,
2-2İ privately ; and they had already past a year in liis dwelling at Stein in a manner which left them nothing to desire, ex¬ cept that which they now enjoyed, the embraces of those dear'friencb whose loss they had never ceased to lament. Nosooner had the intelligence reached her of our release and arrival at Upper Halbstem, than Gertrude hastened to restore Minna to our arms, and give us an account of the manner, in which she had preserved-this treasure. Her hus¬ band, the worthy Werner Bernsdorf, accompanied her, and brought wilh him a considerable number of his country neighbours to assist my unde against the Count of Carlsheim, whose conduct had 'made him the object of universal detestation. Here
235 Here Minna eagerly interrupted Ger¬ trude's narrative. —" Oh !" said she, " however good Werner's intentions may be, we are already provided with a much morel powerfal ally. You are not aware, dear mother, that Count Lodowick of Hom¬ burg. ......."— —" Forgive me, bdy," said Ger¬ trude smiling, " for having so long omitted the mention of that favourite name!"—then turning again to us, " you must know, my dear mistresses; that the assistance, which the Count of Homburg prepares to give you, is given soldy,because one of the persons injured by Ethelbert is the mother of Minna. Count Lodowick is my husband's de¬ clared patron ; he saw the Damsel of L·5 May-
226 Mayepfield in one of his visit? at Stein, and from that moment his heart —-" Щу« mercy on me, dear Ger¬ trude, " exdaimed the blushing Minna ; " you punish me too severely for my imprudence !"— Gertrude was silent, but we insisted on an explanation. We now heaid all the circumstances pf an attachment) which are detailed at length ih Minna's history, but which I could not relate in this place withput breaking the thread of my narrative^ which. I Shall now pursue without interruption. The arrivid of the foţces of the Count of Homburg and of Werner Bernjdort was highly acceptable to Count Venosta. A variety of circumstances had already 2 con~
227 convinced him, that by the gift of his estates to Ethelbert he had purchased л dangerous enemy, too powerful for him to subdue without assistance. Long was the contest doubtful; but the ven¬ geance of Heaven at length was made manifest, and the balance inclined to¬ wards the rightful cause. Ethelbert was now reduced to solicit an accommodation.. He enquired, What satisfaction for the injuries, which I« had suffered, would content Count Leopold; and he flattered himself, that an acknow¬ ledgement, of my innocence, and tho offer of receiving back his repudiated wife, would cancel all offences : but the demands of Count Venosta extended much farther. He required the resto«. L.6 latitai
228 ration of the whole of that property, which he had made over to Ethdbert with such imprudent generosity ; pro¬ perty, to which the latter had only a right in-quality of my husband, and to which he had forfeited his right, when he ceased to consider me as his wife; The negodation continued for some time; each side abated something in their respective demands ; large sums were offered to facilitate the condusion of the business ; but I doubt much, whe¬ ther an adjustment involving so many difficulties on both sides could ever have been brought, to an amicable termina¬ tion, had not fete collected some few bitter dregs still -îjmaining in the cup of sorrow, that cup which I could not have
£29
have completely emptied, without submit¬ ting to a re-union with my baibarous husband! Almighty Providence, if ever I have murmured against thy decisions, if even now a tear of discontent steals down my cheek, oh ! think on the weakness of human nature, and pardon mine' Still, still I suffer I—But doubtless there will one day come an hour, when time, or oblivion, the shadows of the grave, or the brightness of eternal life, will eSàce the memory Of what I h»ve en¬ dured. Till I can learn forgetfolness, I can never forbear to sorrow ! Not the most distant rumour had ever led me to believe, that there existed another Count of Carlshcim besides Ethelbert. Now all at once the assur¬ ance
230 ance reached me from all quarters, that Count Donat of Carlsheim was arrived from Italy; that after having made many enquiries respectingEthelbert'ssituation, (whom he called his father) he had esta«· blished himself in the old Fortress of Ravenstein ; and that he was there coll lecting a considerable military force, whose destination was still a profound secret. We, poor anxious females, trembled in Our solitary Castle, while we listened to this account of theproceedings of one, whose very name made us already look upon him as our enemy, Yet I could by no means understand, how he should be the son of Ethelbert, never having heard, that my husband had been mar¬ ried, till I gave him my hand, nor that he
231 he lud any natural children, whose ex¬ istence (I had no cause to flatter myself) he would have concealed out of respeat for me !—Edith sighed, when I stated to her my reasons for disbelieving, that Ethelbert had a son ; and my unde, who just at that moment happened ţo return from one of his daily skirmishes with his enemy, explained to me the cause of her sigliing- —" Alas, my child," said he, " it is not without reason, that you look with teţrpr on this newly-arrived Count of Carlsheim. It is but too probable, that he is Ethelbert's son, and is come to strengthen his father's party. Before your union with him a report had reached me, that Count Ethelbert was already the husband of another, though his
232 his passion for you induced him to con¬ ceal his marriage. This story, making me look upon him as a seducer, was the motive of my unexplained antipathy towards him, and of the displeasure with which I observed your growing attach¬ ment. I therefore took an opportunity of questioning Ыт seriously respecting thé report ; but np sooner had the first hint escaped my lips, than his pride took the alarm. —" To justify myself from such an accusation," said he haughtily,' " is be¬ neath me ; thus much I will answer, and no more. Yes; some years ago I married a noble Italian lady (alas ' now she will never claim her rights !) rich and beautiful. Before I was deprived of her, she bore to me a son, whom I left
235 left to the guardianship of his mother's relations ; they were anxious Ui retain him with them, as being all that remained of a person so justly dear to them. The partiality of his mother has made this boy already master of very large possessions; nor would his birth at all interfere with the rights of any friture children, should ever a second wife.... But why do I thus condescend to explain the circumstances of my private life to one, who looks on me as a seducer ?—· You have suspected me of artfully en¬ deavouring to ensnare your niece's affections for the basest purposes ; here then I solemnly swear in the face of Heaven that nothing shall ever tempt me to offer her my hand, or condescend to seek a connexion with a man, who has
234 hat. exprest'an opinion of me so degra¬ ding ! I love Urania, love her passion¬ ately; but never will I become her husband, unless you solicit me with your Own lips to accept her hand, and thus wipe off the injurious aspersion, which you have cast upon the character of one; whose sentiments are as elevated, and whose honour is as strict as your own."— —'"At hearing this declaration," continued my uncle, " I could not re¬ strain a smile; so impossible did it appear to me at that time, that a situation should ever occur, which could induce me to force the heiress of all my posses¬ sions on the noblest and most powerful man on earth.—But from that moment Ethelbert never missed an opportunity of
23í of working himself into my heart. The services, whichhe rendered me, increased in number so rapidly, and were of such material consequence, and his coun¬ tenance bore so plainly the melancholy impression of hopeless love, that I could not avoid wishing to gratify him with your hand. I now began to make all possible enquiries respecting Ms former marriage. Proof upon proof met me at every step, that he had acted by me with candour ; I daily received fresh assur¬ ances, that he had indeed been married to an Italian heiress ; but that his wife was dead, and his son richly provided for. The last and most essential service which ho rendered me, the deliveiing me from the chains of the Abbot of St. Gall, put the finisbir.^-hand to my reso-
236
resolution in his favour. I solicited him to become your husband ; cursed be the hour, in which I did so ! Ah ! what did it avail, that Ethelbert's wife was no more, since her death only left him at libeity to contract an union with one, who has with every hour had fresh cause to lament thé moment, in which that union was formed P'— —" And are ypu then quite Certain," interrupted hiswife (for Edith was now the Countess Venosta) !' that when Ethelbert became Urania's husband, his hand was really free?—Oh! 4 Leopold, how much have we all reason to lament, that your own guileless nature should have made you so urtwiűing to suspect, that others were deceivers ! that even when your suspidons were so justly excited
237 excited, your inclination to find them groundless should have so lightly made you abandon them, and resume your good opinion of a man, whose only talent consisted in concealing his vices with dexterity !—Alas ! alas ! even from th« grave thy voice, unfortunate Lu¬ cretia, calls Ethelbert a murderer I Soon may the curse, which you breathed against him in your last moments, fell on the tyrant's head; but far be its accomplishment from her, whom your unjust fiiry joined with him in the ma¬ lediction. Urania is guiltless of your sufferings; surely had not frenzy and despair made you deaf to all conviction, you» could not have resisted the argu¬ ments, which I advanced ïn'proof óf her unconScfeilS innocence!"·'—' ■ Struck
2S8 Struck dumb with astonishment stood my uncle and mysdf, and-gazed in silence on Edith. Her arms weie crossed upon her bosom ; her eyes were raised towards Heaven ; the tears streamed down her cheeks. She ťeplied not to the anxious enquiries, which her extraordinaiy agitation and incoherent exclamations at length compelled us to make. •—" Be patient with roe for a few moments !" said she after some time ; " the dţejţdful scene, which I witnessed at Ravenstein Castle,« stands before me exprest in such strong and lively colours, that horror almost robs me of my senses! Allow me time to recoyer^ mysdf, in pity !";— , , , ¿.^, We now remained in »nxtøus; ,g%gee,¡ j tation
230 tation of the moment, when Edith should be sufficiently herself to clear up this mystery. My unde was totally in the dark as to her meaning ; but certain obscure suspicions flitted before my, recollection, which Edith's narrative soon confirmed. That unfortunate captive, who had endeavoured to destroy by fire the gloomy prison, in which she r had groaned away so many wretched years ; she, in whom the bar? mention ofmy name had produced so violent an eipotion, that it threw her into the deli¬ rium, in which she ended her life ; she, that unhappy one, had ι daim to Ethel¬ bert's hand prior to that; of the betrayed Urania ! In her last moments she called me the cause pf her misfortunes I In her
her last moments she cursed me ...... and t was innocent ! Edith's tenderness had Induced her to conceal from me the dreadful scene which she had witnessed, an8 in which Lucretia had made known to her this important secret She was well ac¬ quainted with the weakness of my nature ; she thought, that for an heart so tender and so fond as mine, to remain ignorant of the whole extent of the misfortunes, which had been the con¬ sequence óf iby so earnestly desired marriage would be more supportable, than to know that I had been the cause (however innocent) of Lucretia's suffer¬ ings, and had been mysdf so grossly deceived by a man, whom I had Once loved
sti
loved so passionately, and whom in spite of all his crudty I could not yot bring myself tp hate. The Veil was no\y withdrawn ' I now found, tliat I had for many years been the unlawful consort of one, who only deserved my love So long, as I remained ignorant of his real chaiacter. I now found, that I who would not willingly have crushed a worm, who would gladly have banished from the earth every trace of sorrow, had for many years caused the sufferings of an unknpwn, who perhaps was good and amiable '—But no ! that was not Lucre¬ tia's character. Of this you will be -convinced, my children, on reading her story traced by the hand of Edith, and entitled " Lucretia Malaifma." You vol. i. M will
242 wift· there see, that she had obtained Lthelbert'shand by a series of'the vilest artifices ; that hei conduct afterwards had been such, as almost justified his treatment of her ; that the son (whose arrival she so eagerly expected, though in vain) lud been abandoned by her to early licentiousness, and bred Up in hatred of his father ; and he*'miserable death was exactly such an end, as was best adapted to a life' so destitute of virtue. But alas! this knowledge of hér Want of merit was still insuffident to Support me under the weight ~of her 'dying malediction. Methinks, undeserved as it was by me, her curso still- hangs over my head, and sooner Or later IShaH experience its effects.——My cMÜten, I must
248 I myst here break off for a few moments —Dreadful emotions overpower me: I am unable to proceed ! ,ι , J ! ll ' Edith possest still more information * tespetting Count Ethelbert's family. She knew, that by some means or other the news of Lucretia's sufferihgs. had at length reached her son in Italy; but sunk in voluptuousness and totally, engrossed by his libertine pursuits, he liad delayed from day to day the hasten¬ ing to succour his imprisoned mother. At length he arrived at Ravonstein, and demanded the liberty of her,i whose bones were already mouldering among the tuins of the half-burnt Castle The M 2 re-
244
reflection—" hadit tbou tme stoner, ¡he had been saved"— drove him almost fran¬ tic, and in the violence of hb despair he committed the most inhuman outrages. The whole garrison of the fortress was sacrificed to the shade of Lucretia ; the remaining towers of the Castle were converted into her funeral pile, ¡md were consumed to ashes ! He was in¬ formed, that the unfortunate Urania* (whom he, as well as'his mother accused of having caused all these misfortunes) had once been an inmate of these walls ; and he foamed With rage at not finding her still there, that he might have sacri¬ ficed her also to his hatred and revenge ! The mhabitants of the tranquil vale pf Frutiger, to whom I had formerly been indebted for my rescue, did not
24,5 escape without feeling the weight of his fury, They too. suffered for the dilatori- ness, with which he had fulfilled his duty to an unfortunate mother; a crime, which he punished in those guiltless people, but of which he could accuse no оце justly but himself. Every one fled before the raging Donat, whose cruelties were supported by^a strong apmy composed of his Italian vassals. He now was advancing towards tţie place of pur ibode by rapid matches, though, no one yet knew, agwist v/hom in particular his fury would be directed We trembled at his approach, for our feuds with Count Ethelbeft had greatly diminished our strength, and we weťe ill-prepared for encountering troops şo fresh and nu- M d merous,
ы
merous, as those which accompanied our new enemy , Neither wasTUhelbert without: his fears "'tíè iitíägí'ncd with no small probability, 'thit his son waV coming to demand the blood of his mother at his hands, and he Was him¬ self aheady engiged m a cohtcsť-with the Count Veiiostâ, whose milithry prowess supplied the dfefidency ofnufo- bers in his army. Nothing could save both uS and hjm, but an union of our forces against the common enemy ; and now it was, that I was compelled to place myself in a situation, ihan which no other could ever have entallen on me even half such míseťy ln the anxiety of his heart Ätani. Ethelbert made proposals, whieh my uncle (who had scarcely less cause for anxiety)
247 anxiety) judged it imprudent entirely to reject. A négociation 'was entered into, an alliance was conduded against Donat between Ethdbert and Count Leopold; and the wretched Urania was the victim sacrificed to their mutual fears. Almighty Heaved ! the man who had deceived my unde, imprisoned Edith, murdered Lucretia, and branded myself with shame, this man was I obliged for the second time to call by the name of husband—It was in vain, that il resisted; that I wept, and knelt at the feet of my undc. № bade me »emember, that I had for many years lived with Ethdbert as his wife, and that should Igo to my grave without a legal daim to that title, it would leave such 3 stain upon the family honour,' as m 4 all
848 all the waters of the Rhine and Danube could never wa^r away.—Nor was this reflection without its weight! in my own Ыалсс— to be handed down to postet rity as the licentious votary of pleatqaret " Urania Venobta, the couaubiAe-<if the Count of Carlsheim !'*■ wis such the de¬ scription, by which I mustlhe<k»awn in after ages? As the baleful thought glanced upon my imagination, I iccoilcd with honor, a crimson blush sufiused my cheeks, and the blood аз it rushed through my -veins, iseeriied boilbigAr- And yet to prevent this odious image from bemg realized, there existed no possible means except the cohseriting to give the most inhuman of tnen a second legal daim to torture and insult me 1 —Yet still did I resist; and btüí did
249
did the dreaded Donat advance to¬ wards us. Com) 1 Venosta 1 !, persuasions becatiţe every htiur more urgent- Entreaties, threats,, anger, kindness, were employed alternately to obtaiu my unwilling consent.—Edith felt for me, and aided not her husband; but she felt too for the dangers of hør situa¬ tion, and shuddered involuntarily at the bare mention of Donat's name. Her silent terrors affected me to the very soul : I vvas not insensible to apprehen¬ sions on my own account : Ethelbert's arms at least afforded me a refuge from disgrace : I yielded, and with, my eyes open doomed myself to a life of wilful suffering. j j ι Yes I I became again the wife of. Ethelbert ¡-—Expect pçt from me a ar¬ ti 5 cumstantial
2ίβ
cÉpstantial account ofmy first interview with a man, whose crimes had now made him 'as much the object of my aversion, as he had once been the object ofmy love. The news of his approach made méshrink with terror ! I painted to ! myself this imperioui tyrant in the most frightful colours, which imagina¬ tion could supply ; but in the .present instance, as had Heen the case On many former ones, I was deceived in my ex¬ pectations. Its true, the scene which I had to go through was a most painful one, but vety different from that 4 for ' which I had prepared mysdf. Three years, which had elapsed since I parted from Count Ethelbert, had produced a change in him, which struck me with astonishment; he was no lon- 1 ger,
251 ger, as in former times, either an object of love, or of terror: his appearance was capable of exciting, even in the bosoms of those whom he had injured, no sentiment but compassion. -It seemed,, as if' the natural consequences of liis dissolute life had made a much more wretched creature of himself, than he had been able to make of the victims'of his tyranny. Edith'and myself had lost that pale and emaciated appearance,, which we brought with us from Raven¬ stein, and werefast resuming our natural bloom ahd health ; While of, the contrary our persecutor seemed to have but just escaped from the dungeons of that gloomy Castle. Nor was it only his, body's strength which had suffered ; his excessive libertinism, the stings of con- id 6 science,
252 sdence, and his terror pf intending punishment had broken-down the for¬ titude of his mind completely« , No sooner did he enter the ropm щ which I waited for him, than Jie threw himsdf at my feet, and entreated me ш themost abject mannet fo pardori what was past. He alsa bathed Edith's feet with, his tears, and stammered out a long confession of the injuries which he had done her, and of which she was already but too well informed. This-excessive and unmauly degrada¬ tion of himself was neither what we expected, nor wished from him. My sensations were ι equally composed of contempt and pity, and I could not. de¬ ride, which of the two Was the more. powerful. The latter at length pre¬ vailed,
253 vailed, and 11 iffered myself to be draw n by Ethelbert's entreaties into making a promise, which I found in the end 11104 painful to perform ! ;_ I am not certain, what were my uncle's, feelings on this occasion: lpethought J could read in his eyes a strong expres¬ sion of piţy for the pøpr victim, who was thus sacrificed to the .common safety, and qf anger against himself for having consented to the renewal ofa connexion, whose consequences must needs prove to be the most bitter sufferings, that could have been inflicted on his unfor ľ tunate niece. Terror of his two pow¬ erful enemies hadicompellcd him to free Mmself from one of them by this sacrir fice ; but «das!. Iţe- had somi to find his regret at haying , made this, sacrifice . t, increased
254 increased by the knowledge, that it hall been made without advantage. It was only at a distance, that Count Ethelbert appeared dreadful. Our scanty troops, under the command of the martial Leopold (who in spite ofhis increasing age was. still an hero) were of much more effective consequence, than all the thousands who ' were ranged under the banners of the powerful Count of Carlsheim and Sargans; for their chief was a wretch, infirm both in body and mind, made fearful of en¬ countering the wïath of man by his consciousness of deserving the vengeance of Heaven, and who (as we had soon but too much reason to suspect) was not always ia his proper Senses. This last was -a rireünistance, which tod
155 had been carefully concealed from all our family : but I had not resumed the title of Countess of Carlsheim and Sargans more than a few days, when I made some observations respecting my hus¬ band's conduct, which opened before me the most terrific prospects for the future. I never could ascertain, whether Ethelbert's incurable disorder owed its origin to his Imagination having been struck by anyone particular circum¬ stance, for it was seldom prudent, or indeed possible to speak to him on' this subject; but why should we seek for a cause, knowing the life which he had led? Seldom does the hand of licen¬ tiousness feil at length to guide het notariés to the brink of an abyss, the very sight of which makes the brain turn
256
turn giddy, and scares away reason, never to resume her seat again I Ethelbert's profound and fearful me¬ lancholy afflicted him at periodical inter¬ vals. There were times, when he shut -himself up ft om every one, but more particularly from me, in order to indulge himself in solitary sufferings. In one of these hours of voluntary sedusion I was induced (not by curiosity, but by my earnest wish to afford him some rehef) to intrude upon his privacy. All that I gained by this well-intended interference was, (besides beholding a sight the most heart-rending that ever was presented to the eye of woman) that I drew down o n me in the present moment the w hole storm of my distracted husband's fary, and, in future was compelled to witness those
257
those sufferings, which out of a sort.of delicacy for my feelings he had hitherto been careful t&hjde from аду observa¬ tion. His secfiet, bebjg ţiow discovered, he constrained himself no longer, Till this unfortunate day I had never seen the wretdied man except in those gloomy and capricious humours,which occupied the greater «part ofhis timø.» I was now forced to witness his delirious follies, which sometimes rose to such a pitch Pf extravagance, that Edith andmysdf had good reason to tremble for oür.lives. Oftenhave webeenpursuedbythd frantic Ethelbert through every chamber of the Castle, without being able to« find a place secute from his fury, except on the hörders pf tliat ruined well, in which I bad ca used my vassals to inter the dead v bodies
258
bodies of those, who had fallen by the swords bf Edith's ravishers.· Never did Ethelbert dare to enter the Court, in which this чий was situated Tlie montent that he attempted to cross the threshold, he shrieked out that he saw bleeding spectres rising Out of thé abyss; that Lucretia was among the number; and that he could hear her threaten to drag him down with her to the grave. Tortures of a guilty conscience, who, can paint you in coburs sufficiently strong ! Who can endure you without sinking at last beneath your Weight! The phantoms, which in, his disordered •moments terrified the mind of Ethelbert, presented themselves in a thousand dif¬ ferent forms. Many of them wer« totally
259
totally unintelligible to me, as I was not fully instructed in the history of his past errors ; nor was I at all inclined to inquire further into events, whose ton- sequences sufficiently assured me, that their knowledge would afford me ПО sotil*ceS of ËönsolatiOn. Obétìt »Vehosta was at this period compelled to he often absent frort thè Castle Of Sargans. His renewed con¬ nection with Ethelbert made it incum¬ bent on 'him té become the General of those tropps, whpm their master's infirmity would otherwise have left without a leader. Such preparations therefore, as wer« necessaiy for our safety, were made by the sole Orders of my unde; and alas j every succeeding day made us feel with an added certainty, that"
260
that no precautions could be super¬ fluous. , J , Our dreaded enemy, the fierce and incensed Donat, was now daily expected tp sppear. I knew well his animosity against myself; and it is not to be won¬ dered at, that in spiţe, of the cpnsdpus- neps qf myjinnocence, I shuddered when I heard pf his approach. But my anxiety was not tq be compared with the horror, which shook Count Ethclberj.'.s frame, wheneyer fye hgijrd Τ$ηφ ί mentioned, He no longer recollected, that he was his ovvn spn ; he pnly saw in hiin Lucretia's offspring and avenger ; and often when his bewildered brain pictured him pre¬ sent, did he fly for shelter to my arms, and entreat me to save him from Donat's imaginary dagger. What
261 Whaťl endured at this period, is not to be believed ! My friend Edith had often advised meto quit my frantic hus¬ band ; and so excruciating were my sufferings, that I probably should have taken her roUnsd, «had not compassion in the first moments of my re-union with the wretched man forced from me the inconsiderate promise, " that I never would abandon him through life, but that whatever fate was allotted tp him should be shared by me;" a promise, which I hadi confirmed by too solemn an oath, and on which Ethelbert relied with too much confidence, to admit of my departing from it without his consent. Previous to Donat's approaching sc near the Castle, I had been offered many opportunities of exchanging my melan- 3 choly
862
choly situatiop for a secure retreat ¡n the amis of friendship; but I was too strictly bound by my fátaljOath· to profit by tlic kind offices of my friends. Count Lc- dowick of Hombutgv the declared ad¬ mirer of the young Damsel of Mayen- field, had been compelled to leave us for a time 1 , that he might support the claims of the family, of his mistress against the usurping Abbot of St.,Gall« Fortunately, the sudden death of this tyrant greatly facilitated the completion of his views. Iţe now returned to Sar¬ gans, for the purpose Df conducting tho young Count Ludolf to Mayenfield, and seeing him re-instated in Ms natural rights. It'was thought necessary, that Ludolf should beaccompanied Ъу his mother; but
263 but she protested, that she could not consent to leave me exposed to such. ч dangers, and insisted on my accompany¬ ing her to a place, whore I should be in security! Oh ! how gladly would my heart have embraced her offer ! Nor in truth did Count Ethdbert positively forbid my leaving him : in his calmer moments he acknowledged in a tone of« humility, thai after his treatment of me he had no right to detain me contrary to my inchnation ; he left it entirely to myself to dédde, whether I would go or , stay, and dedared, that he would not op¬ pose my abandonmg him, if after what I had sworn, I could reconcile it to my own conscience. ' > ! «You may be certain; my dear children, that havmg witnessed in my husband > „ the
2G4 the tortures of .in accusing conscience, I . had not courage to run the risque of imposing the slightest burthen upon my own. I had swprn, andwas com¬ pelled to keep my oath : I even renewed it, engaged once more never to forsake my husband, and only entreated my friend, that she would yield to her daughter's entreaties not to be separated from me at a time, when I was so mudi in want of consolation. Habit had at¬ tached me so tenderly to the charming girl, that to have parted with her would have seemed to me like the stroke of death ; and even Ethelbert felt« such reverence for the angelic < innocence which beamed in her every feature, that in his unhappy moments I had ire¬ quently found a safe retreat from his violence
265 violence in Miıüıa's arms. Minna too was resolutely determined to share my dangers: nor was it affection fqr me, which alone made her unwilling to depart from Sargans. Count Lodowick was soon to rejoin us for the purpose of defending our boundaries agaiijst the still encroaching enemy, and I extorted a confession from Mmna, that she was anxious to continue near him. We separated; I lost my Edith 1 Mipna remained with me, and with beating hearts did we look forward to futurity, whose gloom appeared to in· crease with every moment. Will not my hand fail me, when I attempt to describe the most cruel blow,which ever fell upon my heait? Edith was dear to me ; so was her daughter, the gentle vol. ι. n affectionate
266 affectionate Minna; but dearer than either, oh' dearer a thousand times, was my uncle, my second father, the venerable Count Venosta ! Count Lodowick's appearance at the Castle of Sargans made my uncle's return necessary. The young warrior was desirous of discussing in person with an hero of such experience in military affairs, what mode of proceeding would be most likely to produce advantage to the causé of those, whose interests were equally dear to both. Till this business Was settled, the Count of Homburg did not think it prudent to quit the Castle, and leave Minna and myself expose to the ente, ţirizes of the enemy, under no better protection than Ethelbert's. The venerable Leopold therefore set forward for
267
for the purpose of acquainting his ally with every thing relating to the present situation of our aflairs, and at the same time to inspire our drooping spirits by liis presence with hope and consola¬ tion. Yet once more (alas ! but once !) did I dasp my benefactor to my bosom ; I bedewed his furrowed cheeks with tears of gratitude, and imparted to htm my anxiety for a life so precious ! The next tears, which I shed on Ms account, were destined to fall on his grave. He accompanied Count Lodowick to review liis forces ; here he parted with his youthful friend, and the path which he traversedon his return tp Sargans con¬ ducted him to death. In the deepest part of the wood assassins were lurking; n 2 his
2С8 his attendants were few, and their re¬ sistance was soon overpowered. Count Venosta fell by the hands of villains, as many a brave man had fallen before him; and "the dreadful news was brought to the Castle of Sargans by two or three of his followers, the swiftness of whose steeds had enabled them to escape from the massacre. What name shall I give to my feelings, at receiving this most crud blow of fate í ShaHiI say, that I sorrowed? that my senses fprsook me ? that despair took possession of both my head and heart ?— No ' no! all this, would but Ш describe what I suffered. The excess of agony can never be justly exprest ; grief like mine çan only be pictured in a veil. I felt only how dear he was to me, how
269
huw much I had lost ¡n him. These re¬ collections made me incapable of all others; and I reflected not, that his death was the certain pledge to me ot approaching danger, and future suffer¬ ings. Count Donat was no longer more than two leagues distant from the Castle. « No one doubted, that the hand which murdered my undc, was armed by Donat : how indeed could he soonep- gain possession of his destined victims, than by depriving them of their most able protector ž —It is true, Count Lo. dowick of Homburg. ... but his youth, his inexperience, even his consternation and sorrow for the loss of his heroic- guide in the paths of glory, all tended to prevent his being to us óf as much assist. ance, as he would gladly have been, and n 3 as
270 , as we too fondly expected that he would be. I will pass over in silence the days of anxiety, which followed my unde's death, nor will torture your tender hearts, my children, by relating how cruelly I suffered from terror while looking forward to events,which (dread¬ ful as my imagination painted them) you will find, were far exceeded by the reality ! Count Lodowick fought bravely, but unsuccessfully. His troops were cut to pieces ; their chief was compelled how¬ ever reluctantly to find safety in flight.' The most faithful of our vassals under the command of Henric Meithal still defended for a while the approach««» to the Castle of Sargans ; but they too at length
271
length were compelled to give way— And now there was nothing to prevent the dreadful victor from seizing the unfortunates, who trembled at his ap¬ proach. Among the many unpleasant circum¬ stances, which had followed my re-Union with the wretched Ethelbert, it was not the kast of my griefs, that t was com¬ pelled almost constantly to endure the . ¡presence of a man, whom I had but too just grounds for abhorring,—-This person, whom I half despised tnd half dreaded, was at that time Abbot of Cloister-Curwald, and by name Guide¬ rius. Had there been no other reason for my ¿¿liking him, it would have been suffident, that it was he, whom the rebellious monks of that monastery had n 4 elected
•m
elected their Superior after the éífpuljiôri Of my friends Christian and Matthias'; arid that he had taken a' conspicuous part ajjainst« hib predecessor, whose dig« nity he coveted, and whose blameless life made Ms own appear thb more«dis¬ gusting. Never did' I see him approach¬ ing the Castle, in all the state and splen¬ dour of a petty prince, wtthóut'conipaíi· irig his ostentation with the dignified simplicity of î my 'venerable friend; of. whbse--fete no intelligence had J ever reached mep after I hid ι procured his escape' by the private passage conducting to the mountains. > But the repugnance towards him, which these reflections inspired, were not my only reasons for disliking the sodety Of Guiderius. He had formerly been
278
been Ethelbert's companion in his prtü fligate enjoyments; he was now his confessor and the only confidant of his secret sins, and in this quality he assumed a much greater share of authority in tlie Castle, than was left to its weak master and his powerless wife. At first I occasionally forced myself to throw aside that timidity, which I had acquired from so many years of suffering, and eh- deavxmred to dispossess the hypocrite of iry husband's favour and of such immo¬ derate influence : but the attempt was always attended with so httle success, that I was compelled to abandon it, and submjit patiently to hear «the yoke, which the omnipotent Abbot imposed on allthe Castle's inmates. Guiderius was young; he might h 5 have
m have been called handsome, had not every feature betrayed the 'traces of riot «nd licentiousness." When I complained ofhis usurped authority, he frequently assured me, that 1 was not hit captive as I stated, but much rather was he mine : but these declarations, which made him still more hateful to me, were received and answered with such contempt and bitterness, that he at length desisted from making them. Instead of these insulting liberties, he seemed to adopt a particularly delicate and humble manner in all dungs, in which /was concerned, and about which I appeared interested. So that as I now began to fee) easy ïespecdng his professions of toe warm an attachment, and in this moment pf most urgent necessity, when our terrible a "foe
275
foe was at our gates, and as every one Bad recourse to me for that advice, which I; poor trembling woman, would so willingly have asked of others; in such a situation, helpless andbewildered as I was, I did nor think it wise to reject without an hearing the proposition, which the Abbot or Curwald requested leave to lay before me, and whose adop¬ tion (he said) would be greatly for my advantage. It proved tp be of a nature so innocent, that ill as I thought of the person who proposed it, 1 could find np reasonable grounds for its rejection. —" There arc few hearts," said! Guiderius, " so hardened as to resist the tears which flow from the eyes of wo¬ men, Or the voice of God when it speaks from the lips of his tervan*», I am Οίο¬ ν, tt roughly
276
roughly persuaded, that Count Donat's fury would be this moment disarmed, tould he Witness the streams of anguish, which fear of his vengeante forces into eyes so bright ; nor did he Once see you kneeling at his feet, could he resist raising you, to fell himself at yours. But you are urtconsdous of the power whicb Heaven confided to you, when he formed you so lovdy ; or knowing it, you will not condescend to make it of use. Well then ' Let us have· recourse to some other means of softeningCount Donat. Permit me to assemble the whole bro¬ therhood of my convent in the Castle- chapel: these holy monks shall form around you with their prayers a waH more solid thah one of brass ; as sopa as your dreaded foe approaches; I wţH <■ place
277
I lace myself at their head, go forthwith them to meet him, command him in the name of our patron-saint to hy aside hb blood-thirsty designs, and you will be astonished to witness the effects of our interference."— 1 consented to his proposal. Guide¬ rius gave his orders, and it was not long before the holy monks (np one but their Abbot could have had the assurance to call them holy) set forth on thejf match with all possible solemnity, and with every circumstance of pomp, which might make them appear pf the more consequence in tie eyes of him, tpwhom their embassy was addreşt. They laid nqislight stress upon the merit ot thii act ,of heroism, as they scrupled neţ ţp tall their interference ; and one ofjthe , , most
278
most teamed brethren went so far, as to« compare their conduct with that of the Roman Deeii, who for the general good devoted themselves to the infernal gods ; a comparison, which would have extor¬ ted a smile from Minna and myself, had any tiling at that moment of danger been, capable of making us smile. We waked for the return of these¬ modern Deeii with inexpressible anxiety. Vet unhappy as we were, and much as we required all our strength of mind and body to support ourselves, we were compelled to exhaust our powers in the difficult task of preventing Ethelbert from sinking under hie apprehensions of his foe's approach, which he dreaded, as if it had been that of an avenging Deity. Durmg the consultation, which took place
279 place on the proposition of Guiderius, we had been necessitated to leave the wretched sufferer to himself. After the departure of the monks, we found him fo our great astonishment busied in re¬ moving the stone, which covered the mouth of that well, which I have al¬ ready mentioned as being so terrible to him in his hours of distraction. A variety of circumstances, as well as some broken sentences, which at first escaped from him, left us no doubt, with what object he had sought that particular spot, and what would have been the event, had we not arrived in time to rescue him from his own fury. In the situation in which he then was, it was unsafe for us to suffer him «ut «f our sight for a moment. We employed
280 employed all our powers of persuasion to soothe his agitated mind; Minna, whose kind and gentle manner had great influence over him, at length sue eeeded in kindling a faint spark of hope in'his anxious bosom; and he seemed to deriv-e some comfort from her assur¬ ances, that (even should Count Donat prove the furious tyrant, which report described him to be) still it was impossible for him to have so totally laid aside all vestiges· of humanity, as to look on his father as on a foe, and punish him« for offences, 1 Which it wae no W be¬ yond his power to remedy. > — K You'are right; sweet angel !" said ithelbert with a childish vacant smile, which generally 'took possession of his countenance, when* he felt himself ex¬ hausted«
281
hausted by any violent breaking Put of his delirium ; " you are quite right! Donat should npt revenge his mother! death on me, I never hated Lucretia; no, no ; she was my first love. Its true, I was unfaithful to her, but though Urania was «more beautiful and rich, tliat could ,onlyihave injured Lucretia for a while. Had but death relieved me from my second wife, nothmg need have prevented my restoring my first to liberty, and permitting her to resume her legal rights! then all would have been well; then Lucretia and Donat would have been appeased : fool that I was! Oh! that I had nat suffered Ura¬ nia to live !"— - « The piouo Minna shrunk back in hor¬ ror at this proof of aggravated wicked. ness,.
282 ness, which she had undesignedly drawn from an heart, whose sentiments' Q had to vainly flattered myself) had been chastened by adversity. Minna dropt the miscreant's hand in disgust, while she cast upon me a look expressive of the deepest sorrow and compassion ; I could not restrain my feeling«, and burst into a flood of tears« —" Nay, weep not !" said the wretch¬ ed man, whose senses had quite forsaken him ; " trust me with a dagger for a few minutes, and neither you nor I shall have reason any longer to tremble at the thoughts of Donat's vengeance I"— This conversation, which became more painful with every minute that it lasted, ahd which was only calculated to make two unpro^cted women appre¬ hend
283 hend a nearer danger than Count Donat's sword, was mterrupted by the return of two of the monks, who had accompa¬ nied Guiderius. They accosted us with countenances expressing jthe greatest consternation, and gave us to under¬ stand, that the eloquence of their holy brethren had by no means produced the desired effect. Count Donat, an avowed enemy of the church and her servants, had ordered them all to be made pri¬ soners, and flight alone had enabled these two to hasten back to the Castle, and apply to us for assistance. —" For assistance? assistance from us ?" Minna and myself excbimed at the same moment. —" Yes, noble ladies, from you !" answered one of the monks, whose name
2Я4 flamewai Hilderic ; " a sign from om discreet Abbot gave us'to understand, what 1 steps he wished to betaken. He ds certain,« that the intercession òf tlıc Damsel of Mayenfield, one tear falling fromi her dove-like eyes, one word spoken in her touching voice, would be suffident tojireserve us aU ! Oh ! dear lady».be not deaf to our entreaties ! A mule stands ready at the Castle-gate to bear you to 'the camp, and we will ac¬ company you thither, and protect you backm safety."— —"Oh! for the love of Heaven," exdaimed my husband eagerly, "go, Minna, go L Soften my son's heart towards his wretched father, and I will bless you-with my latest breath."— Minna shuddered, while she listened to
285 to Hilderic's proposal and Ethelbert's entreaties: nor did I hear this singular request without making many objec¬ tions. Yet Hilderic's powers of persua¬ sion, and the humble supplications of liis companion, the unsuspicious Mark, began to make us relax in our opposition, when the Abbot himself made his ap¬ pearance, and decided our conduct at once. —" If it is your intention to preserve us," said he, addressing himself to Min¬ na, " hasten to the camp, ere it is yet too late ! Under out safe-guard you cannot have any danger to apprehend, andin the few minutes, which I passed with him, I took care to make your situ¬ ation so well known to Count Donat, that you need not fear, lest the powen of
ssi;
of your charms should produce an effect on his heart prejudicial to the rights of your destined husband."— These assurances Guiderius failed not to strengthen with a variety of others ; Hilderic also exerted all his eloquence in support of his superior ; and their joint efforts were so successful, that Minna was obliged to give a promise to follow them to the camp. What Une of conduct was it now most proper for me to adopt ? My ideas were too confused, my apprehensions too painful, to admit of my observing a thou¬ sand contradictions in the Abbot's state¬ ment, a thousand trifling circumstances indicating some concealed design, which could not have failed to strike any in¬ different person. Besides, as Minna had
SS7 had now promised to accompany the monks, it seemed impossible that I should suffer her to set out without the sanction of a female's presence, and ex- роье her beauty and innocence to the perils, which threatened them irr Count Donat's camp. It was equally impossi¬ ble for me to leave my poor weak hus¬ band to himself, and resign him to the dangerous caprices c'his delirium, which during our absence would most probably return. Yet my blood ran cold at the idea of remaining a'one in the power of a desperate man, who had so lately de¬ clared his intentions to destroy me; intentions, which in his frenzy he would find but little difficulty in carrying into effect. Part of our adherents had al¬ ready hastened to the camp, in hopes of avoiding
see
avoiding Cpunt Donat's vengeance by a voluntary surrender ; the rest of them had either betaken themselves to flight, or had sought various places of conceal¬ ment, till the first storm should have subsided After Minna's departure I should bejeft quite alone with the frantic Ethelbert. Л knew not what to resolve, and yet it was necessary to resolve on spmething withput delay. ν At length it was settled, that accom¬ panied by the fathers Mark and Hilderic I should set forward with Minna, and throw myself at the feet of our enemy. In the mean while the Abbot consented ţo wntch pver my husbaiid's actions, a consent,which he seemed tp givewith evi¬ dent reluctance,, though the great influ¬ ence wbch he possest over die maniac's mind
2Я9 mind pointed him out as wdl suited for the'employment. We proceeded slowly, as those are ac¬ customed to do, whose road conducts them to certain sorrow. The learned Ililderic endeavoured to inspire the trembling Minna with confidence, for which purpose he vainly exhausted every argument of consolation, which religion or philosophy could furnish. In the mean while, I was busied in trying to draw such information out of the simple Mark, as might confirm dther my hopes, or my apprehensions. This man, both in conduct and inclinations, was in truth tlie best among the brother¬ hood of Cloister-Curwald ; but his per¬ ception was so limited, that the world vol. i. о migbt
290 might have perished, without his having the least suspicion of such an event tak¬ ing place, or being able to give the least account of It after it had happened. All that he could produce to satisfy me.were repeated assurances, that he believed the step which we were taking to 'ie right and pruder t ; but as to what had past between Guiderius and Count Donat, or what reception we might reasonably expect from the latter, I found that father Mark was no less ignorant than myself. We drew near the conqueror's tent. My heart beat violently : what was I to expect from one, who had sworn to sacrifice me to the manes of his mother ! I endeavoured to muster up all my reso¬ lution ,
291 lution ; I threw back my veil, and fol¬ lowed with desperate courage, whither the Monks conducted us. Count Donat stood before me. I threw myself at his feet, and strove to comprise in one im¬ ploring look all that I wished to ask of him, but which terror prevented me from expressing in words. Donat's piercing eyes dwelt for some moments on my face in silence. He then turned to one of the Friars of Curwald who stood behind him, and asked, " if this waa the person, whose beauty he had heard him praise so highly Î" —" That is Urania Venosta," an¬ swered the Monk, " Countess of Carl¬ sheim and Sargans."—. Instantly the expression of Donat's о 2 features
292
features changed, and the look of satis¬ faction, which they had worn at first, was replaced by that of aversion. He tuined from me without smeiking, and ad¬ vanced to receive Minna, who approach¬ ing slowly raised her veil, and sank on her knees before him with that inex¬ pressible grace, which accompanied even the most trifling of her actions. —·' Mercy ! mercy !" she exclaimed, while she extended towards him her hands dasped in supplication ; " mercy for the helpless and the innocent ! Is it possible, that the victorious Donat should stain the glory of his sword, by directing it against trembling women, against an infirm father, against a people who willingly submit themselves to 1 ' his
293 his power?- -----Oh! be that far from him !"— Donat drew back a few steps, and gazed on her with a look, in which we endeavoured vainly to read the senti¬ ments of his bosom, No one could guess from it, whether he suffered the fair suppliant to remain kneeling through forgetfolness of every thing but her beauty, or from feeling the same con¬ tempt for her entreaties, with which he had treated mine. —" Rise !" said he at length in a stern voice, but whose sternness was evidently assumed ; " who are you ?"— —" «Minna of Mayenfield."— —" And your companion ?" he re¬ sumed, pointing to me. о 3 —" Urania
İİ9İ —" Urania Venosta, my adopted mother, and the wife of your father, of your father who shudders at your ap¬ proach ! Oh ! Donat, think how dread¬ ful, it is to be the cause of terror to a repentant father !—Mercy, Donat ! Oh ! mercy for us all !"— Donat raised the imploring girl with¬ out replying ; he ако motioned to me to quit my kneeling posture, and then ordered liis attendants to conduct us into another tent. Towards evenitig he visited us, and gare that answer in person, which we had vainly solicited in the morning. Now that he had laid aside his threaten¬ ing casque and blood-stained armour, he appeared to be entirdy a diflerent person.
295 person. His manner was respectful to Minna, courteous to me. He men¬ tioned his father in terms rather of grief than anger ; Liicretia's name, (which, as we had been informed, used to be constantly on his lips) was not pro¬ nounced by him ; and ia the course of conversation he once so far forgot his wrath, as to mention me by the title of " his mother."— —« Oh! rejoice with me, dear Min¬ na," I exclaimed, while I prest the Damsel of Mayenfield to my bosom; " it is now certam, that we are safe ! Heard you not, that Count Donat called me mother ? See'st thou in him that terrific conqueror, such as report de¬ scribed him? Oh! that Ethelbert were o. 4· but
296
but here to know, and love the real cha¬ racter of his so dreaded son : all would be pardoned, all forgotten !" —" That is possible," answered Do¬ nat, who could not help smiling at the unrestrained expression of my feelings ; " the only person who has anything to pardon is myself; and I cannot deny that beauty like Urania's may well ex¬ cuse an act of injustice, even though it should be monstrous as that, which was suffered by the poor Lucretia !"— We saw, that at the recollection of Lucretia a doud seemed to pass over Donat's countenance, though it soon disappeared again. We therefore lost no time in mentioning to him the only request about which we were now anxious,
297 anxious, fearful lest he should alter his good dispositions towatds us, before they had produced the effect which was so earnesdy desired. We entreated him to suffer us to return to his anxious father, and inform him, how unjustly he had doubted Ые son's filial affection. Donat hesitated, and inquired, why we were desirous of leaving him in such haste ì —Besides our wish to relieve Count ľthelbert from his apprehensions without toss of time, we alledged as an excuse the impropriety of our remaining in a camp without any other females. , —" Oh !" replied Donat, « this last reason can be none for your departure ; and if you have no better, I flatter my- o 5 self,
298
self, that Ishall not lose your company, till after I have been presented by you to-monow to my long-estranged «(ther in the Castle of Sargans. You ar« not theonly ladies in my camp; I-haveawife snd sister with me, who will be delighted fo welcome you, rød who (to confess the truth) pleaded widi me ín your behalf most urgently, «re I was yet de¬ cided, what aniwer I should make to your request."— It ¡3 impossible to express the various causes of satisfaction, which we disco¬ vered in these few words. It is no trifling comfort for bashful timid wo¬ llen io meet with persons of their own Sex in a place, where they expected to find only rude turbulent soldieis ; and 2 hers
299
here we found two benevolent brings, whose kind hearts had already induced them even without knowing in lo in¬ terest themsdves in our hehriŕ. But that which above all seemed music «to my ear, was the infontiatíon, that «ne of these unknown ladies was «Count Donat's wife. In the course of «our conversation, our conqueror's «eyes had frequently dwek on Minna's face with an expression Ъу no means «equivocai ; I was strongly inclined to attribute his unexpected lenity entirely to iqy «com¬ panion's charms. «Minna was tiie be¬ trothed of another. Donat was aty· rant. My heart fereboded from these circumstances a long succession of diffi¬ culties and dangers; all -of'which were о 6 banished'
300 banished as phantoms existing only in my imagination, as soon as I understood, that Donat was already married, and that he hesitated not to place the young crea¬ ture, whom he looked upon with so much interest, under the protection of hiswife. We were presentee to the ladies, who composed Count Donat's family. We were graciously received : yet we could not hdp remarking,'' that the behaviour of the young Countess of Carlsheim ra¬ ther exprest that condescension which is onlyused with inferiors, than the friendly openness which marked our reception by Count Donat's sister, who was made known to us by the name of Adelaide, Lady of the Beacon-Tower. Besides
301 Besides this, it must be confest that the appearand of the Countess Mellu- sina (such was the name of Donat's wife) was by no means such, as preju¬ diced us in her favour. The best that could be said of her, was that she was not ugly ; and tlie haughty manners, which she thought proper to assume, were but ill calculated to make her per¬ son appear to advantage.—Oh I how different was Meilusina from the interesting Lav / of the Beacon- Tower! 1 —·* Can this lovely woman," I said to Minna, as soon as we were left alone, " can she be Lucretia's daughter, and the sister of Count Donat ? I vainly endeavoured to find in that heavenly coun-
S02 -countenance a ringle feature, which re¬ sembled her nearest relations."— Mmna however maintained, that she could discover a strong likeness to Count Oonat ; we at length determined, that early misfortune bad extinguished the kriüíant fire of Lucretiais eyes, which (on further reflection I wis compelled to own) had descended to her daughter ţ «nd also that female delicacy prevented her superior stature and commanding make -(in both of which she was her brother's very counterpart) from inspir¬ ing that terrific awe, which at sight of Count Donat made «very beholder's heart tremble. The night, which succeeded a day, in which we «had gone «through so mucli, aijd
303 and with success so ««expected, was past in a state of no trifling anxiety. Finding ourselves obliged to accept the invitation prest opon us most «meetly by Count Donat and the ladies (to re¬ main with diem till the next mommg, when the canni would be rased) we entreat ed, that at least a messenger might be despatched to assure Ethdbert, that his -fears were without foundation. Adelaide lost no rime oa causing Mark and «Hilderic to hasten back to the Castle, and relieve the Abbot from the difficuk task of watching over Ле actions of a man, who was by no means «fit to be trusted with himself ; they were abo commissioned to requeft Guiderius to retur« without delay to «the camp, and inform
304 inform us, in what manner our absence had affected the unfortunate Count of Carlsheim. Gladly would Adelaide have accom¬ panied the Frjars, and thrown herself at the feet of her wretched father, whom she had never seen. Her brother how¬ evei did not think proper to permit lier departure ; and she now shared in our uneasiness at perceiving, that one hour after another stole away without the arrival of any intelligence from the Castle. Yet great as was my own anxiety, it was evidently far inferior to Adelaide's. Her evident agitation was so excessive, that 1 found some difficulty in ascribing it entirely to the interest, which she fdt about
SOJ about a father, whom she had~never seen, and for whom she had nothing to tear, since his fate depended on her brother. She had suddenly left the tent during supper without taking leave of us : it was already past midnight ; when, guiding her steps with a dark lanthorn, we saw her return, under the pretence of paying us those compli¬ ments of the night, which she had before omitted,' and of talking over with us undisturbed the circumstances of our mutual inquietude. But it was clear, that she had not yet mentioned all her motives for visiting us at this unusual hour. Somewhat lay concealed in her heart, which she longed to reveal ; un¬ luckily she delayed the wished dlsdo- sure,
806
mire, till the opportunity was lost. The curtam, which dosed our tent, was sud¬ denly withdrawn, and Mellusina en¬ tered. While her manner gave us to under¬ stand, that her presence was an honour which she bestowed on us extremely against her own inclination, the -entreated permission to share our nocturnal conference. Adelaide in¬ quired with her accustomed gentle¬ ness, why her dear sister should think it necessary to deprive herself of her night's repose? —" You have not the same cause »hat We have," said she, "to watch iway the melancholy hours; sleep is not banished fromywr eyes, by anxiety for
307
for the fate ofan husband and a father, iind by those foreboding fears of some misfortune having befallen Mm, which the long delay of our messenger must needs excite."—- —" Whatever may be the reason," answered the Countess coldly, "I found it impossible to sleep. The gUmmering of your lamp attracted me hither, and i was much surprised........much rejoiced, I «meant to lay,.... at finding that you, Adelaide, had arrived here before me !"— Cood heavens I how is it possible for any being possest of common feeling, to intrude into a cirde without any other object, than disturbing the plea¬ sure of lhose who are already assem¬ bled!
308 bled ! Mellusina's situation must have been as unpleasant to herself, as her presence was to us. She resisted with difficulty her inclination to slumber; and on the other hand, we suffered under the most torturing impatience to see her dehor departing, or asleep. It was more evidtnt with every moment, that matters of the utmost importance floated upon the lip. of Adelaide, and we waited with inexpressible anxiety for the moment-, when she would be at liberty to disclose them. Thus did we mutually torment each other during more than half the night ; when suddenly we were startled by a circumstance, at once the most unac¬ countable .and the most impossible for me
300 me to forget. ------ It was almost morn¬ ing. We were all silent, for we had long exhausted the few uninteresting topics, on which we could convei se with Mellusina. Adelaide had already made two or three movements, as if she would have taken leave of us, and yet could not resolve to abandon all hopes of finding an opportunity of speaking to us unob¬ served. The lights burned faintly. Mellusina's eyes at length dosed ; and to pur great delight we saw her head recline against her shoulder with a look, which c ivinced us, that sleep had at last taken complete possession of her. Adelaide drew nearer to us, and pressing her finger on her «lip with an air of caution,
caution, pointed with her other hand to the sleeping Mellusina. At that moment * · * # #
END ОГ THE FIKST VOtVMB.
РтЫ1у D. К. SHI/XT, Binmk-Slral, Ы:
