Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Feudal tyrants: or, The Counts of Carlsheim and Sargans: a romance: taken from the German
FEUD-AiL TYRANTS, «Cr fif«; Sc ι? abt Ttm Fara
COUNT DONAT'a DAUGHTERS FAST 11
Γοιιηιΐ ш the Cellof a Nua, after her Decease, in the Convent of Zurich SINCE Amabel Bloomberg traced tlte letters which will bo found with tMs, how many years have elapsed' how many changes have taken place ! How vol ш в many
2 * many persons are now insensible dnst, who are described as agitated with sudi anKiods <feart -Midl aident Qiopeá, by the pens of Amabel and the Damsels of Sargans ! Accident has also made me mistress of the letters of thpse unfortu¬ nate sisters. ,iAcddent, did I say ? Sure¬ ly, it was something more than mere chance, which brought them into thte hands of her, who is most able to supply that chasm, which otherwise would have been left in these adventuies. To undertake this task I have both leisure and information sufficient. My fete was too dosely united with that of the sisters, to permit the slightest parti- cular concerning them to be concealed from me ; and jointly with theirs will my
9> my natne be handed down to poste¬ rity. Yet is it not an idle vanity, a love of worldly fame, which makes me desire this species of immortality?—Well then, I will repress tlie wish. Long practised in self-denial, I will make even this last sacrifice to my celestial spouse, and will write, as if 1 treated of stiangers and of interests quite foreign to myself. No one shall know niy name except Heaven, to whom alone is thoroughly known, how much I have suffered 1 When I'entered the woild, the course of innpcence and beauty lay among a . thousand snares and pit-falls, which weie the more dangerous from bemg most artfully concealed. Thb is a truth в 2 which
4 which I leamt to my cost, before I sought, and found, tranquillity in a conventi Amabel was blind to those snares; though they were spread carelessly enough for her to have seen them, had not her own guileless nature thrown a veil over her eyes, and had not female obstinacy made her reject the prudent Warnings ofher best friends. The visit to Engelberg, which she had agreed upon in concert with her brother's wife, was made tbe next day ; and the. bitter, as young, imprudent, and unsuspicious as Amabel, undertook to excuse her sister-in-law's absence to the jealous Arnold, and tite sick old' man, who suffered no quarter of an hour
-Us
5 hourto pass without enquiring for his daughter. However, Juttila engaged to invent some means for satisfying him till Amabel's return, which was delayed much longer than eithei of them in¬ tended. How indeed could she return so speedily, since adventures J «ncounter«d her on the road, on which ehe tittie reckoned, and whose nature Was o'f Buffi. dent consequence to have« fearful influ- «nee ovei herself, and overall 'those-who were most dear to her ? Alas ! the cot¬ tage which she left with sucha thought¬ less heart, she was destined -to revisit nomorewitbsuch content : tfae »fate of tbe two sisters, which sbe was «b ¡eager to learn, was now lenvdoped by such в 3 impenetrable
6 impenetrable darkness, that she in vain .... But I am running away from the proper order of events, which iu truth it is natu al for one of my profession and time of life to da Be it known to you, my youthful readers, that it is not easy for an old doating Nun to transcribe even a verse out of her Psalter, without tacking to it at least a dozen ofher own childish observations. At Engelberg Amabel found the Nun to whom Wolfenrad hsd directed her to apply, and who was Ms confidante and the secret instrument for effecting the carrying away of Amalbeiga. She assured Amabel, that her friend had by no means been forced away, but that on account of the assiduities of the Loid
7 Lord of ťindeiiDeig, and the popjlar di turbances w hich increased with every day, Amalbcrgi had \ olunt-inly chosen to w íthUr-iw herself from Engelberg —" Your partiality for the govern or," said the artful hypocrite, " and your incessant pleading m behalf òf a man whom she could not love, marie the I ady unWUhng to let you know her design I was her sole confidante on thb occasion, and I think I have done wdl m enabling the'dear soul to escape from the temptations of the wicked world 1 She has taken lefuge in the Convent of Zurich, under the protection of an old Lady celled Urania, who is either her friend О some near ι dation, foi I understand, nevtr. was there joy в 4 known
в г known equal to that ojf феи* meet¬ ing."— In this account Amabel could not dis¬ cover the least vestige of deception or improbability: still she blamed the Nun greatly for concealing the real cause of Amalberga's disappearance, by which means the spirit of discontent was en¬ couraged among the people against Laudenberg, who bore the odium of having violated the^anctuary, and for- dhly carried away ap inmate of those holy walb. The Nun made hut an indifferent de¬ fence against this change, and Amabel left her by no meajjs satisfied with her conduct. However, she soon forgot what Jittle Jiad djspleased tor in the Nun's
θ Nun's conversation, and gave herself up entirely to the joy of being assured, that one of her friends at least was safe in the arms of friendship and of maternal love. — " Oh I that I could but have the same assuiance respecting my beloved Emmeiine!" thus said Amabel to her¬ self, as she hastened back to her bro¬ ther's cottage; "Oh! that as I pass homewards, chance would but throw Wolfenrad in my way, that I might learn from Mm vhat he knows about the dear-one 1 He might just toll me in half a dozea words, and the., hurry away, in order that I might not-blush too deep a crimson, when the severe Censurer of my actions looks me in the B-5 face,
10 face, and says with his magisterial air, — ' Now, Amabel! whence do you come, and with whom have you spoken?'—How ridiculous, that Ар nold should take it jnto his head, that . an old man like Wolfenrad has designs upon a young creature like me, not yet twenty! Yet ridiculous as it is, his anxiety proceeds from the warmth of Ms affection for me, and I ought to for¬ give my good Arnold for the faults of his head, when I recollect the kindness ofhis heart."— Such were the thoughts which occu¬ pied Amabel, as she hastily retraced the long way between her home and the Convent ; and as she past along, she threw many an anxious Ьок од every S aide
11 side in hopes of seeing the man, who alone co ild confirm to her the fortu¬ nate escape of her friend. Wolfenrad had frequently busmess that carried him .to Engeiberg, and it was by no means improbable, that she should encounter him on her way. ^ In fact, the tempter had long been at no great distance from the fair pilgrim, though without her seeing Mm ; since he stole along concealed bya thick haw¬ thorn plantation, which boidered more than half the road between the village and the Convent of Engelberg. It is easy for the wicked to guess what steps will be taken by Unsuspect¬ ing innocence, whose proceedings arc the natural result of existing drcum· 1 s 6 stances
lü stances and feelings, Wolfenrad knew 'how warmly Amabel's heatt was inte¬ rested about her friends ; he had given her hopes of obtaining intelligence re¬ specting them ; he had pointed out the place, where a part of tliose hopes might be realized; andhe was therefore cer¬ tain of finding her on the road to that place, before many days were elapsed· lie had accidentally missed seeing her on her way to Engelberg ; but when on her return she was descending the Con¬ vent-hill, he espied her from behind the watch-tower wluch stands at the farthest extremity of the mount, and the» hastened to sheker himself behind the hawthorn hedge, in -order tliat he might unseen watch her motions· and 1 discover
13 discover what temper she was in, before he accosted her. And thus did he for some time steal along, examining every change of her expressive countenance, and drawing but too just conclusions of the subject, which employed her thoughts. Her look, now gay, now sorrowful, and the impatient glances which she fre¬ quently threw around her, would have been sufficient to betray her, even though a ¡few broken sentences, which escaped from her in the anxiety .of ber mind, -had not left hiin without a doubt of Ms presence being perfecdy welcome. Wolfenrad's .plans for the innocent girl's ruin had been so long arranged, that tbey were seady to he carried into effect
и effect at a moment's warning; nor could he have wished for a more fa¬ vourable opportunity than the present. The fiercest passion for Amabel reigned in his bosom, and deceived bim, who was so well skilled in deceiving others. He fancied, that in her impatient looks, in the tone which she used in pronoun¬ cing his name o"casionally, there was something more than mere-friendship for Emmeiine, and that love was the motive that made her so anxious to meet him ! Immortal powers ! Love! love from a girl, pure as innocence it¬ self, for such an earthly dæmon, a dæ¬ mon both in person and in mind-! —" Yet however she may be dis¬ posed," 'twas thus he argued with him¬ self,
15 self, " too abrupt an appearance, too hasty a discovery of my % iews, might do me a prejudice, and put her too much upon her guard. When her impatience Is worked up to the highest piteli, 1 shall be the more secure of hei."— And therefore he still remained in¬ visible, and hastened onwards, keeping still a little way before her; só that when the fair pilgrim reached the end of the"plantation, and ei erged into the open plain, she descried him crossing the path at some distance, as if totally unaware of her approach. Amabel gave a cry of joy, called him by his name, and flew to join Mm. —" Is it you, my Шг damer" an·. swered Wolfenrad. " What would you ' with
16 with me P'—and he stopped, as waiting for her ír, come up to hhn. —" Ob I tell me ! tdl me ! give me some tidings of the damsel of Sar¬ gans!"— —" You have been to Engdberg, and surely must have heard more there, -than I am able to tell you."— ' "Oh! no, no, no! Ftnmelkie! speak of Emmdine !"— · —" Why, the Lady Emmeiine..,. 'Concealment being absolutely песеезагу .... But we are dose to your,jealous brother's house, and lie miy take of¬ fence at our conference—Farewell! I must find an opportunity ot communi¬ cating what I know unobserved, when i retan» from Uri."— *' From
17
" From Uri ? Heavens ! and when do you go tMther, and how fong shall you remain away î" — •—"Iset out to-morrow; as to my stay, 1 fear the disturbances there will make my return very distant."— Amabd'·) itmjatippcje to Jtnowiome- tUng decisivexespactiag her friend now grew beyond all bounds, She intreated Mm at least to put it out of doubt that Emmelinehadbcensaved fromtircflames, and hesitated not to follow Mm into a bye-path, which conducted to theCastle. As they passed along, the deceiver be¬ gan a long and wonderful narrativi* of Emmeline's adventures, which occupied Ms auditor's whole attention ; but as it contamed not one syllable-of truth, it would
18 would be superfluous to relate it here. —" But one question triare *" said Amabel afiength, and stopped. " See! night is approaching ; we are already at the foot of the Castle-hill, and I have still a weary way to traverse, ere I can regain my brother's cottage, where, I fear, I must be already missed. You assure me that Emmeiine is safe, and is concealed in the neighbourhood : Oh ! tell me then inhere she is concealed, for my bosom pants to embrace her '"— —" That were easily done. You see the Castle is close at hand : thither have Ì brought her, and I mean to convey her with ine to Un to-morrow, since the disturbances wliieh prevail in these
19 thcsp parts render them an unsafe abode."— —"To Uri? To-morrow? Cruel, cruel Wolfenrad! Would you then have removed her, without suffering me to see her for one moment ?"— —" How could I have contrived an interview without betraying the secret? Had not accident thlown you in my way, I should not have had an oppor¬ tunity of even telling you, that she is in your neighbourhood. However, às soon as she vr^ out of the reach of dis¬ covery, jou would have received a let¬ ter explaining every thing. I left her occupied in writing it, and when finish¬ ed it was to be delivei eel to your hus¬ band's care, -who is now with hep at tbe Castle,
го Castle, and who has been the diief means of bringing her Lther in safe¬ ty."— —« What say you ? My husband ? Is Edmund then with Emmeiine? Oh ! lead me to Mm, dear Woltonrad, I must accompany you to the Castle ; permit me to pass this last evening with the dear lady, or at least suffer me to embrace her once more, and assure her of my unchanged affection, and then my hus¬ band can conduct me back to my bro¬ ther."— Wolfenrad heard this proposal witha malicious smile, and answered that for his part he had no objection ; but he suggested his fears, lest her taking such a step should displease the suspicious • Arnold,
21 Arnold, who surpassed het husband in jealousy a thousand fold. —·" Oh! heed not that !" exclaimed Amabel ; " while I am with you, I can set all suspidons at defiance !"— * She said this thoughtlessly, for she alluded to his age and ugliness. The miscreant however interpreted it to his * own taste, and saw in it the confirma¬ tion of his insolent hopes. He was on the pomt of rewarding the avowral by a tender pressure of her hand, wliieh per¬ haps might have opened her eyes, ere it was too late: but she prevented him by making a thousand fond enquiries re¬ specting her beloved Edmund, which put Mm agam 'upon Ms guard, and which were not ended till thev arrived at
23 at the Castle. The gates were dosed r Wolfenrad sounded his horn; the draw¬ bridge descended. He entered the Castle, Amabel followed him, and the moment that she had passed the thres¬ hold, heard with terrpr the noise of a port-cullis-falling behind her. How strange is it, that we should fre¬ quently remain thoroughly blind till we reach a certain point, and then be rouzed at once from our ddusions by some un¬ important circumstance I Amabd has frequenUy told me since, that the sound ofthat port-cullis (though nothmg un¬ usual in the Castle) gave her the first indistinct idea of her imprudence and the danger ofher situation. Her voice feltered, as she pronounced the
2Β tlie names of Edmund and Emmeiine, while she hastily withdrew her hand, which Wolfenrad had now seized with an air of impetuous passion. She look¬ ed Mm anxiously in the face, and her eyes read with horror in Ms an express¬ ion, which explained to her the whole fearful secret. Yet she was stilLunwilling to believe that man so great a villain, whom she had long believed so mudi her friend. It was not till she was convinced, that neither Edmund nor Emmeiine were in the Castle ; that she found herself to¬ tally alone with the wretch, whom she had despised as being too insignificant to be dangerous ; and that an old wo¬ man, whom (in order to carni the first violence
ai violence* of hef fct*Ktige) he had pro¬ duced'to her as his- Wifir, was notMng more'than à domestic; it was not till then, that she·- stW.tfle Whole business clearly, -and' the sight was one oí such danger, that perhaps had' she bee« a woman df a commen mind, it Would have thrown her into such a state of bodiljr insensibility, or'Of mental de¬ jection, as might «effectually hav« pre· - vented af endeavours' to effect an es¬ cape*. But Amabel 1 was a« daughter of Helvetia' that is-, she was a woman, whose powers both of body and-mind' existed in their fullest vigour ; neither die first was weakened by luxurious in- dulf ence, nor the second liable· to bè sulÉdiietrl^imägiharyterrors. Bi spite - too
аз
pf all«that credulity and imprudence which had oetrayed Jier into her ipresent daiger, hoţimagination was 4 stiU both clear jandaţute euOugb toi suggest a means for eflsttiesgilbtr rescUei or at least 'fbiig»li\iiig time.iK . She -ippeared' reseitved and shy, ahd sat down in silence to thei voluptuous pnterttimroent, Whioh was now served up by Wolfenrad's confidante ; the only person, ; whom he suffered to penetrate mtoi that part, of the Castle. rrXlet'did Amabel contrive to-give her, sileuee ,ti)g appearance of being preserved myth against Iter i*liH pt she refused -not at Wolfenrad's ι request to lay aside the large hA,ariiiwbowshacjBW«dheţ fijo?, and which (as he -oimpíained) con¬ voi,, m. с cealed
s»
cetftedjfrom Mm numberless beauties; nor did «he draw away very hastily or witha look of «trome displeasure bác eoftwliite hand, when lie prest it -nas. sionately bel-ween hi»iown. < ι —" May I flatteeiiiyseif,''«aid*hede» ceivecV.decţiiver.r" that Amabel does not absolutely hate me V~* —" My religion forbids -эту hatmg any one."— —-" And you are not very much of- * fended at my having employed a little artifice to procure myself the happiness of this evening ?"— «__Artifice ?—Nay j the effect of ac cident, and____and, I am afraid» my , own inclination was so much on your ^ side, that...."-—. —"My
27 —<" My charming Amabel ! then I may hope, that Wolfenrad is not en¬ tirely indifferent to your!"— —*' Indifferent? ОЫ that you are not mdeed'^—Aiiă as to hoping.... why, nobody can prevent your doing that, you'know."— And with this kind of doubtful and nattering discourse did she long enter¬ tain the betrayer, and forgot not to fill the silver bowls from time to time; though the effects of his frequent draughts prevented Mm from observ¬ ing, that while she poured wihe into his goblet, nothirtgbut water entered-ittto her owm. At the expence of a few disgusting kisses, wMch were forced from her oc- 1 ' с 2 casionally
28
casionally, shtrit length'had the plea¬ sure to see Wolfenrad fall senseless from bis chair. Jt was midnight; the old woman had long since betaken herself torest, and Amabel found -herself at li¬ berty to wander through the vacant chambers in search of some means of 'escape. Alas! the locks and bars were im¬ moveable, and no keys wer" to be fbund.-rShe at length discovered an unfastened door opening into a balco¬ ny; it overhung the middle ¿court; the -height was fearful; yet would she-have gladly ran the hazard of springing be¬ low, if she had not dreaded the meet¬ ing there with a greater danger, than that from wbich she was fiying. , The Castle-
29
Castle-Garrison oreupied this quarters Slie heard from above fhe conversation, which passed between the sentinels; and its nature was such as to leave her no hope of finding from them protection or even pity,, ft also informed her, that Wolfentad'a bounty, and his wmkipg at· their committing the most heinous of¬ fences, had united them too dosdy to Ms interests, to admit even a chance of tbeir acting in opposition to Ms will. She wept in agony ' She rung her hands ' At length despair took possess¬ ion Jof her whole soul. She eyed for a while lhe torch, whicli flamed in her hand, Likidin a moment of desperate re¬ solution sţie determined to set the Castle on fire ; in hopes ot either being able to с 9 effect
so
effect her escape during the conflagra¬ tion, or at least of saving herself by death from existing for one instant with dishonour. Thus resolved, she was on the point of quitting the balcony when a well- known name struck her ear. She stopt, and listened. Two sentinels stood be¬ neath, the balcony, and she heard one tell the other, that it would be neces¬ sary to Wate Wtitfehradi for that hö (the Sentinel) was just returned from the outer'wall, and had seen a çohı jiany of soldiers crossing ovet the nlain ; that he had hailed one of them, and found them ttx be part Ofthose whoTiadaccomi panied Bloomberg to Sargans^ andithat their leader'with the rest of Jus troops would follow them before mid-day. —" Bloom-
31
—" Bloomberg their leader ì" said his companion. " And since When has the gentle peace-loving Bloomberg tur n . cd soldier, and what has Wolfenrad to fear from a fellowj who but yesterday followed the plough ί"— " Faith," rejoined the first, " this is a time, when everycountryman exchanges his sickle and ploughshare for a sword and spea'r ; ahd I know enough of Ed¬ mund Bloomberg to be convinced, that the carrying off his pretty wife will make him rage like a mad bull."— -τ-" Carrying off, d'ye Call it f " said the other ; ·* I think, she seemed to fol¬ low Wolfen ad f her own accord; and if Bloomberg draw- Ms swoidupon her account, the mori* froi Bloomberg '"-ι¬ ε 4 A burst
32 A burnt of insulting laughter termi¬ nated this conversation, every syllable of which pierced Amabel, to the heart) and the soldiers sêparat«d,having agreed that it was unnecessary to disturb Wolf¬ enrad tliat night, and that the news of Boombcrg's return 1 might «ately be de¬ layed tffljfhe nei« ffiorntng. - '·*■ * Amabel burst into tears ; butsh'eisooá recollected, that she had better occupa¬ tion than weeping. A thousand ideas floated before her mind, inspired by the distant hope which she derived from the assurance, that in a few hours her hus¬ band would pass within sight of her prison. The great object therefore was to gain time to wait for his arrival With safety, and find means to inform Mm of her confinement in the Casde. Accident
ss
Accident furnished her with both. She returned trembling into the apart¬ ment, where the vile Wolfenrad still lay sleeping, the most odious picture of intoxication that the eye ever witnessed. Despair made her snatch a knife from the table, and she rushed to plunge it into his heart ; but herr* the softness of woman's nature got the better of her resolution and her vengeance. She threw down the knife, and hastened into the balcony, that'in the free air •tnd under the sky thick sown -with stars, shemight implore the Creator of that sky to look down upon and assist her itţ tMs hour of fear and danger. Sht rose from prayer much comforted : shp turned toward», the East, and fooked > l . fifi- eagerly
Sir eagerly for the arrival of the dawn, who^e approach was already announced. She Soon perceived, that the balcony in which she stood, though much too'higH from the ground to admit of her throw¬ ing herself from it Without being dashed to pieces, at least commanded an exten¬ sive view over thé surrounding country, and was admirably calculated for sum¬ moning any passing travellers toher as¬ sistance. '' Oh ! now, would but the sleeping Li¬ bertine doze aWay the morning, alt might Ъе wdl! Often did she Steal softly into the chamber to see, Whethi* he gave any signs of waking; again the knife attracted her gaze. She seized št, ànd concealed it in her boson)) as her last resource should all others fail.
35
It Was,now broad-day., Wolfenrad stretched Mmself, yawned, and opened Ms red eye-lids. Auubet fled to a dis¬ tant corner, but his voice soon compel¬ led her to return. — " My charming angel," said ho, " tome near me. You filled my goblet last night too generously, and this morning I feel myself still under the in¬ fluence of fhe too potent liquor. , Be- shrewme, but I am marveUoMsly indis- posed."-»- —-" Let not tiiat trouble you, my dear friend," answered Amabel, -vybile she advanced a few paces, trembling with, apprehension ; " while J resided in the Castle *f Sargans, Count Donat fre¬ quently found himself unwell- fröna a с 6 , similar
36 similar indulgentie in convivial plea¬ sures ; but he soon got the. better of his indisposition! by using a warm -bath, which «ever failed to restore Mm to perfect health within an hour, in the next chamber there is a large brazen cisteţn ; the water shad be heated for yoti without delay; apd as soon as your bath is ready, I will call some of your attendants to convey you tMther."— 'Without waiting for his answer, she hastened to her new occupation; she söbn returned with one pitcher óf water, then went back again for another, and thllá 1 contrived ţo get rid of near an hour; nêVer-fàiiittg as she pawed the balcony'to east-ifrom it a glance of en¬ quiry, whether-there wereyet ijo signs ЧаШ deliverer. l It
37
It was in vain, that Wolfenrad de¬ sired her to call some of the servants to spare her tMs unnecessary labour. Amabel remonstrated against the impro¬ priety of suffering herself to be seen by strangers in his apartment', ?ad at the same time protested, that she felt the greatest pbasţire in taking this trouble, since it-was for bijn that she took it. Wolfenrad knew not how tc find terms sufficiently strong to express Ms grati¬ tude for her attention, and^protested, that he had not flattered Mmself with the idea of possessing so .warm an inte¬ rest in her heart. He wasçjStill expatiating on the satis¬ faction wMch thè agreeabl« discovery gave him, when the sound of trampling at
ss
at a distance struck her hearing. She lboked towards the window, and de* scried a cloud of düst, Down fell the pitcher from her hand. —« Your bath i» íeady!" she said in a voice i-careeiy audible from agitation ; andVMe Wolfenrad staggered Into the adjoining chamber, 'she hastiened into the balcony. The horsemen came neater; she ŕecegnliseďmánycounte- nances well-known to hír , she recog¬ nized anjpng them that of Edmund ■Bloomberg. ' ι His name pronounced in bet loudest tone, the cry of " Help for the Virgin's sake !" ahd heťhandkercbiif waved in the air towards the horsemen, soon at¬ tracted their attention. With equal surprise
89
surprise and terror Bloomberg recog¬ nized his wife at a balcony ofthe Castle, heard her implore assistance, and flew with Ms brave compahions tó affed it. What followed, I shah íelate briefly : the narrative of this adventure may ap¬ pear already too drcumstantlal, since its'connexion with the Sisters o£ SaSr- gans is not at present evident ; but it had too material an influence upon the fate Of all Helvetia to admit of bay pass- ingit over with a slight mention. Before the Castle-Garrison had time to communicate to their Superior that intelligence, which they ought to have conyeyed to Mm the preceding night, and while all bands were busily employV •ed in guarding against an attack on .he main-
40 main-quarter,Blaúmbcrgand Ms friends had already forced their way into the Castle at that neglected side, whence Amabd had called to them for assist¬ ance. The bath, in which the still half-in¬ toxicated Wolfenrad hoped to get rid of the efiects of his night's excess,- wai crimsoned with bis blood. Amabel again found herself safe in the hands of her husband, in whose bosom delight con¬ tended with indignation. The opposi¬ tion ofthe garrison tothe complete con¬ quest of the Castle was but trifling ; and this fortress would certainly have remaîiţed in the hahds Of the Helvetians (a circumstance to'them of the greatest advantage) iiad thei« numbers been strong
41 strong enough to resist the troops, who were shortly after sent against them by the Abbot of St. Gall and other allies of the governor. Bloomberg's friends were inadequate to maintaining the pos¬ session of their conquest, and in a few days afterwards he was compelled to evacuate the Castle. > , Hitherto, the resentment of the mul¬ titude had been restrained witMn some bounds : but Amabel's adventure and the death of Wolfenrad were the signal for open rebellion. The whole country was floated with blood: would that I could say, that the blood which flowed was entirely that of the foes of free¬ dom! But alas! the number of the op¬ pressors was too mighty. The Helve¬ tians
42 tians were over-powered j and after dis« playing the sentiments and performing the actions of heroes, Edmund Bloom~ berg, Arnold Melthal, and his venerable- father Henric (to whom patriotism'and Ms daughter's injuries had restored some of his youthful strength) were constrained to fly from those beloved unhappy vallieg, which once had been the favourite abodes of freedom and tranquillity. · ι J The nariie of "fiightV' was of itself offensive to Helvetian candour and cou- rage; the place tó which they were com¬ pelled to address their flight, made it no less painful than disgraceful. Altdorf, which was in the jurisdiction of Gessler, whose tyranny had already been the cause
43
cause of such bitter sufferings to Henric and Arnolds, was the only refuge which remained to them. By remaining here quiet and concealed, till time allowed them to find fresh means of resisting their enemies, they hoped to escape Gessler's notice ; and accordingly they hastened to take sMter at Altdotf, with the brave William Tell, Bloomberg's halfJbrbther : here alsa they were sure ofi powerful protector in! the person of Walten Tîorest, a man whosei átuation and/native greatness of mind sďuck awe into the bosom even ofthe insolent Gessler. Here then the fugitnies remained conceajed,! and nourished hopes of bet« ter times, wMch perhaps would Save made
44 made even tbe present chearful, had not domestic discord obtruded itself irito their little cirde Thè imprudence witftWhicn Airiabel had thrown herself into the seducer's миге; in spite of aU his' warnings anil remonstrances, bad not paäsed uncensttrad ,by her rbrotheh His bitter reproaches iosietimej excited Edmund's anger,! and sometimes his jealousy; and theïpoor girl would have been absolutely wretched,,had not hen father sustained her cause, and had'not her innocence 1 found a most strenuous advocate ih William Tell. It is true, tbe language of veracity, in which she related her 'unadorned story, was not to be mistaken; but still it required Tell's cool unprejudiced nature, and Ms noble
4S noble guileless heart, to see overy cir¬ cumstance in its real colours. He at length succeeded in restoring perfect harmony in Bloomberg's family, and Amabel Messed him for the second time аз the author of all her t arthly hap¬ piness, Perhaps, her entire reconcilia¬ tion with her husband was a little for¬ warded by Arnold's absence. This im¬ petuous young man Jiad, been the ring¬ leader of those, who at the Easter feast had insulted the Abbot of St. Gall by singing the hallad of " Bishop Ul· jric ;" the Abbot ¡jhatţ not forgotten it ; and the unfortunate Arnold atlength fell into Tine pf the maiw snares, which hadıbeen spread for Min^iy his priestly foe, Doubtless, he would havefiţllena victim
46 -vìctìm to the Abbot's vengeance, had not Werner Bernsdorf, by means Which it is unnecessary to relate circumstan¬ tially, contrived torelease him from his dungeon, and sheltered him in his own house. Though Amabel had received her husband's full pardon, still the reconci¬ liation had taken place too freshly tó al¬ low her as yet to fefel quite at her ease": .and now when the news arrived that her brother (whom she loved most dearly in spite of his violence) wag ä prisoner, she would have had sufficient reason to be unhappy, even had she not been tormented by the most cruel an¬ xiety respecting the fate of the Damsels of Sargans. She ceased not to make en- ( quiries
47 ejuir'ies concerning them ; and at length she received the confirmation of her bit¬ terest apprehensions. Amalberga wal bevond a doubt totally in Landenberg's power, Who (in spite of all Wolfenrad's assertions to the contrary) kept her confined in the Castle of Rasburg ; nor was it less certam, that the Lady Emme- line kad perahed in the flames of St. Roswitha's Sanctuary. Report spread far and wide many strange anecdotei re¬ specting that conflagration, which I shall relate in another place ; in truth, there is no one better able to give an account of that dreadful incident than myself. ' The tears, which Amabel shed for her- self andifor her beloved friends, were soon
48
soon required by i stilt more painful cause: misfortunes now awaited her, which were worthy to be mourned'with tears of "blood." ι The furious Gessler's ι insolence in¬ creased •with every succeeding ' day. JUS most earnest care was to discover those who disapproved of Mm, tbat he , might revenge himself by jtheir tor¬ ments. At length; his pride and folly grew to such ahdght, that he fixed the plumed bonnet (which he usually wore) upon ¿lafce in tlie market-place of Alt¬ dorf« and ordered, that all who passed should bow before it. The sneering populace obeyed, and contented them¬ selves with whispering to each other, "that tbey'bad much rather pay their • * respect
49 respect to the empty hat, than the wicked head which it was accustomed to decorate: but William Tell and some few ethers of the principal inhabitants passed by the bonnet proudly and with unbending necks. From that moment did Gessler mark them down as the fu¬ ture victims of his revenge and ran¬ cour. Had the tyrant dared to hy violent hands on Tell, or had he contrived means of stamping the mark of infamy on Ms reputation; had he sold the wife of his bosom for a slave, or murdered his infants before his eyes ; still would all these atrocities have been excelled by that, which now entered Ms infernal brain. A prize was to be contended for 'vol. m. ρ by
■50 by archers. The sport was interrupted by the arrival pf Gessler. What was the borror of all who heard him, when he commanded Ms gqards to seize Tell's sen, a lovely child but four years old, and bind him tothe tree which had been selected as a mark for the arrows. He then declared aloud with the most im¬ pious execrations, that the heads of six of Ten's relations (whom he had con¬ fined upon some slight pretences) should fall before night, unless the father would engage at a considerable distance to fix a.dart into an apple, wMch should be placed on the head of the child. HoW did the father burn with secret indignation, when Gessler dared to lay before him this unnatural proposal! 3 No
Sl río earthly force could have compelled liim to arm his hand for ttie'perfortn' ance of an action So uncertain and so fearful·, yet in fact the bow and arrow could be scarcely called atı uncertain •weapon in the hands of the most dex¬ terous archer in Helvetia : and after a few moments past in thought hé confi¬ dently accepted a proposal, whose atro¬ city (he was certain) was thoroughly felt by all present ; and' whose consé¬ quence he trusted would be the kindling the fire of liberty in every bosom till it shouH at lengtb break into open flames', and the emandpating Ms country for ever from its present state of ignomini¬ ous bondage. A glance, more expressing contempt d '2 than
52 than wrath, was darted by Tell's dark eyes upon the Governor, as he rocked Mmself backwards and forwards upon his elevated chair of state, and looked dawn upon the circle of noble Helve¬ tians, whom the sports had attracted to Altdorf, as if they had been creatures of an inferior kind. Gessler was too void of sensibility to understand the meaning of the glance, which was darted on Mm by Tell's piercing íye. He only smiled contempt¬ uously at having compelled the pride of thb great mind to stoop itself to his or¬ ders, when he saw Mm press the lovely laughing child, his latest-born, to his heart with passion, and then bear Mm iq hit arms to the tree, where he was 1 destmed
53 destined to take his stand. The apple, wMch was the nominal mark foi that arrow, whose point Gessler hoped to see crimsoned with human blood, was fixed on the child's head by the hands of thé'unhappy father. ' Oesšler's attendants prepared to bind the innocent creature to the tree ; but a spark of patern;! spirit a'ready burned in the soul of the son. —" I am an Helvetian !" cried he with boyish eagerness; " I.am not atraid of death, but of bonds.: why, if nty father really wanted to kill me, do you think I would run away'"— AU withdrew from the place, where De«th.'s intended victim stood calm and sweetly-Smiling, like a secOndlsaac. The d*3 multitude,
multitude, agonized with terror, coukl scarcely be heard to breathe : Ţell had already taken his station. All. were still, all dreadmg, lest the father's hand, ren¬ dered trembling and uncertain by an¬ xiety for Ms darling, should for the first time miss the mark; when the arrow whistled through the air, and fixed it¬ self in the apple just above the crown of the child's head, who saw it coming towards him, and smiled aş he, marked its flight. Now then all rushed eagerly to learn the event of this awful scene. Sonie ex¬ claimed—" He is fallen ! he is fallen !" —But the bayhad only stooped to pick up the apple which the force of the blow had struckfrom his head, and he now
ss now presented it to his father, who had flown to embrace hi» rescued dar¬ ling with speed scarce inferior to that of liis arrow. —"I was ceitain, father," cried the cţrild, *· l.e liung, munci ilte UU.K ur LţlL. breatMess Tell, " I was certain, that you were not really going to kill your own William!"— x —" Kilt tbet I exclaimed the father ; " sooner would I have driven the arrow into my own heart ! But eternal curses and sudden death to him, who wou'd have made a man the murderer of his •own elüld! Look!" he continued, while he clasped the boy to his breast with one hand, and with the other drew from his bosom a dart, which he held D 4 towards
56
towards Gessler, "Look, monster t liad the first arrow pierced my son's breast, ι*« should have been buried to the very beard in tbine,— For this time thou art safe; but yet rest thou assured, that at the last tnou shalt not escape u-ij-uubl·,- ed ! Though ƒ may spare thee, Heaven will not."— —" Vengeance I vengeance ! death •artd curses to the tyrant I Eternal de¬ struction to the infernal Gessler and all the miscreants who assist Mm !" thus exclaimed theimiltitude with one voice; while they dosed round Tell in order to conduct Mm home in safety, an pro¬ tect him from the Governor's guards, to whom a signal had been given to fall upon Mm without delay. , But
SI But the friends of liberty were too weak in numbers to resist their power¬ ful oppressors. Before the gallant Tell had retraced half the way to Ms cot¬ tage, his companions were dispersed, and Mmself delivered into the hands of his enemy. Gessler commanded, that he should be bound, thrown into a ves¬ sd which was ready for sailing, and con¬ veyed to the dungeons of Kussnach, as a violator of the respect due to imperial dignity. No one was suffered to accompany Tell; but his little son clung to the bonds wbich were cutting the flesh of his father, and cried, that he would throw himself into the flood, if they tore him from Mm. Gessler's soldiers е -S had
J8 had no objection .to taking two victims instead of one, and yielded to the child's request, whom Amabel followed into the vessd without being questioned. The boy was her darling, and it was she who bad conducted Mm to the fatal archery, where- it was his destiny to play so principal a part. The cry that he was safe had rouzed her from the swoon into wMch the sight of his dan¬ ger had thrown her; and she now found it impossible to part so soon from the cherub, whom she had expected never more to clasp to her bosom but as a corse. She had abo no slight grounds for apprehending new dangers for the rescued victim, should she leave him in fhehands of Ms enemies with no other protector
59 ' protector than his captive father. Gess¬ ler's servile ministers could not have well pitched upon a more skilful or cer¬ tain means of inflicting pain on Ţell, than by murdering his son before hb face Amabel was aware of this ; and di ead- ing lest this horrible plan of vengeance should occur to the soldiers, she took the first opportunity of enticing the child away from Ms father, and con· cealing Mm in a dark corner of the ves¬ sd. Here she charged the little Wil- liam to remain quiet, and pointing to Tell, bade him-observe how quiet his father was lying on the floor, his fetter¬ ed hands dasped together and raised to¬ wards Heaven, whither Ms eyes directed d 6 devout
60 devout and imploring glances, wnich reached the Preserver of innocence above the douds. —"What is my rathei doing î" en¬ quired the child atlength in a whisper. —" He is praying for Mmself and for us," answered Amabd. —" Oh ! then God will hear him, andl.dp Mm ; and then you know, we can creep out, and take away those ugly cords from his poor bleeding hands."-— Amabd replied in the manner, which she thought most Ukdy to satisfy the cMld; and a conversation was carried on in whispers between her and her litde companion wMch gradually became interesting enough to prevent their ob¬ serving that a dreadful storm was rising, that
61
that thick clouds had changed the day into night, and that the light vessel was forced far out of its intended course. The rolling of the thunder, the frequent flashes of lightning, and the heavy torrents of rain at length made both attentive and silent; till William proposed that he should steal to his Either under covert of the thick darkness, and spread Ms litde coat over him, for Tell lay entirely exposed to the tempest. Amabd burst Mto tears as she listened to the kind-hearted boy, then gave Mm her own doak, and bade him hasten to alleviate the prisoner's sufferings. But Tell showed by no sign, that he was conscious of this affecting testimony of
62
of Ms child's care : ha remained with his hands clasped, and hiseyes still fixed upon the heavens. Perhaps, the trans¬ actions of that day had blunted all his feelings; perhaps, he was revolving plans of escape 1 , which never fail to oc¬ cupy the thoughts of the captive hero, and whose future execution frequently prevent his beingsensibleof the weight of present calamities. The tempest continued to rage : with every moment the danger of the slight vessel became more imminent. Tell, Amabel, and the child were now left by themselvest lhe other persons were employed in various quarters, endeav¬ ouring if possible to save the sMp, which was already deprived of sail and mast.
03 mast. The prisoners were now the hap¬ piest ofthe party: they at least rejoiced in the hope of perishing together. The child too, who had no clear idea of the danger, and fended that everything Went wrong only because his father was in bonds, ceased not to esert all his little powers in endeavouring to untye the cords; but even with Amabel's as¬ sistance he found the task too difficult for his strength. While they were still employed in this unavailing labour, they heard the cry of distress increase with tenfold vio¬ lence : presently some one on'the upper deck exclaimed— u Now then all is lost! What winds and waves have failed in doing, will be done by the Mdden rocks which
в* wMch abound upon thb coast, and with which not a soul of us is acquainted. Oh ! what would I now give to be as good a pilot as Tell, and to possess his knowledge of these shores ·"— Amabel started up, and listened with more attention. She heard the name of Tell frequently mentioned ; and after a few minutes past in contention, some of the sailors approached the place, where she stood by the side of her un¬ fortunate friend. —" Tell," said the Captain, " yön know, that your life is forfeit to the law ; but if you will engage to conduct the vessel safe to land, as a favour we will unbind you, and promise to do our utmost to obtain a milder sentence for you from the Emperor's mercy."— —" I have
es ------ " I have saved many a vessel," an¬ swered Tell, " in a more desperate situ¬ ation than the present ; and that wMch has succeeded with me ten times before, I trust, will not fail with me now.—As to tsrhat ynu say about favours, bestow them on those who ask them ; I expect mercy from no one, save ftom Him under whose hand we all now trem¬ bler- Tell was unbound, and the rudder committed to his care. William and Amabel still remained close by his side, while the rest of theVed «ompany dis¬ persed to their several eßaSons. Tell's rudder seamed to command the tempest: he steered confidently through the foaming waves, and already the companions
66
Companions of his danger shouted witb joy at the certainty of then escape. —" And what will be the reward of our preserver ?" asked one pf the most compassionate among Gessler's' soldiers. —« What should it be ί" answprpd their leader angrily. " The most he can lay claim to is a speedy death with¬ out being previously tortured ; or per¬ haps his sentence may be softened mto that of eternal imprisonment."— TeH was silent, and cast a despairing look through the dark douds of tho storm tosı-Aûr lehe Only-one, from whom hehad hopes of assistance 1 —" Oh ! that I had no one here to tremble for, except myself!" said Tell to the afflicted Amabel, who knelt beside Mm
Mm aiterà silence of some minutes— " how quickly shoiţld I ba taf e from the malice of my enemies-!"— —" And what then would you do ?"— —'« The rocks are not lofty ! One bold and lucky spring, and I were in safety !"— —« Throw me into the waves, fa¬ ther!" cried the boy, " throw me into the waves, for ƒ »m a hindrance to you !"— At that moment a tremendous flash of lightning illuminated the whole scene. Tell desa ied an immense tree at a slight distance growing out of a rock which they were approaching, and ex¬ tending its arms far over the foaming flood— —" Ama-
ββ «Amabel!" cried Tell, "dare you sdze a bough of that tree as we pass under it, suffer the bark to be carried away from you, and cling' fiut to the branch, till I have time to come to your assistance i" — -—"I darei Idare!"· cried Amabel in the tone of desperation—" But -the ehildi Oh! God! the child!"— —" Be that my care !—Be prepared ! —Now then!" he Cried, and was obeyed. He saw that she had fast hold ofthe bough, andin the same moment he seized the boy with his left arm, with his right turned the rudder to¬ wards the rock, then sprang boldly from the deck, and left the vessel with its unthankful freight a prey to the raging
69 raging flood. The tempest seized it; tne rudder was broken in the shock, and dreadful was the shriek of the crew, as the fury of the winds and waves drove it far away over the roar¬ ing billows. Tell sprang upon the rock unhurt; he hastily dimbed up the upper part of the coast, and having placed the boy on the ground, he flew to give Amabd his assistance. But she, who was deficient neither in strength of body or presence of mind, had abeady found means to gain the rock in which the tree was rooted, had forced her way through all impediments, and had near¬ ly reached the loftiest of the broken cliflš, before he could arrive. He assist¬ ed bei to attain the* summit, when she instantly
tb
ínátantly sank bn her knees, anďreturn- ed thanks to God -with all the joy of one just rescueďfrom destruction. But I forget, that Tell and Amabel are in fact foreign to my story, arid I have already suffered myself to dwell on" their adventures tod long, to the prejudice of my ťeal heroines. I will therefore pass over ih silence the cir¬ cumstances which followed their escape from the vessel, and those wMch again threw them into Gessler's power. Suf¬ fice it to say, that the dart which the Avenger of human nature seemed to have reserved for that express purpose, the dart wMch Tel) had shown Gessler, in the first butst of his indignation, that very dart pierced the tyrant's bosom ;' and
-n and thus was Helvetia freed from a monster, who had laid waste h-r tran¬ quil vallies with circumstances of much greater cruelty, than were ever attri¬ buted to fabled dragons in the Legends of Romance. After performing this dangerous act ofjustice, Tell betook Mmself to Stein, where he intended to take refuge with Werner Bernsdorf. Here he found new cause to rejoice at having rid the world t>f Gessler. Bernsdorf 's new-raised edi- fice, the admiration of the whole coun¬ try, lay an heap of ashes ! Gessler had thought it too good for a private man, and had threatened to pull it down. Werner laughed at Ms,threats, for it seemed to be no trifle to destroy the property
72 property of a man of Ms consequence, while living in the midst of a neighbour¬ hood, where every arm and every heart were devoted to his service : but he did not reflect, that villany can find a hun¬ dred secret means for effecting its pur¬ poses. In the depth of the night a fire broke out, whicli, from its bursting all at once trom the four corners of the building, and at a time when all were buried in sleep, gained ground too ra¬ pidly to admit of its being got under. Werner and Gertrude saved nothing from the flames, except their livesi Every one exclaimed against secret in¬ cendiaries, and no one doubted by whose orders this shameful action had been committed: in fact, there were proofs sufficient
73 sufficient to make it morally certain, that the author of tMs mischief could be no other than Gessler. 'The sight Of Ms friend's distress (for this fire had ι educed Werner to beg¬ gary) raised Tell's indignation' to the highest pitch. He left Amabel and his son to the care of Gertrude, and hast¬ ened with Bernsdorf in disguise back to Altdorf, to consult with Walter Fo¬ rest and Henric Melthal on the best and speediest means of rescuing Helvetia from her disgraceful' yoke. Arnold Melthal also, who had but lately escaped from the dungeons of the Abbot of St. Gall, increased their band; and the union of five men so remarkable for courage and for prudence produced such vot. πι. e fortunate
74
fortunate and such' glorious conse¬ quences, as will immortalize thdr names to the latest posterity *. Bloomberg hastened to Stem, to re¬ joice with bis wife at her escape, and to eflace in her embraces the injurious im¬ pressions, to which his too easy heart had given way during their separation. Spite and Envy had not neglected the opporttmity of calumniatmg one of Amabel's noblest actions. Her frank and guildesG nature had prevented her from making it a secret, that the admi¬ rable William Tell had been the first lové of her innocent heart ; and her vo¬ luntary forsaMng her family, in order
that
IS that she might share the fitte of tiiat gal¬ lant prisoner (a circumstance of wliieh all Altdorf had been an eye-witness) had found that misinterpretation, whidi Ca¬ lumny is always so eager to bestow Oh those heroic actions, of wMch she feels herself incapable. Fortunately the heart of .Edmund Bloomberg- was not more prone to jealous doubts, than open to conviction- Nothing more than the sight of his'ex¬ cellent brother, and tbe relation of tbe true circumstances of the case,- was ne¬ cessary to make bim feel the folly of suspecting the integrity of such a man. He requested his lovely wife to forgive his unjust suspicions ; and the tempo¬ rary separation of their hearts seemed e 2 . to
76
to have renewed his former love with such violence, that he could not resolve 'totear himself away from-her, in spite of his- earnest désire to partidpate with his friendsin tbe glorious attempt to rescue-Helvetia from her chains. Yet was not Edmund entirdy idle. His wife's anxiety respecting the Dam¬ sels of Sargans had, formerly induced Mm to make enquiries respecting their fete ; but Wolfenrad (whose sole view was to remove the hushand, in order that the unprotected wife might fall a prey during his absence) had taken care to direct his search, where he well knew that it must be fruitless. Edmund at length discovered the trick, and in¬ censed at having been sent on such a wild-
77 wild-goose-chase, he hastened bäck ac¬ companied by a band of well-armed companions, determined to revenge the insult. His vengeance' was complete, and now at Amabel's request he again resumed his search after the Damsels of Sargans : nor was it long before he as¬ certained, that report had said no more than the truth, when she asserted thať Amalberga was at captive in the dun¬ geons of Rassburg,, and that Emmeiine had really perished among the flames. To rescue the one and to revenge the other nowfbrmedthe only subject of the conversations, which passed be¬ tween Gertrude, Amabel, and her hus- bandi The more they discussed the circum- E 3 stances,
78
stances, th* more d.-eadful did the fate ofthe two sisters appear, and the more diflicult of execution did they find their plans respecting them. They were con¬ sdous, that without some powerful supporter, their strength was insuf¬ ficient for the undmtaking ; and Ama¬ bel's thoughts immediately suggested to her the names of two young knights, to whom at a former period the Damsels of Sargans had been by no means indif¬ ferent, and who (she doubted not) would still feel so much interest about them, as to forward her wish to avenge the death ofthe ohe and procure the de¬ liverance of the other, , On enquiry,it appeared, that but few hopes could be grounded upon the aid of
79
of Count Herman of Werdenberg. Suspidons, injurious to Emmehne's cha¬ racter, hád made hhn resolve to con- / quer Ms passión for her : but to eradi¬ cate her from his heart had not been found a task so easy, as he imagined ; and at length he had quitted Germany, tormented by his unsatisfied love, and by anger at himself for not having'suc¬ ceeded in overcoming it. He was at this time in England, whence his rela¬ tions had solidted Мз return most ear¬ nestly, but ift vain. But little as was to be expected from Count Herman, so much the more was to be hoped from the noble Eginhart of Torrenburg, and it was resolved that Edmund should' hasten to Mm without e 4 ! delay :
80 delay : it was not long before he return¬ ed accompanied by the youthful hero. There are reasons, which it is unne¬ cessary to, disdose, wbicii make it parti¬ cularly painful to ще to trace the name of Torrenburg, and to recollect how, closely his hie is Interwoven with that of Amalberga of Sargans : but it must be done, and I will not complain. Yes, there ought to be now no sacrifice too difficult for my heart to make \ there shall be none! Eginhart of Torrenburg, who had formerly been as, dosely bound to Helen of Homburg through motives of policy, as he was now* attacbedby aflecţion and Ms own choice to the lpvely Amalberga, was at lengtb free-from Ms engagements, to
81 to the former, and at liberty to bestow his hand according to tlie-dictates of his heart. Helen (alas for that poor Hden !) had been carried off on her bridal-day by that fierce terrific tyrant, Doriat, Count of Carlsheim and Sargans: force had compelled her to become hb wife ! An¬ gels of innocence, where were you then lingçring,,that you gave the unfortunate no warning-sign of the danger, into which she was on the brink, of falling ƒ Yet scarcely can I decide, which would have been the harder fate ; to become the victim of Count Donat, or with a heart glowing with love to,be delivered into the anns of a husband, whose soul . was in secret devoted ţo another, and , E í whose
82 · whose hand was only given to the wretched Hden from motives of ho¬ nour and respect for Ms plighted word. Instead of the expected bride, the news of her Deing carried off reached thei Casde of Torrenburg, where the wedding was to have been cde- brated. Though love had no share in bis concern on tMs occasion, compas¬ sion for the unfortunate girl, and the insult thus offered to himself, made the young Count immediately place himself at the head of Msl vassab, and hasten to rescue the intended victim from Donat's clutches. Hden, who bad been compelled 'to assent to this unhallowed union at the Cistle of Upper Halbstein, was now or- 1 dered
83 dered to follow her unamiable Lord to another of his fortresses situated southwards among the Rhœtian Alpa. She received the command with joy, for at the Castle of Sargans she hoped at least to receive the consolations of friendship. Her step-daughters had been the play-fellows bf Helen's child¬ hood during several weeks ; artd since thdr separation, occasional letters and messages conveyed by third persons had frequently assured' her, that she still lived in the remembrances of her early friends. In their embraces she hoped to find some alleviation of her suffer¬ ings: she flattered herself also, that the station Which she was now to fill in their house*. Would give her frequent oppor* e 6- tunities
84 tunities of making the situation of the poor girls more happy than it had been hitherto , and this reflexion prevented her from feeling herself quite miserable. Cruel fete decreed, that bet Journet , wMch was made in company with her husband and under the protection of a numerous retinue, should be interrupted by the arrival of the Qountof Torrenburg and his forces. It, was pow, that for the firsttime she saw the bridegroom, whom fortune had destmed never to be hers ; for whose character she had ever been, taught to entertain the highest admira¬ tion; and whose eight (for oh' there never yet was man more formed to cap¬ tivate' the soul of woman) was suffi¬ cient to make hejt fed, how near ber happiness
85 happmess had been, and how com¬ pletely it was now lost to her for ever, Torrenburg's valour forced Count Donat to seek Ms safety in flight, and lhe trembhng Helen was brought before the conqueror. Hden (who believed herself to be no less dear to her des¬ tined bridegroom, than He was dear to Her)for afew momente forgot her duty ; but mdandioly reflexion soon made her tear herself away from the embraces Of the beloved warrior, and sbe com¬ manded him to leave her. —" My rescue comes too late !" she exdaimed, wringing her hands in ago¬ ny -, " I am Count Doaaťs wife, and must remain ίο, though it slioulc' break my heart! Ob! Eginhart, restoreme to
86 to my husband, and forget the unfor¬ tunate, whom fate has separated from you for ever."— Tears stood glittering in the warrior's eyes. He advanced, as if he would have detained her, but she peremptorily forbade his nearer approach. She hast¬ ened to her palfrey, and giving the reins to the animal, shesöon reached the val¬ ley, whither Doriat and his vassals had directed their flight. Hden's conduct on this occasion, which might well have been termed a difficult effort, if virtue and duty did pot make every effort easy, was re¬ warded by her stern husband with cold¬ ness, with sarcasms, with reproaches. She arrived at Sargans ; aiid here was Helen
87 Hden destined to find the disappoint¬ ment of her last poor promised plea¬ sure, the society of her two friends. Count Donat held out to her as a mark of his complaisance and of Ms consideration for her happiness, that he had ordered the only one of Ms daugh¬ ters who remained to him (for the other had unaccountably disappeared) to quit the Castle. In vain did Helen implore him to recall Emneieline of Sar¬ gans from the Sanctuary of St. Roswi¬ tha : he was deaf to her entreaties, and she was left a prey to solitude and de¬ spair. Nor had the husband, who had gained her hand by such unworthy means, reason to be entirely satisfied with
88 with his situation, The Counts of Tor¬ renburg, Mayenfield, and Homburg, mortally offended at the carrying off of Helen, like a deluge over-ran with their forces the territories of Count Donat. His fortresses were forced andplundered one after another, and they now ad¬ vanced to attack the Castle of Sargans. But Helen, whose only remaining conso¬ lation was derived from the most puncti¬ lious dischaţge ofher duties, came forth to throw herself at the feet of heţ rela¬ tions -^ and she implored for peace so fer¬ vently and so earnestly, and she assert¬ ed with so much solemnity her belief, . that being once become the Count of Carlsheim's wife, it was her duty to live and die with Mm, (a duty, which 1 she
89 she was resolved to fulfill, whatever might be the consequences,)- that her intercession was found irresistible. Dearly, was Helen beloved by her pa¬ rents ; earnestly did they dfsire her happiness, which they well knew she never cpuld find in the arms of Donat : bptiţwaş by themsdyes.thatshehadbeen taught the merit of sacrificing all other considérations to that of fulfilling her duties; haWfthe/i coujd tbey advise Jier now to break through the rules,, winch they had themselves laid down for her î —Peace was granted, ancţ granted sole¬ ly to Helen's intercession. The ra¬ visher was ţeft in possession cf his un¬ willing bride ; and her rdations quitted lus territories, having first exacted from him
90 him the most solemn and dreadful oath to recompense her for the happy station, ofwMchhe had deprived hér, by un¬ changing love and never-ceasing anxiety for her welfare. Donat-took the oath í 1 bow hé kept- it, ié a secret to all save the Almighty and Helen : but she has 'sworn h the - presence of God tó be silent on this sub¬ ject, and she will carry that dreadful se¬ cret With her to the grave* unpublished. She was very ... oh ! very miser¬ able 1 On those days only, when her stern husband was from home, had she any gleams of sunshine. On one of these days ah" unknown messenger ar' rived, and desired to speak with the Lady Emmdine of Sargans. He was in¬ formed
»1 formed, that she was not at the Castle, - and he was conducted to Helen. He brought letters from tue Lake of Thun, which he at 'length confided to her, though unwillingly, and only (as he said) induced by the frank expression ofher countenance. •—« But'," saidhe, " will you deliver them to the Lady Emmelme with your own hands?"— Ilden, who lived at Sargans almost in a state of captivity, knew too well that she was not authorised to give such - a promise, and only answered by a me¬ lancholy shake of the head. Her look, the suspicious countenances of the at¬ tendants, and the well-known charac¬ ter of her husband, alarmed the mes¬ senger, t
92
senger, and made him suspect that his life was in danger : he stole unperceived to the gate, and hastened away. The packet was thus left in Helen's possess¬ ion. She knew, that it Would be im¬ possible to deliver it into the hands of her," for whom it was intended ; she long, sought for opportunities of doing soin vain; and at length ennui, and her anxiety to obtain some further in¬ formation respectmg the Sisters, which might possibly furnish her with the means of alleviating their cruel destiny, induced her to open the letters. , They were from Amabel Melthal and the lost Amalberga. „ Heavens ! ля -hat unexpected discoveries did Helen make while perusing them; discoveries, which
93
wMch had no slight connexion with her own situation I God be thanked, that among other things they made it known to her, that notMngbut duty to his pa¬ rents, and consideration for his plighted word, had induced Eginhart of Tor¬ renburg to offer her Ms hand, while every fond sentiment of his heart had long been Amalberga's. This discovery at first wounded her tothe very soul- but after a time she drew from it rea¬ sons for being better satisfied with her fate, and she resolutely banished the beloved youth from her memory, in wliieh 'tifi then lie had too frequenUy occupied a place. ' Determined to abstract herself en¬ tirely from every thing wliieh regarded herself,
9* lierself, Helen now determined to con¬ sider the happiness ofher two friends as her only object in life. She endeavour¬ ed to make herself mistress of every cir¬ cumstance belonging to them. Men¬ tion was made in ontvof Amabel's letters of áh old maid-servant at Sargans, called Bertha, who had been Emmeline's con¬ fidante during the latter days of her abode at her father's mansion ; and in hopes of gaining some further informa¬ tion Helen desired, that Bertha might be brought before her. She was answered, that the old woman had -been sick for several weeks, and was now drawing near her end. To the great astonish¬ ment Of the domestics Helen immedi¬ ately hastened to Bertha's chambeť, say- "•S>
95 ing, that she would go and comfort her in her last moments. * Helen had but little time allowed her torpeuform tMs charitable office: yet tbaťUttle.she employed to the best ad¬ vantage, and in return Bertha's grati¬ tude rewarded her more amply, than she had hoped. Bertha, who had fallen ill soon after Emmeline's departure, had only had-time toi forward the letter for Amabel ; another packet, intended for the Countess Urania Venosta, was still in her possession. She gave it to Helen, and implored her to take care, that it reached its destination. That was not in Helen's power ; she kept-it forsorne time, m constant terror lest her tyrant hiibb.md should discover it, and
96 and lest it should be the means of drawing down on herself and Emmeiine fresh anger and increased sufferings. At length, she resolved at least «0 tput the contents out of Count Donat's powerto_bury in Oblivion: she broke the seal, and what she read exalted her impatience to rescue the unfortunate writer to a degree, that was almost tbo strong to admit of concealment. What Helen suffered at this period is not to be expressed ; peihaps her own misfortunes had made her still more compassionate towards those of others, than it was her nature otherwise to be. Three objects were now never out of her thoughts for a moment. The firft was, since the Count of Tonenburg was
97
vfas now lostttQilier for ever, tpmak*/ known to Mm the present residence of Amalberga ; but how İP convey tQ.ljun that intelligence, she in vain soyjght to discover. The second was, if possible, _, to rescue EmmeUne from /the detested Convent of St. Roswithsj, but alasi she had but little hopes ,qf tlelivpring others, while she was herself a pptive in the Castle of Sargans. The last was. to obtain possession of the key to. that chamber, in which was the secret en¬ trance to the subterraneous] passages leadingto the dwellingsofj,theAt*cho-| rets. ! The last sr-emed tp afford her ,fhe most probable means of gratifying her two former wishes ; perhaps too, she vol. ш. г ' was
98 wWofttsohseiously tíesirous of securing а^еайглг escafteg from the Cattde, sKoUld ehe- ever find such a step' neces¬ sary. ' It is at least certain, tbat in her eagerness to carry her Soltit, she took many steps, which prudence would not justify. Frequently did she repair to that chamber'-, ihe/· found the door guarded byseven locks. Frequently in the deaa of the night, when all slept, or seemed'td sleep, did she try the house- keys, which were in her charge ; and when a« length two of the locks shot back from their fastenings, she sank on her knees, and thanked Heaven with a florid of tears. She doubted not* that the rest of the locks would yield to her perseverance ; but a sudden noise at no great
9»
great distance prevented her from push¬ ing the attempt farther that night, and she hastened back to her chamber with a heart filled with delight and expect¬ ation. Joy, at being so near the accomplish¬ ment of her wishes, prevented her from sleeping during the remainder of the nig)'t, and she employed the vacant hours in revolving her future plans. —«"If," said she to bersdf, after giving the matter her most serious con¬ sideration ; " if I should be so fortunate as to obtain an entrance into the mys¬ terious chamber to-morrow night, I will hasten to the subterraneous passage without losing á moment. A torch, and the clear description of the way f ΐ given
100 given in Amalberga's letter will guide me to, the Hermitage to a certainty, and I need only use more than ordinary diligence, in order to be back at ,the Castle before day-break; for precious as liberty appears tojne, I will not obtain it by improper means.' I am Donat^ wife, and privately to withdraw myself from his protection wereto commit an act of infidelity and treason against njy husband. I will content njyself there¬ fore with relating what I know tp the good hermits, and entreating them to take the best and speediest means, of re¬ scuing Emmelihe from her dangerous abode, and for placing the fortunate Amalberga in the arms of TorretK, burg!"— , On
101 ' On second thoughts, she reflected, that merely to give mis intelligence to fhe hermits Mould not be to do ehough ; it would also bo necessary fo give sbme explanation to the Countess Urania respecting the letters which she had opened, and by advising Torren¬ burg to make Ahialberga his wife, to render it clear to him, that she had her¬ self forgotten 'the tyes wMch once ex¬ isted between them. Perhaps too, a threatening letter ti» the Abbot of Cur¬ wald ¿should all other means fall) might have røme Weight in inducing him to surrender Emmeiine. In order that 'nothing might delay her oh the^n- suing nightj' she rose instantly from her bed, and began to write. But be- í 3 fore
402
fore her letters were concluded, it was morning, and her attendants, or rather her jailors, entered the apartment to wake her. They exprest no little sur¬ prise at finding her already out of bed. .—"I presume, noble Lady," said the eldest of them, "dther some joy¬ ous foreboding, or reame iprophetic dream has roused you 'from your couch -so early. Our Lord will return ţo-day ; in truth, we knew this yesterday, but we kept U to make our morning-greet¬ ing the morrrwdcqme, and also through apprehension Jest your joy at this intel¬ ligence should spoil your night's rést."-,- Helen pply answered the speaker by one of those expressive glances, with wMch
103 which the open-hearted repay words, -which belie theseeiet mind. Shew/as well aware, that her women who .had besn so often the witnesses of her tufferingT!, could not but know the-dature of those feelings, which Donat's return was likdy to excite in her bosom· ι №ж did she alone tremble in the presente ofthe fierce Count of Carlsheim ; every crea¬ ture that existed in the Casţlţ tise»ed to his name, with terror, and noftţog but irony nad dictated tMs.speedi,0!$$be insolent Jutta. Yet dared not Help" find the least fault with any one of her female attendants, who were chieflycom- posed tof her husband's former favour¬ ites, and the meanest Of whom had more influehco with Mm still, than was allowed to his unhappy wife. f 4 The
.104 . -The news of Donat's return Was sóim •txmfirmedi it i: was scatc'ely midday, 'WheiV sbe !'heard |; the rdfawbndge re- - r Sounding beneéťfrithe hasty ; tráttipling čí-hís'BlSek'effcSd. She : hasteiied iţo-te-" ' cäverMn^at the'gafe witli that smile of Uubtttiasive'duty, which she had accus- -tiAíllèrtèlfialiÍàye to wear inhie pre- -íeiteé.^^HeífepiilsedWr 'bffllfetihana 'With'¿' furious 'look, and¡ shut himstlf ;--apm hW own chinnbe'r=witheuch -of his ďe^nctots tóíwetem'ošt b:his CÖ1Îİİ- 'derice. ; An hour elapsed; hischamber- dooi·-. wasîthrottTi 'ópeh, 1 atid Dbhiit iruShed'iòut ágalri; ло'йЪ dppeatânrje -ttoreincenseaiffpessiblertăaii'b'eforei bi;tl-Hf;iAimii armf"¡- cried -he twith a 'f voice r &£■· thunder,; wMchîïresound- • /jI·.' rPc:í.iÍMii rľ I c ij-,virr!érl -..fif- ' .'. ■ i- \.
103 èd through the whole fortressl/' and which sooh collectecl all his soldiers artriind nim, who, Wearied with'the joílrneý'frtjm Whiäl they were just re- turnee!, wete better 1 fitted fór repose th*h for a'secohd eJípèíditibn ; ' « to horse, aad away this instant ·- business of importance- summohS'tls, and WMch admits df ho dHay. Talk rrdt óf Weari¬ ness, br exhausted strength?! 'thé deed, Which nbW demands ýour'nulchiofts, catita be'exeeuted, if-yoUŕaráfe werellalf Useless, for Ileadyoii'tia against atout warriors, bvit cowardly möhks, on whom í sweat toObe revenged before rsuivsetl"— ·' Li-¡nn {'(ι ι .i 1 1 They *i7erentoO Welt «customed 1 to obey-Count Stonaca» she! first 'àiotiPn I S -i of
,106
of his finger,-to make any .remon¬ strances. In a few -minutes all Utete" mounted, and their horses galloped over the echomg draw-bridge into the ; valley below, whence they disappeared from the eyes of these, whoga-eed after thero, with the rapidity of Ughtning. The Caşde-inhabiJants .poked ion »ach other ia silent astonishment. ЧЬе íimifanty of their present feel¬ ings produced a kind of confidence between the Countess and lier wennen ; and on« of them, confessed to her, her .being- almost certain, that she knew the catue of all this uproar. ¡She «ould however only impart thus -much of ber torølrileclge:, -on Ms return tomeWards the Count had rtóvedía-Jettvr' 60m % 1 ene
107
one wbo was in the habit of sending hjm intelligence, ami this letfer most probably contained thf¡ spark, jWhich had kindled such flames in the bosom of Connt Donat ; for as soon as he bad read jt to his confidents, h$ toréit m a thousandpieceş, and trampled ; jţ under Ms feet. 3psides ¡this, ,m theniidst of a torrent of execţatiops ţie had beep heard to mention the .Abbot of C»r- a, waid and bis daughter Emrnefinc. —" Enjmelineand the Abb^f-j",·-^- daimed Helen ddighted. 'f h it pos¬ sible, that scene benevolent Being shijjdd bve opened his eyes to the^iserAçs of Ms daughter ? b^t to rescue h/eţ, thap he departed ш nucb baste? t Alt ! then why havejsolongjdelayed to take ,the τ β nearest
m
learest and sütést way for effecting her dehverancè » '' Had I btťť «infest her datígür to' «tèunkDoiàt .«"Surely the Woist of m'en Än not endure, that WU cniia'snetilď'be overwhelmed то shamfcíihtí İTtmli the depravity of the Nuns -df'St. Robťitha- must have been concetűtíd -from Cbant L Dbnat, "o\ fie never would have made his daughter a member eif tbsirsOaay ("— ThesW-reHyèfaons, wMch Were only- half pnmbiunced by Hden, Were totally unintelligible to her attendants, who continued tó discuss what has past, and to conjecture what was to follow, tMs occupied them so entirely, that they did not percente, that their mistress had left them She had hastened to her 3 husband's
' 109
husband-s ¿hamber/ 'where she tópecl to obtain some insight ma'thelérdnA- stance, which at once botffrejbicéä arid alarmed her. '- ~" fl '° "' ^° The fragments óf thrjVifflptfkaÄt letter strili lay upon the floor j'4he· eagerly seized them, and ha^m^-sectrred^er- self against 'interbptiöri, íiJ píft Ji -tBi* agam togethei* careftdly. éhe ! léarrieti from them the trţtH of ^What? 'she Ъаа just been told^ the wtìifer"waVned Count Dbriäť to btîiWaru'iof ihe 'íS&ot-s artifices; discovered 'to' htrri, *ЙЙгУАЬ Roswitha's Sanctuary tiV Httlè "¿eïter than the harem' of the Momtì'Oif'Cur- wald, andthat^by enclcbtog'tlte ЗЫЙу Emmehne within Îhése ¡sacrilegious •ivalls^ he had delivered'¿p his daughter to the passion ofher licentious lover. No
по No wonder, that information like this sliould have given a deadly wound to Coupţ tyqnat's pride: nor (in spite of his own excesses) was h'e şo totally lost to scarne as to endure patiently, that his daughter should become the prey oţ, a libertine. Ft was almost ,fraţţtic,with fage, and fpr the first time in Ms ; hfe he dre, w Ms sword to punish ¡dip ^suiters /of virtus Helen sank on her knees, and thank¬ ed God fpr this unexpected accomphsh- menţjOf her, wishes, ßhe sent a-thou- •auid prayers after her Imsband for the good .eijcj-ess-iof ,hts esjaedition: she ejjep went j^o fy( t asjto begin to matte preparations -for'feceiying the rescued Einmehne, wbem in fancy she ahjeady
m prest to her heart; and when tMs agreeable, occupation was finished, sbe turned her thoughts towards guessing at tbe benevolent writer of the letter, -which had induced the father to hasten to preserve his child. Poor simple Hden! it entered not into 'her thoughts (and it was not till longafter, that she made the discovery) that villainy often performs a seemingly virtuous action, in order to forward its own unholy designs. She knew not, that the author of 'that letter was Wolf¬ enrad. It seems, that those oppressors of Rhcetian and Hdvetian liberty, the lord governors and their assistants, car¬ ried on a veiy dose though secret up- derstanding wilb soine of the most po¬ tent
im téñt 'nobleitierí, whose object 'it' tvis equally to bring the inhabitantéW thkse unfortunate 1 cbnntrïéà Still njoré beneath \heyoke, ШаЪаПе ütiä'tiieit séb- jèction ihte febriťeŕ tHeŕír o«*A pöVVırr and grandeur. Among'the secret "al¬ lies of tíessleľ andfeimdenbérg t -Count Donat atei the'Abbot' of"«3arwalä Wüfe thè most distinguished í r Йпа'^Гойеп- rad on iccount of his weH-khowtt skill m'penmanshiý«ivas fréqvíently eniployed by bothľtfie governor to carry'on their correspondáiee "both with Ctirwildíáhd Sargans.' ' ' * StiU the fact was, that neither'of these parties meant honestly' W each other. Dbnat and the Abbot werfe de- terminéd only to'gohaild in'hand with ther
US the vice-getcnts so' long, as it suited their own views ; and these on the other side intended« as soon as they had de¬ rived as much benefit as they could frohi the assistance ofthe Count and his ecdesiastical ally, to osate а quarrel be¬ tween them, and then 'join with/ the one in plundering the Other. ' j We have already'seen, how impru¬ dently Amabel had Md her secrets open to Wolfenrad. Her letters to Emme- Kne passed through Ms hands, and he missed not this opportunity to Increase his knowledge ofthe afftirs of theCount of Girláheim ; and though EmmeuW's letters'to Amabel were not' confided to him, by òhe artifice or another he had •übt -failed to obtain a sight of 1 them. Bloom-
Д1*
Bloomberg's simple wife observed in- •deed, that the seal of Emmehne's packet had been .forced ; but she little guest by whom. The cortents of this letter immedi¬ ately furnished him with the most cer¬ tain means for producing an irreconcili¬ able hatred between Connt Donatand the potent Abbot of Curwald. The power of the latter '-was beginning to appear dangerous to the Lord Govern¬ ors ; but they could expect nothing but an accession of strength to themselves, while the Count of Carlsheim and the Abbot were mutually weakening them¬ selves in feudal skiripiihes. Such was Wolfenrad's .object in writing this warn¬ ing-letter, whose author was t loadød with
115 -with blessings by the unsuspicious He¬ len, while waiting with a throbbing heart for the return of lier Lord. The night arrived. She now thought no longer -of attempting to open the door of the mysterious chamber« wMch she had meant to attempt, at this hour, smce a principal object of her wish to visit the Hermitage wat aLteady accom¬ plished. Besides, the design could not then have been possibly executed, since -everyone in-the Castle was still awake, and waking with impatience for Count • Donat's return. It was almost morning, when some of her attendants rushed with looks of terror'into Helen's apartment, and en¬ treated her to ascend the upper plat¬ form,
lic form 1 ' "whence she would discern ίο - wards' the west indubitable marks of sorredreadfulcenfllgrat-ioii. i t "*' God preserve us ¡from soméi mis¬ hap ' B JeSdahned Helen, while, she fol- löWédAer women to the battlements ; tfie'whdle-epTartér of the heavensto- wardš Curwald Seemed OneiblazM of redli— * Oh i Donat, Oonat/ what hast thoü done i' "Were there -Н no genfler means?—Emmelihe, my poor EUtme- liné.wherea« thoü attfeis rrreiiieut?''^-- ' Helen's feat»¡were bpt-itoo well- founded. Donat, in doing what he thought it right to do, had done it m ■his 1 usual manner. Wolfenmľs- letter had given Mm some hints of the* mid¬ night revels,-which were frequentlytar- ïicd
П7
ried on between the) inhabitants of the adjacent Convents of Curwald and St. Roswitha, lie made enquiries of the neighbouring ppasaiits, who were no friends of these ecclesiastical libertines; tlieir repqrt confirmed the truth of Wolfenrad's assertions ; and an old man (who declared himself particularly well informed respecting these disgraceful secrets) added—·' that on that very night there was to be a superb entertain¬ ment given to celebrate the conversion of a Nun, who was the last admit¬ ted."— —" You may easily guess, valiant knight," continued the old man, " what they mean by her conversion. I suppose the lady (I saw her brought into the Convent
118 plunge their children into yonder abyss of infamy ! I warrant you, the parents of this converted damsel little thought, when they sent het to St. Roswitha, that they were placing the sweet creature in Satan's own claws. But when one is speaking to gallant warriors like your¬ selves, who are able, and perhaps vnl- ling to help Us, one must be open- hearted. I see that you are all well- armed, and yonder tall gentleman vith his eye-brows bent so sternly and his hands clenched seems to foel for what we poor country-folks must suffer under the dominion of these voluptuous Monks, who make us contribute the chief part of our; hard-earned gains to the support Of their luxury. A6 to the Bishop
119 Cànvctìtmyselst 'and she seemed to -be an angel bf innocence and beauty) was a littlt violent at first'; and so they have at last succeeded- in taming her stern niarahly-, as' many another has been tamed in the same way before her.'i— -------- Good heavens !" exdaimed one of the least-depraved among Count Do¬ nat's knights ; " are such tilings spoken ofin these parts so openly, and yet is Justice silent, and does ťbSe Bishop of Coirà take no notice of stich abomina¬ tions?"— —» Oh ' the Lord have mercy on me, Sir Knight," answered the r old ma*, " such things are not talked of openly, or so many fathers wöulä not plunge.
1*0
Bishop of Coirà,,,,. , I am afraid, yo« , are in the right about Mm ! The no¬ tice which ¿f takes.... Aye ; were old Hugo of ■ Werdenberg «till bishop in¬ deed. ... But the present, Bishop.... Well! well! he «nd his boon-compa¬ nion, the Abbot of St. Gall, make a pair of worthies- itideed !"— While his knights were carrying On this discourse with die peasants, their Lord, whom fury had almost deprived ofhis senses, was considering what was to be done: the resolution wMch he took was worthy of his character, was worthy of no one but Mmself. En¬ trance into dther of the two convents was demanded in vain; every other proposal which his attendants suggested, was
iai was rejected as incompetent to effect his object; at length his commands were obeyed, and by midnight St. Roswitha's Sanctuary was enveloped in flames. It's true, that a spark of pater¬ nal love stUl glimmered in his heart for tbe unfortunate Emmdine; but the idea, that in all probability sbe also had heen converted after the fasbion of the sisterhood, soon extinguished it, and he resolved to hide her and his shame together- in the ashes of St. Roswitha. Impressed with this idea—" Drive thein back into the flames!" roared the inhu¬ man Donat,whenever either Friar or Nun tried to rescue themselves from the con¬ flagration, without deigning to examine whether Emmeiine might not be one of vol. ui. . о those
122 those unfortunates. The number of monks, whom tbe flames compelled to attempt their escape from St. Roswitha at this undue time of night, confirmed the reports'of the mode of life practised in the convents ; and the dresses of the Nuns, who had been arrayed for the feast, proclaimed bow little their hearts were estranged from worldly vanities. The fire continued to spread ; it now caught the adjacent Abbey of Curwald, and before day-break there remained of both the Sanctuaries and their infamous inhabitants notMng but heaps of smoak- ing ruins *. ·*
Such
123 Such was the cause of those flames, whose reflexion on the sky excited so much consternation at Sargans : Helen's heart had not throbbed with sad fore¬ bodings without necessity. In the course of the morning Donat returned home, and returned witbout Emme¬ iine ! Helen flew to meet him, and eagerly enquired, where was hb daughter? His answer was a short and cold narra¬ tive of tho dreadful transaction, which had just taken place, and the conse- quence was, that overpowered with horror Hden fell senseless at the mon¬ ster's feet. When she recovered, her first words were to ask, where he had placed Emmelme, (for she doubted not, о 2 . that
124 that previous to firing ths Convent he had piovidcd for his daughter's safety,) artd unfortunately her question was so worded, that it betrayed her more inti¬ mate knowledge of the business, than was by any means suspected by Donat. TMs discovery converted Ms unfeel¬ ing coldness into a degree of fury, that, nearly approached delirium. He seized her roughly by the aim, and demanded, in a voice of thun¬ der, how she came to be so well ac¬ quainted with his affairs? The unfor¬ tunate knew no other way of extricat¬ ing herself from this dilemma, than re¬ peating what she had heard mentioned by one of her attendants respecting Wolfenrad's letter, which (shexonfest) had so strongly excited her anxiety 1 about
about Emmeiine, that she had not scrupled to piece the fragments again together. The storm of rage was now diverted fi om Helen to the woman, who had given her mistress this intelligence, and who had it in her power to disclose much more important secrets, if she had thought proper. Incensed at Count Donat's ill-treat¬ ment of her, for which she considered herself as indebted to Helen, Jutta re¬ solved to disdose in her turn all that she thought most likely to injure her mistress. Accordingly she began an accusation, which among a thousand falsehoods contained some truths, cal¬ culated to make Helen shudder as she listened to them. o3 The
126 The Countess (Jutta said) had some -time before received a packet from an unknown messenger, who afterwards quitted the Castle with all speed, and whose arrival she ordered to. be con¬ cealed ftom her husband. She had also received several letters from the hands of the dying Bertha; after j-eading which she had been frequenUy seen loitering about the door of that Cham¬ ber, which (on account of the strange noises frequently heard withm) was supposed to be haunted. Nay, on the night beforo last she had actually tried to force back the locks, but had been scared away, by hearing Jutta's rosary fall on the ground, while she was watch¬ ing her Lady's proceedings concealed be. hind
127 hind St. Martin's statue. She had after¬ wards seen through the key-hole the Countess busily employed in writing, and duringthe confusion which followed Count Donat's arrival, had found means to get the letters into her possession, which to confirm her story Jutta was now ready to lay before him. These heavy charges against Helen failed not to produce the effect 'mend¬ ed. Donat ordered the letters to be brought immediately: He was no scholar ; yet was he not so totally defi¬ cient in the laiowledge of writing, but that he cuuld dearly decypher the ad¬ dresses, which were written in large characters. His eyes flashed fire, while he spdt the names of " Eginhart of g 4 Torrenburg,"
128 Torrenburg," « the Abbot -of Cur¬ wald," and " Urania Venosta, the wi¬ dowed Countess of Carlsheim mid Sar¬ gans." These directions would have been sufficient to condemn the poor Helen, even had she been tried by a more impartial judge. < It was certain, that these three persons were her hus¬ band's bitterest enemies ; with what propriety then could she bc engaged in a secret corresposidence with them ? In particular, what motive could she have for writing to the Count of Torrenburg, who was her former lover, and had been so long her destined bridegroom ? Alas ! poor Helen ι appearances were sorely against thee ' Nor would Donat\ fury give him time to enquire further into the business.
129
business. In a paroxysm of rage he tore the letters into a thousand fragments, and pronounced Helen to be in a secret correspondence with his implacable foe, the Countess Urania for the purpose of betraying him to his enemies ; he as¬ serted also, that she had been privy to the Abbot's designs upon Ms daughter, and had encouraged them in order to be revenged on the father ; and that she was still in love with the Count of Tor¬ renburg and meant to have fled to Mm from Sargans, an intention wMch was sufficiently proved by her midnight ef¬ forts to obtam entrance into that cham¬ ber, which concealed a private outlet from the Castle. It's true, that findmg Emmelme had quitted that chamber of c S her
İSO her own accord, and tMnking the knowledge of the secret passage might be of use to himself on some future occasion, the Abbot bad not mentioned to Count Dpnat his suspidons, that such a passage existed ; and the room had been merdy shut up from the report of its being haunted. But Wolfenrad had learned this secret from the perusal of Amalberga's letter to Emmelme, and had communicated it to the Count, hoping thereby to increase the merit of his .services. Now then Donat bad no doubt, tbat the noises, wMch had been heardrin that chamber, proceeded from - по ghosts, but from persons who were waiting to assist his wife'in her projected flight. Under the influence of these S impressions,
131 impressions, Hden was held convicted of the most intimions designs, and con¬ demned to suffer the most exemplary chastisement. She was instantly con¬ fined in one of the strongest dungeons, probably in that Where Urania had shed so many tears ; in the mean While her tyrant with'Ms confidents and those Women öf the Castle who were most her enemies, sat in' council to decide, what punishment would be sufficiently severe to suit her crime. I am in doubt as to Donat's reasons for not immediately proceeding to the last extremities with Ms wife : that sen¬ timent towards her, which he 'had chosen to dignify with the natrie of love, had long ago disappeared*, 'and g 6 his
132 his late atrocious act, which had proved the destruction of the whole Orders of Curwald and St. Roswitha, had left him no scruples to overcome. One murder more or less, what did that sig¬ nify -to a man ' who had arrived at so dreadful aheight of guilt ?—The most probable cause foţ Donat's moderation was, fear : Helen ,was the Count of Homburg's daughter ; was niece to the Count of Mayenfield -. and had been af¬ fianced to the Count of, Torrenburg, who it was well known, would not suf¬ fer her to be injured 'with impunity. These considerations made Donat hesi¬ tate, as to-the course which he was now to pursue. Donat past two days in resolving, whether
133 whether it would not be possible to bring Helen to confess herself guilty. This would justify tim in the eyes of her relations for any severity, which he might think proper to inflict upon her ; but when he considered his wife's cha.- racter, he saw little prospect of per¬ suading her to declare herself infamous. In the mean while Helen was suffered to remain tranquil in her dungeon ; and her husband was still meditating how to avoid the vengeance of her friends, when the Castle was unexpectedly at¬ tacked by enemies incensed upon я dif¬ ferent account. He might indeed have foreseen, that the Bishop of Coirà would not pass over the destruction of 'Cloister-Curwald in silence; occupied however
f13·* however by his anger against Helen, Donat had bestowed no thought upon the Bishop, ind the avengers of the Monks of Curwald were at the gates of Sargans, before anyone had even be¬ stowed a thought on the possibility- of such an attack Helen heard-from her prison the noise of the assault, the shouts of the victors, and the expiring groans of those who fell beneath their swords, but her spirit was too much broken to enable her to guess at what was passing, or to ofler up prayers or wishes for the success of either patty. She lay almost in a state of insensibility, When the door of her dungeon Was thrown open. The Count x>t iCarlsheim entered, snatched heir " rudely
135 Tudely from the earth, and more by gestures than speech,- commanded her attendance. She followed her conduct¬ or in silence, like a lamb to the slaugh¬ ter ; he saw, that she was scarcely able to move through weakness, and either out of compassion or-cruélty compelled her to swallow a cordial. She gradually re¬ covered herself sufliciently to remark, that her husband was habited like a pilgrim on the point of setting out on aome long journey, and that he guided her towards a part of the Castle remote from the damour ofthe combat. Here they found a domestic waiting with a torch, who in a low voice and with few words assured his Lord, that the paseage was still safe. A door, art- folly
136
fully concealed in the wall, was now unlocked, and Helen was commanded to ascend the stair-Case, wMch present¬ ed itself before her. She was too weak, too hopeless, to think it worth while to make any re¬ flections on Donat's unaccountable con¬ duct in regaining the upper apartments of the fortress, (which,, she was con¬ vinced, was already inthe enemy's ров - session,) instead of employing these pre¬ cious moments to eflect his escape, •They now .arrived at ifhe door Of tbat chamber, wMch concealed the entrance to the subterraneous passages: the touch of a single key was suffident to make all the seven locks fly back. Do¬ nat entered, and compelled Ms unhappy wife
187
wife to follow him ; he then took the torch fiom tlţe domestic, and com¬ manded Mm to execute Ms orders with¬ out delay, and then to provide for his own safety. The servant bowed, and retired. , Now then Helen was at length in that very spot, which she had so an¬ xiously wished to visit, but not with such a companion. Donat paused for amoment; and she could hear distinct¬ ly, that the domestic fastened the door through which she had enteied, not omitting a single lock. Her tyrant left her no time for reflecting on the purpose for which She had been con¬ ducted Mther ; he ' hastened to undpse the secret door wMch led to Urania's baths,
ISS
baths, dragged her through it, and then commanded her to proceed, having first taken care to fasten the door after him. Helen obeyed, and as she moved slowly forwards, through the subter¬ raneous-passages, she observed that her husband occasionally examined the'side- walls with his hand or foot. At length he stopped before a small door half sunk in the ground ; he forced it open with a violenee which shook the whole ca¬ vern, -andlleld his torch within, in or¬ der to e&sinine it. —" Yes, yes '" said he, " this is it ! Tound in -good'time 1 ·—Helen, return I or canst thou find the way through these vaults without assistance ?"— She dragged her feeble steps towards Mm.
139 hiin : he grasped her arm, and dasbed her with violence down a few steps ter¬ minating in a small caveľ She sank on the ground with a shriek of pain, which her tyrant answered by a burst of diabolical laughter. —" Here, traitress!" he exdaimed ; " here is tht place of your punbhment and your perdition ; and here is thelast nourishment, which you shall ever re¬ ceive on this side the grave. I give it not out of compassion, but that you may not perish in your present state of stupor, and thus escape the sense of what Lhave doomed you to suffer.— Eat! revive to the foil consciousness of your misery; then die in agony, as others have died here before you !"— Thus
140
Thus saying, he placed by her side a loaf of bread and a small flask of water, which he had brought with him in Ms pilgrim's scrip. She was not in a con¬ dition to make Mm any answer, and listened in morbid silence, while he quit -tfed the ave» flinging the door after Mm with violence, and carefully barricading it on the outside to prevent her es- ícape. Nothing now animated the frame of Helen but mere animal life ; and even that was half extinguished by the shock wMch she had sustained the. day before and by long abstinence from all nourish¬ ment. She was scarcely conscious of what had past, and it afterwards cost her no little difliculty to recall the re¬ collection
141
collection of it. Instinct made her seize eagerly the food, of which she had so long been deprived ; and the re¬ lief, which this afforded her, was the first thing, which brought her to herself, and gave her spirits to ask the ques¬ tion—" What has happened to me ? WMther have I been conveyed ?"—She thought, that she must be the sport of some fantastic vision, and with the sen¬ sation of being totally exhauuted sbe closed her eyes, and endeavoured to end her dream. A violent shock, which made the hollow ground tremble beneath her, forced her to start up in terror ; and she now had strength and recolleâion suffident to rush forward a few paces, which
142 which brought her to the steps, down whicli Count Donat had so lately dashed* her. An ¡nstant after she was sensible of a second shock like that of an earth¬ quake, and which was accompamed by a, noise so loud, that for a few moments she was completely stunned. On re¬ covering herself, she was sensible of a strong current of air blowing into the cave: her heart beat violently with hope and fear, while she thought it possible, that the late earthquake might have forced tbe dungeon open. She hastened up the steps, and with rapture ascertained by the touch that the door had been driven from its fastenings, and that nothing pre- { vented her from quitting herpriîon. Witb, as much speed, as her extreme weakness
HS
weakness^and the total obscurity would ' permit, she hastened to profit by tbis interposition of Providence. She crept along slowly and cautiously, when on turning a corner she perceived a distant gleam of light. With increased hopes she made the best of her way towards it, and found, that it proceeded from Count Donat's torch, äs it lay half ex¬ tinguished in the rubbish, among which it had fallen. Without giving herself time to guess, what motive could have induced her husband to throw away his only guide through the gloom, or how he could have found his way out of these intri. cate passages without its aid, she caught it eagerly from the ground, cleared the wick
141 Wick from the dust with which it was dogged, and, made the fiame^ burn- brightly; while she frequently cast a look of anxiety round her, lest some one should be advancing to rob her of this invaluable prize. This apprehen¬ sion made her proceed with still greater exertion of speed ; but she had not gone far, before her way was barred by large heaps of stones and earth : she fancied too, that she heard a faint murmur at no great distance, like some one groan¬ ing. She stopped; she listened;—it struck-her, that from beneath a pile of stones, which seemed to have lately fallen down, there came а -voice, whose accents were familiar to her ; but be¬ fore she could recover herself from the horror
us
horrpr, wMch this idea occasioned her suffidently to ascertain the truth of her suspidons, a third shock, similar to the two first, but if possible more violent and terrible, overpowered her faculties so completely, that she sank upon the earth, unable to move for several mi¬ nutes. Fortunately her torch was not extinguished by her fall She_rose,the way, so lately open before her, was now completely blocked up by the earth, which had fallen in, and it seem¬ ed toher in the first moments of terror, that she saw the roof tottering above, and felt the ground giving way beneath lier· Fear gave her strength, and she fledhastdy down aside passage, which accident presented to her, nor rested, VPJ..III. h till
146 fill 'slie thoiight r that the place, WMch she Kid reached, was not totally unknown toher. She stopped, and looking down discovered lying on the earth', torn from its hinges, and considerably shattered, the low tloor of -that dungeon, wMch Donat had destined for her grave. She now exerted her whole strength topass onwards, without falling into an enormous chasm,wMch hadbeen formed by the late convulsion, and wMch Oc¬ cupied almost the whole breadth of the passage. She shuddered, as she re¬ marked, that the earth had fallen into the dungeon, and would infallibly have smothered her, had she remained there hut a few minutes longer. She reached the opposite side of the chasm
147
chasm with much difficulty, but un¬ hurt. She was now certain, that the Castle was at no great distance : but she dreaded either to miss the proper road, or to find it rendered impassable by earth and rubbish. Should either happen) she bad no alternative left but perishing of hunger in these frightful dungeons : nor had she much time left her for deliberation, since her torch al¬ ready began to draw towards its end. Observing this, she rushed forwards with desperate resolution, .and commit¬ ted herself to the guidance of chance. Accident, or rather a benevolent Pi ovi¬ dence directed her footsteps; and she ' reached the staircase and Urania's cham¬ ber, before her strength entirdy failed к 2 her.
148 her. Here then she rested at length; but that rest was insensibility. After some time her recollection rc. turned. She raised herself, and saw with surprise, that the chamber, which Donat to favour his escape had caused to be fastened so caiefully, was filled with people. She felt, that they con¬ veyed her to a couch, and rendered her every pQssible assistance ; and she heard them make a thousand kind enquiries respecting her health and her wishes : but her strength both of mind and body was so completely .exhausted, that she found it impossible to pronounce a word, Or even make a sign, that she was sen¬ sible of their attentions. It was pain, which enabled her to give the
149
the first token of sensation. Her arms and bosom were much bruised, and the blood streamed copiously from a wound on her head. She has never been able to recollect, whether she received these injuries, when Donat threw her down the dungeon steps, or from her being struck by the falling stones while mak¬ ing her escape. The persons, who sur¬ rounded her couch, lost no time in Dind¬ ing up her wounds, and the pain of this operation forced from her a feeble ci y. Finding that she was now sensible, they repeated their enquiries as to what had happened to her, and how she had been brought into so terrible a condition. She stammered outthe word " earthquake ! " Where was Count Donat, was the next h ¡^ demand,
150
demand, which she answered by point¬ ing to the private door conducting to the vaults. She was soon removed to a more quiet chamber, and thi* care which was taken of her convinced her, that she bad not fallen into the hands of enemies. •On the fourth day she was already declared to be convalescent ; and it was announced to her, that the Commander of the Bishop of Coira's forces, which had conquered the Castle, request¬ ed an audience of her. She consented to receive bm, and shortly after a young man of prepossessing appearance entered the. room. —" Noble Lady," said he, " though you are the wife of the cruel owner of this
151 this fortress, we are well aware, that you are not a partner ih his crimes, His people are some of them slain ; others have betaken themselves to flight ; and it is ih vain, that we have endeavoured to find the place of his concealment. Your pointing out the door into the vaults has not been suf¬ ficient; he cannot have made his es¬ cape through that passage, since the falling in ofthe roof has rendered it im¬ practicable; and had he in his flight been overtaken by the vengeance of Heaven, how couid you have avoided the sharing Ms fate? Be frank with us, noble Lady ; I conjure you in the name of humanity, tell us, where he is concealed, and depend on our dealing h 4 better
i 52
better with Mm, than he has been ac customed to deal with others."— Helen musteted Up all her strength, and endeavouVed to relate the drcum- stances of her escape : but anxiety to be as brief as possible, and her endeavours to conceal Donat's Ш -usage of her; (which she thought, duty to her hus¬ band forbade her revealing,) rendered every thihg she said obscure and im¬ probable. She mentioned the earth¬ quake, and to prove it showed the bruises and wounds, which it had Occa¬ sioned her. The stranger, however, assured her, that she must have received them 1 in iome other manner, for that no one in the Castle had perceived the slightest symptoms of an earthquake. > Helen,
1.-3 Helen, however, endeavoured to es¬ tablish her assertion ; and while recall¬ ing the various drcumstances which had passed in the caverns, she suddenly recollected the groans, which had struck bor hearing. She earnestly entreated, that the heap of rubbish might be exa¬ mined; she was obeyed; the ¿tones were removed, and beneath them was discovered the shattered and lifeless form of the Count'of Carlsheim. It was now the general opinion, that the violence which Donat had used in fordng open the dungeon-door, bad shattered the rotten cavern, had made the supports crack, and bad brought down the roof, whose fall had involved in it his own destruction. h S Helen's
'iái Helen's horror at this discovery, her urgent entreaties that the corse might have christian burial, and the many hours which she past in prayers for the repose of Donat's spirit, startled the pre¬ sent masters of the Casde not a little. They began to suspect, that she was not by any means so innocent a creature, and so-unfortunate á victim of conjugal tyranny, as she had been represented, and as m truth she was. They there¬ fore ceased to trouble her with ques¬ tions, considering her as the confidante aúd accomplice of Count Donat's crimes ; but as they had no Other fault to lay to her charge, and as the power of her rehtions compelled them to treat hei with respect, as soon as she was sufficiently
iss
sufficiently recovered, she was removed to the Convent of Zurich, and left there with a hint by no means equivocal,— "that all tilings considered, she wquld do well to pass the remainder of hef days within that sanctuary."— Helen's joy at understanding, that she had been conveyed to Zurich, was inde¬ scribable : she immediatdy requested to> see the venerable Countess Urania, and discovered to the patroness of her roo- therbafh herself and all that had happen¬ ed. Itwas now, that her fate seemed dis¬ posed to abate its severity. In an unre¬ strained intercourse with this excellent woman, wbo received her with open. arms, and to whom she unveiled hen whole, heart, she looked førward to a- Jb6 life.
156 life of tranquil happiness. Urania's conversation poured babam into ber Wounded soul, and explained' to her many things', wMch had hither »appear¬ ed to her unaccountable. Donat's resoltŕ- tlon to make her his wife was produced by a former passion, which he had en¬ tertained for her mother, and oy a de¬ sire to be revenged on her father, the Count of Homburg ; and that unknown cavern to wMch he had conducted her', was doubtless the same, in which (as ft was reported) the worthy father of sHich a son had starved to death two of the fugitive monks of Curwald. Oh ! Towers of Sargans, what ¿rimes have neen committed within your gloomy bounds I And will then the vengeante of
157 of the Eternal Judge sleep for ever? Will neither the heavens rain down fire to consume you, nor the earth" unclose to swallow you in its Womb, and thus prevent you from reminding posterity of those horrible acts, to whicli you have been so long a witness ? —Yet the blood"of your barbarous master has pu¬ rified you, and you are now the abode of innocence and virtue. Peace, long peace be with -you, and be with your lawful possessors; and may the curse of retribution only fall on those, who ' shall dare to deprive those pdssessorsttf their right ! Solitude and experience sometimes endow the soul, -which has withdrawn itself from earth to devote itself-to < Heaven, with a prophetic power. Eyen now
где aow I see into futurity ! I see, that the family of Carlsheim and Sargans, wMch bas already suffered so much, has still much more to suffers but again bay it —« Alas for those, by whom the de¬ scendants of Amalberga and Emmeiine shall be robbed of theu* hwful inherit¬ ance, and compelled to experience the calamities of their predecessors."— I have deviated from my narrative, to wMch Inow rebm,—Helen lived tranquil by Urania's side, equally un- «onsdous of the evil reports, which were circulated respecting her late mis¬ fortunes by her enemies, and of the be¬ nevolent intentions of her powerful friends. Her parents soon -visited her »% Zurich, and now that she was a widow,-
159
widow, requested her to accept the hand of her former bridegroom, the Count of Torrenburg: but Helen knew but too well, that no Count of Torren¬ burg existed for her. She had cou¬ rageously torn his image from her heatt ; and she avowed to her friends her knowledge of Ms passion for Amal¬ berga, and declared, that to see them. happy in the possession of each other was now the only wish of her heart. Helen's relations listened to this de¬ claration with nor trifling regret : they would willingly have rewarded her for her past sufferings'by the certainty, that the remainder ofher life would be past in happiness with one ofthe noblest of Helvetian youths. But tbey had brought with 2
"îeô 'with them (for the purpose of per¬ suading Helen to the proposed mar- * riage) some of Torrenburg's relations, to whom his passion for Amalberga was by no means so unpleasant a subject. She was now a rich "heiress; as Count Donat's only surviving daughter, she was entided to the extensive domains of Carlsheim and Sargans, and consequent¬ ly she Was a much more advantageous match than Helen. This gave -rise to some disputes between the friends pf the different parties : but the solemn de¬ claration of Count Donat's widow, that she never would lay aside that name, at length silenced every opposition ; aiid she obtained from them all a promise, that they would mutually exert them¬ selves
161
Selves tO accomplish the only Wish, wluch she indulged on this side of the grave; namely, the union of Eginhart of Tor¬ renburg with Amalberga of' Sargans. They were informed by her, that ac cording to Amabel's letter the lady was concealed in the Convent of Engelberg, and thither they hastened to apprize her ofthe happiness, which awaited her. î need not say, that they sought her there in vain; theCount of Torrenburg's endeavours to discover her were also un¬ successful, tih the arrival of Bloomberg, who assured him, that she must be in Landenberg's power, and that the most likely place to look for her was the Fort¬ ress of Rassburg, ι Tha consequence of this information was a bond of union between
/62 between Torrenburg and the Friends of Freedom against Landenberg and his brother in iniquity, the insolent Gess¬ ler; and the Count immediately ac¬ companied Bloomberg to Stein, that he might consult with his new al¬ lies the best means for effecting Lan- denberg's overthrow and Amalberga'«. deliverance. In the mean while William Tell's plan, for throwing off the Governor's yoke, and asserting the liberty of his beloved country, had been gradually ripening.. The impression, wMch he and búl friends, Walter Forest, ' Bernsdorf, and the two Melthals, had made upon the general mind was great, and their adherents were numerous; but the success
163
success of their enterprise stiU depended entirely upon its being kept a profound secret. Those men, whose plans were soon to burst out into flamţs terrible as the explosion of a volcano, and to give posterity an example of heroic devo¬ tion to the cause ofFreedom, were as yet compelled to work in darkness, and arrange thdr vast designs in corners and by stealth. It was not till the 28th of December (being the Festival of St. Alexander)that they ventured to muster their numbers in a large meadow near the Lake ofthe Four Cantons ; this was to be thdr last conference; and even tbis they took the precaution of holding Under covert of the night. The Count of Torrenburg and
16* and Edmund Bloomberg were also pre¬ sent ; but the former by his impatience had nearly ruined the whole design. Consdous of his exalted station, andof the valour of Ms new allies, he could not endure the degrading idea of skulk« ing about in darkness and concealment, as if Le were plotting the execution of some crime. He insisted upon an in¬ stant declaration of hostility against Landenberg, and that an attempt to re¬ scue his bdoved should be made with-r, out delay : it was not without difliculty that William Tell convinced him, how impossible it would be to rescue Amal¬ berga any other way than by artifice, without exposing her to the most immi¬ nent danger, and that he persuaded him
465
him to wait patiently till St. Sylvester's Eve, when (it was determined) the ty¬ rant should have an open and fordble attack made upon Mm ; though in mak¬ ing that attack, there would still be an absolute necessity for conducting it with the utmost caution. ~ Amalberga's friends had obtained some intelligence respecting her present situation. Dne of Arnold Melthal's sons, a spirited lad, equally well adapted to daring enterprise and the winding paths of artifice, found means to enter theJFortress of Rassburg in dis¬ guise, and ej-amine whether any thing could be attempted -.towards the rescue of the lady. Durihg her abode on the banks Of ths Lake of Thun, her sweetness and humility of manners ; her
Ι6β her majestic air accompanied hy the condescension of" an angd ; the little difference which she seemed to make between herself and the girls of the vil¬ lage, whom she honoured with the name of her companions ; all these to¬ gether had made her an umversal fa¬ vourite f and had not every appearance of a chain been hateful in the eyes of the sons of Freedom, it would have been easy for Amalberga to have esta¬ blished he r 'df as the queen of one pf the best people that the earth holds, and to have mounted Helvetia's throne by general acclamation. To an eager desire for rescuing this adored lady from the power of Landen- berg, was now united the wish to gain possession
167 possession of the strong Castle of Rass- burg ; which would secure to Helvetia the success of all those mighty plans, whose accomplishment still lay concealed within the bosom of futurity. Alwyn, Arnold Melthal's son, when Ъе ventured to approach the fortress in disguise, was not aware, that his was one of those countenances, which can¬ not pass unobserved. Fortunately, the eyes, whose notice he attracted, were those of one, by whom features like his were seldom viewed with displeasure. Landenberg happened to be absent, and had left his fair prisoner to the charge of .a female attendant, who'had for¬ merly stood high in his estimation for the sake of her Own beauty, and who now
now preserved her influence with him by condescending tolwratch ov«r_ those-, who were in present possession of that heart, to which she was herself become indifferent. Well skilled in manly beauty, she no sbOüer saw Alwyn pass along with a butket on his head (for he had obtained entrance into Rassburg under the disguise of a common water- carrier) than she was convinced of his being something oetter, than (lis dress denoted. She accosted, and questioned him. His affected simplicity could npt deceive herţjand he saw Mmself com¬ pelled either to adopt some artifice, or tobe reduced to that suspidous silence, which in such a situation would have been scarcely better than a confession of the, truth. 3 —"And
rø —'" And so you continue to'deny," continued the girl, " that there is any secret reason for a man like you being here, habited in a mann er to wMch, I am certain, you have never been accustom¬ ed? Young man, be frank with me! I should be sorry to give you over to some other questioner, who might use rough means to obtain an answer, or to order that you should be kept in cus¬ tody, till the Governor returns. Then tell me honestly at once, who you are, and what motive has brought you hither ?"— Alwyn during this speech had exa¬ mined the countenance of Ms new ac¬ quaintance, and fancied, that lie could read in it marks of a partiality for Mm vol. щ. ι by
JW hft» mean» «Söubtrm. Hit resolution was taken in a moment, and he thiew· Umself it ber feet. —« What tbrought me hither ?" he exchimed ; " 'twas Love, most beautiful of afl earthly ireature« I Bttt who I «m. ... Ah ! shall! dare to avow my¬ self one df the lowliest among the inha- tjitants of yonder valley, and thus make it certain, that my suit will be rejected, and »myself driven with scorn from the ■presenceof her whom I adore V' — —" And who и it that you adore i" demanded Ursula. —v Tou, lovdy angd! yOv !" he exclaimed passionately, while he seized lier hand, andrprest upon it a thousand kisses ; " my heart is devoted to you alone, and your cruelty will kill me !"— The
m
Tbeastenbbedauddelia*h№l Ursula forced herself from Ms embrace· and fled ; but it was mot long before she re¬ turned, anxious to convince herself, that her half-faded charms had really made so valuable a conquest. To make a woman's vanity bdieve any thing nattering, Heaven knows, is no diffi¬ cult task; and half an hour was sufficient to leave her no doubt iof her triumph. She soon grew weary of playing the prude, and she gave Mm to under¬ stand, that he would not find her heart absolutely marble; and thus did the handsome Alwyn find Mmself involved inan amour, at whose termination he could not guess, andofwMch, while it lasted, he thought, that he bad but little reason to be vain. 12 At
172 At present he reaped no great advan¬ tages from Ms artifice. It was impos¬ able to get a sight of Amalleiga, 01 convey to her a Mnt, that her friends in the valley were making preparations for her rescue. He was also soon com¬ pelled to retire by the leturn of the Governor, who was now frequently ab¬ sent for days together fiom Rassburg on account Of the popular disturbances, and who could only bestow a few isola¬ ted hours on the prosecution of Ms suit to the heiress of Sargans. As soon as the warder's horn announced the Governor's return, Ursula (who trem¬ bled, lest her supposed lover should be discovered by others, as he had been by ber) requested Mm to be gone, yet still there
173 there was a secret means left for him to gain entrance into the fortress of the rock, which (disagreeable as it was) for Amalberga's sake and the generalad- vantage, he did not refuse to employ. At midnight his doating inamorata ysed to let a bucket down through a chasm in the wall ; the rock was steep and flat ; the unwilling Lover was then drawn up to the top, where he was obliged to purchase every little scrap of intelligence, wMch it was requisite for Mm to know, by a thousand lies and flattering speeches; every one of wMch, to an heart filled withHelvetian honesty, was scarcely less painful than the stab of a dagger. 4' He was rewarded, however, for this 1 3 sacrifice
1*#
sacrifice by obtaining (He important in¬ formation, thať hitherto Landenberg's behaviour towards the Lady of Sargans hadbeen restrained within the limits of the most respectful adoration: bot that he had assured her with the most dread- fial Hmprecations, that a period wa» S-ted, beyond wMch he wobM no longer »öbmit to be the patient victim of her sweriry. The-first day ofthá ensuing year, he was determined, should make die «net beauty completely Ms by fiur means Or by farce. This mteUigence' induced Alwyn tobe more frequent in hb midn.grw visita ; he repeated them, tifi every part öf the fortress was be¬ come Derfectly familiar, and tiB every little ckciimsttnce had been carefully gleaned
175 gleaned by hún, which might assist kin friends in their design of storming the. fort and rescuing the lovely captive. By the Festival of St. Sylvester every necessary preparation was completed; and all the machines were ready to be worked aţ once in various pants of tha country·, whieh might secure the su,q- cess of an enterprise, of whose views the release of an impiisoned damsel made but a very trifling part—these views were of the most ex-tensive na¬ ture ; yet if the plan had tailed, in spite of the justice of Tell's cause posterity would no doubţ have branded Mm with the name of rebel, and confounded Mm with the common herd of unsuc¬ cessful adventurers, who bave dared to 1 4 attempt
i. 176 attempt objects beyond their pdwer to attain. But as his plan was arranged with the utmost foresight, and its exe¬ cution was followed with the most pros¬ perous issue, after-ages have .viewed his deed with admiration, have reck¬ oned it as the proudest triumph of the rights of nature over cruelty and op¬ pression, and have bestowed on its au¬ thor the title of a Hero : so certain is it, that actions are almost always weighed according to their result, and the most impartial judge (without being aware of it) is frequently induced to decide unfairly of events, dazzled by the lustre of the success with which they were attended. • Had nothmg but the Count of Tor- renburg*!»
177 renburg*s inclination been consulted, tho attempt, wMch was to dedde uponhis fu¬ ture happiness or despair, would not have been deferred till the latest day possible ; neither when it was made, would so small a number of men have been employed to carry it into effect. Perhaps in this respect something would have been sacrificed in consideration of the impatience natural to a lover ; but Helvetia's deliverers were not without a certain portion of that obstinacy, wjiich so often accompanies] valour and resolu¬ tion. Torrenburg's opinion would doubtless have had more influence with them, had he not been a nobleman and one who was able to bring so powerful a force either to their aid or against 1 S them.
VIS them. Tbey considered the most db* tatit trace of authority over them with abhorrence, and were determined, that every step, wMch they made in the ser¬ vice of liberty, shouldbe taken of thdr own free will. It was certain, that the fortress was but ffl garrisoned, and that its security consisted solely in its inac¬ cessible situation: in spite therefore of Torrenburg's entreaties and anger, they resolved, that no more than one hun¬ dred men thould be allotted for tiue ser¬ vice ; and among thete the jealous Hel¬ vetians, who could not endure that any hands but their own should break their fetters, would not sufier one of Torren¬ burg's warriors to be introduced. It avss not without some difficulty, that l the
179
the Count obtained permission to ac¬ company the party Mmself, and to-be the next to Alwyn Melthal, who »houli penetrate into the Castle of Sassburg. Never did any summer's day seem so long to the Count as St. Sylvester's, while he waited with impatience for the departure of light. No sooner was it dark, than the allies began to assemble by twos and threes from different quar¬ ters. It was one of the most glpomy wmter nights, that ever favoured a se¬ cret enterprize; and the glimmering taper, which was the usual signal for Alwyn to ascend the wall, was not yet discernible. Midnight was already past} stiU there was no token of Ursula's ap¬ proach ; when suddenly the trampling 1 6 of
ISO of horses was heard, and the gleam of approaching torches showed them a «Ody of soldiers coming from the Castle by a path, which Was well guarded by sentinels and provided with several draw-bridges. Landenberg was at the head of the troop. Unmoved by her tears and fainting, he hadjust informed Amalberga, that he should return the next day to hear her final decision ; and he was now bending his course to Sar¬ no, in order to exact the usual new- year's gift from the inhabitants of the Valley, and hear them renew the oath of submission to their Leige-Lord, .the Emperor. It was an established custom of the vice-gerents to receive from the Iiands of the vassals on the first day of the
1ΒΊ the new year, what little had escaped their extortion duringtheold one ; in re¬ turn for which they never failed to promise greater indulgence for the fu¬ ture, nor in spite of that promise to conduct themselves with increased op¬ pression. As he tourneyed onwards, Landen¬ berg recapitulatedto Mmself the advan¬ tages, which this year had produced to him ; the quantity of wealth which he had collected in gold, jewels, and other valuables; the possesion of the lovely Amalberga, whom he already looked upon as his own ; and above all, the power of throwing off the wearisome mask of hypocrisy, which he had at first been compelled to assume. —« As
IBS —" As to Gessler's death," said he to himself, " that has rather improved my situation, than done me any harm. It has relieved me from the rival of my greatness, and authorises me to exer¬ cise that severity, which is necessary for my own vie as, under the fair-sounding name of just revenge. These late un¬ availing efforts to oppose my will have convinced me, that I liave to do with a weak, powerless people, who may be incensed indeed so Ar as to make some show of resistance at first, but whom firmness and chastisement will toon re¬ duce within the limits of abject submis¬ sion. There are not many Tells among them, God be thanked! He was the only man whom I teased, and luckily he
183 heb either dead, or a voluntary exile in some distant country ; report says the former j but let him be where he will, so he be not here to spirit up my slaves against me with his poisonous influence. My slaves ì Right; they are mine, no other's. The ensuing year will, I trust, make dear to, the world, for whom I am labouring, and whose advantage and peril are most implicated in the busi¬ ness ! Then when I have attained the height at which I aim, doubtless my new dignity being shared with then- adored Amalberga will have no slight influence in reconciling these people to my authority; and her popularity will induce them to protect her husbind against the wrath of the deceived Em¬ peror.
184 peror. * The precious priïe oflcp secure^ I ehall then have no need of this assu¬ med severity; the affection of my sub- jeer»'Wilt'suffice to preserve them in obedience ; I shall be at liberty to follow thabent of my indinations by ruling witli a gentle sway; and all of us will at once be made happy, Amalberga, myself, and the country which we •govern,"— Such was the subject of Landenberg's reflections) many of which he occasion¬ ally imparted tosomelof his confidential attendants, as he rode along, totally un- cOhsdous of the foes so near him, and of the>'danger which threatened the speedy overthrow of all Ms ambitious hopes and piojects. Here and there a sentence or two spoken in a louder voice
185 voice than ordinary reached the hearing of the Helvetians, who were concealed among the various caverns öf the Castle"· rock : and then was many a sword half drawn from the scabbard to imposer eternal silence upon the insolent boaster. The vigilance of the prudent chiefs, however, and consideration for the public welfare compelled them to repress their unseasonable zeal. An over-hasty attack would have been sufficient to ruin every r thing. Landenberg, it's true, would probably have perished, but only tomake room for a successor perhaps even worse than Mmself. The object here was not to make away with a single tyrant ; no, it was to throw off a dis¬ graceful yoke for ever, and to bequeath tho
IBG tbe precious treasure Liberíy tn their children, and to the children o£ their children even, down to the latest poste¬ rity. Laudenberg theiefoie was suäer- ed to fJi*riísedvritk Me attendants imma· lested, iinthiiig gave the» warning oi thetfcuigtr, wkechbrked so near, ex¬ oept now and then a law whispering 2*ttmasmmgthe brambles, which made thar hau* stand an end, for it waanow the ghostly hour ; and as- they dreaded its being scjoethmg stiperoatural, thei sound only served to make those who heard it pursue thdr course with the greater apeed. Scarcely haet the last horseman dis¬ appeared in the farther patt of the Vak ley» or rather scarcely had da r kmag dropt
rø?
dropt her thick curtain between the ene¬ mies; st-aiiceey. had.the mountain-echoes ceased to reverberate the bst sound of the hoofs cf their smeds, when Alwiyn's. guiding-star made its appearance : Ur¬ sula's lamp was seen glimmering oathe- battkmcnts above. A few hasty words t were spoken among the confedérales re¬ specting the conduct ofthe eiiterpeise·; the last directions, were given j aad then young Mehbal sprang into dm bucket destmed ta convey him to her who expected hinv ttt mipatiendy, and whom he now met for -the bst time with expressions of pretended love. It was 1 no Ulung- sacrifice, Which poor Al- wyn made on th» occasion to the gémi¬ rai welfare. To constai the feelings of Mi
18β hls honest guileless heart ; tó dissemble love for one who was totally indifferent to him ; in many a rude tempestuovs night to encounter dangers, suchas no¬ tMng but the most sincere and ardent passion would have induced any'other e man to risk ; and then at last to throw aside the mask, and to hear himself called a betrayer and ä hypocrite, and called SO- with justice ; this task was a most painful one, aiid keenly did Al¬ wyn feel that his situation Was disgrace¬ ful. Yet he thought, that even this sa¬ crifice was not too much to make for hb native land ; and duty and patriot¬ ism made him submit to do that, which was of all things the most crud to his feelings, and repugnant to his nature ; they
1,89
they made hún submit to play theJiy- pocrite. Silently lamenting the ignominious character wliieh he was obliged to sus¬ tain, Alwyn followed his supposed mis¬ tress to a retiied chamber, where (she told Mm) they should be secure from disturbance till mornmg ; for hitherto the fear of discovery had only suffered tlieir interviews to last for a few mi- mites. But. at the moment when she expected to leceive the kiss of ardent love, and when she turned to her lover after having carefully closed the door, to her utter astonishment a gag was forced into her half-opened mouth; and then seizing her arms, her supposed admirer fastened them with strong , cords 4
190 ÉorÄtothe<bed-posts. It is true, that the general -safety had been dedared to require the death of'this wretched crea¬ ture; but the-noble heart of Alwyn revolted at fhe Шее. Even the precau¬ tions, which circumstances now made it absolutely necessary for him to take, caused 'his cheeks to burn -with indigna¬ tion against himself; 'he took care to confine Ursula's hands in such a -way, that the pressure of the bonds could give her no pain; nor could he résolve to leave even a creature, Whom in -Ms heart he despised, a prey to absolute despair. —rí« Tľear notMng, "Ursula," 'Said he in a gentle voice, while quitting the aroom ; " every thing shall he explained shortly,
191 shortly, and on >my -soul no harm shall liappen to you"—a promise, which was religiously fulfilled. Alwyn now hastened back to the bat- dements, and drew up the Count of Torrenburginthesatnemanner,by-which he had ascended himself; and anxious ав Eginhart'was to-fly to Amalberga's assistance, still did he not quit,his-sta¬ tion, till two mote of the confederate« were safely landed on the platform of •the Castle. These in their turn ren¬ dered the same -service to their compa¬ nions, and ra sufficient number were soon -mustered within'the walls to au¬ thorize their proceeding to more ha¬ zardous attempts. Half of them seized the sleeping centinels, while -the rest without
1Э2 '•without noise made the best of their -way to the great gate. They opened it, and the approach through the rock was soon made practicable for the re¬ mainder of their friends, whom time had not permitted to ascend in the bucket. ' No slight expectations had been en¬ tertained by the Helvetians, that this midnight attack would have made them masters of Rassburg, without its cost¬ ing them a single drop of blood ; but they had miscounted the strength of the garrison. Sufficient opposition was mide to compel the besiegers to pur¬ chase their conquest dearly. Many a brave Helvetian bit the dust, and shared the grave of the enemy, who had just expired
193
expired at bis feet. The dawn of morn¬ ing discovered the wall» of the Castle of the Rock dyed with the blood both of friends and foes. By the time that the sun was fully risen, tbe work was com¬ pleted ; Helvetia's sons had achieved their object, and the sheaths once more re¬ ceived their bloody swords. Tbe cMefs now employed themselves in giving orders and makmg dispositions to preserve their conquest, wMle Torrenburg flew to deli- veţ Ms Amalberga. He found her m a statdy,chamber; she was on her knees praying- forhim. The noiseof the combat had roused her from sleep; yet convinced that her situation could not alter for the worse, she experienced no alarm for her- self,,till as the clash of arms, occasionally drew nearer to her chamber-door, site voi. ш. к heard
İM heard theìMmetof Torrenburg shouted, and concluded, that he was among the tombattirits : then indeed she trembled, find šoughťrefuge from her terrors in sup¬ plication to her P4tron-Saint. The heart «jf the pious girl Was full of confidence ia the Divine justice : she doubted tıpı, tlrit the Ruler of dl things had decreed every thingYor the. best ; she knew, that neither bérseli nòr Torrenbufg-hadAmeriteeito «Ιιί- -fer, arid she trusted, that Heaven would ■act towards her with gentleness. In her ■euppHcatìons therefore she ШЬёГ»врбке of -the^òodílèss Of-Providence, than iliıplöred ■its help : úr if she priyed for any thing, it 'was tbt a speedy stop might be put -to the Shedding Of Mood, of whose fteJWiiig she was hut too well convinced i 'by the dashing of arms, and the dying groans of •some
Iflŕ
some, who were sUughbered at no great distance from her chamber. A long and fearful silence now succeed¬ ed. Suddenly her doot was thrown open, and a knight in complete armour entered the room. He hastened towards her, raised Ms visor, and wdl did she recol¬ lect the noble countenance cf bipi„ whose portrait was ten graved on her -heart in (cha¬ racters indçlible: but she recollected also his-engagements to Helen; -ihe was con¬ scious of ber dagger f and the .weakness cf ber heart, ahd attempted to force away tbe band, which he had.seized, and prest to his fips witb passion. It was long, be¬ fore she recovered from her surprise and confusion sufficiently to comprehend tbe whole extent of those tjeligbtfol views, wMch were now presented before her (by indulgent Fortune. к 2 ANun
196
A Nun is but a sorry describer of love- scenes , andshe, whotracestmViiarfátive, though she may not-perhaps have always been a stranger Co tender sentiments, still is unwiffing to dwell longer than is neces¬ sary npon those, whieh filled the heart of tbe happy Amalberga, when she· sank into her lover's arms, ahd murmured—" Tor- Tenbur¿¡ I artı thine l·"—I have since been assured, that in these first moments Of rapture.the name of Helen was not forgot¬ ten. In truth some trifling recollection, iorre little portion of gratitude at feast was due to the unfortunate·-who to pro¬ cure the happiness of Amalberga and Tor¬ renburg bad not hesitated to immolate her own. The sacrifice was indeed a most diflicult and pamful one; but never did Helen once regret, that sbe had made it. While
197
While thé lovers forgot every thing in the contemplation of those flattering pro¬ spects, wMch futurity showed them on all sides ; and while the Helvetians ¡were em¬ ployed ia taking every possible precaution, that might preserve to them the Fortress, of which they had so valiantly obtained possession ; the other Patriota (as, had been •previously arranged) Were carrying their glorious designs into execution in different paits of ithe country. ι Peregrine of Landenberg had reached Castìe-Sarno before day-break, i Де slept for a few hours* and then rose to welcome the-day, wMcbithe was. determined«şhouJd stie hım the hustand ot tbe HdreSs of Sar- gaös.r He had commanded« that towards evening a-stroňg guard should cppduţt her tMther from Rassbuig, when a Friar» be- j кз longing
193
longing; to the Abbot of St. Galli, and ' Wht) was entirely devoted to theGovernor, hâd : engaged'to perform thè marriage ce' remowytiMWeenltbem: whether with her consent, oy without it, the good father cared but Utile. К Anstellst to give as creditable' an appear 1 - Meei- ası poistM» ito t hfe mete; important frafte«.-tlöH!0fMsüfe,l«tie*i*ettthoti^ It bet* fo« the general ешйеяюп to open the day's business by Walking- Ih solenni procession to the ndghbotaririg сЪш-сЬ. Fbr thii purpose be was already descend- irigtfi«great staircase accompanied bya numerous train- of courtiers, when he wai informedr that the inhabitants of the ad; jačent distŕíétshad assemblea in the valley below, each bringing the accustomed Níw-ýear'sofférhig. Landenberg
199
tandenberg bad great confidence in omens ; he looked upon it as a pledge of future goodrfortune, that before he had set Ms foot withou; the Caatle-walb, his содае was ilijneded by presents, The procession to the cburch was, deferred for a.white : part of his attendants were sent to, take charge gi tbe ftfta, wMeb had been brought to him; of tbe fatteci oxen, the com, tbe fouit, tbe doth woven by the skilful hands ojf the industrious Hdvetian housewives ; the casks of wine ; and bete and thero a few bags of coin, which were not tbe least welcome part oi the offert jilgs, bi the mean while the Governor himself remained in the front-court, at¬ tended by a few of his most confidential attendants, and prepared for tbe reception of " the slaves of his servants," as iţ к 4 was
soo
was usual for Mm to term the brave Hel¬ vetians, The deputation arrived. It consisted of fifty persons, with Henric Melthal at their head, Henric, on wh'ose locks eighty win¬ ters had now shed their snows. —-" Lord Governor," said the venera¬ ble matt, approacMng Landenbeig, " the old year expired yesterday ; the new one begins to-day. How you have sustained the character of Imperial Majesty among the opprest children of a free-born nation, that is your affair. How we begin the new, is o«r*i· ' Be God the judge between you and us, Peregrine of Landenberg ; God, who has already judged Gessler, as he will judge ybu ! But as for you, my sons, do as ye see me do, nor hesitate to lay down your lives in the cause of liberty and jus¬ tice."— It
201 It is inconceivable to me, how the dar¬ ing eld. man was suffered to proceed so far in Ms speedt." The Almighty must have struck a panic into the tyrant .md his base dependents; but now recovering themselves, thşy hastily drew their side- weapons, which (from being rather in¬ tended for ornament than use, and able to do but little injury) were generally called " holy-swords." Some, who were un- ,provided with even these weak instru¬ ments, hastened into.the Casde in search of arms ; in the mean while olď~Melthal and his trusty companions had drawn con¬ cealed pike-heads from under their cloaks, ,which they fixed dexterously and with promptitude on the tops of their long wMte staves; apd now was the signal given for beginning a massacre, wMch -ib, K 5 once
2Ò2 once commehced was hdt conduded basti¬ ly. Among thè first \№o fell wite the Go¬ vernor. The feeble arm of Hemic Met thai, strengthened by Heaven and the jus¬ tice of Ms cause, gave the decisive Mow-, atld Edmund Bloomberg haitertêd to ex¬ tricate his fcther-in-law front Bie eröüd of those, Who (now that fltfey Wete recdveïea from their first consternation) prest on Mm to destroy fhe slayer tif their chief. Landenberg cursed his fate, tbat be should ull so disgracefully by the arm of à dotárd, and pouted out his last breath in execra¬ tions. The combat became general. The Friends of Liberty were attacked by tbe Governor's remaining attendants, Who were now better armed ; but ťMs opposi¬ tion was not of much avail, since at a given signal a second party df Hdvetians, 2 who
аоз who were in waiting фо the o**jtsţde of the Castb, hastened to support thei; con¬ federates. The superiority of numbers being qcjw on their side, the conquerors **ţoclajn*red quarter in the name of Hiinric Mek,hah The loss of their chief had deprived ^be scanty band of his adhere-its of aţi tţtejr courage : they were glad to sheathe then- weapons, and the conquering Helvetians' took them under their protection, and conducted them uninjured to.thelwuiid- aries. The gallaqt men were upwilliiig tp stain thetr native soil with blood shed un¬ necessarily, and dpub, ted not, that such a baţbarous measure would have induced the Almighty to withdraw his blessing froni their enterprise. They lost no time in taking measures for ifaaiatainbg them- K. 6 selves
204 sdves in the possession of Castle-Sarno. Towards evening intelligence arrived, that Rassburg also had been attacked with suc¬ cess, and during the three or four suc¬ ceeding days similar tidings were received from other parts of the country: Schwan- nau, Kussnach, Zinguri (which was not yet finished) and many other places of im¬ portance, had been wrested from the hands of Hdvetia's tyrants. Such uni¬ versal success testified, that the arm ofthe Protector of innocence had fought in their cause; and they thought, the best means of showing their gratitude for such power¬ ful aid to him, who detests unnecessary bloodshed, was to use their victory with mildness and moderation. They had ex¬ pelled their enemies, and reinstated them¬ selves in their.natural rights : moie they I 9 sought
205 sought not, more they desired not ; and itwas this laudable moderation, which, by preventing them from aiming to obtain further advantages, enabled them to se¬ cure, what they had won already. Peace after so long an absence returned once more to these happy vallies ; andra firm fraternal union for offence and de¬ fence was established, which I pray, that God may grant to last, as long as the world'exists. Has not the ignorant Nun sufferedher- self tobe enticed out of her proper sphere, .while she described scenes of war and the eflbrts of Liberty ? She, a weak defence¬ less woman, a slave bound in lasting let¬ ters? Yet Heaven be thanlced for it, those fetters are light: pious submission enables me to bear them, and they will ete
ж»
ere long be loosened by the hand ot Death. Count Donat's widow lived in tranquil seclusion at Zurich in the society oftlie Countess tirania; and their prayers were frequently offered up for the success ofthe honest Helvetians. They rejoiced to hear tìf -their victories, of Amalberga's rescue, .andof her union with theCountof Torren¬ burg. But Helen did not wish to be her¬ self a spectatress of their felicity ; nor (when sbcjrtly after their marriage the loppy pair visited hejr to express their mutual gratitude) could she be prevailed -upon to pass more than one hour in thetr ••ociety; and many, manyof the succeed¬ ing days'were for her days of anguish. Poor Helen was but a weak mortal, uo saint, so angel: and alas! to J orget is, a task pot so easy, as some may think! . fet
207
Yet in recompence fbr her past sorrows Heaven had still reserved one pleasure for her future life. Oh! Illessed Virgin, what a pleasure was that I what a surprise ! what an unexpected re-union !—But let me pro¬ ceed regularly. The good Domina of Zurich was dead ; the Princess Euphemia had already been appointed Abbess 'Of Tull, and therefore could not accept the vacant dignity. No persuasion could Induce Urania, at her ad¬ vanced age, to fill so laborious a situation, and the lot now fell upon Count Donat's- widow. She obeyed the general voice, and was well-pleased to have a means for exerting benevolence fo a more extended arde. She becatie (what I say of her ought not to be counted to her as a merit, «ince she did but her duty) she became the
208 the mother of the opprest; and-the man, who intrusted to her a· daughter, л sister, or a mistress, inewt/thitbshe could be nb •where' safer than in-ier artns. TMs-was universally known; and many a knight, before he set out on some distant expedi¬ tion, secured under .hér protection those treasures, ι which be ¡valued dearer than all others, wMch the world contained. 'One day a knight requested an audi¬ ence of her : as soon as she saw Mm, it struck Jier, that his features were not al- togeth-et unknown tojher. TT K -Sir Knight," said she, " it appears tome» that weihave met before."— , r—« You tray, truly, holy mother,," answered he; i" it was I, who by the Bishop of Coira's command took the Castle of Sargans by storm, and afterwards con¬ ducted
20Θ ducted you to this Convent. Methinks, you placed but little confidence ib me on that occasion, though perhaps it would have been for your advantage, had you shown more : but its true, you knew not my name ; knew not, that never had any one reason to repent the trust, wMch he reposed in Herman o{ Werdenberg. I wiH not follow your-example ; I am now preparing to reveal to you my dearest se¬ crets, and solicit you to become the guardian of my most precious treasure. Grief of heart some time ago drove me from my native land : my uncle's death necessitated my return j and being once more in Germany^ I suffeied myself to be persuaded to remain there : nay, under a borrowed name I consented to act as the knignt-protector of thr new Bishop's sub¬ jects,
sn
jede, and to become tbe asseitor of Ma rights and privileges. " h vras in this capacity, that I became ao-piainted with you, Lady, in the Castle of Sargans: report, and mysterious, dr «-umstaiices respecting your oonduct, I confess; had not prejudiced me in your fa¬ vour ; and ψ· · I did not treat you with to m , met and attention, aa (J ¡«та now -we¡ л i-rced) was justly dueto yonr merits. Atter escorting you Mther, 1 returned to Strgana, being commission? ed to, defend the Castle against Landen« terg and Ms associate», in the name of Count Donat's daughters ; whom the Bi¬ shop had adopted as his wards, and whom he publidy dedared his intention of re¬ instating in thdr rights, as soon as the place of their concealment could be ascer. tained.
an tuined. It seems, the rebellious Landen· berg thought, that this Was the fit time fon making liimself master of all Rhcetia, while the Teri Jurisdictions were torn to pieces by the tumults and confusion, to wMch hie artifices had given rise ; but re¬ port must have already informed you« ho»· soon, those ntm hop« were crushed by the noble efforts of the assertori of Liberty. " Iii order that I might not be quite idle fluting my undisturbed residence at Su· gans, thé Bishop (Who hat no antipathy to gold) commissioned me to enquire into the truth of an old tradition very current among the people, that immense treasures lié buried in the foundation of that an· tient fortress. Upon asking some ques¬ tions, I was conducted to an old and ru. ined
W2 ined well in a remote court, and assured that it contained wealth 4 inexhaustible. The Bishop on thb report desired me to cause tlie well to be cleared out ; but its contents furnished npthingibut venomous reptiles, filth, and some human bones, the melancholy memorials of former cruelties, whose commission Heaven no doubt had long since punished. Other places were afterwards pointed out to me as the repository bf tMs buried wealth ; but noi better success attended their examination. At lengtb I resolved, to set my workmen to dear out that sub¬ terraneous passage, the fallmg-in of whose roof had so neariyproved your destruction. It seemed to mc much more probable, that I should find here that of which I was in search, than in those places which I had . already
213 already examined ; but it was my full de¬ termination, in case of discovering the sup¬ posed treasures, not to give them up to the Bishop, but to reserve them for the heir¬ ess of Carlsheim and Sargans, who had lately been rescued from Landenberg's power, and was now Countess of Torren¬ burg. It was however less my object to find wealth which I despised, than to fur¬ nish my followers, with t ^armless occupa¬ tion, and by restoring l' concealed pass¬ age (wMchin our turbi · times is abso- lutely necessary in ever *ss) to ren¬ der a trifling service to ι -ity. The work was difficult and ted«, j f he wever, I was just rejoicing in the reflection, that'a few'days would suffice to finish it," when the Bishop of Coirà found it impossible to dday any longer with common de¬ cency
,21*
cency the restoring of Sirgans to tbe Countess Amalberga and her husband. One branch of the passage alone remained in ruins, and I would gladly have com¬ pleted my task; but Count Eginhart was already at the gates of Sargans. I hasten¬ ed to deliver up every tMng, which Jhad been committed to my custody, and we renewed our farmer friendship ; a friend¬ ship, wMch in the earlier-part of «ur lives had been most intimate. " It was my intention to ïequest his permission to finish the repairs of the sub¬ terraneous caverns : unluckily, as we -sat -conversing together, and recalling the events of former days over -our flowing goblets, he mentioned the sister of Ms bride, who had once made upon my {heart a very fordble impression ; but my ipas- sion
, 215 sion was not «Tosg enough to make me consent to commit my honour to the keeping of a daughter of Count Donat. The Count painted in glowing colours the happiness, which he enjoyed with Amal¬ berga -, and he finally accused mc of hav¬ ing treated the Lady Emmeiine unworthi¬ ly, and of having driven her into the jaws of perdition by my rigour and contempt. As her relations have always wrapt in my¬ stery the latter scenes of Emmeline's life, I am even at this moment ignorant, as to What is become of Her, .who was once so dear to me ; nor could I understand, to what fhe Count alluded in the conclusion of his speech. I could not, however, al¬ low, that I had acted by her with injust¬ ice, and asserted, with that warmth which is natural to.me, that no man of prudence and
216 tmd honour would have acted otherwise. 'Our* conversation grew bitter j and at length we parted in such anger, that it was impossible for meto submit to asking of 'him as a favour, that I might prosecute Шу subterraneous labours. « Perhaps you will be surprised at my being so anxious about such a trifle, as the repairs of these vaults ; I must therefore confess to you, that the real motive of my wish to examine this passage thoroughly, was nothing mure than a dream ; but that dream was in truth a very remarkable one. " Tlie first time that I broke a lance at a public tournament, it was my fortune-to obtain the prize, a ring apparently of consi¬ derable valuer I was pleased both with the jewel, and with the manner in which I ob¬ tained
217
taiaed it, and never bäte to- кем it m aUsBkbmn festivals; tiUapcrstrnw'tlliikiU. ed in precious stones convinctd me, that «he diamond was falser aad thai rmg itself scareelyi worth, three goM«o stridde *. In¬ censed at having been so grossly imposed upon, I snatched it from- my finger, and threw k over the battlements: the dr> ¿umstance of its having been the reward of my address soon made me wish to re¬ cover it ; but though my squire was im- .mediately dispatched, heieturnedwithout having· been able to find it. Ihadquite for¬ gotten this ring and all its drcumsttmces; but on both the two nights preceding Tor¬ renburg's entry mto the Castteof Sargans, I dreamt; that in traversing the subtecra» neons passage-1 found my lost ring, and * A Cjoin so called, feom its Scaring a slijcld*ni- prest upon it, ■vol. in. L that
■SI'S trnü ¡the false stone was'chnnged into a di¬ amond, /which illuminated the whole ca¬ vern with its radiance. ■ ι \ " I cannot account for the strong im¬ piession, which : thjs dream made upon •my fancy ; yet (Heaven knows !) I set but little store upon the treasures Of this world, and tveie I possest of allthe diamonds which the cai th contains, I sliould only employ them to adorn our Redeemer's cross ; that cross, which it is my firm resolution to wear in future against the Saracens, and other enemies of our holy religion. Yet irt spite of tMs contempt of wealth, and of the little faith which I put in omens, the repetition of tMs dream struck тау imagination so for» cibly, that I could not rest without ascer¬ taining, whether the vaults did really con- tain the ring,'which I had so long lost. "My
SJ 9
"My disagreement with loi renburg had made it unpqssible for me lo satisfy my doubfs by meats of the Cast|e-entranc but I thought it by no means unhkely, that there înight be some cc-mmunication between fhe passage and the ruinediAbbey ofClţrwild, wluch was s>taated at no great distance, and was just beginning to be rebuilt. J " I was vsçll acquainted with Falhar Jeljii , ι μ οι tby man, who had lately been appointed the, Superior, pi tliose, few Monks, who had escaped fiom Count Donat'i, bai bai ity. He readily acceded to my n-cjue^fs, andi immediately began mj woik , , " Foi s.evei.al days the ruins were езв- mincd wiihont success yet the assuiance of ijne of (the elder Mo«ks, thathe ¿етеаъ, í 2 bered
220 bered having heard (but merely as a tra¬ dition) that a private communication had formerly existed between the Convent and Sargans, made me unwilling to give up the pursuit. It was frequently my custom , after dismissing my labourers (wearied ' with then* fruitless endeavours to discover that, Which they were firmly'persuaded had no existence) to wander by myself, and mark the melancholy contrast made j by the slow ry-rising walls of the new build- | ing, with the ruins of the old one which ι had not yet been removed. The vaults ! beneath the Convent being generally the scene of our enquiries, as affording us the best chance for finding the so much wished- for passage, I fiequently loitered here alone, after my workmen had left me for the evening. A fixed melancholy had taken
221 taken possession of my soul : in truth, ir could not well be otherwise, surrounded as I was on all sides by memorials of mortali. ity, and tbe marks of celestial judgments! —" Where," said I Oftth to myself, « where are now the voluptuous pleasures of the Monks of Curwald f where the· pride afia power of the tyrants of Cari- ■ÆemiiHaSargahs? The gra ve has s wai- toWed them all·; iWthingremainsbfthem, but the meWoiry of their crfhfts aftd thb deteftiťioh of posterity i— Herman, still preserve in your heart iinstrikeri thé love mf vittüe-, and not less the hatred tìfvktV : bfe St OAcethe terror df tbe pr6fllgate anti the ftiend of the innocent and the Help¬ less. Bring equally before the world's eye the rights Of the oppi-est and thte criinfes oftheoppftjsSor, anduiifte in ohe péťioh the pıotecting and the avenging angel."— ь 3 « These
222 '· Diese ideas prest themselves upon my mind witli more than ordinary force, as I sat one evening in one of the Convent- vaults upon a heap of stones. It was in the vault nearest to those of Sargans, and despairing of finding the old secret com¬ munication, 1 had at length resolved tc employ my workmen in digging oiţt a new one. 'fhey had already commenced their labours, and were retired after mak¬ ing no inconsiderable progress. The hour was late, darkness had dosed round me, but an iron lamp was fixed .against the wall and. guided,my steps, ras I slowly tra¬ versed to and fro this abode of religious melancholy. Ihe scene was congenial to the state of my feelings ; I consecrated it to secret sorrow; and hereit was that I offered up my prayers for the futuie, here * it
223 it was that I poured forth my tears-, while dwelling upon the past. Yes, holy ţ»Iq- ther, my teetti ' fhe stein and haughty Herman, of Werdenberg has wept fie¬ quently ; has wept, when if any eye had witnessed the drops, his cheek would have blushed with shame at the unworthy cause of Ms sorrow ; to you alone, to the ear of. indulgent pity, he scruples not to disçloso the secret of his weakness- " Lady, my teats streamed for hav-" ing formed an early attachment (foe one, who deserved not my affection. I once adored Emmeiine of Sargans; but I tore her from ffiy heart, convinced that it was impossible for ¡ber to be virtuous^who had been educated in the very lap of vice. Vet Amalberga, Emmehne's sister, and who bad been educated with her, wa» L 4 modest,
EM mostet, pure, and irreproachable ; thun why not Emmeiine. f What had since happened to that unfortunate was un· known to me 5 and my disagreement with her brother-in-law prevented my obtain¬ ing that information irom bim, which I was now most anxious to obtain ; for one ef his egressions had cut me tothe very soul, md I strov« in vain to banish it from my mumbfy. He told mè, "that «ly rigour had driven Emmeiine lnm the jaws of perdition ;" and while Ms Worth lay heavy llptoi my htart, I couM nöt ľjut «шпщ that it wot possible for his acditatâm to be welt-founded. An union with «ft honest Юаля, «Uch as Herman of Wsrduib)trg boasts himself to be, W*ould have been tl* test шк most semin гпеыш ef rescuing İte* from tite power of her li- centioui
22î
cent ous fither aid tho cantigïon of Ms example Yet what could I do·* Say, that I w ач mistaken m my judgment bf Emfflehne, still wa it incumbent oh ttte to run so great a risque to preserve her, as to entrust the cdŕe of my honour to one, w ho I fc ired would pro·, e a wanton ' " But at -dl events, these considerations eame tOolate N iningwbnowlcftformt; but to banish recollections which, (Heaven enlyknowb,why)mtrudfcdtliémselv>ésúpon me so forcibly, and Which certainly were the most absurd and fruitless, with Which I could have employed my mind Yet still they did employ it in spite of аЯ my ef forts, as I sat with my ejes söhietimes fi\cű on thé dark vaults which frOWrtcd above me, sometimes on the gtímínÈiílngs 6f the instant lafnp, Without being con и 1 SClOlb
326 scious what it was, at whicli I was gasing. At length incensed at my own folly I started from my seat, and was quitting the vault ^biuptly, when a faint murmur struck my hearing. " I stopped. It was not the first time, that I had heard something like a groan, while traveling these vaults ; but I had always supposed the noise to be occasion¬ ed by the wind, or else to be the echo of my own heart-drawn sighs. But now it v. as not only more loud and more distinct, but I almost fancied, that it was followed by sounds resembling words spoken by one in agony. " I hastened back to the place, which I had just quitted. I shouted, to observe whether an echo would answer me, but all was silent.—I removed to a distance ; I came
227 I came back again ; I placed, my head against the wall of the cavern; 1 knelt, and laid my ear to the ground ; I heard the noise again. 1 endeavoured to trace ' it ; still it conlinued, sometimes louder,- sometimes weaker; till at length it con¬ ducted me to ι small iron gi -uing inserted I in the ground, and from whence the wind, w hich blew upon me, Seemed to be more heavy and chilling, than tliat which I' bieathed in the Vaults abqve. * f And through this opening did a Voice now reach me, whose melancholy tones ' seemed those of a female ! It sounded so > audibly, that all my doubts vanished at once, and all my sensationsresolvad them¬ selves into the single eager enquiry—' By> what means I could,assist,flie*sufferer i' — —" Are you then come, at last?" an- i. 6 swereii
2β8 swered tbe voice; " but spiai; louder, for I cannot understand w'hat yeu saj!— My tentes are so confused.... and my bram setmi to- wMtl round ahd round so rapidly !"— '' I repeated my enquiries, but witli no better effeetv —" L bear thèsound öf your voice, but not your word»," answered the captive; " and weakness prevents mydiaggmg,my¬ self nearer to the grate—Do ybu bring me foo8;?>—Abe·) itrts so tent sincìe yo» last visited *«·!*—Iwav afraid, that yo» had-t c5edsiàddenli?-Af*aidi did isay?-MJh,l Heaten, wbowOnilâ have suspected, (hat I should ever hava. dreaded Luprian'» «ЫЫ"'*-' 1 " These words wériepWiiTOijrnerídsfcwiy*. and in brcfam sentencns. 1 1 now st'rettìwd aby voice to its utmdlt extent r and dwelt 3> with
229
with peculiar einphasig on the words· " Help" and " Liberty." --"Liberty?" she repeated; "no, Luprian ; at your price it would be too dearly purchasedv Urge me no more to- be the partner of yOur flight ·. could I have ever stooped to disgrace, I need not haVe languished SO kmg in tbis dreary dungBQtv В I have иО choice left but death ot infamy^ I prefer the former ; leave me; «nd let me die!—Andyet,. ». Qhl, Cod in Heaven ! To part with even. the most miserable existence is so bitter.. .,ι Oh!· it »ΜϊΆ Jîo bitteri" " I saw, that к,- would be vain for me to> labour any more at making myself under«) stood ;->»bcV the famt tone, in which these last wsmfciWeri» tìttereda alarmed b*i Yet Lsjjjoke snee again, but no wfcwer! war *г-> ι turned;
230* turned ; I doubted not, that the unfortu¬ nate had fainted. " How 1 might effect her delivery with the utmost celerity, 1 knew not ; yet in my angui-.li and lincei tainty I accidentally sii utk upon that, which was most pru¬ dent : I hastened to the small temporary building inhabited by Abbot John and his Monks, I related in afew words what had happened, and requested their advice. " The Fraternity one and all hastuned with me to the Vault, every one bearing a mattock, a pick-axe, or some such insttu-' ment. They were holy benevolent men, resembling the original founders of tlieir Order, and had escaped as it were by a miracle from the flames, in wliieh their guilty brethren had perished; ' They were eager to redeem by their own conduct th«
231 the slur, whicli the crimes of otheis had brought upon their Convent, and w ere as gieedy of good actions, as most other Monks aie of rich legacies and well-stored cellais. " We were now near the vault, and al- ïeady the beams ofthe dislant lamp struck our eyes, but on our entrance, tliose among us who weie best-sighted were aware, that the vault was not so totally unoccupied, as I had left it. By the glim¬ merings of a small lanthorn a tall dai к figuie was descried, kneeling on the be¬ foı e-pipntioncd grating. I sprang for¬ ward. 'Ihe stranger heard my steps, started from the ground, and lushed by me so suddenly, that I attempted to stop him in vain. I called to the approaching Monks not to let Mm pass ; but be&ie they *
232 fhey could rbacli him, his foot slumbled, and he fell prostrate on the ground. • " Totally engrossed by thdr irhpatiohce to rescue the prisoner, my companion·. weie listening forwaids without paying any ancntiön to the stringer; but a thought, Whith passed through by mind Uke a flash of light, made me conceive, hOW important it was to examine hhn. I flatteťed toyself, that I should discover in him that same Luprian, whoni the unfor¬ tunate hacì mentioned, ahd Who in all pro¬ bability was her gaoler. SKoulet my con¬ jecture provò correct, I Considered this meeting us a great step towards her deli¬ verance ! I theiefore gíašpéď Mm firmly by thiS arm, and dragged him towards the fcrttp, in Order that I might examine my prize- «Ibe.
233 " I beheld a miserable creature, enve¬ loped in the ragged habit of a monk, ahd whose bloodless cheeks, sunk eyes, and emaciated limbs would have excited ray deepest compassion, had I hot had good cause to harbour suspidohs, that corny passion Was a sentiment, of Which hè was but little deserving, —" Art thou Luprian f* said ï in a thuiuteïingvokr!. ·' He sank м my fiset, тй 'stammered butMitvowal. -"." Wretch!'* Itìontinasdj "whit motive could indüt» ihte to cbnflne an unfortunate Woman ift yonder subterra' neous dungeon ï"— " He Was šäent fot a few ««menu;. théh suddenly starting from the gtoiaid-r-- " Y6U know that she it confined thêfe,'- said
284 said he,with a-rfuriòus look, ''„andrlinow- ïçg t thaS,ıypü.,know enough-wtoidestroy •wl^Aakjöie-^^WPr«' ftUfSÖOftr -ai-JS-UI ail» , «IW»iat»e4vnrl'!'.O// £ Λτ,ι1 bsnurrna , /'¿HfeiftrejW llimssllf, SftHenly uponjtl* hsap of rttmşj.şrrö maintained aň qbstiaMe sUeııç(t.ibywJlh>gtqLi0WO' that btøjeitt no more than Ms nau"ie>.I first.endeaiiour·' ed й> itestify Umi Що a discjoaure of this mystery ; and finding lnyjbneate.prödiis^ rø.effet*i!4!h»d те&овдзеДсу persıiîsion, painting ih as strong coloyrs as pfissibkji th*.«rMdty,cť«Ufferiijg Ae,mrfoitunate to rjOT»Hirtong»r)W'tejristii), , and «гФййт ingJnm to »tone hi some,«jkîgrae,forjibţs faults towards his captive, by being Mm.-. s»l£,the bstrvtal«i*,tO, effect her.reiease. •tni)t4e,mtTatil wMte rt myi companies,had RUen,ţo;work with their.spades and nrat- . · ' tocks;
aja torks ¡ but large pieces of stone frequent¬ ly fell into the dungeon below ; and the cries of ithe sufferer, who dreaded being crushed beneath 'their weight, convinced them, hqw dangerous was this mode of procuring her dehveranceyand finally com¬ pelled them to desist from the, attempt, , " What was now to be done f While we agitated this questioni .Luprian stood wlthihiá artns folded, silent and thought. ful, as if He too had'been resolving some difficult point, at length he ithrew himself oh Msikneei bifore m КгЗДо-оЦгСРВфарй ťhalhiä |ife änd Hberty ; pl>94Ítl be stcure-l to him, he made a proposal, whiţh he sWore to fulfil conscientiously. ,, u ,;„ [ —" No one but myself," saidhe,-" can enable you tp.seţjţţiaţ captive free, and it is in my powejtrjtstshow ypu şucb means ^~ as
236 ss are most sure -and speeds. You see how rotten is this vault·, and you may judge from tite faint murmur of her com¬ plaints, how deep her dungeon Is sunk iato th* ground- It will at any fate be Ι»^ Λ ere ytiuwa foree your way to hert and from her %мгете wtakhets it is ün» HkeÍy,th»tiH«ál,buMltTetmywur.àH:iVa!, e-zrM-snWWiAaecIf^tliieiftiWrø get* of having he* ШШ dashed Out by som« ïraghiöhV «fitte ïriWnbling röct out-öMyipfsTc öne -word to atmrt me of fife ahd ftťgtVeft«siH »Ud I M Immediatdy fuWiish ýon With ÖeplårtatiDmi, WMch tsböUMyoaWfirsëmyoBer) thb dagger snail eiiable tt« Vt Hk» «ith me tothe grave."-·- «"The AaksiStefel, Wbfch LupíĽm now póihWd towards Ш ШеШ, «ispiíed us with
237
м ith no alarm. It would have been easy to wrest the weapon from his grasp ; but our impatience to assist the unfortunate captive compelled us to give the icquired promise. Her complaints had now again ceased to be audible ; apd we felt, that tiot a moment Was tob» lost, if we meant to find her Stilt in existence. " As soon as we had solemnly engaged not to attempt either his life or freedom, Luprian resigned his dagger to one ofthe Monks, ind informed us, that in order to accortiplish our-object it would be- ne¬ cessary to quit the vault, and seek a dif¬ ferent entrance' to the lady's dungeon, wMch wai weH known to him. Accord¬ ingly we folfewed'him for some- time-, tili we arrived at a'remote part of the Con¬ vent ruins. —" Here,"
ÎSS
—" Here," said he¡ Stopping before a ruined wall, from Which he гето^ a few loose, stones, and showed, uä a narro-*»· ffight of stairs ; 'f here уоц must descend, and these Steps will conduct rvou^tt-frlhe place, of which you alp,, jø, ызагф ¿Now then I have performed myprorpisf, arid lequire the performance of yours: permit meto retire."— , , *" I.iiistily seized 4 torch fi-ţţuţ оде of the Monks, -ii*d.waB hisţenine<d c ţff n th? staircase, withoiţt giving mys/$ a; mo¬ ment's rJeflection : but ,the, more rødent. Abbot dejtaiţed mţ, gave ¡the torch toLu- prianjrand co*i)4iande41iim^o fiiysh f the wprk) which ifec.ihad, bggijin, before he ckimecljtrlie reward of jiij services. ''•Ncţj^iijg w"^ kşft-tpr Mm bpt to obey,. He guided us down about fifty stags, atid, 4*ί .__ after
азэ
after reaching the foot of the stairs we had a subterraneous passage to traverse of the same length, With ¿bat, (Which lud led m from the grating to the ruined wäll. It was terminated by an iron door strongly fastened on the outside, and wliieh had we npt detained Luprian, we should luve found no little difficulty, and lost no little time, in opening. As I made this observa¬ tion, I cast upon him an accusing glance ; but tlie door undosing left mc no time to express Mi words my mdiguaţion at this proof of Ms intended treachery. , We rushed eagerly'into the duogeoji, and fouod it to be a large vaulted cell, of which darkness badı take« 'such complete pos¬ session, that the beams ,»f ι our > torches Were msuflicient to. dissipate the gloom, and could only,shed-a faint glimmering· j around
340 around us. Its only recommendations were its loftiness and space. By holding our lights on Mgh, we could discern (but with difliculty) the iron grating inserted in the roof, through wMch the complaincs of the prisoner had so* seasonably reached me. Exactly beneath it stood a loaf and a flask of wine, which Luprian had just let down into tlie dungeon ; aad in a comer of it stretched on amiserable pahet the ob¬ ject of our search lay fainting, as indeed we had suspectedrfrom her sUence. With the assistance of one ol the younger ,5*onks I raised her from the ground", and kore her tothe upper air-, which w» con¬ sidered as the most likely means of bring- ing hev to herself. « Thia-lropesmwiwepproved vain. Ani¬ mation was lost too completely to be-so >i easily
241
easily recalled. Above an hour had elapsed since our conveying her to the Abbot's dwelling (where no means wete neglected that could restore animation) before we had the least reason to flatter ' ourselves with hopes ofher recovery. At length with inexpressible delight we saw her half unclose her eyes; but she in¬ stantly shut them again on account of the pain caused in them by the light, to which they were now quite unaccustomed. " We gave her every possible assistance, and after some time she gained strength and recollection enough to enable her tò comprehend the favourable change, wMch had taken place in her situation. Tears of joy, and ber clasped hands raised in gratitude to Heaven, were her only an¬ swer. She strove to thank us for the vol, ш. tt service
242 service whicli, we had rendered her ; but emotion choaked her utterance, and to express, her sense of ourlcmdjiess by looks was not in her power, ainee the beams of the sun (who was now risen) were so pain¬ ful to her eyes, that she had been obliged to cover her face with a tMck veil to save herself from relapsing into insensibility. " We therefore carefully excluded day¬ light from her chamber, and left her to repose. While she slept, we resolved to take the opportunity of making Luprian explain a business, which we conceived to be of some importance, and respecting which our curiosity was raised to the Mghest pitch by hearing some of the Monks assert their persuasion, that Lu- prian's features were not unknown to them. Ike last Abbot of Curwald, who was
243 was supposed to have perished in the con¬ flagration, had borne that name, and in spite of his pale countenance and meagre form they verily believed my prisoner to be no other. We were now all impatience to ascertain this point; but we found, that in order to effect our object we ought to have been more upon our guard. Oc¬ cupied by the melancholy situation of the lady, which excited universal interest and compassion, not one of us had paid the least attention to her gaoler : now »hat we recollected him, he was not to be iaund. It app^red probable, that he had forsaken us immediately upon our entrance mto the subterraneous dungeon, since no one remembered to have seen him since that time, nor indeed to have bestowed a thought upon him. We hadnow nothing и 2 left
<ί*Η left for it but to-rail at our inattention, and to lay the blame upon each other. However, wc did not think our loss of any material consequence, since we doubt¬ ed not the lady's ability to dear up -the mystery ·, and at all events the captive was at liberty, and we had effectedagood deed- « She awoke, greatly strengthened by lier refreshing slumber : her first request was to be removed from the sodety of men, and committed to the charge of per¬ sons of her own sex. We had already agreed with л respectable widow in one of the neighbouring villages, that the inva¬ lid shouldbe taken to ker house, as soon as she was able to bear the removal. The good woman soon made her appearance, and the stranger's impatience to quit the Monastery
245 Monastery was so extreme, that we judged her likely to suffer less detriment from the journey than from delay. Tlie distance was not great ; she was placed in an easy litter ; and her nurse took such good care of her both during her removal and after¬ wards, that she was quickly pronounced out of all danger. Her eyes again became accustomed to day-light ; her hearing was no longer hurt by the loudness of human voices, and she could speak without diffi¬ culty : yet has she never thought proper to disclose her name either to myself, or to¬ the Abbot who visited her daily.—But let it-still remain concealed; there is at least me title, wMch- after hearing the brief re^ lation of her sufferings I know well to be *■·» proper right; the title of the purest and most heroic of virtuous martyrs, a M3 name
246 name Which deserves to be engraved on maible, and employed to add sanctity to altars! " You are surprised, holy Lady, to hear the cold and serious Herman speak vnth such enthusiasm ; but let it not injure me in your opinion. The rescued (prisoner perhaps was once beautiful, but now she is so no longer. Sorrow and confinement have robbed lier person of every charm, which could inspire tiie voluptuary's heart witb passion : yet were I ever to love agam, my soul should be devoted to -the perfection of female virtus, not of female kıvdinçss. Emmdine, the enchanting Emmeiine, with all her train ef charms and graces, perhaps, I may intime cease to remember; but never, oh! never shall I forget itiie farm of mý f ale emaciated cap. tive,
247 tive, smiting into the grave the victim of hei prindples ; never while he has breath, ' shall that interesting countenance fade from the recollection of Herman of Wer¬ denberg ! *' But I have wandered widely from the object of this long discourse, I caipe hi- 'ther to make a request, to which all that I bave said is but an introduction · tin- health of this noble persecuted creature, of my friend, my sister, my presei ved one, is now almost re-established. She be¬ gins to consider, what it will hereafter be teost expedient-for her todo ; and as sbe says, that she has no rdation in the woild to whom she dares confide her toterests, she has condescended to ask my advice re¬ specting her future proceedings. We both agreed, that a convent is the most proper m 4 retreat
ЗД9 retreat for her- in her present circum¬ stances; and on my mentioning tohcr that, whidi is under your direction, holy Mother, she received the proposal with rapture. l —" Oh J surely," she exclaimed, " my mind cannot yet be quite itself again, ori could nor have hesitated a moment re¬ specting my choice.—Hden of Homburg! —the Convent of Zurich !—Heavenly powers, how could I have forgotten those- dear dear names so long ?"— " She then enquired eagerly, whether Urania Venosta still lived within these walls·, and when I answered in the aflirm¬ ative, she discovered such strong emotion, as her gentle despondent manners had little led me to expect her being capable of feeling. She clasped her hands in ec¬ stacy*,
249
atacy ; a shower o£ tears rolled down her pale cheeks, whilt. the sank on her knees, and returned thanks to Heaven ; she then entreated me to leave her without delay, and prepare a receptfon for her in your Convent. I would sviffingly have first as¬ certained, whether she Was already known to you ; but her impatience would not admit of my postponing my journey for an instant, and Lwas compelled to de¬ part unsatisfied. , " Now then may I hope, that my request will not be rejected ? Shall I be authorised to assure my friend of a welcome reception within these walls ? Speak but one gra- dous word, and a few hours will be- suffi· dent to bringher to your feet. Conduct¬ ed by the good Abbot she has followed my steps hither, and I need only your m S permission
• BM
permission to deliver her up to your pro¬ tection."— It is superfluous to say, that Herman's request was granted with readiness, but how great was the emotion, wMch his nar¬ rative had excited in his auditress, how ardent her impatience for the arrival of the unhappy lady ! She was unable to re¬ strain her tears, and a thousand joyful ex¬ clamations escaped her lips, whose import was unintelligible to Herman. —" Am I right," said he, " in sup¬ posing, that my friend is not unknown to you ?"— —" Heaven grant, that it may prove so," answered the Abbess, while she hast¬ ily wiped away her tears. " But as yet you have allowed me so little insight mto her history, that I scarcely dare give credit to my
2SI
iny hopes. Oh I furnish me with more light; tell me every thing that you know about her ; and prevent my nourishihg the sweet but deceitful dreams, wMch now oc¬ cupy my fancy. Alas · alas ! it is impos¬ sible that they should be verified; in pity then destroy them at once, before these fond hopes have time to take such root in Iny heart, that to tear them out again- would almost break it."— —" AU that I know respecting tMs stranger," answered Heittun, " is, that she was immured by het frietids in the Convent of St. Roswitha several mo'iths before the fatal conflagration. It was not long, before she became acquainted with the manners, wMch prevailed iii this pol¬ luted Sanctuary. Luprian, the unworthy Abbot of Curwald, whb even Under the Μ δ protecting
252 pıotecting roof Af her father had insulted her by a declaration of his passion, re¬ newed his persecution with increased ar¬ dour in a place, which waa completely un¬ der his dombion. Much time was not suffered to elapse, before her resistance was punished by confinement in the cell, whence I released her i yet she. was occar· sionally compeUed'ta return to the Con. vent, ш order that her virtue might be as¬ sailed by artj flattery, and every power of the most refined seduction, as well as by severity and persecution. "The day preceding the dreadful night, in which these dwellings of shi were puri. fied by firej, had witnessed such a scene of temptation, as Luprian thought could not possibly fail of success. But it was defeated ш a manner -so djsgraceM for the
253
the enemies of innocence, tlut spite and fury took the place of seduction and love. The heroine was compelled to endure a va¬ riety ofthe most crud insults and injuries, and then was dragged back to her dun¬ geon so exhausted with her sufferings, that she could scarcely be called alive. " To her return to this prison was she indebted for existence. It was sunk so deep witMn the earth and so remote from the inhabited parts of the Convent, that she only, iad a slight suspicion from dif¬ ferent circumstances, that something un¬ usual was passing above her head. She was confirmed in this idea by several days eUpsing without any nourishment being brought to her. She was reduced to the greatest extremity; and hunger would soon have put a period to her sufferings, when
254 when the prison-door was unlocked, and the Abbot entered. A cordial of-great power, which he gave her, restored her strength sulficiently to enable her at length to comprehend the object of his visit. He first informed her ofthe events which had lately taken place, and then proceeded to propose to her the terms, on which she might obtam her liberty. —" It is universally believed," said he, " that I, as wefl as the rest of my Order, have fallen a prey to the flames ţ I encou¬ rage this opinion, since it enables me with security to quit a profession, for which I am ill calculated, and which I have always held in detestation. I acknowkdge it, my passion for you has hitherto been such, as you, ought not to have cctaiplied With ; but I now come to declare sentiments so pure,
255
pure, that you may safely listen to them without doing the least Injury to your honour. I have rescued the Abbey-trea¬ sure from the ruins ; I have also secured such considerable funds in other countries, as will enable me to support the establish¬ ment of a,temporal prince in any place v wMch you may prefer, provided it be one where my person is not known. Nothing is wanting to complete my happiness,-ex¬ cept the possession of your hand, and I trust, you will not be so blind to your own advantage, as to reject n*,y honourable suit. But one choice is allowed you; either you must perish in this dungeon, whose existence is now a secret to every human being except myself; or else you must take a solemn oath upon the cross to share my flight from Ger many, and be¬ ül come
256 come my wife, as soon as we are safe in some foreign climate. There is no time for deliberation ; the success of my plans depends upon thdr speedy execution, and you must Instantly and at once pronounce the sentence, which decides'both your fate and my own.—I wait your answer!"— " That answer was such, as might have been expected from one, by whom the li¬ centious Luprian was heldin as much ab¬ horrence, as virtue was hdd dear and idoli. ized. She asserted the mdissoluble nature of his vows tp religion, and repaid Ms tender speeches with such scorn, that he left her with a threat never to repeat his offer, but to suffer her to perish of hunger without compassion or remorse. But the captive was too dear to Mm to permit his keeping that resolution· He tormented ι her
SÍT her with frequent visits, and desisted not from his fruitless, endeavours to reconcile her to Ms plans ; though tq her great sa¬ tisfaction he was latterly compelled ţo ab¬ stain from entering her dungeon. A sus¬ picion existed, that considerable treasures were buried among the ruins of the Mo¬ nastery ; it was therefore judged prudent topiace sentinels about them, and thus was the execrable Monk debarred all inter¬ course with his prisoner, except such as could be carried on by favour of the iron grating; " Luprian now found it absolutely ne- eessary for Mm to visit Italy, where he had deposited the cMef part of Ms wealth. He entrusted the care ofthe hdy to Ms sole Confident. As Ms absence was protracted longer than he had himself expected, she enjoyed
äse
enjoyed some respite 'from his infamous addresses, and was hot without'hopes, that her entreaties and süfferiilgs would at last induce Ms representative to take some steps towards effecting her deliverance. Thosehoptìa however were continually dis¬ appointed. His heart was not more flexi¬ ble than Ms associate's ; he remained im¬ mutably faithful to the trust reposed in Mm; and in answer to her enquiries re¬ specting the transactions of fhe regions above her, he gave her such accounts of (he successes of her enemies andof the desmc- tîon of aH those who were dear to her, as almost extinguished her anxiety to escape from ber dungeon. She saw, that notMng but sorrow would welcome her return to liberty, and the natural love of life strug- gled but faintly against the certainty of present
25Θ present sufferings, and the apprehension of those, which were still to come. " Day after day crept away, during which the dreadful uniformity of her un¬ happy situation was uninterrupted, except by moments of utter despair, whose power fiequently was on the point of sub¬ duing the poor prisoner ; or else by those. gleams of ungrounded hope, with which Providence strengthens and comforts those whom he means finally topreserve, in or¬ der that they may not quite sink beneath the burthen of their calamities. -Luprian still returned not: the lady's complaints seemed gradually to make thdr impression on tiie mind of his deputy. He occasion¬ ally suffered Mnis to escape him, that it would not be impossible to obtain Ms con¬ sent to her liberty : and at length at her earnest
860
earnest request hè was induced to dedare, that he was ready that instant terput an end to her sufferings, provideď&he would consent to share with him as his wife the enjoyment of that wealth, wliieh the Ab¬ bot had placed in his custody. '· Here-then her hopes again were dis¬ appointed. Vexation added bitterness to the manner, in which she indignantly re· jected his infamous proposal: and the wretch, exasperated by her cutting ex¬ pressions, swore, that he would put his plan in execution without her that very day, and would leave her to her fitte. He kept Ms oath ; and the captive must have perbhed, had not the Abbot fortunately returned at this identical moment. His expedition had been attended with no¬ tMng but disappointment. The wealth, wMch
261 which he had vested in foreign hands.bad disappeared from a variety of causes, some through mischance, more through treach¬ ery; and he now only returned to find his associate fled, his treasure plundered, and Ms mistress as inflexible as ever. Vex¬ ation, poverty, and fatigue threw him on the bed of sickness. Many days frequent. ly past, durmg which the captive was to¬ tally neglected ; when at length her gaoler appeared, it was only to throw to her a loaf of that bread, of which he now could with difficulty procure a sufficiency for his own sustenance, and with every time to assure her, that this nourishment was the last, which she would ever receive from Ms hands. He spoke no longer of flight, or indeed ofhis passion for her ; in truth, the, former now seemed to be al¬ most
262 most impracticable, for the rebuilding of the Monastery was begun ; people were constantly employed in the neighbourhood öf the dungeon's entrance ; and the out¬ lets from" the ruins were watched with more vigilance than ever. The sufferer frequently entreated him to promise, that he would at least reveal to some one the place ofher confinement before bis death ; since in order to increase'her terrors he never mist an opportunity of assuring her, that he had not many days to exist. But in vam did she represent to Mm, that when he should be in another world, her sufferings in this could by no means be to Mm of any advantage : he was deaf to her supplications. Bitter and contemptuous irony was Ms only answer ; and it seemed as ifhe solely enabled her to support life, in order
263
order that he might still have a human be¬ ing in Ms power to torment. " It was about this time, that the vaults above heï prison became an object of exa¬ mination : they were completely dogged up With rubbish, except one narrow pass¬ age conducting to the grate. She had often determmed on ending her sufferings by a Voluntary death, and for several days persisted in refusing sustenance ; but nov/ that she frequently heard a noise above her head,· and even once or twice caught the gleam of distant torches through the iron Opening, her feartui resolutions were laid aside, and their place occupied by the hope, that accident perhaps might effect her deliverance. " These hopes she concealed most sedu¬ lously from her tyrant ; and so often had her
364 bev sweetest dreams disappointed her, that despair still was able at times to regain his former influence over her mind. Yet she was now so accustomed to mark by some piteous sound, that there was a suffering! ■creature buried in these caverns who im- plored assistance, that slie continued her groans and cries, even -when she had long given up the expectation of thdr readiing the ear of compassion. In truth, the workmen, during the intervals of their la¬ bours, had caught the famt murmurs cf her complaints ; bnt they put no other in¬ terpretations upoi. the sound, than such as were suggested by terror and supersti¬ tion. Fortunately oui· enterprise necessa¬ rily brought us every day nearer the place of her sedusion ; tül at length some good Angel made me attentive to the cry of sor- 4 row
îfes row, and guided me to tbe performance of an action, which I shall never ctáseto consider as the most blessed and fortunate event of my whole life."— Herman of Werdenberg here ended his long narrative ; the emotions which it had produced in Helen were so violent, that every similitude would fall shoit of ex¬ pressing their strength. — " Ľmmeline !" said she in that inter¬ nal voice, which is only audible to the soul, " thou liv'st then, and I shall once more ciasp to my bosom the poor forlorn orphan, the persecuted dove, the pious martyr of chastity and religion !—And Herman is your deliverer ! that very Herman of Werdenberg, who once was unjust to your merits, and who now (ifl may judge by every possible evidence) vol. m. n adores
2d· adores you with the warmest, purest af¬ fection, ever kindled In -the bosom of a mortal! Oh ! Helen, Helen, what unex¬ pected joy ! You will see two of the best of human beihgs made happy after long and cruel sufferings, and will yourself as¬ sist in forwarding their happiness ! My own plans of worldly bliss have all been ruined ; in reward for my not murmur¬ ing at their destruction, grant me, ye powers of mercy, that wisdom and that foresight, which may enable me to esta¬ blish the felicity of my friend on the firm¬ est foundations and with the least de¬ lay."— Herman was at a loss to comprehend the long silence of the Abbess, and the deep meditation, into wliieh Ms narrative seemed to have plunged her. At length she
267
she recollected herself, and at her request he retired in search of the stranger, Helen having previously stipulated that he should not be present at their meeting. She was not certain, that in the first moments of emotion she should be sufficiently mistress of herself to conceal Emmeline's name ; and from what he had said, she collected, that it was not her friend's intention at present to discover herself to her deli¬ verer. A few hours elapsed, before Emmeiine appeared leaning on the good Abbot: Helen now was no longer surpiised, that in her present situation bhe Ind not been recognized by her former lover. She w-ii sadly, sadly changed ! It was necessary to have been-quite as lovely as Emmeiine, in order ilot to have lost etfery charm of per- n 2 son
•268
son (Jiming the long and cruel period of her, captivity; it was necessary to have possest as wouderful a strength of mind as hers, in order to escape -witli her senses unimpaired from the fearful shipwreck of all that was then most dear to her. Ah ! Herman, Herman ! that youthful vivacity, \vhid\ appeared to you so high a crime, and for w(iich you so unjustly blamed the innocent girl, was now fled for ever ; its place was supplied by a mild and serious look of lesignation, whose melancholy it's ti ue was soiiielime& illumined by a benevp¬ lent smile ; but the smile was but mo¬ mentary, and its lustre soon faded away. Yet thus it w abjithat jou wished her to be ; and thus must Emmeiine needs appear to you a thousand times more pleasing, than while she yet shone with allthe brilliant powers
269
poweis of unfaded youth, vivuity, and beauty. Beautiful in truth was Emmeiine' no more ; but Emmeiine was still inte¬ resting beyond expression. A slight frail nymph like form, so light that it seemed as if air could have sustained her ; a face, robbed of its roseate colour, but so daz¬ zling fair, that she resembled a marble statue ; a countenance, from which a' painter might have forined a portrait óf Christian Humility, and to*which the con-' sciousness of heroic self-denial and of long abstraction from all eartbiy bo-**s and pleasures, had given a sai'rt-like expression that was almost supe'natural ; such now was the once brilliant Emmeiine of Sar¬ gans! But Helen did not make these observa¬ tions during the first moments of their N 3 meeting; L
270
meeting; she could attend to nothing but the joy of once more embracing her per¬ secuted friend, whom she prest to her bo¬ som with pleasure too great for utterance. Emmeiine was more composed; itwas teng since she had seen Helen, whohad never been to her mote than a beloved play-feUow, -whom she sometimes; «mem¬ bered with » wish to meet again, and sometimes quite forgot in contemplation of nearer interests nod impending dangers : but much more was she to Helen. The sufferings of аг.йаЫе persons, witb. whom we bave ; ever bad even the slightest ac¬ quaintance, give them an extraordinary value in our eyes; and they inspire us with an affection for them which rises to the highest pitch, if we feel that it is at all in our power, to show them kindness, and
271 and to repair in some degree the past in¬ justice of their fate. < What happened at this interview be¬ tween the re-united friends ; with what rapture Emmdine was received by the in¬ firm Urania, whose life was now drawing towards its close; the recapitulation Of what had past during their separation, and the plans which they arranged for the future ; all thb I shall pass over in silence, and shall only relate so much of the tatter, aa may be absobtdy necessary. Time and grief had made alterations in Herman'« ap¬ pearance scarcely less surprising than in Emmeline's. His assumed name·, his gentle manners softened by melancholy r.ecollections and by compassion for the in¬ valid, so di&erent from the sternness and contempt with which he had ever treated n 4, her
?72
her at ţhe Bishop's, court ; the diiiineás of her still-enfeebled sight ; the darkened cjranjbefr, whose half-light рдЬ/ afforded her an Indistinct view Qt hci deliverer, iyheftjhe vriaiţcd her, these circumstances hail contributed to conceal Herman from her knowledge, ( and she only entertained a suspicion, that the sound of his voice ■was neţ totally.unknpwnrto her. , But she remarked lus growing, affection-, and be¬ ing i-nwiffingto encourage.it,' she abstain¬ ed from making those euquiries, which Biij-jhji pe*%»ps Jiave satisfiedl-hej: fcuriosity, bjitrf-rhjcb, also jrøight have led him to be¬ lieve, tliat she was interested respectmg hit». i„i _ \ i _ . . She wal perfectly ignorant of all, that had passed during her captivity. She had given her gaoler's assertions implicit cre¬ dit,
273 dit, and firmly believed, that the few per¬ sons whom she loved were numbered among the dead.—With what joy did she hear from Hden's lips the assurance, that Amalberga was alive and happy, and that she herself was indebted for her release to no other than Herman of Werdenberg '— In truth, she had hitherto been resolved to discourage the attachment of tMs un¬ known wai r ior ¡ but this resolution only lasted, till she discovered his real name. Present gratitude and former affection now gave him a ι double interest in her heart : yet did it not so totally overpower all other feelings, 1 as to determine her fo forget entirely ithe injustice of his formel: conduct. Sbe wasjresolved to put liim to a severe trial ·. she was besides not quite certain, that his ancient prejudices might ν 5 not
274
not still have some influence over Mm ; but a few conversations with the Knight were sufficient to- efface every suspidon on this subject. He frequently visited his unknown mistresa at the Convent-grate, where (the Detter to elude a discovery) she never appeared witnout a veil: with every visit his attachment evidently in¬ creased irt strength; yet even in her pre¬ sence he frequently bestowed a sigh upon the rejected Emmdine, whom he never mentioned faut in terms of interest and compassion. This conduct wis not with¬ out its advantage, and when hewas soon after compelled to fulfill Ms vow of assist¬ ing in the crusade against the infidel Albi. gtóe, het did not depart without hopes of being welcome at Ms return. During his absence the meeting took 1 place
275
place between Emmeiine and her beloved sister. Hden had ttt length gained sueh perfect mastery over her feelings, as to en¬ dure without agony thè presence bf Tor¬ renburg and the happy Amalberga ; and she and Urania were the delighted wit¬ nesses of a scene, which appeared rather calculated for the regions of hght beyond the grave, than for the habitation of wretched mortality. Amalberga, cfcesped inthe armsOfthat »ister, Vhom ehe liadW 1 long numbered with the'deaďj Tortiti- 1 burg, Urania, and Helen, the'Spectators· of and the partnera in their joy ; andthrm- the rehtion of Emmeline's cruel süffer-i ings; and then the description ol Amal¬ berga's undouded happiness; -and •thrift'' the brilliant prospectó for the nlmre'Whictľ displayed themselves to both,'an* WMch' N6 for
276
for this time were ito illusions ... No, I will notiOust my feeble pen with the de- scripjioe ! Thq report soon.drculated through the country, that the lost daughter of Count Donat was stiH in existence. The sisters shared die inheritance amicably, like two lovers dividing some scarce and delicious- fruit, each anxious.that the other should receive, a full proportion. From every quarter of the free and happy Helvetia, thronged the ancient friends of the family of-Sargans to Congratulate the co-heiresses. At length came also Herman of Werden¬ berg in quest of hiuunknowB mistress, whom be understood to· be resident at Sargans ; he returned from Ms expedition, crowned with glory, and rewarded by the Pope with absolution from his sins ; a fa- 3 vour
277
vour, ef which the pious warrior stood but little in need. Count Torrenburg prof¬ fered him the hand of his sister, of the rich heiress of Sargans, ot her whose beauty had formerly fascinated his eyes ; but his heatt was now possest by the poor and friendless stianger, and the hand of the iicli heiress was respectfully declined. Indignation at this retusai was the reason assigned by Amalberga for the non-appear¬ ance of her sister ; the stranger however was not equally invisible, tliough her veil was not yet laid s ude ; and her consent to become Ms bride soon repaid him for his constancy. It was not till the espous¬ als had taken place, that she revealed to him her real name, which Herman now grown wiser heard without repugnance ; for Ms early prejudices had at length lost their
278 their influence in his bosom, and Emme¬ line's past sufferings left him no doubt re¬ specting the purity of her future conduct. He believed, that he had plighted his faith to a. needy friendless orphan; and the orphan in giving him her hand made Mm the powerfiil Lord of Upper-Carls- hdm, of Ortenstein, and of many other fruitful terdtories. Happy were tbeir days ; happy was she through him, and he through her! He had found once more the long-lost jewd, of whose value he was so fong unconscious; he had found the attachments of Ms early youth and of his maturer manhood, the choice both of his heart and of Ms head, and had found them all united In the person of his adored Emmeiine ! And Helen was the spectatress of thdr felicity,
279 felicity, nay is so still at the moment that I trace these fines I Dear as they were to her, so dear to her are still the sisters and their worthy husbands !—Lo ! how in this world every thing passes away; God be thanked for it, even our passions pass away, as well as the rest. Tranquil age succeeds tbe impetuosity and hurry of youth; the summer, whose every day was disturbed by tempests, is replaced by the mild and mellow autumn.—Much as it had suffered, bitter as had been its disap¬ pointments, cruel д» had been its sacrifices, even the heart of Helen at length was at rest. All my friends still flourish; all who are dear to me still live, even the venera¬ ble Urania. My native land smiles all around in blessed peace ; not one of those, who
280 who are near to my heart, has as yet been obliged to pay with his blood the price of predous Freedom ! Guilt begins' to be a stranger among our citizens; the dwell¬ ings of luxury and indolence are convert¬ ed; into sanctuaries of virtue and rdigion. The Monastery of Curwald has rben from its ashes With increased lost', e ; no Lu¬ prian, no Guiderius now rules there ovei· proud voluptuous Monks; no sisters of Love * now inhabit the cells of the neigh¬ bouring Convent. The good Abbot John has admitted into his fraternity none but suchlncn, as look on vice with no less de¬ testation than Mmself; and their holy con¬ duct has completely, removed the stigma, which the remembrance of their abandon-.
ed
281 ed predecessors had fixed upon tile whole brotherhood of Cloister-Curwald. In the subterraneous vaults of Sarg.ms has Herman lately raised a splendid monu¬ ment sacred to the sufferings of Ms wife. Thirty silver lamps blaze before it ; an easy and unguarded entrance admits every one, who chooses to approach it; and there does many apilgrim often loiter to hear with pious admiration the history of a still living saint. Amalberga was desirous of opening the communication between the vaulted ca¬ verns and the south-western mountains; where the fugitive Monks established their hermitage : but hitherto all attempts to discover the outlet have been unsuccess¬ ful. The old Gertrude is no more ; the Countess Urania's age and infirmity for¬ bids
282 bids her visiting the Castle; and the di¬ rections, wMch her memory could fur¬ nish, are rendered of no avail, the vaults being completdy altered in appear¬ ance by the ialling-in of the roof. Re¬ searches made on the outside of the moun¬ tain have been equally fruitleis, nor has even the Hermitage itself been discovered. Probably tbe holy Society has been dis¬ solved by death : Fame will not hand down their good works to tbe admiration of after-ages, but that is of but litde con¬ sequence; they stand inscribed in letters of flame in the book of tbe Everlasting!
283 ELIZABETH OF TORRENBURG [CONTINUED.] Elizabeth, Countess of Torrenburg, tt Count Oswald of March. By this, my dear brother, you must be as well informed of the Mstory of the La¬ dies of Sargans, as myself; I am impatient to know your opinion of these papers, and whether the eflèct which they have pro. duced upon -.'-jar mind is as strong, as that which during their perusal I experienced uponmy own.-wYet that is impossible*. my peculiar aituation.makes these annals, inexpressibly mteresting to me ; and did not
283 not the parchments, from whidi 1 have copied them, bear unequivocal marks of their antiquity, I should suspect their hav¬ ing been written for the purpose of being laid before me. While I read, I was half tempted tobelieve, that the good old Abbot, who recommended them to my notice, bad inserted all those passages, which apply so well to my own situation, in order to lead me unconsdously to the poin*,' where he lias been labouring to place me ; and if this were the fact, how would hetriumph in tlie success of Ms design. ! But ihe dr- cumstances of these memoirs are alas ! but too authentic; as to thdr antiquity I have such proofs of it, that I would bold¬ ly match them against the title-deeds of my domains, and other old documents of that period, at which these annals. are stated to have been composed. Never-
285 Nevertheless, feeling it to be of no slight importance to me to know, whether what I had read was authentic or a mere fabrication, ,1 spared no pains to ascertain the fact. You arc aware, that I became possest of these writings by little better than a piece of theft ; and in tiulb there may be good reasons for nov communicat¬ ing to one of the laity these papeis, which contain such frightful memorials of eccle¬ siastical guilt __I could not therefore at¬ tack the Abbess on the subject directly ; but as in hopes of pacifying me for my disappointment she had proposed to relate such particulars lespecting the Ladies of Sargans, as were most worthy of my at¬ tention, (an offer, which I at first rejected out of obstinacy, and through vexation at the denial of my request) I now sum-, moned
286 moned her to perform her promue, for the purpose of comparing what I should hear from her with the particulars con¬ tained in the stolen parchments. The Abbess bestowed upon me a few hours every day in that doset, where the portraits of the Ladies of Sargans had first attracted my attention to thole models of virtue and patient suffering : her account of them did not greatly vary from that, whicli 1 had already obtained. I confess, that where ever a derical person would have appealed in rather an odious fight, ."•hether it was a Monk or a Nun, a Bishop or an Abbess, the good lady never failed to soften matteis and wrap the transgrtss- ors up carefully in the veil of mystery ; but those examples of misfortune and he¬ roic self-command, which appeared so pe¬ culiarly *
287 culiarly applicable to myself, she confirm¬ ed most folly, and exactly as I had read them: nor can I decide, whether they made most imprejsion on me while read¬ ing them alone and for the first time by the glimmerings of a midnight lamp, or when they were pronounced by the lips of this holy woman, this earthly saint, whose head within a few short years (too soon alas! for those who like me know her worth) will be crowned with wreaths of celestial glory. Though scartely in the autumn of her life, the excellent Abbess already stands upon the brink of her gräva. A slow con¬ sumption insensibly destroys her noble powers, and the repetition of these ad¬ ventures was a real sacrifice which she made to fnendship. Her present state adds
288 adds weight to her testimony. Ihiiik you, Oswald, that so near the transit from time to eternity, she would waste away her hours in relating tales, which she knew to be mtre fabrications ?—Im¬ possible I No! oh,no! What I have read, Is true! The venerable Urania, on whose image my eye rests with such soft melan¬ choly, and thou too, poor Adelaide, whose bitter fate beguiled me so often of my tears ! you both once lived and suffered, you both once thought and acted, exactly as I have read and believed; and these ex¬ amples of heroic patience, under afflictions far heavier than mine, shall serve me as guides in the conduct, which it now be¬ comes me to pursue. But for thee, generous Helen ! for thee whose
«Ì9
whqse, fi^tune ,8Ц thoroughly resembje? my Чт> ftjOí» tbjsjtinqwent tbqu shalt be ihfi model, after ¡wbich jbwA-i-oţw my \iil*?k batırt sajd cbaraţjtecî | ap^he-ţ my «ΓΡίί^Λ staggers under the, \ye(ght> of •humaa щ->це:-р» to фу porjffia»| д -ţifl, I 1 Ч тп^уеуй,&г,.одт^лпфа)еиет1 >> ÄlbWbqii,^ ajticopvinçe-Jjbftyipnétiie powpr ¡of dt-rabtmg» that ^Н-Йеп Ьеце$ i*ndno otiifip, iWgş ţhe q^hpj-ijss «{(tlie со·». çhıdııjgınanuşçrıpt,) -Ľvejcj, B ageof ^,Ιιρ цад Bî¥ks of WiMfrfrŕ» w№*0>mi>H.\ mv äífpr m the#te souid, Hif^-·!*· p f fe<#4gj íu»d qb j' how Jtţţich ,has tlys, petsuasi^on шсгеавсДш вдеуев thçivalije c^the^t-itmg, iìt ih ».ми МШ rø-ft^/'feilA^s po-eted oţi, to me Helen'e picture, a-jd-^uçh^was toy enthusiast«; •'aMi.iJtøy.j^jhal! I, хщ угеак vol ш о enough
290 «trough to fancy a striking likeness be. twee» her features-, and those which my mirror shows me. I made the observation to my- venable friend ; she assented to it With a smile, and added« '--thtt it was hot in person alone, that I resembled Helen of Homburg."·-^ started, and requested im explanation as Ό the parts' of Helen's Mstcn-y, which Were so fike my own. Again tiie idea bt an imposition flitted across my mind; 1 believed, What had passed between myself and Ida to be a to¬ tal secret in the Convent; and if the Ab¬ bess was icquaiifted -with nty story, it was still possible, that all which I had heard from her had been dictated by Abbot Con rid. Her answer, however, soon remov¬ ed this truirpidon. —í' jHefen," said she, " Was not only fair,
291
fair, iUustrious, benevolent, and pious, like Elizabeth, but she was also learned like Her. I underatand, thatthe exercise of your pen is your favourite amusement ; and there still exist writings of Helen, wMch are well deserving your attention, and which I would willingly, communicate toyou; my dear Lady,* had I not been po¬ sitively enjoined to the contrary by supe¬ rior orders."— The recollection of ray treachery forced the colour into my cheeks. To prevent my confusion being remarked, I hastened to enquire—" wh/I' was prohibited this plea¬ sure; and who Was my secret enemy?"— Tbe Abbess shook her head, and confest, thatthe writings of ecdesiastical personi, frequently contained circumstances iin- o 2 proper
'Ш propeţ to-be ¿WdBiknijmin toi the 1 laity, tor fe»· Of· giving 1 -' a/ shockwtjo-'thelr.vicitho'-t dö&«pinione^«Ii Λ«' 'ьои-Г 7"IÍ o-Jil , зш» Butionlyiretolvt/.'.ishe. added smil¬ ing,' Ätriibecpmei *.myofioriri Sisterhobd, andiwhervl die¡ Liwill. bequeath you.niy iïtirti*irjiiand''iful}jpélimilsiocir.to penise rall the; tt*ianu^eMpiWepi-sUtddinbtlt.e-spacipus aroMvesiof this Convetit."-*Viriu(ru ,u и Ah ι my dear brother, weť&Moa'&rt á Torrenburg and Idaan Amilbar-ga, how easy лмоиЦ lit be .for meii tortuksi such a stepit, But Üıe; illopiıwgıiİEMchıİ!eıttar- taiìi bothoo6<Herixy^aad!lvs!'eiistreBsvíinid mý'štffl livelytsenseipfrthei peffid-y ι and in- jusdcffwítJiAvJiiclilthey repaid rayriiffectioH, witt perhaps' wake me yetj longer besitate to'act, as would best become n-¡é;iiand to follow
393 follow the glorious example of self-demal, set forth m Hden's conduct —Farewell, dear Oswald, my heart is sad, but loves yotttimo-erly ^ ^ "· 0IÜ J ,_! ! I »1 1 ! j •Usquicj mm Ι n j л· ! ν nf 'i- 1 f bin ποα üt/r Ut ,jí ι j з Лл! bnr -iti İt ,ιι i i I í · -isJlsd 1 í«,-· n 1 « o í li « tf мш! Q« ι ol m rit jjiv *,n lit -grjsd vi - 1 -ä j »t > и jù ' j mulli vf lil ι j t π ft го) ιοί« ι ι № ι·· e jiu -lil u í ä 1 it ш •ч il ι 'i *tt m ni Ь ík li ι Ι ι li u Ь " u 0 8 Elizabeth
2S* ¿r'* 5 -l i -. s ^ 1 jr<i I* 7 j' / Elizabeth of Ί er renburg to Сощ QiwU.
I have confided my secret history to the Abbess. In whom can I more properly confide, than in her who will soon stand betere ttte Almighty's throne, and before whose eyes all concealed things will soon be made manifest ? To whom can 1 better apply for advice, than to a aoul so near the boundaries of earthly being, that a ray of celestial light already illumines it, and enables her mental vision to see the things of this world in their proper likeness ' Sh»Ì9 now informed of every thing; ' and! must acknowledge, I was frequently 4 \ î < о embarrassed
295 embarrassed by some questions, with which she every now and then interrupt¬ ed my narrative. ·*-" Tbtn you are certain, f mtt certain of having been the first object of Mont- fort's affectioni·*---- v —-" 1 am to understand then, that the attachment between yoii" was equaUy strong, and that his whole tout was as mnch devoted to you, as yours was to himi*'—. . 1 " What? and could he really be aobaat as todeaert you, at the very foot of the attar, merdy became at that tnomeiit he happened to be struck by the «harms, of one of yaw bri dem aidi? this seemi to me very »главке, my daughter ; and me. thinks, it does not well harmonise with tht aclraowledgedprobibity of Moeafort's о 4 tormer
29β
former «mdfit*tUj»-Ifche had'sfc^lirei-iyou, to be'sore he'would not haveipersuaded you to fly with Mm from youc brothers Castle—ontt ye»,iif >I«collect right,' you raentÌDntul,j>tJiat].his ^rrying c yeu,u ей prevented your being-«r-fffipeikid .to es-' poüstfuthe agiidi.Coeiitb.Tif .Tonrdnburg, wboiWBs then aiinuafctlisWbjett^ÉiVoiUr- ateitionjitat (WsMn-ihiswrirties l-ţcamft knowivtoyou) he wajiafeiiwarilitM.ejbi· ject of your esteem í —You were-y'chiiigii amiibfepm'idistiessi í jlarriaLto Montiert: . . .AÍàvel-y^pt-í^^A-rtlasw-iridueifdtóm toi adsstj^typiiiiiibght v<baf tttbuiagainit faialwpatjsiblei thatl eeK^sympltaiy, and aliBtjnisJomeb^/'iJiavsrliTdilmnitogiyfi the vijiyliame, sÄliipl^jai^^v-ií^ikeMii^eísyer^ sitne í^si-p-ffiwt&í lb w Joa pj ib з «*ц .- ISiití» .'»Vtó'rtheoWi^di» modei of argil·- —i m Л * o ing
ÍS97
lii^-mdiof.séeiflgiiiMngisdldopterl by tite -Abbess, i IÄr*t-apimlat»sdtheetrc)iirg.rea*öns whjrrhyl l*-ål't(jJl*«iicvev kat imoSéring -ane bis :hand .Montfort wis; prompted by •ssfe4ioni-M--"Thri J Abbo(B¡i.*«cluio.wledged their force; butslieiaduerfe-" that it .was 'veryl easy for thatjiwhiuh/wasat/riit no- -tMngrltneirertJiaa compassionate'interest for tWibeautifuI Elizabeth, to beiiiitime tamát^luatíktbiUíňhr^^n ri r >' .· ι lilis cűmpjSmentjeoí.ils-timedíput rrţe ímore-jout .ofipatienceíi thaW rjÆ&liamlfi- ating/questioiib-mdri-rimarkái! j.It WaSJwith difficulty,,that.I cíncealtid aajűill-humoilr, №d«sW%jíndeasd»red toi-cUangeá the sát»jíci^iettt*jiiisc!»uis«.l :·Λ; Jj. " .'¿•Ajielrí ,1-^ejepbrotJMrt eti«y«weséems tobe in Mont*fottfsiMiiiieítji,iandi avers« ••»АюГ.^ТЬ»: tJfeťiÄ^i,of; my-venerable i --.b 0.S ccunseUor
1198 <bue»*ïar ¡AÄwRe-d^lras. jtMt been otfflimuiwatøl toiíwjiaóekl firtd. ..» Bat 4, М-Шпй reftatto ydu,, what beíiays: What do.wealit and powët, ¡whit iii vas¬ sals anii domains concernane now í— My -peace itflfeď, my. Heart ia brófan,!:— ι. ; Th* Atbeti· was Bot.easUy persnadedto quit the ,i«b)ectr »d ate lengtlValijt-ptit toaeicm^iines, whichcut me; t*ŕtheiivery heart —They r«gai^cl'tli«iri«d-mtUom- jramOn ortay -earliest youtliV the «withy Jhth-á-díoEUmiWir^i^ «those love l'hod iBjecced) ilsotdţrn ıvtSıienceiıV iby 141 jisjtlt- riakty fi* Jtmifiafc. ılı was thrown Md. smJit-ossitai-ca by thisiÄ«xpee»edricim«- attack, tliat. .. I set aO.i^ejiicMsiaii-ly acdetante* tmd ужЫ>иь*ер1у5рй, »btiıpüy spoke upe» jihotheiWbjeÄ. ¡< 'Л -rí ' We wereeittuig ul· A* iibbew-sprivatv· Я' ' closet,
βθ9 closet; and I now compelled those por¬ traits, which had at first eiidted my curio¬ sity respecting the secrets of this Convent, to. furnish me with an excuse (good or tnd) fór eluding questions) Whieh I-felt but little incllt-ation to answer. ~»*ttdy Mother," said I, M among all the histories respecting the Ladies of Sarjam», which you hav« related, there- is one stiU unknown'to me. You have al¬ ways past: over the picture, which repre¬ sents two female pilgrim«, bewildered among the bitren -wild» of a snow-covefcd mountain, ayicttne, which when I first entered ibis room, drew more of my at¬ tention, «bae any of its companibns. lat first believed them to represent the unfor¬ tunate aiMen, Klntneline and Amalberga ; but. I de оЫ «colleet to have heard (I ·■> о 6 had
at» had nearlyissid ЧХо have¡rtad'¡') any, dr- inimstancesiil jtheir Mstory accoiding with theiscene^tefore me. rHoW-anxiously they seehtipjbiV-lookiDg forthe right pathİT- Good.Mítthers imfoiìm meibwhelherthey found it, and what untoward accident brought-thernijin to dteir.pfesetiridistress ì •You! really must-make mubetteTi acquaint¬ ed-with thdt, adventure», for my whole heart already speaks in their favours— —"¡Does « in txuthf? said the Abbess, ¡smiling at my eagerness, ι 'f Oli ¡-that rgeiod.îheaitlr-Butii took,-at ithe pictuie nearer,: see, whether ryou can find, io the counteiianeea.notMng to, justify your pae- -tiality, rexcept .the. > exprcstkto of, dis¬ tiess i"im ι *"-» r ţr % с ' »nari <- b «v i u ¡t ч! Ί drewiňeM,-.-m*e*atumed Лл picture «asefiíily ; but l-soonlltweedaway agam, л ii j j and
SOI
and folt, that my cheeks were burning ; in truth ι something tdl then unobserved •track me m the features, but the eflèct pif.duced ivas by no means pleasing. , -^«VKenTienquiredtheAbbesii-'lUTe you discovered any thing ?"— »■■'That general family-likeness," I re¬ plied carelessly, ι" which is pecubar toithe House «i Sargias. ; Buti I entreat ,ycu, Mother, inform nte, who do those figures represent?"-!- ш —" TWot alnOcent and unfortunate Suters," was the Abbess's/answer, " diiven from their prosper station, and compelled even to conceal their very names bya suo- cession Of untoward circumstances, not by any fault-of their ciwn committing. I could teH you much resţejctjqg. v tbtrj»^íbat-per- baps wonld not appear to y oil. uninterdst-
802 ing ; but I am too-weak to undertake the task at present. However, not to leave ryoür oiriouty quite unsatisfied, sud* tan account of them ias exists in our arch-· ivedshaHUe-Iookedout, and delivered to you in the eouise of this evening. «Pro¬ bably, you will find thii narrative -moie in¬ structive, and m ονβιγ rear««better Worth your tospittion, than thpie which 1 am comptlted to withhold from you, since the latter were written by Females but little skilled in utei -ашге ; while the history, of -ιιΛιιΛί speak, was-transmitted to poste¬ rity by the learned pen. of an Abbot df -€toÄfi>CunBald."--~ ι > ■ , w Qt iGcrtt-aldi" I repeated, witha »tùile of-coiittmpt andincrecklity. > ' -H"May;này,goodCeuntes!í'' eaidthc АЫЬет with lottie wareith ; »mo preju. judíeos,
WS judtces, I implore you' The author of that manuscript, a copy of which I pro¬ pose entrusting to-yeu-pw'as no Guiderius, itó Lupriatlíteüey« mc! Vo,, daughter, he was one of th&.wiiest and holiest men of the age, in which he hved, a man in shqrt| whose íärtii^, «inferred honour on the raiil· ot;3,prelat*?,andwha *«·ϊ< ţn-faţţ, as welLa^in ı^^tr-ue tligniţary rfrtlie chnrciy^. iii r ţ νμ mow lfajting |in momeiitarvj ex¬ pectation of recejtyb¿g. 1 |t)i| r pxqmibed ma¬ nuscrit. The situation, in wMch I exist at present, is such, as makes it necessary for me to seize every means of diverting the natural currenUtfLmy thoughts into a r Afferent channel it ts to this necessity, that a great portion must be ascribed of the impatience, with which I юок forward to the arrivai of this narrativer " β -— * Elizahttb
S04 ) 1 J ! tl 1 ',Ί 1 l( 'l li /fil ,nj- Γ I- / fi 11 -Ьш,) О I űt ?»SSJB»}sjB^ giHl'Ul J J ι - ШйщШЬ ý.TofrexbttrgiiiiCwilittaitdi от idolba ant, ШШЦ^> l' io , \r ' ι ι η ·· Ijjïu jrl djtii'· m ,j ιι! ι 1 ï hïVé WSviídthe-rninosdtípt ; I»have rtadií^^-h-rVii-ft^^ -bl кпйМЫ>йя,-Ч^-ЫШг f'i-êafiPltV-is /bave done, feel, wbt / havrfèwV -flien Wffl mbthÎBg surprisSyod wHlffi y№ may near; r« 8 pectMğ4«tö'Ms^y6ÜV 1 5İtrtei· J r 'Э I ıb Л ν ιιι ι " î* г il J fuit ·™ ι EuzrABJETH. tl t )l 'Jr.. 4 ^ lj 1 ,1>ЛЛ 0 Jl Ik J J J Mijn ni Й O t f' UCHÍ! ·"" ·,.<«-■■■« irr·. Ii-rr.1 ¡i i-· -ι 'iiii ratti) in-nJDif] j ; f' ι II лили; ji^ ' -'i b v 'i! ılı* * ,9 iţ» qniterll Oitl ι ili bll'tlil jííl *■ vliii. tiì — m -
30í • ι / Л x ιι « -и 1 ' ' br Ifl' I '' ,* 1 Tbl ' ' -'■ ΡΑίύΤΦΒΕ'ΒΙΧΤΆ '' >' ' " ι 'l" ■ ■'■ ·«' '<i f! m i)·» I „j THE SISTFRS WITHOUT Л NAME. "İT·»-«« iy tïè 'Abbot of Cloiiter-Curättíľ t t - Г 'Atili I i', ifi ι- 1 1 'finai (nu'l ' iff ■' Abòver a century åas paued away, since the last heroines ofthat family, to whose. annalslam .preparirtg taadd ( ι qi*itted thu scene of human action. nlsayttlheJastfbe*. cause no accounts existoftlreirjiicceisore; but durmg that long ahd vacant/period; who knows, but that many excellent ¡peri lon&may have acted in a inanrier which did: cfedit to their ancestors» though no writ- ton ,or traditional memorial remains tO it communicate
90S communicate to posterity their virtues and their woes, their trials andtheir vic¬ tories? My heart ddights in the tale, which records example« of heroic excd- lcnce ; and I have frequently censured the indoüetice of cotemporary writers, for suf¬ fering this period to remain a blank. Lest I should deserve that censure myself, which I have cot icrilpledto inflict upon others, I now take up my pen» and pro¬ ceed to execute a taak, wMch (should I Kt* to finish it) rwin, I trust, rescue from obfivion some circumstances veeU-dentrv. ing to be remembared. What I shall set down wiU be truth, pure unadorned truth. A just cau«e demands not the aid of orna¬ menti' and should these leaves ever meet the-eye φ persons, who may tMnk themselves more nearly interested in their contents
307
Contents than othefsilet tkem not for an instant »uspect, that one sybble i> either insetted«» retreilthed Upon ŕŕíir account, or with a view to produee auy othei sete- liment in their bosøiBV thaa »iconvktioh of the truth. It is not before thetr tribu¬ nal, that I plead the cause of two unfortu¬ nates, but before that of the wholeworldi I write not for t^ii*K.wliose:|srtji»dites mx$ perhaps make themuefiiíe toperfuseinco·« thrHua- Sm piges of thi* iíair«ive ( !ánd who:_*m»y, dose the» .»iye<io|*tu**tdy •gajWt,f*e¡)^,oWbiiilh «htwí-tkem that. whish tbey ,m №wiljipg юяее. NeWi write for isapa-ttial judges,,and will state my,case мфЬ as nître^iţndiigid 'fidelity, as ¡were í stating iţ ţo,ţbp ¿ar of Неауйн ln the tranquil; vales* «Mchıbörder the lakes, of Thua and of the Four Cantons, > those
aos those lakes whêré Helvetian Liberty ftrst thiew her fetters away,' still dt) tìie»i*mli- lies exist ofthose bat friends ■ of »their na¬ tive codhtry, the Melthals, tilø röïésts; the Bernsdorft, and the 'Tells, l'heir dif¬ ferent branches hive spread themselves dit attsides) and almost forma little tıaiîonof their -own |' whoie- sons -and<! daughters, even ir! »'land where hohoâr'obravtryi and' truth' are so -universal, 'Btilt'dis'tin- guleh themaelven from their; compatviots t>y the uperioiiity of their vittuţei ι tt we're ав10а5у°4азк-''<о* 4tte-to point>iobť tmtsy HViiHams,'9Wâlte«|l and Henrjes,»'many Gertrudes) and Amabels "in ¡this amiable community, sa' 'perfectly háVe thé^ood qualities of their ftif е -fathers betn inherit¬ ed býithe'ir children : but at' préäe«: I shall only mention the mhutótatabi'òf one particular
J09 paiticular house, wliici sl cl|eied the uı fmcy of the heroines pf piy tale, 'IV as tlte, peaceful coftAge ofa younger VV"fliam ançi ^ î94 n S er Apıabe], the de şpendants of tbîyt ıi)e\l t wlţp offered up |ţţ»e t) mit Gcbslcr as i sacrifice to the msultod liberties of Helvetia heie among a crowd of blooming soışs and daughters tv о love ly girls were reinarl,pd, -whose appeaiance made it evident, that their origin was îfoţ mo sam with, tint of thur ph) mates It m trpe, that they called tlittuisdves then sisteis, and were persvaded, that ni fact lhey wert; so, but yeţ the tr^th was quiti. oťieiwisi. lhe re/U duldren of tlie fa mily were healthy a**4 strong like ¡tlie, ge пуДцу of,¡tl)fjir kindred} but these two a u-ls weit. &iç and delicate, p,ne\ rathei ι e ^embled beautiful e.xotuì plants, şurro^ııd
310 ed by meadow flowers, to which they con¬ descended to allow the honour of acommon origin : and however they miglit them¬ selves esteem the. merits of these simple children of nature, to all othu eyes it was plain, that their oWn perfections were far superior. I have entitled tbü narrative " the Sisters without a Name," for itwas long before they knew the family, from which they sprung ; and when it was at length revealed to them, they found, that their rights were in the possession of strangers. Nay, at the moment that I am writing, they are still denied the privilege of calling themselves by the name of an illustrious House, whose dignity would be disgraced by the inferior station, in which they arc at present compelled to exist. In
Sil In the early and happiest period of their lives, the Sisters were totally unconscious of the magnitude of their claims, and their minds encouraged no wish to be greater than they were. Happy in the humble sphere for which they believed themselves ordained, happy in the shades of their mountains, in the tranquillity of their flowery vallies and glassy lakes, thty considered the scenes which surrounded them, and which appeared to them so en¬ chanting, as a beautiful specimen of the whole world ; nor did they ever trouble their heads with a thought, whether be¬ yond those mountains, and on the outside ofthose vallies, there existed objects which were deserving of a wish to be acquainted with. This fortunate unconsciousness was assiduously preserved in their minds by
вия
by those«: to whose, cAre tJieŕy wsfe tlon fidedjiandrÆnwintej-tevemngiiKWhenAu- htmi Teril .hadi ç|*neetedbatt, l; hıat ¿Ш*Ю ai!oi»idíJ»»mr f>4»tiit uwbPjn-fcţllfttS«Wî *.№^tiHr*e4|{onedi) ÆevSj^ir-s.^tliriBtluih hsitsittistained ^»п^теауздч^^оэдще berOiiOr hengitte, pf цпдае**5-,Не1\^й1 so tbatr nqthingYWBş (P^dg )щягц tojftem ejfiep^the'coum^y^ii-Aigravert^eijribirrti. aod tbey wer^ikdr tcvcjansidpr m>tbng щ of impQçl^cebb^t^hatite^ed to ţhaţ 6íT*ntry,bíí<*%4!*jeQf ţhajfţoiintfy alv *)e,Jisd •ijeyu^vef beeç toldjipy thmgHfftpo-jtap); In.|ta.e sjujt^manner yfere, thşy -nşţri^ctecl rSitecţingr-AS ' çpncerns» oi turnaji Jifc, •AfrW^JirltWtøfti,«·» líHfttárl'OWlíte 4РЖГгР^-Р«№Р8йФ 5 ^Г^АОЯ?т» >sV4 fei^røw- 1 еи г*°в? °f iţ- ie шт j hid
313 had it not been for an old man, over whose head near a century had past, and who was a member of the happy family, in which the Sis,ters resided. This good father would often take the two girls apart frpm their playmates, and recount to them particulars of the ancient Houses of Carlsheim, Torrenburg, and Homburg. Mary and Rosanna (so were the Sisters called, while under Tell's roof) listened to him with the greatest interest, and each selected a heroine from among the Helens, Einmelbcs, and Uranias, as the object of het peculiar admiration. J. 'But such ladies of those illustrious fami- lies, as had finished their lives in ¡л cloister, were sure of obtaining the favour of the gentle serious Mary. She was not four¬ teen, when she made a pilgrimage to the vol. in. ρ Convent
3U
Convent of Engelberg for the purpose of kissing the stone, on which Amalberga was kneeling, when surprised by Landenberg's emissaries; and she frequently expressed a wish, that she might one day be permit¬ ted to take the veil in that Convent, which bad so long givetfahelter to the heiress ot Swgans. The laughing Rosanna often added to this wish an assertion, that her sister hoped like Amalberga to exchange in due time the cloister for a bridal garland; but Mary's cpndMÇt sufficiently proved, that her religious vocation was at that time no affectation. She was just sixteen, when William TeU was obliged to comply with her entreaties, and suffer her to reside at Engelberg. He seemed to consent to this step unwillingly : but he comforted hinv- self
SIS
self with the reflection, that the rules of tbis House permitted no one to pronounce the irrevocable vow, who had not com¬ pleted her twenty-fiftlt year ; a period, be¬ fore whose arrival a thousand accidents must necessarily have taken place, capable of shaking the most determined resolu¬ tions and the most ardent zeal. Rosanna accompanied her sister to the Convent, and for a few days forced her¬ self to be pleased and satisfied with the re¬ ligious tranquillity of her new abode. But at length she could no longer conceal from herself, that nothing save Mary's soc ! t/ could have made the manners of a con¬ vent endurable ; and that in fact she was much better calculated for singing and dancing with her young·companions on the village green, than for attending the f 2 Abbess
316 Abbess and her Nuns to the midnight mass. She therefore endeavoured to give her occupations some variety by taking an active part in the internal arrangements of the Convent. Rosanna was beautiful, but as yet no one had told åser so. None of the neigh¬ bouring jouths pleased her enough to make any impression upon Iter, and the consequence was, that her charms made but little impression npon tbem. Witli aU her vivacity, there was a certain some¬ thing in Rosanna'., manner, which kept the multitude in awe. Every one admired her, wished her weU, was pleased to see herjoin in their amusements, but she pro¬ duced no wanner sentiment. A kind of dignity, of which she was herself uncon¬ scious, prevented the young men from being
Sl -7 being as much at their ease with her, is with her companions, and kept even thte least abashed of them at a distance - * ¡ength tht society Was increased by the ar¬ rival of a person, who only required to be | seen, in order to inspire her with a wish tO j obtain from him something moie than in¬ difference, or mere dispassionate approba¬ tion. The andent friendship established be¬ tween the families of William Teil and Henric Melthal was kept up by their de¬ scendants in all its original vigour. A son of that-Alwyn Melthal, who played thè chief part at the capture of Rassburg, was still alive, and nearly of the same age with that old relation of William Tell, whom I formerly mentioned. Both these venera¬ ble men were still fresh and hearty in spite P3 of
918
of their advanced time of life ; such is in deed llie natural effect of breathing the pure mountain air, and living far from the vices and excesses of cities. The two families often met together, and their days of festivity were always observed in common. Old Melthal had several children ; but now itwas rumoured, that one of them called Erwin (whom no one recollected to have ever heard of before) was just re¬ turned from foreign parts, and that л great feast wat, shortly to be given in ho¬ nour of his safe arrival. Accordingly, the venerable chief of the Melthals made a tour through the neighbouring dis¬ tricts, for the purpose of inviting his rel i- tions and intimates to assemble on the green lawn before his house on an ap¬ pointed
S19 pointed day; thence to accompany his newly-arrived son to the old church on the banks of the Lakt, and return thanks to Heaven for his prosperous return ; and finally, to pass the remainder of the day and a good portion of the following night at Ms expence in various festivities and amusements. Tell's family was one of the fir« in¬ vited : the expectation of the approaching entertainment gave a look of joy to every countenance. In the great work., no one looks forward to a day marked out for some amusement with half this enthusi- asm : the hurry of tiresome and expens¬ ive preparations; recollections, how often on similar occasions we have expected more amusement, than we received ; the frequent recurrence of such pleasures, - ρ 4 which
S20 which robs them of the charm of novdty ; the suggestions of mortified vanity or dis¬ satisfied pride ; all these combine to embit¬ ter the festivals of the great. Buthere in the land of innocence and gaiety, here where no one looks for any pleasure, but that wMch he is sure of finding; where pride and vanity have nothing to do ; where every recollection is delightful, and the whole expence and preparation consist in a wreath of fresh-gathered flowers; here it is, that an invitation to a party of pleasure is really welcome, and seldom fails of justifying its name. The sun was not yet risen, and the youths and damsels of Tell's family were already on their road to Melthal's cottage. Lots were cast among the girls to decide, who should have the honour to conduct the
321 the procession ; the chance fell upon Ro¬ sanna. In consequence, she added to that wMch confined her locks, a second wreath of flowers which she hung round her arm, ready (as was the custom on such occa¬ sions) to crown the hero of the entertain¬ ment. It was a special privilege enjoyed by that company of young people, which arrived first at the place of rendezvous, that a similar garland to that, with which themselves were adorned, should orna¬ ment the head of the principal personage, whereas the garlands of the others could only be worn by relations of that par¬ ticular family; andtbis privilege was one, which they valued highly. Tell's children, therefore, entreated their sister Rosanna to hasten fonvards, in' or¬ der that no one migbt arrive before them ; ρ 5 and
322 and obliging as she ever was, she quickened her steps, though solely &om the desire to temply with their wishes: for shelittle guest the sort of youth, for whom her garland. hadbeen woven. She expected to see a per¬ son, who would be as indifferent to her as all those were, whom she had already seen ; and it was a matter of little concern to her, whether she ornamented with her garland the locks of the young Melthal, or of one of her own relations. But how were her sentiments changed, when at the head of her company she ar¬ rived cn the brow of a httle bill, and looked down upon Melthal's cottage! There sat the old man on a stone bench before the door i and Hear bim stood a youth, whose countenance w* illumined by the rosy fight Of tbe rising sun, and 1 whose
S23 whose figure excelled in manly beauty every thing that she had ever seen, nay that she had ever thought or dreamt of.-— She started back. —" What '" said she to herself; " can this be a son of the old Henric Melthal ? No, no ! tis certainly some ange), or some saint or martyr at the least. In truth, I never saw one of the beings, to whom those names, are applied ; but I have been told much respecting such supernatural Existences, and surely if they ever deign to visit the earth in human form, they must needs resemble yonder youth."— Erwin Melthal appeared to be in earnest conversation with his father: but no sooner was he aware of the approacMng guests, than he hastened towards them, and delivered a welcome with such unaf- τ 6 fected
~ S?4 fected grace and easy dignity, that Rosan¬ na's delight and astonishment were raised to the very highest pitch. Tell's family was in fact the first arrived, apd Rosanna's garland was without a com¬ petitor for the honour Of adorning Er- winlshead; an honour, whiebshe now no longer .looked'upba as a matter of uu- difierence, and Which she could not bave consented to make bvei; to one of her com¬ panions without sonie little movements of jealousy and dissatisfaction. She approached the stranger, while her cheeks were suffused witb blushes, and her hand trembled, as she drew the gar¬ land from lier arm. .He stood before her like some well grown cedar, and bowed down Ms head a little to be crowned by the lovely stranger. She hesitated, retired 2 afew
325 afew steps, and lboked anxiously round to her female companions, as if she would willingly have given up her office to dne ţ of them -. while Erwin, either out of re¬ spect and admiration at the heavenly.vi¬ sion wMch now stood manifest before him, or from the more earthly consideration of the difference between her stature and his own, sank upon one knee before her, and in this attitude was crowned by her trem¬ bling hands. It was an established custom, that the conductress of the first company that ar¬ rived, on these occasions should be the partner of the king of the festival during the whole of the day. Rosanna, who loved to enjoy the earliest breath of morn¬ ing and the glories of the rising sun, had already frequently obtained this privilege. without
326 without its causing her much emotion ι but now when'she reflected, that for a -whole day she should be by the side ef Erwin Melthal; that she should kneel on the same step with him at church; should join at the same time and almost in the same breath with Mm in the most solemn offices of devotion ; shouldtlend her voice with Ms in prayers and anthems; and that at table, in the dance, at «very kind of festivity, she should still have no asso¬ ciate but Erwin, all this was too much for her ţo conceive at once, and her feelings scarcely permitted her to breathe. Still she only dared to express those feelings by looks and blushes : but Erwin, who felt the same, was not confined like her by the restraints of decorum. He made use of the privilege of Ms sex, and not
327 not only spoke, but spoke so plainly, that little as Rosanna was skilled in the lan¬ guage of love, which she then first heard from his lips, she still understood Ms meaning ; aad littie as she ventured to an¬ swer, stiU before the entertainment con¬ duded, she had left no doubt upon his mind, that their affection was mutual The embarrassment,, which took place at thdr first meeting ; the gift of her garland ; the religious ceremoniesin which they had been engaged together, and in wMch each had stolen a little from that which was destmed for Heaven, for the purpose of bestowing it on the other ; all these circumstances and a thousand other trifles, which occur¬ red in the course of the entertainment, as-' sured them, that an exchange of heart!, bad taken place, that their sentimenls were
' 328 ■were sanctioned by the approbation of Heaven, and that every thing would turn out as they"wished and expected. From this day forwards Erwin's leisure was totally engrossed by Rosanna. The habitations of Tell and Melthal were not sd yery distant, but that by setting out at the same time the lovers were certain to meet half way, time enough to passsome hours together undisturbed: besides the intimate connection, which subsisted be¬ tween thetwo families,furnished too many opportunities of intercourse, to admit'of their often complaining of long absence from each other. The passion, which grew stronger in their bosoms with every Jiour, was carefully concealed front every one -, not that they had any reason to ap¬ prehend censure from their superiors ; but because
S29 because secrecy seented to give an addition- al charm to the correspondence of their hearts, and because the goal of their de¬ sires seemed to be still at a considerable distance. The venerable Melthal, the youth's great-grandfather, had caused him to be educated in a foreign country, and in¬ tended him for the profession of arms. Erwin had been fong suffered to remain ignorant, both to what family he belonged, and to what country he owed his origin : but the good antient (whom the number of his years rather than any sensible infirm¬ ity made conscious, that the close of Ms existence could not be far removed) now thought proper to summon liis grandson to a private conference, in which he dis¬ closed to Mm many particulars of great importance. —« One
wo —" One more campaign," taid Erwin to his mistress, the first time-that he saw her after holding this conversation with oldMdthal, " one more campaign under the Emperor's banners, m whose service I am at present engaged ) and then will I hasten back to lay my laurels at the feet of my Rosanna, confess my love for her, and fix my habitation with her in that quarter of the gl· b , which htr fancy hall prefer. If she thinks proper still to reside in the shades ofher native vallies, there too will Itake up my abode : if she rather desires to see the world (which in truth has its charms and can show aome scenes, with wMch even these enchanting solitudes must not come-in competition) perhaps her happy Erwin may succeed in procuring for her there a situation hetter suited to ber
331 her merits, than that which sne must fill in the obscurity of these retired moun¬ tains."— —" Dear Erwin," interrupted Rosan¬ na, " speak nu more of this ; speak not of my merits, or of removing me to the great world ! Ah ! why must you needs yourself go tMther ì Is it not enough to make me hate that world, that it soon must robme ofyour sodety? ándalas! who knows, whether you will return from that wild tumult, which I only know by de¬ scription, with sentiments as kmd and as honest and true an heart, as you will bear away with you !"— Poor Rosanna was bathed in tears, while she made these representations. She had had dreams, and omens, and fore¬ bodings, which promised notMng good, and
332 and which her lover soon banished by means, which every lover (the false as well as the true) equally practises on simi¬ lar occasions. But Erwin was true as the truest ; and Ms oaths were heard and re¬ gistered in the Book of Eternity by the Angel, who suffers no perjury to escape unpunished. There was one person in the world, with whom Rosanna had been too long accustomed to share all her joys and all her sorrows, aU her hopes and aU her fears, not to make her feel uneasy under the pro¬ found secrecy, which she had hitherto im¬ posed on herself respecting her attach¬ ment: that person was Mary. In fact, she had already suffered some distant hints to escape her, that she had a secret to com¬ municate ; and at length she summoned up
333 up all her resolution, and (with Erwin's approbation) set forward one morning for the Convent of Engelberg, determined to lay her whole heart open to her sister's in¬ spection. Though Mary found her own felicity within the bounds of doistered retirement, her notions «ere too liberal to make her consider it as improper, that Rosanna should seek for happiness in the arms of an affectionate husband. With folded hands and a countenance bright with tranquil- joy, she piously invoked a blessing on her sister's union with the honest-hearted Er- win ; though she could not help lamenting with a sigh, that he should have adopted the profession of Blood ! Befóle they se¬ parated, it was settled between the Sisters, that on an appointed day Rosanna should conduct
334
conduct her'lover to the Convent, in or¬ der lhat Mary might become personally acquainted with her fnture brother. This interview was not diflicult to be procured; Mary had not yet pronounced her vows, and was left at perfect liberty to employ her time, as she thought proper. Yet pardy from a wish to make the busi¬ ness no mare public than could be avoided, and partly- from a movement of religious enthusiasm which forcibly operated upon her imagination, Mary desired, that the meeting should not take place, till the evening was on the pomt of closing. It was in autumn, and the weather proved gloomy. Mary had provided her¬ self with a key of the Chapel, and it was и this awful place, that she received the tovers. A small porch, faintly hghted by the
335 the glimmerings of a distant lamp, wit¬ nessed their first meeting. Mary (who in spite of her extreme youth had already adopted the dignity and grave character appropriate to her destined station) spoke long andsertously to the vv*arrior,respecting the sincerity of Ms attachment and the sa¬ cred nature of his engagement to Rosan¬ na. His answers were such as she most desired to hear ; and she now conducted them into the Chapel, where she had al¬ ready placed two burning tapers before an altar consecrated to Saint Engeltruda. —" Kneel," said she, " kneel upon the stone, on which Amalberga was kneeling when seized by the sacrile¬ gious Landenberg ; kneel, and swear in the presence of God and of this chapel's Patron-Saint, never even in thought to swerve
33& swerve from the strictest rules of eternal truth and unsullied virtue : so shall this place be cleansed from the pollution, which it contracted from the impure steps ofthe virgin's ravisher '.—May Landenberg's fate be thine, Erwin, shouldst thou ever for one instant prove faithless to Rosanna! — Never may'st~thou, Rosanna, find in the time of need such a preserver as Amaiber- ga found in Eginhart, shouldst thou ever forget the man, to whom I now solemnly betroth thee in the face of listening Heaven.—Let nothing part you, but the grave ! —And should hereafter either of )oü from inconstancy o·- caprice rend asundei the saCred bonds, with which I now unite your fates for ever, that in¬ stant shall my form (be I living, or be I dead) stand before you threatening and awful,
337
awfol, and warn you to return to the paths of propriety and duty !—But peace, everlasting peace be with tlie bosoms of faith, and may the wings of angels 'over¬ spread them and preserve them !"— Erwin and Rosanna, as they gazed on the lovely form, which stood before them illuminated by tbe pale lighf ofthe conse¬ crated tapers, fancied themselves in the presence of some celestial being. They thought, that in her words they heavd the voice of her Patron-Saint ; they swore fidelity while lite should hst, and Mary kissed and blçsscd them. < She then accompanied thom to the Chapel-porch ; and the betiothed or rather the espoused }oyei> (for as such they now considered tlıemşelves) Ьерб tlışir course homew-ai.ds beneath a sky heavy with vol. ш. q the
338 the dews of an autumnal evening. Not one syllable did they exchange, as they past along; a gentle pressure of the hand occasionally was the ohly manner, in which they gave token of their feelings. Yet was their joy not quite undouded ; a se¬ cret heaviness weighed down their hearts : melancholy forebodings forbade their abandoning themselves entirely to the de¬ lightful thought—" We are united for ever !"— The three actors in tMs solemn and sin¬ gular scene had not enveloped their secret in so impenetrable a veil, as they imagined ; and this transaction was the means of their meeting with ' many severe reproofs from those, to wlom they were in subjection. The youthful devotee had been watched by an mquisiùvc Nun; and the respect¬ able
З.ЗД- able ot'ice, which she had thought proper »perform on this occasion, was made known to the Abbess the next morning. Severe were the censures past by that guod lady on Mary's boldness, in assum¬ ing a character so ill adapted to her time of life. Ön the other hand, each of the lovers was closeted by the chief of their respective families; and many representa¬ tions were laid before them in these private conferences, which seemed to make great impression on the minds of both, though they had not the smallest effect in dimi¬ nishing their mim"2! attachment. At their next meeting Erwin revealed not to Rosanna one word of the conversation, wMch he had held with his grandfather Melthal ; neither on her side was Rosanna more communicative of the information, q 2 which
340 which she had gained from the old Wil¬ liam Tell.. They only confest to each other, that the main-topic of both thesa secret .conferences had been reasons for their renouncing their so lately contracted union; and the question was exchanged— " TVhether what each had heard, but which neither revealed, was of such force, as to authorize their breaking vows, which had been pronounced with such solemn¬ ity"—" No I"—uttered in a tone so posi¬ tive, aş to convey in it a renewal of all their former oaths, was the reply on both sides: yet they agreed to commit their cause to Heaven and Tirre, and to suffer, to hope, and to believe, what (in secret each was compelled to own) appeared then to be impossible. Tliat Erwin and Rosanna were mutually attached
34-1 attached to each Other, had been tóg sus¬ pected; but the feet was now made known throughout the Province, and the prejudice ran universally in favour of the lovers. The youths and damsels exdaim- -ed loudly against the severity ot the two fethers ; and even the old people shook their heads, and let a few words escape them now and then about inexplicable ob¬ stinacy. They declared, that Melthal's soli and Tell's daughter seemed to be form¬ ed for one another, that they ought to be united, and that united they would be some day or other, happen what might. Whenever they encountered the deject«! lovers, they never failed to whisper some kind exhortations to be faithful, and to hope for better times; while on the other hand their young companions were m- Q.3 -det»
342 xious 'to furnish them with opportunities of meeting, and frequently in their village festivals the lovers suddenly found them-' sdves endrded by the sam? chain-of flowers, and heard every voice unite in einging the praise of thdr tender attach¬ ment and thdr wishes for its happy issue. A thousand ballads were made upon them, some plaintive, some gay, and they cir- curtted from mouth to mouth with ra¬ pidity; for tlie love of Erwin and Ro¬ sanna Was an atrair, in which the Whole Prqvince felt itself interested. „,,ι, This umversal good-will, however^ ad- vanceçV their cause but little. When the,y weie -done, each spoke of eternal fidelity and.- insurmountable difficulties; .each made it evident, that a secret sorrow jl^igqed heavy upon the heart ; eaph tutbt found
343 found fault with the father of the other, and dedared Mm to be extremely in the wrong ; while the father of the speaker was asserted to be perfectly in the right, at the same time that to obey him was ac¬ knowledged to be impossible. As to thetwo old men, they took no steps towards an explanation. It was rather observed, that from thb time forward tliey shunned each other's sodety, and seemed by the mutual distance thus suddenly created between them, to give their children a hint of the conduct, wMch they expected them also to adopt. Sooner than they were aware, chance relieved them from the troublesome em¬ ployment of watching over the lovers. Erwin was unexpectedly summoned to join the Emperor's army, and the orders q 4 weie
Э44 were so pressing, as not even to permit his taking leave of his mistress. Yet as he past by it On his road, he said a short but fervent prayer in the Ghapel of Engel¬ berg ; he commended Mmself and his for¬ tunes to the. protection of that Saint, who had heara his vows pronounced; and Mary being· fortunately **mong the Nuns, and within reach of his eye, he implored her by signs to bear his melancholy greet¬ ing td hei sister. Mary perfectly under¬ stood the meaning of those signs; though it was long, before an opportunity present¬ ed itself for complying with his wish. Ever since her cvîpable interference in un¬ hallowed love-affairs, the virtuous Lady Abbess had caused a strict watch to be kept over Mary ; and though Rosanna's heart was full and greatly needed the consolations
345 consolations of a sister's tenderness, she still hesitated to visit Engelberg. The se- cret,which the old Tell had revealed to her, was a dead weight upon her heart ; sho knew well, that it was her duty to make it immediately known to Mary, who was no less interested in it than herself; and she trembled to hear the dedsion, whidi (she doubted not) would be pronounced even by her truest friend and the partial fa¬ vourer of her love, as soon as she should be made acquainted with the real nature of the case. Ihe useful art of penmanship, which a century before had been familiar in these parts, and practised by persons totally un¬ connected with learned rpm suits, even by women, (as the annals of the Ladies of Sargans testify,) at the present peiiod Q 5 was
34&
was fallen into neglect. - With the excep¬ tion of some few characters of distin¬ guished merit, it was confined to the clergy ; and alas! in this respect Erwin and Rosanna were completely laical : nei¬ ther was it safe or prudent to confide thdr tender secrets to the discretion of chance messengers ; and it necessarily fol¬ lowed) that tbe lovers were but seldom informed of the proceedings of each other. Common feme however occasion¬ ally brought the maid tidings of her war¬ rior not less strange tban satisfactory, and the girk qf the Valley frequently were able to comfort their sorrowing compa¬ nion with reports, wliieh asserted Erwin's heroism to be only equalled by his good fortune. Rosanna's heart readily gave credit to assertions so flattering; and she l was
347 was too well disposed to believe them, to require much proof of their veracity; nay, she sometimes was so completely fas¬ cinated by the illusions of Fancy, that she could not refrain from communicating her hopes to the venerable Tell. —" Surely, my good father," would she say to Mm, " should Erwin return to me crowned with honour and renown ; should he be really what Fame asserts, the favourite of his Emperor, what is more probable, than that the lowness of his ori¬ gin should be sunk in the splendour of some new-acquired title, and his merits bc rewarded by Ms elevation to some station of importance ? and in that case, where would be the impropriety of my giving him my hand.' and what obstacle .would my mother's injunctions oppose any longer to our union ?"— q 6 The
"348
The old man on hearing such observa¬ tions never failed to exclaim against the credulity of young minds, and to warn the e-.nlthig girl against the painful effect, which evil, tidings would produce upon her mind with as mudi facility and with stillgreater violence. They say, that Age often-possesses the gift of second -sight ; it is at least certain, that what Tell fore¬ boded, happened but too soon. On. a sudden, Rosanna's Companions greeted her arrival no more with chektful songs of en¬ couragement and hope ; the name of the heroic Erwin now was never suffered to pass their Ups ; when she enquired, whe¬ ther no tidings of him had reached- the Valley, her question was evaded. At length the deep mourning, in which the Melthal family appeared, made public the 2 dreadful
349 dreadml intelligence, which her friends had so long concealed from her, and the relation of which struck'her senseless to th·· earth, as ifit had been a flash of light¬ ning. Erwin had accompanied his sove¬ reign to relieve the Fortress of Zender, which was besieged by Sultan Amurath, and in an unsuccessful attack upon the enemy's camp had fallen as became a war¬ rior. The whole Valley was afflicted at Ms loss ; the old Melthal was insonsolabie. ¡-¡hoitly afterwards he left his home to visit the Casde of >a nobleman, ι /ho had been long his patron and his fiicnd, and he returned no more. Death surprised him on his journey ; and his children brought nothing back but his bones, which they buried in Ms native land, that' bnd which through life he had cvti loved so dearly ! It
350 It seemed, as if at this period every kind of misfortune had conspired to ruin this once so happy Provinces It was visited by continuai storms, such as bad never be¬ fore taken place within the memory of man : the mpuntam-torrents deluged the country with unusual fury ; 40Г was it possible for tiie cultivator industrious as they were, to brmg their ruined fields into order again, till a considerable time had dapsed. The crops failed-, prices rose ; at length the distress became uni¬ versal, and it was soon followed by the twin-sisters of Death, Famine and Dis¬ ease. Ãosanna saw so many of the venerable fathers of the Valley ¿atk into the grave, and wept over the tombs ot so many of her youthful friends, tbat she could not but e-.pr-ct
051 esspect the lot soon to fall upon herself and her good old grandfather. The first was as earnestly desired by Her, who languishr ed to embrace her Erwin in the land of shadows, as the latter was looked forward to with terror. She anxiously wished to lengthen the days of one, who was now al¬ most her only friend, and she implored Mm to retire for a wble from a spot be¬ come SO dangerous. It was not far from Tell's habitation to the Convent of Engel¬ berg, and there the plague had not as yet commenced its ravages. Mary obtained permission from the Abbess to take pos¬ session of an uninhabited monastery, which made part of the domains of En¬ gelberg ; and she now hastened like some volent Angel to guide her sickening rel. lions to the place of refuge, which she hA
.352 had found for them, and where she pro¬ posed to be their nurse herself. As many as -were still capable Of moving, blest her, and followed her to -the Monastery ; Ro¬ sanna and Tell made part of the melan¬ choly caravan, which Death had taken care to prevent from bemg numerous. In defiance of the extreme danger, Mary re¬ sided with them, and administered to their necessities with her own hands. Her exertions were crowned with their de¬ served success; she had the happmess of rescuing all her patients from the grave, except the grey-headed Tell. Yet even He did not fall a martyi to the plague, Mary's unceasing efforts had rehevedihim from that poisonous eneihy; opt j the weight Of near an hundred years prest him down, and forbade his ever' rising agam
ass
again from that bed, from whose side, du¬ ring the time of bis most imminent dan¬ ger, be had vainly entreated Mary and her sister to retire and attend to their own preservation. ' — u My cMldren," said) he at length, when no doubt remained tbat the hour of Ms deith was at hand, " I feel, that we must part: and long as my worldly tourse has lasted, still at its dose does notMng press heavy on my heart except the re¬ flection· that I leave your fate and fortunes iiridedded. Rosanna, haye. you commu¬ nicated to your sister those circumstances, which 1 thought fit to lay, before you, in order that you might be convinced, that an union vrilhErrwin Melthal would be ill- sorted and improper Ul every point of view ί"-τ- , i r Rosanna
354
Rosanna replied in the negative ; she had of late found but few opportuni- ties,'she said, of seeing her sister; and even when they were together, the Lady Abbess (whose notions of decorum had been greatly shocked at the shaţe, which Mary had taken in the Chapd-scene) had watched them with such vigilance,*as ef¬ fectually prevented any confidential com¬ munications. She concluded her apology for having so long neglected »Obey his. injunctions, by eritreating ι him to suffer Mary to retiin- «he pleasing r illusitíh that she- had à right to Ms affection -, an il¬ lusion, With 'which she heťedt had parted so unwillingly.- ; i f ■—* tťímlSIÍJtit-it Же,» tűWWeiod ithe ex- pirıngiTeıl,, w 4t.sinectjssary,i that both of you should be aware, that you are no ŕ grand-
355 grandchildren of mine. The story of your birth is longs Rosanna is informed of all the circumstances, and will relaté them to you, my gentle Mary, at some hour of leisure: aťpresent learn fromme such points, as are most essential. « You and your sister are the sole re¬ maining descendants of the younger branch of the ancient and illustrious fami¬ lies of Gwlsheim and Sargans. That you have past so Inge a portion of yoiir lives in obscurity, and that your great ^expecta¬ tions ^ are still insb questionable a'state, you must accuse the ».uperstitious Obsti¬ nacy of the Comtess, your deceased moj- - ther. She, was a daughter of the Count of Mayenfield, and her extraordinary beauty made her the object of universal admiration. Among her suitors were a ti numbered
356 numbered the heads of the two families of Torrenburg and Werdenberg, both equal¬ ly descended from the united House of Carlsheim and Sargans. The latter was accepted, the former was not only reject¬ ed, but even hdd by your mother in the most absolute detestation. Orr the con¬ trary, the Count of Torrenburg (who is still alive, and whose »cellent heart never harboured resentment against ¡my'human bdn b) ) not only forgave the slight, but -continued on .the most friendly terms with Ms successful rival. He succeeded in expelling from Ms bosom his unfortunate passion, bestowed his heart on another lady more capable of estimating its worth, and his marriage was blest with two sons, as was that of the Count of Werdenberg with two daughters. On this fortunate occurrence
3J7 occurrence taking place, the fathers enter¬ ed into the most solemn engagements tq unite their children in marriage, and by this means blend inseparably their mutual claims upon the inheritance of each other. " My bvely girls, you were these daugh. tcrs thus betrothed while in the cradle : I cannot express to you the repugnance, with which your mother entertained the idea, that she should one day hear you call the sons of the Count of Torrenburg by the name of husband. The antipathy, which she bore that family, was inci eased a thousandfold by the death of her hus¬ band, on which event the great domains of your father (according to the long-esta¬ blished customs of the Houses, to which you owe your origin) fell to the only re¬ maining male heirs of the Counts of Carl¬ sheim
3Æ8 sheim and Sargans, tlife Count of Torren- bùi g and his sons. Tlie prospect of recover¬ ing the whole of this inheritance by your union with those sons, and the generous offers made by their father for her accom¬ modation, had no eflèct in softening her animosity : she felt, that it was less diia- grceable to lose every tKiiig and sacrifice both herself and you, than to depart in any degree from her obstinate resolution. " Arrordingly she quitted the Castle of Wefdenberg in the greatest privacy, and concealed herself in my humble habitation. I had been long known to her, and in ge¬ neral had been honoured with her confi¬ dence ; but she carefully hid from me the real situation of her affairs and the true motives of her conduct. She did not long survive the loss of her husband. grief
333- grief fou his death and vexation at the good fortune of Torrenburg rapidly de¬ stroyed her health. On her death-bed she demanded from me a solemn oath, that I would adopt her orphan-daughters for my own, and would bring them up according to the instructions, which after her decease I should find conveyed in writing. " That your prudent mother should pre¬ fer your being educated in the lap of rural innocence and tranquillity, rather than in the tumult of the great world, did not surprise me in the least, and I readily gave the oath demanded. But when after her death I learned from her papers the whole extent of my promise, and found myself enjoined to spread the report of your death, *and never to disclo^ your real names, unless circumstarces should give
360 give you a just claim to the inheritance of your ancestors, my surprise was exïreme; and gladly would I have called back the oath, тхкЫЬ your mother had carried with her into the grave, and which therefore was irrevrxable. " As the case stood, no choice was left me, and I was compelled to obey your mother's injunctions respecting your edu¬ cation. It greatly comforted me to find, that the secret ofyour real station was not confined to myself. The deceased Countess mentioned in her mH, that the Bishop of Coirà and the Abbot of Cloister- Curwald (both of them related to her though but distantly) were aware of her design, and had sanctioned it with their consent ; and I conduded, that since her jdetermination had found rfavour in the eyes
361 eyes of such learned and respectable per¬ sons, it must needs have daims to appro¬ bation, which my'own understanding was too short-sighted to discover. —" It is possible," it was thus that the Countess exprest herself in her fast will ; -- it is possible, however trifling the pro¬ bability seems at present, that the family of Torrenburg may become extinct ; or that it may please Heaven to deprive it of male heirs, -as it has been pleased to de¬ prive the family ot Werdenberg. In that case, let the claims of my daughters be ad¬ vanced, and the documents produced, which are deposited in the hands of the Bishop of Coirà, and in the archives of Cloister-Curwald : for the rights of these consolidated families are so ordained, that the daughters can only lay claim to the in- vOL, hi. R heritance
362 heritance of their ancestors, in case no male heir should exist ; a regulation, on whose justice I am too little learned to give an opinion, and whose effect I pos¬ sess too little power to counteract. " But as it is possible, that my orphan daughters may one day become the heir¬ esses of Sargans, care must be taken to prevent their adopting any measure, which may make them blush at recollect¬ ing the obscurity, in which they are to pass their early years. I desire therefore, that you- William Tell (whom I appoint their guardian) should not only bring them up innocently and virtuously, but should make them mistresses of as many elegant accomplishments, as circumstances will adroit. Above all I command you on no account to suffer them to contract a marriage
363 marriage unsuitable to tbdr illustrious birth. Unless a mother's fondness de¬ ceives me, they will be singularly beauti¬ ful. Providence ever watches over tbe orphan's destiny; and perhaps even in their humble station tlieir charms may at¬ tract the observant glance of some young nobleman. Should such be the case, Wil¬ liam Tell is at liberty to remove all obsta¬ cles to such an union, by revealing to the lover the real name of the parents of my daughteis; and I also absolve him from his oath in so far, as to authorize Mm to disclose to themselves the secret of their illustrious origin, whenever they are suffi¬ ciently arrived at years of discretion, to make such a disclosure necessary or use¬ ful."— —" Here is tMs important paper," re¬ ii 2 sumed
•364 sumed Tell after a short pause, for this long discourse had greatly exhausted him ; " you will read it over together at your leisure : but one tMng more I must ob¬ serve to you. The Countess was no less averse to the sedusion of a convent than to ill-assorted marriages.—In one place (which I have pomted out for Mary's ob¬ servation by three crosses) she writes thus — " Be the veil the last refuge of my chil¬ dren, and on no account must either of them be suffered to assume it before her six-and-twentieth year. Then, if no more inviting prospect presents itself, their real rank may be revealed to the Superior, and the sums (which I leave for that purpose in the hands of Williatn Tell) appropriated to the endowment of the Convent, in wMch they tMnk proper to pronounce their vows."— _____________________________ —« I trust," j
367 —'■ I trust," continued the old man, " that I havenot abused the confidence with whidi youi noble mother honoured me. Anxiety to leave no part of her commands unexecuted made me lose no time in hast¬ ening to the Bishop of Coirà and the Abbot of Cloister-Curwald, and requesting thdr advice respecting youi future education. I found tbem already fully acquamted wiih tbe intentions of the deceased Countess ; I also gathered from some words which es¬ caped them, that all the singular injunc¬ tions of that lady's will related to an old prophecy, by wMch the daughters of Werdenberg were threatened with tlie most seveie mortifications and persecu¬ tions through the means of the family of Torrenburg. For my own part, I cannot say, that I lay any great stress upon these КЗ old
sec oíd traditions, and even look upon belici in them as little better than rank supersti¬ tion: nay, I am almost persuaded, that the very means taken to avoid the dangers with which such piopheries menace us, fiequently produce their accomplishment, of which (unless I am mudi deceived) your own history will furnj'Ti an addition¬ al proof. The two reverend gentlemen, however, were quite of a different opinion from me on this point ; in truth, they re¬ ceived so ill a hint of this nature which j escaped me, that if I had not held my ' tongue in good time, I verily believe, they would have excommunicated me as an arch-heretic. Luckily, »he business was not to decide, whether your mother's opi-j nions were right, but whether her will ' sťould be obeyed ; and on this head all tluee'
'İÖ7 three were of the same way of think¬ ing. " Annually 1 made them a visit to lay before them my pr jceedings, and recei' - instructions respecting your future con¬ duct. At length they died, both nearly at the same time, and were succeeded by Bishop Sigisbert, and Abbot Oonrad the Fourth, who also succeeded to the know¬ ledge ofyour secret. The latter of those prelates (as you probably remember) once visited our cottage, as it seemed, by acci¬ dent. He saw you, and felt himself great¬ ly interested in your welfare. I have in¬ formed him of my illneas, and also of the melancholy occurrences which have lately taken place, and which render these val¬ lies no longer a safe retreat. In his answer, the good Abbot promises you Ms protecţ¬ ii i ion,
3G8 ion, proposes to remove you to those scenes where your noble ancestors once ruled, and engages (when the proper time shall be arrived) to support your dainis to the utmost of his power. " The sons of the Count of Torrenburg are dead ; the Count himself is a widower, but is not quite so far advanced in years as to make his contracting a second marriage highly improbable. StUl you hat-e much to expect from his known generosity of mind, and I cannot but natter myself, that you may кюк forwards to more fortunate times 1 Oh ! with what content could I lay my head down in my grave, were I but certain that this hope will soon be re¬ alized ! But alas ! every thing shows it- ) self to me, as if still at a fearful distance ! ' Every thing seems covered with a gloomy veil
369 veil of douds. Many and" matty a bitter sigh must you heave, many and many a painful step must you tread, ere you re¬ gain thatsta'ion, whence you have been de¬ graded by maternal obstinacy and super- stitiousţjrejudice. —Yet take courage, my cMldren · an invisible hand still guides the steps ofthe innooent, and you will find a powerful friend and safe adviser in the Abbot of Cloister-Curw-ud."— Here tbe old man concluded ; Ms adopt¬ ed daughters were silent, and wept.—All that they had heard, all the glorious pro¬ spects, which were just piesented before them, were unable to overpower the me- landiory conviction, that tlie hour was ar¬ rived, when they must doss the eyes of that venerable man, who had for so many years cherished them «ith alitile fondness R 5 Of
370 ofa. father, ln losing him, tliey foresaw too the loss of those simple pleasures, Wbich had made thdr childhood glide away so gaily, and for wbich thoy feared to find the advantages of their new situa¬ tion but a sorry and incomplete ex¬ change. Tell visibly became weaker, that is, Ms body became so ; but Ms mind preserved its strength unimpaired, and to the las'. moment of sensibility possest its gaL'ty and freedom. He had indeed got the bet¬ ter of that iUness, wMch at first confined him to a sick couch, but he sank under the burthen of his years. His heart at (tîigth felt the arrow of death ; though in truth tliat metaphor 'xs here inapplicable, for he felt no wound, he endured no pain. His existence ended in a gradual peaceful t slumber;
371 slumber ; the lamp of his life was extin¬ guished gently and imperceptibly. Abbot Conrad arrived before the decease of Tell, for the purpose of removing tho Sisters: but they implored a short respite. Gladly would they have remained Tell's daughters all their lives ; it was no light blow, that could sever the bonds, by which they were connected with the good old man; even Death was unable to effect this completely, and their affection still followed him even beyond the giave. Neither was Conrad anxious to remove them from the dying man : it was a bless¬ ed sight for him to witness the gentle de¬ parture of a just spirit, and for once to be¬ hold the so-dreaded form of Deatli ar¬ rayed in the peaceful appearance of a be¬ neficent Angel. Neither was it an unin- u. G tei esting
S72 Wresting sight, to see two girls in the Hoom of youth and beauty turning away ňom the brilliant prospects of the world, to dwell with their whole souls on one of the most sorrowful and painful scenes, which can meet tbe eye of human nature ; to see two highly-born princesses weep at resigning for such sounding titles the dearer-ones of daughters and sisters in the abode of rustic innocence; and tohear them ţt the grave of thdr common an¬ cestor vow to their former play-mates, that they should ever hold their relation¬ ship as the most dose and predous, though the whole universe should unite in endea- ysfouring to efface the recollection of it from their minds. Tell's children ould not understand rightly, what their supposed sisters meant - 2 by
373 b/ such assurances; and the Abbot thought it unnecessary-to explain to them a mystery, which their approacMng separa¬ tion from the young Countesses of Wei'- denberg would soon make sufficiently clear. The Abbot was obliged to be more com¬ municative with the Domina of Engel¬ barg. He found no great difficulty in obtaining her permission, that Mary (or Constantia, as she was now called, while Rosanna resumed her baptismal name of Ida.,.. Yes, Elizabeth : Ida and Constan¬ tia were their real names!) that Mary should for a time make trial of a worldly life, and should postpone her adoption of the veil till after the unravelling of her destiny. Three conditions however were annexed to the permission ; first, that in case he. call to a religious profession should be
374 l e contirmed, that she should pronounce her vows in no other Convent than En¬ gelberg; secondly, that in remembrance ot her doister-duties she shbuld always wear the habit of the Order ; lastly, that m case of the worst (by which the pious lady meant an union with an eartMy bride¬ groom) she should -not assume-a worldly dress till her wedding-day, and should purchase the permission of renouncing the veil by a handsome benefaction to the Convent of Engelberg. Tlie abbot under¬ stood the manners of the doister, and agreed to these conditions on behalf of his wards-, who in the mean while heaved many a sigh, while preparing for a jour¬ ney, from which their hearts boded no good. In the sphere in wMch they now moved, every
375 every thing appeared strange to them, and consequently disagreeable, from their not being accustomed to such manners and appearances. The splendour of Bishop Si- gisbert's court (at which they now re¬ sided) was too dazzling to be pleasant to eyes, which were only used to admire the simple charms of Nature ; and when com¬ pared with those sceni*s, in which their childhood liad past so happily, every¬ thing which nav offered itself to their no¬ tice seemed ridiculous and frequently dis¬ gusting. The,Bishop, who felt the greater inte¬ rest in the welfare of his young wards cn account of their simplicity and want of relish for the dissipations of the world, was soon obliged to consent to their re¬ tiring from Ms court, and taking refuge in
376 in the tranquillity of a Convent at Zurich, Here Constantia was perfectly at ease ; but Ida, who had been always accustomed to liberty, was but half satisfied with die re¬ straints of her abode. Nay, she wouhl have found them insupportable, had not ťhe recollection of Erwin Melthal followed lier to the Convent, and made solitude and silence agreeable, by suffering her to indulge unrestrained the melancholy of her heart. In truth, Ida had so litde of that lofty spirit, wMch should have been united with her lofty station, that the re¬ membrance of the son of an humble pea¬ sant, who had perished as an undistin¬ guished warrior, still was sacred to aer affection ; and often did she assure Con¬ stant», that were he brill in existence, she would rather have renounced her birth¬ right
377
right than the hope of being one day called his wife —" I concealed my rank from Erwin," said she, " that Ms love might not take the alarm at hearing the proud title of the Countess of Werdenberg : but I will not conceal the affection which I felt, and still ted for tMs Erwin, this humble peasant's son, this undistinguished warrior, from any one, sliould any one hereafter think proper to demand my hand. No ! I will avow my passion openly and firmly ; and doubtless this confession will be enough to make my noble suitors abandon a girl, whose folly sets so little value on illustri¬ ous birth and titles handed down by a long line of ancestors."— Conrtantia was a little embarrassed in answering these dedarations. Not being in
378 in love, she could not easily reconcile the union of two such names as i.rwin Mel¬ thal, and Ida, Countess of Werdonberg : yet still she could not edace from her me¬ mory the solemn Vows, wMib had passed between them; and in particular she could not but lay great stress upon their having been affianced before the altar of St. Engeltruda- a transaction, in which she had herself borne so principal a part. However the turn of her reflections was (though the goodness of her heart made her sigh, as she confent it) thai it yas for¬ tunate, that Erwin's, death had solved all the difficulties, which would otherwise have -urisen ; and she could not but fancy, that in this event she saw the hand of Pi ovidence, wMch had preserved from degradation the honour of the illustrious House of Werdijnberg. In
379 In the mean while the Bishop and Ab¬ bot Conrad were consulting, how they might best advance the interests of then- young favourites. As they were not in¬ fluenced by the prejudices, which made the late Countess of Werdenberg refuse all intercourse with the family of Torren¬ burg, and as they laid no stress upon the before-mentioned prophecy, they soon agreed to take the straight road (which indeed is always the best) and make the generous Frederick of Torrenburg imme¬ diately acquainted with the existence and adventures of his long-forgotten relations. The Count was old, and without children; and it was not unlikely, that he would adopt these orphans, and bring them up as the future heiresses of his domains. Under this impression they set forward for
380 for his Castle, well provided witli letters and other documents to establish the vera¬ city of their assertions. The Abbot has been heard to say, that when the Count was first informed of the lÄture of their embassy, he started and turned pale ; as the Bishop proceeded and made the faa certain beyond the possibi¬ lity of dispute, this paleness gave place to a burning crimson, and when the tale vras finished, the Count sat for a few moments lost in silent meditation,* circumstances, from which the'friends of the two Sisters augared nothing good to their cause. The event however proved that they were mis¬ taken in imagining, that the generous Frederick would wilfully dose his eyes against a truth, because it was unpleasant to him; though what made it so unpleas¬ ant
381 ant to him, they were then at a loss to conceive. He bestowed a noble heart-drawn sigh upon the memory of the Countess of Werdenberg. He blamed her for having suffered her prejudices to interfere so much with the welfare of her daughters, and engaged to repair the injury, wMch she had done them. Accompanied by the two Prelates he hastened to the Convent of Zurich, and entreated his new-found relations to make his abode their own. Deep was the emotion exprest in his ho- n-st countenance, when he first saw the Sisters. In them he beheld renewed in their most brilliant colours the charms of their mother, whom he had loved so long and so deariy without success; and he dasped them to his bosom with tears, which
JS 2 which lie vamly struggled to conceal lhc girls too felt their hearts attracted towards the excellent man, and found no difficulty m considi.ring lum m every respect as their fathei They followed him to his Castle with w lUmgucs , w tre grateful for the kindness whch he showed them, nor did it ever enter then thoughts, that it was in his pow er to show them more but the Bishop was eMremely surprised, that although the Count had acknowledged thi. validity of the documents which testified then birth, and had adopted them as his nieces, he made no mention of then being en titled to any part of his ınhcııtance, noi eemed to have it m his contemplation to bestow them on propei bndegrooms —" 1 he little eagerness, said thr- Ab bot
S8J bot, " which tlie Count shows for the wedding ofhis nieces confirms the report, that he is thinking of one for liimself. I have already heard it whispered, that he is attached to a young person, with whom we are both well acquainted. She is love¬ ly and virtuous ; nobody can blame Count Frederick's choice, though perhaps some people may blame liim for making at his time of life any choice 3t all."— —" I am sorry to hear this," replied tbe Bishop , " should children spring fumi this union, the claims of our wards will be completely annihilated."— —" In which case w ill they be made unhappy ?" said the Abbot (who thought liberally on the subject, and to whom the lady, on whom the Count's choice was supposed to have fallen, was even more dear
S84 dear than Constantia' and her sister). —" Their rank is acknowledged; the sums left by their mother in our charge are suffident to secure them against abso¬ lute want; their desires are moderate; nrither will Frederick's generosity fail to provide for them in a manner suitable to their station. But to expert tliat he should sacrifice the point, on which he grounds the happiness of Ms whole future life, in ordei that Ms inheritance may descend unimpaired to these unexpected new¬ comers, is really more than I can possibly justify to myself."— j This conversation was communicated tol the Sisters : they heard it with indiffer-' ence. They were too little acquainted with the world to thmk muchabout events, which might affect their future interests, and
S8S and were too grateful to their benefactor to wish for more favours from Mm, than such as he could grant without injury to Ms own feelings. But had they known on whom their unde's choice had fallen, they would have offered up their most fervent prayers for the success of his suit ; and would have looked forward to the wedding-day with as much heart-felt plea¬ sure, as to any wMch they had ever wit¬ nessed, while they were still the daughters of old Tell and-Inhabitants of the happy Vale of Rutelis. In the drde of young women, with whom their near relationship to the Count of Torrenburg necessarily brought them acquainted, none attracted thdr afleetion so strongly, as the beautiful Elizabeth of March. The interest, which Ida felt for vol. ni. s tMs
386 this charming stranger was shordy reci- procah yet it is probable, that Constantia would in the end have obtained the largest share of Elizabeth's friendship and confi¬ dence, on account of that winning soft¬ ness of manner and gentleness of temper, which made her a much more universal favourite than her gay and thoughtless sister, had she not thought proper to re¬ tire for a while from the world not long after the commencement of her acquaint. ance with Elizabeth. In spite of Ida's re¬ monstrances, Constantia entreated her unde to suffer her to pass some time in fhe Convent of Zurich, and easily obtain¬ ed her request. It seems, that lovdy as were the Ladies of Werdenberg, and general as was the admiration wMch they excited, still there was
387 was not so violent a contest for the pos¬ session of their hands, as the good Bishop had expected. It was known, that they Were doweriess orphans ; and гч their un¬ cle's marriage (though not publicly spoken of) was much circulated in whispers, this event, which was likely to anmhilatc at once all the lofty daims of the Sisters, made their admirers think it to the follas prudent to confine their admiration for the present to their own breasts. The gentle Constantia alone found in the young Count of Thuringia one, who would have chosen her as Ms bride, had she been still the daughter of the peasant Tell. Con- stantia on her side felt, how generous was the youth's conduct, and could not doubt the sincerity of Ms love : her heart in- clined her to listen to Mm : but she could s 2 not
388 not consent to break her religious deter¬ minations so quickly and so lightly ; and she retired into the Convent, that she might at least weigh the matter maturely, and try her suitor's patience and perse¬ verance a little by the test of time. After her departure, the friendship of Elizabeth and Ida acquired strength daily -, though their intercourse was much re¬ stricted by Count Frederick's evident dis¬ satisfaction at it, which the unsuspecting Ida attributed to some unaccountable anti¬ pathy conceived by her unde against her lovely friend. The fact was, that with all his excellent qualities the Count was not without his weaknesses; amo ig the chief of wMch maybe reckoned suspidon, bigot¬ ry, and a fondness for mystery even in the most innocent things. The last induced . him
389
him carefully to conceal the propusali which (under the seal of secrecy) he had laid before Ebzabeth's father : the first, made him fancy, that Ida had fathomed his purpose, and from interested motives nad endeavoured to set her friend against him ; and Ms superstitious enthusiasm led Mm to believe that the best means of obtaining Elizabeth's heart and hand was to tell Ms rotary more freque tiy than ever, and be. stow enormous donations on the-Church. He gave much ; he promised more ; and those promises were not breathed in inat¬ tentive ears. The Count's domestic Priest and the chaplain ofthe March family found, that their own advantage w r concerned in the accomplishment of Count Frede¬ rick's wishes ; and they held many a se¬ cret and serious conference эп the means S3 of 4
390 of bringing about this union, Besides the grand inducement of avarice, Father Hilarius (so was thé priest of Torrenburg named) had additional motivee for action. He looked on the Damsels of Werdenberg with all that aversion, wMch old family- servants ever bear to new-comers ; whom they generally consider as intraders, and whom they fear, test by thtir influence their own should be diminished. ¿But with most invindble antipathy did the Monk regard the gay and thoughtless Ida, who had sometimes indulged her mirth at his expence, and whom he was determined to expd from her uncle's heart, whatever trouble it might cost-Mm. Elizabeth by thb time had no secrets for Ida. She informed her, that her pa¬ rents had promised her hand to a powerful nobleman,
391 nobleman, and had ordei ed her in the most peremptory manner to prepare foi the re¬ ception of her future husband, without even condescending to inform her of Ms name or situation. However, she was in truth little curious respecting him, for her heart was already bestowed upon another. —■" Yes !" raid she to Ida, " I love Count Hen.y of Montfort, and have every reason to believe, that I am beloved in return most sincerely. Be tMs un¬ known bridegroom whom he may, he will find himself only an object of aversion in the eyes of EUtabeth of March."— Ida, judging by her own attachment to the deceased E.win, agreed, that to ba¬ nish from the heart the image of an adored lover was quite impossible : and Elizabeth was so well pleased with her friend's mode s 4 of
8Θ3 of reasoning, that she enbraced her with redoubled affection. Ida advised her by no means to give up Count Henry ; and Elizabeth on tbe other hand promised so¬ lemnly to follow that advice, which was oo perfectly in unison with her own indi- nations. —" I am grieved to think," said Eli. zabeth, " that probably in future wt shall be Suffered to meet but seldom ι I bave already received some hints, that my pa¬ rents suspect you of not giving me such counsels, as they could wish; and yet in the present situation of my aflairs it is so necessary for me to possess some feeling heart, to whom I can apply for sympathy and advice !—However, we shall still be able to correspond privately ; and those communications may be made in writing, vhich
which the enemies of our friendship for¬ bid us to impart in conversation."— Ida unluckily knew nothing of the ait of writing on her first arrival at the Castle of Torrenburg ; and since that time she had made but little progress under the tu¬ ition of Father Hilarius. She blushed, while she cpnfest this ignonnce; liow- ever, on examination Elizabeth was. of opinion, that her friend was already suf¬ ficiently advanced to answer all necessary purposes. —" I shall require, no circumstantial answers from you," said sha; " a single expressive word will be enorgh to convey to me your < pinion of my situation, and guide me in my difficulties : a " yes" tr " no" will in general be sufficient to de¬ dde vvf conduct. On my side, I will s 5 take
394 take care to write so large a hand tbat it can be easily read, and to expres? myself in a manner that shall be intelligible only to yourself. Then if you are quite at a loss respecting any part of my letters, you may show the isolated passage to your chaplain Father Hilarius. He is a simple good kmd of man, whose understanding is not keen enough to pierce through our mystery, and who may easily be deceived by two young ţirls with all their wits about them "— TMs " simple good kind of man,"' as Elizabeth called bim, the f ¡ous Father Hilarius, was perfectly astonished at the diligence, with which Ida now prosecuted her studies under Ms direction. Hitherto he had found her a very inattentive -Jupil, and as long as his lessons lasted, Ida ι was
395 was accustomed to yawn without inter¬ mission : on a sudden she was seized with the greatest fondness for that, which hi¬ therto had inspired her with nothing but disgust : she even requested, that an addi¬ tional hour's instruction might be allowed her every day; and as Father Hilarias was not quite so simple as the girls had imagined, he conduded, that there must be some secret cause for this unexpected love of literature. An epistolary inter¬ course, arising from some love-aflair, na¬ turally suggested itself to Ms mind ; and he ditermined to watch with the eyes of an Argus, whether he could not make some discovery to the prejudice of Ms de¬ tested pupil Ida soon received a pressing invitation to visit Elizabeth ; the, Count's permission s U was
S96 was lequested ; but as he was now on ths pomt of dedaring himself, and conceived that the presence of his lineal heiress could by no means be advantageous to bis suit, that permission was refused. Elizabeth therefore bad recourse to Jier pen, and Ida soon received the following letter. —" I told you, that I had-every reason to think that he loved me : alas ! I fear, that I deceived myself. He knows my situation ; knows, how I am persecuted ; and yet he offers no friendly advice for my relief, nay even seems to dedine every opportunity of visiting the Castle. He is at present with his unde, wbo is too dosdy connected with my parents to fa¬ vour an attachment, which would disap¬ point their views. Pei naps, he even in¬ sists upon Henry's giving up every thought
397 thought ofme !—The bridegroom of my father's choice has not yet revealed him¬ self: I am still ignorant of all, except that he is rich, powerful, and old; but I am threatened with his speedy arrival, and have been assured, that the day in Which I am presented to him, shall be that of my nuptials.—Write to me, dear Ida, and say, what courae'I should follow: the danger is urgent."— The messenger, who brought tMs let¬ ter, waited for an answer : it was with in¬ finite difficulty, that Ida contrived to scrawl the following words. —" Write to your Henry : if he loves you, he will hasten to your relief."— Several letters followed the foregoing; though Ida was frequently unable to de- cypher whole sentences of Elizabeth's, and 9 Elizabeth
393 Elizabeth was somľtimee completely at a los» togues« the neaning of Ida's pot¬ hooks. But the ,iei t letter of any conse¬ quence ran as follows- — —" Though he is tlie friend of my pa- Tente, my lover's unci ι is-not my enemy. He' read the letter w rich 1 addrest to Henry, and permitted him to obey it. Henry has done so : Η 'nry is here, and says that he is come tu save me: but how f —Many a bold res kintion presents itself to my thoughts, but aH are too '"es¬ perite to be adopted witho it advice. De¬ cide for me, my friend ; 1 vill follow your judgment implicitly."— To this, Ida answered—" ily with your Henry, and take refoge in his uncle's Casde. In your situation, I woi Id not have hesitated to follow Erwin through the 'worid 1"— This
аээ
This reply was not received, till the Count of Torrenburg hadbeen presented to Eliiâbeth as the man, io whom her band was destined. The repugnance, with wbich she listened to Ms declaration, was too visible to escape Ms notice ; but as her parents gave Mm the most solemn as¬ surances, that her heart (though not yet disposed in Ms favour) was still free from any other attachment, he persisted in his. addresses. He persuaded himself, that Ms assiduities must in the end make Mm mas f er of her affections, /if once her nand became Ms property; and he looked for¬ ward witb impatience to the nuptial-day, wMch was abeady fixed, and át no great distance. Ida's reply arriving at this critical mo¬ ment, produced a rejoinder from her friend,
400 friend, w Meh put her in no slight embar¬ rassment; for the greatest partof it was totally unintelligible to her. Of Hızar. beth's former letters she had frequenUy failed in decypbering tbe uords; but- ih the present epistle, even »here she had overcome that difficulty, the sense fre¬ quently appeared to her as obscure as ever. — K Ah ! my sweet friend ! how pre¬ cious should I esteem your last advice, coUid I but be certain, that in giving it you were promptad by no motive but af¬ fection for Me. · You cannot be ignorant, that -all mystery is now laid aside ; the dreaded bridegroom is arrived; and doubtless you must have been made aware of his intentions, long before my parents thought proper to communicate them to myself.
401 myself. Wben therefore you counsel me to shun this marriage by flight, can I avoid apprehending lest interest. ... Ah ! forgive me these suspidons, dear Ida ! I will not doubt the sincerity of your friendship.—Yet flight is diflicult, danger¬ ous, disgraciful ; Henry Mmself is unwil¬ ling to resort to this clandestine means of rescue ! On the other hand, this hated Bridegroom.... Why do they tell me of his wealth and power ? What are they to me Ì What are the domarns of Carlsheim, Torrenburg, ind Sargans, when balanced 'against Henry' ι heart f—I know not what to do !·—Once more, dear Ida ! but once more advise me I Lay aside every inte¬ rested motive, which might prompt your counselling me to flight ; assure me, that friendship alqne dictates your decision, and
409
and then ifyou still bid me trust mý fate to Henry, l wiU throw mysdf into his arms, and bid adieu to the Castle of İMarch. ... alas' perhaps fo«· ever !"— " Again and again did Ida-read this letter, and still found herself as far -as ever from understanding it. She would gladly have submitted it to -some mot« -teamed head than her own ; but her sister was absent, and prudence forbade her communicating к to the chaplain. Aboye all, tbe line wMch contained the three diflicult words "Torrenburg" K Carlsheim," aid "Sar¬ pını" set all her skill at defiance; and зЬе could not but fancy, that were she Once mistress of the meaning of that one fine, it would make tbe rest of the letter quite intelligible.—And then what harm could there be in showing a stianger that single
403
single passage ? The reader would cer* tamly be able to gain but little informa» tion from it; and arguing thus, she cut the passage out of the letter, and; hastened to request Father Hilarius to give her the in- terptctation. Father Hilarius (whose activity was quite indefatigable, when exerted to find out what could injure Ms enemies, among whom he numbered the innocent Ida) al¬ ready suspected tfi'e secret conespondence between Ms pupil and Elizabeth. The subject of it, however, was still unknown to Mm ; but now the whole was as dear as day-light. He read wfat was shown to Mm, guest the remainder, md malicious pleasure sparkled in his eyes. Ί о put the matter beyond a doubt, he pretended, that it Was impossible to understand the «*■ * meaning.
404 meaning of a passage so detached, and de« manded a sight of the whole epistle. This, however,, was refused him: upon.wMch he dedared it to be his opinion, tbat " the difiicult words in question must be Greek; for bit part, be eould make neither head nor tail of them."— Ida went away out of all patience! However, ai she could not discover, that her friend's situation had undergone any material alteration since her last letter, sbe at length determined at all events to send her the same answer : accordingly the messenger was despatched with a note containing only——" Flight! instant flight."—- Ida's belief, that the bands of love once iormed could never be broken (together with other romantic notions, which she had
405 had imbibed among the Helvetian moun¬ tains, respecting justice and injustice, lit- berty of the heart, and suitability in mar¬ riage) must plead her excuse for the rash advice, wMch in the .simplicity of ber na¬ tuie she gave her friend; advice, which afterwards operated to her prejudice so strongly, that it nearly ruined her reputa¬ tion and her whole happiness in life. She counselled Elizabeth to take that step which (had sbe beenherself the heroine of the adventure) she would herself undoubt¬ edly have taken: this was the utmost extent of her error ; this, and np more I The advice was given.; the advice was followed. A few days elapsed, and she heard, that the whole country was m an uproar.' The beautiful Elizabeth of March had eloped With Henry of Montfort ; and her
406
her brother Oswald, assisted by the forces of the Count of TorrenWfc, -had set for¬ ward in pursuit ofthe fugitiva. Idawasddightedto -find, that Jier ad- vice'hSďbeen carried into-**e«cution with so much succes«* sbe only feared, lest the lovers -should be overtaken by their pur¬ suers, among whom she grieved to heat her unde numbered ; she was still igno¬ rant, how deeply he was interested in this affair, arid conduded that he was actuated to take a part, in it by tbe friendship, which had solong'subsisted between him¬ self and tfi¿- öld Count of March. Her'prayers and wiàhes were half ac¬ complished, half rejefted. The- lovers were overtaken · but Count Oswald of Martíh was %ndhf attached to his sister, somewëÛ-dispostrd persons' kindly inter fered,
407
fered; Count Froderick voluntarily re¬ signed his pretensions; and it was finally resolved, 'that the errors of love should be'pardoned, and the fugitives united in a public and customary manner, 'In truth, no one could deny, that Henry was a much »ore suitable partner fór the bloom¬ ing Elisabeth, than her destined bride¬ groom, the age-strickonCoijint of Torren¬ burg. ■ -' t Ida was not long without hearing from her friend: this letter, (the last which ehe evet received from Elizabeth,) in¬ duced her to take a step, which filled up the measure of her mischances, and not only deprived her of the favour of het de¬ ceived uncle, but totally rumed her in the general opinion. ' —" Ida! dear Ida ! authoress of,all my present
4оъ
present happiness ! How wise was your advice! How perfectly has it "succeeded! Yet a few days, and I shall become the wife of Henry. Still I shall feel my pleasure incomplete, unless I can thank you for it isithan embrace on my bridal-day, Come then, my friend I come to -place the gar¬ land On my brow*, and rejoice in therwork ofyour prudence! You will find your sister with me : it was easy for her to ob¬ tain a dispensation from her Abbess. I rejoice, that your uncle is now in a dis¬ tant part of the country, as in the present moment you would certainly have been
refused
409
refused permission to cóme to me. As it is, resolve to braVe the hazard of a few frowns at his return, he will soon forget his displeasure at your witnessing my nuptials, being totally ignorant of every* tMng* which iriight seriously make him of¬ fended with yöu, mă which (yotľiňay bä assured) shall never corne to bis know' ledge.—But though concealed from alt others, the friendly part WMch you have acted in this busmess, shall never be for¬ gotten by the grateful heart of your Ell· zabeth, « Then haste to me, my friend ! I burn with impatience to make my Henry known to you*, he too is impatient to see tlie friend-of his Betrothed, the kind ad- iviseri to Whom the Нарру-ойез owe tUeH happiness. I have tesorfred, that this vol. ш. τ , wished-
410
wished-for introduction shall яке.рЬсе at the altar, before which I am to pronounce the nuptial vow. I confess, this decision is in some degree dictated by sdfish mo¬ tives: wereBenryto see the lovdy Ida of Werdenberg, before it is too late forhim to 'retract with honour, who knows but her) charms might make him faithless to theless fair Elizabeth ?—Ah', dearest Ida, you are consdous, that I do but jest; I know well the heart of my friend, imd the honour of my lover! Forgive then the fantastic hu¬ mours of a girl already half wild with her happiness, and refuse not to make by your presence that happiness still greater."— A great part of this letter was as little understood by Ida as "the former one; however, she took good care not to em¬ ploy the Chaplain to explain the meaning 2 She
411'
She doubted not his opposing her depart¬ ure for the Caatle Of March, since net unde (though for What reason «he could' not imagine) would disapprove of het vtó sit; ahd in the Counťá absence «He was totally under the direction of/ Father Hin larius. Ida ¡therefore contented' herselfi Wnh 'understanding ftom iheiette», diati shíé^fbs invited' to * wélding,i abnvMrihr the successful 4 counsels Whicnuishe-had* ¿íven 1 ' (togethertW$hi- otliei* fräendlyrser- vieJeï^KhicK' she had réAderád thè) happy! pair) wöifld'iflake ¿r*)an4mpoi;tant per¬ sonage ; aí Which she should meet hen sister ^Constantia, and ''doubtless many othtif-Of bet youthful friends; atid whue* sléÏhouldiexhibit ber beauty to the best a№antage, and'should dressy dance, sing, and laugh, as slle had frïqijiintly/done on v " J ' τ 2 similar
41)3
similar occasions on the blooming, lawn of Rutefis. This was enough fpr her to know, and to determine herpcoceedings, Ota thè appointed day Elïzabeth_scnt a small Hody, ^attendants to wait for her fneiidilii-«!v*ood-at no great distance from, the Castle o£ Torrenburg. 'idjiiÉiilednoti ta join theni there,;, а«4 44ţhout bidding. adieu ¿оЛафеп Hilarinsi jOn very quietly set forwardffor- the Cafóle «f March, She beaeheditia sa&ty, and soon found. herself clašpeldiiňtitb* atjns.of her delight· ettfriand» [Jthere too\she; hadihe happi. nest of-once moţe embracing Constantia. ThBitjwoSitit^iipas^the mtei^enţng tiine between, tbeir. arrival aitd, the we4ding> day vrithiE^tftbeih Ы é№ арадипет,; ^!heiiaei,(-s«iVding tpi the. custom of puţ times) onítniílttpíasioiiB ñaman was per¬ li e mitted
413 mitted to show Mmself, not even th* bridegroom. r . The important day arrived. Followed by her lovdy companion·-« herself the most lovely, E&eabeth'with trembling; stept and a fluttering heart approached the altar, where Henry of Montfoit waited hér arrival. Ida noW' stepped forward г she threw back her veil; and prepared to fasten the wreath of Innocence among, the golden ringlets of her friend : a similar garland hung on her am, with wMch she» Was afterwards 1 to present the bridegroom. Cfcrapled-entírely with 1 the task of deoo« rating Elizabeth» she had not yet cast hen e/es on young Montfort; she-badt, no* observed.that he started onbehoMingıbei; she hadnot heard the name of " Rosmmaí' wliidl escaped from bis tHjmblinglips. Sho now
+1* now turned to Mm. for the purpose of offei·, ing him the other wreath ; sh-*- already extended her hand ; when fixing her.eyes on his counteuancc, she uttered a cryi ex¬ pressive at once of the. utnjoSt surprise ind terror, attempted butHDi vain ţo pro- jiounce the naine of Erwin Melthal, and would bave sank upon the ground, had not Constant» rushed forward and re¬ ceived her in lier supporting armş. Constantia still wore the habit of a £Iun ; the altarvwiis adçrned exactly in the same, manner, and the blazing lamps şhed ţbe samé mysterious light alopg- \Ьч$еЦ.ес\ roofs-and gloomy arches, as on that day when jFjwin ţnd Rosanna ikneh\ at the shring ofi'St.,Engeltruda> родаЫ fortb the most solemn vows of eternal fidelity, and heard Constantia, devote; tlie breaker ■n of
•и, :"^ip •of those vows to unceasing sliame and* sorrow.— Erwin Melthal (or rather Henry of Montfort, for alas I they formed but one) had long believed the lovely Sisters to be no more the inhabitants of earth : Constantia on the other hand was in the same error respecting Erwin. The sud¬ den appearance of one, whom she had long since' numbered with the dead, imprest upon her countenance something of that serious, that strangely awful expression, wMch struck him so forcibly, -when she united his hand with Rosanna'» in the Chapel of Engelberg. He recollected her words—" Should either of you rend asunder tlie bonds, with which I now unite your fetes for ever, that instant shall my form (be I living, or be I dead) stand be¬ fore you threatening and awful, to re¬ proach
41β fpïoacll you with your crimes."—'These - recollections, and the unexpected ap¬ pearance of the Sisters, at tile very moment when ho was on the point of giving Ms hand to anotlier, made him consider the whole scene as a supernatural vision ! He believed, that the forms which stood before him, Were creatures of another world ; his biain was unable to support the shuck ; the surrounding ob· jects Abated before his eyes, Ms senses forsook him, and he' sank without anima¬ tion at the feet of his astonished bride. END OP THB THIRD VOLUME.
Г D.S. 8HÜİIY, BERWICK STREIT SOHO.
