Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Romantic tales: by M. G. Lewis
MISTRUST, OR BLANCHE AND OSBRIGHT, CHAP. L —« The bird îs dead, That we haye made so much on ! I had rather Have skipped from sixteen years of age to sixtj ? To have turned røy leaping time into a crutcb ? Than have seen tins !" Cymbiijunp Peace was concluded, and the waters ofthe Rhine again flowed through plains unpollutec with blood. The Palatine saw his enemies at his feet j it rested in his own pleasure tc trample, or to raise them, and the use which he made of the victory proved, how well he
merited to be victorious» His valour had subdued his enemies ; his clemency convert¬ ed those enemies into friends. The Duke of Saxony, the hereditary foe of his family, had been made his prisoner in the last en· gagement ; he restored him to liberty with¬ out ransom or conditions, and he could have framed none so binding as those, which this fearless generosity imposed on the Duke's gratitude. Henry of Saxony became from that moment his firmest ally ; and the Pala¬ tine found in his powerful friendship more real strength, than if he had surrounded his whole dominions with a triple wail of brass. The Saxons departed to their own country; the Palatine dismist his feudatory troops ; and their chiefs led back their vassals, loaded with the presents of their HegeJbrd, and proud of the wounds whkh they had те* ceived in his service. Among these warriors few had displayed more valour than the youthful Osbright of Frankheim j but no sooner was the war concluded^ than none
panted with more impatience for the per¬ mission to depart. It ips given, and the next hour saw him spring upon his courser ι he committed the care of his vassals to a grey-headed knight, in whose prudence he could confide ; and then, while his heart swelled' high with joy and expectation, he gave hb horse the spur, and sped towards his native towers* But it was not the recollection of those na* tive towers, nor of any one whom his castle- walls contained, which now made his cheeks glow and his eyes bla&e with such impatient fire· It was not to embrace his beloved and loving mother \ nor to kneel at the feet of his respected father, who held his two sons precious as the two apples of his eyes j nor yet to behold once more his littie darling, the young Joscelyn, who looked upon his elder brother as the master-piece of creation ; none of these was the motive, which now hurried Osbright onwards : none of these, while the mountains, woods, and wilds were в 3
left behind him with inconceivable rapidity, Biade him wonder at the unaccustomed sluggishness of his çonrser. No ! it was the hope of once mere beholding the avowed ruemy of himself and ofhis whole honse s that being to whom he was an object of the wildest alarm- and by whom his very пайш was held in abhorrence 5 this was the hope, which made the young warriors heart swell with eagerness almost to burstings There was not "a fleeter «teed in the whole Palatinate, than Osbrighťs : his speed was strctced lo the utmost, but in vain. Night wds at hands and he had not yet arrived at the wished-for goal The knight abandoned the fruitless attempt to reach it, checked his courser, and stopped for a few moments to gaze upon the hostile towers of Orrenberg, as they rose proudly in the distance, all golden and glittering with the splendours „of the Betting sun* ~ ss Oh I yes !" he sighed to himself, " the day must at length arrive, when I need no
longer gaze at distance on yonder walls, and envy every Pilgrim, who dares approach tlie portals with the prayer of hospitality ! the day shall surely come, when my name, now never mentioned but with curses, or at least with alarm within the precincts of yonder castie, shall call down blessings only inferior to those given to its Lord's ; ' when the sound of my courseras tramp on the draw-bridge shall seem to the .hearer sweet as the merry bells whkh announce a victory , and when to proclaim that Osbright of Frankbeim' draws near, shall be to announce an holiday throughout Orrenberg, Till then, peace dwell in all your hearts,my beloved enemies ! with every bead that he tells, with every orison that he breathes, Osbright of Frank« heim draU call down blessings on the heads of those, 'who now call down curses on his Г— Again he set forwards, but now suffered his horse to chuse what pace he pleased. The wearied animal gladly, profited by the per¬ ii 4
mission* Osb. ? ght, plunged in melancholy but not unpleasing thought, observed not the moderate rate« at which he was now per¬ forming his journey ; till the moon, emerg¬ ing from behind a cloud, suddenly poured her radiance fo?! upon his sight, aad the un¬ expected light startled him from his reverie* He looked up, and saw the place before him, to reach which had been the object of his proceeding with such unwearied expedition. But it was already night, and the spell,which had drawn him thither so forcibly^ had ceased to operate» Still, though he knew well that the search must be få'uiiiess, he could not refuse himself the satisfaction of revisiting that place«, whose remembrance was so dear to his imagination, so consecrated by his heart He bound his steed to the branch of a shattered oak, and entered a narrow path, which wound among the mountains. He soon reached an open space, nearly square in its form, surrounded on three sidas with flowering shrubs and
branches 3 and presenting on the fourth the entrance to a grotto, whose mouth was thickly overgrown wiih Ivy, woodbines, and a variety of tangling weeds, Osbright heard the well-known murmur of the water-fall ; his heart beat quicker as he listened to the sounds and his eyes sparkled in the moon¬ beams with tears of melancholy pleasure. He entered the cavern; as he expected and feared, it was vacant ; but the moon¬ shine, penetrating through an opening in the rocky roof ? and converting the cataract into a ñood of silver light, enabled him to see a wreath of flowers stiil fresh, which was lying од a stone seat at no great distance from the water. With an exclamation of joy heseized the wreath, and prest it to his iips* The cave then had been visited that very day ! åh ! if he had but reached il before sun-set* .. ·. But the sun %vas not set for ever : to¬ morrow it would rise again, and he now doubted no longer, that it vi ould rise a sun of joy to him* Ke kist off the dew-drops, ß ã
with which fhe flowers were heavy, and which fae ctrøld not help flattering himself wove *ears of sorrow for his absence* lie then hung the garland ronnd his neck, and having deposited his well-known scarf in puce of the flowers, he quitted the ca\ern with a lightened heart, and with hopes in¬ creased by the cerainty*» that in his absence lie had not been forsaken· And now this iirst and chief anirfety dispel· ed, he was at liberty to bestow his thoughts on those friends, who were tîıe next dearest ob¬ jects ofhis affectîon,and on that home, whsre hh unexpected arrival was certain to diffuse íincli joy. Again he spurred his horse for» wards; but the animal needed no inducement to make him exert all his speed, vi bile re¬ tracing a road whose goal was so well known to him« He darted forwards with the rapi« dity of an airow, and would not have panned till his arrival at thecastle of Frankheim, had not Osbright checked him, when within half a mile ofhis paternal towers* The sound of ι
a bell tolling heavily attracted Ids attention, and gave lus imagination the зЬгт : from the quarter whence it sounded, he guests that it must proceed from St.- John's chapel, a building raised by the piety of one of his ancestors long deceased, and who^e vaults were appropriated to the sole purpose of re¬ ceiving the reliques of those, who expired within the walk of Frankheim· Vespers must have long been past 5 it was not yet midnight 1 nor indeed was it tisnai Lo cele¬ brate religious rites within that chapel except on particular festivals, or occasions of extra¬ ordinary solemnity* His heart beat high, while he paused to listen. The bell con¬ tinued to toll, so slow, so solemn, as to permit his doubting no longer, that it was» sounding for the departure of some enfranchised spirit* ~" Was there a death then in his familv ? had he to lament the loss of a relation, of a friend, of a parent ? s> —AnxiHy to have this question answered without delay, would not permit -him to pumie Iiis destined course* B.6
í üstü} he turned the bridle of im horse, and darted into the grove of cypress, whose in ter- % ening shades hid the chapel from lua obser- % .ıtîon. îi was situated in the bosom of this grove, and a few minutes v/ere sufficient to bring him to the place, whence the sound pro« ceeded. But the bell had already ceabed to toll, and in its place, after a momentary ъйепсе, a strain of solemn choral music and the full swell of the organ burst upon the cat of Osbright, He knew well those sad melo¬ dious sounds : it was the w De Profundis*' chaunted by the nuns and monks of the two neighbouring monasteries, St, Hildegardc, and St. John, The chapel was brilliantly illuminated ; the painted windows poured a flood of Hght upon the surrounding \ 'ces,and -stained their leaves with a thousand glowing colours : к was evident, that a burial was performing, snd that the deceased must be a person of no mean consideration, Osbright sprang frem his horse, and without allowing
himself time to secure the animal from escape, he rpshííu into the chapel, whilf anxiety al¬ most deprived him of the powers of respi¬ ration» The chapel was crowded ; and as he had lowered the visor of his casque^ i о one was disposed to make way for him : but within a few pace·* ofthe principal entrance there was alow door conducting to a gallery, the access to which was prohibited, to all, except the members of the noble family of Frank¬ heim. Too impatient to ask questions, which he dreaded to hear answered, Osbright with¬ out a momenťs delay hastened îowards the private door· It was not without diffi¬ culty, that he forced his way to it ; but all present were too much engaged by the mournful business, which they had come thither to witness, to permit their attending to his motions, and he reached the gallery unquestioned and unobserved» Aias ! it was empty ! with every moment fbe conviction acquired Bew force, that the
limerai bell had knelled for some one of his family* llis whole frame shook with alarm, as he cast his eyes upon the aisle beneath. It was Imng with black throughout j but the blase of innumerable torches dispelled the double gloom of night and of the sable hangings* The sweet sad requiem still rose from the choir, where the nuns of St» Kilde¬ gårde were stationed. The avenues to the aisle were thronged with the vassals of Frank- heim ; but the middle of the aisle was left free, for there stood the chief actors in this mourn¬ ful ceremony, and the crowd kept a respect« iul distance. By the side of an open grave, which occupied the centre of the aisle, stood the Abbot of St, John's, the venerable Sylves¬ ter* His arms were extended over the grave, as if bestowing on the already consecrated earth an additional benediction. An awe- inspiring air of sanctity pervaded his tall thin figure ; his eyes seemed to shine with a mild coelestial brightness, when lie raised them with ali the rapture of enthusiasm to-
wards heaven ; but their fires were quenched by tears of pity, when he cast a glance of b mevolence towards a stately tomb of white rurbîe, which rose upon hts left hand* Igainst that tomb, (which was raised in honour of Ladislaus the first Count of Frank« knm, and which was exactly opposite to Osi right's retreat) reclined the two chief moni lers, a warrior and л lady ; and the youth's heart felt itself relieved from a weight almost intolerable^ when he recognised the beloved authors of his being* Now then he no longer trembled for the life of one of those parents, whose undeviat¬ ing affection through the ivhole course of his existence had made ¿hem so justly dear to him.—But for whom then were they mourn¬ ing ? The loss must needs touch Osbright nearly, which could occasion such extreme affliction to his parents : and that their afflic¬ tion <wa$ extreme, it was not permitted him to cherish even a doubt. The noble Magda¬ lena stood wkh her hands clasped, her*eyes
raised to heave«, while unconscious 1еагй гошъес! each olher down her checks; mo¬ tionless as a statue ; pale as the marble tomb, against which she was leaning; the very image of unutterable despair·-— Widely dineren t was the expression pro¬ duced by anguish upon the ^noble and strongly -marked features of Count Rudiger* liis heart was the seat of agony ; a thousand scorpions seemed every moment to pierce it with their poisonous stings: İrat not one tear farced itself into his blood-shot eye-balls ; not the slightest convulsion of his gigantic limbs betrayed the silent tortures of hn bosom» Â gloom settled and profound reigned upon his dark and high-arched eye¬ brows« He bent his gaze immutably upon a bier 5 which Stood between himrelf and Mag¬ dalena, aud which supported a coflîn richly adorned with the escutcheons of the houle of Frankheim. He rested one hand on the coffin ι his other hand grasped firmly the ţewelfcd handle of bis dagger* His glaring
ss were stretched widely, as if their strings re on the point of breaking, and the enes, which blamed in them, were red and id· Disdain seemed to curl his lips s and pand his nostrils ; an expression of re¬ amed fury pervaded his whole depart» 2nt ι and his resolute attitude^ and some- ing almost like a sullen smile which marked elf round his mouth* gave the prophetic шгапсе of revenge dreadfully satisfied* ís long sable mantle was wrapped round s right arm ; !t had fallen from his left loulder^ and hung rctund him in loose dra* sry 5 while its folds rustled wildly İn the ight-wind, in whose blast the tapers were armg,-and whose murmurs seemed to s'gh )r the deceased* when the nuns pausing in leír mournful melody, permitted its hollow oice to be heard* With every fresh gust he white plumes» which decorated the four orners of the bier, waved themselves back¬ yards and forwards with a melancholy mo« ion ¡ and then did the tears stream faster
from Magdiiénak eyes to think, that now nothing of motion remained to the being whom she had ever loved so fondly, except the waving plumes with which his hearse was decorated* And now the moment was come for do* positing the coffin in the earth* The music ceased ; a profound and awful silence reigned in the chapel, only interrupted by the loud sobbing of a young page, who had thrown« bimself oa his knees, and who by enveloping his head in his cloak, had endeavoured with¬ out success to prevent his grief from becom¬ ing audible* Though hìs face was thus con¬ cealed, his light and graceful form, the loflg tresses of his dark golden hair which stream¬ ed in the night-wind, and still more the en¬ thusiastic extravagance of his .sorrow,, left Osbright no doubt, who was the mourner,» It was the young Eugene, Count Rudiger's beloved but unacknowledged offspring. Four of the friars had now approached the bier 5 they raised the coflin in silence^ and
bore it towards the open grave. The heavy sound of their departing footsteps ro^ed Magdalena : · she extended her arms towards the coffin, and started forwards a few paces^ as if she wished to detain the bearers. But a moment's recollée* Ion was sufficient to make her feel the inutility of delay § and folding her arms across upo\ her bosom, she bowed her head in humble resignation** Бег lord s* :| i remained witftout rnotior· The coLm was lowered gently into the grave; it disappeared, and the attendants were on the point of covering it with the appointed marble, when Eugene uttered a ioud shriek* "~~" Oh! not yet! not yet P he cried* while he started from the ground, and rush¬ ing forwards, he arrested the arm of one of tiie friars, who held the monumental stone* His eyes were swollen with weeping, his gestures were wild as a-maniac's, and hîs voice was xhe very accent of despair·«*—" Oh ! net yet l'*, he exclaimed 5 ^ he was the
only being in the world, that ever really loved me ! the slightest drop of blood in his Teins was dearer to me, than those which warm my own heart ! i cannot endure to part with him for ever! Oh! not yet, father" good father, not yet !"—~ Thé youth was now kneeling on the Terge of the grave, and he bent down his head, and bathed the friar's feet with his tears in all the humility of supplication* As yet Magdalena had born& her * sorrow like a heroine j but the unexpected shriek of Eu¬ gene, the heart-piercing hopeless tone 5n which he nronounced the words of €C for ever i'* was more than her fortitude could bear. She uttered a deep sigh, and sank b> sensible into Ше arms .of her attendants: while Rüdiger (whom the Page*s cry of ?guny tod also rouzed from his gloomy me* ditations) sprang forwards with a furious look, and plunged into the grave. With ¡«voluntary horror the friars started Ыск, and then as if changed tQ stone by a
Cîorgon's head, they remained gazing upon the dreadful countenance, which presented itself before them« Count Rudiger's stature was colossal ; tîıe grave in w r hich lie stood > scarcely rose above his knees* His eyes blazed j his mouth foamed ι his coal-black hair stood erect, in which he twisted his hands, and tearing out whole handfulls by the roots, he strewed them on the coffin, which stood beside his feet — ^ Right ! right !*' he cried, while his thundering voice shook the vaults above him, and while he stamped upon the hallowed earth with impotent fury. Ğ€ Right, Eugene ! not yet shall the earth cover the innocent victim of avarice ! not yet shall the lips of holiness pronounce the last long farewell! not till I have sworn upon his coffin never to know rest, till his death is avenged most amply ; not till I have devoted to the dæ- mons of darkness the murderer and his ac¬ cursed offspring ! yes, yes í not he alone, but his whole serpent-brood shall pay the penaltj
of lus crime^ his wife^ his children^ hb servants, all ! all ! his vassals shall be hunt* ed through Ms woods like wolves» slaugh¬ tered where-ever found ι his towers $hall be wrapt by my hand in flames, and its shriek« røg inmates hurled back into the burning ruins ! you hear me, frtebds i yøu see the agony, which tortures my heart, and yet do I curse aîone? and yet does no voice join mine iu the vow of revenge ?—-Nay dien, look >here !«*~Observe this pallid face ! observe this mangled bosom İ look m these., look on these, and join witb me in one dreadful irrevocable curse.— iS Vengeance ! everlasting vengeance on the bloody bouse of Orrenberg/™ As lie said this, he violently forced open the coffins tore from the shroud.a lifeless body, and held it up to the gaze of the shud» dering multitude around him. It was the corse of a child apparently not more than nine years old* a large wound disfigured the ivory bosom ¡ yet even in death the
countenance was that of a sleeping angei His eyes were closed ; as Rüdiger held it forth at his arm's length, the profusion of its light flaxen hair fell over the pale lovely features of the child; but Osbright had already seen enough to confirm his worst suspicions. His brain whirled round, his sight grew dim, and he sank lifeless upon a bench which stood behind him. Yet as his eyes closed, and before his senses quite for¬ sook him, he unjld hear the exasperated multitude answer his fatheťs demand by a general shout of*** a Vengeance ! everlasting vengeance on the bloody house of Orren¬ berg/*-
CHAP. H
-** Suspicioni^ krkîng frown and prying eye,"— « IL· P. Knight's, 4í Laiådsoape,"
Тик vizor of Osbrighťs helmet was closed^ and the exclusion of air necessarily pro* longed his insensibility« When he recovered himself, the chapel was vacant,and the lamps and torches all extinguished. The total darkness, which surrounded him, added to the confusion of his ideas § and a cornicle?-»
able time elapsed, before he could recottect himself sufficiently ťo arrange ín their proper order the dreadful circumstances, which had just occurred. The image erf his murdered brother haunted his imagination, and resisted all his eftorts to chase it away* Though hm own education had been received principally at the court of the Bishop of Bamberg, and therefore he had seen but little of the young Joscelyn, that Httle was sufficient to make him feel an affection most truly fraterr \ for the amiable child. Deeply therefore did he regret his loss} but yet he regretted tfae circumstances, w T hich attended it, even more than the loss itself. His fathers horrible curse still rang in his ears ι the sentence of death pronounced upon himself would have sounded to him less dreadful, than that gene¬ ral shout of the incensed vassals— u Venge¬ ance on the house of Orrenberg l**-— Bewildered, irresolute, daring scarcely to admit the possibility of his father's solemn assertion being unfounded, and heaving VOL» I, С
many a sigh of anguish over the probable ruin of all his schemes of happiness, did Osbf ight quit the gallery, and pursue his way to the great entrance of the chapeL The darkness was profound, and he reached the gates with some difficulty: but here he found his intention of departure completely frustrated. During his swoon the doors had been carefully locked and barred, and though his strength was great f it was still insufficient to enable him to force them open* Exhausted with his fruitless efforts, he abandoned the attempt, and had made up his mind to return to the matted gallery, and remain there quietly, till morning should enable him to regain his liberty ; when he recollected, that at the further extremity of the aisle there existed a celb which generally was tenanted by one of the Brethren of St. John, whose office it was to keep the chapel in order, and by whose care infill probability the doors had been so carefully secured* Thither he bent his way, hoping to obtain
his freedom bv the Friar's assistance, and at least certain of finding a less damp and un¬ wholesome shelter for the night. Feeling his way from pillar to pillar he proceeded slowly and cautiously, Il was not Ioìk;, before a ray of light at some distance guided his steps, and a low murmuring voice assured him, that the cell was inhabited. He pushed the door gently open. A lamp, which was placed in the nook of a narrow gothic window, threw its light fall upon thç pale face and grey locks of the friar, who was kneeling before a crucifix, with an im¬ mense rosary in his hand, and his eyes fixed devoutly upon the Redeenser^s countenance* Osbright was both too unwell and too impa* lient to wait for the conclusion of his prayer j he stepped into the cell, and the sound of his heavy spurs, which clattered as he trod, roused the Monk from hib devotions, lie started up, and looked round, amazed at so unusual an intrusion : Hut no sooner did he cast his eyes upon his visitor, than he ÙV с 2
prostrate upon the earth before him, loaded him with benedictions, and poured forth a prolusion of thanks to Heaven, which had thought the meanest of its servants worthy of so unusual and distinguished an honour. Osbright had raised his visor for the benefit of air ; and the singular beauty of his fea* tu-iís, the noble expression of his counte¬ nance, the symmetry of^ hb form, and the dazzling brilliance of his armour, made the pious brother conclude, that he was honour¬ ed by a eedestial vision, and that the form, who stood before him,was no other than the arch-angel Michaei He was so convinced of this* that he was on the very point of asking news ofthe Dragon, when the knight hasten-* ^d to dissipate his illusion* _« Ris£ s good fathçr ľ* said he j u I am a mortal like yourself, and what is more, am a mortal» whc, greatly need jour «asgjstønce* During the iate mournful ceremony, a sud¬ den illness overpowered me : I became in¬ sensible ; no one observed ще, and I found
myself on my recovery alone* in darkness,- and inclosed within the chapel. Doubtless, you possess the means of opening the gate,^ and can restore me to liberty."—- — î€ Truly can I, my son/* answered the monk ; u and it is but just that f should be the person to let you out, as I was the per* son, who locked you in so carefully. Mercy on me, poor old mani I îittfe thought, that I was locking in any thing better than the dead, and myself, and my old raven Jojo· But oh! all ye blessed spirits! you must have been ill indeed, Sir Knight ; for the poor child, that Count Rüdiger tore out of its shroud, did not look paler, than you do at this moment. Nay 9 in truth, it was your paleness, which made me be so sure of your being a spirit, when I first looked òn you j for f thought, that no living thing could have had a countenance so blood» less. But how I stand here talking, when I ought to be doing somewhat to assist youf —Here, Sir Knight ľ* he continued, at the V w'
same» time hastening to a small walnut-tree cupboard, and spreading his whole store of provisions before the stranger; u here is some refreshment—here is brea4r~~and fruit —and harci eggs—and here is even some venison for you ; for alas, the day ! I am old and weak, and our Abbot has forbidden my fasting and keeping the spare holy diet, which 1 used, and which 1 ought to keep» Ah ! 1 shall never have the good fortune to be a Saint, nor even a Martyr heaven help me ! but i will not murmur at Providence, sinner that I am for saying so ! Now, good Sir Knight, eat, and refresh yourself, for it makes my heart bleed to see you look so pale.—And see ! I protest« I had like to have, forgotten the best of ail ΐ here is a small bottle of a most rare cordial·: it was given me by sister Radigonda, the fat portress of St. Hildegarde's, and she assured me, that its virtue was sovereign. Now taste it, good son, 1 beseech you ! I am sure it will do you service: not that I ever tried its good qualities
myself-, but sister Radigonda has, and she's a devout person, who (I warrant you) knows whaťs good. Now taste it, dear Sir Knightî in the name of St. Ursula and the eleven thousand virgins (rest their souls, though nobody was ever lucky enough to find their blessed bodies !) I beseech you* now, taste it ! —~" The benevolent manner of the old man was irresistible· Osbright partook of the cordial, and the warmth which immediately difiused itself through his chilled veins, and the glow which it produced upon his cheeks, sufficiently testified, that sister Radigonda had not said too much in favour of her pre« sent—Brother Feter now prest the youth to partake of the viands placed before him ; and Osbright, finding that his person was totally unknown to the Monk, thought, that by engaging him in conversation he might most easily and expeditiously learn the mean¬ ing ofthe melancholy transactions, which he had, just witnessed in the chape!. Accord« с 4
mgly 5 he took some of the refreshments, which liis host presented to him, and found no difficulty in leading the conversation to the funeral and its cause ¡ while on the other hand Father Peter, believing hb discourse to be directed to a stranger, whom curiosity alone had led to the chapel, and who had no personal interest in the transaction felt no hesitation in answering the questions put to liim without disguise and in their fullest ex¬ tent* ~ i€ You shall hear all that 1 know, Sir Knight," said the old man ; α and 1 believe, í know more of the matter than most people. Indeed, you'll marvel perhaps, how ϊ came to know $o much ; but did you remark a young Page at the funeral* who sobbed so piteously, that one heard him in spite of the organ ì bis name is Eugene ; he is the Countess's Page, and (between ourselves) they do say^ that he b «more nearly related to the Count, than law and religion allow of; but the Count wishes this to be kept a
secret, and so I shall not say a syllable upon the subjects Well ! this Eugene is an excel¬ lent pious youth, and often comes to the chapel, and prays upom his knees for whole hours together before the Virgin's image, and employs ail the money he can procure in purchasing irasses İn hopes of removing the soul of his poor sinful mother out of purgatory—and во he used ofte» to bring the poor little murdered Joscelyn to viut me in my cell, and he told me the whole matte? exactly, as I now teli v it you* You. must know, Sir Knight, that some twenty years ago, there was an old * Count of Frankbeim, by name Jerony mu«, who, bequeathed his large domains. »... * M —~ —-" Nay,pry 5 thee, my good father," 4 inter¬ rupted Osbright impatiently ;. " proceed to the murder at once, and leava ош% the. ber quest of Count Jercmyrnm P-— ~" Leave out the bequest?" cried Brothfev Peter; u Heaven help us L you might as well bid me tell you the story of tlie Fall of Maxi* C5
und leave out the Apple) why, that bequest bas nulde the whole mischief; and into the bargain. Sir Knight, 1 must tell my own «tory my own way, or I shall never be able to tell it at alL«-—Well ! as I was saying, this Count Jerony mus had but one chikl, a daughter; and as his ruling passion was family pride (of which, however, the present Count has a hogshead, where the old one had but a drop), he resolved to bestow her hand and his large domains' upon the next heir* Unluckily, before his intentions were 'made known to him, the next .heir was already affianced to another.-—Rudder of West Frankheim and his cousin Uast^vus of Or- îvnbcrg, equally needy and equally related to Jcronymus, (onìy Rudiger was the eldest branch), were both suitors to Magdalena, the rich heiress of Heimstadt, who at this very moment chose to make her election in favour ofthe former. Now who was puzzled but the olcl Count. ? what should he do ? family pride forbad his alienating the patrimony of
Frankhelm from the man who at his death would be the reigning Count; and yet pater¬ nal affection would not suffer him to leave his unoffending daughter quite destitute.— To reconcile these two jarring passions, he bequeathed the whole hereditary estates to Count Rüdiger, and gave his daughter the Lady Ulrica his whole personal property, besides several purchased estates of consider¬ able value, together with permission to be¬ stow them and her hand according toher own free choice. That choice fell on Gusta¬ vus of Orrenberg, who was too greedy oí wealth to refuse so advantageous a match ; though he never forgave the Lady Magda- lena's rejection of him, but cherished a secret spite in his heart against her and his success¬ ful rival* '— — iC Indeed? is that quite certain ľ'™ — α Oh ! quite, quite ! why, Count Rudi- ger always said so himself ! though to Ы sure Gustavus carried himself artfully enougl towards him, and woukl fain have been oi с о
friendly terms at Frankhelm, But Rudiger was too prudent to be deceived, and guest, dut ail these fair speeches and mild looks wcre intended to lull lum into a dangerous security, till an opportunity should offer of doing him an injury without danger·"—* <g And did Gustavus ever betray any such intention by his actions P~-* ~ a Oh ! blessed Virgin ! No 9 to be sure not ! my lord was too much oa his guard to give him an opportunity! iťs true, the fami* lies stiU kept up an appearance of being om decent terms, and even visited : but my lord never went to the Castle of Orrenberg but well armed und attended, and kept án eye of suspicion on every thing that was passing around him : snd when Gustavus returned the visits he must easily have seen by my lord*s looks and manner, that he was aware of hb being come for no good ; and so he never ventured to put his evil designs in execution**-—But how my oíd head rambles ! I forget to ,tcll you, that there was a worse
:ause of enmity than their joint-stut to Magdalena! you must know, that when Count Jerony mus found his daughter's choice to have fallen upon Gustavus ('who, after Rüdiger, would inherit the titles of Frank- heim), he bethought himself of a way to render the union of that beloved name and his large possessions more durable than ever» Accordingly in a clause to his will he enacted, that in case either Gustavus or Rüdiger should die without heirs, the property, which he had bequeathed to the one, should descend to the other undimimshed.™Ncither of them bad children at the time of the old Count's decease ¿ but within a twelvemonth after it, Rüdiger fell dangerously ill .—He lay for two days insensible ; the physicians beHeved him to be dead : the report spread wer the whole country ; and oh ! m uhat xaste was Gustavus, to take possession of :he casde and its domains ! he came gallop* hig over in all joy, when lo and behold ! he found our good lord still in the land of the
living, and was obliged to return home quite chap-fallen ! If the plague had broken out among them, it could not have produced inon* sorrow in the Castle of Orrenberg than í lie tidings of this recovery !"—- —- fi< Indeed ! who told you that, father ? s * — α Oh ! I remember, that it was the com¬ mon report throughout Frankhcim : Ì never heard any one say otherwise* WeH 1 Sir Knight, Gustavus had scarcely got the better of this disappointment when he met with another. The Lady Magdalena proved with child, and was safely delivered of a fine boy, who was christened Osbright, When Gus¬ tavus heard this, he turned as white as a corpse ľ ? ™ — ťc How know you thai? did you see him ?" -»·" I? St. Chrysostom forbid! I never saw the hypocritical assassin (heaven par» don me for calling him so, who am myself so hardened a sinner !) I say, 1 never &aw him in my whole life, not I ! í would as soon
look on Beelzebub in person ! No, no ! I might indeed have seen him once ; but ï cast down my eyes, crossed myself, and past un* Well ! the house of Orrenberg comforted itself with thinking, that Rüdiger had but one son, while the lady Ulrica had borne four, besides a daughter. Iťs true, Count Rudiger's prudence had made him send the young Osbright out of the reach of their enmity ; but still he might be taken off by a thousand natural accidents. This hope also received its death-blow about nine years ago by the birth of a second son to Rüdiger, this very little luckless Joscelyn. The two boys increased in bloom and strength, as they in¬ creased in years; while the Orrenberg chil¬ dren were all weak sickly creatures. One after another, the three eldest sank into the grave : but when about six months ago the fourth boy expired, and left them with only a daughter and without hopes of further progeny, Gustav us*s spite ancl avarice coukl no longer contain itself within bounds. He resolved to remove the objects of his aver«
rien, cost what it might ; and you saw îr* the roangìect body of Joscelyn the effects· of ihis diabolical resolution ! Ilcaven pardon him and mc ? and all sinners, Amen ! M ~* — w Aye, that murder^ father ! that mur· cleť, . t * that is what I would fain hear ! oh! ' proceed, proceed, for pity*s sake ! let me know e^ery cruel circumstance* « * * * even though to hear it should break my heart ! *'™ — ~ ť * Ah ! mul that would be a thousand pities«! fot it must needs be a kind heart, to tate on so grcviously at hearing a story, in which you have no concern,—Well then ! yoti must know, that one morning the Count set forth to hunt the hart* and Jiis young son pleaded so earnestly to accompany him, that the father could not resist his entreaties«, Ïhe sport was excellent} and in the eagerness of pursuit, every one forgot to look after Joscelyn* At length the animal was taken ; the hunters found themselves at a consider« able distance from home ; by degrees they all assembled» all except joscelyn. Now then a toe and v y commenced 5 the Count was
half frantic with apprehensions, and bit- alarm was increased ten fold, when he dis¬ covered tliat the chace had beguiled them into the woods of Orrenberg, Away rode the hunters, some one way, some another : font of the most trusty followed Rüdiger^ and 4vhilo he made tbc forests ring again with thename of Joscelyn^ the hand of Providence^ in order that themiirderermight he punished^ guided him to the place* where the poor child had already breathed his last ¡ it was near a small river 5 the ground was stained with blood, and a huge wound stood gaping upon his ivory bosom» Search was made for the assassin, who (it was evident) could not have gone far, for the body was not yet coid ! and a man, whose garments were still crimsoned with blood, and whose counte« nance pronounced him capable of committing any mischief, was found concealed in a thicket at no great distance."-— —" And what reason had he for. «.. ? ™ — si Oh ! Sir Knight, every one guest at the rcason f as soon as Martin (the Count's
Squire) exclaimed, that he knew the assassin, and that he was one of the Count of Orren» berg's domestics« The villain too' knew in whose presence he was, and addressing Count Rüdiger by his поде, he fell on his knees, and entreated him not to hurt him 5 a sure proof of his being conscious of some crime/ else why should he have been apprehensive of receiving hurt. Sir Knight ? well ! he could not deny his belonging to Gustavus, but for a long time he persisted in swearing, that he had found the child already insensi¬ ble in the wood, and that tlie blood had stained hb clothes, while conveying him to the rivulet, In hopes that by bathing his face with water he might restore him to his senses* Truly, the fellow was artful enough, and made out a good plausible story ; but Rüdiger was not easily to be deceived* He had the villain conveyed to the Castle of Frankhelm, and there proper means were taken for extorting from him a confession ofthe truth/'—
— и And what was thaï confesbíuii ?*'— — u Exactly wdiat every one expected; that he had been commanded to murder the child by his master, Gustavus of Orren- berg."—■» — <c He confest it?—Almighty powers !~ Are you siire^ that he confest it Г™ —^ Sure of it? why, alas~the~day! î heard him say it with my own ears* He was asked by the Count,-—" who set him on to commit the murder"—-and I heard him answer as plain as I now hear you—« a Gustavus of Orrenberg·"— -—** Is it possible!** exclaimed Osbright in agony. His last lingering hope was now destroyed, and with all his anxiety to beiieve Gustavus innocent, he found himself unable ţo exclude the irresistible conviction of his guilt, —** Alı ! it is but too certain V* resumed the Friar wîth a deep sigh j u one would willingly disbelieve the existence of such villain\% but 1 heard the assassin own it mv-
self \ and a hardened sinner he was S in spite of all my pious exhortations to repent¬ ance, not a word would he confess* though ï begged him with tears in my eyes^ for wicked as he was, it almost broke my heart to see the torturer which he endured., and all out of Ъщ own obstinacy ! Since the very moment that he made the desired confessions my lord ordered him to be taken from the гаск э though it was then but to litde pur- pose.*'·— —,«« The rack i n exclaimed Osbright«, seizing the old man*s hand math а convulsive grop ; ^ was it then only on the гаск э that he made this confession ľ ?í — —«* € No truly ; till Count Rüdiger had re* course to torture, not a syllable would he utter* but assertions of his own and his master's innocence. Nay, even when he was actually on the- rack, he persisted in his оЫ stínate falsehood* He had already remained the e so Iong s that he was scarcely unbound, before he breathed bis iast 3 poor sinful
wretch ! Heaven pardon Mm and take him to its mercy Γ— Now then the heart of Osbright again beat freely. It is true, the death ofhis brother made that heart the abode of deep sorrow ; but to banish from it the belief, that Gus¬ tavus was the boy*s assassin, was to relieve it from a burthen of insupportable agony* That belief grew weaker with every question, which he put to brother Peter ; he found, that whiie in possession of his strength and faculties the supposed culprit had most strenuously denied all knowledge cf the crime ; that the excess of torture alone had forced from him the declaration, that Gus¬ tavus of Orrenberg bad any concern in it ; that the name of Gustavus had been suggest¬ ed by the prejudices of the suspicious and already exasperated father ; and that the whole confession was comprised in the mere pronouncing that name, when the speaker was seduced into uttering it by the certainty of immediate release from tortures the most
excruciating, Osbright had been educated at a distance from his family, and his mind thereforchadnot imbibed theprcjudices, which made the Count of Orrenberg be considered as an incarnate fiend throughout the do¬ mains of frankhelm» His liberal nature in« dined hitn to wish all hearts to be as pure and as benevolent as his own j and his jndge« ment was both too candid and too keen to mistake assertions for proofs, or to be deluded by the artful colouring, in which prejudice ever paints the actions of a detested object* In defiance therefore of all his father's endeavours, he had resolved to suspend his opinion of Gustavus, even while his charac¬ ter was a matter of indifference to him: but now that the dearest of all interests made him wish to find him worthy, to have found him so deeply culpable would have wrung with excess of torture the most sus¬ ceptible fibres of his heart* On reflection, he found, that his plans must be delayed till the innocence of Gusta-
vus in this bloody business could be fully cleared to the satisfaction of Count Rüdiger and of all Germany ; and he silently vowed never to know rest» till he had proved that innocence, and ascertained, beyond the power of doubting, the real name of the monster, whose dagger had sent the bloom«* ing Joscelyn to an untimely grave. But hov/ was he to commence his inqui¬ ries ? Brother Peter was so fully convinced of the guilt of Gustavus, that his answers to Osbrighťs questions, only served to mislead his search, instead of furnishing the unravel¬ ling cloe to this mystery of iniquity» The youth anxiously desired to talk over the business with some unprejudiced persons arid for this purpose he resolved to depart immediately for the Castle of Sir Lennard of Kleeborn. This worthy Knight was, in spite of their alienation, considered equally as a friend by the two families of Frankhcim and Orrenberg ; Osbright had seen enough of his character, during his last visit at his
fathers, to feel for him the highest senti¬ ments of esteem and reverence ; and he re¬ solved te lay his difficulties, his hopes, and his fears before this excellent man without disguise, and entreat his assistance in /or« warding the one and removing the others. The moon shone bright j in defiance of the Friar's entreaties he resolved not to wait for morning, since grief and anxiety would have prevented sleep from visiting his couch· However, being anxious to avoid the pre» scuce of Count Rüdiger till the first emo¬ tions of grief for the loss ofhis child, and of passion against the house of Orrenberg, should have studded, he requested the Monk to allow him to find hospitality within his cell on the succeeding night, when (as he said) his affairs would necessitate his being again in the chapeľs neighbourhood· His request being readily granted, he charged the old man to conceal his visit from every ones ană then having enforced his charge, by a considerable present to be appropriated to
the use of Brother Peters Patron-Saint, Os¬ bright vaulted upon his courser, whom fide^ lity had detained near the chapel» and whose frequent neighing had already announced his impatience at the absence ofhis Lord*
vOl* ι
I"
chap. ra.
^ c Alas ! tlic ßpring-Hme*s pleasant hours returning Ferve but to waken me to зЬагрег.раш^ KťcaHiiig scenes of agony and mourning, Of bafHtcl hopest and prayers preferred hi val» ! Thus was ilie stm his verna! beams displaying. Thus did the woods iu early foliage ware, Wiiile dire diseas* x on all I ioved wai preying, And flowers seemed rising, but to sire w Ыч grave/' Charlotti. Sm π u« V/hile the Castle of Frankheim resounded wilh cries of agony and threats of venge¬ ance, the spirit of tranquil sorrow reigned on every brow and ín every heat t through¬ out the domains of Orrenberg, Seven months had elapsed since the death of the beír of those domains, the young and ami-
able Philip ; the wound was skinned over, but the pain was ftiU felt ; tears had ceased to trickle, but the heart had not yet ceased to bleed. Gustavus stood at an oriel-window, and contemplated the fertile fields, which he hoped on his death-bed to have bequeathed to his darling. The lady Ulrica was employed at her tapestry-frame ; but her work was ofteu suspended, while she cast a look of anxious tenderness on the lovely Blanche, (who was at work beside her,) and while she breathed a mental prayer, that Heaven in mercy to an almost broken heart would preserve toher this, her loveliest, her dearest, her only remaining chikl The silence was interrupted by the en¬ trance of an old female domestic, who in¬ formed Blanche, that she had at length found the canvas bag which had been so long missing, and which she now presented to her, Blanche hastily quitted the tapestry- frame, while her cheek alternately coloured Π 2
52 mistrust ; ок with anger 3 and grew pale with apprehen» sion. ~ a Oh! Rachel!" she exclaimed in a tone of reproach, fiC how thoughtless to bring it hither ! ah ! and see ! my dear mother has recognised it but too surely, for her eyes are already filled with tears I м —and she threw her arms affectionately round the waist of Ulrica, and entreated her pardon for being the occasion of suggesting such pairoful recollections* —" What b the matter ?" demanded her father, advancing from the window:,—· " what distresses you, Ulrica ?" — then glancing his eye on the canvas bag, which Blanche had suffered to fall upon the grounds ·—" Ah!** he continued, a 1 need no an¬ swer ! those are the play-things of my poor dead boy ¡—What would you do with them 5 Blanche Г— —- α 1 meant, to give them to the gar¬ dener's children ; they were Philip's play« fellows and friends, and they have not
forgotten yet, how dearly he loved them. ft was only yesterday that as I past towards St. Hildegarden grotto, I met the poor chil¬ dren going to adorn Philip's grave with their choicest flowers ; and their father tells me, that they mention him every night in their prayers, and never pass a day without visit¬ ing his monument—and so I fancied,that by giving these play-things* ....... But I wish, that I had never thought at all about them, since the sight of them has distressed you so much, dear mother !—»Nay now, pry'thee, weep no more ! you know, my father says 3 that ? tis sinful to murmur at the dispensa¬ tions of Providence, and that it gives Jiim pain, whenever he 'sees our tears !"— ■~ ss And " should not that reflection check your own, my Blanche?" enquired Gusta¬ vus ; ** why are your cheeks so wet ? Fie ! fie, my ¿hild !"— —" Ah! dear father, ï cannot prevent their flowing, do all tliat I can ! "When any¬ one seems happy, ï cannot help smiling $ и 3
and when any one dies s surely I needs must weep* But at least I obey you better than my mother : indeed neither of us talk of Plnlip,but then she always rĂ/«^ of I;im,andis always melancholy. Now I am always gay, and endeavour not to think of him ; ex¬ cept when something brings him suddenly before me, and then I cannot choose but weep, or else my heart would break in two : —for instance, when I look at these play« things, it seems to mc, as if Philip were pre« bent ; I think, I see him arranging his troops so busily on the ground ; î think, I Ьегрг him entreating me to leave my tiresome tapestry, and observe, hov/ bravely he wffl fight the battle* u The blue, 5 ' he used to say, '* are the vassafa of Orrenberg, and the red are the vassals of Frankheim ; and now, —** Of Frankheim, Blanche?'* interrupted Gustavus; "no,no; that was not what Philip called them ; a the red/ 5 he used to say 9 "are our cnemie&"—~
~" Yes, yes ţ our enemies, the vassals of Frankheim."-— — u You misunderstoodhim 9 Blandie;why should Philip call the vassals of Frankbeim our enemies ?"— ~ €& Nay, dear father, are they not so ? every om m the castle thinks, and says it."— —** Tbey» who say so, had better not say it in my hearing* The count of Frankheira ia my nearest relation, a man of singular military prowess and distinguished by many noble qualities. It is true, the dissimilarity of our manners and habits, together with vari¬ ous other impediments, has prevented so cordial an intimacy between the families, as should exist between such near connexions; but still I entertain a high respect for the character of the owners of Frankheira, and sha 1 ! not hear without displeasure those persons called my enemies, whom I would willingly boast of аь -,uy friend·;. 5 '— — u Your friends ? oh ! father ι would
^. A.
you call those your friends, who have poison* ed your only remaining son, who have deprived me of an only remaining brother? Ahl should I not call these cruel people our enemies, our worst of enemies ?"—~ ~ a Poisoned my son? poisonedPhilip?"™- ~ s< Nay, it is the common talk of the whole castle ! every child on the domains knows it, as well as I do, and trembles at the name of Rüdiger, the ruthless child-mur» derer ! nay ; has not my mother openly ac¬ knowledged that, · · ·, · "—* —" Blanche !" interrupted Ulrica hasti¬ ly; ** you go too far; you misrepresent the fact* What have! ever openly acknow* ledged ? I merely, in confidential conversa¬ tion, let fall a hint, ' a sort of suspicion ..,. that it was just possible. , , * that to judge from appearances», ·. that I was al¬ most tempted to imagine*. *. " —*' Aye, Ulricas'* replied her husband ; ^ I feared from the very first that you were the original cause of this ill-founded report.
Is there no hope then, that my entreaties and advice will ever eradicate from your mind the only dark speck, which deforms it? Of all the defects of the human heart, there is none more encroaching, more insidious, more dangerous than mistrust : viewed through her distorted optics, there is no action so innocent, no every-day occurrence so insignificant, that does not assume the appearance of offence. Words are miscon¬ strued j looks are interpreted ! thoughts are guest at and acted upon, as if thoughts were facts ; the supposed fault is retaliated by a real one \ that one gives birth to more ; injury succeeds injury, and crime treads upon the heels of crime, till the web of mischief and misery is complete ; and the suspector starts in surprise and horror to find both himself and his adversary equally involved in that guilt, which but for his suspicions would probabîv have been the lot of neither."— -—"Nay, Gustavus, why thus severe? what d 5
have ( clone ? I assert nothing 5 I accuse no one ι I merely have hinted ж the possibility .... and thatt while I have life and consci¬ ousness, I mim maintain-—to die so suddenly! to-day in all tha bloom of health, and to* morrow in his coffin !—Oh ! that fatal in¬ heritance ! to that shail I ever ascribe the los» of my child I-—And then the livid spots ? which broke out upon my poor boy's corse* »,. and the agonies, which he suffered t ... the burning heat, and the insatiable thirst which tormented him... « and above all the rapid putrefaction. #.. Yes ! yes ! the moment that I beheld that, ϊ exchimed**-» u such a death cannot be natural"«—a dread* ful light broke in upon me, and* β * * « _And at that light you have kindled a torch, capable of burning to the very ground the house of your unsuspecting neighbour^ of your nearest relation ! you have inflamed the imaginations of the giddy unthinking multitude, whose rage if once let loose, and countenanced by their superiors.. * · "<— о
'— a I inflamed them ľ oh! you' injure me, my husband í it is true, tlieîr rage, their hatred against the Count of Frankheim is at this moment extreme ; but I have done my utmost to prevent their breaking out into violence. I dread Count Rüdiger ; but t hate' him not 3 for I will not hate any one ; and though your former love for Magdalena once made me fear her influence over your heart, your uniform kindness during many long years has totally erased all such appre¬ hensions from, my bosom* Do not then sus¬ pect me of stirring up our people to venge¬ ance upon the Frankheimers. Aim ! it needed no instigation of mine to make them understand a tale so clear, a fact so evident,. that the murder circulated from lip to lip, ere I had time to impose silence on the death-bed attendants ; and every man's own consciousness suggested to him the murder¬ er's name."—- ~ u A tale so clear, Ulrica ? before yoar father's fatal bequest had raised suspi- D G
cions of each other between the families^ you attended Magdalenas lying-in— tîıe child lived but a few hours, and expired in your arms« Had Magdalena been as mistrust« ud as yourself, how well would the tale have been to!d 5 that jealous of my former attach« ment to the mother, you had privately* while pretending to kiss it,confined the wind* pipe of the child, or prest its skull together,or — * Sí Oh! spare me, my husband! yes, such a tale might have been told.. ». Oh ! horror! might perhaps have been believed* I will say nothing more ; I will accuse no one in futures I will bury all my suspicions in oblivion ; I will forgive all.. · « if they will but leave me this one blessing, this one dar¬ ling, this my last, my only existing child!''—- As she said this, Ulrica threw her arms round iier kneeling daughter; and she was stili weeping upon her neck, when a domes» tic entered, and announced a herald from tite Castle of Frankheim* As all intimacy
between the families had ceased,and they now only met on great festivals, or at tourna¬ ments, or on some solemn occasion, it was concluded, that the herald's business related to some public occurrence, some imperial edict, or some regulations for the welfare of thePalatinate—thewomen,therefore,thoughi proper to withdraw ; Ulrica, greatly agitat- ted by the conversation which had just taken place, retired to indulge the agony of ma¬ ternal regret in her own solitary apartment; and Blanche, e . · ?— The war was concluded j the troops were dismissed ţ the knights were returning home» -— ^ Perhaps /*' said Blanche, and with a light step and heart full of hope, she fled through the secret passage towards the cave among the rocks.
CHAP. IV.
—. · ζζ Öli ! my sou! come not thou into their' counsels ; mito their assembly, mine honour, Ы not thon united ;" for in their ånger ihey slew а таи, imd in their seif- w Ut they digged a waii* Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce, №d their wrath, for itwascr-ucb*-— Genesis»
And the hopes of Blanche were not quite disappointed» ït is true, the cave was vacant ; but he had been there ; but he had left a .token, that she was not forgotten by him.
To-morrow according to their mutual agree*. ment she might depend upon seeing once more the youth, whose image gratitude had engraved upon her heart in characters never to be effaced j and then might she claim his- promise of revealing to her his real name, and clearing up the mystery, in which he had hitherto enveloped all that related to him, except hb adoration of herself· Satis¬ fied of that most material point, she had hitherto been content to leave every other in obscurity ; but now she should know every» thing ; now her lover would disclose him¬ self, and authorise her disclosing their at¬ tachment to her parents; and precious as they held her, she still feared not their op¬ posing her union with a ipan, whom she loved so tenderly, and by whom she was so tenderly beloved. Besides, hey father was sinking into the vale of years; the family required some younger and inore , л active champion to defend them against tho nefarious designs of «ther mortal foc ; the
cruel and insidious Count of Frankheim ; and where could they find a fitter protector than this unknown knight, who had already proved the strength of his arm and valour of his heart so successfully, when he rescued her from the banditti ? oh ! when once his bride, she should no longer tremble at the dreadful name of Rudiger ! all then would be peace 5 security and happiness ! and while she made these reflections, she prest the well- known scarf to her Hps a thousand and a thousand times. The sun was setting, and it was time for her to return home» She threw herself on iier knees before the crucifix, which she had herself placed on the rough-hewn altar ; she poured forth a prayer of fervent gratitude to St* llildegarde, traced a cross upon her forehead and bosom with the same holy water» which had formerly quenched the thirst of that virgin martyr, and then bidding a tender adieu to the cavern in which she had passed so many happy moments, she
,ped back towards the Castle, the scarf flut- ering in the evening-breeze as she retraced he secret passages. She was proceeding towards her own ipartment, when in crossing a gallery which vas connected with the great hall, she was därmed at seeing several of the domestics lurrying backwards and forwards in con- iision ι she stopped, and listened; she heard ier father's name frequently repeated 5 and at ength caught some words, as if some acci« lent had happened to him. Now then everything else was forgotten in the appre« tension of his being in danger. She flew towards his apartment, which v/as on the Dther side of the castle ; but in crossing the great hall, she was detained by the young Baron of HartfckL ~ <r Heaven be thanked, that î have found you. Lady i îf —said ho, taking her hand affectionately—" the Countess charged me to seek you, and prevent your being «uddenly alarmed. Nay, look nor m terri-
lied í on my knightly word there is no danger, and a few hours will restore your father to that fortitude, of whkh the too great sensibility of his nature lias at present deprived hkn."— —" Ohi what has happened? what hai overcome his fortitude f something dreadful surely! is he ill, Sir Ottokár? oh! «assur* me at least, that he is not ill !"~ — íâ His illness is merely temporary ; bf this time no doubt ît is quite past*—It is true, his senses forsook him for a time 5 he fainted, and. *.. '*-— —-" He fainted? oh! heavens! let me hasten to him this moment, «, * ,э ~ -—** You must not,till you are mom calm« Your present agitai ion would affect him, and probably occasion a relapse* Sufler me to lead you into a less public apartment 5 there you shall hear all that has happened, and ivhen your spirits are composed, you shall thea carry peace and consolation to the wounded feelings of your father. w -~*
Butüıcenıotions of Blanche could admît ui no delay ; she still hurried onwards ; and as in fact Sir Ottokár had only wished to de¬ tain her, in order that he might enjoy her society for a few minutes without re¬ straint, all that he had to communicate was told» before they reached tho Counts cham¬ ber-door. Interlarding his discourse with many com¬ pliments to his auditress, and insinuations of the tender interest which he ielt for hcr» the Baron now related,— 5i that the business of the Count of Frankheim's herald was to ac¬ cuse Gustavus of the assassination of the Count's youngest son, and to proclaim open and inveterate feuds between the families of Frankheim and Orrenberg. This the herald had not only announced to Gustavus in the most disrespectful manner, but had though*/ proper to repeat the purport of his mission publicly in the court yard ; at the same time accompanying his speech with such insult¬ ing remarks upon their master and his whole
family, that the indignation of the vassals became outrageous^ and threatened the in¬ solent herald with consequences the most dangerous* The Count of Orrenberg was alarmed at the tumult, and hastened to the court-yard to appease his incensed people, whose affection for them was unbounded, Gustavus was but lately recovered from a perilous malady, occasioned by grief for the loss of his last male-heir ; he was still in a state of lamentable weakness, and the shock of being so unexpectedly accused of assassi¬ nation had greatly increased the irritability of his nerves,which naturally was excessive; yet still he exerted himself most strenuously in endeavouring to quell the confusion. But in vaio did he command his vassals to be silení and temperáié ; in vain did he conjure the herald to be goue 5 ii he valued his own saiety* lhe insolent ei % **Luy .-^r- bisted in heaping taunt хцюп !^nu, and slander upon j>lan«i<<\ ' : U¿ people grew more incensed with every word, that lie
uttered ; and at length overcome with agi¬ tation, heat, fatigue, and weakness, Gusta¬ vus sank into the arms of liis attendants, and was conveyed to his apartment in a state of insensibility* However, he was already nearly recovered, when Ulrica re« quested Sir Ottokár to seek her daughter, and relate what had happened, lest she should be unnecessarily alarmed/*—· But Blanche loved her father too dearly to believe, that he was quite out of danger, till her own eyes had convinced her of his health and safety* She found him very pale and feeble, and his recollection was yet scarcely clear enough to permit his perfectly understanding the events, which had taken place» Blanche sank on her knees by the couch, on which he was reposing, and threw her white arms round his neck affection¬ ately. ·—*' You have heard it alî, my child?'* said Gustavus ý " you know, of how dread«
fuî a crime your üt her is accused ? but surely you will not believe me capable of, « * * ,5 ~ — iQ Nor she, no^ any one can believe it,'* interrupted Ulrica, u except those, who are interested in working the destruction of you And all your house, Nay more ; every one, except yorrseif, knew well«, that sooner or later the rancour and avarice of Count Ru¬ diger must end in open war ι but 1 little thought, that he would have advanced so gross % falsehood, as an excuse for commenc¬ ing hostilities! they to accuse you of mm- dering a child; thev, who them-elves but seven months ago deprived us,.., '*— —·** Peace ! Peace ! Ulrica ; no more of that !«■— But tell me, » * * my ideas are sull sê wandering. * * .Is ii then true, that Rudiger's зов и murdered ?"—· -— c4 It is bur too certain. He was found dead iu one of our forests, and what makes the fact more distressing щ that one of our domestics was tlie assassin, He confest his
crime on the rack, and died in з f™· minute«! afterwards t died (horrible to tell !) with a lye stiU warm upon îıîs Hps» For oh ! my husband, in his last moments he declared, thai he had been bribed by you to assas* sinate the poor child ! n — —-** By me? 1 * exclaimed Gustavus, and started from his couch j " confest it f no ; thb is not to be endured i under such an imputation there ii no living. Bring my armour ; saddle mý steed ! I will hasten this moment to Frankheim ţ I will assert my in¬ nocence with aË the irresistible energy of truth ; I will demand to be tried by every ordeal, by fire, by water.. ». Nay, nay, de¬ tain me not, I must to Rüdiger this instant, and eitiier convince him that I am guiltless, or perish by his hand/'— He was rushing towards the door«, but all present hastened to impede his passage* —" Count, this is insanity P* exclaimed Sir Ottokár ; u you are rushing on inevit¬ able destruction ! Rüdiger is not to be con-
vinced* He has vowed your destruction xvith the most solemn atìd terrible adjura¬ tions : nor your destruction only ; his ven¬ geance includes all, who are related to you, all who love y ou ! your wife, your daughter, your very domestics...... — u My daughter?" repeated Gustavus, clasping his hands in an agony of horror ; tí my innocent Blanche ?'*-*- — u All î all are involved in Count Ru¬ diger's plan of vengeance! he has sworn to give your castle a prey to the flames, and to feed them with its wretched inmates, No man, no woman, no child, no, not the very dog that now licks your hand, shall be suffered to escape! this did 1 myself heai the Count of Frankheim swear last night at the burial of his murdered child ; and his friends, his servants, his vassals, all made St, John's vaults echo, while with one voicr they repeated the bloody, the diabolical oath. My friendship for you, my Lord, and my alarm for the safety of the Lady Blanche,
made me hasten homewards to summon the assistance of my followers; they arc mount¬ ed to the number of forty, well-armed and accoutred, and I have conducted ihem hither prepared to spill the last drop of their blood in vindication of yonr innocence, and in defence of the Countess and your lovely daughter/*™ —" I thank you, Sir Ottokár, and shouid diere be no means of avoiding this unnatu¬ ral war, 1 shall profit with gratitude by your kind and ready ftiendship. But stili I in¬ dulge the hopes of peace: I have no real fauk towards Rüdiger; and could I but contrive a personal interview with him.. . « could I but explain the injustice of his sus¬ picions. . * * at least 1 will make the at tempe j and perhaps.. * Ha! well remembered! Kurí/* he continued, addressing himself to a grey* headed domestic, who was standing near the door, " is the herald yet gone ?"— —" Gone?" repeated ihe old man, shak» VOL* U К
ing his head -ivith a smile of satisfaction ; u No, truly, nor likely to go, the villain!**—- —" Then call him hither instandy»·—He shall bear my request for an interview with Rüdiger, and . · * How is this, Kurt ? why, do you still linger here ? I --'/ould have the herald come to me; bring him this mo« men! ! 5 ™ — a Bring him ? why, aye^ to be sure I could easily do that ; bul as to his comings he'd fmd that a difficult matter «... unless he can walk without his head—Nay, my Lord, it is even so, and new aiľs out—the people's rage was not to be bridled 5 when they saw you fall, they thought, that the herald had stabbed you «j they fell upon him, men, women, and children, like so many mad- people, and before one could say—" Ave"«— his head was off his shoulders, and nailed over the gateway between the two gťeat kites.*'— —<* Ulrica!— Ottokár!** stammered tlie
Count, and seemed, as if he had been struck by a thunder-bolt ; " is this true ? has my Castle indeed been polluted by 00 horrible an outrage ?—Almighty powers ! the mur¬ der of a herald.. „. a character, ever held sacred even among the most barbarous na¬ tions. . *. murdered in my own castle* « * » almost in my own sight. ».. Mow then indeed the mischief is irremediable» From the imputation of this guilt never shall î be ab!¿ to clear myself in Rudiger*s eyes !"— —" Nay, my dear Lord,'* replied Sir Ottokar; €í let not this misfortune affect you so decpiy. The insolent menial merited well such a fate; a fate which (7 can witness, as I arrived in the heat of the tumult) you did your utmost to avert. But to save him was not within the power of a mortal His calumnies» » *. his threats against your whole family»,.. Your people's hatred of Rüdiger » *, * their consciousness, that he had deprived you of your son Philip by poison. *. β n —~* —- ce Aye, aye Ρ exclaimed Gustavus j E 2
α hear you that, Ulrica ? now th*m you see tlie fatal effects of your mistrust ! now then you enjoy the bloody fruits of those un¬ bounded suspicions, which you so lightly infused into the minds of the rash and wanton multitude ! Oh ! шу wife, I fear greatly, that at the day cf judgment when this mur« der is cited, your hands will not appear quite bloodless i God forgive you !"-— The Countess shuddered* ljut only an« swered by a flood of tears- ~ a Spare your Lady, my noble friend," said Ottokar, taking the Count's hand,; ** even if your reproaches are deserved, they now come too late, and the present difficul¬ ties demand our attention too much to ad- Biit of reflections on the past. The Frank- helmers arc powerful and inveterate : Ru¬ diger has sworn the extirpation of your whole family; Osbright is returned ftom the wars to assist his father's plans of venge« ame : these human wolves thirst for your blood, and, * « * Earth and heavens ! can it be
possible ? It h. - - - it must be the same ¡~ Pardon me, Lady Blanche ; by what strange accident do ï sec that scarf in your posses¬ sion Г— — rî This scarf?—you know it, Sir Knight ?—I came by it, » .. That is,... 1 found it.... as 1 was passing through tho secret passages, which lead.« * . *'— —** The secret passages? Osbright of Frankheim lurking in ihe secret passages of Orrenberg Castle ? ,s — ~" Osbright ?" exclaimed Ulrica in the greatest alarm-—** and you traversed those passages alone ?—Oh ! my child, from what a danger have you escaped ! No doubt, liis purpose there. ♦ « * **«■** — w Must needs have been hostile to the inmates of this Castle Î" ^terrupted Otto¬ kar eagerly ; Cí perhaps.... perliaps, he was aware, that the lovdy Blanche frequented those secret passages, and hoped, that Ыь dagger might unobserved revenge,.. ♦ * , -~ ™ ifi Oh! no, Sir Knight," excUiiío J tho
affrîgltted Blanche, ťť you misunderstood me ! no one was lurking in the secret paths! it was nor there that I found the scarfs it was in the cavern of St, HUdef&rde. * « » and 4S.Ï perhaps you mistake about the scarf too! perhaps, it is not Cbbrighťs ! oh ! no, no, uo ! heavenly mercy forbids that it should» be !"— -»-»" Indeed?'* said Ottokár, while jealousy whispered a thousand suspicions to his mind ; * 4 nay 2 of that there is no doubt : it is the work of the Lady Magdalena, and too remarkable to be mistaken. Besides» in saving the Palatine's life in battle, Os¬ brighťs bosom was slightly wounded ; his scarf was stained with blood, and I heard him swear, that the blood shed in his sove« reign's defence was the noblest ornament of his scarf, and should never be effaced —look, lady, look ! Osbright has kept bis oath."-~ Blanche looked on the bloody marks ţ the scarf fell from her hands, and she clasp- ed them in an agony of despaii:* With every
moment did Sir Ottokar's jealous fears grow more strong, and hk debire to impress Blanche with an idea of Osbrighťs animo¬ sity more keen and anxious. — a But one thing more V* said Blanche with difficulty, wink she almost gasped for breath— w that horrible curse, which you spoke of·... which Rudiger. f . * which his vassals pronounced. * *. was it pronounced by Osbright ? was Osbright in the chapel, when it was pronounced ?"— —" He was, lady ! he was !" replied Ot¬ tokár, eagerly and peremptorily; α I Was near the chapel-door, and saw him rush inio the chapel with a maniac's look, his eyes burning with vengeance, his lips pale with passion, his whole frame trembling with eagerness, and v/ith fear lest he should be too late to join in the horrible execration.™! heard Count Rüdiger de¬ vote to destruction your father, yonr mother, your innocent belf! I saw Osbright rush furiously forward to join his father ; ïï 4
and instantly every voice except my own re¬ echoed the dreadful words—" vengeance! everlasting vengeance on the bloody house of Orrenberg !"—» ™ i5 And did not one kind voice," said Blanche faintly, " did no suggestion qf pity ..., ah ! did no one utter one word to plead for the poor Blanche ?"-- ™ 4έ No one, íady ! no one, as I have a soni to save ľ'— —·" Oh ! í am very faint, my mother \ n murmured Blanche, and bursting into tears she sank upon the bosom 'of Ulrica. 11er pale looks and trembling frame great¬ ly alarmed her parents ; but believing her agitation to be solely produced by apprehen·» bion rud by horror at the dreadful threats pronounced against her life by the Frank¬ heimers, they advised her to retire to rest '^ui compose herself, Blanche willingly accepted the permission of departing, and hastened to meditate in the solitude of her chamber on the fatal discovery, which acci- duit had just made*
CHAP. V.
4b Lot no one say 5 that there ís need Öf time for love ίο grow : Oh ! no ; the !ove ? which kills ţndcod, Dispatches at a blow» " Love all at once should from ihe earth Start up full-grown and tall ; If not an Adam at his birth, lie is no love at aU." Loes Но&ьлш> ftom Lope ţbY^i*
While mese transactions were passing at Orrenberg, Osbright was anxiously employ» ed in finding means to remove all existing prejudices, and establish a close and lasting ж 5
amity between the wa! kinsmen* tío found Sir Lennard of Kleeborn willing to assist Mr design, and scrupled not to lay before him the dearest secret of his bosom. So great had been his father's apprehen* sions of treachery on the part of Orrenberg, that Osbriorht was seldom suffered to visit о his paternal mansion* Year after year^ how¬ ever, having past au ay without any fatal effects arising from the supposed avaricious views of Gustavus, and the youth being now of an age to take his own part, Count Rudi¬ ger about nine month« before had gratified himself and his fondly anxious Consort by the recall of his first-born son. The break¬ ing out of hostilities compelled Osbright to leave the Castle of Frankheim a second time; but previous to his departure it had been his fortune to rescue the lovely Blanche from the hands of ruffians, and at fhe same moment to receive and impart a passion the most ardent and irradkable, Blanche dedxredha" name to her deliverer, 5¿
and earnestly entreated him to accompany her to the Castle of Orrenberg, where her parents would receive theîr child's deliverer with all the warmth of heartfelt gratitude ; but Osbrighťs prudence forbade his taking so dangerous a step, especially when the dis¬ course of his mistress convinced him, how deeply engraved, and how odiom in their nature, were the prejudices attached to the name of Frankheim in the minds of the inmates of Orrenberg. Educated himself at the court of Bamberg, his heart was un« tainted ,by the gloomy niistruht, which (with the solitary exception of Magdalena) he found prevailing throughout Ins fatherV domains ; and the knowledge of Blanche's family name instantly suggested to his fancy the pleasing hope, that their пиши might b^ the means of extinguishing the animosity, which prevailed between two famines :к> nearly related; but'he found that the mind of Blanche jvaa very differently modesta* . The Lady Ulrica was naturally of а temper
timid and suspiciqus. Jealousy of her lord's early attachment to Magdalena had origin- ally disposed her to consider the actions of the Frankheimers in no favourable point of view; her father's unfortunate bequest made her regard them as persons, whose in¬ terest must necessarily lead them to wish for the extinction of her family ; a variety of trifling circumstances, which her jaundiced imagination made her see in false colours, strengthened her in this persuasion ; and the successive deaths of four sons thoroughly persuaded her, that she had not evil wishes aîone to fear on the part of those, who woukl benefit so greatly by depriving her of her children« All these ideas had been imbibed by lier oniy remaining offspring, Blanche from her infancy had been accustomed to pray, that the virgin would preserve her from Satan and the Frankheimers ; at the mention of Rudigeťs name she never failed to cross herself 3 and while she was thanking Osbright for her rescue from the ruffians, he I
could scarcely help smiling at the positive* ness, with which she assured him of their having been emissaries either of his wicked father or of his blood-thirsty self! Till these prejudices so deeply-rooted could be effaced, Osbright thought it abso» lutely necessary to conceal his name, and to refuse Blanche's invitation to visit the Castle of Orrenberg. At the drawbridge he re¬ spectfully took his leave, and in return for his service, he v>my requested her word of honour, that she would not mention her ad¬ venture to any human being. Though sur¬ prised at the entreaty, Blanche could not refuse to give this promise j not to mention,, that she was herself apprehensive, that if the danger which slie had ran should be made public, her motheťs anxious care wouk never again suffer her to pass the walls оз Orrenberg. This promise therefore she gav« readily ; but she hesitated a little, when tlu unknown youth exprest an ardent hope that he should in future be permitted t<
thaiik the Lady Blanche for her compliance» To permit such interviews unknown-to her parents, and when even herself was ignorant of his name and quality, she felt, would be highly imprudent : but he implored so earn¬ estly, yet with such diffidence; he had treat¬ ed her with such respectful delicacy, while* she %vas in his power unprotected ; his man¬ ners were so noble ; her obligations to him were so recent; and above all, her cwn in¬ clination to see him again was 30 strong, that before she was herself aware >of her in¬ tention, she hinted, that she generally visited the Grotto of St, Ilildegardc about two hours before sun-set. The youth prest her hand to his lips with respectful gratitude, breathed a fervent prayer for her welfare, and she then hastened into the castle, her cheeks glowing with blushes, and her heart beating high with hope. To oue interview another still succeeded, and siili did the unknown Knight acquire a greater influence over the heart of the inno-
cent Blanche. That influence he chiefly ex¬ erted in efforts to eradicate hcr antipathy to everything belonging to Frankheim ; but he found it a Jess easy task to destroy her ill opinion of his relations, than to inspire her with a favourable one of himself. However, his own interest in her heart appeared to be so firmly established, that he no longer dreaded, lest the knowledge of his connec¬ tions should make him the object of Blanche's aversion: and when the Palatine's sum¬ mons compelled him to lead his retainers to Heidelberg, he gave his mistre$s at parting a solemn promise, that when next they in^ he wouid disclose to her his real name and situation ; a secret, which she was most anx¬ ious to know, and to arrive at which, she hai exhausted all the little arty, of which she was mistress, though all were exhausted in vain. However, he had assured her of liis rank being equal to her own; and the splendour of his dress, at once simple and magnificent, and (still more) the variety of
his accomplishments and dignified frankness of his manners, convinced her, that the sphere, in which he moved, must needs be elevated. ouch was the present situation of the lovers, which Osbright now laid before the good Sir Lennard» His host heard him witli evident satisfaction ; and his excellent heart exulted in tlie prospect of a reconciliation between two families, the chiefs of which had both been his earliest friends, and with whom (m despite of their disunion) he was till upon the most amicable terms. >. Пе therefore said everything in his power to confirm Osbright in his attachment* He exclaimed loudly against the injustice of sup¬ posing Gustavus to be concerned in the death of Joscelyn : he described him as the most humane of mortals, a man, whose fault was rather to push compassion and bene¬ volence beyond the limits of reason and pra- dence, than to be reduced into the commis* sion of a crime ьо atrocious as the murder of
an unøfil-ftduig cliilcï ý and as to the tempta¬ tion which was supposed to have infiuenccd Gustavos m this transaction, he quoted a thousand acts of disinterestedness and gene¬ rosity, each strong enough to convince even the most prejudiced, that the шап, who performed them, must possess a mind totally free fron ι the pollution of avarice, In con¬ cluyen Sir Lennard promised the youth iiis best offices ^ and as he judged it most ad* viseabîe to make the whole business known to Gustavus as soon as possible, he en« gaged to visit the Casi le of örrenberg the nex*, day, where he was certain, that Os- bright*s proposals would be received with eagerness. The great point, however, was to remove from Rudiger's raind the per¬ suasion, that Gustavus had caused hk younger son to be assassinated, and he ad« viácd Osbright to spare no pains tí* dis¬ cover the real murderers î that mystery once deai ed up, all υ ther difficulties he look¬ ed upon a> trifles, Osbright rereived Sir
I.eimarďs advjice with gratitude, promibcd to obey it implicitly, and having past the night at his ff ienďb castle, he returned with renovated hopes to the Chapel of St. John. Father Peter gave him the most cordial welcome, tliough still ignorant, that his humble cell was honoured by affording a re* foge to ihe heir of Fraiikheim* Osbright made hirø repeat the story of the murder circumstantially, and amc¡)g other things the old man mentioned, that the Httle fmger of Joscelyiťs left hand was missing, when his corse was found, and tliat it had bmi re- peatedly sought on the fatal spot, but with¬ out success. This circumstance struck Os¬ bright as very singular, and he thought it not impossible, but that ît might furnish a clue to unravel the whole mystery* But with much more sanguine expectations did hß learn from Father Peter, that the assassin had left a wifr, for whom (even while enduring the agony of the rack) he exprest the most urdent afloc-
ion* Was it not probable then, mat this jeloved wife was in her husband's con fi¬ lence, and could explain the motive, which „emptedhim to commit the crime ? Osbright ■esolved to examine 1er himself; but he bund, that she had gone to visit a relation it some distance, where she was ¡said to be nconsolable for the loss of her ill-fated lusband. To depart without seems; Blanche .vas too much to be expected $ he therefore determined to pass the day in Father Peter's :el!, to visit St. Hildegarden Grotto îa the evening, and after assuring himself that ihe heart of Blanche was still his own, to set forward on his expedition without suffering ι moment's longer delay* Evening approached; and Osbright wm crossing the aisle, which led towards the principal gate ofthe chapel, when his at ten- lion was arrested by the murmuring of a voice, proceeding from a small oratory de¬ dicated to the Virgin· The door was open, and he cast a passing glance within* A youth
was kneeling at the shrine in fervent prayer, and a second glance .assured Osbright, that the youth was the page, Fugene. Enthusiasm seemed to have marked Eu¬ gene for her own, even from his earliest in¬ fancy ; and succeeding events had given to that enthusiasm an universal cast of tender melancholy, Rüdiger esteemed and ad« mired the Lady Magdalena ; but a visit to the Convent of St. Hildegarde several years after his marriage convinced him, that he had never loved till then. He there saw a sister of the order, who made upon his heart the most forcible impression ; and though Rüdiger possest many noble qualities, the mastery of his passions was not uumbt red among them. The personal attractions, which had gained for him «he heart of Magdalena, were equally triumphant over the principles ofthe sister pallia ; she eloped with him from the convent, and became the mother of Eugene* But all the blandishments of her seducer^
whose love survived the gratification of Iris desires, could not stifle in her bosom the cries of remorse. She saw herself the dis¬ grace of her noble family, and the violator of the sacred marriage-bed j the dread of discovery constantly tormented her ; her perjury to heaven made her look upon her¬ self as a mark for divine vengeance ; she trembled every moment with apprehension of punishment in this world, and she des¬ paired of obtaining pardon in th.* next« At length her mental sufferings became too ex« quisite for endurances she resolved to break < the disgraceful chains, which united lier to Rüdiger, and endeavour to atone for her past errors by the penitence of her future life. She made by letter a full confession to the Lady Magdalena ; entreated pardon for herself, and protection for her helpless in« fant ; and then hastened to conceal her igno¬ miny in a retreat, to diacover which baffled all the inquiries ofher forsaken seducer* Magdalena forgave her husband's fauUs,
pitied his sufferings, ma became the benevo* lent protectress of his child* It was thought highly adviseable for the sake ofhis own re¬ spectability, that Rüdiger should be supposed to have no concern in this business, and that the disgraceful circumstances attending the chilďs birth should be supprest, as much as possible. Accordingly, Eugene was edu¬ cated as a foundling, whose helpless situation had attracted Magdalenas notice and com¬ passion ι but this fortunate delusion was not suffered to last. The wretched mother felt that her end was approaching, and could not resist her desire to see and bless her child, though she prudently resolved to keep her relation to him still unknown. Remorse, and self-enforced penance the most cruel, had worn her to the very bone* Opprest with long travel, her feet bleeding, fainting, dying, she arrived at the Castle of lYankheim. She sought out her boy ; she saw him ; and in an agony of tenderness and grief the mother's heart betrayed her secret.
The boy's character had ever appeared singu¬ lar* He entered into no childish sports ; he tvould listen for hours to stories of murders, or robbers, but above all he delighted in the ¿narrative of religious miraclen and the suf¬ ferings of martyrs. His favourite walk was in the church-yard, where he past whole evenings, learning by heart the rhymes en» graved upon the tombstones. He was sel¬ dom moved to laughter ; even in his smile there was something melancholy ; nor had he any way of expressing joy or gratitude, except by tears» Every word, 1оок э and gesture already betrayed the enthusiast 5 and from his fondness for all church ceremonies and his continually chaunting religious hynyis, he had obtained among the domestic» of Frankhéim the name of the Littie Abbot« Such was the boy, who at ten years old saw himself unexpectedly clasped in the arms of an expiring mother, whom he had long numbered among the dead» The sudden recognition \ her wild and emaciated appear-
ance^ her tattered garments, her bleeding feet; the passion of herk; ¿ses, the agony of iier tears ¡ the description of her faults, of her remorse, of her terrors of the future, of her dreadful and unexampled penance ; all these united were too much for Eugene's sensibility to endure ! when in spite of all Magdalenas efforts to prolong her existence^ the wretched mother breathed her last, the son was forcibly torn from the corse deliri¬ ous. No sooner had the report reached the Countess, that a dying beggar had declared herself to be Eugene's mother, than she has«· tended to assist the sufferer, and rescue tbe feeling child from a scene so terrible, But she arrived too late } a few moments termi¬ nated the Nun ? s existence, and Eugene had already received a shock, whkh during a twelvemonth set the physician's skill at de¬ fiance.. His senses at length returned j but hh heart never seemed to recover from the
лташо, whkh liad agonised it so exquisitely. Pálé, drooping, absorbed in thought, no¬ thing seemed capable of affording him plea¬ sure. He declined all amusements 5 he ne¬ glected all attainments, both literary and warlike : and when chid by the chaplain for inattention to his lessons, and when mocked by the military vassals for effeminacy, he listened to.their reproofs and taunts with indifference, and answered both with silence, His time was past in listless indolence ; he %vouid stand haar after hour dropping peb« bles in the river 5 and gazing upon the cir¬ cles as they formed themselves and then vanished into nothing, Vain were the exer¬ tions of Magdalena and her husband to awaken him from tliis torpor of the mind : though compelled to endure their kindness^ he evidently felt it a burthen,and sedulously avoided it, Agatha*s sad story occupied his whole sou!: he could not but consider Ma^ dalena as filling the place, which hid mother should have occupied ι he could not but con·* VOL. I, F
sider Rudiger, as the author of his mothers sufferings; andthaugh the Count aimosi doat* ed upon the boy wkh a truly paternal ten* derness^ the mobt that he could obtain from him was implicit submission and cold re¬ spect* Eugene only saw in himself a 'forlorn beîng f whose odious birth had branded his mother ,6,r 4th infamy, and whose -existence was given under circumstances too disgrare- fuî to permit his being avowed by his sur¬ viving parent* Magdalenas kindness was the offspring of mere compassion ι the me¬ mory of hh mothers wrongs was insepar¬ ably connected with the s; ö ht of his father : he felt, that he had no claim to the iove of any one, nor did he see any one, tow«./ds whom his heart felt love, till accident made liim the preserver of the little Joscelyn* The child had strayed from its careless nurse, and fell into the river. No one but Eugene saw its danger, who having obsti¬ nately refused to practise all manly exercises*
was totally ignorant of the art of swimming* The river was deep, the stream was strong ^ to attempt to save Joscelyn was to expose himself to equal danger : yet without a mo¬ menťs hesitation did the effeminate Eugene plunge into the river, grasp the child's gar¬ ments with one hand and the bough of a neighbouring willow with the other j and thus did he sustain his already insensible burthen,* till his fnuitic cries an^acted the notice of the domestics. They hastened to the place, and arrived at the very moment, when the bough giving way menaced the child and his preserver with inevitable de¬ struction* From that moment joscelyn became the object of Eugene's whole solicitude and af* fection. He was his brother«, was a being who had no faults in his eyes, and was one, who but for him would have been number¬ ed with the dead. Attachment to Joscelyn now divided his heart with grief for the слггЫу buftermgs of his motherland v/ifcb г 9,
religions terrors for her eternal salvation* However, as he increased in years, İt was suspected in the castle, that other passions would ere long possess no inconsiderable in¬ fluence over hb bosom. Though he stii! shunned society, it was remarked, that he only shunned that of men ; in the company of women, his habitual gloom seemed to melt into a voluptuous languor. The Countess's damsels perceived, that when they addrest him in the language of kind¬ ness, his large eyes swam in tears and spark* led with lire, and the rush of biood spread a hectic crimson over his pale fair cheeks. Moreover it was observed, that though his devotions were performed with unabated srdour, after he reached the age of fifteen Eugene prayed to no saint but female ones. Even now it was to the Virgin, that he was kneeling, when Osbright discovered him in the Oratory, During his short visits at Frankhelm, the knight's attention had been
engaged by the singularity of the Page's demeanour; and tuough respect for his own character had induced Rüdiger to conceal the relationship between himself arid Eugene fro í и his soiťs knowledge, stiil Osbrigh*, •-uid by his own feelings, had neglected к -ans of showing the boy, that he bore Jiim much good-will· But hL advances were all rejected with the most obstinate coldness: Eugene only looked upon him as the posses- sor of that place,, which, if his own mother had filled Magdalena*s,he should himself have occupied : Ik* could not help envying Count Rudiger*s fortunate heir and avowed off¬ spring : and when he reflected, that but for tliis odious elder brother, his darling Josce¬ lyn would one day be lord of the exten¬ sive domains of Frankhelm, a sentiment mingled itself with his envy and repugnance, which nothing but his religions principles prevented from becoming hatred. As a Christian, he would not hate any one; but as a human being, he felt, that it was impos- b' 3
sible for him to love Count Rudiger's eldest son and Joscclyn's elder brother* Finding his attentions so ill repaid, Os¬ bright bestowed no further thought on the wayward lad ; and the interest, with which he at this moment surveyed him, arose from the recollection of Eugene's ardent attach¬ ment to the murdered chikl* He listened in mournful silence, while the Page poured forth his lamentations in a strain of devotion the most ardent ; with a thousand touching expressions, with enthusiasm almost deliri¬ ous, he described his favourite's petfections* and bewailed his own irreparable loss ; but what was the knight's astonishment to hear lhe Paga conclude his orisons by imploring ihe blessed spirit of Joscelyn to protect from every danger, and watch with cœîestîaî care the precious life of Blanche of Orren¬ berg! An exclamation of surprise burst from Osbrighťs lips, and warned Eugene of his being over-heard. The Page started from
the ground, and în his confusion 2 rosary formed of ebony and coral estaped from hh hasnds» Osbright sprang forwards.» and seized it, for he knew that rosary well ; and had he doubted its identity^ the name o£ Blanche engraved upon the golden crucifix wou^d have removed all hesitation on the subject : in an instant a thousand jealous fears rushed before im fkucy. The lad was singularly beautiful % his figure, Hght and ex¬ quisitely formed, might have served the Statuary as a model for a Zephyr % confusion had spread over his cheeks an unusual glow> and his blight and flowing hair glittered m the sun-beams Hke dark goltL Osbright eyed him with displeasure, and asked him haughtily, how that rosary came into liis hands. — ^ Noble sir,'* replied Eugene, trembling and embarrassed; u I. -. Л found it ;~1 found it near the cave of St* Hildegarde·"—- — u Ana of course you know not iu Έ é
owner, or I should not find it still in your possession ?"·—(Eugene was silent») *—" WeU! the workmanship'pleases met there is a diamond of price ; take it, jEug^ne 3 and let, ihe rosary be mine* 3 '™ > * He drew a ring from his finger* and pre» sented it to the .page j but it was not'ac* cepted* —** Oh!' Sìr Osbright," ежЫиюе* Eu¬ gene, and sank дзроп his knee |. ^ take my Hfe from me ι it is at your disposal ι but wMlţ I live, do not deprive me of that rosary·-—It и my ooly remembrance of an event so dear to me*.. * Of the day s in which I first found existence valuable!*— Three months are past, since while following my Lords yonr father, to the chace, my horse became ungovernable, and bore me to the brink of a precipice* My efforts tu restrain him were in vain; I at length sprang from his back, but too late to save myself* I rolled down the declivity, and
vas dashed to the bottom of the pred¬ ike* I lost my senses, but projecting shrubs loubttess broke my descentrând preservedme from destruction. On opening my eyes, I believed, that my fall had killed me, and that I was in Heaven already : for near me knelt a form so angelic, with looks so bene¬ volent, with eyes so expressive of compas« sion ! and she questioned me about my safety in so sweet a voice ! and she related with an air of such interest, how in re¬ turning from St. Hildegarde's Grotto she had observed my fall ; how she had trem¬ bled for my life, and had brought water from the cave to wash off the blood, and had torn her veil to bind up my wounded head ! and then she bade me so tenderly be of good chear, for that the danger was past, and that she hoped, ï shopi4fspş^ i be quite well ! Oh ! how valu« able ■ dici ДЩ| life then become in my own f5
eyes, when I founds that it had some worth in hers P ? — —-*' And you knew not her name V* — w Oh! no, my Lord, not then; but alas ! her terror too soon made me guess it ; for no sooner did I mention the Castle of Frankheim as my abode, than she utter¬ ed a loud shriek s started from the ground with every mark of horror and alar ttt i and fled from me with the rapidity of an arrow. Then did my foreboding heart tall me too truly 5 that she, in whom tho bare mention of Frankheim could ex¬ cite such aversion^ must needs belong to the hostile family of Orrenberg. That suspicion was confirmed, when I observ¬ ed lying near me this rosary, which she had forgotten in her haste, and whose cru¬ cifix bears the dear, dear name of Blanche ! э name 5 whkh from that momeit^Btest in Ыегу prayer ! a name, which Ш'сМ* since ν
beim held in my fancy sacred as that of rny Patron-Saint Í"— — u And you paw her no more? and you spoke to her no more ?—Nay, answer me with frankness, boy 3 or I swear· ·.. "*— —-" Oh ! be patient, good my Lord ; I mean ndt to deceive ycu. Yes j once more, only once I addrest her \ I would have re¬ stored hei rosary ; I wished to thank her for her timely succour: but the vr men. that she beheld me, her 'former terrors returned* She shrieked out «■— f a Frankheimer ! ? ~ and hastened away, as if flying from an assassin. Thenceforward 1 accosted her no more : I found that the sight of me alarmed her, and I forbore to intrude upon Her, whom my whole souî adores, a presence so hateful î you now know all : noble knight, restore my rosary.**— The frankness of this narration dissipated entirely Osbrighťs jealous terrors. The im¬ passioned yet respectful manner, in which Blanche wm mentioned, and the height of
admiration wliich the sight of her had in* spired»both pleased and softened him; and lie could not help feeling himself strongly influenced in favour of the young enthu¬ siast, whose heart beat so perfectly in unison with his own. Yet he judged it prudent to conceal that favourable impression^ and ac* company the surrender of the rosary with a lecture on the folly of his nourishing sa hopeless а passion. *— ÉS There is your rosary/ 5 said he, as« su roing a severity of tone and manner very foreign to his feelings ţ u though I know not ? whether in restoring it 1 do you any kind¬ ness, imprudent youth, for whom tlo you feel this excess of adoration ì for the daugh¬ ter of your patron's most inveterate enemy ; of а шап, accused of the murder of your clearest friend \ of one ? against whom scarce forty hours ago you vowed in this very- chape!* . - » "~™* M Oh ! nøs no Æ no Ρ exclaimed the Page •with a look of horror ; *'I vowed nothing; I
took no oath ; 1 heard, bnt joined not in the blasphemy ; and when all around me cursed the devoted family of Orrenberg, ï prayed for the angel Blanche !"— — ie For the daughter of Joscelyn's sup« posed assassin ? Joscelyn, whom you profest to love so truly, that your life. ;,. "— — u Oh ! and I did love Joscelyn 5 truly* dearly ! but I feel, that I love Blanche even better than Joscelyn, a thousand, oh ! and a thousand times!"·™ ** Love her indeed? alas, poor youth! love whom ? the only child of the rich and noble Count of Orrenberg ; after me, the heiress of all those domains, on which you have been educated through my father's charity, Blanche, Countess of Orrenberg, and the orphan Page, Eugene, a foundling, without family, without friends; how ill do these names sound together ! my good Jad, I mean not to wound your feelings, but observe, how hopeless is your present pursuit ; rouze yourself from your romantic
dream, and erase from your heart this frantic passion ľ ™ Daring tins speech, the glow faded from the cheeks or Eugcue ; the fire of enthusiasm no longer blazed in his eyes ; the deepest gloom of melancholy overspread his counte¬ nance. His head sank upon his bosom, and 'his eyes were filled with tears» —« True ! true ! Sir Knight/* said he after a short pause ; ëc I know it well ! I am an orphan-boy» without family, without friends ! God help me Г— He prest the crucifix to lus trembling lips, bowed his head to Osbright. with humi¬ lity, and turned to leave the chapeL Osbright was deeply affected, and he suf¬ fered him to pass him in silence : but -soon recollecting himself·—" stay, Eugene/' said he, calling after him, and the Page stopped ; a I would not have my parents know, that I am in their neighbourhood j should you reveal, that I am here, my displeasure.. » » ~ э> ·—** I reveal ľ' interrupted Eugene proud-
ly ; " I am no tale-bearer, Sir Knight ľ*— and he quitted the chapel, his passion for Blanche inflamed by the opposition made to ît, and his antipathy to Osbright strength¬ ened by resentment at his being the person who opposed it,
CHAP. VL
— α My life ! my soui ! my aH that Heaven can give \ Death's Hfe with thee, without thee death to Hve!' 5 —
While Osbright tvas employed in smooth¬ ing the real obstacles to their union, 1ш mistress was the victim of imaginary terror. *—She had discovered in her unknown lover the son of her father's most inveterate
enemy ; a mari too, whom from her cradle* she had been taught to consider with horror, and who (according to Sir Ottokár*» ac¬ count) had taken a most solemn and irrevo¬ cable oath to exterminate herself and her whole family. She now believed, that Os- brighťs protestation were all false, and only calculated to beguile hcr to destruction ; or else that he was ignorant of her origin,' when he pretended aifection ι or that, even ifin spite ofher bearing the detested name of Orrenberg, he had stiil formerly felt a real love for her, she doubted not, that grief for his brother's murder and thirst of venge¬ ance had converted that love into hatred, and thet he would seize the first opportu¬ nity of fulfilling his horrible vow by plung¬ ing his dagger in her bosom. But she prudently resolved to aflord him no such opportunity. The linage of her loved preserver no longer beckoned her to the Grotto ; she only saw there him, whom her pi ejü diced fancy had delighted to bad
with every vice, and who thirsted to sign * in her blood his claim to the rich inherit¬ ance of her parents. No! to St* Hildegarden Grotto suie woold venture no more : that was a point determined !—And it re¬ mained determined íbr a whole long day and night: but when the, second morning arrived, her resolution faltered ; and when the evening was at hand, her prudence totally failed. Yet another hour, and the knight woukl be waiting for her iu the cave; and for what purpose lie waited, now ap¬ peared to her but of little consequence. He might mmrlei her, it's troc ; but to see him no more yhe felt, was but to perish by a пюге painful though more lingering death, and she determined to ascertain the worst immediately. Her mother was occupied by household arrangements. Gustavus was in close coni erence with Sir Leimard of Klee- boni, who was just arrived: no one ob¬ served her movements, and siie employed her liberty in hastening to the grotto of St« Ilildenrarde*
Nu one was there ; and now a new terror seized her, lest Osbright should not mean ta come. She seated herself on a broken stone which had rolled from the rock above 5 and was lost -in melancholy refections, when. some one took her hand gently, She look¬ ed up ; Osbright stood before her ι but in the moment of surprize she only saw in him the dreaded assassin, and uttering a «ry of terror, her first movement was to ñy from the place. The knight started back in asto» nishment. But she soon recollected herself, and returned. —-** Is it you then ? ?i she said, endea¬ vouring to assutne a tranquil look, and ex¬ tending her hand with a smile, equally ex¬ pressive of tenderness and melancholy ; iç I feared*,. Л thought, s # * β , "—- —~" What did you think ì what couk! vour innocence have to fear?"—and he gently drew her back to the seat, which she hadtjuilk'd, and togk ids place by her side*
~ a ï feared. *., that some enemy. *., that some assassin. * .. that some emissary of the Count of Frankheim, ... n — ~" Ah í Blanche ! still this aversion ? to belong to Frankhcim is sufficient to become the object of your hate,"— ™ ç€ All, v/ho belong to Frankhcim, hate тсГ~ -—" Not ¿?//, Blanche, certainly.**— —« The Count at least."— — u Dearcîıt Blanche ! did you but know the pain, which 1 feci, when you calumniate the Count.... ! he is stern and passionate I confess, but he has ever been an honour¬ able man.—-ShaU I own to you the truth, my Blanche? the Count is my friend, is my host friend ! his affeciion is my proudest boast j his commands î have never dis¬ obeyed. ·*."-— .«->* lodoed?—2nd never will ?"~ «_« Kever \ at least, I hope-not ! his com¬ mands from my earliest infancy have ever
been to me as a law* and. -. * my love ! why thus pale ? what alarms you ? what distres¬ ses you ?'*~ ~ ci 'Tis nothing ί it will soon be past î í am not quite well, and. » * * î5 — —'* You speak still more faintly ¡—stay one moment ! I will bring water for you from the grotto."— ■—" Oh! no, no, no !" she exclaimed, and detained him by his arm* He stopped-, surprized at- the eagerness with which she spoke.—" Yet 'tis no matter l' s she con¬ tinued ; u bring it, if yoa will ; í will drink it» — ~~" I will return instantly !" said he, and hastened to the water-fall Blanche started wildly from her seat ; she sank upon her knees, covered her face with her hand«, and prayed for a few moments fervently and silently, — u Now then," she said in a firm voice, while she rose from the ground ; ^ now then Ì am prepared for everything. Let him
bring me what he will, be ît water, or be it poison, from " his hands will I receive it without hesitation, and die, if he will have ît вщ without a murmur·"**— A consecrated goblet ever stood upon the rustic altar of St* Hildegarde ; it was sup¬ posed to be that, which -had once pressed the blessed lips of the Saint, and even the starving robber respected its s&octîty» Os- bright hastily filled it, and returning to his mistress,, urged her to taste the water which it contained* Blanche received the cup with a trembling hand, and fixing her eyes upon his counten¬ ance—" will it not chill me too suddenly ?" she asked. ~" You need not drkk much of it ; a few drops will be sufficient to produce the eflect desired/'™ " Indeed? is ît so powerful then? nay, it is all the better* See ? Sir Knight, you are obeyed ; from yoar hands even this is wel¬ come Г— and she placed the goblet to her
lips, nor doubted that she drôtik a farewell to the world.—-" Look! 5 * she resumed restoring the cup ; i4 havcIswaliowed enough? are you satisfied ?"— — w Blanche I м exclaimed the youth, his surprize at her demeanor increasing with every moment ţ C4 what is the matter ? what means this mysterious conduct ? you seem to me so much altered* *. » * ? — —**, Alreadv ? does it then work so spee¬ dily ? nay, then I must be sudden, and here all disguise shall end, You promised, when I saw you last, that at our next meeting you would disclose your name : I know it already, Osbright of Frankheim j know the hatred, which you bear to me and mine; know the dreadful oath, which was taken last night In the chapel of St, John, and know also that you have now made one step towards fulfilling it. Osbright, when I raised yonder goblet to my lips, I was not ignorant that it contained poison,,.., ^~— —¿* Poison ?" interrupted Osbright ;
&k what ! yi)u believe then* ,, * you suspect .. , . yet believe it still ! yes, Blanche, yes ί let this convince you, that the cup, vvhich you have tasted, Osbright will raise to his lips with joy, even though that cup be poisoned !"—and he seized the goblet, and drank its contents with eagerness. —* c Osbright ! my own Osbright ľ' ex* claimed Bianche, and sank upon her lover*s bosom ¡ " oh ! that it were indeed poison, and that I might die with you în thîs mo¬ ment, for to live with you í feel myself un« worthy ! shame upon me ! how could I for one instant belie your generous nature so grossly ! never, no, never more will I suspect* * ». * 5 -— - -" Nor me ? nor any one, my Blanche, 1 hope, without some better reason. Oh ! banish from your bosom the gloomy fiend, Mistrust j so pure a shrine should never ba polluted by an inmate so odious ! away with the prejudices, which have been so carefully instilled into your youthful mind : see no
more with the eyes of parents ; see with your own, niy Blanche, and judge by your own good heart of the feelings of others, Then will the world again become lovely in your sight, for you will see it the abode of truth, of virtue, of »flection ¡ then will this host of imagined enemies be converted into a band of real friends ; then will your mind be freed from these visionary terrors, so in¬ jurious to others, so painful to yourself, which now fill your waking thoughts with anxiety, and your nightly dreams with gloomy re« collections» You have loid me yourself that you have frequently started from bleep exclaiming, that Count Rüdiger of Frank» heim was at hand : and yet this Count Rüdiger is Osbrighťs rather ! you have mistaken me; you are mistaken in him, and... , Г™ —·" In the Count ? Oh ! no, nõ, no, Os¬ bright ! impossible ! Indeed, indeed Ahc Count is a very fierce, a very, cruel man! ah! your partiality blinds you ; but if you Knew vol, и с,
as well m I do*. * * but I was forbidden to mention it.. .. ?" — ss And have you still secrets from пщ Blanche ì From this moment I have none tO you."—- ~* s Nay, look not so sad ; you shali know all ; and you should have known it before, but that you ever spoke so warmly in favour of the Count, that I was unwilling to grieve you* WmI then, Osbright ţ it is certain, (guile certain!) that the Count of Frank¬ heim caused my poor brother Philip to be poisoned."— — íá Indeed ì quite certain ? and do you know, Blanche, that it is equally certain, nay, much more certain, that the Count of Or¬ renberg caused my brother to be assassinated in Burnholm wood?"—· —." Oh ! most atrocious calumny ! oh ! falsehood most incredible! what! my father^ whose actions» · ·. "— _« щ filier never dki an unworthy action, either^ Blanche, 5 "—
— ~ c< Nay, but ! saw with шу own eyes the livid spots, with which Philips neck.. » * ? *~» —*' 1 too saw with mine the deep wound, which gaped on poor JosceIyn ? s bosom/'—· — a The attendants, the physician, ali have told me themselves.,. · ·"—· o— cő Every inmate of Frankheim Castle heard the confession. , , # Ji ~ «-^ c * That your father had bribed Philip's nurse, who left us about a week before his illness.. v ~ •~ ce That assassins were bribed by your father to murder Joscelyn while hunting."— —*** Nay 3 what is more strong, my mother herself assured ш.,., **-— —* w But what is still stronger than that is, that yonr father's crime was actually con¬ fest by the very assassins themselves.**·— — * ς Well, Osbright, you surely cannot expect me to see everything with your —" Should / see everything with ygurs. Blanche Г'—
n П
— ίβ Nor to believe my dear good father, whose heart I know so well, guilty of a crime so base and so atrocious Γ™ —" Does not the argument bold equally good lor me, Blanche? your father may be innocent of Joscelyn s s tieath, but sois mine of Philip's ; you love your father well, but not better, than î love mine. Each thinks the other's father to be guilty ι why may not each be wrong? both believe their own father to be innocent, and why should not both be right .**— ™* € Oh! that it were so! how gladly should 1 banish from my bosom these gloomy terrors, which now torture it $o cruelly. No, Osbright | the heart may feel $ but the tengue can never utter, how painful it is for me to hate one^ who is so much beloved by you Г— Osbright thanked her by a kiss, the purest and the warmest that ever was sealed upon the lip of woman : and he now proceeded to unfold to her his intentions of seeking the S
widow of the assassin, and endeavouring to learn from her the real motives of her hus¬ band for murdering the innocent Josce¬ lyn. She approved of his design, and then urged his immediate departure, ач the even¬ ing was already closing ronnd them, and Osbrighťs road lay through a forest, ren¬ dered dangerous in several parts by pit-falls and not entirely free from wild beasts* Osbright obeyed ; bur he first advised her to visit St» Hildegarde's Grotto no more till hk return 5 of whkh he could easily apprise her by means of Sir Lennard of "Kleeborn, —-** For 1 must confess/* he added, u though ï ата certain, that nothing could induce my father to act ill deliberately, yet his passions are so violent, and so frequently overcome his better judgment, that I know not into what extremes he might be hurried in a momentary ebullition of fury· My brother's death (I understand) has almost driven Ыт frantic ; he breathes vengeance against the whole family of Orrenberg j It is о 3
rumoured afar», that the herald, whom he dispatched to signify to your father». * »* ~ *— <tf Áías ! it is but too true! the wild cruel people murdered the poor man ¿ but my father did his utmost to prevent the crime | indeed, indeed, Osbright, my father was not in fault ľ™ -V^ Heaven grant, that it may be ftmnd m ; but at present appearances are greatly against Count Gustavus, and this unlucky event will make my father's resentment burn with ten«fold fury* He is noble, generous^ benevolent, friendly. ·. * But in his rage he is terrible, and he cherishes in his heart wkh unjustifiable fetidness the thirst for vengeance* Some- officious vassal may observe your visits hither, and unpro¬ tected as you are, may easily purchase his lorďs favour by delive Jng you into his power* Dearest Blanche, enraged as he is at this moment» I would not even answer, that your life.. » * *'-*- ·—" Mine ? one, who never offended him
bý word or deed ? one, who for your sake would so willingly love htm? and you real« îy think , ♦. Ab ! Osbright, say what you will, î fear, that your father is a very wicked man Г— —" He has his faults, but they are great¬ ly overbalanced by his virtues· Yet I con« fess. * » · there have been moments when.. „ * But let us drop this unpleasant subject* Time presses ; I must be gone. Give mc your promise not to visit this spot during my absence, one «wcet kiss to confirm that pro¬ mise, and then farewell, my Blanche."—- The promise was given ; the kiss was taken ; the farewell was said ι and then Osbright, having conducted his mistress in safety to the spot, which concealed the pri¬ vate entrance to Orrenberg Castle, (and whkh was within a very short distance of the cave,) returned to the place, where he had fastened his courser, and giving him the bpur, was soon concealed within the shades of the neighbouring forest, о 4
Вы scarcely had he quitted her, when Blanche recollected, that the consecrated gob¬ let was left on thaoutbideof the cave. Tore- place this, her reverenco for the saint made her think absolutely necessary; yet the close of her conversion with Osbright made her feel no small descree of repugnance to ivvkit îng the grott о by herself* However, it was «о near, that bhe соцк! rot suppose* it possible for her to meet wiih any danger during the few minutes, which itwould take her to perform this duty, and therefore after some little hesitation she retraced hcr steps* Trembling as she ran, she traversed the space, which divided her from the cave, threaded the rockypassages,and soon reached the mouth of the cave, lhe goblet was re¬ placed ; an A-vr was murmured before the altar in all haste, and she now hurried back again ; when as she rushed out of the grotto —>* Stay ľ** —exclaimed a voice, and spring¬ ing from the rock above, a man stood before hor. She shrieked, and started back; the
moon, whkh was now risen 5 showed her what seeffied rathe^ to be a spectre, than any mortal beiug* His ta!! thin form (viewed through the medium of her fears, and seen but indistinctly among the shadows of the surrounding rocks) dilated to an height which appeared gigantic^ hh tresses flutter¬ ing wildly in the evening blasts his limbs trembling with agitation, his face colourless as the face of a corse 5 his large eyes almost starting from their sockets and glaring with ali the fires of delirium» his hands filled with locks of bright hair torn from his own head, and stained with biood which» had flowed from liis own self-mangled bosor»*, such was the stranger ; such was t he wretch¬ ed Eugene* The terror, which the sight of him evi¬ dently caused in Blanche«, had prevented the page from obtruding his presence upou hor imy more ; but he couîd not prevail upon himself to abstain from the delight of ga^in« upon that beauty s which had made su
*» %/
heart. He watched her, and observed, that regularly every evening she visitad the cave of St* Hiìdegarde ^ and regularly every even¬ ing did Eugene climb the rocks, among which, it wau situated, and feed his hopeless passion by gating fot whole hours upon the lovely form of Blanche· He admired the cedeätiaLerpfesáon of her countenance, as she knelt in prayer before the shrine; he listened in silent ecstacy, when, seated before the grottors mouth, and weaving into gar¬ lands the wild-flowers which sprouted among the rocks, she chaunted some sweet though simple ballad ; he smiled, when he saiv her staile ät the dexterity, with whkh her flowery work had been completed; and when some melancholy thought glanced a- c^ose her mind, he eclteed back the sigh», #hich escaped from her bosom. He knew tiot,-that the wreaths were woven to deck the Seat, which had been hallowed by sus¬ taining ш 'rivals he knew not s that the ■ 1
sigh proceeded froto grief for that rivaťs. absence* And thus had whole months rolled away y and with everyday did the charms of Blanche- inflame his heart with mofe glowing pas« sion, and exalt his imagination to an higher pitch of enthusiasm, At length came the fatal blow, which at once destroyed this soli¬ tary source of ideal happiness : he found not only that he had a beloved rival, but that this rivQl was the man, who possesť that place in his father's affections, which he would so gladly have possest in them him¬ self; was Count.Rudiger's avowed offsprings while he was rejected and pointed out to the world as nothing better, than an orphan and an outcast ; was the heir of the rich domains of Frankheim, while he was con¬ demned to a life of servitude and obscurity j in short, was the very man, towards whom of all existing beings :he cherished, and had cherished from his. childhood, the most in¬ veterate and uncontroulable antipathy. o G
BreutWess with agitation, and fixing his nails in his bosom in order to distract the sense of mental agony by the infliction of bodily pain, he had witnessed from the rock above them the mterview between the lovers« He heard not their words ; but he saw, as they sat, the arm of Osbright tenderly en* circling the waist of Blanche, and witnessed the kiss, which he prest upon her lip at parti ţig. They were gone ; yet the boy still lay extended upon the rock, stupefied by a blow so unexpected* A few minutes re¬ stored him to sensation, but not to himself. Horror at Josceìyn's death had shaken his nerves most cruelly ; since that event grief had scarcely permitted his tasting food ; ι hat constitutional infirmity, which the know¬ ledge of his mother's sad story had inflamed mio delirium, now exerted itself with dread¬ ful violence upon his enfeebled frame and exalted imagination : his brain was un¬ able to support the shock, and he now stood a in-omar before the affrighted Blanche*
— <£ It is she indeed!" he exclaimed; u she here again ? here, and alone ! oh! then it was no illusion i the night-wind murmur¬ ed in my ear—-^ death !"—And the screech- owl shrieked in my ear—* 4 death 1"—And the wind and the screech-owl told me true, for you are returned on purpose ! yes, yes ; I feel it well, angel ι you are here, and the hour is comeP— —" What hour? I know you not.— You terrify me ?"— She attempted to pass him, but he grasped her by the wrist. —*' Terrified? are you not a blessed spirit, and what can you fear ? í must away to the skies, and there will I kneel, and im¬ plore for you, and pray, that you may speedily follow me thither ! you will soon be made a Saint in Heaven, but I must pre¬ pare the way for you : take this sword, and plunge it-----Nay, nay ! why should you dread to use it ? have you not plunged a dagger in my heart already ? you have, "you
have ! and oh ! that wound vt*«i a wound so pamfuL * * * Take it s ï say j take it | here is my naked bøsom ľ*— · And as Im iSaid thi% · he toro open ' hi-s doublet with one. hand* while with frantic eagerness he endeavoured to force her to take the sword with the other ; when sum* moning up all her strength Blanche rushed swiftly past him» and with lottd shrieks fled through the rocky passage. The frantic youth pursued her, in vain imploring her to stay : with fruitless efforts did Blanche ex¬ ert her speed 5 the maniac gained upon her ; and overcome by terror she fell breathless at his feer, at the moment when guided by her shrieks Baron Ottokár arrived to her assistance* île heard her scream for help ; he saw her pursued by one» who held an un¬ sheathed šword 1 he beheld her sink upon the «arth* and doubted not, tliat die had perished by the blow of an assassin* —" Inhuman ruffian V* , exclaimed the Knight, and imtalitly his svt^ord struck tbe
supposed murderer to the earth. Then raising the trembling Blanche in his arms, he hastened towards the castle to procure sur¬ gical assistance for his lovely burthen* During Blanche's absence, Sir Lennard of Kleeborn was employed in the performance of his promise to Osbright· He requested an audience of the Count of Orrenberg, which was readily granted ; but Gustavus added, that as .what Sir Lennard had to state was announced to be of importance, he begged, that· Baron Ottokár might share the communication ; the nature of his engage¬ ments to that young nobleman being sudi, tliat they poâsest a common interest in every thing. Sir Lennard foreboded from this declaration an obstacle to his negotiation ; however, he immediately commenced it, dis¬ closed to the astonished Count the mutual attachment between Osbright and his daugh¬ ter, and concluded by advising him most strenuously to seke so favourable ån oppor¬ tunity of putting a final stose to the dis«
putes, which had so long separated the kin¬ dred houses of Orrenberg and Frankheim» Whiie Gustavus lbtened to this narrative, a variety of emotions exprest themselves by turns on Ms countenance. Sir Lennard had finished, The Count past a few minutes in silence ; but at length taking his resolu¬ tion decisively 5 he assured Sir Lennard, α that most earnestly did he desire to see amity established between the two families ; that there was no personal sacrifice, which he would not joyfully make to accomplish an eyent so desirable; but that unfortunately, he had already contracted such engagements as formed an insuperable obstacle to the union of Blanche and Osbright* —·** No, my lord, 5 ' hastily interrupted Ottokár ; ** you have contracted none, at least if you allude to those which you have contracted with me* Itis true^ last night î received your knightly word, that the hand of Blanche should be mine : and had you promised me the Imperial crown,-1 should
have thought the boon less valuable* But when the object is, to prevent the effusion of kindred blood, to establish peace between the two noblest families in the whole Palati¬ nate, nay more, to procure the happiness of Blanche herself, shall I suffer my own selfish wishes to interfere ? shall 1 hesitate foľ one moment to sacrifice them to the general welfare: no,mylord,readtheheart of Ottokár more justly. Were the affections of your daughter the prize,I would dispute it against Osbright, against the world, and would never resign my claim but with the last sigh of my bosom ; but the possession of her hand alone could only make me wretched· The heart of Blanche is Osbrighťs ; Blanche can only be happy in being his, and unless she h happy,/must be miserable myself, Count of Orrenberg, I restore your promise ţ I resume my own ; let this wished-for union take place. Heaven itself surely Hghted up this flame in the bosoms of the lovers ; and the hour, which gives Blanche to the envied
Osbright, will doubtless bury ia eternal oblivion all past offences^ all existing preju¬ dices all future mistrust» It is true, my heart váll bleed; but th» applause of my consci« ence will repay mc for every selfish pang most amply*—Still consider me as your warmest friend, Gustavus ; but for the sake of Blaiiche 3 1 must now refuse to be your son."—- In vam did Gustavus combat this gêneri¬ ons resignation ι Ottokar was firm¿ and at length the Count honestly confest to Sir Lennard the joy*, which he should feel at the accomplishment ofthe union in question* The difliculty now was, how to convince Rüdiger of thi injustice of hîs suspicions respecting Josceìyn's murder, and to bring him to view Osbrighťs attachment in the same favourable light. In thi» also Ottokár protFered his assistance* As nephew to the Lady Magdalena, though he was no fe. vourite with her lord, he had ready access to the Castk of Fnmkheim > that lady wm
well aware ofthe strength ofhis attacnmenü to Blanche., and the generosity of her own nature rendered her folly capable of appre¬ ciating the sacrifice, which he made in sur¬ rendering his claims in favour of Osbrighťs· He knew abo, that the feuds between the families had long been to her a source of mental uneasiness the most acute ţ that she had ever vindicated the eonductof Gustavus, as far a$ Rudiger's violence would permit her prudence to give such an opinion ; and he was certain, that she would sei^e with joy an opportunity of terminating disputes so odious. He therefore proposed his im¬ mediate departure for the Castle of Frank¬ heim, where he wouid make a confidential communication of the whole business to the Countess, and discuss with her the most likely means of gaining over to their side the inclinations of her stormy husband* This plan was universally approved of; and without an hour's delay Ottokár set out for i'Vankheitn Castle·, accompanied by the warm-
est gratitude of Gustavus, and the highest admiration of Sir Lennard. it was on his progress to Frankheim, that the shrieks of the alarmed Blanche had sum¬ moned him to her assistance. On his ani« val with her at the castle, immediately alî was anxiety and confusion ; but it was soon ascertained, that she had received no wound, though some time elapsed, before she could recollect herself sufficiently to give an ac« count of what had happened, liven then, her narrative was greatly confused ι alarm and anxiety to escape had prevented her from hearing much of what the maria.: ad* drewœd to her· She could only relate, that a youth (whom she remembered to have seen twice before, and who had confest himself to be a Frankheimer) had surprized her among the rocks ; had accosted her with much violence and passion, frequently men¬ tioning the word— α death"—and (as she believed) had told her, α that her hour was come/* She was however quite certain, that
heaccusedher of having attempted" to plunge a dagger in his heart ;'* had threatened " to make her a Saint in Heaven," and had drawn his sword to put his threats in esecu« tion ; at which she had fled, still pursued by him, till her strength failed her, and she sank on the earth before him. Having given this imperfect account, Blanche was committed to the care of her female attendants, and advised by the physician to retire to rest, and endeavour to compose her milled spirits \ advice, which she readily adopted, and immediately withdrew to her own apart¬ ment, Gustavus had listened to her narrative with surprize, Ulrica with horror; and when Ottokár confirmed the assertion of Blanche, that the supposed assassin was in the service ofthe Count of Frankheim, (add» ing, that he had seen him occasionally in at¬ tendance upon Magdalena, and that he rather believed his name to be £ugene 9 ) the
Countess darted a triumphant glance upon her husband. The latter ordered some do¬ mestics to go in quest of the assassin, and convey him to the castle. — ÊC Perhaps," said he, α his wound may not be mortal, and we may induce him to explain this mysterious business» I confess, that at present it wears a most hideous aspect; yet I cannot believe, that the noble and brave Count Rüdiger would descend to so base an action as to instigate a menial to take away the life of an innocent girl by assassi¬ nation* if indeed, he should really be guilty of an action so atrocious, « *. ?¥ -~» —" If?** interrupted his wife impatient¬ ly ; " and is it possible any longer to doubt lib guilt ? is not everything confirmed ? does not this agree with my suspicions re¬ specting Philip ? suspicions, did I say ? 'twas certainty i 'twas fact, supported by proofs too clear to be mistaken by any cyes,but by those of wilful blindness! nay, t coukl teil you more*. *. ?jf —*
— α Indeed ?" said Gustavus with a look of incredulity, — u Yes, Gustavus, yes i you remember well the fever, which about two years ago brought you to the very gates of the sepul¬ chre ? you were recovering 5 you were pro¬ nounced out of danger ; when a present of sweetmeats arrived for you from the Lady Magdalena."*— — íc And what inference..., '— ~ cs Be patient ; I come to the point. J warned you not to taste them, and presented you with some conserves prepared by my own hand. You were obstinate j you first ridiculed my rears, then chid me for enter¬ taining such unjust suspicions* What was the result ? you eat freely of Magdalenas present, and rhe very next day your fever returned with such violence, as made the physician for several days despair of your recovery-/*™ *— u It was very singular! you are perfectly'
correci, Dlrka ; and certainly, · * * But stay! í think, i recollect one little circumstance, which* * » * Exactly so ! our dispute took place in the honey-suckle bower on the south- side of the garden, and out of patience at (what yon termed) my obstinacy», you left me in displeasure* Scarcely were you gone, when old Grim the wolf-dog came bounding to caress me, and springing upon me unex¬ pectedly, Magdalenas present fell from my hands, and the vessel broke into a thousand pieces* This accident made nie luwe re¬ course to your conserves», which were still standing on the table : and what ís something singular s old Grim (who had appropriated the fallen sweetmeats to himself without he¬ sitation) sufiered not the least inconvenience; while 1 had scarcely tasted those prepared by your own hand, before my fever returned with violence, and I was declared to be in danger of my life.**— —■** Why, certainly," saitl Ulrica, hésitât-
ing, -and embarrassed; u there are two ways of telling everything* Appearances seemed strong*.. » I argued to the best of my know¬ ledge. . * * Evv-ry body is liable to be mis¬ taken» ·.. * 9 ***^ —·** Are they so ? then, good Ulrica, since ycu find yourself mistaken in one instance, allow the possibility of your having been mistaken in another, in short, î insist upon It, and will not be disobeyed, that you are henceforth silent on the subject of ľhilipV malady* Were he poisoned or were he not» it is my pleasure, that he should be mention* ed only as dead, and nothing further. Nay, Ulrica ! not a syllable more, I entreat you t —»My friends," he 'continued, turning to Ottokár and Sir Lennard ; δδ advise me what io do* This new adventure, I own^ wears a very embarrassing appearance : and yet ap¬ pearances are no less strong against myself respecting the Herald's death, and still inoré respecting the murder of young Joscelyn, One of my own people was found nera* VOi» L U
the corse ; lie declared ' upon the rack with his last breath, that I had instigated him to commit the crime ; and yet God sees the heart, and knows, that I am innocent* Ru« diger may be equally guiltless · of this attack upon my child: if fortunately, there should still be life in the assassin, and he could be brought to confess». *. "— — u Nay/* " exclaimed Ottokár, α he must confess ; he shall confess ! if he refuses, the rack shall force from hím* . ♦ » ,, «-~ -—" And if he thteu declares, that Rüdiger set him on, · · „ "— — ίβ Then the business is ended! then Rudiger's guilt is clear, and. · ». **— —" Indeed ? then it is also clear, that i am Joscelyn's murderer* Is not that equally well proved, Sir Ottokár, and by means ex¬ actly the same ? îs — The youth coloured, and hung his head in confusion : nor did any one break the silence, tili a domestic entering informed the Count, that the assassin had been· removed
from the place, where Sir Ottokár left him· On enquiry he had learned from some pea« santSj tha^ they had found the youth bleeding profusely, but that his wound appeared not to be dangerous : that they were preparing to convey him to the Castle, when a part y of Frankheimers accidentally past that way, and recognizing a favourite domestic of their liege-lord* had forced him from them* and hastened to convey him out of the domains of Orrenberg. All hopes of Eugene*s clearing up this mystery being thus removed, it was thought best, that Ottokár should resume his intend* id visit to the Lady Magdalena, should in* Form her of all that had happened» should cn- .reat her to account for the highly culpable xmduct of the Pagc% and ascertain, whether Rudiger was disposed to bury ail mutual in- uries in oblivion ; a measure, which for hk )wn part s Gustavus profest himself bull >erfectly ready to adopt, in spite of the su .- исюш transactions of that «veutful evuu
ч ?
ing, Ottokár Immediately mt forth % 'but Sir Lennard reroaîned at th« Castle of Or¬ renberg to wait tm issue of the young war« rioťs negotiation.
CHAP. VIL
«*·.** Tbe!m#ge of a wicked heinous fault Üresin îıîs eye ; tbat close aspect of his doth shew the mood ©f a rnuöh troubled bosQm."— King John*
Tí ie arrival of Ottokár at Frankheim Castle appeared to create no trifling astonishment and embarrassment in the domestics* Sus¬ picion and ill-humour were exprest on every coimtenance; and Wilfred, the Seneschal, only answered the y ath's inquiries for the HS
Lady Magdalena by a dry aad sullen-^ u this way, Sir Knight Y 9 — r £he Countess was alone | his appearance seemed to excke in her almost as much surprize as it had produced on her atter dants, and her reception of him waa studiously cold* But the frankness and impetuosity of Ottokar's nature soon banish¬ ed this constraint ; he opened his embassy without loss of time > and as she listened.» the countenance of his auditress gradually brightened. The mutual attachment of Osbright and Blanche equally surprised and pleased her j bhe bestowed the highest encomia on that generosity of sentissent, which had prompted Ottokár to sacrifice his own passion to the general welfare ; she declared her thorough persuasion of the merits of the fäíťBlandie s and her anxiety to see these odious feuds terminated in an amicable manner. She was also willing to give credit to Ottakar's solemn protestations, that Gustavus was innocent of io&celyu'ß death ; but she greatly feared, tint
it would be difficult to inspire her husband with the same confidence ; especially at the present moment* when his persuasion of Gusîavus's animosity had gained additional strength from several late occurrences The account of the Herald's murder 3 she said, had inspired Rndiger with a degree of in* dignation, which (often as she had witnessed the strength of his emotions) had far sur¬ passed anything, of which she had before believed him capable* Ottokár hastened to clear np this transac¬ tion, at which he was present ; and his ac¬ count perfectly exculpated Gustavus in Mag- dalena's eyes j though (conscious of Rudiger's innate obstinacy) she was doubtful of its being equally successful with her husband· Ottokár, whose chief -virtue was by no means that .of patience, took fire at this ι and it escaped him to say, " that it 5Ц be¬ came a person to be so difficult in believing the innocence of another, who lay himself under such strong suspicions of having in¬ ii 4
í^t igaťecl an assassin to commit the very same crime"-—-the Countess eageriy demanded an explanation, and heard with surprise and resentment whicli increased with every word ™ ct that in the course ofthat very evening a domestic of Count Rüdiger had at-' tempted to stab the Lady Blanche^ and would have succeeded in his diabolical attempt, had not Ottokár arrived in time to fell the assas¬ sin to the ground/'—* Ottokár wos still expatiating with aU the warmth of a lover on the atrocity of the attempt ; the Countess was still listening to this dreadful charge in such horror, as de¬ prived her of all power to interrupt her nephew; when the door was thrown open with violence, and Count Rüdiger rushed into the room« *—." Have you heard it, Magdalena ì n lie exclaimed İn a thundering voice, while he stamped upon the floor with passion; α have you heard· * * * "~at that moment lib eyes rested upon ütlokar, and instantiy they ap*
reared to flash out fir^ § He started back *■ all the blood in his body seemed at once to rush into his face ;· for some moments he gazed upon tlie youth in terrific silence, as if he would have devoured him with his eyes. At length—" So !" he exciaimed in a satis¬ fied tone ; u here ! he is here /—What hoa ! Wilfred !"—And he rushed again from the apartment, as abruptly as he had entered. -—" What can this mean ?" said the amaz¬ ed and trembling Magdalena ; u those looks ..., t hítt well-known terrible expression... - oh! this very moment I must be satisfied.*'™ She hastened to a window which over« looked the principal court, and summoned the old porter, who was then crossing k. He soon entered the apartment, and' the Countess hastily inquired^ whether within the Kbt hour anv strangers had arrived at the castle, atid whether he** lord had seo u them. *—" Nib Lady, no strângerii Γ replied the - old man, "but truly "Martin and Lis ь\т и 6
MHiTRüSr Ι Ок, Hans, the farmers of Helmstadt, are arrived, and sad news they bring to be sure* By your inquiry, Lady, 1 suppose, thac you have not yet heard, what has happened at Orrenberg ? Ah ! the hard hearts ! Ah ! the barbarians ! How could they be so cruel as to biut the poor harmless innocent lad ! One so gentle, that· *. * the Lord have mercy ! Is it you, Sir Ottokár ? Why, sure¬ ly you must be distracted to show your face within these wails, after committing an act so barbarous ľ'— Ottokar declared his ignorance of the old man's meaning, — u indeed ì Nay, then perhaps the story is not true ; Mailin and Hans may have mis¬ taken the name, and lieaven grant it may prove so ! Bui to be plain, Sir Knight, Martin told me himself, that on his road hither he found the young page Eugene bleeding and fainting; that the peasants, who stood near him, had assured him, that the lad was stabbed by no hand but yours.
and that you had perpetrated this barbarous action by the command of the Lady Blanche, under whose very eyes it was committed. Finding that Eugene still lived, and knowing how much my Lord and yourself, noble Lady, value him, Martin and his companions rescued him from the hands of the Orren- bergers, and endeavoured to bring liim home to the castk, But his wound beingj dangerous, they thought it safest to stop with him at rhe Convent of St, John, where they left him under the care of the good fathers« and then hastened hit lier to inform my Lord of what had happened. But, bless my Iieart ! I quite forget, Lady ; the Count ordered me to summon W ih red immediately to his chamber, and 1 doubt, even this little delay will bring mc into anger. Your par¬ don, lady; 1 must away this instant!"— And he hurried out of the Apartment, —"Lugen**?" repeated Magdalena; "Hu¬ gene wounded? una w nmid^á hy your hai"!, Ottokár? A boy, a poor harmien boy ! i) L· ¡ и β
impossible ! This is some egregious mistake., and ....,"— — ss No^ lady; there is no mistake in this ; the peasants told the truth. It was my hand, which struck Eugene to the ground ; tor Eugene was the wretch*, who (as 1 before aient ioned to you) attempted this evening the precious Ше of Blanche·"— —*"You rave a Sir Ottokar! Eugeiie 3 an assassin ì The asaassiø of г female too ľ He, who bears to the very name uf woman a • ìove, a reverence almost idolatrous? He 5 the gentlest, tendereste * s «, * "'—- ·—-" Lady, î saw him myself y I heard the shrieks of Blanche with my own ears! Ь bäw ber bînk at his feet in terror ; I saw Eu¬ gene with his sword drawn on the very point of plunging ii in her bosom. *.·.«, ' 5 — — ce Kay, nay ! Let us not waste our time in disputing about Eugene» Be he innocents or be he guilty, your hands are stained with iiis blood, md fiere you are no longer in
$
safety. So dear as Eugene is to my hus¬ band· . · · · · "™*™ ~ йй Surely, Countess, surely, he will be no longer dear to him, when Rüdiger learns his guilt j or if he still protects· him, that pr- - taction wiil prove, that Rüdiger himself can· not be innocent« Criminal as Eugene is^ if he can still inspif e his master with any senti¬ ment, but indignation, bat hatred. ♦ „ „. „ s *™ —"Hatred? His master ŕ Ohi Ottokar, you know not*. » „ there is a mystery about that bov. , ». there is a secret reason» « · * fiudiger hate Eugene? Eugene, who is his own. *.. î mean. * * Л would say» », » Eu¬ gene, whom Rüdiger loves as dearly, as if he were his own son ľ'— The eagerness, with wliich she endeavour¬ ed to recall her words ; the hesitation, with which she pronounced û\% correcting phrase; the colour, which crimsoned her cheeks at having so nearly divulged her husband's se« çret ; all these immediately dispelled the cloud, which overhung ihe birth oí Eugene
Ottokar mstantly comprehended, how dear an interest Rüdiger took in the page's wel¬ fare, and how odious the man must appear in his eyes, who had plunged his sword in the boy's bosom« He hesitated, what course to pursue; Magdalena advised his leaving her to reconcile the mind of her husband to what had happened, and not to repeat his visit at the castle, till she should inform him, that his present offence was forgotten and forgiven : and the Knight was on the point of following her counsels, when the door was again thrown open, and the Count of Frankheim re-entered the room. The Countess shuddered, as she cast an anxious glance upon his countenance. His face was of a deadly paleness ; the deepest gloom bat upon his frowning brows ; his burning eyes glared with ten ible expression; yet a smile of forced urbanity played round his bloodless lips, and on his entrance he bowed his proud head towards Ottokár with an air oí unusual uMidesceosum. *
«*~- u You are welcome, Sir Knight !" said he ş ' c this visit affords me a satisfaction to¬ tally unexpected. Magdalena, your nephew will need some refreshment : will you not see, that it is prepared ?'*— The tone, in which this question was ask* ed, converted it into a command : sha was obliged to obey, and could only whisper to Ottokar in passing™" Be on your guard, for God's sake !"— -— cs Ee seated, Sir Ottokár," resumed the Count 5 " nay, no ceremony ! and npw may I inquire, what lucky circumstance brings you hither ? It is not often, that Frankheim Castle is honoived by your presence. You come, I understand, from Orrenberg ; you are a friend of Gustavus, and a suitor of his daughter ; is it not so ? A fair lady and an excellent choice : I am told, that her influence over you is unbounded ; that what she desires, be it right, or be it wrong, you perform wkh all the ardour of a true lover ; and in truth, it is fitting, that you I
should* But as 1 said before, you come straight from Orrenberg: perhaps, you bring some message from your friend Gustavus ? Some conciliatory proposal. ·. » some expla¬ nation of past circumstances» ...or perhaps, he has sent me a defiance in return for mine, and your friendship for him induces you to appear before me in the sacred character of his herald. Am I right, Sir Ottokár ľ'— ~ u As the herald of Gustavus ? No, Count Rüdiger : I come here as yom friends if you will permit me to be so ; as your guest? unless you have forsworn the rights of hos« jÄtálity."— —- u My guest ? Oh ! undoubtedly ! You do me but too much honour ! But.. ·. am i to understand then, that you bring no commission from Orrenberg ?**·— — Cá Yes ; one, which I trust will convince νου- that 1 am not more the friend of Or* renborg, than of Frarkheim. Count, Gus¬ tavus wishes to hold with you a personal с* »ь fornice."—-
*— u A conference ? With me ?**~ — Cť You may well be surprised : 1 was so myself, when he first mentioned it ; but he asserts with such solemn adjurations his Ы+ —** His innocence ? Indeed ?'*— — " He declares himself so certain of prov¬ ing to your complete satisfaction, that he had no hand in Joscelyn*s murder s and hp is so anxious of laying before you a plan for putting an end to all feuds in a manner equally beneficial and agreeable to both fami¬ lies, that if you will but listen to him,. ♦ * **«— —^Listen to him? Ohi by all means* When you see him again, pray, assure him* that an interview with him will give me the highest satisfaction/'— *-" When I see him ? Dear Count» since you charge me with so welcome a commis¬ sion, I will hasten back to Orrenberg without a moment's delay. Oh í from what a weight shall I relieve -his mind, and how wisely do you act щ showing this readiness
to conciliation! Rudiger, may the right hitfid, which ï thus stretch toward heaven, wither and rot away, if I am perjured in swearing, that J believe Gustavus to be in* nocent. Now then, farewell! Yet holdi there are two points« ·. * two unlucky acci¬ dents, which have lately happened. *. » and which while unexplained*... must have pro¬ duced a disadvantageous impression upon your mind ? and may be the source of future dissension* Permit me therefore to mention^ that Eugene.. ·, · · * ~ —** I know it ţ I have heard it already ţ Eugene ha^ been mortally wounded in the neighbourhood of Orrenberg Castle, You need say до шЬге about it«/*-*- —-** Not mortally^ Count* 1 am assured, that his wounds are not mortal : I trust, that he will recove*/'— —" ¡iot mortal, you say ? Nay, just as you picase!"—-» —« Count Rüdiger Г'—
~*'Аду thing more? You mentioned two accidents, I think,, and.... *. "·— -*«~ a Before I enter upon the seconds per¬ mit me to explain, that if tliere was any fault in the first, it proceeded entirely from the conduct of Eugene himself. He attempt¬ ed to assassinate the Lady Blanche this even-* ingaand. · *.,. ъ — —" Oh 1 to be sure ! extremely probable* and extremely wrongs the boy deserved hi$ fate ! And I make no doubts that Gustavus supposes him to have been instigated by me to commit this crime ? Nay* 1 confess, that seems highly probable too !"-*- ■ — w Noj Rüdiger, you wrong him· It is true, every one else at Orrenberg accuses you, but Gustavus himself loudly asserts hiä con* viction of your innocence»' 1 ·— ~« Fiend ! fiend í Oh ! artful devil... ten thousand pardons, Baron ! a sudden pain· * *. but 'tis gone î I am quite myself again, Now then ; the second little acci« dent, * , , ?"*-—
— Ji The herald, whom you sent to Orren¬ berg two days ago, * » * n «— — u Was knocked on the head ; they told me so before j but of course* Gustavus had no hand in tlïe affair P~— ~~" He had none, indeed. 1 was present myself, and witnessed his exertions to calm the fury of the mob j till unluckily, exhaust* ed with fatigue, and overcome with appre» bension, he fainted, and while he was insen- sible...... w — -~ w He fainted ? that was unlucky in- deedP— —- u This misfortune'has.distrest Gustavus beyond measure ι he has commissioned me to say, that any reparation which you can de« mand în honour.. * · **— -*» €i Reparation for such a trifle ? Oh ! absurd ! the thing is really not worth talking of."— -— w Count of Frankheim ! 9Î — —- <e For after all, the man was buta herald 5 and what is a herald, you know Γ—
**»*· ζζ What is he? permit me to say* · » ·. **—* —í* How is this, Sir Ottokár ? you es» pouse the cause of heralds so warmly, that one would think, you were a herald yourself) and in fact you are so ! you bring the Count of Orre»berg*s messages | you make the Count of Orrenberg*s conciliatory proposals $ and therefore to all intents and purposes you are the Count of Orrenberg*s herald» Is it not so. Sir Knight î* f — — w Rüdiger, I repeat it, I am here only as your friend, and as the Lady Magdalenas near kinsman-«-aud even should the laws of Chivalry not induce you to respect the he¬ rald, the rights of hospitality must surely make you consider the person of your guest as sacred.'*-*— ~~* c Sacred í my guest? Oh! undoubt¬ edly ! nothing can be better said, or more certain—the person of my guest must always be considered as sacred by me ; only. » * * there ís one truing point* of which it may be
as well to make you aware«— >I also am very subject to fainting* 9 ·^« — u Indeed?" exclaimed Ottokár, starting; then fixing his eyes on those of Rudiger, Jie read in them an expression, which almost froge the marrow in his bones— 46 Farewell, Count Rüdiger!"— said he, and hastily quit« led the room* The Count remained in his seat, reclining his head upon his hand, silent, motionless, and gloomy.—Some minutes elapsed, and still he moved not* ™" Save him ! save him !" shrieked Mag¬ dalena, as she rushed into the chamber, pale as death ; йй hasten to his rescue, Rüdiger ! For God*s sake, hasten! look! look!"—- and she threw open the window which com¬ manded the court-yard, and from whence the light óf the full moon and the blaze of numerous torches permitted her to obswve distinctly \i r hat was passing below* " He к surrounded* ·. * Ottokár, * „. the people, the
whole croud of them, with swords, with clubs. *. * Hy s fly 5 Rüdiger, and rescue him ! *—Merciful Heaven ! they drag him from his horse. * · * they throw him on the earth. * *. they will kill him ! they will murder him !— Nay, look yourself ! cometo the window; speak to the wild rabble, or their fury»..'. Ha! he forces himself out of their clutches! he draws his sword. · * * he fights«, · . · he drives them back,.. · now, now, my lord ! now they can hear you ! seize this interval of fear, and command them. „.. „. Alas ! alas ! now they all rush upon him at once, like madmen; he defends himself still, but their numbers.. * β ». Rudiger ! Rudiger ! for mercy's sake, for God*s sake, call to them from the win¬ dow. ... speak one word, speak hut one word, and. *.. Ah ! his head».. · a blow.. , · he staggers ... and now another,. * » and another, ». » iťs done ! it's done !—he falls ! he is dead ¡—Oh ! blessed Магу э receive his soul to mercy ľ*— She sank upon her knees, prest to her lip«
the golden cross, which hung at her bosom, and past some minutesin fervent supplication for the sins of her unhappy nephew* As she prayed, the excess of horror gradually abated; religion already poured balm into her stiU bleeding wounds ţ the thought of eternal hap* piness hereafter, enabled her to sustain the weight of her present afflictions 5 the agony of grief was softened into melancholy tender*- ness 1 she found, that she could again breathe freely j and a torrent of grateful tears rushed into her burning eyes, and relieved the bur¬ then of her over-charged bosom* She rose from her knees t she- turned to¬ wards her husband, who stiü sat motionless İn his chair, —"Rüdiger!" she said, * 4 your guest, your kinsman has been murdered in your castle, almost before your eyes : it would have cost you but one word, but one look, nay, the very sight of their Lord's counto nance, his mere presence would have been sufficient to recall the rabble to their duty,
and terrify them from accomplishing their barbarous purpose ! ï told you what would * happen ; I called you ; I implored you ; and stili you were deaf to my cries ; and still you moved not ! Oh ! what cruel insensibility ! Oh ! what inhuman obstinacy ! Now God grant, that in that bitter hour when you most want his help, he may not be as slow to aflord it, as you have been to the wretched Ottokár Г— The Count replied not«—the door opened, and Wilfred entered. —- €C Noble Lord !" said he ¡ ž< your orders arc obeyed."— —" Obeyed ? hîs orders ?'* repeated Mag¬ dalena with a shriek of surprise and horror. She fixed her eyes upon the countenance of her husband with a look (if dreadful enquiry. Every muscle in his gigantic form seemed convulsed by some horrible sensation ; tîıe deepest gloom dai kened every feature: the wind from the unclosed window acriuted his raven locks, and every hair appeared to VOL, I, I
v. ril he itself· Ilia eye-balls glared ; his teeth chattered j his lips trembled j and yet a smile ot bat isiied vengeance played horribly round them* Iiis complexion appeared suddenly to be changed to the dark tincture of an African : lhe expression of his countenance was dreadful, was diabolical ; Magdalena, as she gazed upon his face, thought, that she gazed upon the face of a dæmon. —" Obeyed r" after a long pause she re¬ peated once more 5 ** Rüdiger ! obeyed !"— He raised his еуеь ίο hers, but lie could not bupport their ga%e. He turned hastily away, and concealed his coimtenance with his robe· • -«Now then,' 5 she rebumed, w the whole is clear ! fool that 1 wab ! and I called you to ihe innocent youth's rescue ! fye, oh ! fye !—~this is not the action of a warrior, of a man ! this is so odious, so despicable, that /^ your wife, your fond, your humble, your much-injured, your ever-enduring wife, even 1 pronounce it odious and despicable, and citre to proclaim aloud my hatred and my
contempt. Oh ! shame ! shame !—how the man siu there, and must endure to hear the just reproaches of one 5 whom he knows so inferior in all things but virtue ; of a woman, weak in raißd, weak m body, but strong in conscious innocence, and therefore stronger than himself! Heaven can witness, with what truth, with what fondness, with what adoration, I have ever loved you, Rüdiger : but the feeling of what is right is superior to ail other feelings ; but the voice of justice will be heard : and not even the husband of my heart, not even the father of my chil¬ dren is to me a character so sacred, as to stifle the sentence of rny reason, of my con* science, which cries to me aloud—"The husband of your h^art, the father of your children, is a murderer ľ'— Your caprice, your pride, your wayward humours, your infi¬ delities, I have borne ihem all, and loved you still; but when î cec your hands stahied whh ihe biood of your kinsman, of your guest, oi a man who came hither solely for your ι 2
service, who had sacrificed to your welfare all his heart's dearest wishes ; when I see your hands stained with his blood, with his innocent blood, · · · Oh! Rudiger! Rudiger! is it possible, tliat I should ever love you more!"— Her heart agonized, her brain almost dis¬ tracted, she fled from her husband's presence^ and inclosing herself within her oratory, past the night in prayer equally for the souls of the murdered one, and of his unhappy mur* derer î
CHAR VIH
— ä4 Semina, űoresqae, ct suecos iucoquít acres j Addii et eжcepias lunk pernocte pruínas, Et strlgîs iîîfaraes ipsîs cum carmbus alas, VÍFudsque jécur corvi; quibus lasuper addii Oracaputque novem cornicia sæcula pass»."*— Ovid* -*» с ζ Here búiVâ slie many a sced ? ancî herb; and flower^ And dews in moonshine culled at midnight hour-, Bat's wings, a stag's stili-panting hearts and last A rayen*s head s o'er which nine hundred years hai! past*"-—* While his fatiier was thus plunging hiin* self ín an abyss of real guilt. Osbright was hastening în eager pursuit of means to elu-* adate the imaginary crime of Gustavus, £ 3-
The forest was thick; the way was lpng 3 and difficult to find without a guide. Osbright had obtained ample instructions respecting the course, which he was to hold, and he believed it impossible to make a mis¬ take : but his mind occupied with canvass¬ ing the obstacles, which impeded his union with Blanche and the reconciliation of the families, and in weighing the arguments for and against success in his present pursuit, he sufiered himself to fall into a reverie, during whkh his steed directed his course entirely nt his own pleasure. At length the animal thought proper to stop, The cessation of motion recalled Osbright to himself: he looked around, and found himself in the deepest part of the wood, and where no beaten path was discernible* Which way to guide his horse he had not the most diatant idea. Highly incensed at his own negligence, he urged his courser on at random, being only able to decide, that to remain where he was then, was the worst
thing lhat he could do; whereas by pro¬ ceeding he might possibly either regam fho lOpCl 'UťtUj Ol. JLJUi^UL 1U*U. ÖUitiv, l/vwov».»*^ vw direct him ho# to find it, lie therefore continued to hasten onwards, till his hor^ put his* foot into a pit-fall, and entangled himself too completely to be extricated by any efforts of his rider. Osbright was now at a complete юз?, what to do. The groans of the anima! an¬ nounced, that he had received some injury, though the thickness of the boughs exclud¬ ing all assistance irom the moon, the Knight was unable to ascertain the nature of his hurt. A .sound, like distant thunder, seem¬ ed to foretell a coming storm, and to re¬ mind him, that it was probable in a short time that his situation would become still more disagreeable j while his medications on the means of extricating himseit from his present embarrassment received verv unnica- sant interruptions from tlie howih'g of wolves and otheft wild beasts, by whom ihe t 4*
forest was infested· Suddenly Osbright fan¬ cied, that he saw something glimmer among the trees. He hastily hewed away with his sword some of the intervening branches, which impeded his view, and was delighted to perceive the light of a fire, which evi¬ dently shed its rays through the casement of a cottage-window at no great distance. Thither he resolved to hasten, and request its owners to assist him in recovering his horse* He arrived at the spot, whence the Hght proceeded. Here stood a low and wretched- looking hut, rudely constructed, and cover¬ ed with fern and withered boughs« Before he gave notice of his presence, the youth judged it prudent to ascertam the nature of the inhabitants. Accordingly he approach¬ ed the small window without noise, whence he had a perfect view into the hut's in¬ terior« A young gîrî, who seemed to be about fifteen, and whose patched garments declar-
ed her to be the child of povcrty 3 sat upon a low stool by the hearth. Sometimes she fed the fire with dry sticks, and at others she 'cast different materials into an iron kettle, which was boiling before her. She frequently stirred its contents, and seemed extremely intent upon her occupation, Os¬ bright doubted not, that she was preparing the repast of her parents, or perhaps of her master, and he was on the point of lifting the latch of the door, when he heard the girl speak, as if addressing some one in an adjoining room* —** Yes! yes !" said she \ " I hear you: ill is going on well!" and then turning igain to the cauldron—-" Now then," she æntmued; a once again! First for Father, '-" Peace to his hones! May they bleep in the ceil, SVer mingled for mischief in poison, nor bpcll V lest ia the coffin! Ail ghastly and pale, iy night may Ыь ghost nover wander and wail! 'oy to theboul ! May he rbe without fears, Vhcn ükî ¿rumpet, to sinners so dreadful, hchears. ,% -~ i S
" Now for my grandmother« — iS Feuds with the Fiends! May the Hag's evil eye Nc'ä- cause. ··,·*.."— * ♦ •~ u Barbara ! Barbara !" screamed a cracked voice, from the inner room— m idle hussey, what are you thinking about? ľm sure, you're not repeating the three wishes Г— —- w Sure, are you ? Nay, for certain, if the Saints are half as deaf as you are, I repeat them to little purpose. Set your heart at rest, I tell you ; I warrant you, all goes right* ~" Joy to tfie soal ! May he rise* ..»·.· ."— —" No i no ! I said that ; where was 1 ì Stay ! oh ! aye, now I remember. — ťC Feuds with the» Fiends t May the Hag's etiî eye №*er cause our cow Brindle to droop and to die i Mprey to шап ! May her limbs cease tô ache, Which the agiiOMøw forets ta shifcf ama shake ! Safety with Saints ! Let not Sitali succeed Ju laming hef tongue, whêa she's saying hey creed P— 1
—" And now for myself ! — - ť< Holy aiul sweet ! May the knot socm be iyed By the priest, which shall make me some honest man's bride ! Sorrow and Joy i When ia child-birth I lie* Light be my labour, am!, „..·.. ."— Here her eye fell upon Osbright^ who having lifted u ^ the latch of the door soft¬ ly, had entered, and was now standing be¬ side her—" Oh ! preserve me^ all blessed saints and angels !** cried the girl with a loud shriek 3 and sprang from her seat ; u mercy upon me, Sir Knight; who are you, and wliat brings you here Г*— —"Be not alarmed, my pretty lass!" answered Osbright ; ** my horse has fallen into a pit-fall^ and I need assistance to draw him out. Are' there any men belonging to this cottage^ who,. „.., ,, -~> _« yli I no, Sir Knight; there ís no one here, but myself, and my oíd grandmother, uho is confined to her bed with a temb>
ague-fit ! But to the right, you will find a narrow path, which leads to the village of Orrenberg: there you may procure as¬ sistance in plenty ι it is not above a mile ofl': and now, good Sir Knight, be gone, 1 entreat you !"«—And she turned again to the hearth. — ξ *Ύο the right, I think, you said?" inquired the youth ; " my good girl, leave your cookery to itself for a few minutes, and just point out the path of which you spoke, and an ample reward. ·.. ·, **— ™ £€ Oh ! no, no, no ! I could not stir a step out of this room for the universe, Sir Knight! So pry'thee, interrupt me no longer, or you 3 !! certainly. , ,. look you there now !" she exclaimed, running to the caul¬ dron, and beginning to stir it again with great eagerness ţ " I thoughts what would come of talking to me! The brewage was just going to boil over, and then all the charm would have been to do over again !"~ —-*« The charm í"—
— a No, no ! not a charm! 1 did not mean to say, charm. ». * I don*t know, what 1 meant to say ý but I know, I wish, that you would not interrupt me any longer. Now do go away, there's a good young Knight \ now go !"~And she began again to mutter her rhymes. „« Barbara !" called again the cracked voice from the inner room— u For Heaven's love, don't forget the ague ľ 1 — ■ — u No, no !'* replied Barbara, " nor the cow neither. 1 *— — <ς Did I teU you/ 1 resumed the voice 5 €й did I tell you, that the snail-shells must be whole ? If they are cracked in the least part, the broth will be spoiled, and then the child's finger wül have no power or vir« tue»— . —" A child^s finger ? >? *—Osbright started, and his heart beat violently at the sound : he recollected, that Father Peter had men¬ tioned the loss of Josceìyn's little finger of ths right hand; should this prove to be the
same, here was a clue furnished, which might lead to the most important discoveries! While he made this renection, Barbara an¬ swered her grandmother— u that she had observed hcr caution respecting the shells, and bade her make herself quite easy."— —" Good ! good !" said again the old woman} " only be sure, that you put in cobwebs enough, for that is a prime ingre* dient."— And now Barbara resumed her entreaties, that the stranger would leave the collage. _ 5 < By no means \ n answered he reso« lately ; " there seems to be something im¬ proper going on here, A child's finger is boiling in that cauldron, and I must know for what purpose you procured it, and in what manner you came by it, before I stir one step from this apartment/'-— ·—" Now indeed, Sir Knight \ n cried the girl evidently alarmed, ** the purpose, fbr which it İs intended, is a very harmless one* A child's finger is boiling yonder, í
must confess ; but it is oniy to make a spell of great virtue, though so innocent, that the Virgin herself need not have scru¬ pled to make use of it· That kettle contains the broth of good-luck, and whatever wishes I pronounce, while it is making, sooner or later will ail come to pass. And then when it is done, the child's finger being past nine times through a wedding-ring, it affords an infallible cure for the ague and the ear-ache; and being wrapped in the skin of a dor¬ mouse with a sprig of St. John's wort, and laid under the threshold of the door, it is better than an old horse-shoe, and neither witch nor devil will venture to put their noses over it; and being dipped in bafs blood, and well rubbed in·... but mercy on me, what am í about ? I ought to be alone while the broth is brewing, for my grandmother herself must not set her foot in the room, because she's not a virgin, Now, dear, gootl young Knight,go along, for if any impure per¬ son is present, the charm h quite spoiled**'—-
— ťC Very possibly/'* observed Osbright ; " bnt though an impure person may do so much mischief, the presence of another pure person ought to make the work go on still better/'—- — H Indeed ? Why, as to that point, my grandmother gave no instructions, and it may very well be, as you say<> Sir Knight! Slay a moments and HI ask her/'-~ ~" By no means Γ resumed Osbright/, detaining her with я look of feigned se* verily ; " it would be quiUi, superfluous, as 1 am determined, not only to remain where í ani 3 but to know, by what means the child's finger came into your possession/'— ~" Oh ! gracious ! Sir Knight ! my grandmother charged me not to say a word about the finger to any soul breath¬ ing; she said, that it might bring us into much trouble, in spite of our innocence/'— —**It will bring you into much more trouble, if you do not obey me without a moment's hesitation : for I shall hasten to
BLANCHE ANB OSBRIGHT* the next village, and depose, that I found you in the very act of composing an unlaw¬ ful potion. Both yourself and your grand¬ mother will be seized as witches, and.. ·. ,, -~ — t c Oh ! all ye blessed Saints protect us P' cried the girl trembling in every limb;. " that is exactly what we are afraid of ; that is it, which has obliged us to take refuge in this wild forest out of the reach of every human eye. Indeed, Sir Knight, we are honest creatures; but my grand« mother is a wise woman, and knows a power of strange secrets, and all the hidden virtues of herbs and plants ; and so some ignorant evil-minded person accused her of dealing in sorcery, and if she had not escaped in time, the poor innocent woman would most probably have been burnt for a witch, only because she knew a little more than her neighbours. Now, good Sir Knight, do not depose against us ; only promise to keep Dur secret, and you shall know every sylla¬ ble of the matter as faithfully, as if I wis
kneeling at confession before the Father- Abbot of St, John's himself !"— Osbright gave the required promise—and now he listened with interest, wliich almost deprived him of the power of breathing, while the girl related-*--** that a fortnight Jiad scarcely elapsed, since she found in the wood a young boy, apparently not above nine years old, and at the point ot death. She endeavoured to save his life but in vain ; he had only time to tell her, that while sepa¬ rated from his friends during the chace, he had been seized by a wolf } that lie had drawn his little dagger and had defended himself so successfully, that though in the contest he gave himself several wounds with his owe weapon, he atchkved the death of the ferocious animal; but before he could accomplish this, his bosom was dreadfully lacerated, and he had lost so much blood before the girľs arrival, that in spite of all her efforts to succour him, he soon breathed his last, Assured, that he was quite dead,
she left the fetal spot, but took with her the dead wolf, whose skin, she knew, would be an acceptable winter-gift to her grandmother* The old woman, however, on hearing the story, mformed her 5 that she had left some¬ thing behind mudi mqr e valuable than the skins of all the wolves in the forest· This was the little finger of the child # s left hand, which being bolted* with certain mystical in* gradients, possest a thousand important and beneficial properties· Barbara greatly re¬ gretted her not having been aware of its virtue ; especially as she had taken notice, that in struggling with the wolf the boy had broken that identical finger, and as it seemed only to hang by the skin, nothing would have been more easy for her than to make herself mistress of it* However, it might possibly not be too late, and she hur¬ ried back to the scene of death. The corpse was still lying there ; no one observed her, and she ьесигес! the finger : but in one mi¬ nute more she would have been too late*
She heard footsteps approaching, and had scarcely tíme to conceal herself behind a bush, when a man arrived at the place 5 whom she well knew to be a domestic of the Count of Orrenberg, having frequently see» him at the castle,when she occasionally ventur¬ ed thither to dispose of the eggs of her poul· try,and the milk of the aforesaid cow Brindle* The roan, she said, seemed to be greatly distrest and shocked at finding the poor child weltering in his biood ; he lifted him in his arms, and she watched him to the river's side, where she left him bathing the child's forehead, washing the blood from the wounds, and using all those efforts to recover him, which, ежрепепсе had already assured her, must be ineffectual. However, she judged it unwise to tell him so 5 lest see· ing her cloaths stained with the blood which had trickled from the dead wolf, and per« haps missing the Httle finger from the child's hand, he might be induced to suspect her of having beeu accessary to his death, She
therefore left him still engaged in his cha¬ ritable endeavours, and returned to her grandmother with her important prize ; the use of which, however, had been deferred till the present evening, on account of the difficulty of collecting the other ingredients of the charm. 35 — Such was Barbara's narrative, and Os¬ bright heard with rapture the confirmation of Gustavus's innocence. He asked the girl, why she had not disclosed these cir¬ cumstances, when inquiry was made res¬ pecting the child's supposed murder : but no such inquiry had reached this secluded hut, whose existence was unknown even at Orrenberg, though so near, and whose inha« bitants had no intercourse with the rest of the world, except when necessity compelled Barbara to venture with fear and trembling, either to the Castle to dispose of her ware, or to the village to purchase those few arti« cies of life, whkh were indispensible. Osbright rewarded the girl's information
liberally, and then having received certain instructions for reaching the neighbouring village, he set forward to request assistance for his embarrassed .horse* 'His plans were now changed ţ and instead of prosecuting his journey, he deterniined to hasten to Sir Lennard of Kleeborn with the explanation of those circumstances, which (as that war¬ rior had assured him) formed the principal objection to his union with Blanche and to a reconciliation between the hostile kins« mem
CHAP. IX.
u To you my scuľs affections move, Devoutly, warmly íme ; My life bitó Ыеп a task of love, Oiiolongj long thought of yo«."«-«· Ί\ Moore.
>*«»*»·
OsBEioHT found the castle of Kleeborn in all the hurry of warlike preparation. The· court-yard was str own with swords and lances ; on every side Vassal* were seen employed in furbishing up their shield« and
breast-plates, and from every quarter re¬ sounded the noise of the busy-armourers» The youth was too eager to impart the pur¬ port of his visit to Sir Lennard to allow himself time for inquiring thé cause of all this bustle. He hastened to his friend's apartment, and started back in surprize and disappointment at the marked coldness, with which he was received« With all the frankness and impetuosity of his age, he demanded the reason of this al¬ tered treatment ; and he now learned*, with equal grief and horror the crime with which his father had burthened his soul, and the effect, wliich it had produced at Orrenberg, Sir Ottokár had always been particularly ac* ceptable to Gustavus and his wife ι his de¬ ference to thcir opinions, and the pardal in¬ terest which he had ever taken in their con¬ cerns, had not only flattered their pride» but had even been of essential benefit on many most important occasions : his wealth his power, his high birth and military talents
rendered his fnencLhip and support a trea¬ sure to those, on whom it was conferred * his evident adoration of Blanche had made them for some time past consider him as their future son ; ar¿d the generosity, with which in their last interview he had sacri¬ ficed his own pretensions to the wishes of Blanche and the welfare of her family, had exalted their esteem to a pitch of the highest admiration ; a sentiment, whicli was shared by Şir Lennard, whose heart Ottokar's dis¬ interested conduct had completely won. When, therefore, the news of his murder reached Orrenberg, the consternation, the astonishment, the grief, the thirst for re¬ venge, and the bursts of frantic angen which it excited, exceeded all powers of description« Ulrica poured forth without restraint the effusions of all that jealousy and mistrust, which she had so long stifled with¬ in her bosom against the house of Frank« heim« Tfae gentie Blanche wept floods of tear?, alternately pitying ihe kind youth, vor., и ζ.
who from her childhood liad been to her- as a brother, and bev/ailing this freah obstacle to ζ reconciliation with her lover's family ş while Gustavus now mourned the loss of his friend, whom he considered as having fallen a victim to the warmth, with which he had espoused the interests of Orrenberg, now expatiated opt his numerous merits and his owe extensive obligations to hirn, and now vowed to enact a dreadful vengeance for his death on the barbarous bloody Rüdiger. Sir Lennard, inspired with similar indignation, agreed» that no vengeance could be exacted too severe for such a crime ; he promised to assist Gustavus in obtaining it with his whole power ; and having sworn to renounce all intercourse with the house of Frankheim, he hastened to hm own castle to arm his vassals, and lead them to the assistance of Gustavus* Osbright listened in the utmost conster¬ nation» while thç above circumstances were narrated by hb host : but the vchemen' e,
with which he reprobated ÜttokarV« murder^ and the agony, which he evidently felt at hearing the guilt of his father, were such as speedily to remove from Sir Lennard's mind every unfavourable impression respecting the youth himself. The good Knight, therefore* gave him his hand wkh his accustomed cor¬ diality, and assured him ofhis undiminished anxiety for his welfare. Heartily did he wish his future happiness \ but he added, that after his solemn promise to Gustavus, he must confine himself to merely wishing it, Osbright must now prosecute his love» suit entirely by his own address : if he could obtain the lady, .uo one would feel nxre joy at his success, than Bir Leimard, .But never more should the name of Osbright be pro* nounced by him at the castle oi Orrenberg, he had sworn it, and nothing could induce him to violate his oath» Entreaties, that he would change this re¬ solution, proved unavailing, and Osbright departed with a heavy heart. Yet a hint, К 2
which had fallen from Sir Lennard, had not been wasted in the air. Could Blanche be induced to ñy with him, and unite her fate to his, the casde of Kleeborn would af¬ ford them a secure refuge during the first storm of paternal indignation. He was himself innocent of any offence, and doubt¬ less Gustavus would soon forbear to con¬ found the son with the father* The irre¬ vocable knot once tied, the two fami¬ lies must needs reconcile themselves to a measure, whkh could no longer be avoided: Time, the great healer of wounds, might even obliterate the remembrance of this atrocious act from the minds of the difle¬ rent parties; and thcir respective interests being inseparably blended by this marriage, Mistrust (that odious and malignant mon¬ ster, whkh for so long had blasted the hap» piness of the hostile kinsmen) must needs perish for want of aliment. That Blanche could be persuaded to abandon those parents, whom she loved so passionately, Osbright
with justice greatly doubted ; but he re¬ solved, that at least the attempt should be made« An interview with her must be im¬ mediately procured : then if she refused to share his fate, he determined to bid an eter¬ nal adieu both to Blanche and to Germany, to join the Crusaders who v/ere on the point of departing on tlieir holy mission, and to lose on the ensanguined plains'of Palestine at once his sorrows, his affection, and his life» But how was he to obtain this interview ? Blanche was not to visit the grotto, till in¬ formed of his return by Sir Lennard, and SV Lennard had positively refused to inter¬ fere any further in the business» He in vain looked round for some other friend to render him this service; and after much deliberation, -he determined, that uuďr pre¬ tence of disposing of her ware at ilie castle, the young Barbara might-easily deliver a letter to Blanche. He, therefore, hastened once more to the cottage in ürj wood» lib
liberality soon induced the girt to under¬ take the commission. Writing materials tvere procured at the next village : and Bar- bara soon departed with a most pressing letter, for the answer to which he deter¬ mined to wait at the cottage* But Blanche was no longer mistress of her actions. In the height of their indignation at Ottokar's murder, her parents had insist¬ ed upon her renouncing all thoughts of an uïiïon with Osbright of Frankheim* Her he?rt would not allow her to make this re¬ nunciation. She protested against ihe in¬ justice of implicating the son in the fa¬ ther's guilt, and avowed the impossibility of withdraw ing her ailection,, "Ulrica, whobc passions were violent and whose under¬ standing was not strong, was highly indíg* nant at her daughter's disobedience, de¬ clared, that she would see her no ir.ore tili she was awakened to a proper sense of duty» and ordered her to be confined to hcr own apartment ; as to Gustavus, though he am*
approved în his heart of such compulsory measures, yet having entirely given up the management of Bianche to his wife hitherto^ he forbore on this occasion aho to interfere with her orders* Willingty would the poor Blanche have complied with her loveťs request for a last patting interview, to which he had confined himself in his letter, thinking the plan of elopement more likely to be adopted by her, if presented without allowing her time for consideration : but how was that com* pliance to be eifected ? She was a captive, and conld not even leave her own apart¬ ment, much less the castle* In this di* lemma she resolved to appeal to her nurso ? the only person who had access to her, and one who had ever shown towards her the aftection of a mother. The good woman at first remonstrated loudly against the impropriety of her lady*s quitting her father's home clandestinely, and insisted upon the danger of her being en- K. 4
countered by the emissaries of the Count of Frankheim, from whose bloody designs she had so lately and во narrowly escaped. But the prav ers and tears of Elanche con¬ quered all resistance ; and on her promising to be absent but a single hour, and to wear such a disguise, as must effectually prevent her being recognized either by friend or foe, Margaret consented to assist hcr temporary ťvasion. Пег son, a young peasant, was at that time on a visit to her and resident in the castle. His stature %>vas nearly the same as ihat of Blanche*: it was accordingly agreed, that Margaret should procure permission for him to take leave ofhis young mistress, who was also his foster sister, previous to his quitting the castle : that Blanche arrayed in a suit of his cloaths, might easily elude the vigilance of her guards, while he remained concealed in her apartment tili her return ; for wliicli his being supposed to have re membered something of importance to buy
lo his mother would afford a plaubible rea¬ son: and that, as the late occurrences had occasioned the private passage to be shut upj Barbara should wait near the draw-bridge to conduct Blanche to the grotto by a path through the woods, by which means she would be less exposed to observation and discovery, than if obliged to traverse the usual and beaten road. Blanche adopted this plan with eagerness, and rewarded her kind nurse for her invention with a thou¬ sand benedictions and caresses : but as this discussion had lasted till the approach of night, it was agreed to defer the interview till the succeeding evening. This being arranged, Barbara hastened back to the cottage with a letter, whose as« surances of undiminished affection filled the heart of Osbright with hope, and joy, and gratitude. To prevent by his presence even the possibility of danger, he engaged to meet Barbara near the draw-bridge at the appointed hour ; and he now bought th'. к ã
villager, to whose care he had entrusted liis wounded horse, and from whom he had borrowed a sorry beast for his excursion to the castle of Kleeborn* He found his courser perfectly recovered, rewarded tlie villager for his attention, and he now resolved to return to Fraiikheim ; where his plans macle It necessary for hirn to furnish himself with gold and jewels for the expences of hb journey in case of his departure for the Holy Land, or for the sustinence of his wife, in к tse be should be so fortunale as to prevail on Blanche to accompany him in his pro¬ posed flight Ilis course was again directed to St. John's Chapel ; where the intelligence communicated by brother Peter, respecting Öttohar's murder, Eugene's illness, and tht state of Castle Frankheim, confirmed him in íhe prudence of his determinations, He found, that under the present circum» stance* there was no hope of getting his lather to countenance his affeciion for tho daughter of Gustavus; but his knowledge
øf MagdalouA*s character, and of ine warm undeviating aifection she had ever borne him, convinced him, that he ran no danger of her betraying him, should he venture to confess to her his love and his designs ţ and that if they were once made known ю her 9 she would assist hb wishes to the very ut* most of his power* Accordingly, he re¬ quested brother Peter to convey a Ltter to the Countess, which must be delivered with the greatest secrecy into her own hands ; in chis, he disclosed to her his irrevocable vows to Blanche, entreated her to use every means to soften hk father's heart towards the fa¬ mily of Orrenberg, and finally requested her to transmit to him by the bearer д casket containing gold and some jewels of value,, which she would find iti a particular part of his bed chamber« Ttie good Friar, though stiil ignorant of the name of his young guest, already was too much fascinated by his manners and lunvuľbattou to refuso him any honejts^v- kG
тке : accordingly, wilhout requiring to have his curiosity gratified by an explanation of its nature, he leadily accepted the com- mission, and departed widi the letter for the castle of Fraukheim.
CHAP. X.
«—." Horror аш! doubt distract ЙЬ trèabìed thoııghtSş and in Ws bosom sür The hell within him—-^-Now conscience wakes dospaii Wbich slumbered ; wakes the better memory Of w hat he was, what is, må what must be, Worse ι of worse deeds, wor&e sufferings т\Ы шшш, 5 Milton, Anger had satiated itself with blood; the tempest was past ι the voice of conscience now could be heard again, and dreadful wa? its bound İn the ears of the guilty Rüdiger,
Blinded by passion, he had persuaded lum* self that in putting Ottokár to death he had exercised a just retaliation for the murder of his herald : but now that the illusion was dissipated, he shuddered at perceiving, that tlie two actions wore a very different com¬ plexion. Gustavus at. least had given no positive orders for the one ; but no such excuse coukl be alledged for the other ; the one at least was sudden, and might have occurred through accident ; the other was premeditated, and coui J only have happened through design : agaio, the herald was the partizan of a foe, and was indeed a foe him¬ self ; but Ottokár was a friend, was a kins¬ man, was a guest who had trusted to the laws of knightly hospitality and knightly honour ; laws, which had been found imufľL cient to preserve his life, Conscience and his wife's reproaches had awakened Rüdiger to a full ense rf his fniilt ; but instead of being beneficial, fitaliy dreadful were the effects, whkh thb ton*
viction produced upon his character* He was not a villain ; on the contrary, crimes filled his soul with horror and indignation ; nay, he possessed a thousand noble, generous* and heroic feelings : but he was the slave of tempestuous passions» and even in the most audable movements of his nature^ he might rather be said to detest vic€% than to love virtue» Now then,when he saw himself on a sud¬ den the object of Ins own abhorrence, of that abhorrence wliich he had formerly ex¬ prest so loudly and so warmly against others \ svhen he heard the bitter reproaches of Mag- alena, and felt în ali the agony of his soul, ,hat her reproaches were deserved; he sank at hice into the deepest gloom of despondency, mo all the horrors oiVif-loathing,and all the internets of mental misery, He indulged ìu wish of reparation ; he formed no plan ■i repentance \ he sought no excuse for his lime: be ra'her exaggerated ili» atrocity. л bat he now telt towaxdb Ui^Uvub \vu$ no
longer suspicions or jealousy, or ill-will ! No ; it was the deepest, deadliest hatred ; it was; a burning thirst for vengeance, which ihe blood, of the whole family of Orrenberg seemed scarcely enough to quench. He was guilty, he was the most execrable of mortals, he was odious in his own. eyes ; and what punishment could be Inflicted too severe on the man, who had made him so ? That man was Gustavus ; on Gustavus he swore to be revenged with the most dreadful imprecati¬ ons : the magnitude of this one crime made him consider all future ones as but of Ettle accounts and he became the more a villam from his very abhorrence of vice. When the first emotions of grief and horror had subsided, and Magdalenas heart no longer prevented her better judgment from exercising ks influence, she regretted bitterly her having exposed her feelings so plainly before her Lord. She was well aware, that with his temper reproaches could only serve to exasperate bis passions, and
unqualified opposition to confirm him in a course of error. With the dawn of morn¬ ing, therefore, she hastened to his chamber^ determined to remove as much as possible the impression, which she had left on his mind at their last parting. She wished to soothe the agonies of his bleeding conscience, to convince Mm gently and gradually* that all these mischiefs arose from the long-sub¬ sisting and unnatural enmity of the two houses, and (if possible) by using the gentlest persuasion to win from him a consent, that the occurrence of similar disasters should be prevented by the union of Blanche and Os¬ bright, and consequently of the dearest in« terests of the two families. But her good intentions wcre frustrated : she was refused admittance to Rüdiger^ who passed the next-four-and twenty hours in the solitude of his chamber, alternately execrating him¬ self and others, and passing by turns from the depth of the blackest gloom to the ex* treme of the wildest fury*
No one but Wilfred was suffered to ap¬ proach him ; nor would he quit his chamber, til! informed of the arrival of Eugene, whom (though his wound was not mortal) it had been at first judged imprudent to remove from the monastery of St. John* Though he had hitherto endeavoured to conceal it even from himself, partly through prudence, partly through pride, it was in truth this unacknowledged boy ? who possest the whole paternal love of Rüdiger. The différence of his sensations towards him and Osbright partook of those, which he had felt towards their respective mothers. His esteem, his admiration were bestowed in the highest degree on Magdalena \ but his heart had never melted with love but for the un« happv Agatha* Osbright was his heir, was a hero \ he was fond of him, but on Eugene he doated. In the one^ he prized the transmitter of that name, which was so precious to his vanity ; but he cherished Eugene for his own sake. It is true,, if
he had been asked—" which of the youths should perish"— ^he would have sacrificed Eugene without a moment's hesitation; for, in the bosom of Rüdiger pride eve r bore a sway far superior to that of ten¬ derness % but had he been asked™ <$ which of them he could consent never to see again"—he would have felt as little doubt in answering — ** Osbright* 9 — nor perliaps would have felt very deeply the deprivation* though the being ins heir was the strongest cbim to his attention· Stih the reflection^ that he must be his heir, made Rüdiger en¬ tertain some little jealousy towards him ; and in the presence of Osbright, the father's self-love felt painfully wounded by being sensible, that the perfections of hia son made the defects of his own character appear in a more glaring Hght* On the other hand he saw in Eugene a poor defenceless bring, whom he had brought into a worid of a or- row, where hk lot was hard, and against whose difficulties he wa* ill calculated to
straggle : he pitied him for his destitute situation, and he loved him for his likeness to his wretched morher. m short Eugene was dearer to him than Osbright ι but the pride of blood was a thousand times dearer to him than either : he would have sa¬ crificed his own life to preserve Eugene's ţ but he would have aacrificed Eugene's as well as his own to preserve iu Osbright" the future Count of Fraiikheim." No sooner was he informed ofthe youth's arrival, than he hastened to visit him ; but he had scarcely past the threshold of his chamber., wher Magdalena stood before him. He Parted back, and a deep gloom darkened all hîs features. In vain did she address him in the most soothing language, and endeavour to extenuate the atrocity of Oitokax'b murder: he listened in silence, and only replied by a look of scornful in¬ credulity* In vain did she recant the too hasty declaration of her sentiments towardj Ыш, and assure him of her undiminished
affection : the bending of his head with constrained politeness and a smile of the bitterest irony was the only manner, in which he exprest his gratitude* His coldness hurt, and his sullenness alarmed ¿ier. Her eyes filled with tears ; she motioned to take his hand, and press it to her lips ; but he drew it ' tack, haughtily and gloomily, and passing her without uttering a word, proceeded to the chamber of Eugene, But no comfort awaited him there. He found the wretched youth tortured by one of his most violent paroxysms. He ravjd incessantly of his mother and of the mur¬ dered Joscelyn ι of the lovely cruel Blanche, and the happy hated Osbright· Kvery word, which fell from his lips 5 either tuie opea a scarcely healed wound in his father's bosom, or inflicted upon it a new one* Rud" ger Us· tened with horror and remorse to the reca¬ pitulation of the poor Agatha's injuries and bufferings : the mention of Joscciyn's mur¬ der re-kindled in his heart the liâmes of
vengeance against Gustavus ; but when he collected from Eugene's ravings, that the child of that very Gustavus was likely to become his daughter-in-law^ that she, whose fetal beauty had robbed his darling son of his reason^ and almost of his life^ had also fascinated the affections of his heiri and that the proud name of Frankheim was destined to be perpetuated through a descendant of the detested race of Orren¬ berg ; no sooner was this discovery rpade to him, than his surprize, his alarm, his indignation were extreme^ extravagant, ungovernable. He rushed from Eugene's apartment, hastened to that of Magdalena, and entering abruptly, assailed her at once with such a storm of passion, of threats, of vows of vengeance against Blanche, agamst Osbright, against herself if he should fmd her privy to her son's attachment, that it was long,, before the Countess could discover the origin of his frantic beha¬ viour.
But when she did discover it, she found all efforts to appease his fury totally una¬ vailing» Oh the contrary, the attempt to soothe him, and the bare suggestion of the advantages Hkdy to,result from Osbrighťs attachment, only served to increase his passions and after loading hib wife with the bitterest reproaches, he was rushing from the chamber, when his eye rested on a letter, which in her agitation had fallen from her bosom unobserved. At the same moment wdth her Lord, she also had per¬ ceived the paper ţ with a cry of terror she hastily caught it from the ground; but Rüdiger had recognized his son*s hand¬ writing, and Magdalenas evident alarm convincing Mm, that it contained some mystery, and that a mystery of no slight importance, he rudely forced the letter from her» One Laif, however, remained in the hand of the Countess, and she has¬ tened to conceal its contents from disco*
very by throwing it into a brasier, vhich was burning on the hearth* ït was Oábrighťs letters which Brother Peter had delivered not an hour before. Pale and trembling with passion, Rüdiger read the avowal of his son's love for Bknche exprest in the most glowing terms, his urgent entreaties that Magdalena would prevaii on his father to consent to their union, and his confession, that for several days he had remained in concealment at the ceil of Brother Peter. He also men- tioned, that he was to have an interview with Blanche that evening. ♦ *. —-and here the letter broke off. The object of that interview, the place of rendezvous, the precise time of meeting, these points were contained in the burnt half of the letter; and on these points the alarmed Magdalénu resolutely refused to give any information* Threats and entreaties were employed in vain ; and having placed guards at her chamber-door, lest she should make Os-
bright aware that hh incensed father was apprised of the intended meeting, Rüdiger Iert her to meditate on the most certain means of getting the defenceless Blanche into his power. Wilfred was summoned to his counsels ; but the Seneschal refused his assistance, till assured that his Lord's designs aimed at the liberty, but not at the life of Blanche ; though perhaps had he reasoned justly, he would have known, that with a man like Rüdiger, whose passions were so Ímpetu«* dus, and who was ever swayed by the im¬ pulse of the moment, her liberty once lost, iier life could not for one instaut be se* cure. However, at present Rudiger's ob¬ ject was 3 by getting Blanche into his hands, U) prevent the possibility of her marriage vvith Osbright, and to inflict the bitterest agony on Gustavus, by making him trem¬ ble wkh every minute for the life of Ыь darling daughter. He also fancied, that her presence might be of great efficacy in re- VOL. u ì,
storing Eugene to his senses -, but he swore with dreadful imprecations, that if she failed to produce that beneficial eßsct, she should be the lunatic's only mrøe and con» tinual attendant, and should p^ss the re¬ mainder of her existence in witnessing the frantic transports of the wretch, whom her fatal charms had ruined. Such beiïig his avowed objects, Wilfred made no longer any scruple of givmp; his advice* It w T as accordingly agreed, tliat St. John's Chapel should be watched j that Osbright should be followed to the place of rendezvous ; and that Rudiger shouid hasten thither with а small body of chosen тещ to seize and convey Blanche to the Castk of Frank- heim.— But Wilfred (who dreaded the re« sentment of his young Lord, should he be known to have had any hand in this bu¬ siness, and in whose power he should be left entirely after Rudiger's decease) stipu* lated, that every possible means should je used to surprize the lady, either previous
" AHD ier meetmg witn usbrignt, or arter sne had parted from him, but not when the lovers were together. Bv taking this nre- caution, he trusted, that Osbright would be kept in ignorance of the persons, by whom his mistress had been carried oiT; all resistance on his part would also be precluded, which otherwise was likely to be very desperate and dangerous to the assailants 5 and it might even be possible to conceal from him, that the scene of his mistress's captivity was the Castle of his own father. To these stipulations Rüdiger readily consented j and every thing being now ar« ranged, he waited with the utmost im¬ patience for the information, that Osbright had set forward from the Chapel oi St* John,
CHAP. XL
4ζ Why does she stop 5 and Ιοοίε often around ? As she gudes down the secret stair; Anci why does she pat thr, shaggy blood-bound, As he rouses him up from bis iair ; And thougli sbe passes the postero aione, Why is not ibe watchman's bugle» blown ?" W. Scoffs " Lttj ofthe Lust MimtreL"
The time was arrived, ac which Osbright had engaged to meet Barbara near the draw¬ bridge : but some suspicious circumstances had alarmed Brother Peter, and made him
intimate to his guest, that spies were cer¬ tainly watching near the Chapel-gate» Tiiere was no other out-iet ; Osbright, how¬ ever unwillingly, thought it advisable to protract his departure for a short time : after which Brother Peter was sent out to ^examine, whether the persons, whose ap¬ pearance had excited his suspicions, weie still loitering near the place» The old man soon returned with the report, that all seemed quiet, and that in his belief his guest might now set forward without dan¬ ger of a discovery. But as much time had been lobt by this hesitation, the youth doubted not, that Blanche and her com¬ panion must have long since quitted the Castle of Orrenberg, and probably had ah eady sheltered themselves within the cave. Thither he therefore hastened with all possible expedition, and found hb conje¬ tures verified· Blanche and Barbara were bafe within St, Hildegarden Croito, and L· 3
extremely uneasy at his not arriving. In two hours the draw-bridge of Orrenberg Castle would be raised, and Blanche's return prevented : while on the other hand Barba¬ ra wa<! uneasy at being so long absent from her decrepit grandmother, and yet could not think of leaving Blanche in the caver% without a companion. The arrivai of Os¬ bright at once dispelled their uneasiness* Blanche received him with mingled joy and sorrow ; and Barbara, having congratulated the lovers on their meeting, stated her own presence to be now superfluous, and en¬ treated permission to return to her grand¬ mother, who (she was certain) must be ex¬ tremely uneasy at her absence* The per¬ mission was readily granted, and she lost no time in profiting by it. And now did Osbright employ every re¬ source of his eloquence to persuade Blanche, that the hour was cornet when they must either part for ever, or must part no more, Blanche heard the assurance with agony ;
but the proposal of night, of marriage un¬ authorized by her parents, was rejected by her, not merely with firmness, but even with abhorrence· She owned, « 4 that to see Osbright no more, was the bitterest of al! earthly misfortunes, except to live under the consciousness of having merited pater¬ nal displeasure/ 5 She said, " that in truth her parting with him would break her heart, but her flight with him would break the hearts of her parents ;' ? aiid she pray* ed— <c that the vengeance of oďended Ilea- л ven might fall heavy on her head, if she ever planted a single painful feeling in those bosoms, whicli from the first moment of her birth had only palpitated with love and with anxiety for her/*—- In answer to this, Osbright said every thing, that despairing passion could suggest» In vain did Blanche assure him, that no per¬ suasion could induce her to act in contra» diction to her sense of duty» The youth persisted in pointing out all the advantages L é
likely to result from so slight and so tern» porary a deviation from the path of strict propriety j and he was still urging his hope¬ less suit, when a stone fell through the chasm in the Grotto's roof, which was at some little distance from the rocky bank, on which the lovers were seated» Osbright turned round ; a second stone fell, and was followed by a third, accompanied by a low murmuring noise* He listened, and fan« cied ? that he could distinguish his own name. He rose, and advanced to the chasm. — a h any one above ?" said he aloud \ *' did any one call* » », '*— -— α Hush İ hush! Sir Knight!' 5 interrupt» ed a voice, still whispering ; * 4 speak softly for heaven's sake ; I am Barbara ! Oh ! Sir Knight, I fear, that we are ail undone, or at least that the Lady Blanche has got into the saddest hole, thai ever poor lady- put her head into* Would you think it, Sir Knight ì 1 had scarcely set my foot cm the
outside of the narrow passage*.., I was go¬ ing along gaily, singing to myself, and (the Lord knows) thinking of no harm.. .. all on a sudden—* Seize her,' cries a voice like thun¬ der, and in an instant I found my self surround« .ed by armed men· I fell on my kneesj, and begged for my life, and with good reason; for one tall terrible Knight had got his dagger drawn as if ready to stab me, only his com¬ panion caught him by the arm, and bade him remember his oath-—' Right/ said the tierce» one ; й then away with her to the Castle! Con¬ fine her in the dungeons ofthe South Tower Ρ —When I heard the word * dungeon/ ϊ thought, that 1 should have died outright j ьо I fell too*}ing and entreating more than ever, and as luck woulu have it, the moon just theu happent d to come fiom behind a cloud·*—* Па ¡* tried the quiet-ore, as soon nsbc saw my Глее ; * this onrot be the I,¿dy Г Luther'—- 4 Oh! ло, nn, no!" Kiiti 1, btKre I ¡rive myself time to think; 1 1 ani not the Lady lìb.odie iudet'd. She и yonder in Ли:
f cave with Sir Osbright, disguised in boy ? s cloaths, and, β » *. β **— — u You told them so ? Imprudent girl ! You have undone us all!**— ~~~" Alas the day ! Sir Knight i I was in such a flutter, that I scarcely knew, what I did, or what I said: but as soon as they knew, who I really was, they released me, and bade me go my ways. I would fain have returned to tell you, what had hap¬ pened ; but they would not suffer me, and I was obliged to set forward as if going to my own home* Yet I could not bear to leave you in ignorance of their evil designs: so after a little while I stole back again without noise, and by help of the shrubs mid bushes 1 crept behind the two, who appeared to be the chief of the party«, so that ϊ could overhear their whole design*"-— — Cê And that design is. .. *. * "— "** To seize the Lady Blanche on her leaving the grotto, and convey her to thu Castle nf Frankheim, where she ís to be
shut up in a dungeon, tül she consents to marry some young madman, who (it seems) has lost his wits for love ofher, The fierce- one was for going to the Grotto, and dragging her away thk moment ¡ but hk companion reminded him* of his promise of seizing her if possible, after bhe had parted with Sir Osbright— й But suppose,' says the fierce-one, 4 he should not part with her, till she is safe within die walk of Orrenberg ľ— At last it was agreed be¬ tween them, that they should still wait an hour to see, whetlier Blanche would come out aione; but if that time should elapse without your quitting the cave, Sii Knight«, then the fierce*one bwore with a thou\md dreadful oaths, that he would tear her fiom you with his own hands— 4 And ίί ! e re·* bïbtb,* continued he ia a diva tm voce, and he clctxhcd im handb, and í tuiid ln-ar him gnash hia teeJi ; ť ιί' Iw мы í, í will either plunge шу vwuid lu the ia-! h 6
girľs heart, or he shall bury his in hîs feiherV·— — ¿t Your father« Ohbright? Your dread¬ ful father ? M exciaimed lifanchc, wringing her hands» ; c " «uw you see, in what danger even this trifling breach of duty has in¬ volved me 1 Oh ! my parents, my dear, good parents ! How severely am I punish¬ ed for havirg clandestinely left for one hour the shelter of your protecting arms!**™ —* v No ! no ! '* said Bai bara eagerly, while Osbright vainly endeavoured to calm the terrors of his mibíresH, though hin own alarm was scarcely less j " all is not lost jvt, dear La<ty ; calm yourself, ami iLteu to me ¿ for as soon as I knew the designs of these villains, 1 bethought me ora means to save yuu, and it was for this purpose, that í hazarded to climb the rock, and &teal hither unobserved to give you this intelligence, ît seems, that Sir Osbiight is in no danger ; tliey will let him pass forth without hindrance, and will rejoice in get*
ting rid of him, in order that tliey may hear you away to thcir horrible dungeons without resistance* Now mark, what you mmt do ; throw off that long cloak, in which Dame Margaret wrapped you up so carefully ¡ array yourself instead in Sir Os» bright*» armour, and then march forth whh a stout heait, his shield on your arm, and his helmet on your head. The shadows of night will doubtless prevent the strangers from observing any difference in your height ; the clattering of the armour will confirm them in their mistake ; and though to be sure the moon shines bright¬ ly just at present, that is a circumstance iu )Our favour ; for I heard one of the villains tell the other, that though you were in boy's cloaths, there couid be no mistaking you for «Sir Osbright, who would be known by the device of Jiis shiekl, and by the bcarlet and white plomes on his helmet* Соше 5 come, make haste, Lady; for I war¬ rant you, there is but little time to*spare,"—
Osbright îıacî already divested himself of his breast-plate and his glittering casque, and he now hastened to adorn with them the delicate form of Blanche* Confused and terrified in the extreme, she yeiided to his entreaties, but frequently compelled both him and Barbara to repeat their assurances, chat he ran no clanger in remaining in the grotto. At length her disguise was com* plete, and with a beating heart and trem- biing limbs, she set forward on her danger¬ ous expedition» No sooner had the lady left the cave 5 ihaft Barbara resumed her discourse—" And now, Sir Knight/* said she, " it will be necessary for you abo to play a part, 1 warrant you, the Lady will be no sooner out of hearing, than the strangers will hurry hither to se¬ cure their prbe ; and should tliey discover her flight immediately, they may still be in time to prevent her escape* Therefore wrap yourself up in her scariet mantle, and con¬ ceal your face under tîıe large slouched Int.
whkh she h toft behind her; they arc aware, that she h in male apparel, and by disguising your voice a little^ you may easily persuade them, that you are the person whom they seek, till she is safe at Orren« berg, Thaťs right ! now then the hat !— hark! I hear the noise of armour. Keep up the deception as long as you can-; you knoWy they can but carry you to your own Castle ; and as it seems, that the chief of these strangers is your own father, at worst you have only to discover. *. * they are here î hush Г— Barbara was correct. Count Rüdiger and his attendants had suffered the trembling Blanche to pass unmolested through their ambuscade : they only marked the clank of het* arms and the waving of her parti-colour¬ ed plumes \ whilo the faintness of her step 3 and that she tottered under the weight of the ponderous shield, past entirely unobserv¬ ed. Yet as -she drew near the out-Li of the rocky path, ï>he once heard a voice whisper
from among some bashes— <ŕ Now then ! now ;"—-and the sound appeared to her the sentence of deridi* Her pulse ceased to beat; she staggered, and caught at a projection of the rock : but presently another voice whis¬ pered eagerly in reply—" No î no ! be silent, fooi ! Vh Bir Osbright ! 1 know him by that cisque ;"—and she felt her hopes and her spirits revive* She rushed forward with re¬ newed vigour, andin a few minutes found herself in the great road leading to Orren- berp;« — (i Kow praised be the Virgin !" she ?x» claimed in a rapture of gratitude ; " I am safe !"—when at that moment she found her« self seized with violence ; her lance was wrested from her hand, and on looking round she perceived herself surrounded by armed men» A shout of exultation imme* diately followed her capture. —'" What iş the matter T 9 exclaimed a warrior, at whose approach the croud ga\e way, and in whose voice Bianche recognized
with shame and terror the voice of her fa¬ ther* But the vkor of her casque was closed, and he Httle guest, that the warrior who stood before him, was the daughter, whom he believed secure in the Castle of Orrenberg» —'* The business is half done, my Lord l $$ was the answer; "I should know that helmet and shield among a thousand ; and i here present you (without the capture cost« ing you a single blow) with that redoubtable warrior, Osbright of Frankheim."— - — ÉS Sir Osbright ?** cried Gustavus, * e Maurice, are you certain of what you assert ?«—.Nay then, this ís indeed a pri^e ! But time permits not ,. ♦, Fear nothing, Sir Knight ; your treatment shall bo noble, but for the present you must remain my pri¬ soner. Let six of you convey him to the castle, and confine him in the state-cham* ber, adjoining to the Great Hall» Guard him honourably, but closely, and see 5 tint
no one has access to him. Now then fbr Rüdiger! Away!"-— Gustavus said, and hastened towards the Grotto; and now Blanche found herself compelled to visit the castle of her parents, as an enemy and a captive* However, her plan was already arranged, She determined to keep her secret till safe within the walls of Orrenbcrg. Once arrived there, she meant to request au interview with her mother, confess to her the whole of her imprudence, and entreat her assistance in repairing it. She doiibted not, that the strength of maternal tenderness would soon conquer the first emotions of resentment, that Ulrica wo'jld find some means of enabling her to regain her own chamber undiscover¬ ed; and that as the disappearance of the supposed Osbright might easily be accounted for by hîs having effected his escape by brib« ing his guards, or any other artifice, her fault and her clanger on this adventurous night might effectually be kept from the
knowledge of her father. Such were the designs of Bianche; and halving thus ar¬ ranged them to her satisfaction, she pro¬ secuted her journey to Orrenberg with a less heavy heart.
chap. хи.
™^е $2vcn«ban<!<!å Justice Cosnmendf! tho ingrediente of tho poiâoned сЫ1Ш To oar own Hps,"-—— Macbeth.
A DOMISI ic, whom Count Rüdiger had chastized for some trivial fauk with unjus¬ tifiable severity, in revenge had fled to the Castle of Orrenberg, and informed its Lord,
iat both Ohbright and his father were in t. Hildegarden Grotto 5 slightly attended, nd might easily be surprized« Gustavus tiled not to employ so fortunate and un- oped-for an opportunity of getting his hief enemies into his pomer. He imme- iately set forward with all the force«, which e could muster—and so great was the sup¬ eriority of his numbers^ that in spite of ludigeťs resistance (who exposed his life >n this occasion with all the inconsiderate nry of a madman 3 and performed prodigies if valour almost incredible) the small body >f frankheimers were soo л .put to flights ind their Chief was conveyed a prisoner to he castle of Orrenberg· Now then it was in the power of Gus- avus to take a full revenge on his furious dnsman, and secure to himself, by tha leaths of Rüdiger and his son^ the entire •jossessions of the haughty house of Frank« 'íeim ; but to profit by this opportunity шш not in the noble and forgiving nature
of Gustavus: he meditated a more honour¬ able vengearcc. His own injuries were al¬ ready forgotten : the death of Ottokar was stili remembered, but remembered, with gricf 5 not rage. His enemies wcre totally in his power ; that consideration was suffi¬ cient to make him view them no longer as enemies : ahd he seized with eagerness this opportunity of evincing the disinterested¬ ness of his wishes and the sincerity of his professions of good-will by a proof so clear and striking, as should effectually banish all future mistrust, even from the suspicious bosom of Rüdiger.- Ile communicated his intention) to Sir Lennard, who oil thai evening had arrived with his promised suc¬ cours at Orrenberg* The worthy Knight sanctioned the plan with his warmest ap¬ probation, and Gustavus now hastened, wkii a heart glowing with delight at the thought of doing a great and generous act, to ex¬ plain himself to his indignant prisoner*
-ΐΗ The great hall was the scene of this in¬ terview between the hostile kinsmen. His guards had caused Rudiger's wounds to be carefully drest, but had thought it proper to restrain him by chains from committing acts of violence. Gustavus, however, no sooner observed this precaution, than he ordered the fetters to be removed ; but the sullen captive neither thanked the ser» vants for their care of his wounds, nor the master for the restoration of his li¬ bertv. lie looked on all around him with an air of haughty indiflerence; but while he listened to Gustavus's professions of good will, and proposals ft r a mutual ob¬ livion of past injuries, the expression of gratified malice glared terribly in his burn¬ ing eye-balls* — u In short," said Gustavus in conclu¬ sion, " ï am convinced, that the numerous causes, which have occasioned the mutual alienation of onr hearts and families, arose
entirely from misinterpretation of accidental circumstances, and nôt from any intention 1 5 offence, or desire to inflict a premcdi* tated injury» Your suspicions are earfiy ex» cited ; those of my wife are not more dif¬ ficult to rouzej every trifle was exagerated ? every fact was misrepresented^ and supposi¬ tions were counted as facts. It is my most earnest wish to root out all misunderstand¬ ing for ever, and I know of no more certain means than an union of our children, the union of Osbright and Blanche.'*— —^•Blanche? 5 ' repeated Rüdiger "Blanche? —Nay, *tis a most fortunate idea*!— í only doubt the facility of.... "— -—"Nothing can be effected more'easily Γ interrupted Gustavus, rejoiced to find his proposal so favourably received—** they love each other*... have loved each other long« and*. . * '**— —" True ! I have heard .so ! Osbright loves your daughter fondly ţ and no doubt vuu love her fondly too ?"—-
— cc Fondly ? passionately ! She is the joy of my existence, the beiríg, on йот alone ï depend for the whole happiness of my fu¬ ture life!'^ —-" Indeed ? that is still better—I rejoice to hear it~there is a youth at home, * .. His name is Eugene.. ». He too loves her passionately.. * » madly, indeed, I might say . · · · But she, you think, loves Osbright?"·— —«Think it? I know it! It was but this morning, that she assured me so ar- dently, that her heart burned for him with such true affection. ;. · *'·— ·— fs Nay, it may be so \ you must know best ; and yet í cannot help suspecting, that her heart feels colder towards* him new, than it did this morning.**— —" Your suspicions are unjust, Count Rüdiger. Blanche is no capricious.,. „ But you shall hear her own lips declare her sen« timents* She shall be called hither instant« ly, and· * » . **— vol» u m
—■** By no means/' cried kudiger hasti¬ ly, while he detained his host \ u by no means! She is probably retired to rest; 1 do not wish her to be disturbed ; I do not even wish to see her· * *. till Osbright shall present her to me as his bride/— —~ u That may be done this instant : you are not yet aware, Count Rüdiger, that you arc not the only captive of rank whom this night's adventure has thrown into my power. Your son inhabits yonder cham¬ ber."— Instantly the expression of Rudiger's countenance changed. He turned pale, and starting from his chair grasped the arm of his Seneschal, who had b*:ea captured with him in the cave, and had aLCøiipankd him to Orrenberg« ^> ϊν'*ν йог here ľ' he exclaimed ; *'* here \ in your power ľ — Å «Л milar dismay seemed to have taken possession of the Seneschal* ™** I warned yon,** he replied in broken
accents; «'I told yon. . * Л charged you»« · ,s — ~ w Peace, babbler !" interrupted his Lord passionately ; whik Gustavus thus resum¬ ed his discourse, —« c Yes ; Osbright, on leaving the cave f was seized by iny followers, and conveyed hither; but calm this agitation, Count э whkh doubtless is caused by your un¬ just suspicions respecting the death of your •younger son* Your elder, your only one 9 s now in my hands, and with a single vord could I annihilate your whole race*, kit fear nothing ; I would rather perish nyself, than pronounce that word» Os- right's liberty shall prove to you, that ï tn innocent of the death of Joscelyn : he rail be immediately restored to you ? and. í only ask in return your consent to his union with my sole heiress, with my darl¬ ing child."—« α I consent !*' crieďTiudiger eagerly j cc I consent to that, to every thing ί only give me back my son} suffer m to depart this m %
OR instaat^ and to-morrow name your own con ditions/'—- —- £ς You shali be obeyed/' answered Gustavus, and ordered the doors of the captive's chamber to De thrown open, and himself conducted to their presence.-- '.* But,** he continued^ addressing him¬ self to Rüdiger, ťt surely you will not de« part immediately· 'Tis late } the espousals may take place to-morrow} a messenger may be dispatched to inform the Lady Magda¬ lena of the cause, which detains you¿ then tarry here this night, and» *.. "~ " This night ?" exclaimed Rüdiger wildly; * § йо э no ! not an hour ! not an instant !~ Count of Orrenberg, would you -extort my consent to this union ? would you believe this reconciliation tobe sincere, if made with your captives? no! be generous! give ше back my son without conditions j restore us to liberty} then send your herald to tin Castle of Frankheim to-morrow, and rcctivc iny answer, free and uncontrolled.**—
—" Be it so ľ* said Gustavus \ and at the same moment the captive Knight enter* cd the hall. The" Count of Frankhcim, in spite of his agitation (which increased with every moment), recognized the well-known shield and helmet; and before Gustavus had time to explain what had happened, he hastily commanded the youth to follow him* But the youth obeyed not the com¬ mand* Again it was repeated» and still he remained motionless. Rüdiger, whose im* patience by this time amounted almost to frenæy, rushed forwards to grasp his son's hand, and draw him by force from the apartment* The youth started back with a cry of terror, and retreating nearer to the Count of Orrenberg, seemed to implare his protection against his incensed father. Gus« tavus endeavoured to re-assure him* — <c Fear" nothing, noble youth !** said he ; ** your father knows your atta hment, and approves it, We are no longer enemies; your union with my daughter is settled, anti
you wffl only leave this castle to-night, that you may return to it go-morrow as the ac* knowtedgcd bridegroom of yourBlanche.'*— -— u Indeed ?' f exclaimed the young Knight in joyful surprize; " oh! happy tidings ! now then I need nothing more to compleat my happiness*. ♦. nothing but my father's pardon—then pardon me, my father,*' he continued, at the same time throwing off his ponderous casque, and fali* ing at the'feet of Gustavus ; "oh! pardon your penitents your imprudent child V $ — * ~~~" Amassement!" exclaimed the Count of Orrenberg ; ÉC *Tis Blanche î"~ . ~"' u Blanche ? is cried Rüdiger, f 4 Blanche in Osbrighťs armour ?~-Oh I Wilfred, Wil* fred ! whom then,... ? Speak, girl, speak ! explain. ·. . oh ! lose not a moment*.. * you know not the fears. ,..',. the agonica. , ,. speak, oh ! speak Г— ■ Agitated by hope, blushing at her impru* ¿епсе э confused by the rapidity and violence wîth which Rüdiger questioned her, it was -u it h difficulty, tliat Blanche related the ad-
ventures of the cave to her astoaished audi* tors: but Rüdiger soon heard enough to guess the rest* He understood, that the lovers had been aware^ of his approach -, that they had changed habits; that dis* guised as Blanche, Osbright had remained in the cavern \ he required to know no more ! a shriek of horror interrupted the narrative; his countenance exprest all the agonies of despair ; he seemed to be some fiend, rather than a human being» —.'* The blow is struck !" he exclaimed; " 'tis past ! all is over !■—agony !—madness í —yet 'tis possible,... To the cave ! to the cave ! to save him, or to die í**— he said, and rushed out of the hall —" Oh! follow bim ľ* cried Wilfred, wringing his hands ; u drag him from the cavern ! nay, nay î detam me not ! his brain will turn. * ·. his heart will break»., * He promised so solemnly· » but his violence« * , · Iiis parions. . *. a sudden burst of fury* J m 4
, , tet mc be gone ! for the love of Heaven, oh ! let me depart this moment*'*— And breaking from Gustavus, who wish¬ ed Jiim to explain the cause of this excessive agitation, the Seneschal followed his master, who had already crossed the draw-bridge with the rapidity of an eagle« After a few wards to tranquillize his affrighted daughter, the Count of Örrenberg judged it best to pursue the fugitives, and learn the cause of their alarm : but before he coukl leave the ball, a freáh* incident ob« tracted his progress» A young girl, bathed in tears, pale as a speclrc, -and her garments spotted with blood, rushed wildly into the room, and threw herself sobbing at the feet of Blanche» It was Barbara. ·*-'* 4 He ís gone l P she exclaimed, wring¬ ing· her hands| ^ oh! Lady, Lady -, he is çoı:e ¡—From the rock above 1 heard the clank of the assassin's armour, as he rushed into the cavern-—" Blanche ! Blanche !" ho cried ; cs Blanche of Orrenberg !"— ci Here
ï am l n a swe d the p' or victim, *' whar would you v/ith Blanche?" —** Ha ! sorcer¬ ess !'* cried again the terrible vo* e; ** take this ! 'tis Eugene, who sends it you !"—and then.... oh ! then I saw the weapon gleam ... „ I heard a dreadful shriek*.. Л heard no more I—I lost my senses ; when they returned, all was hushed-—! ventured down from the rock,. » Л .* tole into the cave», . ♦ 1 dragged him into the light... .he was bloody. . · Лю was cold. „ ·. he wm dead !**—-·* — u Whom ? whom ľ* exclaimed Blanche, almost frantic with alarm» —-" Oh! Osbright! Osb "ght!** answered the sobbing girl ; «id Blanche fell lifeless at the feet of her father. At the door of St. Hildegarde's rave stood the wretched Rüdiger: before him lay a corse, on which he gazed for a few mo¬ ments in silent agony. At length with desperate resolution lie drew away the large hat, whkh overshadowed the face of the dead person, and the mooa-beams shone full и 5
υροη his features : Rüdiger knew those fea¬ tures well ! lie tore off ths scarîct robe, îb which the body waf enveloped : he saw ά largo wound on the breast ; he saw his own dugger İn tlie wound ; he snatched it forth, plunged it in his heart, and then murmuring the name n'* Osbright, the Slave of passion- ышк υροη his victim's body, and sank to rise no more! Blanche was restored to life, but her hap¬ piness was fled for ever. She languished through a few mourniul years, and then sought the grave, whither her broken-heart* eå fether soon followed his darling. The fatal inheritance past into another family, and the proud race of Frankheim closed its illustrious line for ever. át the expiration of some years, Eugene was unhappy enough to recover his senses sufiiciently to know, that Blanche was al¬ ready numbered among the dead. He visit¬ ed her tomb, wept, and prayed there ; then fixed the Cross upon his bosom, and wander-
tå în pilgrim's weeds to the Holy Land. He was never heard of more ţ but whh a frame so delicate, intellects so shattered, and a heart so wounded, doubtless his sufferings could not be Song, Magdalena and Ulrica, th^s^ sisters in ca« lamity, retired to the Convent of St. Kilde¬ gårde, where they soon after assumed the veil, and in whose chapel they caused a stately tomb to be erected over the ashes of their departed children. Here every clay they met to indulge their common sorrows : here every night they joined in prayer for the eternal happiness of those dear-ones : here during, many years of unavailing an¬ guish they bathed with tears the marble tab¬ let, on which stood engraved these words, so mournful, so fatal, and so true, — %i Here rest tfie Victims of Mistrust'*«— FINIS.
ъя fi
THE ADMIRAL GUARrøO.
'T-*"""-" ·—.^ I have a weapon«, A better nevcr did sustain itself Upon α soldier's thigh ; I have seen the <ky 3 When with this Üttîo arm and this good sword I have made my way through more impediments* Than twenty иш$ yom stop."—»* Othello*
ΊΉΕ ADMIRAL GUARINO;
Hark, and heet! me > de¿ds reciting Sad to bear and sad to teli 5 How at Honcevaİles fightings, Charles's dioictsi warriors fell. Dealing round eternal slumber, Stili Guarino kept hit sword; Moorish monarcha, neveri in number^ Seized at length the Christian I<ord« Whose the Kiiighfc should b^ deciding, Sevťa times seven the dice they shake 5 Seven times ficven the Test dinding, Frond Mariotes wins the ctafce.
Mote ľejoiced that bc possest him, Than Arabia's realm to sway, —**' Captivď'*-^-thus ibe Prince addrest him, -- Captive, hear, and th?« obey ! * ť Quit the faith to Mahom hateful, Corsed by Heaven, and cursed by me j Follow mine ; thy master, grateful* Shall thy friend and father be« ** Of two daughters high descended, Tim ¿hali in your arms be prest ; Thut ohall work you garments splendid, Deck yonr bed, and watch your rest, * i€ And, because 1 pi he thee dead/, Thine Arabias crown shall be! NííW; Sir Christian, speak ьшсеге1у j Wilt thou moie* lit give it thte !"«— sSpuke the Iviiigbt, to Heaven appealing, (íiaii^ m'A heed the words he said,) —" Subtly now ь Satan dealing, inched Virgin I be niy aid İ
« Moor, ľil ne W Ьс Pvíahotu*s servant, Ne'er the name of Chriafc profane, And my hearts with faith most fervent, Wears a Christian maidens etuín,"*— t^™ €ff Ha !" the Pagan roars in anger; <* Guards* in dungeons dark as night Instant plunge this hawghty stra»ger ? Ne'er again to see the light. " Heap on him from spur to shoulder Weight on weight, a«d chala on chain» Till his sinews shrink and moulder, That he ne'er may fight again I ** Last, the dave before me bridging» Bid his gaoler thrice a year Scourge him, till the blood ш ¿prhiguig, Whai the solemn feasts are wear ï u Deep İn dungeons, deep in wuter, Shall he mout n hb* scom and pride t Since he dares reject my daugh^o Now kt aoiïow bc Ый bride/'*-«
Bays they came., and days they perished, Till Saint John the Baptist came 5 Bay» by both religions cherished, l ' Day, which bath а fast proclaim. Moms were then seen myrtle strowingj Christian« then burnt frankineence | Лпй a royal prí»e bestowing^ Bade the King the sports eommence· Åt a shield with jewel« ifarørøg^ "Which abft was seen tø riec* AH the Mcors» their lance» aiming, Stro4 r e in vain to win the prize î from the lists with shame returning, AU confest their skill too weak % Tili, v/ith scorn and anger burning, Thus the King was heard to speak ï—* *~" Touch no breast shali babe complaining» Man no broad shall dare to eat, Till β- nie К night, the mark attaining, Lays-İt at my loyal ket Г—»
Of the noise wa» well »wäre He, Ia the dungeon's depth who lay ; »-* rf Holy Cross, anc? Blessed Mary, Wherefore shout the Moors to-day ? *■ Does theíť Chief some bîoommg virgiir Home a§ bride in triumph bring ? Or is come my time of ecourging To dsiight tho crud King Г— fîpoke the Gaokr i«-* f<f Tie no vîrgîn^ - Who to-day must lose the ttam^, Nor b thia your time of scourging, Which the clarions now proclaim î <f 'Tia St. John*s day thus respected, Aad his feai t ίο honour more Halb the King ρ shield erected, Bright with gmi$ and precious ore* 14 All the Moors, their iances throwing, Vainly hoped t lì mark tu í each ; TiU with íjmek impatience g luw. ing, Vov« cd ih« Kiug ι« angr^ ьрссс!г д
^ Till on earth ths shield was scendilo Bread should itt Ыа realm, be broke,'*—* — t€ Say 'st thou ?" cried with joy Guarino, (Hark , audited the words he spake ;) **" Give me back my courser trasty, Which was went my weight to bear i Cive my яггоощ* n«w so ruèty* Which ï erst v/as wont to wem; j ** From its lofty station drivfin, Soon I'll bring the buckler low > This ГН do, or else by Heaven, Од the Mock my blood shali tiow Г— ■—■*' Seven long wmtors/' spoke the Gaokr^ * f iu ibis dungeon hast thou шп» Ånå atiotlier*s force would fail her% W he» he scarcely one had bc^n ţ ŕl Tet présumât thou now to proffer i)efib u( strength and skill to show ? Slave, farewell ! thy daring offer '^ ντ Λ ,.„;. и К intr «ball I nnw. M -<«·
Thus he said wiih iannis шт еЬкКп^з, Then with speed he songht the King ! *—" Monarch, ăe'ign to hear my tidings, Wond'rous is the tale î bring ! wt Know ? my prisoner boasts full \o\iu\j? Steed and anını our but restore, Yonder shïeïd now placed so proudly, Soon heli lay your throne before."—** This the King with wonder learning, Bade him straight the Knight produce j Then Guarino'sarms returning, Spoiled with rust and long disuse, Spoke Matfates, grimly smiling, *— ie Now, brave Sir» your course pursue ¡ Lies a warriors lips defiling, Mount, and make your boasting true Г*»* Soon his steed Guarino mounted, Jn the well known weight who joyed ; Seven long years the lk:ast had counted, Í!» the vilest ta»ks eniployetl.
Then with speed of lightning fiying» (Calm his eye was» mild his raieu,) Hurled the Knight his lance* and lying On the earth the shield was seen* Straight the Moofô the victor leap on, Envying sore that gallant feat ¿ But Guarino s Spamsh weapon Makes them bleeding soon retreat. Though their numbers are so mighty« They obscure the light of day, Through the ranks of hostile fight, líe Boldly hews his desperate way» j Thet) with vigour still unshaken, Home his course Guarino shaped j Many a Knight the Moors have takers But Hke bim hath none escaped !
FINÍS.
KING RODRIGO's FALL.
■—— ζ( О Lasso ! Quanti doici pensieri quanto disio Meno costoro al doloroso passo!" , 2)ΛΝΤ£.
a The unfortunate passion of King Rodrigo for Count Julian's Daughter, which occasioned the conquest of Spain by the Moors, is too well known to require miy recital of U here» This Spanish Mean Ы by some authors catted Florinda ι hut La Cava is the name assigned ίο lier în thi* Ballad, and (í bellen 1 ) isthat, by wìmh sheil mo*t usually dMingaushcd*"
KING RODRIGO's "FALL.
Тйе moon was full, and full the tide $ The warring winds were heard to rave;' The fish in anxious terror sighed*, So rude a. tempest, shook the wave? "When to that rkh and royal tent. With gold and gems so bright and gaj, His Coot-steps King Rodrigo bent, For there his loved La Cava lay Three hundred silver cords sustained That, proud PayilHoiťs vaulted height 5 Twice fifty maids within remained* So costly clad they dimmed the-sight : .
TOL* 'L·
N
And half tbose maids delighted still On lyres and ïulessoft airs to phyţ And hslf tbose maids with vocal skill Breathed stiU some melting lovely lay« Oh f then a stranger-damsel came, Aod thus the sleeping King bespoke. And Fortune was the damsel's л ame, Whose voice the midnight dilence broke«, - «— w And dost thou, Dors Rodrigo, sleep ? Awake, Sir King! awake, and see* Who evil sows, must evil reap, Ann bail by worse must followed be. t4 Awake to see your subjects sla!n 5 Your iiyiug friendsj and conquering Voe ι Yom towns» and towers, and wick domain. In one bad day laid waste and Io*v i « У mır casites strong, your blooming land, Shall now a stranger Loid obey ; Andwoulďťt ihou knoWfWhifee fated band Shall woik this ill, e*en that I'll З ду,
*« 'Tis Conili Don Julian ! well, too well, Thou know'st (alas !) that injured name ! His daughter's wrongs his bosom swell, By thee his daughter robbed of fame % u And now he comes hh word to keep,, (With many an oath that word was said) That just revenge should never sleep, Till thou a bleeding corse wert kid." These words the King with trouble fill j He woke, antl sadly ihns quoth he : — "Thanks, Fortune,, for thy news though ill j A heavy heart thou kav'st with me,"-* And now comes one, who letters brings To say, Count Julian scours the coast j Swift on his stt*ed Rodrigo springs, And hables to front ihe Uebcl-hoät* But such tlieir numbers, such their mights The Monarch ή u«, b resistance vaui ; ΙΙΪλ chídS and «оМитч 'л\\ lu íHght Alike íoiíjäkc the falj рЫп»
^ Adieu, Rodrigos subject bowers ! Adieu, Iìi$ native groves and bides ? He files his regal hails and towers : Alas, poor King î a'ona he flies ! llis соигйег roved, as humoor pleased 5 Neglected flowed lhe guiding rein ; Such deep despair the King hid seized, That sense had neariy left his brain* All ghastly dyed in crimson gore, A brand of rire hv seemed from far j His casque, with gems incrusted¿ bore In de^p-hewn dints the stamp of wan His arms were marked from head to heel With marry a bruise and gapingilaw; Stich frequent strokes had hacked the stecî, Ilis txiwiy sword appeared a saw t Anã down Ы sadly drooped his head, Like one with anguish worn and weak ; Ånd dropj of pain, and toil, and dread* Defiled the luckier Monarch's cherk :
And thirst am! anguish plagued him sore ? His lip was parched, and wild hm eye : J wot, to see what then he borf> Had cost the hardest heart a sigh. He gained a motmtahA beetling height j He paused awhüe, and looked below : He sought his troops 5 Oh ! shameful sight $ They fled fosfore the shouting fue» lie ¿ought hla «lUndatd'b iLy*d pr*d«u And vaesai-banners waging χ ound 5 He saw them scattered far and wide. And trampled ш the unworthy ground, He sought the ficicľs once verdant hue> But streams of blood dísUbed the green } He sought his captains brave and true ; Alas ! not one could n*>w be seen ! Then pondering on hts piteoiH case s The v/ekhtof wo« Ihs temper broket And gjblang кдгз b'dewtu h*a face r While thus th« vanquished ЫтжОл spoke i—
— Sí This mom I rose sok Lord of Spain> Asid now во foot of land have î j This morn whole cities owned my leigo^ Ana now unhoused my limbs-must He? fi This morn did armies croud iriy lists Of those, who bent a subject knee j And now on earth no soul exiüts, Would stoop to show respect to me ! " Then curst that ä&y $ and cwrst that bow. Which saw rne born to weal. h and sway ? Since all tbat wealth and ail that power One luckless morn h ¡it b snatched away, '* Oh ï hu í e thee, Death, my woes to end | My &oül fiom this loath« d body free ! Г11 ih.-mk theť> as шу truest friend, lhe only friend «ow ieň ίο me/'—
FIKíl
BERTRAND & MARY-BELLE,
Fc№t Medias f Ыт пос1щ cum somnia vera. а 'Twas jast past midnight, whm it met my vievţ^ And 'At that hour (41% sakì) ali dreams are true."—
St
M
BERTRAND k MARY-BELLE.
«- f * Pale shines the moon ! the evening star. lİîumea bolh grove and dell ! Bright are ¡ta beams 3 but brighter far Ths eyes of^Mary-Beik, ** Soft echoes from the hills repeat The nightingale's gad swell 3 Sweet are her notes, but iar more sweet The voice of Mary-ßelk, " Of traí h unchanged and happy hy^ Now let each zephyr iell ¿ While Bertrand through the foCtønlight grovs Cgîuiact* hib Äbry-Ľ^Uc,"«^
Through manya wood thç fond-ones past, O'ei many a meadow wide, And gäirťd a vaÎîcy*s gloom atlast*, Which Alary tîemhliïig eyed. There every object breathed âİsmay a There all was stili aud dread ι The stars no light, the moon no ray> Athwart the darkness shed* Wiih wonder Bertrand saw the tear Fiom Mary's eye descend-*— «^ What sorrow stains thy cheek, my dear ? W h) mourns my lovely frientl ) u Weep you, because in wealth and power No more yonr parents shine Ì Oi weep you¿ that tlie marriage hout Has bound your fate to mmt ?"«*» ^*jt I weep not that my friends no mor* Can shine in power and wealth, Sinte ease still îo\es my father'* door¿ ík »ull is m b in health ¿
sí î weep not, that by holy vows ï now am Beríranďs wife, For since he first became my spouse^ FuU biest has been my Hfe, ft But when this dreary vaie I view, My tears unbidden stream -, I tremble, lest my dream prove true* My sad foreboding âíeãm. " Methought alì in the dead cf night* E'en in this very vak-> í $aw nine mæids ih garments white, Theii- faces warj and pale» ** With solemn steps advanced the band And on her breast each iriaid s Imprinted by .«ome cruel hand> A ghastly wound display d. ** I heard their hollow * oice s swells Aod this wa» sull their ь'ящ , 1 Thy hour is near î come, Mary-Belle, Aiid join our meurirfal thiong.* 1 —* ·
— ■■»« And didst thou then nine damsels see ì Did blood their bosoms stain? Oh Mary-Belie, now list to me* · While I thy dream «r phiu. t( These damsels once to me were dear* As once to me wert thou 5 My wife was €жЬ a single year¿ And thou has been во now. 1S ï loved thern once, I loved no more* And I no more love thee j Nine wives ha?e dyed my brand with gore^ And tho« ihs tenth must be !"-— He said* an3 in his victim's side^ 1 Straight plung'd his cruel glaive; Down Mary gankj yet ere she died Three piercing shrieks she gave, ' The fust implored her sire so old) The next her God addrest $ The last, it naia«* lier brother boîè, The one she loved the bebt*
Young Oswald heard the fearfui noise, As near the vale he strayed ι — «* ť Hark \ bark ; I hear my eisters voic% Who shrieks to me for aid Γ— Full swift he sought the fotal places Whence came the dying groans And there with sad arid gloomy face Sír Bertrand stood аюяе, ■— ŕc Ok, Bertrand ! wherefore here so late * Where is my sister, say J' 1 —- — if Secure within my ca$tîe»gate She dreams the night away.**— *«-*' Then why does red thy weapon stairs Which erst was pure and bright ?"■— —«. *f f iow should it not be red ì I'vo slain A turtle-dove to -night, 5 * —· «—" Tha*" turtlc»dove my mother-bor¿) That dove was good and true 3 That dove to me was diiar, and sore шап xnoii из ïïiututr ťac ι «»«»
Then Oswald with avenging zeal Fierce on the villain rush'd, While steel replied to clashing sted, And blood in torrents gissh'd. But guilt enfeebled Bertranďs sword, H'm heart received a wound, And sinking low, his bosoen poured Its life-etreams on the ground» Then searched the brother through the woody, Then searched he through the vale, And fonod at length all bathed in blood Sweet Mary cold and pale. Low ín the grave sad Oswald laid. The corse with pkrøs čare, ånd o'er her tomb was duly said, Full many a pious prayer. But Bertrand**» lbnhs, of life bereft, Wii M» the fatal wood Lhih.dl w\l anduntombVl were left' To Ы the vulture- 'ď tbod.
And Angels moura'd for Mary's fate, And sang her parting knells Whiie Fiends caught Bertrando dying breath* And bore his öouî to Hell.
FINIS.
THE LORD OF FALKENSTEÍN, A BALLAD.
— í¿ Vøwij which Mon liare broke] In tmm W m^m tbm mm woman spoke·'* Miãmmnwr Night* 9 Vream,
THE LORD OF FALKJ&iNSibliJ,
ÎT was the Lord of Faîkensteîn* He met a lass of form divine % Loose fìowed berlocks, and rohes of whlte ß Лш! sorrow dimmed hereyeaso bright» —~ f * And whither goVt thoo, lovely røaidi > w —<· The Lord of Falkenstcin, he said ; si To yonder castle com« with mo, And there rny Lqvq. and Lady be,' , -^ u And wherefore mcniru'bt thou, lovely ffîaid ?*'—· The Lord of Falkcnstcin, he said $ if Oh tell ше whence thy borrows flow, And let me sooth, thy bosoms wge."—*·
—-" To go with thee r Sir Knight, whose name I know notj couid but cause my shame 5 Kor may'st thou wipe away the tear, Whkh streams for one most false, most dear !" *— #r ï nm the Lord of Falkenstein \ Ύοη haughty castle-towers arc mine, Like purest gold which gaily gleam, And glitter İn the morning beam ?"— — fi Art thon the Lord of Falköaskm Ì Auá aie yon towera so haughty thine ? Yon castk-towers, which gaily gleam, And glitter in the morning beam ? i4 A boon, a boon» Sir Knight, of thee İ era'* e npon my bentkd knee j Behold my grid* with pitying eye, And spare young Rupert, doom'd to die !"— — u Now hubh, fair girl î an hapless maid WdF by his perj med arts betrayed, And i-ouii abandf ned«— Ion*» bhe bíghed, And ihen m tond distraction dîvd."—
^- ťí So kft her Kupert 5 so did he Leave owe, wbo ìuvecl him Ы tt^r ï Me ! So úb'á the ch m ici ? — ?о will ï Of grief expire^ if Rupert üic ľ'— *— <ŕ There stands a tower in Falkciiöteín^ Whose walls thy ţierjured love confine j There doth he now in fetters stay, And shall until his dying day Z'— — u Stands there а tower in Falkenstein, Whose walls my weU-beíov'd confine Ì Oh ! let me thither hafte to chcar Äly Ropert in his prison drear. ** My piercing shrieks shall reach his cell ; My groans and sighs my truth aluli tell } And when at length he breathes no more, П1 die his prison-gate before!"-— The tower then went she round and roimd- ■*-"'* Ait here, my love, in tettere bound ' } Ob ! spr.'tk one word, \ηγ Rupert dcìr 7 And ui! iu4 t İt toy vince y*m tisar ľ ««-
Then went she round and round the tower—-- *— u Cola bbws the wind> fast falls the shower 1 Loud howls the storm, it chills røy heart | More chİÎİ İt they 5 our loves who part Г-— The ï.oul of Faìkenstcin, who heard The faithful damsels plaintive wordj İJnîock'd, in pity, Iluperťs chain^ And gave him to her arms again» - ~ r * Receive thy lover, constat maid !" The Lord of Falkcnstein, he said 5 " Yet must he leave these lands of mine* .Hor svermere вес Fai kenstein,**-"-· *— u Now thanks i »ow thanks, thou gallant Loid? May fume thy mercy long record, Biesbtng« герлу this gracious atta, Auá every wish or thine succeed I u May joys unmixed thy steps attťiid, While far írom henee our course we bend r Ami ln Kime îoneïy foresta gîoom^ r l bc icîimant of our days consti met .
¿í There manya tear shall Ropert pour 5 Th«*re long hi« sins ot youth deplores Shall weep, and pray, and fast, and pine, And blesg the Lord of Faikeriöteiïi Γ*—
FINÍS,
SIR GUY, THE SEEKER ; A LEGENDARY TALE. INSCRIBED TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE EARL GREY.
(i Xo son l'Occasione, a pochi noia, Dietro de! capo ogni capei m'e tolto, Onde ìn van s'atľatica, un, sc gli avviesic^ UIC ¡o ľabbia trapassato, o* s'io r«i volto»*-^ —Dimmi; citi e 1 colei, cha teco viene ?—- *— u K* Penitenza ! с pero, nota e intende, Chi non m prender me, costei ritiene/*— MaCBIåVGL·*
VOL* I.
о
SIR GUY, THE SEEKER.
Like those iti the head of a iman just dead Are his eyes* and his bearďs üke snow ι But when here he came # his glance was a flame s And big locks seemed the plumes of the crow* Since then are o'er forty summers anil more j Yet he still neat the castle remains, Ana pines for a sight o£ that lady bright^ Who wears the wizard's chains* Кот sun nor snow from the ruim to go Can force that aged wight ; And still the pile, hail, chaptíl^ and mk ß He searches dav and nieht ;
Bui firìJ can he neVr the winding stair, Which he past that beauty to .«ee, Whom spells enthrall in the haunted hail, Where none bui once røay be. That once regret will not let him forget !—-· *Twas night, and pelting showers Did patter atvî splash» when the lightning's flash Showed Dun&tanburgh*s grey towers. Hai sed higlî oo a mound that castk frowned Jn ruined pagean-trie ¿ And where to the north did rod« s jut $ох1щ lis towers hung o'er the sea. rioud they flood, and dnrhcmã the ílood \ For thť cliøl v, ere so nigged and steep* Ilad а plummet be^íi dropt frora thrir summit^ unstopped That p] u minet had reached the deep, Nor Auwei* there grew ; nor tree e** r drew its nuriurť from ih^t ground. Stive a ! Aul) \ew, wlui-c btdiichc£» thiew Thvir baltiul äiwdfc around.
Loud was the roar on i h ît чоип lin^ млиге ¡ Yet still could the Knight discern, Louder ihanaìL the sw,4î and the fall Ofthe bellowing liutuble Chum ! With strange turmoil did İt bubble and bull, And echo from piace to place ¿ So strong was its dash, and so high did it splashy That it washed the castle's base : The spray, as it broke, appeared Hke smoke From a sea-volcano pouring $ And stiU did it rumble, and grumble, and tumble, Hiotlng î raging î roariüg ! Up the hill Sir Gay made his coarser fly, And hoped, from the wind and the rani That he there should iind some refuee ktiuL But he sought it long in yam : For fast and h mì each portal was barred, And .iűrtiti4 İ.İ4 * '.forti* l,»4>')f: Till at length he espied a pu* t h ¿pread wide Ths $!ic I Lr of i b roof, ^3
— w Gramercy # St. €eorge !** quotb glad Bit Guy,. And sought the porch with speed j And fast to the yew, which near itgrew 5 He bound his Barbary steed, Åna saiety found on tbat sheltered grommi From the sky's increasing gloom, From his brow he took bis casque, and he shook The rain off, that burthened its plume. Then long he stood irr mournful mood With listless sullen air* Propped on hia lance, and with indolent glanc* Watched the red lightning's glare \ And sadly listened to the shower, On the clattering roof that fell \ And counted twice the lonely hour» Tolled by some distant bell. Bai scarce that bell could midnight leli. When louder roared tbe thunder. And the be,; so red whizzed by his head And berst tlie «¿ate* asundti»
And lo I through the dark a glimmering spark He espied of 1ш id-blue j Onward í i came, and a form all íl am e Soon struck his wondering view 1 *Twae an ancient man of visage wan, Gigantic was his height -, And his breast below there was seen to ilow A beard of grizzled white : And flames o*er-spread his hairless head # And down his beard they streamed | And in his hand a radiant wand Of burning iron gleamed* Of darkest graia» with flowing trails A wond'rous robe he wore, With many a charm to work man's harm . In iire embroidered o'er ; And this robe was bound his waist around With a triple chain red-hot !—* And still came nigher that phantom of firţ? Tili he reached tfae self-same spot, ô 4
Where bíood ς ir Guy, while his hair bristled high, And his breath he scaice could drawj And he rrost his breast, fur 1 wot, he guest·, 'Twas íkkííbub'a self that he saw ! And full on the Knight that ghastly wight Fixt his green and glassy eyes % ÅPså he clanked his chain* nnd he howled wiih \шщ Ехе his u$wb were heard to rise. *—** Sir Knight. Sir Knight ! if your heart be rights Andyour nerves he firm and true* Sir Knight, Sir Knight ! a Boaut) bight In durance waits fur ym, "ButSir Knight, Sit Knight! ifyou eyer knew frightj Thai Dame foi hear to view ; Or Sir К nightj Sir Knight İ that you feasted your sight» While you live, youlï sorely гае Г«— ^— fi Thul mov'iïiî ne*cr dicw vital air, Λνΐιο witnch^^d feai in rne : Come what come will, come goud come ìì\ Uad ou ! I'll follow thw Γ—*
And now they go both high and low, Above and under ground, And in and ontj and about and about,, And roiľiid, and rounds and mund ! The storm is husheJ, and lets thern hear The Howlcťs boding screech, Aa now through many a passage drear A winding stair they reach, With beckoning hand, vvhich flamed like a brands Stiìl on the Wizard led ι And well could Sir Guy hear a sob and a sigr^ As np the firat Might he aped 1 Whde the second he past with footsteps fast, He heard a death-bell toll î While he climbed tht third, a whimper h 2 heard, *— u God's mercy on thy sowl !"—« And now at th¿ top the warukms stup A brazen gate before Of massive make 3 ana а ïivinj чыке Wtii the boît^ which held tlie dmir*
în many a fold round the staple 'twas rolled ψ With venom its jaws ran o'er \ And that juke of hell, where-ever it fell» To a cinder burned the floor. W T hen the monster beheld Sir Guy, he swelled With fury, and threw out his sting} Sparks íl ashed from each eye, and he fêâred hím ош high, Arid prepared on the warrior to spring % But the wizard's hand extended hh wand^ And the reptile drooped hk crest, Yet strove to bite in impotent spite The ground, which gave him rest î A«d now Ihe gate is heard ίο grate, On ha hiiigeí turning ьЬж ¡ Tiil on either S'de the valves yawn wide,» Attd in the vonderere go. 'Twin a spacious hall, whose sìàcj were all With ьаЫе hangings d%ht s Ami whose echoing iìooi vràb uian t uBŰr4 ott With шагЬкЫаск and m bitt ,
and of røarbb black as the Raven's back A hundred steeds stood ronnd ι And of marble white by each a knight Lay sleeping on the ground % And a hundred shafts of laboured bronze The fretted roof upheld > And the ponderous gbom of that vaulted room A hundred lights dispelled | And a ãtaã man's arm by a magic charm Each glimmering taper bore* And where it waâ îopt, still dropt and daropt Thick gouts of .dotted gore. Where ends the room, doth a chrystal tomb Ih towering front uphold; And on each hand two skeletons stands Whieh belonged to two giants of old ; 'lhat on th« right holdi a faulchion bright, That öü the left а Ьып ; And vumm of jet with ¡twtk be»t Theii €ftk$h tàkuim adoni :
And both those grim colosaal kings With fingers long and lean Foint tow'rds the tomb, within whose womb A captive Dame h scen, A form more fair than that prisoners, ne'er Since the days of Eve was known 5 Every gìanccj that íiew írom hcr eyes of blue, Was worth an Eraperur*s thrcne 3 And one sweet kiss írom hei roseate Ups Would have melted a bosom of stone. Soon as Sir Guy had met her eye, Knelt low that captive maid 5 And her При of love seemed fast to move, Jìut h«· heard not what she suiã t Then lier ha .ids did bhe join m suppliant sîgn r Hit ham!, more while than snow; And Икс dvîWo that streak the root's chu,k, Ha teai d began toücw. 1 he \v im«»r i f İt hL stout heart melt, \VlK4 Ut -h» w íhvwv il? untain,- í un t
~*« ŕ ' Oh ! what ся η ï <Ъ." b<ľ ггЬ'<1, íŕ far you ? What murtal can do, shail be done !'*—- Then out and speaks the wizard > Hollow his accents fall ! «—" Was never man, since the world began« Could burst that chrystal wall ï ** For *he hand, whkh raised ita magic frame. Had oft clapped Satan*s uwn ; And the lid bears a name. ..,,,.* Young Knight the same Is stamped on Satan's throne } " At its maker's birth long trembled the earth ¡ The skies dropt showers of sjt » $ And sbe, who to light gave tht: v/urakrous wtght, Had died seven yean before j 4i Airi at Satana right hand wliiîe kteping Ыа stands Thefoulcát Kìond «fiire Shrank back with awe, whea the babe he saw, Fyr it shocked its very йга \ I Aí
' п Biii .-hark, Sir Knight ! and riddle aright The riddle I'll riddle to thee :· '■ . i nou it learn a way without deUy To set yon damsel free* (< See'st yonder sword, with jewels vare Its dudgeon crusted o'er.? See'st yonder horn of ivory fair.? 'Twas Merlin's hom of yoro ! * That horn to sound, or sword to draw. Now, youth, your choice explain j. But that which you chuse* beware how you î For you never will find it again î u Åna th.it orice lost, sill hopes are crost* Wimh по* ybu fondly formj Aiid lha.; on<----: ^on-,ih^ тц ne'er shone Ά sadder wight ы sv;.ü-m ¿'. . ' f ť Bot such It w r* w ov-, as pevsr con know Oblivion's balmy p-iv/cr, Wiih fixed despair )'оьггои1 w'd] ¡»h¿ie,. Till comes ycurdyhi^ hour*
H Yonr choke now make for yon ]Beauty*s saï<e| To burst her bonds endeavour j But that which you chuse, beware how you lose ι Once lost, 'tis lost for ever !"—* In pensive mood awhile now stood Sir Guy 5 and gazed around ţ Now he turned hîs sight to the left, to che rights How he fixed it on the ground, How the fauîchîon*3 Ыаже attracted hîs gaxe j On the hiît his fingers lay ? But be heard fear cry,— ir you re wrottg, Sir Gay !*'—· And he suatched his hand away ! Now his steps Ы addrest tow*tds the North and ite West; №w he turned tow*îds the East and the Sonta ζ ТШ with desperate thought the horn he caught* And prest it to his mouth, ! htk ! the blast ís α blast so strong and so shrill, Thut the vanito like thunder ring j 4.nd each tuarb 1 « horec stamps the İoor with force, ΑιιΊ from Фор iiu^im%hnf> »pring t
And ingiù ful slare» each sumey eye. As now with poti de ι one tread They rush on th Guy. poising on high Their ц cars to strike him dead. At this strange attack full swift sprang bad?, J wot, the ^artlecî Knight! , Away he threw the horn, and drew Hia faulchion keen artel bright, But soon as the horn his grasp forsook, Wab heard a cry of grief ; It£Ct-mc<l the y til of a soul in hell 4 Made desperate of relief ! And straight each light was extinguished quite.. Save the Hame so lurid Ы«е On the Wizard's brow, (whose flashings now Assumed a bloody hiiej) Ami thu^e rpark.s of fire, which grief and İre From his gïaîing eye-balls ciiew ! And he stamped in rage, and he laughed in scorn, Whiie in thundering tone he roared*
t4 Kow înhame on tbe row ir' who sounded a horn, Whi n he might have unsheathed a sword Î"— - He faid, and from his month there came A vapour blue and dank, Wbo?epi»irfon«u9 breath seemed the kiss of death, For the Warrior senseless sank» Morning breaks ! again he wakes ş Lo î in the porch he lies, And &IİÎÎ in his heart he fl-els the dart, Which shot fiom the capti vâdeye?« From the ground he spring« ! as if he had wt ngs^ The ruin he wanders o'er, And with prying look each cranny and nook ML· anxious eyes explore ï But una carî he ne'er the winding stair, Which he climbed that Dam¿ to ь&^ Who»« sjH'e enthrall in the h rønted hallj Where none but unce auy tc»
The earliest ray of dawning day Beholds his search begun $ The evening star ascends her car # Mor yet his search is done % Whence the neighbours all the Knight now call By «* Guy, the S&kerV' name 5 For never he knows one hour's reposo From his wish to find the Dame 5 But stili he seel», and aye he seeks, And seeks , and seeks in vainj And still he repeats to all he meets, *— u Could I find the sword again /«—'* Which words he follows with a groan, As If his heart would break $ And oh ! that groan has so strange atone* It makes all hearers quak& ! The villagers round know well its Sounds And when they hear It poured* —» Hark ! hark !" they cry ? « the Seeker Guy Groans for the Wizard*« sword/*—
Twice twenty springs on their fragrant wings For his wound have brought no balm % For* stiil he*s found, . . . But hark ! what sound Disturbs the midnight calm ? Oood peasants, tell, why rings that knell Ì •— u 'Tis the Seeker-G«y*s we toli : 4t His race is run ; his search is done/'-«**»» God's mercy on his soul J
Ш® OF THK FIRST TOMMF*
ľftlŕíTEB Bf J>, H 9 SHURY, &&XWICK STÄSßT,
