Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Romantic tales: by M. G. Lewis
THE FOUR FACARDİNS, JN ARABIAN TALE.
FA.RT IL
— u Calí up him, who kft half told Thc story."—*
VOL, Uh
THE FOUR FACARDİNS.
???? Ih —**' kiUÏ hy and by íbe wond co'ar-e < 'omes lagitiug üke a diäUjyiccd Jiorho. ,í — FoAMC JllíYS*.
— u î informed your majesty,'' continued Facardin of t he Chrystai Rock, ¡for such was the title assumed by him upon delivering Chrystallina the Curious,] u I informed your majesty, that on the banks of the river ? was destined to behold a sight, the most singular and magnificent: but upon rccol* lection it strikes me, that it may possibly make my narrative more intelligible*if, before I describe the nature of that sight, I relate thc events which occurred ρ^ν?υαν4?ν/ , ->*- ai 2
™ w ! uni (¡uiic oí your opinion/' replied tîü s Sultdn, " And j^ive γυιι gieat credit for tlie idea, which is equally novel und just. Proemi therefore in your own way; hitherto your adventures liave amused nie much, and ! ¿??? be delighted to hear the conclusion of them/'—' *—" And so shall 1 with all my toul!" ex¬ claimed Dinarzade ; ^ but I fear, there are as yet but lit lie hopes of such a blessing, I low« over, sto on, Prince Facardin, since his su« Minie highness will have it so ; but for the love of the prophet, make as much liaste as you can/~ The Sultan here gave the divine Sehe* razado a slight kkk to wake her 5 for during the history of the lVncess of Astracan she had lallen fast asleep, and was snoring as loud, as if her life had depended upon it, Though not over pleased at the interruption of her slumbers, bhe was prudent enough to restram her anger; well knowing from the lemper of her illustrious husband, that if she did not keep her tongue between her teeth,
she poshii)ly might not long kivp h^r h ?? between her Shoulders* The Julian was going to recapitulai e lho latter avlvontmvs for her information ; Ivat Scherazade re¬ quested him not to give himself thu trouble, assuring him, that she was as perfectly i\\c from the curiosity, as from the oilier do feci s of Chrystallina. Schahriar [I know not why, for he never thought proper to tell me J seldom heard this lady's name mentioned without giving some token of displeasure : he immediately turned his back towards his beautiful Sultana, and ordered Facardin to proceed with his history, which he did in the following terms*
Continuation qf the History qf ihe l'lUNCË OF TltEIUZONIlE· I was very much prepossessed in favour of my new companion by his noble coun« tenance and graceful deportment : that pre ? ;;
tb)i^\.4Îr,m w »s u^niìrmed by thc amusement aíiovded un* by his converjatton, and by a t444iiiar manner of expressing himself* which l'*v** vrlino to tlu 4 mobt insignificant trifles, I listened to htm with incxpmsable pleasure, a-u! thtnight, thai the charms of his natural vloqueme were not a lii ík* set oft" by u set of the whitest teeth that I ever beheld. Jtìemg culturally open and conversible, í somi gave Ιύιη to understand that I felt interested in his fate; and lind ing, that our sentiments oí esteem were mutual, we vowed upon the ¡spot eternal friendship, and promised to communicate our adventures to one another with the very first opportunity, i shall not fais to recount them to your exalted majesty ia their proper place. (The in »pat ient Ouuurzade gave a deep groan on hearing this promise; but the î>pci!uT paid her no sort of attention·) Such discourse (continued he) conduct« eã uh to the banks of the river, where an in fmile number of pavillions formed of the richest and most beautiful chintz inform-
cd us, that the Princess Moisscllma was already arrived, la &pUv uf ?'hu îaubCiu^ compan) hi which I found myself, (of which certainly not a member seemed to have met with a more fashionable taylor than myself,) I could not help feeling rather embarrassed at Lhe idea of appearing thus singuhrly ac¬ coutred before so illustrious an assembly. The attendants of the Princess, as t had already been informed, consisted of ihe prin¬ cipal Satraps and most distinguished chame* ters of the court of Astracan ; and as I have remarked, that people of the highest rank are generally people of the worst manners, î macle no doubt, tbat I should be ridiculed most intolerably» ín this I was mistaken; the deliverance of their mi* tress fiom her tedious giwì ¡ty was ? ponti of too much consequence to pcimit her aU aidants to be merry on the subject. On the contrary, they loaded us with compliments» upon the ex« treme absurdity of our appearance; and î ??? id peuoiw, ihat my companions were as much delighted to bo thought ridiculous F 4
??? ¿his occasion* as they woukl have Ιχνη offended upon any other; such is the in. fluence of circurnbtances. ! must not, however s omît to mention, thiit the Knight with the Aw! did not parti- upate In thk delight. Absorbed in profound melancholy, ît seemed scarcely a less difficult l ( \sk to í nake him smile, than the Princess» Yet his conversation was so lively and enter¬ taining, that being naturally addicted to gaie! ?? 1 was frequently ready to uic with laughter* Not so my companion ; while he amused nil around him, his own countenance remained perfectly unaltered ; he uttered a }\n*:ucLi 'dis ii he was announcing some mis* tortane, and whenever he favoured us with an epigram impromptu^ í always expected to hear a funeral oration, í could uot help remarking to him Um inconsistency of his conduct :-«■" Your busi¬ ness here/* said 1 5 " is to make the Princess launli ' instead of which, if she has but one grain of sensibility in her whole composition, the moment that she beholds you, she will
buiVt into a flood of tears, I doubt not, that the gloomy melancholy, in which you are absorbed, is occasioned by your love for Moussellina, and by jour fear of being com¬ pelled to resign her perfections to some rival : but however such proofs of your inward attachment may flatter the vinity of that lady's bosom, they are by no means likely to operate upon the muscles of her face."·— —" You are not the first by many," re¬ plied my new friend, u who has made the Mime muai ? ; and I own, I have but little hope of succeeding in the first mentioned adventure. ?? far as regards myself, I doubt not ? that the Printvss will look all her life, ?? if she were a,* undertaker's apprentice; however, ifl cannot make Hie lady laugh, I hope at least to make the crocodile cry, and that will answer my purpose just as well,"— —-" But," *aid I, interrupting him, u are yov not desirous ) olirseli, that Moussellina should get rid of a Ht de of her everlasting guvity? IVhy, }our marriage ceremony vi ? n semble the nuptials of a couple of ? 5
screech-owls ! Your contract will be drip-* Ving wet with the Notary's tears, and the Muhi will nol be able io read the service for sobbing!"—- — u You have guest right," rejoined the stranger, " in supposing the cause of my melancholy to be love, but you have mis¬ taken its object« My intention is not to obtain ilie hand of the Princess in marriage, but to purchase for myself a claim to the king of Astracan *s assistance, and for my brother the possession of a woman, whom he loves most ardently. Yet even should m\ hopes be crowned with success, how shall 1 then proceed to obtain the object of my dearest wishes? Wiiere shall ! seek, what I 2»over yet have found? lkny shall í find her, whom 1 never yet have lost? And how, oh! Low shall I join my existence to that of a fair-one, who perhaps never had any existence at all?"—· Tìnse questions were-much too difficult for me io answer; and the stranger having sunk into a profound reverie, i forbore to
iiiterrnpt him. We therefore proceeded in bilence towards the tent, which was prepared for the reception of all those adventurers who aspired to the conquest of Moussellimts gravity. The time appointed for this trial (as i was informed by one of the Satraps our conductors, with whom, in order no: to remain quite idle, I entered into conversation on dismounting from my horse,) was still at tiie distance of four days-, when also the two months appropriated for Moussellina^ ab- teute írom Astracan would be completed;. atter which (shouid no one have succeeded in the adventure) she would return to h¿r í at her *s as solemn as ever, and le e ;ve the crococliie to pursue hb riots undisturbed* The tent to which we were conducted, occupied at least hdf a square røiie ; it was separated into a multitude of apartments by pannels of painted chintz; inclosed wiihin iramos of massy gold, I remarked, that alj the figures, which adorned those singular walk, wc'Æ pourtrayed in the most ludicrous attitudes, and represented in the* act of
hughing heartily, doubtless from the hope of inspiring* the Princess with an inclination to imitate them, in my own mind, (but ï toolc care to keep my opinion to myself,) I was decided, that his Astracanical majesty had judged ill oil this point :. for the faces made by these merry figures were so distorted, that ît. was very unlikely, that his daughter would wish to resemble them : not: to men« tion s that as some of them were represented in the act of standing on their heads, it nnght possibly not have been thought quite con- bist ent with hor royal higlmess's dignity to appear in a similar situation. Each 'of the pretenders to Moussellina's hand (for the Satraps insisted upon reckon¬ ing me. among these merry rivals,) was con¬ ducted to a separate apartment: to my ia* unite satisfaction I found, that the lodging oí' my new friend was appointed next to my own. My conductor, having ushered me into my chamber, opened a wardrobe well stored with robes, turbans, and other articles of dress, iie then informed me* that as the
grand trial would not take place for some d t *ys, ï liad bei ier not throw away the ad* v?ntage of novelty ; but laying aside for the present the laudable absurdity of my ap¬ pearance, he advised me to make a choice among the various garments, with which he then presented ra, 1 I lost no time in ink Sowing his advice: and while I exchanged my bed-gown for a magnificent robe of silver tissue, I informed the Satrap, dm ï by no «leans aspired to the hand of his mistress ; that I would make faces before her with all my heart and soul, and might and main, if my doing so could be of the least \\%v to her, or her illustrious father ; and that it was so long since í had met with anything of the kind, that I should think killing the crocodile an extremely good morning's entertainment: bnt as for the Princess herself, î begged leave to declare with all possible respect, that it was exactly the same thing to me, whom she married, or whom she refused* ~-- ci Upon my word, Prince," interrupted Dinarzade» in a voice equally expressive of
anger and contempt, " you are strangely indifferent about women ! ?3 ™ —^ By mo means strangely,** answered thc Prince with a smile ; * 4 nothing can be more naturai Nay. í will even own to you, that there-Is but one woman in tlie work!, of whom I have a very high opinion., and she İs ' "~ —" For the love of heaven, who is she ?" cried Dinaraadc eagerly, ~~" Ä perfect stranger to you/" rejoined the Prince, " and i mean, that she should. remain so : but more of this hereafter : at present I resume my narrative/*— 1 was just finishing my dress (and doubt¬ less my companions were employed in the same manner,) when Chrystallina bounced into my room without ceremony· She seemed greatly agitated, and very soon poured forth such ι· torrent of words, as made the astonished ¡Satrap's ears ring again·· She insisted upon her right to be presented to the Princess, and ordet ed the Satrap to conduct her to tlm royal tent without delay*
The Lord Chamberlain being sent for to decide the difik alt question, u whether as the wife of a Genius she was entitled to an entre at court/' lie immediately decided it against her ; assunng her, that no Genius, or any one belonging to a Genius, was permitted to remain in th° kingdom of Astracan. — ~ ít For íny own part," continued his lord¬ ship, " I was fortunately born with a naturai antipathy to Geniusses of all kinds* I thank my stars, I never saw more than one in my life; and though he was an extremely,dull one, he still contrived to make such a disturbance in the court of Ispahan, that the king swore by the poppy-coloured whiskers of Mahomet*s fifth wife, (his most solemn and irrevocable oath,)rhat in future no Genius should dare to smell roast meat in his dominions. You see, therefore, my dearest madam," added his ex¬ cellence, shrugging his shoulders in the most fashionable manner, and bowing to the very ground ; " you see, that is quite impossible ior me to oblige you. i am absolutely in despair at my refusal ý but í trust, the rea-
sons, which í have dene myself the honor tìf laying before you, will be /bund equally »strong and satisfactory."«— Chrystallina, dying with curiosity to see this much celebrated Princess, answered the Chamberlain with vehemence so audible, that it soon drew a croud of listeners around her. But in vain did she talk herself hoarse in explaining, that though married to a Genius, ehe was anything but a Genius herself: thc Chamberlau was obstinate, and she could obtain noi ning further from him, than an admission a that though she might very pos¬ sibly be no Genius, she certainly came under tlie description oï a white witch/' Having said this, he was on the point of retiring, when his eyes rested on the ebony spinning- wheel, which Chrystallina still carried, and v/hîch in the most eloquent parts of her oration, she occasionally menaced to dis¬ charge at his excellency's head. No sooner did he perceive this machine, than he started ba^k, and whispered his deputy, who whis¬ pered the Mufti, who whispered the Prin»
cess's nurse, who whispered the body-phy- MCian, who whispered the Lord Chamberlain again, and then they all whispered together, It was thus, that I stood with my incensed companion surrounded by a circle of whis¬ perers, who seemed engaged upon something of the most serious nature. Chrystaaina was ready to burst with curiosity to know, what they were saying, and begged for an explanation in the most urgent and pathetic terms. After a full quarter of an hour the conference ended ; and the Chamberlain ad¬ vancing towards us, was on the point of addressing the lady, when he fixed his eyes upon me, who for want of something better todo, was amusing myself with turning the handle of my spinning-wheel. No sooner did he perceive it than he started back a second time, and whispered his députy s who whispered the Mufti, who whispered the Princess's nurse, who whispered the body- physician, who whispered the Lord Cham¬ berlain, ard then the whispering begun aH over aikain.
This second conference lasted much longer than the first t but I need not inform your most sagacious majesty, that one way or other every diing must come to an end at¬ lasi : so was it with this whispering«. ît ceas¬ ed; and then advancing to Chrystallina with an air equally polite but much more res¬ pectful than before, the Chamberlain in* formed her, that Ik was ready to conduct her to the royal tent. Dreading, lest he should change his mind a second time, she took him at his word* In vain did 1 beg her to consider her singular appearance, and assure her, that since the days of Eve no woman had «tone to court in her shift* The Chamberlain was too impatient to conduct her to Moussellina to allow time for chang¬ ing her dress ; and as Chrystallina was just as v/ell pleased to be seen in her shift as in any other way, she soon quitted my* apart¬ ment, and hastened towards that of the Princess. Thither I followed her, but not till í had been prevailed upon to carry my spinning-wheel along with me*
lhe night being already far advanced, we found Mousscllina's tent illuminated by so great a quantity of torches of rose-colöured wax, that day itself would have been far less brilliant. I could not avoid remarking, that each of these torches issued from the beak of an immense golden cock, richly or¬ namented with rubies and emeralds ; and the Knight of the Awl whispered rae, that this bird was held in profound veneration throughout the dominions of Astracan. The Princess was seated upon a throne of bifver, overshadowed by a canopy hewn out of a single emerald· She was attended by twelve antient females, and an equal number of the principal Satraps, mid was occupied in receiving the pretenders to her hand. I wiH not attempt to describe the charms of this adorable personage | suffice it to say, that her eyes effaced the splendour of the torches, which biased around her; and'that when she opened her mouth by accident, her breath was so sweet and balmy, that my head being naturally unable to support perfumes, it was
with the greatest difficulty, that 1 kept my¬ self !4>m fainting away. The tent being already crowded by the multitude of her admirers, we, as the last comers were obliged to wait, till the others had been presented, She received them in a very gracious, though somewhat solemn manner, permitting each of them to kiss her alabaster hand ; but she spoke to no one* As soon as the king, or prince, or whatever he chose to call himself, (for î suspect, that many of these dignities were entirely of their own creation,) was announced, she signed to her nurse, a venerable woman about sixty, who stood at the foot of the throne« Imme¬ diately the old lady put her lips in motion, and as soon as she had pronounced a few civil sentences, her mistress nodded three times, as much as to say~— cc she has hit it : 5Î —thc knight then retired to make room for his neighbour, who went through the same cere¬ mony» I asked a grave-looking oU Satrap (he had the most enviable pair of mustachoes *
that ever I set my eyes upon !) whether by chance it had not been hur royal high« ness's pleasure to be born dumb? he assu¬ red me very positively of the contrary, —" For,'* said he, tC though she has ne¬ ver been heard to utter a syllable, she can¬ not possibly be dumb, as she perfectly understands every thing that is said to her."— This argument was so irresistible, that I had not a word more to say^ upon the subject. I afterwards inquired, who was this able Logician ? I was told, that he was the president of the royal Astracanical socie¬ ty; I could not but acknowledge, that he was well entitled to fill such a place, by^ his whiskers· Near four hundred knights had already been presented 4 and now Chrystallina im¬ patiently requested thc Lord Chamberlain to perform his promise. He hesitated not to obey her, and giving her his little finger with the most graceful air imaginable, he prepared lu d her towards the throne j when the
Centinels, who guarded the entrance of the pavillion, rushed into it suddenly .vith looks« equally expressing apprehension and surprise, and exclaimed, that the sky exhibited a sight the most extraordinary. It was indeed that very sight, which I have already had the ho¬ nour of announcing to your majesty. This information was more than sufficient to rou^e Chrystallina*s curiosity· Without considering the impropriety of her beha¬ viour, she darted out of the tent, and in her hurry overset the unlucky Lord Chamber» lain. Shocked at her rudeness in quitting this noble assembly so abruptly, I ran after hcr to bring her ????, and (as he lay direct¬ ly in my way) made bold to tread upon the Lord Chamberlain in passing* The knights, the Satraps, the guards, the old women, and at last the Princess herself all followed my example, and never since the days of the de« luge was a man of thg. Lord Chamberlain's rank so bc-kicked and be-trampled» The Princess was the last person to quit the tent. However as soon as she reached
the door, the crowd respectfully opened, and she passed tlirough the midst of us with as much speed, as her gravity would admit of her usinjr j that is to say, upon a moderate jog-trot, Hcr attendants, one and aU assured me, that she had never been seen to move along so nimbly before. For my own part s I could not help observing something con¬ strained and ungraceful in her manner of moving | but 1 suppose this was occasioned by her being without a shift, and certainly cloth of silver next to the skin must needs feel extremely uncomfortable,—But to pro¬ ceed* And now with one consent, every eye was fixed upon the Heavens. What was our as¬ tonishment at beholding an immense ball of fire, which every now and then burst into a multitude of little stars, and then as sud« denly collected itself again into one blading mass. We made various conjectures respect¬ ing this phenomenon ;. they were all ex¬ tremely ingenious ; unluckily, none of them were right, However, as the naming ball
seemed descending towards us, we at length agreed unanimously, that the most likely means of ascertaining what it could possi¬ bly be, would bc to wait till we could dis* tinguish what it really was. This was the suggestion of the whisker'd philosopher; it met with universal approbation, and I could perceive, that he was himself not a little proud of having struck out so lumi¬ nous an idea. Though extremely curious to know the cause of this smgular appearance, my atten¬ tion was not so much engrossed as to pre¬ vent ?? observing, that one of Moussclli- na's women was considerably agitated at the approach of this flaming ball. She en¬ deavoured, indeed, to conceal her emotions as well as she could, though it was consi¬ derably increased upon her finding, that my e; was fixed upon her. The cause of her alarm had by this time arriyed so near us, that %ve coukl distinguish the par¬ ticles of wiiich it was composed. But if we felt surprize at its first appearance, how
was that surprize augmented, when we found the light to proceed from the mouths and eyes of an innumerable number of iiy» ing tygers, who appeared to act as guards and lanthoribbearers to personages still more extraordinary than themselves. Imagine, most illustrious Sultan, a cock considerably larger than a full-grown tur» key, his eyes sparkling with a brilliance fir exceeding that of the finest carbuncles, his body adorned with a thousand beautiful colours, and his neck encircled with a chain of enormous emeralds ; seated upon this uncommon courser, and guiding him by the chain which served as a bridle, we be¬ held a riffantic monkev, who held a bow of polished steel in one hand, while with the other he governed his chanticleer with more grace, than could have been expect* j ed from the very best-bred baboon in the [universe. On his back hung a golden qui* ver adorned with precious stones ; and upon t vrimson velvet pillion behind him sat a Ut¬ ile old woman so hideous, that we all ex-
claimed with one voice that the monkey was by much the handsomest animal of tlie two. It was with the utmost difliculty that she kept her seat, so long was her body and so «hort were her legs. Her nose was so little and snubby, that it was not to be seen with¬ out a magnifying glass; but to make up for this deficiency, lier chin was so immo¬ derately long, that it curled over her mouth and rested its point between her eye-brows* She squinted so horribly that the earth had full possession of one of her eyes, while the other was the property of the heavens» Her ears were of such a length, that to keep tliem from flapping about, she had been obliged to tuck them into her gir¬ dle j however she had taken care to deck them out with a very smart pair of ear-rings ; and her hair, wiiich was of a flaming red, was frizzled up as high as a tower, and piaister- ed all over with flour and hog Vlarch To set off this charming face and figure to the best advantage, she had a little scarlet turban or¬ namented with a profusion of feathers of ali
possible colours, and stuck upon one bide of her head coquettishlv ; while her person was envelopped in a travelling dress of deep yellow velvet, trimmed with a broad gold lace, and flounced and furbeiowed with cats skin. When 1 add, that her breath was so strong, that we needed all the perfume of Moussellb na's to overpower it, your highness may form some idea of the charms, which orna- ι mented this masterpiece of nature and art* These extraordinary personages continued to descend, and as they approached, inspired us with very justifiable apprehensions ; a flight of fiery tygers being by no means the most agreeable visitors. The event proved, that our alarms were without cause. When they arrived within a few yards of us, the es« cort remained motionless in the air 3 while the cock lighted on the ground not far from Mousselina : the monkey sprang nimbly out ot the saddle, and taking the old woman in his arms, placed her upon her feet with fbe greatest care and delicacy* She seemed greatly fatigued with her journey ; but as c \?
suon as slie recovered her bìeath, she ad« lânced towards the heiress of Astracan, and addressed her as follows, ~ u Illustrious Princess, you behold an ambassadress from the great Caramoussai : he requests you through me, not only to receive with kindness, but to treat with pro- found respect, tins paragon of all earthly monkies, Here only can he expect the cure of that melancholy, under which he now la¬ bours, and here lias Caramoussai engaged, that he shall obtain it* Farewell, lovely lady ! may the chin increase, may the foot be diminished; jmay the spinning-wheels turn, may the rope be woven ; and oh ! may your beauty never subject you to the same misfortune, which my unlucky charms have entailed upon your most obedient and very humble servant."— As she said these last words» she burst in¬ to tears, and while she sobbed most piteous- ly, she made sucli abominable wry faces, that all the beholders were ready to expire with î lughing 5 it was then, that the Princess re«
joiced in her immoveable gravity : she alono kept her countenance, and endeavoured to apologize by signs for the ill-breeding of her company. The nurse explained this to the old woman in very polite terms ; adding, that Moussellina requested her to repose herself in the royal tent after her journey ; when she hoped., that she would relate her ad« ventures, as she was extremely anxious to know the birth, parentage, and education of so extraordinary a person as she appeared to be, and also to hear some account of the great Caramoussai who made presents of monkies to princesses. The stranger accept¬ ed the proposal, and the whoie company re« turned to the tent ; but the old woman would not begin her narrative, till she had thrown herself upon her knees before the monkey, and demanded his permission. The animal (who really seemed to be the best tempered and best-bred of the monkey «kind) gave his assent in a very gracious manner ; then throwing himself upon the embroidered ? S
carpet, ?? % Koomodto be absorbed in profound melancholv. <» lu the mean while, the old woman, having |\iHt a few minutes in silent reflection, (a pre¬ caution highly necessary in relating so long a history,) began her narrative in the follow» ipg words. History qf the .Matrmi qf Mimmi Atlas, — α Your ro)*al highness/ 9 said she, ad¬ dressing herself to Moussellina, a ? proba« bly not aware that our families are nearly connected. The queen, who had the ho- nour to die in giving you birth, was no other than«.. · · · · "— » The okl woman had proceeded no further in her tale, when her eyes rested upon me. She stopped, and suddenly starting from her seat, she hobbled towards mc*
" Sir Knight," said she, " what is your ?ume ?**~ — cc It is Facardin," 1 replied* This singular name appeared to excite surprize in every body, except in the en¬ quirer, and in the tall Knight with the fish kettle upon his head; to whom the old lady now made the same demand respecting bis name* —*' My name?" answered he with an air of perfect indifference, yawning at the same time ; " it is Facardin.**-—The gene¬ ral wonder redoubled. ~" And yours?" resumed the old wo¬ man after a moments pause, addressing herself to the Knight of the Awl. —" It is," replied he with a low bow, " it is Facarcün."— " —Facardin!" screamed out the old woman (in a voice so shrill, that it almost cracked the drum of my ears ; at the same time giving three skips in the air with such activity, as was truly surprising in a person of her age and figure,) " Facardin ì Facar* ? 4
din ?™—Οηο I'acardin—two Facardin s— three Facardin.s · -One Facardin more, and one Fa¬ cardin Îlv s 1 1· -en all for a time will be wrong, and all will at :.<rt be caute right*"— Having said this, she darted out of the í avíllion, sprang nimbly upon the cock, and giving him a slight kick, he rose into thc air, and instantly disappeared, old woman, flying tygers j and all, It may not, however, be improper to remark, that the foot with which ohe kicked her chanticleer, was the smallest and most elegantly formed, that I ever remember to have beheld. Great was the general disappointment at the Matron's abrupt departure. We trusted however, that the monkey would supply her place, and continue the relation of those ad¬ ventures, in which his companion had made so little progress ; but here our hopes were again frustrated* In vain did we promise him pig-nuts and bilberries 5 in vain did we threaten him with whips and chains. To our utter surprise^ the monkey seemed not to understand us· We thought that he
might probably be a foreignen and tried by turns every language in use throughout thc habitable globe ι but with no better success. Say what we would, not one syllable would the monkey answer ! at length we were obliged to agree with the opinion of the whiskered philosopher ; who in a speech of three hours, replete with the most sublime eloquence, most learned disquisitions, and ar¬ guments the most logical and irresistible, proved to us very clearly,— <i: that whatever sceptics might advance to ihe contrary, lhe monkey was actually...... a monkey.**— The Princess, however, was still persuad¬ ing the animal not to be as provokingly silent as herself, when Chrystallina rimpatient to have her presentation over) was led forward by the Deputy Chamberlain, for as to the Chamberlain himself, he was too much bruised to appear again that night. Instead of attending to Chrystallina's compliments ? was not a little surprized to see the Princess- suddenly seize her by the corner of the shi ft¬ and examine the mark of it with ^nnt cv ? ã
geriiess and attention. She then shook her head, and with a deep sigh let the linen drop again* After this strange behaviour, she »cerned tu recollect its impropriety, for she blushed deeply, and was signing to her nurse io make an apology, when she discovered the spinning-wheel, which Chrystallina, during fhe ceremony of presentation, had deposited upon thc carpet·"— —>* That is mine! 95 cried the Princess, seizing it eagerly, a and have it 1 will, that's positive !**— The joy of the whole court at hearing her speak for the first time was only equalled by the rage of my fair companion ; but without minding her reproaches, the Princess began to spin with all her might and main, when she stopped her work for an instant, in or¬ iler to address herself to me. —" Spin l n said the Princess; f m though she had thus unexpectedly gained the power uf speech, she was not yet able to, use it fluently. u Spin ?— - In vain did ï protest, that I never had
spun a thread in my life* Moussellina would be obeyed ; and the whole court repeating in full choras™ cc spin !"-—I even set myself to work with the best grace that I could. But scarcely had* I turned the handle twice, when a third wheel was seen at the top of the tent, and a pair of beautiful white arms passing themselves through two holes in the chintz hangings began vo turn the machine with incredible swiftness and dex¬ terity. While thc general attention seemed en· grossed by this phœnomcnon, mine was employed upon a different object. Enraged at her having been thus plundered by the Princess, Chrystallina had retired in dud¬ geon to a distant corner of the pavillion, and was busily engaged in conversation with that identical antient lady, who had ex** prest so much emotion at the sight of the flaming ball : but their discourse did not long continue undisturbed* The monkey had raised himself from the floor quietly t he advanced with caution toward* tlie talk* ? a
ors, and having crept behind them unob¬ served, he suddenly sprang upon the old lady's back, and fastened his teeth in her left car* The duenna screamed, cried, kick¬ ed, and struggled : but in spite of her efforts and those of the spectators, the animal main¬ tained his hold, nor quitted it, till he had fair¬ ly dissevered the ear from its adjoining parís* No sooner was her head deprived of this natu¬ ral ornament, than her form dissolved into a cloud of smoke, but soon collected itself again into the figure of an enormous giant, who rose with angry looks into the air; the roof of the tent opened,and the Colossus disappeared» At the same moment the beautiful hands vanished 5 Chrystallina fled shrieking from the tent ¡ and the monkey slipping off his skin with as much ease as if it had been a great coat, there was seen in his place a man about five and forty, of a most noble pre¬ sence, and whose features (except his mouth) were truly prepossessing. But oh ! thai mouth î Mahomet, what a mouth ! Your majesty may possibly think,
flutt a feature so out of all proportion was likely to excite merriment in the specta¬ tors ; but no ! terror was the eiiect pro¬ duced upon all present by this miraculous mouth; and when he opened it to address the Princess, so terrible an abyss was pre* sented, that the poor little soul involunta¬ rily jumped back, and we had some diffi¬ culty in convincing her that she had not been swallowed up alive! In truth, had the stranger felt any wish for such a mouth¬ ful, ï am certain, that he could have bolt* ed her royal highness without any diffi¬ culty ; for I would have bet tell ten to one, that his mouth coukl take in a full grown ox, horns and all, without troub¬ ling itself to make more than a moderate stretch. But I must beg leave to observe that î do not mean an ox bred in Lincoln¬ shire, which kingdom (as 1 have read) produces that animal uncommonly large, but merely such ordinary sized oxen as are usually found iu your Majesty's domi¬ nions, ï thought it right to mention this,
as í by no means approve the fashion of those rhodomontading travellers, who ex¬ agerate matters in order to excite wonder, whexi iu fact nothing can be more ordina¬ ry and natural ™ cc Yoa are quite right/* observed the Sultan, u aïïd I much admire so scrupu¬ lous an attention to veracity» But pray, go on with your history ; for as you have told us what could go into tlie stranger's mouth, î am quite impatient to know, what could come out of it.**-— —You will naturally suppose, (pro« cecded Facardin,) that from so capacious a mouth we expected a tremendous voice, and words every one of them composed of at least ten syllables* However, it soon appeared that the stranger's voke was Hke any other voice, and that he had not the slightest objection to—" ife,~ands,—ofe— or also's."-—As soon as Moussellina had re« covered from her fright, he announced himself to her as Fortimbrass, King of Den¬ mark) brother-in-law to the merry Queen
of Astracan, and consequently uncle to the moi rnful Princess» She gave him a very afie lionate welcome, and permitted him to salute her roseate cheek ; but it was ob¬ se ved by all, that when his monstrous mortii approached hcr, the poor little Prin¬ cess bhook like an aspin ?eaf. We were all impatient to hear the ad¬ ventures of this monkey-monarch, which, we doubted not, would include those of the frighful old woman. Fortimbrass begged us to suspend our curiosity till the next day, as he was greatly fatigued, having galloped ail the way from Mount Atlas (upwards of seven thousand leagues) in two hours and a quarten We could not deny the plausibility of this excuse, and we soon after separated for the night; Fortimbrass rejoicing that he had got rid of his claws and tail ^ the courtiers, that the Princess had been induced to speaks and Moussellina, that she had not only recovered her own spin¬ ning-wheel, but through my means possess« ed another besides it! Of both of these
wheels she requested me to take charge, adding, that the next day wc would re. sume our work Ί he whole company then retired in perfect good-humour, except thc nurse, who was somewhat chagrined at the reflection, that in future she was only to talk for herself. It is true that because her mistress had recovered her voice s it did not follow 5 that the nurse had lost hers : but the old lady knew well, that being old and ugly she might talk to all eternity without a soul listening to her, and that, she thought, was almost as bad as not talking at all. Facardin of the Grotto (for such was the title of my new friend) followed me to rny apartment. Here he in'reduced me to his brother, who was no other than the Knight with the fish-kettle for a helmet* lie was certainly much handsomer than his brother, and his person was truly noble and majestic : but the countenance of my acquaintance was so amiable, and bore so strong an expression of mingled sense and sweetness that I hesitated not for a moment
to give him the preference, As soon ?? thc fiist compliments were o\er, 1 bcggotl ïm- rardin of the (»rotto to gutiiy my curioriiy by relating the cause of hu bearing ihi» ??\? name with myself, With this request he complied in the following terms»
History qf FACARDIN of the Grotto. It is impossible for me to tell you where aad in what manner I was born ; since, though it was a ceremony in which I sus» tained a very principal part, the circum¬ stances have as completely slipped mv me* mory, as if they had rever happened ! nei* ther can î tell you, who were my parents, as, in spite of all my pains in looking for them, Ì liave been able to meet with no relation«, except my brother, whose ignorance on ihis subject equals my own. The earliest period which I can recollect, found me tîr* inhabU
tunt of a subterraneous grotto, under the cjîreof an old herr it ; whom 1 called father, but who, 1 have more reasons than one for believing, had no right to that appellation* This singular person was by birth a Chinese, and his name had formerly been the Manda¬ rin Fi-Fum-Foam-Fim» He possessed extra· ordinary abilities, and not only gave me daily proofs of his being a prodigy of wisdom, but vas even at the trouble of aasuring me ot the fact himself. Unluckily, the extrava¬ gant kindness, which nature had shown in forming his irtellectual parts, was fully counterbalanced by her stinting him in his externals* The poor Mandarin was born with but one eye, one ear, one nostril, one arm, and one leg : the latter was placed in the centre ofhis body, which turned round upon it as if upon a pivot ; and to such perfection was he arrived in the manage* ment of it by dint of practice, that he could hop upon his one leg nearly as fast, as any other person could run upon two« It was long, before his parents could pitch
upon a proper wife for him ; till at length a female appeared at the coari of reki», who seemed formed by nature for the ex¬ press purpose of supplying all th** deficien¬ cies of the young Fi-Fum-Foam-Fim* S tie called herself the lady Fim-Foam-Fum-Fi ; and as he was entirely made up of unities, she on the other hand was composed of nothing b v quinquities | for she h-d five arms, five legs, five ears, five eyes, and five nostrils to each of her five noses. As with such a person she was not pestered with too îT-any admirers, she readily accept« ed the addresses of the young Mandarin : but alas! it soon appeared, that her name was not more the reverse of his, than the temper of Fi-Foam-Fum*Fim was opposite to that of Fim-Foam-Fum-Fi 1 he was gen¬ tle, and she was passionate ι he was wise, and she was silly : he employed his single hand in no offices but kind ones ; while she was persuaded, that nature had given her three additional legs and arms for no earthly purpose than the better to
enable hor to t 1 -??? and kick her husband, åt length, however, ??'; line sunshiny morn¬ ing, the Mandarina look it iuí ? her head to d k', and thc Mandarin took it into liis to bury her. ît was shortly after tins event, tlrat a revolution in China obliged him to leave that country, and one of his friends having entrusted me to his care, he took re« fuge with me in the island of Serendin- Ills acquaintance \? ith the Mandarina Fim* Foam-Fum-Fi of lamented memory had made him an inveterate woman-hater, and he en¬ deavoured to communicate bis aversion to me« His labour was thrown away ; i sighed ardently to behold one of these terrible wild beasts (for such he had taught me to fancy them) neither coi ld 'all his arguments erase this wish from my mind, any more than a singular accident, which occurred to me when scarce sixteen« I was sitting in the grotto one evening, and endeavouring to persuade my governor to hit me have at least one peep at these mon¬ sters, when suddenly a large black cloud des-
rended into the cave· ln a few minutes-it ü*î|K4 JUU, rlnín. i i/wii\.iVî tl ftU »Ui^gj, ÍJA ?????' '??? commanding presence, who held in one hand a golden wand, and permitted the other to cerve as a perch for the largest and most beautiful cock, that I evsr beheld : it struck me this evening, that it was the very same bird, which brought hither thc King of Den¬ mark ; but of that I cannot be positive. No uooner did the hermit perceive the cock, tlian he sank upon his one knee : the bird extended its right wing towards him, and he kissed it with every mark of affection and respect· The stranger then conversed with the Mandarin in some language unknown to ?? ; but their eyes sufficiently testified, that 1 was the subject of their discourse. It lasted about an hour, after which the »stranger pre¬ pared to depart ; but iirst he addrcst me in these remarkable words : —" Youth, be in all things submissive to your venerable protector, but in nothing more than in abstaining from the sight of women* Know, that as í lately consulted
the stars respecting you, I read in them thk threatening prediction.— u The first object which he loves, he shall love for ever 1 the first object which he loves, shall for ever prove cold and insensible ; and even though that object should be in his possession, he never shall be united to the first object which he loves ¡"-—Remember tfr% be pru¬ dent, and be happy.—Farewell !" As he uttered these last words, a shower of tears Fell from the ey-es of the beautiful cock : at the same moment, a cloud wrap¬ ped itself round them, and they quitted the grotto in the same manner, as they had en« tered it. This incident for a time made an impression upon me; but reflecting that there was Httle danger of my feeling any senti« ment like love for a wild beast, I resolved to gratify my curiosity, and see a woman, let the danger be what it might. Accord¬ ingly I escaped from the Mandarin Fi-Fum- Foam-Fini, and after a fruitless search of some days I stumbled upon the fi ; r Clin* tallina, whose curiosity was not a jot L-y>
urgent than my own. What passed till we parted, as well as the adventure which separated us, you probably have heard from that lady : it would therefore be unnecessary to relate it now/'— Here Schahriar interrupted the Prince of Trebizonde anr? requested him to repeat those adventures ·, as he had so happy a knack at forgetting what was told him, that they would seem to him exactly as if he had ne« ver heard them before ; a talent upon which he seemed to value himself prodigiously· However, Dinarzade begging with tears in her eyes, that thc Prince might be suffered to get to the end of his long-winded history (if indeed such a thing was possible, which she began to doubt,) the Sultan was pre¬ vailed upon to suffer him to proceed. He :lid so, as follows* —* 4 Facardin of the Grotto continued thus-—." ï had for some time flattered mvself, that the oracle respecting m v future tite had been completely mistaken: it was at least certain that Chrvstallina had been
any thing but coid and insensible. But now limit we were parted, I disco vered, thai the sentiment with which that curious damsel had inspired me, had nothing to do with ? vc. So far was I from being grieved ai her departure, that I rather rejoiced at no longer having a woman continually at my elbow, tvith whom ï had found full leisure to be satiated. The gust of wind which di» vided us so obligingly, bore me swiftly through the air* It deposited røe unhurt at the foot of a mountain, whose base was bathed by a rapid river. It mas night ; the moon was at its* full, and its beams enabled me to discover a small island at no great dis¬ tance· 1 was in doubt what, course to pursue. îhc island seemed uninhabited, and the mountain did not wear an aspect much more promising* While 1 hesitated, I ob¬ served something moving on the shore oí the island» I strove to distinguish its Ji- gure, but in vain· After a few momenb it plunged into thc water, and seemed tc>
be hastening towards the mountain* Not to be deficient in good-breeding, ï advanced to receive the new-comers but my politeness instantly vanished on perceivings that it was nothing ebe than an old lion, whose bulk wd looks were truly tremendous, My doubts were now removed t I immediately look to 1 røy heels, and began to c**.nb the mountain with all possible expedition. As the iion did not-pursue me, I soon slackened røy pace* It now for the first rime entered my head, that this exploit of mine was by no means to my credit, and that to begin my career by running away was but a sorry presage for my future fame* í therefore determined to return and face the Hon t and drawing a sabre wkh which I had provided myself on quitting the grotto, í measured back my steps. I confess, that is I drew nearer to the lion's neighbourhood, 1 felt my eagerness to engage decrease very ?; and at length I could not resist peeping over a piece of rock, in order to observe his motion», before I attacked him* lie was vol. m, ?
stretched at his full length just below me $ reclining his head upon his left hand· lie sighed frequently, and at intervals wiped his eyes with his tail, which served him for a pocket handkerchief, He was in such evi¬ dent distress, that I thought it quite cruel to disturb him, and resolved rather to deprive myself of the honor of cutting off his head, than intrude upon liis sorrows by giving him an opportunity of biting off mine. .While we were in this position, my atten* lion was attracted by a light, which glim¬ mered upon the top of the mountain* At first, I thoughts that it was a paper kite with •a lanthorn tied to its tail ι but on its descent 1 discovered the light to proceed from .a fiery car drawn by two flying tygers, bi this sat a man splendidly habited, and I ' recognized with surprize the stranger^ who had fold ?? fortune in the Mandarin's .grotto« He was accompanied by a lady, the elegance of whose form gave me great curiosity to see the face belonging to it ; but this was im¬ possible, in coiiscquence of her head*dre$5,
ITHE FOUR FACARBÎHS*
51
which was the most extraordinary ever worn by woman. It was no other than the enor¬ mous cock, which I had seen in the grotto^ and which placing a claw upon each of her shoulders, over-shadowed her face with his wings, while his tail streaming down her back, formed a lappet very tasty and orna* men tak As soon as the car touched the earth, the lEnchanteir aided his compamon to alight» instead of expressing terror at the sight of the lion, she hastened towards ??? while he upon bearing her steps reared himself upon hiš hind-legs, and (as I imagined) pre¬ pared to spring upon lier. 1 already g^ve her up for lost*, but to røy great surprise, I found, that if he devoured her at all, it was likely to be with kisses. The nymph repaid his caresses with interest? though she w r as evidently so much affected, that she was ready to faint. The Hon, however, who seemed to have all liis wits' about him, made .haste to', feel ■ in liis left ear for '■ a smelling- bottle,■ with whose contents lie proceeded to
bathe her nose and temples* When I saw him prepare for this charitable office, I .felt no little concern for the poor iady, as I thought him by no means calculated for the employment, and doubted not, that his claws would flay her nose completely* I was, therefore, much pleased to find, that the considerate beast was aware of this danger ; for he poured a little of the lavender water tipon the tip of his bushy tail, and then chafed her nostrils with the greatest success and dexterity* The nymph being recovered, the lion now paid his compliments to the Enchanter, and afterwards shook the cock by the right wing in the most hearty and affectionate manner. The whole party then sat down on the banks of the river, where the Magi¬ cian ? cerned to endeavour to console the other three ; but to judge by the tears that were shed, his eloquence was not very per¬ suasive* ?? about an hour the party broke up ι the members of it took a most affecting leave of each other; after which, the lion,
throwing himself into the water, returned to his island, while the Enchanter and thc nymph (still wearing her singular head- dress) returned to their car: it rose into the air, and disappeared on reaching the summit of the mountain. Supposing, that this same mountain must serve as a retreat for the Enchanter, I re¬ solved to ascend it, and endeavour to find him out. He had formerly appeared to take an interest in ray fate, and I thought it possible, that he might give me some in¬ telligence respecting my parents ; a subject on which the Mandarin had always preserv« ed an inviolable silence, and which I was extremely anxious to get cleared up. I fancied, that ï should feel aukward upon entering the world, if on being interrogated respecting my family, I shouid find myself obliged to answer—" Upon my honour, Sir, 1 know no more about it than yourself?*™ Accordingly, I set off in pursuit of the En* chanter, and at length reached the mountain's summit ; though not without being twenty D 3
times on the point of breaking my neck by * the way*. 1 now found myself at thc entrance of a spacious grotto, adorned with statues, shells, md a variety of other ornaments, rustic, its true* but disposed with infinite taste* In the middle hung a bird-cage composed of jet and ivory, and in one corner stood the enormous cock, employed in turning with great gra¬ vity the handle of an ebony spinning-wheel* 1 thought this occupation extremely unpro* litable 9 for the foolish bird (who probably had been ill taught) had neglected to cut any flax upon the distaili As the grotto had another outlet, I was proceeding to try my fortune further, when I heard the voices of persons approaching* ï drew back, m¿ soon after saw the En¬ chanter enter, leading the same lady, who had exprest so singular an attachment to the lion, They were accompanied by a stranger, whose person I need not describe to yoo, as he was no other than thc Giant» the loss of whose ear disenchanted Fortim«
brass this evening, aad who (by the bye) is also ChrysUlllud*b huib*uid. İn unu ???? he held an enormous ckb, and the other sus¬ tained a gilded tobacco-pipe, from which he occasionally puiïed clouds of amoke in the face of the Enchanter. No one seemed to be aware of my presence* The Giant threw himself upon a couch of turf, and listened with an indifferent air to the supplications of his companions* -—* Be not thus contemptuous» 9 ï heard the Enchanter say, on entering % u you have the advantage at present, but fortune will one day change. The same arts, which have made you possessor of the two spinning- wheels, may again deprive you of them; nor can you put them to any use without the third, which I never will trust out of my own custody. Listen then to my proposals*. Restore my brothers to thcir originalforms; suffer me to re-assemble the limbs of the Queen of Denmark ; and forbear to insist upon the dreadful conditions attached to the possession of Sapinella, On my part, î as- B 4
sure you, tliough I cannot consent to be¬ coming your subject, that 1 will never at¬ tempt to become your master ¿ ?? two »spinning-wheels shall remain yours for ever, and I promise you from this moment eternal peace and amity,"— — u Promise me a fiddlestick!" interrupt« ed the Giant, taking the pipe out of hia mouth; ^will yonder stubborn little Princess promise to marry me, if 1 put matters to rights again? That is the only promise,, which will have any eifect, I can assure you."—- — cc I marry you?" exclaimed the damsel: <e Inhuman monster, what claim can you ad» vanee to my affections ? Have you not cut my unfortunate mother into a thousand pieces ì Have not your spells compelled my royal father to walk upon all fours ? Be* sides, if you had not the worst memory of any Genius upon earth, you would recollect, that the stars have decreed, that 1 shall marry nobody, unless I marry Facardin, Prince of Ophir*"—
—j u A figfor the stars l' cried the Giant; u they don't know what they talk about y for it was.but last night, that I read'in them these iden acal words, written in a very neat running hand~-* c Sapinella of Jutland shall never marry Facardin, Prince of Ophir/ *'~ — ^ 1 shall certainly go distracted l 1 ex¬ claimed Sapinella, wringing her hands j * 4 1 am to marry nobody, if not the Prince of Ophir, and yet it seems, the Prince of Ophir is never to marry me : the meaning of all which is, that I am never to marry at ali î Surely, the devil is in the stars, and I wish they were all at the bottom of the sea, for they are the plague df my existence !**~ Here she began to weep, as if she means to set the room afloat. However y „ her tears could not melt the Giant's hard heart,, who rose to take his departure« —" On no other conditions^ 5 said he* " wifl I reverse my spells ; and if you ??? reverse them yourself, you are cleverer than I take you to-be. Farewell, Princess; the Prince of Ophir will be here shortly ; i ? ã
cannot prevent your seeing him, but I will prevent your liking him, while with you 5 as to his liking ??? that your own rashness has already prevented* Aye! aye!" continued he, addressing himself to thb cock ι α Turn away, old gentleman ! If you had done" that sooner, you would have done wisely. Às it is, your labour is thrown away, and you are likely to crow for sixteen years longer.'*—« The cock only replied by a look of indig« natioo, »nd by turning his tail upon him with an air, for a- cock remarkably majestic> fn the mean' while^ the form of the Giant disoîviïig into a cloud of smoke soon made its exit from the grotto, ïn this conversation, nothing struck me more than the name of the Prince of Ophir 5 at was the same with my own, and I faegÄ to suspects that the family»name of the $oya! family of Ophir must needs be Facardin« Tø ascertain this point, ï now advanced from my concealment, and having made, one of
?? best dancing bows* I addrcst the En» chanter neariy as follows« ™ €e Permit me, Doctor,"* said I,- (for as he was a Conjuror, 1 thought, that he must certainly have taken an University degree,) cc permit me, Doctor, to make myself known to you, audi ask you a few questions» Idle as you may think my curiosity, I confess, ï eannot help wishing to know the name of my parents, and to what place I went to bc born* Satisfy me on this head, and you shali be handsomely rewarded for your trouble/*— With these words, Ï' showed him the palm of my hand, and prepared to cross his with a^ piece of money* The Enchanter, who was by no means a common fortune-teller^ rejected both 5 but before he could repiy 2 tiie cock hopped up to him with much dignity, and crowed thrice in tones· so ex* pressive, that I was convinced of their mean¬ ing more, than cocks do in ordinary. —"Alas! my dear Tarif-Eldm,*' said the- Älagician, as if replying to some question ? 6
which the cock liad asked % *♦ 1 fear, that your hopes are too sanguine* In spite of \m name, this young man seems calculated «either by his age nor his natural strength for so violent an exertion* However, as the bow is luckily in my possession^ if you insist upon it, the trial shall be made \ but re* member^ that from the moment you enter jour príson 5 its door must be closed u ? more to open, till thc Facardin arrives destined to free you írom your* feathers, restore S.apmclk*s original form, dispell Mousseffina's gravity, and devour that fatal toe, in which consuls the whole power of our enemy."-— Upon hearing thb, the cock for a few moments appeared to hesitate, and he hung his head mournfully ι but his spirits soon levived* He spread lus tail, clapped his wings, aud then turning to the Knchanter, exclaimed m a tone the most resolute, and with an air the most intrepid—*" Cock-a- doodle-doo !"·—He tben hopped into the bird cage with great alacrity, the door et
which closed upon Mm with a thundering noise* The Enchanter now opening a case of sandal-wood, and drawing forth a bow of polished steel, requested me to bend it. I hesitated not to obey, but in vain did I first try it one way, 'and then another* My attitudes, it must be allowed, were uncom¬ monly graceful, but the bow remained un¬ bent ; and at length the skin being rubbed oft* both my hands, (which naturally are rather of a delicate texture,) I was obliged to relinquish tlie instrument in despair. ~ a I thought so !" said the Enchanter, shaking his head mournfully ; " ît is well, that I have three strings to my bow ! As for this, be it your charge, SapinePa, and re¬ member, that he who bends it, Λν?Ι thereby prove himself the person destined to reverse the ill fortunes of your family. I am now compelled to leave you ; henceforth, I am not permitted to visit you, neither is it in my power to prevent the Genius Feridouu from occasionally tormenting you with his
presence : but let ît be some consolation to know, that whenever he sets his foot upon this tnountain, he becomes your slave, not your master, and that my spells will force him to forbear repeating his addresses, or attempting to possess your person by force. Take courage then, røy dear niece ;. however disagreeable the form which your rash vow compels you to assume, remember, that you will one day regain your own, will be married to the Prince of Ophir, have a great many children, and live very happy ever after,"— — w Alas!" replied the lady, « you forget-, most wise Caramoussai, that the provoking stars have decreed, that I never am to marry the Prince of Ophir! But what surprizes me most is, that since you are a Conjuror, and practice the black art, you did not foresee- and prevent all this mischief."— —·** Sapinella!" replied Caramoussai, with· a look of profound wisdom, α though I am an Enchanter, 1 would have you to know, ihat I never was taken for a Conjuror before S
neither can the power of marie possibly reverse the decrees of fate, for decrees arc decrees, and fete is fate! Be concent to ????¥, that no exertions on my part shall be wanting to alleviate your sorrows 5 nor do I quite despair of finding at length a Prince vigorous enough to bend this bow, a mouth as large ás#your father's, a cock that can fiy as high as the emperor, and a rope spun by the hands of three Princesses the most beau¬ tiful in the %vorld, long enough to reach from the summit of Mount Atlas to the surface of the sea, and strong enough to bind our inveterate enemy in fetters never to be broken* As for you, young man/* con« tinued he, addressing himself to me, €s l must not at present satisfy your curiosity respecting your parents t suffice it to know 5 that you have a brother, who will shortly fall into the power of Feridoun, that Giant whom you have just now seen* Be it your care to deliver him from thence, and in order that you ?? know hini when you meet % behold his figure l '—
Hero lhe Enchanter waved his wand«, I immediately beheld on the opposite side of the grotto a young man seated on a rose- coloured sopha, and picking his teeth in a carefcbs attitude : thc vision lasted but a mo¬ ment ; yet in that short period he found time to yawn thrice, an habit of which (as you probably have already observed) love itself has not been able to cure him. The ligure having disappeared, Caramoussai thus continued his discourse* „« Your brother is called Facardin as well as yourself j a name, which important reasons have induced me to bestow on vari* ous children, in whose fate I fed interested* Feridoun's abode is not easily discovered ; but as it is necessary, that you should reach it for the purpose of rescuing your brother* I now present you with this phoenix of all coursers, who not only surpasses the winds themselves in fleetness, but will, unbidden, conduct you to those places, where it ? most your interest to be."-— 1 heard the latter part of lm speech with
oome surprize, in vain did I look round and round; no courser was to be seen, and vet did Caramoussai continue to enhance the value of his present ; assuring me, that the animal was sound wind and limb, perfectly free from vice, and altogether as clever a little tit, as ever was crossed by a gentle¬ man. And still no horse appeared! At length I began to suspect, that my friend fhe Enchanter was not quite himself, and that he had been ^endeavouring to settle matters with the Genius over a bottle. This sus¬ picion was confirmed, when conducting me to a corner of the grotto, he pointed to a three-legged stool, and desired me to mount immediately. He then forcibly obliged me to seat myself upon the stools and thus pro¬ ceeded. — ζς Excellent l n said he, with an air of satisfaction ; cc really, considering that you never were on horse-back before, you make a tolerable appearance, and seem to have a very good seat Now then, nothing is want* ing to complete your travelling equipage^
except this two-btringod guittar* Take it, aud observe, that whenever you strike the silver chord, all who are within hearing will be compelled to dance j and when you strike the golden one, whatever actions are going on at that moment will be continued by thc performers during a full hour : on yourself .done the charm will have no effect* Now* then proceed in search of your brother ; and should you meet by the way with any stray legs, arms, heads, or bodies, have the good¬ ness to put them into the green velvet bag, which is suspended under your horse» Re- member also, that whenever you wish him to set forwards, you must say«—* Chick-ali* allah-mamouibiazîl-khan j*-*-iand that you never must dismount him without first whistling thrice, and rubbing the tip of your nose as often against the bridge of your guittar·"—» — <c My dear Doctor/' said I, *' you must certainly be dreaming ! What in thc name of heaven can j ou mean by stray legs arid arms? and as to making this three-legged 4
THE »OUR FACARDİNS· 67 stool move by merely pronouncing— u CMdk-dîi-aHah-mamöüd-bizziî-khan^—tke thing is absolutely impossible/*™ The words were scarcely out of my m juth, when the stool set off with me, as hard as it could lay its three legs io the ground ! It galloped up hili and down dale Hke a mad thing, leaped over five-barred gates with the greatest agility, and upon reaching the banks of a river, without hesi¬ tation it dashed into the water, and soon landed me on the opposite shore. Immedi* ately my wooden courser resumed his speed, arid away we went again, as if we had been galloping for a wager* As we past through a village, the people ran out to wonder at us 5 the men and women hooted us, and the little boys pelted us with mud, stones, rotten eggs, and dead cats | but all this only served to make my nag go the faster« I cried out to them to stop him, for that î w*as run away with. Some of them endeavoured to obey me; but whenever ihey approached the »tool to lay hold of it, one of its legs kicked
up, and dealt about broken heads and bloody noses with such generosity, that the attempt was soon abandoned* The machine continued to proceed, nor stopped, till we reached the grits of an antient castle. Notwithstanding the rapidity of my pro¬ gress, I was not in the least fatigued ; it's true, my horse was nothing more than a joint-stool, but it was as easy as ifit had been an arm-chair ! I was occupied in ex¬ amining the castle's exterior, when the portal grated upan its rusty hinges, and two ser« vants, almost bent double with age, advanced with an entreaty, that I would enter, and accept of some refreshment. With this re¬ quest I readily complied ; but nothing could induce me to quit my seat, till I had whistled thrice, and given my nose three gentle rubs against the bridge of my guittar. After this important ceremony I entered the castle; nor was I a little pleased, nor my companions a little surprized, at observing that the stool came trotting after me, and never suffered me to go out of its sight, This induced m%
to hope, that the machine w ? as growing at« tached to mc ; and desirous of encouraging this predilection, I failed not occasionally to pat it upon the back, and seize every means of showing, that I was satisfied with its ser¬ vices. My guides crawled on so slowly, that I had full leisure to observe the apartments through which we past. They were magni* ficently furnished, but all in an antiquated taste ; old tapestry, old books, old pictures, old chairs ; every thing was old and seemed of a piece with my conductors. They usher¬ ed me into a small octagon chamber, and I now begged to know their master's name* *— w We have no master," was the reply; a this castle belongs to a Princess, to whom you will be introduced as soon as you arc old enough."— I thought this a very strange condition, and begged to know, at what age her high¬ ness would think me presentable, I was answered, that natives of that country did not presume to appear at court till they were
turned of sixty ; but that in consideration of my being a stranger, ten full years would bo abated, I hastened to assure the domestics^ that* anxious as I was to be acquainted with their mistress, still ï could not possibly wak thirty years for that honour: that I was obliged to proceed on my journey immedi¬ ately ; but that I should take care to return and pay my respects to her highness, as soon as í should be decently decrepit. _« You mistake me," interrupted one of the old mení ct as a stranger, it will be sufficient for you to kuk old 5 and provided 5 ou do but wear the appearance of age, your possessing the vigour of youth is ^a defect, which you wiU find the Princess very ready to forgive in you» You are to know, that ishe once was a místtess of the Genius Feri¬ doun ; but being grown old and consequent¬ ly neglected» she retired from the world in disgust, and now keeps her court in this antient castle» In order to preserve her eyes from being offended by the sight of that youth and beauty in others^ which she no
î longer possesses herself, nothing but what is old is suffered to approach her, and her court _ is composed entirely of superannuated belles, f > and beaux ïn tiieir dotage. A talisman placed ; here by Feridoun preserves in our hearts our ä youthful passions j we love, intrigue, quarrel, j and fight f as if we were still in the bloom of seventeen, and to a stranger this sight will probably appear entertaining. Here you will find four antiquated couple, tottering through a cotillion in spectacles; while there, a circle of seniors with trumpets at their ears are fascinated by the vocal powers of a toothless toast. In one -room, ymx will ad¬ mire two fiery dolards, burning with rage, anxious to fight, but unable to draw their swords; and in another, you will see a wrinkled beauty of fourscore snatch het shrivelled hand from her drivelling adorer, refuse him in disdain one of her five remain¬ ing hairs, and exclaim agaimt the wiká of wicked man, and the too easy fekh of un* suspecting woman/**— This account piqued my curiosi*y ? and
having nothing better to do, I accepted the services of the old domestics, who hastened to equip me for their lady's presence- chamber. They began by fmng a grey wig upon my heads and then fastened under my chin a beard, whose length was truly respect¬ able* After this, thew drew red circles round my eyes, traced several wrinkles on my forehead, and in a quarter of an hour ren dered my appearance so venerable,» that when I first looked in the glass, í involun¬ tarily made myself á low bow. The servants now withdrew to announce my arrival to their mistress. Scarcely was í left alone, when the sound of complaint attracted my attention. I listened, and heard a voice which seemed to be in the room, bemoan its hard fate, call ihe stars cruel, and (as is usual on such oc¬ casions) invite death to put an end to its sorrows. As ï could discover nobody ex cept myself in the chamber, and as the voice seemed to be cluse at my elbow, 1 was somewhat puzzled by this occurrence* Pre*
sently, 1 felt something treading upon my toes: í looked down : ic wis the joint-stool, which had taken that mode of attracting my attention, and which having obtained it, marched before me towards a corner-cup« board. It was fastened, and as I have aiways been told, that it is extremely wrong to pick a lock, Ì judged, that it would be much more genteel to break the door open. I did so, and found in it a tortoise-shell box, which \ examined without delay. What was my -urprize at finding a pair of lips of the most j osy freshness, whose continual motion (as well as that of the tongue, which I could perceive occasionally,) left me no doubt from whence the voice proceeded ! This circumstance embarrassed mc not a Httle. ïn vain did I endeavour to unravel it, but could only ascertain, that from their incessant motion, the lips mibt certainly have belonged lo a woman, utili the complaints continued; í liste» Λ to them attentively, and at length heard some sentences which cleared up my doubts ar once, \ol. uu ?
—-" No !'* said the voice, u never was 4vretchedness equal to mine ! Never before 4vas woman chopped in pieces, because hcr daughter refused to marry a man ten yards high ! Oh ! ifl had my eyes again, ï should certainly cry them out at thinking to how ignoble an office my bosom is fated, that bosom of which I was once so proud S And shall that Harridan of a Princess possess it for ever ? No ! let but the rest of me be put together a^aîn, and soon will î have mv bosom back in spite of her teeth ; or rather in spite of mine, for alas! ihe traitress lias got possession oithem too ! As for my other limbs, heaven only knows, what is become of them ; but I am terribly afraid;, that my legs are fallen into bad hands- Ah ! if that defect in them, which 1 so carefully concealed from every eye, should be discovered, Insupportable thought ! Heaven and earth ! 1 yhould certainly expire with shame, were * ît once publicly known, that my legs are bandy P ? — So pathetic was the tone, in which these
ibt wortis were pronounced, that I could not refrain írom weeping, I asked the lips several questions, but to no purpose ¿ indeed ï found afterwards, that the earL'^hich ought to have heard me, were at tliat time about three thousand leagues off. However s I had no doubt, but that these very lips were part of thc stray limbs recommended to my care by Caramoussai, and I immediately de- pobited them in the green velvet bag. This was scarcely done, when the servants re- turned to conduct me to the Princess; 1 followed them, and my three-legged com¬ panion trotted after me¬ llié Princess Chiuchiuosa (for that was her name) ît seems, had been a favourite of i· eridoun ; í could not by any means admire Fcridoutts taste. She might indeed have been handsome once, but 1 should never have suspected it. Her skin was like so much tanned leather : her hierh cheek-bones* daub- ed thickly over with paint, seemed ready to pierce tlirough the skin which covered them: and not having hair enough left with which E 'Á
to fasten it on, her monstrous flaxen peri¬ wig got a little more on one side with every movement j so that by the time that I had been ? the room a quarter of an hour, it had made half the circuit of her head, and the 'hind part hung down before. Slie sat upon a lofty throne surrounded by her cour¬ tiers, whose nodding heads and trembling hands made me í think at first, that I had got among a parcel of shaking Mandarins at a china shop,/ The ladies of the bed-chamber were all turned of fourscore ; every maid of honour was at least in her grand climac¬ teric ; and there was not a staff officer in her whole army, who did not go upon crutches. Such was the court of thc Princess Chinchi- nosa. She received me very graciously, and at dinner í was placed at her right hand. I soon found, that spoon meat was in great request ; not but that there was a variety of other dishes, such as old mutton, large beef, and full grown fowls* But as for Iamb and veal they were forbidden food ; the Princess
would have fainted at the sight of a chicken,; and a oïofpnn ίο whirl» ? ?*?? Imlnnd. nroveci so extremely old and tough, that in my con- bcience, I believe it was the same that carried Noah the olive-branch* puring dinner, there was a concert, at which nothing but old music was performed ; and between the instrumental pieces, a Soprano (who looked like Methusalem) favoured us by warbling Solomons song. His hands trembled so, that he could hardly hold the music-book* and his voice being extremely infirm^ I could not but allow, that his shake was wonderful. However I did not much at· tend to the music t another object engross* ed all my attention. Her higlmess's nose and chin being of an immoderate length, and meeting so close that a walnut placed between would have remained there firmly, she was obliged to introduce her food into her month at one corner. Luckily, that mouth was so large that she accomplished the point without difficulty, and in doing it took care to dis* JK 3
play two rows of teetu admirable for their regularity and whiteness. She saw that I remarked them, and willing to com¬ plete her supposed conquest, she made the luat a pretext for removing the gauze from her neck, and discovering a bosom of which a Grace need not have been ashamed* I no tfooner beheld it, than I was convinced, that both this zná the teeth belonged to the Tips already in my possession. Instantly ï starred from my seat, with one hand cut a flesh-co¬ loured string which fastened the bosom tú the back of her highness's scraggy neck, and with the other clapped it into my bag with¬ out saying a syllable. Ghinchinosa's surprisse and rage at first choaked her uttef ance. No sooner did she recover herself, than she seized a plate, in¬ tending to throw it at my head, and prepared to utter a volley of execrations, the first word of which í verily believe to have been nothing less üu <i-—" Damnation ί"-— Before bhe could execute either the one ot the other design, I struck the golden string of my gui-
tar* Instantly her hand remained with the plate suspended İn the air ; her lips continued to move with incredible velocity, and she continued to repeat—- Damn, damn, damn, damn,"—without being able ro bring out an¬ other syllable· Nor was the effect produced upon the spectators less strong. The High Steward, who was drinking, was «nable tø take the cup from his lips ? and swallowed such a quantity of liquor that 1 expected to see Mm burst every moment. His wife, whtt was fanning herself violently, soon knocked off the mounting, and continued to shake the bare sticks. The chief Cadi was repeat¬ ing an interesting anecdote, but instead of making any progress in it, he repeated the i»ame sentence over and over and over again, while his hearers listened as attentively, as if ihey had ?./?? heard it before. Two old generals, who were shaking hands, continued to wring each others" lingers, tili î though** that they wouki all havr* dropped oü*: aml the ma.ster of the hoi>.% being employed in treading arteciionateb on the toes of thi» mani ^ -h
of honour who sat next to him, remained so long in this attitude, that the poor creature, (who happened to have corns) roared aloud with all her might and main.. Above all I was amused by an old lady of the bed-cham¬ bers who having just filled her mouth with a piece of burning hot pudding, was unable to get rid of k 3 and persevered ia tossing it from one side to the other with such horri¬ ble wry faces, as would have provoked laugh« ter in Mahomet himself, I now prepared for my departure ; but first I made bold to strip Chinchinosa's mouth of its borrowed ornaments. These also I put carefully into my bag; then seating myself on the tripod, I pronounced—" Chick-ali-allah-ma- moud-bizzil-khan !"—* on which it gave a great jump, darted with me out of the win» dow, and I soon lost sight of the castle and its environs. Iwas well satisfied with the issue of this adventure^ and still better with my wooden horse, who for a flying leap was without his equal. We soon reached the gates of a no-
?? city ; not chusing to make too conspi¬ cuous a figure, í quitted my seat after using the necessary precautions, and entered the city on foot ; but my companion attracted such universal notice* and the crowd which followed ? created such a disturbance, that as we passed the prime minister's palace, he was induced to appear in his bakony. Struck with surprise at the sight of this animated machine, he gave orders that both of us should be conducted into his presence. This command I readily obeyed, and the stool trotted up stairs after me of its own My reception was very gracious. I took care to keep my birth and station in life a secret, which (as I knew nothing about them myself) was a matter of no great diíEculty ; however, I failed not occasion¬ ally to throw out certain little hints, which by saying nothing and implying a great deal, made the minister understand that I was a person of no slight importance. On his part, he informed me, that I was thea E S
ín the capital of the Danish dominions: and he beggeel me very politely to make use of his house during my stay at Copen« hagen, a request with which I was con¬ descending enough to comply. At night ! was conducted to a superb apartment« 1 couîd nøt lielp* expressing to the domestics who were appointed to at- tend me, my surprize, that aftio^g all his civilities their lord had not offered to pre- serit me at court,-* A flood of tears was the first answer to this observation ι after wUch, they informed me, that the whole royal family had suddenly disappeared in a most unaccountable manner, and that the supreme power was for the present exer¬ cised by the chief minister alone. They also entreated me not to mention this sub« ject before their lord, whose grief had been excessive on this occasion ; and they even hinted, that a tender attachment to her ' Majesty was suspected to have no smali mirare in producing so violent an affliction. The 1 domestics now loft mo ? í retired to
my couch, where I soon fell 'mio a pro¬ found sleep } but the tripod did not suffer me to enjoy it long. As its movements seemed to buist upon my rising, I took my guitar, and followed the most intelli¬ gent of all moveables through a long gal¬ lery, which led to the minister's own bed¬ chamber. Unwilling to disturb him at an hour so unseasonable, I would not enter ; but I made no scruple of looking through the key-hole, which (I thought) could do no harm to ai:y-body. My surprize at what I beheld, was excessive! the minister, a grave, stately man with a white beard, was on his knees, while he addrest the most passionate and pathetic speeches to a pair of the bandiest legs that ever were covered by a petticoat ! Its true,to set them offa little, they were clothed in name-coloured stock« ings, with silver docks ; and I remarked, that in spite of their crookedness, they Walked np and down the room with ?? air of extraordinary dignity 1 **— u Oh ho !" said I to myself: " these 1?*? ι 6
nmst certainly belong to the lips and bosom in my green velvet bag : they must needs become their companions 5 *™ Eut how was this to be managed ? the door was locked, ana the key on the inside*. How¬ ever, accidentally applying my shoulder to oue part, and my knee to another, at the same time through mere inattention giving a tolerably hard push against it, as good luck would have it, the door happened to fly open ! at that moment the right leg was re¬ plying to a tender speech of the minister's by a tolerably hard kick upon the left cheek* I walked straight up to them, took one in each hand, and in spite of all their struggling, de* posited them very quietly in my green velvet bag. Most extravagant was the rage of the prime minister ! he called loudly for his servants to throw me out of the window ; a ceremo·» ?? ? which in my opinion was quite unneces¬ sary« Desirous, therefore, to save the poor fellows the trouble of coming up stairs, 1 now tried for the first time the silver chord of my i
guitar. No sooner had I struck it, than the minister seemed to have been stung by a Ta¬ rantula· In vain did he strive to repress his desire to dance, a desire so unbecoming his age and station ! First he extended one arm, then the other ; now he lifted the left leg, and now the right j till at length he set off at full speed, and danced the Hayes round two elbow chairs with wonderful activity. I could not restrain my mirth, when I saw the old gentleman (his cheeks glowing with rage and his eyes flashing fire) frisk away, snap his ungers, nod his head, figure in and out between the chairs, and every now and then set to a corner cupboard. But my attention was soon called to quiet a disturbance, which had taken place in the green velvet bag. It seems,the rage for dancinghad communicated itself to the flame-coloured legs; they were footing it away at an astonishing rate ¿ while lhe lips complained aloud, that they were kicked black and blue, and the bosom sent forth such sighs, as if its very heart was breaking, Tliis being the case. I thought üt
to put an end to the ball I forbore tí? strike ?? guitar, seated myself on the joint» stool, and it sprang with me through thc window, just as the minister came tum¬ bling upon the floor, quite out of breath, and totally exhausted. 1 will pass over the three next years of my life, whose events were wholly unim¬ portant, and hasten to the period when I encountered my broiher for the first time* One day, the friendly enchanter suddenly appeared before me, as 1 was reposing my¬ self upon the shore of the Red Sea. <—·" Youth," said hc 5 u I am well satis¬ fied witb your obedience; you have secured those limbs, about which I was most an¬ xious, and now I have only to find the nose and the left hip. But the time is ar¬ rived, when your brother requires your as¬ sistance t hasten then to> Feridoun's island, and release him from life disgraceful capti¬ vity ; but in order to accomplish that do birable event, you must first assume this ne« cessary disguise."—·
With these words he presented me with a female dress and assisted me in thc ar* rangement of it* fie proved to be a very dextrous attendant, and contrived to set off my person to such advantage, that when í peeped into my only looking-glass (thc Red Sea, whose billows washed my feet,) a very Sinari young woman presented herself in the watery mirror. One circumstance, in¬ deed, by no means contributed to give me a feminine appearance. I had not shaved for two days, and my beard being natural¬ ly, rather black and bushy, }t formed a ve¬ ri* striking contrast 4vith the snow-white muslin, in which my head was enveloped· No sooner did I mention this, than Cara¬ moussai (who really is a sharp active fd* low, and can turn his hand to any thing) drew out a shaving case, caught me by the nose, and whipped off my beard in the twinkling of an eye. This done, he took the green velvet bag in his hand, bade me adieu, and vanished. I was now Lit to m v own thoughts; í rf ? ^
did not indulge them long, for ï was of opinion, that in order to support a female character naturally, the less that I thought the better. Not doubting that my joint- stool was acquainted with the nearest road to Feridoun's habitation, ï seated myself upon ît as usual, and began to pronounce the charm, when to my utter astonishment the stool slipped from under me, and ï fell upon my nose with a terrible flump* Ì was not a little displeased at this practi¬ cal jest ; but resolving not to give np the point, I endeavoured to rc-seat myself : the tripod proved too cunning for me : aware of my design, it would not sulfer me to approach within arm's length of it, nor was it till after an hour's chace, that 1 suc¬ ceeded in catching it„ Scarcely did I grasp its fore-leg, when suddenly I felt myselt seized and lifted into the air. Greatly was 1 alarmed at discovering, that a monstrous bird called ? Roc, had pounced me, and was bearing me through the atmosphere in his talons. You may be sure that I did
not spare my lungs on this occasion, and a pair of tolerable ears might have heard my cries from the Red Sea to Jerusalem. A few moments only had elapsed, when saw something gutter beneath me. The rd descended straight towards it, and I on found myself on an island apparent- composed of chrystai ; upon which the ams of the sun were playing and tinging with a variety of colours, the most beau« ? and brilliant. Instantly the bird was etamorphoscd into a female, the deformi- of whose person and countenance was - no means compensated by the magnifi- oce of her dress. —** Be not alarmed, lovely lady," said e in a gentle voice t " If you prove the ???? for whom I take you $ you have it your power to render a signal service the Genius Feridoun, and in return may ckon upon his most fervent gratitude, ¡t should I find myself mistaken in the rson, I will immediately either convey >u back to the spot where í found )uu,
or transport you to any part of the globe which you may think proper to point out» Now follow me to my sovereign.*'™ She then conducted me down a magnifi¬ cent staircase of chrystai, till we reached a spacious saloon. Here on a throne of coral sat the giant, whom I had already seen upon Mount Atlas* He seemed greatly pulled about somethings and was entertaining him¬ self with an immense magic bnthorn. My conductress interrupted him* —-*' Illustrious lord i f * said she, u look upon this damsel ; in my opinion her beauty far exceíls that of the Princess Nour."-— The Genius forbore to answer, till he had fid on his spectacles. They were formed of two enormous telescopes, and with these he examined mc for some minutes with great Attention« In the mean while 1 affected to 1 b!ush,and fix my eyes through modest y on the ground. -— " In point of beauty," he replied, " you are ccTUn.ly right ; bui charms alone will not answer my ???^??? : I must first know
whether she is of royal blood—come hither, pretty one : pray, where were you born ?** After a pause, during which I seemed to struggle with excess of timidity. I made a low reverence, and replied in a feigned voice—- " where ever your excellence pleases·*'— —* w You are extremely obliging," answer¬ ed he ; '* but as that does not quite resolve my question^ î should be glad to know, who were your parents ?'* —·" To the best of my knowlege,** said I* after a few moments past in reflection ; " to the best of my knowledge tliey were my fa* ther and mother."—* —~* c So I should suppose l* f cried the giant impatiently, i€ why the girl is an idiot ί what I want to know is, what were their names and stations in life ?"— cs My Lord/' answered I, *f they never thought proper to tell me of their own ac- •cord, and Mahomet forbid that ? should have been so indiscreet» as to ask them any such impertinent questions»"- - " Why, 1 protest," exclaimed Feridoun,
u yon are a very paragon of prudence ! But as f am not likely to gain much information from you, we may as well break off our dis« course, Cadiga, conduct hex to the Princess Nour, while í endeavour to discover by my books, that of which she seems herself to be so ignorant* Gû£ my pretty simplicity ι Ca* diga will furnish you with play-things, and yon may have as many almonds and raisins as you can manage to eat."-— I thanked hím with an aukward childish air^ and then followed Cadiga, mincing my steps as much as possible, and mostly walking upon tip-toe* 1 was now ushered into an apartment, formed also of chrystai But curtains of gold stuff were suspended round the walls, and effectually prevented the per¬ sons within, írom being seen by those without. At the further end of the room was a sofa 9 on which sat a young lady of ex- ijuisite beauty* She was splendidly drest, and was hinging a plaintive air to her lute· Cadiga now bade me adieu, and retired, locking the door after her.
'lhe joint stool all this while had remained in my hand without motion. Its weight, added to that of the guitar, was by no means inconsiderable ; 1 was not sorry therefore to set it on tlie ground. No sooner was ic at libertv, than it ran towards the ladv, tumbled h.iclf at her fcot, and as far as I could guess from its movements, seemed to express great joy at the sight of her. Without paying it any attention, the stranger rose, and came towards me with open arms. — ^ Welcome," she began, u welcome, lovely Princess, to this odious prison 3 I am well aware that in you í behohl one of these unhappy beautioá, who are destined to share with me tho task of spinning the cord, on which depends the préservation of our ty¬ rant's power ; but í am still ignorant, whether \ ou are the adorable Sapinella of Jutland, or the divine Moussellina of Astracan, Answer me, amiable stranger ; whom do I embrace at this moment ? s, ~ Thus saying, she extended har arms to¬ wards me, and i was not behind-hand in
opening mine: unluckily, the joint siooï,\vho had no arms to spread, was provoked at see¬ ing ours in that attitude: and just as we were on the point of embracing, it very im¬ politely pushed itself between us ?? Midden!)-, that î v/as very near tumbling over 'n head foremost, í made two or three more at t empi - with no better success ; till finding, tha» whenever I approached the lad)% the incon¬ venient tripod never foiled to tread upon im toes, break my shins, or kick my ankles r J gave up the point, and resolved to make ? virtue of necessity. Accordingly, I de¬ clared my sex, and requested to know whe¬ ther she could give me any intelligence of tin brother. On finding that she had oilVreù lo embrace aman, the fair Granger ondo.i- voured to blush : she did not succeed, ?? i gave her great credit for the attempt. Slu: then launched out in praise of the propriet} of my conduct; protested that «he should have been shocked to death, had she kissed :i male creature ; and thanked me in ver) strong terms for having 1 made my confix
???, though 1 saw, that in her heart üv¿ would have been quite as well plea^d, it í had kept it to my^ih She then desired me robe seated ; I obeyed, and placed myself by her on the sopha; butthe jealous joint stool took care to squeeze himself in between m< —" If by your brother," began the Prin¬ cess, É * you mean the warrior who calls him- m li' Facardin, I can only inform you, that h e is now upon this island, and is a great fa¬ vourite of Feridoun's, and a still greater of kis wife's. Not that I have seen him myself, being never suffered to quit this apartment ; nor is he likely to visit me, as Cadiga informs me, that he professes an invincible antipathy to women. 1 know no more alwut your brother, wliose rescue, I hope, y ou will spee¬ dily accomplish, My own deliverance, i fear, is faroil: I am guarded by a thousand indis¬ soluble spells, and alas ! the chains which î wear, were forged by my own imprudence/*
History of NOUIt, Princess of Screndip* My father, who was sovereign of Scren dip, died when I was scarcely fourteen, and left me his ??!? heiress. Ì was sought in marriage by a multitude of admirera, but ?ione made himself so agreeable to me, a> Zemin, Prince of Fez. Not that there wa- :my thing particularly captivating either îi? lus figure or his face ¡ neither was lm wit very biilliant, or his understanding uncom¬ monly profound : but then he was extreme ly good-humoured, and composed the vor y best riddles, that I ever read in my lift, Besides, he was so merry and comical, tha» he kept me in a lit of laughter from morn¬ ing till night ; and when í add, that Ir danced perfectly well, and had very white teeth, you will easily conceive that ï lovoo him to detraction.
On the day preceding .bnt fixed for our Eiarriage, as we sat in a bower of my gar¬ dens, Zemin happened to praise the work¬ manship of a certain chest, which stood in lib chamber, liis account of it excited my curiosity, and it was sent for. It proved to be made of sandal-wood* but its greatest odament consisted in a number of goîden ligm es inlaid upon the lid, on which they moved about as if they were alive, perform¬ ed dances, fought battles, and were perfectly obedient to the commands of Zenjin, At length í inquired, what the box contained ? With surprize 1 learned, that my lover was ignorant himself. A dervise, who wits then dead, had made him a present of it ; at the same time assuring him, that if he dared to open it without the Genius Feridoun's permission, he would expose himself to the most dreadful misfortunes. No sooner did 1 hear this, than I resolved ίο try my influence over Zemin by compel!* ng him to open the chest. In vain did he -emonstratc} and as lie still persisted ia VOL, UU ?
refusing compliance, 1 threw myself into an agony of passion, and at length pretended to faint. Zemin could not stand this ;rial of his affection. He seized the chest, touched a secret spring known only to himself, and the lid instantly flying off, he drew forth the contents, and had them at my feet. Of course I immediately recovered from my swoon, in order to examine his present. It consisted oí a steel bow and an arrow with a golden head. But no sooner were they out of Zemin's hand, than an enormous bird (shaped and coloured like a cock, but neither whose Sisse nor flight resembled that ani¬ mal's) darted from above, seized the bow and arrow, and was out of sight with them in an instant. This incident was strange, but thc next was terrible* Suddenly, the ground opened at a few paces distant from us, and a black shaggy gigantic arm coming out of it s grasp* ed my two hands, and dragged me into the cavity. Zemin, who was staring after the feathered robber with his mouth wide open,
was alarmed by my cries. He iiew to asbkt me, and was just in time to catch me by the feet, By these he attempted to draw me back again ; and ihc shaggy arm persisting in pulling me down, while my lover persisted in pulling me up, I was see-sawed in this manner for a full half hour, than which no¬ thing could be more disagreeable. At length, * a violent exertion of the shaggy arm com¬ pelled Zemin to let go his hold* Down I went head foremost ; the earth closed over me, and for this time 1 fainted in good earnest* On recovering, I found myself in this apartments and attended by Cadiga, who informed me, that I was in the power of the Genius Feridoun, I inquired, for what crime ? was thus imprisoned ? She replied, that her master was highly offended with me for having been the means of throwing the enchanted bow and arrow into the power of his enemy Caramoussai ; but this was not his only motive in carrying me oil'. It seems, that there exist tliree spinning-wheels, which F 2
being put into the hands of the three most beautiful Prircesset in the universe, will fabricate a cord, long enough to reach from the summit of Mount Atlas to the surface of the sea, and strong enough to fetter the three ¿ons of the Enchantress, Mergian- Banou, whose magic powers are alone equal to contend against Fcridoun's. By various stratagems he has obtained possession of two of these spinning-wheels; and as he daily hopes to make himself master of the third, he naturally is anxious to discover the three Princesses destined to make use of these * cabalistica! machines. For this purpose, he procured the baptismal registers' of all the 'Princesses at present in existence. Ke then, by means of an enchanted lanthorn, caused them all to pass in review before him, and adjudged the palm of beauty to Moussellina of Astracan, Sapinella of Jutland, and your humble servant- To assure himself that his selection was correct, he next summoned the three most beautiful Princesses in the world to appear. First came Moussellina5 good!—
Then appeared Sapinella \ better ¡—But now wben it was my turn to advance, lo! and behold ! in walked a ladv veiled from head to foot, and whose stature sufficiently de¬ clared, that she was not the Princess , of Serendip« This lias puzzled the Genius not a little. Though frequently repeated, the trial has never met with better success. Every time, that he summons the Princesses by their names, he is more and more con¬ vinced, that I am one of the charming trio : but no sooner does he call for the three most beautiful Princesses, than in steps this veiled lady, and puts all his ideas in confusion. Cadiga, under the form of a Roc, is frequently dispatched abroad, in hopes of leaking some discovery; nor do I doubt, noble stranger,'* (continued the Princess Nour, addressing her¬ self to me,) " that deceived by your dress, she fancied, that you might possibly be that mysterious fair-one, and under that persua¬ sion conveyed you to Feridoun's island* Should this be the case, I can only advisa yOU tO. . * * » » ""—·
~ w I caitt hear one word they say Γ cried some one above us in an angry tone. We both started from the sopha, and looked upwards: to roy utter astonishment I beheld my former mistress, Chrystallina, perched upon the transparent roof, which (not being so thick as the wails) happened at this moment to give way with a loud crash ? and thô paragon of curiosity came tumbling into the middle of ilie room* We ran to her assistance, and found, that in spite of so dangerous an accident, she would escape with a black eye and two or three contusions* She now thought proper to apologise for so abrupt an entrance. She stated, that learn¬ ing from her attendants, that two unknown persons were concealed m this apartments she could not but feel anxious to take a peep at them ; that as the door was locked, she made bold to procure a ladder and look in at the roof; and she finished by entreating to know who we were, as she was extremely curious to learn our histories* Nour (who had good reasons for pardon-
ing the faults of curiosity) readily promised to content Chrystallina: but I had other business in hand. The stool having given me several hints, that it w&* time to resume our journey, I pronounced the usual chasm, on which it sprang with me through tlm fractured cieling, and soon landed me in the saloon, where I had been presented to tbe Genius. He was absent himself, but in his stead î beheld a person much more welcome to me : it was my brother, who holding the magic lamhorn, gazed with great earnestness on the opposite wall, where appeared the figure of a beautiful female: her countenance was extremely grave, and above her head was inscribed in characters of fire~* c Moussellina thc Serious, Prmcess of Astracan/^— I hastened to embrace him, and expected him to be greatly surprized at liearing mc salute him as my brother : but it seems, that Caramoussai had already informed him in a dream both of my relationship and my dis» guise. lie received· me, thereiore, with much cordiality, but little astonishment* I ν 4<
? xphïned to him the virtues of my tripod, and proposed, that we should make use of them to quit Feridoun's dominions» He embraced my offer without hesitation, —-" You cannot do me a greater favour," said he, € * for of ail the islands in the universe, this island is the dullest, and its mistress is the most tiresome person under the sun, except its master* Besides, happening to enter this apartment, I found this magic lanthorn, and the Hmp being lighted, to keep myself frcm going to sleep, İ began to play with it. You see the figure which presented îtseif; nothing can be more lovely, anuí was just thinking how much I should be delighted to throw myself at the feet of the original, if travelling all the way to Astracan «vere no« ?? extremely troublesome. How¬ ever, your equipage t bvüres this difficulty* and (if your praise of its expedition be not exaggerated) I shall soon find myself in the presence of the ibcomparable Moussellina,''— 1 diiulen^'ed him to an immediate trial ot ι he merit* ol my stool: it was large enough
to carry double with ease ; we seated our¬ selves, and it set off at full speed. We soon reached the sea, into which the intrepid machine plunged without hesitation? and landed us safe on the opposite shore. Here Garamoussal was waiting for us - f he gave me great credit for the manner in which I had executed my commission ; at the same time informing me, that as no one could enter Feridoun's· island without its master's per» mission', he had been obliged to disguise mc? in order that the Genius might introduce me there himself. Then restoring my male- apparel, and ordering us to hasten to Astra¬ can, he embraced us affectionately, and then disappeared* We obeyed him, and travelled forward' witli great celerity ; though my brother fre* quently complained of not being $hle to lean back. However, in spite of this incon¬ venience, the drowsiness of his nature so far got the better of him, that when we wcrp about two days journey from Astracan, he F 3
reli asleep in broad day-light, aüd losing ?? beat, in the middle of a sound nap, came tum¬ bling upon the ground» The machine stop ped of its own accord ; but in my anxiety for his safety, 1 forgot every thing else, ami sprang oit the stool without taking thc neces¬ sary precautions. No whistling was thought of! No guittar-bridge was remembered. Fraternal afteetum took entire possession o» my roind ! My brother was luckily unhurt ; he yawned, rubbed his eyes, and rose ; bai *wen his apathy was not quite proof against astonishment, when he saw the joint-stool rake itself upon its hind legs, split its thii\i leg into two arms, (between which sprouted out an head and shoulders,) and at length present to us the farm of ? youth, of diminu¬ tive but elegant form, and of a countenance. though not handsome, remarkably ongag- ing. ~- —." 1 am soi ry fork, 5 * exclaimed Dinar- zade, " with all my hearr and soul. Let me die, if this be not another Prince, withano- 2
ther history, which will prove as long and as tedious as those of the Princes, his prede» cessors."— ~*~" Fair Dinarzade," replied Facardin of f rchizonde, H as frequently is the case with you, you are perfectly mistaken* This stranger was no other than Zemin, whose adventures you have already heard related by ihc Princess Nour, The Genius having in bis wrath changed him into a threa-lcgged stool, Caramoussai took pity on him ; and as one spell can only be reversed by another, he promised that Zemin should regain his ori- t-;ma! shape, whenever the person, who sat upon him, should rise without first comply¬ ing with certain conditions· On giving him to me, and endowing, him with peculiar powers of velocity and discrétion, the En¬ chanter was compelled to make those condi¬ tions known to me,- 1 had neglected to* fulfil them, and in consequence Zemin had- regained his proper form, lie thanked us in very strong terms for the service, which we had rendered lmn¿ F ?
though wo could not help wishing, that ii: hatl been delayed eight and forty hour.*; longer. J lis magic speed would have con« veyed us in two days to Astracan, which, in the common mode vf travelling, we had no hopes of reaching under a month. 1 Iowever, we concealed our chagrin from Zemin, and accepted the ofier of his company to Astra - can* On our arrival we found, that the Princess was absent on her usual tour, but were advised to meet her on the banks of this river, where she would not fail to appear. at a stated period, and where the grand. laughing trial was to take place. Hither then we hastened, each lui ving adopted that dress, which seemed most likely to excite ludicrous ideas, Zemin, in remembrance of that brd which robbed hirn of the fatal bow and arrow, has choseit the resemblance of a cock. For my part, a whimsical fellow whom ï encountered the other day, and who made himself extremely ridiculous by his admira¬ tion of a lady's slipper, which he wore in his
S
helmet, suggested to rne \ he dress, which you sav/ me wear this morning. ï now come to the most unfortunate ad¬ venture of my life, or shall I rather say, thc most fortunate ? But a few days are past, since I recognized at a distance the royal music of Astracan. Not doubting but that the Princess was at hand, we hastened to« wards it. Suddenly, we heard loud shrieks proceeding from the banks of a river, and on looking round, wc descryed two strangers mounted cm camels ; one of whom, being unable to restrain the animal on which he rode, was carried by him into the. water* We quickened our pace in hopes of assisting him ; but being at some distance, when we reached the spot, neither men nor camels were discernible. Nothing was to be seen, except some loose papers Abating upon the water. Suddenly, I perceived something glittering at my feet - y it proved to be a gold box studded with sapphires, and which probably had been dropped by » one ' of the two
strangers. ï opened it; that moment de¬ rided my fate ! ï beheld the portrait of a female so exquisitely beautiful, that from the first moment î folt my happiness to depend on my possessing the original, and every succeeding minute has confirmed that con« viction. Judge then, what must be my grief, when my brother assured me, that 'jy means of Feridoun's magic lanthorn having seen all the Princesses in existence, he beheld no face in the least resembling this portrait : yet, that it must represent a Princess, is suffi» ciently proved by the diadem upon her brow. Alas ! she was doubtless some anti-deluvian toast ! Some fair-one, who was in vogue about the time of the building of Babel! Otherwise, hcr beauty must already have rendered her celebrated, and the sighs of innumerable adorers have thundered her name through the universe. Judge, noble stranger, whether I have praised her too highly ?— —" Here/* continued the Prince of Tre* bizonde, u he put the gold bo^ into my
hand. What was mv surprize, mv iov* mv ecstasy, when 1 recognized a portrait, which I had lost, and which was the exact resem« blance of. *.... "~ —" Of whom l 1 ' interrupted Dinarzade eagerly· —** Of a person,'* continued Facardin, u whose name must never pass my lips. No,. Caramoussai; I will preserve my oath to you inviolate, however hard may be the task, however strong may be the temptation."— Here the Prince paused for a few minutes ; he sighed deeply £ his eyes w r ere suffused with tears. However, he soon recovered himself, and resumed his narration in these words: -—" The jay with which I surveyed thc portrait, did not escape its admirer. He eagerly inquired, whether I recognized th© features ? 1 replied in the affirmative ¿ add¬ ing, that it represented a Princess, who had been buried at least ten years,. The gaiety, with which Ì gave this intelligence^ greatly
offended the enamoured knight. I endea» voured to appease him. —" Who the lady was," said í, té I am not at liberty to reveal ; but though she is dead and buried, I can assure you, that your passion ? likely to meet with a return» One part of Caramoussals prediction is accom¬ plished; this portrait, at the sight of which )Our hear, for the first time throbbed with real love, will doubtless prove cold and in« Ãtntsible; and though it îs in your possession, I presume, you have no thoughts of making that piece ot ivory your wife* One part of the oracle is still unfulfilled—* The first ob¬ ject, which he loves, 5 said the Enchanter, he shall love for ever/—Prove this to be true, and all may yet be well. But above all, take no ofience at anything, that I may do or say. Be assured, that røy favour is at present of no slight consequence to you, and that my good word will have great influence upon the success of your amour»."— Facardin of the Grotto entreated me to
be more explicit ; but finding me resolute in silence, he woke his brother, (who during this conversation had fallen asleep») took a cordial leave or me, and then my two name¬ sakes retired ? their own apartments* Next morning I was routed by a message from Mousscllina, *who was impatient to see me, and my spinning-wheel. I drest myself in haste, and (wheel in land) ¿oon entered the royal tent. The whole court was assem¬ bled 'here, and even Chrystallina; for in spite of ti .· affronts which she had received on the precedmg evening, curiosity t ·*» hear the story of Fortimbrass would not permit her to be absent, On my entrance a chair of state was presented to me. ~~" Spin !" said the Princess, as soon as I was seated :—" Spin !"—> I obeyed ; she followed my example. No sooner did we turn the handles of our wheels, than the third appeared at the top of the lent, accompanied by the two beautiful arms, which had made use of it on the former evening. The Princess romand made a low
reverence, as if to thank them for taking so much trouble upon her account. On the contrary, Fortimbrass, who sat near his niece, immediately burst into a flood of tears. —~" You do well, my dear niece," said he, u in showing attention to so near a relation, Alas! those lovely hands are the cause of ill my woes, and yet With what tender delight does the sight of them inspire me ! But I fear, that I am not quite intelligible* Listen then, charming Moussellina, and compassion« ate my sufferings/'*^· An universal silence instantly prevailed through the tent,ana Fortimbrass commenced his narrative as follows*
Histon/ of Fortimbrass^ Kîng of bj£NMARK· Though my birth on the mothers side îs illustrious, I must own with blushes, that my father was a plebeian: Bedreddin was the son pf a respectable pastry-cook in Samareand, and from his earliest years evinced a natural turn for his father's profession» In particular, his pigeon~piel were inimitable: but un« luckily happening to season one" with rats« bane instead of pepper, (which occasioned the death of th* favourite Sultana, the Mufti, and a sky-blue lap dog, of which the king was particularly fond) he was obliged to make a precipitate retreat from Samareand. It was rumoured indeed, that he might have been forgiven for the deaths of the Queen and the Mufti, for his Samarcandish majesty very sagaciously observed— 4 * Women and parsons are to be found in plenty every where ; but where can I find another sky-blue lap-dog?**-—
In short, the dog proved my father's ruin, who for several years wandered about the world in thc most abject poverty* Chance at length conducted him to the ibland, on which the enchantress Mergian- Banou had fixed her residence. His person pleased her eye, and his pigeon pies her palate. To fix so admirable a cook for ever in her service, she resolved to marry him ; but previous to the nuptials, she took the precaution of rooting every twig of hemlock and nightshade out of the island* This proceeding was by no means unne¬ cessary ; for often did my father feel a strong inclination to treat her with ataste of such a pigeon-pie, as he had served up to tae sky blue lap dog. This being out of the case, he endeavoured to bear Mer¬ gian-Banou's ill-temper f which İn truth was diabolical) with patiences and upon the whole they lived together very tolerably for man and wife, though extremely ill for man and woman« Three children wert ι
the fruits of their union, one of which î had the honour to be. At the age of sixty, death paid a vbit to Bedreddin ; for though my mother could prolong her own days, her power did not extend to prolonging those of other peo* pb. No sooner was her husband dead, than she felt the loss of him most severely. Deprived of the exercise of kicking and cuff¬ ing him, she could find no use upon earth for her arms and legs. Her appetite left her entirely, for no dish was now so well seasoned as Bedrcddin's pigeon pies. So exquisite had been her pleasure in scolding him, that scolding other people appeared quite insipid to her ; her tongue remained motionless ; she ieft off talking entirely ; when matters were come to such a pitch as this, I knew, that the business must be nearly over with her ! in short, she re¬ solved to follow her husband to the grave, m hopes of eating pigeon pies with him in Paradise. In consequence... she neglected the Ubuai means of prolonging her existence.
ïn vain did my brothers and myself im¬ plore her to change this fatal resolution; she paid no more regard to our remon¬ strances than if they had been her hus* band's. — w It's extremely hard," said she angri¬ ly, u that ï may not so much as die to please myself; but certainly it must be the will of the stars, that I should be thwarted In every thing ! However, your disobedience shall not prevent my performing the part of a good mother. ï have it in my power to make two of my sons sovereigns ; while the third will become possest of my ma* gic art, a lot by no means the least valua* ble* Come then, my children ; let each of you draw a paper from this bag of green velvet, and ycu will know the portions al¬ lot ted to you by fate*"— We obeyed» Each drew forth a scaled paper, and examined its contents with ea* gemess# The kingdom of Denmark fell to my own bhare; that of Cbina to Tarif
Eldin's, while to Caramoussai (th* eldest of us) was allotted our mother's magic art. —" Nor shall my kindness stop here," resumed MergianJBanou. cc Behold these three ebony spinning-wheels ; in them are contained those potent spells, which hold in submission the spirits of earth and air, of fire and water ! no one can deprive you of them by force, nor even by artifice, except a woman ; be careful therefore never to trust them out of your own keeping, till you can place them in the hands of the three most beautiful princesses in the universe. These lovely persons must then spin a cord long enough to reach from the summit of Mount Atlas to the surface of the sea ; the possession of which, my sons, you must afterwards decide by lot. He, to whose share it falls will become sovereign, not only over his brothers, but ??^?? all the ge* nii and sorcerers who exist ; and in parti* cular wili be enabled to bind with that rope in everlasting fetters, the giant Feri dom?, the mortal enemy of my race. But abovo
ull, yon must take care to make no mis¬ take respecting the beauty of the royal dam¬ sels to whom you intrust the wheel*, for unless they are the most beautiful, thc charm will have no effect."— 4Î Mother/ 5 replied Caramoussai, after a short conference in private with Tarit-Eldin and myself," we thank you sincerely for your generous intentions ; but forgive us, if we do not profit by your last bequest. Too fondly linked together by fraternal affec¬ tion, for either of us to wish for dominion over the others, we never can consent to the spinning of the mysterious cord."— . Though sensible that her last moments were at hand, MergianJBanou could not restrain her vexation at this speech. . — a Mahomet grant me patience," cried the enchantress jumping bolt upright in her bed ; " was ever mother cursed with three such obstinate blockheads by way of sons ! î can tell you, young gentlemen, if my ad¬ vice is not followed, you will repent it sorely | for though while the wheels are in
your possession, they wül guard you against every misfortune^ should any one of them ever fall into the hands of. *... · "=*=*- Here death broke the thread of her dis« course, and our mother lay before ? ? a breathless corse. Fatal accident! had we but heard the conclusion of that sentence, what dreadful calamities should we have es¬ caped! but alas! repining is now of no more use than these reflections !—I proceed with my history· The first burst of grief being ovei% Ta¬ rif-Eldin and myself urged Caramoussai to accept the mysterious cord. He positively S refused* and as neither of us would even t \ endure the thoughts of becoming the sove* \ reign of our elder brother, it was unanimous* ¡ ly resolved, that the cord should not be fe- I bricated at ail* We now separated ; but not till Caramoussai had given to each of his I brothers a small silver hand-beH, the sound 1 of which would summon him to our assist* ; ance from the utmost extremity of the VOL* ?. ? :
globe. To this gift was added a couple of lying tygers ; for as neither Tarif-Eldin nor myself possessed the least necromantic know¬ ledge, without this assistance we should pro¬ bably have found some little difficulty in tra¬ velling into China and Denmark from ?? island in the Caspian Sea in three quarters of an hour, —- ^ Pardon my interrupting you/' said Chrystallina at this part of the King ©f Den« mark's story, Ä< but I have heard Feridoun frequently mention the Danish monarch, the Chinese Emperor, and Caramoussai as the three Gentis of whom alone he was in fear. How comes it then, that being ?, Genius, you possess no supernatural powers ?""— «—" Because, my fair lady,'* answered For» timbrass, " our mother being a sorceress in her own right, her soos were all called Genii by courtesy* though in fact none but the cl„ dest had any legal claim to that title: and as to his fears of us, they proceeded from our being in possession of the ebony spinning« wheels?
which (as an Oracle had fore-warned him) were capable of fabricating a talisman supe¬ rior to all those, of which he was master himself· My first appearance upon a flying tyger had sonjiething in it so novel and striking, that my new subjects were instantly prepos¬ sessed in my favour, and I was placed upon the throne with universal approbation» Soon after, I espoused Farruknaz, the reign¬ ing queen of Bactria, a woman of singular beauty, whose younger sister was already married to the King of Astracan* In little more than four months after our marriage, the queen presented me with a tlaughter. Being somewhat surprised at this circumstance, I consulted several famous physicians, whether they had ever heard of achacase before? ihey answered, that such an accident was common enough on the first tíme of a wife's lying-in, but desired ?? to make myself quite easy, for it was :evcr known to happen a second time· n 'Á
This assurance satisfied me completely ; and as m\ daughter had made hef appearance in the very spring of my marriage, I de¬ termined to call her Sapinella, which (as I need not inform you) in the Danish tongue means Primrose. Her charms Iiave render¬ ed this imme famous ; but of all the Prin¬ ces, who at the age of fifteen sought the hand of the lovely Sapinella of Jutland, heiress of Denmark and of Bactria, no pro¬ posals were so acceptable to me or to her¬ self, as those óf the Prince of Ophir« Pos¬ sibly, fair Moussellina, you are not suffi¬ ciently skilled in geography to know the exact situation of that kingdom : permit me therefore to explain it to you. At that extremity of the Red Sea, which is nearest to the indies, are situated on one side the confines of Ophir, and on the other ex¬ tend those of Bactria. The sovereigns of Bactria for time immemorial have been at enmity with those of Ophir: the rea¬ son was a very silly one, a case by no
means unexampled among neighbours, who like these were only separated by five or six hundred leagues of,water. These two potent sovereigns having plagued themselves with wars during upwards of fifteen hun» dred years, it was at length agreed between the King of Ophir and myself, that a final period should be put to tliem, and a last¬ ing peace cemented by the union of our children« My daughter was loveliness itself; and the Prince of Ophir was a prodigy of per* * sonal charms and mental talents, though hitherto he had been as cold as ice to the fair sex. However, plenipotentiaries hav« ing met on both skies, the treaty was soon concluded. Now it happened that the Bactrian minister, though a great politi¬ cian, liad scarcely an inch of nose ; but to make up for it, he had the most enormous mouth, that ever was beheld with eyes* The ambassador of Ophir. on. the contra¬ ry, .. # no ! stay a moment, till I recollect o S
myself !~yes—exactly so· It was the am« bassador of Ophir, whose mouth was so small, that a child of a year old would have got the tip of its finger into it with diffi¬ culty ; but tben he made amends for it by a nose the most gigantic, and the thickest studded with warts and pimples, that ever adorned the face of a plenipotentiary· My ambassador carried the artides of peace and Sapinella's portrait to the court of Ophir | but he might have saved himself the trouble \ the Prince would not even look at the picture, and having watched for an opportimity of escaping, fled secretly from court one night, at about three quarters after twelve» But what happened in the interim at the other court, will make your hair stand 'an end with horror* Before I relate this catastrophe, it is necessary to in¬ form you, that at the distance of about two stadii and a half from Fourchimena (the Bactrian capital) there was a small wood, extremely dark; that within this wood there
was a temple still more gloomy, [listen to this with attention, I beseech yon,] that on the summit of this temple, there was a pinnacle, which towered among the clouds ; that on the top of this pinnacle, there wa& a cage; and that in this cage there was a certain cock, whose predictions were es¬ teemed as oracles throughout Bactria. Re¬ member these circumstances, if you please, for they are of material consequence* I was at this period resident myself at Fourchimena· The ambassador of Ophir was not yet arrived, and thè whole court was expecting him with the greatest impatience, on account of the splendid fire-works pre¬ pared against the wedding-night In the mean while, the lovely Sapinella, who (as a princess ought to be, who had received so excellent an education) was extremely par¬ tial to handsome, well-made young men, entreated her mother to accompany her privately to the oracle of the cock, in or* der to ascertain exactly at what hour the g é
Prince of Ophir would arrive : for, trust¬ ing to the information of the news-papers she made no doubt, that in order to ren¬ der the scene more interesting, her lover himself would arrive most gallantly, under the name of the King his father's ambas¬ sador. My daughter, therefore, growing weary ,of being drest out, frizzed, and per¬ fumed, at ail hours, (as through fear of being ^taken by sürprize» had been the case during three days &n$ three nights toge¬ ther,) wgs just on the point of slipping out through the stable door in the twilight, .unaccompanied by maids of honor or ladies f #f the bçd«chamber ; when the queen was infqrtned, that the minister of Ophir was just arrived ip a post chaise This proof of amorous impatience con- f med tbem ia the ?? that this „could |ie no other Ahm the hand^ow Prince in person« The chariot wbicb wap to have carried them to the oracle, brought tliem Hcfc %9 ?? palace. .$%fin4h (wbo faope/f
ta reward the Prince for his anxiety to see 8 her, by proving to him, that the sight was worth the trouble) did nothing but teach her eyes to languish, bite her lips to make them look red, and pull her hair this way and the other; till at length the audience began. But when the real ambassador ap« peared, I really thought,, that she woukl· have fainted. She was so folly persuaded* that this was the Prince in disguise^ that when instead of tlie most lovely oounte« nance in the world she beheld this pelican's nose hanging over a mouth, which appear« ed to be made with a gîmbkt, she exclaim* ed aloud, and with violence,— 46 that the- Prince of Ophir's mouth might water, but that the Princess of Bactria turned up her new at him P*—Not contented with this transport of indignation, she sank upon her knees before the whole assembly, and. rais* iug her eyes to heaven,~* c may Mahomet never have mercy upon my bins/' bhe cried, ^ and may his akoran b^ my poison, it Q 5.
ever 1 marry the Prince of Ophir, til 1 be* come oki and hideous enough to inspire him with the same aversion, "which the sight of him now creates in me·'*—•Having said this she kissed the earth, which is looked upon by the Bactrians as the most solemn man¬ ner of ratifying a vow. The poor ambassador who had not yet commenced his harangue, was extremely astonished at this aversion m openly avowed towards the most charming Prince in the universe« lie pocketed the golden trum¬ pet, which he was going to insert in his mouth ín order to render his compliments audible^ and quitted the audience-chamber in the same manner that he had entered \t t but he ascended his post chaise in such a storm of rage, that we all thought his nose would never get out of the city with¬ out setting it in llames, it appeared so red and fiery ! On the other hand the Princess tore herself from the encircling arms ot hcr father, gave a sound box on the ear 1
lo her governess who was in vain endea¬ vouring to pacify her» sprang upon the horse of one of the officers of the guard, and away she galloped astride to the oracle of the miraculous cock. On reaching the wood, she descended, and was on the point oí entering the temple, when by the glimmer¬ ings of the moon beams she perceived a youth r in bright armour seated at the foot of a lofty cedar, to which his courser was bound. I need not explain that this stranger was the Prince of Ophir, whom (while flying from his father's court) chance had guided to the oraculous wood ; neither need I men¬ tion, that Sapinella instantly fell in love with him to distr?xtion. —" Gallant stranger/ 5 s?ad she in a gentle voice, while her blushes made her cover her face with her fan, though she made no scru¬ ple of peeping at the Prince through an oval hole in the handle of it, α gallant stranger, pardon ihe intrusion of an unknown ! you G (i
behold i« me tåe unfortunate Princess of Bactria, who*. · · "~r — u Of Bactria^" exclaimed the Prince of Ophir, starting back ? dismay ! that name recalled to him all the horrors of matri¬ mony ! already he fancied himself married, already heard Sapinella called bone of hb bone, and fie« h ofhis flesh - T and unable to re¬ sist the impube of his feelings, he §prang upon his horse, struck his spurs into the animal's sides, and without raying adieu to my daughter, he soon left the ?????? wood α full league behind him* Sapinella wîis not a little surprised at this abrupt departure* She ga&ed after him with her mouth wide open v nor had she succeeded in closing it, when the giant Feridoun stood before her. Happening to have some busi« ness with the miraculous cock that evening, he entered the wood just as the Prince of Ophir left it» No sooner did he see niy daughter, than he loved her, and no sooner did he love her than he told her so : but he
had chosen a most unpropitious moment for making his addressee. She not only -reject¬ ed theHi positively, but assured him, that he was the most horrible creature she had ?? ? ?? seen, and that if he would come to the capital, he might easily mate a fortune by exhibiting himself as a monster· At the con¬ clusion-of this civil speech* gfce vaulted into her sadile without staying to consult the oracle, snapped her fingers at the Genius in token of contempt, then gave her horse a kick and galloped homa again, as hard as she galloped away. incensed at this behaviour, Feridoun had recourse to his spells *> but when he found that tliey had no effect upon the fugitive, ? struck him, that she must certainly be under the protection of one of the three magic spin*· ning wheels, of which he had so long been in search. It was to preserve ns from the malevolence of this very sorcerer, that our mother had advised our- spinning the mys¬ terious cord, which would render tbe power
of the possessor superior to -his, and would enable ? to bind this formidable enemy hand and foot, whenever he should-render himself obnoxious. We had neglected Mer« gian«Banou ? s prudent counsels and (tliough it was then unknown to me) one member of our family had already experienced the fatal eílects of our disobedience, Feridoun had, it seems, taken a fancy to be Emperor of China, and »invaded that kingdom at a time, when grief for the recent loss of his wife rendered Tarif-Eldin the less able to repel the attack« However, consci¬ ous that though the loss of his wife was a bad thing, the loss of his empire would be a still worse, he exerted his military talents with such effect as to defeat the invaders ; and as the spinning-wheel protected him from all supernatural enemies, Feridoun was obliged to regain the chrystai island without having accomplished his object. On reach» ing his home, his first care was to consult his books, as to the cause wiiich rendered his
most powerful spells without effect * wher¿ exercised upon the Emperor of China» He ???.· .ourned-for the first time that there existe·.;: three spinning-wheels, once the pro¬ perty'of the pre-adamite Sultanas 5 that each of these sufficed to protect not only its owner but his family fcorn every species of enchantment ; and that if they were collect» ed and placed in the hands of the three most beautiful Princesses in the world, they would fabricate a cord, which would make its possessor sovereign lord over all the Genii and sorcerers in existence^ whether good- bad, or indifferent· This intelligence made Feridoun set all his wits to work* The talismans iri question (he well knew) could not be taken by force, nor could he become master of them except through a woman's hunds» To a woman then he applied himself, and caused your merry mother, fair Moussellina, to stopat Pekin, in her road to her husband's domi¬ nions· Here under the disguise of a dervise,
he took care to explain to her the importance of the ebony spinning-wheel, and expatiated upon its virtues, tili her desire to possess it became extreme,. Tarii-Eldin was still sor¬ rowing in widowhood j but the Queen of Astracan soothed him and consoled him so comically, that in less than a week she had completely laughed his wife out of his heart, and herself into it* No sooner did she find Mm entirely in her power, than tihe fixed the price of her favoni s at the surrender of the spinning-wheel ; though she was too mudi ? woman of honour to intend to keep her word· My" brother was infatuated; the wheel was given into her hands, and that very night the Queen departed privately from Pekin, carrying with her the palladium of TarifJEldin's happiness. He soon feit the fatal effects of hb imprudence. Feridoun again invaded Chinai, and with such success, that scarcely could a faithful courtier escape with my brother's two young son% both of thçm still İu the cradle.·
Soon wearied of his conquest, Feridoun shortly after returned to the chryatai islands but he w r as not so soon weary of tormenting : the unfortunate Emperor, wh@m he had j transformed into an enormous cock, fre* I quently amusing himself by making him Ì fight matches againat animals of the same i spedes, and sometimes setting him up to be , thrown at by little boys at an asper a piece· At length even these amusements lost their relish, and one day he bad actually ordered him to be fricasseed for dinner t when røy feathered relation perceived the magic hand* bell, given to him by Cttramoussal, which tili then he had totally forgotten, and which the Genius (ignorant of its use) had brought with him to the island among other spoils for the sake of the silver. Tarif-Eldin seized it with eagerness, and the very first tinglø brought Caramoussai to his assistance, The Enchanter's threats and expostulations included 'Feridoun to spare the life of tlie liumsutwckt but it was only upon conditio»^
that he should act the part of the Bactria« oracle during a certain number of years, at the expiration of which term, he should be delivered into the hands of Caramousbal Accordingly, the Emperor was inclosed with* in the cage of the pinnacle, and compelled occasionally to deliver such oracles as the Genius (who frequently officiated as priestess himself) thought proper to suggest» ~ 6δ But wherefore/ 5 said Moussellina, M did Feridoun suffer my mother to retain possession of the spinning-wheel ? For in her possession it still was, when she died. Her principal confidante then gave røe the key of the closets which contained it, accom¬ panied by ?ήγ mother's dying injunction, not to unlock the door: an injunction, which ? never disobeyed till after the loss of a certain part of my dress, which shall be nameless."·— ·— w To take it from her by force*" replied Fortimbrass, * c was impracticable ; but Feri¬ doun certainly expected tlie Queen to give it bim with hcr own free will However,
when he demanded it* her majesty, your mother, (who knew v/ell the value of the wheel, and who loved a joke better than custard,) thought, that it would be an excellent jest to outwit the Genius, and therefore assured him (at the same time laughing heartily) that she intended to keep it herself. This promise she adhered to more faithfully than her former ones, as indeed was natural; for it certainly is infinitely more difficult to keep a promise, which we make to please other people, than one which we make to please ourselves. ^Feridoun, however took this joke so ill, that he vowed to make your mother laugh on the wrong side of her mouth j but as the talisman effectually se¬ cured her from his resentment, he resolved, that you at least should not jest so out of season, and accordingly endowed you at your birth with that immoveable gravity, which nothing but tlie eflect of his own enchant¬ ments can dispel—So much for the history of my brother, I now resume to my own*
On Sapinella's return home, she expatiated upon the beauty of the unknown youth, and painted the giants appearance and menaces In the most terrific colours. My poor wife was so much alarmed, that she was actually going to swoon, but on second thoughts put it off till a more convenient season. Every female in the palace joined her in beseeching me to ake aï! possible measures for preserv¬ ing them from this terrible giant, declaring one and all, that they expected to be murdered or worse before the ne&t morn» ing: at all events, they should never be able to sleep quietly in their beds for thinking of tlie giant, that was absolutely certain ! Far* rukuaz indeed, who was a most virtuous personage, and held her honour far more precious than her life, dwelt more particu¬ larly on Feridoun's enormous stature, and hinted, that all the female chastity, both in Denmark and Bactria, would be endangered by an enemy ten yards high» For røy own part, ï was persuaded, that the talisman
(whose mysterious virtue I had prudently concealed from every one) was a nul securi¬ ty against the attacks of our unknown foe : however, to satisfy the women, I ordered the palace guard to be doubled, and soon after removed my court to the capital of Den* marina Some weeks past away in such tranquili¬ ty, that we not only hoped that Feridoun had forgotten i¿$¿ but at last we actually forgot him· In the mean while, Sapinella had spared no pains to obtain some tidings of thc unknown possessor of her heart. She described his person accurately in the royal Copenhagen Gazette, and offered five hun¬ dred sequins reward to any, who would tell hcr where to find him. All her exertions were in vain ; and slie began to despair of ever discovering him, when one evening while she was wandering in the palace gar* dens, she suddenly felt something seize her by the foot. She looked down, and perceiv¬ ed an enormous toad (a reptile^ to which she
had aiways a particular aversion; gnawing the toe of her slipper. She uttered a loud scream«* hastily drew her foot out of its covering, and instantly the toad and the slsppei disappeared together· As soon as the beautiful Sapinella recovered from her alarm, she hobbled back to her chamber, antl called fnr another pair of shoes l but, oh ! grief oí griefs l none could be found, that would fit her* In vain did we ransack everv shop in Copenhagen : one pair was too large, and another was too small ; this made her walk as if she had a wooden leg, and ihat in a few minutes produced corns as big as pumpkins ! All were at a loss to account for so strange a circumstance, but no one doubted, that Feridoun had a finger in the business: such indeed was rhe fact, for Caramoussai some time after explained the matter as follows. It seems, that it was a condition (though unknown to my brothers and myself) annexed to the possession oí our spinniug-whcekj that the children oi
those, in whose custody they were kept, should each have some personal perfection, so exquisite, as actually to become a defect % and such was the case with my daughter's foot; with your skin, adorable Moussellina, and with the respective noses of the two Princes of China. It was also decreed, that no cloth should be suffered to touch that particular part without causing extreme pain, except the first piece which should be applied to it. Thus it was, my fair niece, that you could only wear one particular shift; that Sapinella coukl only be fitted with ??? particular pair of slippers t and that my Chinese nephews could only blow their noses wkh one particular pocket-handkerchief. I nmst not, however, omit to mention, that these several articles had thc peculiar pro¬ perty of never wearing out, or of requirmg washing, Feridoun discovered this circumstance, and revived *to deprive Sapinella of her slipper, lilis accomplished, and roy daugh-
1er thrown into the greatest perplexity, he next assumed the form of my prime minis. ter, and assured my too credulous Queen, that the sandal-wood chest, which I kept locked so carefully, contained a remedy ibr her darling's distress* Nay, so artfully did he work upon her maternal feelings, that at length she broke open the mysterious chest, First, she drew forth the ebony spinning- wheel: not conceiving, how this machine coukl possibly supply her with slippets for ííapinella, she proceeded to search deeper, and in the mean while requested her adviser to bc so obliging as to hold the talisman for a moment. Ah ! how willingly the traitor complied ! No. sooner was it in his hands 5 than he resumed his natural form. Far- ruknass screamed with terror and surprize * ? ï heard the cry, and hastening with my daughter to her assistance, beheld for the first time my colossal enemy« —-< c King of Denmark," said he, a listen with attention to my commands. * This talis«
man was stolen from ?? father by Mergian- Banou: justly should I punish ycu for having detained from me so long my paternal in¬ heritance ; but in consideration of the pas¬ sion with which your daughter has inspired me, your offence shall be pardoned, and my enmity converted into friendship, provided the fair Sapinella consents to become my bride."— The poor Princess was frightened out of her Httle wits at this proposal ; but my wife, who had a natural turn for satire, and was highly incensed at having been over-reached, thought proper to indulge her propensity at the giant's expence. This she did with such success, and rendered Feridoun so irresistibly ludicrous, that in spíte of my vexation i langhed, ι ill I was ready to expire. This was highly imprudent in boi h of us, for the giant could no more command his temper, than 1 could my muscles, or the Queen her tongue ; and suddenly lifting up his left leg, he with¬ out any ceremony made, «, », (you need not VOI, ?. π %
put up your fans, ladies,)*.... he suddenly made a nail as big as a scymitar issue from his great toc, with which tremendous instru* ment, when I w^as in the very midst of a horse-laugh, he gave my mouth such a slicer, that he slit it completely from ear to ear : then grasping my wife by the nape of her neck^ he rose with her into the air ; where (horrible to tell!) we saw him with his enormous nail cut her up as dexterously, as the most expert butcher could have done a 'calf. 'This done, he hurled her limbs to different quarters of the globe, a leg one way, and an arm another ; while the blood iowed from them in such quantities, that it tinged the waters on which it fell, and ha* caused that part of the ocean to be called ever since by the name of the Red Sea* This horrible scene performed, the Genius »descended to inform us, that he woukl return on that day twelve-month; when, if ?? daughter still refused his hand, he would inflict on us the most exemplary punish*
meut· Ile added ? that to teach me better manners than to laugh at people before their faces* my mouth should never return to its original size 5 till I had found another of the same dimensions ; and having said this, he disappeared with the fatal spinning-wheel For some time I could do nothing but lament my wife.» who had not a single fault in her whole composition, except having a passion for satire and a pair of bandy legs'*—- (at this remarli from the King, the white arms were observed to turn the wheel with incredible velocity; but Fortimbrass did not notice this circumstance* lie proceeded,)«— " When my grief was somçwhat abated, î hastened iri search of the silver bell, which wouki summon Caramoussai to my assis¬ tance, and which till then I had neglected. What was my despair at learning, that the Queen, being ignorant of its secret qualities, aud thinking it old-fashioned, had caused ? to be melted down, and converted into % butter-boat for· her own i!se ! I was near π 2
losing my senses af: this discovery ; and Sa¬ pinella really lost hers, not only through fear of the Genius» but from pain at walking unshod with feet so delicate. The shoe¬ makers endeavoured to fit her in vain ; and as at first I ascribed their failure to their aukwardness, in a moment of passion I hap¬ pened to Jiang two or three of the poor devils, for which, however, I was afterwards very sorry. At length í judged it best to publish in every foreign kingdom as well as íny own, that whoever could produce a shoe that would fit Sapinella, or a month as large as my own, should espouse the Princess, and be heir to my dominions. These am« bassador& were ordered, on pain of death, never again to set foot in Denmark, tili they had succeeded in their search : while on the other hand, a messenger, whom ï dispatched to Caramoussals residence on Mount Atlas, was commanded to return with all possible speed. He was but ust in iinwt a-single Jay
only was wanting to complete the year, when Caramoussai arrived. Before I had time to request it, he promised me his protection, at the same time assuring me, that till my mes¬ senger's arrival he had been ignorant of my distress, having trusted to my ringing the silver bell He also comforted me with the prospect of ultimate happiness and tran-. quiUityi but added, that for the present he could not prevent Feridoun from inflicting the most cruel calamities both upon myself and my daughter. He likewise made known to me Tarif »Eldin's adventures, whose servi¬ tude to the Genius was at length expired, and whom he had just left upon Mount Atlas. He concluded by lamenting the increase of Feridoun's power, who had obtained possession of another spinning« wheel by practising the same artifice, by which he had deprived Sapinella of her slip¬ per, upon the Princess of Astracan, who had lately been robbed ofher single shift/*·— ~** Alas! he told you but too true!" ex- h S
rliîmed Moussellina^ în this part of her uncles tiarrativcj u assuming the form of my nurse* he persuaded me* that he could easily spin me ? proper piece of cambric, provided he were furnished with the ebony wheel, so carefully locked op in my mother's doset, I gave it into his hands, and he vanished with it instantly* This it was, which, -upon hearing of the arrival of Feri¬ doun's wife^ put it into røy head, that she might possibly have got my sliiftj and I made bold to take up the corner of hers, in order to examine the mark, for which liber» ty, í beg her ton thousand pardons*.***-* Chrystallina received this apology very graciously, but requested the Princess to Sufíer Fortimbrass to proceed with his his¬ tory, being extremely curious to hear ils conclusion. ï now began to suspect, that î was spinning a shift for the lovely Mousse!-* ??? and feeling for the aukwardness of Jut hi^hnvsj'ss situation, I redoubled my dili
gence, while Fortimblašs, ????????! as fob lows. ~ α Caramoussai now. .summoned mf daughter. Great was her surprize and grief at learning, that the handsome stranger was ?? other than the Prince» of Ophb^ and at being reminded of h^ imprudent oath¡ The Enchanter also took this opportunity of reading her a lecture upon swearing; assuring her^ that no paths were proper in a young la* dy's mouth stronger than™* 6 Bless my heart! 9 * — u Ods-fish l n ~ or at most—* 6 By the living jingo Í"-— He was still holding forth upon this topic, when the Genius arrived. Greatly was he. displeased at Caramoussals presence-, whose skill in astrology and posses» sion of the third talisman, rendered him a formidable antagonist· My brother per¬ ceived, and made use of his confusie^, to bring him to some reasonable treaty, and after much parley the following conditions were settled between thc Enchanters* SapU nella was doomed to reside upon Mount n 4
Atlas, under a form the most frightful, till some Prince of the name of Facardin shoukl arrive there, and either accept her hand at first sight, or devour Feridoun- s left leg raw, before the Genius was able to prevent him : but if no such event took place during twenty years, she was then to become Feri« doun's undisputed property. My sentence was to wear the form of some animal, and the only indulgence granted me was the choice, what particular animal it should be. Ir was, however, stipulated by Caramoussai, that if by any means I could manage to draw blood from my enemy, I should instantly resume my natural shape* With regard to TaritEldin, it was enacted, that he should never leave off crowing till a cock couid be found, whose powers of flying were as ex¬ traordinary, as those with which the Genius (in order to enlarge the sphere of his amuse» ments) had endowed the unfortunate Em¬ peror* On the other hand, Feridoun was allowed free admission to Caramoussals
grotto, in order that he might entertain no doubts of SapinelLts performing strictly the articles of the treaty : but so far was lie from being permitted to take any advantage of these interviews, that he was even 'forbidden to press the tip of her little linger, These conditions being agreed to, the giant dibap· peared to our very great satisfaction* As a clause in the treaty forbade my resid¬ ing with my daughterly brother advised my taking up my abode in the isle of lions, under the form of one of those animals» This island being close to Mount Atlas, I could then re¬ ceive the earliest intelligence of any change in my daughter's hituation; and he promis¬ ed, that she should meet me at the moun¬ tain's foot every evening, when, during a full hour, she should enjoy her natural shape* He next comforted my daughter with the assurance, that the twenty years of enchant¬ ment should not be reckoned in her life, and that wlien the charm should bc dissolved,. bhe should still find herself in ail the bloom ? S
and beauty of sixteen* Then taking an af¬ fectionate rare wdl, he transported her to the top of Mount Atlas, and 1 immediately found myself upon all fours in the isle of lions, Every evening 1 swam to the opposite bhore, where Caramoussai failed not to con« duct my daughter aud -the imperial cock. lu these visits" I learned many particulars, of. which 1 was till then ignorant, ît seems, Garamoussals ????? had taught him, that¬ the bending of the famous bow of Ulysses would ascertain the person destined to dis¬ enchant my daughter. This was also no secret to Feridoun, but fortunately the bow was already in my brother's possession * Caramoussai also informed ??, that he daily expected a Prince to arrive at Mount Atlas, on whom he placed his strongest hopes of reversing Feridoun's spells ; and that though niy unhappy Queen had (it's true) been chopped in pieces, yet consideration for his future mother-in-b'.v had induced Feridoun to preserve her in existence, lie should»
FOUR FAC AKDİNİ. therefore, immediately dispatch an emissary ία collect her scattered but still animated limbs, and he doubted not his being able to stitch them together again so cleverly with a needle and thread, that the nicest eye should be un¬ able to detect the deception. Her hands and arms (he had tho pleasure to assure me) were already in his possession ; and as she was extremely proud of their beauty, he had gratified her innocent vanity by cutting two holes in the door of his grotto, through which she never failed to pass her arms on the arrival of any stranger. She generally affected to be turning the handle of the spinning-wheel \ and by this device she con¬ trived'to secure the stranger's admiration of her alabaster hands, without being mor¬ tified by his discovering, that the rest of her person was running wild about the universe* Accordingly, she frequently profited by this amusement, and Sapinella, having no better means of passing her time, occasionally be¬ guiled lier annul by the same occupation II 0
These conversations lasted during an hours after which Sapinella regained the summit of Mount Atlas, while I swam back to the isle of lions. Near a year elapsed, ai*d though many persons hac 1 attempted it, the bow of Ulysses remained unbent* At length the day ar¬ rived, when the annual hunting-match w r as accustomed to take place. You must un¬ doubtedly have heard of this singular fes¬ tival, whose novelty excited in me no small degree of expectation: and I was pleased with the opportunity of ascertaining, whe¬ ther animals on four legs receive as much pleasure from being hunted, as animals upon two legs receive from hunting them ι a -point, which had always appeared to me somewhat questionable, On the appointed morning, I failed not to be at the ¿ea-shore, where about seven hundred of my com¬ panions were already assembled. As! was evidently a stranger, they very politely in¬ sisted on my taking the command, and
would not hear of a refusal, îhough I pro¬ tested that ï should be perfectly contented with a cornetcy, or at most with a troop. But I soon found, that in heading such forces, but little honor could be gained: no sooner was a cock heard to crow, than they fled in confusion, fell into the nets or the hunters, and I soon saw eleven landed on the opposite shore. One was still wanting to complete the usual number» Heaven and earth! how great was my joy, when I recognized in the warrior, who remained after his com- panions for the purpose of taking the twelfth lion, the very person, who (as Caramous¬ sai had assured me) was most likely to ef¬ fect my daughter's deliverance. I flew to meet him,' intending to discover myself, and request 1dm to proceed to Mount At¬ las without a moment's delay. But my kind intentions were frustrated» Seeing me run towards him open-mouthed, he very natu¬ rally concluded, that i meant to make a
1
dum er of him ; and mider this persuasion, he attacked ?? so furiously, that I Λνί?« obliged to ret urn lys blows in aiy own «lelence. Still ? endeavoured to make him awato of his mistake; but the cock kept crowing so loud, and his female companion exerted her lungs so successfully, that the knight could not possibly hear a word that í said to him. At length being quite out of patience, I just gave him a scratch, which (1 thought) would ? jisable him from fight« mg for/he present, anei în order to stop the noise, a litde, I made bold to swal¬ low the cock at a mouthful, ? then re¬ turned to ?? antagonist; but whhout at¬ tending to the sîgns, by wiiich I strove to express that 1 had something to say to him, he very uncivilly chopped off my left paw* Anguish deprived me of iny senses, and I had only time to pronounce his name, before I fainted away. During my swoon,* Caramoussai (who, to do him justice, never discovered any danger tili it
was too late to prevent it) conveyed me to his grotto, fixed on my severed hand with an excellent salve of our mother's own composition, and í had the satisfaction of seeing it once more united to my arm* However, 1 long felt the effects of the wound, and (as you see) f am still obliged to carry my arm in a sling. 'While loss of blood anil confined me to my bed,-Facardin, Prince of Ophir, arrived at the grotto, bent the bow of Ulysses, and finding my daughter in her horrible iuetaniorphobis, he positively rejected the offer of her hand, He abo despised her advice, not to drink from a certain en¬ chanted fountain ; the coi sequence was, that his heart immediately became inflaoiimble at ihc sigli t of every female, while on the other hand, so singular a chjnge took place in his person, as in the ???? of every ie¬ male rendered him unavoidably an object of ridicule and disgust* Very different therefore, were thc impressions produced
npon tlprn, by a second interview* Sapi¬ nella hiid resinned hcr original form, and the Prince was struck with admiration at her beauty; while she on the other hand coidd only look upon him with the most violent aversion. Aware, however, that on him depended her strongest hopes of deli¬ verances and also that, during their tempo* rary separation, he had vanquished Feridoun in single combats and had actually cut off the fatal leg 3 she endeavoured to soften the severity of her countenance, and encouraged her lover with smiles to persevere in the adventure. The leg was served up to him ; he was persuaded to begin upon it ·, he had already swallowed several slices, and all was going on in the most; prosperous manner imaginable, when Sapinelb felt, that her single hour of beauty was elapsed* Shock¬ ed at the thought of being recognised for the woman, whose deformity had alreatly excited in him such strong sentiments of disgust, she thought it best to make her es-
cape, before the transformation could take place, and leave the Prince to finish his nauseous meal by himself. Most unfortu¬ nate were the consequences of hèr üLttmed vanity. Seeing her run away, the Prince thought proper to run after her 9 Feridoun beiæed his mysterious leg, clapped it on again, and with it resumed all his former power. He then raised a whirlwind, which rolled Facardin from the top of the moun¬ tain to the bottom, and thus concluded an adventure, on which we had so long ground¬ ed our strongest expectation?* They say, and very truly, that misfor¬ tunes never come single* It was soon dis¬ covered, that during the confesión occa¬ sioned by the Prince of Ophir's visit, our enemy had contrived to carry off the Ulys¬ sean bow* This loss almost deprived tho poor Astronomer of the little wits, which Heaven had vouchsafed to grant ium» Tlm weapon was absolutely necessary for Sapi« neîla's deliverance, and to recover it at any
rare was an indispensable duty—Fortunate¬ ly, the Prince of Fez (to whom Feridouu entrusted it, thinking my brother less like¬ ly to discover the place of its concealment when in the possession of a stranger, than to regain it while under his own care) disobeyed the command of never unlock« ing the chest, in which it was deposited« It was opened : as luck would have it, the imperial cock (whom Garamoussal had dis¬ patched in search of the bow) was at that moment hovering over the palace-gardens of Serendip. Instantly, he darted down« carried off the bow, and it is the very same which, you now see in my possession* No sooner was I recovered from my wound, than Feridoun insisted upon * my rc-commencing beast, and out of pure spite and ill-nature transported me* to that part of the g!obe ? which is at the greatest dis* tance from Mount Alias. Most gladly would I have returned thither ; but I was igno¬ rant of the way, and had no book of the
roads* My joy, therefore, was boundless, when the King of Astracan happened to send me under the form of an Outang Outang, in common with many other« of my species, as a present to Caramoussai; Feridoun*s spells had prevented that En*» chanter ttpxa knowing wbat was become of tne 5 he could only discover, that after alternately assuming the appearances of an hippotamus, an armadillo, and a tortoise- shell cat, I had at length determmed upon remaining a monkey for the rest of my bestial existence j in consequence of w ? bîch^ he gave all who wished to consult him, to understand, that a present of those animals would be the most certain means of con* ciliating his protection ; and he trusted that, I should one day or other be included in the number of those transmitted to him* That confidence at length proved* well- founded; I reached the grotto, and widi Some difficulty Feridoun was prevailed upon fo pcrmii my icskHug upon Mourn ??\$ %
as also to resume my original form during a whole day; it was that, ?? which the ambassadors from Astracan had their au¬ dience „of Caramoussai. They htxd been very polite to me on the road j and I was for¬ tunate enough to return their civilities on their way back again, by rescuing them from two or three hundred lions (I forget the exact number) who had the impertí. nence to make a party to breakfast upon the ill-fated Ambassadors : But the lions soon found, that there went two words to that bargain* Aware of their intention, my bro¬ ther dispatched me to the scene of action, and being armed with the Ulyssean bow (which since the Prince of Ophir's success it required no great strength to use) I ea» sily defeated the assailants and rescued my friends. My time on Mount Atlas passed very quietly and very dully till the other morn¬ ing, when my brother accosted me with a joyful countenance·
— a I have at length," said he* α disco¬ vered a remedy for all our misfortunes. Hasten to the Princess of Astracan \ with her you will find Feridoun, under the form of a matron. While he is off his guard, take an opportunity to draw blood from him, and your original shape will be im* mediately restored. Leave Sapinella^s des¬ tiny to my care $ the emperor will imme¬ diately transport you into .Moussellina's pre- sence ; mount him, and away l' — I obeyed ; Sapinella obtained permission to accompany me hither for the sake of à little air and exercise. Of what followed, my dear niece, you have been an eye-wit* ness ; nor will you be surprized at the emo»· tion produced in my bosom on beholding these beautiful white arms, when I mention, that I doubt not their having, formerly been the property of my beloved and inr* prudent consort/*— - ; * With another flood of tears, Fortimbrass here concluded his affecting narrative* The
evening being far advanced, the Princess gave over work« Instantly the beautiful arms disappeared with the third spinning- wheel ; the two first were again commuted lo my custody« Fortimbrass embraced his neice ; she courtesied, we bowed, and the assembly broke up In good order. For my part, I followed the brother Fa- cardins to their apartment, expecting to be as agreeably entertained with the history of the second, as I had been with that of the first Great, therefore, was my disappoint¬ ment, when on my requesting him to re¬ late his adventures, he assured me, that except those in the chrystai island, he had never met with any thing extraordinary in the whole course of his life» *—" What,** cried I, u have you really reached the age of one-and twenty without having once been turned into a blue bear or a china tea-pot? Are you really unluc¬ ky enough never to have seen so much as
a single kingdom transformed into a fish¬ pond? never to have destroyed a single black giant or fiery dragon, nor rescued from some sorcerer's den, two or three dozen of bewitched queens and metamor¬ phosed Princesses ? The most extraordinary thing that I ever heard of!·—Why, what can you have been doing all this while ?"— ~» α Just what other people do," answer¬ ed he ; u I ate and drank a good deal, made love occasionally, said little, thought less, and yawned immoderately· I was educated in Cappadocia ; it is a damned stupid coun· try : the King of it was my guardian $ he was a damned stupid old fellow* I thought books a bore, arid regularly played truant ; my tutor as regularly chastised me, and I thought flogging a greater bore than books. I set out on my travels, bought an easy palanquin, and made the tour of Asia with my eyes shut, 1 next prepared to pay Africa a similar visit* I embarked on board a felucca 5 my hammock was a very good
one, and I slept there very comfortably* Unluckily, a violent storm woke me from a sound nap ; ï yawned, rubbed my eyes, and was drowned - $ I thought this the great¬ est bore of alb The rest you know, and I shall only add, that Moussellina has made an impression on my heart so forcible, fhat ......"— He accompanied his love confession with so hearty a yawn, that it produced an in- stantaneous drowsiness upon his hearers* We parted for the night, and scarcely had ï thrown myself on my couch, before I fell into a profound slumber; I was-not Jong permitted to enjoy it. Midnight was already past, The day ap¬ pointed for the laughing contest, that <L·}, so long, so c-*nestly expected; that da\, pregnant with Moussellina's fate and with the conclusion of so many wonderful events ; that day was now already an hour old."—- ~ α I am glad e of it, with all my heart and soul," cried Schahnar^ rubbing hL
hands, iC now then we bbaii hear, whether the Queen of Denmark got tacked together again ; who succeeded in killing the ???* codile, and making the Princess laugh; what became of the monkey and his daugh¬ ter, and how Moussellina almost jumped out of her skin, for joy at getting a shift next to it. Tell away, my good friend ! I die to know, what happened on that impor¬ tant morning."—» — α Since your Majesty," resumed Trebi- æonde, a îs so anxious to know the whole affair, I hasten to inform you without losing a moment, that I am quite ignorant of every particular."—- —"The devil you are!" exclaimed the Sultan, jumping bolt upright in his bed. —" It is but too true V 9 rejoined Facar¬ din t α an extraordinary accident on chat very morning compelled me to quit the tents of Astracan» Your Majesty may remember, that in order to possess the spinning-wheels, it \ym you ill* ι
necessary to obtain them voluntarily from some female hand* To regain these trea« sures, Feridoun had craftily enough addrcst himself to Chrystallina. Perceiving that her passion for tlie tall Facardm (for thus is he best distinguished) had revived, he promised to make her Empress of China, and (waving bis own claim to her hand) to unite her to the object of her choice, provided she would steal the talismans from my charge, and put them once more in his power* To make this proposal, was his motive for visiting Mousseilma 9 s tent that evening. Crystal¬ lina had observed with much displeasure the glances, which past between the Princess and her former admirer* Love, jealousy, re¬ venge, and above all curiosity to know whe ther Facardin was much changed since tiieir parting, all these motives made her eagerly embrace Feridouits offers* Accordingly during my absence she con¬ cealed herself iti my chamber ; and scarcely was I asleep, before the wheels were in her
possession. Now theo her business was to leave the tent as quickly as possible ; but she could not repist her curiosity to know, whe« ther I usually slept upon my back or on one side» For this purpose^ she deposited the talismans on the ground, took the night-lamp, and softly approached my couch. As she leaned over me, a drop of burning oil fell on my shoulder. A cry of pain convinced the intruder, that I was disturbed; and hastily dropping the lamp, she caught up the spinning-wheels, and fled from the chamber. bhe fled not unpursued ; the importance of my loss flashed upon my mind instantly; 1 started from my couch, and followed her...,.. "— ~ a Without dressing yourself?" exclaim· cid Dinarzade; ** oh ! monstrous ! No won- der, tliat Chrystallina ran away; in such a situation I shouid have ou t-stlipped the winds in swiftness, nor would ever h:\\ ν forgiven you for not staying at least to ¡,?ρ on ?. bed-gown/* - i t 2
~ a Fair Dinarzade/ 5 replied the Prince smiling, " your extreme delicacy has taken the alarm without reason. I certainly was not in mil dress ; still my appearance was by no means so terrible, as your lively fancy pictures it, as from infancy I have been ac¬ customed to sleep in a waistcoat and drawers of rose-colouted taffeta."— -~* c And a very süly custom too! Ji ob¬ served Dinarzade pettishly. — <c I had very strong reasons for adopting it," answered Facardin, " but whicb I can¬ not explain to you at present. Perhaps, a time may come, when»..... but I proceed with my story, which now approaches its conclusion, I pursued the thief so swiftly, that 1 overtook her at the entrance of the rent; there Feridoun was waiting'for her; but before she coukl deliver the talismans Into his hands, I fortunately seized, and pulled her kick again by the tail ofher shift. To obtain the wheels from her against her consent, I well knew to be impossible. All
that I could do was to prevent her giving them to the Genius ; this I for some time effected by contriving, whenever he put himself in her w ay, to whisk her suddenly round to the other side : till Feridoun losing «ill patience, muttered a few unintelligible words, and twisting his hand in Chrystalli¬ na's long tresses, (which a gust of wind happened to bring within his reach,) he sprang with her into the air \ and as I per¬ sisted in detaining her by the aforesaid cam« brie, away we all three flew together, to the unmiu; lui^ii^ aud terror of a numerous audience, attracted by the noise of our dìspute. Chrystallina sareau^- f o quite a wonder ; nor was I by any ttáffiS pleased to fmd myself hanging in mid-air by so ticklish a dependence as the tail of a lady's shift. However, i did not retain this situation long. The Genius, having as little taste for my society as I had for his, drew a large pair of sheers from his girdle, snipped í ?
off the piece of linen by which I was holding, and restored me to the earth with the great» est possible expedition» Down ï came, tum¬ bling head over heels; but long before I reached Terra firma, I had completely lost my senses. On their return, I was not a little sur« -prized to fmd myself on a sopha in my own palace at Trebizonde. A venerable man was standing near me, in whom 1 instantly re¬ cognized the admirable Caramoussai."— -*- <e Recognized him ?" repeated the Sul™ tani '« why, had yoa ever seen Jüm be·* fore ?"-. —* Frequently," answers *- "* ain î * büt , . -julñea by him never to revea! what has past between us, in this narrative of my adventures ? have carefully avoided touching upon those, which relate to the Enchanter, Suffice it to say, that I was not surprized to hear, that I was indebted to his care for niy late escape from destruction. Líe abo informed me, that he had at length
discovered the onlv certain means for con- eluding the misfortunes of his family, and he gave me full instructions as to the part, which I was destined to perform* In the execution of it I have been engaged ever since· Our plot succeeds, Feridoun is our dupe com¬ pletely ; his power will soon be at an end, and I shall then relate to your majesty, by %vhat means Caramoussai has attained his object, At present, you must excuse my not saying a syllable more upon the subject, and I have now the honour to lca\e you at the end of my story, as much in the dark as you were at the beginning/'— The Prince was silent; surprize at the abrupt conclusion of his history for some moments compelled his hearers to follow his example, but Schahriar at length recovered himself, —-** And so/* said he, in an angry voice, " and so you really mean to leave your story unfinished ? Now, my worthy friend, have the goodness to listen to me for a few mo- 1 4
ments* ïf you don't instantly and on the spot rebite every tittle that has passed be¬ tween you and that old he-witch Caramous¬ sai, as lm a sultan and a sinner, I'll treat you no better than if you were my wife ! and it you refuse to conclude your adventures yourself, never may 1 speak again., ifl don't do it for you with two yards and a half of whip-chord : now that's flat l*— »and at the same time dapping his hands, he called the guard oí black eunuchs into thc chamber. — w Though your threats cannot alarm me," replied the Prince, " my anxiety to giatify your majesty induces me to relate every circumstance, which 1 can possibly dis« < lose with safety. Know then, tha 4 : since my ¿riunì to your majesty's dominions, wo booker does the clock point to midnight than, », * haik! it strikes at this moment l*— rjid at the same instant a loud burst of thun¬ der shook the room, a bright flame en- velloped Facardin, and he instantly vanished from the eyes of the astonished spectators*
Before they were perfectly recovered from their surprize at this unexpected incident* the door of the royal apartment was suddenly thrown open, and the Lord Chamberlain entei ing in thc greatest hurry and confusion^ put the following letter into the Sultan's hands : — u Caramoussai, Lord of Mount Atlas, presents his best compliments to the Sultan and Sultaness of the Indies, and in¬ forms them, that if not inconvenient, the King and Queen of Denmark, the Kings of Astracan and Ophir, Zemin Prince of Fez, and the Emperor (if China wiih his two sons, intend having the honour of break» fasting with their sublime Majesties."— Great was the joy of Schahriar and thc two beautiful sisters at this promised visit of such illustrious and extraordinary personages. They were expected every moment, and therefore no time was to be lost in prepar¬ ing for their reception, The news spread i 5
through the palace like wild-fire, and never was there such an uproar known in it, since the peculiar tasie of the first Sultaness was discovered. In five minutes ail was noise and bustle, and confusion : every body was conscious, that on this important occasion a great deal was to bc done, and every body had so much to do, that nobody did any¬ thing« Servants ran here and there, back¬ wards and forwards, without knowing of what they were in search : lords and ladies were seen flying about in all directions, some lull-drest, some half-drest, some not drest at all ; whoever wanted one thing, was sure to get another; Scherazade asked for a wash- ball, and they brought her a chafling-dish of charcoal ; and when \he Grand-Vizir called for his court-going slippers, they crammed his mouth with a buttered muffin. In spke of ail these accidents, the royal family made so much expedition that they were ready before the centinels (who were stationed on tiie loftiest towers) announced fhe approach of a nuir.erous and,brilliant
cavalcade. Soor after, the exported guests entered the palace, and were received in a mønner suitable to their distinguished rank. After many compliments had past on both sideb, than which nothing could be more polite or less to the purpose, the whole company partook of an entertainment truly magnificent, and served up in the very best taste. Dinarzade paid particular attention to the appearance of the Queen of Den¬ mark: her beauty she could not question; but she whispered her sister—" that the poor woman had been very clumsily sew¬ ed together, and that she plainly discovered a seam, where the taylor had sì itched ??? nose on."—She abo occasionally touched upon the subject of crooked legs» at the same time taking care to convince the com¬ pany, that her own were straight; nor coidd all Scherazade*s frowns prevent hrr troni declaliAg aloud, thai—" long petticoats wei e like charity, and frequently covered a mul¬ titude of defects."—-Lukily, Ük ????? ef í 6
penmark was too well pleased at finding herself all of a piece again, to sulfer these hints to ruffle her temper^ and the repast was finished in undisturbed harmony. And now it was, that Schahriar requested to be informed, to what occasion he was. indebted for the honour of this visit, and what adventures had taken place, since the Prince of Trebizonde^s departure from the tents of Astracan. Great was his surprize and pleasure, when Fortimbrass assured him, that the Princes of China were no other than the brother Facardin*, of whom he had already heard so much ι and Facardin of the Grotto being unanimously requested to sa¬ tisfy the Sultan's curiosity, he readily com * plied and commenced as follows,
Continuation . qf the History qf Facardin of the Grotto. It is needless to inform you (and there* fore following the example of tlie best his¬ torians, I shall not fail to relate it) that the sudden elopement of Trebizonde and his fair companion occasioned no slight surprise and sorrow. As for Moussellina, she was inconsolable for the loss of her spinning- wheel, and became more grave than ever, which was a great discouragement to her illustrious admirers. My brother and myself did our best to comfort the Princess, to whom we were presented next day as rela¬ tions by our good uncle, the Xing of Den« mark.*'— — riC The King your uncle i n interrupted Schahriar t " oh ! aye ! very true ! But pray, my dear sir. how did you find out this connexion i n ^^
·—· ζζ By my ????/* answered Facardin of the Grotto. — €€ Your nose ?" repeated the astonished Sultan : C€ what then, did you know your uncle by his smell? Or perhaps you only mean, that you smelt out the secret ?'*— ™ cc By no means," said Facardin ; n the fact is, that the secret lay hid in my pocket« handkerchief. Caramoussai informs me, that you have heard from the Prince of Trebizonde, all that passed in the tents of Astracan previous to that Prince's departure* Doubtless, you must remember, that Fortim¬ brass mentioned in his history, that his ne- phews 3 the two Princes of China, had their noses formed of so delicate a texture, as only to permit their using a particular pocket-handkerchief. Thc truth flashed up¬ on me, the very first time that I blew my nose after hearing this remark; and my brother's nostrils proving to be endowed with a similar sensibility, we boldly claimed kindred with Fortimbrass on the succeeding
day. He heard us with attention, recog¬ nized our pocket-handkerchiefs to have once been his mother's (indeed, they were still marked with an M. B, at the corner?;.) and instantly acknowledged us for his nephews in the most gracious manner possible. The hour appointed for the merry content arrived. Though my heart was devoted to another, I still entered my name upon the list óf Moussellina's admirers, being resolved (in case of success) to resign my claim in favour of my brother, upon whom she had made a most forcible impression. The Prin¬ cess took her place; the lots were drawn, and each, as his name was called, advanced to attack Moussellina^ risible muscles.' Se¬ veral had already failed ; at length my name was pronounced, and I was on the point of obeying the summons, when I stopped on hearing the sound of a trumoet. The croud opened to the right and left, and our assembly was augmented by the arrival of the King of Ophir·"—-
—* u I beg ten thousand pardons ! ,? said Scherazade 5 u but pray, is that the gentle¬ man ?— —" The very same," replied Facardin ; ζζ by the death of his father, he is now in possession of the crown of Ophir."— ~~" Then let me beg," she continued, €6 that before you go any further, we may hear what happened to him in Denmark."—~ —" Nothing of consequence/* replied the King of Ophir very politely» " On ray arri« val at court, I found, that the King, Queen, and Princess had all disappeared ; that the Prime Minister had usurped the crown ; and what was worse than all, that the Danish la¬ dies have the largest splay-feet in the uní» verse."— ~- c< Fspecially those whose legs are ban¬ dy Ρ said Dinarzade; but the Sultan, clap¬ ping his hand before her mouth, prevented her observation from being heard* The &ing of Ophir proceeded. —»** Having sought in vain for a foot^ that
would fit my adorable slipper, I quitted Den» mark, and soon after encountered the Prince of Trebizonde ! after having had the misfor¬ tune to meet with the King of Astracan^ orchestra, (whose taste in music 1 must, how¬ ever, confess to be truly original,) I wander¬ ed from place to place, occasionally knocking a few giants on the head, and now and then killing a stray dragon or two ; but nothing unusual happened to me, till I reached the presence of Moussellina. Here as I per* formed a principal part, and as modesty forbids my relating my exploits myself, 1 must request the Prince of China to resume his narrative."—- Facardin of the Grotto complied in the fol« lowing terms. — u Moussellina rose from her throne, and advanced to welcome her royal visitor, No sooner did the king behold her, than his heart (that heart so easily inflamed !) became ihe captive of her eyes. His passion was too violent to be concealed for a moment : throw«
ing himself at her feet, and seizing her ivory hand—" Angel ! Goddess ! Houri ! Jî he ex^ claimed ; α why have you left your celes* fial abode to blind with the radiance of your beauty.. * « "—But 1 need not repeat the amorous rhapsody with which he favoured m$ for his words were soon drowned in an universal shout of astonishment. Conceive our feelings, magnanimous Schahriar î no sooner did the kneeling monarch commence his love-declaration than his chin began to lengthen, and before he had reached the end ofhis first sentence, its extent was truly won¬ derful and tremendous. At the same time an infinite number of little horns sprouted from every part of it, variegated with all the colours oi îhe rainbow. Heedless of this circumstance, the king sfili continued to declare his passion, and still his chin continued to increase its dimensions; till stretching itself quite across the tent, it fairly lodged itself within the wide-extended jaws of Fortimbrass, who unluckily stood op-
pošite to him, gazing at this unaccounta« ble phenomenon. No sooner did the King of Denmark find his mouth so unexpect¬ edly invaded, than he hastily retreated, but ín vain. The further that he retired, the longer the chin grew, nor could he fly half so fast, as his persecutor followed. By this time the tip of this preposterous feature had actually found its way into his throat \ the horns tickled him terribly ; and as it did not yet seem to have reached its full s<-uwth, he ??£?-~ *- wienarn serious apprehensions of being spitted upon his neighbour's chin like a woodcock. Greatly alarmed, he tried every imaginable means to effect his escape; and you will easily conceive that the pos« tares into which he threw himself for this purpose, afforded no less mirth to the spec¬ tators, than his persecutor's perseverance in pleading his passion (apparently quite un« conscious, or quite careless, as to what his chin w T as about) excited surprise. But greatly was that surprise increased, when
overcome by her uncle's ridiculous distress, by the strange and grotesque contortions of his monstrous mouth, and (above aH) by ihe singulaiity of her admirer's making- love with his chin in -Another man's sto« mach, Moussellina for the first time in her life burst into a violent fit of laughter, and threw herself back in her elbow-chair to indulge her merriment at her ease ! Fortimbrass could endure his situation no km S or Finding himself the jest of the whole assembly, and auu^a *.* <.}. a ?^???. of this embarrassing adventure (to which he literally could see no end) he suddenly gnashed his teeth together, snapped off a great piece of the intruding chin, and then unclosing his monstrous jaws, he spit out at the least three yards and a quarter. In¬ stantly, the remainder of the stranger's chin shrunk to its natural size \ no blood issued from the wound, nor was there any ves¬ tige of the bite· On the contrary, the King of Ophir secured to awaken as from
a dream. líe gazed «irouiid him with a look of astonishment, rose haftily from his knees, and afrer examinii\t Moussellina with an indifferent air, he made her a cold bow and retired from the circle. As if willing to make up for lost time, the Princess laughed for three quarters of an hour without ceasing ; then suddenly recollecting herself, she burst into tears, and cried for three quarters of an hour more» She had imbibed a sincere affection for my broiher, and could not reflect without in¬ expressible sorrow, that her mirth had made her the property of the King of Ophir» Her grief was shared by her disappointed ad¬ mirers : universal, therefore, was the satis¬ faction, when the King of Ophir advanced and addrest her as follows. ™ Ä<; Weep not, fair Princess, nor suspect me of wishing to force your affections by insisting on a claim, whose nature I consi¬ der as degrading both to you and to my¬ self* Never will 1 gain my Bride by ihc
talent of making myself ridiculous £ anu when 1 marry, Lhope to owe the heart of my mistress To the strength of my at¬ tachment, not to the length of my chin! but before I proceed, let ?? thank your illustrious uncle for the service which he has rendered me» in snapping off a part of that preposterous feature. Doubtless, thc enchanted water, which I drank upon Mount Atlas, rendered my heart susceptible of love at the sight of every female., and also in* creased the dimensions of my chin, when¬ ever I was under the influence of the ten» der passion ! no wonder, that my addresses met with so little success : though I wa^ «ot aware of it myself, this personal enor¬ mity must certainly have rendered me a disgusting object in the eyes of the nume¬ rous beauties, at whose feet ? have sighed· ? now feel, that the spell is broken, which kindled these fictitious flames in my bosom; I feel too, that even your charms, fair Princess, transcendant as they are, ?????
banish the remembrance of the lovely hun¬ tress of the grotto! For myself, then, I have only to request, that you will try on this slipper $ in return for which conde* bcension, I here renounce my claim to your hand, declaring, that he only whose valour can succeed in killing the crocodile, U worthy the possession of such inestimable beauty/ 3 — A shout of applause followed this gene¬ rous speech : the rivals eagerly accepted the proposal : but the Prince of ¥ez (who must blush to hear me mention, tliat Mousselli- na's superior charms had made him for¬ get his engagements to the Princess Nour) was particularly delighted ; and his head being still full* of the fictitious character which he was drest to play, he clapped his false wings and crowed thrice with such precise imitation, that an eagle mistook * him for a real cock, and pouncing him in her talons, bore him away with the great¬ est celerity« 1
The spectators were petrified with grief and surprise, all but thc King of Ophir, Snatching the bow and quiver with which Fortimbrass was furnished, he dispatched an arrow which pierced the robber through and through, and she instantly released her prey. Down tumbled the Prince ; all ran, in hopes of catching him ; but before he either reached us or the ground, out of the river rushed the enormous crocodile, received him in his jaws, and bolted him, as if he had been an oyster. The mon¬ ster was now for retreating j but eager to assert his claim to Moussellina, one of her admirers was already prepared to attack him« Alas ! he soon followed the unfor¬ tunate Zemin : other combatants still suc¬ ceeded, and were all lodged successively in the same dwelling-house, which appeared to be wonderfully capacious. My brother held out longer than the rest; nor were we quite without hopes of his ultimate success, till the monster suddenly gave him
?? terrible a gash with a hail belonging to one of his hinder feet, that he sank on the earth bleeding and insensible. Moussellina screamed and fainted: far different were the emotions of the King of Ophir ! Hk face was instantly flushed with joy ; and rushing upon the crocodile, (who was busy in swallowing my brother^ and being em« barassed by one of the spurs which stuck in his throat, perceived not the approach of this fresh antagonist,) he seized him by the left leg, and chopped it off at a single blow. A shout of joy applauded the action 9 but amazement again chained us in silence, when %ve saw thc monarch lift the bleeding member to his mouth, and swallow a large piece of it. With screams of rage thc monster pursued him; but being obliged to hop along upon three legs, he overtook him not till the King had fairly devoured every bit of it, ex¬ cept the bone. The great toe formed the last mouthful; and no sooner did it enter the King VOL. IIU ?
of Ophir*s lips, than an enormous volume of fire and smoke issued from the crocodile's. tvho instantly fell lifeless upon the ground. We ran eagerly and with one conseil f to inspect the monster; conceive olir sur« prise at discovering him to be composed of nothing but painted pasteboard ! That such a machine could have swallowed even so much as Moussellina's shift, not to men« tion men, women, and children, appeared to us scarcely possible : but the President of the royal Astracanical society proved to us by arguments quite incontrovertible, that it was not only possible, but extremely na* turai for pasteboard, not merely to swallow, but even to masticate ; and he was proceed¬ ing to discuss the subject of digestion, if Moussellina's ladies had not begged him in all love not to meddle with that part of the question« The discussion was interrupted by cer¬ tain indistinct sounds, issuing from the animal's carcase· Mousselhna screamed oif.
in a fright, that it certainly must prDCöed from a little brood ^of sucking pasteboard crocodiles ; but unterrified by this idea^ the King of Ophir instantly ripped up the belly, and we beheld within it a table elegantly set out, brilliantly illuminated, and sur¬ rounded by a numerous company of both sexes, I need not inform your majesty, that these were no other than the knights and ladies, whom the monster had at different times imprisoned in his capacious maw. You will also suppose, that ibis discovery greatly increased our satisfaction, and with «very moment did fresh sources of joy pre* sent themselves. The crocodile's jaws were considerably wider than those of Fortimbrass^ and no sooner did the Danish monarch make this remark, than he felt his mouth con¬ traci to its natural size ; the whole combat having been effected by magical illusion, my brother's wounds existed only in idM, ? 2
ami now to complete Mousscllina's felicity the King of Ophir addrcst her as follows* *— <fi Again, lovely Princess, am ï become the arbiter of your destiny; but I shall only use my rights to lay them at your teet. Survey this illustrious assembly ; se» ket from it the happy object of your choice, nor do I now despair of ojbtaining the ob» ject of mine* Prince Zemin's,aerial expe* dition makes me hope, that I have found the flying cock : the monstrous naii assures me, that in devouring the crocodile's leg I finished the nauseous meal commenced upon Mount Atlas j and as I have now per* formed every condition imposed by the fair huntress. * s . *. "— ~- w Except one !" exclaimed a shrill voice in the air, and on looking upwards^ we beheld the Matron of Mount Atlas mounted on the beautiful cock, who in a fear seconds reached the ground ; u you forget, Sir Knight/* she continued, α that the pos-
session of your mistress is attached to mine, and out of pure compassion 1 am now come hither to offer you my hand for the last time/'— * A shudder of disgust was the King of Ophir's answer, and he turned away, at the same time covering his face with his hands· Every one was eager to inform him, that the Matron and his fair huntress were one and the same person ; but the lady herself preventedus. * _« Why, the man must be crazy!" she resumed ; " King of Ophir, cast upon me one look more, and then if you chuse, re¬ ject me for ever P*~— Scarcely had she ceased to speak, when in place of the cock and the Matron, we beheld a damsel of admirable beauty, leaning upon the arm of a stranger, whose dress sufiicient¬ ly announced the Emperor of China» Every one expressed their satisfaction at the dh~ enchantment of these illustrious persons ; my fatiier embraced my brother and myself ? '?
.VAC most affectionately, and Fortimbrass rewarci ixi the King of Ophir's services by presenting him with his daughter's hand j while Mous- Milina declared hef election of my fortunati! luOthcr. The hour growing late* the Prin¬ cess requested Fortimbrass to take charge of die Emperor's accommodations, ami insiste:! on sharing hcr own apartment with Sa- pinella- 'llie assembly now broke up ι we all re¬ tired in high spirits : alas ! cf how short duration was our felicity! Suddenly we were alarmed by a loud cry ; it issued from the tent, in which wc had that inoment left the two Princesses, and on turning round, wh?t was our agony at perceiving it rising ι into the air· By the light of the moon wc coukl distinguish the afliighted ladies, who were tearing their flowing locks and beating their ivory bosoms: ?he tent continued 4 to ascend, and in a few minutes disappeared entirely, Ou t joy vas now converted into sor-
row: the two royal brothers tore out their hair by handfuls. As for the King of Ophir, he drew his sword, and protest» eu, that he would not live -mother mo¬ ment j and we were too much occupied with our own feelings to prevent him from executing his threats. Luckily, a powerful arm suddenly wrested the weapon fiom his grasp: it was the arm of no less a personage, than the admirable Caramoussai. —«Hold, King of Ophir ? said he: " know, that I have wilfully thrown the Princesses- into Feridoun's hand, and ! trust, that this transient evil will sooxi produce a lasting good. The loss of Ms enchanted leg has greatly diminished the power of our foe, and ï " can now enter the lists with him on t quai terms; nay, 1 c m even visk íhe Chrystai bland unknown to him, and in consequence can at length, execute a design, which I have long meditated. Ia the mean while, lot all concerned hasten to the court of India; there svill I meet you on the iirst of Åpxli,
and make each happy in the possession of his respective wishes» Yet before we part, let me ia one respect at ieabt restore tran» «[liílliíy tu iny royal brother of Denmark."-— Thus saying, he drew from beneath his tobe the well-known green velvet bag ; on opening its legs f arms 5 hands, and hips rolled out in promiscuous confusion» The Enchanter arranged them in proper order, took out a needle and thread, stitched the disjointed limbs together, and in less than half an hour, Fortimbrass clasped once more in his arms his lovely consort» This difìì¬ cult task Caramoussai performed so neatly as io convince us, that his mother had quite mistaken the bent of his genius, and by making hina a very indifferent magician, had deprived the world of an admirable taylor* Caramoussai then disappeared* We obey¬ ed his orders, and have reached your court on the appointed first of .April. Doubtless, the Enchanter will soon arrive, and till then
inexpressible will be our impatience for the solution of all these mysteries/*-—· Facardin of the Grotto was silent. Schah* riar returned his thanks, and then inquired of the Prince of Fez—*** How he liked his abode in the crocodile's stomach, and whe¬ ther being eaten was not a very comical sensation ?"— ™ cc The whole of tliat affair," answered Zemin, u wits a mere magical delusion. The crocodile was nothing more than an ingeni* ous machine 3 whose springs Feridoun un* derstood well how to manage, and whose interior served him as a place of confinement for ¡ns prisoners. In making those prison¬ ers, his object was to gain possession of t lie persons qf the four iliustriouj Facardins, on one of whom (as he had lately discovered) his own destiny İn a '¿redt measure depended, and events Ìli ve proved that« one to be the King of Ophir, Eut a f i -he-had no particula«: enmity agiiinst them, l^ 4 ilwiiys was obliging enough to hart hh captives as little as possi- K â
ble în swallowing them, and suffered them to want for no accommodation, which tht* crocodile's stomach could afford» For m> own part, I was not a little surprized, when after rolling down tlie monster's throat, î íound myself in a spacious hall, well-lighted, and occupied by a numerous company, Soon afterwards a splendid entertainment was served up ; two ladies (whose names I learnt to be Cadiga and Harpiana, ugly as ourang-outangs, but extremely well-bred,). did the honours of the table \ and it is but doing the cook justice to say, that I never eat a better dinner* The King of Ophir, however, made ?? rise in the middle of thc first course, and I believe, none of the guests were sorry to find themselves once more in οραι day-light."— Py this time, evening was at hand ; night shut in : still Caramoussai gave no signs of his approach ! The illustrious strangers now began to be extremely uneasy» That uneasi¬ ness was greatly ina eased, when Juinamde,
íl
recollecting the particular month and day^ clapped her hands together and declared— " that the Enchanter had certainly sent them all the way to Delhi, for the express purpose of making April fools of them P'—-This as- sertion gained additional credit with every succeeding minute ; gradually all became im¬ patient, captious, and ill-tempered; there was no abusive epithet which they did not liberally bestow on the author of this ill-timed joke, and they were on the point of giving up the business in despair, when Fortimbrass ex¬ claimed, that his brother certainly was at hand. In fact, a large bull ot lire was discerni¬ ble in the air, and all hastened into thc palace-garden, in order to observe îl more distinctly. It descended with rapklkv, and thev now beheld a throne apparently formed entirely of clustered diamonds, and supported ???? the shoulders of an innumerable quantity of living timers, each of whom carried a car- bun<Je in his mouth by way of α ??????,
On ihe throne*s summit, in a chair com« posed of gold and rubies, sat the victorious Caramoussai. At his feet were placed four damsels, magnificently atthcd, and veiled from head to foot. At the base of the throne, a monstrous one-legged giant lay ex¬ tended, bis hands bound with a strong cord, and his face distorted by fury into such horrible grimaces, that no sooner were Cara¬ moussai and his companions on Terra firma, ihan the ladies one and all requested to be relieved from so disagreeable a sight. In ihis request, Schahriar (who at thc first glance recognized the Giant of the Ocean, and in consequence trembled in every limb,} joined most heartily, Tlie Enchanter com¬ plied 5 on his muttering a few words, the diamond wall opened, the Giant sank into it D and the throne rising again into the ait, soon disappeared with its odioub inmate. Caramoussai having paid his first com« pliments to the assembly, beggetl leave to inUoducc his travelling companions* One
of the damsels had not waited for that ce¬ remony: on her first landings she threw aside her veil, and hastened to embrace the Prince of Fez· «— u Is it you, charming Nour ?" exclaim¬ ed Zemin, in whom the sight of her im¬ proved charms re-kindled his early afiëe- tion ; u are you then mine once more, and can you forgive my unpardonable incon« fitancy ?"~ — cc Reflect on the dangers, to which my curiosity has exposed you," replied Nour* * s and you will find, that I too have many pardons to ask. Then let all be forgotten; let me but hoid the first place in your heart, and ï shall be content to hold only the fourth in beauty«."«™ Zemin forbore to answer, on perceiving Caramoussai approach with another of the damsels, whose veil he raised, —«* "Tis Moussellina !" exclaimed in one breath hcr lover and the King of Astracan* and they hastened to receive her*
The third stranger now advanced, and was unveiled in the same manner. ~"*Tis Sapinella!" cried both Fortim* brass and the King of Ophir, and clasped lier alternately to their bosoms« Every eye was now beut on Caramoussals fourth companion» Who could she possibly be? The Enchanter-led her forward 5 he lifted hcr veil, and Facardin of the Grotto beheld with rapture the original of lm be ■ loved miniature. —>" Mercy upon me l* screamed ou? Dinarzade : ? let me die, but it's the Prince of Trebizonde ?— "No, lovely Dinarzade," said the strang¬ er, while with a smile she extended her hand ; ςζ were 1 indeed a Prince, as í once seemed to be, and as you once thought mc, my sentiments towards you would bo very different. At present. I can only say., that what you so- generously bestowed i 1 love upen ihe Prince Facardin, shall ?
moa amply returned in friendship by the ÏJ^.' It W./Ì Λ Λ f- /1 · ??? /'íl /" f'' ______ i r i-íttw-çjà ? nmt u í/ ι ίι· » -—— Dinarzade blushed not a Jtttie at this »peech, but the company were too much occupied to notice her confusion. They joined in pressing the Enchanter to unravel this mysterious business, -and he gratified them without loss of time» History of the Enchanter? Caiiamoussal« í shall begin by informing you, that be- Bidés her three sons, MergianJBanou was the mother of a daughter, whom at an early age she gave in marriage to the IVince of Trebizonde, and having done this, she troubled her head no more about her, in truth, Zemira*» beauty was no re¬ commendation in the eyes of a mother, who had not withdrawn her own claims
i ? admiration: but I need not describe nr/ sistcr, since you behold in her daughter Incardina her living·image, it was indeed/" continued he, addressing his discourse to Facardin of the Grotto ; a it was indeed Zcmira's picture, which you, Prince, found on thc banks of the river, where it had just been lost by Facardina's secretary. Thus, therefore, is the oracle explained, which gave you so much alarm ; and I arn happy to announce, that although the ori¬ ginal of that miniature never can be yours, you will possess in Facardina her mother's exact counterpart. My books had informed ???, that the ul¬ timate happiness of my family would in a great measure depend upon a Prince boni upon a particular days and who should bear thc singular name of Facardin* The day arrived; the Empress of China produced male twins, and the Queen of Astracan a son aud a daughter. Now then I was strangely perplexed to fiud out, which oí
these three boys was the Prince in question? ï consulted my book in vain ; and at length faring to miss the right one, I desired, that all three might bear the appellation of facardin. My brother made no difficulty in obliging me¿ but it seems, the Queen of Astracan, on her deathbed, had made her husband solemnly promise, that her son should be called after his maternal grand¬ father, and this promise neither prayers nor menaces could prevail on him to break, As it %vas on this boy, that I founded (and that very justly) my strongest expectations, 1 was obliged to take advantage of a fire in the palace of Astracan, to steal him away, md to commit him to the care of the wise King of Ophir, by whom (under the name of Facardin^ he was brought up as his own· But ir is now time, that he should resume his original appellation. Receive then from my hands, King of Aotracan, a son, whose exploits have already proved him worthy of such a father; nor need you,
lovely Sapinella, hesitate any longer to look upon him as your husband. The starr,, indeed, forbade your union with Facardin of Ophir; but (though planetary laws permit¬ ted mc not to reveal the secret,) know, the lover, who now kneels at your feet is in fact Zahnoreddin, Prince of Astracan. Two years elapsed, .when I received intel¬ ligence, that my sister had lost her husband, but was hourly expected to produce an heir to the principality of Trebizonde* I hasten¬ ed to consult the stars, respecting this un¬ born infant, I found, that it would be the most beautiful girl in the universe, but that should she ever faüLmto Feridoun's power, the total destruction of our family would ensue« Instantly, my mother*s injunction respecting the three most beautiful Prin« cesses flashed upon my mind! My nckc evidently woukl be one of them, and il struck me, that while I kept her out oi his bande, he could not possibly execute bis evil designs in their whole extent* Thk
reflection made me advise my sister to ^breed ?? her daughter as a boy; and the more to mislead Feridoun, I bestowed on ?? infant ueice the same name, whicb I liad already given to her cousins* I was obeyed in every particular ; though during her visit to the Chrystai Island, Pacardina was on the very brink of discovery. No¬ thing indeed but the terror of the sword which she carried with her into the bath, and with which she solemnly vowed to make the head fly from the shoulders of any one, who should dare to peep at her before she had slipped on her dressing-gown, could have prevented her sex from being ascer¬ tained by the prying eyes of Chrystallina's attendants. As it happened* every thing succeeded to my wish; Facardina's secret was unsus¬ pected ; Feridoun, having vainly endeavour« ed to discover the third Princess, persuaded himself at îength, that the fault was in his r.ngic lan'horn, and that the Princes oí
Serendip was in fact the person, of whom he had been so long in search. This wab what 1 had expected, and wished* No sooner was he thoroughly possest with this belief, tiian 1 suffered him not only to get possession of Moussellina and Sapinella, but even of the third spinning-wheel» Feridoun now reckoned ???? 1 ? secure of victory, He immediately set his í air captives to work; terror obliged them to obey, and he flattered himself, that he should soon be master of ihe wonderful cord, so long and so ardently desired. But he was not aware that every night, as soon as he retired to rest, I trans- . ported Facardina to the Chrystai Island, where she occupied the place of Nuur at the third wheel. An enchanted water rendered sleep unnecessary for the trincesses; the cord spun dóriiig the Giants sleep, was regularly put into my hands at day-break ; and when Feridoun entcied the room, he found his three fair captives busy at theii: work, and every thing in perfect order*
Last night saw their magic labours com¬ pleted Îhe important cord was of a length sufficient to reach from the summit of Mount Atlas to the surface of the sea ; and so well was I pleased at receiving the last yard, that I could not restrain a shout of joy. It alarmed Feridoun, who hastened to learn the cause, and great was his surprize 3 when on entering the chamber, he beheld me seated there. Snatching the unfinished rope from the hands of Nour* he suddenly threw it round ¿ïie 3 and attempted to bind my arms ; but I burst the .flimsy bond with the utmost ease 3 and then throwing round him the real talismanic cord ? no sooner did it touch him^ than he sank on the ground unable to resist. I then transformed the Chrystai Island into a moveable throne, bound my vanquished enemy at its foot ? and hastened hither with my beautiful companions. ï must just mention, that when Feridoun seized upon the Empire of China, I thought it prudent to conceal my two nephews- from
his wrath, the one in the grotto of a Chinese mandarín, the other at the court of the King of Cappadocia* Ì believe, ï have now cleared up every thing, that was at all mysterious« However, should any part of these adven¬ tures still appear unictelHgible, the póm- pany must ascribe it entirely to their own want of comprehension, and not to any de¬ fect in my narrative/'— The joy which now prevailed through the assembly, could only be equalled by that of my readers at reaching the end of this long- winded history. The four marriages were celebrated next morning; and Facardina's secretary, as well as the worthy old Fi-fum- foaxn-fim, luckily arrived just in time for the ceremony* As to Dinargade, she mar¬ ried Caramoussai. So great was the happiness of these new- wedded couples, that nothing was left for them to wish, except that^ their situation might never alter* To prevent this, the En¬ chanter raised a magnificent structure on the
summit of Mount Atlas, where every thing was to be found ¿hat could delight the senses, or interest the heart. An ever-flowing stream of that precious water, which had so long preserved to Mergian-Banou the bless¬ ings of beauty and >outh, meandered through the garden 5 and a talisman, fixed over the principal gate, forbade the approach of Satiety. Thither Caramoussai transport¬ ed the whole company (except the Sultan and his family) then assembled in Schahriar's palace: theie they fixed their abode never to leave it ? and there, I doubt not, they con¬ tinue to reside : at least I never heard any thing to the contrary. Farewell, gentle reader, and good-night ; may you sleep soundly, and dream pleasant¬ ly. If you are a bachelor, make haste to get well-married 4 if you are already a husband, waste not your wife's time and your own at night in listening to childish stories like Schahriar» FINIS.
OBERON'S HENCHMAN; OE,. ?& tt%tt? nï TUE THREE SISTERS,
INSCRIBED 'Λ the RL Hon. LADY DOUGLAS,
— bí - Mence, ye profane! I feel a former dread ; A thousand visions iloat around my head ! See ! moais ??$ bridges, walls and castles r be ! Ghosts fairies, dæiuons, dance before my eyes.*'-— ??????
vol» in.
L
ADVERTISEMENT.
On opposite banks of the Clyde, in La« Berkshire, North Britain, are situated the remains of Bothwell-Castle, and of Blantvrc Priory. There too are still seen three isola¬ ted stones, known by the name of " The Three Sisters" Curiosity respecting the cause of their bearing the above appellation, induced a Lady (during my residence at Bothwell-Castle) to address me in the following lines ; and it must be unne¬ cessary to inform an}' reader of tastc s that í found it impossible to refuse a request urged m a manner so persuasive and so ihb torina:.
To ÜS/. G. LEWIS*
Oh ì Laureate of that nether king, Whose birth-day odes hobgoblins sing ! Toasted by. . , ΛΥφΊΙ not whisper whom, Whene'er a Vampyre quits the tomb! Consulted».. · Wi\'H not fancy where s Whene'er a broomstick wings the air! Well taught. « » .no mafter by what master, What crimson spirits in the blast arc, What grim-white-woman woods contain. And what damp devil dwells in rain ! Nor less in whiter magie wise, Taught by the softest sylph that fires, All frolic tldiogs fresh and new From Oberøu's courts or Ariel's crew ! î
221 Ohî te.lï us ffor thon ???? sprist k^owì Why rise yon crags in mystic row ? Why form they thine own number, three Ρ Why Sister ierracd is each ? Why She f ïn that dark age thy science reaches, Were these tìire& babes Ì three queens Ì three witches ? Three wicked nuns, who veils renounced? Three fairies by Titania trounced? Three love-sick maidens drowned in Clyde î Or three she-thieves to gallows tyed ì Oh ï gentle Fard, when pilgrim here is, Snpply some tale to stop his querns, To force the tender tear, ov make His manly heart within him quake, Whate'er thy small familiar still Stowed snug in thine enehanted quii!, ShaH prompt of piteous, dire, or dread, Γ11 swear—* 4 Just so roy Gran'num said ! The fac tr, by aH tradition thundered, Are gospel held throughout the hundred* i\\v y,'f\fthxf fr«end ?ία? Lewis madam- Took them from mc, just as 1 had 'em ¡
¡lm
and (wond'rous, if one did not know him) Posi haste composad this charmirg poem! 1? Tlie poents ch'trms a truth caufest ri í am p straight authentic all thc rest; And not an b\ A, S. disowns The Legend of thc Sister-Stones, Aty&22, 1800.
Extracts from ike Midsummer's Nights Dream* referred to in the course of this Poem. -«'fiic King doth kcrp his revois Ïacîv to oight ; Taku hcr.d, tbo Queen come «ot within his sight, For Obcron is passing feli and wrath, Because that she as her attendant hath A iovely Boy, stolen from an Indian King : She never had so sweet a changeling I And jealous Oberon would have the child Knight of his train, to trace the forests wikl : Buf she perforce with-hoïds the loved Boy, Crocus liim with iìowcrs 5 and make? him .ill her juy, —Why shonldTiiunht crobs her Oberon ? İ da but hvy^ ? little ehíiugeluig Coy To homy iienchunn. Titania,— Sft your heart aí rest ; Tho fuiry land huvi not ihe child of ra.*, L 4
??
♦—"When í hael ai i»y pleasure taunted ?? ? Aml she Iri miltl terms bogged røy patience^ Ι Οχρ.η did ask of hotlicr changeling child^ Whicb straight she gave tnc, and hcr fairy acni To beai 1 him to my bower in fairy land—* And now ï bate ilio Boy,*-*—
Tû SIIAKSPEARE.
Lord of the song ! whose locks boon Nature^ granting Her gifts profuse 5 with sun-Hke Aureôl crowned, Thy laurelled harp enchanted and enchanting Ne ? er shall my feeble touch presume to sound* Reverent î pace thy elfin haunts around ; Am? where my raptured eye thy footstep traces, With rhymes of power í greet the wizard ground, But cautious shun those genius-hallowed plai -??, Where Fancy's wand has showered her wildest love*, liest graces* Flow, Aton 5 flow, nor dread to hear thy billows Reverberate notes, which Shakspeare's lute prophuuc: Mil!, silver ovnnets- haunt vour favourite w ilions, ?? lay of tøine í-hail mar your Poels f trai ru L v?
227 Vet though (be mulberry cup uo more ccmiam 'i'hat pivcious vine which erst so richly blest il, Though thin the streams which now its bosom stain, Siili shall this thought with secret charms invest it; -— u Once mighty Shakspearc'& selfagiiinbt his» full lip p rest it,"— - Oh ! list my lay !- As soft antl sad ï breathe it, As moonlight stealing o'or the summer wave İ Oh! bring my ìyrvl --Lo! bands unseen enwreathcit Wkh iïowors, antl glittering form«* tti sunshine lave i Those tUiry sweets I stro w on ¿tfcHnts grive; And while, my vers* 1 th« lovf-lorn griefs tlibcloses Öf One, most foml, most tnu^ «m&t fair, moat bravo, Clouds of ambrosial Mghv, showers of imtnorfiil roses Shall bless ihe spi'H.bouud soä 7 where the bright hoy reposes. Holland Home) &? 3, 1808,
OBERON'S HENCHMAN ? OE, %& ïlcgsttu of THE THREE BISTERS.
BOOK THE FIRST, -* i; Moiirn, Nature, mourn Í"—· what shrieks invade; the ai r ? Titania wecpSj and rends ?? radiant hair : Droops every elf, fades every mugic How er, Aud zephyr ftUb n ith ??? thv immortal bower» ? (I
~— tí ^loiirn, Nature, moura!" exclaims lhe sorrow ? Fay ! íc Id showers of tears) -rødt, -silver clouds, away ! VouremeraUl li^ht, y a glow-worms, cea&e to pour, Titania joins thegretni-sward dauci 1 no more : ilush, )v wild hoes, m \í»ui your ivar blings rise, Tiíaniíts ear now loves n^ sound hut sighs ; m Μυοη, veil thy light; birde, wuke ììo song of joy ; Die, Joy, and Light, with* my sweet Indian Boy î α When his quttcn-mothef to my guardian rare Con tf igned ihe child, waft ever child .so fair? Whine bloomed lib charms uithin roy bowers dirine, Was ever mother's love more fond ihan mine? Winded with delight eaeh roseate moment flew, Ko harm he dreaded, and no care he knew, Till oberoils partial iovc 5 or jealous raso, 19 Claimed the su eet changeling for his Ïfeuehman-Page, Well could'yt íhon ídl^ ?? hen forced with thee io part, What pangs, my Zeliny rent my boding heart! What tears I shed ! what w ι ath and envious ^pite {Kre f wor-ld yield thee from my doating sight) From my s(ei u Lord 1 bore, j ct held my bufferings liftht!
SUU wben *íö sued, î made tSisfirm reply; -—* Not fdf-F^f'-laiia of -næ that Boy shall buy i'[l ]— Still when that firm reply his anger tlrewj ï. met lus frown mmiovecl ; for eh ! 1 knew Great tliough Ms care, far greater mine would bc ; 30 Well though he loved, he loved thee aot liko me 1 "'His power prevailed—-oh ! thence my woes í date, IILs love was fetal as the fiercest hute I 'Twas in bis train, that luckless night you roved, When Lilliä first was seen, and seen was loved ; And'twas with him to-Hunt you sought tlm wood, Which-soon yon purpled with Karl Both well's blood. What thongh'(when Imried thc Thane hm well-aimed spear, Incensed that hi his bounds you chased the deer) Tise hand of Oberon caught tha flying dart, 40 And bade yonrs pierce the stormy tyrant's heart ? íiad'fít thou been sült ? charge, Ì had not there Bounded my friendship and conftnvá my cave ï 1 had not granted, that an earthly bride Shoidd «Jer have slumbered by the .???????'? side .
í had not yielded, fhat his time should be Six months with Lilliä past, »sii months with me ; Å ud wheu fhe G) de he sought, while midnight reigned, fin r í И oPi*rl fíí!»íY* ??? en mu» 1íítí»v /?-??!???^ y«.«· »*ivt*W»» ? ν* ι »ι, ??? Ou MH» StA rf & ttuiHiiaU; To view the tower where Lilliä wept forlorn, 50 1 had not trusted thc cairn-goran horn. [1] No, #elim, nol wherc-e'eryou strayed,your Queen Had watched yonr footsteps stilb a guard unseen, Bv day, by night, in forest, or in field ; ^ Your call to answer, and her aid to yield,, i These arms your shelter, and this heart your shield î J iS Yain, vain regrets ï —Fled is Titanias joy. And Clyde now rolls o'er my sweet Indian Boy !"—- Grief choaked her voice—and why she wept and sighed, How Zolim loved, and how through Uno he died, 60 Now sing, my Muse, but sing it soft and bw ; List, Lady, list the tale—a tale of woe! The midnight moon, which tinged with silver light Bothwell'fr wh'.· · locks, (for Bothwell once was white,)
Beheld Three Sisters, charged with many a weed Of mystic power, from yonder castle speed. ???? Margare? s eyes glared with vindictive flame; Fa!e seemed the next* who bore Brown Marion'' s name ; While frequent sighed the third ; Fair Lilliä she, The last and loveliest of the sister-three* 70 —" Speed, Sisters, speed !" Black Margaret cried ; 4t tho. hour Is near, when mandrakes ah riek, and spells have power, The moon-light feast and green-sward dancj are o'er ; The shadowy tribes attend thcir king no more ; But each, as humour sways, his pastime makes, ^ His dreaded round till Dæmogorgon takes, j- And drives thc Fays, who lag till morning breaks» [ I] J Now some, who humii strong forts, or castles high, Warn the scared Thane with shrieks, th.it danger's nigh : Some Hit the sluttish housewife's couch around, 80 \nd pinch and plague her while in slmnber bound ι
Or lead with meteor-fira the pilgrim wrong ; Or glide with corse-dights church-yard paths along; Or from its cradle steal the new-born hoir To pUcc suine Fairy's idiot offspring there; Or lure young wanton Knights tojóin their band, And live the pleasant life of Eliin land, Tilreven swift years elapsed (so legends ?1) Their souls discharge King Oberon's debt to hell. [I ] But others, gentler, sweeter tasks pursue— These (tHafi'tn acorn-cups the nectarine's dew ; While those, by fìre-tì ies borne, through æther soar ; Or secret Oceans coral groves explore ; Or plunder the wild bee ; or gild their plumes With gleams of moonshine ; or condense perfumes, Of power in spells, from flowery banks ; or play N (Close hid in heather bells) a thousand frolicks gay, f And bid the «big«? of Love waft their blithe hours í away I -/ u Yet whetlwrearth, or air, or åre, or sea jlM> Detains her now, how-far-so-e'ershebe,
Those mystic rhymes, which Maudlins now« to sììi^ Hoou Bothvfcìì's Urowuie to our aid shall bring: Nor doubt, that guardián Bprtgbt o«r swit will hear (if true our mothers tale) with gracious isar. Oft have î heard her say, whene'er her pain«? Had given a öliîid to Bothwdi's race, that strains Of musk (soon m tolled ilio midnight ?\\) By her, und her alone, wore hmnl ίο ??? ,* Aud straight mysterious aícôp on all her damt ek fall J Then saw site by tha tap'e blue glimmering light A dame of beauteous farm mi pigmy height Approach the cradk where tbe infant ?? $ With looks of love its tiew-borø charms ??????, Its pillow &tn»w with flowers of fairy land* Åiiåtvom its forestad with her silver wand» With lips diffusing rose*bairø ?\?%1????? lts tonder cheek j thon on its feaby wrbt, Murmuring strange word», bhe bound a golden hair, aproad hcr groen wi%s 3 and straight was lost In air. l^i ? íítíU ?? Uut myotic twine our wrbts are bound ; n pf»'d, İhterih nweû ï drad ?!™*^ v a hn% aromid ;
Closed is each prying eye and curious ear,— Stay, Sisters, slay! Lot Maudlin's hut is here."~- Its lowly roof and porch of rustic form With straw well thatched against the winter storm, Hard by thc Clyde, embosomed deep in wood. And far from public gaze the cottage stood, Two chambers dark with smoke composed thu abode. Whom housed familiar tmmy ? blotted to&d ; And many a viper foul and odious eft Their secret haunts at midnight oft had left, Compelled by charms in slime and deadly gall To smear Hell's secrets on the, wizard walk [J ] Here «ang no bird; here bloomed «or shrub, not ilo wer ; But all those plants, which boast such baleful power As turns to poison Heaven's salubrious dew, In rank luxunauco round the hovej grew.
Nor sun, nor moon e'er pierced these shades pro¬ found ; But owls, and bats, and birds of fatal sound î 40 Still brooded on the t rees which gloomed around, And while their screams alarmed the adjacent groves. Now fiercely fought; and now pursued their loathsome loves. Thorn u t-deror, whom uo mortal power dismayed, Had feared to croi« by night thU haun ted glade f The bandit, though by hunger tortured sores Had feared to lift the latch of Maudlin's door ; That dom· ut IF&lîow-o'en on Caithness hewed, With ? raicen 1 * foam, and Sorcerer 1 ! blood imbrued, Whose planks no earthly strength eould hope to breáis jtforo'or miûtl earthly hands» its fastenings shake, Save those whom Maudlin taught α secret spell Of fearful power!—Black Margaret knew it well 1 With practised hand the spell-fraught,lock bhe \m^i^ Thrice kfcsed the threshold, and thrice smote her breast! (1)
Slow turned the door ; and void ofdonbi or dread, Forward the elder twain adventurous $??? } While tre:nbling Lilliä followed where they led. Iter long lank fingers wreathed in mystic guise, Hogga t d hm took«, hcr limbi» of giant size, IßO Maiidi'* π, üm mistress ottbis drear abode, Knrlt < ? tho floor m ith rue and nightshade strowed, Watchu g a cauldron, whose blûod«tinctuted llamo 111 «med with sullen glare that ghastly dame. And still she cast the fire ii> favourite food, Hallowed tre-foii ("2], witch-elm, and row*n-tree wood [3], Which when she saw the ungodly Harnes dcstroy t Har*h hollow laughter ???????? impious joy* Hound hcr strong loins a tattered plaid was etat, Whose folds loose fluttering in fhe northern blast, 1?C Streamed like a maniac*8, and hor girdle scorned With bratcu knobs of lion-heads adorned ι
For af ihat hour when ïifeshe first obtained, Loni of hur fate's ascendant ¡¿eo reigned. O'er her lank checks 1? ???? homs stood far t Her meagre bmists sh owed manya mysric s€är, Whence gore had gushed for spells, or in strangt guif-ö Whence îiöps bad nurture sacked—-her blood-sboteyes liolled ceaseless roundj and scowled with fiend-Uke glare, ïf tr seitit remains of coai-bîack matted hair î 80 In wild neg teet down her bare shoulders hung \ ^? Aini whíie bfâsphemiiig rhymes she hoars*?ry sung, / She gnashed her jeliow teeth, md iolied her spiteful í ???* J The Sisters entered—nought thc Wood-Witch said, Out on her pale thin l*p in silence laid One shrivelled finger—oa the fiâmes she threw Their profferì herbs, then clasped *ier hands anew, While ????? the cuiildroa nine-times -??? she paced ; Next magìe circles ntn«-titncs*itine she truced, And with a dead-man's arm the helt-broth stirred, 190 Thïice- wMij shrîuked, ??? spak -? a dread fui word ;
A word, whose import split the rocks around, And math; deep groans of horror cleave the ground ! But what she spake (unmeet for Christian ear) 'T« ere sin forme to say. 'twere sin for ¿/ou to hear. *■—" Now then draw near, my daughters!" Maudlin erlens u That hair which round jour wrists the Brownie tyed, Unbinding, in yon blazing cauldron throw. And as it burns, what seeret each would knou, Let each declare, nor doubt the event. 4 —She said, Wo And tirsi Brown Marion ihm the Hag obeyed. — u l love, but love in vam! —A hopeless dame ???? in my heart for one, *, ? must not nume ! Another boasts his hand, and charms hL» ???: For her alone he lives l'or her well pleased would die ! " And when with gasping breast aad streaming luir 1 Hasp his knee,-?* aud sue in fond despair, He plead> my rival's ri^hb, my rival's charms >îoeksmy complaints, and Hies ?? folding ann*· !
i i" P AJ
bniall ? } ?? mast« eye or soni I owti my power ; Ner gracious form is mine nor pdneeìy dower, Whi!e many a bard fair Lillia's praises sounds. And rich-born Margaret rules through Bothwells boundí* Yet, guardìaiìospright, teach bnt some winning art To rob my rival of this nrpcious heart ; Lut me but see his brilliant eyes confer Those looks on me, which now he pours on her ; Then shall Brown Marion in his dear embrace. Though low her fortunes, and though coarse her face. Aï! other wealth, all other charms despbe, L 23ú Rich in hh iove, and beauteous hi his eyes, O'er ail bnt him may powerful Margaret reign ; Hound ail but him may LilUawind her chain; To them wealth, power, and beauty ï resign, This my sole prayer—** Let that one heart be mine!**—- Here Marion ceased—-next Lillïa silence broke, And thus 'm faltering sounds the beauty spoke i — H I fove 3 and am beloved ! through Bothwcli\ glade, Led by the moon's ??? lights as late i sivayvd^
Afid mourned my fathers loss, amazed I stood 2-JO To hear d huntsman's horn alarm the wood î And lo ! a youth; theiovdiest e'er í viewed« Close to my path a milk* while hart pursued. With li dian plumes his silver casque was gay. And gems of price blazed on Ins bright array. Hound his full lips wantoned sweet smiles: his eyes Bine, mild, and brilliant, shone like summer skies s Fresher bis cheeks than blush of morning glowed; A?>d wild, and free his chesnut ringlets flowed; Ail gemmed with dew»dropS; which a rainbow gleam Caught from thü lovely moonshine's lucid stream. 250 lie saw 'aie !-—From his steed he sprang, and swore °? He ne'er for woman burned with iove before, i Yet from that hour buí lived^ my beauty to adore ! J ï asked not, whence he ????, and whither roved ; 1 only asked liim, if in iruih he loveds Nor wealth the Hunbman sought, »or regal powers He sought a heart; 'iwas Ltøi&'s only dower ! Awhile his soit ï struggled to deny ; But who could long unmoved hear Zclim sigh ? ÆV
Awliîle dici Margare* brr consent refusi* ; îiui who could long rt'bisíj when /*cHm sii*«s ? His hand \t as mine, m) bliss compieai !~— Dat soon rHcarccfeiiu v e uur bntlaì-itighl, ?\ linn's the moo» Had fûhâ her circle,) Lo ! thc ??????? lc -Ά Lilliä <? mourn, of oil she loved bereft ! Wliilherlic went, iü\aîn ? prayed hini fell : jtlourufcl his htad he shook, and sighed t4 F^rowch ; T * Yel vonódj his heart foi'ine&hould uir.'i/iiî burn, Ki4 (íilíBy tours, and promis.»'] <j»nc!í ivtíifíi. ί-ί ? Two months au» pisi : he ????·» not back !™ι <1'*?«? From H )î ! i ? cll-'o'Aors n>) in es i» win btlo>r. lu ??? t i->ü .o\* or\ Ι ι ??? ai ????? ot m ), ? ; Ni« h' < <\? -s. an ! ί,ί?Π ??^???? i*· Ζ- h\i\ hot I Ål.i-1 uiii'ïv sira} 1 - be? ïî£»îh\s I ?? ïanil or ·>υ ? vîùil dw'b Ik* li , e, ίίί) å hu 1 î«e ^ί if! îor .η" ? Perhaps i >j»uíI"hí ot îi»** {Hifi 1 ! ι!τ '\ S "me tó/ujj! V..ÌH i»it" ,-i» 1 -. ? .,ieh)*e!i\l<íun ,u . ., , ilence, jwiiHb íV.n^l n»ì '- vãvh no nioiv uh lnea-,0 Lu!!,j>;aard»»ìi- ìroMuie. !u!l |???· Icjis to u»st ! '2Sm rf \ach mv íbv «κ'?ιι.ίη/ j t>-nu' - heai Ho '.»ud. (Ίι,ιηιι his ι e'^i ím e„ and t ,„.. ? hi» o ttínUin^ min.' VOJ.* Jíí. M *
Faithful and urna hev Eimismim^ìme ????? To Lillia's arms, and 1??? asks wot ???? ? 1 —— 'Twos Margaret's tura— her dark eye*: hashing ûre f — 4Í Re^eöge I" she cried, u I blood for bîöod require ! These whining girls who prate of love-iick pains, Of passion unrepaid, and faithless swai ? s, M usi; sure forget, that Blanty re's chapei owns (Oh î grief of heart!) our murdered father's bones ! 290 Unknown whose javeiin gave his breast the wound, The higlt-soul'd Thane itt his own woods was found All bathed in blood ! No art could ufo recali ï No word he spake ; no eye beheld him fal! ι No trace was left to guide my sacred hate, And show, on whom should burst the storm of fate. In vain røy spies have traversed land and sea t Now, Guaïdian-Brownie, now I fly to thee! If (as our annals teii) our favoured race S till found (hy succour, and still shared thy grace, 30C Oh İ hear my prayer, nor let the assassin boast, —« Vainly for vengeance wails Earl Bothwfll« ^host l'—
Spill but his blood by whom my sire's was splits Give but some clue to track this son of guilt ; And though that moment, when his dying groan Shall charra mine eiv 9 be doomed to hear my own, I'll strike my poniard io hb heart, and cry, -~ c Revenge is mine l— kiss ?? ^ood stesi, and die!"— Ere yet she ctased to speak, wide yawned ihe ground ; The cauldron sank, and alî was dark !— Üiq sound 310 Of wings earae rushing on the blast ; and Ιο ? In soft sweet iones these words were heard to now. — ít Where ??? tyre's sacred spires ascend (what time ivingb through the echoing ai&les the midnight chime) A beauteous Spaniel oft is seen to stray, Nor quits thc river's bank, tili breaks the day. Daipsols, that Spaniel seized, thai Spaniel slain 5 Gives each hcr wbh-— ? may not more explain. Nor further aid.. · .bat morning bids mo íly ! I know thai footstep 5 Dæmogorgon'a pigh ! 8%?
í* w i ff sírivicB thcFiond iiUmg. mid swift each fay Vhe ï from his brandished scourge—away, nwnyl Sisters, fiiroAvell ; thc Spaniel'.* life pursue ! S'iecess be yours, ibr miiw depends on you.**— Xlfibbi d is the voire, mu\ ceased lho charm—the room Amitin ihe cauldron's lurid ñames illume : From ^îargt'iîl's hand hur meed the witch receive^, Ami now with gladsome haste each Sister leaves That hcaven-abhoi red abode-—the sky was fair ; Brighi shone the morning star ; refreshing aîr 330 Pl«*} ed on their cheeks w'tii magic vigils wan, While through the dew-sprent paths so light they ran, 'Jììey sliimmcd the lawn, jet scarcely bout ? flowers Audieachcd ? as matins rung, their native towers.
f**^Bil?"""***
BOOR THE SECOND, Two ???? bcnoatb tbat rocie, whence BIuji iyrc ???» Clydes wiiidiitg course, concealed by bheUerhsg Ircei«, Now Tairily wa(chcd tim Sisters—-On the third (Soon as tbo midnight hy mn ίο lise was bearti) ^luhU'ii with hornsund liountls fîie grecii-wood ????, And the rockifpLMtiiip;, forth aSpaiiic! sprang* Lartco yellow spots aduzned his atilk-wliire coat; liib long cars» swept thc earth ; and round his Uno¿*> À blight c<iirib.£Oluri bom '»vas loosely tyd By golden chains —he sought the rivcr'b slue, 10* And oit clayed Uio further bank to gain, Where Buthneil stood, Luí feiili essa ved in να?η. J \t Sengati ?> îth pi*e"u4 wî.ine, an.ï d-iîopin^ i»i ?? left thchont'los (?^? ; în mut.' d * i ?*?? ? 'i
Frone on the sand his wearied ???? helaid^ And with fist longing eyes that tower surveyed, V/hen ce Lill í a bade her IluntstnaiUovc adieu ? And as ho went, siili parting kisses blew· Thea high beat Margaret's heart ! she thought he slept, Hcr poniard drew, and near him softly crept ; SO Already aimed her hand the stroke of death ; When, ìo ! the horn (waked by no mortal breath) Stent forth a'piercing blast, and quick as thought arpmed and scared his rock the Spaniel sought· Black Margaret foamed with rage ; while Marion strove To lure the tremblcj bad*.— With bi&ns of lore Rieri caie« .she truffe red of delicious smell. And woord Jam kindly to ??????? ?? cell. Nor seemed her &ifíb ihe Spaniel to despise; Awhile lie \ iewed ¡he maid with doubling ????, $0 Then »eni π ι ttl fori h one pav/ (? still he feared) ; Another soon ; at last his tail appealed î And wrx in fancy Margaret grasped once more lier destined prey; when louder than before
Again the horn poured forth its boding sound ï Again the Spaniel fled, agahi had found His safety iu the rock, when — Ci Stay í ohi stay l' — Fair LiIIia f s silver voice *vas heard to say : * ς Stay, Spaniei, stay I what Jfcar'st thou, pretty thing? Why iiy thy friends f why scorn the gifts {?? bring ì 40 No ruthless scourge, no hostile wolf is near ; Kind hearts ami guardian hands alone are here : And wilt thou leave thy rock, and dwell with me. My food rhit îooaw my bed ///;/ bed shall be. Come, Spatikd 5 ?????! by day ?? steps attend, And gmvå by wight thy mistress and thy friend. Come, Spaniel, corae í VH wash thy silky coat With mine own hands ; and still thy milk-white throat A guttering band shall for a collar weai, With Lillia's name embossed in Lillia's hair, 50 Alas î Oie summer's pleasant time is past 5 Chill falls the dew ; and ah í how keen the biast Wdl by thy shivering limbs ï see contest! Come, Spaniel, come, and warm thee?.. »»on my breast ?'— JM é
? he ceaS'^h nor wás4 in ??1? her minie flowed The eniíiptnred Spaniel left his ^afeabode, A «d where she sat, sül! near nud ???\?? drvvr s Thou^a still tlie guardia» horn ?? loudly folevfr, Thai »*.Hh rhe souod hill ? dale, and water rung ! 'iuí siiiu^í.ítne Spaniel heard, ???? iAWtl·' > tomxuo ; ? Buí »ought the Spaniel ?? »v, 4>ave Lillian ??????^ Crept ïofeer feet, and leapt Into her arms. — rc The prise is ours !" cried Margaret,— Swift she drew Ouec more oer steel, and tow'rdb him straight ehe Hew. Vtho, nil forgot bat lovely Lilliä, stifi Kyed her w ith iaok<k which spokti such right good-ift ill, 'hich iejtder interest, and f « ch fond deüghí, *■ rii.it iiìlbii"» .so! ! was melled ui the sight Ì 4i if crííi! h ?? 'l 5 she ciied ; but ah! ??? cried too 'Iti· > ?? isiiét aliv.kf} bigned her ????? fale ; 70 IIb ÎHMïtuhvdd) l' ÜU|C d ít¡> precious tide ! — The ^panH rjro.iüí.d, licked 1?1??'? hand, and died. fîbteiâ, je /rîtïïhph !——Why then breaks no tolcfe AhVhlft siluKc fciih the signal to rejoice ?
Why drops from Margaret's hand her poniard? Why (While Marion'b bloodleí-s lip and lifeless eye, That sí rangu d^pair has chilled her heart, proclaim)* Does f ran iie Lilila siniek ont Zdim 4 s name ? Aias î ?? Spaniel now deludes tlb ir Hgbt î Broke is the Elfin spell î the hi nar light BO Full on tiic victim pours ib crncl gleam, Una shows from Zelim's bosom flowed the stream, Which purples Margaret's bteel—'twas ?», whcrrVr/ From Oberon's court ho sfrayed, compelled ίο wear l'hai Spaniel-form, üli twice three months were o'er, And time to Ltîlîa should her love restore. ^Twas he (though viewless chains to cross thc ftood Forbade, or reach the bank where Both well btoQil) Who ivghtly sought ihe adjacent shore, at l^iisfc With that ?? well-kiiown tower his 4*\hi îo tea-ît, ÔO Whence Liüîa îookec! her ?1 iarewell ! 'T was he, V/hom üK>f 4ÌÌÙ wished, whom now most gtievod to see! y Fwashe, of all who e'er love's worship knew r ¿ i {.(¡i- f,tî*» ιΛΑ-ί Uf'ltî/ » ì^rtVt i.in'i¿i~* '4 y*'i ?И?«! i 'H<ì í
*Twas be, 4was Lillians ??? ? and joy, ^nd príde! Wliom £??? loved past aH the world beside ! Who but for Lilliä lived* ·. ,&?! «ow tlirough Lilliä di#"l ! As when 'm Bothweil'» modern halls (where now The (hief of Douglas reigns) v, H h clammy brow, ???? wiåely stretched, oale ebeek, and trembling knees, 1ÔÔ At midnigh(,if by chance some mciiiaii sees, In blood-stained amis, with shadowy pomp and pride, Karl Archibald»the»Grim 9 s tall spectre glide ; Straight leaves the guiding lamp his clay «cold hand, His thickening blood congeals at Fear's comm&uãj And fixt by horror to his station fast, He stands a statue, till the vision's pasti— Thus $o«g the Sisters ¡stood^ confused, amazed, And on the beauteous corse despairing gaged 100 In speechlen& trance !—^but now once more they feel, Önre worn ihey speak !-—they execrate tho steel« ·*, 'The hand, * .Abe heart.... B»? thief their curses light Oh tho witch M#udliii aud her treadwoüsspright.
Their shrieks alarm the echoing shores of Cljdt— ·—" Thc Brownie î the taîse Brownie!'' wild they cried ; Nor cried unheard—for to ! a watery ray Shot from thc moon, and winged to earth its way» Again deep silence chains the Sister4hree ; For on that moon-beam borne, a form they see So strangely radiant, and so lovely dread, ISO it chills their blood, and strikes their spirits dead* Through her tine limbs, air-woven, pure, and bright, The passing moonshine gleamed with golden light. Her robes, which graceful flowed adown her feet, (In cte*drops washed and bleached by starry heat,) Were glitter ing-white as Botnwelî rocks; sare'whcVe Loose from her shoulders streamed ? plaid In ? Öf ttothwell tartan ; but no mortal dye *? E*er poured such glorious colours on Ihe eye :— v The hues, which decked it, once had decked the sky. J Its web was spun by glow· vorms: Spring was seen 131 To tre tk it with her earliest fresh est green : Imp *t bright Jnîy w a» «aug'tt iha nooiv&te ???; MayViOvuhNî&ï mørn had lent the autota hue ; M 6
While to afford these tînt« harmonious shade, Clear as ihey burn, an<l beauteous as ihey í\iúv y Auíumnal sun-sets oiHh«texture shed l>eep-y;iowing blushes of pnrpnreal rvã* Yet though uîthcrial charms, and fairy grace, Breathed through her form and beamed upon Iter face, What settled woe that lovely face betrayed İ i '41 Bound her sweei lips no laughing pleasures played ; flip rose that once had decked ber chce L wíib gone, Ami on her eye-lids pearia of sorrow shoin\ Her emerald wi%s were closed and drojpin^ ï Dead Thc Wiiter-liliCb cerned that wreathed her head, xditl who.se elobi'd kv.yes with coruscations bright Innocuous uashiu^ pf'owed the northern l ¡¿»ht. Wild and dispersed her air-borne t ?????.·* streamed; And in hor jH-arly hand a javelin gleamed, íñi Who*-e blood-impurplcd barb v^hene'or.she eyctl, ^he ιξίΓ /? an elnteh ery 5 and turned her he-ad aside, Soon ib tiut bpot, v/hich scum's heart had btained \?\ίί{ its bebt drops, thu beauteous Vbion guincd, With hun^hty glance the Sifters dhc surveyed, and thits »* üümub uti^ry ? yet ¡»wcel, she said.
— u Why r ¡s« ¿???? frenzied clamours ? W hy de» fame These wrathful shucks the Rothwcll-Brownle's name ? What sought ye ? iinobtained? or what did I, When asked in Maudlin's hut, untine reply ? ICt) Black Margaret asked revengo; 'tb hers, for know, 'Tuas Zcliin'b javelin Jaki Earl Bof h weU low* ? Thai fwy on lúhom ¡? l fond noul h /w¿f, mtghf nv y cr Prove faithless to his r^v*,* 1 was Lillin piacer: And is4 not heard? the \???? )ofì ?????^ }ouíh, Aad doubts no inore hev Ihim.-íuian-Iof dh tnuí«. And iXiaiion («»he-, who etili a gudty flanio iti secret caused Ì¥ Ja on '«...*??* nui-ft not name 3 J Who, r >pİie ofmarnage vohs, jíiü doating liong On Zelim*, a»^ U hire, aiul a.iitvl toii'me)-» İ ?? í Jan r/r" n îth íi^hlíhthe iMputa^ciu thiosv 4 la\i»¿t my w ani of Jaith?- -Uii¿»iv-teto!, nu! id ? word is kept, una ???? the tfrbi.e.ï-ior pi ¡?? ; í4as 3£eli u^ heart ? —jo î at thy 1'? * 4Í tí He;, - " Ye weep?-— (»h ! U ier ?????! t,*y fcari Η,ιί ttn^tvl bei! biith, íuf ia'aï ?^? ¡îs ? , ' '
When, by the EiWCing guided;, zelints dart Winged its sure flight, to pierce your father's heart ; Nor pierced his heart alone. That ruthless blow în fairy-land gave costlier blood to flow* And bade a mother's soul ache with immortal woe ! Oh ! Àmie!, Amiei !-—name most dear, most sad ! l$'Z 1 had a son«. # .oh ! grief to say, í had! llow fair he ???. ». .no speech can e'er reveal ; Ifow dear he was. *. .no heart but mine can feel. Witness tho joy, with which (my travail past) First to my swelling heart 1 held hiin fast¿ And wept, and smiled, and kist him o*er and o*er ; And thought, with every kiss I loved him more, And liim -with every kiss grown fairer than be¬ fore !— lie witness too røy fears (oh ! fears too wise !) löi Whtn dread reflection placed before mine eyes Tiiis aritiriirfiiry*)aw [1 |—~ ς a mn whene'er Some Brownie in that point of time shall bear,
When first her Casiíe's Heir saíuírb'thu lighr, We to his hte that Brownie-child's unite. Whate'er of ill the Castle's Heir shall know, AHke the Brownie child shall feel thc blow î Whate'er of good shall bh'ss the Castle's Heir, That cup of ¡oy ihe Brownie chiid sh3ll share. 200 Through life, (its beams if Fortune's surt reveal, Or hide its orb in clouds,) in woe or weal¿ In sickness or in health, in grief or joy, ??; thread shall guide each sympathetic boy* Then when Time's hand at length shali gently close The morud's lids», and give the grave's reposo, The Brownie child·; with fears no more opprest, With lasting youth and lasting beauty ?? 9 Shall inmate uve for aye of fairy bowers, Partake our pleasures and possess our powers, 210 Bui ere ihat period, should untimely Death Cut short with spectre-hand the m or f aKs breaths Then too the grave*—-my tongue denies to say What for leit claims that law ; for oh ! the day, Which lit st on A'niid'soyesdiifused its lighi, ^hcú the firii t »un-beains ?? Etri Buth» cllb ?>:?,
tb i 1???!. » * .us inoüiüi's lovcî— -ihon jiiflgo, hov. i\íy μ/.'?'ί'ιο Kïs.e, bow w arit ι my wh>h ίο keep I hidrei wiih whatlovoj, what íVar, whiifzon!, w luí Ey ãíi)\ by niglii, 1 -íb r Uth(4Í ?? (???-? Heir I Ii în ibe arms of hlee\ì íhe bab« ?\?? 1???*?!, i uowlvss&uai' , his wirki'i t:o«th 1 rockot!; \nn eìo\e.\ hh iKHİdiap, uium* her rareio^ en ?, Al ? ni^híiift willes voou ????? her slumbt-rs íly. Tiu 1 !? dia isc start who» ni;i£ ihc uitUtii^ht clame, '?? r ?? r I ifb'inuciiMm n İtli some inamic rb; mv ÍXá Wïai or f ro wn? «????, İ round iiim cast M\ plaîil ίο bííitld ¡ma f ??? ihe ¡?-???? hhv t. ¡ìld Siinmu'i^fíikt/zMsiitsyii too lu^ucfy ^hi ì t l ?? ÎamiïsH; pioions rooicd t hs sttllrj ??: lu chace «?· iourrn ƒ it !? m>;o4 hr? bí^'í1 5 İ cieullil oaditdom' ÜuW ηίίφί hic ?????.* '.iiipodr. la batluiwîivti ïu* br.utd btnm'f"îb! t îl îo»», İVİ y diitmoiid bhlvhl rotTİvod cacir '??;.<1'??? 1*'<??. OM sii JkiK'bt gritve hí>¡ fran»t, or cure bi& soid ? With pvttious ï>.ds*iïu l ???????? huwì V rom VMnuihiW í r- C'iU'?"^ ; aud when Ικ* ??'?1\ if m'ai lds Cí-'Uv'h ük 4 ¡¡?^-4-?1 N ij'/i.t.míito an pt :
* I seared ihe fiend nbhoned, and in her stead Hade ro^titíe \ ???? ílií round Coi hu ells bt'd. 2 ? ¡'hen d.ired no lorUirin^dreant his mind iinadt·: Qnenehrdcifii iwi'av İ!<tht,:iud Iní^híesjedcver} nlnide, 1 drew enjoymenti» i»e4're}»jo)«d before, Heeuiloti ^.? pleasures ???????! millions mors ltVH fiiendb, high power, latía btreiched from kh¡>i fo Wosl, Foe s -\ei tinvarnjubhcd* lovesyet imposât, Days of \ietori(ins toil, and nights of jovial re^t ** Oh í love ioo ill tepaid! oh* fruitless care! Lo! Z.A'iin* j ivrlin ruts the midaİ^hi air! ?? finin 4 , ran fair;, V arm ib flight arrest, f50 ÌVhen Obrlon ??1?> t he barbio BedhweU's bre.i«t ì Ohî noï— ihe iii'ì'n ï,f ,J -!—and h irk ! --a et v, # .* l f 'tom f:»lrwhtnd ¡И came í — í ????? —1 ily .\¡,\\ Q hti\Wi\ ÍLtl r-**l iind my broki'U rose Thrown υ» thv tiiiWrt;íhy earth ! 11α\ν swiftly flows From hi^deepfivouucfed breidt thu living Hood ! ????! are his heavenly ejes ; and hi ihed iu blood, His tn\n dear bïood, M reams loose his go'den hair ('outustin§ h ith hb.diuoksü pale, uo Uh i
Fr&niic ï sink my darling rhild beside; COO Strive v^kh my lips to adaunch thai gushing tide; And from all nature wiih vain prayers entreat One breath of life* one spark of vital heat, To animate that Dear-øitc ! Γ î ]-—At my cries Once more (alabt bnt once) he rabed hb eym^ Ami fixed them on roy face í still, still I "?? Those eyes, which nevermore will look on røe! SîîİÎs still î hear that voice, whose hollow strain Told me, I ne'er should hear his voice again ! I ghrieked !-— í caught him. to my' heart !—-twas donet— . 270 Cold were his lips !—I had no more a son. a And wiiile such thorns were rankling in my breast» And while remembrance still denies me rest, (Retracing on my heart with anguish soro What once was mine, imt must be mine no more,) "Ye wonder, that with hate the wretch I viewed. Who stabbed that heart ì that hating I puibued.
My j¡mt revenge ì roveuge íoü lor.g dcl«yc-¿lí Ια vaiti each snare ? placed, each avi essayed To work his harm, by whom my darling áien t ISO For still ray subtlest snares that horn defied* Hound Zclim's ???? which anxious Oberon bound, Of dangers near to warn with gttardian sound. ThmikSj Lilliä ! Margaret, thanks !-—alone to you This praise í owe, that at my feci I view My foe stretched lifeless—come, thou fata! dart, Farpîetl so deep in streams from Bothwdls hearts Come! ict my wrath efface those hateful stains In the best bloods which flowed through Zolim'» veins ! Next of that blood ihree drops I'll catch, and tear Thus from his brow three locks of sunny hair, 491 To burn npon tbc tomb where A miei's laidj Offering most grateful to his blmlingshadu. Now then I'll speed... » But oh İ what magic ???? lîursib troai the river's bed !—*my conscious frame What terrors seize !—oh î whither shaH I íly Ì Where hide me from the lightning of his eye Ì What cave will shelter si a wr^tjhed, «reichini e-f\ île comes ! lie < ornes ï — '?? he ! ?? ObcrouS beh V'—
-*>? — ¿e Ve% traiíms, \es!*' the King CYchutned {? hand ;jo Couu-.bed by pulían · hook hib ldly wand ; ib,íx iro\uied his ??*??**?.?? brow, aml ¡*??1 (.4 t »-at e Of tears ?????'*'!! int* glorias of bin face,) — ít Tes, traiti m, }??! 'tis ??????'? »elf, and just Tho*o fears, which bid thy ringlets sweep the diiî>t. Dead is the youth (I weep thai death to tell !) Whom Oberon n-.ul Titania loved so well ; Dead, and thiough ilve ! —And could thy ùtnny dreary Rebellious e!f, Ihy Sovereign's tears bhonld stream. And thou (he cause ????? unpunished? -No!-— Jl'. By that dread forfeil, which to helt we owe! By the im.ú tea?>, which Kenna's doomed to shed, When Spunk's first ,>now drop picture^ Aihion dead![ î | By the cro^-i, road, where (ppite of Ellin dip) Bolil Janet watched and won her famed Tam Lin!}* 0
Ily the blest sounds in ??? of Pay ni ins poured, Which baved } '-¿\?? Huon fïvtr. lho Caliph'.- a>\>wtu î[l ] fîy the green cup Mİdch changed ίο whinsîoue blue, h, »on as St, Clair had rou*ed our sleeping crew l¡2\ By Kdwin'.s joy, when from my roof he fell, 3Ί0 And bade his shape's disgrace for aye farewell ![3] By tho lost ring, winch made the marble Dame To liu per fs hand assert her midnight claim ![ 4 J liy the witch-ehn, where erst was sleeping seen, And by my spells enslaved, King Orfeo's Queen lib J By that strange lolumc, whence the goblin P*i£c, One spell surprising, routed dead Michael's rage! 1 ii j (By the blaek drops from Sorcerers' veins (hvit ib>w, To bign their compact with thc Powers below Î)
By all the sprights of earth, air, fire, and sea t 330 And by ihai rnwus so awful e'on to tne, I swear (and swearing, thrice I sign my breast, And thrice í bow me, North, So«ih 5 East, and West) Thou ne'er shalt join out visionary band, .Nor taste again the bliss of fairyland, *Tili twice three hundred ye&rs of pain are o'er, When cruel kindness shall thy form restore; [1 ] Till then, abanishid wretch, from clime to clirae In Spaniel-shape (memorial of thy crime).
Stfây tlmu tmceasİBg î— Hence ! ?? power obey \ 310 Hence !. Abut» I rend thy glittering wings away ! TINE Y 'S PETITION, ΛΟΟΗΕΙ'ί' TO The Bight ???. Lady Dçnglas.
™»™» M Never since the middle summer 4 spring Met we on hill,in fore&t, dale, or mead s By paved fountain, or by rushy brook. Oh ! Lady, list with gracens ear ' Your Spaniel, filled with grief and £ear 3 Thus humbly greets ????? highness î She heard this morning, ranch surprized; That Beelzebub is here disguised, AndiawhQRCforøi» * » - .butTineyV
fïiws break thy silver wand, and thus with mine in Dicmogorgon's name, amngicsi^H
Dear Lad/,bid suspicion fly ; These lips, oí" mine ne'er bicathcd a íyc 3 1 ?? bieast ïitVr harboured evil ; hei no vain fear« your fancy clog; ??? ? but ?? talc, and though no dogi You 'İ i fmd, that í 'm do dtvil. 'íha e was a time, though now you view Four lugs, lh.it 'I incy pia} t-d on two lisch frolickaomt V3g4i'y ; ün t lîicraîd pinion-. Iîoinc, hfif roí cd Mid* Bothv.cH'ö îü\4cr^ an J jh«dc-. belo vai, ? nel v.'.l-. flu ίι ^i' \j diali l'.iii / ; l'ili Oberoii, with resentment stinig 5 [2 ?'-, bindin» ?? Ih. lorla J my tríU¿uc To nil that mvrtie ^tuiyj ìlvit m> einimtd v.in^&tú gbuering gn^iK Λι dìdì in "i uu, v S» placc \ví«l· ??? 'j'İk do», who \\ hints buore ?<?.
Trace on tby front—'tis done ! the wizard spell Spreads o*er her form !—Faïsc Sprighl, a. long farewell!
At Blenheim doomed to mourn her woes* Th«re many a year her hairy nose Salt tears poor Tmey soaks in ; For ah ! jaó fay is Tiney »ow ; Her only spdl is—" Bow-wow-wow !"■»- Her only art İs coaxing* But Eliînïaws forbid, that e'er A fay should kaow compleat despairs And soothing Oberon's rigour Fate made before hcr magic glass The Dame, who should relieve me pass ; i-ady, she wore your figure. Yet crt' arrived thc destined hour To give rtie back my fairy power, Whole years I past in sorrow ¿ ï watched and wept the night away, And still if fruitless proved the day, ?? fruitless pro yed tht molrov--
YOL* HL
£?
Spcik ?? U-4hy arísani kitown 9 thy crime is dear; UnnioviMİ thy tears I see» í lì ƒ plaints ì bear ;
Thus monmiîd ï^ till through Biciïhcim's grove ??? summer morn ï saw you rove ; With joy I aîmost fainted í Pleased on my back ï turned, und trita To play siH'htîickSî a$ testified, «—" Dear ??&?? we*i4 acquainted İ"™— «*. This won your heart ! by yon conveyed, Once more î sought dear Bothwdtô shades And tiow (it sucli your pleasure) By giow-worin light I aoon ???? vítali iroYic 'm Titania» train, And weave the m^tic jneasure. Voi know, what last htr tranquil light 1 he moon rtutwetí, once mofe (Ws ilibai With hope and terror viewing) I «w the offended Fairy King His course o*cf Clydes Uwe %varcra vtin-fo And pause o'a Bothwcli's ruíAí
Vain are ihy raiirnnirs, νιμιι ihy weak «JeJfWiCt 1 ! Syîpbs of thv Stíuth-wiiidj rise, and waft lier honof-
In humbitat gube, hisbvart -to îtiove» ! di opt my tail ; with ?? of love I ventured next to ehukc ii. The King with pity saw my pain î Antl he, wîhwc magic formed my chain, Hat taught me how to break it. Now, Lady» learn the mtaiift to show My story*« truth, and end my woe 3 White Pms you've often read of î Treat me ükeüw· /—my form re&tore, And kindly deign (Î ask no more) l*o chop rny latí and ht\uì o d. Yet should ? und thin boon dtnitd, And stiii to gamhoiby your side, íjhould 'tincy*!* falc enclave her ; Though Übt for ay t.* hcr iairy skHi, Shell Tic"er icpinc» po^cssin^ »till liîKHigh tokcrp yourfavouf,
N
ii
u Sisters, your rash feci stay !—In i?am ye fly t .re morning âawns, your forms shall meet the eye 35 Ì Hard as your hearts, vhich bade my Henchman die. Ye rocks of Bothwcll, greet ?? more the sight Arrayed in Virtue's livery , spotless white .* Henceforth with blushing foreheads stain thc ilood, To pilgrim-eyes recalling Zclim's blood I ??? ye, prond towers, in crumbling fragments fall ! Reign, Silence, reign through each abandoned hail. Save frora some room of state when shrieks the owl, Or claps the bat her wing 5 or sabbaths foul 360 When Beldames hold ; or when some ghost in pain Lifts the shrill wait, and dar?.ks th® infernai chain. α Rise 5 winds and waves, and roar, till breaks the day j Then die at once!— 'Tis Oberon calls!—Obey Í"«- He ceased ; and straight an earthquake rocked the ground ì Loud thunders burst, blue lightning flashed around. High swelled the river; soon its mounds it broke: Whirlwinds sprang loose, and many a groaning oak
Fell victim to their rage !—-Yet ^ hite each rock Rebellowed to tiie tempest's thundering shock, 370 Still could thc Monks in ßtaulyre Friory hear The lal Hug Castled crash.— í îî awe and fear Those Heaven-vowed Fathers past the livo-iong night With prayers, and ieará, and many a ghostly ritt% Watching thc sand-glass nm with wistfull eye. And whimpering,—- 64 Jesu ï sure, ihy judgiug-day ? nigh !'*— But soon as blew the cock his clarion «shrill, The storm expired at once I—-The air was ?<?, Fled every cloud ; so gently sighed the breeze, It mocked the ear , and motionless the trees ¿SO Slept with the ¡sleep of death ; no bound was heard,* Save the light twittering of ???? matin bird, Or where soft gurgliug loved the Clyde to pabs, While zephyr's wing scarce curled its hquid glass» Struck by ihis sadden chang**, iheir cloibtered Fane The Friars forsake : the oyer's bank they gain. And start, surprised to see a sanguine gleam From BothwclJ's t^cka reflected on the stream* Meanwhile, with anxious cries and wonder loud, Grouped on the further shore, the Yas&al»crowd 390
Mourn o'er tb¿ Castle's wreck, and oft ????? Somo Margaret's, Marioits some, more Lillian name« And now in haste ihey leap the shattered walls, Scab' the sníit tower«;, and search thc roofless halls : IN ? traces of the Sisters meet their eyes î No voire but Echo's to their shouts replies î At length convinced too well their quest is vain, The crowd tetires ? and all their homes regain ; Thongh marvelling m tch, that, none should missing he Of all the Castle's inmates, save those Three. 400 Not so thn Prior ; he ?!»??!? ?< ???? head, And-— u Much ï fear/' ¿hus ίο Lì*» ???? be said, ?? Scorn of our ord'4 hathat length drawn down Oil tliOiC irrcve?* :U Imhrcs S fr . Boihan's frown ! Our ??? nil's Hoor, when mars was chaunted, ne'er Their kiï^.'f in penance hont were known to wear ; Bïîtaye at matin-chime and vesper-hour Their beads they told, each in her secret bower ! Confession they disdained, and still as well Concealed iheir sins... .as had they none to teli ! 410 They burnt no tapers sit St. Botban's thrttie; iVor bade with gorgeous gifts his altars shines
Nor joyed to waste the pale lamp's midnight oil. Plying their needles with unwearied toil Through zeal to deck with richly-wrought attire St. Bothan's statue, or St. Bothan's Prior. Their errors now... .aias ! toolute y they see: But hold ! such crimes deserve no sigh from me t i *Twas the Saint's will ; so benedicite Z"— 419 J He said; the obedient Monks applauding hoards And following facts stamped judgement on thc word : For when eve's balmy breath allayed the heat, And o'er thc waves of Clyde blew fresh and meot¿ As strayed thc Prior along the winding shore, Three crags he marked, which none e'er marked be¬ fore» A Ktrangc thought crost his mind !—he nearer ????, And on each roek impressed, a well-known name Trembling he read î —at once the truth he guessed; A paternoster said, and signed his breast ; Then back to Liantyre sped, and bade there be 430 An annual mass baidfor that Sister-three So strangely snatched írom life—thc Monks obeyed; And aye those annual rites were duly paid 5
While Scotland's hardy sons and daughters fair Still owned obedience ίο St. Peter's chair, Bowed with dne reverence to the priestly cope, And dreaded much the Devil 5 and more the Pope. But when proud Heresy, on earth to dwell, At Luther's cali tWsook her native hell. That Harpy's breath soon poisoned bcotland's gale ; And pious clouds no more had power to veil 441 Home's venerable weakness—impious hands Then seized on cloistered gems and Abbey lands ; Cancelled the bonds by d}ing misers given To buy with worldly wealth a right to Heaven ; f 1 j And marred tlie bargains (maugre monkish plaints) Of sorrowing sinners and of would-be saints. Robbed of support, and viewed with general hate, Monastic piles then found one common faie, Wreck aud contempt : and Blantyre with thv re^f, Beneath the tempest bowed her spiry crest, 4Γ» I
No more with pealing anthems rang her choir, No more were masses said for souls in tire : No more his labour's fruit the peasant bore, A hard-earned otTering. to the chapel's door 5 And soon, her sons dispersi, the crumbling- Fano Saw in her grassy cloisters silence reign. Both well's Three Ladies shared the Priory's lot \ Their memories, nay* their names are now forgot : Though still those names each Sister-Crag displays, 460 Seldom they draw the careless Traveller*« gaze | Or (if he reads) the work he thinks them still Of love-lorn striplings from the neighbouring Mill, [l] Meanwhile, Clyde Kelpies [2] in their river's bed Bug Zelints grave, and wreathed his beauteous ??&? With flowers unfading»—-As in earth they lay The HLstarred youth, Spright, Spunkie, Elf, and Fay, Sigh o'er the corse a long, alast farewell, Haise lho sad dirge, and sound thQ passing fcelh
Slow o' w that funeral spot Clyde's waters 4 roll, 470 To huntsmen fatal still, and called " Tke Huntsman's Ihlc." ¡3} Since then, ίο Bothwell's Lord though danger's near, No Brownien warning strikes his startled ear : No circles now, with livelier verdure crowned, Beíray, where Fairies formed the moonlight round· To dime» Atr <t ¡staut} ?\? ?? guilty m^tidn lib phantom-train indignant Oberon hmd% And all the fairy*people shun the flood» Whose streams were Bullied with thcir Favourite's blood» fet once methought, as all alone I strayed, 4SO (While on fhe Clyde's smooth bosom trembling played The golden moonshine ; all was calm around, And hushed the midnight air) I caught a sound, So sweet* ,so strange* . .so pure from touch of earth. · To call it musics were to wrong its worth» But whether 'twas the ghost of bonnic Jane, Whose shadowy lute sent forth that plaintive strain ;
Ör 4was the charmed caí ro*goran horn, tvhich played Self-blown a requiem to its Master's shade ; Or rather was't tho lirdian Huntsman's knell 490 By mermaids rung..... .in sooth í may not tell. ?? earth-barn verse it mors belite- to show, From this wild tale what useful truths may flow ; And try (while now my Muse in maniac's gown Binds the last straws on hei Ui.ustic crown) From critic-wrath my idle rhyim -j save By moral meaning and instruction grave. Oh ! Lovily Sex, your gracious hearing l?ml ; For you I sing î — Oh ï Lovely Sex ; attend ! MORAL. beinone, who read thc tale of Margarets ire, ¿00 E'er killa puppy to revenge a sire! Iiy Marion warned, ye virtuous maids and wivcs ? Court not your sister's spouses for your lives I And ye, who love as Lilliä loved, and fain Would bind your husband's hearts with lasting dudn j
lìut fear, their eyes should prettier babies sec lii other eyes than yoursj leam this from ??: *—· ίς Finn to one tow man's truant thoughts to bhid 9 Cham his ?&? tiili¿ undfix his vain loose mind" I ¡v iûm Sage wømuCiliS thia ??€?!?1 A iJUOtej ??? "Qm means ihm is certam— CUT HIS THROAT»"
ΕΝΠ OF THE THIRD VObUMB*
¡X N.SHURY, Printer, Berwick Street
