Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The infernal Quixote: a tale of the day
,, r .............. .?**?~?**?-?—?!???*? *~!!^ , , Ι III IU THE INFERNAL QUIXOTE. CHAP. I. SCARCELY had Marauder, settle« this business to the satisfaction of the leaders of his party, and his own re¬ nown, before he ??? earnestly pressed to go over to Ireland, and inspect into the state of affairs there. This he had for some time before determined upon, and Fahany, who had partly settled his Irish mortgages, prepared to vol. in. ? ■- accompany
accompany him. They left town to¬ gether. As thev were walking through the *> Ort tOM r n of Holyhead, a gentìeman in a foreign military uniform came up to Fahany, and, in bad l.ngii-di, said— " Luckily met, Sir ; 1 have been seeking vou in Ireland, and am just ? *j ' v landed in England, very ready to pay my draft. Where is your banker Marauder, for wliose service it was drawn ?" Marauder, instantly guessing at the man, who was no other than Geutes¬ piere, answered in French—" My name is Marauder ; and if you have any thiiig to say to me, I can speak 1
ío you in your native language, auH- -----" 6i My name is Geutespiere; ifyou arc thc man who was with Mr. Fahany at Turin, you cannot be ignorant who 1 am. '' ít Well, Sir," replied Marauder, with equal haut cur, t4 I am the person you mean. What are your com¬ mands ?" ¿ 4Í Proceed, Sir," said Fahany, reco- vering from a conscious confusion lie affected to hide under a contemptuous brow. " I will, if possible, with patience too," said the injured emigrant, " lest my anger, in this public place, should disappoint my revenge* Mr. Fahany, you produced my name to a note of ? 2 h md
hand for a large amount, whieh you pretended to have won of mc." " Tis false," replied Fahany. Geutespiere clapped his hand to his sword ; but restraining himself, con¬ tinued— " No matter—it is enough !—· Mr. Marauder, vou made the use intended by the forgery, aiul debauched the foolish, the inconstant, the per¬ jured Leonora." " In much stronger language, and not with language alone, would I an¬ swer your base implication," retorted Marauder, adding with a sneer, " but that 1 am not willing to let your anger disappoint your revenge* Tis true I have enjoyed Leonora ; nor, till I was satiated· with her charms, did she express
express any regret that she had sacri¬ ficed for me an honourable connection with a Captain Geutespiere." With difficulty the irritated and in¬ jured Frenchman could restrain hispas- sion.—·" Let me not again speak but act," said he; "where are you to be found ?" " Half an hour hence, had we not - met you, vve had been on thc sea towards Ireland," said Fahanjs " we shall now wait your commands at yon¬ der hotel. " Geutespiere passed them, and they returned back to their inn. In a short time a regular challenge ? 3 ????,
came, brought by a young gentleman in the same uniform. Time and wea¬ pons were mentioned. Early the next morning with sword and pistols, at the MQSt retired ά/ίοΛ— " We call on you at five," said tlie young soldier, " and expect you will be ready to attend us, and point out where that spot ?." „ To this they assented. Before six in the morning, the four gentlemen arrived at a wood afew miles from the town, and, without loss of time, prepared immediately for %hø combat. Marauder and Fahany expected that eaeh of them was to take an opponent ; but
but Geutespiere, in defiance of thc most earnest entreaties of his compa¬ nion, was resolved İt should bc other¬ wise. " The battle is mine," said he; "the firing of a pistol will not fatigue me. If I fall, then, my friend, I cannot prevent your noble courage from re¬ venging my death." Maraudet and Fahany tossed up who should be the first opponent to Geu¬ tespiere. Tbe lot fell on Fahany. The combatants fired together. ι Fahany felk ? 4 Marauder,.
Marauder, without a word, took his place. For the second time the pistols were discharged. Marauders aim was deadly. The ball passed into the heart of the brave emigrant ; he bounded from the ground, and dropped dead on the spot. Marauder was slightly wounded. Geutespiete's ball had passed through the fleshy part of his left arm ; and Marauder mentally admired his own prudence, which had induced him, as he fired, to step his^ight foot forward, and thus probably prevented the ball froni
from taking the same direction as his 'own had done. A common duellist would no. have perceived this masterstroke of Marau¬ der's, much less did the young soldier ; it was only known to, and woithy of, an adept and veteran in the art. Ma¬ rauder had before practised it in Italy, when he avoided the shot of a famous Irishman, who had beeu in the service of France. This man, a professed duellist, had noticed the finesse; but Marauder's pistol stopped the remark whicli was about to issue from his lips, and buried his knowledge in eternal silence. The young emigrant, perceiving the ? 5 fate
fate of his friend, hastened to reload tbe pistols, when the report of some guns at no great distance roused his attention. " There is no time to be lost," said he, as he threw down the present im¬ plements of death, and drew his sword. He rushed upon his antagonist, crying -~ " Revenge I revenge! revenge !" Marauder was prepared for him. The fight lasted for some minutes. They were both pretty equally skilled in the sword ; but Marauder had every other advantage. It required some skill indeed to avoid the first thrusts of the young Officer ; but when once his exertions.
exertions began to relax, the contest was no longer equal. The Frenchman was wounded, fa¬ tigued, and faint Marauder pressed upon him, became master of his sword- arin, closed, and threw him on the ground. At this moment, while Marauder's hand was lifted up to put a finish to the bloody work, a rustling among the leaves caught his ear, and stopped the blow. i * Two gentlemen, with fowling-pieces and spaniels, came out of the wood vcrv near them. s 6 Maraudes
Marauder spoke loud enough to bc heard by them.—" Your life is in my power; I give it you, though your friends rashness and your own compel¬ led me to meet you in this manner." These w r ere the first w T ords of English Marauder had spoken to either of the emigrant Officers. The words indeed were not under¬ stood by him to whom they were ad¬ dressed, but clearly heard by those he most wished to hear them. " Your compassion, Sir," said one of the sportsmen, as they both came forward, " shews vou a man of true r */ honour. It may be necessary for you to
to leave this spot. Our servants are at hand, ancl will give every assistance that is necessary. " ... _»■ Marauder thanked them for their civility ; but declined departing. He ran up to Fahany, and perceived, with great demonstrations ofjoy, that his friend was not mortally wounded ;—the ball had passed through the upper part of his thigh. The young emigrant, by loss of blood, was extremelv faint. The gen- tlemen stanched it as well as they were able; and while one of them sent a ser¬ vant for chaises ancl a surgeon, the other produced a present support, the brandy bottle. A moderate application of
of this revived tfie two wounded gen¬ tlemen ; and Marauder was at last pre¬ vailed upon, by the persuasions of his friend Fahany, to continue his ççute to Ireland without him. But this he dkl not consent to till after the arrival of the surgeon and the carriages, and the medical gentleman had assured him 1? friend was out of danger. It was the present policy of Ma¬ rauder to make his conduct seem as humane as possible. The character of Marauder wae be¬ come very high in the estimation of the strangers; they provided him vvith a horse to carry him as far as the first post- town, from whence he could get into Scotland ;;
Scotland; and, as he was unencum¬ bered with any other baggage than a portmanteau, and attended by his valet (who was sent for from Holyhead), he understood that it would be a pleasant journey to the Mull of Galloway in Scotland, and a short passage of twenty miles to the Irish coast His wound, which was trifling, was bound up by the surgeon before he left the field. Marauder therefore took the advice of the strangers ; and, proceeding to¬ wards Scotland, gave up the idea of going from Holyhead, lest thc report of the duel might have been heard of « there. His clothes he knew Mould reach
reach Dublin before him, as they had been sent in the vessel in which *. Fahany and himself were to have sailed. Fahany's Wound, though by no means mortal, would not permit his accom¬ panying him ; and as to the event of a trial, they were both of them very indifferent, as they were able to prove that the challenge originated from the deceased. Before he departed, Marauder was careful to whisper a few data in Fahany "s - r* ear. The strangers also vvere so willing to come forward as witnesses of the gene¬ rosity
rosity and humanity of Marauder, that tlieir acquittal was certain. The young Frenchman knew no otherwise of the affair, than as his deceased friend Geutespiere had told him ; both Marauder and Fahany had denied the charge, and he soon began to think that his friend might have been imposed on. Duchesne (the other emigrant Offi¬ cer's name) and Fahany were both car¬ ried to the house of one of the strangers, whose name was Forrester, aud the dead body of Geutespiere was con¬ veyed to Holyhead. Duchesne sent to some of his coun¬ trymen
trymen of known respectability, to con- suit how it was best fbr him to act. They very properly took the opinion of some of the first lawyers, whose advice was that he should leave the kingdom ns soon as possible ; informing him also, that as the bearer of a challenge, and second of a challenger, besides being a princi¬ pal, he was in danger of forfeiting his life to the laws of this country. Ac¬ cordingly he was conveyed on board a ship bound to Hamburgh, as soon as his wounds would permit, from which place he could easily join the Emigrant Army that was under the command of the Duke de Condé.
CHAP.
?| |*?»»»*??»?— 1 _ ii ι ι ? .u . m ?? ι i n i»
CHAP. IL İN the meantime, with prosperous breezes, Marauder arrives at Dublin, and is introduced to the first company in that capital.- Marauder, whose ever active mind was in search after information, did not confine himself to one party, but gleaned his knowledge from both.
The
The particulars of his duel soon reached the sister kingdoir, and was the means of making his .name very generally known throughout the coun¬ try. The report came from the strangers, and was adorned, as it passed through various hands, with many heroical ornaments. The gallant gay Marauder found his company courted by every one ; he was almost idolized by the women, respected and envied by the men. -When spoken to upon the late affair, a subject he was far from disliking, he would laughingly tell a fair lady, it was thc fatal effects of beauty. Among
Among the men, who tliought so suc¬ cessful a rencounter added to his credit, he remarked that his passage back to England wouhl be without co*_t, as he expected daily a King's Officer to con- duet him over, that he might attend to take his trial. Sometimes he seriously spoke of the afiair, and affected to lament the intemperate rashness and revengeful jealousy of Geutespiere, aud the fatal effects which his own injured honour demanded. i 4 , Thus could he treat the most serious concerns as it suited the whim of the moment, though in reality every thing was subservient to his interest. Yet, in the midst of that easy and gay de¬ portment he every vvhere exhibited, was
was he seriously plotting some of the deepest and most subtle schemes. It was near the latter end of the summer of 1795, when Marauder made his appearance in Dublin. Thc disturbances, which- had alarmed the public ear, in the North, seemed to have subsided. A temporary explosion indeed was gone by ; but slowly and insidiously did the spreading train creep throughout the kingdom. The latent seeds of rebellion were taking the deepest root in the province of Ulster, and the old name of Defender began to be swallowed up in the more general one of United Irishmen. The poison had crept into the southern parts of the nation ; and Munster soon 6 after
after rapidly swallowed the organizing system. . They.iore civilized parts around the metropolis were by nò means back- v/ard ; but the powers which were ready to oppose thcrn, were better knovui hero, and kept the disaffected some¬ what in awe. But the'otucmal forge, from whence thc whole mass of treason issued, was in the capital itself. Here were the secret and ingenious springs tempered, vvhich were to influence the great ma¬ chine. No mean geniusses directed thc work ; -the very first political artisti gave their aid, and the Machlavelian schemes of ancient and modern times v> ere
were fully investigated to perfect Üie bold design. Marauder beheld with redoubled pleasure the progress of the work, ancl, from his late conference with the French Commissioner, was able to give great information on thc subject About this time it was that Edward John Lewins was sent by the party over to France, to act as circumstances might require, in the capacity of tkeir accredited resident ambassador* In the most fertile part of the county of Tipperary, in the province of Munster, Marauder's chief property laj—a county by no means behind the rest of the province in that licen¬ tious
tious insolence, and artful hypocrisy, the very parents of sedition. Having informed himself in Dublin with a perfect knowledge of the means at present in agitation tc perfect the great undertaking, he set out imme¬ diately for his country seat, as he con¬ cluded lie should very soon be sum¬ moned over to England. Marauder's persotta I appearance at this time it will be proper to remark ; thc reason will bc most evident in the progress of these pages. Marauder was always well dressed ; his clothes in the highest fashion ; his hair long, and constantly powdered; vol. nr. ? his
his beard close shaved, and not tlæ smallest appearance of a whisker. Though he was by nature rather of a dark complexion, he did not appear so now ; some of the most fashionable cos¬ metics he used in great quantities, and with great success. But though his exterior deportment was so very aristo- cratical, his conduct was adapted to conciliate the favour of his dependants. He listened to all their complaints with the greatest patience, and re¬ dressed most of them. He regulari ν ? * attended mass, confessed frequently, and ordered prayers to be said in his own chapel for the soul of his father, who had died a heretic. He was very liberal
liberal to the Priests, and gave away considerable sums to poor families recommended by them ; though his gifts were of more ostentation than real value. One hundred guineas, divided among twenty or thirty fami¬ lies, made an astonishing noise in the country. As in .a morning he walked out with his gun, he never failed to converse with, and sound the sentiments of every farmer and labourer he could find at all communicative. His present steward was an honest, industrious man, a Protestant ; yet, perceiving that he was disliked, because he was violent against the Def ε ν π ? a
and endeavoured to arm the neighbour¬ hood in defence of the Government, Marauder privately promised his prin¬ cipal tenants that he should soon be removed. He hinted to them that there was a relation of his own, and an Iiishman, whom he would send in his place ; he told every one also, that he himself was obliged to go over to the Webt Indies, to look after some property he had got there ; that he pur¬ posed to dispose of the sanie, and lay out the money in Ireland for the benefit of his tenants ; and that on his return he should make that country his future residence. While Marauder remained in Ireland, he did not spend, in his own estima¬ tion,
tíon, an idle hour, personally investi- o-atinff every thins*; that was going for- ward. He was all things to all ???, and put on an assumed character throughout his stay in that kingdom. Soon after he landed, he enrolled his name amono: the United Irish, and took the usual oaths—oaths, the pur¬ port of which he had sworn to agaiu and again in England. Yet, at this very time, to his aristocratical acquamtance he lamented the evils which had so lately harassed Ireland, and wen pre¬ tended, when he returned from the country, to give some information which he had received from his tenants ; all of which was only calculated to mislead and deceive them. c ä In
In a private conversation which he had with a gentleman of considerable consequence in the Government, he spoke, among many other things, to this effect :— " On this, Sir, you may rely, that the people of this country will never be so foolish as to think of satisfying their wants by force. " The pernicious doctrines of the French, indeed, have made some little progress in Dublin ; but the vast num¬ bers of the commonalty, who are cf my persuasion, above all others, repro^ bate their principles. We see, Sir, our holy religion overturned by the vik lains hi France, and we are on our guard. My worldly prospects I have already
already sacrificed to the faith my fore¬ fathers professed, or 1 should at this time be a Member of the British Par¬ liament. We, the Catholics I mean, are, I may say, the native friends of Ireland ; ancl the emancipating of us will be the surest guard to the Crown, thc liberties of the people, and thr safety of the country." \ The great man was struck with what Marauder said, and owned there was mach reason in his remarks. ????? Marauder returned to Dublin, he found a King's messenger in waiting for him, who had heard the affair of the duel in so favourable a light, and his intended prisoner's conduct so ? 4 highly
highly extolled/ that, understanding he was expected from the country in a few da)5, he politely waited his arrival. Marauder returned with him to England. He was immediately put upon his trial for thc death of Captain Geutebf/k re. Not a vvitucss appeared against him ; and with the usual form on such occasions, he was most honour¬ ably acquitted. He found his friend Fahany perfectly recovered of his wound, and as able and as willing as before to participate in any honourable piece tf iniquity he chpse to point out to Jiim. There was a scheme or two, indeed,. ia
ín which the assistance of a friend, who was so little scrupulous as Fahany, would be of great service to him ; but his measures were not yet ripe. W r hen Marauder had intended, by the assistance of Emily, to get the lovely Fanny into his power, he knew Fahany would be at any time willing to take the first off his hands. Now Emily was no where to be found, and Fanny was too mueh upon her guard to put herself easily into his power. He doubted not that at anv time he should be able to carry her off by vio¬ lence, but this force wouhl not answer his other purposes at present. The intentions of Marauder upon: ? 5 Fanny,
Fanny, at every moment of leisure,» occurred to his mind ; but the conti¬ nual hurry of affairs in which he had so deeply involved himself, totally pre¬ vented his putting them in practice. This beautiful subject* staggered his philosophy more than any other; as yet he had never openly declared his pretensions to her favour, and he was resolved to make sure of his prize as soon as ever he avowed himself. The natural pride and turbulence of Marauder's temper was heightened by his late disappointment; his acti¬ vity was roused, his exertions were required, and a restlessness pervaded his whole conduct, that kept his mind or his body continually in motion. CHAP.
CHAP. IIL JM. OST of the circumstances which had come under the notice of Marauder in Ireland, he discovered to his politi¬ cal friends here ; but his mind was preg¬ nant with some plans, that he was- afraid to trust even to the dearest of them. Immersed in political wiles, he ob¬ served, with the highest exultation, the' ? ? prospecta
prospects wliich were open to him. He saw no competitor that had any chance of succeeding against him ; and the greatest men in abilities and resolution, were either removed out of his way, or were already under his direction. 1 The dauntless and desperate mind of Santhorpe had already hurried him to the active scenes which were raised in the West Indies. Injuries had roused him, revenge had called him, and he was- now upon the seas ; his expecta¬ tions and his rights were in those coun¬ tries, and no fear was left that he would soon return. Hambden Arnon, whom once Ma¬ rauder had considered with a jealous eye,
eye, had of late totally withdrawn him¬ self from their society. Fahany, bewildered in a maze of idleness, dissipation, and debauchery, never came forward but at the instiga¬ tion of his friend; and Arnon, the Lycurgus of the party, looked upon Marauder as the hero who should establish his laws. As for the orators, the men of title, of wealth, and present name, he knew human nature too well to fear that such would be the active chiefs of a mob when real danger appeared. In spite of the sanguine temperature of the young Chief, he could not tail 3 observing
observing that the human mind iff England was, as yet, by no means ripe for an universal affiliating system. Since his return from Ireland he saw the contrast, and concluded it might take some years to enlighten thi.s coun¬ try sufficiently for the purpose ; and, as he was not ignorant of the wavering. gale of popularity when it wants the support of the strong blasts of power,- he determined to absent himself for a while, and voluntarily undergo a tem¬ porary ostracism, that he might return at the critical period mature in honours. That the long medium of absence magnifies our virtues, and diminishes our vices, the quick mind of Marauder had often remarked, and of which he was
was now resolved to mike a proper usc. His ambitious, restless soul longed for employment. The meeting of scribes and secretaries, trifling declaim¬ ers, and harebrained enthusiasts, he already began to loath. Marauder was not accustomed to plot and to scheme, and then to doubt of the means of execution ; his undertak¬ ings, although personal, had been most bold and daring ; and his high spirit, his artful temper, had conducted him through them with success. In his late rencounter with the emigrant Officers Geutespiere and Duchesne,
Duchesne, his name had become public in the most favourable point of view ; and he had been by no means sparing* of his puffs in the public papers, in one of which he had a share. Now then, by a temporary retirement from the scene of glory, did he design that his fame "should take root. Had Marauder been portionless, he would long before this have entered into the French service, to join which, even when he was in Italy, he evinced the strongest desire ; but the rumours of a war with England checked him : and vvhen it broke out with this coun¬ try, his interest, as well as prudence restrained him. To
To enter into the English Army for a time, was a subject Älarauder was fond of broaching, solely that he might gratify himself in the pleasure he took in ridiculing it. lie would ironically talk of his own services (as his father had given hini a commission in tlie Militia before he vv;cnt abroad, though he had never but once joined the Regi¬ ment), and compare his experimental knowledge with many of our English Generals, I shall not recapitulate any of the common-place sneers he threw out on a corps, who, however little they may affect the experienced lan¬ guage of warriors, or pompous brag* gadocios, have taught thek enemies that
that genuine courage is ever ready to* meet them in the open liekW So great was Marauder's hatred become to all ovr established profes- sions, that he had a set of phrases and cant terms fbr each of them. A commission. îh the Army he called —purchased honour ; the Officer was called—a red-coated trader; physicians were—regulated murderers; lawyers—- licensed pickpockets, and such-like names. But his grand virulence was directed· against the Clergy, of whom many* of his epithets have already appeared- in this history; and the writings o£ any
any modern philosopher * will present innumerable others, from the respect¬ able-Voltaire, down, down, down to . the almost equally respectable Thomas Pain, Thomas Holcroft, or Thomas Dutton. To retire from this cold country,
whoso
whose rocky soil refuses to admit the roots-of the most flourishing «ciou from the Gallic tree of liberty, was indeed no mighty secret ; yet concerning this removal there was a secret Marauder dared not to trust to any one. Mr. Arnon and Fahany were his- confidential friends ; but to be a great man, he knew that, a person should only tell enough of his-* own secrets to get the whole of others. This Marauder practised with every success. He had lately conceived a most bold and noble scheme ; and he had soon resolved in his own mind, without communicating his thoughts to any living creature, to put it into execu* tion.
tion. If he had a confidant in this aifair, he knew he could carry it on with much more ease ; but he was very unwilling to risk his secret with any one. For manv weeks after his return to England «lid he revolve within him¬ self whether or not he should impart it to Fahany, and again he thought that Amon would be the best confidant. While he was thus unresolved, he perceived Fahany, , replenished with money, give himself up, as usual, to all manner of dissipation. In vain Marauder talked of the noble enterprise in hand, of the srreat benefit his monev vvould ? *t be to him in their expected struggles in Ireland, of the folly of throwing away large sums at thc gaming-table, and tried
tried every inducement and persuasion to check his extravagance. Fahany heard, assented, and swore he would restrain. The next night the wine entered his head, and folly his heart. Arnon of late was become gloomy, To Marauder s enquiries he ever endea¬ voured to laugh İt off; and, from being one of the most abstemious of men, he began to court the jolly god. Ever fond of his son, he had been accustomed to delight in his company ; now, if possible, he seemed more fond of him than ever, yet, strange, avoided
avoided as much as possible his com¬ pany. This the wary, watchful Marauder soon noticed. He perceived the younger Arnon was totally lost to their cause, wliich, in some degree, accounted for the father's conduct ; yet that his sons character was not diminished in his esteem was equally apparent, by Mr. Arnon's transferring some property to him at this time, and by frequently making him thc most handsome pre¬ sents. When, therefore, Marauder had tho¬ roughly investigated in his mind the situation of these friends, he gave up the idea of disclosing his secret to either
cither of them, and set about arrang*· ing his affairs, that he might be able to act witliout the aid of any one. For the first time he now opened his intention to Arnon and Fahany, that he was obliged to go over to the West Indies, to see about a property he had there, and which had been greatly neg¬ lected. He informed them that he purposed selling it as soon as possible alter his arrival, and returning to' England directly. They pressed him earnestly, for ihc public good, to dispose of it here, and, if it was absolutely necessary, to send over an agent.
He
He answered it could not well be done ; that he should not bc absent, he hoped, in the whole, above twelve months ; and that a relation of his own, whom he could in all cases rely upon as himself, would superintend his Irish concerns, and in every respect act as if he was present.— " You, perhaps, have seen," said he, " my friend and kinsman, Captain M 'Ginnis?" fS Never, never," replied both ; thev had not even heard of his name. " Indeed !" exclaimed Marauder; " but I am not surprised at it; 'tis to the aristoeratical prejudices of my edu¬ cation vou must ascribe the omission ; no longer will a false notion of things hide from my dearest friends the most trifling of my thoughts. M 'Ginnis, vol. m. d though
though the most worthy of men, is by principle a staunch Republicas, from the noble examples he has witnessed in the French nation. This has induced him to throw up his commission in the Emperor's service. He writes me word that his conscience will no longer suffer him to defend the usurped power of dopots, against the rights of the whole human race besides. You know in what strong aristocratical notions I was educated ; these prevented my publicly noticing my kinsman, M'Giunis; but now I ??? my error, I glory in my rela¬ tion, and wait with impatience for his arrival from the Continent. I expect him soon in England, and I should wish to introduce him to two men I so highly esteem. »He is reckoned not unlike
unlike me. He has much of the Irish¬ man in his appearance and speech, though he has been many years in fo¬ reign service. " They both said they should bc yery happy to be acquainted vvith him. " In case I fail," continued Ma-_ raudcr, " he is my heir-at-law by my mother's side, from whence my pro¬ perty comes. 1 think you will like him. I have often tried him, and cau depend upon his honour. It is my in¬ tention, for thc sake of concentratine: iny affairs, to have every kind of con¬ cern sent to me through his hands while I am absent ; and as I shall write to him by each opportunity that offers, any ο ? letters
letters or papers directed to him will be the best means to reach me. Before I depart to the West Indies, I mean to arrange with him a regular plan of cor¬ respondence ; and any communication you can favour me with, 1 hope you will transmit immediately to him, and ITI answer for his preserving his trust inviolate." This was the first intimation the dearest friends of Marauder received of Captain M 'Ginnis, a personage who will make no little figure İn the remain¬ der of these memoirs.
CHAP.
(???. IV.
ZIFTER the conference mentioned in the last chapter, Marauder talked fre¬ quently to his acquaintance of his cousin, Captain M t Ginnis, and Anion and Fahany were favoured with the hearing of many letters he had received from him. For a long time he expected M 'Ginn is in town every week ; by and hy he ? 3 received
received a letter that he was obliged to go to Ireland ; rhu ν by some circum¬ stance or oilier, he was still disap¬ pointed. At last he received a letter from Holyhead, that he was just landed in the packet, and would be with hini on the next Monday, Marauder invited a large party, Arnon and his son, Fahany, and above a dozen of their mutual friends, to meet him. The dinner waited till nine o'clock ; uo Captain M 'Ginnis came, Very much disappointed, the com¬ pany
pany sat down. A mout excellent dinner was totally spoiled ;—the fish boiled to a powder—the venison roasted to a rag—the turtle soup alone pas¬ sable. All the company vvere un¬ hinged ; thc Epicurean philosophers pouted ; and Marauder liimself could not conceal that he was unusually alarmed. In the midst of the second coufsc, a loud rapping induced them to sup¬ pose that the Captain was arrived. The servant entered the room vvith a letter for Marauder. Bowing to his guests, he anxiously opened and read it. He rose from table, begged the company to keep ? 4 their
their seats, and, handing the letter to Anion, who sat next to him, imme¬ diately, without further apology, left thc room. The letter ran thus :—
" SIR, " A gentleman, who has just strength enough to inform me that he is a relation of your's, and his name M 'Ginnis, has, by the unskilfulness of a driver, been overturned in this town, and taken up for dead. I happened to be upon the spot, and am of the Faculty. It was some time befbre he re¬ covered his senses sufficiently to inform me
me of the above. I ani afraid now to give you any hope. ; but, if you wish to see hini alive, I earnestly intreat you to come immediately, " I am, Sir, most respectfully, " Your obedient, humble servant, " J. SMITH." Maidenhead, Monday, ò o'clock.
Arnon read thc letter aloud, and gave it to a servant, who stood in wait¬ ing, to carry it to his master. The company saw no more of Marauder that evening. ? In the morning Arnon heard from o å him,
him, that his kinsman was yet alive, but pronounced by the surgeons to be in very imminent clanger. By degrees Captain M 'Ginnis got better ; but not time enough for Arnon to sec him before he was obliged to leave town, and to go into Yorkshire. Fahany too was so engaged with women, wine, ancl dice, that Captain M'Giunis returned to Ireland without being introduced to either of these par¬ ticular friends of Marauder. Indeed at one time Marauder had half a mind to have so contrived it, that the Captain should have been per¬ sonally introduced to them befbre he left
left England ; but prudence advised him not. " What then/' thc reader perhaps may say, "did not Marauder, after all, wish to introduce his kinsman ?" " He had no such intention from thc first." " Why not i v " Because Captain M 'Ginnis was at present but an imaginary being, whom, by and by, Marauder meant to person¬ ate himself." Marauder, it is true, had some intention of introducing himself in masquerade to Fahany, as his cousin, the Captain ; but, for once in his life, he doubted his own command over his d ? risible
risible faculues ; and had he entrusted his secret to either of his worthy friends, Arnon would have had the pre¬ ference. Fahany every night was at some gaming-table, and frequently at the very low r est of the kind. His money too, for h * had taken up no less than jC* £0,000 on his Irish estates, was going at a great rate. His wife's jointure, which he had not only neglected, but disputed the payment of, had lately been recovered by her trustees, and he hid the pleasure of paying the gentle* men of the long robe into the bargain. Marauder did his utmost to wean him of his horrid connections, by forcing hmi
him upon some kind of employment. One while he prevailed on him to answer a ministerial pamphlet, and occasionally to write for the Reviews and Newspapers. But in vain was every argument of Marauder used to induce him to go over to Ireland, ancl settle upon his estate there ; in this case he would probably have made a discovery to him of his own intentions. Fahany's excuse was his unsettled affairs in Eng¬ land ; though it was evident that the lust of dissipation enslaved him. Marauder, therefore, was obliged to be contented with his promise of com¬ ing over as soon as possible ; and, wishing to get him some regular em¬ ployment, which might make his abili¬ ties
ties of use¿ he, at last, by dint of much entreaty, induced him to pur¬ chase a share in an anti-ministerial paper. In this he soon became a con¬ stant writer; the novelty of the thing pleased him much, the party applauded his remarks, aud vanity for a time con¬ tinued him in this pursuit, which gene¬ rally took up those liours which other¬ wise were allotted to the gaming¬ house. Marauder now began to prepare the means to introduce himself in his new character, with full powers and conse¬ quence; well knowing that he could neither give his kinsman too much au¬ thority, or that it would be used against his own interest. For this purpose he not
not only wrote frequently to his stew¬ ard in Ireland upon the occasion ; but to every person the least worthy of attention on his estate, he sent a formal notice, that till his return from the West Indies, they were to consider Captain M 'Ginnis as himself; nor did he omit the reason—on account of his near kindred, and long-tried honour and friendship» That there had been such a person as M *G innis, of his mother's side, was well known in Ireland, who, at a very early age, went into thc sea-service, and the vessel was said to have been lost. This person's name Marauder fished up from the bottom of the ocean—got him a commission in the Imperial service— 4 supported
supported him on a liberal allow¬ ance while he remained there—now generously owned him as his heir—- and, with the utmost liberality and confidence, gave him the management of-his whole property while he himself was absent from Europe. These particulars of his imaginary kinsman, Marauder at times gave forth. In the course of a few inonths, hav¬ ing familiarized his friends to the name of M 'G innis, he was very sedulous that his cousin should be known by the confidential members of the grand oiabolism, and other societies to which he belonged* This was no difficult matter for him to do.
do. When he informed them of the ab¬ solute necessity of his going to the West Indies, he mentioned Captain M *Ginnis us a man devoted to their cause, whom principle luul driveu from a chief com¬ mand, and the expectations of the highest p_efennent in the Imperial ser¬ vice, and who now could give them the best information concerning the general state of Ireland, and more particularly of those parts where his own property was situated. W T henever, too, he was able to produce early inform¬ ation of the plans and designs of either party in that kingdom, his truly worthy and respectable kinsman, Cap¬ tain Patrick M 'Ginnis, was sure to be the person from whom he received the intelligence. CHAP.
.. .???
CHAP. V. İT mny not be amiss toremark, that the chief circumstance which occa¬ sioned that depression of spirits in Mr. Anion, originally arose from perceiving his son totally lost to that party, of whieh he had ever flattered himself Hambden would have been the princi¬ pal leader. What Marauder was so likely to be, he
he doubted not his own interest and connections, his son's abilities and knowledge, vvould easily have made him. When fust thc father perceived that spirit of religious enquiry, which Wil¬ son had raised, began to exert itself more and more in his son, he endea¬ voured, by the most plausible argu¬ ments of which he was master, by reasoning, and by ridicule, to check it entirely. .To one of these discourses of his father, Hambden replied— " If they (the Christians) are wrong, Sir, are we right ?" " So
<t So far right," replied Mr. Arnold ** as not to be prejudiced to their opinions. " ίζ Of their mysterious opinions," continued Hambden, tí I am not yet competent to judge ; but it is that won¬ derful system of morality, whieh the Christian religion has opened to man¬ kind, that makes me fear I have been all my life in an error." '* How is it superior tp the general class, whicli you and I, and every good man observe ?" " I mean not to condemn your con¬ duct, Sir ; I am too well satisfied my own has not been right. Christianity, Sir, is that purity of principle, which will not, by any mental persuasion, commit
commit that vvhich is wrong, even if it is to produce the greatest be¬ nefit." The father seemed affected.— " Surely if the good vvhich follows outweighs the evil, the latter becomes a virtue. " " Christianity says otherwise, and I am firmly convinced." " But w- rong, orevil, depends upon tlie situation of the person, or circum¬ stances, at the time." " To an heathen, Sir, it did; but never to a Christian. He is ever to do that which may conduce to the benefit of his fello w r -crcat u res, and to rely upon God for the issue. One grand rule—to do unto others at he would be
be done unto—is, at all seasons, in prosperity and adversity, to be the bias of his actions." " I see men act otherwise, and even among the Ministers of religion them¬ selves." " That, Sir, is the common argu¬ ment against Christianity ; but it cer¬ tainly is none at ail : for any law may be good, although the persons who have promised to .keep it, break it." *' Christianity affects a perfection human nature is incapable of. " " True, Sir; but it is the duty of each member to approach as near as possible to this superior excellence ; and therefore it is a duty incumbent on the very best of men, to endeavour to be better. " ¥ " Such
<t Such great perfection I cannot think the Deity either expects or requires." " God, who is ail perfection himself, must necessarily rejoice to see others approach to the same. Our earthly wis¬ dom is solely of use to us, as it makes us more honest, virtuous, and good— more fit for another world ; for, what¬ ever may be our endowments of mind or body, here we cannot stay I Petty faults or crimes may be forgiven in the ignorant and uninstructed ; but in your case-or mine, Sir, even in a moral sense alone, how severely would the world condemn us, were we to be guilty of a breach of any trust, or of private or public dishonesty !"
Oftentimes,
Oftentimes, when his son Hambden talked in this way, would Mr. Arnon start from his seat, and walk about vvith a confusion he could not conceal. At other times he would hastily leave the room. Hambden could by no means explain the cause. Mr. Amon did not, on that account, yield to his son's argu¬ ments, and Hambden would often fimcy his father was displeased ; yet his conduct towards him always shewed the contrary. In short, it clearly appeared that, by conversations simi- lar -to these, the son raised certain sen¬ sations in his father's mind, that evi¬ dently made him uneasy. In Qther conversations Hambden expounded more at length, wishing his father
father to study those truths which he himself had so lately begun to be acquainted with ; but he ever spoke with that modesty and affection, that Mr. Anion had not the smallest reason to be displeased. Neither was he so in any respect, was apparent by the property which (as was before said) he about that time transferred to his son. There certainly was much liberality of sentiment, arvVell as generosity of conduct, in Mr. Arnon's thus acting ; 'because he had every reason to suppose that his son was likelv to form a con- neetion in a family, which, however respectable it might be, was of totally difìerent principles from those that Mr. Arnon supported. vol. in. e The
The worthv Dean, who had been the patron of Mr. Lockeridge, ancl one of the executors of the Duke of Silsbuty, had. from the introduction of Wilson, greatly n .ticed Mr. Hambden Arnon. Happily for Hambden, he had become a convert to the principles of Christi¬ anity ere he had yct seen thc pretty Anna, the amiable daughter of this dignified churchman ; or it is not to be doubted, that his forsaken party would have «iven all the merit of the conver- sion to the bewitching eyes of the fair Christian. When Hambden first became ac¬ quainted with the Dean, his family was in the couutry ; and it was not till many months after that he became convinced
convinced how superior the female character shines, vvhen clothed in ths pure garb of religion. From this period, indeed, his inti¬ macy with the Dean's family had been most sedulously cultivated ; and it was generally ¿supposed that Mr. Arnon's. consent was the only thing wanting to his son, that he might publicly declare the wish of his heart to bc, by the hand of tiie lovely Anna, favoured with so respectable an alliance. Wilson was well acquainted with the sentiments of Hambden on this sub¬ ject, but which, knowing how con¬ trary it would beto liti father's prin- e C ciples
ciples, he had not yet mentioned to him. Mr. Arnon had not been thrice in the company of Wilson before he perceived not only how destructive to his own idea's were that young man's sentiments, but also, from his son's partiality to his new acquaintance, how great was his influence over him ; and with pleasure he heard that his stay was to be so short in tovvn. None of the conversations I have alluded to between the father and son, took place till long after Wilson left London, but chiefly while Marauder was in Ireland. These
These conversations had invariably recoiled on Mr. Arnon himself; and he now resolved to try more publicly, if he could, by argument, shame, or ridicule, to turn Hambden aside from his present notions, so hostile to his birth, education, and connections.
e 8 ?И??.
■f Wi, W I M'. JM
????. VI. JT OR this purpose Mr. Arnon invited Marauder ancl Fahany to meet Hamb¬ den, and purposely omitted asking any other company ; he told them the object he had in view, and earnestly requested them to lend their assist¬ ance. Of the abilities of both he knew his son had a very high opinion ; and of Fahany
Fahany he had lately remarked to his father, that he was astonished a man so well read, and of such hi^h literaiy abilities, should consume hi» time, his health, and property among tlie most depraved of both sexe^, Thc u-ross cond uct of a certain Cler- gyinan in a verv* conspieuous situation, which at that time was talked ot in every company, easily led to thc sub* ject Mr. Arnon vvas so desirous to introduce, " I think," said Fahany, "hewas a sensible man ; though I should have liked him better if he had had less hypocrisy. " e 4 " Hypo-,
" Hypocrisy," replied Arnon, "is every thing to a priest, Tis not only his garb, but his very subsistence." "It is truly astonishing to me," continued Fahany, " that enlightened as this nation is, and with the glorious example of the French before them, the farce of religion is not entirely given up. ¡t I still wanted an argu¬ ment to convince me, it is the con¬ duct of the very teachers themselves." " That argument, I think, is against you, " said Hambden. " How so?" asked Fahany. " If the Christian religion flourishes without any assistance—if they, whose duty it is to instruct others, neglect their trust—if the leading men in the kingdom, who profess these principles, are
are the first to violate them, I think all this is an argument of the truth of the religion: it cannot be the con¬ trary. " " Good arguments!" said Fahany, ironically. " My modest friend Boc- cace has something like it in his first taie. What that witty writer men¬ tioned in jest, lhad no idea, Hambden, you would dress up in earnest. Am I to think you so ?" <t Boccacce hatred of priests, or his loose morals, cannot affect his argu¬ ments ; but I had not your friend in my thoughts. As for thc Ministers of religion, I do not believe them worse than other people." " In Italy," said Marauder, "they e 5 were
were one half pimps, and the rest knaves*." 4t My short acquaintance in Italy," replied Hambden, "found them too aus¬ tere for the one, and too simple for the other. In France, I know, the parish Priests, the great body of regular Clergy, were the first patterns of piety and morality ; in England I am inti¬ mately acquainted but with one, and he, though a Dignitary in the Church, is an honour to his profession.'* 41 I understand," said Marauder,
Willi
with an arch look, " that the Dean of Winterbourn has a very pretty daugh¬ ter." Hambden coloured, but said—" Of thc daughter, Sir, I was not speaking ; the father's excellent character, I be¬ lieve, no one will deny. But all this is nothing to the purpose ; for, what¬ ever mav be the conduct of the Mini- *r sters of religion, thc doctrine cannot alter or change/' " I suppose," sakl Marauder, laugh¬ ing, ' c you have beeu reading the Bible lately ?" "Ihave," replied Hambden, gravely. " And did vou ever meet before such incoherent tales, such improba¬ ble, such strange things r 4 ' remarked Fahanv. *j ?? "As
" As what?" asked Hambden. " These miracles," replied Fahany. " They do not pretend to be othei> wise/' replied Hambden. " And vou believe them ?" cried */ Marauder. " Yes; in part, at least, Ido. I begin to think them not so unworthy of credit as I once did." t t Pshaw ! you.cannot be in earnest, " exclaimed Marauder. " I hope also," said Fahany, " you believe those which Vespasian, the Roman Emperor, did. You cannot be ignorant tliat he also performed mi¬ racles-." Hambden Anion, with great stea¬ diness, replied—" I have heard many Deists quote the passage you allude to froni'
from Tacitus ; but it is strange they are not candid enough to tell the parti¬ culars. It has not, Mr. Fahany, I presume, escaped your memory, that in the eases of thc two persons reputed to be cured by thc Emperor, one of whom Vespasian restored to sight, and the other from lameness—that thc phy¬ sicians examined them, and said— * In this man the power of sight reas not wholly extinct, and would return were thc obstacles removed ; the other man's joints were distorted, and might be restored by regular propping and straining,'—To a man just coming to the Empire, do you think thc physi¬ cians were disposed to be flatterers? I need not repeat to you that these were
were the only two miracles Vespasian was ever said to have performed." " You cannot suppose I believe them more than yourself," replied Fahany. " Now give me your opinion of these ;" and with great exactness he imme-' diately quoted some of the most remark¬ able passages from the Old Testament, which have been again and again men¬ tioned by the adversaries of Christi¬ anity for these last two hundred years. —" All these do you believe?" said he. Hambden replied—" What tells me they were not so ?" ** Reason," answered Fahany. " How is human reason to judge of any hing out of the common course of nature ?" Hambden continued ; "yet tliere
there are many passages, I candidly confess, that I do not comprehend ; and considering the language in which they were originally written, and which is now almost lost—the vast number of years ago—how often they have been translated and transcribed, and most probably altered, I shall never attempt to defend a verbal criticism, which perhaps was oiiginally occa¬ sioned by the folly, error, or mistake of some one long since*" " How can the word of God err?" said Marauder, with a contemptuous sneer. " The word of God cannot err," replied Hambden, calmly; ' f but the history of that word, written or copied by a human being, liable to error, may. 4 Some
Some time ago the eighth command¬ ment was printed wrong. Was the real commandment false on that account ? As such, some parts of the Holy Scrip¬ tures may have been injured." " If the Scriptures w r ere the word of God, " said Mr. Arnon, " they must necessarily be the word of truth. But in every passage where the sun, moon, and stars are mentioned, they are spoken of as subservient to this world, and according to the notions of the vulgar and illiterate. Is this, Hamb¬ den, reconcilable to truth ?" " Certainly, Sir," replied his son. " We speak the same language now, though we pretend to know otherwise. When I say—the sun rises—there is a new moon—the earth is immoveable-r- thcl
tlie stars do not shine in the day-time— and many other expressions in daily use, I speak to the common ideas and understanding of mankind; I do not deceive, and no one woukl think of calling my words a falsity. So also did Aloses, Joshua, David, Solomon, and the rest who assisted in writing the Bible, speak according to their own comprehension, and the people's re¬ ceived opinion. It was the word of God, his command, that was revealed to us ; and his wisdom and knowledge, these were left to future ages, by de¬ grees, in part to discover. " " I presume," said Marauder, " these prophets, in the present day, would be called fools"
U V ei y
" Very likely. They never used religion as a worldly wisdom, that is, for worldly purposes." Marauder did not notice the appli¬ cation, but proceeded vvith that plausi¬ ble and reflective manner he could at pleasure assume.—" Few men, I pre¬ sume, Mr. Hambden, have more fully considered this subject than myself; few, I believe, have been more seyere victims in the cause of religion than I have. Educated, after the strictest manner, in the principles of those dis¬ sentient from the Church of Rome, my early reason and watchful con¬ science shewed me they were wrong, and I adopted the original customs oP the primitive Christians ; but when my
my mind was expanded—to your most excellent father, and my worthy friend, Fahany, I gratefully acknowledge the force of truth and learning—1 began to think for myself. No more shall the tricks of priestcraft deceive me ; no more will I give credit to improbable, im¬ perfect fictions ; the mask of antiquity no longer shall appear to my view as reason, truth, and virtue. I have be¬ fore laughed' at your arguments, as I could not conceive it possible that you, brought up in none of my prejudices, could be in earnest; that you, with such an education, and such a father, couid listen to the tales of men noto¬ rious for their ignorance and illiterate- ness. I need not recapitulate Mr. Arnon's argubents, concerning their total
total want of common philosophy, aiuf all human learning; nor need I point out how spurious and doubtful most of the supposed writers arc." Even Hambden, who so well knew thc man, Mas astonished at the specious art of the conscientious Marauder ; but, with a smile, he replied—" As the conduct you have thought proper to adopt, Sir, must be left out of the question, I cannot fuliy answer you ; but thus it appears to me, that there was no necessity for the peculiar ser¬ vants of the Deity to be scholars and astronomers, because they were prophets. Neither does it lessen the Holy Scriptures, whether certain parts were M r ritten by those whose name they bea iv
bear. It is from that excellent spirit which every where shines out in them-— it is from the general tenor of the whole, and particularly the prophecies, that I believe them to bo true. " " And so you tliink the person called Jesus Christ was a Messiah, Saviour, and all that ?" said Fahany. " I am more and more induced to be of that opinion," replied Hambden. " Mr. Hambden," exclaimed Fa¬ hany, " what can have: possessed you? Will you sacrifice your reason and your judgment to the stale poetical fictions of a disgraced, an infamous, a vaga¬ bond people ? Knaves invented the tale, and fools believed it." " Were G roti us, Bacon, Milton, Newton, Locfe, Hale, Addison, Lyt- tleton,
tietön, Blackstone, Johnson, Sir Wil¬ liam Jones, without referring to other great names, or mentioning any of the Ministers of Christianitv, fools? or' were illiterate fishermen, born in io·- norance, brought up in poverty, who suffered disgrace and punishuftnt while living, and died as ignominious male¬ factors, knaves?* By whom were they led astray ? By a poor and peace¬ able man like themselves, who neither aimed at, nor would accept power, riches, honours, pleasure, or any of
tlie
the good things of this world, and pa¬ tiently suffered ignominy, tortures, and death. Many have been the en¬ thusiasts and impostors, who have en¬ deavoured to deceive mankind, and to impose on the world pretended reve¬ lations ; and some of them, from pride, olbtinacy, or perhaps principle, have gone so far as to lay down their lives rallier than retract; but where can his¬ tory shew one who ever made his own s Hearings and death a necessary part of his original plan, and essential' to his mission ? This Jesus Christ actually did; he fiv\ saw, foretold, declared their necessity, and .patiently endured them. When I contemplate the divine lessons, the perfect precepts, the beautiful discourses, and the consistent conduct of
of this person, I cannot but think he was more than man" Eahany, who, at all times irritable, and without any command of his pas¬ sions, now felt himself assailed in his tenderest point, burst at once from that coolness with whieh he had befbre heard Hambden, and exclaimed— " Where was this wonderful man born? In Bethlehem of Judea, they say, a contemptible town of a more contemptible province of the Romans. From what people did he come ? A slavish, base, and conquered nation, the outcasts of thc earth. What man of note, fame, or consequence ever saw or heard of him ? A few years were these
these great things, in which all thc world were to be concerned, acting! in the same low, mean, despicable country î How do I know they were ever performed ? How can I tell he ever existed ?" " Though you insult me, Sir, by your vvarmth," said Hambden, rather sharply, but with a determined steadi¬ ness, " you, without meaning it, ho¬ nour my subject. If, by this intempe¬ rate conduct, the truth is to be investi¬ gated—if reason and argument are thus ----- -" Fahany had recovered himself, and saw his hasty behaviour in its proper light. Interrupting Hambden, there¬ fore, he, with that politeness he could vol, m. f with
with pleasure adopt, apologized for his warmth ; and then, with the most studied calmness, proposed the same questions in a very different manner. " On this part of the subject, Sir," replied Hambden, " I am thoroughly persuaded that you arc as well informed, if not far tøter, than myself. I shall beg leave to answer your ques¬ tions with a few others; and, with your permission we will then drop the subject, as I am sure conviction will not follow on either side." " I beg, Sir, you'll propose what you think proper, and I'll give you as direct an answer as is in my ?????." " It is all that I rçquire. Do you, Sir, from the books you have read^ and the
the information you have by that means received, think there ever was such a person as the Christians call Jesus Christ ?" Fahany paused a little—" Why, yes. " " Do you suppose he was born at Bethlehem of Judæa?" " Most likely." " Did he derive his pedigree from David and from Judah?" " That! know nothing about." " Has any one of thc least authority denied it ?" " I don't know that they have." " According to the writings of the Jews, was it from among their own countrymen, the tribe of Judah, the ' lineage of David, that the Messiah was to come ?" " I believe it was." f 2 " Have
4S Have you reason to suppose that this Jesus, the reputed son of Joseph- and Mary, of the lineage of David and Judah, was a good or a bad man ?" " It is a thing I care not about/' c< Thc accounts you have read of him in sacred and profane writers, must induce you to think one òr the other." " I never heard any thing against his moral character, but his setting liimself up to be better and greater than others." " Can you prove he was not?" " I have nothing to say against him as a matj.— Go on." " Were there in those days at which he was said to be born, such men as Herod the Tetrarch, and afterwards Pontius Pilate, and many others men¬ tioned
tioned in the books called thc New Testament?" " The Roman History acknowledges there were." " Did the historical circumstances, mentioned throughout the New Testa¬ ment, happen in the time, place, and manner there recorded ?" - " Of all these things I have no doubt. The writer, whoever he was, would probably take care not to err in this respect But I do not believe that he was born of a virgin—that he per¬ formed miracles—that he rose from the dead—and all the rest of the wonder¬ ful tales mentioned. " " You cannot prove it was not so ; nor have I any proof but the assertion of his friends that it zvas. But it is f 3 from
from their assertion, from his own words, conduct, and doctrines, that I have lately begun to believe the whole to be true. Since, then, Sir, so much must necessarily depetid upon faith, I wiil say no more, but that I shall be happy to see the day when we shall be all of the same opinion." ? The conversation now took a dir ferent turn ; Marauder was completely tired of the former subject—a subject to him most úfinfttaníng ?? uninterest¬ ing. Marauder could hb religious, or tW contrary, ^hen thie tegument iuited his purpose ; but tb dispute fór what he called principle, was iñ hîs opinion the
the height of folly.—" How eould you gratify the fool," said 'he to Fahany, when they had departed, *' by talking of such nonsense ?" " More madman than fool, I be¬ lieve," said the other. " Who would håve supposed fiom him such notions, eo contrary to his birth, his education, and connections ?" M You, I think, were almost as mad. I am astonished you should think šuch trifles worth a serious dispute; for my part, I am no more inclined to be a Vanini, than a Peter or it Paul." Marauder ever felt himself elevated when he reviewed his own philasophy ; f 4 he
he continued his remarks with no sinali portion of blasphemy, and at last— " Yes, indeed, religion is a good thing if a man knows how to use it It is a chaui upon the hands of a fool, but ? ???? of sense will use it as a scourge. When I was in Ireland——" Marauder perceived he was going too far in his concerns—" But enough, and too much of this* Come,, Fahany, I'll go with you this evenmg to her Grace's àaro -????. I have a gooI hundred in my pqcket, which, as a country¬ woman, I can spare the dear creature* Remember, to-morrow you promised to finish for me that parody from Aristophanes. ? I must see it in our Saturday's paper," Fahany
fahany assented ; and they proceeded to the house of the illustrious dame, widow of a Prince, sister of a King, and head-proprietor of »^gaming¬ table* *
r S ???
CHAP. VII. J. ROM the conversation that had passed at Mr. Arnon's, he saw how little hopes he had of realizing his am¬ bitious prospects in the person of his son Hambden ; and from this time he eve.· avoided any discourse with his son that could lead to _he subject· Λ few mornings after he remarked to Marauder 6
Marauder * that he greatly feareá his. son was bst to their J>arty. Marauder, ever wary and thoughtful,. replied—" I trust the loss of Mr.. Hambden Arnon wilL not prove the cause of weakening your means." After a little more conversation, and Marauder had remarked upon his géne* rosity towards Hambden, he insidiously hinted that, as a citizen of the world—* as the friend of human nature—as ai tover of political justice, more glorious» cares demanded his attention,, than weak filial considerations.. And before Marauder left him, he spoke in plainer language,, and told him that his soa had deserted the cause of % easm and f 6 truth ¿
truth ; and it required him to be very cautious that the property he possessed, did not fall into those hands that would employ it against the glorious cause in which himself and 'friends were toge-t ther engaged- Marauder, in thus advising Amon to* leave his property from his son,, not only gratified his own dislike against Hambden, but gained for himself the next hest chance of possessing it. Most highly, indeed, did Arnon** think of Marauder ; he knew his abi¬ lities to be gre^t, his ambition greater \. his courage and his prudence he liad Qften seen : feriad γ and in every trait of hia cbarac*% that heroic diabolism- shone
the boldness the unrestrained freedom of bis soul :—therefore» when Arnonr expected his son from America, he was, in hopes the similarity of their studies- wonld unite them together, and tbat they would become a second Pylades and Orestes. Neither did he apprehend* that their prospects wonld interfere. Marauder then seemed to follow the high load öf Aristocracy; Hambden he hoped would rise through the rugged track of Democracy». All these fond expectations were now vanished, and even to himself his son; began to be lost ;. for every interview alone with Hambden had lately brought to his mind reflection and ïernembrance,
remembrance, which, in defiance of his frequent boasts, told him that there was such a thing as conscience. As thc principal hero of this history is about to leave England, it may not be amiss to see in what situation he leaves the other characters, who have been presented to our notice- Emily ïîeîïure, retired from the gay world, was become an inmate İn the house of a country Clergyman, front whose example and her own dear- bought experience, she soon became as sedulous to improve the beauties of her nund, as she had formerly been of those of h ¿r person. Fanny
Fanny raided at Richmond with the samfe friends, not more lovely than beloved, nbt more beloved than worthy té ? so. Already the fluttering beaux fagan to bttfc uröuttd het ; already the flattery bf love and admiration stole hito her fcár?, ahd proved her under¬ standing was as excellent, aiid her mind as pure bš the beautiful case that enclosed thbm. Wilson, still at the Castle, was en¬ tered into á corps of which the young Duke of bilsburv was the Colonel; *l J * whose high i*ank in life had neither re¬ moved hfe friendship from Wilson, nor bore him away from the humble vir¬ tues of miklness and urbanitv, which had ever adorned his character· The
The military garb which Wifeon sometimes wore, had not yet infused into him any bolder or more daring hopes when in the presenta of Fanny.. Some slight unintended remark of Mr., Townsend 's had put a stop to their cor¬ respondence ; and the number of fa- slikmable youths, who assiduously courted her. favour, some of whom had already declared their pretensions, be- r gan to make him more clearly under¬ stand those sensations, which had been gaming ground so fast in his heart. Rattle, with young Harrety, in the autumn travelled through great part of Scotland ; the latter was now at the University, aiid Rattle had not yet been able to get rid of his chambers in the Temple..
Temple. In the following spring they have agreed to make a tour through Wales ; and Rattle is positively fixed, that he will then give up every thing of and belonging to the law. The Reverend Mr. Lockeridge, in the true enjoyment of his connubial lot, sees his eldest son, as a reward for his atten¬ tion to his studies, ride by hi^ side at the head of the foremost hounds ; and 'Squire Thickset, who keeps the hounds, and has ten thousand a year, declares he shall marry his only daughter, Bet, who ie already in her tenth year, and v young Lockeridge two years older. Dr. Line w$$ at one time somewhat affronted by the astrological system ; but,
but, by a lucky turn in his calculation, every thing goes on more favourably than ever. Expounding on other celes¬ tial subjects, he has entirely resigned to his friend Lockeridge, whose virtues he thinks are not i.iuch inferior to those of Nichoh.§ Culpepper, Dr. Sibley, &c. &c. &c. Such was the situation of the moré principal characters recorded in this history, when, in the beginning of. the year 1796, Marauder pre^ated to go to Ireland, and assume the person of tataia M-GintU* He settled with the most 'trusty of his friends % cipher ctifrespond^nce, which %t was to give to I is cousin M 'Ginnis ;
M 'G innis: for he told them that he should first go to Ireland, and, having settled every thing with his kinsman, embark from thence for the West Indies· The day at length arrived, when Marauder, having arranged every thing to his satisfaction, and having received accounts that airairs in the sister kingdom were hastì_nifig, with rapid ???, to a crisis, took a farewel of his atcjuaihta-ftèé oft thk side of the water, ahd, hîgfr ih hopeé, dë-ej* in projects, prepared to execute his pfcm. Befóte ?? étøbarked, he eôutd not M W congratulate hhtišdf on his pru- èÉrt foresight, which had prevented his
ï 16 INFERNAL QUIXOTE, his entrusting Fahany with his secret ; who, so far from preparing to return to Ireland, where he had been chosen to a high commission among the United Brethren, that he was again trying to raise more money on his property. He had met with some difficulties iá . raising further mortgages on his Irish estates, and was endeavouring to make a title to seU some property ân Eng- , land; for this r^aso^, h$ wantea hi& wife to live with him for, ? season, till, by her assistance, he ha$ succeeded* This her friends violently opposed ; nor was the lady, who had had too fatal an experience of her husband's reform¬ ation, again ???? -ed to risk her healtji \ «w*Ä4í%
and happiness with a dissipated, unprin¬ cipled man, · Marauder had foreseen, from the first, that if he came into military ser¬ vice with Fahany, he could not fail being known to him; and this had almost induced him to discover his in¬ tentions. But now things appeareel very different ; and he had no idea that Fahany would be able to join him for some months, and most probably that he would never have resolution to break from his old haunts, and come over at all. In the midst of his higher views, Marauder had not neglected his more trifling affairs. He
He did not seli hiis landed property in England, lest it should lead to any suspicions ; but he mortgaged the whole for as much as it would fetch. The house itself, at Hazleton, had been let some months ; and a little before he left London, he let also his toll¬ house for a year, under the care of his steward, Imphell, not chusing to dis- pose of it for a longer period, at a time, as he said, it was uncertain how soon he might return from the West Indies. Thc small house he had on the Downs, he kept in his own hands. The grandSociety had theirpri vate committee meetings here, and kept many papers of considerable consequence, the place of
of which was only known to Marauder and Arnon. Neither did he think it prudent to take any servant with him ; his haughty, absolute, and determined temper had ever prevented any one from being attached to him, and therefore, in this case, he more easily dispensed with any attendance.
CHAP.
CHAP. VIIL Marauder ís for a while off the stage, and Patrick M 'Ginnis, Esq. lately a Captain in the Imperial ser¬ vice, appears in his room, and makes his entrance in Dublin. A complete metamorphosis in dress and person had now taken place. The long well-powdered hair of Marauder,
Marauder had yielded to a close curly crop, which Captain M'Ginnis daiiy rubbed with a liquid to make it still blacker. M'Gmnis's whiskers were long, and nearly met round his chin ; some hair appeared upon his upper lip— his eyebrows vvere died black—his complexion was frequently washed wdth a decoction of walnuts-—Jie wore the undress of the Imperial service—-and a large cocked hat with a cockade in it. M 'Ginnis, unlike his cousin Ma¬ rauder, spoke with the Irish twang (which a few months'practice, when he was alone, had made perfect), and secmed to take large quantities of snuff, a thing Marauder had never been seen to do, vol. m. g It
lt will not be amiss to remark, that while Marauder Mas on his travels, he had often been for weeks together with the Imperial troops ; ever partial to a military life, hehadvrith avidity no¬ ticed their discipline, manners, kc* kc. and this first gave him the idea of making M 'Ginnis a Captain in the Imperial service. From any ignorance in military matters he had not thc smallest fears of detection ; and thc only thing he re¬ quired to complete the deception, M'as the name of a regiment, if by accident lie should meet vvith an Imperial Officer, that he might not be in danger of ex¬ posing himself. After a little time he satisfied his mind in this also ; but he had
had never occasion to use it, so as to bc in the remotest degree liable to de¬ tection. It is necessary to mention these mi¬ nutiæ, to shew the great art and cir¬ cumspection of the hero of this tale ; who, with cool and deliberate reason¬ ing, and swayed by no other passion than uncertain ambition, boldly dared the most adventurous schemes. Captain M 'Ginnis purposed to make but a short stay, for the present, in Dublin. He delivered a great many recom¬ mendatory letters from his kinsman Marauder ; but, as he had not yet ? <2 assumed
assumed his character long enough to have a perfect command of his fea¬ tures, he was not over anxious to see the persons to whom they were ad¬ dressed. > The day before he left Dublin, he had the resolution to dine with a large party of gentlemen and ladies, to whom he was well known before ; and with high satisfaction perceived that no one had the most distant supposition of his being the «ame person. His likeness tc Mr-- Marauder was of course remarked, but by no means universally assented to. The ladies thought him much handsomer, the men older in his look, but not so haughty
haughty and formal in his address. The first he was not supposed to heas; but to the second he replied that he was four years older than his cousin. Marauder had not staid any where long enough to be seen in his real co¬ lours; M t G innis therefore w r as in less danger of being discovered. Marauder had aftected unusual re¬ serve; M 'Ginnis put on the utmost ease and familiarity. Marauder had spoken in the highest terms of his cousin ; and the ? th ei¬ no w, with interest, returned the com¬ pliment.
G 3
In
In short, never clid two of the most finished gamesters play with better suc¬ cess ¡nto oné another's hands, than did the conduct of Älarauder prepare the way for M 'G innis* The first news M t Ginnis received froni England was the marriage of Hambden Arnon, which took place in less than a week after he had taken his leave of his English friends. Marauder's manners were so autho¬ ritative, that he had obtained an in¬ fiuence over Mr. Arnon the elder, he could not easily shake off. This had restrained him from speak¬ ing to his son concerning the connec¬ tion
tion he well knew Hambden had formed with the family of the Dean. The very day on wliich Marauder left England, Arnon wrote thc following letter to his son, who Avas at that time on a visit to the Priest.
f< To influence by the arbitrary ties of kindred when the argumentative power» of reason fails, is contrary, my dear son, to the principles of y r óur father. Though I lament the change of your mental opinions, I cannot but applaud your excellent conduct towards me ; I wish to assure you, by my ac¬ tions as well as words, that I do not behold it with indifference ; and, as I g 4 have
have heard by many a tongue whcre your future hopes of domiciliary happi¬ ness are fixed, I give you the full con¬ sent, and fond wishes of a father that you may succeed in your choice. Your silence, my dear Hambden, I know proceeded from affection towards me ; let me shew you I am not wanting. I beg, therefoie, as a pledge of my love, that you will accept, for a wçddïng present, the house you areso partial to in Wales, with the small property ad¬ joining ; and believe me that the mo¬ ment I hear of your marriage, I shall participate in your happiness. " THOMAS arnon/*
??&
This was the only thing wanting to complete the felicity of Hambden. He waited on his father immediately, to thank him for his kindness. The Dean and his fair daughter lent a willing ear to his suit ; and he was married to the lovely Anna the day after he returned from his father. The house ín Wales was in a few weeks handsomely furnished, and pre¬ pared for their reception* The account of this marriage was enclosed to M 'G innis in a letter from Fahany, to be forwarded to Marauder, Arnon also wrote to his friend by the same post ; but, without entering into r. particulars, he solely mentioned g 5 that
? that his son was married. The begin¬ ning of their correspondence to M'Ginnis was short, formal, -and un¬ interesting ; and thus early a difficulty arose that could not easily be obviated ; as M*Ginnis could not answer, reason, remark, or in any respect notice the letters written to Marauder, without the discovery of the original plan, or the appearance of a breach of trust. Often was M'Giunis, at the com¬ mencement of his career, tempted to disclose the whole, that he might at once sweep away the petty obstacles to a more easy correspondence; but so self-opiniative was he, that he could rarely be persuaded he had acted unwisely; and, though he had confi- 4 dence
dence in no man, he was not willing his friends should percebe how little he trusted them. Marauder's letters introduced M 'Gin¬ nis also to some leading members of the Society of United Irishmen,' and again, in due form and order, he took the necessary oaths, whicli he had before sworn tò as Marauder. His plans thus arranged, without loss of time he went down to his seat in the country.
9 6 CHAP.
CHAP. IX. MARAUDER had received from his late steward, when he was in Ireland, every book and paper that was of the least consequence. Captain M 'Ginnis, therefore, had very little trouble in taking possession of the accounts, and in settling the other affairs, which, as: steward to his cousin, it was necessary for. him to do.
M 'G innis s·
M'Ginnis's first care, after he came down to the estate, was to make him¬ self familiar among the tenants, and with the situation of the property, that a prior knowledge might not appear, and give the remotest suspicion of his ever having been, there before*. He was, for this purpose, up very early, riding all the day about the farms and grounds, and enquiring the name of every person he met. He had not resided in the country a week, be¬ fore he had been within every farm¬ house»; and he got a list of the names of each tenant who rented any part of tlie property, even to the smallest cottage.
The
The whole of Marauder's property was in the Province of Munster, and most of it in the county of Tipperary, on the north-west side. The family mansion, where M 'Ginnis first took up his residence, was plea¬ santly situated ;—but, further into the wild part of tlie country, vvhere its face is more mountainous, and the soil rocky, there is an old house, that has for ages stood, a monument of the savage life, which couid prefer so dreary a spot, solely as a place of strength, ancl as being most difficult of access. When Cromwell conquered the king¬ dom, and liberally bestoweel some of the first estates on his followers, did the
the family of Marauder come into pos¬ session. This house was then consi¬ derably enlarged ancLfortified ; and for years they lived in a continual kind of petty and private warfare with their neighbours. When James II. came to the throne, tlie old soldier was dead ; and his son, more polite, embraced the religious forms of those around him, and built the new mansion ; but the flattering hopes of the family were all blown away with the flight of Jiimes, and tlie opinions of the Ma¬ rauders had ever since continued inve· terate to the Protestant establishment. Some distance below the wild spot, wherfc the ruins of the old residence, in tolerable repair, yet stand, runs the famous
famous river Shannon, which boasts itself far larger than the Thames, but here about sixty miles from its source. The trees which surrounded the house on the eastern side, wherever the soil would admit their growth, were chiefly remarkable for their wild and rugged appearance, but greatly added to the strength of the place; and M 'Ginnis, at his first visit, observed that very strong fo T ces, ignorant of the country,. wouk with difficulty be able to attack a few resolute natives. Under the pretence of shooting, he considerably amended the condition of the building; and put some servants intOî
into it, that he might sleep there whenever he thought proper. The walls of the court-yard were repaired—a deep ditch, which sur¬ rounded the old building, was cleaned out—and the drawbridge, which had for years been clown, was provided with a chain, and made to answer its original intention* All this M t Ginnis did under pretence of protecting himself from the different parties that molested the country, when he made the house his shooting resi¬ dence. Early in the month of May, of the year 1796, M'G innis left his country residence,,
residence, where he had remained not inactive the whole winter, and went to Dublin, on purpose to investigate the preseiitíntentions of Üie leaders of the Union. A few particular acquaintance of Marauder's he was not sorry to find were absent, which made him attend the debates with less apprehensions of being known. He soon discovered his friends were employed in ? mission to tlieir Frendia allies; and in tke owrse-øf the year, he »u-nderstood that L—«d E—-w—<l N F — te — d and Art. ?? ------ r, Esq. had had an interview with the re¬ nowned General Hoche, in Switzerland, that summer, Tliis Officer, he knew, was of the same party as the Com¬ missioner
missioner whom Marauder ha'* ™et in England ; and he was certain thc General had been informed of the state of affairs in both countries according to his representation : every reason therefore did he entertain that the mis¬ sion of his friends would be successful. He now became a most regular at¬ tendant of the private meetings of the grand Committee of United Irishmen, of which he had been chosen a mem¬ ber; norwas it long tefore his seal and abilities, ¿exclusive of the warm recommendatory letters of his kinsman, pointed him out to his associates as n sensible man, and almost able Officer* But very soon he found many, diffi¬ culties arise, and obstacles he bad in the
the beginning no thought of; and* these vvere all from his own party. He had come over to Ireland under the idea of an immediate rising of the people ; but he found the leaders un¬ prepared, the people unarmed. Yet, in defiance of these obstacles, he gave it as his opinion that there should be a general rising all over the kingdom, without loss of time* " Why are not the leaders ready ?"" said he ; "a brave man always is. As for the people, are they to be taught the refinements of discipline, or how are they to leam the use of the gun or of th£ pike, under the eye of a watch¬ ful and suspicious Government? Stir up
„QUIXOTE. up the people;— Furor arma ministrat— Rage will soon furnish them with arms, and vengeance and necessity will soon teach them the use. The lordly English have as yet but few; troops iu Ireland; among the Irish soldiery, numbers are already on our side—and the rest will soon follow if we can but put on the appearance of success. From every part of the kingdomiet the multitude rush to tlie capital ; there we shall find a supply of arms, provisions, and friends ; there we shall meet our enemies—senators and lawyers I mean, not soldiers ; surprised with the report from all parts, for a while, at least, they must be confused, distracted, and un¬ certain. Let us seize this moment, .and Ireland is free l' This
This was the doctrine M 'Ginnis held out to his associates, but he coukl not prevail; delays increased delays; and many a tune, with a curse, had he half resolved to leave tliem for ever. Finding the leading members were of so contrary an opinion to his own, he grew disgusted with their debates, and with redoubled ardour pursued the ob¬ ject at home. He found the greater part of his tenants and labourers were all of the same cause ; and from among the mbre respectable and opulent farmers, he detennined to raise a troop of horse, and discipline them him¬ self At the next meeting of tlie higher Committee
Committee he proposed his schemes, expecting to meet with unbounded applause; but even to this he found opposition, and one man had the rash¬ ness to say, that it was hostile to that principle of equality which was thc basis of their freedom ; that, by such an offer, he shewed himself ignorant of the nature of the people of Ireland, unworthy of his trust, and an enemy to those measures by which her real friends laboured to preserve her. The gentleman who made these re¬ marks, was considered, by the party, as a man of superior consequence. He was not only possessed of a title, but of a large landed property, part of it, indeed, entailed, and the rest bur¬ thened
thened with annuities and mortgages; so that he was encuitobered with debts, and found the greatest difiiculty in rais¬ ing a present supply. What had chiefly impoverished him, was the enormous debt he liad incurred by contested elections ; and in the opening of the Parliament then sitting, he had ex¬ pended every farthing he could raise, without success, to put his friend in for the county. Disappointed in serv¬ ing the people in one way, he was now determined to serve them and himself in another, and was received by the Union with open arms. M 43 innis, who could »ot fail to perceive his own consequence, as Lord of a large property, lost in that of steward,
steward, and had been at times induced to lament thc deception he practised, which thus turned out to his cost, had been oh the watch for an opportunity to signalize himself in his true cha¬ racter. His passions were before in--* flamed, and now, irritated to a parti¬ cular object, who had often before op* posed him, burst out. As soon, then, as the other had spoken, he rushed up to him resolutely, without concealing his desigu, and, in defiance of the interference of one or two who were near, felled him with his fist, in a moment, on the ground— " Infamous scoundrel ! presumptuous, cowardly villain !" and he swore deli¬ berately and dreadfully, " may I have vol. in. π silenced
». ** silenced thy blasphemous tongue for ever i" Surprise, and no small portion of horror, had seized the spectators ; but it was not M'Ginnis's intention to make enemies of these : instantly, therefore, softening his tone, and as¬ suming those easy manners he could so well assume, he said—" Pardon me, gentlemen, my indignation has ex¬ ceeded my discretion. Yet I have a double stake in this glorious cause— in my own person, and as the repre¬ sentative of my kinsman. Do you snppose, gentlemen, my worthy rela¬ tion, Marauder, whose next heir I am, would have, without the smallest restraint or tie, given unlimited com¬ mand
INFERNAL mand and power to mc, even to thc disposal of his whole property,"—and he opened a letter, and threw it on the table—" had he conceived such a wretch as this would have dared to breathe vvith impunity the most distant reflection. Do you suppose, gentle¬ men, I would have thrown up my com¬ mission in the Imperial service—that I would have come to Ireland, vvhere few smiles wait a Catholic, had I not looked forward to a glorious change ?— and is this reptile to doubt my princi¬ ples, or to drop the most distant iiim- miations«against mer— For thc general cause, I panion all that is past ; but if ever again such cursed reflections fall from his lips, I here swear most solemnly, " and again he swore, " the h iî lust
last drop of his blood shall wipe them out." Tlie person who had so grievously offended him, heard the latter part of his speech, and was led out without any answer; he was much hurt in the head, had been stunned for some moments, and bled profusely. M'Giunis had rightly conjectured that his enemy had not spirit enough to take up the affair as a man of ho¬ nour ; in which case M 'G innis was resolved to have shewn that he had as few fears as Marauder himself. Thc new Austrian Officer having thus exhibited his spirit, and given himself
himself a consequence in the eyes of his copartners, his next endeavour was to soften what had happened, by the extreme of politeness and civility to the rest. In the latter point lie did not succeed quite so wdl as in the former, neither did he care so much about it ; yet it answered in a great degree the object he intended, whicli was to give a lift to his conse¬ quence* After this M 'Ginnis was always heard with due attention ; but he found himself as far from the purport of his oratory, in an immediate rising of the people, as ever. Concerning his troop, he succeeded. h â With
With the approbation of the supe¬ rior Committee, he soon enrolled about twenty of his tenants, and offered thek services to the Government. They were accepted. M 'Ginnis quickly raised and embodied a small troop ; and afterwards many loyal neighbouring inhabitants joined his corps, without knowing the principles of tlieir Cap>- tain and his dependants. Marauders hospitality; and con¬ vivial way of life, was very acceptable to the Irish ; and his profession of at¬ tachment to the Government com¬ pletely deceived all but the United Irish. He had nodoubt that he should, by degrees, wiu over the rest to hk party,
party, which induced him to encou¬ rage the entrance of strangers into his troop ; and thus, ere the summer was passed, he was able to bring into the field sixty men, well mounted, apparelled, and accoutred.
n 4
CHAP.
?????????»??*???*1*?????^
CHAP. Χ. ? HE beginning of the winter Marauder was in Dublin ; and heard, with the greatest pleasure, the success¬ ful mission of the Delegates, and the promises of speedy assistance from France, under the command of an ex¬ perienced General. Marauder, in rap¬ tures, hastened back into the coun¬ try.
When,
When, in December, the French armament appeared in Bantry Bay> ■V'' M 'Ginnis was constantly on the watch, expecting every instant to hear that they were landed. He assembled his troop ; he gave them orders to be ready at a moment's warning to hasten to the spot, under the pretence of opposing the enemy. The United Irishmen in his troop were so anxious, with difficulty he re¬ strained them to keep the important secret Once in the power of the French, he knew they must all act for the same cause, or be treated as pri* soners ; and if any refused to join, their horses and accoutrements would aid the cause· ? 5 These
These great hopes soon passed away. The Fiench departed ; and the Epglish fleets appeared along;the coast. Now again M 'Ginnis frequented their private meetings. He was a De¬ legate to the Upper Baronial Com¬ mittee, and, of course, had received the rank of Colonel of a battalion of 600 men. The first months of the year 1797 he employed in making his personal observations throughout the kingdom ; imd hi the spring he joined a great meeting of the Ulster and Lemster Delegates, and a few from the otheï provinces. * v At
At this meeting, which was of the first consequence, the parties became very violent* The Ulster Delegates were for an im¬ mediate rising ; the Leinster were as violent for thè contrary. The former accused thè latter of want of ardour; ihey retorted on the other for haste, violences and abuse of the principle of fraternization. The delegated Colonels from Munster, and a few from Coii- naughty seemed to wait for the deter¬ mination of the superior powers of Ulster and Leinster ; all but M 'Ginnis— he decidedly gave his opinion for open and instant war. The leadmg men of the kingdom ? 6 were
? w-érê of the Leinster party ; and oiie of their most famous orators gave the opinion of the rest in nearly the fol¬ lowing words* *' The affiliating system of organi¬ sation has enlarged itself beyond our most sanguine hopes. Ail ranks, or* ders, degrees of citizens emancipate themselves from the shackles of reli¬ gious and political prejudice and fra¬ ternize together in a Brotherhood of affection, ? ???????? of Rights, and mi Union of Power. Paily does the philanthropic fervour expand* Every return of our forces brings in an in¬ crease of our numbers, an enlargement of our means, and the further perfect¬ ion, of their organized state.—While, then,
then, we are in this flourishing ancl improving course, let us patiently wait the moment till our powers are arrived at their climax. This glorious union is like a snow-ball, which acquires size as it is steadily rolled along; letit, therefore, continue its collective force,, till it bursts of its own accord, and deluges the whole country. " To this M 'Ginnis replied—" A« yet the Union succeeds,. Whilst its power and strength are at the full vigour, let us make the struggle for freedom. If; we wait till we perceive this glorioua Union begins to Jose its collective force r depend upon it that the heart is become rotten. It will not diminish as it has increased. Like the stone of Tisyphus^ 5 when
when it has once arisen to the top, it will suddenly fall headlong, and crush to pieces those who have laboured to raise it. But metaphorical language b the language of deceit ; let me speak in a clearer tone, that every one of the Brotherhood may hear and understand me. " Delegated Colonels of the Pro¬ vince of Ulster ! have ye not been long, waiting with impatience for the signaL to assert your freedom ?" Twenty-two out of twenty-five an¬ swered—" Yes." " Has not your revolutionary sys¬ tem been completed ever since the year 1795?" "- Yes." " Are
" Are not your men organized, ready, and willing ?" 1 " Yes." " Will not the Province of Ulster alone bring into the field five times the number of the forces that can at present be opposed to us ?" " Yes." " Delegated Colonels of LeihsterT can your organization be less forward ?" They answered—" No ; but we wait a more favourable crfeis—the aid of allies, bred up to war. Munster and Connaught will, in a few months, have double their present strength." " Munster," replied M C G innig, " has been less daring than Leinster with the tongue ; but we are not less bold. Connaught, with their present small
small numbers, are most arduous in the cause, and, weak as they are, propose no excuses to postpone the fight. Why should we wait the uncertain coming of the French ? Delay cools our ardour-*- *l delay encourages tlie traitor^—delay opens our intentions to the enemy- delay adds to the bulwark of tyranny— brings with every wind fresh troops from England, and raises more and more obstacles to our success. Last year I gave my voice for action : tlie same weak reasons opposed me. Now the number of our enemies is doubled, but not of ourselves; their vigilance is* thoroughly awakened—our designs be-./ gin to be known ; the English fleets guard the coasts, and the assistance of France is more doubtful than ever. " The
11 The wary Lemster Delegates ac¬ cuse the bold Ulster of violence and rapine;—caution and temperance are indeed most commendable ; buti shall ever prefer the ebullitions of reetrained courage, to the cold ftara of a narrow prudence.'* ,n Another Colonel from Lemster said— u It would be madness to force the people to a premature rising. France promises us supplies. A trusty citizen, " (Edward John Lewins was again sent in April» 1797) " who has already ex¬ ecuted a commission with the highest credit, is about to be sent to France, to negociate a second treaty, and hasten, the promised succours. A little longer let
Tet us bear the yoke of tyranny, that we may throw it%ff for ever." Another Delegate, on the same side,. said—" The march of sentiment al¬ ready pervades the ^jminds of the sons of Erin. The nigb|g§f tyranny is re¬ ceding, and the day-star of liberty rises fast upon it. The philosophy that has enlightened the Continent, ap¬ proaches to illumine our isle. She rides upon the waves, and navies sink before her ; she steps upon the shores and ar* mies disappear. Soon shall her virtue be your own ; for philosophy is truth, and truth is success. Yet a little longer, ye children of Erin í bear with the yoke of the tyrant, and the embraces
embraces of fraternity 'føall unite tlïe Brc herhood of ^, heterogeneous country in the organizing bond of unity. Soon, iCwe persevere in this «V affiliating system, shall the whole mass . of an imperatorial people be regimented in unity ; and a representative legisla¬ ture shall insure to their rights an insu¬ lated independence." This to-be-military orator now launched out in the same style, and in praises most strong of the Union Star and The Press —two notorious papers, which directly proscribed cer¬ tain members of the Government as objects of assassination ; and concluded with saying that those papers alone, without a sword being drawn, would in
în a short time undermine every enemy of the Union. ? ; . ?-* -.„*■ This citizen, whg spoke last, had been concerned in writing for the Union Star, and was known to be chiefly instrumental in establishing The Press.- M t G innis was not ignorant of this, and m ith avidity seized the opportunity of venting his indignation.— tt Curse on these papers ! Curse on the conceit which planned theni, and the strange jargon that forms them ! They betray the public cause, by alarming the Government. They anticipate our measures, and put our adversaries on their guard. Is there an United Irish¬ man
., man that wants to be informed whp his enemy is ? Can any one, who is abie ' «s to read that paper, be ignorant of the names of C. T. ?. G. S ...... ? The present silence of the people is not the silence of fear ancl despondency, but of discretion : yes, and this noisy paper tells the Government so. If an assassin is necessary, who more proper than themselves, that dare not open war ? " For a long time have we been greatly formidable, ancl yet scarcely known. Favoured by the shade of night, we have successfully consulted together. Our decrees have been formed; published by word of mouth, and every vestige of writing has been destroyed. Silence has been our guard. Privately
, Privately have ??? vmdermined the State ; and we want but a steady hand to apply the match, and blow it into ruins. " Now noise and tumult alarm the foe. Senseless clamour draws their at¬ tention ; and stili more senseless boast* ing betrays our purposes. " The alarm once given, every instant we become weaker. " Citizens, delegated Colonels, our cause has already taken up too many words ; I vote for an immediate trial by the sword." M t G innis voted in vain. Ί .eLein- ster Colonels got the few thst came from Connaught, and many of the Munster, of their side ; and the Ulster departed,
departed, extremely incensed against their United Brethren ; and many of them were never afterwards hearty in the affiliating system. The foregoing debate may serve as a literal and correct specimen of the lan¬ guage, sentiments, and conduct of some of the more prominent characters from among the members of the Society of United Irishmen.
????.
?И??. XI. JL HERE was no subject M 'Ginnis reprobated with so much violence as the different writings, by means of vvhich the leading members endea¬ voured to inflame thc ininds of the people. He was continually arguing that it was the ruin of thc cause—that it only helped to betray their measures to the Ministry—
Ministry—that the common people did not understand any of them—the mid¬ dle kind but very few—and that the better sort did not need them :—" Send emissaries, as many as you like, of their own rank and language among theni, but no writing." But the citizens of the quill wouhl not yield up the point. Writings fol¬ lowed writings, till at last the lurking and inveterate spirit of rebellion seemed degenerated into bombast, impudence, abuse, and nonsense. Sume of the most devoted and obe¬ dient of the inferior Officers, by at¬ tempting to obey these rodomontade orders, were guilty of ludicrous absur- vuL. αι. ι dit ies.
dirié». Among many others, there was a circumstance which M 'Ginn is frequently quoted, that he might put the absurdity of the Directorial jargon in its proper light. A famous writer, in an official ad* dress to the Brotherhood of United Irishmen, made use of the following words :— " Let every member wear, day and night, an amulet round his neck, con¬ taining the great principle which unites the Brotherhood, in letters of gold, on a ribbon, striped with all the original colours, and inclosed in a sheath of white silk, to represent the pure Union of the mingled rays, and the abolition of
fif all superficial distinctions, alt co- burs and shades of diflcrence, for the sake of an illustrious end. Let this amulet of Union, Faith, and Honour depend from the neck, and be bound abont thc body, next to the skin, aud close to the heart*. " It happened that M'Giunis was on a certain day to have a private meeting of his Officers. After waiting a long time at the appointed spot, one after another, came a messenger from each, that he was not able to get the amulet* As M'Giunis at hi^t was leaving the
? n
placc,
place, one of his Captains rode up- He began apologies for his delay;— but his manner seemed so constrained, his articulation so uneasy, that M 'G in¬ nis stopped him to know what was the matter with him. " Nothing, but the amulet," he replied. " The devil is in this amulet, what¬ ever it is," exclaimed M 'Ginnis, inhis hasty way whenever any thing vexed him. " This is the excuse of all my Officers for their negligence in not at¬ tending to-day. Be so good, Captain, as to inform me what the amulet is ?" " Has not your Honour seen the last official address of the Directory?"
M 'Ginnis
M 'Ginnis scarcely restrained himself ??? saying, "D —mn the Directory !" he answered—" No," The other, perhaps rinding word-. not so pleasant at present, put his hand in his pocket, and produced the uddrev wliich Ins been just quoted. " Let every member wear, day and night, an amulet round his neck, &c. &c. &c. kc. " I have done my best, Colonel, to fulfil the direction ; but my brother Officers find great difficultv, and 1 know not how we shall be able to fur¬ nish the privates."
ι 3 M 'G innis,
M 'Ginnis, not thinking it prudent to give verbal vent to the contemptuous. anger which raged in his bosom, walked for «ι few seconds up and down the place. Recovering himself, he was more inclined to laugh at the ridiculous misinterpretation wiiich had happened ¿ and vvith a smiling face, said to the Office: — " Well, Captain, how have you obeyed it ?" " I was obliged, Colonel, to get different colours;" and opening his shirt, he discovered a pretty tight binding of various coloured ribbons around his neck, about the body, next to the skin, and the two ends stuck with
with some cobbler's wax close to the region of the heart. M 'G innis, with as much gravity as he could assume, highly commended his zeal ; but told him of his mistake, aud released him from his unpleasant bondage, " Every otVieiai orda," continued he. " wdiich is meant to be literally obeyed, I will, witliout fail, infumi thc Officers under my command of, that they may, in like manner, instruct the others; and I beg you'll remember, Captain, that there is no necessity for your obeying any notices from the Directory, that do not come imme¬ diately from me. I beg you'll inform ι 4 jour
your brother Officers of this; and I will be^answerable for my trust, as, at every meeting: of the Colonels before the superior Committee, we account for our conduct in the discharge of the duty reposed in us." M'Giunis in his own troop bore the rank of a regular Captain appointed hy the Government ; but the rank he held from his private connection wilh the United Irishmen was Colonel, or, as in his civil capacity he was called, a Delegate to the Upper Baronial Com¬ mittee* As soon as open warfare com¬ menced, he had no doubt his abilities would claim the station of a chief commander.
To
To point out systematically the relative degrees of thc conspiracy, will not only elucidate what has been, and still will be noticed in these papers of this rebellion, but will also give the reader a correct and concise view of the grand machine that directed the whole. The Society of United Irish began to be established so early as the year 1791. The abolition of tithes, and, in short, a redress of all grievances, were the objects held out to the common people by the arch-promoters of the plan. Open hostility against the Go¬ vernment was artfully concealed. As their numbers began to increase, ι 5 their
their views became more open ; they divided themselves into societies of twelve each, which twelve choáe from among themselves their own secretary or treasurer. Five secretaries or trea-* surers united together, and elected one of their number to be'a member ofthe Loxver Baronial Committee* Every Loxver Baronial Committee delegated one of their body ; and ten of these formed an Upper Barojiial Committee, which superintended the Lower Baro- niais in their respective counties. Each Upper Baronial delegated one ©f their a umber to the next Superior Cminittee, called District in large towns, and County Committee in coun¬ ties; and the Districts, or County Committee,
Committee, superintended the Upper Baronial. These Superior Committees formed a Subordinate Directory in each of the four provinces, Leinster, Munster, Ulster, and Connaught. The Subordinate* or Provincial Di¬ rectories elected a General Executive Directory of five persons, who governed the whole. But so judiciously was this last elec¬ tion managed, that the secretaries of the Provincial Directories alone knew on whom the election of Chief Directors fell. Afterwards the Delegates to the t 6 Lower
Lower and Upper Baronial Commit¬ tees, Sec* &c. kc. had military rank attached to them, a scale of vvhich may be given in this manner. Twelve United Irishmen, or Privates, elect oiie of their number to be their Secretary or Sergeant* Five Secreta¬ ries, or Sergeants, elect one of their number to be a member of the Lorier Baronial, or Captain. Ten Lower Ba- ronialsy ?? Captains, elect one of thek number to be of the Upper Baronial, or Colonel* One from each Upper Ba* romal was sent to the Provincial Di- rectory* And the four Provinciát Directories appointed
appointed jive Grand Directors, whicli formed the Executive Directory.* The Colonels of each county sent three names to the Executive Directors who chose one of the three as Adju¬ tant-General for that county. Thus a Colonel commanded 600 men a Captain 60 a Sergeant 12 The Adjutant-General according: tb the number in their respective coun¬ ties. Such was the affiliating system which united the Brethren together, and spread with astonishing rapidity over the whole soil. Each member as, with the
thè meist fcpeebiis prospectas he waa entieed by his neighbour to join them, was instantly, in the most sacred terms, sworn to secrecy and fidelity. The real intentions of the Union were only known to the leading members ; and, by their own coñfessibns, have at length appeared to be (what every rational man from the first supposed) the intro^ ductioft of that no-principle of the French, which seeks Ihe gratification of its own interest, without any regard to the laws of God or man, ,and which has already been so fully defined under the term diabolism. f
CHAP.
l___s_a______aa_sàrr7*asfia^^
CHAP« XIL A LETTER from Ýäháuy, whiéb was enclosed for Marauder, M 'Ginnis received hf thè beginning öf the year 179/· As tfiis letfer wirf, in a great degree* shew the situation of his more particula» friends ki England (rmmy, received before, but of nor itaaterial moment, being omitted), it is here giveë
Fahantfs
Fahanfs Letter to Marauder. iC My dearest friend,, if one moment you can spare from the luscious ban¬ quet the new-world is ever courting ! you to partake—Ah Marauder ! how I envy you the unrestrained indulgence of a western clime— * , • l( Where, in the breast, resis tiessi Venus reigns»» % *' And crimson currents fire the throbbing veins \, *' Where the fine fren.y of the jetty eye, <* The raven ringlets, and the skin's dark die, ** The satin polish o'er the surface thrown, " Aad motion's grace,, that made Love's Goddess known !"
* Curse
" Curse on the confined custom», narrow notions, and religious preju¬ dices of Europe ! It is impossible for you to conceive with what anxiety I long for the full-ripe joys that eternally flourish beneath a solar reign. Eng¬ land was welL defined by the ancients— " Et penitù* tota divisos orbe Britanne í/" Virgil* " remotis ** Obstrepit octanu« Britannisl* HotlACE. Yet what is any part of the old world compared to the new ? In works of nature and of art, America has ever been the theme of praise and wonder. In every thing *she surpasses us; ami * equally
equally excites the admiration of the philosopher, the naturalist., the histo¬ rian, and the poet ;—but I must break the enchantment which fascinates me to this delightful subject ; away with the rapturous description—plain narrative must be the order of the day. t( If, my dearest fellow, from that soft couch of pleasure, thou wilt deign to cast a look towards us poor con¬ temptible wights of this cold ai J barren region, I will a tale unfold, not to harrow up thy blood, but to set afloat in thy brain the titillations of the merry Euphrosyne. " Tis of the êapient Cloudley-and Ms Maria, ths/ Maiia^ my Maria» the Maria
Maria of every votary of Cupid, that I am about tell. Nor shall Lucretia, Amazonia, Brutus, Voltaire, Hercules, and Tom Pain, sweet little angels î be forgotten.—Now to pioceed system¬ atically in my story. " In May last died old Rumble, whose heir-at-law our fiiend Cloudley is. But what of that ?—·Old Rumble left ? ?\ ill—his degenerate nephew disinherited—but one hundred a year settled upon each of the young Hope¬ fuls. " Cloudley put on his best garb of philosophy, through which his sweet resigned soul was most visible. He sent
sent to me, as a bit of a cousin, and the trusty Arnon, upon the occasion. " Anion was too unwell to leave home (of him more hereafter) ; I there* fore set off without him, to carry com¬ fort to Cloudley HalL u At Rochester, where I stopped to change horses, who the devil should come up to my carriage but young Ivory 1—Ivory is now a Captain in the ~— regiment ; and, having lately taken the initiated degree in our [ Grand Society, thinks himself a won¬ derous clever fellow. Instantly it struck mc—what if I take Ivory down to comfort poor Maria ! 1 Ivory
1 Ivory/ said I, in a soft whisper, * a beautiful woman—her husband a little jealous—you must be on your guard, my boy—your new uniform and curricle—not to mention how fascinat¬ ing you have already been among the ladies—Hey ! what say you ?' " Ivory was in raptures—embraced the proposal with joy.—' Horrid bore ! —country town—damned quarters- wanted a lounge-—just the thing !' " The curricle was ready in a mi¬ nute ; I sent away my chaise, mounted with him, and away we bowled for Cloudley Hail, his valet and head- grcom following.
4 " On
" Ön the road I gave him hh cue, - Cloudley and his sweet creature were most happy with our company. Ivory played his cards admirably—pro¬ fusely flattered and admired the hus¬ band—politely civil and distant to the wife. Cloudley's jealousy \yore away by degrees, and all parties were happy, " Never w&$ ? ??? in such raptures as Ivory.—* You told me,' said he, * I should se«§ a beautiful woman—by my $Qi4, she's an angel ! It is impos¬ sible she can be the mother of those chüdren I D^ar Fahany r I am eternally obliged to you V
<* Little
*< Little did I dream of the conclu¬ sion to this business. " In two days I went to tovvn. Ivory, by Cloudley's earnest invita¬ tion, was to stay some time longer.·— * What a promising youth,' said the well-judging philosopher to me, * is this Captain Ivory ! What a value to our Society ! He reminds me of my absent friend Marauder/ " Wishing to help the young dog, I enlarged upon his good qualities— the immense riches of his father, the Nabob—what a match for Lucretia ! " I had been returned to town about a week,
a week, vvhen I received the following letter, express, from Cloudley:—
" Ruin and confusion overwhelm me. Maria's fled from my arms vvith the treacherous young Ivory. Lucretia aßd Amazonia are gone off ith his two servants. Yesterday my daughters eloped towards Scotland—I hastened a few stages to overtake them—returned home this morning, and found the house forsaken. I can write no more, Come to the wretched " j* cloudley/'
" I was
- " I was angry with the Captain for his monopoly, aud flew to Cloudley immediately. " Never M'as there such a scene of confusion.- The two daughters have followed nature with Ivory's valet and groom to Scotland. This trick was not known to Maria and her paramour; biit they embraced the opportunity of Ooudlev's absence to be off likewise. Scarce had the mother departed, befbre Brutus and Voltaire mounted two young colts, whieh were breaking in, and scampered away, the devil knows where. The servants were running about the country in pursuit of them ; and Hercules and Tom Pain fell to ^pillaging the house—eating, drink- vol. ι it. ? ing,
ing, and breaking without mercy.—■ Such was the scene when Cloudley returned. " The two boys were npt. when I came, found ; vve heard they were at Dover, vvhere they sold the Lorses. CloucUey speaks not a word, but sinks under his misfortunes ; and from what little he does say, I firmiy believe his intellects (never very, good) have for ever taken their leave. " lie has frequently, at times, when touched with a fit of jealousy, evinced strong symptoms of the conn n g mania. As soon as í arrived, I endeavoured to rouse the stoic within him, by making light of the elopement of his spouse ;
«s for the children", sons and daughters, I knew he was too much a citizen of the world to care about them. " He replied to mc— c I have a great mind tobe Julius Cæsar. Cæsar's wife ought not to be suspected. No,' con- t_iuu$d lie, thinking deeply, 'that won't do; I shall be murdered by the Senate/ " Cæsar, 5 said I, 'was a clever fel¬ low. He wisely made his wife's .suspi¬ cious coiukict an excuse for getting rid ofher. Possession had long banished passion/ * Ah ! ° said lie, repeating my own words, ' possession had long banisheel .passion 1 That's well said !" " I could get very little more con ? Q versation
versation with him that day. The next he seemed unusually busy about the house, and I fancied that his melan¬ choly began to go off. Yet I saw him but seldom, and he did notrjoin me at supper. "The third morning from my arrival, we received tidings of Brutus and Yol- taire ; they had been traced from Dover along the coast to Portsmouth, and had entered on board a small vessel from Dover, which had departed instantly to sea, taking fresh sailors to join the fleet. " I communicated this intelligence to Cloudley, and proposed to set off for Portsmouth
Portsmouth directly, to learn the des^ filiation of the ship and so forth. ' To sea,' said he, 'well,, what of that ? When Cæsar conquered Rome, did not the son of Pompey the Great turn sailor ? But I am not Pompey.*- No.—Who ami?' ' Cloudley, my friend, the friend of all mankind. Nature's citizen. Th# philosopher of the human race.' * Come nearer, 1 said he, in a soft tone. ' Hush ! I'll tell you a secret. I always thought that I felt the soul of the immortal Cato, or else of the noble Cassius, I never could tell which, mov¬ ing in my bosom. Memini me esse ?-? Catomm
Catonem, vei Cassìum. Yet,' conti¬ nued he, loudly stalking about the room, ' I will remember the Senate House—twas on the Ides of March I plunged the dagger in the tyrants breast. * 4< He now ran on with an unusual lo¬ quacity, relating the most memorable actions'of both Cato and Cassius, as if Sit had himself performed them ; sud* denly stopping short, he came up to. me.—* After all, this is nothing. I am- a poor Roman Emperor I find. Here, here, here I"' cried lie, vociferat* ing as lond a* he-could speak, and drawing a paper from his bosom, * here is proof positi ve. My wife i& Messalina, and then who am I ?—Who ?—I am the husband
husband of Messalina. What is my name, what is my name, what is my namc? 01\! what a wretch I am l cried he, striking his forehead with both hands^ " I don't know my own name l " Mad as an heathen priest, in vain I tried to reason with him. He would not listen to a word, but every moment dig¬ nified me with some new title or other* I was a Catiline or Petronius, as the whim suited him. Still he held the paper m his hand, which in vain I endea¬ voured to get from hhn. I enquired of the servants if they knew what it was.* They could only inform me that he had been that morning searching hk wife» room, and J they concluded he found it there* ?# l Ια
" In the evening he grew so bad, that the physician, whom I had sen b for, thought it necessary to confine hinu All his. talk was about the new personi¬ fication he had assumed, with lamenta¬ tions truly ridiculous, that he knew not his own name. " Thinking to make him easv, ï mentioned to him Claudius, as thc hus* band of Messalina ; but it was of no avail, though he had heard of the wan ton dame. The name of her husband did not in the least strike his attention. He continued raving as they put tha Straight waistcoat upon him, and forcibly bled him.—* Who am I? Oh! that I knew iny name, then would I call my guards to my rçscuç ! Beware how you touch me. I am a Roman Emperor! tliough
tliough I cannot tell my name. Here, here, liere ! Proof, proof, proof l u I now contrived to get the piper' from him, and put another into his· hand. His frantic demeanour had much torn and * defaced it ; but such: as I could make out, I send you a copy of, as a precious morceau. 'Twas a letter the fair Maria had left for him.. Mlrs. Cloudley's Letter to her Husband. u The history ofthe early ages of the world, ere mankind were constrained.
IO
oy
by custom, ^nd perverted by art, tells me I act right ; and the sacred love of truth constrains me to speak it. ft Cato, the wisest man in the Roman commonwealth, whose spirit you have so frequently told me you felt moving within your own breast, voluntarily gave up his beloved wife, Martia, ta his friend, Hortensius, that her virtues might be increased, and more generally diffused through tke commonwealth, and not narrowly confined to one object. For this glorious principle of tlie general' good came the Queen of tlie South to the Jewish King, and the Amazonian Queen to the great Alexander. Lycur¬ gus, the wisest of kirgivers *, thought -d ???
a man not to be blamed, who, having a young wife r should recommend some virtuoushandsome young maat, kc. kc; and a worthy man who was in love with a married woman, upon the account of her modesty, and the beauty of her children, would, aiuong the Spartam r beg the favour of her for a season of her husband, that he might have a likely offspring. But these authorities, ami thousands of otliers, you cannot, dbar Cloudley, bc ignorant ofl "Lucretia, let me inform you, is thô øftsprkig of the beautiful young coach¬ man that drove my aunt at Bath. She was born, you must remember, eight months after the unmeaning ceremony passed between us* " Amazonia is your own çlukj ; so # I believe, is Brutus* ? 6 "Voltaire
" Voltaire isthe son of that charming youth* who from a neighbouring town. came to cut my locks, ere we knew that nature would annually shed them herself " Hercules boasts for his sire your brawny ploughman ; and Tom Pain is the son of that ingenious rat-catcher, who, in less than three weeks, routed those voracious animals from our house. " Seriously reflect,, Cloudley; living the recluse life that I have, whom could I find more worthy ? " The young creature that I prema¬ turely lost, had it lived, might have claimed for its sire the dearest of your friends, the incomparable Marauder; him, whom your fond wkhes look up to as the second Cromwell of England. Such
Such lias ever been my conduct to find the most noble of cithers for my chil-* dren. <t To-morrow I flv, not from you, */ f ?/ r but from * jealousy, with the mosti charming youth Nature ever formed, and Truth and Virtue ever adopted. ít Strange^ dear Cloudley, that you, who would be the first of philosophers, should indulge the foolish prejudice of a slavish jealousy. This compels me to leave you ; but Avhenever reason, virtue, sense, and political justice f, shall
obscure your understanding, will I re* turn to Cloudley Hall with the generous Ivory ; then will we all Mve together in theprimitive simplicity of love, freedom*
and
ai-id perfect morality, unfettered by foolish custom, and mental weakness. " Health and wisdom to him who bears a name which confined law hasr given him, but whieh the rights of a woman ami her will can bestow as she thinks most natural to the inward feel¬ ings of her mind ; and tbi& Ivory novr bears by the spontaneous love of 41 MARÍA.'
" Upon my life, Marauder, I knowr not what to think of the charming Maria ; I must conclude h«r to be foil as mail as. lier husband. "From Cloudley Halt I hastened to Portsmouth, to search for my cousins^ Brutus and Voltaire, I found they 3 were
were entered on board a man of waiv The fleet had just sailed; the town wa& quite deserted. I therefore set off im¬ mediately to London, bringing with me here the finest girl from, tbat renowned. seaport. Now, as I know, Marauder, you laugh at my taste, I will not add, a word more of my true-born Venus. " Cloudley is sent to a private mad¬ house ; tlie doctors despair of his reco¬ very. The Court of Chancery are to have the management of his estate. " I have now bad news to tell thee of Anion. He has been ill some time ; the physicians agree with his own opi¬ nion, that it is the dropsy. But, believe me, the cause of the disease ?
? in his mind, Marauder When I pres·, him on the subject, he forces a laugh, and asks me if I wish to be hh Father Confessor. The renegade Hamb¬ den I am sure has vexed him, though on that also he affects to talk with indifierence. Yet the devils surely in the man ; he cannot berauchdispleasecl with his sori, as he gave him, upon his marriage, the-estate in Wales. There is an enigma in Arnon which thou. must solve/ "Ah í Marauder, couldst thou not contrive to ship me over a dear, delicious* nice, beautiful black girl ? By the time thou receivest this, I trust thou wilt be ready to return. Fail not to bring to thb land of Uberty one of those jetty angels
angels with thee, or dread the reception thou wilt find from thv friend. " H. FAKANY." " This moment I flew down stairs to a noise at the door, I found my ser¬ vant vvith a bloody nose, anda hackney «roach driving furiously away. My nymph of the flood has thought proper to leave me for a jolly brisk Tar that »he hailed in tire street t my gentleman, like a fool, had tried to prevent her* I came down time enough for her blessing, which she liberally gave me from the coach wrødow% Remember Ihe sable beauty. - " Royston Santhorpe, we hear, iš •playing the devil m the West I»die#. i Thou
Thou öiightst to know most of him ; •write the particulars, " CHAP. XIIL JN IGHTLY attacks on the known friends of the Government haii kmg been common. In many of these, M 'Ginnis had exercised such of his tïoop as he could depend u pon in a pre-* daftory kind of waar . The moment was now arrived, ¿when they were to mt openly, and by day. ¿ - "Of
Of the threescore men, whkh wa* now the number M t G innis had rais©<J for the pretended service of Government, two or three-and-thirty he knew were United Irishmen, and many of these* domesticated in his house, as a superior kind of labourers on his estate. MOinnis having assembled the whole troop, made them the following laconic speech:— u Brave Irishmen and fellow-soldiers, what heart is there among you that does not bleed for the miseries that harass his beloved country? Who will not lift up hi» hand to protect—who wilL not strike down the enemy to defend het ? For this are we armed, for thfe we
røe draw the sword."—And to give due effect to his speech, he drew his sword. The United Irishmen did the same. The rest of the troop obeyed thc signal. "And for this we swear not to sheath it till Ireland is free."—All who knew the purport of his speech, exclaimed,— 44 We swear !" - '"-Can there ?? one in this troop/* continued M 'Ginnis, " whose eyes are blinded, whose senses are confused, and w_ nnot distinguish his foe 'from his friend? Unjust landlords, who live on our labours, and consume them in a far country—cruel masters, who drain our strength with foreign laws—strangers to Ireland by birth, education, ancl principle. But the wor,t of our enemies are our degenerate countrymen,
countrymen, slaves to the Englibli-^ tyrants to the men of íreknek Who is ignorant of these ? The unfavourable times, the enemy's suspicious treachery, the unarmed state of the afflicted pea- «santry, have yet constrained me to dissemble* But the iron laws, and tlie bloody execution of them by our ty- ' rants,, make a tteesser concealment of ?? -principies a crime. * ( If we join tlie foe, we Temain the instruments of Wbour. Murder is our present employment, and slavery our reward* If we are m hand and heart Uttked Brethren, w-ar, revenge, and liberty await us. "This Coat, liie badge of our servi¬ tude, as yet the base disguise of our vhtue, now we need not; and thus I tear
I tear the scarlet trappings away ! Henceforth thc evergreen of Ireland «hall be openly displayed."------At thi$ signal, witliout waiting for further orders, the United Irishmen followed their Captain's example, ami tore away thc scarlet from their coats, ?- ■ ■ > M 'Gin¬ nis continued. " Is there any one $a base as to desert Ms countrymen, to fear the English Tyrant ?" He had no need to proceed any further; all the restset to work immediately.-—" No, thaaiks to the Genius of Liberiji \ not one. " M'Giunis next enlarged upon thç numbers which wwe in «asms, tlieir vast resources, thc weakness and the ftars of thc enemy, &c« &c. kc. Sec. He
He particularly addressed himself to those who were not United Irishmen ; told them they should be admitted that ïjightmtöthesame bond of Brotherhood •and Unity ; and, finally, he invited the whole company to his house among the rocks, to partake of a festive bowl, saying, that the following inorning he had an object in view, when he pur* «posed J;o prove their courage. On the road to IVPGinnis's house, about ten of those who were not United Irishmen, suddenly turned round when they saw the advantage of the road, and galloped off M f Ginnis did not attempt to pursue them, fearful of tlie rest M/G innis
M 'Ginnis, from the beginning of his oration, had been on his guard, and had before fully arranged his plan. The number on both sides were nearly equal : but the pistols of the United Irishmen he had privately ordered to be loaded, and themselves to be pro¬ vided with ammunition ; while the rest of his troop were in every respect unprepared. Without any attempt on the part of the rest to leave their Captain, two-and-fifty men arrived at his house. There was a gentleman who resided on the same rocky mountain on wliich M'Ginnis's mansion was situated, but somewhat below him on the other side. Mr. O'Connel had ever lived on the vol« i r r. L most
most neighbourly terms with Captain M 'Ginnis, wdio frequently partook of his hospitality. Not without the truest concern did this gentleman behold the misfortunes of his country, and lament the propa¬ gation of those accursed doctrines whicli were so sedulously planted in every mind. Too mild and gentle in his nature to be offensive to either party, he had retired to these wilds, in hopes of being out of the reach of the rude hand of war. To him, who was too much a man of letters to be a man of the world, M 'Ginnis had ever appeared what he seemed to be. There
There were no other mansions but their own, except a few straggling huts, within many miles of the spot. The country, as was before said, was bare, rude, and uncultivated ; and the whole property of Mr. O'Connel was but a life- residence from the family of Marauder. The occasional near neighbourhood of M 'Ginnis, a military man, was rather a pleasing circumstance to the other ; and M 'Ginnis had, in terms of friend¬ ship, offered his own services and those of his troop, if Mr. O'Connel should at any time entertain a fear of being attacked by the United Irishmen. Yet the destruction of this harmless man and family, and the pillage of his L % property,
property, was the first noble achieve¬ ment M 'Ginnis proposed. He knew there were some gentlemen at the house whom he chose to fancy were Govern¬ ment spies, because one of them had a brother who held an oifice under the Crown. Mr. O'Connels house was only one Irish mile from his own, but the worst road that can possibly be conceived. Though the country was so well known, it was necessary to proceed in the light of the aun; besides, Captain M 'G innis wished to strike a decisive blow in the open face of day, both to encourage his troops, and to prevent the means of retracting ύφη the undertaking that they had engaged in. In
In the height of jollity, after supper, he declared his scheme.—"The number of thc enemy," continued he, " inthe whole cannot be above twenty—slaves and their servants ! Well armed, doubt¬ less, our tyrants always take care to be. So much the better; 'twill be part of our spoils. Ready cash, good store of wines, provisions of all kinds, are uot wanting. Let the plunder be divided among you ; I require but the glory of partaking in your danger." Applause unbounded followed this speech. One of the company, not an United Irishman before that night (for the test had been given to the rest bdore supper), replied m -a satirical speech, abusing Mr, 0'CoimeJ f and L 3 calling
calling him a stupid, senseless, uscfess bookworm.—" I thought," continued he, " his fine-spun brain was the poet's only wealth : I am reioiced to hear that *j tf he carries a golden bait. I've been told that the old fellow has a precious store of ancient coins : in the handa of United Irishmen they shall quickly become useful."^—The man concluded by prais¬ ing the Brotherhood, of which he had just been made a member, and declaring his ignorance before of their number, strength, influence, and intentions. On account of their employment the next morning, which was to be as early as possible, M 'G inn is put an end tothe meeting as soon as he decently could.
Carpets,
Carpets, mattresses, beds, couches, ancl every thing of the kind which the house afforded, were ordered to be brought into the large hall for the company ; but the man who had spoken before, proposed that every one should sleep under his horse· M 'G innis had no suspicion that this person, who was the son of a surgeon at some distance, and was lately come from attending the Dublin hospitals to assist his father, was otherwise than hearty in the cause ; as, in coming to the house, M *Ginnis remarked hitn at one time far behind the rest. He was then off his horse, (for this part of the road was impassable to a man upon his horse), and so far from the troop, that L 4 M'Jinnis
M 'Ginnis had no doubt he had turned his Iiorse, and rode away, especially as he was very well mounted. But he had dissipated these suspicions, by calling outto them to stay for him.—" I don't know your crabbed road here ; be so good, Captain, to wait a few seconds. for me." Marauder had an high opinion of the spirit and courage .of young Moirane, (for that was his name), aad 6aw with pleasure how readily he joined them. Neither was Marauder deceived in his ideas of the other's bravery, but greatly sp in the motive of his actions ; for the whole behaviour of Moiranc was founded on the deepest policy. To
INFERNAL To fly alone, he knew he could at any time ; but he wished to entice others away with him, and to be acquainted vvith the schemes and intentions of his Captain, that he might, if possible, counteract them. The proposal of Moirane, that each man should sleep under his horse's manger, was approved of by tlie wiiole troop, and M 'Ginnis himself set the example.
L 5
????.
CHAR XIV. MoiR ANE was the first who roused ín the mornmg, and began calling to the rest. He had said to every one, whom he had observed sworn the over-night, before they went to rest,—" Assemble .before the gates as early as possible." As such, when he had led his horse out,
out, most of the others were proceeding from their different stables, and but very few of the United Irish. A sentinel stood by the gate, but he made no opposition, as Moirane, with great indifference, unlocked it, and let down the drawbridge. Many, leading their horses in their hands, went out. Moirane examined the door, spoke tò the sentinel of its strength, took the key out of the lock, lookeel at it, tried it the other way, moving it backwards and forwards. In the meantime many others came out, and M 'Ginnis came forward from the stables : Moirane waited not a moment longer, but instantly shut the L 6 gate,
gate, and turned thekey. Hisfriendson tìxe outóde comprehended his meaning without a word, and drew their swords. Five or six of the United Irishmen made no opposition. Moirane sprung on his horse, and turning to the latter,—" Tell your Captain, when the riches, trade, and population (of Ireland decrease by the ill management of the present Govern¬ ment, I will unite with M 'Ginnis/' Turning to the rest, to the number «if -a dozen,—" Do any of you know -ihe road to OtConnels ?" One «man replied in the affirmative.
" Then
u Then lead the way," said Moirane, "with all speed : I'll bring up the rear, and thc first who follows, I'll blow his brains out." Looking' at thc United Irishmen,—" Gallop your horses to the right instantly ! " The men obeyed, and Moirane, with the others, took thc road to Mr. O'Connels. Before M 'G innis burst open the door, he had been necessitated to assemble his men, lest he should be attacked at a disadvantage. When he had done this, he hastened on as quick as possible, that he might get to Mr. O'Connels before the fugitives could have put thc place in a state of defence. He naturally suspected the other men
INFERNAL QUIXOTE.' men who had taken the oath, and had not been able to depart with Moirane : he therefore separated them from his own party to the number of six, and ordered them to remain at some distance behind. He then sent one of them, whom he had detained for this purpose, to order them to come on directly, or to be gone the way they had come the day before. They every one took the opportunity, and made the best of their way from the place, under the direction of a guide he had before given them. Had M 43 innis been certain of their defection, he had probably destroyed the whole * ut he buoyed himself up with the hopes that some of them might join him.
M 'Ginnis
M c Ginnis did not venture to take the nearest way to Mr. O'Connels, as there was a small wooden bridge he concluded Moirane would break up, and a dan¬ gerous defile to go through ; but made the utmost haste on the more open road. When Moirane and his party arrived at Mr. O'Connels house, and told them of their clanger, he endeavoured to prevail on them instantly to prepare for resistance; but they were all in confusion—some were willing to stand the fight, but the greater part called for their horses immediately, Mr. O'Connel was the first to fly without loss of time, carrying with him nothing but his cash and valuable medals. He was an infirm and elderly man; andt Moirane
Moirane and his party, who saw it was in vain to resist, conducted him them¬ selves to the nearest place of safety. As soon as Mr. O'Connel was gone, his servant«, whom he had ordered to take care of themselves, for he waited for no one, began to plunder befbre the enemy came. A few of the servants of his guests too, loitered behind under some pretence, but for the same purpose. M'Giunis and his troop came upon them in the midst of their new wealth, and not one escaped. The scene of confusion and horror tliat now ensued is far too bad to be repeated. ¡Five men and two women, who
who had aH remained for thc same greedy purpose, were killed without the slightest opposition, and entreating for mercy, with a thousand ( wounds ; and M 'Ginnis enjoyed the scene. They next began pillaging the house ; and so ravenous was each of them to seize upon the spoils, that their blows were turned against one and another, and their Captain was obliged to cut one of the most violent of them down before he could reduce them to any kind of order. Erom among the gdod things in tlie eating way, M 'Ginnis ordered a sump· tuous dinner, and some of tke troop officiated m cooks» Drinking
Drinking and carousing they staid a long time, and their Captain resolved to take up his abode there that night, and chose Mr. O'Connels own apart¬ ment, whicli, by his absolute orders, had been protected from tlie general pillage. In the morning he had determined that the furniture should be carried away, and the house burnt down, lest the foe, at any future time, should get possession of it, and it might be put in a state of defence against himself. There were only two ways of approach to this spot, which was placed in á lower situation than where Μ-? innis lived. One' road they came in the morning»
morning, and the other, which was very steep and narrow, the fugitives had taken. Upon the brow of the last, M 'Ginnis placed two sentinels, with orders to his Lieutenant, who was im* plicitly devoted to him, to relieve them every three hours during the night. A M 'Ginnis was wonderfully pleased with the occurrences of the day. The defection of part of his troop, indeed, gave him some trouble; but he was glad it had happened so early, before they were acquainted with his defiles, strong holds, intricate roads, and fastnesses. He had not the smallest fear of any attempt they would make against him, as he knew almost the whole of the peasantry were in his interest ;
interest ; and he resolved to increase the difficulties of the road to Mr. O'Connels, and from thence to his own house, though the ascent made it sufficiently impregnable.
CHAP. XV.
AFTER carousing some hours with his gang, M 'Ginnis retired %the room that he had rc^rved for himself, and which had been Mr. O'Connels own bedchamber* This,
Tliis, though untouched by the troop of M 'Ginnis, had nevertheless been attempted to be plundered by the ser¬ vants, and many of the things had been scattered and thrown about. The desk was open; M 'G innis ex* amined every drawer, but the valuables were all removed. There was plenty, indeed, of paper and of writing, among vvhich he perceived many letters, and spine scraps of poetry. Before he retired torest, M 'Ginnis amused himself with reading some of these over. On one ?????! was written German Poetry. M «Ginnis opened it. A trans«
A translation of the famous Leonora first struck his view. This he had read ín England ; but as this translation was different, he perused a few lines, and ruif if in bi« nrif*lr#if The next piece was called " Sir Hildebrand." "This is a warlike Knight," said M 'G innis ; " I'll read his exploits."
SIR HILDEBRAND. ?. How the din of war's begun, Slaughter's reeking o'er tlie plain. See \ the furies madd'ning run, And lust and rapine swell their train· Sir Hildebrand amid the first, Impetuous spurs his foaming horse« « Come,"
*<Come," said M 'Ginnis, beginning liis remarks, " this is not so bad—I did not think my neighbour had so much spirit in him ; but I forget—-its only a translation from the German." II. To Waleteîn Castle speeds his way t Wherei trembling at the raging storm, EUen, lovely mom ner, lay, Listning for a sire's return. * f He comes ! he comes I" Ah ! no, fair maid, * Tis Hildebrand, with m urd' io u s biade. " I should have no objection to be in Sir Hildebrand's place." ?, Aghast th* affrighted m«nîab fly, Or perlah 'neath the couquerote eword t In vatn, İn v; in, docs Mercy cry j ·*« No quarter !" was the Captain's word. "This
* c This stanza will do for our exploits to-day." Yet, when the Knight behelti her charms, He dropp'd the goary blade, and clasp'd her in his arms. " I wish I hkd been so fortunate as to have found an Ellen in this house." IV. Shrieks and prayers rend the air—- Shrieks and prayers all must fail : ** Kelp me, ? God !" implores the fair. " Nor man nor God shall now avail,*' Exclaims Sir Hildebrand, with lustful eyes, " Nor man nor God shall rob me of my prize. v. «' Time was when Walsteîn's haughty Lord *« Refus'd with scorn my profferii vows, " When EUen spurn'd, and I implor'd ι "'Tit she has rankM mc 'mong her foet. * f Honour and love tbe maid wou'd not unite} « Then love and valtwr shall assert their right." S " Well
" Well done, Sir Hildebrand, you reason the point Weil, and I'll iread your story through." VI·. Strength exhausted, spirits fled, The virgin faints beneath his lust $ Like some poor victim, droops its head, And hides its sorrows in the dust. Again Sir Hildebrand exulting cries, <« Nor man nor God shall rob me of my ???·*** vir» And ic each guardian genius ried r Hark 1 hark I what sudden yells I hear ! See, see, fhe sparkling flames they spread, And e'en the viciors quake for fear. As rapid lightning, the flashes fly s *' Away î away î away I " the soldiers cry
VOL. Ill,
M
Sir
VIU» Sir Hildebrand» with vengeful ire, U profe, and seifc'd his bloody blade g And then, with imprecations dire, Ke thus bespoke the trembling maid :<-== «« This instant swear to take me for thy Lord— * f This instant swear, or perish by my swordi" IX. A faint assent the virgin fpoke. " Then Iollow me l* the monster cry'd« Alas I th' obliterating stroke Was given ! She cou'd no more, and dy'd· The swelling fires surround the lovely clay ¡ Thc soul to heaven triumphant wings her way* "So," continued M 'Ginnis, 4( after this fine beginning, hae's an end of this simple story. Your Poets always deceive : poetry is but the language of fiction. Your Poets and your Piicbts are all——— But what's here ?
ìhere? Some dull moral to conclude with ! No. It's too much for that/' X. Now comes the gtoomy hour of jri.ght $ Upon his couch the Knight he lay, And still reviews with mental sight, The recent horrors ofthe day. r * May every curee be heap'd upon my head, '*< But I will find the maid, alive or dead l* XT. « She swore, :η f still bhall be my bride ! " Does lleavgn above our vows record ?"—· *' It does," a soft clear vore reply'd, *' And Ellen comes to claim her Lord." tTp rose the Knignt» and with a sudden bound Rush'd from his tent, and hastened to the found* "Well, the fair damsel is como to life again ; the story improves. This, ?? I suppose,
I suppose, is to be called Love and Honour : Love on the part of the Knight, and Honour on that of the Lady. " ??. The pallid moon, each twinkling star Without a veiiing cloud!, shone bright; And, lo ! be saw a glittering car, And Ellen feated, rob'd in white. Fojr ebon coursers champ the foaming bit, Four sable riders on their saddles sit. XTIT. " Arise, Sir Knight, and mount my car l* In Hvely notes the virgin cry'd : " From hostile tents of blood afar, (t *Tis Ellen's choice to be a bri Je* «« Enough of war, enough of slaughter's \>*\%t t « Sir Hildebrand shall find repose at last."
With
XIV. With nimble steps the warrior rose, And wou'd have clasp'd the beauteous maid ; But iron gratings interpos'd, And thrice in vain the Knight essay'd, " Why do these envious bars," surpris'd hecryM» " From his lov'd spouse Sir Hildebrand divide ?" ·' Am I uot a virgin pure ì " Yes, Sir Knight, thouknow'.t it well. '* No mortal touch will I endure <« Until I hear the wedding bell. « Then fly, my speedy coursers—haste—away, u And reach your deatin'd mansion ere 'tis day." XVI. The snorting steeds obey the word \ The riders crack the twanging thong j The wheels scarce touch the crimson sord j The chariot seems to fly along ! Amaz'd, the Knight his wond'ring silence broke, And thus unto the lovely maiden spoke :—» M 3 » Whence
XVII. " Whence come these noble steeds, my dear ? ** Sure, they wcie bred in regions far s * f By every Power above I swear, «* Tint none so Meet yct drew a car.*'— u Swear not, Sir Hildebrand; and» ere the morn, * c They'll brin¿ thee tothe elime where they were born." xvni. With gathering speed the chariot springs, As from the hiils the falling snow j As light as on the breezy wings, Swift as the arrow from the bow. Panting, the warrior gasps, and sucks the windt The vales, the plains, the mountains, fiy behind. XIX* So furious is the motion now, Scarcely the Knight retains Jus bieath,, And cries-»*" Such rapid baste, I vow, *« Might whirl one to the gate* of Death í " Speed so impetuous, how can Ellen bear r " Can such rude motion »uit a lovely fair l'— «í Tóm.
xx. "Time was," the maiden answer gave, *< When such iude haite might frighten me j ** But fears are fied beyond the grave, '* There all is turn'd to certainty î *« And certainty, most valorous Knight, *" Shall be thy lot ere morning's light.'* "So, after all, this is her ghost I sec. Trash î Sturf ! I'll have no more of it !" and M*Ginnis threw the paper indignantly from him, and took a turn up and down the room.—" Come, let us see how this goblin story ends." HXî» «« Why ofthe grave does Eilen speak ? ** We Hve for happiness and'love.'*— M *Tiu happiness and love I seek," Reply'd the maid, *« and from above !**— « Since,'* cry'd the Knight, «« to me my Ellen's giv'n, «-I seek no other good, no other Heav'n."— WLk Scarce
χ-χιτ. Scarce had he spoke, when, îo ! a voice, In deep and hollow accents, cry'd,— *< Sir Hildebrand, thou'st had thy choice, " And death alone shali take thy bride. *« Death tears each bond, Death breaks each tie am! vow j ** All yield toconqVing Death, and so must tbou l* Again M'Giunis threw down thc paper, and spoke as if the words had been addressed to himself—" Well, then, let him meet me in arms, and I'll not shrink from his, blow î Now J have read so far, I'll see the end of this pitiful story 1" XXIII, " Who speaks.?'* impatient cry*d the Knight. When, by the pallid moon, appear'd An ancient man on steed milk-white, With furrow'd cheek and hoary beard. Bald was his head ; one lock of hah' alone Hun£ down his face, suspended from his crown, « Thy,
xxiv. w Thy servants come," exclaîm'd the manj *< To bring thy marriage couch I haste. «'Behold this glass I the sand has ran.'* He spoke, and swift the chariot past. What means—— ? No more Sir Hildebrand cou/d say*. Eor EUen loud exclaims in accents gay—* XX V4 u Stop, my good horses I well ye've sped—· *« Your work is done !"—·Instant they stop. ' t Behold, Sir Knight, your marriage bed 1" He look'd, and wou'd have started upv A cold stiong hand upon his shoulder; prest— · The cold strong hand his motion did arrest.. M 'Ginnis started up, and sat down» again. Without speaking a word, he? read on.. ¿UCVXé. Appall'd, he finds unusual fear Creep thro* each nerveless, trembling lmib î Agbast he looks, and sees a bier -, Thes« words declare ir comes for him i«—- M e ((Hni
'S «·* *t *' Here shall the fiesh of HildtUrand decay j « But Fíenos of Park ness bear hi. soul away 1" XXVII., Scarce had ht read—«a loud-ton'd bell Tolls slowly out the note of death* *« Hark 1 hark ! Sir Hildebrand, thy knell Is rung} thy body yields its breath I" A voice exclaims : then, with a piercing howl, *' Fiends, seize your prey f your's is each villain's soul l* u Confounded nonsense!" exclaimed M 'Ginnis. "What a fool am I to spend my time in reading such trash!' Here's not much more ; let me see, the -ending of it. xxrm. The wretch, despairing, terms his head—· To Ellen sirains his glaring eyes* He sees, aud sees indeed with diead, The maiden mounting t'wards the skies.
"Seraphic
And waft ia safety through the yielding air· XXIXV Γη tbwndVing notei an angel cries-*-*- « Behold, accurs'd ! thy God's decree » ** He rescues from thy grasp the prize, ** And dooms thee, wretch î to misery» « *' Who dares his power, shall Iearn to fear his rød $-, *' Who spurns his word, shall tremble at his nod.** M C Ginnis exclaimed, not wichout a^ little of that sensation he endeavoured^ to despise— iC This, I suppose, would' affect a superstitious fool* Pretty can& of words !" Tht ready fiends have got their prey t . Struggling he writhes, he pants* he roan _:; Then first his lips did « Mercy l* say,. ' Then first confess'd the heavenly Pow'rt. - M4 «When,,
«* When, wretch ! to others hast thou mercy «shown ? " Mercy condemns thee, and to Heav'n İs ftown." M t Ginnis started up.«— "I heard a groan î Pshaw ! what is the, matter with me ? Is it possible this old woman's tale can--------- There ! I heard it again, by— t — Give me my sword !" and he snatched hjs sword hastily off the table, and drawing it, flew with unusual agitation to the spot. He listened, and now heard the groan dis* tinctly repeated. He looked around? under a large bureau he saw the legs of a man. He pulled him from beneath# A poor wounded fellow supplicated his mercy. M4jtinnis's heart was a little softened. He seemed inclined to pity.
11 Where
u Where are your wounds ?" " One on my side, Sir. I crept under this place, and am now so weak with loss of blood, I could not stifle my groans any longer." " Can you walk ?" The man tried : he was too weak, and held by the furniture. M 'G inn is stepped to the table, and gave him a glass of brandy, Th$ other drank it. It revived him for a moment ; he WJalked a few steps, and fell. M 'Ginnis had recovered that unfeeling tone
tone of mind in which he laboured to excel. Smothering every sensation of human wçakness, he with aftected apathy said, c c We have no time to bestow upoiv the sick. " And as he spoke, with two- blows of his sabre he finished the deed* of blood.I He now called up one of his meny and ordered him to take away thc deadi body ; and, with a sneering frown, worthy a modern Stoic,-sat down at the table again. The poem he had been reading still" lay before him : it was not quit« finished. He, with a philosophical:. calmness, continued,.
XXXI. The sun aj-pears ; the glorious morn Alike on rich and poor expands : The thundVing drum, the sounding horn t Awake the drowsy martial bands. They break the silken bonds of soft repose j v Ali but the Knight, Sir Hildebrand, arosa. . . - XXXII. Why does he steep > His restless soul He'er yet indfdg'd the weary head. Why does he sleep ? That restless soul ; Is far to distant regions ned i The menials seek his tent : a ghastly sight Arrests thek steps, and fixes their affright» His grisly head all lifeless lies j His limbs distorted, stretch'd along j. Black is his facej his ikry eyes Have burst § suspended hung his tongue·, The carcafe dark with livid Spots appear, And smelí* sulphureous taint the genial air» On*
XXXIV. On every face sits pale alarm ; A deathlike silence creeps around j Each, shuddering, dreads some sudden harm, Till one, less conscious, utterance found. « All power is thine, ? God í Thy will is just. *' I own thy hand : on thee alone ï trust l*
M'G innis was thoughtful for a few seconds. He put the paper between his teeth, aud tore it ih halves. Recollect¬ ing himself, he said,—" Conscience l apretty bugbear for grown-up children. Away with this trash—away with all the trumpery !" and he threw it into tlie fire.—" 'Tis the work of some canting Parson. Would 1 had him here too ! How willingly would I offer him up on this funeral pile 1" As
As he thus proceeded, muttering ta> himself, ancl in his hatred towards every thing virtuous and holy, venting, with his usual rancour, his invectives against the Ministers of reUgion, he continued throwing the rest of the papers before him upon the flames. In a few minutes he was roused from his reverie by one of his men rushing into the room, and crying out—" A fire, Colonel—a fire !" " Where ?" exclaimed Μ ? innis. " Your chimney, Colonel, is all i& a "blaze. " ? t G innis seemeel to recover himself as,
as from a trance, when he observed the heap of papers he had piled upon thc fire, and which in flames were flying up the chimney. Without a remark, he took the remainder off, and stifled the blaze under the grate.. But fie could not so easily overcome the fire vvhich raged in the chimney,. and which rapidly began to spread. For some time they endeavoured to smother it, but it proved in vain. The building was old, and ülied with large pieces of wood ; and'some, which crossed the chimney* „ quickly caught the fire*. ?_?????'&
M^Ginnis's men had drank hard; most of them at the commencement were fast asleep, and all ran about In hurry and confusion. The flames, too,, w T ere become powerful before any effec¬ tual measures could be taken to restraia them, and had blazed for some minutes. before they had been discovered by the sentinel.. Greatly enraged was M 'Ginnis with himself fos having been,, in the most trilling degree, interested by thc poem he had read. At the very moment that he thought be shewed the highest contempt of conscience, by, burying his sword in, the breast of the wounded man, did he prove that it had in some degree affected
him ; for the deliberate act of his wilt was but an effort to stifle those feelings. This bloody deed his inglorious mind had attributed in his own favour ; but the inattention, that wait of mental possession which followed, he could not so interpret even to himself. M'Giunis, finding it in vain ta attempt a mastery ever the flames, employed his troop in removing the most valuable of the furniture out of the house.. For this he had use ; but, according to his promise, he gave his men a very liberal price for it, and, early in ?? morning, they assisted in bearing it to his own house. CHAJctk.
Ψ ' ")i!iii|, ??? ι ii n, mi JUUJUft i
«HAP. XVI. THE gallaat hero of these ????*« having thus, in the open face of day, entered his men into the career of blood, and boldly thrown away the mask, no longer appears as a petty Captain of a provincial troop in his Majesty's service, but as Colonel in an United Body, where there was a Com¬ munion of Rights, and an Organized System of Fraternal Equality. Finfe things, as Dr. Line says, to begin with!
The
The s word thus unsheathed, M'Ghp* nis turned his thoughts to make his favourite habitation among thc rocks still more inaccessible than Nature and the fears of two centuries had already done for him. Some pai|s 'of the old road he blew up. He made false roads to lead the unwary into his power, and dug subterranean passages. ,His restless spirit was in its full gloryj and the hours of repose were but the harbingers of his depredating activity ; and day and night he had parties ranging about the country, and carrying off thc goods and cattle of those whom he knew were hostile to his cause. The whole country was all in a fer- 3 ment :
mmt : every man feared his neighbour as his fbe ; and resistance, unless where there were a few regular soldiers, was rarely attempted. From the cultivated part of the land, which was covered with the cabins of the poor, did large parties of the natives* sally forth at night, and plunder their helpless neighbours ; and it was in thesie vast bodies df infantry tliat the strength of M t Ginnis consisted. The houses of those who had been of liis troop were the first destroyed : in some places he met with a temporary resistance, but in the end numbers succeeded. In
In less than a month not a known enemy to the United Brethren resided within eight miles of M'Giunis; and in a few weeks, for a great distance around him, the whole neighbourhood was in astate of successful rebellion; all of which he had the command of, and the success of which he attributed to his own decisive -measures. - M *G innis did not confine himself tò his» rocky domain, but ranged over the whole country. «* The Government fórces, wherever he could find them in small bodies, he often attacked ; and, favoured by the night, or by numbers, he succeeded, or made good his retreat· His
* Ois feats were not long in reaching the Directory, who rewarded his valour and conduct with the appointment of General ofthe District. In a litfcle time M 'Ginnis had above a hundred horse under his command, ancl infantry to a very large amount, armed promiscuously. So strong did he consider himself, that, liaving ar¬ ranged his plans with some of htí neighbouring Officers,, he joined them early in the month of March with a respectablebodyof cavalry, and invested the town of Cahir, in the county of Tipperary» This hie boldly did in the open day ; and, with the utmost order and discipline, searched every house for arms and ammunition, and carried the.whole away with him. vol. m. n In
thousand ??? weU 4 amicd, $ìhì chiefly They marched in exact order a chosen body of foot r tliß cavalry, divided in two parties,, ?? ths right an4 kft, covered tho infa^ry ; m*a General M'GÍ?¥b, ?*> ? w §W a braw as a^y in the K#g's eewic-%, rode in tjbc front of the whole· Yet, in defence of $11 the exertion» of M 'Ginnis th# rÍ4M»g<w»0 notg^nçral; tte ?? civilized r¥ts, lining b4ck ; the Executive Directory stijl ????? to give the wofd f With wliiit r$fß <?? aun hero behold
ïhistlélayt! Mfl&ëtcÉfcfcS ãM ? ? teftìt ^iuWuMtbmmngemeß, ?^?? 5 ^^^ veiled tSétnv íä defiáiréfcef flt* ????? they hadirtv«èfèá'Mffí wfth. To hîs' mmt^áme^t temti'nšftaneeá, the sole atíswet thieyicfeigntd hhftwás— that it was impmdait to rise IMfcethg arrivât of the Frenolí, výHonl they daily expected. * " Such was the state of M 'Ginnis'» - affairs in Ireland at the commence¬ ment of the year İ798 ; and the ambi¬ tious prospects of the hero seemed to ■meet with no check but from the timidity of his own party. So general was the disaffection in that part ofthe country, that in the winter of 1797 he rarely ' Ná inhabited
inhabited his dwelling among the rocks, * not did he meet with any molestation within ten miles of his family residence. The robbery and murder» of individuals had become so frequent, that it ceased tQ be matter of surprise ; and the unci¬ vilized state, and natural wildness of that neighbourhood, made the depredations of M 'Ginnis ma his gang less an object * of notice to the Government, , ? .*■* İ i ι . İ . ì
CHAP. í < *
wasem
• \ í
CHAP. XVII. M the scenes of blood and carnage wh|ch unhappy Ireland exhibits, let us Iff.' ? · .♦'» turn our eyes towards England,, where the Phantom of licentious Liberty has been offered up at the oublie altar of Peace and Security. Tlie letters of Fahany had informed ? *Ginnis of the situation of his more intimate acquaintance ;—but it will be Bicessary also to notice some occurrences í i n 3 which
characters recorded in these volumes. I shall omit a minute napration of young Harrety and Rattle's tour through the country, ibr many good and sub¬ stantial reasons.-— Imprììnis, I have no time to spare from thc main story, to enter into alongopíWe; and, secondly, Mr. Rattle himself has some thoughts of favouring the world with the success *>f theit joint mission, to oppose vice in every form. They had travelled through the greater part of the West of Engfcmd, and were proceeding northerly, when Harrety proposed that they should, without loss of time, turn into W^es.
Iu
In M r ales Rattle called on his old friend Hambden Anions to whom, and his fair spouse, he introduced Harrety, with whose conversation, now a little modernized by being with Rattle, they were greatly amused. After staying here a few days, the two friends pro¬ ceeded further into the country, till thçy arrived 'at .the beautiful vale of LJandwillow. With what amazing rapi¬ dity runs the foaming Rockier adown the sides of the lofty Cloudwrapt ! The summit of this wonderful hill, from w r hence this most impetuous of rivers derives its source, claimed their notice; and one fine summer evening, in thè latter end of August, they rambled to the delightful spot.
N 4 Harrçty
Harrety was in raptures—Rattle'not mueh less so. The former, glowing with the scene befbre him, burst forth-*- " These are my glorious works, Parent of Good, *' Almighty Ì Thine this universal frame, '«Thus wondrous, fai ' ì thyself how wondrous then I « Unspeakable !" Rattle at this instant clapped hjs hand on his friend's shoulder, with— " Hush ! look on yonder brow," ai\d pointed vvith his hand. Harrety looked, and clasping his hands together—"Most sure they are Goddesses, or rather Angels. Nothing human have I seen so lovely. My dear fellow, let me address them." " Soft ! Harrety—they come this way.. On my life 'tis ------ Confusion ! they see us, and fly f" Harrety
i Harrety ahd Rattle flew up a winding path that led to an arbour, which Na¬ ture had formed on the top of a massy rock, from whose awful top rolled spontaneously a torrent, that would' bave sickened tbe sons of artificial cas* cades to have seen.. The travellers quickly gained the summit, but the Goddesses were va- " nished away. Rattle flew oneway, Harrety another ; the pursuit was in vain. They returned to the grotto. For the first time since the commencement of their travels, they mutually uccused oiie another. " If xçu had suffered me to have addressed them," said Harrety. h 5 " You
" Ypu alarmed them by ypursuddøn harangue," said Rattle. u Qodd-is^e^ my dear friend, are always timprpus»'* ' t I'll liye, I'll grow on this spot," continued Harrety, <c but I will see them again ! Striked ??? pot that beautiful Nymph, morç Ipvely than Poets feign Hebe to have been ? Did you observe the vest ? Diana, the Goddess of Chastity, might fe^e f tvvied the foldings !—Ye pompous Drawing* rooms, Balls, Operas, and all ye Courts of Folly, hide your diminished heada ! One child of Innpcence, in the {Jam gsrb of Mede&ty, might shame ye all I I'll travel an hundred «wies \???&??> to have one ??? ?? cjf t^e preet maid!'*
"Which
* u Which of these wondrous beings, Harrety, is the objeefc of your idolatry ? " Botli, upon my word" " Nay, spare your friend one." " Indeed, Rattle, though I had but a glimpse, yet I had a preference. That beauteous maid, whose snowy arms were not exposed to the rude fustic's. gaze, demands my choice/* " My good fellows you, raliew me. I should have been sorry if yoi* had chosen my Goddess ¿ for/to let ??? into & secret, I firmly believe this is the charming fair-one I have been so tong in pursuit o£ You know her history. Since she fled from that vii¬ lain, Marauder, in vain I have sought her ; and 'tis but lately I heard tha«t &? was retired from all society, amid ?? mountains in Wales. This Hambden ? 6 bold*
toid me, but could not give me the feast guess as to the spot. It is. mý firm belief I have now found her." "Then let us away—fly from the dangerous spot ! For your welfare, my friend, I resign my own hopes of agam beholding the lovely maiden that wa» with her.—If this is the deceived, the penitent Emily, she is now in a new, state of virtue and honour, and surely you would not again tempt her fron* their paths. " " Fear me not, Harrety; you have no reason to suppose me a villain. " ; "God forbid I my dear fellow; I wished only to lead you from temptation, tìiat you might not fall into ecil Hymen frowns upon the unhappy con- 5 »ection with Marauder/' " Harrety,
u Harrety, shall I quote your favourite book?—' There is more joy in heaven over one sinner that repenteth, than over ninety-and-nine just persons that need no repentance." tí Enough—come on.— t Meus duv est Crux 1 is aby family motto, and the rule of my actions." n - They descended the hill to a small village'beneath; but not a being coulrf they find that knew sufficient English' to converse with them. It grew late % } the sun was already set, and they were 4 fain to take up their abode at a small\ ale-houee, where cleanliaess^and civility : sweetened their fare, and softened their couch. CHAR
CHAP. XVIIL İN the morning they ¿irose with the kirk, and with the rising sun visited the grotto : from thence they crossed* to the otiier side of the hill, from whicb tliey had ^scended the evening before ; Ipt ere an hour had passed away, thebr steps irresistibly led tb -?? to th« ??® Sf^Ot. Rattle's spirits were low ; his love toi Emily
began to fancy that his warm imagi¬ nation had deceived him.. Harrety was as usual;, for, with ali- the wildness of his character, he was never subject to> fits of despondency. Hope, smiling Hope, shined in his» countenance· # As they came near the grotto, Har-* rety, marking hb friend's gravity, began— '* She disappears, and left me dark ! I wak'd «« To And her, oc foy ewer to deplore ** Her loss, and other pleasures all abjure· 1 * Hattle, on a sudden^ took up the quotation with hb usual volubility— ««When â
^ M Wben out of hope, btboid her nôt ??? oflpj \Z u Such as I saw hei m røy dream, aJorn'd « With what all earth and heaven cou'd bestovr *< To make her unliable·" J As he spoke, lie sprung forwards ■ « .;** * Emily (for it was no other) had started from her seat, and screamed as she flevr out ofthe grotto. * Rattle was at her feet* i'. . '' ι * * * She instantly turned pafe^ Rattle sprung up, and she fainted in his arms*. *· * ê -_-*Ί- Harrety liad scarcely time to make his obeisance to thc otiier fair damsel γ he
he flew, like a winged Mercury, to the torrent for some water, ???1 în a few seconds was sprinkling it in Emily's face* 1 , Rattle, with one knee on the ground, was supporting his fair burden on tlje other, the young stranger untying her -bonnet as Harrety returned with the water. Emily soon opened her eyes, and stood up. *, Rattle held her hand. Harrety, whose feelings were solely occupied dritti the scene before liim, . instinctively took hold of the young stranger; yet in so, mild and respectful r . a manner*,
a manner, that she had not the heart to withdraw her hand from him. Emily turned from Battle.—" Leave- *l me, Mr. Rattle·—leave me, 1 beseech you !" " Never, dearest Emily, never—* unless you say you hate me. Oh Emily ! you are not ignorant how long lve lovfd you ; though respect tied my tongue, my looks betrayed me. I never could, I never attempted to con* ceal my love, '- and he pressed her band to hb lips* Harrety did the same to the young stranger, with an air and manner most soft and insinuating* Emily
Einily could only repeat—*" Leave me, Mr. Rattle î" and faintly tried to take away her hand. Rattle continued·—" Dearest Emily, I am not ignorant of auy thing that has happened to you, and have fong sought you in vain. Do nbt suppose, ,fe$d as you must think of mankind,. 'thatmy intentions can bedisfaonoumbta We are not all villatna." ISImiiy sighed—-her young firiend di4 'the same» and Harrety re-echoed his friend's words.—" Indeed, fair lady, iwe are not alt villains," looking hard At Emilys young companion, who, aa be spoke, mildly witlidrew her hand from his. «No*
u No, Ma'am," continued Harrëty, coming nearer to Emily, " with the most pure, the most disinterested lovo, does mv friend seek vour favour : your *l - *J beauty first caught his eye, but your virtuous perseverance has won his heart. The noble conquest over yourself ha& doubly conquered him." " This gentleman," said Rattle, in¬ troducing Harrety by name, " is no stranger to the sincerity of my affection. Permit me, ever-beloved Emily, to see you in tlie company ofyour friends*" " I have forfeited,my own esteem, Î* replied Emily, with a deep sigh, "and Iiow can I think myself deserving of any one else's? When I fled from society into this wild country, you were the object I chiefly avoided." "Mei
• * t Me! dearest, sweetest Emily !" " Your favourable opinion of me," continued Emily with a downcast look, "I'was not ignorant of: Ifçar you guessed that you were not an object of dislike/' * "This, deafest, clearest Emily!"' exclaimed Rattle, as quick as thought, in raptures, " this oj*>en-conduct is so' like your true character, that candour bever admired in you/' " Nay, Rattle," continued Emily,' " I have learned sufficient caution in the world; but I wished to convince you of the trust I have in you, that you will not abuse my candour/' " If I do, then may —·—·-»" Harrety gave him a smart slap on the shoulders. . ; *.* « "My
tt My friend, ' f said Rattle, " never «wears ; and he's checking me lest I bhould transgress, Yet, most adored Emily," dropping on ??? ????, atid •pressing lier hand t<* ?? lips, ίτ accept my vovvs of love and constancy—vows, sweet Etìlily, 'twill \m th* pride of my heart t^ publicly sanction, by the laws of my G^od-aiwl my country." Battle pleadc*cl with the greatest success* Emily, overpowered with her sensa¬ tions, wa« nigh fain tilig a secoivdtbíc; but her loviÉr&tî-feady aiÄis^ caught his lovely burden, and ahe turned' not with coy disdain from his warm kiss of love. In this respect young Hanæåjr did not
siot presume to follow his friend's ex- &mple; but his looks clearly shewed that hs inclination solely gave way to tke propriety of his conduct The conversation became general, imd the ladies permitted the atteiuteuree of their beaux towards thek own habi¬ tation, Iamily 's residency wa&ki anotber part of the village ??? that in. which. they hatl rfpewd. the former night ; and ???? tø her hauset was another,, whitch wasr the Iføswage* w ???* tbs; fair stranger lived» Th^ vf hol^party mattotka l-iisonagc* Emily intr<?ctuf<r^l Krittle a#cl hm fmml to tlm wørtby ?'?? his wife* andi family, They
Tliey all breakfasted here; and Rattle was not^orry to find that Emily's former -cbndiict seemed to be no secret to her friends, and that even his name was aiot before unknown to them» j4 Not less pleased were all the company •With Harrety, who was in high raptures with every thing he saw and heard/ Scarce was the breakfast over, as he was viewing from the window the beauties of nature, enriched and made useful By judgment and sense, but he ex¬ claimed—" This surely was the blissful Paradise from whence Adam was driven. Such Was thé primeval state of inno¬ cency aiid peace in which our first parents lived ; Where, free from the vices and follies of man, free from the '.· ; ! restless
restless confusion and evet>bustling noke of the world ------" The lusty cryings of a young child, which rung again and again through the house, checkedihis rhapsody ; and a little boy, about* six years old, entered the room, blubbering most pitifully, A new top, which Miss Emily had given him, had spun into the well; and to complete his troubles, his brother Dick had told him it served him right, for going so near to a forbidden spot. "This is my youngest, Sir/' said Mrs, Evans, addressing Harrety ; "aud 1 am ???? to say we rather make a vol. in* ? ptt
pet of him. A certain lady in com¬ pany I think I must blame for all this, who will absolutely spoil him. For shame, Tom ! If Fve any more of these airs, 111 put you in petticoats again, and send you into the nursery." Tom's little Welch blood was by this time cooled : the vent was rapid, but soon over. Mrs. Evans sent him out for his brother. " About six months ago," said she, "I punished him in the manner I men¬ tioned, for he is a boy subject to violent passions·——" " Which he did not gain from me, my dear/' said Mr. Evans, ivith a smile. í * Oh ! certain !y not—certainly not, " said
said all the ladies at once ; by which Rattle and Harrety easily understood that Mr. Evans was sometimes sulyect to these national paroxysms, (i I may as well plead guilty at once, " said Mr. Evans; and turning to his l' wife— ít Now, my dear, I hope before these strangers you will say something civil in return/' (t I can only say," replied she, giving him her hand, "that I should almost bc sorry to find you quite otherwise, for then I should iose one of a female s first privileges—the pleasure of finding fault. But I was telling Mr. Harrety of Tom, that the remembrance of his former punishment, in defiance of Miss Emily, is at present a sufficient check for these angry ebullitions." ? ? ?
In the course of conversation, Mrs. Evans informed her guests that she had seven children. " My dearest Madam, it gives me ·*? the highest pleasure to hear,-it," ex¬ claimed Harrety, in his warm way, though somewhat to the surprise of his hosts, who copld&ttlc guess how thc number of their family afforded satis¬ faction to theytmng stranger ; "for, if the bold robbery my heart has already pi nned, .should happily succeed, 'twill make the loss less severely felt." The pretty N:ney Evans's deep blush reproved the hasty declaration of her admirer.
Harrety,
Harrety, whose eyes had sufficiently declared his meaning, felt thc reproof, " Pardon my abrupt method," con¬ tinued he, "of expressing my feelings. . Little hacknied in the ways of man¬ kind, I have not learned to disguise them." Harrety paused : Emily and Nancy walked out of the room» Harrety continued,—"Yesterday I saw your lovely daughter for the first time ; in a moment I was assured that sbe was not the ofllspring of a dissipated world : her dress, her air -I could not be mistaken !" ? 3 „ Impossible !"
" Impossible !" exclaimed Rattle, warrnlv. " This morning again I have seen her; I have conversed with her ; my fancies of yesternight are realized ; I find her beauties such as my warm wishes pointed them out to be. Is it necessary for me to plot and enquire further? No. I despise the heart that cannot act from its own feelings. Though I am quick in my resolves, I . am not changeable—I act not from passion, but from feeling. Forms, customs, follies, and fashions of the world, I hate you ! I aim but to be a Christian. Such as your daughter ap«* peara to me, innocent and lovely, I have long sought for—I require no more in % helpmate. My present means
means are liberal. Next year, by the blessing of God, J, hope to enter iiito the sacred office. The Rectory of Grove- ley is in the presentation of my mother; my worthy uncle, Dr. Hearty, now holds it for me,—This is my history.— With the world I am no favourite ; they call me enthusiast and madman. The world's opinion, given by the rnouth of Vice and Folly, Τ despise. Whether I am any other than I now appear to youj my friend Rattle or any of my friends, for here I boast my greater riches, can inform you/' τ Harrety bowed with great case to Mr. and Mrs. Evans, and joined the ladies whom he saw walking in the garden.
o4
Rattle
Rattle quickly corroborated every thing Harrety had^eaid—spoke iu the highest terms of hiin —sketched his birth, parentage, and education—and, finally, gave Mr, Evans thc address of his family and connection, fhat he might make any emjuiucs he thought necessary. Not long was Rattle in adjusting this necessary business for his friend, before ¡ic made one of thie party in the garden. Which is most delicious, the renewal of a former passion, or the indulging in the first sensations of a new flame, may be a subject worthy the amplest discussion. In
In the eases before us, doubtless each party thought their own têtc-à-téte to be preferred. Rattle, indeed, would have yielded the palm to no mortal breathing. He had not only found his long-lost Emily in equal grace and beauty, but her mind was cleaiccl of those errors by which it had been before obscured; and she had not only seen, but amended her faults. To sum up his happiness^ she approved ancl·returned his love. Young Harrety had at last realized thc ideal perfection his sanguine thoughts had paia ted« Hope smiled upon him, but success was as yct at a distance·
? 5 While
While Rattle was haranguing, in favour of his young friend, to Mr. and Mrs. Evans, Harrety was not deficient in entertaining the ladies. The pleasures of the country were his theme, where the beauties of Nature please the eye, uncrippled by the dis* tortîons of Art. " But where Art embellishes and improves Nature, then, Mr. Harrety," said Emily, " you do not despise that genius which unites them together." "No, Ma'am; Art ought to beto Nature, what proper learning is to the mind—what moderate exercise is to the body. Art should make Nature useful; but when it only tries to make ¿t beautiful, it becomes a sweet that is grateful
grateful at first, soon cloys, and ever after disgusts. When, upon a flat ground, I proceed along a serpentine path, my reason condemns the winding . of the way, though it may be the line of beauty ; but, if the road winds up a hill, the small increase of distance 4 is amply compensated, by making the ascent less steep, and use and beauty ^ are united. I might carry my simile to the fair sex, in whom, in my humble opinion, one useful accomplishment outweighs a thousand of the tricks of fashion. " " The knowledge of a pudding or a pie ------" said Emily. " Is as much superior, Ma'am, tothe whirling of a cymbal, or gabbling in a foreign tongue, as ----- ■—»" ? 6 u I am
" I am happy," replied Enïily with a smile, "to hear you say so, for these former accomplishments I have lately learned, and the latter I have abo lost ; yet something I tliink may be said——" The presence of Rattle stopped thc defence Emilv was about to make for *> those accomplishments iii which she had once excelled ; aud in a few minutes the lovers mated together.
CHAP.
t J l. ,Ι' ■", JiU'l'W 1 *■
CHAP, XIX. xk LON E with the fair damsel, Harrety opened his pretensions, " Have I your pardon, Miss Evans, for my presumptuous maimer of ad¬ dressing you ?" " Your sprightly sally more confused than offended me, Sir." " Do not, my dear Miss Evans, for a moment believe that I was otherwise 5 thau
than in earnest. If you will permit me to offer my devoirs, it will be the glory of my life to be esteemed in your eyes, and to evince my truth and sin¬ cerity". " So perfectly a stranger, Sir, as I am to you, my temper, mind, dis¬ position so unknown, 1 cannot con¬ sider your behaviour otherwise than a joke." " Upon my word, my pretensions are most real ; every moment heightens my icspcct, my esteem, my love. Yet fixed as my hope is, I ask but to be permitted the honour of your acquaint¬ ance, that I may see and converse with you ; and if on a further intimacy, you will sanction my choice, I have not the smallest fear that I shall ever π pent
repent the quick decision of tny heart, which thus induces me to offer it to your notice." Miss Nancy Evans did uot refuse her. lover's request. Battle and Harrety took up their resi¬ dence in that neighbourhood for more than a month ; at the end of which time, Rattle was united to Emily by the worthy Mr. Evans. Janny Bcllairecame to the wedding, attended by their guardian, Mr. Town¬ send and Mrs. Mountford's eldest daughter, a sensible young lady of about two-and-twenty.
Mr.
Mr. Townsend left the young ladies with the new-married couple; audabout a month after, Mr. and Mrs. Rattle returned ? ith them to Richmond. Harret ν left his Welch friends a few days after the wedding, to wait on his mother, to gain her approbation of hk choice. Nancy Evans was every day more and more plcabcd with her admirer. Mr. and Mrs. Evans considered him almost as a superior being. Iiis gram¬ matical knowledge and manly mind astonibhed thc worthy Vicar, and his mild and conciliating virtues were ever the theme of the mother : but, in thc highest degree, were they pleased vv ith thc pure t pint of religion chicli influ¬ enced
enced his whole conduct, and softened, • with its benignant rays, his warm and susceptible heart. Not less del i «-h ted with the object of ? *' his choice was Harrety ; and while he poured the fond eftusions of thc purest love into her bosom, how often did his grateful soul oflfer up his silent thanks to that invisible hand, which had guided his steps to the mansion of peace and innocence ! From the period vvhen Harrety first left his home to view the manners of the great world, he had at different periods often returned to his paternal mansion, where his mother resided : and, when he was absent, he regularly wrote
wrote to his beloved parent, though the uncertainty of his residence pre¬ vented his receiving a regular answer. At the first commencement of his acquaintance with Mr. Evans and his family, he had informed his mother of the offer he had made to Nancy. His mother doted on her son ; and so high was her opmion of his abilities, so well she knew the goodness of his heart, that, however strange his conduct might bc, she never thought he acted wre ng. This over-fondness of his mother, happily tlie best of tutors had prevented from havin ? any ill effects, while tbe youth Lecame daily more deserving the
the universal favour he obtained. The education of Harrety, though irregu¬ larly conducted, had been most excel¬ lent ; and since Mrs. Harrety had been unwilling to part with her son, Dn Hearty himself, his mother's brother, who lived in the neighbourhood, super¬ intended his instruction. It had been for some time assented to by his mother that he should go to the University ; but the death of his friend, the French Protestant, had so affected the youth, that it was for a time laid aside. His ramble to London had introduced him to Rattle, an acquaint¬ ance his friends saw with pleasure, whose lively manners and quick sense interested Harrety, and dissipated his former gloom. Hb
His travels with Rattle still kept him from residing any time at College; and as lie would now soon he of suihcient age to tike holy orders, Dr. Hearty had no doubt that his superior abilities and learning would induce thc Bishop of ---·- ...........— to dispense witli this part of his education* This digression from the main inci¬ dents of the historv of Marauder is *t somewhat necessary to the general tenor of my sublet : but the moré regular account of the conduct of M'Giunis ia Ireland is now ???????
?И??.
.«????' ¡¿??^??????????????
????. XX. 1 HE arrests at Oliver Boncls, tlic 12tİLof March, were a source of much expiation to General M'Giunis, ? he not only considered it in the light of removing his rivals, but now he trusted necessity would force out the rebellion. > At Wis critical period, on the 31st of the month of March, ¡7<)8, was thc Grand Proclamation issued by the Lord
Lord Lieutenant and Council. In defiance of every exertion used by thc leaders of the United Irish, it spread over the whole kingdom, like oil upon the turbulent waves ; nor misrepre¬ sentation nor arguments availed. In the space of a few weeks its beneficial effects were perceived throughout the country. Many parts of the Provinces were at the time in complete possession o^the Rebels: on a sudden, the tide q| popular frenzy began to subside. M 'Ginnis, in spite of every exertion, was obliged to give way; and his depredations, day after clay, were more and more confined. Quantities of arms, which he had been for some months collecting and
and dbtributing among thc lower classes of the people, were voluntarily given up to the Government, and the names of their leaders sealed their pardon. No longer were thc power and means of M *G innis concealed, no longer could he reign despotic over the country without opposition. Troops began to assemble together with a determined spirit, to search the evil to the bottom ; and the friends of the Government fled no more, but stood tlieir ground. Of all this—fatal change to thc cause! —General M*Ginnis was writing tothe new Executive Directory, and to thc other
other leading members of the Union. who had been chosen in the place of those arrested ; but he soon discovered that .fears for the fate of their impri¬ soned friends prevented any bold stroke ; and that, although an immediate in¬ surrection was universally allowed necessaiy, they could by no means agree among themselves upon the manner of conductiim* it. "t M 'Gumis now severely experienced the little power he had in tîie kingdom at large, and how confined his conse¬ quence was to his own neighbourhood. It was too late to repent his eagerness for a military command-^it w«ts too late to press his ambition forward in thc road of civil employments. Had he
he been among the Directory, he might have been the means of throwing down the gauntlet of war ; but his present station was to obey : yet still his sanguine mind yielded not to the general weakness, but he encouraged his men, magnifying their hopes, and dwelling continually upon the power, the numbers, and confidence of their Brethren, particulariy in the Province of Ulster. By these means, that part of the Province of Munster where M'Giunis dwelt, still cleaved to the affiliating system with thc warmest expectations, looking forward to the arrival of thc l'rench as a certain omen of success. VOL. III. y On
On the latter part of the month of May the exertions of the Government had been so vigorous, and the plans and intentions of the United Party been so ably investigated and laid open, that not the shadow of a hope any longer remained in secrecy. About the 23d of May an attempt was made for* a general rising, which in some parts put on a formidable appearance. The successes of the Rebels in the county of Dublin, in stopping of the mail-coaches, attacking small parties off their guard, and seizing on some few persons obnoxious to them, were re-echoed through the kingdom with ?? many exaggerations, that the more distant parts believed the work to be half
half clone, and put on a new spirit upon the occasion. General M t G innis was not behind hand in making the most of it, but embraced the opportunity to lead his men against some raw troops who had lately arrived in his neighbouihood. He came upon them early in the morning, after a false alarm, in which« he had harassed theni all the night ; and after a hard fought battle, succeeded by his numbers in destroying thc whole. This was in truth a great victory to him, as the first fiuits of his success were the possession of some stores these troops had been appointed to guani. Λ large quantity ot military accoutre- v { l incuts.
ments, with the baggage of most of the Officers of that regiment, fell also into his hands, and all of it was distri¬ buted among his men. The account of this victory soon reached the ears of the Directory, and was by them, in the most pompous and self-sufficient terms, circulated through the kingdom. Specimens of their style have been given before. Buoyed up with this great success, M 'Ginnis began to find his ambitious hopes realized. Their late plunder had heightened the ardour of his troop, and totally dissipated the spirit of dis¬ content and revolt which had begun to shew itself among the lower orders. The
The General was resolved to improve their present advantage ; and doubted not, in a very short time, to get the whole Province into a successful state of rebellion, to make Munster the rallying point of ihc Union* and himself the Generalissimo of the whole.
CHAP. XXL JrkT this period he received another letter from Fahany, not, as usual, with a short address to M 'Ginnis, but solely to Marauder.
W S M'Gİnnis
? M 'Ginnis supposed that in his pre¬ sent character he had in some manner offended his old friend, and expected to meet with some disapprobation of his new-self whieh in many letters- had been thc case. Some friends had informed him that his kinsman M 'Gin¬ nis took upon himself too much ; others that he was haughty, proud, extravagant, kc. Sec. &e. ; and by these means he had·a full opportunity of hearing what people thought and said of his conduct. Among the writers of this kind, Impheîl had signalized himself in his duty to his patron, Marauder, though probably his real motive was envy of the truet and confidence which had been imposed in M 'Ginnis. The
The following was the letter lie received from Fáhàny :—
" MARAUDER, " C'urse on all epithets, now there is no use in lying !"—— " What have we here ?" thought M 'Ginnis ; '* this is a curious beginning, " << Why I should write to you—why 1 should do any act but one, I can give no reason ; yet write I will."- ----- " The enigma increases—no date io his letter : Ì presume my friend is 'in Bedlam. " u Perhaps if you were present, whose ν 4 h ced
head I know to be pregnant with alf that poets feign of art, craft, and in¬ vention—whose heart ι unprejudiced with humanity, pity, or any mortal weakness, never checked what the other determined on——" "Pretty indeed!—Compliments too ?* ——" I might yet escape. Oh Ma« raudcr î if we were together in Italy -----» But I wish not to live—hear my story. " At one of the most infamous (as the world ¿huses to bestow tlie term) gaming-houses in London—among the most infamous (but why are these lom rogues more infamous than the titkd y the honourable gamester ?) ofthe fellows wlio frequent thesame, I lost, three nights ago, five thousand guineas."—— "Fool!
" Fool ! I thought so—I foresaw all this. But what does he mean by troubling me with the old tale of his folly ? He cannot suppose that ITI advance the money ?-—Ah no ! Marauder is too far off, and M'Giunis mnst take care of his trust. " " Dreadfully enraged, I suspected foul play,"™^—- " Dolt ! there was nodoubt of it/* " I got behind. I watched a man who had won part of my money—I fancied I detected him—I caught hold of his hand—I swore the dice were loaded—I insisted upon their being cut open ; they were so, in my presence*. I had been too hasty—-the dice were r 5 fair.
fair. The man insisted upon my begging his pardon in the most abject terms. Stili suspecting I had been wronged, I demurred. He abused me— I abused in return ; the company inter¬ fered ; I made some apology. Peace seemed to be restored. I played agaiu. Luck went against me. Every fury ia hell sebed on me. 'Twas my turn to throw. " There are devils, Marauder î I felt them at that moment, and I feel them now ! I caught one of the dice between my fingers—tried, as I had heard others did, to slide it the numier I wished upon the table. I knew not what I did ! " The fellow I had insulted was on the watch—caught me in some bungling fact
** ine
" The whole place was in an uproar. " I abused and struck at my detector ; he, vvith conscious strength, seized me violently by the nose. Hear me, Ma¬ rauder ! Iii vain I struggled with his Herculean grasp—he tore me along; ancl, amid the hisses of his associates, kicked me repeatedly, till I fell along in the street ! " Any means of revenge I would have employed—Means ! I had none against a man the most conspicuous for bodily strength I ever met with. " ■ " Bad enough ! but what of all this? Deny the fact of the cheating ; prove your honesty by his blood !—Aye í shoot him honourably the next day. " " You know, Marauder, I am no p ? coward—
coward—you know my high sense of honour. Do you think I would suffer such a man to live ?"------ 4 c Most assuredly not. Of course he is no more. Why then this rodomon¬ tade tale ?" " I called next morning on one of the company present, desired him to be my second, and to bear my challenge to my enemy. * Challenge l repeated he ; * are vou ignorant who the fellow is ?— Monkford, the fighting butcher ! He uses his pistols another way. Nobody suspects him of cheating with the rat¬ tlers. He's a Culty* We know where he picks up his cash. Leave him alone ; the
the gentlemen of Bow-street will have him in a few days/ u Such were my associates í What could I do, Marauder ? The thing was become public. Sir Charles Tossup and Lord Jewson— gentlemen, men of honour, respectable characters, like my* self, were present* All St. James's run» of it ! c""-» " I rushed into llie country to hide my cursed head—to think—to plot—to fly the kingdom·—any where—any where—any where—No where ! ! !—An execution at my house !—an arrest issued against me !—I am seized I—a prisoner in my own apartment. Ma¬ rauder! you remember the beautiful tpot, the avenues, the walks, the dis¬ tant river winding among the trees. Every
Every thing valuable and excellent ís gone~-the rest a chaos—a tuin; not the wreck of Nature, but of the infa¬ tuated villain, Fahany. No more !— The pistol is loaded hy my side. I seal this ; and then an abused wife is 'released^—deserted children are pro¬ vided for ! " Yet another dying word :—Twelve years am I your senior, Marauder» How far my learning and abilities are superior to your's, you, who have so oft employed them, cannot be igno¬ rant. " ------ * "The book knowledge l sâlow, friend; pardon me the rest. " " Yet, strange infatuation! 1 have ever been your dupe. n —. Marauder
Marauder smiled at what he conceived a strong proof of his own superiority, and read on. " When first I knew you, I mights in the cant of the sect, be called ω decent Deist. Now what am 1 ?—Ah I would I were an Atheist /—What clo I believe? you may ask me.—I cannot say ; this alone I know, that I do not disbelieve any thing. I am bewildered in doubts and confusion, and every one seems riglit who acts not, who reasons not with Fahany. You were once a Roman Catholic ; your people say prayers can atone for the dead. Re so again—remember me —pray for me — be any thing rather than like the self- murderer, Fahanv/' MHNMMM M'Ginnis's
M'Ginnis's first note of sorrow was a long whistle—" Whew f -----a pretty teáson for shooting himself, because a brother-gamester, who happened to be an odd compound of butcher, boxer, and highwayman, kicked him. What would I have done?—Met him in his own element, and, without asking any questions, have shot. Mm instead of myself. But my poor friend, if he had purposed so to do, could not ; for the naughty bailiffs had him in limbo. That was his own fault—another instance of his not knowing hovv to avoid bad company ; yet, considering that he had no cash to pay—no means to get any* it is all very well as it is.—But this pretty epistle !— As M 'G innis spoke with his accus¬ tomed
tomed manner of sneering at the fate 4 of his friend, he held up the letter. " Such is the last production of my most learned and able friend !-— An ex¬ cellent end for sofine a genius ! Well, so much for Fahany. Fahany I one of the first scholars of the age. Fahany f the universal linguist—Fahany ! who, at the age of one-and-twenty, had twelve thousand a year, without the smallest deduction—who married the prettiest woman in England, with a mind so pure, that even the husband could never find a blot : yet this Fa¬ hany, at the age of five-and-thirty, has ruined his fortune, health, and character, perverted his abilities, debased his learning, abused his own wife, tried to ruin his children, at last cheats
cheats fora few pounds, and, sufïermg: eveiy indignity through his own base¬ ness, blows his braius out to finish the scene !" . The jaundiced eye of M 'Ginnis coukl view the wretched picture of his friend through the most sombre tint ; but when! he tutnecLhis lo^ks inwardly to ! lriínself¿ høwigaudy wás tbe colouring, how highly wat the painting varnished, hbw ftvonrablè was thv /ght hi which he placed h\ ?? iu #et*èàáiiigcf6àtirast forsorne tím, did ? ??? ??? a mratâl t^^ieW <? the ^ccl^ïrcn^as uf hfe oWti fiffe ; Wfth ^И? tógfí^: Sölf-^probation ? ? rimíéer ?? <?&1?^ <rf His èW&
own conduct, aiid applaud that wary and prudent behaviour whicli he had no doubt would, long before he arrived at the age of the deceased Fahany, make him a mau of the very first eminence. The death of his companion in. ini- ' quity gave this genuine modtrn pitita* ¿øpAcrnotasecond moment of uneasiness. Certainly, in the whole; the circum¬ stance \va$ a satisfaction to him: Fahany had long been useless to him—asutiicient reason to make him indifferent about him. Fahany knew many a secret of villany— they all perished with him. There was a tifne indeed, in which Fahany wa&£very thing tm Marauder— when,
when, high in bkod, the youth first traveUed into Italy. Young and inexperienced, with no particular acquamtance, Fahany vvas struck with his spirit—Fahany intro¬ duced him to all his friends—and Fahany soon became the tool of the crafty Marauder· Not only in the infamous aflair of Geutespiere had Fahany been at his service; but, ever ready to second him in his daring attempts, he had once condescended to play the part of a common assassin. Marauder had taken a fancy to & prettyTjirl, aot easily to be attained, befor«
INFERNAL QUIXOTE. 333 before the affair of Leonora : a watchful brother, a low mechanic, was ever in his way. Fahany advised a common bravo. li No," said Marauder; u we may be betrayed—let us do the work our¬ selves/' The tradesman by the greatest luck escaped them, through the nimbleness of his heels. His sister was the next day in a Con¬ vent. Marauder and Fahany thought it most prudent to leave the place, lest retaliation should follow suspicion ; and Leonora,
Lçcatora,, soon sifter falling in the way of Marauder, prevented any further attempt on their part By the same packet in wliich Fahany's letter was received, one also arrived from Arnon. This letter was very short and gloomy. Amon professed an earnest desire to see him, and seemed to allude-to some secret which pressed upon his mind, and which he was anxious to communicate to his friend Marauder. M 'Ginnis read Arnon 's letter with high glee.— 4< If I once again get to the speech of my old friend," cried he, 4 "Hambden
"Hambden Arnon, beware î-^-Make the most of thy Welch property, for thy oftended father will assuredly disinherit liis renegade son."
■"??????????????»
CHAP. XXIL JML*GINNIS remained no time idle and inactive; he soon after prepared to attack about five hundred men in the neighbouihood of Kilnçlugh, before they could be joined by any other troopi, Thc
The body of horse, which Jie com¬ manded in person, was about a hundred, well mounted and caparisoned ; and the infantry which he could raise in the neighbourhood, to six or seven hundred •men. He considered his former action as having changed the fate of Ireland. The news of his victory he doubted not was spreading like wild-fire tlirough the kingdom ; and he was certain it would be a cordial to the spirits of those in arms, and a stimulus to the doubtful and dilatory. M 'Ginnis was up early in the morn¬ ing, vigorous with his former conquest, and alive with new hopes. Scarcely
m
Scarcely had he reviewed his forces, and was giving to the Colonels and Captains the necessary orders for the attack, when a messenger came up with a confirmation of the reports which were before in circulation, "* that a French force had actually landed, and had, with very little opposition, taken possession of the town of Killala. M'Ginnis's ambitious soul could in no wise restrain his joy : he read the note aloud to his army.—" Now, my brave feHûws, Ireland is free; our deeds first checked the torrent; with arms unequal to the foe, we. have already - drove them before us. Now we are, all of us, provided with the same arms*~*- ammunition in abundance, and resources vol, iu. q without
without end. Unpractised in the art of war, the cannon has beeii of little use to you ; now the first engineers ia the world shall accompany your labours, and direct your attempts. The French will instantly ?????? to the capital— èhere we will soon join them. This morning we must again signa ize our¬ selves—your valour demands the plun¬ der, but let it not restrain your pursuit; follow the foe, and take no prisoners." M 'Ginnis preceded his large body ©finfantry with his horse, and completely concealed their number. They came With the utmost silence upon the enemy, who were scattered through different parts of the neighbourhood : the horse wheeled to the right and left, and th€ foot,
foot, with guns, pikes, &c. &c. on a sudden rushed forward with violent noise and outcries, and got into their camp. The confusion was so great, that, instead of collecting together, the enemy, in scattered parties, endea¬ voured to reach the neighbouring town, while M *Ginnis with his divided cavalry charged them as they attempted to form without the trenches, or pursued the fugitives. The pursuit led M'Giunis ??? his horse far beyond his· infim try ; they, contrary to strict orders, not only con¬ sumed their time in pillaging the camp, and burdening themselves with useless plunder, but meeting with some tempt¬ ing viands, began carousing. q£ M'Giunis»
M'Ginnïs, pursuing the slaughter; was within sight of tlie town, when he determined to follow up his success, to wait for his infantry, and storm tli£ place, llie knowledge that there was a large party of friends of the United ♦ Irish in the town, made him consider the event ascertain. «-s With some difficulty he called off his men, and formed them in their ranks. Every thing had smiled on the pro* l_pects of M 'Ginnis. The path which a Cæsar and a Cromwell trod with such success, seemed to lay open to our hero; and, like them, he resolved that his ^ own sword should carve out as glorious a destiny. He
fasten ?? arnyai ctf Ιμ» infaptry, ^he«P f t® his great joy ? he sfw a small body ot cavalry coming out fros* the tgwp^ M 'Gjinnis, İlismen, his horses, ψβτψ ?? /oß their fuU. nfiettle; h^ß h^d ^r-sajt. trouble to restrain their px/fayf, ma continue them in their present situat^aa ^eiiind a wosd, tjt^t the en-sny might »ojt tø i^timi^ed by knowing ?ψ ???^?? opposed to tlie^v. He waited ^ill tliey ^ad eroded ? small ???^ very rugged, and dangerousf rosi thejuneven^ peas of the ?????, ^qd the road? having been totally destroyed^ ????^ shewed his whole force. He charged
q£ Μ'Οίιιμί*
; MtGinnis rode at the Captain of thd other trooj*, who did not decline tte tombât; 4 but owing to the ground, they passed one another at some dis¬ tance, exchanging their pistols. But Who can describe M*Ginnis^ sensations when he recognized 1 the well-known face of Wilson ? The other also wm Struck with the likeness to his old enemy, but Marauder he had heard ???? gone to the West Indies ; yet the * look òf M 'Ginnis, as he remembered Wilsoil, in defiance of the difference between Marauder and the present per<* son, dwelt forcibly on hb mind thai this was the same. * _! Equally eager were both ? meet in the next charge, Tbe roughness of th# country
c^ntry prevented their acting in a ' «body j ancl with their ranks broken, each party attacked the other as they found , ib most to tkfïir advantage. Two men desirous of meeting, coulcf mot be long separated After again passing each other within their swords' length, when Wilson was soon satisfied it Was Marauder himself (for of his cousin he had never heard), they turned their horses short round, and slowly and determined came up to each other· But now the noise of M'Ginnis's infantry approaching,, checked the per¬ sonal anger of Wilson, and induced him to provide for the safety of his men* instead of gratifying his own revenge, 3 He
S$å INTERNAL QUIXOTE. He made a motion to them to retr§a^ and being well mounted* turøgd f rojtb M'Gmnis, au4 leaped over a wall iatø an adjacent field, across which he could more easily join his troop» r M'G innb had the fimt horses of ?? man m the kingdom, aud jnstgntly followed him ; Wikon, finding himself pursued, cpuWiï^d^Jtoethçc^wbat,. He wheeled his horse round a* M'Giunis came furiously up. la a moment tbey were together. As they mutually etfmk? Wibon ma^^ ? * ??,_???;?£? l' Thè
The other uttered only a curse» M 'Ginnis, considerate, crafty, .and revengeful, thought only of making- sure of his old enemy ; the means he cared not about. Wilson, open and vindictive, fought with equal hatred. After a few blows, M 'Ginnis gave a fatal one to the horse ofthe other, and the ill-fated rider fell with the poor animal to the earth. M'G innis exultçd^ and, as Wilson sprung ??, meditated a finishing blow, the full effect ofwhich was turned aside by the other's sword ; but the blood streamed in profusion down his face. M'jSmnis again gave vent to his joy, an4
and seconded his blow., Wilson, now more on his guard, sprung forward, avoided the :ut, and seized the reins of the horse : at the same instant Wil¬ son wounded him in che body» The horse reared and plunged. A second blow from Wilson missed the body of his adversary, but alighted upon his thigh, M'G innis writhed with the pain, ani losing his seat theanunal threw ?? iiow had Wilføn finishfd thç crimes of the infamou* Marauder, whefi the poke of tfø iîîft^try, coming to ths as¬ sistance of their Chief, induced Um to leave his prey, and provide for his own *φψ Without ?? % wmmt, he sprung
sprung on M'GiniiÎe'shnrse, and hasten¬ ing after his own troop, collected the stragglers, and made the best of their way to the town. M'Ginnis's men, seeing the situation of their General, had no inclination to pursue them in their retreat. Tlie whole body were so panic-struck at the fate of their gallant leader, that they vvere not to be prevailed upon by any other of their Officers to make an attack upon the town. Six of them carried M 'Ginnis back in his military cloak, and a surgeon from among them soon examined his wound. Having stopped the blood, he pronounced,
