Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The infernal Quixote: a tale of the day
свШЕтЕтшЕЕшсЕкт1ШЕйЕЕЕШш*тт* ****ш*~--**-**-*^^ THE INFERNAL QUIXOTE. СПЛР. I, A HE illness of the late possessor of the family honours and titles was but a few clays. His Grace ivas insensible after the attack. The moment his death ivas announ¬ ced to the familv. Wibon sent off an express to Sir Avebury Hinton, who he knew was left one of the guardians and trustees for the ehildi cn. vol. ii. в Sir
Sir Avebury left home immediately, but deviated a few"miles from the road, to bring along with him a Mr. Kennet, a distant relation of the family, an emi¬ nent Counsellor, but wlio had hmg retired from pleading at the Bar. When the Duke's nephew, who ar¬ rived first, саше to the Castle gates, he »notlvred his joy a little, put on a grave countenance, asthe case requiretl, •and assumed his usual hauteur and self- consequence. The porter enquiring^the gentleman's падне, one of the servants that attended him, for there were three besides the steward, informed him— " The Duke of SiUbury Г The
Thçsound quickly re echoed through the Castle. Wilson was roused at the bustle and noise in the outward court» nnd went out. The chariot, with four post-horsesş foaming with sweat and dirt, drove up. The young hero stalked out, and, slightly noticing Wilson, was walking into the hall ; the steward, with some books under his arm, following bim, when Wilson thought proper to accost the man of honours· # 61 Mr. Marauder, may I beg tíie honour of a few words ?" " Sir!!!" repeated the other, in a mixed note of surprise, hauteur, repre¬ hension, contempt, and anger· в â " Yoimsr
É< Young man," said the Steward, c< his Grace désirai me to say he had no occasion for your services, but y r ou înmiit remain at the Castle till it was о convenient for you to depart. If you have anv accounts to settle, vou are tó brim»;them to me." " I neither have, nor wish to have any concerns, any accounts with you or Mr. Marauder;" replied WiUon, in a firm .voice. The servant, who had come to the vestible as tin* carriage drove up, stop¬ ped, and looked at Mr. Wilson, as wait¬ ing for his orders. <c Wbat does the fool stop for ?" said his late Grace's nephew. " You seem none
«none of you to know who is your înaster." As the glance which i^coâmpanied these words included Mr. Wilson, he thought proper to answer*"— " I believe no one here is ignorant tliat it* is the,present Duke, Sr." " Well," Sir, and who îs the present Duke?" Wilson did not answer him as Nathan did Daniel, and say, " Thou art the man !" but " The late Duke's eldest son." "Damnation! this insolence is not to be borne. 'Tis well, Sir, for you that my respect for the dead saves you from instant chastisement." в 3 Wilson,
rising passion which the remen thi aneé of his infamous conduct towards .Emily «¿id, athis ñrst appearance, inspire—who had stii! réstaidned the swelling angď in defiance of his insolent pride, and had determined to wait the arrival of Sir Avebury for a full explanation, %as thrown at ouce frotn his guard by thb trord chastisement ! 41 Chastisement /" -repeated he, in his sternest, tliough not loudest key ; 46 yes, my respect," softening his voice, " for the dead—my love for the living, tie my hands. I say no more to you, Mr. Marauder. Sir Avebury Hintón, and your relation, the Honourable Mr. 6
Mr. Kennet м ittsoon be here, and they witt declare to you the particulars." " Thus ever ínsöfciit," retorted the other, " you shall rue the day you first insulted mè. Think -you, Sir, that I ' am to be deceived by the stale story that the late Duke was married to his strum¬ pet? Think you, Sir, I have never heard this before—that I did not hear, and de¬ spise it? But I waste words upon you f" Turning to the servant, " Shew me to a " Mr. Marauder," replied Wilson, with a manly firmness and indignation, " you shall have proof, and damning proof I For. myself, I neither respect your consequence, nor dread your anger."
в 4
Afc.
Mr. Marauder seemed willing to answer; but "Wilson, fearful he should no longer command his temper, hastily withdrew ; and the servant shewed his late Grace's indignant nephew into the library. Far different sensations than those with which he entered the court-yard, occupied Mr. Marauder's mind. The great respectability of Sir Ave¬ bury Hintoiťsandhis relations charac¬ ter he well knew; yet, judging of the rest of mankind by his own heart, he looked upon the tale ofthe Duke's mar¬ riage to be a despairing effort of Wilson, to keep possession of his situation at the ( astle, Again, he supposed that in tîıe
the latter part of his life the Duke might have been privately»married, and that Wilson might have had the art and address to affix a prior date to the licence. In either case, be made no doubt of detecting and exposing his old rival; and be gloried in the revenge, M'hich he \vas resolved the utmost ri¬ gour of the law should inflict upon hinu ч m So full was he of this idea, that he . reached down a law book from the shelf, « to revicM' the cases of pei jury, forgery, and such-like. Mr, Marauder was. rarely inclined to consult any one. Bold and daring,, he Mas always the principal, and acted for в 5 himself:
himself; yet he once or twice wavered concerning sending for his attorney, ímphell, who now resided at the next market town. But, determined not to shew the least doubt of his right, he de- dined, and waited with tolerable pa¬ tience, considering Wilson's case, for the arrival of Sir Avebury and Counsel¬ lor Kennet. In less than an hour they were ushered into the room where the would-be Duke was. The gentlemen were personally known to each other. Wilson was with them. Sir Avebury began. —" We are in¬ formed, Mr, Marauder, that you doubt 6 the
the legality of tîıe late Duke's mar¬ riage. " Mi\ Maunder —— ff T я iti r»v t vitriol ν sorry to see so respectable a gentleman beeome the dupe of so palpable an artifice." Counsellor. —" There is not even the appearance of artifice in this case. Tfie" legality of the marriage of his Grace,, Samuel Duke of Silsbury, M 7 ith Elizabeth Overton^ can be no subject for doubt. His Grace* Sir, was twice married on the same day, about a month before the birth of his eldest son. The Priests, who married him, are yet living :—the Rev. Mr,. Lockeridge, now Rector of Wheatland, but who then lived at Hazleton, and did the duty of Castle^ berry ------" n 6 Д/л
Mr. Marauder, hastily. — <ŕ The very man, whose name I expected M'ould be used as a cloke in this affair. Is his patronage of the giand instrument of ail this," pointing to Wilson, "un¬ known to you ? Are ye not acquainted with the birth, parentage, education, and dependance of this gentleman upon that very Parson. Perhaps the carpen¬ ter of llazleton and his son are Avit- nesscs ; thougli he might be young at tbe time, no doubt he was then a promising boy." u 1 should Avish," replied Sir Ave¬ bury, with great steadiness, and bow¬ ing politely to Wilson, " for no better a Mİtııess than this young man's father; but him wc do not want. I was present at the one, the Roman Catholic cere¬ mony ;
mony ; and, among many proofs, the redster of the Church o r Castlebcrry, CJ m' * which you .may instantly see by apply¬ ing at the Vicaťs house at llazleton, will convince you of the other." " It will not convince me !" retorted Mr. Marauder, evidently troubled in his mind at what he had heard, but en¬ deavouring to conceal it under the mask of anger ; " it will not convince me \ I know how easy it is to insert a thing of that kind. When I discover a plot, 1 naturally expect the perpetrators will try to make it as complete as possible. Gentlemen, you ought to have known better : as for that man, % he is be¬ neath my personal notice ; but not that punishment his folly deserves, aud I swear most solemnly shall have !" Wilson
Wilson spêke. —" Hapjiy might Τ have been, had the name of Marauder never offered itself to my notice. His revenge I despise as much as I abhor his person." " Insolent fellow, beware? Even fhe giant crushes the gnat that stings him." " The imaginary greatness of Mr. Alarauder is crumbled to pieces. I am satisfied." Wilson withdrew to the other end of the library, and, taking down a book, seated himself in a chair. The other two gentlemen spoke not a word.
Mr.
Mr. Marauder paused a few moments* at first in suspense, whether he should attempt to take forcible possession of the Castle ; but considering the small¬ ness of his retinue, he thought proper to adopt other methods. " So, gentlemen, you still contmue to countenance this deceit, and, pre¬ suming on your being the executors of the late Duke of Silsbury, deny me my lawful rights. I shall be sorry to in¬ volve you in the disgrace, which must necessarily attach to the exposure of this damned piece of villany." " On this subject," said Sir Avebury^ " we have neither fears nor doubts." " We hold," continued the Bar¬ rister, " tlie property of the late Duke in trusts
trust, for Samuel, his eldest son, a mi¬ nor, now Duke of Silsburv. The tes- tator has thought proper to join Mr. Wilson Wilson with its in the trust, and м г е applaud his discernment and choice." " Ry G — d !" exclaimed Marauder, no longer preserving even tbe appear* ance of decency, but sM^earing in the grossest terms, " you are all alike ì You shall quickly hear from me .again^ gentlemen. I did expect your grey hairs had covered sense and honour; at present I know not whether ye are the dupes, or the htimble assistants in this infamous plot. Remember I have forewarned you ; let the exposure fall on your own heads. Drive ν p, my car¬ riage ; Iii stay here no longer !" Mr.
Mr. Marauder flew out of the room, and, in the height of his rage, departed alone, leaving his worthy coadjutor, who had not spoken all the time, but stood humbly behind his master, to follow him as he could. This worthy gentleman would have stopped one of the outriders, but he pretended not to hear him ; and he was therefore com¬ pelled, amid the mocks and laughter of the servants, to trudge it on. foot. * As there is no character mòre deserv¬ ing contempt than the base and syco¬ phantic tool of villany, so there seems to be none who more frequently meet with it.
СНЛР.
CHAP. II. » VV HEN Mr. Marauder came a littte to himself, he began to be staggered at the proofs wbich he had just heard of hie uncle's marriage. Though alone in the chariot, he vented, so profusely and so virulently, his curses against the Duke, Wilson, Sir Avebury, the Barrister, his kinsman» tlie Clergyman, and every one concerned in
in the business, that the postboys stop¬ ped, thinking he spoke to them. He had ordered them to drive to the market town where the attorney lived; but, on second thoughts, he now coun¬ termanded them to the village of Hazleton. When there, he drove to the Vicar¬ age, and desired to examine the register of the marriages for the Church at Castleberry. The Vicar, who had resided there ever since Mr. Lockeridge had gone to Wheatland, told him that it was not permitted, unless by authority, but he would
would give him a copy of any thing he ch sired Accordingly he departed, not with¬ out again testifying his anger, with a a copy of the Duke's marriage. To his great surprise and confusion, he perceived the names of tivo gentlemen of unsullied,fame and cha¬ racter, ivhom he knew the Duke highly respected. Dean Bottom, a м'еН -known dignitary of tlie Church* of England, and Pookham Bottom, Esq. his elder brother, and Member of Parliament for the countv. Air. Marauder, not yet satisfied, sent to Imphell, the attorney, and desired him
hini to thoroughly sift the affair, and to let him know the result as soon as possible. The true statement of M'hich Mas to this purpose : — Samuel, Duke of SiUbury, as soon as he M'as satisfied that his mistress was in the family way, determined to be privately married to her, and to have the mar¬ riage M'itnessed, in the most regular шаппег. The Church of Castleberry was his own parish Church, though it made part of the living at llazleton. Mr. Lockeridge, as the livings меге consoli¬ dated, M'as the Curate of both. The
The Duke, in his common sporting garb, and his spouse in her usual attire, one very wet morning, met at the Church, and were united together.' The Dean and his brother меге present It is of no use to dwell upon the rea¬ sons his Grace ahvays assigned for not discovering his marriage during his life. To Wilson he had, some yearsbefore hts death, : revealed it, under promise of secrecy ; and Wilson had endeavoured to persuade his Grace to make it public. But the Duke always positively refused with many specious pretences,- He said his children might be edu¬ cated with less extravagance and more humility : that their mother was per¬ fectly
fectly well satisfied in the present re¬ spect shewed her, and M ? as easy in her owu mind, Avithout publishing it to the world : that if his marriage M'as made public, he should, in a great degree, be obliged to change his mode of life ; that his own relations Mould think it neces¬ sary to visit his Duchess ; that her's would not be contented with the present civilities shewn them ; Mİtlı many other excuses, equally cogent. But, after all, his marriage was solely » performed to gratify his hatred against his brother ; and the motives for con¬ cealing it, to indulge his own pride. The report of the marriage indeed, from the very first, had spread about the country; but as in so many years it had not
not met with any r confirmation, it soon became totally discredited. Lord James and his family had quickly beard the report, and gave- but little credit to it ; but when they afterwards understood* that tiie supposed Duchess was delivered of a boy. and that his Grace did not hail him as his heir, tluy r totally disbelieved it. Every suc¬ ceeding birth weakened, in their mind, "the probability ofthe story being true; and the gentlemen, wbo were present at the double ceremony, were pf tried honour; therefore any circumstances lo corroborate the report, were not likely to transpire. Marauder's consultation with the attorney
attorney was tn \ery little purpose, wir gave bi/n not the s nailed hopes of isctu-'s: 'ibiilc Ьь uncle's marriage. Again and again did Marra !cr give the other to understand (for they had not been so long acquainted, without perfectly knowing eaeh other), that if it were possible, by any means whatever, to succeed, he would not relinquish his claiim The subject was examined χμ every point of view. The double niarriage, the number of witnesses, the respecta¬ bility of their eharacters, and the large family left by, the Duke, the whole of which were born in wedlock, were sub¬ jects all duly considered. vol. n; с The
The attorney', wlio was equal to any thing of the chicane kind, remarked,* that the' only possible means was, by one bold stroke, to invalidate the whole. ŕí Ls it possible, Imphell ?" asked Mr. Marauder. < , " I think it is, Sir," replied the other. ť ' One hundred thousand pounds are ready for tbe purpose ; and an ample compensation shall be made you,' ifyou succeed in this business. But what are your means ?" й ť To prove a former marriage of the Duchess. I will be bound to find a husband, priest, arid witnesses.'*
Mr.
Mr. Marauder M^as for some. time thoughtful; at last, striking his fore¬ head, hé exclaimed—" Oh !* Imphell, thou art indeed a most noble fellow ; but it Mill not do. This woman lived always M r ith her parents in the sanie parish, till she came to the Duke s ; and, Mİıat is worse for our cause, she M r as under age when she first came to live with him." " Then, Sir," said Mr. Imphell, " 1 have no hopes to give you ; unless we could furnish the Dukè with a former M'ife." " The regular and retired life Mhich the okl wretch lived, again totally pre¬ vents us/' replied Mr. Marauder; " yet, my good friend, investigate each particular; let nothing escape you, с 2 * and. л *
and, if you see the smallest opening, ţ F let me know immediately 7 . Here, -take these notes for five hundred pounds ; if you can use tliem for my purpose, they shall be repaid you tenfold ; if not, keep them yourself: your ardour in my service entities you to them : I know, at all times, 1 may^depend on you. " With assertions unbounded, the most profuse thanks, and everlasting grati¬ tude, Mr. Imphell pocketed the notes, and took his leave. Thus, in a moment, were all those bold and splendid Visions of this proud young man dissolved as a dream, and , Marauder awoke to individual insignifi¬ cance. Deeply did he review in his mind
mind the pageantry that was parsed by, till disappointed possession turned his foolish idolatry into rank hatred. " Cursed Aristocracy!" said he, " thou art but the semblance of great¬ ness : I'll no longer pursue the gaudy shadow! Could I have found thy ascent ready prepared for glory, I woukl have mounted to the top. I ivill not servilely follow behind, but Iii hew me out another path. " Better to reign in hfll than serve in heaven,'* said the arch-fiend ; and since heaven was to him a hell, Iii make the hell of democracy my heaven. " Great talents and great virtues," с 3 - says
says, the ingenious Godwin, " are ever united*."— Aman of uncommon genius is a man of high passions and lofty de¬ signs ; and our passions will be found in the last analysis, to have their surest foundation
foundation în a sense of justice, ifa nian be of an aspiring, ambitious temper, it is because, at present, he finds himself out of his place, and wishes to be in it.
/
с 4 ч I have
I have this temper—I feel these great talentsand great vb tues within, and I will mark out a road that shall put me in my proper place. *' Forms and ceremonies, titles and names, distinctions and parties, even opinions and principles are biit the tools with svhich a wise man will cut his way through the world. " Wby was Cromwell a* fanatic? Twas his interest. ic W T hy was Luther a reformer? 'Twas his interest. " Did not Buonaparte offer his ser¬ vices to Royalty? Yes. He was unsuc¬ cessful in his application ; he tried De¬ mocracy, and thrives better. <r From this moment, then, Γ de¬ spise thee, Aristocracy, unless I can bend
bcrfdthee to wy purpose : I will not be thy slave; but now 111 try with other weapons, and with more glorious hopes. Money, the sinews of success in every point, is not wanting ; ''tis mine to em¬ ploy it with skill." Marauder at no time doubted his own abilities ; and as for prejudices to particular tenets and principles, any further than they suited his interest, the young philosopher had long sheu'ii him¬ self superior. His two most intimate acquaintances M r erc avowed democrats ; and, when it had answeretl his purpose, he had fre¬ quently shewn temporary conversions; particularly in his visita to Mr. с 5 Cloudlev, ml f
Cloudley, who practised in his house¬ hold the purest species of democracy. Leaving Marauder for a short time to his new cogitations, let us see how ta belle Emily does.
viri AI ·■
eiiAP. ni. ж HE second morning after, the sup¬ posed Duke had departed to take pos¬ session of the family honours, her dear friend, the Marchioness, called upon his Emily. She had oftentimes shewn her¬ self this dear friend, by amusing Emily with the gossipping tales of the day.. After mutuaľ salutations-—" My amiable creature," cried the Mar>- с 6 chioness,,
I
chioness, tť the Chevalier Touard has told me another curious tale concerning your dear ufan." ť< Well," sakl Emily, affecting a lightness :>" piríts, whieh had long been genuine f ron* í *· heart, u by all means let me bear it." " My beautiful young friend," said the other, ťí I am assured of your in¬ credulity for the trilles, pr, on my life, I am eternally silent." " Emilyr —" You know my con¬ tempt for the stufl^ my dear Mar¬ chioness. " ť£ jílarchioness. — ťí So the old Alderman has fold his spruce young , cousin, that his daughter might be a Duchess as soon as she pleased."
Emilys
Emily.'— -What ! does Alderman Bar¬ row know of the Duke's death ?" Marchioness.—" Mr. Marauder—I mean his Grace—»wrote to the lovely damsel herself the night he departed. Touard says he was of tjie party, and saw the letter. " Emily asked no more questions—she had the utmost difficulty to conceal her feelings. Tbe Marchioness soon departed, and a plentiful flow of tears gave her a momentary relief. I shall here briefly explain the reason of the Marchioness's tale. Alderman Ваггом% supposed to be the richest commoner in the-kingdom, had an only
only daughter. Nor beauty, grace, nor suise, nor any accomplishment, mental or personal, had the young lady ; but she M ? as the sole heiress of all her father's wealth, -mIio publicly/said, if she married with his consent, the happy bridegroom should receive, on the wed¬ ding day, one hundred thousand pounds in ready money. Nothing under Nobility dared aspire; yet Marauder had so plausibly explained his situation to the old man, he had so^ amorously ogled the young inaidén, that the Alderman had already entered into a contract with him ; and had not Mr. Marauder been so hastily ealled away by his uncle's deatli, the marriage was*
was, in a few weeks, to have been so¬ lemnized. Alderman Barrow had a nephew, his sister's son, young, rich, and most dashing. Bond Street, St. James's, and the Park, every fine day, from three to five, were honoured with his phaeton r chariot, or curricle, according to the fashionable taste. liie rage M ľ as now four different co¬ loured horses; as such, a black and white, a strawberry and roan, were his favourites. The young man, before the Révolu- tion, had been twice or thriee in France, making in the ivhole some weeks. He played. 6
pla) ed with a grace, and paid his money to people of the first fashion. His name was Toward, He was become particularly fond of foreigners, who, unlike his countrymen, seemed to pay him great notice. The Marquis and the Marchioness were his most intimate friends. He had assisted the Marquis in some embarrassments; he had lost a few hundreds to the lovely Marchioness ; she had, in return, lost to him ——» What? Nothing. Yet Toward tlu night that he had gained a great prize ; grinned horribly a la François ; spoke, broken French ;· the Marquis called him friend, the Mar¬ chioness Chevalier, and they, moreover, softened
softened his name to Touard. Surely he was a happy man ! So came the intelligence to Emily of Alderman Barrow and his daughter—a tale she had heard of before, but totally disbelieved till this morning. 4 It may not be amiss to remark that, by the voluntas resignation of Mr. Marauder, Le Chevalier Touard came into the Marchioness's favour. . Toward was introduced by Marauder himself a few weeks before Emily came to town ; for Marauder, though resi¬ dent in the country, had made occa¬ sional visits to the metropolis, to pre¬ pare (as he said; the house ibr his dear Emily,
Emily, and to settle, a few other matters. Before Marauder left London on ac¬ count of the Duke's death, he had, while the horses were getting ready, gone into his study alone, and written a letter. This Emily, flvintc into the study the moment he iras gone, per¬ ceived. The letter was to Miss' Barrow, and to this purpose.
" My dearest Clarinda, " My uncle, the Duke, died this morning. I fly on the wings of love to tike
take possession of the family honours and property; whichf immediately on my return, I shall rejoice to lay at the feet of tbe lovely mistress of my heart Wkh respectful remembrance. to the worthy Alderman, most faithfully and eternally " I remain your devoted servant, " silsburv." s
That a Duke proud, -haughty, and rich, should so earnestly seek an alliance M'itlţ a commoner, is something strange. Nor was it his vast concerns in the East Indies, nor his astonishing estates in the West, that humbled the spirit óf Marauder to the match ; but when he heard
heard the Alderman had purchased a fourth borough, tlien the point was de¬ termined in his own mind. Enraged was the no-Duke that he had not before concluded the match ; but he had other thoughts of far more moment at present to trouble hinu
СНЛР.
Ш
СИАР. IV. 1VİARAUDER, perceiving every con¬ test concerning the title must be in vain, and burning M'ith an inveterate hatred against Wilson, was determined to wreak his revenue on him. Mr. Arnon, the younger, he knew was in the neighbourhood, on a tour through tbewestof England. Marauder informed him he Mas in the country, and
and hoped the other would oblige him svitli his company in his way. About three days after the Duke's funeral, Hambden Anion arrived at Marauder's house. Marauder embraced the opportunity of unfolding, according to his own no¬ tions, Wilson's conduct; and begged the favour of Hambdeu to call on Wil- V son, and fix a time and plaee that he ' might receive satisfaction. Hambden, to whose education this species of manslaughter was famiHar, though the urbanity of his own dispo¬ sition had ever prevented his being a principal, did not refuse tbe request of his father's friend, but, with full powers . to
to arrange the work of death, went to the Castle On enquiring for-Air, Wilson, he ivas shewn by a servant to his apartments. Ilambden began.·*—" I come, Sir, ivith an unpleasant message from my feiend, Mr. Marauder, iou have grossly affronted him. He has long been convinced that you are his private enemy, and he demands you, by me, to be his public. Your time and place I am.to require"' Wilson.— 4 ' Sir, I wibh to inform vou, I have never been My. Alarauder's pri¬ vate eUQiny, ivhatever cause I might have had to be so. The affront you allude to I did not give ; my conduct in
in that affair was but a species of self- defence, and in no other manner can I host i lely me*, t your friend." Lamb den. — <r Do I rightly under¬ stand you, Sir ? Do you refuse that satisfaction my friend requires ? Will you not fix a time and place ?" Wilson paused a moment for an answer. He evidently laboured to con¬ quer his feelings. • u Sir, I never will name a time and place to attempt the death of any man, not even my greatest enemy-; and that I believe is Mr. Marauder." Hambden. —" Will you meet Mr. Marauder by his own appointment?" Again
Again thi otlier paused.— The Ш!» the injured man, struggled for revenge; at last, he but faintly and irresolutely answered—" Not" Hambden. —" This, Sir, is most strange! Violent as Mr. Marauder's anger was agaiust you, he ' did not, I am sute, doubt yout ^rage. Do you think prdpeç to give me any reason for yout conduct ?" fVitson.·—»" You may tell Mr. Ma¬ rauder, Sir, ťhať it is not fear prevents, my meeting him i that, on the princi¬ ple of self-defence," I shall, as I have before, oppose him. Aiy principles teach me forgiveness ; I endeavour to practise them*" vol, ii. » Hambdem
Hamiden. —" What principle, may I ask, ean possibly induce a roan of honour, and a gentleman, to refuse his enemy an opportunity of receiving satisfaction ?" Wilson.—" Tlie Christian, Sir." Hamoden. —» ( ζ Of Christianity Γ have never made profession, nor been edu¬ cated in its doctrines; yet it is evident that principle must be wrong, wbich denies to a person justice, where a fault has been committed against Ыт. " ^ Wilson.—r li Yes; but tbe Christian does not. It is ever, ready to pardon, to atone, to reconcile. " If a man, Sir, who acts up to the principles of Christi¬ anity, is injured, he forgives ; if he offends another, it is required of him, . not
bot to give his adversary an opportu¬ nity of revenge, but of reconcilement. " Hambden. —" Isa Christian a judge in'his own causer" Wtlsm. —" Yes, in cases thaťreach not the common law, because he is answerable to God for his conduct more than to man. If I haye injured Mr. Ma- . rauder, Avliich I deny, the laws are open." Hambden. —<* Thelaţvs cannot reach every point. A man of honour catries in his own breast something superior, which makes that perfect, human ordi- lances have left imperfect" WHson.«**" In that sentiment I agree with you, but this love of justice is not influenced by the prejudices or customs of individuals ; as I said before, it goes to a higher tribunal." d â Mr.
Mr. Hambden Arnon paused, anå seemed thoughtful, i( There is much truth, Sir, in what yen say. Yet what reparation has Mr· Marauder for the insult he Conceives you have given htm i n This question produced an explana¬ tion of Wilson's quarrel with Mr. Ma¬ rauder. He told Mr. Hambden the Whole. He began from their fnst quar¬ rel, their acquaintance, their jealousies of each other, to the arrival of Mr· Marauder after the death of the Duke, In clear and impartial language Wilson narrated the facts which had cøme to his o.wn knowledge, and concluded by saying— « if
f ^ if Mr. Marauder can' confute what I have mentioned, then, Sir, you may have reason to^suppoşe that fear, not principle, prevents my meeting him in a hostile manner. " s Mr. Hambden Arnon M'as so well pleased Mith the whole of Wilson's con¬ versation, that he determined, ir the circumstances he had heaul, appeared to be true, (which, from M ilson's open ho¬ nesty, he had no reason to uoubt), to call on him in a day or two, apologize for Ыь former visit, and beg the honour of his acquaintance ; and, as he took his leave, he made a civibspeech to that purpose. ** » I When Mr. Hambden Arnon returned ρ 3 to
to Marauder, he fully related liis inter¬ view with Wilson, and his refusal to meet hima hostile manner. Air. Marauder saicl but little. Hav¬ ing given vent to his passions, he had reflected on the consequences of a duel : - not through personal fear, or the smallest diminution of his hatred to Wilson, but the troublesome conse¬ quences it might, at the present tíme, be of to himself. Mr. Hambden was thoroughly satisfied that Wilson's con¬ duct was perfectly correct; and as. Air. Marauder Y surmises,, that Wilson had prejudiced the Duke against him, were denied by the other, Hambden gave it as his opinion that Mr. Marauder could no longer, with any propriety, insist
mmt upoa Wilson's meeting him inthe field. With a tolerable good grace, Ma¬ rauder acquiesced in the opinion of his friend, and dissembled a satisfaction he was very far from feeling. So the affair rested.
,»4 CHAR
ШШШ""! I'I I I, ί, „■■, ,,■ ■ ,' 4 СНЛР. ν/ - W' HILE things were thus going for¬ ward in the country, the conduct of Marauder, and the suspicious circum¬ stances which had come to Emily's, knowledge s at first made fier, very ill, and she was obliged to send for a phy-* sician. In a few days her fever abated; her spirits, naturally good> supported her* and
assistance. Marauder, ín the confusion of his own affairs, and irresolute how to act, was both unwiUing and ashamed to write to Emily*. This confirmed her suspicions ; and, a,wcek having passed since his departure, she indignantly left 'the house, and took lodgings a few miles >. firom town.. * %f- About this time a letter was brought her, which had been* two чкуе eomingí hy the post.
" Dear Emily, . - , u I am damnably harassed by a ¡щек ofu designing villains, and ypur Vf 5 enamóralo "
enamoratQ at theiu head,, 'Tis a deept laid, and, I fear, a too successful scheftıç to deprive me ofthe title and estates. I have no thoughts of coming to town., I wish I could ask my dear Emiiy to coma to me into the country ; but youknow - the prejudices and nonsense of the neighbourhood. In truth I am most , cursedly sick of this country, where tyranny, villany, and folly, in the per¬ sons of magistrates, parsons, and laws, reign triumphant. What says my Emily ţo a trip to th# land of reason, virtue, and equality, with her constanti adorer ?" This hasty note, partfy/ through shame, and partly disappointed pride, ч Marauder
Marauder purposely omitted to affi» a name to. Emily, having once learned to act and think for herself, the day she left Marauder's house, before she had as yeť positively resolved to go, upon the re¬ ceipt of this note, ordered her chariot* and drove to Alderman Barrow's. She desired to speak to the Aldermam She was shewn into a superb room-*** - tibe Alderman attended. Now the Aldernpian was a great ad* mirer of beauty, and, most profoundly Bowing, begged the honour of her name and commands« d б -* Emily·
Emily. — ζ ' Before I fully answer you* JSir, let me ask you one question-— haa Mr. Marauder made a matrimonial offer to your daughter.?" ; " Mr. Marauder," replied the Alder¬ man, smirking—" it never was a secret, Ma'am—made an oflfer some months ago; and the young Duke of Silsbury is shortly to be married to her* May I repeat—the favour of yourname, Ma'am ?" " My name, I am happy to inform you, Sir, is Emuy Bellaire," replied Miss Emily, trying to assume a cofb scions dignity. " I can also" inform you that Mr. Marauder w ţ ill never be $ Duke._ You are at liberty, Sir,, to read this letter, which will save me any fur¬ ther explanation." Mr.
Mr. Barrow, having read the letter, returned it; and, though he seemed in¬ clined to detain the fair, heroine, she slightly bowed, and with the grace and hauteur of a Duchess, withdrew to her carriage : not that the Aldermart was so deficient in politeness, or daunted by her manner, to neglect handing her into it, which he did with a tender squeeze. · Mr. Barrow had frequently heard that Marauder kept a very pretty girl; butthe Alderman was tob much a man of taste to make that an exception to bis alliance, more partieularly as one of the marriage conditions was, that he should give up his Miss. The thoughtful old gentle¬ man ако intended secretly in his own mind, 3
mind, if she suited his fehcý, to take her to himself.. Tlie letter, which Miss Emily had shewn him, put a complete stop to all thoughts of the marriage ; but, as to the lady, itg, /e him a great many more ч on her account. He sent à trusty ser¬ vant immediately to follow ťie carriage, and find her address, suspecting a fracas would take plaice with her former lover, and hoping to profit by it.. The man executed his commission most fully, He could, therefore, in* form his master on his return, that the lady called at Mr. Marauder's, took up her maid and some trunks, and drove to a handsome lodging near Islington. - The
Tlie Alderman was in rap cures; he liberally rewarded the man, and sent him back to Emily with a very amorous epistle ; . lost splendid were- his offers, , most fulsome his praise, ahd most gla¬ ring his expressions.. Emiiy was at first inclined to kugh heartily when die read his note ; but^ in a moment, recollecting the infamous light in which she had placed herself, she as suddenly gave full vent to her tears. She answered the Alderman's lette* most haughtily, to put a stop to any fuither applicatbn ; but felt herself . - completely humbled by its contents, Finding
» tinding her retreat discovered, fehe dismissed hèr eharìót and men-servants,. and the next morning, Math only one maid, again changed her residence. Now had she time and leisure to re-» fleet upon her former behaviour, and, now did she begin to perceive the de¬ structive tendency of that sophistry, which-had blinded her understanding., The hour of trial·was come;—Mhat new rules hád she learned in the school оГ philosophy to support her? Alas! here she could the least bear reflection. This had been her greatest enemy—this had. taken away tbat soother of the heaviest afflictions, conscious inno¬ cence, and to this she owed her ruin. Marauder
Marauder was too much agitated with his own immediate concern, to make it a cause of alarm that he did not hear from Emily Bellaire ; his vanity totally excluded the idea from his mind that eke couhl possibly leave him\ Though dissatisfied м ith the termi¬ nation of his quarrel with Wilson, and displeased with Ilambden Arnon for some praises he had bestowed on his adversary, particularly Mİıen he under¬ stood that Hambden intended to call at the Castle again, yet he did his utmost to restrain his violent temper; and hoM ? ever he meant to act in-future, he wvls very careful to deceive;. After a little rea¬ soning Mith himself, he so completely succeeded^ that Hambden believed him to.
tobe perfectly satisfied that the affair hadL ended as it did. On the third day, amid a profusion- øf friendly expressions, Arnon took hk kve; and immediately, according t% his intentions, waited on Wilson at the? . Castle.
CHAP,
ШЯШвШЯШШВПНЙИЕ
CHAP. VI. AFTER the common civilities had passed^ and Hambden had mentioned that Mr. Marauder had dropped the intention of calling him to an account* to which Wilson made no reply* Hambden said— 4<< "The more I reflect, Sir, upoa your conduct the other day, the more am I satisfied that, the principle of 1 philanthropy,.
philanthropy/ which influenced your behaviour, in that instance, is right; yet, as the preserver of the private peace of many families—as the refiner qf men and 4 manners—as an instrument, of politeness and civility, I may álmost call it tlie preventer of quarrels,, and the destroyer of animosities, surety in many cases duelling is to be defended." Wilson replied^- u 'Tis. a greater evil whieh swallows up. the lesser ones.^ Your argmnentb tlie best in its favour: you meaa tliat the fear of bein^cailed, to an account inthis %cay } prevents ţ&e greater part of mankin4 from being guilty of incivilities and abusive Ian-* guage towards one another, and f many otlier private injuries, which the laws of this cøuntty do not reach." ' ~ << i.
íc Ido," answered Hambden» Wilson.—^ B «t there are other cleans of preventing these evils. " Hambden remarked by saying— .·** Look at the Roman and the rest of the nations; wiiere duelling,. as it is nmong us, wm unlcnown—what viru¬ lence of language, xhat quarrels, which , frequently ended in murder!" Wilson continued— " Among such Copile, where single comBàts and human daughter was but an »amusement, our 4 refinement might have been' òf service· But we, of this kingdom, 'pïofess a su- -perior principle, which takes away the' necessity of duelling. " > " You mean Christianity," repfied Øambden. H But from the conduct of any countrymen who profess it, I have .'-, ъ ^ w every
ŕ» every reason to suppose that a stronger ' motive than their religion preserves the private peace of society, though you may be an exception. " . " Aty own behaviour," said Wilson, " whether right or wrong, \% out of the , question. Lnow speak of Christianity ν in general ; and the behaviour of one particular sect, who are the strongest - exaæiples of the outward actions of the religion, will suffice to shew that Chris¬ tianity, while it forbids &ll duelling, AviH, of itself, insure civility of speech and of manners, and inoffensive con*· duct I mean the Quakers, who never fighť; but who do not, on that account,, indulge "in intemperate language or behaviour. Every true Christian is in thb respect a Quaker." Mr.
Mr. Hambden attentively revolved in his mind wliat Wilson had said, ; wid then replied—" You have con¬ vinced me that there is a principle more cogent than duelling to preserve, wder and rectitude of con¬ duct in society : but that eager search after weajth, for which the sect you have mentioned is remarkable, is, in my mina, totally contrary to thé Jove of God and love of our neighbour, which all religions profess. " " Sectaries may be right in paiticular tenets, though not in the whole," re¬ plied^ Wilson. " In judging qf the principles qf Christianity, you are not to take the conduct of any man, or set qf møn : search for ihe f p ure spirit qf the religion
..-Wľ.'. religion itself Covetousness is ţnPst forcibly forbidden by the Christian law. Itemember, Sir, the i^eligion itself is still the same, though its professors ^should grossly pen r ert it, or even if the guardian of the realm should be the first to slight and insult it. If the most conspicuous man in this kingdom, the man of all others his country looks up to as an example, was,not only to sig* nalize hiiQself &s a duellist, but add to it the profanation of the Sabbath, by chusing that day to break the laws pf God and man, the disgrace and the in- filmy would fall on his own head: Christianity wOuld be equally pure and free from stain." - v « Since. you would not have m& judge % the name of Christianity, " said Hambden,
Hambden, " how do you reconcile to the virtues of this religion Mİıat Tacitus isfays of~ the primitive Christians? Tacitus, a fair and impartial historian, certainly but little prejudiced in reli¬ gious matters, for he has been ac¬ cused of having none at all, has in his book to this purpose:—" They {the Christians) were so abhorred for their detestable crimes, that Nero accused them of setting fire to Rome, and, in that plea, subjected them to the most exquisite tortures. " Wilson replied—" Yes, Tacitusi has said so. But, at the same time, he has dearly vindicated them from the only crime mentioned, Nero's accusation of firing the city ; which he has declared was, in defiance of all Nero's power and vol. ıı. е craft,
craft, universally believed to be authé- rized by liimself. " This severe accusation of the pri¬ mitive Christians, by so candid an his¬ torian as Tacitus, may indeed, at first view, appear strange to the Christi¬ ans of the present day, and very dif¬ ferent from our ideas ofthe first fathers of the Church. But, luckily, to clear up this subject, Tacitus has mentioned what those detestable crimes were, щате1у— ^ For their hate and enmity of human-kind.' <ζ Now if we recollect the worldly greatness of Rome^-that even among their virtues were ranked pride, ambition, a spirit qf revenge, a love úf ущг, unbounded eMravçgance, and dis- 3 mpatim
sipation— that the wilful and wanton murder of the humati race was in the highest degree commended and ap¬ plauded (ав in their public shews qf gladiators —masters, on the most trifling occasions, killing their servants, &c. &c), and that, in the Lour of danger and difficulty, suicide was ap¬ plauded and encouraged: if we consider, on the other hand, the doctrines of the Christians, meekness, mildness, patience, forgiveness, suffering zvit ho u t revenge, Sec· &c. kc. acontempt of alk/zrøand exterior greatness, an abhorrence of all sangui¬ nary practices, and, lastly, a conscious knowledge of the natural depravity of the human-kind, and a dread of that false courage that can wilfully rush into the presence of its Creator ; if, I say ? б % Sir,
Sir, we consider all these things (and every page in Tacitus will shew us that, whether he had religion or not, he was a true Roman), we shall no longer be surprised, that what he calls " an hate and enmity to human, kind," (i. е. a disregard of the things qf this world, and love only of a future one), should be taken by him in the list of detestable crimes." * When Wilson had spoken, he reached from the shelf a Tacitus, and pointed out to Hambden Arnon the passages he had alluded to. Hambden bowed assent. Wilson continued.—" Tacitus also calls
calls the worship ofthe Jews "profane rites and superstition." But what was the religion of the Romans ? It was a worship paid to Deities altogether fran¬ tic and impure, by sacrifices and follies. ridiculousand vain. It consisted in no purification of heart, nor amendment of morals—the things which men and so¬ cieties require; but Γη sounds, gesticula tions, and the blood of beasts : not in truth and sense, in benevolence and rectitude of mind, but in lying oracles, unaccountable mysteries, and a raving imagination ; sometimes in professed acts of lewdness, often in those of fury and madness ------" " However, Sir," replied Arnon, in¬ terrupting him, ' É you may describe the superstitious fears and follies of the e 3 Greeks*
Greeks, Romans, and other nations we have any account of, vou cannot ex- ceed щ ideas of their unaccountable ignorance ard depravity. I fully agree with you that they were grossly wrong themselves, and that tbey could scarce help mistaking the principles of Christi¬ anity. Neither am I ignorant, that though Trajan at first prosecuted the Christians, yet he desisted upon the re¬ presentation of Pliny, Proconsul of Bithynia, who described them to the Emperor as innocent and simple^ a. harmless, inoffensive kind of people, ". You have induced me to consider the Christian religion in another light, and it shall be my first business to in*^ vestigate their original writings."
fVilsotu
Wilson.*™*" I have every hope that tîıe wonderful spirit of virtue and mo¬ rality which pervades the whole, will convince you that it is the true and only religion. " iC You speak," replied Arnon, " qf tlie spirit of religion. Do you mean by it any other than the literal words of the books called, the Old and New Testament ?" Wilson. — u Yes.. The Old and Nero" Testament have been so frequently transcribed and translated, that many errors, many mistakes, many omissions and additions, must necessarily occur, particularly in the former, which may easily artardan opportunity to tbe seep* tic to cavil at and condemn ; but it is e 4 the
the tenor of the whole a fair judge would consider." Hambden asked—" Do you not call the whole inspired *" Wilson replied— u Certainly not ia the tetter,, as that is in the power of any individual to alter. Many copies of the* sacred writings are different ι both can¬ not be right. But it is from the Å T ew Testament the Christian draws his rule of life and belief; for Christ made that perfect which was before imperfect, &nd gave us more pure, certain, and infalli?· ble laws. These, after his death, many of his followers committed to writing,, with some account of his life and morals. " Hambden..—" I ащ. obliged to you for this remark. I believe a person may bfc
be prejudiced against a thing as well as partial to it. As preparatory to my reading the religious books of the Jews and Christians, " (Wilson smiled at the term), " can you recommend me any small tract that you think may facilitate the understanding them ?" Wilson..—" Here is a book written by a layman:—you may have perhaps heard of it, as he was at one time no Christian— íť Soame Jenyn's View of the Internal Evidence of the Christian Religion."—Till you can furnish your¬ self with books which enter more fully into the subject, tliis, I thin]?, will answer the purpose, and I beg you'll accept of it" The conversation now took a general e $ turn,.
turn. The gentlemen became very much pleased with one auother. Wilson found little difhculty in prevailing witb his new acquaintance to spend the day with him. In a few weeks Wilson was* to be in town, to meet, on business, the otber executors ofthe Duke ; and so earnestly did Hambden Arnon press him to make his house his home, that he promised to do so ; and they parted in the evening with the warmest wishes on both sides» to continue the acquaintance.
CHAR
IU 1 a ...... tU»— LI." ,Γί'
CHAP. VIL JHL WEEK haď passed since the fùnerai of his Grace, in which Marauder had had many closetings with his attorney; but the prospects concerning the title were further removed than ever. * In the meantime he had heard of the fair Emily's departure, of which he affected great indifference, as he had во doubt of recovering her whenever e б he
he might chuse to take the trouble. He therefore penned a* kind note, beg¬ ging her to return to his house; assuring her, whatever was the cause of her taking offence, it was without intention on his part; »and he concluded, as usual, with everlasting vom t s of love and con¬ stancy. It might have been supposed that Marauder would have embraced the opportunity of getting rid of Emily. Gratified in his passion, and cloyed with possession, perhaps he would have done so, Ъы he had reasons most forci¬ ble and persuasiye still to keep in good terms with the lady : of these we shall presently щоге fully speak. Hb
His intended bride he gave up all thoughts of, by no means* desirous of running off with Garında without a certainty of the cash, and well knowing that the prospects of the Dukedom, while it was the cause of the large dowry, was also the bait to the Alderman, whose vast wealth and borough interest were in too tenacious hands—only to be opened by the law. Yet Marauder, ever cautious andartfuV resigned the fair one of his own accord,. with a good graces and with well- affected nonchalance told the Alder¬ man that, since he was disappointed in that consequence he had flattered him¬ self he should have raised Miss Barrow to, he should never think, by prosecu¬ ting his claim, of preventing the pro¬ spects
spects of a more splendid alliance with another. Old Barrow declared to every one that, though Afr. Alarauder had lost the title, he ivas quite a gentleman; and, if he could be sure of his vote, he should have the next vacancy in his Boroughs. While Alarauder was thus preparing the ground, that he might more easily prosecute any schemes of ambition he tiiought woithy his notice, a gentleman He had been intimately acquainted with in Italy, and whose sword had been more than'once draivn with Marauder's for their mutual assistance, came from, Ireland.
This
• This gentleman had a very considera¬ ble property in the county of Ferma¬ nagh, in the province of Ulster, and had spent the latter part of the year 179% and beginning of 1795, in making himself better acquainted M'ith it ; a thing he had ever before neglected, and which the mother of prudence, neces¬ sity, had at length constrained him to. Mr. Fahany was about four-and- thirty, and had been possessed of every worldly endowment at the age of one- ancl-tiventy, to make a man happy. He had had a splendid fortune, a lovely, beautiful wife, fine children, and respectable connections. His person was then favourable ; and in polished manners.
manners, and classical abilities he was inferior to few men. With these ad«»* vantages, natural and acquired, he was restless, discontented, and most misera¬ ble. Totally devoid of every religious and moral principle, his wit and learn¬ ing меге employed to make others like himself. Without attempting the least command over his passions, he wa» cloyed with every vice ; and now, in the prime of manhood, a primitive old age had already seized his frame, weakened by constant debaucheries. His personal affairs were involved and confused by extravagance and continual losses at tlie gaming-table, among the lowest of the human race. His M r ife, injured,, disgusted, and disgraced, fkd from his arms, and by no entreaties could be prevailed
prevailed upon to return. His three children, neglected by their father, were scattered at different schools, far inferior to their abilities or rank in life¿. Such had been, and such was now Fahany^ Personal distress had at length com¬ pelled him to look into his concerns, and he had departed to Ireland for that purpose about the time Emily came to town. Fahany left England for three months, and had been absent above fourteen ; he had not visited his estates before, since his twenty-first year ; and novelty, in any form, bad irresistible charms for him, Whea he arrived in London, and found
found Marauder was at his seat in the country, he lost no time in following him ; and he now eame full of schemes and inventions, to retrieve his shattered. fortune, and found his friend very well disposed to listen to, and partake of them. Marauder had troubled Fahany with a few commissions concerning his own estate in Ireland ; but many other rea¬ sons had he for so hastily calling on, the other· Among the first, an affair which hadí happened at Turin, seemed likely to be revived.. " Geutespiere," said Fahany, " I uuderstaud i
'm
understand from my Italian corre¬ spondent, is by this time in England." " For what purpose?" asked Ma¬ rauder. " Solely to call us out. My friend writes me word that he publicly gave this as his motive." " Indeed! the French Captala is somewhat hot. I shall let him blood with great pleasure. What is become of the credulous Leonora?" ' " The Captain, having proved his honour, reproached her with her 4 infide* lity; and the fair damsel, in despair, has tlirown herself into a Convent." " Foolish girl ! she had charms yet remaining enough for any honest bour¬ geois. Huve you any other intelligence of this Hotspur's arrival ?" " Noue/ 1
" None." " Probably the young hero has thought better ofthe business. " " Very likely." The affair to M'hich this conversation alluded, M^as not very honourable eithei? to Marauder or his friend. It was of the love-kind» Leonora Contelli, a young lady, na¬ tive of Turin, who had been educated in France, had fixed her affections on a French Officer, afterwards in the emi¬ grant service, of the name of Gou* tespiera At the commencement of the Révolu?* tion this lady returned home. Marauder^
Marauder, who tvås intimate witb her tmcle, having tried for some time in -vain to ingratiate himself into her fa*· vour, by the assistance of Fahany adopted the following stratagem* Fahany had been acquainted with "Captain Geutespiere, аж! was just ar- Tİved from the Allied Army, where the Captain was with his Tegiment of Emr- grants. They easiiy, therefore, got pos¬ session of some of the young Officer's writing, and, by the assistance of this, forged a note of hand from Geufespiere to Fahany, payable out of the fortune of Leonora the moment he was married to her. This FaJiany pretended to have won at
at the gaming-table; and a third per¬ son, whoM'as made a d upe in the affair, toid the story to the uncle. He, of course, informed his niece, ivishing her to break oft* the connection* The young lady, doubting the truth of the story, enquired of Marauder, ivho pro¬ fessed a total ignorance of the transac¬ tion : he coukl ouly inform her that his countryman, Fahany, with ivhom he was but iittlc acquainted, ivas devoted to gaming. > By the young lady's desire, he en- qμired into tbe circumstance ; and, at last, was .able to satisfy herself ancl uncle with a sight of the note. The young lady*s temper Marauder had
iiad studied. It was warm, mereenarv, and revengeful. He had laid his schemes accordingly; and/having once remov¬ ed the object whieh obstructed his washes, he, with redoubled ardour, re¬ newed his suit, and in the end was vic¬ torious. •The incredulous fair one was soon forsaken; the gentlemen left Turin, and thought no more of the business, till the better from Fahany's corre¬ spondent revived it. * Greatly was Fahany rejoiced to find ■that his young friend was in the way to relinquish his aristocraticabprejudices— prejudices that could no longer be-of -service to either of them. He unfolded to
to him the plan in agitation? to separate Ireland from this country ; he particu¬ larized the ease with which it might be achieved, and the glory, wealth, and power M'hich must necessarily accrue to the daring leaders of the multitude* Marauder M r as fired at the idea, and ia the M r aniith of his heart cried— A< And ƒ am a Roman Catholic !" Marauder now itiinutery enquired into the situation of Ireland, and the me¬ thods of conducting the enterprize. Mr Fahany confessed to his friend that he was himself a Defender, and had taken the oaths ; but that they had no klea yet Qf acting in an hostile manner, but
but were in hopes that the Parliament would grant certain indulgences to the Roman Catholics (the great body of the commonalty), which would strengthen the means, and insure their success. Alarauder, no longer surprised at his friencľs story, wondered he should leave the country at so critical a time. The other told him he had particular engage¬ ments in London, but that he should return in a few. months. i f »IT "" A thought now struck the quick mind of Alarauder, which he instantly communicated to his friend. ?* I know your business, Fàhany; you want some ready cash." " That I confess is one ofthe motives for my journey. I mean to sell my vol. iï. f estate
estate near Cork. It will fetch ш about ten thousand. " " Sell nothing, my friend, in that country; butdispose of every thing here. ** " That I have done long ago." " With our present plans then, if м*е want money mortgage is the order of the day. Take up in London what money you may want on your Irish estates. The money is easy enough tò be got by givhiga small premium; and, when we have freed St. Patrick's noble country, well m ipeout themortgage, both interest and principal, at the same tinie. " u You are a devilish clever fellow, Marauder. I am obliged to yon for the hint, m hich Fll most assuredly put in practice. My dear fellow, you shall have my vote to be Minister qf Finance the moment we have drove out the English." CHAP.
Ι »ι ι ..... J i ι i ■! m"'*
CHAR VIIL MARAUDER proposed to Fahany to return with him to Ireland, and view the state of affairs there ; but first of all he wished to ¡see Emily and her sister Fanny, whose young beauties wore not easily eradicated from his mind. The chief motive which induced Marauder to wish to be on good terms with Emily, was the remembrance of the lovely Fanny, ' as bw Emily's assistance he F 3 intended
intended to get the other into his power Before Fahany's departure, in the course of conversation, he had told him that he should pay a visit to the prettiest girl in the universe, whom he hoped, some day or other, to get into his power. ζ< I have no doubt you'll succeed, as I never knew you fail in a,n affair of this sort." *' When the time comes," replied Marauder, with an expressive look, " I shall be able also to help my friend. You have no objection, I know, to a transfer." " None in the least; any thing but the
tlie drudgery of making love. "—And he quoted Quin's reply to a certain lady, and a maxim from Petronius, Marauder smiled, but it was a smile tbat applauded himself; and, taking Emily*s picture from his pocket, he shewed it to Fahany. The otber was all in raptures; he could not sufficiently praise the beauty, grace, and symmetry of the fair unknown. " This lovely warbler," continued Marauder, " I left encaged when 1 came from town ; but a little unwillingness to marry her upon the death of the Duke, which was the lure by which I caught f 3 her,
her, has, at present, frightened Her away. Here, keep the picture, and if you find l e truant let me know; arid your reward in the end shall be her fair self, for I only need her as a decoy to, ensnare her fellow-bird. Fahany was so anxious to put in practice the money-scheme (without which he cculd carry on no other), which Marauder had pointed out to him, that he did not wait for his friend's return to town ; but, after a visit of a few clays, took his leave. It may be necessary to remark that their corre¬ spondence had long Ы&& conducted by a cipher. Upon Marauders enquiriaí after Fanny,
ïanny, he found she had left Mr. Vasa- tey's, or be M'ould have made little diffi¬ culty in calling there. He soon discovered she was at Rich¬ mond, and he resolved to call on her in his way to town, and to say her sister Emily had particularly requested him so to do. When he had settled, therefore, a few concerns with his worthy attorney, without loss of time he set forward on his journey. He easily found her residence, and, Without discovering his name, was àheyn into a parlour. # ж 4 Fanny
Fanny came tripping into the room* anxiously hoping the gentleman might be her friend Wilson. So great was her disappointments so strong her disgust, that she was about to leave the room immediatelv, · but Marauder prevented iier by saying—- " Your sister, Miss Bellaire, desired me to call upon you." Fanny stopped. Marauder pretended many anxious enquiries from her sister concerning her health, nd the situa¬ tion she was in, and professed how de¬ sirous they both were to be favoured with her company* Fanny was very cold, very reserved, and desirous to be ,. ■ gone¿
gone ; but could not refuse her tears when she mentioned and enquired for her sister. Marauder quickly perceived that the idea of Emily's not being married hin¬ dered her from accepting his proposals of living with her sister ; he therefore thought it best to make her believe that he was married to Emily the moment they came to town, but that it had been ne¬ cessary to keep it a secret With this intention he said—·" I am sorry, my dear Miss Fanny, to perceive you treat me with such reserve. Am I never to hope that you will consider me as a brother ?"
s S « SirUt
" Sir ! ! !" replied Fanny, not a littfó surprised. " It v/as neither my intention noi* mydear Mrs. Marauder's," continued the would-be kinsman, " to deceive опт friends. But; I thought it then tie-* cessary for your dear sister's sake, that the mivrriage should not transpire till after the death of tlie Duke." " Am I to conclude, then, Miv Marauder, " said Fanny, steadily, ťí that you were married to my sister the mo* ment you arrived in town?" " Certainly : I hope my dear Miss* Fanny never doubted it His Grace, I presume, you have heard is dead. By a successful plot I am for the present deprived of the title and estates. I have no longer any wish to conceal my S ' marriage ;
marrkige ; and the moment I discovered the retrett of my dear sister, Airs. Ala¬ rauder was wretched till f called on yon, to press you to take up your abode with us : and indeed I never exec uted a commission with more pleasure in my life." " I am rather surprised my sister* did not accompany you.'* " For that," replied Air. Alarauder, " I am solely to blame. "—(A falsehood once invented, requires many a one to support it, but in this he ivas by no means at a loss.)—" I flatter myself, before we return, your dear sister will have presented me with the blessed. name of a father. You. ivilhiot, I hope, disappoint her in refusing to accompany » 6- me¿-
me. Your-presence, at this crisis, M'ill be most soothing and obliging*" « When Marauder first called on Fanny, he had no intention of carrying her off with him. The most he expected from his visit was, that she would be prepared to accompany himself and Emily at another time, and lie had no doubt of exerting his usual influence over Emily to make her act and say just what he pleased. He cpnld easily, he was as* sured, make her believe, that whatever he had sakl to Fanny, was on her account ; and ţie had specious pretences not only to delay their marriage, but to make Emily join in the deceit on Fanny that they were already united, and to - countenance
countenance whatever else he might think it necessary to advance. Butthe questkmsof Fanny had carried things.farther than he at first intended ; and noM r , by a happy invention, ^one of those lucky hits he prided himself upon), he could not fail getting her im¬ mediately into his power : and so highly was the beautiful girl improved within the last fifteen months, fiom the daily conversation of women of sense and fashion, that Marauder lost the child in the more mature graces of person and stature, and was resolved to profit by bis present success, and make sure of his, lovely prize. Tó the last wish of her pretended brother,
INFERNAL ÜVIXOTE: Brother, Fanny replied by asking—How far her sister*s residence was from M'here they .Avere ? Marauder луаэ rather at a loss to answer, for he purposed carrying Fanny at least fifty miles, to a lone house he had on the Berkshire Downs, of 4vlrieh more will be sakl hereafter ; and he thought if he mentioned so far, it might preventhcr accompanying him ;. hé therefore said—" No great dis¬ tance. " On Fanny's repeating the question, he replied—" My house near London is about twenty miles from town. " " Well, I will certainly accompany you." Marauder^
Marauder, with his utmost endea¬ vours, could not wholly conceal bis joy, but rung the bell for his carriage* to draw up directly. " Yet," continued Fanny, "it isl·· necessary, Sir,. I should send to Air.. Townsend befbre I leave this house.- My guardian lives ivithin a few doors." Marauder was too anxious to admit rny delay. " Certainly, my dear Miss Fanny,;. but as the business is rather urgent, if you leave a note, I think it will be as Wdl as speaking to youF worthy guar¬ dian. Aiy servanishail take it directly, and
and he will soon overtake the car¬ riage." Nothing could suit Marauder better; his servant understood each look of his master. The note, he knew, would never reach Mr. ToMnsend,. and, as he - had before cautioned bis servant not to discover who he was, he now concluded he should be able to carry off Fanny, and no one be acquainted M ? ith whom she departed* But Fanny's reply checked these hopes. "No, Sir, it will not take up much time, and it is necessary I should speak to my guardian, as ме11 as the lady who has been so obliging as to admit me one, of her family here." Marauder*
Marauder, I have said, had a lone house most peculiarly situated on the Berkshire Downs* This house was called uninhabited, and was a late purchase of Ma¬ rauder's, merely for the situation.. To this he had resolved to take Fanny, the moment he had supposed her so completely in his power. The mention of Mr. Townsend, whose steadiness of character he had heard of] - changed his thoughts ; and, reverting to his original intentions, that another time would be more favourable for his plan, be considered in his mind how to act; while Fanny was sending a ser¬ vant»
vant, by whom she requested to speak to Mr. Townsend. Revolving over his conduct, Ma¬ rauder perceived that he had been mueh too anxious; and fearful of .raising sus¬ picions in her breast, which indeed M*as- not entirely free from them, and some¬ what alarmed at meeting with, and answering the questions· of, Mr. Town- * send, he said—" On second thoughts* my dear «kter, I think it will be better for you not to hurry yourself in thi business ; for though, when I left my Emily tlie other day, she was so desirous that I should bring you back with me, yet, considering the distance of thirty miles or more ------" " Thirty miles, Mr. Marauder, doe&
does my sister live ib>><\ hence, and the otlier day did you leave her? I understood you said it was but eight or ten from here, and twenty from town, and that you were just arrived from the place. " The small scat 1 have a little be¬ yond Epping is full twenty miles the other side of London ; and I thought I had mentioned to you, Miss Fanny, the very urgent business which com¬ pelled me to leave your sister at so cri¬ tical a time. " « The death ofthe Duke of Sibbury you mentioned, Sir, and I had heard of it before ; but I supposed you were now come from my sister." Marauder most readily adapted'a story to
to bis purpose, ancl concluded with telling Fanny tbat he ivould fly post haste to his dear wife, and send her ant express to-morrow how Emily was. Fanny consented. Marauder took his leave before Mr. Townsend came, rejoicing at the suc¬ cess of his. conduct, and certain of Fanny as soon as his schemes were ripe. " Sweet Fanny !" cried he to him¬ self, the moment the chariot drove off, " you shall be mine. In defiance of these bewitcbbig eyes, ivhich pierce my very soul, ГИ soon have the little Gipsy in
în my power. Then the pouting lip and scornful brow shall soften to the voice of love, then——" Marauder, for some miles, was lost in these pleasing fancies; and, recollecting himself, he revolved the means of reali¬ zing his hopes. To find Emily, and make her unknowingly an assistant in his mtentions, was his iirst resolution ; and by the time he arrived in town, h^ had thoroughly arranged the affair to his ом n satisfaction. Without loss of time he drove to his town-house ; (is it necessary to meiir tion that the one twenty miles farther, beyond Epping,Mas butan ideal onc?)
one r) and quickly became acquainted ivith Emily's pàJ/ess. He prepared directly to follow her; ^and, not doubting in the remotest man¬ ner his success, he, at the same instant, dictated a letter to Fanny. In this he saicl that his beloved Emily was perfectly safe and out of danger, though he had to lament his disappoint¬ ment of a son and heir ; that in a day or two, if Mrs. Alarauder ivas sufficiently recovered, they would together call for their dear sister, and hoped she would be prepared to take up her abode M r ith them. He mentioned abo that Mrs. Alarauder was so earnestly wishing to sec her, tbat in case bis beloved wife was not
3iot able to undertake the journey, he should himself come and conduct her to liis house. The letter was written in the language of the most affectionate of husbands and brothers, and was dis*· ¿patched by a special messenger. With eagerness he hastened to Emily's lodgings. So resolved was he iu this point of getting Fanny into his clutches, »that it lulled for a time his darling thoughts of ambition. Full, of the suc¬ cessful projects before him, he arrived at Islington. Emily had left her lodgings, and the »people of the house coukl give him no intelligence of her present abode. He searched for tlie people who were acquainted
acqti lintcd with her footman and coach¬ man; these servants he found ivere dis¬ charged. The relations of her maid had not iicard from her for some time. This someivhat checked his intendeel plan ; but be never gave up a point, and com¬ menced a most diligent search to find her retreat Perceiving his labours, at the end of the second clay, to he employed to no purpose, he M'as resolved to return to Fanny, and, in defiance of the conse¬ quences, to embrace the opportunity M'hich bis former story offered, to gain .possession of her person. Though bold and daring M'as Ala¬ rauder, yet he m as crafty and most vigilant
vigilant. His grand scheme, he per-. ceived, was arrived at its climax before the period he intended ; but he was de¬ termined not to lose the auspicious rao- . ment which Fortune had presented him, even if he should be compelled in the end to leave his countrv. A restless and enterprising mind, a fierce and undaunted spirit were the outlines of Marauder's character; youth spurred him on, and success had buoyed him up. Few Avere the scenes of life he had not experienced, and none that his vanity did not think him equal to. - vol. ii. о He
He looked on no man as his superior, and rarely beheld any one as his equal ; yet experience -and a knowledge of mankind put a gloss upon him, by which he shewed a specious outside im¬ penetrable to almost every gaze.
CHAP.
1
явявввшжаешяяняш CHAP. IX. ! Τ* Ο get Fanny Bellaire safe into his hands was,'at present, the first object to Marauder ; and of this he did not doubt. Willing to ensure success, he, for that purpose, forged a letter, as from Emily, pressing Fanny most earnestly to ac¬ company her husband ; aud, as he had g 2 many
many letters of Emily*s by him, he liad not the smallest fear of detection. Fanny, in the meantime, had been favoured with the company of another visitor. A few hours after Marauder had left her, a stranger called at the house, and enquiring if Miss Fanny Bellaire lived there, desired to see her alone. When Fanny came into the room, she perceived a lady, with a long thick veil over her face, dressed in deep mourning. The lady arose at her entrance» tbteW up the veil, and the features òf theonce beautiful Emily .appeared to her view. Tanny
Emily sbe believed at tbcţjt iţQţţieiit pp ţhe bed of sickness, рег!щр of çleath > ад for Щ i|sţa#t Híishe4 Рц fier аДадпеа шШ, ţ|i|bttl^ figure, noy böípre her, iv$s #e ^şp^şted spirit p^f her siste?, Th^ rpses had fled the cheeks, ahd disappointment and lemorse ;; : ' : '^^; ;< Щр<;;^^п^^ #^ oJdîl^raţ^ ·^ 4 * Does my Еадау wisb to forget ^çr ,#%tşr?" said Emily in a iaint voice, • ' ■■ \' ' '■ '■ ' ' ' " Fanny could make no answer, but threw^bo'şflf Into J^er arm% an4 sobbed g S When
.When the sisters had a little recover^ ed from the agitation their first meeting had occasioned, Fanny, whose young mind was filled with doubts and alarms, expressed her surprise àt seeing her, ànd faintly mentioned that her husband, Air. Marauder, had not long been gone, % Emily trembled, and, with downcast f eyes, endeavoured with firmness to say, what her heart felt#as true, that she rejoiced he was not her husband.—« f "But, dear Fanny, ivhat brings him here? Will he return ? If you ever loved me, do not say you have seen me. Let me be gone directly, and—never see you more." " Dearest sister Emily,", replied Fanny, " do not bé alarmed. You are safe
safe from every intruder bere. No one knows you ; those friends of mine,, you may think proper to trust, you may rely on. I wijl immediately give orders that ч Mr. Marauder shall not be admitted -f beyond the parlour below. Mrs. Mountford, .ivho lives in this house, is' the most kind and affectionate of wo¬ men. Our guardian, Mr. Townsend, ¿Hves near* and has not-been gone from the bouse halfan hour. I will send for him again ; you may ' rely on his goodness." Fanny entered into the particulars of Mr. Marauder's calling on her, and quickly found from Emily that the whole he had recounted to her was a falsity. They mutually testified their m\ g 4 surprise
eurpriie to each other, for what purpose he could think of calling on Fanny, and wishing to take her away with him. Fanny herself attributed it to a wish to Ъе reconciled to Emiiy by her interces¬ sion ; but- her sister, who knew man¬ kind better, without mentioning her suspicions, was much nearer the mark· 1 pass over their conversation with Mr. Townsend, who soon came to them, and his" kind behaviour to the truiy penitent Emily ; as also the prudent and friendly conduct ofthe worthy Mrs, Mountford, This lady and their guar¬ dian were the only persons to whom, Emily was discovered, " m it was thought needless as well as improper to disclose her to the Miss Berricks. " Emily
.QÜÏXOÏfi. Emily declared to Mr. Townsend and her sister that.no consideration what¬ ever should induce her to marry Ma¬ rauder. She further informed them that her mind was fixed, as soon as her affairs were arranged with her guardian* to retire alone to a distant part of the kingdom, where die might live retired, unknowing and unknown. They endeavoured to-prevail on her to depart from her intentions, but ste replied^—" No, my dear sister, my own vanity and folly have deservedly brought their punishment along with them ; „and I am resolved to sufíer alone. I very well know how great the disgrace 'Would be to all my acquaintance, were I to live among you, I have о 5 neither
neither the wish nojr the will. I rejoice to find my dear sister in an agreeable and worthy ßurily, and I hope occa¬ sionally to hear of her happiness, as my friends assuredly in return xshail hear from tóe." Unding Emily had made up her mind, and that all their arguments and entreaties to the contrary were of no avail, Mr. ToMjisend and Fanny were necessitated to acqui¬ esce in her determination. Though Emily's new philosophy had proved a treacherous friend in the hour of need, yet it was not щ easy thing to explode it entirely from her mind; among other traces a kind of positiveness re¬ mained, which she vainly mistook for a firm and resigned spirit. In
In the human soul, when a reform — * tion takes place, we bravely tear jp our hated vices by the roots ; yerthc fibres, spreading far and deep, will mako frequent attempts to spring forth, and, by degrees will succeed, unless we complete the noble work by extermina- . ting them as fast as they make their ap¬ proaches. " No man," says the old proverb, " can all at once be a villain ;" neither is any man in an instant all virtue and - goodness. The greatest villain ou the face of thè earth has his moments of compunction, and what is often taken for hypocrisy, is often temporary repent- . ance; but it is a regular course of о б good
good actions that purifies the soul, and virtue, as it was yesterday, must be the same to-day, and for ever ;—temptation must be overcome, evil must be avoided, agaňi and again, ere a man can lay his hand on his heart, and say—" I have kept the commandments pf my God,"
CHAP.
езааннавя
i^ilAJr. л.
MILY agreed to remain a few weeks with ber «ister, ät the earnest entreaty of the ladies and her guardian ; while she prepared herself a residence to her taste, arrrøged her establishment, cor¬ respondence, and so forth. 4 The next day the messenger came from Marauder, whom they dismissed irvithout any answer. ' ' "rt.
It was about the hourof noon on the v third day, that Marauder himself, high in hopes, came to fetch Fanny away. Conscious that he was now known to her guardian and the family she lived with, and determined in his intention, he put a bold face on the matter. lie drove up to the door in Ms owa chariot and four, with two servants on horseback,- and, alighting, was shewn into a parlour. Upon asking for Miss Fanny BeUaire, and giving his name to a servant who required it, he was informed that Miss Fanny had ordered herself to be denieel to him, and that she had changed her mind. Магаис1сГ||
Marauder, no ways daunted, butsup- posingitsome prudent whim of her guar¬ dian's, which he doubted not the forged Jetter from Emily would dissipate, smiled at the message as conscious, of his success, ançl desired tire servant to deliver her the letter. The sisters read—
" My dearest, beloved Fanny/ " The affectionate kindness of my dear husband, who eould not be pre- vailed on to leave me, prevented his coming for you before. The doctors will not permit ще to travel so far this week ; but so anxious am I to see my dear
dear sister, that I have insisted on Ma¬ rauder s coming for you to-day, and I will meet you this evenmg at my town* house, where,, at a gentle rate, and in a very easy carriage, I shall arrive to re¬ ceive ycu. I have written this scraivl to assure my dear Fanny how unhappy I shall be rill I once more press her in * the arms Of " Her loving and affectionate sister, " EMILV MARAUDER."
A sensation c^ norror struck them both as they read the letter. The de¬ pravity of the writer ivas so apparent, they felt alarmed that he bad been admitted into the parlour below, though . the
the possibility of his carrying off Fanny by violence was sufficiently guarded agamst. ' ' Fanny, somewhat recovered from her alarm, with a trembUng hand wrote— i '·' Sir, " My'sister has been here. " FANNY BELLÁIRA
Marauder, with iudMTetence, opened the note, as he supposed it to be some trifling excuse for delaying him. He glanced hiseyes over it, and started from his seat. Not otherwise did the Arch-fiend
Arch-fiend start up when the celestial spear of Ithuriel touched him. So completely was MaraudèY daunted, that, without knowing what he did, he obeyed the motion of the servant, who held the door open for him, walked im- , mediately out of the house, and leaped into his chariot. In a moment recovering himself, he would have returned. The servant had shut to the door. A dieadful oath burst from his lips, and he ordered his servants to drive to the first inn. ' From hence, after writing a dozen notes
notes to Fanny, none of which even satisfied himself, hesent the following.
" My dearest Miss Fanny, " Believe me, from'the very best of motives, have I been tempted to use deceit. Without it I feared you would never have been prevailed upon to assist me in tlie search after your sister, and to intercede for my pardon. May I beg youll informine where my Emily is? and you shall soon be convinced of my sincerity, my constancy^ and my gra¬ titude. * , * - " Evcýr your's, most faithfully - and affectionately, " J, MARAUDER."
Fanny,
- Fanny, in a feM' words, replied that her sister was concealed from his search, and had resolved never to see him again. Marauder fn$de repeated trţşls to get an interview wjtøfa F^npyi h*§ţ, finding * it in yain, he for the present rclinqiiishetl his intentions, firiply resolved, the mo¬ ment it was convenient to his other planst to carry her c$f by force* 4 ŕ * As soon as Marauder's anger at bia disappointment was in some measure subsided, and his passions cooled by re¬ flection, he began to think it wm better for him that he had not at 'that time succeeded. An amour, which was likely to afford him «ome trouble, would greatly interfere with his ambitious plans ;
л pians ; and he had many necessary steps to take before he cotdd aťrive at that eminence, whieh his daring prospects aimed at* The youth of Fanny was another ar¬ gument to make him wait with more patience for the possession of those beauties, which* ripening every day, be** came more worthy his notice. At the time he first intended calling on Fanny, we have seen that he had not the most distant idea of getting her*inte his power. He went, as it were, to review a beautiful object, which, at a future day, he intended to be master of· But the opening beauties of the lovely girl, and tfce M^derful iaiprovements in
in her person since he had last seen her, had suddenly raised his passions ; and the opportunity which , offered, he could not resist, the temptation he could not withstand. Now again he coolly reviewed his situation, his ambitious hopes and pro¬ jects ; and his soul was fired with flashes of aggrandizement, which con¬ sumed the lighter sparks of love. — * Love ! So Marauder called it ; but the touchstone of truth proves it to be a passion created by the powers, of dark¬ ness, not of light As there are few virtues for which asgeneral rule cannot be given to try them by, so true love may easily be distinguished
distinguished from every spurious kind, by observing whether the passion, whicii assumes its name, benefits the object beloved or not ; for Love } whatever fornì he may appear in, øoer seeks the good of the beloved* And this is the grand touchstone, more infallible than- all the rules of ancient and modern writers on the art of love. Not Anacreon, at the head of the old Grecians, nor Ovid of the Romans ; not Petrarch, with the whole tribe of ihe Italians, French, and Spaniards ; nor, among others at home, the venerable Chaucer, the incompara¬ ble Spencer, and well-known Cowley and Waller, not forgetting Dr. Darwin, can
. can produce a more clear and simple rule to define true love. Plato says there are two Cupids, as different aaday and night—one endow* ed with every virtue, the other with every vice; the one rules and softens the passions of the soul, the other is a mean and grovelling slave to them ; the one is mild, pure, and constant to its object~-the other, headstrong and vio¬ lent, varies>vith every wind. Marauder knew nothing of the former of these, yet Marauder swore he was in love ; the God of his idolatry, tlien, was tliat other Cupid, offspring of Hell. Perhaps, 5
INFERNAL Perhaps, then, that which conduced more than even ambition itself to allay, for a time, the passion the lovely Fanny had kindled in the breast of Marauder, was another object—an object of glory us well as desire· Lady Cassei, the gay wife of Sir Thomas—a Baronet, of every bloody hand the most fashion-formed in the kingdom—for tbe first winter now sparkled in the meridian of St. James's. Sir Thomas's mistresses, horses, and carriages had long been the rage. When mch a man sacrificed all for one woman, what must his wife be? In short, so well pleased was the vol. я. и Baronet
*
Baronet Avith his lot, that it was a diffi¬ cult point to say M'hich was most gra- ' tified, himself or the lady, in hearing · / .the daily panegyrics, whieh, from the Court to the Playhouse, re-echoed in praise of his choice. The beaux soon settled Lady Casseľs character—" Ever tempting, never -attainable;"—not not so Marauder; he allowed tbe first, and determined to try the second. The lady's failings (alas ! even beau¬ ties have them !) he first made himself master of The fave of jame was the most conspicuous :—" If she loves the passion itself," said he, "shell soon love the possessor. " , Marauder
Marauder quickly made himself of notice in Lady Casseľs eyes ; her Abigail was bis own ; the morning paper, whieh graced her toilet, told of hisrenow r n—now thefriend ofa Prince— now the attendant of a Duchess :—so that when Marauder opened his attack on the citadel, his good name had already made a wonderful interest in the gar¬ rison. Yet not in the manner of a conqueror did he assail tlie fair lady, but as a captive. The game he had already so success¬ fully played with Emily, he again be¬ gan with a like prospect of success ; h â though
though his manner of conducting it was somewhat different. Admiration and respect threw the object of adoration off her guard ; and. the first assault carried the place. A private masquerade favoured his views, and in the habit of a slave he triumphed over the glories of a Queen of the East. Too proud was Marauder of his suc¬ cess to eoneeal it ; every eye but the Baroneťs saw it, every ear but his heard it, every tongue but his told it. In this case, the dashing Sir Thomas wil¬ fully lost the use of his sens, s ; nor did he think proper to recover them, till his Lady
Lady some time afterwards eloped with a young Irishman, wbo was aboat to join his legiment in that kingdom. In the foregoing summer at Brighton, Marauders fust acquaintance had com¬ menced with Lady Cansel ; nor did he omit any opportunity of offering up in¬ cense at the shrine of her vanity. He soon perceived tbat the flowery wreaths, whieh entwined tlie niarriage knot, were too green and flourishing to be easily unloosed ; he thereibre put not forth his strength in vain, but prepared himself for a more convenient season. The winter seemed more propitious to his bopes ; till the death of the Duke for some time deferred, and the beauties of n 3 Fanny
Fanny almost made him forget, his purpose. Cheeked in the onc attempt, he re* ncwed the other with redoubled vigour ; and success made hiin for a while forget that he had ever met with disap¬ pointment.
CHAP.
m
CHAP. XL Jilt the commencement of this amour of Marauder's, VV ilson arrived in town. He called on Fanny in the way, but not a word transpired concerning Ala¬ rauder ; neither did he see Emily. Instead ofthat innocent vivacity with ivhich it had been usual for Fanny to arcost h r frien ', he pe; ceived a re¬ straint, vhch less, ned the pleasure he η 4 took
took in observing her mental and per¬ sonal improvements. A somewhat similar observation as to his address atul maimer, Fanny could not fail to notice, tliough far from attributing it to the riidit motive. In the noon of the day Wilson came to Richmond; he walked with Mrs. Mount- ford, Mr. Townsend, and Fanny upon the hill. They passed an elegant young man, well dressed, of an open counte¬ nance, and of a pleasing person ; but with a wildness in his look, that in¬ terested, while it could not fail to strike, an attentive observer. On their return they observed him nearly on the same spot noticing the company.
company. Observing Fanny attentively, he elasped his hands together, and spoke in a mild, though expressive manner, loud enough to be heard by the com¬ pany passing—" Amid the follies and depravity of my countrywomen, your appearance, young lady, revives the philanthropic principle ivithin me, and flatters me that virtue is still an inha¬ bitant of our isle. When I perceive tlie most beautiful of Nature's ivorks has tlie sense to discriminate------" Fanny and the restii:;! stopped at bis first address, but blushing deeply, she drew v her veii over her face, and they continued their walk ; though they plainly heard the stranger asking her pardon for Iris abruptness. h 5. ''- The
The day was remarkably fine, and many well-dressed people were taking tbe same walk. Wilson, struck with the eccentricity of his character, and interested with his appearance, by the desire of the ladies, left them under Mr. Townsend's protection, and joined a group who had collected round the stranger, who, as Wilson came up,, was speaking to this effect :-— " Lettheyears 1794 and 1795 for ever declare to what licentious caprices and disgraceful examples women may be subject. When the fashion of the day, (from France the deadly poison came), induced females of all ranks, condi¬ tions, and ages to seem to be with child—wben different sized bundles, called
^ called pads, were publicly exposed, and publicly sold to suit tbe capricious or wanton whims ofthe dissipated purcha¬ ser, and offered to her notice by a con¬ temptible man-milliner—then did the young girl, yet in the bud, cheapen, even by her mother's side, that article which was to feign her in a condition the profligate female woukl attempt to conceal ; then did the ancient mother, in defiance of every good principle, vir¬ tue, morality, piety, not only counte¬ nances but join herself in the sarne^ hobbling with her sham Burden ! In vain did the father, husband, brother, or friend exclaim f Supreme fashion eould overturn in the female mind every barrier of chaste love, decency, and sense, and at once rend the veil; already и 6 too
too thin, between modesty and depra¬ vity. Behold, then,, thcself-degrading female, the mother, the daughter, the ancient unmarried aunt, or still more ancient grandmother, bearing their in¬ famous burdens ! ! ! the size of which indicated the seeming number of months the whim of the bearer chose. See, the sash ! ah* bow unlike the zone of Venus I tightly braced elose beneath the shoulders, supporting where the chaste delicate fair needs no support Observe the ivalk, the gait the air ! and, lastly, mind the disgusting, though studied, seat ! then candidly say is not the common prostitute the more decent of the two, and less, danger to be appre¬ hended from her to tbe morals of the rising generation, than the modish fair? " Blessed !
£ * Blessed \ ' doubly blessed ! the chaste maid, ivho bravely spurns the bascex- ample—who, in defiance of the taste of Princes, the fashion of Nobility, know& her ом'п worth, preserves her good sense 1 , aud keeps herself mi con tannina ted by actions so scandalous, depraved, de¬ basing* infamous !!!!!!" The ladies, who at the beginning of his speech surrounded him in no small number, had, one by one, gradually taken themselves away ; a feM r tight- laced females аюпе remained, ivho seemed wonderfully pleased ivith the last compliment, * which they took to themselves. Tbe stranger, turning to¬ ivards Wilson, whom he observed par¬ ticularly noticing him, in a lower tone 3 continued
continued—" How, in a future day, will the almost incredulous philosopher account for this shameful fashion? He- will probably call it, and I believe with truth, a bold, canning, and successful invention of the defomıed and usriv to make the more beautiful·, and; in this evidently, the more foolish part of the- female race like themselves." Wilson could not fail giving a slight' assent with his head ; and the stranger? taking the arm of a gentleman, who came upat the latter part of his speech, anil who attempted in vain to move him before, walked coolly away as ifnot.ânğ at all had happened The spectators^ of course, with one accord*
aecord, conduded him to be mad ; but Wilson could not help owning that,, like Hamleťs, there was method in it : ** For what he fpoke, tho* it Jack'd form a little, ** Was not like madness." Wilson now saw the meaning of ¡his address to Fanny, whose dress, though perfectly easy and genteel, was, in the strictest sense of the word, decent ; be endeavoured to discover who the vouth was, and his motives for thus haranguing in public, but without success; As Wilson had no excuse* for staying at Richmond, he took leave of Fanny the next day, yet promised to call again on his return from town. This
This was tbe first time Wilson ever was in London ; and he drove imme¬ diately, according to his promise, to the house of bis new acquaintance, Hambden Arnon, ivhose establishment m as separate from bis father. Ilambden reeeived bis visiter with the utmost satisfaction and pleasure; and as he hlmok him cordially by the hand, he said—>" My dear "Sir, I am most happy to see you. The book you мтге so obliging as to giverne, induces memore deeply to study a subject I am con¬ scious I have too much neglected, aiul which I feel myself higbly interested, in." In his society, Wilson met his father aud
and Rattle, with many 7 other gentlemen, most of whom were of the same princi¬ ples as Mr. Arnon the elder.. It may be necessary to mention that one of the reasons wby Mr. Arnon and his son had separate establishments was, Mr. Arnon had a female friend, who lived with him, and whose temper and manners were very uncongenial to Hambden, tliough the lady was tardy visible to any of his acquaintance*
CHAP.
tüJJJU-JL-.., ' . I ľ l Я" , ' „, İH'
CHAP. XIL VW ILSON one day met at Mr. · Arnon 's house some of the modern phi¬ losophers. This, was the first time he had been in company with a party of this kind ; and he was as much enter¬ tained with the violent inconsistencies they advanced for the doctrines of wis¬ dom, as he was disgusted with their self-conceit and affectation of know¬ ledge. Mr.
Air. hermaph, a person well known in the schismatic world, made a violent invective against Bishops, Deans, &c. kc. kc. ridiculing, with great success, as he supposed, an established form of worship., Rattle, ivhom in argument difficulties seldom daunted, replied-— " And pray, Sir, amid the plenitude of your arguments, what may be your objection to the Liturgy of the Church of England ?" " Because, Sir, it is a Liturgy, a re¬ gular form of prayer. The service of tbe Deity is at the best but a lip-service-— the heart is uninterested." " Your arguments, " replied Rattle, " are trite, and purely methodistical, ancl that of the most fanatical kind. The more regular Methodists, the fol¬ lowers
lowers of Wesley, use tbe prayers ofthe Church. You suppose, then, Sir, that tlie preacher shoukl be inspired, and M'ait fór the operation of the Spirit ?" " Ridiculous!" replied Mr. Her- maph. " You know, Mi\ Rattle,- s-;ch foolish suppositions are none of mine." ** What, then, do you think that ex¬ tempore harangues are more pure and perfect than a regular composition, re¬ vised, corrected, and generally ap¬ proved ?" iĹ I say it has more to do with the heart." u If it has, it must be only with tbe heart of the person who prays. The rest ofthe congregation, who are ignorant of M'hat is to be uttered, wbo perhaps have sentiments totally different from those he
he feels, cannot be said tobe interested, or mentally affected." ".Well, well," sakl Mr. Hermaph, <( I am no advocate for praying of any kind." . ťí Yet, Sir," said Wilson, taking up the argument, "you condemned the Chureh of England because it ivas a regular form. This, I think, Alı, Rattle has very ably defendetl ; for ivhen a pra\ er is repeated to the ears of the people, who already know ivhat is to be uttered, their thoughts are pre¬ pared, their minds are ready, they join ' in the same ideas ; and, as tbe language is already chosen and correct, no gross expressions, no fulsome terms, no dis¬ gusting familiarity of words, no need¬ less repetitions damp that ardour the heart
heart feels. Reason approves what the tongue speaks ; and what you and the Methodists call lip-service, is the service of virtue matured by reflection, in op¬ position to the sanguine rhapsodies of an heated enthusiasm, which, like watery bubhles, will not bear the touch of thought" " What would yon say,'* exclaimed another gentleman of tbe name of Subtile, <4 of an orator in the House of Commons, who learned his speech by heart befbre he went to the Iiouse ?" '' A wonderful deal better," exclaim¬ ed Rattle hastily, " than making an oration to please the gallery. The gal¬ lery ofthe House of Commons is one of the chief means of corrupting the na¬ tion ; our legislators are orators ; fine words
words supply the place of good sense ; the grand qualification is, that of an actor to entertain the gallery, and sup» ply the newsmonger; men of learning and knowledge are abashed and ridi¬ culed, every chattering fool, impudent coxcomb—-" *' Stop, stop, my good friend," said the younger Arnon, interrupting bim, <c you are flying from the subject ; \ve shall hear you talk treason next" t( This gentleman," said Wilson, alluding to Rattle, to whom he had been first introduced that day, " is rather hasty; but I bdieve not many of the declamations we lune, woukl be the worse for a few hours' calm reflection in the closet. But Mr. Subtile's remark of comparing the orations of the Iiouse of Commons
INFERNAL QUIXOTE. Commons to the prayers of the Church, has no analogy to the subject, M'hich Mas a form of prayer, and not a speech. 5 ' " Since you won't allow," replied Mr. Subtile, " my arguments concern¬ ing prayer, but, as ^ili are equally iute* rested, require every one to know what is about to be uttered, Mİıat M'ill you say concerning the custom of the Church of England in reading a dull, unmeaning, м ritten discourse by луау of sermon r ,T " That a written discourse," replied Wiison, e< is more duller unmeaning than an extempore one, even you, Sir, I believe will not afiirm. I shall not re¬ peat to you tlie same arguments whieh have been mentioned for tbe prayers ; but only say that, in my opinion, oratory
Oratory in the pulpit ought to yield to plain reading." ^ " You will make a schoolboy our reader and instructor next," said the elder Arnon. " No. I only mean tbat the pas- «ions ough t not to be roused or affected— that argument svithout the glow of lan¬ guage—that common sense and natural expression should be pronounced with¬ out the aid of the actor—that the peo¬ ple should be^pcrmitted to judge from the sense of what they hear, and not have their passions inflamed by well- turned periods, affecting language, soothing or inflaming terms. If these auxiliary helps are brought in to aid the sense, they are equally as improper whether they are written down, or vol. π. ι uttered
uttered exjtempore. In short, gentle* men, plain and simple doctrine, unin¬ fluenced by passion, whether affected or not, is the most likely way to arrive at the truth." Said Mr. Subtile— <f Yo^ think, Sir, by a regular service tbe people are inte¬ rested. How are they interested in the lessons of the day ?" Wilson replied.— u Certain portions of the holy Scriptures being regularly read over in the service of the Church, at the same time they remind the learned Christian of what he has before read, instruct the uninformed, and »give those, who cannot read, an opportunity of '■ЧГ* hearing the sacred Scriptures. Were the parts to be read left to the discre¬ tion of the Minister, he would of course read
read those only he himself chiefly ap¬ proved of, or preferred ; he ivould most probably be repeating the same ; and if the Minister of the place changes, the portion of Scripture might not : but by the present regular custom, there is a 'continual variety, 4 and each in its turn is noticed and read. " " Right or wrong, Sir," said Air. Hermaph, ' ' it is a farce I shall not very soon join in. But I am sorry, Sir, you also should rank our opinions with those of the mad-headed enthusiasts of the day." " Nay, nay, Sir," replied Rattle warmly, " I defy any rational man to see very little difference betM^een you." " Infidelity/' replied the enlightened gentleman, " is as far removed from i2 enthusiasm
enthusiasm as the east is from the west." " True," said Rattle, "yet the tra¬ vellers, who take the opposite paths, w ill meet together at last. " " Sir, we are the head of the human species ; enthusiasm js the tail grovel¬ ling in the mire," spoke Mr. Subtile warmly. " Ah !" said Rattle, " I thank you for the thought The serpent is no bad emblefn of Infidelity and Enthusiasm. Which is the head, and which the tail, I leave to others to determine—you are generally depictured together ; but, upon my honour, I think you the tail." ( ζ We despise the bigotted wretches, " exclaimed Mr. Subtile; " not fire and water are more opposite. " " Raving
" Raving and melancholy madness," replied Rattle, laughing at the passion in which he had put men who openly professed themselves philosophers, " arc * "both confined in Bedlam." " On these subjects," said Air. Ar- noq, " you know, Rattle, I have long given up the Herculean task of opening your eyes ; you are so violent, fanci¬ ful, and headstrong, 'tis in vain to dis- ■ v pute with you." " Now, gentlemen," continued Rat¬ tle, determined not to give up his point, " in the midst of all my fancies, let me see if I cannot make the comparison good. What says the Alethodist? "The blacker the sinner, thebrighter the saint !" The modern Philosopher will ι 3 tell
tell you " The greater the villain, the better the citizen·" u To this purpose your friend God¬ win argues,— #< It may be questioned whether an honest lawyer is not a more* pernicious member of society than the dishonest lawyer/ " Again the Methodist says—* The more wicked and abandoned you have been, the more likely you areto be con¬ vinced of sin.'—So the Philosopher*-* ' The more ignorant and depraved you are, the less likely you are to be preju¬ diced by the laws of morality and reli¬ gion, and the more likely to become an independent freethinker and actor/
Witness
A* Witness the leaders in France* Thus Godwin, again abusing all national edu¬ cation, from the University down to the »4, poor Sunday Schools, says— # " All this is directly contrary to the true interest of $ the mind ; all this must be unlearned, before we can begin to be wise." u You strain the point to make your
%
argument içöod," said Mr. Arnon. " Yet I quote your scribe, Godwin, verbal ¡fn," replied he, "and I have other proofs." t " The author of the Spiritual Quixote, speaking of the religious enthusiasm.,
enthusiasm, ere the irreligious was yet matured, said— ť Enthusiasm is deaf to the calls of nature—nay esteems it me¬ ritorious to trample upon all the relative duties of life.' t( Did not the wretches in Frances boast the murders of fathers, brothers, sons, &c. &c. ? Does not Godwin also renounce these ties? *** Éí Vanity and self-love are other traits of both religious and irreligious en th usiasm. Was not your grand apos* tie Vojtaire so conceited as to dine in public with his niece, till some English*
men>
men, who were not sufficiently illumi¬ nated with this new philosophy to be spectators of their pride without dis¬ gust, said ic ......... . . . . "—Voltaire and the lady, who knew enough of English to understand them, overheard the remark, and it put a stop to this parade for the future." Rattle now opened his pocket-book, and took out a paper.—" Here is one proof you must all allow. This is a written—now what to call it I don't know—but it is either, or perhaps botb, a Alelhodisfs sermon, or the rant of a Democratica! Enthusiast. Faith, Grace, Hope, and Charity make it the one ; Liberty, Reason, Equality, and Justice make it the other. Call Saints Demo- i, 5 crab ;
crats ; Sinners Aristocrats ; for Satan> read Tyrants; and for more sacred names, take Nature ancl so forth.
rattle's double oration. " Satan and his imps of " Tyrants and their ministers of darkness beloved tyranny are on the watch, my felloxv Brethren, Citizens, to fasten you in the eternal Hell f ' chains of Slavery. Rouse, be vigilant ; garments of Hope, put on the cap of Liberty, seize on thè shield
Grace, sword shield of Equality, and grasp the dagger of Faith. glorious prospects of Justice. The injured rights of Paradise your struggles Citizenship demand vengeance, and the joys Heaven honours of Victory shall be yours. This alone can save you—this will overturn deadly Fiends 9 the wiles of the haughty Tyrants. Brethren, Listen to me, my fellow-Citizens; I bring to you the words of wisdom ; I speak to you the language of truth; I'll ghostly teach you how to overcome the cowardly enemy ; Iii unite you all together in ι 6 the
Charity, the bond of Fraternization ; Iii plant Life, for you the tree of Liberty, and you eat the fruit, and live for shall water it with the blood qf your ever. Temples of tyrants. Down with the Mansions of Satan and his Gang Kings and Nobles— throw their haughty turrets level with the ground ; here let us lay the foundation of a glorious Hope, ЩиаШу— here let us build up an uni- Faitk, versal Liberty; then, my fellow-men, Kingdom Grace the Power of all-sufficient Reason shall 5 insure
insure your happiness* We are the true Ekß> the prechus Stones of the Temple ; sovereign People, Friends of Liberty ; faming fres of Hell and the glorious virtues qf the Guillotine consume the reprobated outcasts^ shall cut down the haughty Aristocrats- slaves Satan, those base instruments of Tyranny, from the face of the earth."
" This was given me," concluded Rattle, ťí as a precious morceau ;— which of these famous rhapsodies M r as the original, I leave to the superior judgment
■* judgment of you and your friends, Mr* Arnon, to find out/* There was a gentleman in the com¬ pany, of whom Wilson could not be 'totally ignorant, as he ivas a M. P. and remarkable for his staunch support of the Government ; yet in a late in- F stance he had acted, in the steady admi- nistration of justice, as a county magi¬ strate, directly contrary to the interest of his ministerial friends. Though his political opinions by no means agreed with many of the present company, his private sentiments were more congenial· Mr. Vantage was intimately con¬ nected with Rattle, having for many- years had the charge of his person and property,
* property, though it was not till after the death of his elder brother, that he took much notice of Ыщ. By this gentleman Rattle had been first intro¬ duced to Mr. Asboç's acquaintance; for Mr. Vantage and Mr. Arnon were successfully concerned in a commer¬ cial speculation. Though Mr. Vantage was rarely a speaker in the House, yet his consum¬ mate prudence was ever considered as a sufficient proof of his wisdom and abi¬ lity ^ and his opinions were always heard with attention, as the sure result of judgment ancl reflection. His known honesty, credit, and wealth were favourite themes among his commercial intimates t and his liberality and muni¬ ficence
■í ficence were not forgotten by life do* mestic friends» He had by no means failed in his earnest endeavours to deserve the good opinion of thè world; and, Mİth an un¬ daunted spirit he had, at an early age> shewn that his honour was as dear to> him as his life. In Mr. Vantage's opinion, the highest perfection of morality was to be found in the elegant and ingenious writings of the philosophical Earl of Shaftesbury ; every thing beyond was priestcraft, en^ thusiasm, or conceit. This gentleman frequently smiled at the arguments and replies which had been
been advanced oà both sides; Mitli Rattle he had* long given up the Hercu¬ lean task of arguing, but Wilson he heard with a look of pity at the con¬ fined notions of so promising a young* man ; and observing, at this time, a favourable opportunity, thus delivered his own opinions :— " While I fervently admire and ap¬ plaud the establishment of a regular form oif religious worship, instituted'by the wisdom of the Government, I aih astonished that any reasonable man should require an indiscriminate appro-* bation of it. " I may say not only the use, but * the necessity of Government, demands order, regularity, and method in every part \
185 INFERNAR Q©IXOTJb part·; and that which in the abstract cannot be defended, may in the whole be of the highest benefit. Tis thus I consider established 4aws, established „religion; though the tedious formalities both of the one and of the other, may be unworthy the assent of a rational, reflective mind. Were I in Turkey, I should not be content to be negatively obedient to the laws of Mahomet : in China—Confucius or.Johi—the relu gion of tbe country would be mine. In this, in tbat, in every case, superstitions and priestcraft would be equally the . object of my inward contempt, but peace and harmony would, in all, be my native. u Inr Church, instate, I fear schisms aud oppositions as the harbingers of confusion, t
confusion, and frotn them I dread the introduction of every species of evil. " Our virtues unite us together ; let щ encoftirage every thing that promotes virtue: and the man, who, dea ves to the social system, cannot be guilty of any actual vice," Wilson, perceiving these sentiments congenial to the greater part ofthe com- - pany, and particularly addressed to him, * replied—- 4 Щ " I cannot believe but that there is as great an individual distinction between good and evil, virtue and vice, as be¬ tween light and darkness, If truth is different from falsehood, professions will follow principles, and conduct resulting
from the same, wrill sanction the whole. If any man is willing to appear other- Arise than what he really is, is he not guilty of deceit ? If tests are ño more than cloaks to conceal, can that which is right require concealment ? If ho¬ nour and honesty are any thing better than specious names to advance self- pride, self-interest—where is the honour of that man, л\Ьо professes an outward assent to what his heart condemns? Where is his honesty, who embraces an opinion that he despises, because it may promote his interest ? There is honour and honesty in the conduct of that Jeu', Turk, or any professed infidel, who, living in a Christian country, will neither conform to professions they be¬ lieve not, nor insidiously impose on the establishment %
establishment, by acccptingsuch stations and situations as are incompatible to any but the real professors ; but where is the honour and honesty of those, who either verbally affirm what they are not, or ihipose upon the received opinion of mankind by appearing to be so, Avithout m hich falsehood they could not enjoy their present advantages? A man of pure honour and honesty will neither directly nor indirectly impose on auy one ; he will no more sanction a false¬ hood by his conduct, thau by his word or his oath ;—butthe man,,who accepts any station, civil, ecclesiastical, or mili¬ tary, under a Government, as a sup¬ posed professor of its established reli¬ gion—M'hich office, if he were not of the establishment, he could not hold— \ : every
every time he speaks against that reli¬ gion, is perjured either in his words or actions. * " The act of wearing the very dress t)f an Officer in the English Army or Navy, or of the different gowns of Law and Divinity, is to a man of genuine honour a direct pledge that he is a Christian ; and every word that he utters to the contrary, is but so much satire against himself. " Of oaths, of conforming to the most sacred rite of the established wor¬ ship, though still more heinous in my mind, I shall not speak ; as the man, M'ho has not religion, owns no other tie than the vague names of honour and honesty."
Mr.
Mr. Vantage's morality was too firmly fixed, too convenient to listen to arguments. With a smile of sclf- knowlddge and consequence, he said— u Young man, I admire the ingenuity of your arguments ; but before you come to my age, youll see these things in another light. The intricate wheels by which society is managed, the motives, the passions, the innumerable aflections of mankind are things not tobe learned in a day. Good and evil are so far from mere names, that the knowledge of them must be the study of years*. " To
To this Wilson made no reply, but Rattle quickly remarked— <f If, my good Sir, the length of years gives a truer knowledge of good and evil, 'tis in vain to argue with you, as you have got so great a start of us. When Wilson was alone with his
friend
friend Hambden, he could not fail testi¬ fying his surprise that there should be a set of men in this kingdom, who call themselves philosophers, ancl think they» prove themselves to be such by a regular course of principles and prac¬ tice contrary to the morality, laws, and religion of their country. <ť You may gain the fullest informa¬ tion on this point," replied Hambden, " by attending some evening the ha¬ rangues of a public and well-known So¬ ciety, where, under the plea of a fair debate, every kind of opinion finds a vent." Wilson told him that he should be highly obliged if he would accompany him to the same. vol. и. к СИАР. ч
iL . ''H
CHAP. XIII. Ат a public meeting where, under the mask of discussing liberal opinions, the partisans of the French endeavoured to propagate their principles, Wilson, who had accompanied his friend Hambden, recognized the young man whose rhap¬ sody had so astonished him at Rich¬ mond. The stranger appeared perfectly calm # sedate,
sedate, and attentive, while many of the company delivered their sentiments. " Unhappy is the country," said an orator, finishing an harangue against Christianity, " where, under the mask of religion, the mind is shackled and restrained, and the property of indivi¬ duals encroached upon by the sons of idleness and pleasure ;—-unhappy is the country ivhere taws defend these things—» laxvs, ivhich should protect to every one their property, justify the theft— laws, which should assist in expanding the human mind, are the first to confine ΐ and depress it " When I lookback upon the glori¬ ous commonwealths of Greece—when I ieflect what Rome once was, what к % France
France noxv is, again and again Τ ex¬ claim— c Oh unhappy country ! un¬ happy people! Mİıere law and religion go hand in hand, in opposition to rea¬ son, liberty, and truth ! That pure and famous morality, wbich Mas known to the early ages, and whieh France again begins to sanction—that stern viitue which has made a Cato and a Brutus immortal, Mas a far better lesson, and of far more benefit to mankind, than the cold, phlegmatic virtue of boasted Christianity. Where is the champion so bold as to deny these things ?" , The stranger startedup. — "Behold bim here. Christianity needs not my weak voice, yet impiety shall have my scourge. Grant me patience, just Hea¬ ven ! Are these new philosophers most knaves
knaves or fools ? Philosophers indeed ! who quote the nations M'here the lire of the slave not only depended on the M'ill ofthe master, but where the laws even forced poor wretches, bought, educated, and fed for the purpose, to murder one another for bis caprice and pleasure—as an example of Liberty !—and again he quotes the men, one of whom prostitu¬ ted his wife for tbe service of his friend, and the other, who slew iiis greatest be¬ nefactor—as instances » f virtue ¡md mo¬ rality !—But in what did their virtue con¬ sist? Did they persevere, in defiance of troubles and misfortunes, in defending their country ? Did they patiently follow the conqueror's chariot in chains and disgrace, that at a future period they might serve thè cause of Liberty ? No. к 3 When
When the day of disappointment came, they fled from these things—by their own murder i ť ť But surely thesegreat men had virtue, and morality, and reason, and liberty, and truth, and equality, and all t he won¬ drous catalogue somewhere ? Yes. So have these modern worthies, and in. the same place—in their tongue ; —in their heads and their pens—not in their hearts and their actions· " Shall I compare the Christian vir¬ tues to their's ? or shall I defend its rites, its ceremonie% its Ministers to the honourable judges before me?—whose- applause has akeady told me—" At this part of his speech almost the whole
whole ofthe company seemed inclined to interrupt him ;— all speaking at once, and calling him—" Enthusiast, Metho¬ dist, Madman, Aristocrat, &c. kc. &c." and again and again crying out—" They can't be defended ! Down ivith him, down with him !" The young stranger stood stilts- smiled—put his arms across—and waited patiently the issue. Rattle was in the house, and m**t violent oa his side, vociferating among the first—" Let him proceed-—let him proceed—no interruption !" t The Chairman, having quieted tlie storm, desired him to finish his speech, к 4f saying
saying he could not allow him above three minutes more. " Then let them chuse their point;" said he, looking at the most clamorous, who were the former speakers—" what shall I defend ?" The last orator cried out—*" Tithes, tithes!" and the others echoed it. The stranger continued in a very dif¬ ferent tone of voice, mild, though firm. " Am I to talk to you ofthe 'origin of tithes—that the Levites were left out of the division of the inheritance with the rest of the children of Israel; or to argue, why the tenth part ivas allotted to them free from trouble, labour, and care—that the Priesthood might be at leisure
leisure for the service of God, and not distracted with the cares of this world— that they might have the means to en¬ tertain strangers, relieve the poor, com¬ fort the sick? Shall I defend tithes be¬ cause Priests are forbid employments, trades, avocations, and so forth ? No. Sooner let me talk to a thief of the ne¬ cessity of justice—to a debauchee of the beauty of virtue—to a drunkard of the comforts of sobriety, than to»-----· but enough. In this place I shall not make a religious question of it. My indignation I have warmly expressed ; you have called mc an enthusiast and madman. Now hear a few plain facts. "The outcry concerning tithes is in every respect unjust and illiberal. The greater part of ihe tithes of this country к 5 are
are in the hands of the Laity; and those, which are held by the regular Clergy, are no hardship to the people. An estate is bought, or rented accord¬ ing to the different incumbrances it is burdened with. If it pays tithes—the occupier has bought it, or rents it for that reason so much the cheaper. The man, who has an estate, that is liable to pay tithes, and wishes to avoid them, equally injures the person whose right they are, as if he refused to pay a legacy or annuity settled on theestate. " It is no new claim—the demand is undoubtedly older than his right to the property ; and therefore may be called a prior claim. But all these demands, however they may have originally be¬ longed to the Ministers of religion, are 4 now
now become the property of all kinds and degrees of people. The greater part of the tithes belong to them, and the rest they have the power to pur¬ chase and to sell. Even the smallest livings, perpetual Curacies, distant re¬ versions, and presentations, are publicly bought and sold by the Laity; and being a Clergyman is now not possessing a right to purchase, but doing the duty for part of the profits. And has not every trade, every profession its exclu¬ sive rights? The real wages of the Clergy are small, very small—not more than 40İ. a year throughout the king¬ dom. i' The Clergy seldom take their tithes in kind ; the Laity almost always : but Iii say no more. It cannot be unknown к 6 to
to you, gentlemen, tbat the most infa¬ mous Priest has virtues enough to be a first rate modern Philosopher—that the outcasts of Christianity, the very dregs His oration was here stopped by the Chairman, who toid him he had already spoken the allotted time. An antagonist started up immedi¬ ately, and liberally bestowed the epithets. of madman, Aristocrat, Sec. Sec. on the young stranger, who calmly heard his abuse without moving a muscle. To the surprise of Wilson and Hamb- den Arnon, Rattle next arose.— " I tbink, gentlemen," said he, very drily, " you
"you have had a fair specimen this evening which has most sense in it, the reason of one party, or the madness of another. Sir," continued he, turning to the stranger, " I agree with your arguments, I venerate your principles, and I adore your contempt ; and shall think myself particularly fortunate to be better acquainted with you." Handing his card to the stranger, he immediately walked out, and the other followed him, The Chairman was about to stop Rattle for not speaking to the subject; but he did not stay long enough to give him the trouble. The company who had been treated so cavalierly, were inclined to have hooted
hooted them as they left the place; but they did not recover from the conster* nation their strange behaviour had oc¬ casioned before the gentlemen were departed» It was very amusing to Wilson and Hambden, who knew one of the parties, to hear the remarks of the company,. which put a stop to the harangues for that evening. They found that neither of the new orators were known, or had been seen there before. Some supposed them to he purposely sent by Mr. Pitt to insult them ; others swore they were two madmen escaped from Bedlam; a third party believed them to be Prists in disguise. One man
man said, he fancied they were two* emigrant Officers, they had so much the appearance of gentlemen ; but this was» objected to on account of their speak¬ ing English so fluently. The grand orator himself was of the opinion of tliose that gave the Prime Minister the credit of sending them there, which, as every one agreed they came there on purpose, seemed to be the most general ©pinion. Every specifier now began to recollect* his own discourse ; and an alarming spasm, lest some treason should have slipped out, turned many a face pale ; some idea of this kind diminished the company very fast.
Wilsoi*
Wilson and Hambden were themselves astonished at the enthusiastic ardour of Rattle, wbo seemed as mad as his new companion ; ancl they knew not Mİıich to admire most, the cool indifference, undaunted boldness, and contemptuous conduct of two such young men, or the surprising success with ivhich it had been croivned. So far was this from a premeditated attack, that the young stranger had never been in London before that day ; and walking the streets, had read the ad¬ vertisement ivhich brought him to the spot : and Rattle had this evening for the first time attended these debates.
СНЛР,
f'i if mm. .............,11 i unti
CHAP. XIV. JtİAAIBDEN, who so well knew the animosity that subsisted betiveen Ala¬ rauder and Wilson, was now as careful to prevent any meeting taking place between them, as he had once been in· strumentai in endeavouring to promote it. Alarauder was indefatigable in put¬ ting his political schemes into a favour¬ able
able way before hé proceeded to Ireland' with Fahany ; and by the assistance of this friend, and the great influence of Air. Arnon,- he was appointed by the grand Society to an office of great trust and confidence. Alarauder's acquaintance in London had ever been very extensive,, but had been rather confined to the higher rank. He was a member of a great many different Societies, and his abilities were not of that confiped kind as to leave him long unknown in any of them. He became a partner in a faro-bank soon after he arrived in England ; and was considered as an experienced veteran at. every gaming-house in the purlieus of St James s. For many years also he had
had been a member of the Jockey Club had been elected one of the Whig Club before he went abroad the last time, and joined the Society of Free-Masons as soon as he was of sufficient age. This promising young hero exhibited a strong instance of his natural charac¬ ter when the solemn and tremendous oath was administered to him· Young men in general cannot help feeling a secret and unknown alarm while the horrid Ueprecation is uttered- Not so Marauder. He smiled with the utmost indifference, and turning to Arnon the elder, who was near him at the time, softly said—" Pretty mum- siery I й This,
This insatiable curiosity of being ini¬ tiated into every Society had manifested itself abroad, and seemed a prelude to his ambition. But in most of these So-^ cieties Marauder had associated with men of rank and consequence—till dis¬ appointment came, and he forswore Aristocracy ;—now he.was as anxious to be acquainted with tlie lower orders, and very soon became one of the moat active members of those secret Societies, who, by some general name and open profession of constitutional principles, concealed their attempts to overthrow both Church and State. The accession ofa man of his fortune and well-known consequence was highly gratifying to these parties. Many of the
the elder members, whose cold hearts prevented their aiming at popular no¬ tice, but whose warm purses chiefly kept the cause alive, seriously consider¬ ai Alarauder as their active head. They dreaded too the controul of a low and needy Democrat, and were always ready to extol bis abilities, and bring him into notiee. In liim too the speculating Philosoph ists saw a bold ancl able instru¬ ment to put their theories in practice. Alarauder, ever quicksighted, at once perceived their object, and, hu¬ mouring them accordingly, was in a short time admitted to a knowledge of their most mysterious intentions. Fahany was at times as sanguine as Alarauder,
Marauder, but not so indefatigable^ and the abilities and learning of the former were, by the art of the latter, constantly turned to Ыа purpose. Hambden Arnon, indeed, Marauder had begun to consider with the Jealous eye of a rival ; but he had lately absented himself frequently from their meetings. It must be remembered that the won¬ derful change in Marauder's situation in life had not so much changed his %iervs as his means* Power, dominion, superiority he aimed at ; and whether he mounted on the shoulders of Aristocrats or Democrats he cared not. Establishments of every kind he always considered as the checks ofa bold and daring spirit, and to
to overturn these was his determined *aim, whether his station had been such as the Prince of ...... . the Duke of....... or Lord ......* . t or that of a Robespierre, Danton, or Marat ; in either case there'was a power and authority above him, ancl upon the. fall of this his ambitious prospects were built. This genuin; '-'.it is that natural Reason, Equality, and Liberty which, under the name of modern Philoso¬ phy (though certainly Philosoph ism, or more properly Diabolism) dazzles the eyes of the present generation of men. Marauder could not fail noticing that this
this new kind of wise men ivere divided and subdivided into an astonishing number of sects; he therefore wisely assented with them all in their anti-prin¬ ciple principles, and uneonfined him¬ self, ranked, as it suited him, among them all. I cannot help remarking here what a hard case it is for some of our young Philosophers and Puilo&ophesses, who, puzzled by the multiplicity of sects, arc at a loss to know to ivhich they belong. »« О fortunatos nlnnum, sua si bona norím 1" VIRC. « Oh happy they if then own sect they knew I"
IV
For the advantage öf such innocent sufferers, with great study and labour a scale has been composed, by which the modern Philosopher may clearly ; кпом г of which sect he is a member. If á sön of Crispin, who abominates all sole-menders beyond the service of the foot,—if any high-minded tailor, who believes in ho hell but his <wn* and considers that alsó as the best recep¬ tacle for the things ofthis world, should read this book, they may meet with a philosophical sect, that will suit them to a needle's point. Neither let the highest or lowest despair, for even a poor nightman may perhaps fiiid himself to be a stoic.
vol. и. î, CHAP*
oe
СПЛР. XV. Å HE greater number of Modern Philosophers do not indeed confine themselves to one sect, but, with amore capacious mind, embrace the principles of many : others again are so delighted with that native wisdom which enlight¬ ened the earlier ages of the world, that they cannot properly be called Modern Philosophers, butAîsrciENT Philo¬ sophers mooernizep: and some there
there arc, whose minds, confined by no object, no principle, and no rule, ex¬ pand themselves over the divisions and subdivisions of every party, and nobly grasp at once the whole. , I shall not dispute their rights to the term Philosophers, and join the hue-and-cry that they arc but Philoso- phists; let them have their favourite title by all means. As the Lacedæmonians said to Alex¬ ander the Great, wlien he desired to be ranked among the Gods— ** Ε* Αλι£αι^οί $н%ч1гл. (»eti Θιος, Θιο? içr^,'* *< li Alexander wishes to be a God—let bimbe a God. 1 * LS So * ·* L *-·
So say I— " If these worthies wish to be Philosophers, let tbem be Phi¬ losophers." Why should I maliciously deprive a child of its plaything ? So far then from denying their claim to the title, I am about to prove, by analyzing it, that (as I said before), each member may know his own class. Let it be observed that I am not about to treat of those Secret Societies, Free-Masons, Illuminati, and such¬ like, so ably discussed by Professor Robison, Abbe Baruel, and others; beeause these depend upon the Ы//— in the same manner as a Lawyer may take his degrees in Divinity, a Divine in Law or
or Physic, and so forth :—I am endea¬ vouring to shew the natural (not ac¬ quired) class to ivhich the numerous tribe of Volunteer Pliilosophers, male and female, belong. My barber now, I understand, tlunks himself a Philosoph er— harangues to his neighbours on Religion and Politics, but the devil-a-bit does he know to ivhat sect he belongs. By my scale be will see that he has a claim both to the Peripatetic and the Natural. Yonder Cobbler too—vou cannot mistake the man, he is a hardy doga¬ is a Philosopher of another class. He might have lived and died in abject po¬ verty, had he not contrived to clap his Ь 3 head
head into the lion s mouth, and draw it out in safety. Indeed he narrowly (scaped ; therefore, since this time he lias been contented to let others try, and they, who get off with a slight squeeze (for few .now escape), the least tiling they ean do is to buy their shoes of him. In reviewing the Philoso- phicalScale, it is evklent, at the first glance, that this worthy is a Rea¬ söner. As in my humble opinion this new Philosophy has never been clearly explained, or systematically defined, I shall, firsts distinguish it from the com 1 mon Philosophy. It may be called—" Â species of Wisdom h
é
Wisdom, which man discovers by the aid qf his own individual powers, corporeal and mental, zvit hout owning the aid of any superior Being, directly or indirectly* Religion, therefore, being totally out ofthe question, they, like the devils in Milton—
« Dbband^and wanďring, each Ы· eeveral way « Pursues, m inclination or sad choice " Lead him perplext.** " In thoughts more elevate, some reasoned high " Of Providence, Foreknowledge, Will, and Fate, «« Fîxt Fate, free Will, Foreknowledge abfolute j " And found no end în wand'ring mazes lost | «« Of good and evil much they argu'd then» " Of happiness, and Hnal misery, " Passion, an J apathy, and glory, and shame«-» « Vmn Wisdom all, unàfate Phibfophy ľ'
t 4 A»
As the grand principle ofthe whole- seems to be the same with the Infernal Spirits, tlie term *Diabolists is pecu-. liarly applicable to these would-be Philosophers, and a general name for their wonderful science may be also r termed Diabolism. Secondly* To define this Diabolism systematically, it may be divided into¬ nine Sects, the number ofthe Muses* They may be thus called :—·
Stoics^
Stoics,
Epicureans, Peripatetics, Virtuosos* The Illuminati, The Libertinians^ The Naturals, The Reasoners, The Nothingers,
Of ancient race, but modern-
ша.
Modem*
1. The Stoics, or Insensibles,- are very proud, esteeming themselves far superior to ibe rest Except upon critical occasions, they rarely condescend to exert themselves ; and the moment the exertion is over, they are as torpid as ever. All the others outwardly pay great respect to these, but laugh at them. in their sleeve. like the owl, their. **■ ' gravity
gravity is so good an emblem of wis¬ dom, that the Stoic is often exhibited for that purpose. They are in general fat, pursy fek lows, whose chief indulgence is in the monotonous note of the silent pipe., With these a puff bespeaks—the nation is ruined ;—a puff declares—all religion a joke ; the voice of joy and gladness with these is heard with a puff; and troubles, misfortunes, or death of the best friends and nearest relatives are, mourned only by a puff; in short, with these— y tis ail a puff. The French Rulers easily cajoled them to their purpose, praised them to the stars, And pushed tliem forward on every
every occasion ; but when the Stoic, swelling with his imaginary greatness,, began at last to talk and look big, the guillotine silenced him 'm a moment· In the first National Assembly there were many of these ; and the Dutch, we know, are very partial to this sect* The Stoics ar© often found among those Critics, whose wit consists in abuse, and whose wbdom in other's- faults· All learning in their opinion is Latm and Greek ; Stubbornness the only Virtue, and Good-nature the only Vice*. Poets with them are called—the L 6 flimsy
flimsy race, and hexameters alone they desire to look at So great is their hatred of every other species of poetry, that a certain famous Stoic has passed the last thirty years of his life in translating of Homer into English hexameters : of which wonder¬ ful ivork I am able to favour the reader with the begiuning. u Sing, Мше celestial, how first that wrathful Achilles* ** With rage inveterate, $ent 7'Iuto many a victim, *' Where by the naked shore limbs lay, dogs hungry devouring, « When Peleus* great son boldly strove with Aga# i rae m non, " Anâ, so the wľH of Jove, the allotted destinies anfwefd, ** О day ill-fated ! which urg'd offended Apollo " 'Mong hosts of Grecians to let his contagious arrows « Pierce their thick nurøbm, and &ç, tic. &c»" This
This author has been 4Vonderfully hurt by a brother Stoic informing him (for they are horribly ill-natured), that let him produce as many lines as he will, he would be bound to point out double the number of false quantities- It is to be feared that this threat will spoil the work.. The arguments of the Stoic are al¬ ways unanswerable,—for this simple rea¬ son, that though they are the mildest creatures breathing, they cannot bear contradiction. Therefore their friends and acquaintance never touch them in this tender point, and wisely keep such naughty things as replies, &c. &c, out oftheir sight.
The
The gentle and patient David Hume¿ ме are informed, could not hear the name of a certain author ivithout flying out into most virulent passions of rage and swearing ; and, that he had good reason to do so, any one, who has read his philosophical works, must allow. What man could bear to have such an argument as this disputed ? David Hume on Suicide, page 12.— " ItwouMbeno crime of meto divert the Nile or the Danube from its course ; where then is the crime of turning a few ounces of blood from their natural channel?"—Again, the same page—"A hair, a fly, an insect is able to destroy this mighty being, Mİıose life is of such importance. Is it an absurdity to sup¬ pose
1 · . 1
å pose that human prudence may lawfully dispose of what depends upon such in¬ significant causes?" Certainly not, Mr. Hume ; you might have set fire to your own, or your neighbour's house, if you like ; for so insignificant a thing as a straw may be the cause of its destruc¬ tion at last. In truth the # Stoic might make a tolerable
tolerable good hero with his negative: virtues, if he would but keep his tongue between his teeth, tie his hands behind him, and never attempt the active ones* II. The Epicureans, or Grati- eiers of the Senses, are as contrary to the last, as the sect of the Saddu- cees to the Pharisees.*
AllCStr
These signalize themselves by eating, drinking, M r enching, Sec. Sec. Sec. never. satisfied, ever cloyed—constantly seek¬ ing for novelty. They prove the Government to be wrong, because they are always in want of something else^—and religion false, because it forbids us to gratify those senses Nature has given us. Enjoyment •is a word ahvays in their mouths, but which theii: hearts seem never to own. They are continually mistaking abuse for user-possession for enjoyment —men of learning for men of sense —men of reading for men of knowledge —men tliat understand languages for men that 3 understand
INFERNAL QUIXOTE;' understand mankind — orators for actors, %vords for things —rand so forth. Their grand creed is—that the Philo¬ sopher's stone consists in the discovery of a sivth sense; and their emblem is Tantalus —yet, unlike him, they arc disappointed by possession itself. The # Epicurean is chiefly to be found among young men, well born, and mo¬ derately taught. / The old French Army had great mim- bers of them«
There
There is scarcely »female Philoso¬ pher to be found that is not an Epicu¬ rean ; and, as soon as the French Re¬ volution commenced, the fdles-des-joie were the first to distinguish themselves. At present, some of these Philosophcsses are united in the spider-woven bonds of the Gallic-Hymen with the most famous of their legislators and warriors* In these kingdoms about a dozen fa¬ mous names might be produced that indubitably belong to the Epicurean System; but, to the honour of my fair countrywomen, it has been clearly proved that ten times greater is the number, and far superior in learning, talents, and ability, who have signalized themselves
themselves in that old-fashioned wisdoms of virtue and religion. The Epicurean Philosophy is alsm very fashionable among the higher ranks* That venerable and dignified character the Duke of —-----, Lord D —1— r — n, Sir Thomas -τ ------- , Sir William — ------, Sir John —---- , and a personage greater than all in birth, titles, and expectations may be said to spin in the very centre of the vortex. It is evident Fahany greatly partici¬ pated of their opinions ; and we shall by and by introduce a fair lady of this* sect,
UL. The*
Ίϊϊ. The Peripatetics or Busy ífofriEá, are more conspicuous for their number than Consequence. These are the echoes of all the others—the newsmongers, loungers ; and being of themselves too ignorant to arrange, too idle to act, fhey become of use to their party by being ever in motion ; and, day after day, run their usual round with the news of the mo-, ment, from the Coffee-house to the Library, to the Park, to Bond Street, St James's, the Playhouse, and the Opera. At first view the reader may suppose that the modern Peripatetics have nothing to do with antiquity ; but I must beg his pardon.—Demosthenes, the famous
famous Grecian orator, in one of his Philippics makes particular mention of them, as they are now. "running about the streets, flying to the public places, everywhere crying out—What news? what news ?"—Juvenal, the Roman satirist, also speaks of them, and so does Horace—again and again. ** Ibam forte via tacra, &c. Äcc." In short, the learned reader may find passages in almost every ancient Greek and Roman author, that put their claim to antiquity out of doubt. I feel a delicacy in quoting the 17th chapter of the Acts ofthe Apostles, the 18th, and particularly the Sist verse, as it is an authority they arc not fond of; yet it may
may be some satisfaction for tbem to know where they may find their elaim to antiquity in a plain English (perhaps intelligible) fonu. The learning, abilities, M'it, and know¬ ledge of these modernized Philosophers are (like the magpies) concentrated in one point, memory ; some of them indeed participate of the ape, in mimicry. When new blasphemy runs scarce, and conversation flags, the talents of these come into action. Texts of Scrip¬ ture are generally familiar to them (chiefly, I suppose, for the reason that they were obliged to read the Bible at school, and have never read any book since) ; a word reeals a sentence to their remembrance ;
remembrance; and sometimes the ap* plication, by perverted indecency οχ coarse blasphemy, raises a laugh, Tbis they rarely venture at in a mixed -company, unless in tbe repetition of one that has succeeded before; as it may happen to prove mal-a-propos. The Devil, we are told, can quote Scripture—-so can some of these ; but the difference is, it is an even chance to the Peripatetic whether it answers •iiis purpose, or not. Young Chatter, of the Temple, is one of this sect. When St. Andrò, the Jacobin, came over to England to give the chosen Brethren the fraternal embrace,
«embrace, poor Chatter, by a misappli¬ cation of Judas's kiss, is even said to have raised the colour in the tawny cheek of the Frenchman. At a public meeting, crowded with Philosophers, the Duke of Wouldbe's modesty was rather squeamish in taking the chair.— <( Tbe old Christian pro¬ verb is in your Graces favour," said Chatter—" The first shall be last, and the last first."—"His Grace was wonder¬ fully down in the mouth, and never spoke on Reform. Liberty, and Equality with a worse air in his life. The Peripatetics have a mortal anti¬ pathy to a Clergyman, or to any person, whom they have once heard utter a seri¬ ous religious sentiment. vol, n. m The
The reason is'— their early pertness and folly have generally subjected them to severe reprimands and chastisement , from friends and masters ; and the very appearance of religion or gravity makes their shoulders smart, and ears tingle. Wien they are in a troublesome talk¬ ing mood, the simple monosyllable "Why ?" will silence them'at any time. To relate is their only fort, to argue is quite out of their way. They have ambition ivithout ability- information 'without knowledge—a cocked hat Mİthout manners—and a scarlet coat ivithout courage. Their sole reading is the newspaper and review, and their best writing in the ability of the hand. Never
Never burdened with too much thought, nor fatigued with too much study and care, they, like the butterfly, flutter through the summer, but, after the first sharp frost, are heard of no more. The fleet, or a condemned regiment is their state of oblivium; sometimes in¬ deed they linger upon an annuity, and degenerate into Naturals (another sect I shall soon treat of); though, like forced converts, they are seldom of m uch eminence in their second state The Peripatetic Philosopher is frequently to be found among the spruce bucks of the city, that areve/y desirous of being seen at the west end of the town : Attorneys' clerks, who, ambiti¬ ous of being Barristers, will never be good for any thing ; young Physicians и 2 with
with a little money and less learning, who ought to have been journeymen Apothecaries ; young Parsons, more fit for any thing else, yet with too little couraire for soldiers, too little sense for lawyers, and too little industry for tradesmen, crdained by influence, sup¬ ported by interest, and ever on the watch for preferment ; their whole con¬ duct a continual theme against the re¬ ligion tbey profess, and themselves the most infamous and contemptible of the Diabolistical Philosophers* I remember a Peripatetic, who set up for a Philosopher, solely upon the merit of not having been in a Church for five years ; another from the nota¬ ble discovery that Samuel did not write the second book that bears his name, because
because the Prophet is dead in the first. He might hazard a similar critique on Moore's Almanack, and many otber modern publications. Some of these also establish them¬ selves to be Philosophers, by adopting a practical joke, or taking up a piece of witticism that is lusting. Thus a Peri¬ patetic, (well known \л their usual circle), by naming four young puppies that he had, after the four Evangelists, became a self-dubbed Philosopher in¬ stantly. Poor fellow ! he unluckily lost his consequence by attempting to put his wit in a legible garb to an embryo-Par¬ son, a Cambridge friend. This latter was not idle in exhibiting his old school-fel¬ low's specimen of Philosophy—Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, were never so ы 3 mispelt
mispelt in their lives ! and our wise-man must now be contented to be a Nat и ral for life.— But enough of these gentry. You meet with tbe Peripatetic so com¬ mon in all public places, it h ;iot neces* sary to say any more. IV. The Virtuosos, or Lovers of Wo χ der, are certainly not ancient Philosophers modernized, but more pro* perly modern Philosophers antiquated. These are continually telling what has. been, In their opinion the less they know of a thing, the more won¬ derful it is, and therefore the more valuable. All modern laws and customs they abominate. Lycurgus, Solon, and Numa are their models ; and if they are ever
ever inclined to believe a Deity, tbey are determined his name shall be Jupi¬ ter. Tbey rake up old doctrines long ago confuted and exploded, ancl attempt to palm them on the world for the very acme of ivhat is right. Their chief objection to the Bible is, that it is not sufficiently ancient ; and, if happily they can detect a modern word which has crept into the text, it is a conclusive argument \uth them that the whole must be wrong. By such irgenkms criticisms as these, one of this sect has determined that the writings of Homer, Horace, and Virgil, and other supposed Grecians and Ko¬ mans, are nothing more than the for¬ geries of a Monk of the twelfth century, m 4 as
as weU as every passage where they arg mentioned by other authors before that period ; in the same maimer as the well- known Probationary Odes, and numbers of Original Letters. In truth, their learning is too much for their brain, and their judgment too lit¬ tle for their learning, which their self- conceit, endeavouring to supply the place of judgment, overturns and con¬ fuses the Mdiole ; hence the term addled is peculiarly applicable to them. A certain Virtuoso was about to leave this country, and live in China* as he understood that was the most an¬ cient kingdom on the face of the earth. Iiis plan was laid; he M r as resolved to be of the primitive religion, and to despise the
the innovation of Confucius. He never opened his lips without expressing his hatred ofthe tyranny of the Tartars; and he began to hold up his head, put his hands behind him, and turn out bis toes—as a prelude to the military art— that he might head the natives, and enable them to recover their liberties. But the,good okl gentleman's schemes were all crushed by the information of a friend—that he would not be permit¬ ted to land. The Virtuosos hate tbe Government because it is a modern fabric ; and use all their might to overturn the State, that they may revive the blessings of primeval times. All their writings in Divinity, Science, or Politics, are in praise of the Golden Age. m 5 One
One thing they believe to be as true as Chinese chronology, that the seasons of the year in England have ever been in confusion since the style was altered. The sons of Hippocrates and Galen were formerly much devoted to the* Vi rtu osean Philosophy ; at the present day the merit of many a M. D.. classes him among the Illuminati. Philosophers, as they increase in years,- get more and more partial to this sect. N umbers have been found among the lawgivers and political writers in France; in Germany they have particularly dis¬ tinguished themselves, and a great many in this country—not omitting to potice the superintendents of some monthly
monthly writings of acknowledged celebri, j*. V. Of the same diabolistical party, though of the extreme from the Virtu¬ osos, are the Illuminati, or Wise¬ acres. These despise the knowledge of what is past, but are quite at honié in what is to come. Their belief is — that all the world were fools till the present generation, and that they them¬ selves are the wisest of this. Their heads are so full of schemes, and their means so few to realize them, that they have been not inaptly com¬ pared to young ducks in a timnder
и 6
storm,
storm, deligbted with the water, yet confused with the jarring of the ele¬ ments. Their oratory, unlike the Virtuosos,. is for ever extempore ; and sometimes the second argument cuts up the first with wonderful eclat. Thus—they will doubt the existence of a Deity, be- causa they never saw him ; and argue against the Divinity of Jesus Christ, because he was a visible personage. In short, as they never know what they mean to do, so they seldom remember m hat they have already done. Most true is the remark—that the understanding of these gentry is ever suffering the fate of Semeie, Jupiter's mistress—lost and confused in their own splendid
splendid speculations. The fair dame indeedleft a young divinity behind her; but the gratification of their ideas is ever sure to prove an abortion.- The famous Anacharsis Cloots, who elegantly called himself the orator ofthe human race, was of this sect, which is evident by that most excellent advice he gave the French Iioav to subjugate England—by taking possession of Scot¬ land—which he called—the granary of' England. Another clever fellow, whose name I forget, was a conspicuous member. He advised his brethren, the French, to avoid the English fleet by means of balloons, to land at once in the midst of Salisbury Plain, and march directly to London. The
The ingenious inventors of the flat- bottomed boats may rank the foremost among the Illuminati. In this country ive have a great many among our financiers, political schemers, and H С. orators; though, happily for the nation, they iiave not been able to put their ideas into a practical form. Nor must the wonderful abilities of some modern М. D's. be forgotten ; — and already the regulars begin to foil the irregulars at their own weapons. Thus, Dr. B's. vivifying spirit, the gaceous oxid of azote, like the Medean Kettle of old, or the mottled Hero's astonishing Mill, makes us all young again, and keeps alive too the profound notions of that able Reasöner, Mr.
Mr. Godwin*; whilethe Animal-Mag- netizers, the Perkin ean Tracia- tors, with the Vaccin ean Preventa¬ tive, the Guestonean Medicines, and 1 know not how many German mysteries, prove the far superior wisdom; of the present day.
4
If
If it is too early yet to speak more fully of the Vaccinean and other inven¬ tions, it is ever too late of the wonder¬ ful medicinal discoveries of our Gallic neighbours ; but the literary ancl philo¬ sophical intelligence ofthe magazine of the month will always shew in this and other subjects the newest fashion of French Philosophy. There are not many of this Illu¬ minated Sect in Scotland—not even among those who have the gift of the second sight ; but there are a vast many very clever gentlemen of the Irish na¬ tion, whose claims are indubitable. A Wiseacre if he knows (o) from («) instantly conclucleshimself a master of all ancient languages, and argues accord- insiv.
ingly. He writes—and down tumbles the fame of Grecian and Roman wor¬ thies without mercy. He sets up an idol of his own, to whom he not only eagerly offers incense, but compels both ancients and moderns to bow befbre it. Touch him in this point, and he raves» Such a one will tell you that the single line— " Ruin seize thee,ruthleit King l'* is infinitely superior to every thing in Virgil :—but when you come to— «* Uprose the king of men with speed, " And «addled strait hie coal-black ttccd|" Homer, at the head of the Grecians, yields the palm, and his king of men, Agamemnon, sinks into nothing. See Letters on Literature, by Robert Heron. VI. The
VI. The next arc the Lì berti n ian s, or Champions of Liberty. These are known by tbeir haughty and tyran¬ nical spirit ; vociferators for Equality, they wouid lower all their superiors to their OM'ii situation in life ; and so fond are they of peace, that they MOuld murder half the MOrld to gain it. Their language and their conduct are in continual opposition. Their ambiti* ous views they call Equality; their love of poxcer — Liberty; depopulation is Mith them Civilization ; and forced subsidies a Voluntary Loan ; the szvord and the pistol are Argument and Reason ; and death— Convic¬ tion. One of these published a dictionary of
ofthis kind; but unluckily the Govern¬ ment mistook it for treason, and prosecu¬ ted the printer and publisher, and some of the parties. Ifthe Liberti nian caHs yon friend, depend upon it he means to make you of use to him ; and the greatest favour you can receive from him is— not to bő noticed· * He has little hypocrisy about him> for he is always a falsehood ; and you may in general form a true opinion of what he says by supposing the contrary·
Yet
Yet he is no common babbler or liar, nor deals in the marvellous, unless it will answer his purpose. A successful villain is the object of his serious praise and imitation, and the length of the catalogue of crimes is the surest test of his greatness ; therefore Sylla and Marius he prefers before Pompey and Cæsar —Richard III. be¬ fore Crom well—and for the same reason, Alfred of England, and Henry IV. of France, were no heroes. The whole stock of a Liberti- ñian often consists in impudence; and he is out of any thing sooner thart countenance. There are in this country a number of
of men of this sect, who having tried some profession or otber, and their abi¬ lity not equalling their ambition, tbey have eagerly embraced the first favour¬ able opportunity of giving up their choice. Of these—some, by the deatli of elder brothers, slide into independence- others, by interest, get presented to places of profit, Sec. Sec. and throw off the red coat, or Doctor's wig, or unpro¬ fitable Lawyer's gown ; these, in their metamorphosed state, generally expand their powers of capability, and adopt the notions ofthe Nothingers. The Libertinians, at one time, were almost universal in France ; and the greater numbers are tobe found in most countries among the dissatisfied in the Army and Navy. They
They are frequent in these kingdoms among the higher orders, particularly among those out of place, out of poiver, or out of pocket. f This sect is very well known, and almost all the others partake of it VIL The Naturaxs are the sect most easily satisfied, as they mean to gain every thing by taking every thing away. They are often known by their appearance, which is not unlike that of those quiet lunatics, who are permitted to rove about the country, ami ivho are in many places called " Crazy Bet- ties." They are very quiet and easy unless they are offended, and then they can fight and claw as well as the best As
As Peter deceived his brothers Martin and Jack, so are the Natu¬ rals continually taken in by the Rea¬ söners ; with this difference-that as Peter made his brothers believe one thing was every thing, the loaf of bread was fish, flesh, ancl fowl ; so do the Reasoners persuade the Naturals that every thing is one thing, that all their (the Reasoners) whims, fancies, tricks, and nonsense are the genuine offspring of Nature. The Naturals have more thought than sense·—more strength than cou¬ rage—more haste than speed—and more fat than flesh. In short, somewhat like tbe Quakers, they are more admired by the rest, than imitated.
We
We shall soon come to the history of a very rigid one of this kind. VIIL The Reasoners are the form¬ ers of the last mentioned sect, though they take good care never to be of it themselves. * They have the advantage of making whatever they like to be right, and, as we hear, there is reason in roasting of eggs,
eggs, so they will aay there is reason ia every thing they do. They can prove it reasonable for others to fast, and they to feast. Why ? Because fasting and feasting make things even ; a&d what¬ ever is even, is right. The Reasoners will tell you that they are never deceived, because, like other frail mortals, they do »ot trust either tothelegendsof antiquity, theopi- nion of the wisest men, or even to their
vol· ιι· n senses,
senses, but to a far superior principle— tiieir Reason· One of this sect will thus argue— ** ComrrKm prejudices, customs, and opinions deceive our fellow-men every day. How ridiculous is it to assert, 'under the foolish proof of daily expe¬ rience, that it is easier to walk dcræn hill than wrik up hill ! When a man walks down hill, *every step is beyond tbo common level; the whole body receives a jar, and the foot is forced below that point, where it ought to have stopped. But when a man walks up hill, the ground, as it were, rises to meet his foot, he does not need tbeeafcertionof patting it down, he has nothing todo butto lift np his leg—the ground is ready to re¬ ceive it ; and, were it not for that pre¬ judice
judice we imbibe in our infancy, when we come to a steep hill, we might be over -it in a moment*." A learned gentleman of this sect in· 4 T ented a scheme to prevent that blind- ness jso incident to <dd -age, by never -using but one^ye at a time. His argument was unanswerable, (t Two threads, proceeding from one point, can never reach farther than one ; therefore one eye sees asfar aa two. ßy using both eyes at a time, Ave see
N 2 double',
ЯоШе; ah inconvenience so greats Ü$i ňifáhtraré^a long thne before they can bringtheir sight to one focus. By using both eyes too, we do not look straight, ЬШ ftóni4hàt comer of each which is neísť ihe nose ; if we used only me eye face rather forwarder than the other, the sight would come straight from the eye, and of course we should see objects much better, and thus keep the other eye forafutèreoècasion.": A person talked ofthe advantage of seeing sideways ; the Reasöner cut him up in ^moment.·-* * r To see sideways is to see imperfectly; imperfection is ever to be avoided ; and, for this cause, someone wisely invented blintøs for ,horses. Much better in¬ deed woidd it be to blind one eye of the horse, keeping the nose a little to that - side
sight might come in a right line from the other eye/' Again, in eating of soup, this gentle¬ man attacked, with wonderful spirit, the ridiculous custom of stirring it— ' It " Motion begets, heat ; stirring ia mq- tion r, therefore stirring of soups and so forth, continues and increases tbeh^at.'* İ ϊ ι . Did these Re aso nerş put in practice their wonderful discoveries themselves ? Oh no ! Their pupils, the Naturals, taied the experiments for them- ; and one poor gentleman spoiled a good setr of teeth by eating hasty-pudding for ? a wager, without using a spoon, while his opponent was to swallow tb^ same quan- tåty in less time, in defiance of the vro- N 3 lent
ícnt motion Шь stiTOTíg bf aispotı^ would give ίί The Жат übal not only test his wager, spoiled bis teeth, scalded his throat, and burnt his sto-» ıhâch,* but Ris ftîend, the Keasöner, declared it waå.his own ffmïfc fof shaking it too ihuch, and caÖied him á root into« the bargain* By orie short argument ihey prove* all history to. be false.—" Wc? know," say they, f * ¿bat historians make men*
speak otherwbe than they really did;*«* ergo~~ they make tliem act otherwise too." They prove the Jewish Religion is not the m era çf God, Ьесаще the virtues there described did not arrivé to that excellence since known in the world— ¿ e. which Christianity has made per¬ fect ; and judging the Christian Reli-^ gion by the standard of ancient virtues—> so ftn? superior to the modem ones—* they in like шаппег condemn that. Again they aigue^" Virtue in the ез&* . tremeis Vicet Christianity is Virtue in the extreme. Therefore Christian* Äy is Viee,"-*-Thus more than ful* Шщ tìm pi overb of borrow* feg of Pina to pay Paul, they . . к 4 also
also borrow again, of Paul to pa# Peter. A certain Reasöner was resolved to. prove that St. Mark's Gospel was not written by. him, but long after his- time. One opponent alledged—·*" The ori-« ginal Greek copy is extant^at Venice, i& St. Marks own hand." " That is impossible," says the Rea* soner; " because, according to the com* mon nature of reason, time must have destroyed the materials on. which it was written long ago." But says another opponent, who had never heard of the original being at Venice-*" Eusebius speaks of St. MadU v and
Und otherprimitive Christians make men¬ tion of a Gospel written by him. " · " Can you produce it, or have уош ever seen it Г' ''No." " Then I won't belteveaword ofthe matter.!* The Reasöners have also made some wonderful discoveries, of which I shall üofcciseîy mention a few. They have endeavoured to improve our language and expressions, our thoughts and ideas*. The common method of speaking— when the animal juices háve imbibed any impure air, and insensible perspiration is checked—is "I have caught cold.** ~ nő This
This expression most grievously offenda them. " It is the very acme of folly and pie* judice," savsa notable Reasöner; 1 — u one grain of reason is enough to tell us that it is the very contrary. It should be—/ haoe caught a heat. Larg« meetings, public assemblies, warm rooms, and the frequenting of all hot places will generally be the cause* What is the effen ? A fever. What is a fever ì An inward fire- What is the remedy? Universal' ~ t warmth—whether in physic, meat, drink, Or cloathing. Achillese spear is an emblem of medi- cine—that which give« the disease, will «ŕdmroister the cure. Poison expela рекщ^ щШ ш$$$ ş4dj aad fir? When
When Mf. ilørne Tooke fii^t pub¬ lished his—" Diversionå of Рийеу," —a certain Reasöner wa& in a most Vio* lent rage, and swore Mr. H. T. had a< Riasterkey, and robbed the storehouse of his brain. But the ci-devant Parsoti having made good his ground, the Reasons* is now determined bo out¬ rival him. We may, therefore, shortly expect a very learned treatise to prøve, that there is »o other part of speech than a substantive, émpie* or compound; though I will aofe be cer¬ tain whether this gentleman has yielded to the remonstrances of his friends, iind may not return to his original intention. of pjovipjg that it ш an adjective* His argumentative proof! bľe keeps W bimself tiU the publication, though he л ' и б Ьт
has favoured his more intimate ac¬ quaintance with a few t specimens of the work* Vulgar— c *?Tom runs faster tlian any body else." Rationally —" Tom superiority- speed." The whole sentence rationally in two words, one simple and one compounâ substantive. The two first lines from Homer» Mr. Ρφ— ** ДсЫИе** wrath to Greece, the direful sp? щ " 0#wwfaimt»mËer\J f heavenly Goélam,ûtig ľ* Mjøwlfy—*** A^hillcs-ľagc Gr£«ce-woes-mfinity-cauv> ** Song, Goddess.Heaven ť! One
* Øne simple substantive, and three čom~ pounds compter, what has* taken Mr« Pope no less than thirteen words*- How incomparably beautiful too the last line *« Song, Goddess-Heaven ir · Again, a specimen of familiar com versation.. Vulgarly —^"How dò you dò, Dick?" Rationally τ· " Health-possession, Dick ?" Vulgarly*— 1 ' Very well I thanlc you,' Tom." '·'"■ ' Rationally— " HèattK-ï)îck, thrøksi Tom.." What can be more simple, plain, and beautiful?
İ 'Xi
римМЩ$кщ and thanks and Трш; ihe whole makes the answer m only too compound siéàstatitices. If thh rage contmues, I know not what will become of our Grammarians. But the argumentum invecťum rf the Reasöner I must not omit, when, at his first onset, be disarms his adversary, and then—c# M s|şsh withoia in^cy. Thus— Tïé Reasöner contends that the Нотт|ша?ота, or thb Men in the Moon (no matter wh»rih)j have the triiptfMtíosi of#eÜj^oş» The simple Christian drøles the as- Tbğr
religion or tbe Шеи of tìm Moon, or the Cape—and one by one picks out the most prominent virtues of Christianity, whicb^ with a tong feather, naked feet, and pknty.of' Н^шеь 1и1еоА^ a very pretty picture, and assumes a most pleasing appearance. /ЗЬе Logician of Christianity is non¬ plused ; /ш virtues arc already taken from him, an ¿ he cuts but a pitiful . gut the mešít common method of the EE^##«^ftb*ci^wtite ψ dialogue upom ţhş subject bcHeen Abiietf and the W4g£/, ^ţ^ytlkWLyi^foffCliiîkt-» îanity ţ the Savage fer hnnsdf. Oh î how the Savage cuts him up t S See
• See thè Travels of the Baron de Hon¬ tan, . and a few others of the Voltaireaft school, with his Huron, as a model fd# them·. It would take me a volume alone to describe in a decently* fair way this most superlatively rational philosophical sect ι 1 shall give the amende honorable to the whole .with one specimen of their pKy— siological knowledge. - > * * An erudite and most able Reasöner has discovered point-blank, that all that" has been said for ages and age^concern- 'mg,solids and liquids^ i» amere hum,— that, in truth, every thmg isU liquid,' and only requires its proper* degree of heat to become scv . * Says
Sayshe—" Iroja, siker, gold^ and alt metals are easily brought to. theb primitive state of liquids. Flint makes glass—glass is easiiy melted, therefore flint is a liquid :—all kinds of earth are but soft stone, and flint is stone. Wood increases from moisture, and may be brought back to its pristine state by boiling, distilling^ and $o fortlv ifyou do it lqng enough., Apirpals of every species may easily be, welted*. stewed, sweated, made spermaceti oi K Sec. Sec. Sec. Probat excmpUmu" This learned Reasöner has not a> doubt that the inhabitants of the planet Mercury, Лоди their proximity to the sun, are living liquids, exactly like large globules of quicksilver, from whence, by some wy wise men (nearly equal
mò^li&rá ftóürishe^ citizens ШШ, Î £ tife ; Ve^î^ii^:ïi^n^ hands unites them in indissoluble bonds ©f biotiialy love j Ш'Ш^: ; Щ : Ш15 ,: hütnan racé in MiERCUîiir h^ only tö meet, and thè äffiliatin|f ^t^ # Ш eountry unîtes thèM ih onè ¿r#ť ШЛ happy society. . 'v^^:; : t;-; /-: v How" they^t î^pamted a,^tì, Ш has not quite detáÄlipKd. Ш^ } ШШШ. Щ fancied the setting of thè ma Mâ İt ; again, by á sudden concussion of the planet, t&e cause of which he «leans t«i discover ι* юЩГЪ cold cornet or itóowy meteor^
wê-ÇéHli ţfcţ whole world) ^ouîd unîţr togethettmè* at om moment, all push¬ ing and pitìling, impel ¿^f^fø^e^allttle nearer thesim,—waa^ and allits train of horrors, envy, hbtsed, malice, revenge r 4 tod the¡ rest of tìie black catalogue would be instantly annihilated, and ia ni versai philaftthropy, though far in* ferior to a general eosmopolitical hap* P5ries8> would fraternize mankind. * The heads of this sect are so very well
well known inthis and other countries it would be envious to particularize them. The leaders of the mob are very partial to them* IX. The ninth, andlast, sect is that of the Notïiinoers. Of great and general import, of wondefful* note, gower, influence» and еошефдшсе. This, Being so får superior to thfc
m&
. . ---Their - тМт : :^^)ШШа^Ш^'-М noth'mgbut тШ4ЩШ к follows t^ - The iiies, 4te otolit ttø ^щ 1)Ш#г$1^ frm Шт : (шт hence th^ ¿í^ing a<|v^nt^^ jíoör mortal wants. vice,.'.: -$<*Г ; every action depends on the cii4?uinstrøces Щот^ îf % '::щт Ш beat, has Ш ıhûuıy, ^ts wife¿ or any thing ebe taken f$om Ыщ ттФщШ^ hm, they 4ή$φ puhfeh Ыш, Judg€Şi Jury, or ^ Executionei|
^QUlXO'TEv decency or sanctity, the wit or satinéis never confined. In argument, itts both an invincible shield and keen sword ; for, having fto principle of their own to'de- fend, tàey may safely attack others, but are themselves invulnerable*. Fifthly. Wlien every other argument for what we call Vice, falls, they use the following :~but I will quote God* win's own words»
* #
ГоШса«
Spoliticai Justice, vol. i. page 389, ' kc.—«" A candlestick has the power or capacity of retaining a candle in a per¬ pendicular direction. A knife has a capacity of cutting. In the same man-, ner a human being has the capacity of walking: though it may be no more true of him than of the inanimate sub¬ stance, lhat he has an option to exercise. or noi to exercise, ¿hat capacity. A knife is as capable as a man in being employ* td in purposes of utility, and the one is no more free than the other as to its employment. Both are equally the affair of necessity, &c. &c. &c.—The man differs from the knife, as the iron candle¬ stick differs froin the brass one ; he has one more way of being acted upon. This additional wav with man ismotivc— with the candlestick is magnetism. But vol. ii. о if
ifthe doctrine of Necessity do hot anni¬ hilate Virtue, it tends to introduce a great change in our ideas respecting it. According to this doctrine, it M'ill be absurd for a man to say—" 1 will exert myself."—" I will take care to remem¬ ber," or even, " ï will do this."—All tiiese expressions imply as if man were or could be something else than what motives made hiin. Alan is in reality a passive, not an active bemg. " So speaks verbatim the supereminent Godwin; and,*therefore, M'henany man pretends to condemn the actions of a Nothinger, tlie Philosopher ex* claims—" I can't help it, and there's an end ofthe business," The French rulers, wisely seeing these advantages,
radvantages, have endeavoured to chuse their whole diplomatique corps from this sect; as is evident in their political Ministers, Ambassadors, Envoys, Ge¬ nerals, Negociators for Peace, &c. kc. by ivhatever name they may be called. They have indeed employed this no- principle with great success, both at home and abroad. By this they cajoled the people ; by tlm tbey overran the Д talian States; by this they took the Isle of Alalta, and landed in Egypt ; whether this will fail tbem at last, time raust determine. Every Jacobin is of this sect, and they generally also embrace most ofthe others, except the Naturals, and that they endeavour to make lc Sowe* rain Peuple. oii In
Iu former times it required learning and virtue to make a Philosopher; now-a-days, so far from being of service, they chiefly act as a clog or hindrance ; and virtue tfany kind is sure to do the owner a mischiefs * Ignorance, particularly where it is
iê joined with Impudence and Ob* stinacy, is of the highest service; and Vice of every species cannot fail tomake a modern Philosopher of one sect or the other. Thus the Parricides in France, who boasted themselves the destroyers of a Äther, child, near kinsman, or beloved
Φ 9 fiiend,
friend, were undoubtedly Stoics aml LlBERTINI'ANS; The amiabie spectators, who enjoyed ihe executions, who went M'ith a dou¬ ble gout a la guillotine instead of a la comedié (and м ? 1ют we ignoramusses should call accomplices in the crime), M ? ere Epicureans ; while those men of learning, who quoted a Brutus and a Nero to encourage them to the noble act, were excellent Virtuosos and Reasoners. The tale-bearers, liars, and common perjurers, thieves, and petty rogues may rank amongthe Peripatetics, Illu¬ minati, and Naturals. But it re¬ quired a mixture of vices to make a Notiiingeb. Of
Of which of all these was our gal¬ lant Hero, Marauder? —The an¬ swer is short— Of alL It may be said— Above ihem all For though, like a Cromwell, he could talk to each in the peculiar cant of his party, he could also/ Hke him, laugh at tliem all in his sleeve. In one thing he was superior to this great man ;—for Cromwell iu¬ deed was somewhat tainted, even to the end of his life, with the same prejudices; and the excellent Tillotson has sanc¬ tioned the general opinion—that his enthusiasm at last got the better of his hypocrisy;—but Marauder had none of those narrow notions to sway him, and when he had used his tool, he threw it by at pleasure. 0 4 The
The Initiated, or the persons who r like Marauder, are most deeply versed iu the mysteries of the? e Sects, have a general rule, by which they judgO every other person, and govern themselves ; no general mie of antiquity—not that ever blessed one of * Christianity will they allow to be more infallible. It was by this the noble youth early in life began to guide liimself, and this he invariably kept to, amid the sunshines or storms of his join ney.
ты»
This key of his breast he suffered no one to po&sess but himself. He consi¬ dered it as a Nepenthe— as a Philo¬ sopher's Stone— the granh Desi¬ deratum of awiseAIan—Nature's eest Secret-—an universal Bias —the Touchstone of every one's real worth—a Loadstone repulsive ot attractive at the owner's choice ; it was a guide by whieh he steered to the fon- gitude qf his wishes ; it was the mystic number by which he squared tke circle of his actions ι —this golden rule was— ALL PRINCIPLE IS FOLLV. No tie of love, friendship, or affec¬ tion, natural or acquired, held him. He could snap asunder the sacred chain о 5 of
of an oath, and burst the close bands of # Gratitude. Every mental power was subservient to our hero ; his words and actions were his ready tools ; and with the failings^ the weaknesses, the follies, and even vices of mankind, he contmued to build that mighty bulwark (which, like the tower of Babel, never could be raised equal to the labourer's wishes), his, own interest.
€HAP.
рацея
CHAP XVL AT was a great amusement to Wilson, while he was in town, to frequent the public places in company with Rattle. Hambden Arnon, from his long resi¬ dence abroad, was not so capable of shetving the town, and Rattle had kindly volunteered his services for that purpose. Wilson quickly found that his enter¬ taining companion knew the characters and persons of all the mm of renown, in о б whatever
whatever station of life they excelled, and seemed himself to have an acquaint¬ ance with the greater part of them, Methodist Preachersand Freethinkers, Dukes and Jockies, Men of learning and Men of words, and Rogues high and low—in short, the more knowing ones of every denomination came under his ken. The morning after the debate, some¬ what early in the routine of fashion, ere the mall had begun, as they were enter¬ ing the P$rk together, Rattle stopped short " Now, Wikon, FU introduce you to the greatest rogue in Europe/' " I return you my sincerest thanks for
för the intended favour, but must de¬ cline your kindness." " No; опту life you shajl not. If I conjure up a devil, I'll teach you how to charm him. As Hotspur says—- tell truth, and shame the devil.—Hush! Ecce signum ! —Mr. Cowspring, this ia Mr. Wilson, a very worthy man, my friend, and who is not ashamed of being tbe son of a carpenter." The person, to whom Wilson was thus strangely introduced, extended both \m hands, as if he would have taken hold of Wilson s ; but he, thinking upon what Rattle had said, made not the smallest advai^e on lib part. " What brings you out so early ?'* said Rattle* " The
" The cause of truth, which is tri* umpiring over the ivhole world." " How? I have heard nothing." " Five millions more of the inhabit* ants of this earth now glow with the rays of Reason \ Superstition and Ty¬ ranny hide their heads !" " Where? In the basket of the guillotine ?" " Ah ! Rattle, are you still waver¬ ing? Ifyou and your friend ivill take- your dinner to-day at my table, you shall hear the particulars. You knoiv* it is my public clay " Wilson was about to excuse himself, but Rattle jogged him, and said— " Weil endeavour to wait on you.— How have you succeeded lately in your converts ?" " I make converts î Sometimes* indeed*
indeed, the force of reason shews the pure truth." <fi What think уош of tlie force of gold ?" "I assure you, on my word and ho* nouXj I never in my life attempted to induce any one to be of my opinions,. but by clear and open arguments." " The young Ensign, whom I safr next to, the. last time I. was at yout: house, told, me that you had entreated him to become a member of a Society upom the pure principles of Philanthropy; and that, in that case, you could furnish him with the cash to purchase his Lieute- nancy-^-as you were sworn to assist nono out of your own Society. He asked me if I were a member, I told him not yet" "Upon my word and honour, Mr. Rattle*
Rattle, this must be some mistake. I— ï shall be most happy to see you and your friend to-day. I m ust leave you at pre¬ sent, as I am in great haste."— And the gentleman, in a quick slouching pace, continued his walk. " Certainly you have no intention of accq^ting his offer ?" said Wilson. " Indeed but I have. You see his character already. There will be some twen ty or thirty people there. We may leave the place as soon as we like ; for I M'ish you to go f thnt you may see with your own eyes the respect wbich is paid to wealth in the — But I will not anticipate your entertainment. Of thb you may be assured, that he is an ac¬ quaintance you may drop with the same ease you would a buffoon or mimic that you #ere in company with for the moment»
moment. What ¡s commonly called—* to be otf-—is so common a thing with this man, that he never regards it." Wilson was persuaded, and consent* ed to accompany Rattler The person so strangely introduced to Wilson, he had supposed, at a little dis¬ tance, to be a very, elderly man ; but a, nearer view of him shewed his age to be scarce fifty. His dress was common,. loose, and slovenly; his hair, uncombed» bung down his face over his суш, of the mme length before and behind ; his hat had a large brim, and slouched. As he spoke, he neither looked at Wilson nor Battle, but his eyes were fixed on the ground; and, though he had spoken only a few words, and those of щ» consequence»
consequence, he had uttered them wítfc a steady and reflective air, as if they had been of the greatest momenta As soon as Wilson had consented to dine at his house, Rattle said—" Whom should you suppose this man to be ?" " I give up the enigma. I heg, youll explain it." " This is General Cowspring." " A General I" " Attend.*—·At seventeen his parent* purchased him a commission in the Guards. He spent twenty thousand pounds before he was twenty. Thorough¬ ly acquainted with the tricks ofthe town, from a Pigeon he became a Rook —in other words—from having been cheated*. he began to cheat. In the next tem years iiis fortune wm considerably increased,
Increased, but his character was entirely gone. Now broke out the American war* ; he had changed his regiment, arid wasordered abroad; and, at the very time his acquaintance thought that he would be dismissed the service for bribery and extortion, and a gross want of courage,. he came home a Lieutenant Colonel. " Having learned experience, he added another vice to his list, Hypo¬ crisy ; and began again to make a figure in London. For many years he played the sycophant in all courtly places, ia hopes* of а regiment ï he soon became a full Colonel and General without one. He had just begun to plume himself upon his new title, when the disgrace, which * had been so long smothered, on a sild¬ eden burst forth, and stifled in a moment ЬЬ full-blown honours. d ener at Cowspring
Cowspring was concealed for sowier months, at the end of which period he again appeared, stripped of his well- bought rank, though with a fresh stock of assurance to begin the world again, as Mr. Cowspring. " About this time died his elder brother. Cowspring, who had not spoken to him for years, flew instantly to the spot. He was heir at law—no will was to be found, though an attor¬ ney and three tenants swore to the making and -signing one ; his brother, therefore, must have destroyed it in his illness, and the á-tkűmt Cenemi be¬ came possessed of en unincumbered estate of twenty thousand a year. " The person, in whose favour the wiil had been made* commenced a law* suit;
suit ; though, it is supposed, with very little hope of success. * ť He now ranged himself in the files ef Opposition ; but,, as they seemed rather ashamed of their new member, and hy no means gave him what he wished for, a leading part, he quickly left them, and commenced Democrat pmfe&sed. " Here he was received >vith opeţt arm% and every guinea he gave to aid thegloriouseauseof Fraternization, was repaid him tenfold in praises., 4i He isat present entered so deep into the schemes of the party, that it is im¬ possible for him to go back; and three* fourths of hb income, I have been cre¬ dibly informed/ is absolutely given up ber the came* with very little «ontroul onbiepart " His
u His sole employment is making converts; for this reason he courts the company of all young men, particularly those in the Army, Navy, and Public Offices. Occasionally too, he lends a sum of money, or makes a small presents ever accompanied with Tom Pain's Age of Reason. * " His library in the country is no¬ torious as the largest collection of infa¬ mous books tliat was ever known in the world, with every tract that has been written against Christianity. " If this maa is æt any time in com¬ pany with young people, hisconversation instantly tums tohis beloved subject; he has always a book ready in b is pocket, and,. whea he calls at a house^ as soon as the master of the family can соще into the room, he finds his young sonor daugh¬ ter
tair reading a chosen passage against the very vitals of religion and virtue Once or twice he has been disgracefully turned out of doors ; and, not long since, a lad of sixteen, who had just left Westminster, and got a cockade in his hat, read one sentence of Cowspring's book, and, witb all tlie ardour of a schoolboy, spit plump in his face. Yet still he goes on ; his known wealth gains him fresh respect and notiee, all his own party countenance him, and I have met him at Marauder's and Arnon's. " Tbe whole party have been long trying to catch me; and Cowspring, I know, has great hopes, as I occasion¬ ally visit at his public dinners ; but I believe he would dispense with my atten* dance if he knew my motive, which is
to caution any strangers I see there, from getting into his clutches; and among others I have succeeded with the young Ensign that I mentioned. ** I have now given you Cow- spring's public character ; his private I will not touch upon, but solely say- conceive it as bad as possible, you can¬ not equal report·** 4i But, Rattle, Ì do not chuse to dine at this fello w's house." 11 I teU you it isa public exhibition. How many people go to Lady ——'- s, Mrs. ---------*s, and other gaming* houses, and never speak to the owners at any other time ! I have never visited hhn but at his public table ; and as for his Bouse in the countiy-—I should not even speak to him in that neigh- 4 bourhood
bourhood if I met him a thousand times ; but it is different in London." " I think it a shocking thing it should be so, and much to be lamented that men, who profess to have good characters, should give any countenance to the riches ofa villain* My curiosity, I confess, is much raised togo ţo Cow- spring's, but I assure you I will not, and my introductory bow shall be my last" Wilson had scarcely made this deter¬ mination before they perceived Cow» spring returning. " 'Tis trueT exclaimed tlie latter, with great exultation. " The French have beat the Despots tf Tyranny* To you, Sir," said he, turning 4 to Wilson, vol. ii* > ŕ " whose
*' whose innate reason and contempt of servile prejudices make you glory in the name of Citizen, uninfluenced by the name of aristocratieal distinctions, this success must be glorious tidings." * ' You allude to what Mr. Rattle saicl, that 1 am the son ofa carpenter?** re¬ plied Wilson gravely. " I honour yoit that you glory in the term," said the other. " Then you mistake," continued Wilson. " My father's humble situa¬ tion in life has at no time been a subject bf glory to me, yet I shall never be ashamed of it, since his conduct and character have made it respectable."— Mr. CWspring looked strangely dis* appointed. ' " Rut wbat is the news ľ 9 said Rattle. " The 6
* 1 The whole Austrian army is com¬ pletely annihilated ; and the man, who s calls himself tlie Emperor of Germany, will soon be hurled from his throne," Wilson spoke warmly, and in evident anger.—" And so, Sir, the success of -our common enemy, and the misfortunes of our Ally, are the causes of .your ex¬ ultation. Sir, I care not who or what you are, but this you have now proved to me, that you are directly or indirect· ly a traitor to your King and Country. 1 * Mr. Wilson, with contempt, turned from him ; Rattle laughed heartily ; and the wretch, without the least reply, slouched off eveu taster than he did tlie first time. - " These smart rubs," said Rattle, ' p2 " this
" this worthy fellow continually meets with. His natural cowardice humbles him for the moment, but he soon again begins the old trade of trying to make converts. I presume you now know the gang, who act upon the principle of recruiting Serjeants—of swearing their recruits in as soon as possible. This old dog, I told you, had been pressing me to enter into their Society with every plausible argument he can use ; and if I find any thing amiss (he says) it will then be time enough to secede : but I have been told that if you are once sworn, you can never retreat." Wilson professed his ignorance of the whole any further than their principles, which, both in private and public, he had heard without any very thick dis¬ guise.
guise. Rattle, who seemed full of his subject, and very inclinable to be communicative, continued— " They swear you, in the most so¬ lemn and sacred, the most horrid and shocking terms, to be true to the Brother" hood. What this Brotherhood is ihey unfold by degrees, and having once caught you, they entangle you still more and more by fresh oaths ; and you curse yourself in every term the most subtile art can invent, ifyou ever betray them. The oath of the Free-masons is bad enough; but they tell me it is nothing to this." " You seem to speak methodically. How do these things transpire ?" '* Partly by treachery, partly by re¬ morse, and sometimes inadvertently,'* f 3 continued
continued Rattle, in a serious and re¬ flective tone, very unusual with him. " Poor Looder, who shot himself last autumn, was inveigled among them. I was then half persuaded to become a member. ï spoke to Looder.—' I'll not advise you, * said he, and trembled as he spoke. * Rattle, I have been mi* serable ever since ! I had many things to vex me, and I thought to have found help here. You cannot conceive how I am entangled. I have a great? mind to tell you every thing, in defiance ©f alî the oaths and- daggers in the world.—The conversation was here in¬ terrupted, and I never saw Loòder afterwards. The horrid catastrophe ~ took place the next day. " Rattle did not wait for any reflec¬ tions from Wilson, but continued— ; " Did
" Did you observe that handsome man, who left Cowspring the last time he came up to us, and μΊιο bowed to me as he passed ?" " I could &ot remove my eyes from him. So noble a countenance, so un¬ daunted a look ;—but that brow of care, Rattle ?" " Entangled by their wiles, and ha fa rassed by domestic troubles, poor fet- low ! I ftar he thinks all mankind his foe. But his spirit will not sink like Looder's ; desperate, he has rashly de¬ voted himself to the party, and is about to play a bold stroke in that climes where his birth, his misfortunes, his injuries first commenced—the West Indies." " You make me anxious to know more. Proceed." ' ν 4 "At
*' At the early age of five 3 r ears, young Santhorpe lost his parents. With - a narrow prudence, the луШ of his father appointed a capital Banking House in London the executors. " Royston Santhprpe comes over to England, heir to six thousand a year, witli the small debt of ten thousand pounds. What might not a sixteen years' minority accomplish ? ** The prudent guardians sent him to one of those trumpery schoob, which af¬ fectation and pomposity, impudence and ' ignorance form frora the follies and vices ofthe metropolis. " The master of the school had been under clerk, and confidential servant to the active jmrtner of this Banking House, and married the endowed trull of his principal Such the connection for
for young- Santhorpe ! for whose board and education was paid one hundred guineas a year. " Thé native abilities of the boy's mind, his energetic soul met with no liberal and genial spirit to aid its strug¬ gles. Torpid dulness depressed him, conceit disgusted him, and hypocrisy corrupted him. His friends, relations, connections, every dear tie were shal¬ lowed up in the name of guardian; and this guardian only visible in the form of clerks and money-servants. * ' For twelve years Santhorpe remaineei at this school, without leaving its bane¬ ful, cold, unfriendly atmosphere. " The man began to exert himself—* for four long years did he struggle ere he could break hb trammels. " At one-and-twenty he left hm f S schoot
school. His accounts were produced. His* estate was in want of-every thing, and the debt was twice doubled. Large interest with great premiums had been for sixteen years paid for every sum wanted. His income remained for six-* teen years without interest, hut with great çare, in his guardian Banker's bands· u He now took possession of an ex«» hausted, impoverished estate, mth a debt of forty thousand pounds ! " What must Royston Santhorpe think of mankind, when every сешпес* tton hud proved the villain? What must Royston Santhorpe tiunk of Rein gion, Laws, and Govenunent, when nothing but infamy, ope», public, un* punished, existed tohim ? * The specious principle of Demo* cracy
ei^acy tempted the injured youth. Twas the form of revenge as well as the fcr&i ef friendship* " It was not long before one aí the prowling sons of the newr Phifosopkyt caught the ипм г агу prey, and he enter¬ ed inta their system wkh the highes* ardour. Bold and undaunted ш mind, strong and vigorous in body, hp к rest* . tess to be distinguished ш a conspicuous manner. " Under the auspices of these wor* tides, Royston Santhorpe is goings ove* to thè West Indies,, to endeavour to re¬ cover the property almost alienated by his guardians. What interest, what powers he тщ bear with him, 1 cannot know, though I can easily ςοηαώνβ ;—* and since the English laws have been $o> в 6 long
long against hirø, I most readily con* elude that he will be against them. " If the French party succeed in the island to which he is going, and if he joins them, the large debts in England are wiped out in a moment ; bat if they do not succeed, and Santhorpe keeps with .his countrymen, his estate must at last be sold; and what will remain, from the mortgages and expences, to him ?" " And can nothing be done for his affairs, and to extricate him from the clutches of this accursed party ?" " What reason has he to trust to the friendly professipns of others? His means for some years have existed front the party. Ke is no longer в child ; and, perhaps, whenhe gets miøanother country, he may see and renounce Ш ' errws. 4< Exclusive
{t Exclusive of the entanglement of his private property, there are two pro¬ secutions at the present time against him, which also induce him to leave England. His late schoolmaster called on him some time since, to pay (every thing being removed from the Banker's hands) some arrears due for his school¬ ing. Words arose; and he disciplined his master most severely with a horsewhip : and, in the midst of the Public Change, when he found no redress from the law, he spit in the face of his acting guardian. " He has also already been noticed by the Government for his public harangues. u His able $nd enterprising mind has thus Jægun to distinguish itself; and some kte writings in a famous anti- mínisteríal
ministerial paper am said to come from his pen* Yet such has been his con¬ duct both in private and public, so nice is his innate sense of honour, so pleas¬ ing his manners, that no one, who ha& the least acquaintance with him, can be his enemy ; and though hk departure from thb country is pretty well known, no means are likely ta be taken to* prevent it." " How came you so well acquainted with his history and charactei, Rattle ?" " I have often heard Arno% Aia*- lauder, and my If te guardian, Vantage^ speak of hhn ; and Santhorpe has men¬ tioned, wfcen I have been present, tnany particulars of his Banking guardians, conchid. I became acquainted with him at tlie time he entered the Society, and I hinted to Ыш' my opinion of the party he*
he was connected with. He looked at me ivith a calm, though determined air, and said—" Sir, I am sworn. My life has been a sea of troubles. Here I first began to swim, and here, if it is neces¬ sary, I am resolved to sink·"
ff"""'* ι . , .) -I. . ■' ' ■."■»
CHAP. XVIL MR, COWSPRING usually break- fasted, every morning at some one of the largest London coffee-houses; from whence, among the number of indivi¬ duals passing andrepassing, he had been able
able to introduce many a member tohis grand Society. At one of these he met with the young man, whose wild, though virtuous, ora¬ tory had so astonished Wiison, and in¬ troduced him to the acquaintance of Rattle» This youth was under age, heir to a small fortune; and having lost his iather early in life, was by a fond mother edu¬ cated in a private though excellent manner. His last tutor was a most accomplish¬ ed mark, a French emigrant of high rank. He had painted to his pupil, in glowing colours, the horrors of Anar* cby, Irreligión, and Democracy. The youth
youth had caught the mental infection, and upon the death of his friend— M'ho had been treacherously inveigled over to France, and tbere basely murdered by the guillotine—a deep melancholy had at first seized the young man ; and while his sorrow kept bun at home, he had deeply studied the sacred M'ritings ; and now, indignant against the impiety and immorality of the age, he boldly rushed out in opposition to vice where- ever * he should meet with it. Inthis alone his mania consisted, that in de¬ fiance of the common forms of thş world, he would frequently speak his jnind with a courage and want of diffi¬ dence, that would oftentimes surprise the very boldest of the sons of impu¬ dence, who had been long hackriied in the more bustling scenes of life. Tha
The youth had been intended for the Church, was of a respectable family ia Norfolk, and hb name Mas PhiHp Harrety. Mr* Cowspring, having noticed him for a few mornings, contrived to take hh breakfast in part of the same box. The strong natural abilities, the inge* ищи s character, and wild manners of the young man, induced the Philoso* pher to be very anxious to gain him to their Society. The subject of conversation turned upon universal Philanthropy, " This¿ Sir," said Harrety, with the ardour
ardour of enthusiasm, " is the grand mrcana of virtue, morality, and religion." Mr. CoM'spring thought that he vr&ñ already a disciple ; but as he did not answer the secret signal, he extolled the purity and perfection of his ideas, and said—" I sm a member, Sir, ofa band óf United Brethren, whose sole aim is to propagate this eosmopolitical princi¬ ple, and whose sublime mystery is the all-perfect knowledge of promoting the happiness of the human race, uninflifc* enced by religious prejudices,,narrow- minded patriotism, and supercilious pride." : Cowspring spoke with caution. Twas but the day before that Wibon had ao leverely lectured him. Harrety
Harrety replied in rapture—condemn* ed the prejudices of religion—owned the narrow and selfish views of the greater number of patriots—severely reprobated every species of pride—and praised, in the most sanguine terms, so excellent an institution. Mr. Cowspring told him that he purposed going to their meeting that evening ; and, if he would favour him with his company, he should bemost happy to introduce him. Harrety with ardour thanked him, and the gentlemen exchanged addresses. The missionary of Philosophy further informed his embryo convert, that the meeting would not be over till a late hour ;
hour ; and he invited the youth to call at his house, and take an early refresh¬ ment. To this Harrety consented, and, with mutual professions of esteem, they for the present separated. u Now,'* thought Harrety, as soon as Cowspring had left him, <; is the moment I have so long wished for ar¬ rived, when I shall be able to unite my weak abilities in the glorious task of reviving our primitive faith. How happy am I to find the world is not so wicked as I at first supposed it to be ! This, no doubt, is one of the religious Societies I have heard of, and this night shall I see Christianity in the mild and heavenly garb the Saviour originally gave
gave it. Ťo the other side of the globe will I willingly go a missionary, if I can promote the cause of our blessed religion!" Young Harrety elevated bis mind to the highest pitch, and in the evening went to sup at Mr. Cowspring's. Here the largeness of the house, tlie elegancy of the furniture, the fashion¬ able style ¿n whicii ¿u.. Cowspring seemed to live, gave him a high opi¬ nion qf the owner,, whose manners, in the midst of his wealth, were simple, his dress plain. They waited not bug after supper before Cowspring's carriage drove to the door, and they set off together to the place
place Mİıere the Society met, of which Hamty маз so eager to become л member. Wiien they came to the house, an old and large ruinous building, through tnany windings and turnings, they were shewn at first into an anti-room. . Here were many other people; and what much surprised Harrety, every one but himself and friend mwc a ma'sk. The youth had no time to make any remark, before a voice, which proceeded from a large statue in tbe room, said—" Let Cato and his pupil approach to the initiating chamber, that fhe blindness of ignorance may be illumina¬ ted by the first sparks of light " Harrety
Harrety was lost in astonisbment. Cowspring came, and softly whispered him—" It is necessary you should be blinded a few minutes. Don't be alarmed—¿'tis but a form. " The pupil was not over pleased at this commencement of his initiation ; yet he said not a word, but suffered a large hood to be placed over his head by a* man in a strange mask. Some one took him by the hand, whom he supposed to be Cowspring ; and after many turnings, and the frequent noise of opening of doors, he stopped in a room, where, even through the thick¬ ness of his hood, he could perceive a Ькге of light
As
, Äs sooii as he was entered, the utmost silence prevailed, and the foUowing was spoken in a voice firm and strong :— " To emancipate the intellectual sys¬ tem from legal and superstitious servi¬ tude, to root out prejudices, to pull down despotic influences, Almighty Reason mounts her throne, the hamun fteart. * i Man, as an intelligent being, wants not the moral freedom to will, nor the physical power to act : united together, our victory is sure; and the Reign of Reason shall commence with the millennium of Liberty and Equality. ' Instantly a buz of approbation went through the room.
VOL. II. Q
Some
Some «me now cried out**-" Name this iafíríít ! n and a person, touching! Harrety, eaid—" Name thyself ľ* The pupil answered—" Philip Har> rety.' 1 ** Wouldst thon not chme aiHÄher шше ? w φι That is røy real name," " We know k, and applaud thy «oa¬ rage (though contrary to the general wisdom), which stiu woald retain it. But m tbis Society be tbou henceforth Alcibiabes. Hear tben, Oh Aki- l¿adesxl ûur gotím mie.—* Lear» to diecover others, but conceal thyself t& all but the Brethren, and thou wilt be wise.' Another voke sakl— H Produce tíie test." 6 A third
A third voice?said— "Alcibíades, re¬ peat after me ! " May the eternal hatred and revenge of my brethren pursue me, if ever I disclose*- ------" " Swear not at all," exclaimed Har* rety, throwing up the hood, " neither by heaven, for it is God's throne, nor by the earth, for it is his footstool î Are secrecy, disguise, and oaths Ш be tlie test of wisdom ? Does universal frirlaft* thropy require' concealment ? Virtue binds good men together ; oaths vil¬ larøs. An honest тщ takes no oath, but what the laws of his country de¬ mand of him. I expected to have found a society of Christian Philoso- pliers, and not of trifling Sophists. I thought to have heard the dictates of pure wisdom, and not the sentimental α 3 slang
slang of scepticism ; and I looked for the gravity of men, and not the murø- niery of players." So far, in defiance of all obstacles, did Harrety proceed in expressing his abhorrence of the grand Society* The sj>ectac!e before him was enough to have daunted the boldest heart ; but his zeal for religion and virtue took away all personal fear. The President, with a mask on like a lion's head, sat on the uppermost seat, in the midst of a blaze of light. On one side of hira was a skeleton ; on the other a man's dead body, with his clothes од. Over the latter was writ¬ ten—" The reward of perjury ľ and over the skeleton —" Who fears ?" All
AH M'as now in an uproar. Harrety, with a firm countenance, beheld the scene. When the noise had a littie subsided, the President said something to hini in a threatening voice, unless he instantly took tbe test, and pointed to the dead body. Harrety vociferated—" Your oaths I abominate—yourselves I, de¬ spise—your proceedings I detest !" . One man, who sat on the other side of the dead body, started şp, and drew from under his cloak a dagger; and turn¬ ing to the President, s^d-^- * Our etefr nal unchangeable laws demand the sa¬ cı ¡fice. I am willing to be the minister of justice." Q 3 Instantly
Instantly some of the persons near bim seized him by the arms. Harrety struggled.—" Mr. Cowi-pring," ex¬ claimed he, "wiil be answerable for my appearance. His life and your's all hang on mine. You dare not hurt me 1 " He looked round for his new acquaint¬ ance, but could not distinguish htm, as aH were masked 5 but some one went and whispered to ťhe Président and would-be minister of justice. The for¬ mer said-—* 1 Cato saves tby Ше ; but If ever the« disee^^e^t to any mortal the *евшгез£$в of thb evening, пщ heave«, nor €arth, nor hell shaii fm* eerv« thee Irem mm vtagerøee· 1 * Ås tb€ President spoke, tarfi шап tliew ери his cloak, and producing a dagger,
dagger, said—" I swear ! I swear ! I swear P* The Presklent again spoke—" Mad¬ man, thou hast heard our decree. Blind him again, and lead him out as he came in." He M T as now forcibly blinded, and eoii¬ dueted out of Uie house. After being led through many streets, Harrety declared to hb conductors he would go no further ; and if he was not released, he would immediately cry out» Ά voice sakl to bim, which he knew to be the volunteer minister of justice— u Remember, ten thousand daggers are it thy heart the moment thy lips betray thee!"—This man was no other than Marauder. Q 4 Hö
He M'as now uncovered, and his con¬ ductors disappeared. Harrety looked around for some object to certify him of the spot ; and, being assured he should know the pľace again, he proceeded leisurely along the middle of the way. The shops м*еге at this time all shut up: but as he turned into a larger street, he perceived a watchman. ' From this man he gained the name of the street where he had been left, and who also directed bim to tbe nearest stand of coaches* Without any accident he arrived safe at his lodgings.
CHAI».
feSSS555SSS9EESS9S9SSSSS
CHAP. XVIII. rlTİ A HE next morning Harrety called on Rattle, with whom an acquaintance had commenced from the time they left the debate together. In defiance of all the threats of tlic former night, Harrety fully mentioned the ivhole occurrence. Rattle told him he knew very well who Cowspring was, and he believed 'Q 5 many
many other of his acquaintance were of the grand Society ; and having related to him the history of Cowspring, and object of the party, asked him if he intended to proceed any further in the Ы1 я ■ γ» Ada " Without doubts rfpjied Harrety warmly. " Are you not afraid of their daggers. and their ofiths ϊ You had hetter føt tbe affair, rest. The secret shall not escape " Do you not thiţik^ asked liairety^ " it may benefit my fellow-creatures ta detect and expose this Society ?" 11 Certainly I do," replied Rattles 1 ' but the danger to yourself -----" 11 I hold no compact with villains». Let the iaw protect me', —and if \ do fall, røy iß&t breath shall thank my God
Göd that I løft this life in the dis*- charge of that great duty incumbent om every Christian**-*» contempt ôf vice whiie in the service of virtue" " However I may act, I cannot but applaud your determination," said Rat¬ tle candidly; "ana as the best means« for your safety ami their apprehension, âdvke y ou, without loss øf time, to apply to the Bow-street Magistrates." To this- Hafrety consented. That no spy might discover their in¬ tentions, Rattle alone waited upon one of the Justices as soon as it was dark.. He informed the worthy Magistrate that Harrety had numbered his steps from the time he left the house, and noticed the different turnings ; he was* о. 6 tiierefore
therefore certain he could conduct any person yery near the spot* but tlia^iie was quite ignorant of the way he went in Mr. Cowspring's carriage. The Magistrate told Rattle if his friend could point out within a few streets, be was well assured the Police Officers could tell the house, as they had a list of every private meeting of any size and consequence in the kingdom. The arrest of Mr. Cowspring alone Mould be of very little service, he said, as nothing could be alledged against him, and that they had no powers to compel him to discover his associates; but by seizing on the whole gang, they should get possessed of their papers, and any improper instruments they might have in their possession. Tliat
That day week, on which Harrety accompanied Cowspring to the meeting, was fixed on for the purpose; It is not to be supposed that Mr. Cowspring frequented the Coffee-house where young Harrety lodged in the interim* He thought proper, tbe morn¬ ing aftei; his disappointment tb go to his country seat for a little time· * - ■· ' When the evening eame, in which the Magistrates purposed to apprehend the Society, Harrety conducted the Bow-street officers, as near as he was able, to the spot. Rattle in high spirits accompanied them. As Harrety stopped, one of the officers instantly said~ u You have mistaken your last turning, Sir; the next street will clear up the business. " They
*Hiey went, therefore^ into the ne^t stre^, tod came to an old building» which Harrety instantly recogirizect The lower part of the house was æ thoroughfare to the habitations of dif^ ferent poor families. They proceeded up two pair of stairs, and, listenings found there were volees within» Two raps at the door produced the watch-word from within ; but as ttey eould not answer» they instantly began? bursting opes the doors. This took up« some few minutes ; and when they entered the inner apartments the large blaze щ the chimney shewed that e very- paper of consequence was destroyed». Neither Harrt ty nor Rattle assisted in. tiie apprehension of the partk». E^hfe
Eight persons weie eeked οα. Their ^ïoiasks, as well m papers, had beea burnt· Tîıeir ydaggers weife thrown eni of the windøwy and picked up the заех, t day ia ant adjoining court. Mr. Arnon was one of the persons appreı^îHk d, во ware Fahany *ne San- thorpe. Marauder had, at the first ihxm* climbed up the chimney, ftøm wlìeace to the toy of the house, he knew v+:as до gieat: distance ; for, with ЬЬ usual c^ţWiii Ы håd before cx,- The Officers of Justice, when they kft tbč lioiii, &sten¿d the doors, purposing to maktf ш search under the ßoovs and around- tihe wakscots iü the BPiornmg, in hopes of gaining farther discoveries ;
discoveries ; but when Marauder, late ia the night, came down from hk retreat, he carried about him tools suffi¬ cient to get the doe^s from their hinges, and complete his escape. Thus he narrowlv evaded behi£ taken. The persons apprehended were imme¬ diately conducted before a Magistrate; but as nothing was alledged except Harrety's testimony tlmt his life was threatened, and a& these were only sus¬ pected to be the people, they were permitted to give bail for their appear¬ ance next day, A messenger had beea sent after Mr. Cowspring, whom the Magistrates knew to be in the eountry, and he was e' pected in the morning. When
When all partie« were on the next day assembled, Harrety made oath that his life was in danger from the threats of a set of people to which Mr. Cow¬ spring had introduced htm, though he could not specify their persons. As tbere was great reason to suppose these tfere the same f the Magistrates required them to find bail for their peaceable behaviour towards Harrety ; and Mr. Cowspring's sureties were bound for double the sum of any of the rest. This arrest, though it had failed in agreat degree, was not without its use· The Justices gained possession of the names of the leadmg members, and Harrety was protected from any sinister attempts of the party against his life ; fori in case of any thing happening to him»
him, the character of Mr. Arnon, Fahany, Cowsprir*g, and the rest would be called in question, and the aflair, without doubt, minutely investigated. Before the Magistrates the party apprehended did not deny that they were of the same Society, but endea¬ voured to makea joke of what Harrety both saw and lieard ; and tliough it iu some degree took away from tìm horror of the appearance of what Harrety had seen, yet it added to the proofs that t. they were the same people. The dead body was found, though not of human substance ; før as the skeleton was legally bought of a surgeon, so had the bedy without life been purchased from the refine of tiie ingenious Mrs* t Salmon»
Salmon, in Fleet-street, wbo had in¬ sured it to keep for any length of time. The discovery ofthe daggers too was a susjiicious circumstance, though it could not be positively attached to the persons apprehended. The whole conduct of Harrety, so dauntless and noble, was highly ap· plauded by the Magistrates, who desired him, upon the smallest suspicion of any assault, to apply to them ; and that a guard was ready, at a momenťs notice, to attend him at any time, Rattle did not appear publicly in this business, on account of his acquaint¬ ance with many of the parties ; but more
more so, his intimacy Mith Hambden Anion prevented his M'ish of taking an active and open part. By the friendship of Wilson, Hamb¬ den was introduced to the other executors of the Duke, and to many respectable acquaintance, whose manners and sta» tions were" very different from those he had been usually in the habit of associating with.
СНЛР.
СНЛГ. XIX. AMONG the реиоп. of note intheif grand Society, with whom Marauder M'as in the highest repute, was a Mr. Cioutîîey. Iiiis gentleman M r as a very staunch Philosopher, but more of the sect of the Naturals than any other. Marauder wished for ЬЧ assistance in some particular scheme he had in hand; but as it was inconvenient for himself
himself to leave London at this time, Mr. Anion undertook the commission. V His son Hambden was engaged ; and wishing for a companion, he prevailed on Rattle to accompany him. Mr. Arnon, finding himself unable by argu¬ ments to convert Rattle to his new system, promised to give him ocular demonstration in a paiticular friend of his owa. Mr* Cloudley was a country gentle¬ man, with a good otate in Kent, and a pretty wife, who brought him (what is called) a very decent fortune. Mr. Cloudley met with this fair lady at Bsuh, where she Imd with her aunt. Conformity
Conformity of kleas soon united in indissoluble bonds the bappy pair. A few years a^ter their marriage, cmr Galli * neighbours having destroyed, Mith complete success^ their own indi¬ vidual happiness, adapted in its pfeee n wonderful mia most comprehensive scheme of universal felicity. Our nrw ceuple were already filled with the eggs of novelty, scepticism, and refonnation ; the spreading mania therefore soon settled «pen them, and tíie marks burst forth with astonishing fury. When Afr. Amon, a warm disciple iimserf, wm émit $o go Ш France, hisr friends, tte Ckmdfeys, detemiined to realise
realize their wonder-pregnant schemes in the country. Cloudley Hall underwent a thorough metamorphosis. Every individual and selfish consideration was nobly sacrificed to the general good of the family ; master and mistress, man-servant and maid-servant, were scarcely to be dis¬ tinguished from each other. Mr Cloudley employed himself in agricul¬ ture ; Mrs. Cloudley read and wrote morning, noon, and night; though sometimes, by way of relaxation, she fed the pigs, milked the cows, madu hay, and did other little jobs. It must not be omitted that Mrs* Cloudley boasted the largest library in the kingdom of female authors. A pro;
A promising ymng&mvåy came wry fast. Misses and .masters, as soon a« they were able to тип, were con¬ signed to the direction of the alb instructing goddess, Nature. Clad in a check-shirt, and a pair of trowsers each (other covering they had none,) boys and girls, barefooted and bare¬ headed, in all seasons and all weathers, ranged, uncontroulcd, about the pre¬ mises. How (iitl Mr. and Mrs, Cloudley, and their philosophical visitors, admire that wonderful natural * instinct (as we call it, though Godwin says there is no
It
vrh
méh Шщ) that» guided them øf their <mvá accord, like pigi, geese, and tur¬ keys, to return to the house whenever tbey wanted meat, drink, warmth, or rest. The latter indeed was t in the summer time, more frequently taken in the stable, the straw-house, or tbe barn, as in these places they could meet with a more comfortable bed; clean straw being allowed, in the place of repose where they all herded together, but once a month. This excellent system had already succeeded in an astonishing degree ; for speed^strength, and hardiness, they surpassed every cbild in the village. Lucretia, the eldest daughter, was twelve years of age, and for kicking and cuffing wa§ the terror of the stoutest plovA -boys, AmazGnia,
Amazonit the second daughter, was eleven. ; ¡Natures indeed, had not "done her duty here, as she never had pro¬ perly set to rights a trifling accident that happened in jher sixth year, from an encounter with a young ram. This young lady limped a little, stopped short in her growth—I mean м to height ; for the deficiency Mas amply supplied by a full share of human sub¬ stance behind. If the agility of the body was thus unluckily cheeked, that of the miud was not ; for this young inaidén shewed a wonderful propensity to mischief. Four sons, aged six, seven, eight, and.nine, completed the family. At the age of ten, Mrs, Cloudley begau to teach them their А. В. С R 2 and
Md То г&Ше, áá 'sht; (lòubred whether dååe r Sifure ; ШЖе to initiate thein М*Чпйе pofhfe. Thè fòàr-aad-twenty letters, and theîr állianccfs, once become 'k'nowií, 6jlpö¥ruıiîttek ı for fórtlier aé- quaintanec were left to'themselves. "Subjects of study," said Mrs. and Mr. Cloudley, " we force hot on them. Γη these thev can exercise their oxen k' will ; here tliey have a choice, a right ;"—and Mrs. Cloudley, as well as her husband, was too true a Philo¬ sophes« to picjudice their uills, or debar them of a choice or right* Lucretia, with one lesson а Шу* knew, in less than two years, alt her letters, and couid make pot-hooks and sheep-crooks ^ith great eclat.
А г- -¿-"ii %
Amazonia, the genius, already ri- vailed her. ι '* Such are the innate powers w ith M'hich Nature has furnished the mind ; A » í ' *» > , , ι ϊ > ŕ ' ! * , '. 1 J , , ŕ < » I ft and how great arid glorious must their strength be when left to themselves,
Cloudley.
t I
It may be, a matter of surprise how . α тоя m ν с ,л {»йп j >fi^fu PwS two people, endowed with such liberal and congenial minďs, ever eame to marry-r-to indulge in such a ridiculous, *8ηρ^Αμοΐΐ8, unmeaning ceremony* To this I answer— éiat tf filharo Godwin himself, the Author qf ¿Political Justice / and Mary Wplktonecraft, the Authoress r3 of
of the Rights of Woman, saw cause # '* to subject themselves to those con¬ sequences which the laws of England annex to husband and wife," how many and more forcible reasons must a simple country gentleman and his fair one have, whose estate needed a wife's for¬ tune to wipe away the life-mortgages, and whose son wanted legitimacy to entitle him to an entailed property. One fine morning Mr. Arnon intro« duced Rattle to this family mansion of a #ew system of morality "realized. I find the utmost difficulty in pro- ceeding any, further in this part of niy tab JJnlucluly for the reader, I am
not
*. j.' * not myself ta Illuminati or Peripä te Oc of this sect ; or, м ithout a blusb, a pause, or an excuse, could I detail the particulars of the scene which met Rattle's eyes on his entering the court¬ yard. The presence of the strangers, added to the ringing of the bell at the gate, alarmed the young Naturals* Thç fair Lucretia leaped from the back ofa don¬ key, and, foUowed by Amazonia, ran giggling into the stable. Brutus^ Vol-* taire, Hercules, Tom Pain«—what a happy combination of names í^-for so the four sons were called, from ^arljr traits in their character, which the philosophic eyetof their pareti tfcperceived, fied with yoyou pote» towards tbe Ьрцц* %4 Enter
Enter into the courťyard from the house, Mr. Cloudley, with long matted locks uncombed, with an 01 ¡veriam covering on bis head, sandals on his utt, short coat or tunic, and belt around bis waist» Having given his friend Arnon the fraternal embrace, M'hich, with great adroitness, under the pretence of a fit of sneesdng, Rattle evaded, he wel¬ comed tbem to Cloudley Hail After a few common civilities and enquiries had passed between them, Cloudley said"—" You see me a citizen of nasute; my garb fa solely for use/* " The belt, Sir?" said lattle. ** Here I t$Nk a sword, or pistol, ^#f Imlfe ; № % Ы Amt, my thing." " I see nothing there at present." Mr.
* ť Mr. Rattle," said Arnon, '4s the? slave,of custom—one of ihe.prejudiced.. I am in Iţopes уоцг, good example will
convert him»**
Mr. Cloudley looked at Rattle ϊ» such a manner while Mr. Arnoii spoke, tfiat a physiognomist would have sup¬ posed he was the man of prejudice ; but, at tbe last sentence, the supercilious brow of conceit was much more eviáént. ·« Welť, Mr. Člouáey," said Rattle, rîşhtij { g:qessing the ? sensations of hi* mind, '* doyouthinkyou shall succeed ?" *' If, ypirøg.man» the force of truth by fttøhio^and superstitions lhe gentlemen all enter the house* m5 М|я
Mrs. Cloudley approaches in a riding jacket, with a short thin petticoat, striped drawers visible, sandals on her feet, and a man's hat on her head. i Introductions and civilities pass of course· ^ , " To you, Sir," said Mrs. Cloudley, addressing Rattle,, " this life that we lead here, though unperverted by art or custom, must at first appear strange. " The lady, I have said, had been χ very pretty woman ; she Mas still so. Though hi her thirty-second year, and the mother of six children, Lady Jersey herself had not a youitger look at that age. There was something in her dress and manner too that' M'as pleasingly # striking ;
striking ; and the contrast with the fashionable dress of the day was con¬ siderably in her favour for gmce, shape, and beauty* Her voice was melodious, her teeth exquisitely white,, and her air,. though free, was feminine* Rattles ever susceptible of beauty, was highly surprised at the one maw present, arid began tó think the scene before him not sò very iSHcuJousl«—» ** My dear Madam," said he, " 'tis new indeed, yet by no means" unplea¬ sant. I am only a learner,, but shall Ье most happy to be your pupiL" Thus him, whom the writings and arguments of scores of modern Philo¬ sophers had been unable to subdue,, me kind glance completely conquered. R 6 Mrs.
Mrs. Cbuclleyi fascinating dimple, -the omen of success, was immediately visible. Mr. Cloudley's looks evidently evinced anotlici passion-, jealmsy. Rat¬ tle observed it, and could acaree refrain his laughter when he perceived the husband affecting a philosophical indif¬ ference. Fiom Ûm defeat in the com¬ bined forets opposed against him, ivere there any impes that Rattle coukl escape 'the¿snare into which Arnon had drawn him. Turning to Air. Cloudley, he said— 1 * The ancient Philosophers con¬ sidered a conquest over the passions of the soal as their first object ; without this they argueel that Mİsdom was not to be obtained. What are your first ^principles, Mr. *C!oudiey ?" 11 ihe geneml welfare ; individuals will con*e of couise."
Rattle
Rattle had .said—" Pshaw !" And was proceeding in bis speech, when a horrid yell from without doqrs preyeţiţed any further reply. AlivCknidiey now put on the active Philosopher, reached dow,n a large horsewhip that hung in the hall, and with great indifference .prqeeeded to.the sound. " Come," said Mr, Cloudley to Rat¬ tle, who., would willingjy have staid behind, "come ancl see how ( easyis the sway of reason and nature." Rattle and Air. Arnon followed liim. Mrs. Cloudley, with equal apathy as her husband concerning the noise, but ivith
with a kind glance toM'ards her younger guest, ivalked up stairs, remarking, as she left them, that "crying was a wonderful effort of nature to draiv the moist vapours, the aqueous parricies, from the brain, thereby clearing tbe understanding, andimprovingtliemmd."* The gentlemen now proceeded to the outward court, мЬеге they discovered the cause of the alarnb Temperance is one of the first quali¬ fications of a Philosopher, especiaHy if \ou mean lo bring up your children to this new trade. Wisely, therefore, мтге the young scientific spirits of the Cloudley family fed but twice a day, morning and evenmg.
A sharp
A sharp stomach makes a sharp wit ; and both being thus sharp, the latter, as in duty bound, returns the favour by providing for the former. Among the alimentary inventions of the yòuríg Ooudîeys, egg-hunting em¬ ployed the day. Their preceptress,, Nature, had gifted her favourite Brutus with a continual titillation on the sapo¬ rirle nerves—I presume meaning him for an Epicurean Philosopher* ** Amazonia knew this, and brought to her dear brother an egg, plump and fair. Brutus тли I: ro bones of the mattes t but, according to his method, clapped the'whole mto his mouth, cracking it nut-fr&hiou»
Now
Now Brutus 4 s olfactory nerves were not sudi faithful guardians ps they ought to havc.j>een ; for thçy luid ^not forewarned him tha,t tbe oyarious con¬ tents had undergone many a metamor- ,phosis .since they bad been grateful to the palate ; as first, in taking the form ofa ypnng eîıick, t whic^ yi nqt being 1 ready to соще forthwith its other bro¬ thers and ,siştcrs, ha^d been neglected, and left hy ţhe mother. Jfaijpg of success in ,this for ; m, the dıick.be^aîi to .change, μ$ιβ a «jpbpyof 1 кроу* ţ ypţ> what species of vermicular ^pimajs nop inhabited the shell. To make my story short.—Pop, full into the midst of these, wiiatever they were, at a venture, Brutus's two rows of masticators, likeaSampson, beganslaying theijc
their thousands, wheu the confined effluvia hurst forth. Is it necessary to particularize any further ? Amazonia, giggling, stood near her brother. He instantly seized her by the matted locks, and pulled her to the ground. Lucretia heard, and knew her squall : she flew upon Brutus ; and as fast as the one pulled, the other cuffed &way. Voltaire, Hercu(es, щи1 Тощ Pain hastened from the top ц£ щ dtjpg- cart to the scene of actioh ? and witjjj kicks and $qual}ş endeavoured to щсщ the unhappy Br ц$т Ы^4к щШ£т$4 them allı gave Vojtøire a l?}aody цощ knocked dowp Hercules, ^nd j^iclţef Tom fmtQ tibe ütfmtßna tfik$ßm%
Such
Such was tlu ¿rene of action as Cloudley, Arnon, and Rattle ap* proached.
CHAP. XX. (jrENŤLE reader, didst thou ever read the first book of Virgil's Æneis, where, in a thunderstorm, while the sons of Eolus are kicking up a dust, up pops Neptune with a trident in his hand, which shaking at the Eolean fry, off they are in a tangent, Not otherwise was the appearance of the father
father of the Cloudley family; his weapon of authority was the large horse¬ whip before mentioned, with which he gave such a crack, tbat the walls ofthe court and the old building re-echoed M*îth the sound. Up jumped Lucretia ; Brutus was not long after, roaring, sputtering, open-mouthed, with the slimy inex* pressible, of a dingy yellow, streaming from each corner of his chops. Ama¬ zonia followed them with unusual nimbleness, aeif conscious of the peace- working effects of her parenťs sceptre. The younger ónét had fled at tbe first crack ; a second routed tbe whole. Peace Being so easily restored, Cloud¬ ley looked around for the applause of his companions, Arnoa
Arnon did not disappoint hini ; but Rattle, who never dealt iu flattery but with a lady, replied—" Where was Katpre, my good Sir? In your horse¬ whip, or in the manner of using it ?" This was a question Cloudley лгав not ready for ; he therefore paused a^ ipo- menţ for an aui^wçf. He thjen Iqgjcaţly хр$\саг~"№а£цге h fim]ile~i$iQ$ţ #Щ; pkwtø mu w$thç4 ; therefore, щ щ^Щ is Hütum" * ť I deny the whole, Sir," şfdd |^at : tie. и Tbos I i*rgue ; уяог chilďrep liay^e Ъ&щ щссцфте4 ţp ţlj^ horsie>vhip-^ £mtp!fiişart! %ıpfi^τ-τ7T эд,, Arnon, who knew his friend Cloudley ящ weij^ as s|0£t щ% Щ Ъцщ ş jpke, * tmrnå Щ» %ti^ доте· <# %tt|r> fWîï
bylldgism'by soilie rertíark concerning Mrs. Cloudley,; who was approaching towards them. Tlie gentlemen returned to the house with her, and soon after saţ down to dinner. The dinner, bad in quality, dressing, and accompaniments, was not worth fbe mentioning; and nothing deserving of notiee passed till it was over. The company then walked into another room, where were some fruit and win-, of whicii the former was too sour, aiul the latter too sweet. The moment after 'they« left the dining-room, and >vere out of sight, Rattle! heard a strange clatter, which he afterwards 6
afterwards understood was occasioned by the young yoyous rushing in, and scrambling for the fragments. In the course of the evening, Arnon attempted many times to leave his friend Rattle alone with Airs. Cloudley, by drawing the husband aside ; but the jealous watchfulness of Mr. Cloudley Mas roused by the evident attention of Rattle, who was seldom on his guard, and this always prevented him. Anion had no doubt of better success the next day ; and already in his mind triumphed in the proselyte he had gained by the charms of Mrs. Cloudley. Rat¬ tle, at length, retired tø his couch Mİthout the tétentele with his kind hostess,
hostess, which his friend seemed so desirous to get for liim. In spite of the wildness and eccen¬ tricity of his character, -Rattle was far from wanting a virtuous principle. Wlien alone in his chamber, he reviewed the occurrences of the day; he saw the easy character of the lady, bis friend's officiousness, and his own danger ; and he determined the next day he woidd conquer, by flying from the temptation. He began also to suspect that there was some trick in the case; for he knew Arnon wtll, that heVassly and subtile, full of schemes and contrivances, indif¬ ferent in obligi ug another, unless he had some object of his own innvie w ; so that he was resolved to be doubly on his guard. Had he sooner known of the
the fasciiiating evil, lie had not risked the temptation ; but he had been sur¬ prised unaM r ares, and happily a moment s -reflection was spared him, and he sum¬ moned reason, principle, virtue, and religio л to his aid. Thus armed, in the morning, not earlv, he came down to breakfast. Greatly indeed м>а$ he surprised to find Marauder Mas bclow r . As he entered the breakfast-room, and deep in thought, slowly opened the door, he had just time enough to see the bewitching Mrs, Cloudley sitting on Marauders knee : slie sprung up imme¬ diately. Marauder was coolly talking to the husband, who was busily writing m a closet adjoining. Rattle
Rattle testified his amazement at see¬ ing Marauder, but took not the slightest notice of the familiar situation of the lady, to whom he made his obeisance with his accustomed courtesy. Cloud¬ ley, hearing his voice, quickly joined them. Marauder, he found, was to leave them soon after breakfast, and to pro¬ ceed immediately to Dovcp Rattle therefore broke the ice of his departure by oflering to accompany bim, alledging that he hatl a relation in that neighbourhood, whom he wisheel to visit while he was in this part of the country. Mr. Arnon and Mrs. Cloud- ley's disappointment M'as evident : Mr. Cloudley said nothing, and Marauder vol.il s could
could not, as he was alone, refuse him a place in his chaise. Durino; the time of breakfast manv* things became very e\ ident to Rattle, whose suspicion* м г еге already raised ; and M'ho, afiecting indiťference, and not bavin«; vet deeiared his intentions of leaving them, was all the time on the M r atchr He perceived the intimacy of Ma¬ rauder with thelady, by their atten pting so anxiously to conceal it ; and he was astonished at the partiality the husband sheM'ed for Marauder, considering him as an oracle of wisdom. Arnon too was very thoughtful and silent. Rattle soon discovered that the other
Other had noticed his suspicions ; and a most curious group they formed, eacli endeavouring to hide his own thoughts, and watchful of those of his neighbour. In defiance of the kind hints of Mrs. Cloudley, and persuasions of Mr. Ar¬ non, Rattle had resolution to keep to tbe good plan he had adopted, and to leave Cloudley Hall at the same time with Marauder. Rattle, by this prudent conduct, escaped a deep-laid snare. Arnon and Marauder had long M'ished to entangle bim in tlieir schemes ; and had settled tbeir plan tiiat he shoukl accompany the former to Cloudley Hall, little doubt¬ ing out that, in a few days, the fair Maria Cloudley mouUI make a convert s 2 of
of him. Marauder knew the Cy theræan powers of the lady full well, and also the weak side of Rattle, м ho had more than once been tlie dupe of a pretty woman ; and, in his sneering м^ау, he had said to Anion, before he left town—" Our friend Rattle has once honoured my choice with his approba¬ tion," (alluding to Emily), " and been ambitious to be my rivals though with little success, or he would not be so anxious to diseover the retreat of the fair fugitive. I now generously give him an opportunity of supplanting mc, and most beai tily мьЬ he may succeed. My dear friend, this Rattle has long been a spy upon us. Involve him in this intrigue, and we will soon turn him to our puiposc, either by the almighty power of love, or by the Hydra fears
Hy dra- fears of a crim<on business. Oh \ bow I shall laugh to see his honour, his character, his conscience, all that the world holds dear, iu the hands 6f my dear little enchantress, Maria, Cloudley I й Before Marauder and Rattle left the house, Rattle had in part discovered the charm by M'hich Marauder possessed such astonishing influence over Cloud¬ ley.-—** My dearest friend," said Ma¬ rauder to him, " nothii.LÇ but the very urgent business v, bid 4 compels me to leave you so abnptly, could force me so soon fiom a seciety I so highly value and admire. I know not w hich most to commend—the manly strength of your mind, whieh burst the fetters of art and custom, or the wonderful s 3 success
success which has followed if. Ever- blooming youth and health are among the most conspicuous of your blessings ; and in your rising progeny, I expect to see the golden age revive. It is the pride of my life to call you my friend ; and yoar simple promise once given me, I more rely on than the multiplied oaths of all the Potentates upon earth. Na¬ ture, the goddess you adore, crowns your offerings with success ;—-a wife most lovely, faithful, ^and sensible ; children, the wonders of the world ; л\ hue, \> ith a mind strong and vigorous, a soul calm and determined, you revive tbe dignity of human nature, and par¬ ticipate, with a liberal hand, your bless¬ ings to your friends. Wc live not for ourselves alone ; human nature claims us, or never would I leave this beloved society.'* Sueh
Such was the parting speech of Ala¬ rauder, .as he tbrew his arms around the credulous Natural; then, with his handkerchief to his face, he slowly ascended his chariot, and set off with Rattle. From the tivo speeches of Alarauder just mentioned, some idea may be formed, not only of tbe versatility of his character, but of his prudence and - judgment in acting. Rattle's admira¬ tion of Emily had not escaped the ready ken of Alarauder, nor the diligent enquiries silice her departure, bis watch¬ ful, intelligence ; but as they did not interfere iv itb lm Interest or his passions, he forbore to notice them.
s 4 СНЛР.
CHAP. XXL JCATTLE accompanied Maiaufler to Dover—a very silent ride on botb sides. Here they separated ; Rattle went to his relations, dined witìi hhn, aiul set off in the evening to town, Tlie specimen of m&dtm PhUosupky realised, which Rattle had seen at the Cloudley's, and the snare which he had so happily evaded, more firmly rooted him
him in his dislike against Marauder and his associates· The charm whieh had chiefly drawn him to Marauder's table, was fled ; the lovely Emily was no where to be found ; for Rattle had been indeed far more anxious to find the place of her abode than Marauder. As Rattle journied to London, he , had sufficient leisure fully to revolve in his mind the consequences which might have attended the vicious connection that was prepared for him ; and many serious" thoughts, he was little accus¬ tomed to, arose to his review. The state of tbe Cloudley family clearly shewed him tbe weakness of human nature whea left to its own guidance ,♦ s ã aud
ånd Airs. Cloudley herself was a melan¬ choly instance how degrading every female excellence is ivithout virtue. To leave ýoun^ minds to the care of Nature, isa principie not confined only to this familv. V Many ivell-mcaning parents are not Milling to give their children early in¬ formation in life, particularly ih reli¬ gious matters, under the idea that they ivilb not prejudice them, but give their reason full scope, that their young minds may have the liberty of judging for themselves, and not become slaves to the errors of custom, or to the false opinion of others. But these conscien¬ tious people forget that human nature ' is ever imperfect of itself; that the mind,
INFERNAL QUIXOTE.' mind, from its earliest infancy, will w*arp one way or other, and therefore it is necessary to turn it towards those principles that seem best. The human mind, without very eariy culture (ivhat a modern Philosopher will call prejudice) will soon go to waste;—to speak without a metaphor, unless ive instil some no¬ tions of right and ivrong, of virtue and vice, idiotism or absolute madness will undoubtedly be the consequence. This ivas the case of the ivild man, Peter, who never, after he camcto full age, could be reclaimed from his igno¬ rant and savage nature ; and many ' Cloudley families exhibit the same in a partial degree. . The wisdom of man, unlike all other so animals,
animals, seems tø be the collection øf former ages; in early youth is the mind to be stored with knowledge ; and it ш the duty of a parent to instil that which he thinks best, and not, through a foolish fear of doing too much, leave the whole undone. ," Tlie argument of these Sophists play» against all subjects, but strikes its venom-'at Melighn :-—with this then I shall conclude the digression. - If Religion were left entirely töhersel£ И* every one were to propose articles for his own faith, and if these strange med-* leys were to be tolerated by the legis¬ lature, few vestiges would remain of the original institution of'Christ. The majority of the world are composed of г * the
the ignorant, the designing, the indo* lent, and tbe open reprobate; and these would easily, make that their principles whicii suited themselves ancl their cir¬ cumstances best W T hat tiren would be the situation of the rising generation ? and ivhat would they naturally think of a Religion aud Government, where the different opinions of the wise-man and the fool, the learned and the unlearned^ the good and the bad, ivere equally countenanced, and openly approved? How dark and gloomy is the prospect of the human mind left to itself ! It is absolutely necessary, for the safety of each other, that our unruly minds, as well as persons, should have some law ; and if good principles and learning, as well as good conduct, were not in some respect forced upon the mind, ignorance and
and wickedness M'ould soon overpower learning and virtue. These remarks do not confine xvhat is good to the narrow pi in ciples of any class, but to that doctrine the whole life of Christ taught, and the spirit of which cannot be mistaken by those who mean well— м hether it is called uni¬ versal Philanthropy\ Love, Cood-xcill, or Charity. One famous explanation of itj under the List term (lately trans¬ lated) this chapter bhall finish with.
1st Co rin tiitans, Сил p. xiii. I. Tho* praises with an angel's voice I sung» Oi all the sweetness of tlie human tongue, And h»v- not Chaiity— I am no moie Tbsn sounding braß, or c> tubals were before. Allrï
And tho* the gift of prophecy were mine, And ev'i y myuery and sense divine j Tiio' 1 lud Faith een mountains to remove» And have no Charity«—1 nothing prove. JU. Tho* all my goods to feed the poor were giv'n, My body burnt İn earnest zeal for Heav'n, And stiil the sacred attribute unsought Of Godlike Charity—I am as nought. IV. Chai ity long suffarcth, and is kind- And Chai ity hath not an envious mind ï Nor vaun teth Charity iier praises forth, Nor, puff M with pi ide, boastcth her fancied worth. v. Not greedy she, nor anxious for her own, Not easily provok'd, nor judging wrong } Rejoiceth not when othei s go asu ay j But all her glory's in the righteous way· In
vi. In snifnings, trust, and hope, and patience, she Is still the same,—nor faileth Charity ; But gifts prophetic shall in time decay. Tongues they shall cease» and knowledge pass away* VII. For all our knowledge is in part confin'd, And prophecies themselves have bounds consign'd î But when a pet feet spiiit ruVs the heart, No moie instruction we shall need in part* VIH. When I vras young, then childish was my word y ChildUh I thought, and as a child I heard; • But when the age of manhood once b¿gan, I icit oif childish things? and thought as mán. IX. For now imperfect tlirough a glass we see j Rut face to face then open we shall be : Now all my .knowledge is but pai tly shewn % Then shal) I knovv, a» also I am knovvn. Faitu,
χ. FAtttí, Hope, aml Chaäity are now— thélethm* ßut the greatest uf ihese is Си aäit Ý*
«йшнпапвниямнп
CHAP. XXII. ÔO much was Rattle disgusted at the г scenes he had witnessed at the Cloud- leys, that,· before he arrived in town, he had resolved some most wonderful schemes of education in his head :—whe¬ ther or not he was ever able to put tliem into execution/a future day may declare. Jt
It M'ill be needless to particularize that they were directly contrai y to these he had so lately MİUıessed, - as the very first part of Rattles plan was, to teach his young ones to read before they мтге to speak ; by this» means furnishing their young minds M'itîı a proper idea aud notion of things. Eut leaving Rattle to his M'onderful cogitations, tbe progress oí Marauder in the road to glory proceeds. The business which had hurried Ma¬ rauder from town Mas of no common kind. He,had received private intelli¬ gence that a Commissioner was coming over from France, under pretence of settling tbe terms for an exchange of prisoners;^
prisoners ; but -that his real motive* were to prepare the way for a peace. To counteract this, it was determined that some intelligent person should give him the meeting as soon as he was landed ; and Marauder was fixed upon for that purpose. M, M ----- , who was chosen to execute this commission, arrived at Dover the third day, and Marauder waited upon him with private, as well as his public letters of introduction. The French¬ man received him most favourably; and the other r with no snmll satisfaction, soon discovered from his conversation that he came, to this country more in the character of a spy than in those of a. Commissioner
Commissioner for an exchange of pri¬ soners,- or a negotiator for a peace. Alarauder, in his conversation, was all openness, confidence, and candour, trusting such would be the most sure mean» of making AI. AI—— the same. In the most forcible language he fepresenfed to the Frenchman the weak and distressed situation ofthis country ; he enlarged upon the national debt, and the M^ant of future resources. He boldly declared to him that Ireland, Scotland, and England, one after the other, were ready to burst into opea rebellion. Of the Irish affairs he spoke with decision*
decision, ^as of a work already done, unless crushed in its birth of liberty by a premature peace. *No arguments he could conceive were omitted, that he thought might mfluence the mind of the Frenchman. Among other things, he artfully men¬ tioned the natural situation of Ireland, firom whenee many Politicians had con¬ cluded that she never could exist as a civilized and mercantile state without a dependance on some other nation. This, ivith great affected candour, he pretended to believe.—" Yet, Sir," continued he to thè Commissioner, " there is not aman in Ireland, unin- fluenced by Alinisterial pay, that does not look up to the Great Nation as the
the people vith Mİıom they wish to imite and fraternize. Commanded by French Officers, мЬеге is tbe power of England ? The vast Navy of Britain Mill insensibly crumble to pieces. The Irish ports, crowded with small frigates and privateers, will attack this unwieldy monster. Its trade, whiclu has been centuries in collecting, will soon be torn from it, and participated among the different States of Europe. Its sinews, strength, and vigour already begin to fail ; and the shilalah of Ireland shall complete whaŕthe sword of France has begun. - The Frenchman heard him with plea¬ sure, the discourse M'as so congenial to his ом'п ideas ; and enquired what were their
tiieir means to shake off the English yoke, and what progress ivas made in the affiliating system. Marauder minutely ansivered him, arid declared himself personally versed in the situation öf England, Scotland, and Ireland, though neither of tbe two last he'had at that time ever set his foot on. He unfolded to the Commissioner the chain of connection by which the * mr people in each country were linked together, in opposition to the established laws and Government Hè dwelt upon the abilities, the power, the popularity oftheir leaders. lie produced instances of disaffection in the Armv and 'the Kavy; and found no difficulty iri making tlie- Frenchman believe that it was general throughout the м hole kingdom. In
Iti terms most hyperbolical did he praise the Great Nation (particularly in the cant of tnat party to which he ■ knew the Commissioner belonged), and * declareil that every enlightened people -pn the face of the earth would follow the glorious example set them by France. He positively asserted that many of the ostensible agents bf the Government in England were secretly adverse to the present situation of affairs, and that an immediate peace was the only measure to prop the falling Ministry, of which Mr. A— and his agents were so well assured, that they woukl purchase it on any tenus. The arguments and bold assertions of Marauder completely succeeded ; and every thing becauie perverted in the
pacific endeavours of the Minbtry ho mistook for fear, and thek civilittó* as a bait to deceive him. Hb conduct m settling an exchange of prisoner* was so suspicious, and his demands werţr so exorbitant, thai att hopes of a nego¬ tiation for a peace weife soon lost. , By Marauder's advice also it ^vas« that the pretended object of h® cota- mission was not put ш execution ; a* he argued thaV iu case of a suddert* insurrection among tìm people, the French prisoners would be of the utmost service—*not so much from tlieir num¬ bers, ,a$. their knowledge in^militaryr aifairs. The issue of this business is f veiy welb V«. if. τ known*.
known. The method which bad been originally adopted, as a prelude to allay the strife between the nations, became the means of irritating both parties* Measures for carrying on the war were renewed with redoubled virulence and vigour, and public and private enemies, loudly prophesied that England was ruinad* Arnon joined his friend at Dove/* and corroborated every thing which the other had advanced; and when Ma¬ rauder returned, to town, he left Amok with the Frenchman, wha had not re* ceived permission to come to Lotidon^ Many other well-knowa characters; waited upon him here; and Marauder,, who knew all this from his correspon¬ dence with Arnoh, gave indirect iiáor- iäatk>ii! ?
