Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The albigenses: a romance
THE ALBIGENSES.
CHAPTER I. A gentle knight cam© pricking o'er the plain. SPEKSEIt. The crusade undertaken against the Albi¬ genses in the- reign of Philip Augustus, in the year 1208, had produced the most decisive results, and had terminated in the almost total, extirpation of thai; people throughout the province of Languedoc. The sack and spoliation of Beziers—the desertion of Car- cassone by its inhabitants—the absence of Count Raymond of Toulouse (the ill-fated favourer of the Albigenses), who had jjone to Rome to make his peace with the Pope—the death of his nephew, the Count of Beziers — vol. I. b
and the general terror impressed by the sweep¬ ing conquests and terrific cruelties of Count Simon de Monfort, the chief of the armies of the church*, had scarcely, as it was deemed, left a victim for the next crusade. Occasional disturbances, however, soon began to arise, from the unquenchable zeal and proselyting spirit of the few surviving Albigenses; but nothing worthy of record occurs till about the close of the year 1214, when Count Ray¬ mond's return from Rome, with the object of his journey unaccomplished, gave pretext to the Pope's legate to hold a council at Mont- pelier, and proclaim a second crusade against the followers of Waldo. Count Raymond had pleaded his cause before the Pope power-. fully; his representations of the cruelty, ava¬ rice, and violence of Count Simon de Monfort and the Bishop of Toulouse were supported. and corroborated by those of Arnaud de Ville-; mur, and Raymond de Roquefeuille,. lord of Querci; and the Pope, moved, by their remon-
THE ALBIGENSES."
strances, felt disposed to favour them, when, by the advice of some members of the con¬ clave, who dreaded a breach with the Count de Monfort, he was induced to dismiss them with a reference to the legate; couched in terms sufficiently soothing to excite hoped he never meant to realize, and sufficiently indefinite 1 to justify the legate for declining to fulfil them. On their return, therefore, to France, they received from the Pope's representative those evasive answers, and in¬ effective promises, in which the court of Rome was so well skilled to deal; and, perceiving they had nothing else to expect, prepared once more to take up arms for the recovery of their rights and possessions. The capture of the town or city of Beaucaire was the signal for renewed hostilities on both sides. One hundred bishops preached the crusade throughout Languedoc; and the Count de Monfort, with a splendid train of Italian ecclesiastics, armed with bulls and indulgences, journeyed to Paris to be in¬ vested by the King of France with the duchy of Narbonne and the county of Toulouse, b 2
vowing not to leave on his return one heretic alive tvithin the realm of France. This vow was, however, owing to recent circumstances, more easily made than kept; the want of regular forces rendered the event of so pro¬ tracted a warfare eminently doubtful. The King of France, less powerful than many of his barons, and kept in a state of anxious and restless vigilance by his neighbour, John of England, had been unable or unwilling to afford the slightest assistance to the first cru¬ sade. The Pelerins, who constituted the main body of the crusading army, were chiefly re¬ tained in their ranks by the promise of forty days' indulgence, and paradise if they fell in battle. The former condition appeared the most inviting, as they generally disbanded at the end of the forty days, and took their chance for paradise afterwards. Finally, King Philip Augustus had good reason to dread the ambition and desperate daring spirit of the Count de Monfort*; and
tnoiigh, in obedience to the commands of the Pope, he invested him with the duchy of Narbonne and the county of Toulouse, he refused to add a single soldier to the cru¬ sading army, and was even suspected of a secret disaffection to the cause, which no¬ thing but his fear of Rome prevented him from testifying more effectively. Under these inauspicious circumstances, Count Simon, however, succeeded in raising a powerful army, and advanced to the assault of the castle of Monteil-Aimar, held by Gui- tand, lord of Monteil-Aimar, who, with Aimar de Poitiers, were more than suspected of se¬ cretly favouring the cause and persons of the Aibigeois. On the other hand, Count Ray¬ mond was said to be employed in vigorous, though silent preparation; he was supported by the powerful lords, the Count de Com-
minges, Gaspard de la Barre, Enguerand de Gordo, lord of Caraman, and Estephe de la Vallette, whom an old historian describes as tous braves, vailtans, et bien accompggnes; and, in spite of all his WTongs and his mis¬ fortunes, he had a dependence on the hearts, fealty, and indomitable spirit of the Aibigeois, which the leaders of Varmee de I'Eglise could scarcely place in the desultory, tumultuous, and excursive bands of the Pelerins. The castle of Monteil-Aimar held out against the forces of the crusaders; the preparations of Count Raymond were becoming formidable, less, perhaps, from their vigour than from their secrecy; and thus the affairs of the Aibigeois began to assume an aspect of doubtful and latent hope, when Count Ravmond, in the year 1216, took one of those steps which marked tbe vacillating and unreliable cha¬ racter which cotemporary and succeeding his¬ torians have ascribed to him alike in politics, warfare, and ecclesiastical negotiations:—he abandoned his warlike preparations, and set out once more to seek reconciliation with the
-Pope; while Count Simon j wearied and ashamed of exhausting his time and forces under the -walls of Monteil-Aimar, availed himself of the intelligence that the castle of a noble crusadei\ was invested by a band of the Albigenses, to draw off his troops, and haste to the aid of the beleaguered fortress. It was the castle of the lord of Courtenaye and Beaurevoir, the most powerful and wealthy baron in all Lan¬ guedoc, and a zealous persecutor of the Albi¬ genses, it was said, less from zeal for the cause of the church, than from dread of her castiga- tions; for he was reported to be deeply attached to the pursuit of knowledge forbidden to man, and justly denounced by the church as impious and damnable. It was said that a numerous body of the Albigenses (who had effected their subterra¬ nean escape from Carcassone under (circum¬ stances which, though historically attested, have all the air of romance, and had since concealed themselves in the woods arid moun¬ tains,) had at length, stimulated by want, and confident by numbers, rushed forth from their
hiding place to force their way to the domi¬ nions of the King of Arragon, whom personal hostility to the Count de Monfort had ren¬ dered more propitious to the Aibigeois than the orthodoxy of his creed warranted; and the castle of Courtenaye obstructing their pro¬ gress, they had invested and attacked it. The Count de Monfort, who well knew that these wretched people, so far from being fur¬ nished with means to carry on a siege, (an undertaking requiring at that period disciplined forces, and complicated and ponderous ma¬ chinery,) were not able to oppose any thing in the field but their clubs, airrows, and woollen garments, to the lances, swords, and complete armour of the crusaders, laughed secretly at the terrors of the Lord of Courtenaye, while he availed himself of the pretext they gave him to raise the unsuccessful siege of Monteil- Aimar. Of the Lord of Courtenaye we have not at this period of our story much to tell— save that he avenged himself on his inferiors for the general disdain and derision of his equals. The deformity of his person, and
the weakness of his constitution, rendered him incapable of bearing arms from his infancy: it vvas even said, according to an opprobrious proverbial formula of that country, that " had he lacked a pigeon for his breakfast, the craven could not have hit it with a bird-bolt." This inefficiency, which exposed him so much to the disdain of the warlike age in which he lived, he tried to balance by the strictest seve¬ rity of feudal discipline within his castle, and the fiercest rigour of feudal tyranny throughout his vast domains; but neither could protect him against the terror inspired by the approach of the- Albigenses; and he continued to urge, by missive overtaking missive, the Count de Monfort and the Bishop of Toulouse to speed to his assistance. Some said that the Lord of Courtenaye was more jealous of his niece, the Lady Isabelle, heiress of Courtenaye and Beaurevoir (on whose continuing unmarried his state and wealth depended), than of the catholic faith; and that, provided he could keep her suitors at a distance, he cared little how near the Aibigeois might be: they were b 5
mistaken; the Lord of Courtenaye, however he might pique himself on his duplicity in other matters, was always profoundly sincere in his cowardice. The Count and the Bishop, a warlike prelate of that age, were advancing with their band of Pelerins to the defence of the castle, and their numbers were perpetually increasing with their progress; the announcement of the new cru¬ sade, and the report of the heretics having had the insolence to assault the castle of a crusading baron, had collected a number of military adventurers, (chiefly single knights, with their small trains of men-at-arms ; ) who poured in from every province in France, all eager to break a spear in honour of the church,—all sure of winning heaven by dip¬ ping their lance-point in the blood of its enemies. Under the circumstances of the times which we have thus attempted to sketch, our readers will not be surprised if we thus abruptly intro¬ duce to them a solitary knight, mounted on his war-steed, and attended by a person who,
without assuming the rank of squire or page, fulfilled occasionally the offices of both. The scenery* from its air of deep solitude* was well suited to the lonely appearance of the two passengers. No painter could imagine a background of richer darkness or more pro¬ found repose, or give a stronger outline and character to the figures in front, than did the evening sky and dark heath over which they were advancing. The knight and his attendant, after a long day's journey without rest or refreshment, (for they had neither encountered hostel; town, nor castle in their way,) had now entered on a wild lande or heath, wild as ever was trod by the " brogued feet"* of highland hunter, or "rough Irish kerne." The wars in Languedoc had left many parts of the country almost desert, and the province was, moreover, at this time, from various circumstances resulting from the ope¬ ration of the feudal system, partitioned into vast tracts of heath, (deserted from the checked and depressed spirit of agriculture, or from
their being infested by hordes of robbers' or gipsies, then almost as formidable,) slips of arable or of pasture ground in the immediate vicinity of towns, or cultivated lands situated close to the castles of powerful barons. On sugh a heath our knight and his attend¬ ant appeared in an evening in tbe autumn of the year 1216. It was about the beginning of September; the sun had set, but there was a broad bright band of gold round the western heaven that powerfully contrasted the darkness of the upper sky, and the deep shade that had fallen upon the face of the earth;—the heath lay wide, brown, and unbroken around and before'the travellers to the utmost verge of the horizon, and on its whole extent there was not to be discovered living or moving thing, or trace of human habitation, or aught else to break the perfect loneliness of the view,- save the two silently advancing figures;-—the deep moss with which the heath was covered scarce permitting the heavy $read of their steeds to be heard by the riders,—while the forms of each seemed dilated to tlie dimensions of a giant,
from thfc circumstance of their being alone on the wide scene, and strongly defined on that golden light whose fading richness flushed the western sky. The first figure rode far before his com¬ panion, so as almost to be alone. He seemed in the vigorous prime of adolescence, just at that period when the slender and flexile graces of youth are strengthening into the marked and muscular symmetry of perfect manhood. He was in armour from throat to heel, but i*^ was of a construction that rather displayed than concealed the exquisite proportions of bis form; it was formed of that complete mail used in those days, composed of innumerable rings of steel, as intricately arranged as those of a modern steel purse, and, from its extreme elasticity and flexibility, possessing a power of adaptation the nicest)and most faithful,to the human form. The modulation of, the finely- turned knee, the taper limb, and slender ancle, were as perceptible through it as if they were veiled only by the light texture of modern drapery. This armour covered the entire;
person, including'even the feet; on the hand it was divided at the thumb, but enclosed the fingers to the very tips; it was also furnished with a hood or shirt (as it was called) of the same construction, which in battle was drawn over the helmet, and on other occasions was, as on the present, flung back and hung on the shoulders, producing no ungraceful effect. In his right hand the knight bore a lance, • which >was held loosely, as in the hand of one unconscious of the burthen. On his left arm hung his shield, of the singular half- cylindrical shape used at that period, the sides being so bent in as to give the bearer the appearance of being defended by a tower on the left side; it bore for device a moon over which a cloud was passing, with the motto, Lucet dum latet. Below was a bloody cross, allusive to the exploit from whence Sir Paladour de la Croix Sanglante had derived his title and his fame. At his saddle-bow, as he rode, hung his ponderous gisarme, and his helmet of the uncouth and tub-ljke fashion then in use, and which a
\botemporary writer describes not unaptly as I" lebes inversus" Over his shoulders fell in fample folds a mantle of the richest scarlet, fthe cross on which, transferred from the shoulder to the breast, announced that the warrior was devoted to the crusade, not against pagans, but heretics. The knight's head was covered only by a barrel cap, without jewel, plume, or favour, which did not conceal the dark luxuriance of his curled chesnutlocks; and his features, thus exposed, displayed that perfect beauty, to which imagination or art would vainly, in copying them, have added tint or touch : they were such as might have visited the inspired dreams of a classic sculptor, haunted by the godlike images of " the fair humanities of old religion," the deity of Delos, or the son of Maia. The slight degree of unmanliness which the rose-leaf tint of the cheek, and the " riper and more lusty red" of the small mouth, gave to his contour, was corrected by the commanding character of his noble profile, the shade of his dark hair, and short but thickly
curled beard, and a brow, on whose broad expanse thought seemed to sit as enthroned. Yet over that brow hung a cloud, whose elements, unanalysed and unknown to the sufferer himself, lay brooding there like the thunder-clouds that gather in the glorious west of the summer evening-sky; and the smile of the eye and lip that nature had shed her brightest radiance aud roses on, made strange contrast with tbe storm that scowled and blackened above. The unfortunate youth was conscious when this expression began to settle on his features, for it vvas accompanied by an undefinable feeling that had haunted him from childhood, and which he felt must one day determine his mortal destiny;-—dim traces of past events, effaced resolutions and forgotten struggles, lay like a mass of ruins in his memory; but, amid these ruins, the image of a terrible vow stalked forth like a tenanting spectre, and, while all else of the past lay obscure, colourless, and dream-like, forced itself on the mind's eye with the hideous vividness of distinct and vital reality. The
recurrence of this image was attended from his childhood upward by increasing horror—- with the expansion of his faculties the image seemed to expand, and the burthen to increase, till it was becoming too much for reason to endure. The hour of his visitation vvas on him now; he passed his hand twice or thrice across his forehead, and then, unable to master the rising fiend, called with a quick and eager voice to his attendant to join him, whose ill- favoured visage bore a sinister expression of timidity, cunning, and affected vacancy. The attendant complied, with shrugged shoulders, up-turned eyes, and that mixed expression of deference and derision which a crafty domestic assumes, conscious that his cunning is more than a match for his master's power or anger. " Where are we now, knave?" demanded the knight. " Upon a lone heath, without the vestige of human habitation, or the trace of human foot, or the murk of man or beast to guide us," quoth the attendant, looking, leisurely around him, as if he had been merely required
to give a topographical sketch of the spot where they stood. " If I lacked the track of a beast to guide me," said the knight impatiently, " I would surely have bid thee lead the way." " Your knightship forgets," said the squire doggedly, " that we are warned ever to eschew the mark of the beast" —(the term applied by the catholics to the professors of the here¬ tical religion, and which was retaliated by the reformers on the catholics three hundred years afterwards with equal felicity of allusion and acrimony of retort.) " Truce with thy buffoonery," said the knight^checking his steed, " and tell me truly, if thou knowest, where we be; this heath seems to spread before us, as we advance— the night is gathering round us — and I am all uncertain of the track we are pursuing." Before the knight had ceased to speak, the squire disappeared; and the former, striking his lance in the earth, rested on it for a few moments, like one who sought forgetfulness ©f himself and of all around him, when the
attendant suddenly came galloping back, toss¬ ing his meagre arms, and shouting at the top of his shrill voics, " I have found it— I have found it." " What hast thou found ?" said the knight,, snatching his lance from the ground. " Only, that wc have lost our way/' said the squire, dropping his arms, elevating his eye-brows, and standing before his master with that ineffable expression of mingled stolidity and cunning which he had generally found available in averting the anger which his humour, at once shy and mischievous, sullen and caustic, seldom failed to incur, often to the hazard of his misshapen bones. On this occasion the experiment was once more suc¬ cessful, and the knight changed his humour of auger for one of laughter. As they continued to ride on in anxious un¬ certainty, the scene began somew f hat to vary, and some features of diversified landscape ap¬ peared dimly in the departing twilight. " Shall we betake ourselves," said the knight, " to jyonder wood on the left? Its darkly-tinted
mass," he cried, gazing on it, u seems like an assembled host waiting the leader's war- word— now, as the breeze rises, the foremost branches bend and float like standards in the van, and that dense and serried mass in the rear stands like a noble harvest for the sword to reap—shall we thither, knave ?" " Yea, marry," said the squire; " and the rather, because men say there be as many wolves as leaves in that wood; and what rent their fangs and claws may make in that goodly shield and mail of price, I leave to God, your knightship, and the armourer; in whose dan¬ ger*," lowering his voice, " perchance you stand for their value." K What think'st thou," said the knight, pausing, " shall we hie us to those hills on the right?—such, methinks, was the track the Pelerins pointed out to us." "Perchance so," quoth the squire, " be¬ cause they know them to be haunted by a sort of bears, and peradventure they are so jealous of vour hearinrf awav the honours of
the crusade against those heretics, that they would first send you to tilt against their brethren of the hill and cavern by way of essay; — take my counsel, valiant knight, and rather encoun¬ ter the dint of fifty of those rascal-heretics' clubs on your crest, than the fangs of a dozen bears in your flesh;—Heaven pardon me, but I could hardly chide them for comforting their bowels as they might, vvhen I feel the ravage grief and emptiness are making in mine own." " Thou hast not fasted longer than thy master, I trow," said the knight. " All's one for that," rejoined the squire; " your knight's stomach is all for fighting, your squire's for fare wholly more nutritious, digestible, and Christian-like; many, there is also a huge difference in their capacity as, in their taste; your knight can break his fast on a tournament, dine heartily on a battle, sup lightly on a duello, and sleep on the siege of a castle or two, and then (Insatiable as he is!) whimper for the lack of similar dainties for a month to come; while your squire, Heaven
THE ALBIGENSES."
help! needs no more than four meals a day, with contingencies — and when his stomach hath rung matins, noon, and vespers, to some forty pounds of beef or boar's flesh, moated with brewis, flanked with capons, and gallantly guarded with rosemary and bays, he thinks, in the moderation of his spirit, of nothing more than to pray to his Saint Venter, that his devotions may be paid at the same shrine every quarter—of an hour." While the squire was thus delivering him¬ self, the knight caught the glimpse of several figures passing swiftly along the verge of the heath;—the increasing darkness, and the speed with which they rode, preventing his discover¬ ing whether they were armed or not; at the same moment, but by very different instincts, the knight spurred forward, and the attendant after, so closely as almost to thrust the nose of his jade among the bases of the richly caparisoned war-steed. " See'st thou yonder group ?" asked his master. " Of them I may learn my way, or perchance join them in
theirs." Then turning to the attendant—f " I wot not what may be the issue of this encounter, or when we may again meet—* hast thou any provision, poor knave ?" " A quarter of kid and a loaf of buck-wheat, that I bought qf a peasant while your knight¬ ship was at shrift this morning—poor viands, and all unfit for knightly food. Would I had the secret of that widow of Zarephath, of whom I have heard monks tell, though the close fathers would never confess in what part of France she sojourned." "Thou art not-then unprovided for; and for myself I reck not," said the knight, dashing his heavy spurs into his steed, and disappear¬ ing in a moment. The feelings of the unfor¬ tunate squire, distracted between the wish to. enjoy.his meal undivided, and his terror at being thus -suddenly deserted, broke forth in the following exclamations. " Hear; s ^ r knight, hear me !—in the name of all the saints or all the devils, will you run a tilt against (it may be) a host of spirits that. haunt this heath?—By the mass, an' I have
not a mind to devour the whole quarter for mere vexation, I am no true squire—and a morsel might refresh me!—Turn back, I say, sir knight," (here his exclamations became evi¬ dently fainter)—" ah, foul befall thee, losel squire, who pamperest thyself when thy master is in peril!—now the fiend ha' me if I swallow another morsel — save this, to give me strength to cry after him! — Nay, now my mouth is so full, ;t is in vain to strive—he will never, never," said the squire with a sigh, " return to taste a morsel of it—so it were better briefly to discuss what remains, than leave it, per¬ chance, to be the prey of these accursed heretics." While the attendant was thus vociferating gradually in diminuendo, and masticating in crescendo, the knight rode across the heath, and prepared himself to accost the group he was approaching. In spite of the increasing darkness, he could observe, as he drew near them, one of distinguished figure, who by his gestures seemed about to dismiss a numerous body of .attendants, and to prepare to ride
alone. There was something awful and even ghostly in the appearance of this shadowy group, who parted at the signal of their leader in perfect silence, the deep moss of the heath rendering their horse-tramp scarce distinguish¬ able even amid profound stillness. They divided, part wheeling to the right, part to the left, like broken masses of the heavy even¬ ing clouds, and the knight and the stranger were left alone on the beach; the latter still continuing to extend his arm in the direction his band were now faintly seen pursuing.
VOL. I.
c
CHAPTER II. As Sir Paladour approached the stranger, the latter wrapt himself in the folds of a vast houpland, which covered even the flanks of his horse, and, drawing his barrel, over bis face, seemed wishing to render his person wholly undistinguishable. To the inquiries of the knight, however, he prepared to return an answer; especially when the inquirer added, " Methinks the band of Pelerins of whom I sought my way this morn have shown me aught but the right one." " So do they with many," said the stranger in a disguised voice, and evidently with a deeper meaning than his words at first seemed to bear —" so do they with many—it is their use; meanwhile, sir crusadei, (for such I deem you,)
your courtesy enforces me to teach you what otherwise I might withhold- Your way to the castle of Courtenaye lieth light onward, yet may you hardly reach it by to-morrow's nigbt; and in your way, if I remember me, there i& a lake, over which X doubt- .that you will find bark or boat to waft you at this hcaiv" " Sir traveller," said the Paladour;. " thou knowest, that .to place peril in the ,path of /a. true knjght, is to,determine his choice of that path, were a thousand courting him ( to safety." " There is. more than you wot of, perchance," said tlie traveller. " ,Men say— X vouch not for the, tale -~i that at midnight a female form appears on tbe,lake, and.heckqns belated tra¬ vellers to her ,bark, prqmising to .waft them ove** -with .all swiftness ,and security ; fyvt t qf those vvho embanked, none wjthiu mortal memory<ever,reached the other side." " .OL.earthly might I reck not," said ,tke knight after a t pause,, 'Sand unearthly J % defy, having this morn been shriven by a holy re¬ cluse who dwelt ittaFock, being of the order c 2
of St. Simeon Stylites*, the odour of whose sanctity hath reached hither even from the shores of Egypt, where God's people sojourned of old." " And thus prepared, thou art most fit to join the band of the crusaders," said the stranger, with a peculiar expression. " Go," he added— " go, and add one more to the countless and causeless enemies of the unfortunate Raymond of Toulouse. — Forbear thy thanks," he conti¬ nued, interrupting Sir Paladour; " forbear them till thou meet Count Raymond in the field; to him I refer thy debt of obligation. Pay him not with thy words, but thy deeds; and look they be the boldest thine arm ever wrought, or I shall hold thee still my debtor." " Oh, that the hour were come 1" exclaimed Paladour, while his steed, as if participating in his rider's feeling, reared and pawed the earth ; " my lance should pierce more deeply into his false heart than did ever the lash of the legate Millon into his flesh when he did
penance for the slaughter of the holy preacher and martyr Chateauneuf*." " Perchance," said the stranger, in a voice still more subdued, " he had before received a wound, in vvhose anguish that of all others was forgotten; before the legate's lash had marked
his flesh, a deeper one had torn his heart—he had lost two fair sons*" The knight, confounded at this appearance Of* compassion for a heretic, indignantly reined up his steed, and exclaimed, " Art thou then a fautor of that arch-heretic—and have I rode in peace by the side of one who upholds him ?" " No, so save me Heaven," said the stranger solemnly, " as I know not a more deadly enemy to Raymond of Toulouse than him with whom thou talkest; all other foes but me he might have defied—but what is thy cause of quarrel, youth, to him ?" " Askest thou the cause of quarrel," inter¬ rupted Paladour, " between a champion of holy church, and the mortal foe of her faith and hei' fold ?" * ( Truc—1 had forgot," said the stranger, acquiescing. After a long pause, which nei¬ ther of them (now alike mysteriously suspi¬ cious each of the other) seemed inclined to break, the stranger spoke: " Art thou lettered, sir knight?" said he.
^ I skill somewhat of the learned tongues," said Paladour, blushing at the avowal of an acquirement then held to be the exclusive accomplishment of the ' book *• bosomed priest.' " Then thou hast perchance read of a wight in antique story, surnamed the Just ?" said the stranger. " He was a Greek," replied the knight; " his name, I take it, was Aristides*" " Clerks tell of this Aristides," rejoined the stranger, " that, when he was about to be banished by his enemies, a rustical man prayed him to write his name on the shell of banish¬ ment, avouching that the branch of his hatred sprung from no deeper root than his jealous weariness of hearing him ever named the Just. It is said of this Count Raymond, Ihat he is noble and pitiful;—courteous to his peers, and fulfilled with all gentleness to his vassals and subjects." " Men speak him so," said Paladour. "And wilt thou sign his sentence too?" asked- the stranger.
" He is the enemy of God, and therefore mine," replied the knight. " Farewell, sir knight," said the stranger, who appeared unwilling to trust himself with further parley; " perchauce, ere long, Count Raymond may defy thee to make good the boast thou hast this night uttered." " To the bounds of Christendom, and at peril of my life," exclaimed the youth, " I trust in the good cause for which I combat, that I shall pierce the arch-heretic's heart, were my lance a reed, and he in panoply of adamant." " So wouldst thou do him most acceptable service," said the stranger; " he is one who would rather feel the lance of a knight in his bosom, than the lash of a monk on his shoulder." Thus saying, the stranger clapped spurs to his steed; iiis parting form was seen for a moment through the mist, and then lost. As the knight rode slowly on in the direc¬ tion indicated by the stranger, the scene be¬ came wilder, and the night more gloomy;— it was one of those nights so rare on the
continent, which recall the image of the sad and troubled atmosphere of the north, where masses of dark-grey cloud, vvith a few gleams of pale and dusky white, pursue each other incessantly, and make the sky appear like a dark and agitated ocean suspended over our heads. The objects around were now scarcely distinguishable; but by the sound of waters the knight perceived he approached the lake, and, alighting, he led his steed cautiously. The gleams of a struggling and watery moon broke forth at that moment, and he found himself on the border of a lake of some ex¬ tent, enclosed by rocky hills on every side, save that by which he had approached it. A breeze, whose sound vvas multiplied by the echoes of the shore, swept over its dark sur¬ face, and sent its waves with hoarse and heavy murmurs to his feet Amid the hills were a few huts, and an aged fisherman was hauling his crazy boat on shore. At the sight of a knight in armour leading his steed, the old .man was about to fly; but, reassured by the tones of Paladour's voice, he remained, c 5
though visibly with reluctance. The <gift<of a few liards assuaged his fears, and the natural anxiety of solitude for the relief of -human intercourse soon 'made 'him communicative. Shaking 'his diead at 'the desolation around him, he began to tell, that, till lately, the fishery of the lake had supported the inha¬ bitants of the neighbouring 'huts, who were ac¬ customed f to sell its produce chiefly tartheLord of Courtenaye, and the wealthy abbot of Nor¬ moutier;— that, within the last two months, a female form .had appeared, rowing a bark along 'the shores of the lake, the terror of whose presence had prevented the boldest fishermen from venturing out, and the little community was thus reduced to poverty. She never spoke to any of the peasantry, but was sometimes heard talking, or rather chanting, 'to herself. She never debarked, but vvas seen by some whom fear or curiosity kept awake to watch her, rowing whole nights close to >the shore, and apparently waiting with anxiety for some one whom she was to waft over. When a knight or armed man arrived.at the
lake, she eagerly offered her services; but of, those who accepted them, it was said that not one had ever reached the other side* A holy and intrepid monk had once ventured to adr dress her as she lay resting on her oar beneath the shadow of a rock in the twilight; but he soon shrunk from the conference in hon;or, and declared afterwards, thatjbe must do deep penance to clear him from the sin of listening to the words he t had heard. The knight, whose strong faculties struggled with..the credulity of that dark age, demanded if the fisherman indeed believed that a being, human in form and action, could exercise such deadly operations on the elements and their inhabitants. " For what cause," said the old man, "djid my net break this morning—and my strong line, when I cast it, float on the surface.like a rush, as if it were flung there to catch water-flies withal ?," And he sat dojvn sullenly among his broken nets, as if doubting of^vhat use it, was to repair them. " The night wanes, and I must win yonder sliore ere midnight," jsajd the youth; 4 " fcjear
me thither in safety, old man, and I will requite thee like a knight." " Not for the ransom of a crusader," said the fisherman; " against such encounter the mail of a knight is of as light avail as the dank and sorry weeds of the fisherman—as thou thyself shalt prove, an' thou tarry longer," he added, pointing with his trembling hand to what seemed a swell on the distant surface of the lake, but, as it approached, appeared to be a boat rowed by a female form. Sir Paladour watched its approach in si¬ lence ; he counted every stroke of the oar, of which the sound seemed to 3mite on his heart. The female pursued her task silently, but with increasing force, and in a few moments her oar sent the spray dashing against the stony bank on which stood Sir Paladour, his arm wreathed in the mane of his war-steed. " Embark, sir knight, and come with me," were her first words; " the boat is launched— the sail is.set—the oar is feathering the surge. Long have I wandered on this lonely shore, and all for thee—embark, then, and come;
your passage shall be swift, and your welcome fair on yonder shore. Many await you there; and I bear a charge to waft you to them." " Jesu preserve him who trusts to your pilotage!" muttered the old fisherman, who at first had retired to some distance, but still continued to linger without departing. While he spoke, a gleam of moonlight gave Sir Pala¬ dour a view of the figure who addressed him. Instead of the witch-like and haggard features he had expected to see, the glimpse he had of her lineaments showed them to be noble and majestic, suited to her lofty stature, but dis¬ coloured by an unnatural paleness; her dress vvas that of a peasant, a tunic and mantle of woollen cloth, but she wore it not like a peasant; her hair, grey, but of a remarkable length, floated on her shoulders. She stood upright in the boat, resting one arm on the oar, and waving the other with a gesture of lofty invitation to Paladour. It was impossible to look on this singular being, seeming a creature of the elements, sailing for ever under the clouds of night,
and apparently dwelling on the dark waters, without ideeming her something ." not of this world," There seemed, too, a power of fasci¬ nation in.her silent look; for the knight, as he viewed jier, felt himself impelled towards the bark. • c Now gp not with,her, sir knight, in the name of heaven," cried the old man—"go not, ; as you dread body's scathe and .soul's peril." This ..adjuration was strengthened by the cries ..pf another .voice; it vvas .that of his squire, who came on galloping f at full speed, and exclaiming, " Turn ,back, sir knight r— wherefore should you be so wilful to wend with ;the .fiend ?—,turn back, in the name of all jioly .saints!—Would, that you were as well learned in their lives and legeqds, as in those, lying scrolls of troubadours, more t apo^ cryphaf than my grandame's winter tales, that send you madding after these misadventures, to the perilling of your ,soul, and the,manifest discomfiture of your foriorn"— ry " Had you no warning of danger," said the
old man, "ere mow ?" laying bis hand .on the reins of :Sir Paladour's steed. " I remember somewhat," said the knight, musing-^- 1 " but all uncertainly; .what was that the traveller told ias we rode by the way?" "The traveller was the devil, and yonder ill-fared* hag is doubtless his dam," interjected the squire. " Ill-fared !" repeated the female, i the awful and ruined >. majesty of whose figure .seemed .to dilate in the moonlight—"^ill-fared I— vvas jt so;once??TT-or was the!past a dream, and js the present a lie ?-r-Yet, .well it /may be—evil passions do upon our frame more deadly work than/time or distemperature; and the greenest tree.of the forest, when scathed by the light¬ ning,? becomes, a gnarled and unsightly stump." "■Lo.you<now, whatacaptious spirit!"quoth the* squire^-":a most, delicate, aud exceptions devil! my rosary to a- handful of acorns, but it is afemale fiend-r-she can bear to be called the. devil without wincing—-marry, the word 'jill-fared' galls her shrewdly."
I.
" Paladour de la Croix Sanglante," said the female, " befits it one who wears chain and spurs to take counsel with fishermen and grooms, when his course lies fair, and a woman is his guide? — Erase the impress from thy shield, or give it for the guard of some bolder heart." As she spoke, the knight sprung into the boat, which shook with the impulse of his bound, and the weight of his armour; the moon sunk behind the clouds, and a flock of birds, roused by the clash of the armour, flew in heavy circles and with melancholy cries above their heads. " Nay, then," said the squire, sadly re¬ treating, " may lance and shield avail you in the matter you wot of!—I trow beads and breviary were the better gear for such encoun¬ ter.—St. Dennis to speed, did ever earthly arm row so swiftly!" The faint beams of the moon were reflected from the knight's armour, and gave a dim and shadowy tinge to the figure of the mysterious pilot, as the boat, whose track furrowed the lake'with a long line of silvered foam, departed
with its freight from their sight. The fisher¬ man and his companion remained standing on the shore, and gazing aftc/ it, when a shriek, the most wild and fearful that ever pierced the human ear, reached them. No other sound was heard that night but the moan of the wind or the murmur of the lake; nor ever again was that female seen rowing her bark on its waters. Before dawn the fisherman conveyed the knight s attendant with his steed across it, and the latter found his master alone on the other side. There were a few spots of blood on his armour, and he was plunged in one of those fits of profound and gloomy thought which his follower dared not arouse him from. Even when it had passed away, no question, whether put insidiously or directly, could extort from him an answer; and in silence they pursued their way to the castle of Courtenaye.
CHAPTER III. There was saddling and mounting in haste, There was pricking o'er moor and lea. Scott. We must pow hasten to the scene and com¬ pany that Sir Paladour was speeding to joiq, and introduce the reader to the spot where various parties of the crusaders were assem¬ bling in detached and irregular bands, suitably to that desultory and unorganised system of warfare which formed one of the most striking characteristics of that period. The country, for many a league round the castle of Courte¬ naye, was all alive with military preparations; and though reports hourly arrived that not an heretic had yet appeared beneath its walls, the crusaders continued to press forward with un¬ abated speed. Here were to be seen the lords
, ancl barons of Languedoc arraying their men? at-arms, in rescue of one whom, though they despised as an ally, they dreaded as a dark and potent enemy;—young knights who had mortgaged their lands to purchase gaudy and gilded coats for themselves and their followers, to win favour in the eyes of the lady of the castle;—troops of engineers, their huge wains groaning under the weight of mangonels and arbalists, or guiding on wheels their catapults and war-wolves, and all that " devilish en¬ ginery," which anticipated, before its invention, the most destructive effects of gunpowder ;-— straggling troops of Pelerins, the wandering condottieri of that war, with cross shifted from the shoulder to the breast;—and troops of eccle^ siastics, regular as well as secular, with crucifix and banner, fairly displayed^ chanting aloud the " Exsurgat Dominus" amid the deafening hum of martial preparation,—fierce conten? tion often arising between these two classes, the latter threatening to shut the gates of Para¬ dise against the contumacious, and the former menacing to withhold the aid of the arm of
flesh, and leave the churchmen to wage rosary and crucifix against the clubs and arrows of the heretics. These were generally appeased by the BonnibeMes, who followed this tumultu¬ ary array in competent numbers, and were most frequently the objects of contention them¬ selves. Nor were there lacking in flank and rear of the crusading army bands of minstrels and mimes, furnished with all the dissolute¬ ness, poverty, cunning, and amusive powers, which were then, and still are, " the badge of all their tribe." Now, harping to knights and nobles in their silken pavilions,—now vainly trying to woo the ear of a village churl,—now caressed, and now spurned, always necessary, yet always contemptible, with hearts as light as their purses, and a good-humoured vanity, making them ample satisfaction for all scorns and wrongs,— they lived that life of exigencies and extremes that seems to the individual himself something unreal and dramatic; as if he were acting a life, not living one,—the very excitement constituting its wild charm, and its perils and privations possessing an
interest denied to the homely monotony of every-day existence. Such was the army and array of the crusaders. It was the night following that on which Sir Paladour had been encountered on the heath, that, in the van of this tumultuous band, there came riding on three distinguished crusaders, who, though pursuing the same direction towards the castle of Courtenaye, seemed, by the slowness of their pace, and easy lightness of their conversation, either much to doubt the danger which menaced its lord, or wholly to disregard it. This group consisted of the Bishop of Toulouse, a con¬ spicuous character in that age,—an old knight, Sir Aymer du Chastelroi, and a young one, who rode beside him in silence. The bishop led a numerous band of men-at-arms, amply appointed; in their van rode a body of priests, one of whom sustained the weight of his vast crosier, and the other his banner, emblazoned with the mitre, and bearing the motto of the crusaders, Dieu et I'Eglise, wrought in gold. Close behind him was a confessor, mounted
on a.goodly mule, and telling his beads; while two pages on foot led the prela&e's war-steed, the noble animal champing and rearing, as if he longed for an armed weight to press his loins, and already " smelled the battle afar off, the thunder of the captains and Ihe shout¬ ing." His 'master seemed to share his impa¬ tience, often booking >back on the fiftiy force he 'hoped ere long to bestride -in bettle, -and which, in truth, iio.ie save himself seemed able to guide or >to command. He had that marked .and regular, but chilling physiognomy, which seems rather that of a sSatue than of \< breathing man,—an im pression which was strengthened by the .gigantic piroportions >of his'figure, the immobility of his liron features, and -tbe stern repose of his large commanding eye. He was arrayed less according to the military v costume of the age, than to his own ideas of ecclesiastical* chivalry. He disdained the f aid c of tlie 'defeibiive armour .allotted at that (period to the -higher classes exclusively ; he woire rkjither hose nor shiKt-of mail, but a' corslet teced •ovei' a well-quilted gambazon.
He bad also cuisses and greaves of polished and'ponderous steel; and at iirst sight it would have been difficult to distinguish the warlike prelate from a 'man fully armed, but for the magnificent and jewelled cope which he wore on his head-; while his helmet hung at his saddle-bow, or was occasionally given to a priest to bear, who received it as reverently as-be would a relic. Combining in his single person all the phy¬ sical powers that were the requisites of the stormy age in which he lived, wiith all the mental energies that make themselves known and felt in every age>the Bishop of Toulouse presented to the eye all that is imposing and magnificent — to v the mind all 'that is over¬ powering and formidable—a man of powter and mighty body and-soul, whose strong'mind clung to his strong frame like tbe human'part of thecentaurof old to>the animal part, making but one between them; the former urging and directing the latter, and the latter second¬ ing the mighty impulses of the former with a force that seemed instinctive and connatural. Beside 'the bishop rode the
brave old merry knight, Sir Aymer du Chas¬ telroi. He was in armour, but had his helmet doffed for ease; and his bald forehead, grey locks* and lank cheeks, were strongly con¬ trasted with the laughter of his blue glittering eye, and the curl about his lip, sometimes sarcastic,, always jocular. The firm seat he kept on his war-steed, (which he disdained to change for a pacing palfrey) and the ease and address with which he wore his heavy harness, proved him a knight '* not dubbed on ctrpet consideration, and with unhacked rapier," but one who, though in advanced years, " at their own play, could foil a dozen would-be's of the day." The brave old knight had stirred him¬ self in his tower, like a veteran war-steed in his stall at the sound of the trumpet, on the intelligence that the castle of Courtenaye had been invested by the heretics; and set out at the head of fifty men-at-arms (the appointed complement'of a knight); but through his sympathy with young bloods, or his con¬ donation for old — the placket the former loitered for, or the pullen the latter coveted,
the good knight seldom rode with more than fifteen out of fifty of his company; yet he never gave them word of rebuke, jestingly overpassing the one, and but coldly chiding the other. The youthful knight, his com¬ panion, seldom spoke; his head, covered with a profusion of pale golden locks, was generally declined, and he seemed meditating on softer subjects than crusades or sieges. Sometimes, when jocularly addressed by Sir Aymer, whose notion of humour was by no means delicate, he looked up, and, blushing for the effeminate beauty of his features, he touched his budding mustaches, as if anticipating the time when h«s visage would boast a more martial and manly shade. As the party rode on, their conversation ran diffusedly as that of men apparently more occupied with the local inconveniencies of their progress than with the object of its termination. " How now, Sir Aymer," cried the bishop, " are we near the castle of this lord of Courtenaye?" VOL. I. D
" I know not well," replied the knight; " for, by the mass, when I enter on a doubtful way towards nightfall, I care not whither my - course tends, so it have end at all—hamlet or hovel, tower or town. Many a cherry lip and <*rey eye* may be found under the woollen hood; while the white hand you kiss in a castle-hall may take you over the lips for the license." . " What! art thou there still, mad knight r" quoth the bishop with a smile; " still for the, placket and coif ?.—marry, other pursuit would better befit thy years, and thy vow of chivalry binds thee to aid distressed demoiselles, not to add to their number." " Mine age !" retorted Sir Aymer; " many a breast has been prematurely swept by a white beard ere now; and your snow," he. added, stroking it, u was ever a close neighbour to your volcano. For my vow as a knight, let it rest with thine, lord, as a churchman; men say that the Bishop of Toulouse would not
hav^ sped so fast to the aid of the Lord of Courtenaye, had not the beauty of the Lady Isabelle, his niece, outshone the brightest blazonry on his towers."—The bishop smiled, not unpleased.—" But, reverend lord," pursued Sir Aymer, " should we fail to reach the castle of Courtenaye to-night, may ue not harbour with the Abbot of Normoutier? a festive churchman he, and a hospitable—who will not spare the best of his fare, and the choicest of his wine, to welcome us withal." " What!" said the bishop impatiently, "ask hospitality of that mere murderer of languages, against whom the soul of every martyred letter in the alphabet will rise up in judgment at the last day?—Wot ye not, that though he hath scarce Latin to mumble a mass, yet would the fool be learned, and he betaketh him to a cunning priest, praying him for certain phrases of the Latin tongue to grace his speech withal; and • sir priest, in a witty spleen, teacheth him phrases clean contrary to the meaning he seeketh to convey; so that he cannot ut.ter his reasons in plain language, if they be not tagged d 2
with some remnants of ill-assorted Latin. By the bones of St. Benedict, the founder of his rule, I had rather couch on the heath, than on the softest bed in the abbey of Normoutier. I would dream all night of the dispersion at Babel, or wake to be haunted by the ghost of some basely murdered quotation. Was it not, as we went on pilgrimage to holy St. John of Beaucaire, in honour of the martyr Chateau- neuf, that he broke forth with, How now, my fellow-pilgrims, what talk shall we beguile the way withal ? for, as a father saith, loquendi homines magistros habemus, tacendi Deos "— " That breaks no squares," said Sir Aymer, affecting to listen as if he understood him— " that breaks no squares with a loreless knight, though it may with a lettered churchman— that my lord the abbot's saws shall be found of light digestion when swallowed along with his rich viands—what say you, Sir Amirald, to our choice of harbourage for the night ?" " That I had rather kneel to receive the bishop's lance in my bosom at the gates of Normoutier, than his benison in the halls of
Courtenaye," said the youth, with an emotion that made strange contrast vvith his silvery voice and boyish features. " How now, sii boy!" said the ancient knight, laughing, " art thou such a heretic in love that thou speakest thus of the walls that enshrine the very saint of beauty, the dame sans peer, the Lady Isabelle?" " She hath been a good mistress to me," answered the youth in a subdued voice — " a noble and a gentle—and to save one golden hair of her head from shredding," ( c Her hair is brown,' muttered Sir Aymer,) " I would pour my heart's last prayer, my heart's best blood." " Nay, I wage my knighthood, spurs and all," said Sir Aymer, " that we win him yet within the towers of Courtenaye; and to prove that I am master of the spell, I will conjure in a name less potent than that,of Lady Isabelle. Hear, thou recreant to beauty; were the castle of Courtenaye this moment invested by the heretics, headed by that incarnate devil, Ray¬ mond of Toulouse—were the barbican won,
the moat crossed—every loop-hole filled with shot from arrow and arbalist—tower and bastion rocking with the blows of war-wolves —every pinnacle and battlement ablaze with wild-fire and burning darts—whom wouldst thou plunge amid the burning ruin to save ?" " The Lord of Courtenaye," answered the youth, vvith a fierce but generous pride; " and as I bore his cankered and worthless body through the flames, I would whisper to him, 1 1 swore to be avenged of thee, and I am !'" " Well sung, young cockerel of no dunghill brood !" quoth Sir Aymer; " thou wilt one day crow that all France shall hear thee." " What hath been the youthful knight's wrong ?" said the prelate, half excited by the emotion of Sir Amirald, who now, apparently ashamed of betraying, or struggling to subdue it, rode apart. " Marry, an old tale, my lord," said Sir Aymer—"the mere burthen of a minstrel's ditty—how a page loved to kiss my lady's hand better than her pantoffle—how he was there¬ upon sentenced to the discipline of the porter's
lodge—how he resisted—how my lady prayed —how~but, irifandum, regina,jubesrenovare dolor em." " Reserve it then till I am more in the mood of condolence," said the bishop, whose eye had caught another figure through the increasing gloom; " for I would first gladly learn whether he who approaches through the darkness be friend or fos, I heard his horse- tramp on the heath long ere I beheld him." As he spoke, the stately figure of a knight, completely armed, approached them; and the shade could no longer conceal the lofty grandeur of his air, or the martial splendour of his fur- - niture. . " Now, by'r Lady," said Sir Aymer, than whom none was better skilled to judge of ' the thewes and sinews of a man/—" Now, by'r Lady, a knightly presence and a noble— would that he may ride up and join our company!" While this was said, the knight advanced, and saluted the,party with a lofty grace, with which the slight reverence of modern ceremony
THE ALBIGENSES. would make most vile comparison, and, with his hand raised to the visor of his helm, and his plume almost touching his horse's mane, he demanded of them if they were bound to the same cause and course with himself. His action, as he spoke, made the cross on the breast of his mantle visible; and Sir Aymer, without further explanation, greeted him with the free welcome of the brave. " Welcome, fair sir," he said; " our cause and errand are, without question, the same. We be crusaders, who speed to the aid of the Lord of Courte¬ naye; we march in ample strength and meet appointment to his rescue —Fie, where be those loitering knaves of mine' 1 " And here the old knight cast an abashed glance on his dispersed and desultory train, ashamed of the license he allowed them, and of himself for allowing it " My holy lord," he muttered, " I pray jou hold the stranger knight in parley while I chide the knaves for their tardiness." The bishop, meanwhile, was scanning the young crusader as he would a noble animal
whose physical force he was appreciating, or more properly a machine whose momentum he vvas calculating. " Benedicite!" he said, in his most gracious tones, " journey you with us, sir stranger knight ?" " So your holy lordship pleases,", replied the youth. " It pleaseth us well," answered the prelate; " thou art armed in the cause of holy church, and we are also the soldiers of Christ —ride up beside our rein. Why, here," he cried, in admiration unrepressed, " here is an arm might mow down an heretic host as the fire kindled by our peasants consumes the weeds of the field — a hand that might fell the oak of the forest with a blow — a breast that might meet the flight of a hundred arrows, and shake them from thee like bird-bolts from the pinion of a soaring eagle. Stand up in thy stirrups, sir stranger, and let me view thy might." The youthful knight obeyed, with a mixture of proud submission and graceful conscious- d5
ness. He rose upright in his stirrups, poising himself 'vvith his lance, and then slowly sunk to his seat, bowing low to the bishop. " God's .mother !" whispered Sir Aymer, who had meanwhile rejoined them, " is he not one in a thousand ?" . " Thou wouldst rightlier say, a thousand in one," said the bishop, smiling. Sir Aymer, who had availed himself of the interruption caused by the stranger's approach to lead the party into the road that conducted to the abbey of Normoutier, was in no mood to contend with the bishop; but, being some¬ what of Polonius's taste in topics of conversa¬ tional amusement, he broke forth ere they had ridden half a mile: "Alas, for a trouba¬ dour's tale, or a minstrel's lay. to cheer us as we speed !—or even for that witty parrot vvho bore the loves of the. son of King Antiphanor to the lonely lady of the orchard *. : I warrant me, sir stranger, thou couldst unfold-some curious and delicate love-tale if thou wouldst;
but give modesty to the devil (marry, I know no one else will take her,) for a moment— What!—I know thee for a lover and a loyal one; that trick of thy folded arms—that careless tossing of thy reins on thy steed's neck—that smothered sigh that ushers every word—nay, thou art convicted to thy very heart; betake thee to thy confession, and we will share the penance by listening to thy tale—list, young Amirald, and be edified." " For a career in the lists of love," said the stranger, trying to catch the vein of the merry knight, "you shall hold me excused, if I boast not of trophy or prowess — — I am one of Dian's knights, and my heart' is yet sans impress or device; but if I am summoned before the parliament of love to answer for my treason to its sovereign, I shall doubtless choose for my proxy so gay and loyal a votarist as I deem thee, sir knight." Oid Sir Aymer smiled at the compliment, while he felt it a jest; then, " What will the youth of this age come to," he cried, in a sad and sententious tone, " when sixty must be
proxy for twenty!-—But be it so —shift we the theme to war; to that strain I warrant me thou canst sing a mean or bass*without a trumpet to rouse thee." - . ; : "Among valorous and veteran knights," said the youthful stranger, "such theme would ill become the lips of an adventurer who hath joined your company by chance, and who claims no honour but that cf being reckoned ■D among the meanest of those who contend for the rights of holy church." " That shall not serve your turn, sir knight," said the persevering querist; " you have looked on deeds of chivalry ere now." "I have been at the siege- of the castle of Andely, and of Chateau-Gaillard," said the stranger with reluctance*. . " And that was a glorious encounter," said Sir Aymer, kindling at the name of the first— " when Robert de Lacy held out full bravely for his liege lord, King John of England. He was Norman by birth, that Robert de'Lacy,"
he added, passing his hand over his brow. " Tell us some stirring tale of the siege, sir knight; the English claim all" the glory for the defence made by their Robert de Lacy." " I'have heard," said the stranger in a sub¬ dued voice, " that he whom men call Gaubert the Swimmer did good service at that siege." " I heard not of him," said the bishop— " how goes the tale ?" " He was a man of huge strength and dauntless resolve," replied the youth; " and when the castle held out beyond all expect¬ ancy, when surprise was hopeless and assault desperate, he disrobed himself on a dark night by the edge of the castle moat, and, fastening around him certain earthen vessels skilfully stopped, and cc.'taining fire within, he plunged into the moat, and, diving his way across, lodged the concealed fire under the bastions, and ere morn the castle was in a-blaze above its defenders'.heads, and Robert de Lacy"— ' " I remember me now," said the prelate, vvith marks of impatient weariness; " but; for mine own part, the feats of villains and of vassalry leave me~ lightly in their debt either
for credence or for merit—tell us, if thou canst, a better tale, or iet us have at least a better hero." " The next that I remember," said the stranger, who seemed to shun speaking of himself," was Pierre Bogis, surnamed Camus*, whose piercing eye discovered a window in the basement story of the castle, which was kept open to air a magazine withal, and which the besieged imagined was con¬ cealed from all. At peril of his life he swam the fosse, clomb the parapet, wrenched the iron bars from the window, and, ere morn, the Earl of Chester yielded him prisoner to King Philip, who, in requital of his valorous bearing and stout defence, permitted him to walk the streets of Paris free, till order could be taken for his return to England." ** Thou merely weariest us by these tales of the rascaille," said the proud prelate; " what know or care we for thy Gaubert and Camus (whose nose, short as it might be, was, God wot, an overmatch for his pedigree,) — canst
thou not preach to us from a text that will teach loftier lessons?—Were there not, at the taking of Chateau-Gaillard, three youthful candidates for knighthood, who had borne them with such high and equal courage in the assault, and done such sprigh;hil deeds of gentle emulation, that the king exclaimed, as he stood on the well-won turrets of Chateau-Gaillard, and saw tlie reek of its smouldering bastions ascend, and hover like clouds o'er the mouth of a volcano, * Who¬ ever plunges into that gulf of fire, and brings to us the most precious thing that can be saved from its burning ruin, him will we make knight-banneret on the spot where we stand, and he shall tear the oriSamme before us in battle, though kings riding beside our rein contended for its grasp.* At the word, the three youths plunged into the fiery darkness." "It reminds me of a tale I have heard," quoth Sir Aymer, " how King Frederic of Sicily tempted a foolish diver to plunge into the gulf betwixt Scylla and Charybdis (two potent sorceresses, men say,) for a silver cup,
or the like foolish toy — marry, he never saw cup or diver more, and for what befell them the polypuses must answer." ' " The first youth," said the bishop, disre¬ garding the interruption, " whom men called Sir Ezzelin de Verac, returned with a beautiful woman whom he had saved, and bore her in his arms to Philip's feet, not doubting that such prize liked his sovereign well. Perchance those in lofty state cannot brook a saucy con¬ sciousness of their pleasant vices in an inferior, which they deem like a rebuke; for so it was that the king turned in displeasure from the youth — in truth, his goodly form was so de¬ faced by affectation, and his scarf and adorn¬ ments were of such fantastical and overwrought fashion, that he seemed fitter to play in a pageant with maskers than couch lance among knights who do battle. The second, the wealthy heir of Semonville, had worked like a mole amid the foundations of the castle, where the waters of the moat slaked the inendurable heat, and brought from thence pix, chalice, and candlestick of solid gold, worthy the high
altar of Notre Dame in Paris; but he ap¬ proached the king vvith an air so mean and proud, so full of pretension and emptiness, and with a touch withal of base and plebeian ronfidence in his costly prize, that the king would have laughed outright, had not another and a nobler form stood beside him, bearing in his mantle somewhat which he seemed anxious ; yet trembling, to offer to his sove¬ reign." " And what 'was that," said Sir Aymer, smiling, " which King Philip held of dearer preciousness than beauty or than gold ?" " King Philip," quoth the bishop, " looked more earnestly on the youth, and bade him advance and show the prize he had won. From the folds of his bloody mantle the youth drew forth an infant, the child of an heretic Aibigeois, (who had got, Heaven knows how, into the castle,) and whom its parent was about to cast into the flames, when the youth, baptizing it in his blood, whose trace the forehead of the infant yet bore, hasted to offer it to his sovereign, as the most precious
relic of the ruins. At sight of this prize, King Philip demanded the name of the youth; whose blood, fast streaming through his broken armour, made the sacrifice of the drops with which he had assoiled his wretched burden more precious and more perilous every mo¬ ment l Men call me Paladour, my liege,' said the youth, bending beneath the keen regards of Philip's eagle eye—' but my birth, my descent, are all unknown to me; mine infant life began with mystery, and not a ray hath yet broke on tiie dark and thorny path I have trod to manhood.' * It is the destiny of some to be the last of a mighty race,' replied the king, ' and of others to be the first; take thou no shame, youth, that the latter and better fate is thine. I trust to the promise of thy gracious and manly form, that the honours now bestowed on thee will flourish in thine own house ' unto the end of many genera¬ tions'— Grace k Dieu, so much of holy writ have we learned from our chaplain Bigord— Paladour, kneel down.' The youth obeyed. ' Rise up, Sir Paladour, 3 said the king, after
a short whisper with an old knight (who was as skilful in toys of heraldry as if he had emblemed the banners of the twelve tribes when camping in the wilderness)-—.* Rise up, Sir Paladour de la Croix Sanglante, knight banneret, dubbed on the field of battle by the hand of thy liege lord.'—' And now,' he said, * let our surgeon look needfully to his wounds, or France may lose the stoutest lance in her host, and chivalry the fairest flower in her ample field of honour and of gentleness.'" " And what said the young knight to this golden prodigality of royal praise and honour?" asked Sir Aymer, touched for a moment with generous admiration; then relapsing into the habit which time and indulgence had made inveterate, he loosely added —" marry; that night I warrant the fairest maid in the vicinage, not the royal chirurgeon, found ready salve for his wounds; and the young knight would rather have pledged his new-won spurs than wanted his will." " No—on my life—on my soul, he would not," broke forth Amirald with all tbe fervour
of young enthusiasm, and the freshness of untainted purity—" the breast over which so holy a blazon is spread can nourish none but holy thoughts and pure." " Be not in such haste to enshrine thy demigod, sir boy," said the bishop, with a proud laugh of dissolute derision; " men say the infant was a promising one, and that the youth had a fatherly care of it—not without cause." " /have neither parent nor child," said the stranger, speaking for the first time after a long interval. As he spoke, the breeze wafted aside his mantle; and the moon, which now rode high, threw her bright full light on the cognizance of Sir Paladour de la Croix Sanglante. The effect of the discovery, made thus involuntarily, was strikingly marked by the different modes in which it was recognised by the bishop, Sir Aymer, and his youthful companion. The former, full of fire and interest while the relater of a narrative which he believed unknown to the hearers, felt all that interest lost when its
genuine hero appeared; and, after a few words of cold but courteous compliment to Sir Pala¬ dour, he was silent;—not so old Sir Aymer; after causing his steed to make sundry cara¬ coles, he swore, " by Mary's knight, a gentler passage of knigbthood might not be found in story;"—while Amirald, springing from his steed, bowed his knee beside Sir Paladour's stirrup, and with resistless enthusiasm pressed his lips to his glove of mail. . At this moment the sound of a bell, heard deeply amid the silence of night, struck the ears of the crusaders. They paused, and reined up their steeds. The sound was re¬ peated. Though their armed train was now left far behind, their courage defied all thought of danger; but there was something unspeak¬ ably solemn in the sound thus heard at night, on the verge of a lone heath whose limits were lost in darkness, for the moon was again concealed in heavy clouds, and the bishop's attendants had not yet lit the torches with which they were provided. In a few moments, during which scarce a breath was drawn, from
a sensation at once awful and pleasurable, lights were seen twinkling through a wood to thejeft, which till then had appeared like a mass of'Solid and sable rock, and a band of monks emerging from it vvith tapers in their hands in regular procession, offered, in the name of the abbot of Normoutier, the hospitality of the abbey for'the'night. The night had become intensely still; not a breeze stirred a leaf of the wood, or ruffled a fold of the churchmen s garments; the tapers, burning upright and steadily, gave their strong light to the mailed forms, floating plumes, and reined and pawing.steeds of the crusaders, and to the sombre habits and white scalps of the monks, the latter strongly defined on the dark and clustered trees that formed the back ground of the scene. To the bishop's indica¬ tions of reluctance and distaste at this unwel¬ come invitation, Sir Aymer replied, by urging the impossibility of reaching the castle of Courtenaye that night. To his further inti¬ mation of danger from wandering bands of the heretics, who were known to be dispersed
over the country, the bishop replied only by an impatient movement to pursue his journey. But when Sir Aymer, whose heart was in the cause, whispered to the prelate the loose dis¬ cipline and luxurious accommodation of the abbey, and ■ swore that they would be little molested by any bell within its walls, save those which ever tolled punctually for the service of Soint Jentaculum, Saint Prandium, and Saint Ccena, the muscles of the bishop's face began to relax, and with them relaxed his resolution. " Sith better may not be," said the bishop. in a reluctant tone—then casting his eye on the armed train, who, at the tidings that they were about to halt for the night, began to gather fast round their leaders —" where, in the name of Lot and his guests, are all these to be housed and fed to-night ?" " My holy lord," said Sir Aymei> " you are not to learn that the abbot of Clugny hath re¬ ceived into his hospitalitium three kings, with their trains, yet never a monk was dislodged from his pallet to make room for a page in
the royal following—I trust there is not less wealth or less courtesy within the walls of the jolly abbot of Normoutier—trust me, we shall fare well." " On, then, in the name of Heaven, since it must be so," quoth the bishop; " I shall at least escape the sufferings of St. Jerome, who was punished by the angels for his unchristian familiarity with the writings of Cicero. I am not likely to hear much of him to-night, and if I did, the ancient, if raised from the dead, could not swear to his own name were it uttered by the abbot of Normoutier." As the prelate spoke, the train of knights and men-at-arms approached the gates of the abbey of Normoutier.
CHAPTER IV. There was high feasting held at Vaucouleur. Southey. The valves of the grert entrance were dis¬ played to their utmostextent on the approach of the crusaders, and the bishop rode through them in pride ; recollecting that such entrance was never opened but for a royal visitor, or for one honoured next to royalty* Sir Aymer and the young knights followed; and fast behind them came the mingled and mul¬ titudinous throng of men-at-arms, Pelerins, and military stragglers, all zealously inclined to put to the proof the munificent hospitality of the princely-revenued abbot of Normoutier. The 21'OUD rallied, and formed in a vast snnare, _..~ w . «..»vuiuic jlki r tutnci
VOL. I. E
which was enclosed by the buildings of the abbey. The lord abbot, who was engaged with a guest whom he much wished to conceal, and who, like many modern inviters, had sent the invitation in strong hopes of its being rejected, now rushed forward, in his first trepidation, issuing contradictory orders, and uttering unin¬ telligible quotations, in the same breath, to his visitor, and to the monastic officials, who crowded into his presence for direction and orders. To the former he whispered, " Hide thyself with that speed thou hast. Alack! thou hast not had a morsel of food or a cup of wine. Lusisti satis edisti atque bibisti." To his cross-bearer, " Do me thine office seemly; knowest thou not its dignity, and to what thou mayst yet aspire? — Hum. — Pasces in cruce corvos." And as the friars thronged into the procession, eyeing their stony figures, and the perpendicular and motionless folds of their draper}', he murmured, " Ay, this looks well. — Sinuanturflamine vestes,"
And while tbe torch-bearers stood in goodly row, Each holding as it were a stall', A tapei burning bught.— Southey. " They burn steadily and bright," he cried; " Afflavit Deus mentis, et dissipantur. — Now, where be my ring, my cope, my" — as he hastily indued the insignia presented by the lay-assistants — " Now all is meetly- ordered, and as a father saith, ' Asinus portal inysteria.' Now for a witty greeting to meet the bishop withal — as — Amice, ad quod'venisti — Fie, that were stale,— they say the ghost of my predecessor murmurs that at the door of my cell every night" As the lord abbot spoke, the increasing trampling of the steeds, the clashing of the armour, and the ringing of the massive spurs of the knights on the paved court, warned him he had not a moment to lose; and quickening his movements, he led the way, sunounded by his ecclesiastical attendants, to greet his dis¬ tinguished guests vvith the mingled courtliness e2
and formality of a man of the world and a monastic dignitary. His guests collected in such order as they might, to await his welcome; and as they stood, rode, or knelt, the torches lit by the bishop's attendants blazing on the band, there vvas a magnificence of grouping, a glare of light, a depth of shadow, a broad and bold outline of the principal figures, and a tumul¬ tuous and massive heaping in the perspective, that made the scene of meeting like a dark but richly tinted picture, of some hand of the olden time; such as we see by dim and unpro- pitious light in some ancient gallery, and wish, as we gaze, to snatch it from the wall, and hold it up once more to the light before it fades for ever. The inner gates, at the extremity of the court, opposite to, and correspondent with, those of the great entrance, widely unfolded, dis¬ played the goodly person of the abbot, stand¬ ing between their ample valves, with a vast attendance of monks and torch-bearers in the
rear; taper and torch flinging a yellow and smoky but strong glare on the foremost figures of the group on both sides; while the vapour, eddying in thick and heavy wreaths round the cloistered stories, narrow windows, and tapering carved spires of the interior buildings, and then descending, settled in a dark but richly tinted mass (purple streaked, like tliat which precedes the thunder storm,) over the crowded heads of the multitude, lay and clerical, who thronged the vast area. The light fell powerfully on the contrasted figures of the gorgeously robed abbot and his pale mute attendants, vvith their sallow aspects, bare scalps, dark habits, and apathetic features, and the dazzling reflection flashed back from shirts of mail, cuisses of steel, em¬ broidered surcoats, emblazoned banners, and chains of all rich metals, and the caparisons of vvar-steeds, mingled from the sparkling chevrons on their foreheads to the gilded bells on their necks, vvith the scariet and purple plumage of their crested riders,
who vailed their heads low in honour of their host, while the court of the abbey rung beyond the echoes of its loudest bells with the tram¬ pling of the steeds, the trooping of the mul¬ titude, the tumult of martial and monastic life, thus abruptly thrown together, yet each combating for and maintaining its own splendid formality and solemn pretension. Even the well-intended courtesy of the knights, as they sprung from their steeds, and low ering lance and pennon, in reverence to the place, shook the stone pavement with the clatter of their armour, caused a din that, warlike, exhilarating, and glory-sounding as it vvas, made the abbot's brains reel under his jewelled cope; and he hasted to bestow the monastic forms of bene¬ diction to his guests, to avoid further ceremo¬ nial. It vvas at this moment that above, and distinct from all other sounds, a voice from the crowd was heard to exclaim, " Hold — hold — tarry for my blessing! I have waited long to shed it on you : tarry a moment yet." The bishop and the knights, amazed, reined
up their steeds, and cast back angry glances on their train, conceiving that this interruption must arise from some drunken minstrel," or " all-licensed fool," who had chosen ill time to vent his buffoonery in. The men-at-arms who followed them, as if to exculpate themselves from such charge, opened on each side in opposite semicircles, and in the centre stood a figure, covered in dark drapery from head to foot; sex, form, and age, were alike undistinguishable; only the torch¬ light, resting fully through the wide opening just made, rendered the form perfectly visible. For a moment it seemed motionless as it was inscrutable; then advancing, with a move¬ ment whose rapidity caused some tremor in the breasts of those it glided past, it stopped between the bishop and the abbot.- " Bless on," it said, in a soft and unnatural voice,— " I come to bless also." Then, with a sud¬ den and supernatural exaltation of accent, " Accursed be ye slayers of men!" it cried, pointing to the crusaders, " accursed be ye who bless those that deface the image of ^our
mutual Maker! For every drop of blood ye shed, or ye sanctify, may oceans of molten lead be roaring and hissing for you in the teeming, over-seething caldrons of your master and mine." " Blasphemer—wizard — sacrilegious!"— uttered a thousand voices, and a hundred lances were raised against the oftender: one of these chanced to raise the thick veil that covered the figure; it fell back, and discovered the form of a woman. The uproar increased, " A female, and within cloistered walls!—a female! shame for thy sex! and insult to these walls!" cried the ecclesiastics, " What makest thou here?" The military followers soon caught the example of indignity and outrage, and the wretched female was hurried to the gate. ------Breaking from them she exclaimed, in a voice that made the rudest pause: — "A woman! Yes; Did not a woman bear ye ? Did not a woman nurse ye? Did not a woman love ye? Ay, or ye had nev^r grown to that pitch of lustihood: and manly and grateful use ye make of it, to thrust and throng a woman thus!"
Some of the gentler held back; and taking advantage of her momentary liberation, she walked rapidly forward, and standing close to the bishop of Toulouse, before he was aware of her approach, she asked abruptly, " Dost thou know me?" " Know thee, vile hag!" cried the proud prelate, recoiling from her in ineffable disdain. " Yet thou knewest me once," said the figure, " and I know thee yet; drunk with pride, and crime, and blood, as thou art; and as deeply and bitterly as I have wished, from this withered heart, that I had never beheld thee, so deeply shalt thou wish, one day, from % that burning and ulcerated heart of thine, that thou hadst never seen me. Oh! vengeance is Jong-lived; and for years after the .tree is blasted and leafless, the trace of the lightning that scathed it remains on its trunk. Knowest thou me?" she continued, turniug to Sir Pa¬ ladour. Paladour, who recognised his guide over, the lake, and round whom fearful reminiscences, e5
and more terrible anticipations, began to gather at the sight, shrunk from it, and leaned for support on the shoulder of Sir Amirald; who, ignorant of the cause of his agitation,' sup¬ ported him with that homage, at once affec¬ tionate and reverential, which the youthful brave are first to pay to the mature in valour and glory. Meanwhile the wretched female was fast hurried to the gate by the military and eccle¬ siastic attendants; but not before, turning her tall figure, and waving her arm above her head, she exclaimed, " Ye know me not— ye know me not—none of ye know me now. Be it so; but ye will all — all — ay, spurn and buffet me as ye will," she cried, struggling with the rude attendants—" Ye will all, at mortal peril of your lives, arid to your souls' eternal bale, ye shall all know me hereafter." She was then thrust from the gate; and this accident little discomposed the ceremonial of the meeting. The procession moved on; the
bishop, reverently welcomed as the prime guest in honour and sanctity, marched at the right hand of the abbot'; the knights followed, through a narrow and • stone-paved - passage;" the clank of their armed tread and ringing spurs making its arches resound with other echo than that of the'whispered'Benedicite,-so long the sole and tranquil tenant of its solitude; From this dark and narrow' passage, which Sir Aymer, as he stumbled through it," termed the previous purgatory' to the'paradise of the abbot's refectory, the guests passed into a spacious hall. ' It seemed dim'at first,.but the attendants crowding in fast with' their torches; and arranging themselves behind the guests, as they seated themselves,- soon .made the space which' they encircled'as bright as noon, while the thick smoke' that arose from ■ the torches formed a kind of atmospheric canopy that enriched and deepened the lustre below. The banquet was worthy of the wealth and hospitality of the' abbot of Normoutier.'' At the extremity of the two.long tables, which extended half the length of the refectory, there
was a transverse table, to which the abbot led the bishop and his more distinguished guests: this was the dais of this monastic banquet- hall, and was raised about three feet above the level of the paved floor; but all the tables were heaped with the same profusion of game, fowls, and fish, (not cold, like the relics of a feast, but all smoking, and all ol them " gris- amber steamed,") with entremets of march¬ pane, blanc-mange, and subtilties then so called, being devices in confectionary, with figures, flags, and mottoes. All wondered how the abbot could on the sudden heap his tables with such daintiness and profusion; but that was a secret which the lord abbot kept to himself; and it was certain that the appetite of his guests was not'at all observed to diminish in consequence of their not participating in it. Ample store of pigment and claret washed down their costly viands, and reconciled even the most fastidious of the feasters to the com¬ paratively coarse accommodation of this con¬ ventual revel. Save the tables, — which were covered with carpets, sore worn and much
stained with wine, and the benches, which were totally bare,—the ample hall was wholly unfurnished; except that, in an "obscure un¬ heeded nook, stood a kind of wooden pulpit, from whence, in days of purer discipline, a monk used to read a homily or a legend during ihe period of the temperate meal. Yet, amid this meagre and uncouth arrangement, there was a picturesque glory of light and colouring, of costume, and character, that redeemed the inferiority of all " appliances and means to boot/' and shed over this mixture of mean¬ ness and magnificence a lustre that intoxi¬ cated the eye and the imagination. The volumes of dark and wreathed smoke, that rose from the torches of the atten¬ dants, hung at an undulating distance above: above them still was seen the dark but richly carved wainscoting of the refectory, which rose to the height of eighteen feet on its walls; and above that again the sole vast window, that enlightened it by day, and that now, with all its glory of emblazoned panes, and burning hues, and figures of saints, as
glowingly portrayed as if the tints were kindled at the flames and furnaces that con¬ sumed them, rose in rich pride above the mingled and heavy masses of light and vapour that crossed each other in the lower part of the hall. And above all, the risen moon, in her full-orbed light, gleamed through the uncoloured compartments of the topmost panes with pure, pale, silver light. These three strongly-marked belts of light might, even to an unimaginative gazer, have suggested the idea of the gross and sordid vapours that depress the soul in its first aspirations; then of the gorgeous, mystical, and fantastic gleam, that superstition sheds on the eye it dazzles and bedims; and, lastly, of that pure and holy beam that breaks on the soul that has struggled through the mists of life, and the illusions of fanaticism, and fixes its failing organ on that light which emanates from Him who is light, and. the Father of it. TJncppscious of thoughts like these, or, indeed, of any but what were " more germane to the matter" of feasting, Sir Aymer, after his
trencher had been often replenished by ..the sewer, and his goblet still oftener by the cel¬ larer and his assistants, turned suddenly to the bishop of Toulouse, and exclaimed, " Said I not, my lord, that 1 would quit your tale of the knight De la Croix Sanglante, with a romaunt of mine own, worth many a min¬ strel's ' tale ? — Many, the bishop heeds me. not — he is deep in sad and holy talk with the lord abbot. — Now Heaven' forefend that I should mar their conference ! Doubtless it is on some grave matter, touching the widening of the nunnery grates, or the abridging of veils and frontlets; would they would admit me of their counsel! Come on, Sir Paladour, pledge me in a full goblet, and thou shalt hear a tale worthy a knight's ear." " Noble knight," said Sir Paladour, slowly raising the goblet to his lip, and slightly tasting it, " Noble knight, I pledge you." " Nay, I win name a pledge," quoth Sir Aymer, " that will make thee drain the goblet as if a favour from thy lady-love lay sparkling
at the bottom. Pledge me here to him* who saved the life of king Philip at the battle of Bovines." " To the bottom of my clip and of my heart," answered the young knight, emptying the former at a draught. <f .But who was he, I pray you? I have heard of him, but men said that, with the modesty of a true valour, he shuns all fame and mention." " And he doth so," .answered Sir Aymer, repelling, the monitory pressure of Sir Ami- raid's hand on his mantle. " Nathless men will talk of him, though the virtuous fool himself were praying them for silence. Bore you arms on that bloody day, sir knight ?" "I was not so honoured,"; answered Pala¬ dour. " Ah! there were deeds wrought to stir the blood in bold hearts, and ■ make the harps of minstrels ring as though the chords were fire!" cried Sir Aymer; and he pro-
ceeded, in " good circumstance," to detail the battle of Bovines to Sir Paladour; whose ear, filled for ever with mysterious and inaudible whisperings, caught but half his tale, and wel¬ comed the noisy stranger but coldly. Sir Aymer described the vast- disparity in numbers betwixt the army of king Philip and that of the emperor Otho; the former amounting to but fifty thousand, while the latter trebled that number. He spoke of the skilful disposition by which the king of France gained to his forces the advantage of sun and wind, and the (till then unheard of, or, at least, unpractised,) system of warfare, by which he arrayed the squires and armour-bearers in the van; vvith whom the knights of the imperial army, disdaining at first to contend, were mowed down by hun¬ dreds; till, feeling the blows of squires as heavy and mortal as those of dubbed knights, they deigned at length to return them, but too late to prevent their own utter defeat and dis¬ comfiture. So far Sir Aymer related like a cool and
experienced martialist; but when his narrative bore him into the heat of the battle, his heart and tongue kindled with his theme,, and he exclaimed, " Hadst thou seen, sir knight, the close of that day, thou hadst never wished to behold another: no after-time, or after-tale, were worth the living for or listening. The field vvas well-nigh won by king Philip's chivalry, when the emperor Otho, vvho had all that day done deeds surpassing human valour, made his last and furious charge against the royal guard, who fought closely round the king, for fear of the assassinates. It was a perilous and mortal shock — a bloody and fearful grappling. The royal guard dealt about their iron-headed clubs with heavy force and wearied strength. The duke of Burgundy, vvho fought by the king's banner, was unhorsed. The count St. Paul, the stoutest lance in the royal host, lay wounded, and supported by his squires at the foot of a tree. King Philip himself fought on foot, though he was now dealing impotent blows on the dead bodies of his guard, that, faithful even after death, lay
round' him like' a rampart.' ' The emperor Otho pressed on, mounted for the third time that day, and surrounded by the flower of the imperial chivalry. ■ It was ' then the few vvho 'still ' fought round King Philip,- and deemed all lost in his danger, shouted aloud, " Lower the oriflamme, in token of the king's peril!" The oriflamme had ' bent no more from its stately height all that day than the oak of the forest, when the storm hath swept it, and laid all but its monarch on the earth; but, at the cry of the knights, the banner- bearer lowered the oriflamme, and a hundred knights, from various distances and dangers of the field, hasted to the royal rescue.. I vvas then in a far distant spot, confronted vvith that traitor Eustache de Maguelines; but, when I saw the oriflamme lowered, it seemed to .me as if the sun vvas sunk. I know not how it fared with' me—all wandered in a bloody mist. But I say, Sir Paladour," continued the veteran, recovering his voice, " an hundred, yea two hundred, sore wounded as they were,
so that many could scarce bestride their steeds, hastened from every part of the field at that signal. " But there was one, a boy in arms, a wan¬ derer, a mere adventurer of the day, unnamed and unknown, who arrived first of them all — with one blow of a battle-axe, which he had snatched from some powerless hand, he clove the skull of the emperor's horse, while the rider's grasp was on the king of France's rein, who vvas again horsed; and the noble steed, rearing in mortal agony, turned with his rider from the blow. King Philip shouted, " The emperor hath turned his back and fled!" The word spread like lightning. The chivalry of France rallied;—and—and for the rest of the day," said Sir Aymer, wiping his eyes, which overflowed involuntarily at the mention or relation of a noble action, " methinks this boy left us little to do but to chase the flanks of the emperor's host as a hawk would a flight of pigeons; and, as we bound up our wounds, to curse the Count of Flanders, who gave the cause of
quarrel. But, as touching that boy, — Know you him?" said he abruptly to Amirald. " No one knows him less," said the youth, in a suppressed tone. " There thou liest, aud loudly," quoth Sir Aymer, with the coarse jocularity permitted in that age between equals in rank. " Thou art the man, or wilt be, if thou livest to be a man. Now, by the saints, it was thou thy¬ self didst the very deed, and won'st thy title of knight banneret from the royal hand of Philip: an hand that would, ere this day, have been cold, had not thine — thine, clove the skull of the emperor's steed. Tush, what signify words, or becks, or blushes? reserve thern for thy bridal, if ever thou gettest a beard, and breath enough to woo a maiden withal. Sir Paladour, I wot 'thee to know this is Amirald, who saved the life and royaume of our liege lord King Philip. Now shame to me, a bearded knight, to sit betwixt two boys knight bannerets, whilst I — Fill me a cup of Muscadel, good cellarer, to wash down remembrance."
While the cellarer promptly handed the cup, which the knight as promptly quaffed, Sir Paladour, tearing off his glove of mail, eagerly extended his hand to Sir Amirald; and again the youth, instead of grasping it in his, pressed it to his lips with grateful re¬ verence. " And wast thou the unknown youth," said Paladour, extricating his hand, " of whom I have heard such glorious tales; vvho, when the oriflamme and fleur-de-lis vailed before the lion and the dragon, upbore them like the streamers of a drifting bark, and sailed glori¬ ously with-them into haven?" " Less honoured in such deed," said the blushing youth, " than in the clasp of that hand, which saved a soul from mortal sin, and baptized it in the blood that burst from the gracious fountain of a Christian heart." " I like not this," sajd Sir Aymer, shaking his head, " I like not this. I see thou hast found thee a new brother-in-arms; and thy father-in-arms, as you was wont in fondness to term me, must now give place," But as he
spoke in a tone of affected anger, his eye rested with delight on the view of mutual affection, thus kindled in brave young hearts by the recital of honourable deeds, and illuminating features in which the glow of enthusiasm was heightened by the consciousness of valour. At this moment the raised voices of the bishop and the abbot caught the ear of the old knight; for whose ready organ any sound of tumult, from the thunder of the battle to the roar of the revel, had an excitement and a charm ; and he exclaimed, laughing, " What, more brothers-in-arms! By my faith they pledge their vow somewhat aloud." And he turned towards the disputants, whose clamour was now at the highest. The abbot, according to the habits of the age, had begun the conversation by courteously pressing his guest to partake of various dishes, and solemnly excusing the deficiencies of his entertainment; but his " bald disjointed chat,'' patched with ill-assorted Latin, seemed designed to turn into a jest the welcome it vvas meant to convey.
" What now, my lord" he said;" Cl you scorn our sorry cheer. Nay, jou must wash it down with a cup of Muscadine, or wine of Candy; for what saith a certain father? Ne quis modici transiliat munera Liberi, Cen- taurea monet cum Lapithis rixa ; wherefore I say, deprome quadrimum, strenua Lyde." (The strenua Lyde was a paralytic monk of fourscore, assistant to the cellarer). " Fill higher," said the bishop, " reverend brother,' till I pledge the lord abbot; for saith not the same father, vertere pallor turn paro- chifaciem, nil sic metuentis ul acres pot ores?" ei By my mitre, a shrewd text, and aptly 'quoted," cried the abbot. " Nay, your lord¬ ship' hath the gifts. Alack! my memory (bestrew ■ mine overmuch love of study) is a blank, a desert, a quicksand. What with the fathers, the lives of the saints, homi¬ lies on vigils, and mysteries for holidays, the constitutions of the order, and private exhorta¬ tions, my brain is a mere Babel, and my zeal for learning hath eaten me up." -" I pray you, reverend abbot," quoth the
.bishop, " let your memory be fruitful in answer to an idle question:—Of what rule is your community?" - The'abbot's dull bkie eye, that had begun to twinkle with incipient ebriety, sunk at this question under the penetrating glance of the bishop, and he faltered out, " The Bene¬ dictine." " I asked but for mine own satisfaction, my reverend host," said the bishop; " for you know," contemptuously substituting the frag¬ ment of a royal sumptuary edict for a quota¬ tion from a canon'of the order, "Nemoaudeat dare prater duofercula cum potagio" " Wc will have none of those texts handled now," said the abbot " Fill a goblet of Greekish wine to my lord of Toulouse. My lord, I marvel fiow grapes may grow in Greece, an outlandish country, men say many leagues from France." " If I remember me," said the bishop, " some of the rules of your order be, that the monks quit not their cells but to go to church, nor speak to any but with good vol. i. F
leave; that their beds be straw, with a coverlet of woollen cloth, and their habit," glancing at the abbot's ermined and jewelled vestments, " a cowl,- hose, and cloak of hair-cloth; that at meals their hands be on the table, their eyes on the dish, their attention on the reader, and their hearts on God."* " My holy lord," said the abbot, rallying, " however we may as it were abridge and overpass certain items of our rule, there be others also of which we have high regard, nothing intermitting the performing of the same: for proof, look down the board, and wherever the attention be straying, I trow you shall find every hand on the table, and every eye on the dish. Marry, good discipline, and meetly observed ! What! some of our rules be as mouldy as the bones of the founder, and did we stick to them with an unadvised sourness, little should we joy in such guests as gallant knights, or reverend bishops either; seeing that, by the charter of Hugh, bishop of Grenoble, (whose soul is in para-
dise,) no woman is allowed to pass through our conventual territories: a grievous pro¬ hibition, and nowise tending, I guess, to make our neighbourhood the more gracious to my lord of Toulouse. For, as Saint Augustine hath it, ubifcemina est, quid est quod potest deesse, ubi autem non est, quid est quod potest prodesse ? *" " Thou art right, lord abbot:," said the pre¬ late, nothing displeased at this allusion to his gallant propensities; " and I hold thy copy of St. Augustine more orthodox than mine own. Were it not to behold the fair beauty of the lady Isabelle of Courtenaye, and to visit the shrine of that enskyed goddess, I would not set foot in stirrup, or lance in rest, for all the peril of her craven kinsman." " They speak her a peerless and unima¬ ginable beauty, a treasury of unsummed excel¬ lencies, and, indeed, a paradise of ;all rare felicities," said the abbot; " and yet I warrant I have seen fairer than she." aODot substttutesJiFMina tor caritas.
that heaven of beauty," said the bishop im¬ patiently, " and art a heretic in heart, if not in thy creed. What saint hath taught thee thy newtfaith?"/ -: "A "peasant damsel, the daughter of an Aibigeois; whom I saved from being con¬ verted in a summary way by certain Pelerins, on a day." - " Humph! since thou lackedst charity for the task," said the bishop, " thou shouldest have left it to more willing hands." .' " Never trust'me, but her innocent help¬ lessness and beauty pitied me at my very heart." ' ' • - ■ I " What talkest thou of thy peasant maiden?" said the bishop in scorn ;' " thine eyes shall be opened, and tliat shall be revealed to thee that shall convert thee in a twinkling. Ho! brother Eustache!"—he'called to his crosier-bearer; " my breviary," I say." Then, in a tone half confidential, half boastful, to the abbot, " I have caused a cunning limner to counterfeit the features of all the prized dames of France, in the margent of this book, under thr* forrrs of female saints. Con the holy page well,
lord abbot," he added, with a smile, as he gave the splendidly illuminated volume into his hands, " and tdl me whose lineaments there, from Queen Ingelberg on the throne, to the abbess Eloise in the cloister, may vie with those of the lady Isabelle." The abbot, no stranger to this invention of profane gallantry, which was practised in France, even so late as the reign of Henry the Third, received the book with the smile of a gratified connoisseur, and proceeded to study its pages with an air of profound ^meditation. The head of the beauteous Isabelle, portrayed as Saint Cecilia, drew from him a crv of delighted admiration; but, after gazing on it for some time, he swore to the bishop, by his faith as a Christian, and his habit as a monk, that the peasant maid was fairer. . " An umpire! an umpire! there is trea¬ chery in the lists," exclaimed the bishop. • " And to what umpire shall we better appeal than to yon .young knights ?" answered the abbot.
It was at this period of their conversation that their exalted voices reached the ear of Sir Aymer, The arbitration vvas eagerly ac¬ cepted by the young knights, among whom Sir Aymer affected to consider himself in¬ cluded, and the crosier-bearer put the gorgeous book into the hands of Sir Paladour. " A prosperous augury! the book opens of itself at the page of my saint," said the bishop, as he beheld the eye of Sir Paladour riveted on the portrait of her, who vvas never excelled in beauty by the fairest of the daughters of men. " Have you ever beheld aught so fair, sir knight?" demanded the bishop. " Never," answered Sir Paladour, with a burst of emotion, that gave that little word the effect of volumes. " Nay, let us judge not rashly," said Sir Aymer; " these texts must not be so handled. What says our coadjutor, Sir Amirald ?" " That I have beheld a far fairer," said Sir Amirald, in the deep but timid tones of suppressed emotion.
At this moment, while many gazers were collected round the portrait, the abbot, who had good reason for being on the watch, saw distinctly a dark figure emerge, Hke a shadow, from adistant nook, mingle for a momentamong the group unobserved, as they bent over it, and then retire, no one seeing him but theabbot. All bis insouciance and jollity forsook him at this vision, which he interpreted but too well. He sunk back in his chair, pale and gasping; then starting up, exclaimed, " The torches wax dim, and the night doth wane, our noble guests must needs lack repose." The guests rose. " We trouble you, sir abbot," said the bishop. > " Nay, my holy lord," quoth the abbot, recovering his presence of mind, and his sua¬ vity, " I doubt your hard couch will make ill apology for your stinted fare. Ho! tapers and meet attendance for my lord of Toulouse; suffer me to be your lordship's torch-bearer.' The ceremonial of parting now commenced; the bishop and abbot exchanged the kiss of peace; the former bestowed his benison on the
knights, who knelt reverently to receive it,- and then on their followers, who took it kneeling or standing, as they might. " My holy lord, and noble knights, a fair good rest," said the abbot. " My brethren, I give you a dispensation from midnight lauds." " By the mass," said Sir Aymer, " we have sung them to St. Bacchus for the last half hour; their chimes will ring in my head till matins." / , ? < It was half an hour ere the refectory was cleared of the guests, the monks, and the men- at-arms. The abbot walked up and down restlessly among the lay-brothers, vvho were removing the viands, and the cellarer and bis assistants, who were busy about the wine flagons, and drinking cups. " These matters shall be cared for," said the abbot; " tarry not now; I will lock the door f of the refectory, and the remnants of the feast will serve for — the poor. Tarry not now,, but depart, I pray you. Why loiterest thou ? " he, added, angrily, to the paralytic monk, vvho tottered from the refectory, singing, or rather
croning over part of the hymn wont to be chanted at the Feast of Asses: — Lentus erat pedibus Nijifjret baculus Et cum in clunibus Pungeret aculeus, " Take heed, thou sluggard," said the abbot, whom association had made familiar with the meaning of the Latin words, " lest thou hast to pray thy Saint Aculeus too to spare thee his goad, an' thou tarriest longer." , , The ample hall was at length empty, and the abbot walked up and down for some time, looking at the fragments of the feast, with an expression of restlessness and absence. As the last servitor departed, the abbot went out and locked the door of the refectory. In the meantime all bed-rites bad been done to the guests of the abbey: the monks had re-> signed their cells to the men-at-arms; the rude and disorganized band of the Pelerins rwere housed in the ample offices of the abbey. ■The bishop of Toulouse was marshalled to hit?' f5
selected apartment by the sacristan, vvith a wax taper in each hand, followed by two monks with torches. He took courteous leave of the knights in tbe narrow passage which led to their separate apartments, and entered his own. The splendid curtains that encano- pied his bed were of silk, wrought with silver and gold, the sheets were cambric, and, con¬ trary to the decree of Urban the Second, the coverlet was of miniver; yet this superb chamber lacked al! the appliances which a modern garret would have furnished: in lieu of them stood an ample vase of holy water, and opposite, in a niche, which contained the image of the Virgin, two tapers were lit, whose smoke had blackened it to the hue of ebony. The bishop threw off his robes, which he bad resumed during the feast; the wind, from a broken casement, shook the tapestry, that, coarsely nailed to the walls, shivered in every blast; the rats chased each other over the floor, and gnawed at the gold-twisted hangings of the bed; and the bishop, after gazing on the martial figures in the tapestry
till their shapes multiplied and darkened in his eye, sunk into a slumber. Sir Aymer was conducted to an inferior apartment; and when the monks .who attended him" thither retired, leaving him to the care of his squire, the old knight flung himself at his length on a wooden settle, or form, in his chamber, and bidding his squire call him if the heretics assailed the abbey of Normoutier ere morning, was asleep in a moment. Sir Paladour and Sir Amirald were ushered to the same chamber. An over-watched and weary monk placed a lamp on an oaken stand, and, with a drowsy Benedicite, left them together. In silence, they flung their armed limbs by each other; and a muttered night* prayer, and short but fervent clasp of each other's hands, were the only preludes to that slumber which soon fell deeply on both. Sir Paladour's dreams were illuminated by the lovely apparition of the lady Isabelle, and Amirald's by one still lovelier. Through the vast extent of the abbey walls', the sounds of tumultuous and highly excited
life subsiding into repose, were heard every moment less and less distinctly. The cataract of noise that.all night had thundered through court and cloister, was fast sinking into a stilly murmur, and sooei that murmur itself was hushed. The snort and stamp of steeds, and the, noise of the inferior multitude in the outer, court, ceased first. On them always falls first the.blessing of the " prima quies." Then died away the clash and clang of the iron-shod men-at-arms, as they trod the pas¬ sages to their respective cells, or flung them¬ selves, like rocks of metal, on their creaking pallets. Then all was stiil, save the whisper¬ like hymn of the novices from the pistorium; where, after it had been duly sifted and pre¬ pared by the priests and deacons, they were employed in shaping the consecrated wafer for the holy ceremonies. At this moment the abbot was stealing unseen, with a lamp in his hand, and his sandals off, along the passage that led to the refectory. After a long pause he slowly opened the door, and throwing, while lie held up the lamp, an apprehensive
glance around, he entered. All vvas dark in the deserted hall. The abbot, treading as if eveiy footfal would waken a slumbering enemy, descended a few stone steps, to a low and narrow-arched door, that lay below the level of the paved hall: he opened it, and whispering, " Descend swiftly, all is safe, and the night is wearing fast;" descending steps, for the door opened on a narrow stair, soon greeted his ears, and the figure which had been seen more than once that night within the walls of the abbey, bowing beneath the narrow door, entered the hall of the refectory.
CHAPTER V. Didst thou not share? — liadst thou not fifteen pence? Merry Wives of Windsor. As this strange visitor crossed the hall, the abbot threw himself into his chair with an air sullen and dissatisfied, but inquisitive and anxious withal. The visitor, seeming nothing tp regard his looks, strode across the hall with firm but light steps, till he stood right opposite theabbot. He was a man apparently of middle age, formed like a Hercules, and with a strongly marked, but not unpleasant physiognomy. Yet, though the general contour of his features was good, and such as a shallow and hasty observer would have deemed handsome, there were lines of cunning and ferocity in his coun¬ tenance, and a hard brow, and a sneering lip, and a look of defiance, with a forced gleam of insolent jocularity playing over it, that bespoke
a character at war with itself, where, though the worse struggled potently with the better pp.rt, and was ultimately sure of the victory, yet still the better was not wholly -subdued, nor as yet inactive. His dress was as singular as his figure; his tunic and hose were of the woollen cloth worn by peasants (probably adopted for disguise); over his broad shoulders was spread a cloak of wolf-skin; a cap of the same material was on his head, and in its front uncouthly sparkled a gem of price; his feet were covered with strong buskins, plaited vvith leathern straps. But what appeared to strike most the abbot's eye, was the richly-jewelled dagger that was stuck in his coarse belt; the spear, too, in his hand, which gleamed brightly in the reflected glow of the dying embers, bad a certain share of the dignitary's uneasy attention. Such was ihe figure who now, confronted the abbot of Normoutier, and who seated himself, sans in¬ vitation, on the first bench that offered itself. The lord abbot clasped and unclasped his hands, rich with many a ring, poised himself
in his chair, and then, with looks averted, de¬ manded— "Now, thou naughty knave, as,I before demanded when the arrival of the cru¬ saders interrupted us, whence comest thou ?" ' " From the rat-hole where I hid me till ihe visit.was overpast—marry, let me taste a cup of wine to wash down the cobwebs I swallowed there, and their musty recollection that is even now rising in my throat." And as he spoke, he knocked off the head of a flagon of wine with his dagger-hilt, and drained its contents at a draught. " A truce with thy tricks of foolish wit," said the abbot doggedly, " and answer me roundly, whence comest thou r" .; " From my palace, dormitory, and fortalice of L'Aigle sur la Roche," said the outlaw, for such he was. r " I deemed no better," said the abbot sul¬ lenly ; "'it were a rare sight to see thee come full-handed from, the plunder of a castle (I mean, a hamlet) of the heretics, or the dis- burthening of a band of pilgrims richly gifted, or of merchants. wealthily laden travelling
towards- some town of mart, as Nismes - or Beaucaire ; marry v < the heretics 'have>-left* nought to^ be plundered in Toulouse—and* for Beziers, it is as empty as — thy purse/ I trow. And what may be thy errand here at this time, fellow?" « < , . ■<. , .:•.,.> " To win absolution for all sins for the time- forepast, "and indulgence for those that may be committed for forty days to come," quoth the outlaw. " You wot well that the season for adventures is approaching; autumn.hath set- in sharp and early; but my knaves will not. break up the capon till the lord abbot shath said grace. Marry, if you could strain courtesy, • and stretch the indulgence.to twice that period, we should be much your debtors." " Debtors!" rejoined the abbot —" ay, and our debtors ye would remain till dooms¬ day.- Hear ye me, sir outlaw, sir robber ! — thou: hast exhausted the exchequer of the church ; thou hast drawn upon her indulgence. till there remains not enough to save a soul of thine excommunicated fraternity from purga¬ tory, far, less from another place, you wot of;
thou ever comest craving for indulgence when the saints have not one to spare—and worse, thou bringest nothing to purchase it with. Where be the silver lamps for the shrines, the plate for the altar, the rich robes for thesaints?— where be all that thou hast promised for years, and lacking which our abbey shows like the cell of an eremite,or a chapel hewed by miners out of the bare rock ?— : An' I am not ashamed to say mass in our church before the crusaders to-morrow, I am no mitred abbot." The outlaw muttered something about hard and perilous times, and about the country being overspread by the crusading armies, or by bands of the Aibigeois, who were as poor as mendicants, and ended by urging his former petition for indulgence. • " Indulgence me no indulgences," quoth the abbot, " but come roundly to the matter in hand. What hast thou to offer for the boon thou seekest of the church ?—Hast thou not had absolution already for rapine, murder, and conflagration, beyond all modest count and computation?—Did I not annul for thy sake
the * truce of God,' solemnly kept by the boldest barons and deadliest foes in France, and give thee license to prede and burn in the weeks of Advent?—Have I even spared Lent for thy sake ?" " Thou hadst the plunder of two castles for it," muttered the outlaw. t " Nay, did I not,?' continued the abbot, who seemed not to hear him—" Did I not, overpassing all thine other enormities, connive at thy devouring a haunch of red-deer on Good Friday, the most abominable of all thy transgressions ?" " Your refectory board, lord abbot/' quoth the offender, " smoked with the pasty of that very deer .three days following." "Tell not me—taRc not to me," said the abbot wrathfully —" my conscience can bear the burden no longer." - " Nor can my conscience any longer bear the burden of your impositions," cried the in¬ censed outlaw, striking his iron-nerved hand on the table vvith a force that made its planks start asunder. " For forepast transgressions I am
but lightly thy debtor, I trow; and for what I.seek,, if .the band of L'Aigle, sur la Roche lack, indulgence, let the abbot of Normoutier look how his board be spread, and his cellars stored, when he next holds a feast for pre¬ lates and crusaders." " Thou knowest the way to win me," said the abbot; "or, as a certain father hatlrit, cedant arma toga __But, God-a-mercy, wilt thou drink all the wine, and devour the rem¬ nants of the feast alone?—methinks I am sore athirst, and could never handle these texts with dry lips." The outlaw, who had been eating and drink¬ ing sans intermission, knocking off the heads of the bottles with the handle of his dagger, and helping himself furiously with its point to the scattered viands, placed a flagon beside his host. ... " Thou wast muttering something about in¬ dulgence for thy lawless band," said the abbot, sinking into a solemn and pacific tone as he drained the flagon to its last, drop—" hadst thou not better seek it first for thyself?" Then
fixing his light but keen eyes, on the outlaw : " Deemest thou the bells of Normoutier haVe deafened me to the hearing of all other sound ? Where be the two hundred bezants thou rob- bedst the Jew'of under the walls of Nismes within this week ?" " Sir abbot," quoth the outlaw, " in robbing a Jew I deemed I was doing service to holy church, and needed not to trouble the saints for their merits to pay the price of mine own. " And was it also doing the church service when thou plunderedst a company of mer¬ chants, who were travelling • with jewels of price from Italy for the princess Alice, and buch they were as might enrich for life the man who won them ?" ' ' •' " We deemed such gear too heavy for rascal burghers, and too light for church¬ men," said the dauntless robber, " and so we kept them for ourselves — all but this gem ;" and he took it from his cap. " And now I pray, lord abbot, let not the saint look dim longer, unless some fair leman of
thine wills to outshine him, and wear it in her carkanet next confession-day." The abbot's passion here rose beyond all bounds; but he had one to contend with whose voice was as loud, whose passions were as fierce, and whose plea was perhaps the stronger. " Curb thee, lord abbot," he cried; " for the matter in debate we peril life and limb, and our souls beside, if all thou sayest be true; and what receive we from thee but empty promises of absolution, (and I know not what,) that a century hence, if these heretics thrive, would not cheat a child ?~Wottest thou, sir abbot, I came hither to crave pardon for myself?—I hold thy benison at a liard's value, and thine excommunication at a liard's loss. But I have scrupulous knaves to deal with, vvho must needs make the sign of the cross ere they whet their brands, and would fain dip in holy water before they dip in blood." " Why, there it is," said the abbot, cooling as his antagonist warmed —" no man can
speak to thee for thy good, but straight thou art—I know not how; thou and thy band shall have the indulgence thou seekest —on conditions well observed — a score of heretics slaughtered — or —we will not stand for a trifle. The doughty knight, Sir Samson, won his bride with an hundred scalps of the Phi¬ listine chivalry, and shall the church be less easily won for a bride ?" " I have paid that dowry ; toq often already," said the outlaw doggedly. A long pause followed; and the outlaw, very slowly., and vvith more appearance of feeling than he.had hitherto betrayed, said in a subdued voice — " Father — I remember, though Iwas but a youth — and would" (he sighed) " I had never been man ! — I remem¬ ber the dreadful fate that befell that noble unhappy lady, Marie de Mortemar." " She was an heretic, and accursed," said the abbot " And accursed were they who did the deed," added the robber.
•'■■' " Ho**v, thou unreverend knave," cried the abbot, "knowest thou of whom thou speakest?" •'■'"■ I know them well," said -the outlaw; " they were the bishop thy guest — the de¬ ceased brother of the Lord of Courtenaye — and Count Raymond of Toulouse, then a per¬ secutor, but now a fautor of these same here¬ tics ; and this I say, that* three more ruthless lords never banded together to work their will if it might be, or to wreak vengeance if it might not. But all is over now — it was a sad and fearful deed■— wild tales are told still that she is alive—Holy Mary sain me. from such encounter !—and that the Lord of Courtenaye lcss : dreads the power of the heretics, than the prophecy uttered in her madness, that the Jiery arrow should one day level the usurped towers of Courtenaye with the dust." As he spoke, the abbot dozed, vino gra- vatus, but waked now and then with a startled exclamation, that showed him not unconscious of the subject. " Wake, lord abbot," cried the outlaw,
" and pledge me to the success of my next petition." " Thy next petition ?" said . the abbot, rousing himself, — " what wouldst thou have? Art thou not already excommunicated?—ab¬ solved, 1 would say. Petition me no more — I will not be petitioned'— I swear I will hear no petitions — my head will no longer bear them.—And now that I have thought better of thy petition (and will by no means listen to or grant it), let me hear it, and briefly— Fie, where the devil is this foolish bottle ?" " Even in thy hand, sir abbot.—As for my petition," continued the dauntless visitor, " I must needs accompany you on your purposed visit to the castle of Courtenaye; for there I know you will bear the crusaders company, and thither I must follow in your train.". At tnese words the abbot threw himself back- in his chair, in an agony of consternation un¬ feigned. , " Save me—sain me—uphold me," he cried; but as not a saint came to aid, and his companion gave no help, or testified even the least sympathy, the abbot contrived to VOL. I. g
recover within a reasonable space; but with his faculties, his passions and his voice re¬ turned also. " What, art thou there still, thou petrum scandali, thou catharma, or all else vile that I may call thee?" he cried;— " thou, an excommunicated outlaw, thou ride vvith godly churchmen and valiant crusaders ? — thou — what goad but that of the fiend spurs thee on to such pursuit?—Speak, what motive canst thou urge, external, internal, or infernal ?" " Only," said the outlaw, coolly and daringly repeating the words of the bishop of- Tou¬ louse, " to behold the fair beauty of the Lady Isabelle, and to visit that enskied goddess— Nay, never cross or sain your breast, lord abbot — of your train I will be, in your van I will ride. I will disguise me so that she who bore me would not know—Alas!" (he groaned) " may she never know me !—I shall be your guide," he added, recovering himself, " through this wild country, and lead you through paths you wot not of to the castle of Courtenaye; this wolf-skin, with other guise-
ments I have, would bear me unknown through miue.own band.—By Heaven, he sleeps! — rouse thee, lord abbot!" " Where is the bottle?" said his host, scarcely waking. " In thine hand, I told thee, and still un- emptied ; where be thine eyes, lord abbot ?" " Well nigh blinded with tears for the enor¬ mities of a sinful age," quoth the abbot with a maudlin whimper,' attempting, however, to lift the bottle. At that moment a sound was heard that made the abbot relinquish his hold, and the bold outlaw start from his seat: it was that of the tremendous war-horn, well known in those days, whose blast seemed to shake the massive building from spire to foundation. It was in¬ stantly followed by loud knocks on the outer gate, evidently struck by a lance-head, or some stouter implement, wielded by no weak-hand. " Curse of Heaven !" cried the abbot, sink¬ ing on the floor, " the Aibigeois are on us, and we are utterly spoiled; and"—lifting the cup he had dropped — " and. behold, the precious g 2
liquor spilled! — Fie on the water-drinking knaves, they never deem how thirsty our prayers for their soul-safety may render churchmen." " Fie on thee, sir abbot," said the more manly outlaw; " is this a time"—-— " The wisest of men hath said there is a time for all things," quoth the abbot; " and for me, I hold this a fitting time for retreat; lo, I will ensconce me behind the tapestry of this chair —and, dost thou hear?— should the heretics force their way, remember I am a mitred abbot, and my life may be loss incomputable;—whereas thou, being an osten¬ sible sinner, and most notorious layman"- ----- " A3 thou puttest it," said the outlaw, " my life is a lighter loss to the church than thine own. " It is no time for controversy," cried the abbot—" the heretics come; make good the pass, I charge thee, with thy life." . Another blast of tbe horn was wound; the outlaw ,stood in consternation; and the bare- fooled porter, stumbling after the revels of the
night, unbarred the gate, and a messenger (whose horse fell dead as he lit, and who was girthed from hip to shoulder,) rushed into the refectory, exclaiming, " Missives, missives, lord abbot, from the Lord of Courcenaye. ,His castle is beleaguered by the heretics; and he deems all fautors of that heresy who do not hasten to his aid/' • The outlaw kept back, and a pause fol¬ lowed, till the abbot crept from behind his chair, " The monks of Normoutier are slug¬ gards at early mass," he said, " or thouhadst never caught me watching them thus, to over¬ see the discipline of the house more strictly observed." " Lord abbot," cried the breathless mes¬ senger, " the Lord of Courtenaye commends him to you, and bids you haste to his rescue. He is avertised that many a crusading lord and knight is couched within the walls of your abbey to-night; and ' he bids me bay, they had fitter ride to his rescue than snore vigils to St. Somnus in the cells of a monk. Whether there be such a saint in the calendar, my lord abbot knows better than I."
" Away —away!" cried the abbot, fully awakened from his drunken sleep, and trem¬ bling lest the heretics should remember how near the towers of Normoutier were to those of Courtenaye — " Sound thine horn again till it make cloister and cell ring—sound it, as if it would, split the ear, and waken the dead. The Lord of Courtenaye in danger—in mortal danger ?" " The Lady Isabelle in peril?" cried the outlaw, brandishing his dagger and spear — " perchance, she may see as daring deed done for her safety by an outlaw as by a belted knight.". " Wind thine horn, I say—toll out the great bell," cried the abbot in a fever of terror. He was obeyed; and at the toll of the ponderous bell, and the winding of the horn, whose sound, confined within the walls of the refectory, seemed to split its very roof, the sleepers started up, like men roused by the trump of doom. Life was then full of such stirring scenes, and no man lay down with the certainty of an hour's rest, if the sound of war was in the
neighbourhood. Up started the thousand guests of the abbey at the summons. The Pelerins, who lay on the stone pavement of the court, or were dispersed through the various offices of the abbey, were the first to spring from their slumber and seize their arms; a few torches burned dimly in the courts to light them; then followed fast the glancing lights seen through the narrow windows of the galleries, as the men-at-arms and the bishop's followers hurried from their dormitories, lit by the monks. The bishop of Toulouse was in the court at the first summons, casting, as he mounted his steed, a look of reproach on his laggard attendants. The flaring torches, lit in haste at the presence of the bishop, were now blazing through the court, held by the brotherhood, who dreamed as they stood; t and the court itself rung like the streets of a town besieged. The surly waking of the troops —the tumult of oaths, orders, and ex¬ clamations—the hurried and hasty confronting of men belonging to- various leaders—formed a scene of discord and of din, amid which the
bishop of Toulouse's voice alone could have commanded attention, or enforced control. The men-at-arms were summoned to their respective standards — the promiscuous band required to keep in the rear, and a kind of disorderly order established; while the abbot himself was seen to join the train, mounted on a pacing palfrey, and attended by a muffled figure in a dress which partook of that of a hunter and a peasant, to whom he whispered ever and anon, " Be true, thou false knave, for thine own sake." " And who is this companion r" said the bishop, as he rodc^by. " A rustical fellow, but useful withal," re¬ plied the abbot; " he knows the perplexed paths of this wild country, and will track your heretic sure as a bloodhound. Alack, my lord,'your sleep, I fear, hath been broken; for me, a few pages of St. Chrysostom or St. Jerome in my cell, and I sleep as I would after a vigil or at a mystery— eripiunt somnum Druso vitulisque marinis." • At this moment the great gate was once
more flung open; its vast arches again rung with the din of steeds, arms, and men; the torch-light that flashed on its ribbed vaults of stone was contrasted with the pale light of an autumnal morning; and out rushed leader and vassal, " the horse and his rider," like a flood, through the gates (that quivered on their massive hinges with the impulse), and poured themselves tumultuously over the heath that surrounded the spacious walls of the abbey. " To him," cried Paladour, couching his lance, " who arrives but a spear's length before me at the castle of Courtenaye, I will forfeit, if he be a knight, my steed of price; and if a man-at-arms, my glove of mail filled vvith agnels." " To him," cried Amirald, spurring his steed to the rowel-head —" to him who at¬ tains a spear's length after me, I will forfeit, if a knight, my helm and corslet, and if a vassal, its value summed and paid" ------- " My holy lor.d," cried Sir Aymer, who saw the bishop's armed heel pointed towards his steed's flank at these words, " I pray you, use & 5
your discretion—let these mad boys run a.tilt for the love of their lady Luna, and shiver lances in the clouds, an' they list; but leave thou such fierce fooleries to us youth, I pray." " Most reverend youth, I stand checked," said the bishop, smiling. " But believest thou this tale of the peril in which the towers of Courtena}^ stand from a handful of unarmed and wretched peasants ?" " If Raymond of Toulouse be in France, as true men bave reported," answered the old knight, " there is no saying what enterprise he will not dare, sith all hope of his reconciliation with the church ends with his return." "Dieu el VEglise be the word then," quoth the bishop, shouting the war-cry of the cru¬ saders. It was repeated by the voices of armed hundreds, breaking the morning mists that hung round their path, and the progress began — Sir Paladour and Sir Amirald still heading the van — Sir Aymer now jesting with the Pelerins, and now repeating with hoarse and quavering .voice the ditty of some minstrel —
and the abbot, sore fatigued with his journey, and trembling for his doubtful and dangerous companion, who, however, faithfully discharged his office as guic-e. It was twilight when they caught the first sight of the stately towers of Courtenaye and Beaurevoir; but, from the summits of the hills by which they were surrounded, a band of the Albigenses, pouring down in increasing num¬ bers, seemed preparing, however desperate the effort, to dispute or to delay the advance of the crusaders.
CHAPTER VI. Avenge, 0 Lord, thy slaughtered saints, whose bones Lie scattered ou the Alpine mountains cold, Slain by the bloody Piedmontese, who rolled Mother with infant down'the rocks,— Milton. We have to transport our readers to a very different scene, and represent to them the actual state of that persecuted people, at the sound of whose name prelates, nobles, and knights had started to arms. The AlbJgeois were then very generally diffused throughout JLanguedoc.; but, scattered and depressed by persecution, by the death (supposed violent) of the Count of Beziers, and by the frequent absence and vacillating character of Raymond of Toulouse, they in general affected conformity to the church of Rome, or at least conducted themselves so as to escape dangerous notoriety. The few who
still held the reformed faith were dispersed among the mountains of Languedoc, awaiting their destiny amid suffering and privation, some¬ times expecting aid from the „Count of Tou¬ louse, and sometimes refuge from the King of Arragon. Their numbers diminishing as their hopes declined, some rushed desperately for¬ ward to find shelter or death amid friends or foes; and of this number was the band to which we have now to introduce the reader, who, though a small and inconsiderable com¬ pany, may possibly serve as a specimen of the rest, like Sterne's single captive, shut up. in his dungeon. l The band of the Aibigeois, then, vvho were said to menace the towers of Courtenaye, were tbe remains of those who had effected their miraculous subterranean escape from Carcassone. Their . harbour since . had been the mountains; • and from the mountains they now rushed to force their way, or. perish. The rigour of their creed had not been at all softened by their mountain habits; they also boasted of having among
them .the most powerful of their preachers, and the most dauntless of their unarmed warriors; and, in this last attempt, to skill they opposed ferocity, and even to victory, despair. All their best and bravest had been de¬ spatched the preceding day as an advanced guard, not to molest or oppose the crusaders, but, if possible, to win their way to Arragon; and on the following evening a band of wretched enfeebled beings, old men and maidens, mothers and infants, were descending in slow and .sad march from their mountain fastnesses — from " caves and holes, and dens of the rock," where they had lingered in vain hope of being permitted by their persecutors to reach their land of promise, the territories of the-King of Arragon. The stoutest of their band were (as we have said) on the advance, furnished with what arms' they could obtain (chiefly clubs and arrows), to ascertain or secure .the safety of those who followed. The central body con-
sisted, chiefly of their bar bes, or pastors, with their wives and children; behind, them the mingled and .mournful band of the Aibigeois. The women had wrapped their children in their scanty mantles; the men sought food for them where they could, and, failing in the search, had nothing to present but wild chesnuts and roots, and the stalks of the wild vine to roast them by when fire could be obtained; — still, however, as they boasted in language they were fond of borrowing, " there was no complaining heard in their streets." If a famished infant died, the mother laid it on her exhausted bosom, and lay down to perish with it, as if she.had been hushing her infant to slumber:— -if a man fell, his wife spread her garment over him; and to those who passed and spoke, she shook. her head, as if his slumber was not to be- broken (that slumber she was resolved to share with him). But still, amid these dread¬ ful scenes, there was a strong excitement kept op amid this spiritual army, where leader and preacher .were synonymous terms; and the
advancing host uttered a shout, that was echoed from the hearts, if not from the voices, of the feeblest that followed. The audible prayer of thousands, issuing from rock and glen every morning,—their solemn hymn, resounding every evening from cliff to cliff, where no other sounds were heard, save the scream of the vulture, or the sweep of the blast,-— the midnight murmur of the distant prayer of fathers, husbands, and sons, mingled with and sounding like the stream that roared from the hills, or rushed through the rocky gorges of the mountains,-— gave comfort, if not hope, to those who heard them, and suggested to them images of un¬ dying patience and eternal hope. The very children leaned over the crags to catch the echoes; and when they.ceased,,the elders or barbes hoped, from the pause, that, their brethren " had found the shadow of a great rock in a weary land," and turned vvith sick¬ ened hearts and shrinking hands to bestow what remained of, sustenance and support on the dying, the wearied, and the weak..
Such had been their progress; but now, deserted by their bravest and boldest, the evening darkening round them without tidings, and almost without hope, and a wild and hostile country before them, its termination presented a prospect dreary enough to wither the most patient hearts; and as they wound with painful and way-worn steps their path down a rude declivity, grasping at shrubs and tufts of sun-burnt grass for their support, many a prayer for release from unutterable misery vvas breathed by hearts' that suppressed the unuttered feeling, and trembled lest it might be guessed by their companion, while they felt that companion echoed' it from the bottom of his own. ,Of these men it is difficult to speak; history has told but little of them; and their characters, alike exaggerated by friends and foes, has left " the middle vvay," if the safest way, the very hardest to take. It is, however, admitted, that their manners were pure, their discipline strict, and their creed evangelical. It is also a curious, but indisputable matter of
fact, that the majority of them were as tena¬ cious of certain texts and terms of the Old Testament, as their legitimate descendants, the English Puritans, were some centuries later; and that, like them, they assumed Jewish names, fought with Jewish obduracy, and felt with Jewish hostility, even towards those of their community who differed from them iu a penumbra of their creed, whom they termed, in the' phraseology they loved, the half-tribe of Manassehj the spies that brought evil report of the land, the offerers of unholy incense, whom the earth would swallow up like Nadab and Abihu; with various other vituperative comparisons, with which memory or malice furnished them from that law, which He who came to " fulfil every tittle and jot of, hath fulfilled and nailed to his cross, bearing away the law of ordinances" Such were the dif¬ ferences which prevailed even among these scriptural and conscientious men, who had in a good and honest heart received the word, but among whom it brought forth according
to the nature of the soil; not forbidding the hope, that even where it was most divergent and eccentric, it -might bring forth fruit- to life everlasting. By a singular coincidence, at the same moment that the armed and splendid array of the crusaders were approaching the castle of Courtenaye, the central band of the Aibi¬ geois were descending from the rock into a valley, where they hoped to find shelter for the night The moon at that moment burst¬ ing forth, shed a light on their path, and revealed the valley, or rather deep gorge, into which they wound, with its masses of grey stone, that had fallen from the precipices above, and obstructed the fractured bed of the stream that struggled through it; its caves, whose shadows, sinking far into their rocky hollows, no light could penetrate; and the silvery-tinted crags of its peaked fantastic summits, on which the scanty foliage of many an-autumnal spray still smiled in the moon¬ light, and waved to the breeze.
The sight was lovely, but not to the eyes that now beheld it; nor is there a more withering effect of habitual wretchedness than that which deprives us of our sensibility of nature, and makes us look on all that is wild and grand in her forms aud operations, as enemies with whose hostilities we must struggle, or masters to whose stern power we must sub¬ mit. The foremost of the group consisted of an aged pastor, named Pierre, whom the cruelty of De Monfort had deprived of sight, and who was led by a young female, his grand-daughter— another who had taken to himself the appella¬ tion of Boanerges, an assumption well justified by the thunder of his eloquence and the extra¬ ordinary powers of his voice, which were said to be so great as even to have split rocks, and brought down their fragments on the congre¬ gation assembled beneath them;—a pheno¬ menon that will scarce appear miraculous to those who know that amid the Alpine heights the slightest sounds will often cause tho most alarming concussions of the air, and that tra-
vellers are even obliged to tie up the bells of their mules, lest the reverberation should bring down an avalanche on their heads. With these came the deacon Mephibosheth (the only office beside that of pastor recognized in the church of the Aibigeois), a man of low stature, forbidding features, intolerant zeal, and intolerable pretensions. Lame from his birth, he had adopted the name of the son of Jonathan ; and after (with infinite difficulty) having slid, stumbled, or scrambled down the declivity, he contrived to join the party at the entrance of a cavern that seemed to promise them shelter for the night. Before its entrance, which was shaded with pine and larch, and mantled over vvith shoots of the wild vine, genistum, and clematis, stood for a moment the pastor Pierre, turning his sightless sockets towards heaven. He could no longer see the light, but he could feel that partial vvarmth of light of which the blind are peculiarly sus¬ ceptible, .and he removed his hoary and stream¬ ing,hair from his forehead as if to bask in it. Jt
Beside him, and still supporting him, stood the slender form of his daughter, her white unsandaled feet bleeding from her painful path, the hood of her coarse mantle thrown back to watch the moonlight as it played on her grand¬ father's face, and her dark redundant hair, escaped from confinement, almost reaching her feet as she stood. The face, thus transiently disclosed, had the character of the light that revealed it, pure, pale, and heavenly;—the dark, thoughtful eye, — the nobly arched, but mild and patient brow, — the smile of the pale resolved lip, announced that mixture of strength and purity that is never to be found but in woman. The pastor felt from the pressure of his daughter's arm that he was near a place of rest; and another touch, still softer, made him feel (for those deprived of sight are oftenrepaid with an exquisite sensibility in their remaining organs) that Genevieve was gazing on the moon, and tasting the calm and holy glory of her efful¬ gence. " I feel what thou seest, my daughter,"
said Pierre, pressing her arm closer to his; but Genevieve at that moment felt hiin totter¬ ing from feebleness, and hasted to lead him into the cavern. Where a crowd presses together for ease or shelter, the wives whom husbands support, or the children whom their mothers bear, seldom are the slowest, and an aged man, led by a slender timid girl, is often the last; so it fared with Pierre and his daughter. " Let me pass, I pray," said the deacon Mephibosheth, hastening past therri.; " I see the sisters and brethren are preparing for the supply of our failing bodies. Wot ye not mine office?—It is meet that the deacons should serve tables, for thereunto were we elected from times apostolical." . And he pressed on. Meantime the band had gathered some vine-stalks, and cut some peat, to which they quickly set fire ; and a vivid blaze, contrasted by the darkness of the cavern, began to glare on their pale and cheerless visages. Gene-
vieve placed Pierre as near as she could to the heat, chafing his numbed hands, till, warmed by the action herself, she retired to make room for others. All this while the deacon, exclaiming, " I am faint for lack of food," went about inspecting the stinted pro¬ visions that the harassed group displayed for the refreshment of their aged, their sick, and their infants, selecting from each whatever might s satiate or soothe an appetite that, like that of the horse-leech, seemed ever to cry, " Give, give." " And thou too art faint for lack of food," said Genevieve, bending sadly over the pale and uncomplaining face of the old man as she supported his head on her knees, while his aged limbs were extended on the rocky floor of the cavern. " My father," she whispered, "would that your bed were softer!" " My daughter," murmured the pastor, " my couch is softer than that which pillowed the patriarch when journeying to Padan-aram he placed a stone beneath his head, even in the
field of Luz, and that night saw a vision of angels, such as may visit my dreams, and I also find this flinty bed the gate to heaven— or that, in Egypt, where the holy Joseph slept in the dungeon of Pharaoh, the spirits of the pure watching him — or that in Susa, the ancient seat of the Persic king, where the highly favoured Daniel couched vvith lions on the stony floor of their den. Even in our dreary wanderings today, what thoughts, what themes, have come rushing on me like floods of inward light, till my mental eye, like my bodily, seemed exhausted and seared ! But," and he checked' himself, "feelest thou no hunger, my child?" — and he pressed her hand, as if he would feel, from its faint damp touch, the answer her lips would not give. " I too have had visions, my father," said Genevieve, with a fkind. of ghastly sportfulness. " When I hungered, I thought of the brook Cnerith, where the prophet Elijah was fed morn and evening ' by ravens :' or of that palace where the holy-Daniel lived on pulse, VOL. I. H
and was nurtured even as if fed at the royal table." " My daughter," cried Pierre, grasping her hands more earnestly, " seek not to visions or dreams — they are the glory and the joy of the sightless. Holy visions and images, unembo- died and unspeakable, sometimes float before me; and God thus supplies the loss of those organs of which cruel men deprived me; but to thee all the grandeur of the broad heaven, all the brightness of the green earth, are still open. Oh! if I could once more behold creation — could I want a motive to adore creations God ------. But I err," he added, declining his head on Genevieve's knees as he spoke, while she spread her cool and fragrant fingers, like the petals of a flower, over lids that, though sightless, were burning to the touch from fatigue and excitement; and silently declining, as she sat, the offers of their scanty refreshment from the rest, lest the pastor's rest should be disturbed, sat vvith her eyes fixed on the entrance of the cavern, where
the full-risen glory of the moon shone, turning every crag she gleamed on to silver, and tint¬ ing the very weeds that crept around them with the hue of a pale emerald. She gazed on the sight till her vision seemed to fail, and' the sleep that fell deeply on her was but a continuation of its glories. The character of her dreams was soon ex¬ changed for that which, from infancy, had haunted her scared and broken sleep. There was a youth, named Amand, in the advanced party that day, whom not even the life of peril and privation they mutually had lived from childhood, had prevented from expressing towards her feelings which at first she understood not, and when she was at length compelled to do so, could not return. His fate seemed to weigh heavy on her spirit in dreams that night, She had seen him go forth that day to certain danger, per¬ haps to certain death,—she had seen his mother weep, though she wept not; and the coldness of her last farewell reproached her in h 2
her last waking moments, and haunted her in her visions like a crime. Perhaps indifference towards those who love us truly, fondly, and worthily, that insolvency of the heart towards a generous creditor, is the pang that tries its chords most deeply. The figure of Amand,-pale, his garments dripping blood, seemed to stand before the entrance of the cavern ; the moonlight was still there, for she had slept so recently that the images of reality still were mixed with those of her dream. The figure seemed to point to a dim perspective of confused slaughter, as if an¬ nouncing the fate of her friends. Genevieve tossed and moaned on her bed of flint; sud¬ denly the same figure appeared, but the image was so vivid, the action so distinct, and the scene so real, that Genevieve, though asleep, felt as if it was no longer a dream, — she screamed aloud — her scream seemed echoed and prolonged by a wild and piercing cry, that rung through the cavern, as thoroughly awake, she started up, and -gazing round
her, beheld the worst bodings of her dream verified. The scene was like many that she had wit¬ nessed, but exceeding all in horror and grief. The party who had dared to meet the cru¬ saders had suffered for their temerity; few sur¬ vived, and those few were scarce enough to an¬ nounce their utter discomfiture, and to tell that those who might follow were scarce enough to bear away the bodies of the dead. The group of wounded, defeated, hopeless men, darkened the centre of the cavern; around them, vividly, and even hideously pictured out by the light, hung the asking forms and eyes of mothers, wives, and daughters; and their- looks were accompanied, not by words, but by cries sc terrible, that Genevieve, long accustomed to sounds of woe and horror, closed her ears for a moment. The men stood sullen and dis¬ comfited, as all men after a defeat, even in the eyes of those who know victory is impos¬ sible; shrouding themselves in the darkness of the cavern, and answered in sullen reluctant
tones, — " We are but the first of the messen¬ gers of Job's desolation; those that follow will bear tidings less welcome." Boanerges, who never till then lifted his eyes from a manuscript copy of the New Testament, (then of an im¬ mense price,) which he had obtained by chance in the plunder of a monastery, closed the vo¬ lume, and uttered, in his tremendous voice, the words, —" Mourn not as those who have no hope:" while deacon Mephibosheth, starting from his sleep, muttered something from the Song of Solomon, " of fear in the night." Al¬ most as they spoke, another band' poured into the cavern; they were led by Mattathias, a ferocious warrior and eloquent preacher, who had stoutly, but vainly, opposed that day the clubs and arrows of bis band to the lances and swords of the crusaders; and, defeated as he and his desperate followers were, they had succeeded, by dint of surpassing courage, strength, and perseverance, in bearing away the dead bodies of their companions. There was an instant and awful silence in
the cavern. The women knelt on the earth to recognise the defaced bodies of fathers, husbands, and sons; but when they had done so — the shriek and the agony, the hope and the fear, were over — all were dumb as the dead beside whom they knelt. They wept, but their tears felt to the weepers themselves like ice; a dreadful certainty con¬ gealed every heart and chained every tongue — no one inquired, for the object for whom her heart trembled lay before her.. Amid the prostrate band, dumb with feeling too profound and bitter for utterance, the figure of Mattathias stood sternly erect, streaming with blood, and silent as the dead around him ; — leaning on his heavy club, which had been wielded not in vain that day; but those who knew him (and Genevieve was one) dreaded when that silence would end: -^ it ended at length. " The Lord hath forsaken us," said the fierce warrior and intolerant zealot, — "and wherefore? because we have not kept our vow, — the vow we vowed on the
spoiling of Beziers —on the escape from Car¬ cassonne— over the bodies of these saints who sleep let us renew it — and keep it, as I have kept it vvith arm and heart to-day, — from henceforth be our persecutors accursed, body and soul, life and limb; accursed be those who help or pity them —those who ------" "Thou forgettest," whispered the deacon Mephibosheth, "the fat things of the earth, all that grazes the field, or travel ses the wood, especially their venison and their kid." " All that appertains to them," said Boan¬ erges, closing the Bible, and exalting his awful voice, — " horn and hoof, vassal and menial, from the serf who eats their bread in fear, to the waiting-damsel chambered in luxury." " Thou hast spoken wisely," said the deacon, adopting the strong Hebraic metaphor, " but not warmly — not to the hearts of the brethren. I say, moreover, that, though prelate, peer, and knight, be banded against us; though Amalek be joined with them, and they are upholden by the children of Lot; yet they
shall be*as the daughter of Babylon, wasted, vvith misery, and blessed shall they be who rewardeth her as she hath served us." The sharp vociferation of the deacon roused the pastor from his slumber, and, feeble and starting, he exclaimed, —• <( What-are they now saying, my child ?" Genevieve tried to hold him back for a moment, and then whispered, fearfully, " My father, they are cursing." "Then let me try to-turn their curses into» blessings," said the pastor, rousing his feeble strength. " Help me, thou," he cried, as stag¬ gering from weakness and blindness* he tried to rise, and Qenevieve endeavoured to sup¬ port him. As they stood among the distracted group, half of them eager to join in the imprecation, half of them shuddering at it, but all stung and sore with recent anguish and menaced evil, they seemed like spiritual beings, appearing under those forms that-might best soothe or solem¬ nize the human mind, even in its fiercest exacerbations of misery and hostility; —- the h5
holy beauty of Genevieve preaching more elo¬ quently than many sermons to the young men and maidens, and the withered but awful figure of him whom she supported, appealing alike resistlessly to old men and children. " My brethren," said the aged pastor, ex¬ tending his hands, as if to touch the hearts he invoked but could not reach, " wherefore are ye gathered together ? what rites are these ye, are assembled to celebrate? are they the spells of sorcery, the bloody ceremonies of Heathen¬ ism, or the prayers of an afflicted and perse¬ cuted church ?" All were silent on a sudden at the voice of this living martyr of the faith, "Ye are assembled," continued the pastor, "in the name of your God —the God who is love; and for what! — to curse; the horrid contradiction thrills through your ears, it thrills through your hearts. If any sufferer be here," he cried, exalting his feeble but piercing voice,. " if any be here who has suffered more than me, and claims a mournful right to dictate from the pre-eminence of misery, let him
speak.** All were silent " I dare not com¬ pare myself," continued the.aged man, "with him who was in sufferings often, in labours more abundant, in perils often. I have lost—," his voice was choked, and the tears gushed from his eyeless sockets and trembled over his hoary beard, "I dare not now think.of what I have lost; but if poverty and persecu¬ tion, if the slaughter of my family (all but this feeble girl who tries to support me), if blind¬ ness, and the cruel spoiling of my goods, entitle me to this wretched priority, hear how I will curse your enemies." A deep and breathless pause followed his- words; the character of Pierre the pastor stood high among the congregation, and his offer to join in this vituperative and maledic¬ tory mode of devotion, that had become,, from their adoption of the Jewish phraseology, too much the habit of the Aibigeois, was so new, and the excitement caused by it so strong, as for some time to suspend.every other feeling, Boanerges and the deacon Mephibqsheth (for Mattathias still stood leaning on his bloody
club in the rear of the cavern, like some mis-^ shapen and sanguinary idol of .ancient super¬ stition,) hurried forwards, and irreverently and urgently pressing their hands on the shoulders of the aged man, exclaimed, " Kneel—kneel." He knelt, and the congregation was hushed. " Bless them, God !" cried Pierre; " bless them to see the many errors of their ways, and to grant to thy persecuted people the permission * after the way they call heresy to worship the God of their fathers.'" At these words, so different from what they had expected, a murmur deep and loud burst from the congregation, and Boanerges and the deacon, incensed and disappointed, threw them¬ selves among the assembly, (while Mattathias stood in fierce stillness,) and fed their kindled spirits by every art of inflammation. The tumult increased, and the multitude appeared like the trees of a foi est, groaning and tossing under the power of tempestuous winds. Gene¬ vieve clung to her father, pale with terrors,. which he felt not. " Lead me hence," he cried, with an energy that made her start;
. "stand-ye there on Mount Ebal to curse — whilst I go up to Mount Gerizim to bless- even though I go alone." , A few feeble voices, that seemed to dread tlieir own sound, repeated, " Thou shalt not go alone;" and as Pierre returned to his re¬ treat, he was followed by a small band of the moderate, the timid, and the irresolute,—those who were still attached to ancient authority, and those whose hearts calamity had crushed, but not embittered;—by the old, who followed their pastor because they had followed him for forty years,—and by the young, to whom the beauty of Genevieve seemed, amid darkness and desolation, to gleam like a light from heaven. On the side of Boanerges and his party remained the sanguinary, the melancholy, the enthusiastic, and the despairing,— those whom a fierce attachment to the cause, or the cruel¬ ties of their enemies, had led to such act3 of atrocity and vengeance, that, feeling recon¬ ciliation hopeless, they laboured to render it impossible,—and those who, distinguished by-
the name of zealous, placed all religion in a creed of exclusion and a practice of hostility, and painted heaven to their imaginations and their hearers as a place whose joys would be exalted by their consciousness of the inter¬ minable sufferings of their persecutors and enemies. Mattathias was called on to address them, and he prepared; but, after a long pause of internal conflict, such was the fierce intensity of his emotions, and so powerful their action on his gigantic frame, that when he at length attempted to speak, the blood gushed from his mouth and nostrils, and he fell prostrate on the fioor of the cave. He was borne away; Boanerges and the deacon succeeded to the office of addressing the multitude; and by prayer, by exhortation, by every means that could sustain the energy of high-toned passion, and make excited minds fight their desperate and successful strife with exhausted bodies and worn-out hearts, did they all that long night of physical weariness and mental fever toil to feed the flame that lit it, and cherish,
amid the embers of wasted frames and wan¬ dering minds, every spark that could be kindled to a blaze, or emit, even ih its ashes, a dismal aud smouldering ligh?. Boanerges began; and when he had ex¬ hausted every topic and term of denunciation with which a well-stored memory and an im¬ placable hostility inspired him, he was followed by the deacon, who, pointing to the few who had retired with Pierre, extended the broad anathema of Boanerges, and included within its circumference the feeble hearts and faint hands, and " sinners who went two zvays." Then- he rehearsed the bitter and .'emphatic curse of Meroz, and comprehended in it those who had not come up to the help of the Lord against the mighty. He proceeded, and wrought up his hearers and himself to a pitcji of ferocity which has often armed fanaticism with desperate and successful opposition even to disciplined troops and systematized warfare'. To the exhortation of Boanerges the con¬ gregation replied in deep assenting murmurs; but as the deacon finished, those, murmurs
were exchanged for groans and bowlings as wild as those of the neighbouring wolves; every period of his frantic and incendiary eloquence was drowned in the cry of his hearers; and Boanerges himself, as he saw the increased excitement, the powerful and universal action of which he had been the first propeller, trembled at the working of the machine he himself had set in motion, and " doubted whereunto this would grow." So fares it with all who presumptuously ap¬ proach the ark of Revelation, and are lost in the attempt to steady its progress and direct its course ere they have ascertained their right to touch it. In the meantime Pierre and his companions were kneeling in their remote recess; and the lights and features of scenery under which these different groups were assembled were singularly adapted to their different characters. In the interior of the cavern an ample fire had been lit; its light, flaming upward, fell vividly on the notched and ragged edges of the rocks that impended above, shaping their wild out-
lines into a resemblance of the visages of gigantic spectres seen in a feverish dream; even the light foliage of the shrubs that started from among their interstices, and the pendant and waving vegetation of the weeds that clustered round them, lost all the beauty of their verdure and forms in that strong un¬ natural light, and seemed like the dark webs that wave in the chambers of sorcery. Below, the glare was reflected from fierce faces, marked with fiercer passions, obstinacy and rage, hatred and despair, and that peculiar expression of religious hostility that combines all and sur¬ passes all. In the little sanctuary of Pierre's associates there was no fierce and fiery light, no passion or tumult; they knelt on the floor of stone, and the moon, gleaming through a chasm in the rock, was the only light that fell on faces, mild, pale, and sorrowful, — on clasped hands, heads meekly depressed, and bodies, in whose deep and tranquil prostration you might see that hearts were bowed down also; and amid the cataract of sound that thundered from their fiercer brethren, the stilly
flow of their pure prayer was heard to murmur sounds only of love and of peace, of sub¬ mission and of sorrow. It seemed as if the accusing and deprecatory spirits were on their flight towards heaven together, and the still small voice of the latter proclaimed that his petition was accepted. It was now past midnight; the fires had sunk low, the moonlight was withdrawn, and the stormy congregation of Boanerges, and the placid followers of Pierre, alike sought a refuge from the stings of many wants and sufferings in slumber. The gleam of the embers shed a sullen and wearied light at length on hands locked in defiance or in supplication—now unclasped; — on eyes that had flashed with the light of every passion that can dilate or inflame their orbs—now closed;—on forms agitated by every spirit that can shake and convulse them most fear¬ fully— now still as infancy; all buried in a sleep like that of death : rage and grief, talent and mediocrity, power and weakness, slumbered beside each other. The stormy Boanerges,
and the hot deacon, and all their followers and favourers, with all their various shades of dis¬ crepancy and contradiction, were mute; as deep a repose was on the few followers of the pastor; it was,a living churchyard. Genevieve alone, like the angel of the resurrection, sat watching till the morning.
CHAPTER VII. Fate sits on these dark battlements, and frowns, And, as the portals open to receive me, Her voice in sullen echoes through the courts Tells of a nameless deed. » WAtroLE's Mysterious Mother. The desperate courage of Mattathias and his followers had delayed, though not rendered doubtful, the strife with the crusaders. Many fell, and the few who survived fled to their mountain retreat, their flight well covered by their dauntless leader, who fought to the last, and, while the flying party were mingling with the mists of the mountains that shrouded them, still Jcept his face toward the foe. His arrow- was the last that flew-—and it never flew without quivering in a foeman's heart; his club was the last that was wielded—and it never fell without crushing a man-at-arms to
the earth; his curse on the cowards that fled, and tlie foes that opposed, was the last sound that thundered over the hills, amid which the flying Aibigeois seemed, like spectres, hasten¬ ing to hide themselves amid the deepening shades of the mountains and of the night. Paladour and Amirald, who had dealt about with their lances and swords as boys would with their staves amid a heap of bulrushes, grew weary of the carnage, and toward twilight rode apart from the field and stuck their lances in the ground, while they viewed with some amazement the deeds of a min¬ strel, apparently the most eccentric and dis¬ solute of his profession, who had all day long sung the loose strains that pleased the ear of Sir Aymer; and when the conflict (if it could be termed so between armed knights and unarmed peasantry) commenced, had snatched a weapon from one of the. bishop's attendants, and dealt about his blows with. such mortal force, that he* scarce gave a wound where he did not leave a corse.. At the end of the business he caught up his
harp, and, tuning it as he might, began to sing some antique ditty, apparently careless to whom he sung, or whether his strain vvas noted or not There was an insouciance about his general deportment that accorded with this abrupt transition from ferocity to levity. He was not old, though he looked so; intemperance, anticipating the approach of age, had done its full work on him; his hair was white, and his hands shrivelled; his sarb too vvas such as betokened rather the attire of a poor wandering minstrel, than of the pampered favourite of a lordly castle; and from time to time there vvas an expression of insanity in his sunk eye, and something like the reality of it in the stubbornness vvith which he refused all solicitation to sing the songs that his companions called for, and persisted in chanting the wildest and loosest lays that ever minstrel uttered. They were, however, sufficiently acceptable to Sir Aymer, whose admiration was not diminibhed by the valour of which he gave such unexpected proofs, and who, riding up to the young knights, exclaimed,
"This is a brave minstrel! — Where, fellow, didst thou learn to wield the harp and sword together ?" The minstrel, instead of answering, struck some vague chords on his harp, and then replied, " In the service of a noble valiant lord, whose name I dare not utter now; there I learned that the brave alone can worthily sound the actions of the brave, and that none should dare to lay finger on the harp, who could not lay hand on sword and lance." " And who was thy valiant lord ?" said Sir Aymer. " One whom I dare not name, though his towers are near ;—let the bishop of Toulouse tell ye whose they were once." " Thou darest not name Raymond of Tou¬ louse, an heretic and accursed of the church," said the bishop, as he rode by. t( Thou hast named him," answered the minstrel in a suppressed voice, te though I dare not; those towers once were the abode of Raymond - of Toulouse; a neighbouring retreat, where he had placed his family for
,safety t —alas! not a stone of, v it is left;, the smoke of its last flame was slaked by the blood of his wife and infant children; and ever since that day of blood and death," he exclaimed, " I have been all for mirth and jollity;" and he preluded wildly on his harp. " Ever since that day," he repeated, striking his harp so strongly that some of the strings gave way ------ , " Thou hast broken the strings of thy harp. fellow," said Sir Aymer. " It was in memory of the day the strings of the minstrel's heart were broken," said the player— ". "Who busied himself the strings withal, To hide the tear tliat tain would fall." " And whose service boasts thy minstrelsy now ?" said Sir Aymer, laughing as the min¬ strel wept. " I am in the service of the Lord of Courte¬ naye, the tenant of yon castle," said tbe min¬ strel. " What!" cried Sir Amirald, advancing as they rode, " thou the follower of Raymond of
Toulouse, and now the menial of the Lord of Courtenaye, his deadliest foe ?" The minstrel, without answering, struck a few wild chords on his dismantled harp; then suddenly raising his head and his voice, "Hadst thou ever loved the harp, sir knight," he said, " never wouldst thou cease to love the spot where its chords were first struck and echoed. The stones of that castie," he cried, pointing (o it—" the weeds that hurst through its walls — the very waters of its moat — the rugged battlements of its walls, are dearer to me than all or aught ,but this" —and with enthusiastic expression he kissed his harp as he spoke. " With this." he cried wildly, " I can raise palaces of amethyst and rivers of silver, and flowers of hue and odour that shame paradise.—But such visions mock me," he continued in a dejected tone; — " give me the dark-grey stone, the heavy .water, the weeping and tufted weed, and the dim twilight that sheltered me as I sung of themes then praised, now forgotten — give me ray dreams of childhood back again, when my harp and VOL. J. I
I were alone the tenants of a world of vision and felicity. Nay, were not one stone of those walls left on another—were the streams flowed away, and the trees rooted from the hills, this spot would still be populous with forms and sounds — would still have tenants for me." " And who are they ?" asked the bishop. " The dead," replied the minstrel. " The fellow raves!" said Sir Aymer, re¬ treating. " Sing us some strain of that lovely min¬ strelsy thou talkest of," said Sir Amirald. " And look that thou usest virtuous words, thou ungodly fellow," said the abbot of Nor- moutier, who retained all the spleen then felt by churchmen against mimes and minstrels, with whom they were at deadly feud for their dramatic superiority; " but I forewarn thee, let thy speech be decent; for what saith the text?— Castum pium poet am esse decet ipsum — versiculos nihil necesse est." " Sing, fellow, as thou art commanded," said the bishop of Toulouse haughtily. .
" Not till my master commands me," said the minstrel firmly. " Thy master is absent." " No, my master is here," said the minstrel, bowing to Paladour. " Does he rave ?" said Sir Aymer, while the bishop of Toulouse steadily regarded the speaker. " No," answered Vidal, (for that was his name;) " if there be truth in words or faith in hearts, the broad lands he treads, the towers that rise to his view, and I and all the vassals beneath their roofs, are his, and his alone." " What!" said Sir Aymer, " art thou one of those songsters that will be prophets too, and tell mad tales of the fiery arrow that is to pierce yonder towers." " It is on its flight already," said Vidal emphatically. " What meanest thou?" cried Paladour with amazement, not unmixed with stronger feelings. " Mean, sir knight?—Nothing," said Vidal i 2
vacantly ; " what meaning have minstrels and madmen?—Nought, save lies and dotage.— They say Cassandra's fate was hard, but what was the fate of those who despised her ?" 11 This is somewhat strange," whispered Sir Aymer to the bishop. " Strange!" replied the prelate, " that an half-crazed minstrel should lie, and a romance- ful youth should listen ?—Hark ! he is going to sing again." And Vidal, as he spoke, burst into a different strain. Lallan. Round Padua's towers the clouds that rolled, The parting sun had tinged with gold : Her spires are reddening with his rays, Her domes are wrapt in purple blaze. — And lo! as fades the lingering light, A thousand joy-fires burst to sight; And her streets, beneath the Itindling ray, Burn with the busy glow of day.— In tower and spire the bells are ringing; In holy domes the mass is singing; From warder's hold the clarion braying; In lady's bower sweet music playing: Minstrel and mime alternate chaunt Of love and war and wild romauut —•
Tales of the might of Charlemagne, Or British Arthur's fairy reign. Tho light Morisco twirls his bell, The jongleur plies his cunning well: Pardoner and pilgrim, through the crowd, Vaunted their godly gear aloud; Or turned to hail with wondering eye, The masquer's torch-light revelry. They come, in mystic pageant quaint, Paynim and prophet, fiend and saint ; And classic legend blent uncouth With mysteries deep of sacred truth: While from the latticed casement high, Hoof, battlement, and balcony, The clustered gazers fling-below Their bending torches* umbered glow, While, with each shadow's fitful change, They image forth expression strange. 'Mid the mixed group beneath, —■ Now tinge a pilgrim's dark grey cowl,— Now flash upon a demon's scowl; Flit from the churchman's tonsure white To steely form in mailed might j From laughing beauty's up-cast eye To tortured saint in agony; From gibing dwarf, and antic folly, To tapered shrine and relique holy, And cross upreared, in awful state, Hich and red with the precious weight, Of him who died the death.— Thus did in truth the pageant seem, Like minstrel lover's haunted dream.
Yet might the bookman's thoughtful mind Apt foot! amid the triflers find ; — Childhood vvas there, with wondering cry, And restless step, and flashing eye; And manhood grave, intent the while To taste the joy, but veil the sraile; And hoary eld, with joyless eye, Marvelling, with retrospective moan, How younger sights such charms can spy ' In what no longer charms their own. --------- Sir Paladour, rode on as the minstrel sung, full of those heavy though is that a mysterious word or an unexpected incident never failed to stir up like a host of sleeping enemies within; and Amirald rode vvith him in sad and wondering silence, till his companion, with the strong habit of solitary suffering, spoke aloud. " And wherefore," said he at length — " where¬ fore is every step of my earthly progress marked by presages and voices that, though of the living, sound as if they issued from the grave?—The voice, the song of that minstrel, recall to me the images of years in which I seem to have lived; — I could, methinks, repeat every word of his lay, echo every note of his harp;—but unless so touched, every
chord of my early memory is broken, tune¬ less, and irresponsive. — Hast thou over had, Amirald, such thoughts, such feelings r" Amirald answered that such communi¬ cations might be; but he believed that they were bestowed by blessed spirits, and were given as tokens of good. " Alas!" said Paladour, " no tokens are on me for good—no blessed spirits attend me. I could swear to that minstrel's voice — I could swear that in infancy I sat on his knees and listened to it. Hadst thou ever such thoughts of a life ihat. began before thou hadst living consciousness — of a power that awed, a vow that bound thee even then?" " I have had such dreams" said Amirald. " Tell me thy dreams then, and I will tell thee my life; for my life is as a dream, and thy dreams perhaps resemble my life," said Paladour: and Amirald was about to listen, when the minstrel sung again : and the words, though totally unconnected with the.preced-
ing, seemed to seize irresistibly the ear of Paladour. 23alla& toittfauetf. When their red light the torches lent, They feasted full in the victor's tent: And eve; 1 , with loud and lavish boast, Tbe stranger youthS acclaim they raise, — For wonder vanquished jealous pride, And joy had made them prone to praise — The stranger youth, who sought that mom Their leader, with petition high, To bear his banner in the fight, And plant it there in blood —■ or die; And how, when chiefs of bearded might Deemed it foul scorn, that stripling light, Who n*ver, as his words confess'd, In sportive tournay's bloodless jest So much as shivered spear,— Dared now, in dread and mortal fight, Of chief assayed and well-fleshed knight To hold himself the peer: How the proud blush of conscious worth His hero features burned, And his cheek, so pale with awe and hor e, To speaking crimson turned: And while he pleaded yet, and prayed, And still the pausing chief delayed, The standard from its staff he tore.
And where upon the heath's dim, bound, - Rung conch and cymbal's heavy sound — And faintly rose the Paynim moon, In dim eclipse to set so soon—■ Where the dark battle mustered well Tlie turbaned bands of Ishmael — Headlong in desperate charge he bore; Then closed aiound the Paynim bands In unavailing strife j For lo! a thousand weapons aimed Against a single life ! — And there are lightning lance, and spear, And sabre-flash, and scimetar, And arrows are hailing from the rear, And javelin glance like falling star. Then sprung each warrior to his steed, To aid their champion at his need; And as tbe heath they win — Like oarless bark on ocean tost — Now seen, now sunk, now safe, now lost — His victim head was seen. Not heaven itself, in tiiis dread hour, To save that desperate life has pow.er,— Wheu loud was heard the blood-choked cry, That shouted — " God and victory 1" And ere the aids can come, Through brand and blood his way he wore, To earth the struggling foemen bore, And on to meet the rescue sprung, And mid the shouting champions flung The banner blessed by Rome. ---------
15
Like lightning that precedes the storm, Ere the clouds dark, battle form, Was that wild sally's desperate strife;— Then, like the whirlwind in its sway, Jomedthe dark hosts in dread array, That parted but with parting life — And he who still aloft that day, With bloody hand, the banner bore, Who, thrice that day, his bold breast threw The Christian leader's life before; And from the yelling Paynim's grasp Their waning moon in triumph tore; Amid tlie assembled chieftains proud, In that dread day's tremendous close, While his proud eyes'new-lighted fire Still lightened on his breathless foes, Low kneeling 'neath his leader's sword, Knight-banneret arose : " And bear henceforth," the chieftain said, " The cross of blood upon thy shield ; And mayest thou still, as on this day, The sword of God resistless wield : And uaints stiil give thee faith in death, And valour in the field." " Not the oaths of the holiest on earth — hot the attestation of a descended angel, though he left heaven for the purpose," cried Paladour with vehement solemnity, " could
make me believe I had not heard those words, those sounds, before, — though amid scenes I cannot, cannot recall. Oh those associations," he cried, with increasing emotion, " that, far seen, and faintly remembered, we struggle after through mist and darkness, and grasp only their shadows — those spectres of departed memory that rise before us when its essence is gone for ever!" " And whatever may be the mystery of thy fivte," said Amirald, " mine can parallel it." " Speak it, then," said Paladour, abruptly. " I was an orphan, left exposed ?t the gates of the Lord of Courtenaye: some mark, that rny flesh still bears, announced me not of ignoble birth: thus I was committed to the charity or cruelty of the Lord of Courtenaye. But amid all the indignities my proud heart was forced to crouch to, I felt he hated because he feared me." " There my early fate parallels thine," said Paladour; — "I too was left an orphan, reared by an obscure burgher, ■— and, for the rest, I cannot for shame speak it; even the
dark reminiscences that haunt me, are a relief to the gloomier picture of my boyish suf¬ ferings ------" " My cheek still burns," interrupted Ami- raid, " at the recoliection of the unworthy, the unutterable usage I met with in yonder towers, whose lord trembled at the presence of the boy he sentenced to vile punishment I fled the castle: the bounty of the Lady Isabelle, generous as she is beautiful, furnished me with the means of purchasing steed and armour; and at the battle of Bovines, — but thou hast heard that tale; — and now, with this good lance, this gallant steed, a tight bosom, and a loyal heart, I am prepared to run my career in this wild tilting world, as unconscious how it may terminate as how it began." " Such fate too hath befallen me," said Paladour; " and it is marvellous how the early destinies of strangers should thus agree. One would think that we were both enchained, from our cradles, in one link of suffering, — but thine hath been twined with flowers, and mine forged of iron."
" I have sometimes thought we might be brothers," said Amirald, pausing. " I have often wished that we were," said Paladour. "Hark!" he exclaimed, as Vidal rushed past them, and plunged into the gloom of the deep-spreading valley that lay below,—striking, even in that moment of partial frenzy, the broken chords of his harp with a master hand, — '* hark, how he thunders into the vale, hand and harp, foot and voice, in deep and terrible accord! — is it a mortal minstrel that sweeps the strings?" " How sweetly," said Amirald, listening to his own associations, — " how sweetly they mingle wiih the blasts that wail round these dark hills, deepening in rich sadness as the darkness deepens! Methinks, while listening to such wild minstrelsy by twilight like this, I could forego ail thoughts of war and fair renown, and wish to live for ever amid these pleasant and solitary places, dwelling with the images that such sounds could stiil raise before me." " The images that rise before tne" said
Paladour, with a melancholy smile, " are of a darker hue; — but what are thine?" " There is but one" said Amirald, with en¬ thusiasm ; "that of a form which sometimes floats between the evening clouds and me, so softly, so lucidly, that though her beautiful face be real, (I have beheld its portrait, as I avouched at the abbey of Normoutier,) the figure, as it ever floats on the evening clouds, to mine eye seems more of heaven than of earth: I see the stars through her form — her veil is of light; there is a filmy transparency between us as I gaze, that I deem her a saint, though, alas! ------" " I too see the form of a female, — but" — Paladour became convulsed as he spoke, but still repeated, —" and I too see the form of a female." " Heaven comfort thee!" said Amirald, rein¬ ing up his steed, that Paladour's head might sink on his shoulder. "Wilt thou seek to the bishop of Toulouse, or the reverend abbot? they bear holy reliques that might fight with the dark thoughts that beset thee ------/'
" No," cried Paladour, raising his head. "Those sounds have ceased, — those sounds to which I can give no name — affix no mean¬ ing— save that they madden me to hear them. This pale light, those dark hills, our gloomy progress, will restore me. My spirit swells amid a scene like this, as thine would, Amirald, under a sunny sky and a bowery landscape." - The scene vvas, indeed, such as might have inspired or cherished the darkest thoughts. Unlike the other fortified castles of the age, the castle of Courtenaye, as it was then called, though it had formerly belonged to Raymond of Toulouse, seemed built rather for safety than hostility. It lay in a vast hollow, sur¬ rounded by many hills or mountains, that, rising one above another, and winding amongst themselves into endless and shadowy intricacy, defied the skill of the traveller. Where these mountains formed a hollow sweep, their sum¬ mits retiring behind each other, the castle of Courtenaye arose like a mountain of stone that had fallen into the valley; but still, from
its commanding magnificence and va,st extent of structure, seeming the master alike of valley and of mountain. The youths paused and reined up their steeds to gaze below. The dark and flying troops of the Aibigeois had long disappeared from the summits of the hills, — the mists of night began to deepen and mingle there, like a dark advancing host in aid of those who fled, — the mountain-sum¬ mits themselves, partially shrouded by the de¬ scending clouds, and the rising vapours of the valleys, lay like a giant army in the heavens, mingling their huge and darkly-defined masses with those of the clouds that settled heavily on them. Above the castle, as it stood, one broad and burning gleam of western light still lingered, giving to the towers aud battlements the appearance of being in a blaze; and this appearance was heightened by the contrasted darkness of the mountains, so that a red and lowering banner of vengeance and hostility seemed to stream over the pinnacles of the castle, while all around lay in darkness. Pa¬ ladour and Amirald rode into the valley, ,.
" Here we part," said Amirald, as they now descried the many-twinkling lights from the casements and loopholes, and the torches that began to blaze from the battlements, as tokens of invitation to the crusaders: " Here we part; — on the wild and dark hills that sur¬ round us would I rather seek for shelter, than couch in the towers of that felon lord." "On their bleakest points would I rather rest," said Paladour, " than in yonder towers- The unbidden impulse that hath swayed me all my life seems now more potent than ever. I tell thee, sir knight, no armed host, with lances couched and banners spread t could strike such terror into my soul as yonder castle vvith its dark battlements and towers. This is no dream of fancy — no fond imagining of a morbid mind brooding over its own dark workings: no; — it is something that nature warns me from, by those dark but ceaseless intimations (aided by many external bode- ments), and yet seems to impel me to - I know not what impulse to obey, — I stagger beneath the burden of my destiny, — fate is
beckoning me from every battlement, — some¬ thing more than human weighs me down;— nothing human ever weighed me down before." As he spoke he fell from his horse, and lay prostrate on the earth. Sir Amirald unclasped his helmet, undid his gorget, and bared his throat and bosom to the air. In doing so, he discovered on the shoulder of Sir Paladour a trace which, though his eye glanced at it but for a moment (dimly seen as it was), he started to behold ; ■— he bore a similar one himself, — riot merely similar, but so exactly the same, that it was evident they must have been im¬ pressed-by the same hand, and for the same purpose. The slight disparity of their years was no disproval of this conjecture. Pala¬ dour had indeed the finished form of youth on the confines of manhood: Amirald's form had the growing .graces of a youth of eighteen; and often had he, when a page in the castle of Courtenaye, consoled, under many indig¬ nities, his young heart of pride with the mark that his shoulder bore, deeming it impressed, at his birth, by those whom he might be proud to
recognise as his parents, and who might be proud to recognise their child. As these visions of past ignominy and future glory, as¬ sociated as they seemed to be with this singular discovery, passed rapidly and brightly across his imagination and eye, young Amirald had the precaution to throw the silken scarf over Paladour's shoulder; a moment afterwards Paladour breathed, and his hand sought for and felt with strong affectionate pressure the hand of Amirald. " Dismiss those fellows," whispered Palar dour, (imagining, like all who recoyer from a swoon, that he vvas surrounded by a multw tude,)—"do thou alone remain near me." " We are alone," said Amirald, pressing his hand. "Amirald,"said Paladour, faintly, "where¬ fore am I thus overcome ? Have I borne me like a coward to-day ?" "Oh no!" said the light-hearted Amirald, " thou wast like the eagle of Jove in flight and pounce; there vvas blood enough on ,thy beak and talons to warrant thee the cup-
bearer of the Thunderer; but now thou hast to encounter a sort of doves — Venus's doves, I deem. Shrinkest thou from such encounter, thou craven? Mine eagle," he added cheer- ingty* "bear away thy plume and breast unruffled from such conflict; and thou shalt be my bird of birds — yea, my phoenix." They were now beneath the walls of the castle. " Wilt thou leave me now, — now, in this untold conflict of horrid thoughts?"—said Pala¬ dour, raising himself from the earth. " Sir Paladour," replied the youth, springing on his steed, " claim mine arm and brand in thine hour of peril — mine heart in thine hour of kindliness and brothership (if Heaven allow us another) — and my life at any hour — all shall be thine, at thy lightest summons; but ask me not to enter the walls of this castle. There is mystery in thy fate; there is mystery also in mine, which I cannot now reveal to thee. Perchance the fiery arrow hath a two- foldflight? The tramp of his armed steed's hoofs
drowned his last words as he departed : and Sir Paladour, who had resumed his casque and gorget, joined the other crusaders as they approached the entrance of the castle. Amirald pursued his course among the hills, with that uncertainty of purpose and of desti¬ nation that has its charms for the romantic and enterprising,—sometimes murmuring a love-sonnet, and sometimes listening, amid the echoes of the hills, for the sound of a convent bell, where he might claim hospitality for the night. As pausing thus, from the summit of a neighbouring eminence he took a last look of the procession of the crusaders as they wound in long and dim 'array through the portals of the castle, his ears were struck by a cry suddenly and forcibly suppressed;—he listened —it was repeated—and the voice was evidently a female's: there needed no more to inspire Amirald, who, immediately couching his lance, spurred his steed in the direction from whence the cries proceeded.
CHAPTER VIII. Lo, at the close of a stormy day, They saw a proud castle among the trees f Moore. The Lord of Courtenaye had watched that evening the conflict between the crusaders and the Aibigeois, from the highest turret of his castle, scarcely feeling himself in safety even there. When at length, however, the crusaders poured onward, like a river in flood between the rushes on its banks that it sweeps away in its progress, and held their course towards the castle, ^e descended from his turret, and pre¬ pared to receive them at the entrance of his banquet-hall. He was lit on his way by his constant at¬ tendant, Thibaud, (who bore a torch through the dark and vaulted passages which they had
to traverse before they reached the portals of the castle,) and whose visage, though he was silent, bore a meaning his lord did not seek to interpret. We hold a feast to-night," said the Lord of Courtenaye, with a kind of officious restless¬ ness, ■— " is all prepared ?" " AU is prepared," answered the attendant; " but there is a guest coming thou hast not reckoned on." " And who is he" said the Lord of Cour¬ tenaye, who had but one object for the con¬ centrated terrors of his mental vision. " She will visit thee to-night," said Thibaud. — " She hath been seen on the hills this day ; and wherever war or woe chance to be, there is she, sure as the raven to prey on the dead, or the spoiler to strip the slain. Moreover^ the wise astrologer who hath watched, fasting and pure, in the highest tower of the castle, since the dawn of morning, hath declared that the lord of the ascendant is combust and retro¬ grade, and that Almoden is cusped in the seventh house."
And the man, as he spoke, shook as if he was uttering a necromantic spell, though ob¬ viously (from his misuse of the terms of astro¬ logy) ignorant of their meaning. " Hold the torch higher!" said his lord, impatiently, " I cannot see my way." The vassal flashed it full in his eyes. "Lord of Courtenaye," he cried, stopping vvith an air of savage resolution, " I have gra¬ duated long in thy school of perdition. I have learned my trivium and my quadrivium in it For a hasty handling of sword or dagger in my mood, or at the command of my liege lord, absolution may be lightly won. — Show me a throat to be gashed, or a heart to be pierced, and where wilt thou find stronger arm than this?"— and he bared it,—" or keener blade than this?"—and he brandished it before his shrinking lord ! — "but for your deeds of wizardry, your dark dealings in yonder cham¬ ber of sorcery, I scorn them with my heels, and spit at them with my tongue. Meet the foul hag if thou wilt, but thou shalt meet her alone; — I witness your ghastly conferences
no more. What, — I have a soul to be saved, — you must needs bear a conscience, Lord of Courtenaye?" " But hush, I pray thee, Thibaud," said the lord, "have I not explained to thee the difference between magic lawful and unlawful ; betwixt the evocation of spirits by periapts and words of power, and foul and fatal com¬ pact with the master of evil ? Thou gavest up thine error, heldest it no longer that it was a damned art, and wast a believer in the virtues of fumigation, so grateful to the planetary spirits"—— " Peace with thy wild jargon," said his companion, 'whom familiarity in crime had rendered insolent. " My blood is thine, and it hath often been shed in streams to spare the drop that trembles at thy craven heart;—my life is thine, for I am thy sworn vassal ~ my liege-lord,— but my soul never shall be'thine." -" But hear me, Thibaud," said' the Lord of Courtenaye, " the arrival of her whom thou dreadest is horary and auspicious,- 1 -'the"night advances ■—ere it wane, I have been told, and vol. i. k
feel, of a surety, that my mortal enemy will be here—whether he come in human form or no, I wist not; but hark, there be trampling of steeds and riders over our heads, — the cru¬ saders come, and I must bend up my spirit to receive and greet them as I may, — we will talk further of this business at midnight ------." "Nor at midnight—nor ever," said Thi- baud. "Command me in aught else; but for that sin for which men burn both here and hereafter, you shall hold me excused. I quailed not at murder, — not even thy bro'—" " The smoke of thy torch chokes me," said the Lord of Courtenaye, dashing it from the hand of his attendant, and emerging from the dark passage through which they had wound to a corridor that opened on the court of the castle. The crusaders were pouring into it, and seemed, frojn their loose array and joyous colloquy, more like huntsmen returning from the chase than from a field of battle. The loud laugh — the careless bearing of their arms — the minglement of 'squire and knight, of monks.and men-at-arms, — the inter-cross-
ing of the banners of chivalry and of the church, — the pennons of the knights, vvith their armorial bearings, floating and conflicting in the air, with the standard of the cross, up¬ held by the attendants of the bishop of Tou¬ louse, gave to victory the air of a pageant. It was dim twilight as they entered ; the vast towers of the castle seemed mingling with the mases of cloud in the western hemisphere, nor vvas it easy to distinguish the remoter buildings of the castle from a heap of misty and volumed vapour; or the clouds that impended over them, with their sombrous masses and shifting pinnacles, from an edifice of magic reared in the air. Light enough remained to distin¬ guish forms, though not colours; so there was a dim and shadowy magnificence overspread¬ ing the group, and as its torrent swept onwards towards the vast arch of the portal, it seemed like a river rushing to bury itself vvith all its waves beneath the mouth of a cavern. But as they entered the inner court all was changed in a moment;—four hundred torches, borne by vassals and domestics, turned the twilight Kg
into noon — vermillion and saffron giving them a brilliant and almost magical lustre — heralds and pursuivants, with tabards of cloth of gold, and embroidered banners depending from their trumpets, gave note of welcome, and hailed each distinguished crusader by name as he rode into the court—every cor¬ ridor and casement around did " blaze with lights and bray with minstrelsy." The songs of minstrels an' 1 troubadours were mingled with the soft sounds of lutes and the softer of female voices, while the fair songstresses scat¬ tered flowers and essenced waters from the casements and loopholes through which their bright eyes and necks of snow were displayed. The Lady Isabelle herself, with her tw,o fa¬ vourite damsels and her aged gouvernante, seated on the summit of an interior tower, where four torches of perfumed wax blazed around her, waved her silken scarf in token of welcome; while every knight, as he rode by " bare-headed, lower than his proud steed's neck," bowed in proud and graceful obeisance; and the Lord of Courtenaye, in the triumph of
his feudal pride and individual vanity, forgot his crimes, his dangers, and all — but his terrors —yet had he heard certain passages among the guests for whom he had prepared so magnificent a reception, that vanity would have had but slender aliment. " This fool," said the bishop, gazing on the splendour that surrounded him, " ever loved the pomp that follows greatness more than greatness itself." Then turning to the abbot of Normoutier, " Meseems the Lord of Cour¬ tenaye wills us to play in a pageant to-night — what part wilt thou play, lord abbot ?" " Marry," said the literal abbot, as two ecclesiastics helped him from his palfrey; " I am clean spoiled for play or pageant — alas, I am shrewdly galled — but if pastime be going- on, pity it were that it were marred ; if it be a mystery or such, I will think no scorn to bear my part — let your holy lordship play the devil, and I will play the fool." " Thou hast spoken well," said the bishop, with a prophetic smile; " but I devise to play my part on a wider stage than this."
" The castle-hall is ample wide," answered the abbot, puffing on.. " Pray God there be a cushion on the settle after all; for what saith the text, percussit eos in" ------ " Speed thee on," said the bishop, alighting; " or thou wilt be too late to play the fool." u I am never too late lo play the fool — I doubt not to do my part — for, as a father hath it ------" " I do believe the text, spare us the gloss," said the bishop. " Nee lusisse pudet, scd non incidere ludum? said the inveterate abbot, " I deem it apt authority to prove it is never too late to play the fool." Meantime the crusaders, with the bishop of Toulouse at their head (equally from re¬ spect to his military talents as to his eccle¬ siastical dignity) pressed onward to the banquet- hall ; and Paladour, who followed among the rest, seemed to himself to be plunging into his grave. The force of his bodily sensations, the agony of his mental horrors, drove him on among the crowd as if he were an automaton,
a lifeless breathless thing; and while all eyes were fixed on his towering form and conspi¬ cuous armorial, he gazed on all with glassy rayless eye, nor was he conscious that he was a spectator of the magnificent banquet that swam before his darkened vision, till he was roused by the voice of Sir Aymer, who de¬ manded, half jocularly, half reproachfully, " What, is this a guise to meet ladies withal, clad in armour as if thou wert tilting in the lists ? Ladies must lack mirrors when they need to see themselves in corselets and brigantines — it is a mere reproach to their tirewomen." " I had forgot me," said Paladour, absently, " or I had not appeared thus —• and yet I know not — I feci as if within these walls I were best wear armour." " Armour!" repeated Sir Aymer, " what! hast thou no bravery to honour the feast withal —no cloak of velvet vvith a golden guard —. no nice foppery of the Italian guise ? By the mass, a taper leg in cloth hose, and a straight back in a satin doublet, were worth a
score of your hacked gorgets and vant-braces. What avails a taper leg in a boot of steel, a white neck if it be buckled in mail, a curled head if it be hid in a helmet?—Youth, let thine eyes be opened, and the virtues of tissue be revealed unto thee." " My mails contain some suits indifferent costly," said Paladour; " but the disquietude of my mind — I would say the negligence of my knave ------" " Away, away to thy mails — examine their contents — and if but a point, a thread be missing, torture thy 'squire; put all the dam¬ sels in the castle to a rack of thine own de¬ vising, and strain it to thine utmost strength!" " How merrily thou talkest, Sir Aymer," said his sad companion. " Now heaven forefend," said Sir Aymer, with an expression of ludicrous solemnity, " for here be waged the loves and lives of two doughty knights on the issue — go, array thee in thy panoply — here is a wasted leg to thy full calf—a narrow chest to thy ample shoul¬ ders — a bald forehead to thy thick dark
locks — in the teeth of such deadly odds, I defy thee to combat; go, accoutre thee as thou mayest, and the lady Isabelle be at once judge and prize of the field — but mark me — so speed me tissue and velvet, if I make thee not an example to all presumptuous youth, no masses shall be able to redeem my tailor's soul from purgatory !" " I skill so little in gauds," said Paladour, " that thy tailor's soul is in small danger." As he prepared to retire, the splendid reti¬ nues of the Lord of Courtenaye entering the hall made him pause: though he was in armour, and concealing himself among the crowd, he thought the eye of the Lord of Courtenaye rested on him for a moment. The train passed on, and he was almost alone at the door; he cast back one glance on the splendid hall, and some shadows of faint remi¬ niscence rose before him — he thought he had beheld that place before, and struggled with the recollection, but could not dismiss it. Meanwhile the guests crowded fast and fre¬ quent into the hall, the costume of which, *5
rude as it might appear to modern refinement, boasted a wild barbaric splendour with which modern refinement could not dare to vie. The light effused from the torches of the attendants, who arranged themselves at the backs of the guests as they sat, fell on the rich liveried habits emblazoned with the arms of Courte¬ naye and Beaurevoir; and on sheets of tapestry suspended round the walls, where figures, though uncouthly delineated, glowed in all the richness of silk and silver. The subjects were grouped, perhaps, with more than poetical license: the giant Termagant (a corruption probably of Tres-magne) was conflicting with Goliath of Gath — Bathsheba was ministered to by the three Graces in her bath — and 4 Cupid was aiming his mischievous darts at king David tho while. In another compart¬ ment, the sacrifice of Iphigenia was paralleled with that of Isaac, and Abraham and Aga¬ memnon (who had probably never met before save in the head of a mythological nun who wove the tapestry), were portrayed in the same panel, knife in hand; while, by some
singular confusion of appropriate situations, Diana was carrying away Isaac, and a ram caught by the horns was butting away amid the foliage that wreathed the classic altar of the Grecian sacrifice. It could not be said that these persons, in extenuation of their ma¬ nifold absurdities, had nothing to say for them¬ selves, for from their mouths issued long labels announcing their names, characters, and desti¬ nation, as well as could.be told by needle. Between these sheets of tapestry hung the por¬ traits of armed chiefs and feudal beauties — all the high ancestry of a lordly line*; and the chandelier suspended from the ceiling blazed with lights, and shed its aromatic dif¬ fusions over viands and banquetters. Nor was the flavour of the one unworthy the rank of the other; there were the red-legged par¬ tridges so famed in Languedoc, the livers of geese fattened by Jews (then eminent in tliat art), snails stewed in .oil of Lucc.aj conger
and sturgeon, cranes and swans, Tuscan veal, marchpane and marmalade, and " princely peacock's gilded train," vvith its brilliant plu¬ mage and its bill on fire, for the dainty; and for stomachs more robust, the boar's head and the haunch of the hart of ten duly broken. The richest wines of France and Italy sparkled in the goblets of the knights, which they did not fail to drain; and at every pledge from the carved and gilded galleries of the halls, the minstrels sounded their loud and joyous strains, vvith the exception of Vidal, who had seated himself among them, and who - looked round with an absent and earnest expression, as if awaiting the arrival of some one for whom he was to touch the harp he leant on in silence. Paladour, as he lingered at the door, and his dazzled eye passing over the group, fell for a moment on Sir Aymer, now no longer a veteran and skilful martialist, but a mere superannuated fop " frounct and trickt" from head to foot, sighed to himself unheard, " he bears him like an aged elm, around which the vines of pleasure still cling, flushing lovely and
luxuriant. I am like the oak that spreads its branches in broad and vigorous flourishing, but at whose heart a rottenness hath engen¬ dered that causeth the trunk to fall before its time, and to crush even the flower that was smiling by its roots." The Lord of Courtenaye vvas now seated at his board-end, between the bishop of Tou¬ louse and the abbot of Normoutier, whom he greeted as became their rank and his: but amid his courtlv smiles and silver tones, there was about him an air of circumspective anxiety and jealous frugality and apprehended disdain, that ill became the lord of a feast, at whose board were seated the first prelates and peers of France. There was another expression, too, which passed from time to time over his features; but of this the Lord of Courtenaye vvas him¬ self unconscious, from the long indulgence of evil thoughts, corroding recollections, and fear¬ ful anticipations; and his guests were too busy with the banquet and too careless of him to re¬ mark. For a few moments he sat thus silent
and aghast at the head of. his splendid board, often clearing his throat, and at length poured forth, in tremulous but well-modulated tones, a panegyric on the champions of the church who had that day saved the castle of Courtenaye. The speech only drew forth a haughty and indignant laugh from the bishop of Toulouse. " What, my lord," he said, dipping his hands in a ewer of perfumed water which a kneeling page presented to him, " what! do you deem the crusaders spiders that are sum¬ moned to chase a sort of flies from the case¬ ments of thy castle— the flight of the heretics was as swift, and their murmur as soon stifled. If such be the peril of thy castle, St Do¬ minic may garrison thee with his band of inquisitors, and thou mayest defend thy towers with a rosary !" " Nay," said Sir Aymer, who enjoyed the jest at the expense of the Lord of Courtenaye, " nay, at the next assault, send me summons, and hold me no true knight if thy pages with their silken caps, and thy damsels with their needles, do not beat off the assailants. Marry,
let me have the marshalling of the maidens; they shall be expert, I warrant, in their dis¬ cipline, and thy foes shall be prostrate before them. Trust me it was pity of my life to see them fall as they did to-day, unarmed and unresisting — alas, to see a host of armed knights trample on a herd of peusant heretics ! — it made the very hoofs of my arm* •« ieed recoil as I spurred him through the iieid !" " The lord abbot," said the bishop, setting down his cup, " should have been mounted on your steed; he would have seconded the im¬ pulse, and have been most apt in the recoil." " I retreated to the rear of the host," said the abbot, " that I might win the fight by prayer. Wot ye not, my lord of Toulouse, that the lifting up of the prophet's hands won the fight when Israel strove at the siege of Troy — or how d'ye name the place — I know 'tis in Africa ------" " Even so," said the bishop, " thou didst strive and didst also prevail — for as the ras- caille peasantry fled or fell, ever and anon thy bands were devoutly lifted up to a flagon of
muscadine, and deeply didst thou drain it. Marry, there was a transitory neat's tongue, but of that we will not talk — thou didst deal with fervent prayer and hot wines, and we with cold steel and tough carcasses." The abbot was about to rejoin, when Sir Aymer joyously exclaimed : — "The lord abbot must needs prove his orthodoxy by drain¬ ing this goblet of Cyprus wine to the speedy destruction of the heretics. What! let him that will not draw his brand against them draw his beaker, at the least; else by my beads (heaven pardon sin I have none), I hold him no true churchman, and the absolution he pro¬ mised me for the matter he wots of is stark naught." The abbot filled his cup; the bishop was not slack to follow; Sir Aymer's was spark¬ ling to. the brim before theirs were filled ; and the Lord of Courtenaye was slowly and grace¬ fully lifting his to his head, when he recol¬ lected the usual ceremonial of every pledge being announced by the lay of a minstrel, and made a sign to Vidal, who was leaning in
gloomy absence over the rails of the gallery where he was seated, to touch his harp- The minstrel complied with a disturbed and reluctant look, and rung out some chords preluding a warlike song that had often been sung at the feasts of his former lord, Raymond of Toulouse: it had been. composed on the event of the battle in which, some centuries before, the Saracens, on their invasion of Italy, had been defeated near Padua; and Vidal loved it, for his lord had loved it well — it was a fragment of his former strain. Jrngmcitt. Night sunk upon the field — by Brenta's bide, Whose troubled currents red with slaughter swell, Paynim and Christian bands their might have tried. The arm of God hath smote the infidel, Tlie shades that loured where many fought and fell (Shrouding in darkness day's last gleamings red), Wild image of the battle pictured well To wanderer lone — or bard with shuddering tread — If bard might venture well, unscathed, near scene so dread. 2. , For clouds are furling there their volumes deep, Like folded banners of retiring host. Tlie partod sun hath sunk in fiery sleep, ' Like tented chieftain on his victor-post 1
Wild as the cry that murmured ' All is lost!' The night-winds sweep tho Held with hollow dirge—- While (-as he mourned his bloody purpose crobt) The sanguine streaks that in the darkness merge Liko war-fiend's angry scowl, glare o'er the battle's verge. 3. Hushed is the battle's roar—the breeze of morn Waved standard sheet, and woke the clarion— Low sung on evening's blast the distant horn To the cold ear of flight, its warning tone ; — • Fallen is the battle's pride—where gonfalon O'er peer aud paladin in glory streamed; Hovering in hungry swoop on dark pennon The vuicare and the bird of carrion screamed, Where, wan beneath the moon, their mailed corses gleamed. As the minstrel struck the last chords, and, animated by his theme, was arming his hand for a more martial touch, and tuned to words more thrilling, the two side doors of the ample hall unclosed, and from the one appeared the beautiful vision of the Lady Isabelle, (whom her uncle willed to grace the feast by her presence,) attended by her damsels and gou¬ vernante, and from the other Sir Paladour, his armour doffed, and splendidly arrayed for the banquet; and as they thus appeared, no youthful painter, in his dreams inspired by
love and genius, ever imaged two forms more bright and perfect. The form of Paladour had all the sculpture-like glory of a god descended from his pedestal; his eagle eye and cheek of flame seemed at war with the immobility of his figure, as he stood gazing on the loveliness of the form that he beheld. He stood trans¬ fixed ; but the life-blood that seemed to have deserted his frame gushed in the brightest torrents and wildest tides to his cheek and lip, that, in the language of Southey, Made the rose's blush of beauty pale, And dimmed tlie rich geranium's scarlet blaze. Opposite to him the heiress of Courtenaye and Beaurevoir burst on the eye and soul at once, converting admiration into rapture, and leaving the gazer mute and breathless; moving in the light of beauty, she seemed to communi¬ cate a portion of it to the very atmosphere she breathed in. The consciousness of unrivalled loveliness, and the pride of lofty birth, were blended on her brow vvith, a dignity that seemed not to seek for conquests, but to
demand homage; and the mutable brilliancy of her expression proved feelings within that took instant part with all that wakes the noblest or touches the softest chords of the heart. In every movement of her form, in every variation of her features, there was an undula¬ tion of majesty and gentleness, an union of vivacity and power, a submissive grandeur, i sportive imperiousness that is the peculiar character of female loveliness, claiming pro¬ tection amid its very omnipotence, but most omnipotent in its weakness. The union of brilliant and lively intelligence with perfect purity is to be found in the human face scarce ever—in those of men never; it was embodied in that of the Lady Isabelle. Her apparel was suited alike to her rank and her beauty; the attire of noble females of that age bearing, from its lengthened drapery and numerous folds, more resemblance to the Grecian than lo the Gothic costume. She was arrayed in a tunic and skirt of azure silk ; a zone (not lower than the modern cincture)
compressed her exquisitely modulated bust, and from it hung her embroidered gipsire; her mantle of crimson swept the ground, but one end, gracefully fastened to her zone, dis¬ played the rich embroidery of her left skirt, that blazed with the arms of Courtenaye and Beaurevoir; her wide sleeves, open from the shoulder, disclosed her graceful arms, wreathed with bracelets set with gems; her swan-like neck was encircled with a costly carkanet, and the ringlets of her dark-brown hair, twisted with pearl, were suffered to stream on her bosom, (doubtless through the negligence of her damsels, whom, however, she forgot to chide;) while a gem-studded coronal of gold, over which was flung a glittering veil of auri- frisium, was insufficient to restrain her dark curls from straying over her forehead, and mingling their shade with that of her nobly- arched brows. Some said the Lady Isabelle looked loveliest when she touched her lute in iier evening bower; some deemed her so when she presided at the tournament or the banquet; but Vidal, the minstrel, swore she never looked
so lovely as vvhen she distributed the weekly dole at her castle-gate, and with her own deli¬ cate hands bestowed their portions on the de¬ formed, the cripple, and the leper, vvho gazed upon her as they received it, as if at her heavenly smile disease fled, and anguish vvas forgotten. As Paladour approached the chair of state where her maidens spread the rich folds oi her mantle, while the lady placed her slender foot on an embroidered cushion that a page reverently laid for her, not all Sir Aymer's whispered ridicule and monitory touches could recover him from the delicious trance, the awful tremblings, that at once urged and re¬ pelled his timid advance. Sir Aymer, versed in courtly ceremonial as well as in martial discipline, announced with becoming dignity the Knight de la Croix Sanglante; while Pa¬ ladour blushed and bowed, and the lady, after a graceful bend, dropt her veil of golden thread over half her beautiful face, as if avoiding all further encounter vvith the fixed and glowing eyes thai were raised to hers, but betraying by
the action a feeling and a fear of their power, as flowers close their silken leaves beneath the ardours of a too brilliant sun. Perhaps the same instinct induced the lady to address herself with smiles and laughter to her maidens, and even to bestow a transient glance on two gorgeously-habited knights who were near her, Sir Ezzelin de Verac and the Sieur de Semonville; the former of whom, with exaggerated affectation, lay on a cushion at her feet, while the other sat upright on his bench, disarranged his costly garb at every movement, called to his page to mend his .scarf, cursed him for misdoing it, ancl then turned to catch the lady's eye, as if his paulant folly and peevish spleen were merito¬ rious service in the eye of high-born beauty. Sir Paladour leant in silence on the arm of her chair, when the lady half turned towards him, and her beautiful lips, slowly unclosing, murmured, " Art thou indeed that knmht De la Croix Sanglante, of whom Fame hath said so much ?" Paladour, trembling, was about to answer by a profound obeisance, vvhen
Yidal, who from his gallery had watched the moment with anxious eye, pursued his strain unbidden, and painted the reception of the hero of his ballad after his victory. .dpraiperit. Oh ! sweet it was to see his smile Breaking through terror and through toil, (As summer lightning's vivid glow Plays o'er the evening's misty brow,) v While graceful thanks ir courtly phrase To prelate, peer, and dame he pays; But in his path no rose was shed Like that his glowing cheek that spread— Waved on the night no ensign fair Like his rich rings of floating hair— Nor gem on beauty's bosom past The glory that his eye-beam cast, And mingled, deep expressions strange Glance o'er his cheek with lovely change— Where the wild glow of boyish grace Mixed with the warrior's sterner trace— And high-arched brows' majestic gloom Shaded a cheek of vernal bloom, And vermeil lip of dowy thrill Seemed quivering with the war-word still. The Lady Isabelle bowed to the minstrel as he sung; and he, mistaking the signal, paused
in his strain.- " I cannot for my soul sing'any other songs than those I sung in the halls of Raymond of Toulouse; I sing no song to please the Lord of Courtenaye." The Lord of Courtenaye meanwhile had been pledging his noble guests deeply, and with graceful courtesy at every pledge, till, at tho sudden change of Vidal's minstrelsy, and the force and power of his altered voice at the moment that Paladour vvas about to address the Lady Isabelle, he bent forward in his chair with ominous conjecture ancl fearful curiosity. The form and features of Paladour (before concealed by his armour) were then distinctly visible. " Fill the goblet of our noble host," said the bishop of Toulouse; " he hath forgotten our pledge," " Yea, to the brim," said the abbot of Normoutier; " for what saith the text — marry, I have forgot — fill mine, knave." " Hold it to his head, fellow," said Sir Aymer — u he seemeth unable to lift or to empty it." vol. i. l
It was so indeed: the eyes of the Lord of Courtenaye seemed convulsed in their sockets. He held his goblet, and forced a ghastly smile; but while he did so a blue circle gathered round his lips, wbich contracted rapidly; a hideous and squalid paleness overspread his visage; and whiie dropping the cup that a page attempted to take from his hands, he exclaimed, " God! — another risen from the dead! — this is sorcery and hellish dealing !" and the Lord of Courtenaye fell senseless beside his chair.
CHAPTER IX. What shall b« the maiden's fate,— Who shall be the maiden's mate? Lay of the Last Minstrel, The consternation that diffused itself was universal. The Lady Isabelle, with a faint shriek, rose and retired hastily with her female attendants. The guests rose also to depart ; those who were unconscious of the cause of the disturbance, full of wonder and inquiry, loud and anxious, — and those who were perhaps conscious profoundly silent, repelling all curio¬ sity with grave looks, and hiding under them feelings that they would willingly have ex¬ changed for those of the most idle and vacant querist. So rapid was the dispersion, that but a few moments had elapsed, when Sir Paladour, starting from the trance-like feeling which L2
had now become the habit of his life, and which the recent event had powerfully in¬ duced, gazed around, and saw himself the sole inmate of the deserted banquet hall. For a moment he seemed to himself to have sat at a feast of visionary beings, and to have been mocked by the semblance of beauties, nobles, knights, and minstrels; but the un¬ finished viands, the untrimmed lights, the unemptied goblets, were still there, and to his first profound amazement succeeded that deep melancholy with which we view the haunt of departed splendour and festivity. All the emblems and incentives of gaiety and of glory were still there; but the spirit of life that kindled them was extinct, and all were like glowing but dull embers of a dying fire. Unconscious and uncaring where he flung himself, Paladour sat for a few moments opposite the deserted chair of the Lady Isa¬ belle, till, startled by a.sigh that almost'was breathed' in his ear, he turned, and beheld close to him the minstrel Vidal. The gentleness of Paladour's spirit struggled
with its habitual depression; and he said slowly, " That was a sweet fragment of old minstrelsy thou sungst to us, minstrel; repeat it, I pray thee." " Lord of these towers," answered Vidal, " seat thee in thy rightful seat, from which the usurper hath fallen beneath the glance of thine eye as if beneath the lightning of heaven, and I will harp to thee as I have to thy father, who loved a minstrel well, while my harp hath a string, or I a finger to touch it." " Thy words are madness," said Paladour, rising at this wild address. " So they may be," said Vidal, whose in¬ flamed visage and wandering eyes proclaimed him overcome by wine; " for I am mad vvho utter them; but yet I have words to utter to thee of high import, if the devil that blazes in my brain would deliver them faith¬ fully to the devil that stammers from my tongue. No — I see it is in vain — thou wouldst not believe what thou scarce couldst understand."
" Wretched man," said Paladour, " how couldst thou fall into so low a vice — one that degrades thy lofty art, ennobled as it hath been by hands in whose veins runs the richest blood in France?" " Upbraid me not thou" said Vidal, " for it vvas grief for thy father and his house" ------ " And who, then, was my father?" said Paladour. Vidal only answered himself. " Then habit — the devil — or that strong appetence for feverish life which the minstrel must feel and feed from his first hour to his last. What the murmur of the stream, the song of the birds, the music of the woods when the wind waved them, did for me in my youth — this must do for me now;" and he drained a goblet as he spoke. " Wo — wo to those," he said, setting it down, " who, like me, dip the wings of their muse in wine to brighten her plumes, but lose and drown her in the attempt, and lose themselves after to seek her!" " My life seems haunted by portents and
omens," said Paladour; " in the name of Heaven" ------ " Hush!" said Vidal, with an aspect of mysterious but mockful solemnity, " name not Heaven beneath this roof; its usurper hath devoted himself to hell, and its inferior agents are now around and watching us. Yet I had something to unfold—something, too, that might redeem my worthless and weary life, and make men say the wandering minstrel parted with a full and fair confession : but not now—-my brain still burns and my senses blaze,. and I would mix images of my harp's creation—that harp, my comfort and my curse —•with substantial things of real horrid life. Darest thou meet me in thy chamber at mid¬ night, youth ?" " Did ever mortal ask such question of me before ?" said the knight; " why dare I not ?" " I know not 1 am a drunkard—a fool— a madman," he added, draining another goblet. " But look to the furniture of thy sleeping chamber." And drinking again, he sung wildly—■
" And now for the deep and dumken sleep When tbe brain is turning, wh!«zing ancl burning, And v\e plunge into a bed offire, Whose roof seems rising higher and higher, Till the eye-lids drop; yet within them keep The flame that glares through our frantic sleep, And we toss through a night of feverish pain, And wake to thirst and flames again. Oh ! thus ye slumber, minstrels, well — Would that such sleep were your only hell!" " At midnight, if thou darest," he added, nodding at the knight " At midnight, if thou canst V said Pala¬ dour. " Poor soul, I pity thee." " Pity thyself" said Vidal, " but heed me: I will be punctual as the castle bell, solemn as its sound, true as its touch of time, and — forgotten as its echo." And they parted. Even vvhen Paladour reached the chamber to which they conducted him, he could not help making a kind of shadowy acquaintance with the objects around him, as if he had beheld them in some early and forgotten part of his existence; hut it vvas singular, that the more he endeavoured to bring these objects into contact with his faded recollections, they only receded
the faster; yet, when he gave up the effort, the reminiscences returned with more vividness than ever. Seated by his lamp, which he forgot to trim, he awaited the approach of midnight, while the words of Vidal recurred to his memory ; " survey the furniture of thy sleeping chamber." A heavy stupor fell on him as he sat, — it was not sleep, for his senses were awake to the slightest impression. The heavy toll of the castle bell, the only an¬ nouncement of time then known, measured by the hour-glass of the warder of the barbican, and instantly echoed from battlement to terrace, proclaimed midnight. Paladour, staiting up, listened and thought he heard the sound of distant stepsj he rose — the steps approached, and a light gleamed along the passage; a moment afterwards a sound vvas heard like the fall of a trap-door, mixed with a brief and stifled cry of agony. Paladour never again beheld the minstrel Vidal. All was hushed in the castle. The per¬ fumed torches with their light were dying away in the arched passages; not the echo of a step was l5
heard along them, from the sounding tread of the knights and their attendants to the noise¬ less step of the sandaled monks; all that broke on the stillness was the distant baying of the dogs chained in the'holes of the outer ballium, or the footfall of the warders, whose armed tread made the stone terraces ring with their marked and accordant sound. The Lord of Courtenaye sat in his closet in silence and with clasped hands. He had recovered from his swoon, but his faculties still seemed dark¬ ened and bewildered. Thibaud was his sole attendant, — his ample hand rested on the back of his lord's chair, and his eves were fixed on the ground: from time to time he raised them to gaze on a black curtain that hung opposite him, and then hastily withdrew them. At length, "How wears the night?" said the Lord of Courtenaye. " It draws towards midnight," said the attendant; " towards the appointed hour." " What sOund is that in mine ears, like that of cries of slaughter ?" said his lord; " Perchance the distant baying of the dogs
who are chained in the outer court," answered Thibaud. " I hear no other." " Nay, but listen." " I do." Both were intently silent. " A footstep approaches," said the Lord of Courtenaye, starting. " Thou hearest the armed tread of the war¬ ders, as they pace the rocky terraces, which return every step with a marked and distinct echo," replied the vassal. " Methought," said the Lord of Courtenaye, " the sound was close at my chamber door." " In the deep and stilly night," said Thi¬ baud, " sounds come with a strong distinct¬ ness to the ear, that in the hurry of day we would not heed, or could not hear." "Itfares, then," said his lord, "with the mind as with the ear; for, in the night, many thoughts arise that seem to shun us by day. Oh that the eye of the mind could be closed, even as the ear of the body may be shut, against such visitors, by sleep, — yea, though the sleep were eternal!" He paused, and
rocking himself in his chair, murmured, "Now that all sound hath ceased, doth not the still¬ ness press on thine ear as somewhat dreary and unnatural ?" v" Dreary enough," said Thibaud, vvith a faint shudder, " but not unnatural. -The castle is hushed, and all the guests are de¬ parted." " Would that they were," said the Lord of Courtenaye;'" but I have a guest vvho will not depart: he is with me vvhen I am alone:— were an hundred voices around me, his is the only one I hear : he vvas at my board to-night, — he is in my 'closet now." Ancl, as he spoke, the Lord of Courtenaye, with trembling hand and reverted eye, withdrew the black curtain and disclosed the portrait of an armed warrior. Thibaud shrunk from the view, or from the resemblance it bore to one he beheld so lately; but his lord fiercely shook his feeble hand at the portrait as he dropt the curtain, and cried, — " The sword cannot slay — ba¬ nishment cannot expel — excommunication cannot crush and wither the accursed race, —
one serpent maimed sends forth another to hiss in my face. There is but another course to be taken," he added, his eyes fixed on a point vvith fearful expression. " And that course, lord, thou must tread alone,'' said Thibaud, retiring. " Begone, then, fool," said his lord in wrath; " thou art not fit to hear of such high mysteries, far less to speak of them. One sound of thy profane utterance were enough to undo all that the words of the sage, and the works wrought in this chamber of secrecy, are doing for me now — even this moment I pray thee rid me of thy presence!" " That is lightly done," said Thibaud, open¬ ing the door,-—"as lightly," he muttered be¬ hind it, " as at thy best I left thee brotherless." Then half opening it and showing his inflamed yet ghastly face, — " for the encounter thou art about to brave, trust me, one holy priest were worth an host of armed knights. For the body I reck not, come fiend come foe,—-but for the soul ------ ■ I have had fearful dreams of late;—what will be thine, dark-dealing lord,
to-night ? — even amid the horrors of mine own I will smile, in vision, to think how deeper thine must be." As the door by which Thibaud retired closed, another opened, (for every pannel in the closet contained a secret door,) and a figure appeared at it that seemed, indeed, " not of this world." His visage was deeply marked with the traces of time and thought, his eyes sunk, his fore¬ head wrinkled, and his beard descended to his girdle; on his bald head was a conical cap, marked with strange figures, and on his breast the mystical angles of the pentacle: he had a staff in one hand, and a parchment with the plan of a horoscope in the other. His white garment had a border wrought with the signs of the zodiac, and his girdle was wrought with Arabic characters, in the centre of which blazed in gold the tetragrammaton—the awful four letters, whose influence, alike awing the devout and intimidating the weak, gave at once sanctity and terror to his appearance. • Thus arrayed, pale, trembling, and hoary, the sage stood before the Lord of Courtenaye;
and each gazed on the other as those who have to hear or to communicate fearful intelli¬ gence, yet dread to ask or to utter it. " Speak!" said the lord at last, in a choked voice, " for I feel thou hast evil to tell, — herald and agent, perchance, of evil as thou art." " The constellations withhold their light to-night," said the trembling astrologer; " but one burns dimly in the heavens, and he is to thee most hostile;— a stranger is in the house of Mars, whose mail is redder than blood; and the planet that is the lord of thine ascend¬ ant is dim." " Liar and villain !" said the spleenful lord, rushing on the defenceless old man. " Villain, — but not liar," he added, shuddering as he recoiled, " a stranger indeed hath come,"— and he sunk on his seat. " Then are my words verified," said the trembling seer. " Alas! I can read the stars, but cannot command them." . , . "Slave and dog!" cried the patron, gnashr ing ..his teeth; "was it for this I snatched thy
withered carcass from the flames of the inqui¬ sition ?—marry, I did the flames little wrong, — thine whole anatomy would not have yielded one drop of blood, to hiss in the fire. Was it for this I saved thee from the vassalage, when old wives vvith distaffs, and boys with bird- bolts, would have threshed thee to chaff? Was it for this ? — to taunt me vvith thy terms of art, the jargonry of thy vile trade, and teach me a lesson from the stars thou never readest thyself; or, if thine art be aught but a lie, mightest efface, and seek or trace happier characters and more auspicious pre¬ sages." ' " Lord of Courtenaye," said the seer, more incensed at the indignity offered to his art than to his person, " what talkest thou of effacing the letters of thy destiny written in that book of heaven, the stars, which all eyes may gaze on, — but gifted eyes alone may read? Canst thou turnback their courses'or veil their light? Thou mayest place thine hand over thy feeble organs, and hide their lustre from thee; but will that retard their
viewless operation, or empower him who reads them to say, because they are not bright to thee, they are not legible to him. Thus was the prophet rebuked by the incredulous Moabitish chief; and thus also he answered, — if Balak would give me his house full of silver ancl gold, I cannot go aside from" ------ — "Knave, slave, and in one word—astro¬ loger," said the angry lord, stamping in agony of impotent wrath, " wretch and dog, is it for this I have periieS life and soul to shelter thee in the turrets of my castle ?" " Light thanks I owe thee for it," said the incensed sage, " for thou didst it for the sake of that which thou valuest more than soul or body, the towers of that castle which to-night trembles over thine head." " Thou monster of ignorance," said the lord, not hearing him in his passion, " scarce worthy to rehearse a traditionary almanack, to tell the peasants' wives that by our Lady's grace it will thunder in summer, and if the foul fiend (would he had thee) prevent not, in winter there will be snow; — thou human
horologe — thou — but words are wasted on thee thou ducking obsequious slave of time, and boasted ruler of futurity, that canst set all the stars in an uproar when the handle of my lady's fan is lost, and put constellations to torture if her lap-dog be astray;—is it thou who pratest when the destiny of the Lord of Courtenaye is weighing in the balances of heaven, or of hell?—Avaunt, I say, begone, teach thy stars to speak better language, or by the protomartyr, I will exalt thee fifty feet nearer them on a gibbet in the castle-court, where, nailed to it, thou shalt have leisure to view them, unless the hooded crow first peck thy bleared and doating eyes out." The astrologer stood aghast, and the Lord of Courtenaye was rapidly approaching one of those paroxysms of fury that so often proved fatal alike to associate or foe, when a sound was heard from beneath his feet that operated instantaneously on his fiercest moods; and the fear of the one, and the passion of the other, were hushed in a moment to watch it. The sound was repeated, and soon after a board in
the floor beneath them (which was for certain purposes but partially paved) rose with a slow motion, and disclosed the form of a female, who emerged from it. She was wraps in a grey mantle, the hood of which fell far over her face : her shape was completely enveloped in this mantle, but when her feet touched the floor, she extended one bare and sinewy arm towards the Lord of Courtenaye, and ex¬ claimed, " Spirit dark and disquieted, be at rest—for I am here." " And welcome art thou, my meet ally," said the wretched man, now almost raving between the extremes of rage and terror; "the assassin and the astrologer, the powers that I could hope aid from in earth or sky, have de¬ serted me: there remains but thee,—whence thou comest I guess, where thou wilt bear me I reck not,—the strong necessity of fate drives me to thee, and to thee I will cling as my last, deadly,inevitable, and most accursed resource." " Thou hast spoken my welcome well," answered the figure, without changing po¬ sition, place, or feature, — " none ever cursed
the evil power in bitterness of voice and spirit more deeply than when they felt their sole dependence was on him." " Speak to her," said the Lord of Courte¬ naye, " for though her presence exalts, her voice chills me;"—and he sunk on his chair incensed, and yet vacillating between them, not knowing in the agony of his incerti¬ tude on which he should bestow the name of demon and deluder, or to which he should offer himself a victim. l( Lord of Courtenaye," exclaimed the astro¬ loger, "theastral spirits, whose being is purity, and whose essence is light, may ill consort vvith those whose forms are exhalations from the burn¬ ing lake, whose breath is blasting, and whose blessings are curses. If man will rend asunder the veil that wraps futurity, if he will know that which Heaven will not have known, let him seek it at least where the temptation may be a balance against the offence, as the fruit of Eden might be a palliation for the fail; — let him read the vast volume of the planetary skies, alive with glory and instinct with know-
ledge :■—not fhe blood-scrawled leaves of dead- men's skin where sorcery traces the dooms of hell. Even if our system err, is it not better to err with us ?—to dream that we see the astral intelligences seated each on his golden orb, guiding their mystic dance round the throne of light, and hymning to each other the songs of paradise through the stillness of unmeasured space, till mortal cares and thoughts are lost amid the dim glories of nocturnal contempla¬ tion—the inaudible but heart-echoed harmonies of heaven — and the rush of the expanded soul that pursues its bright and boundless career through the infinitudes of the universe, seeking and tracing the mysterious and irre¬ versible relation which every minute and opaque orb holds to the destination of the inhabitants of its neighbour-planet;—is not this a laudable temerity? — a god-like sin?—an aspiration worthy of an angel not quite fallen ?" He paused; but of his hearers, one seemed as if he heard him not, and the other as if she were listening to other voices. " The glories,
and perchance the truths of heaven, were unfolded to thee," said the indignant sage, departing, " and thou hast rejected them, — the horrors and the darkness of hell be thine, since thou hast chosen them;" and he dis¬ appeared through the narrow door which led by a secret stair to the loftiest turret in the castle. " The dotard is gone," said the Lord of Courtenaye; " speak now, if thine art be not a fable, or thy power a dream; canst thou by drug or charm, or aught of evil operation thou boastest of, do deadly and sudden work on mine enemy? —he is within these walls — within my very clutch—do thou some mortal deed on him this night." " What fearest thou from him ?" said the fearless female. " That which I cannot utter," answered her shuddering companion. " Were an assassin holding a dagger to my throat,— were a fiend grasping my disembodied spirit, I should know what I had to fear, and knowing would cease to fear: but this suspense between earth and
hell, this dream-like existence among beings of this world, and beings that are not of it, fills me with fears I cannot utter;—indefinite fears worse than darkest realities." " Then art thou twice the coward I deemed thee," said the female; " there is a peril from which the bravest may shrink, even in his hour of might: but he who dreads to name his danger, dreads the sound of his own voice,— becomes a spectre to himself, and never was fear so horrible. Men have said, fear is the shadow of danger; but I say unto thee, danger is but the shadow of fears like thine;—but thou art a dissembler in thy very cowardice;—there is something lurking in the folds of thy heart which thou darest not reveal to thyself, though I already know it" " A stranger came to my castle to-night," said the Lord of Courtenaye, covering his eyes with his hands;—" and he bears such resem¬ blance to my mortal enemy—" " As son to sire," answered the female,— " I know it,—and such he is." " Hell take thee, sorceress," exclaimed the
angry lord, grinding the curse between hit> teeth. " Waste not thy breath on useless prayer," said the female, with a dreadful smile; — " Hell is at work to find room for us both." " Accursed be thy destiny !" said the furious lord, " and doubly accursed the instrument!) with which it hath enforced me to deal!" " Accursed rather," retorted the female, " be thy evil passions; and tenfold accursed the need that compels the power that moves thee to assume the form of thine instrument!" " Instrument or power," exclaimed the lord, * l name thyself, or be what thou wilt, — mine enemy is within my walls, rid me ol' hirn, and -------Oh that I knew what demon wafted him hither, that I might curse him !" " Curse me, then," said the female; "this hand pointed, this arm rowed, this eye fixed his path to thy towers." " I am bewildered," said the unhappy man; "there is a mystery about thee that nought can penetrate;—thou hast promised me the de¬ struction of mine enemy, — thou bringest him
beneath my roof, — thou triumphest in my ruin,— thou hast boasted thou wilt work his — What must I think, — is this thy faith to me?" " Oh !" cried the female, exalting her lofty figure with her voice —" my faith to thee shall be truly kept. I am bound to thee by ties thou knowest not, or hast, perchance, for¬ gotten,— by me remembered ever, I swore that by my means should be wrought the de¬ struction of thine enemy ; — that oath I pledged to thee in thy vault of sorcery — again I pledge it to thee in this chamber — the portal of hell; and that I may redeem it, know that Vidal, the minstrel ; is even now seeking the chamber of the stranger, and will reveal to him that which may give the 'fiery arrow ' a fleeter wing and surer mark." '.' Vidal here!" exclaimed the Lord of Courtenaye, — " and seeking the chamber of that stranger knight, but whence and where¬ fore is it," he cried, pausing, " that thou thus ever scemest to deal doubtfully betwixt me and mine enemies, — to evade, and yet fulfil my purpose ?" vol. r, m
" For mine czvn" answered the female, sternly; " but if the deed thou wishest be wrought, ask not thou the means or instru¬ ment ; — they may be beyond thy thought *o reach, or thy touch to finger, save to harm them ------" "Ho! Thibaud!" cried the Lord of Courtenaye. " Ay, summon him," repeated the female. "Now is Thibaud in his office. Alas! that vengeance should rest in men's hands, and only in women's hearts !" Thibaud appeared at the door, and seemed to listen with eagerness to the whispered com¬ munications of his lord. " Assassin—lord and murdering ruffian ! ye are met again," said the female to herself; " but soon shall ye be parted, each to his destiny. Amid fires your bond of slaughter vvas begun; amid fires it shall be consum¬ mated ---------" At this moment the whispers of the lord and his attendant reached her, as she stood erect and motionless, her arms folded, appear-
ing to listen only to her own dark mutterings; yet, from habit, involuntarily catching the slightest sound within the compass of hearing. Some of those sounds were terrific enough; but her ear was now cold as her heart was seared; and she listened, if not with pleasure, with a kind of fearful interest, as one who herself had interest in all fearful things. The whispers became louder, and Thibaud seemed urging some desperate measure. "No noise — no tumult!" murmured the lord; " the castle is full of guests lightly aroused." The whispers sunk lower; then came the scarce audiblesound,—" The passage that he must tread to that chamber — the trap-door he wots not of, but thou canst go¬ vern its springs — thou knowest how they play — he falls through it. My countdom to the coin thou balancest in thine hand,—I wi 11 treble it — quadruple it—so thou doest thy work well; — the drunken dreamer will fall into the snare, and awake in eternity." Their slow and faltering steps were then M 2
heard for a few moments, as they glided along the passage; the female listened till the sound had ceased, and then raising the trap-door, plunged into the vaults to pursue her unutter¬ able occupation. * * * # # # # Far other scenes than those that occurred in the secret chambers of the Lord of Courte¬ naye, and the restless apartment of Paladour, were passing in the chamber of the Lady Isa¬ belle ;— scenes of loveliness and light, of reposing beauty, ancl perfumes that gently- prepared the senses for slumber; and music, that wound up the spell by its richest and softest tones; and all that high-born beauty might claim, or feudal power command; — all were displayed in the, night-chamber of the Lady Isabelle. The lady, her dark-brown locks (now un¬ twined from the band of gems, coronal, and veil,) touching the ground, sat in a lofty chair; while her female attendants, of the lower class, were arranging her beautiful
tresses for the night. Germonda and Blanche, her favourite attendants, lay on cushions at their lady's feet,—sometimes chiding the infe¬ rior attendants for their negligence in arranging her long-flowing locks, — sometimes pausing, in their chidings, to admire their beauty and length, and lifting in their slender hands the lady's hair, that .now, fully displayed, fell from her tapestried chair to the floor. Dame Marguerite kept her post of honour at the back of the lady's chair, fan in hand, mirror at her girdle, her eye glancing at the inferior attendants, as- if to intimate that the art of placing combs, or of braiding tresses, was lost since her time; and ever and anon scowling at the young favourites vvho occupied the embroidered cushions at their lady's feet Meanwhile, Dame Marguerite panted vvith terror, lest a secret of her own should be dis¬ covered, which, if known, would, in those towers of feudal power and violence, have cost her life on its discovery. Undisturbed by the secret jealousies of ■her attendants, and the desperate treachery of the
gouvernante, the Lady Isabelle, in all the light- hearted sportiveness of undoubting security, and the gay consciousness of triumphant beauty preparing for gorgeous repose, was jesting with her attendant damsels: "Now read me my riddle, maidens," she said, "and read it right, — Which of all my suitors deserves to be rated highest in our esteem, or in your commendation?" The damsels, as the lady guessed, each commended him whom she was least anxious to acknowledge as her favourite. " Ah, lady!" said the elder, " who can doubt the supremacy of that knight for the very lists of love, Sir "Ezzelin, that sovereign of cuts, slashes, and guards, and indeed that most potent prince of the territory of fringes and feathers ?— Cupid's arrows are ambushed in every fold of his doublet, Venus's swans are in the plumes of his cap. Trust me, no knight dare tilt with him, unless a tailor were his squire; then there might be fearful odds. For me, so help me needle and bodkin, I dare no more undertake him on the ground of women's gear from the
tapestry that covers your chair to the lace that binds your skirt, than I dare do battle with the heretics, or encounter the Lord of Courtenaye when the crane or peacock is not duly dismembered, or the wines of Greece and Italy offered to the guests below the salt." " Where didst thou learn the nonsense thou hast talked ?" said the lady. " Be not displeased, lady," said the attend¬ ant, trembling; " it was from a wandering minstrel, an attendant of Sir Ezzelin de Verac, The words were dictated, he told me, by a maid who loved him." " The words are naught, and the music discord to mine ear," said the lady. " What canst thou say ?"—to her other attendant. " Nought but what the Lady Isabelle would hear," replied the cautious damsel; and the lady answered, " Say on without offence." " Then, for my life," said the damsel, " me¬ thinks the Sieur de Semonville hath a pleasant wit; his patrimony is ample, his birth noble, his haviour gentle."
" Check thy falcon, lest it prove a haggard," said the lady, smiling; " I will myself tell the rest; his hawks well bathed—his hounds well fed — his towers well warded — his treasures well barred in the ample chests of his castle hall. — But, mercy of Heaven! what hand rends mine hair so?" Dame Marguerite, weary of her long silence and perhaps anxious to conceal her treachery by increased officiousness, advanced, fanning herself with much trepidation; and avouched that she had snatched the lady's tresses out of the hands of the conspiring minions, vvho, beside their want of skill in bredes and bands, globes and spires, had dared to breathe the name of a landless knight, whose birth and lineage were unknown, as paregal with the names of the noble suitors of the lady, Sir Ezzelin de Verac and the Sieur de Semon¬ ville. " And who was that knight of whom they dared to speak'" said the Lady Isabelle, in a tone that made each party fear she had gone too far.
" Sir Paladour," quoth Marguerite at length .—" that doubtful and dangerous guest of the castle of Courtenaye. Twice' did I courtesy to him unnoticed, though I stood close beside thy chair—three times (by chance) I dropt my fan; he never regarded it—then I coughed aloud; and, instead of tending me the broidered kerchief or napkin, he bowed to look for thine. Now out on him for an hilding, a most un- courteous and unnurtured knight!—I say fie on him ------" " Dame Marguerite," said the Lady Isa¬ belle, pointing to the tapestry of her chamber, which was embroidered in allegorical figures representing the seven deadly sins, with their concomitants, " thou seest the punishment of Mal-bouche and ViUreproche — I trust thou wilt not incur it." Dame Marguerite was dumb as the figures in the tapestry. " Clau- dine," said the lady in a tone of languid pleasure to the discarded attendant, ," bind thou my hair; thy touch is softer, methinks, and' thy hand most skilful.—Now for a tale m 5
of the last tourney we witnessed, damsels. Where was the last pageant shown ? I love to have those bright images haunt.me between sleep and waking, to have them linger betwixt mine eyelids ere I sleep, and wake me with their bright forms before the dawn." The damsels were instantly profuse in their praises of some splendid pageants exhibited in honour of the Lady of Courtenaye. "' Methought," said the skilful Claudine, " I saw in my dreams a pageant that outdid them both. I saw a fair fortalice assailed by a knight who called himself L'Amour, and he flung feathers, fringes, and flounces at it, and the lady who held out the fortalice laughed him to scorn : then came another knight, naming himself La Richesse, and he flung purse after purse, and then he began to fling heavy chests at it, and still the fortalice and the lady held out bravely. Now, at the end of the pageant, came in a knight named Le Bel Estranger, and he neither summoned nor assaulted the fortress.; he bowed, and looked,
and the lady and the fortress were in his hands in a moment." The Lady Isabelle was silent; but the at¬ tendant damsels navigated instantly and skil¬ fully on the new tack indicated by Claudine. " Methinks," said Blanche, " 1 too have seen that pageant played, but not in a dream; and oh, how lovely looked Le Bel Estranger ! Is he not the absolute prince of fancy, the sovereign of the domains of valour and of beauty? How looks the Sieur de Semon¬ ville's visage to his ?—like that of a mousing owl to a soaring falcon's." " And Sir Ezzelin's gorgeous attire," quoth the other, " seemed in comparison like the mottled plumage of the pje with the dark pinion of the king of birds, the strong rider of the elements." " I am weary," said the lady;—" disarray me for rest. But thou, Claudine, be near when I sleep; I love thee well, wench, though I have not shown it hitherto. Wear this carkanet for my sake; but wear it not, I charge thee, in presence of Sir Paladour.—
Now read me my riddle once more, my maidens." As her head sunk on the silken pillow—" How may ladies sink most sweetly into their first slumber ?" " I ever sleep best," said Blanche, " when some withered crone is seated by the hearth fire to tell me tales of wizardry or goblins, till they are mingled with my dreams, and I start up, tell my beads, and pray her to go on, till I see that I am talking only to the dying embers, or the fantastic forms shaped by their flashes on the dark tapestry or darker ceiling." " And I love," said Germonda, " to be lulled to rest by tales of knights met in forests by fairy damsels, and conducted to enchanted halls, where they are assailed by foul fiends, and do battle with strong giants; and are, in fine, rewarded with the hand of the fair dame, for whom they have perilled all that knight or Christian may hold precious for the safety of body and of soul." " Peace and good rest to vou all, my dame and maidens!" said the lady in whispering
tones from her silken couch. " None of you have read my riddle. She sleeps sweetest and deepest who sleeps to dream of her first love— her first — her last — her only. A fair good night to all. Stay thou with me, Claudine, and touch thy lute, wench, to the strain of some old ditty — old and melancholy — such as may so softly usher sleep, that I feel not his downy fingers closing mine eyelids, or the stilly rush of his pinions as they sweep my brow." \ ' • : Claudine prepared to obey, as the lady sunk to rest amid softened lights, subdued odours, and dying melodies. A silver lamp, richly fretted, suspended from the raftered roof, gleamed faintly on the splendid bed. The curtains were of silk, and the coverlet of velvet, faced vvith miniver; gilded coronals and tufts of plumage shed alternate gleam and shadow over every angle of the canopy; and tapestry of silk and silver covered every compartment of the vvalls, save where the un¬ couthly constructed doors and windows broke them into angles, irreconcileable alike to every
rule of symmetry or purpose of accommoda¬ tion. Near the ample hearth, stored with blazing wood, were placed a sculptured desk, furnished with a missal and breviary gorgeously illuminated, and a black marble tripod, sup¬ porting a vase of holy water; certain amulets, too, lay on the hearth, placed there by the care of Dame Marguerite, some in the shape of relics, and others in less consecrated forms, on which the lady was often observed by her attendants io look somewhat dis- regardfully. The great door of the chamber was closed by the departing damsels carefully ; and the rich sheet of tapestry dropt over it, whose hushful sweeping on the floor seemed like the wish for a deep repose breathed from a thing inanimate. The castle was still, the silver lamp twinkled silently and dimly; the perfumes, burning in small silver vases round the chamber, began to abate their gleams and odours; the scented waters, scat¬ tered on the rushes with which the floor was strewn, flagged and failed in their delicious tribute to the sense; the bright moon, pouring
its glories through the uncurtained but richly- tinted casement, shed its borrowed hues of crimson, amber, and purple on curtain and canopy, as in defiance of the artificial light that gieamed so feebly within the chamber. Claudine tuned her lute, and murmured the rude song of a troubadour, such as follows. Sleep, noble lady I—They sleep well who sleep in warded castles. If the Count de Monfort, the champion of the church, and the strongest lance in tho chivalry of France, were your foe, as he is your friend, one hundred of the arrows of his boldest archers at their best flight would fail to reach a loophole of your towers. Sleep, noble lady I—They sleep well who are guarded by the valiant. Five hundred belted knights feast in your halls; they would not see your towers won, though to defend them they took the place of your vassals, who are tenfold that number—and, lady, I wish they were more for your sake. Valiant knights, faithful vassals, watch well your lady's slumbers; see that the^ be never broken but by the matin hell, or the sighs of lovers whispered between its tolls. Sleep, noble lady! — Your castle is strong, and the brave and the loyal are your guard. - Then the noble lady whispered to mo through her silken
curtain : * A foe hath found his way to mc, though my towcis are strong, and the valiant are my guard, and tlie brave and ilie heaiuiful uoo me in song, and with many kissings of their hands.' And I asked, what foe is that ?—The lady dropt her silken curtain, and slept; but methought in her dreams she murmured—■' Tliat Foe is Love!'
CHAPTER X, New oaths I can exactly swear, No woman under heaven I fear, And forty healths my brains will bear Most stoutly. Suckling, The next day after the arrival of the crusaders, when a brief mass had been said in the chapel, a kind of war-council was held in the great hall of the castle of Courtenaye. The Lord of Courtenaye himself {dextra frigida bello) presided at it, to accustom himself to the dreaded sight of Paladour. The deliberation was deep and anxious; it was obvious that the Aibigeois, crushed and scattered as they were, were still formidable, as a band of them had so lately, though unsuccessfully, attempted to make their way to Arragon. They might be aided by similar parties from the mountain.
fastnesses; and those who were dispersed through the cities of Languedoc might rise in support of their brethren; and thus the defeat of a feeble and unarmed outpost might operate as a signal to raise the inhabitants of the most populous and cultivated territory in France. The abbot of Normoutier and the majority were therefore for crushing all who resisted at a single blow, without mercy, hesitation, or delay; and they urged their present state of terror and weakness as the most opportune for striking such a blow, when a slight skir¬ mish on the preceding day had made their bravest bite the dust. Others urged the ex¬ pediency of tarrying till King Philip had dis¬ embroiled his affairs with King John of Eng¬ land—till the result of the Count of Toulouse's negotiation with the Pope were known —or, finally, till the arrival of Count Simon de Monfort, who, with his forces, was expected every hour; and this (as they represented) less from their need of his aid, than from their fear of offending that powerful lord, the
favourite of the Pope, the rival of his sove¬ reign, and the chosen champion of the armies of the church. During the debate, while the Lord of Courte¬ naye sat pale and balancing between the fears of having his castle deserted and the charges attendant on the protracted sojourn of the crusaders and their followers, a horn was sounded at the gate, and letters from Rome were delivered by a kneeling messenger to the bishop of Toulouse, who retired to a distant window to read them. From the moment of their perusal, the bishop sat silent and abstracted during the debate, shaking his head when appealed to, and tracing with the end of his crosier shape¬ less figures amid the rushes on the floor. At length, roused by the repeated cries of " My lord, we lack your counsel" —" My lord of Toulouse was not wont to spare in giving sharp counsel against the heretics"— " My lord of Toulouse was wont to deal with the brand, not the crosier"—" Yea," quoth the abbot of Normoutier, " for what was my
censure—let us crush them at a blow— non vi, sed scepe c&dendo" Thus urged, the bishop of Toulouse, with evident reluctance, spoke of the expediency of a brief delay. Mortified pride and disappointed passions struggled through his extorted confession, and were ob¬ viously the causes of its having been so long withheld. Yet not even under circumstances the most unfavourable did his deportment lack- dignity, or his arguments plausibility. He said, that till the pleasure of the Pope was known through the legate, now on his way to France, it were perilous to proceed further in the matter; and he added, as matter of confidence, that the legate's counsels were perchance too much under the influence of an obscure ascetic, an eremite whom men called the monk of Montcalm, who held preaching to be a better means of converting the heretics, according to the mode of the blessed St. Dominic, (founder of the order of Dominican preachers,) than the lances and swords of crusaders. " Yet let us yield," concluded the bishop, " to the will of the
holy father; thus by a timeous delay we .shall win his approbation, and avoid all shadow of offence to the champion of the church, the valiant Simon de Monfort, who might grudge to see the harvest reaped to his hand, before he had put in his own sickle. And we will also relieve our noble host from the fear of having his towers besieged by the heretics; for, ere three days elapse, the warder's horn shall blow a blast from his highest battlement, as he descries the advancing army of Simon de Monfort; and that blast will be echoed by the trumpets of the champion of the church, with all his famed and fair array glittering on the mountains that tower and frown through yonder casement." • Loud and deep murmurs were heard in the hall at the bishop's words, though all, from their knowledge of his warlike, ambitious, and impetuous character, felt they were extorted. Some exclaimed they were betrayed; some that they were deceived and dishonoured; and the rest, indignant alike and weary of the perpetual vacillations and compromising
spirit of the papal councils, swore they never would clasp gorget or draw brand again while a sort of halting priests, whose missives might be months in reaching them, were to determine on the chance of blows that must be struck within the hour, and their echo never heard in the Vatican. ' The tumult of voices and of passions rose and raged louder and fiercer every moment, while the Lord of Courtenaye trembled, and the ecclesiastics attempted to mediate in vain. " Hot lords," exclaimtd the one party, " be more restrained; is it thus ye show your reverence for holy church, whose champions ye vaunt to be, by defying the authority of its holy head in the teeth of his own missives ?" " Craven knights, recreant crusaders," re¬ torted the others, " we best show our regard for the interests of the church when we defend them at peril of our lives, even though its head seems to have forgotten them." The abbot of Normoutier, meanwhile, whose voice had little weight in the assembly, but who appeared in full costume of crosier, ring,
and mitre, raised his weary eyes often to the windows; and, as he saw the shadows fall far eastward, wondered how men could waste time in wild debate while the meats were cooling; and felt disposed to answer those who occa¬ sionally sought his opinion (more from defer¬ ence to his rank than his judgment) somewhat in the style of the honest priest in the * Fop's Fortune,' — " In truth, unless some one be married presently, dinner will be cold, and then—nobody will be able to eat it:"—while the bishop of Toulouse, who had his own reasons for keeping on terms with the court of Rome, and yet felt deeply the personal indignity of being held dependent on the counsels of the legate, governed, as he ad¬ mitted they were, by an ascetic monk whom he affected to despise, sat indignant* and sullen, enjoying the storm that gathered and growled around him, and deeming the hour was not far distant when he might grasp its collected thunders in his hand, and, while they rocked the towers of the Vatican, make
the roar rebellow through every court in Europe. The debate had now reached a pitch of wrath and fury, when the sound of horns was once more heard at the gates of the castle; and the crusaders, like steeds reined up and foaming for battle, (who, at the sound of the trumpet, stand for a moment with ears erect and eyes on flame, arching their noble necks and champing their bits,) paused, fretted and impatient for the tidings. They had long to wait for them, and fiercely their impatience brooked the delay; while a wearied horseman rode slowly into the castle- yard, and, seeking the hall with the heavy step of one toil-worn and foredone, his steel sandals making heavy measure to his tread along the paved passages, after he was re¬ freshed with a deep draught, told for truth the certain tidings of the arrival of Count Raymond of Toulouse in France: but whether he was content to sit down with the spoliation of his domains and the dispersion of his vassalage,
or to rise in aid and rescue of both, the nar¬ rator knew not. The effect of this intelligence on the as¬ sembly, divided as they were, was single and simultaneous. All, in spite of his vacillating character and compromising spirit, dreaded the power and presence, the exhaustless re¬ sources, and undiminished popularity of Ray¬ mond of Toulouse;— reconciled to, or at feud with, the Pope, they felt his presence was equally formidable to them; and at the tidings the loudest became silent, and the boldest were awed. Some apprehensions too, accord¬ ing to the superstitions of the age, were mingled with their dread of the recent in¬ telligence,— for all believed Raymond of Toulouse held communication with infernal powers, and forbidden arts as a heretic; and those who had most fiercely urged the neces¬ sity of immediately exterminating the heretics, began to wish for further delay in the matter, till the legate's pleasure were known; and even accused themselves of bringing, by their irre- VOL. I. n
verent language used against the Pope, a judgment on the land in the return of Count Raymond, — an impression which, it must be acknowledged, the ecclesiastics took no parti¬ cular pains to efface. Meanwhile, Sir Paladour mused on his meeting with the stranger on the heath, and deemed it was not impossible that Count Ray¬ mond and he had met before, though under circumstances so strange and shadowy that they now crossed his memory like a dream: while the Lord of Courtenaye, weary of a debate where he had no share, and of a scene where he sustained no part of dignity, seized the first moment of tranquillity to command the doors of the banqueting hall to be thrown open: the seneschal, with his silver wand, advanced; the pages and sewers stood in prompt attendance; and Paladour, forgetting the past, and compromising for the dreaded future, felt his whole frame thrill with deli¬ cious tremblings, as the order was obeyed. The lights, the luxuries, and the splendour of
the banquet, — splendid as that age of feudal power could invent or furnish, made strong contrast to the gloomy hall — the fierce and protracted debate—the interchanged pledges of mortal defiance — and, finally, the tidings that spread doubt and consternation among them all. It was a proud and yet softening sight, to see how the most fierce and evil passions that can disturb the frame and agitate the mind of man, even when those frames are as adamant, and those minds fit tenants for such mansions, bowed and .humbled themselves in the presence of female beauty. As the knights crowded into the banquet hall, " the might, the majesty of loveliness," displayed in the form, the array, and the lofty courtesy of the Lady Isabelle, hushed every ruder sound, and dispelled every fiercer feeling. Men forgot they were , foes while they looked at her; and those who had not felt enmity, wondered it could ever be felt on earth while such a being.trod its surface. The command of her uncle had summoned her again to the banquet; but, from the splen- N 2
dour of her habit, her damsels guessed that the command was not reluctantly obeyed: and as the crusaders filled the hall, she bowed with such lofty submission —she greeted with such gentle stateliness — her lovely swan-like neck vvas curved with such majestic yet win¬ ning undulation — her sunny eyes flashed such brilliant yet chastened light on all who bowed within the sphere of their radiance — that the elder knights, like Priam's counsellors on another occasion, swore, that a ten years' crusade were better waged in the cause of such beauty, than against the rascaille Aibigeois for a day;—while the younger testified their devotion by swearing certain fantastical vows, which the lady annulled as soon as they were uttered, and smiled in gay disdain on those who imagined she could ever be plaintiff or defendant in the court of les arrets (Tumour. The knights then flung themselves on the rushes and tapestry at the lady's feet, and sought her attention by modes of courtship, so long exploded, that the tale would be tedious to modern ears. In that vast assembly there
were but two individuals vvho beheld the proud sight of power, rank, and valour, prostrate at the feet of beauty, with indifference or with reluctance. The Lord of Courtenaye, who murmured to himself, — "While that witch can spell within her circle of beauty all that is noble and valiant in France, these towers may defy the fiery arrow; but ------ " in invo¬ luntary agony he clenched his hands, then instantly, with strong effort unclasping them, extended them with a graceful action of hos¬ pitality towards his guests, as he seated him¬ self at the board end.—And the abbot of Nor¬ moutier, who, puffing in the rear, and telling his beads, repeated incessantly, — " Oh for the quiet of mine abbey, where vigils, matins, vespers, nocturns, and lauds, were not more duly observed than the hours of refection and rest, or indeed so well attended ! Our Lady speed me in safety from these warlike counsels, or rather counsel-like wars, where men have no appetite but for cold steel, which would clean spoil both appetite and digestion with me. Good fellow, I pray thee, break up that
pasty! —nay, stand not on bowing and tarry¬ ing for sewer or carver; I am an humble churchman, and bound to take with gratitude the bounty of the founder. Ha! before God, an excellent and well-devised condiment- somewhat overdone though. Holy St. Bruno!" — he exclaimed, after having dealt with the pasty, wiping his beard with a napkin, and looking round on the younger knights—" Holy St. Bruno ! what fools men be ! after a day of fasting that would have tried the stomach of b friar of Gamaldoli,* and an uproar that would have silenced a conclave of Cardinals or a synod of Dominican preachers, even with the wind in their favour, — with good cheer before them, these youths turn from it to be eye-fed on a woman's favour. — A cup of wine, I pray thee! —stint not till I bid thee; my tongue cleaves to my palate with ruling the stormy counsels of this day; —fill it again, I tell thee!—uttering much wisdom hath made me thirsty, and commanding those enchafed spirits
hath so chafed my blood, that it will require more than that flagon to cool it." Paladour, who had mingled among the crowd of the crusaders, placed himself near the entrance of the hall, to observe the effect that his presence might produce on the Lord of Courtenaye, — many motives mingling in his'purpose; and, perhaps, the most powerful being that of discovering the secret of his destiny by some look, word, or movement; for those who, like him, are mysteriously wretched, place a wretched dependence on mystery for its development. So he stood near the door-way, when the cry of the pages, who bore cushions for the seat and footstool of their lord, was heard, — " On before my masters! — on before! — room for the Lord of Courtenaye!" At that moment Sir Paladour stood almost beside him, erect, lofty, and fixing on him eyes whose expression could neither be shunned nor mistaken. The Lord of Courtenaye had evidently screwed not only his courage but his countenance to the sticking place; for he passed Sir Paladcur with a
graceful wave of his hand and a smile some¬ what livid, and instantly hastened forward. At that moment the bright vision of the Lady Isabelle rose on his view ; and almost cursing the stormy clouds that, for ever crossing his soul, hid from it that lovely light, he vvas about to approach her where she sat, when seeing her so splendid in her array, and so gallantly attended by kneeling knights, that the floor seemed carpeted around her by glittering and graceful figures, — a feeling of pride and diffidence struggled in his breast, and almost suspended his respiration, while it gave added lustre to the burning hue of his cheek and the dark glory of his full and flashing eye. It is certain that love, in its first opera¬ tions/is very unskilful, and even self-frustrating; — the splendour by which Isabelle believed she might excite her lover, repelled and even offended him ; and the diflidence which is the strongest proof of masculine devotion, appeared to her like the effect of indifference or disdain. Thus they remained, with eyes averted, speech suppressed, and hearts burn-
'ing for the communion which pride withheld each from seeking. Sir Paladour shrunk back among the crowd of guests, and again he felt his shoulder touched by old Sir Aymer, and his ear assailed by his rough but well-meant jocularity. "What! thou art equipped then, eap-a-pied? —Look to thy doublet; an' mine do not prove it a recreant, there is no faith in satin. Lo, yonder is the Venus of this mortal sphere!—but your schoolmen tell us your Venus had a hankering after a senior called Anchises. Look to thyself." " I am not in the mood for jest," said Pala¬ dour, who felt the mingled irritation of habitual melancholy, and incipient, though almost un¬ conscious, jealousy. " I pray thee, who are those who press so boldly around the lady ? Methinks I have seen them before, though not flung on rushes at the feet of beauty, and glistening in broidered cloaks and doublets of tissue ?" " The chief of them," said Sir Aymer, " are Sir Ezzelin de Verac and the Sieur de Semon¬ ville, both inveterate suitors of the Lady Isa- n 5
belle. Were a herald to blazon them, he would tell thee they were men of puissance, birth, and valour; but 7* tell thee they are fools — yea, fools of the first head. He who hath seated himself on the cushion at the lady's feet, is a knight, sir, of carpet and tapestry; marry, he was engendered of silk and velvet, and holdeth high respect to his parents, but heforgetteth his maker—a tailor! He kisseth his hand to the mere dissolution of his fingers; and for their resurrection let his next mistress answer, or furnish him at her own expense. His hose and doublet are of such orthodox cut, that he may defy the inquisition even of St. Dominic, unless some Italian minion of the new legate, fulhof fresh-imported vanities, pronounce it heresy; then will he straight doff his apparel, and thou shalt see him a true convertite to the creeds of gallantry newly devised in a conclave of the coxcombs of Verona or Genoa. For thy further de¬ spair, know, thou man of ^misery, that his tags .are of silver gilt, and his pantoffles (I tell thee j in sad,and solemn secrecy) studded with pearl
and braided with gold. I bribed his page for the tidings, that I might overwhelm thee withal." " These are fearful odds," said Paladour, smiling; " yet this Sir Vanity hath valour withal. He did good service at the siege of Andely; and I saw him make into the thick of our bloody feast but yesterday." " Tush ! tell not me of valour!—what care I for courageous coxcombry, or, at the best, coxcombical courage? He flourished his brand in pure vanity, as if it were a Jady's favour. Tell not me of the valour of one who, if you hold talk with him of a field, turns on you with, ' Sir, I was not supervacaneous in that hostium congressu :' —' Sir, at the spoliation of that caktellum, I wore as a favour a glove bestowed on me by the noblest hand in France — I nominate not Queen Ingelberg—marry, fie on my precipitant precocity, or rather preco¬ cious precipitancy!'" " Does he dare," said Paladour, vvith kindling eye and cheek, " to boast of favours received from the Lady Isabelle ?"
" Tush! he never lies under a queen or a princess—hold thee content; then will he say of a field where he bore himself right valiantly, * Yea, sir, I was there, and wore that day my lilac scarf purfled with gold; I may not say whose fair fingers wove and wound it around me.' And thus he talketh—number¬ ing his battles and sieges by the plumes and trinketry he was arrayed in; and deeming more of the feathers in his crest than of the banners he rends from besieged battlements __ and of the hue Of the scarf he wears, than of how blazed the red and gold of the oriflamme of France, when her chivalry fought round it only to bleed and die." " Yet he did good service at that fearful and prolonged siege," said Sir Paiadour.- " So did that figure," said Sir Aymer, point¬ ing to De Semonville, " who looketh as if he were carved out of a trencher, and the instru¬ ment had been a wooden knife: but, by Corpus, though he looks all wood, it is touchwood; he will be quarrelling, though it were .with his shadow; and men say they will not walk with
him of a sunny day therefore. Every man hath something great to which he is born, and the genius of the Sieur de Semonville inclineth him most especially—to kicking. He keepeth dogs, not to course vvith, but to kick; he kicks his pages if his points be not well trussed — his chaplain, if he be over-long at mass — his sewer, if he break not up a capon handsomely. He is a Herod — a very Herod. He will deflower a scullion's lockram, rend a menial's doublet in twain, pluck a herald's tabard over his shoulders if his trumpet rung too loudly in his ears;—and should he wed the Lady Isabelle, let her set her carkanet aright, or look to her white throat, lest it be twisted on her shoulders." " And these are my rivals 1" said Paladour mentally—" a coxcomb and a fool—a peevish fool!" " Why, what the devil standest thou mut¬ tering here for?" cried Sir Aymer; " advance — approach the lady; thy sight will not make her swoon as it did her kinsman last night. Udsfoot! to see the boys of this age !—they
lack liver, blood, heart, and vitals; they are excuterated. Wert thou my son, and thy mother the chastest dame in France, I would pronounce thee bastard. Were I like thee, I would ere this have seized her white hand, assaulted her lip, carried by storm or mine her heart, body, and soul, and made the fortalice surrender .ere it knew whose trumpet summoned it; on—on, I say, thou recreant!" " I'care not to contend with fops and fools," said Paladour, retreating proudly. " Now, by Heaven," cried Sir Aymer, " thou exceedest in thy folly even that Amirald, who shuns these towers because he was a page here and had a quarrel with his lord; — on, to the lady, I say! Hear the language in which her suitors woo her; and if thine make not better music in her ear ------ He heeds me no more than I would one of mine own age, were I of his. How opinionated and singular the boys of this age have grown !" " Urge me not thus,"said Paladour dejectedly; " they are men, as thou saidst, of puissance, birth and blood, rich revenue and noble de-
scent. What am I?—a landless knight, and nameless — birth, descent, alliance, all un¬ known." " All the better," quoth Sir Aymer; " the lady can imagine them—she can trace thee up to Charlemagne, or King Arthur of Britain— him of Elfland ; on, on, I say! by Heaven, she hath sent a lure to thee twice; she hath glanced in thy direction—dropped her ker¬ chief—her fan, and received them with an absent negligence. Again she looks in thy direction ------" " With a negligent disdain," said Paladour. " God's wounds!" exclaimed the incensed knight, " with a disdain of thy negligence, thou meanest. Wert thou of another sex, St. Francis might have spared his wife of snow — thou wouldst have quenched him in a twinkling. Wilt thou yet approach the lady?—Death, that boys can thus brave a thousand men in the field, and shrink before a single female — a thing made of silks and smiles, paintings, pouncings, fopperies, fooleries, treacheries, and heartlessness!"
" And why dost thou push me on such a shore ?" said Paladour, forcing a smile as he advanced. ' "To see thee wrecked—that is all,"—whis¬ pered Sir Aymer. " Now listen how those fools are beating about the rocks: if thou utter not better reasons to the lady's ear and taste, I hold thee no better than------" " But where must I place me ?" said Pala¬ dour, hesitating, but still advancing. " Why, curse thee ! beside the lady's chair : marry, show thine arm as thou leanest on the drapery — it is well formed, and may prevail. Doff thy cap; those curled locks win faster on women'? hearts than barrets of velvet, and feathers set in aigrets of diamond. Now mark what folly her suitors talk!" " Oh, that I could utter even such folly!" said Paladour, " since it seems to win her ear." ' 11 On, then!" whispered Sir Aymer; " a woman's presence^ hath ever a marvellous power in inspiring men to talk folly —and act it too."
Thus urged, Paladour approached. The Lady Isabelle, who, wearied, mortified, and displeased at his apparent neglect, was listen¬ ing with an air of vacancy to her wooers, at this motion raised her head; the attendant damsels interchanged smiles behind the ample drapery of her chair of state, on which they leaned; the fan of feathers, borne by Dame Marguerite, moved in piu presto time; and Sir Ezzelin, who mistook the signal, pursued his courtship to the lady " in good set terms," according to the fashion of his time, being all as allegorical as John Bunyan, as " affectioned an ass" as Malvolio, and as unintelligible as most love-makers by profession have been from the year 1216 to that of 1823; six hundred years'' grace being quite insufficient to restore them to a solvency of sense. " Sir knight," said he, briefly recognising Paladour as his compeer at the siege of Andely, " encroach not on the sad hours of a pilgrim who is now journeying from the shrine of mercy* (a phrase well understood in those days) " to the'valley of Malcontent. There the pilgrim wandereth,
failing of the shrine his vows were addressed to; and there is he committed as a captive to the custody of cruel jailors, whose names be disappointed hope, defeated desire, darkful doubt, and carking care. Anon, they have their prisoner to a dungeon where his food is Jel, his atmosphere suspiria, his drink lachry- true, and his companionship the thereon-sequent amaritude of all discomfortable thoughts." " Now," said the Sieur de Semonville in¬ ternally, as he sat on his bench in the perfect perpendicularity of supreme awkwardness-— " now, would I might be hanged if I could utter such a charm to my dogs when a witch crosses me in coursing; marry, I'll beg it of him, and try it with the rats, that do griev¬ ously, as it were, infest my castle of Semon¬ ville ; my grandame's spell against them i$ not worth—but I stifle its value for good manners' sake." (Ail this was said sot to voce, and nei¬ ther De Semonville nor his hearers were a whit wiser.) " It is a dear happiness to ladies," said Isabelle, flinging back all the glories of her
sunny eyes, and winding her swan-like neck towards her maidens as they bowed forward— " it is a dear happiness to hear the praise of their beauty in terms they cannot understand, and to be wooed in a tongue they cannot answer in. Sir knight of the bloody cross," she continued, averting her eyes, and speaking as if she addressed an absent person, " how, I pray thee, wooest thou thy lady-love ?" " I scarcely know," said Paladour, quivering in every limb, through which her accents thrilled ; (t if she understood not the language of mine eyes, I know none other in which I dare address her with such force, such fervency, such deep and burning devotion." " But it might be that the lady skilled not in such language," said Isabelle; " how, then, wouldst thou fare ?" " That is impossible," said Paladour, who felt, as he spoke, inspired and carried beyond himself; " her eyes were formed only to breathe of love, to talk of love, and to inspire love. Nor could she fail of an interpreter, when all that those love-lit eyes could tell
lacked but the interpreter of her lips. • Nay, by Heaven, her eyes, were they but once turned on me, would have' lacked no interpreter; for never did such light burn in mortal orbs— never did such beams pierce mortal bosom." " She must be wondrous fair," said Isabelle pensively;—" was it for her beauty's sake that the achievement was wrought which hath placed thee among the first and fairest in fame of Christian chivalry?" " I had not seen her then," said Paladour, " or — but I will not boast — since I have be¬ held her, there is nought that mortal may dare that I would not undergo —yea, accomplish— save the desperate task — to tell her that I love." " And how shall the lady then apprehend thy love, sir knight ?" answered Isabelle, with averted eyes, and subdued but most expressive voice. " If," said Paladour, " she feels it not from my deep and reverential silence—from the dew that gathers on my brow when I sec ber — from the delicious trembling that deprives me
of all power when I approach her —from my hatred of those I loved the dearest — my loathing of food — my willingness not to sleep, but to dream —my inaptitude to all warlike exercise — from my fierce indolence, impatient, yet melancholy, hating the voice of men, even of my best-loved and heart-cherished friend, yet crouching to catch a woman's whispers, though it were her meanest dar-isel's — from my fearful indifference even to Heaven, as, while I bow to the image of the Virgin, but utter another name — if from my wild¬ ness, worthlessness, irritation, and melancholy, she knows it not, —then am I the most ill- starred of lovers, and she of ladies the most insensate." " 0 no, she is not /" said the Lady Isabelle half internally, and dropping her veil between her and Paladour.—But these whispered words, which he would almost have given his life to hear, were drowned in the blasts of the warders' horns that rung out from every turret of the castle; not in that heavy tone that announced the approach of the weary messenger from
THE ALBIGENSES.
Rome, but with that loud and lively blast that harbingers a distinguished guest. These sounds were soon echoed distantly, but distinctly, by the trumpets of the party whose approach the warders had descried. The hall was hushed, and listening, " It is the trumpet of the heretics, that seek to treat for ransom of prisoners," said Sir Aymer, laughing; " hast thou many to yield them, Lord of Courtenaye?" " Methinks it is the trumpet of the legate," muttered the abbot. " Pray Heaven the ascetic monk comes not with him; then will the viands and flagons disappear in a twinkling.—Page, fill my goblet ere the worst befall — higher — fuller, I say! By Saint Benedict, one would think the monk of Montcalm himself were measuring my draught!" '" It is the trumpet of Count Simon de Monfort," said the bishop of Toulouse; "I know its sound." Another moment removed all doubt: the jarring and creaking of the ponderous draw¬ bridge as it was lowered, the hollow tramp of
the men-at-arms, and the ringing hoofs of the steeds of mounted knights, as the former pranced and curvetted over its sounding arch, were blended not unmeetly with the re-echoing horns, blown shriller and louder as the object of their salutation approached, with the trum¬ pets of the heralds, who advanced into the court to greet him with the high ceremonial of chivalric honour, and with those of the noble stranger's train, which were drowned in the war-cry of a thousand followers, knights, squires, and vassals, all pealing in wild and deep accordance, * Simon de Monfort— Dieu et VEglise /' The heavy tread of armed steps was heard approaching the hall — the folding doors were expanded ,to their utmost limits by the pages— marshal and minstrel, sewer and seneschal, were all in their places to perform their appro¬ priate rites of ceremony—the guests rose from their seats, and the Lord of Courtenaye was gracefully carrying the cup of wine to his lips, about to give as his pledge the health of De Monfort, when the object of all this homage
strode into the hall; and following him like skiffs in the wake of some mighty galleon, came knights and squires of noble birth, with their various trains of attendants; and, as they floated on in a tide of gorgeous and gloomy magnificence, seemed as if they entered the castle rather as conquerors than guests. The courtesy with which the company was prepared to receive the champion of the church was repelled by the uncouth and unnurtured fashion in which he made his entry. Armed from head to foot, and scanning the guests through the oars of his helmet as he would the features of a foe, he stalked to the board end of the hall, like an iron tower that was moved by some internal mechanism. Arrived there, without greeting the lord of the castle, or bowing to the lady of the feast, he flung himself on a seat, and made signs to his squires to undo his helm and gorget. While this was performing, he growled internal curses at their unskilfuluess; and, rending all asunder, flung the weighty pieces of armour on the floor, and disclosed a visage that ac-
corded with the promise of his figure. The latter was gigantic, of a clownish heavy make, but unequalled in strength; the former were coarse and inexpressive, but sometimes lit by a gleam of rude jocularity, and oftener by a glare of ruthless and savage ferocity. As he flung his helmet on the floor, his heavy' but not undiscriminating eye rested for a moment on the Lady Isabelle; and the omnipotence of female beauty received at the moment that homage of instinct which is perhaps the most powerful, as it is the most sincere. As he viewed the fair vision, the jaws of the uncourtly gazer involuntarily expanded, his cold eyes twinkled and rolled in their sockets, and his vague and savage Ifuigh indicated that species of admiration, wnich, wanting words, announces itself by a fierce and involuntary delight. This rude homage paid, the Count de Monfort began to give a glance of surly recognition at the guests. " My Lord of Monfort, we pledge you," repeated the Lord of Courtenaye, holding his goblet high. vol. i. o
" I will do you reason, Lord of Courtenaye," answered the Count; " but first let me know those who pledge me, as well as thee. Now, by my faith, that star of beauty had almost quenched my sight!—I drink to thee, Lord of Courtenaye. And whom have we here?— Ha! the lord abbot of Normoutier?—Nay, then, all the fathers have taken the field in one thick volume, and we may lay aside sword and spear, and beat out the brains of the heretics (if the Dominican preachers have left them any) with mere books. But what say the fathers to this, lord abbot?" he pursued s in a tone of rude jocularity; " where be thine authorities, thy citations and quotations, and the devil knows what?—Nay, if thou lackest motto for thy crusading banner, it shall go hard with my Latin an' I do not furnish thee with a meet one—' qui ensem capita ense peribit' " " I have thought of it," said the abbot -demurely, who sometimes blundered on a right construction; " but methought it savoured too much of carnal vanity for a churchman ; where-
fore, I pray you, cherish the motto for your¬ self." " Sinful man that I am !" said De Monfort, not heeding him, " and have I overpassed the bishop of Toulouse ?" " Champion of the church!" said the bishop, " champion of the church ! we greet you well, and give you the amplest benediction of the cause, whose noble and approved soldier you are. The warlike savage bowed his head in short reverence at these words; then raising it, and shaking back his thick and uncombed locks, " Now foul befall the meddling priests," he exclaimed, " vvho put a mitre on thy head, and a crosier in thy hand, when the one should have borne the helmet, and the other wielded the brand i" " The sword of the church," said the bishop, " is two-edged, and smiteth both ways." " I wot it well," said the rude lord; " one edge to scare the wolf, and another to shear the flock. How now, lord abbot ? Drain not thy flagon so fast! I am sore athirst; and o 2
thou, though a crusader against the heretics, wilt not on such occasion deny the cup to a lavmah ?" " By the bones of St. Benedict," said the abbot, much incensed, " a most scurril and profane jest, lepide ac facete dictum /" " And who be these," said Simon de Mon¬ fort, finishing his ample draught, " who cluster round thy board, Lord of Courtenaye?—min¬ strels or mimes, as it should seem by their holiday array. What pageant, what device, are they about to show us ? Let them forth with their foolery, that we may laugh." ' The bishop in vain plucked the mantle of the count; and the Lord of Courtenaye grew pale with terror and anger, as, gazing round, he saw Paladour's brow crimsoned to the roots of his hair, the Sieur de Semonville (who was choleric) lay his ready hand on his dagger, and even the courtly Sir Ezzelin start from the Lady Isabelle's footstool at this insolent sally. " My Lord of Monfort," said he, " you do my noble guests and me most heavy wrong; they are the best and bravest of the crusading host.
v Speak for yourselves, valiant knights; ye have perchance met the Lord of Monfort at the siege of Andely, and the battle of Bovines, and other scenes which your memories can better furnish than mine." " Noble lord," said Sir Paladour, " if my deeds speak not for me, I dare not be mine own herald." " Aye, I have heard of thee," said De Monfort, scanning him under his scowling brows; " thou wonnest knighthood by bap¬ tizing a heretic brat, whom it were better deed to have flung into the flames." - " King Philip, thy liege lord and mine, deemed not so," said Paladour with modest pride, " when he conferred on me the noble rank of knight; the which I will maintain (less for mine own sake than that of my sovereign) in the teeth of him who avouches it was lightly won or unworthily bestowed." " By the mass, a brave stripling to ruffle with pages in my lady's antichamber! Good youth, keep thy wit warm and thy steel cold," said De Monfort, with a brutal laugh. " And
who be those gay companions who seem to have dealt for their array more with the mercer than with the armourer?" — and his eye rested in scorn on the gorgeous habits of Sir Ezzelin and de Semonville, while the Lord of Courte¬ naye basted to whisper their rank and namesi " Now, by my grandame's soul P quoth Semonville, " if he pass further gibe on me, "I have a foolish dagger here, that will not long lack acquaintance with his unmannered pate." " Certes," said Sir Ezzelin, addressing the lady as if in scorn of his assailant; "certes, this rustical lord, or rather lordly rustic, resem- hleth his visage (which courtesy itself cannot term lovely) to some outlaw's hold; his eye¬ brows are the bartizans, his nose the portal tower, his upper jaw the portcullis; and when the rusty trumpet of his tongue hath sounded an alarum, out rush his words, not like a train of courtly knights, but as a sort of ruffian bandits to assail, and stab, and brawl." " We, youth," said Sir Aymer, " are better nurtured. Marry, the Lord of Monfort hath
a rude trick of the olden time—our forefathers were but a discourteous race." " Ha, old Sir Aymer," cried de Monfort recognizing him, " art thoii there ? Marry, I was much amiss not to seek for thee at the first amongst beardless chins and gaudy doublets — what, hast thou yet made peace between those near neighbouring foes, thy green head and gray beard?—never trust me an' thou lookest not among those gay and gilded youths like a roosted owl amid a cast of newly- bathed falcons with their bells and bravery on — that beard of thine waves like a scourge to whip the boy Cupid from the very chamber thou hauntest — get thee a scythe and hour¬ glass,, man, so thou mayest save the charges of a wooden figure of time for an abbey clock, or some old monument. — Thou make love to ladies! — provide thee first a bright eye, a curled head, a soft palm, and a straight back, and thou mayest yet win the grace of my lady's bower-woman to swear thee her servant on the knot of her pantoffle; for trust me, knight, even in thy better days (I should say
hine earlier), thy wit was all too unreclaimed to pounce on nobler quarry." " An' it were not less of a haggard than thine, de Monfort," said the knight laughing, but much irritated, " I would not fly it at the coif of a country wench." " But whereto tends this," cried de Monfort without heeding him — "but whereto tends this r" and he looked round with an amazed disdain. " These be crusaders that sit around me, as I guess by the crosses on their mantles, and knights of birth and valour, as our host speaks them (himself a meet judge of valour), otherwise I might have guessed them for a band of troubadours. What, am I summoned to. a battle or a banquet ? The champion of the church looked for other greeting in these towers — where be the harness clattering on the floor and the war-steeds neighing in the court,—the clasping of gorgets and the closing of helmets,—the grasping of brands and the vvielding of lances,^—and all that glorious and stirring invitation to the high-heaped feast of battle that makes a warrior of a very coward,
and turns a warrior into a host ? What,' is there an Aibigeois left in Languedoc, that the crusaders are sitting at a feast? My Lord of ' Courtenaye," he continued, > " when I reached your castle, I deemed to see it moated with'the blood of the enemies of God, and to note every knosp and pinnacle of your battle¬ ments crested with an heretic head (the best blazon they ever could boast); and now, what see I ? — a band of revellers — a masque — a pageant: by Heaven, the Pope is sore deceived in the trust he puts in these crusaders !" " Thou art deceived, unadvised lord," said the Bishop of Toulouse in a voice that stilled even the turbulent and ferocious de Monfort; " thou seest around thee men bound heart and hand, body and soul, to the service of holy church, and her warfare against her enemies. What though they be garbed in satin, they have felt the griding pressure of steel on head, breast, and body ere now; moreover, noble de Monfort," he whispered, " our hands are held for a space — the Dalilah of the Vatican hath bound the strong man — we wait for further
missives from the legate, or rather from his concubine, who hath some foolish pity on these Aibigeois, being herself a native of Languedoc. There is a monk — they call him the monk of Montcalm—an ascetic—a very Eremite—a St. Simeon Stylites, or whatever saint you please to miscall him, vvho is inward with the legate. He outpreacheth the Dominicans, worketh miracles, and doeth such tricks that I dare not quarrel with him for the value of my mitre. The legate hath employed him to win a truce between the heretics and us for a space — mark ine, for a space only. Now, in the name of Heaven, lord, since such reasons are uttered to you, restrain your free speech, and do no further offence to this fair meeting," " It is well," said de Monfort, who appeared slowly, but at length thoroughly, to apprehend the bishop's reasons; "and my hand must then be in the pasty, and not on my brand; but, mercy of Heaven, what stuff is here!" striking down with the hilt of his dagger a rich and luscious confectionai-y, as if to avenge himself on inani¬ mate things— "nsotiltye, with streamers and I
know not what devices as high as a bannered castle! — Bear it away, knave !" to the sewer. " My noble guest," said the Lord of Cour¬ tenaye, " there are more solid viands at hand." " Look that there be," said de Monfort rudely to the attendants, without regarding his host; " meanwhile fill me a cup of wine, and break up that pasty (that seems as if it held venison) to prepare the way for my next draught." By this time the Lady Isabelle, shrinking alike from this gross excess and obvious negli¬ gence of her rank and sex, rose with her female attendants to quit the banquet-hall, polluted by the presence of the brutal lord and his companions, who were fast following his example in insolence and licentiousness. " Stay, lady, stay!" cried de Monfort as he saw her preparing to retire; " what, flying without news from the courts?—how queen Ingelberg sets her hood, and how many gems her girdle is studded withal — meet tidings for fair dames when uttered by courtier-lips like mine!"
" We will hear the court-tidings at our better leisure," said the Lady Isabelle with the dignity, of offended beauty, " and we trust your ample draughts of Malvoisie will not have washed such precious matter from your brains ere the morning." " Marry! my tidings from the court will brook no such delay," said the stern lord, ex¬ alting his voice to a pitch the ears of the proud beauty were ill accustomed to —" I bear a message from King Philip, which matters of higher import had swept from my remem¬ brance." He rose with fierce action from his seat, and while the Lady Isabelle, terrified and incensed, stood pale and proud, averting her looks, but delaying her departure — " Lady of Courtenaye and Beaurevoir," he cried, " I come to claim thee as the ward of King Philip. He hath vowed thine hand to the Lord of Auberval; and if his lands be not broad as thine, or his coffers filled like yon ample chests," (here the Lord of Courtenaye cast a look of speechless agony on the chests
that then formed the principal furniture of feudal mansions, and which in the hall' of Courtenaye were loaded with plate, gems, and coin, so as almost to be immoveable), " I pledged word, oath, and fealty, to deliver the royal hest, and five hundred of my knights and men-at-arms shall be thine escort to" the court of King Philip, though their absence cost me to spare the live3 of thrice that number of here¬ tics — a debt which this good arm and brand shall soon redeem," and he brandished the former as he spoke: " meanwhile," he added, crossing the hall, " let me hail the future bride of the Lord of Auberval." The spirit of her high-descended race glowed on the cheek and lit the eye of the noble maiden, as, withdrawing her hand from his touch, she exclaimed, with a strong but an ill- timed allusion to the masculine and martial propensities of certain females of the count's family, " The dames of the house of de Mon¬ fort may be won, like the Amazons of old, by him who can deal the heaviest blows; but the ladies of Courtenaye are to be won by other
suitors, and in different wise from those who claim them as tributes to their liege lord." Neither the incensed looks which the younger knights exchanged as they half rose from their seats, nor the majesty of insulted and trembling beauty, touched the fierce spirit of de Monfort " For my dame," he said with a hoarse laugh, " I grant she can furbish a corslet, and even wield a brand at need —good gifts in times like these; but for thee, thou gaudy, delicate, dis¬ dainful toy, what must I say to thee? This only —yield thee to the will of King Philip, whose ward thou art, and think nc; to strive with me. Will thy skirt of tissue prove a fence against a royal mandate, or thy braided tresses man thy towers when the boldest of thy warders would tremble at the summons of the royal trumpet ? Nay, dry thine eyes, lady — I promise thee a bridegroom noble and valiant — the minion of the king — the very Hylas of our royal Hercu¬ les, as our school-bred courtiers phrase him; what would woman in all her fantastic cupidity, all her minstrel-taught visionry of loving
days and livelong nights, desire beyond such offer?" " Her liberty," answered the lady with a voice of power that made her persecutor start at the spirit he had raised. " Her liberty ■— that liberty granted to the meanest cottage- dame whose locks are hid by the coif, hot bound by the coronal — the liberty which I would give to the daughter of the meanest serf vvho lives under the shadow of the towers of Courtenaye, to choose or reject her humble partner. And shall such privilege be denied to the daughter of the lordly line of Beaurevoir and Courtenaye?"—and the pride and spirit of her ancestry (the proudest of their day) seemed to dilate her form, and inspire her looks as she spoke. " Thou knowest the law, or rather the will of the king," said de Monfort doggedly; " thy hand, person, and ample dower, are all at his dispose, or thou must redeem the pledge per¬ chance at the price of half thy lands. The wars against these heretics have deeply drained the royal coffers; our liege hath also to watch the
movements of King John of England; and other matters, which may not be told to a lady's ear, have made King Philip willing to transfer some of the heavy chests that cumber this hall to make easy seats for,his favourites at Paris." " Lord of Monfort!" said the Lady Isabelle with that high-wrought energy of look, voice, and resolve, which, thougli originating in fear, has in woman all the effect of courage, " Lord of Monfort! Bear back my greetings to the king, and tell him thus, as thou art true knight — let him take lands and living, towers and towns —■ despoil my domains and enslave my vassals; and then let him despair of bending to his will the spirit of Isabelle of Courtenaye, nor deem that her hand and her heart shall ever be bestowed but upon him she deems worthy of them, without consulting prince or peasant on the bequest." " Haughty terms and proud," said de Mon¬ fort] biting his lip till the blood came to curb his mood, " from a ward to her guardian and her sovereign!"
.THE " Say," cried Isabelle, sinking on her chair of state that trembled vvith her emotion — " say from a persecuted but not powerless female to her oppressor." A murmur, like a rising storm, began to stir and gather through the banquet-hall. The crusaders, who had been prepared to behold de Monfort with veneration, as the champion of the church and their leader, and to greet him with deference, as a peer of France and a warrior of fame, felt both claims dissolved by his insulting and brutal bearing towards a lady. The Lord of Courtenaye could brook his agony no longer. " Fair niece," he said, " I pray you consi¬ der you are a royal ward. I see how the matter goes," he exclaimed, encountering the eloquent flash of her dark eyes; " castle, towers, and cities claimed by King Philip, and the well-filled coffers fleeting, as if they had wings, into the pouch of some velvet-clad minion of the court. Fair niece, relent, and save thee from confiscation, spoliation, and the fiend knows what other terms the time
may devise for divesting thee of land and seignory, worship, and wealth, and suitors." " Nay, not suitors," said de Monfort; " deemest thou not that were thy queenly dower diminished to the value of a vassal's ransom, thy lover would not still woo thee for thy fair beauty's sake, Lady Isabelle?"—and " his voice assumed a kind of reluctant softness as he gazed on her. " Tell such a wooer," said the lady, now in extremity between her dastard kinsman and his fierce guest — "' tell him that his unknightly persecution will-leave his bride landless, dower- less, and houseless, ere she wed him; tell him, moreover, that I am homely, disfeatured, unnurtured as a peasant maiden, ungracious to sight as a leper, or a dwarf hired to make mirth for menials. See — see if I am not P and w T ith that mixture of terror and pride that predominates in the female mind even in ex¬ tremes, she raised her veil, and displayed the resplendence of her unequalled beauty, at the moment she required to be described as an object of deformity.
This effort cost her much; for, repeating her last words, she drew her veil over her face, gasped for breath beneath its folds, and while her high heart denied her the relief of a tear, she felt as if she could have given the world to shed one, if it could be concealed. She did not swoon, nor did she weep, but a choked and tremulous sob indicated the effort she made, and how much that effort cost her. The murmur deepened in the hall. The voice of admiration and pity was heard in many a mingled tone. The female attendants col¬ lected round the lady, and dame Margueritej officiously removing her veil, muttered — " An' that Lord of Monfort be fit for better than to play the Selvaggio in a masque, or the devil in a mystery play, I am no true maiden!" As she spoke, she eagerly rent away veil, wimple, and kerchief, which her lady as eagerly replaced; but in the moment that intervened, the beauty of the noble maiden, agitated, dishevelled, and suddenly exposed, touchod even the savage de Monfort. He " grumbled pity," and muttered half
inwardly, "By the rood, an' I had deemed the lady would have brooked the tidings so ill, King Philip should have chosen other messen¬ ger!" He added in a voice as if he wished to give consolation, but knew not how — " That the lady might yet at a desperate chance redeem her person from the royal claim, with¬ out the risk of land or wealth; and that had he been her champion, he would have saved her and her dower for the splinter of a spear, or her fair beauty's sake." " We thank you," said the lady, recovering breath and speech by a strong effort, " we thank you for valuing our beauty and the splinter of a spear alike; at the same rate as the latter, do we hold the Lord of Monfort's courtesy. But thou seem'st to speak of a way of deliverance; if such may be found, and we with honour may accept it, we are willing to hear it, even from the unwelcome deliverer of King Philip's behest." . " Marry ! I know not well how to make my discourse pleasing to ladies' ears," said de Monfort, rocking himself on the bench where
he sat; " but if a noble bridegroom and all courtly delights do thy fantasy such offence, there is a way of deliverance, as thou termest it, though scarce any may undertake that way with¬ out certain peril, or accomplish it without loss of life." It was said, that at these words certain of the knights who surrounded the chair of the lady recoiled. Perchance, her declaration that she would forfeit land and dower ere she would bow to the will of King Philip had been but cold fuel to the flame of their passion ; and the condition of added mortal peril in her cause was, in ordinary estimation, not likely to rekindle it to a blaze. The Count de Monfort went on — " Thy chance, I fear, is desperate, lady; but to the tears of beauty I will not refuse to tell it, desperate though it be. As I parted from King Philip he said, as it 1 were jestingly, 'Thou wilt find that fortalice guarded by many a strong warder — see thou do thy devoir if my hest be disputed;' and I, answer¬ ing him in the same humour of mirth, replied, ( My liege, I will forfeit my head, if among the suitors that besiege the castle of Courtenaye
and its fair wardress, there be one who in tilt and tourney can unhorse me, or draw blood from between the joints of mine harness.' If such champion may be found among thy gilded wooers, summon him, lady, in God's name, to aid thine appeal, and here lies my gage;" and as he spoke, he flung down his glove of mail on the floor with a force that made the hall resound, and the Lord of Cour¬ tenaye rock and quiver in his chair of state. " Gage for gage !" cried the Lady Isabelle, flinging down her glove of silk with despe¬ rate courage ■—■" Gage for gage!" — the fall ' of the soft light glove caused no sound, like the clank of de Monfort's heavy gauntlet; but ere the echo of the former had ceased, Sir Paladour had seized it, and brandishing it at de Monfort, announced his acceptance of the challenge, " if the lady deigned to accept such champion of her right," — and he |>owed with blushing and deferential awe to the fair being for whom he was perilling fame and life. " Valiant knight," said the lady, her cheek
glowing with a hue, and her form dilating to a grandeur more than mortal, as she saw the chosen of her heart, the first and boldest assertor of her rights—" Valiant knight, I accept thee for my champion, and God and our Lady nerve thine arm to strike in the right of the defenceless and persecuted ! Mean¬ while, take and wear this favour for my sake; and may it prove a shirt of mail to a breast so bold and true!" And detaching an embroi¬ dered scarf from her ivory shoulders, she flung it round those of her kneeling champion.— Long before this action of the lady,' the knights had started from their trance, and a hundred voices claimed the combat in the cause of the Lady Isabelle. " Come on — come all!" exclaimed their giant-like antagonist, with a savage but gleeful shout of defiance—tossing his huge arms like the branches of an oak in a storm — " Mass! it were mere sport to encounter scores of such velvet bodies and heads of feather! I will requite their new fence vvith certain convincing touches of the old discipline of tourney — I
shall be but half-breathed to encounter a hun¬ dred of such in the career, and toss them about like tennis-balls — mine health lacks such exercise. An' the court of the castle be not strewed to-morrow with scarfs and sur¬ coats, plumes and favours, like a tapestried floor, or the path of a royal pageant, say there is no true manhood left in France." " A boon, a boon, my Lord of Monfort!" cried the Lady Isabelle, in a voice whose wonted tone of imperious gaiety was exchanged for one of anxious supplication. " And of what boon may not so fair a suitor be assured ?"' said de Monfort, involun¬ tarily softened. " I claim as a boon," said the lady, " that your combat in the encounter to-morrow be the combat of Courtesy, not the bloody and mortal fight a. I'Outrance." And she added, with a delicate and venial dissimu¬ lation, " Heaven forefend that the noble blood which should be cherished for tbe cause of holy church, were spent in the cause of a woman!"
" Thou wouldst have found thy boon hard to win," muttered De Monfort, " could I have guessed its purport. Ho, minion!" he added, in.,a tone of furious disappointment, to his page, striking at,the lady's glove rudely with his foot, " take up that toy, hang it on some pillar in the castle-court, and let him that dreads to die shun to touch it with his lance to-morrow.—Lady, I doubt that this fence will prove sufficient barrier — for how, in the combat of courtesy that thou hast claimed, can blood be drawn from betwixt the joints of my mail? otherwise, my grant is bootless as thy boon vvas trivial." " I put. my trust in Heaven," replied the trembling beauty, raising her eyes upward — a motion instantly followed by her attendants, who devoutly crossed themselves, uttering prayers to every saint for their lady's rescue. " For thee, boy," said De Monfort to Pala¬ dour, ," I will turn<pedagogue to thy vanity; and so whip this humour of valour out of thee, ( VOL, i. p
that thou shalt turn as pale at the sight of a lady's favour as thou wouldst at the array of a bannered host." " The hue of death must be on my cheek," said Paladour, " ere it turn pale at the voice of defenceless beauty, or the stirring summons to battle; — for the former, I need no instinct as man—for the latter, I lack no spirit as knight — yea, knight I say, and warrior, approved in a field where thou foughtest not," he exclaimed, maddening at the sight of De Monfort's cold and savage sneer. De Monfort sat amazed, if not awed, by tbe power of a voice that pealed round the hall, like' "a trumpet with a silver sound ;" he set down his untasted cup r in which he had been pledging the abbot of Normoutier, and looked as if expecting the silent defiance he vvas about to meet. Sir Paladour, after again kissing the scarf which the lady had bestowed on him, and then proudly, replacing it on hi& shoulders,
crossed the hall, and stood full opposed to De Monfort, front to front, breast to breast, and eye to eye; for the Count had risen frofn his seat, and met tbis mute challenge Of physical strength, by confronting the frame of an Atlas with that of an Aritinous. Neither of them spoke -*■ their eyes only darkly flashing, and deeply fixed on each other, uttered a language more than audible— for it was felt by the spectators — by the latter the issue of the combat Was already anticipated, as they surveyed the contrasted figures of the champidns, who still stood measuring each other with looks of mortal defiance. " Here break we off," said Sir Aymer, who dreaded the further incensemeiit of such proud and fiery spirits—" and, lady, I will hold myself honoured as a self-chosen marshal of the combat of the field to-morrow; so please you to accept my service—let the Lord of Monfort, of all these nobles, choose the other." " Valiant sir," said the lady, struggling to p 2
assume her wonted tone of stately courtesy, ci we thank you for-the proffer—you will doubtless do the devoir of an experienced martialist. — For thee, Sir Paladour,-we enjoin thee, as our champion, to perform deep orisons to thy saint to-night—we give thee this relic to aid thy devotions," she continued, giving him a silver box of curious workmanship and exquisite perfume, containing a relic, in the estimation of that age invaluably precious; — " and in those devotions, forget not the name of her whose fair possessions and fairer hopes are trusted undoubtingly to the justice of thy cause, and the valour of thine arm." As she spoke, the lady, with her female attendants, rose to quit the hall. Sir Paladour, as bound by his lady's command, prepared to retire in obedience to her will, tremblingly conscious of the solicitude that betrayed itself through her tone of ceremonious imperative¬ ness, and of the soft and subdued emphasis by which she distinguished between her fair possessions and her fairer hopes. He led the lady to tbe door, through which she retired,
made a low obeisance to the Lord of Courte¬ naye; and then advancing for a moment, flashed the last light of his proud eye on De Monfort, like the glance of a retiring storm, whose thunders are hushed for a space, but menace a swift return. • " The braggart is gone," said De Monfort with a hoarse laugh, flinging himself on his seat, and calling for more wine. " Term him : so when thou hast proved him so," said Sir Aymer, whose superannuated levity* had not left him insensible to what in those days would have been termed -" a.touch of true valour," displayed by Paladour. " He is a valiant knight and faithful cru¬ sader," said the bishop of Toulouse, who spoke from the impulse that instinctively urged him towards physical or mental power, however discovered or-developed, as a laborious and skilful alchemist would cull a useful ingredient for the alembic from which he hoped to ex¬ tract the gold-creating stone or the elixir-of immortality; — "nor would I, for my mitre, lack the blaze of his cognizance in the van of
our battle, or the dmt of his bra,nd in its heart, and heat, and centre," At these words, tfc$X see,med tQ place no difference between a new-nrade knigl)| and the descendants of countless npbles and war¬ riors, the murmur deepened round tN hall; arid as a* silent but emphatic answer to them, Que hundred shields, bright with blazonry, traced from achievement,-or tradition, blazed in the eye of the bishop; and tjwjcq that number of banners floated opposite to, above, and around him, (the latter almost touch¬ ing his robes as l?e sat,) all bearing the memorials of far-descended ancestry and of valour, which has the power of uniting the past; with the future age* and calling on poste¬ rity to echo the acclamations vyitih which their departed progenitors have hailed the might anid the memory of the brave. The bishop wa.s neither dazzled nor dismayed—above tfie prejudices of his, age, though unhappily not above its vices; his commanding voice made tUe advanced banners quiver- in the bands of those who. hejtf them, and thrilled through
the bosoms of some over whose' heads their proudest blazonry sparkled and floated. " Valorous knights," he said, " noble peers —and, if I may address you by a higher title, champions of the church, and crusaders in her sacred cause, — why spurn ye and scoff at a single knight? Trace upwards but for a few dark and perhaps fabled ages, and the founda¬ tion of the proudest castle ye own rests for its corner-stone on the grave of some sole dis¬ tinguished being, who, had he been not known like this Paladour, never perchance had ye been known, and ye would have had no need to scorn at recent honours, having never known what honour was. The first and proudest of your line was one like this Sir Paladour, and in him is concentred, dimly as it this day shines, that glory, to whose pale and reflected light ye look back through centuries for all the lustre ye borrow while ye boast of. By Heaven! I had rather be the bright and salient fountain, bursting from the mountain side, and sparkling in the eye of the traveller, than the muddy stream that stagnates in its
course, neither reflecting light from heaven, or bestowing fertility on earth, in its proud and fruitless progress." The tumult, if not appeased, was hushed at these words, and each betook himself to the topic of the morrow's encounter. Sir Aymer, an expert tactician in the strategy of that age, arranged vvith zealous but skilful officiousness the ceremonial of the combat. The Count de Monfort drained cup after cup, pledging the bewildered abbot of Normoutier, who, after doing him reason till he had nearly lost his own, began to ask his crosier-bearer if the Aibigeois were at the gates, that there was such an infernal ringing in his ears? De Verac whispered sundry orders to his pages and squire concerning plumes, gems, and de¬ vices, and then murmured to Semonville,— " Thinkest thou that faded scarf of the lady's will bear com'parison with that I wear to¬ morrow of green (the colour of hope) purfled with silver (the type of innocence) ?—for I would as it were be most emblematic and ex¬ quisite in mine array."
, " I think not at all of it," said his blunt companion. -" Mass! I am thinking more of the hard knocks that will ring on my, mail to-morrow,. than of a silken scarf that will never brook' their dint !".••■ " Oh! for a device !" quoth De Verac; — " some quaint, curious, and absolute touch of fancy inspire me now, and I will be its vowed slave for ever !"— as he rushed from the hall in a fit of amorous delirium de re vestiaria, leaving, as Sir Aymer said, his funeral dirge to be sung by all the tailors in France, and his bones to be converted into the handles, of fans for ladies. De Semonville followed, calling aloud on armourer and squire; and the younger knights hastened after, each vvith anxious and tumultu¬ ous orders to their respective attendants. The elder guests sat late; the Count de Monfort continued to drink deep, fearless of the event of-the*morrow; the bishop and the abbot were not slack to pledge him, (the quotations of the latter, - always indistinct, having now the ad¬ vantage of being quite unintelligible;) while p5
the lord o| the feast (who, while he gracefully performed all the offices of a noble host, sipped cautiously the goblet his kneeling page presented to him,) sat with his eyes fixed on an internal perspective, t— the body of Pala¬ dour breathless and bloody beneath the lightest stroke of the laJice pf {Simon de Monfort, " She b#th claimed tjie combat of courtesy fpr her minjpn," he said to himself; ^ but so speed me their, heated blood and fiery spirits, if it be not soon exchanged for mortal strife! And then—mid then," he murmured, w one vision of peril aud horror shall pass from before mine eyes, and I shall be as though I had nevep seen him." The roar of the dee,p and late carousal, mingled with the din of the urmourers, the orders of the knights, and the hurried pre- paratipn of the menials and vassals for the tourney to be held on the morrow, rung through the castle the livelong night from turret to rampart. Every individual felt ex¬ citement, apd assumed importance, frqm the meanest wench ajid drudging horseboy,
through all the acclivities of the'vast house¬ hold, to the busy page, the anxious squire, the favoured minstrel, and the bower-woman, to him whose life was suspended onthe event, and her whose liberty, wealth, and honours, hung on the same precarious issue. Marshal and minstrel, proud of their ex¬ pected functions, met with hastened step and glad greeting: henchman and herald hurried to and fro with hasty and tumultuous orders. The most forlorn of the group were the pale dismayed monks and priests, who formed the corps of the bishop and the abbot, and who, as they traversed the crowded passages to their humble dormitory in the base-court of the castle, uttered many a terrified " Denedicite," (as the rude war-men, in passing, pushed them against piles of scatteied armour and horse- furniture), mingled with many a prayer for their safe and speedy return to the placid monotony of their conventual life. The din and stir were not less in the court of the castle, where the vassals, with their assistants, tpiled all night to prepare the lists, the
scaffolding, and the seats for the marshals/ and a canopied state (as it was called) for her who was the judge of the combat. They toiled the livelong night by torch-light, to complete their work before dawn; and till within half an hour' of it, the sound of axe and hammer, and the shout and turmoil, were still ringing through the court of the castle. This tumult, so wide, various, and prolonged, was augmented, from time to time, by the sound of bugles and clarions, that rung, from distance to distance, fbr' miles around the castle: they were blown to summon or 1 warn tbe wandering troops of the numerous crusading chiefs assembled in the towers of Courtenaye. They seemed the echo of that' uproar returned from mountain, valley, and' heath; not a shout of La Croix Sanglante and Dieu et I'Eglise was uttered within the walls of the castle, but was-overtaken by a wild and wind-borne blast from without and from far. On every side, for leagues around, was heard the indistinct hum, or the thrilling shout, the war-blast blown fierce and near,"
or the far-echoed sound of the horn dying on the distant hills. Through the depth of night the'very air'seemed alive with the sounds of martial preparation and highly excited feeling; and a dim but tumultuous vitality seemed to pervade the face of the country round, wrapt- as it was in darkness. There was a deep contrast between this fever of excitement amongst those who had neither life nor fame to risk on the issue of the combat, and the deep and lonely emotion of Paladour, as, long unused to repose, he. paced his chamber till he was weary of the effort, ^et still more wearied at the thought of flinging himself on that bed which gave no rest. It Is the peculiar character of all mental diseases'to'be highly accelerated by external accident or local excitement, and such was his present state; the visions of his childhood, the strange events of his growing years, the mysterious pilot, the songs of Vidal, and, above all, his own dark and troubled and antedated recollections, rose and rolled like' a dark
vapour over his soul. The image of the Lady Isabelle came gleaming betimes, like a moon¬ beam through stormy clouds; and he started as a benighted truvollcr would when she bursts suddenly on his sight, and then is as sud¬ denly lost:— -the gleam was transient, the gloom permanent and deepening. At this moment his squire brought in the last piece of his armour, which was to be worn on the morrow. " Will't pleuse you survey it, sir knight?" said the attendant, as he stood, torch in hand, " It will do well," said Paladour, with¬ out cvon glancing at it. " I pray thec now remove thy torch, and thyself too — the moon shines brightly through the easement." " And she gives fittest light to madmen, like thee/' said tho attendant, retiring, Paladour again, and perhaps voluntarily, for thftt is the chief error of a morbid and wandering spirit, plunged himself into the vision his attendant had interrupted. It wius broken by the moon boing suddenly lost
in clouds. I-Jp awoke, lus foot striking against the armour, that was heaped in a corner of his chamber, and at the same moment his hand involuntarily touched thp relic the kady Isabelle had bestowed on him, and reminded him of the orisons he had vowed to perform that night " I have neglected this too much," he murmured, " and bcttc\ in my dark hour, had I oftener had recourse to it. Sweet saint! then for thy sake," ho added, bonding before the relic, which ho placed on the lofty window-seat, (above which the bright moon gleamed,) as he would on a tapered altar, — " Sweet saint! for thy sakp I pray that tp-morrqw my life may be preserved, to ^ave, what I value more than life, thy peacp, wealth, and honours.; and $hat mine arm inuy bo nerved to,smite their rude ch,aUQn&er beneath the hoofs of his steed." While he spoke (as he long after told — whether true or not ho vouched not for, nor rcquirpcl thp .hearer to belipvo it,) between the emerging moon unci him there came, as before,
a thin cloud; and as it wafted aside,-there seemed to lie on mist behind it a female form, stretched as on a couch; her bosom bare, and gashed with a deep and mortal wound; her body and limbs, as the mist floated on, wrapt in a shroud. Twice before had that form been visible, but never so dis¬ tinctly. In childhood it had floated before him a confused mass, something that he was sworn to wound and slay, and that he often smote the air to catch and grasp. - In ad¬ vancing manhood, though the vision always hovered round him, a cloud on his brow, ^nd a burthen on his heart, it had never been dis¬ tinctly revealed to him but. on the night he met vvith his mysterious pilot, and -the evening hour when he parted with Sir Amirald; but he had gathered from horrid internal inti¬ mations, that he was born, arid sworn, to be the sacrificer of some victim; that that victim was to be a female, young and beautiful. His mind and body collapsed alike under th'i3 fearful visitation, and he fell, still kneeling, but almost prostrate, before the relic,
whose fragrance scarcely revived his scattered senses. " In the name of Heaven," said a soft voice, " what orisons art thou perform¬ ing, or to what saint art thou addressing thyself?" " To none," replied the wretched youth. " The saints and all good beings have, I believe, renounced me. But whom am I to invoke in thee?" he cried, rising without fear, but not without surprise, at the sound of the voice, as he turned. What could scarcely be called a form, or any thing that embodies itself to the eye, hung hovering in an upper cavity of the chamber, from which, it seemed, a pannel had been removed. It stood, so white, tremulous, and visionary there, that Paladour addressed it, in the spirit of his pre¬ ternatural and wildly excited feelings, and darkly and waywardly ruled existence. " Speak thy message! If from Heaven, I submit: if from other power or place, I defy thee."
" Neither of heaven nor earth," said the vision, in a kind of sportive whisper, " but so mingled of both, that the wisest doubt to which we indeed belong— nay, we scarce know ourselves — so are the celestial and ter¬ rene elements mingled in us." " Thou art some light damsel of the house¬ hold," said the knight, restored to recollection, and recognizing mortal tones, if not mortal form, in the apparition — and who, moreover, pure as he was proud, valued himself on a virtue, then as indispensable to chivalry as valour. " I pray thee, minion, avoid my chamber, and betake thee to that of some l'osel page — fitter place for thee than this." " Were mine the arm of man," said the figure, in an altered voice, " it would thrust that lie down thy throat, ere thou couchedst lance against De Monfort in the lists to-mor¬ row." " In the name of Heaven!" answered the astonished knight, " what seekest thou? or
why art thou here in my chamber in such doubt¬ ful guise, and at such unwonted hour ? " " To do the hest of the Lady Isabelle," answered the voice. " Of the Lady Isabelle!" cried Paladour, the fresh blood returning to his cheek, and new pulses beating in every artery, — " Speak! speak! and pardon me!" " She wills thee— she prays thee, — " said the vision, with many pauses, " to — forbear the combat to-morrow with the redoubted and invincible Simon de Monfort. She prays thee not to trust to thy strength — thy skill -r- to all that she would trust, were it her life that were perilled — and — to forgive that fear, that never sprung from hatred." '< Am I all so lightly held," said the knight, " that thy lady repents to trust the redeeming of her rights to mine arm ? Tell her, to relin* quish the pledge were to avouch myself un¬ worthy of it;—and soothly say to her damsel," he added, " that Paladour, in risking his life, risks not aught be loves or values." " You wrong the lady's meaning," said the
voice, in a tone still more subdued, and strug¬ gling with emotion; " it was from aught but mistrust of your valour, or indifference to your safety, that she ------" " I pray thee, maiden," interrupted Pala¬ dour, " give over this fruitless parley. Thy lady hath trusted her right to the defence of this arm; and weak as she may deem it, it shall be hewn from, my body ere I resign that trust, more precious than life, save — to her commands." " Then / command thee------" said the vision; and the voice, which assumed its natural tone, and the veil, which in her agitation had fallen from her head, betrayed the Lady Isa¬ belle. She stood for a moment discovered, and agonized at the discovery; then catching up her veil, and throwing herself into the arms of her maidens, who were at short distance, waiting the event of the scene, she disap¬ peared; the pannel closed as it had opened, without a sound; and Paladour flung himself once more before the relic, on which the moonbeam emerged auspiciously, with feel-
ings that the purest religionist might partici¬ pate, the boldest warrior might envy, but the most impassioned of lovers alone could under¬ stand. His devotion was not long undis¬ turbed. Some inhabitants of the castle were retiring to ' their apartments through the gal¬ lery where his chamber lay ; their loud voices and reeling steps, bearing attestation to the effect of the long-protracted revel. Amid the last of the group, Paladour recognized the voices of the abbot of Normoutier, and the guide who had conducted them to the castle, and who appeared to be attending the abbot to his chamber. Part of their dialogue vvas singular enough to catch Paladour's ear, as he listened involuntarily. " I pray thee have a more reverend care of thy speech," said the abbot; vvith many a hiccup, and an audibly titubating march. " How near thou wast to betraying thyself to-night! " " Or betraying thee rather, lord abbot," said his companion, who appeared to forget all reverence due to the tottering dignitary. " But fear not, lord abbot, the wage is won,
and the peril past; and thine shall be the ample guerdon — thine shall be the red-deer of Unknown forests, and the vines of all Lan¬ guedoc shall shed their rich blood into thy cellars exclusively— r yea, and amen for ever — the merchants of Bruges and Antwerp shall ransom their silks with the velvets of Genoa — the Jew shall resign to thee his simple profit of eighty in the hundred — thou shalt reign abbot of monopolies and usances — the crown of king Philip of France shall look dim before the gems that adorn thy meanest crypt, and Queen Ingelberg herself shall swoon with envy at the brocade that covers the curtain before the host." This was said in a tone that proved the state of the attendant to be pretty similar to that of the abbot. " Go to!" muttered the abbot, " go to! thou art drunk, fellow !— why canst thou not take pattern by me ? — Saints uphold me 1 here is a step I did not see. A curse on this broken pavement! it had well nigh overthrown me — hie thee to rest, thou swine, and sleep off thy
drunkenness !— but first help me up this stair. — Now, by St. Benedict, this is a miracle!— the steps double as I ascend, and, moreover, the walls grow narrower and narrower — every thing is wrought in this castle by magic — I was warned of it: send two of the friars to assist me to my chamber. — I am well holpen to trust to the aid of a profane laic, and an excommunicate withal!" " Trust to my shoulders," quoth the com¬ panion ; " place thy back against mine, lord abbot, and 'tis as great or greater odds, that I do not shove thee up the narrow stair, as that the Lord of Monfort's lance do not pierce through shirt and mail of that unnamed adven¬ turer to-morrow." * " All that avails not," quoth the abbot. — " By crosier and mitre, here I sit till I am fitly aided to my chamber !" and he seated himself, " suiting the action to the word," resolutely on the staiis. The companion, finding the case thus de¬ sperate, and having other business to attend to,
flung the abbot across his shoulder, conveyed him up the stair, threw him on the silken cover¬ let of his sumptuous bed, without much.heed¬ ing his frequent invocation of St. Benedict, and hasted again to the gallery, where the rustling silks, the creaking shoes, and the waftage of the fan, announced the presence of a female. The mincing tones of superannuated flirta¬ tion soon discovered dame Marguerite;, and sundry speeches of high-strained .gallantry passed between her and her companion, who seemed to insist on escorting her to her apart¬ ment. The sounds, " Oh, sweet sir !—• nay, in sooth, it is too much " — were answered by, " I am listed .under the banners of the bold knight, Love; and in his name I assiege the fortalice of thy beauty, sage Marguerite; thus I take possession of the. palisadoes," kissing the outspread fingers of the withered gouver¬ nante, " thus I overpass the fosse, .guarded as it is by the archers stationed in those,bright eyes; and thus------" " Thus andjhus," squeaked the.dame, a but
I vow.it must not be thus — I may be ruined, thus and. thus, and then what becomes of the family ?" " Ungrateful Marguerite," said her com¬ panion, evidently retreating vvith satisfaction at the slightest repulse. " Ungrateful, callest thou me ?" said Mar¬ guerite, :: when to obtain this interview I have counselled and instructed the lady to seek the secret passage to the chamber of this knight- adventurer; and where their.parley will detain her perchance an hour." " Went she alone ?" answered her com¬ panion. " Alone !" exclaimed Marguerite ; " not for the world : two damsels went vvith her for security — but come to my chamber, and thou shalt hear more." " Would," muttered her companion, " that two damsels were vvith thee also, for my secu¬ rity ;" and the voices died away in whispers, and the steps in lighter treading along the gallery. Paladour could have smiled at this folly, VOL. i. Q
(not knowing what deep purpose was har¬ boured beneath it), though he marvelled at such disorder. within the vvalls of a noble's castle ; but his rest and his disposition to de¬ votion were alike broken by the interruption. He sat while the red gleams of the dying em¬ bers were reflected from his armour, in deep but not painful meditation, till the pale light of an autumnal morning succeeded them; and the shield, corslet, and cuisses, that had glowed like heated iron, now returned a pale and bluish gleam to the feebler light. At the wished-for approach of dawn, Sir Paladour summoned his squire; and-after a brief but earnest act of devotion, prepared to array himself for the combat.
CHAPTER XL Since i\hen, my watch hath told me towards ray grave I have travelled but two hours. Shakspeare's Twelfth Night. It was on the dawn of that eventful day, that the figure of an aged monk might be seen by its earliest light, winding his pain¬ ful way down one of the rocky hills that we have before described as engirdling the castle of Courtenaye. His figure, though not picturesque in itself, being only that of a stooping enfeebled man, clad in a coarse dark garment, girt with a rope, and wearing sandals fastened vvith the same rude material, derived, nevertheless, some interest from the scenery through which his slow and pain¬ ful path descended. Sometimes he disap- q 2
peared wholly among the heavy mists that gathered and dispersed around the hills ; sometimes he stood on a peak, measuring with doubtful and cautious glance the pre¬ cipice he was. about to plunge into; and more often treading with a pace and aspect that at once implied weariness, resignation, subdued fears, and humble hopes, down the steep and perilous paths which wound along the sides of these rocky hills — some hol¬ lowed by the mountain-stream, some broken up by the earthquake, and a very few bear¬ ing marks of human attempts (apparently resigned in despair) to shape a track for the traveller down declivities almost impassable. The mists increasing as the dim autumnal morning broke, the monk lost all view of his way; and as the heavy vapours rolled like art ocean in foam beneath him, he seated himself on a projecting crag, looking like a mariner perched on the fragment of a wreck, and gazing sadly on the ocean that surrounds him. As the monk seated himself, his staff, as lightly as it was leant on by a feeble hand,
detached a huge mass of loosened' stone from the cliff, which went flashing and thunder¬ ing down the .precipice, and sinking amid the waters of a dark quiet mountain-lake, sent its agitated waves in ripple and foam to the shore. At the sound, so abrupt and unexpected amid that deep and stilly lone¬ liness, the thousand echoes of the hills awoke; the eagle started from his aerie, and added his wild scream to the clamour; and the mist .itself, by the strong percussion of the air, parted for a moment, then slowly and dimly gathered and settled again. All then was still ; the echoes subsided, the scream died away, the lake lay still again, and the silence became more profound and touching from the contrast The monk looked round him at first with that expression of wonder mingled vvith cu¬ riosity and awe, which the slightest pheno¬ mena of nature amid these her deep and profound recesses of solitude must, cause — it was like the cry of treason in the cham¬ ber of a slumbering monarch. — " And here,
even here," said the monk, " amid the still¬ ness of the everlasting mountains, of the primeval lakes, the fall of a pebble can cause inquietude and uproar! The rocks make war on the waters, and the wide echoes take part in the fray — inanimate nature it¬ self becomes hostile around me ;—but how soon that enmity is appeased i" His mind reverted sadly to the assembly of the Albi¬ genses, whom he expected to find fixed as their mountains and cold as their streams — pure, passionless, and moveless: his mission had proved them far otherwise. His eye glanced involuntarily from the cliff he had now descended to the direction in which stood the lofty towers of Courtenaye, shrouded by the surrounding hills" and by the mists that mantled them from summit to base, — " And thus," he exclaimed, " must man wander ever amid doubtful evils ;— and wherefore, but to show him there is on earth no certain good ? Yon mountains shelter as fierce or fiercer passions in their cold breasts as those towers within whose proud walls lie
knight, and noble, and prelate, all on fire with unholy feelings, baptized in the name of holy church, and defying the God of Mercy in wicked honour to his name \ • — Wherefore is this ?" he exclaimed (his mental feet stumbling on the dark mountains)," where¬ fore is this, that from hovel to castle, from the persecuted peasant to the baron in his tower and the knight on his steed, we meet with nought that resembles thine image, nought that bears thine image and superscription — O God ! whither are we to turn ? Wretch¬ edness in castles, and pride in huts — evil every where — good alone in Thee ! Dry up thus, dry up thus every source from which we hoped to drain even a drop to slake our thirst, that our burning and insatiate hearts may turn at last to the fountain of living waters, and feel that there alone it may be quenched !" Again his thoughts wandered back to the congregation of the Aibigeois, and to the events which had occurred during his sojourn among them. On his first arrival, his habit
had given such offence to the more zealous among them, (though they could scarce ex¬ pect a visitant in a less formidable garb,) that it was with much difficulty he gained access to their leaders. The known sanctity of his character, however, proved available security for him even among those who abjured- his creed; and he was at length allowed to state the terms offered by the Pope's legate. Then " rose the riot and the din"— powerful objections from the teachers, and deep mis¬ givings of heart among the congregation,-too well founded on former instances of treachery and fears of their renewal. The Hugonot deputies, when admitted to an audience with Catharine of Medici, were never more tena¬ cious of security, nor with more reason. But instead of offering the proud security of prince and peer and prelate, (a pledge too often violated,) the monk of Montcalm pledged his own good faith for the safety of the Aibigeois; and kissing the wooden cross ap¬ pended to his rosary, he attested the Redeemer of all to witness the pledge.
This action awoke the controversial "spirit and declamatory zeal of the whole party ; ancl Mattathias, Boanerges, with the rest of the preachers, (the deacon Mephibosheth-' was not lacking,) denounced anathemas, fierce as ever were fulminated from the Vatican, against the abominable idolatry (as they termed it) of a senseless piece of wood : and moreover their wrath began to' wax hot against the messenger of peace; remembered injuries stung them —apprehended dangers surrounded them ; — the" tumult became louder, and the language and gestures of the crowd more violent. Pale, but not dismayed, the monk of Montcalm pressed the cross to his lips and breast, 'when a well-remembered- voice pro¬ duced a momentary suspension of all tumul¬ tuous feelings — it was the voice of Pierre the pastor. — " Let me hear him! let me hear him!" he cried ; "T canriot see him; but if ever there was truth in human accents) there is truth in that voice, -r- Let me feel thy hand," he" said, affectingly feeling about for the hand Of the'monk. 0.5
" It is clasped in thine," said the monk, grasping the hand of the venerable pastor; his heart responding to the chord the pastor had struck, perhaps not without some latent anxiety for his own safety. " The pledge of knight and noble, gauntlet to gauntlet clasped, was never truer than mine to thine," said the ancient pastor : " thou art safe among us; we will hear the reasons of thy preachers : and tell them, on thy return, that depriving me of sight, I thank them for it, mine eyes will not be dazzled with their glo¬ rious array, (in which, I yield, we are much lacking;) and mine ears will better hear their reasons; for God hath recompensed the loss of one sense by keenly quickening another, so that hearing is now sight to me ; for I swear to thee by yea and nay, I heard in thy voice a touch of sincerity, and feel in thy hand a grasp of holy warnith, that kindles the embers of an expired heart within me." " Now, holy blessings be on thee,' aged man," t said'the monk of Montcalm;" and though thine eyes be darkened, may thy mental sight be illumined to see the error of thy evil
THE ALBIGENSES. and heretical path, which leadeth to destruc¬ tion. Meanwhile I will not spare my rosary to pray for thee." The monk betook himself to his rosary as he spoke; and the tumult of anger and vitupe¬ ration which this action produced, was on a sudden drowned by the yet louder voices of the military leaders contending with the pastors of the congregation, each party fiercely insist¬ ing on their exclusive right to treat with the crusaders in the name of the whole body, and return the answer to their messenger. It was difficult to .adjust the pretensions thus hotly urged, as the military chiefs had alwavs been accustomed to exercise the offices of preaching and praying, as well as of com¬ manding and fighting, and had been raised by th'e exigencies of their warlike existence to a superiority in the estimation of the brethren. The barbes, on the other hand, seconded by the deacons, contended that the privilege of pleading for the church belonged to her minis¬ ters, not to her disciples; and they soon brought their battle to fierce issue, for tongues in debate
strike as'keenly as swords in battle. As usual, v each availed themselves sufficiently of allusions borrowed from wholly inapplicable passages in the Jewish dispensation. "HolyHeaven!"- cried the bewildered monk of Montcalm, " how impotent are human efforts, and how baseless human hopes ! In •the solitude of my cell I had dreamed that all the world might have been one vast Christen¬ dom, living in one feeling of love, rejoicing in one hope' of immortality : and now ' — and mine eyes weep to see it — not only are the -Catholics set in arms against their erring bre¬ thren, but even amongst you, who boast your purer faith and closer unity, every man's hand •is against his brother! -7-What answer shall I bear back to them that sent me ?—save that, since the clamour of your own contentions hath deafened you to the' voice of warning and the message of peace, the war-cry of the crusaders, thundering among your caverns and •your mountains, must • rouse you to your answer. v , . ', - r - The' effect of this rebuke was lost: both
parties sought to forget the shame of their mu¬ tual exposure, by joining their forces to assail the helpless monk; till some, more moderate, dreading a repetition of the tragedy of Chateau- neuf, gathered round the victim to prevent it. " I dread not peril of my life—they will not kill a helpless monk,"—he replied to their assur¬ ances of safety ; " and if their wrath burn so hot, that nought but mine aged blood must quench it, I pray thee, reverend man," calmly turning to Pierre, " let my rosary and cross be buried with me. I hope not for flowers to spring, or odours to breathe from the earth where I fall; but let the sole companions of my sixty years' pilgrimage be the companions of my grave, should thy brethren dig it for me. Scorn not this, I pray thee, as the prayer of superstition — it is the prayer of memory and of hope—they have been mine only wealth during many years of wandering; and thou knowest/' he added, with a martyr's smile, " a miser doth not willingly part with his treasure, even on his dying bed !"
■ e Thou art safe—thou art safe," cried Pierre, grasping with unwonted energy the hand he felt for; " I am old, blind, and powerless ; yet, ere a foot approach thee, they must first tread on this withered body—-the body; of, their pastor."—• And as he spoke, he •flung:himself before the monk. A ;deep silence;followed this action, and Pierre felt the force of its appeal. : " My brethren," said Pierre, "to-morrow ye may pass to your mortal trial before the mighty of the earth—even those who keep in their hands the keys of the. doors of life and death : if,they unlock the latter, ye appear at sun-rise before your eternal Judge.!—And in His presence of what avail will be the trifles that divideye now ? There the question will not be whether ye have bap¬ tized infants or adults—'whether ye have sung the: songs of the Jews, or the hymns of our more ; enlightened brethren ; but whether ye have fed the hungry, clothed the \ naked ^ Alas! ye could not, for ye were hungry, naked,
sick yourselves; but this ye can do — protect and save the stranger;" and he pointed with strong action towards the monk of Montcalm. The appeal had its full effect; the multitude retreated, the clamour subsided, and the mur¬ mur arose deep and strong among the congre¬ gation, —" Pierre, our pastor, we will hear him ; he shall guide us touching the matter of our treating with the crusaders." " The zeal of our brethren may seem to thee rash," said the poor pastor, " but thou must needs yield they be zealous." " I may not deny it," said the'monk, smil¬ ing, " when they were well nigh zealous unto slaying." The pastor felt rebuked ; and murmured that their zeal might indeed be urged to extremes; but that, at least, they must be al¬ lowed the praise of an unmoved and constant firmness. At this moment, the multitude again lifted up their voices, exclaiming that they would hold a conference with the divines of the em-
saders; and that Pierre, the pastor, should be their pleader — their Moses to speak for them in the presence of Pharaoh." " They call me Moses, now," said Pierre, " and yesterday they would have rent mc to pieces, in a controversy touching whether the Psalms of David, or the hymns of the bre¬ thren, should be sung in the congregation." " Alas ! reverend man," said the monk, " I fear thou canst claim as light praise for the firmness as for the zeal of thy people." The " hectic of a moment" passed across the cheek of the humbled pastor —" Thou hast seen the nakedness of the land in truth," he said, "and I am rebuked.for my confident boasting; yet, credit me, these are'but'the infirmities of our evil' nature, that'break forth in all: and judge not of us, that we are vio¬ lent, rash, and unjust because we'are (what thou wouldst deem) heretics, but because we are human." The monk of Montcalm admitted""the humble apology, though,' perchance, his creed disclaimed it; and the rhatterof conference/so
long disturbed and interrupted by the violence of the multitude, was now about to be settled in a few moments by two mild and heavenly- minded men. " Bear back our message," said Pierre, " to the crusaders—a message of peace will well become thy lips: tell them we will hear the reasons of their preachers ; and that I, the humblest of those thou seest, (and humble we are all in rank, and power, and birth, and spr,ech,) I will answer them by action, if not by words;" and he waved his staff, meditating perhaps the action which he meant to substi¬ tute in place of " many words" on the day of the intended meeting. " Surely I will bear thy message," said the monk; and, resolved to give no offence to the tenacious Aibigeois, he told his beads in silence for the prosperous event of the meeting. A chill seemed to hang over the pastor as he pronounced his assent to the meeting '; he struggled with recollections at once painful and terrible — remembered massacres, under the guise of truce, floated before his sightless but sharpened vision, turning inward on me-
mory with redoubled power from the suspen¬ sion of itr> exercise on things external. — " And what security shall we demand for our safety," he asked, " before the lords and knights in whose presence we must plead defenceless ?" " Do peasants then demand security from noble lords and valiant knights ?" said the monk, who was not wholly untouched by the spirit of the age, and its high prejudice in favour of noble and gentle blood. " We demand it," said Pierre, " in the name of a thousand massacres." The monk's blood rose to the cheek and brow that il had deserted for thirty years. — " Thy rebuke i3 just," he said, " and we have both erred-—each in cleaving too closely to the cause, not the motive--to the instrument in whose power and pride we have trusted, not to tho Great Agent who gave them power, but not pride—/stand your surety ; let that suf¬ fice." " And it shall," said the pastor: " wc shall meet in that plehi of controversy thou hast named ; and if that fail, where next?" " In heaven,"—said the monk, grasping his
hand,—" doubtless, in heaven !"—and they parted. As the monk, in his painful progress down the declivities of the hills that encircled the caslle, pondered on these scenes, whose im¬ pression on his memory was not the less power¬ ful from his recent share in their danger, he was intcriuptcd in his meditations by the tramp of a war-steed. He paused, and looked up¬ ward, for the sound came from above; and soon, between the precipices of a defile on whose rocky platform the monk stood, but far below, came pawing and prancing a proud and beautiful animal, his broidered housing waving in the wild air of the mountains, and the bells round his proud and foam-spotted neck ring¬ ing out in time to his haughty curvcttings, as ho trod the rocky path : his fiery pride was reined by the arm of a knight in complete harness, who often, however, turncn 7 jack his head, as if to trace some forgotten or doubtful way; while his plumes, floating in various di¬ rections vvith the breeze as he turned, seemed
indicative of the knight's irresolution, and un¬ certainty of the path he was to follow. As man and steed, harnessed and barded, came thundering down the narrow pass, the monk of Montcalm turned humbly aside. His figure, however, did not escape the notice ol the youthful knight, who, reining up his steed, (while his hoofs struck fire from the stones on which he reared and backed,) with humble grace asked benison of the holy man. " Thou hast it, fair son," said the monk ; " and, if I may demand of thee a boon in re¬ quital of so mean a gift as a poor monk's benison, may I ask of thee my nearest way to the castle oi Courtenaye?—for, in truth, I am well nigh bewildered in these mountain paths." " The rather, reverend sir," said the youth, " that mine own way lieth thither ; but, meanwhile, it becomes not a layman like me to bestride a steed, while thou, reve¬ rend man, treadest thy hard and dreary path on foot: I pray you mount my steed ; you
will find him fleet as a bird and calm as the air it cleaves ; otherwise, I will guide the rein while you keep the saddle." " Fair son," said the monk, " I dare well answer for your steed's fleetness, if not for his gentleness — but thine arm is better fitted to rule him, as thy form is to govern and to grace him. — I ivill nather pace softly by thy side — the knight to Ihis steed, and the monk to fifc sandal; and truly mine," said the poor monk, halting from weariness, " mine are sore worn in my late travel." As the monk thus paused, looking up vvith an expression of interest, his coarse garments folded round him and bound by a rope—and the young knight in his " pride of panoply," with floating plume, and low¬ ered bannerol fastened to his lance's point, reining up his steed, paid graceful atten¬ tion to the humble form before him, — the precipice behind, the steep and perilous path before, forming a wild landscape to the two figures thus singularly contrasted,—one would
have deemed it an emblem of the martial spirit of the age doing homage to its devotion. " And these sandals are thus worn, fair son," 7—said the monk, observing that curiosity vvas blended with the expression of attention in the young knight's attitude—" they are thus worn from my late painful journeys to the mountain abode of the heretics, where, in truth, ihey. have been driven to sojourn by the seve¬ rity — but that imports not now. — I am re¬ turning with a message of peace from that persecuted people: would it had not been so qualified by their rancour and hostility. — But of ihem let no man judge; they are embittered by causes that I would had not existed. — But wherefore art thou again at my feet, fair son ?" . " To beg thy benison, if thou art the holy monk of Montcalm," said the youth. " Receive.it, fair son," said the monk, "but not in the name with which thou hast, in the language of earthly men, flattered me. — I am the monk of Montcalm — holy appertains to Him who shares not his glory with his crea-
tures: but near the close of my earthly pil¬ grimage, I rejoice to bear the message of peace." " Message of peace !" said the knight, fling¬ ing himself again on his war-steed, " message of peace! monk of Montcalm ! By heaven thou bearest most unwelcome news — tidings that will win thee cold welcome at the castle of Courtenaye. Thy breath will be the coldest air that ever fanned the banners on its towers." He added, highly chafed— " All this fair ar¬ ray— this goodly and gallant preparation — and thy message of peace ! " " Alas !" said the monk, regarding his dis¬ turbed form and angry gestures with an air at once humble and commiserating, like a partial and overawed parent at the insolence of a wayward child — "Alas! and hast thou,fair son, so young in years, so goodly in form, drank thus deeply of the cup which this fierce age lias filled with the waters of bitterness, even ito overflowing ? While thy mother's milk is yet warm on thy beardless lip, dost thou'already thirst for blood ? — Were it not
better, fair son, that the wanderers of the flock should be brought back to the fold by the voice of the shepherd, than driven to it by the yell of the wolf?" " I am not learned in metaphor, reverend sir," said the fiery youth; " but I deem foul scorn that lords, and knights, and holy pre¬ lates, and learned clerks, should stand to ex¬ change reasons with loreless peasants, and be baited vvith the jargon of their vile heresy — by heaven, I would convince them with my lance, and so close the controversy for ever. — Trust me, sir monk, thou bearest most un¬ gracious tidings to the thousand warriors that are even now sweeping down yon hills towards the castle of Courtenaye — mark what wel¬ come they will give them !" " Be they warriors thou pointest towaid?" said the dim-eyed monk, his crouching figure and tremulous hand, as he turned in the direc¬ tion, making strong contrast with the spirited form of the youthful knight, whose mailed arm was extended at almost a right angle with his body, and whose eyes flashed through the bars
of his helmet— " Be they warriors ?" repeated the monk; " to my dim eyes they seem like wreaths of mist winding down the mountain sides." " Wreaths of mist!" exclaimed the knight; " say thou rather thunder-clouds, that will burst ere long. — There," he said, rising in hi" stirrups, while his quick young eye pierced through the mists that veiled the descending hosts from the eyes of the monk, as quitting their mountain encampment, they sped towards the castle, " there float the banners of the good knight Sir Aymer du Chastelroi — alas ! that his train is so poor; but such is his wont, he hath no power over his loose licentious band. — There fly the banners of Sir Ezzelin de Verac and the Sieur de Semonville — now, by Heaven, a gallant array !— pity it is, that a fop and a churl should be brothers in arms to lead such a band. — See," he exclaimed, with the feelings of a child, before whose senses one splendid pageant, passing momently, supersedes and eclipses another, " see the vol. i. n
men-at-arms of Count Simon de Monfort, cham-r pion of the church, sweep down the declivity! — lo ! the standard of the cross, how it rocks and nods, as the standard-bearers wind through the defile—proud men are they who bear it the while. — Grace and good fortune to thee, holy sign, and to those who charge in thy van, and to those who uphold thee, and to those who perish in thy sacred shadow !— Be thou as a beacon in the stormy ocean of the battle. Va victisl veevictis! — I see the banners of the bishop of Toulouse — woe be to those who meet thee, proud and mighty prelate, either in council or in the field ! Thy words, when thou speakest, are mightier than wielded swords; and thy sword, when thou wieldest it, makes the lances of an army vain — terror and delight tremble in my heart, while I gaze on thy array, thou mightiest of the mighty! ■— Though thou art in peace, I behold thee as a foe—for there is that in thee which seems to make toys of kings, and tools of armies; and when thou strikest thy boldest blow, it seems
struck for thine own high and secret purposes, not for the cause in which thou hast flung down the crosier for the lance, and buckled harness over rocket and hood ------" .. "In the name of Heaven, fair son," said the bewildered monk, " of whom speakest thou— and what is that gallant array of which thou talkest, and whereto wind they?" " Did I not tell thee, reverend monk," said the youth, still fixing his fiery eye on the descending groups, and spurring on his steed, " did I not tell thee, that this day a tourney is held in the caslle of Courtenaye; and Sir Paladour de la Croix Sanglante combats against Count Simon de Monfort, in rescue of the Lady Isabelle's lands and hand.—May Heaven favour him who strikes in the cause of right and of beauty !" " Holy Heaven ! " cried the monk, drop¬ ping in utter dismay his beads, and clasp¬ ing his hands together—" Holy Heaven, what mad and wayward times! — Are there not enemies enough, but the crusaders must turn it 2
the lances consecrated to the service of the church against each other? — well said the prophet, * I labour for peace, but they make them ready to battle.' Set on, sir knight, I pray, and in the name of Heaven stay, if thou canst, this mad battle, at least till such time as I can arrive and yield them reasons for the delay." " You must needs, pardon me, sir monk," said the youth; " I know no power that may bind the arm of Sir Paladour from striking in such cause; and thou best knowest whether De Monfort in his mood may be turned away by a churchman's prayers. Try first whether they shake yon deep-seated hill, or check the torrent that thunders down its side; and if they obey thee—despair of moving him"—and spurring forward, he mingled in the train that hastened towards the castle of Cour¬ tenaye, his vow of never re-entering its walls forgotten in his solicitude for the fate of Paladour. He arrived at a critical moment — the
combat had already begun — the order of the Lady Isabelle's champions had been deter¬ mined by lot, and it chanced that Sir Pala¬ dour's was the last. Hitherto all that had encountered Simon de Montfort had been disabled and overthrown,—The ladies who surrounded Isabelle began to tremble. Sir Aymer, who was the marshal of the field on her part, with compressed lip and tightening grasp of his staff, began in his need to pray vehemently, but infernally.—The Lady Isabelle herself, who had mechanically bowed, smiled, and waved her hand to each of her ill- fated champions as they rode into the lists, now sat with unrelaxing features, and a cheek as pale as death, when the trumpets sounded for Sir Paladour's encounter— -it was her last hope, but it was her first fear. Amirald, who had dismounted, and was making his way with difficulty through the crowd, was sud¬ denly stopped by one of the lady's attendants, veiled, who caught his arm, and whispered, u Art thou Sir Paladour's friend?"
' " I am his brother-in-arms, damsel," an¬ swered the knight. " Prove it at his need," replied the damsel; " for the Count de Monfort hath made a vow .to God, that nought shall mar the overthrow .of. Sir Paladour this day, though the laws t of •combat and of chivalry be broken to accom- .plish it." ; Amirald eagerly pressed on — as he gained a post, Sir Paladour, taking his lance from his page, rode to the barrier — his tall but slender form was but too evidently no match for the gigantic De Monfort;, yet, so stately was his demeanour, so lightly did he bear the weight of his ponderous arms, and with such graceful strength did he manage his.steed, that every heart in the assembly beat high for his success, and every lip put up a prayer for his safety. De Monfort himself seemed to enter into the impression made by his appearance; for, though he had hitherto met all comers with¬ out any other preparation than that of changing his lance when it shivered, he now dismounted,
demanded another steed and another lance, and carefully examined that which was given him in exchange. He also called for a goblet of wine; and as this could not be swallowed without unclosing his helmet, a circumstance in consequence occurred that had deep share in the event of the day, and was exactly similar to that by which Henry the Eighth was near losing his life in a tourney with his future brother-in-law, Charles, Duke of Suffolk. While De Monfort was swallowing a deep draught, Sir Paladour put his steed in motion to approach the gallery where the Lady Isabelle sat; and De Montfort, mistaking this movement, snatched his lance from his squire, and flung himself on his steed, closing his helmet hastily, and so carelessly, that some of the rivets remained unfastened. Sir Aymer, aware of the movement Paladour was making, called aloud on Lady Isabelle to give her champion word, or smile, or look. " Smile on him, lady," he cried:" " look lovely on hirn for Heaven s sake-—throw him a glove-— let down thy long hair, — smile on him at
least, nay give him a word — a word — a look. Now, God help thee, noble Paladour! thou perilest life for one who will not give thee a smile in recompense—did ever champion ride against such odds?"—Isabelle sat insensible, and frozen vvith horror, grasping the warder with unconscious fingers,-—" Holy God! she cannot speak," cried Sir Aymer; " and his lance is already in rest My lord of Toulouse, hast thou no saint to call *o aid ?" The bishop shook his head as he viewed Sir Pala¬ dour. Sir Aymer clasped his hands, dropping his marshal's staff— " the champion rides to his doom," he cried, " without a smile of comfort, a word of hope:" then glancing at the mute and pallid terror of Isabelle,—" Lord abbot," he cried, " out with thy beads, and call on the saints for succour! Holy St Be¬ nedict, aid us in this extremity, and thy altar shall burn brighter, till the day of doom, with a candlestick of solid silver—nay, I will not stand with thee for gold, blessed saint, at this need, though the last rood round mine ancient tower of Chastelroi were sold to pay
the charge. Ladies,—dames and damsels, have ye no saints to invoke, no tongue to speak withal ? I warrant me ye would weary all the saints if your lap-dog ailed, or your dove pined; have ye not a breath to utter when a noble lady is in peril, hand, land, and liberty ? Mi¬ nions, to your prayers, to your prayers! — nought but Heaven can save us in this de¬ sperate strait." The w ords were not addressed to unwilling ears — the attendants of Isabelle were uttering prayers with clasped hands and uplift eyes. The ladies, spectatresses of the combat, forgave her beauty for once, and making common cause, uttered vows audibly. The abbot of Normoutier called on St. Benedict with his utmost might, and told his beads as fast as he could tell. Sir Amirald dropped his reins on his steed's neck, and clasped his armed hands together— " I make a vow," he cried, " I make a vow to go on a pilgrimage to St. Jaques le Grand barefoot, and vvith hair-cloth on my skin, so my brother-in-arms escape this peril in success and safety —so help me, God, and St. Denis r 5
of France!"' The champions ■ met in full career. The blow aimed by De Monfort, right at the.helmetof Sir Paladour, must have felled him to the dust, if he had been a statue of stone cleaving to a steed hewn out of the same block—but, an instant before it reached him, the chevron of Sir Paladour's barded steed (who had chanced to bend his head) darted into the .nostril of the Count de Mon- fort's; and the noble animal, maddening with the agony, reared so suddenly and so high, ihat the lance of the unseated rider passed .above .the shoulder of Sir Paladour; while, at the.same moment, the lance of Paladour touched the very point of the unclosed helmet of De Monfort—shook the heavy harness from yisor .to gorget—the giant form of De Monfort rolled in the dust—and a thousand voices thundered applause through the lists as he fell. i Those shouts were soon exchanged for cries of terror and dismay. De Monfort, maddened by his disgrace, forgot all laws of chivalry; and springing fro?n the (ground, as Sir Paladour, who.'had dismounted,- approached
to call on him to confess himself vanquished, be retreated towards the barriers, and snatch¬ ing a' battle-axe from the ready hand of one of his followers, he rushed on his antagonist. At that moment, vvith the speed of lightning, Sir Amirald, aware of the meditated act, not perhaps of treachery, but of ferocious ven¬ geance, tore a battle-axe from the hand of a by-stander, and gave it over the lists to Pala¬ dour. Meanwhile, the whole assembly, lists, barriers, and galleries, were in an uproar at this unheard-of infraction of the rules of combat " Cast down the warder, lady; in God's name cast it down! — they fight their combat d, Toutrance — in the name of God, cast it down!" Isabelle sat petrified, turned to a statue, and grasping the warder closer as the cries redoubled round her, and sounded in her ears like the waves of a distant ocean. Marshal and herald hurried into the lists to part the combatants. Enguerrand de Vitry, brother-in-arms to the Count de Monfort, made all haste for the honour of chivalry, and in deep shame for the disgrace done by the count. Sir Aymer, on the contrary, who had
started from his seat at the first impulse, paused vvith conscious delight as he saw Sir Paladour snatch the battle-axe from Amirald^ and approach boldly in his defence — never¬ theless, he shouted with tbe rest, " Treachery, treachery in the lists! part them, heralds I Lord marshal make in, make in for the honour of chivalry — part them !" Yet he muttered under his breath, while purposely delaying his descent to the barriers, " Now down -thou goest, an thou wert an Ascapart, or the twelve peers of France, and the knights of the round table to boot." Ere the marshals could meet hi the lists, this second combat had been decided—and as the first, by chance — for Paladour, in actual strength, the great re¬ quisite in such combats, was far inferior to his antagonist. Tf~e blood, streaming from the wound of Simon de Monfort, right over the eye, had dimmed and drowned its .vision; and with blind fury he heaved his battle-axe, sure of its first felling his antagonist; but the blood flowed fast, and the blow, dealt in furv and blindness, struck into a lance that lay' on the sands, with which the lists- were
strewed, with a force that made the splinters spring into the air several feet. Sir Paladour's blow, better aimed, and inspired by a pas¬ sionate desire, not only to signalize himself in his lady's sight, but to avenge himself for this outrage on chivalry and knightly practice, fell full on ihe part exposed by the still unc 1 osed helmet; and then the " Griding axo, with discontinuous wound," wandered down the gorget in its descent, and the blood gushed from between the joints of the giant champion's armour as he fell a second time. Sir Paladour, his strength ex¬ hausted by the last unexpected blow, was now in no condition to make demand of the van¬ quished champion. He leaned exhausted on the breast of Amirald, who had hurried into the lists; but he turned his swimming eye and waved his broken brand in token of triumph towards the gallery, where the Lady Isabelle, starting from her trance of terror, flung herself on her knees, and then bursting into a sudden agony of tears, fell into the arms of her attendants.
CHAPTER XII. •-----------I trust, right well, She wrought not by forbidden spell; For mighty words and signs have power O'er sprites in planetary hour — Yet scarce T praise their venturous part, Who tamper with such dangerous art. Lay of the Last Minstrel. In agony of spirit that he could neither brook nor conceal any longer, theiLord of Courtenaye had rushed from his place on the unexpected event of the combat, leaving to some of his attendants to plead sudden indisposition as the cause .of his absence—rand burying himself in the dark recesses of. his seqret apartments, he summoned their darker visitants,round him on the instant. The, astrologer descended from his tower; the female, that, mysterious pre¬ sident of evil, emerged from the vaults of the castle, .with whose secret passages she was well acquainted,, and where latterly she, cjiiefly abode, except when for months she wandered among the mountains, without giving^
on her return, account of her employment or her time — and both stood beside him, one, as usual, trembling, and one making him tremble* The astrologer had' positively piedicted- the death of Paladour; the female seemed to exult in his safety, and yet to promise from it a richer fulfilment of the Lord of Courtenaye's hopes than could ever have been obtained by his death at that period; — their harassed victim fluctuated between them, cursed them, and begged their aid alternately, with the natural vacillation of hopeless misery; and finally would have summoned Thibaud and his attendants to spurn them from the castle gates, had not a thought been suggested to him at that moment that made him pause in the expression, if not in the purpose of his evil will — and he lent an eager ear, and glanced with a lynx-like eye, while certain whispers from the female, who seemed to enjoy alike her powers of command and of torture as exercised on him, trembled through hi3 eais. What dark counsels were given and received at that meeting, never transpired but by their
results. A report had spread through the castle, (favourable to the views of the Lord of Courtenaye,) originating perhaps from the ab¬ stracted habits and visionary language of Pala¬ dour, that he had dealt with the agents of the invisible world, and that voices had been heard the preceding night in his chamber at an hour when ail earthly voices are mute. The menials of the castle, fond of the " wonderful and wild," believed and repeated it; and the defeat of Count Simon de Monfort, the fiercest cham¬ pion of the age, by an almost beardless boy, seemed to give sanction to the report of the latter having been aided in the combat by a power worse than earthly. Memory is apt and active in furnishing materials for morbid and feverish fancy to work on — the songs of Vidal were now repeated through the house¬ hold with all their mysterious allusions — the report of " the fiery arrow" was rife in mouths that dared not, the preceding day, have whispered the sound within the towers of Courtenaye— the Lady Isabelle herself, as she' passed from the court of the castle to her
ALBIGENSES.
chamber to throw off her heavy robes, had paused ominously before the portrait of an ancestress, the most beautiful of her race and age, who had been wooed by a splendid and valorous knight, whose title and birth no one knew, though all had witnessed his achieve¬ ments—-and whose mangled corse was soon after discovered in the woods near the castle; nor had it ever been known whether her bride¬ groom was the fearful loup garoux so dreaded in Languedoc, or whether she had perished by a less horrible destiny, even under the fangs of real wolves — the bridegroom never re¬ turned— tbe corse was interred — the por¬ trait still smiled in the lejuvenescence of two hundred years; and the Lady Isabelle paused as she passed it, gazed, and shuddered. Nature that day seemed to rise in aid' of the Lord of Courtenaye — the morning had been gloomy, but calm — the combat had protracted the dinner-hour till twoj and all met at the banquet exhausted and spiritless after the strife of the morning. Meanwhile, the clouds that had hung over the
'mountains all day began to descend in misty wreaths "down, their summits. These appeared at first like masses of wool, white, but shedding darkness where they spread; then assuming the forms of water-spouts, some descended in inverted cones on the hills, and burst in a de¬ luge—others, perhaps, fuller of electric matter, wandered lower in search of some point of attraction,-snd. sent forth flashes of pale light¬ ning, and rumours of distant thunder among the valiey-s-*-at.length, toward evening, the whole, collected force of the tempest. burst forth, and .it was terrible — the mountains seemed to-rock to' tb?ir bases, and even" to change their aspects and postures as the storm- clouds, iljing .before the blast, swept round their dizzy and shifting peaks — the rain, mingled wiih hail, came down in a deluge; not the rain that*patters.against the casement, but that which ; ploughs up the ground where }t falls, and strews the-mined hovel of the peasant beside his blasted harvest—the moun¬ tain torrents came rushing down, as if at a signal, and the roars,of the bears .and the
wolves, whom it swept away, were drowned in the roar of its flood; and this was increased by the masses of granite which, struck by the lightning or precipitated by the flood, thun¬ dered from precipice to precipice, lashing the foam into madness, and dragging down trees, overwhelming animals, and indenting the earth where they fell with traces that seemed to have been left by the primeval deluge. The banquet was thinly attended — those \\ ho had encountered De Monfort*had retired to their apartments, sore and discomfited, and con¬ soling themselves for their bruises by the re¬ flection, that they were so impartially shared among a number, that no individual of the defeated band could fairly reproach a fellow- sufferer. . The lady, according to a vow she had made when Sir Paladour was in extremity, had shut herself in her chamber to perform her devotions, which were to continue till morning. The vast hall looked dim and de¬ solate — the fierce spirits, who had passed the day in mortal contention, seemed awed, if not subdued, by the terrors of the elements, and
each took his place in silence; they were but few, and they crossed themselves often as they sat, and offered internal vows to their various saints for the overpassing of the storm, in which each heard pealing the remembrance of crime, or the summons of vengeance. The torches of the attendants waned as the light¬ ning flashed through the vast windows — and the tapestry, waving to and fro in the blast that rushed through door and casement, gave to its distorted forms the appearance of gigantic spectres, who menaced the guests as they sat by their fitful and shadowy movements. As the night advanced the storm diminished — the attendants were desired to remove their torches ; and the knights, gathering round the vast wood-fire that blazed on the hearth, about which their benches had been placed by the attendants, began to feel that kind of gloomy comfort vvith which men, after a day of toil and a night of terror, gaze ou glowing embers and listen to the gossip's tale, whiie the blast is raving at the casement and rocking the battlement, and the excluded world without
is wrapt in darkness and in danger. One> single minstrel in the dim gallery touched his harp; but, whether from impulse or command, he chose a wild theme of spirits abroad on the- elements guiding their force and aggravating their mischief, launching the lightning at the chieftain's tower, pouring the deluge over the peasant's hut, scaring the traveller on the biow of the precipice, and luring the wanderer to the verge of tbe cold dark flood or the foot¬ ing of the treacherous morass. Tbe haughty spirits, who had a thousand times braved death in the field, subdued (as the fiercest animals are said to be) by the terrors of the- elements and the lassitude produced by con¬ finement within walls, listened with a kind of gloomy and passive relaxation; and the Lord of Courtenaye, who saw their minds lowered to the very key he wished and was well skilled to touch, gradually and cautiously introduced the subject of the appearance of disembodied) spirits, and of the possibility of holding safe intercourse with the invisible world. Full of the spirit of the age, which inculcated such-
belief, rather as matter of creed than of debate, the guests eagerly embraced the topic ; and those who could relate nothing in support of the prevailing impression, listened with wild and breathless anxiety to the evidences pro¬ duced by others; and though all were tradi¬ tional and obscure, and many trivial and even ludicrous, the feeling deepened, and the awe became general. Among the group there were but two silent and absent listeners, the bishop of Toulouse, a resolute sceptic, who sat on perhaps for that very reason, and by a strong effort concealed his smiles; and Pala¬ dour, who internally struggled vvith the fearful ascendancy which early and undated feelings, combined with supposed experience, vvas ob¬ taining over his intellects. It vvas remarkable, that though the conversation among the other guests was at first adopted incidentally, and without any appearance of interest, yet the interest now strongly increased — the embers were on the wane — the hall waxed dim — men could not see the speaker's face, or catch from his expression the horrors of his tale, or
how that expression was affected by their in¬ fluence ~— the laugh, under which some sought to disguise their fears, grew fainter and then- ceased; and the fire, though roused by the< pages at the order of their lord, was at length reflected from pale cheeks, (which no other; fear could blanch,) unclosed and breathless lips, and sunk but eager eyes fixed on the teller of the last tale; and no sound was heard in the pause, but the rustling of the mantles of the guests, who laid down their untasted wine, or started as the blast, putting to full proof the strength of the cusement and door, seemed like the dark menace of the entrance of some¬ thing that was steering on its pinion, and ming¬ ling its voice with its roar. Tae Lord of Courtenaye, like all cowards, grew stronger amid the fears he had inspired—and as be watched with anxious eye the hall gradually thinned, (while some retired to pray, and some lest they should hear what would keep them sleepless that dreary night,) saw, with unuttered satisfaction, the group reduced to all he wished
,it to contain — the bishop of Toulouse, vvho lingered to guard his scepticism from suspi¬ cion — the Count de Monfort, on whom some dark convictions pressed, ■ which he felt the narratives of others were a kind of silent channel for — the abbot of Normoutier, who dozed over his goblet, but who generally awoke at the end of a relation in due time to utter an ave, or make the sign of the cross — Pala¬ dour, vvho loitered because he dreaded, and Sir Aymer, because he hated the hour of re¬ tiring, be the cause what it might— De Verac and Semonville, who tarried, the former in visions of new garbs, armour, and devices, and the latter in downright honest terror, afraid alike of his bed, of the passages that led to it, of the very floor be trod, and almost of the air be breathed, for every thing around him seemed to partake of a hideous and preternatural vitality; — of the latter the Lord of Courtenaye recked not but he in¬ wardly rejoiced that the two dignitaries were of the number. The group was now so dimi-
•» nished, that they seemed in the vast hall, ih dimension like fairies collecting, and in sound like crickets chirping round the hearth. " How say ye, my lords ?" said he of Cour¬ tenaye ; " shall we have some authentic tale to wipe these foolish fantasies from our brains, somewhat that may be sternly credited ? Nay, let us draw nearer the fire — the night is foul and the tempest raving still — better an hour wasted thus than in tossing on a sleepless couch, while the wind and rain beat heavy time.to our restless heavings. Sir Aymer du Chastelroi, hast thou nought to tell us of what thou may'st have heard or remembered of these terrors of the olden and overpast time?" " Of the old time," said Sir Aymer, some¬ what chafed, " I can remember nothing, being then a youth; but I remember a tale that chanced a century before I vvas born, and that will I relate." Sir Aymer's Tale. " My grand-uncle, Odo of Chastelroi ■ -----' " It was thine uncle Odo, surnamed the vol. i, s
Lion/' interrupted De Monfort; " and the matter chanced about4ifty years ago, which is rife in thy memory." " Thou art right," said Sir Aymer, though discomfited at this rectification of dates. " Mine uncle Odo, surnamed the Lion, being at one time sore sick, and at point to die, sent for the prior of St. Bernard's to shrieve him: the prior came, attended by two friars; one of whom bore away on his departure a relic of precious value, which an ancestor of Sir Odo's hacfchrought from the Holy Land in the first crusade. Odo the Lion r well so named, when restored to health ------" " That was owing to the prayers of the prior," muttered the abbot of Normoutier. " He showed but little gratitude," said Sir Aymer; " for when he could brook his saddle, his first exploit vvas vo assail the priory of St. Bernard's, and demand his relic, which he swore had been secretly conveyed away by the crafty friar. Odo the Lion was at the head of fifty men-at-arms — the prior came forth to
meet him at the^head of the brethren; but it so chanced that, bead and bell were weak fence against lance and brand — the good prior, by some mistake, lost his life jn thescufrle; and by the same, mismanagement certain;torches, that happened to be in the hands of the men-at- arms, found their^vay to the roof of.the priory, which w,as a heap of smouldering ashes ere mom. Mine uncle, leaving his train to settle the matter with the friars, set forth without delay for Rome, where, having obtained abso¬ lution from the Pope, he was enjoined, for penance, yearly to make a pilgrimage to the tomb of the martyred prior, (who might thank » Odo for his martyrdom,) and to endow the spot where he was interred with a heavy.sum for niasses to be said for ever. -.Mine uncle readily, complied with the latter enjoinment, which hath left the shrine of St. Bernard as rich as the tower of Chastelroi js poor — marry, for the former he commuted; for it was enjoined him to go barefoot to the shrine the day the deed was done; and that being in December, when vyeatjierjs foul-and roads c Cf
stark naught, Odo the Lion rode with his bare feet in his stirrups, while a henchman, bearing his boots of steel, (lest the weather should prove too rough,) ran beside him as he rode. Now it chanced that the shrine of St. Bernard lay. sixteen miles from Odo's castle, and be ween them was neither town nor tower, or other sojourn than a hostel, which, however, was well-liked and frequented, being possessed by a merry old host, whose free humour, jovial songs, and quaint sayings, made, his abode better liked than the towers of certain castles, where men say ------ I- crave your pardon, Lord of Courtenaye." The Lord of Courtenaye bowed in grim civility. " He was named the host of the Black Hog from the letters on his sign, which ran thus — * Je met en Dieu mon tout espoir, Et je demeure au Cochon Noir.'* Mine uncle, on his pilgrimage, always,so¬ journed at the host of Cochon Noir. He loved
to gather with his train round the bright wood- fire, to list his merry songs, and quaff his wine, while the storms of December pealed without the walls, and to-morrow's journey lay before him unremembered. It was one night while they sat thus, as the storm waxed fierce, and the fire blazed bright,* and the host, with broken voice and increasing girth and lungs, puffing away their last breath in merriment, tried to excite the sinking spirits of his noble guest, that a mingled humour of mirth and melan¬ choly seizing on Odo the Lion, he exclaimed, 'My merry old host sing no longer—thy voice is to me like a voice I shall never hear again; the hand with which thou touchest thy harp is weak, tbe tones that follow its chords are broken; and thou hast rounded to such a size, and thy limbs are like those of a grasshopper. Trust me, my pleasant host, I never expect to meet thee on another De¬ cember anniversary; and so I bid adieu to good wine, well-aired chambers, and cheerful converse on my next visit to the shrine of St. Bernard.'—* And trust me,' said the merry
hostj ' even if I be dead, the harp shall ring in your ears, your wine-cup shall be filled, and, noble ■ guesty your bed shall be as well-aired and as warmly spread as when you honoured my poor hostel last.'—Some maudlin tears were then shed—I say not they were insincere, for mine eyes gushed over this day when Sir Patedour foiled thee in the lists, De Monfort." " Finish thy goblet and thy tale," said De Monfort. " Odo the Lion was then conveyed to his bed," said Sir Aymer; " and they say he murmured, as he went, that he would slay every prior in France, and do penance after for the deed, provided that the hostel of le Cochon Noir lay in his way as he rode." " The storm increases," said the abbot of Normoutier, starting from a dose. " Were we not best to bed?—not that I could close-an eye — I must tell my beads all night." " Such a storm as fell to-night," said Sir Aymer, " chanced the night that a twelve¬ month after mine uncle set out on his wonted pilgrimage: heavy rains, mixed with gusts
from the mountains, fell during the short day, the- night closed, and matters grew worse — the guides, though well-accustomed to their way, lost the track — ths deluges ploughed up the roads, and made every brook a river — flashes of pale lightning glimmered round the horizon, but there was not a peal of thunder; nought but the roar of streams, and of winds conflicting with woods, and the yells of wolves, that, though distant, sounded but too near in the watchful ear of terror. Odo the Lion himself, in attempting to ford a stream, was well nigh lost in the strong current; two of his squires swam beside to hold him on his steed, and by dint of a vow to the Trinity of Gaeta at his utmost need he won the hither bank : his train fol¬ lowed as they might— a light gleamed at scant distance, to which they tended, and which issued from the hostel, now a drenched hovel rocking in a morass. The noble guest was received, however, with joy, ushered to his wonted chamber, and his shivering train spread themselves before the fire below, after placing
one or two wine flagons they had saved on a table before their lord. After he had drained them, and warmed his chilled limbs, (for he still rode barefooted,) his heart began to glow, and his memory to return; and as he expanded himself to the grateful heat, he could not choose but exclaim, ' Would that my merry old host were here to touch harp or lute, and sing me some drowsy strain, betwixt whose changes I might wake and nod, and then be lulled again!' Odo the Lion, on his dying bed,.and to an holy friar, but not of St Bernard's, assevered, that as he uttered these words, (nay, all his life-time he told the same tale,) the dull low tinkling of'a lute was heard in the pauses of the wind. Mine uncle had two companions, one his confessor, the other his squire;—the latter became senseless at the sound; the other, being a bold as well as a holy man, sat out this awful visitation. The sounds increased, and were accompanied by words that seemed to come neither from below the earth nor above it; still less did it resemble any sound on earth. Mine uncle was wont to
term it the ghost of speech. These words, so sepulchral, unnatural, and fearful to human ears, were, nevertheless, part of the welcome song his former host used to sing to his guest; and as they ended, my kinsman, turning his head, saw something faint, shapeless, and fea¬ tureless, stand in the corner of the chamber— he said there was a film or gauze either before his eyes, (which he allowed grew a little dim on the occasion,) or before the aspect of that something; for, though no human visage could be traced, he swore it bore a kind of fearful indefinite- resemblance to his ancient host. He added, that the garb vvas neither that of living man, nor the last dreary array of a shrouded corse, but a shadowy envelopment he could not describe. Odo, collecting his spirits when his head was averted, stamped for his attendants to spread for supper; they prepared to do so, but first applied themselves to the recovery of the squire, who recovered only to a state of idiotism. This Odo did not much regard — the table was spread, and the attendants were s5
prompt; but Odo observed one more prompt than them all, his eye followed the swift silent figure as it flitted around, and he saw zvho filled his trencher ere he could swallow its contents, and made his goblet sparkle to the brim when he thought he had drained it, so over officious was this mute attendant. The confessor himself avouched that there was one more in the chamber than he' could reckon; and though he began and ended the tale* over and over again,- still there was one ih the chamber who completely perplexed his calcu¬ lation, and whom, though he saw, Iw never could count airiong the number — he ever saw twelve, but could number but eleven. The confessor betook him to his beads, and my kinsman, to his bed, (the poor squire being jn a lamentable state); but he had not rested long when he was awoke by some one softly and lightly pacing round his bed, and ever and anon adjusting the clothes. Odo started up, and beheld the same shapeless, nameless thing, employed, as it seemed, officiously around his bed ; and what was worse, as the bed was but
narrow, the face without lineaments, the aspect not to be thought of vvithout horror, even in the silence and absence of the grave, was now close to his — the dead one was his silent gliding chamberlain. There was no standing this. Odo sprung from the bed, roused his confessor, who was sleeping on the rushes, fenced by relics above, below, and around, and commanded his train to set forth that moment. The storm had abated, and they gladly obeyed; for they had heard some fearful whispers as they waited, and all were ready on the instant: some said a shadowy figure, without head or shape, helped Odo to his stirrup, and bowed as he rode off. I know not how it was, the confessor retired into a monastery, the squire was an idiot for life; so mine uncle, to save charges, made him his fool; but amid his fooleries he would utter such ghastly things as made Odo's hair rise round his scalp. Odo also withdrew his annual offering nt the shrine of St Bernard, and defied them, having impoverished himself by his lavish endowment for ever."
" Humph," quoth the abbot of Normoutier, " he had the authority of a certain father for it — cantabit vacuus coram latrone viator." " I remember," said Sir Aymer, whispering his next neighbour, " that is, I do not remember, but I have heard in mine infancy ------" " There he lies deeply," said De Monfort, quaffing his goblet; " he remembers it well." Sir Aymer whispered on — "a wild tale, that on the annual night of that strange meet¬ ing a voice is heard murmuring at the tomb of Odo, (he lies interred in the chapel of the castle du Chastelroi,) ' Wilt thou have thy cup filled, Odo ?' and an hour after, c Is thy couch soft and well-spread, Odo?' The effigy of mine uncle lies on his monument in marble, his feet on a couchant hound, his hands uplift in prayer, his armed legs crossed ; but it is said, at these sounds the stony lips of the figure un¬ close with a crashing noise like the opening of a sepulchre, and sounds issue forth, that many who watch at that fearful moment do not un¬ derstand, and the few who do have never dared to interpret. By the mass, an' it be so, I would
not choose to rest with my grandsires!" and Sir Aymer ended with his usual laugh. ' " Laugh as thou wilt," said De Monfort, who had listened with a kind of sullen atten¬ tion, " but there are those who have faith in such tales;" and he seemed angry with himself at the concession an inward and unavouched feeling seemod suddenly to extort from him, " My lord of Toulouse," he cried, "is it not the truth that disembodied spirits may be made visible to bodily eyes, avouched by holy church ?" " Doubtless," said the bishop, who always concealed his scepticism under a show of yield¬ ing to the grossest superstitions of a gross age; " and, noble De Monfort, perchance you have had some proof of the point on which we hold such dark and doubtful question." " By the mass," said De Monfort, " some¬ thing comes dimly to my memory since Sir Aymer spoke, which I had sooner were forgot! I feel like one whom sudden mention of a drear and desert country, through which he has travelled, brings back to the recollection of the
dark stream, and leafless bush, and grey un¬ sightly stone, he encountered on his cheerless way." De Monfort's Tale. " About twenty years since I hunted the wild boar and the wolf with Enguerrand de Vitry and thy brother, Lord of Courtenaye, in the woods of Lanp-uedoc. We had toiled three days and nights in the chase; and on the even¬ ing of the fourth, as the sun set amid heavy clouds, and the forest shades fell deeper round us, and a rustling wind among the leaves be¬ tokened a gathering storm, I found myself separated from my companions, amid a path so trackless and overshadowed by interlacing boughs of oak and elm and pine, that I might as soon have made my way through the clois¬ tered passages of a cathedral, which they much resembled. " Mine attendants, to the number of twenty, were well-armed with boar-spears and other hunting gear; and they gave counsel to pass the night on the spot, where the deep sward
formed a cOuch, and the broad oak a canopy; and the glimmering moon, that now began to show herself between the trees, seemed like the lamp in my lady's bower, fitful and pale, yef beaming sweet light on the dreamer's broken rest, who looked up, and slumbered again. Such was the page's song, who sung at my knee while I lay on my folded mantle and endeavoured myself to sleep. Suddenly there was a shout among the huntsmen that they descried a light at a distance. I started up, for the mention of light vvas mingled in my half- begun dreams vvith the discovery of a nest of wolves or a troop of bears; and I urged on the knaves, half in my sleep, till we reached a thick avenue of trees, at the end of which opened a glade unencumbered even with a shrub-—a wide, open, deep circle, from whence issued* the light we had seen: the wind had sunk, the chilly rain had ceased to patter among the forest-leaves — all was still — the light burned clear, and as we advanced without whoop or horn, what think you we beheld ?'* " A group of sorcerers at their infernal in-
cantations," said the Lord of Courtenaye, with a deeper interest than his tone betrayed. " A band of pilgrims," said the abbot of Normoutier, " belated in their journey to some holy shrine — perchance St. Benedict's — marry, well fare them!" " Travellers," said the bishop of Toulouse, " who had lost their way, and had kindled a fire to warm themselves withal." " Ye err," said De Monfort; " it was a con¬ gregation of these same pestilent heretics, more than two hundred in number; and among them was placed on high a preacher or barbe, as they call him; and the light we followed arose from a pine-torch, which some knave-heretic held ik his hands, while the preacher read aloud lines from that forbidden book of which our holy father has closed the leaves — such was the sight." " And how didst thou deal with them ?" asked Paladour. " Askest thou how a hunter deals with a brood of wolves—sire, dam, and whelp, all helpless, and within the gash and gore of his
weapon ?" said De Monfort, with a grim smile. " Askest thou a crusader how I dealt with heretics, unarmed too, and in my power? By Heaven, there lives not one man, woman, child, or infant clinging to the breast, fo tell the deed of that night, save those who wrought it! and the hunter's boar-spears were as deeply dyed as the brands of knights in battle! They perished, kneeling as they were—none rose, and none resisted; and it was bright morning ere the huntsmen wiped their spears." u It was a cursed deed," muttered' Pa¬ ladour. " It was ten years after," said De Monfort, not heeding, or perhaps hearing him, " that I chanced to hunt again the wild boar and the wolf in the same forest, in the same spot, or near it. It was evening, when tracing the windings of a thicket in pursuit of a wolf, who, from size and fierceness, was the terror of all that country, I found myself at the foot of a rock without cavity or aperture. My pursuit vvas checked — I had dismounted, and was now on foot alone^ amid a wildering thicket,
with no weapon save my hunting-spear in my hand, and mine horn at my side. I climbed the rock, not without danger, and saw around me nought but the darkening mountains and the declining day. " I wound mine horn to summon my train, but the sole answer was the echo from the dark hills; and I will confess, that at the moment, the-meanest serf, who ran that day barefoot beside my rerfi, would have been a sight most welcome. I deem there was, beside the dreariness of the spot, and the deepening gloom of the evening, (now fast closing into night,) an unwonted heaviness that hung on me, and weighed me down. As I descended info the hollow or ravine betwixt two stony hills, (forbearing to wind mine horn, for the sound, unanswered as it vvas by human voice, added to the deep loneliness that surrounded me,) I saw on tbe summit of a hill, the lowest pnd nearest to me, a figure, small, mean, and peasant-like. I shouted to him, and com¬ manded him to conduct me on my way. He descended in a moment, but remained at a
distance from me; and though he appeared to understand every sign I made, he never answered to a word, though I strained my voice to its utmost pitch. Still he-beckoned me onward, and signified, ■ as* it were, that he would guide me; and I, seeing him in the habit of a peasant, judged that he might be ne'er the worse guide through those hilly pas¬ sages, and followed at mine utmost speed." " Heap on more wood," said the Lord of Courtenaye, — " the fire waxes low." " Not so, Lord of Courtenaye," said De Monfort, " with your fair leave, such tales are ever best told by the dim and glowing embers. It was not until we came within the deep and narrow gorge, formed by two hills, rock from summit to base, that I caught a distinct view of my strange guide. I discovered he was in the garb of an Aibigeois, such as I had seen, and I called and threatened louder; but though his stature was dwarfish, and his strength, mated with mine, had been as the thistle-down's to the whirlwind's, yet his speed so far surpassed mine, that, panting, I followed
him as I might. My mood hath been always hot, and impatient of the peasant's insolence. I strained my utmost strength to overtake and slay him on the spot, (even though I might wander among the mountains till I perished,) but he vvas ever a bow-shot length before me, and still he waved and beckoned with such more than human eagerness, that, incensed and well-nigh exhausted as I vvas, I could not choose but follow. Thrice I flung mine hunting- spear after him, and I was then no erring marks¬ man, but twice it fell far short of him; the third time it seemed to pass through his body, yet still he pressed on; and when I reached the spot, it stood quivering and bloodless amid a bunch of fern. At this moment the figure had reached the summit of the path that wound between those rocky hills, and he stood there fixed as them,; and beckoning me to advance — I did so, sure that when I reached him I would force him to speak, or make him dumb for ever. I was within arm's length of that dwarfish figure, which I now could dis¬ tinctly see between the receding hills, and
nought but the twilight sky behind his dusky form, vvhen, uttering a faint and wailing cry, he bounded from where he stood, and plunged into a dark glen, where the pine and larch growing thickly hid him from my sight in a moment. I know not, nor can I tell, nor do I distinctly remember, the desperate and defy¬ ing feeling in which I plunged after him. I sprung from crag to crag on my descent vvith a speed and safety that seemed to myself super¬ natural : the thick dark wood in the hollow opened its bosom to receive me — as I entered it, my brain cooled, and my senses settled; and I saw, as distinctly as I now see this group, in the wide opening glade, the same band of heretics, barbe, torch-bearer, and all, in a kind of ghastly mockery of devotion — they looked, but not with the same visages; they prayed, but not with the same voices; and they turned on me, but—oh! they were the same, and not the same. Maddened at the sight, as I am now by the bare recital, I rushed among them — I thought I did — but all rose to meet me, the barbe with his book, the mother with her child,
the father vvith his young daughter, the crone with her grandchild, the stripling with his boy-brother, and the aged with their gray shaking locks — and all were as the dead. I heard the clattering bones — I .saw the eyeless sockets, the bare and grinning jaws.—I would sooner have rushed on a thousand spears. — I raised mine hunting-spear, but their cold eyes seemed to have blunted its point and withered the hand that held it. — They gathered round — they closed in on me — St. Mary ! I hear them now !" -he cried, clasping his hands on hi* rough forehead, and bending forward for a moment, as if a viewless choir were still pealing in his ears. " I know not how it fared with me — my fellows found me stretched on the sward, in a swoon, they said,"—he added in a more sub¬ dued voice, but withoiit raising his head, " and I survived it. — But," he cried, suddenly lifting up iead and figure at once, and bursting into a wild laugh,-" vvas it not—might it not be all a dream, a vision?—-„how sayest thou, lord abbot ?"
" That it was a mere device of the foul fiend," quoth the abbot: "regard it no more than I do this empty cup ; fill it, knave!" " But, my Lord of Courtenaye," said De Monfort, whose brief fit of-superstitious re¬ morse was over, " you who have urged us to those dark tales could yourself tell a darker still. What was that mysterious fate that befell my lord, your brother ? Men have spoken strangely of it. Nay, never look on the tapes¬ try, man, as if its waving chided you, or on the portraits as if they would start from their frames. — Tell us truly how perished the. Lord of Courtenaye. Fellow, fill your lord's goblet! —he looks deadly pale." " Fill my lord's goblet, knave, dost thou hear ? " said the abbot, from association : " in vino Veritas." " For a vile marksman, thou hast for once hit the white," said the bishop of Toulouse, internally. — " My .Lord of Courtenaye, we wait for your tale;" .and his eye and voice as¬ sumed a peculiar expression, that made the
Lord of Courtenaye quit his untasted goblet, and, though dreadfully pale, enter abruptly on the subject he was thus forced to. " My brother," he said, or rather whispered, " was a bold and approved warrior, and a true Catholic ; but he had ever a spirit and will to pry into * those things that are hidden from man." " I trust that spirit has not descended to his family," said the bishop somewhat sternly, and yet hesitatingly, as if he felt the remark might be retorted. . " My brother's death," said the Lord of Courtenaye, shuddering, " has been loudly mouthed, and darkly whispered, as the talkers were more or less confident or. ignorant— but I know the truth !" "Asif truth ever came out of that mouth!" muttered the bishop : " let us have it then, we pray you.'* " My departed brother was fond of those dark studies I have hinted at," said the Lord of Courtenaye, commencing his solemn tale.
" From which of his family did he learn that taste ?" said the abbot of Normoutier in his insouciance. No one heeded him, and the Lord of Courtenaye proceeded — " Every year, it was his wont,. (I mean in the latter troubled and unhappy years of his life,) on ihe eve of St.' Michael — but I tell my tale ill, noble hearers.—I should have first related that there was in the neighbourhood of our castle of Beaurevoir a lake that lay among the moun¬ tains—a dark, still, gloomy sheet of water, that the traveller started when he beheld in such a spot, where he looked only for a yawn¬ ing gorge amid the stony hills: — it was said that in its'waters no fish lived, and no fowl dipped its wing — that it bore on its dark surface only the reflection of the rocks that impended over it, and of the twilight sky, which their precipices darkened even at noon into somewhat like the shadows of evening. No peasant built his hut near the spot; the wanderer who had lost his way struck into VOL. 1. T
another path, ere he would follow that, even at midnight ------" " Enough of the spot," said the bishop of Toulouse ; " we know it well." " It was my brother's wont,". continued the .Lord of Courtenaye, in a still.more suppressed and hollow tone, " on the eve of St. Michael, as I have said, to embark on that lake in a boat rowed by a single vassal—my brother ever rowed back alone. The following year he embarked at the same period with another vassal, and returned again alone. Small count is held of vassals' lives ; but I know not how it was, when many such visits had chanced, neither the scourge, nor torture, could force a vassal, old or young,----- »-" he paused, and then slowly resumed—" In the stormy twilight of an autumnal eve, the eve of St. Michael, (all day the wind had roared, and the waves of the lake were crested vvith foam, and the •sky was dark as December;) on such an evening my brother rowed forth on the lake alone."
" And when did he return?" asked the abbot of Normoutier, starting from a doze. "Never*!" answered the bishop of Tou¬ louse : — " My Lord of Courtenaye, have ye aught further to communicate concerning your brother's fate ?" " Nought," said the Lord of Courtenaye, applying his napkin to his eyes, " save the profound grief in which his mysterious disap¬ pearance plunged our house." At this moment, a laugh of derision, wild and fiendlike, burst from behind the tapestry of the hall ; nor did it cease till every ear had distinctly heard it. The contrast was so strong as to force itself on the senses of all whom these long tales had left awake. At the close of Sir Aymer's and de Monfort's relations, wild and vague as they were, the silence deepened, the group gathered closer, the very rushing of the wind, as it shook the hangings, was watched vvith a kind of jealousy — all had been still, as if inanimate things themselves had become mute and anxious listeners ; but the laugh that followed the Lord of Courtenaye's tale of t 2
his brother's fate seemed to announce other than human listeners to his words. " That was a ghastly sound," said the abbot, effectually startled from his doze. " "It was the wind howling through the pas¬ sages," said Sir Aymer : " our talk hath been dismal, and such themes make men eager interpreters of sad and boding sounds. I have heard the wind sweep over a battle-field while I rode in my harness; but in my lonely tower of Chastelroy, its very whispers had sounded to me like the wailings of the dead." " I have heard," said the bishop with a stern smile, " of winds that sighed, or moaned, yea, uttered all sounds that imitated the tones of human suffering, from the wail of the infant, a span long, to the dying groan of man in the strength of maturity; but never did I hear before the winds accused of mocking the sound of human laughter." "And what other sounds," said the Lord of Courtenaye, who perceived that the excited feelings of his guests required a sudden change to work them to his purpose; " and what other
sounds would you have to join in the burthen of idle tales but thosr of laughter? Methinks such tales told by dim light give pleasure like that the cricket gives when he chirps faintly on the hearth, and the slumbering warrior stretched near it knows not whether that, or the minstrel's drowsy note, is humming in his earo. But what, my noble guests, if we turn this to matter of mirth, after the sad and solemn talk that hath held us so long? what if we prove these things but toys—fables—mere vanities ? The proof lies within a moment's trial. There is one, a woman too, whom some hold a sorce¬ ress, and some mad-r-she hath shown some curious tricks of art. Please you, my lords and knights, to see th§m ; 'twill be as pastime after our sad supper. She is now in the vaults of the castle — indeed she tenanteth chiefly in vaults or, in dismal places. What say ye, Lords? — shall we visit her ? — shall we hear what she hath to tell, that we may mock at it and her ? Methinns it will be a merry period to our sad controversy." The guests shuddered as he spoke ; but the
Lord of Courtenaye pursued his point, apply¬ ing himself dexterously to the individual feel¬ ing of each he addressed : — " I have heard," he said in a mysterious whisper to the bishop,' " that she predicted the popedom to a cobler's serf, and that a Holy Father should one day have a laundress to his sister*; and that a goose and a swan should one day hiss the Roman eagle from the Capitol ;f and that though their wings would be scorched, their flutter would extinguish the fire kindled by their opposers — strange, unmeaning words, my lord!" " Strange, but perchance not ■ unmeaning," said the bishop, starting from a reverie;■-" let us see this woman, and hear what she hath to say"—many things foretold by an astrologer, and many others suggested by his own potent and prophetic spirit, rushing on it at that moment.
", Lord abbot," cried the Lord of Courte¬ naye, encouraged by his success, " What! — shall we skulk from the array of the Philistiues to-night, and visit this Witch of Endor ?" "'My lord," said the abbot, who vvas now very tolerably drunk, " wherefore not ?— for what saith a father — magicas invitam accin- gier artes —and, as he sweetly added, si nequeo super'os fleetere, Acheronte movebo." " Noble guests!" said the Lord of Cour¬ tenaye, pursuing his triumph as he addressed the rest, " ye will not grudge to break a spear in a visionary list, vvho have borne yourselves in a real one so manfully to-day." Paladour, under the influence of a feeling he dared not avow even to himself, intimated his compliance silently ; butde Verac, hesitating, whispered Semonville—"By m} faith as a knight! I like not these magical meetings ; (this castle is but too much noted for them ;) there will be such a smouldering smoke of brimstone, sulphur, and unsavoury herbs, that my sensitive organs would be sore offended ; and worse, my mantle and doublet turned to
THE ALBIGENSES. such hues and drenched in such vapours] that the devil himself could not abide them, were he to tilt for recovery of his former state." « " I understand not that," said Semonville ; nevertheless I would risk the meeting to-night, but I have not my grandame's spell about me—I would it were here; thou shouldst then see how I would confront and confound the sorceress." As they whispered thus, the Lord of Courte¬ naye had raised the tapestry that covered a small and narrow arched door in the hall,-and' looked back as if to assure tbem that some pre¬ paration would be necessary. - :.* This door ©pened on a nook, through which Thibaud passed angrily, a torch in his hand, and exclaiming, " Art thou' mad, Lord - of Courtenaye?—dost thou bring churchmen to witness the* for wm*cb, in their holy charity, they might commend thee to the care of the In¬ quisition r Remember that though Chateauneuf is dead, his spirit may yet kindle a fire in Languedoc, whose flame will overtop thy highest towers;" and he parted, his speech
> being as brief as the glare of his torch, which he flashed full before his intimidated lord. The^ Lord of Courtenaye paused for a mo¬ ment^ and dreaded to proceed in his purpose without holding advice with him—his lips were half open to - call him back, even to entreat hinwthen die reflected that the topics he would have urged on, Thibaud were such as perhaps, if suppressed or concealed, would give him at a future day added power over, his vassal. He had the presence of dignitaries of the Catholic church to hear him out in all they might see or imagine they saw; their presence was ample sanction against the anger of the church. Another motive trembled at the bottom of his coward heart: he wished for witnesses to support his courage during this terrible scene; but that was a motive he dared not avow to his guests, or even to himself. So, opening the narrow door again, and look¬ ing; into the hall, he whispered to Verac and Semonville, " You go not, with us, noble knights." They nodded a refusal. The door then admitted successively the t 5
bishop of Toulouse, on whose brow sat a min¬ gled cloud of pride, daring hopes, and some¬ thing that resembled anxiety—it was impossible it could be fear — the Count de Monfort, turbid, dark, and restless as ever, went on like a wave in a storm rushing to encounter a rock, though fated to perish against it; he had not mental power to analyse his feelings to their elements, but he felt excitement: a summons to a new species of trial and of peril, and a, spirit that defied them both to extremity — both of them (though of far different characters and habits) verified the words of our great dramatist: It ever is the marked propensity Of restless and aspiring minds to look Into the secrets of futurity. Etuwald. Then followed the abbot, supported by,two attendants, whose office was on this occasion no sinecure, exclaiming loudly against loups garoux, and. all other goblins and: fiends whatever, let their operations and occupations be what they would. - . " Come, fiend or fury!" he cried, brandish-
ing his crosier, " I defy them in the name of St. Benedict!—shew me these spirits !—I will exorcise thy vaults for thee, Lord of Cour¬ tenaye ! — Bear me gently down the steps, I pray ye. — Oh ghost! thou art no ghost of this world; I promise thee, ere another hour hath struck — gentiy ever, I pray ye !" Paladour went last. The door was closed, the tapestry dropt over it, and Verac and Semonville were left the sole tenants of the hall.
CHAPTER XIII. Double, double, toil and trouble, Fire burn, and caldron bubble. Macbeth. The belief in the power of witchcraft, and its influence as connected with that belief, were during the dark ages in a state of fluctuation and obscurity, equally puzzling to the historian and the writer of romances. The art was denounced as unlawful and damnable, yet often resorted to by those who reviled it the most. It was at once disclaimed and confided in, forbidden, and employed. Councils and courts consigned its professors to flames temporal and eternal, yet nevertheless " sought to them" on all occasions momentous or trivial. All the thunderbolts of law, eccle¬ siastical and civil, had been let loose against
them; and those who fulminated them with, the utmost fury .admitted similar impostors to their confidence, sheltered them in their castles; 1 and entrusted them with. secrets big with all their hopes of the. present, or all. their fears of the future world. Thus the wretchedibeings we have alluded to, alternately persecuted and worshipped, tor¬ tured .or rewarded, passing, from the closet of the prince or prelate to the dungeon or the stake.and faggot, caught at their precarious existence with a convulsive grasp,, and, dealt about their spells, charms, and promises, in the, vaults of a castle one night, for vast reward, at the risk of perchance blazing in its. court on the following day. _ These observations were perhaps necessary to introduce, the reader to the scene.that.was now acting in the vaults of the castle ofCourte-j naye, .and to the beings. vvho. were the per¬ formers in it. „■..... ;* The vault to which the Lord pf Courtenaye led his guests by.many steps,of stone was,.of vast extent — arch beyond arch, solid, low,
and strongly built of stone, seemed intended to lead to recesses of interminable darkness. There was a kind of compartment where four low arches of stone rose from the paved floor; the roof was in that place vaulted above; and by the sport or spleen of the architect, or perchance by order of the founder, the arches were springing from corbelles hewed into the faces of demons, their hideousness magnified by their being strongly hewn out in stone, and presenting features " grotesque and grim" beyond the drean> of the sufferer under the nightmare to paint or to imagine. Beneath the midmost arch of this vault sat a form, clothed in rags, applying iuei to a cal¬ dron that was slow in seething. Sh? drew from her withered bosom fragments ot charmed wood, and placed them slowly and carefully under the caldron — still it boiled not. The hag, in the inveteracy of her nature, cursed the inanimate materials, and then sat rocking beside the embers, when two other forms appeared through the arches of the vault. They were both women far advanced in years,
yet still possessing marked muscular strength of frame, inveterate malignity of aspect, but something of decision of character in their ex¬ pression that had its effect alike on the aged and the young. " And what hast thou done ?" said the elder of the twain ; " has the caldron seethed?" " Six hours have I drudged here," growled the bag, " till my limbs are numbed, and mine eyes are bleared, and thou seest my toil is bootless yet." " I bring that which will aid it," said the other, crouching beside her, and displaying her lap full of withered herbs : *' here be marmartin and mandragora, pannax and hemlock; and that herb," she said, twisting it within her bony fingers, " which frustrates all the hopes of love ; and that also • ;hich makes those love to madness who hated before to death. " And what is that," said her companion, ct to what I bring ? Here be n'jhtshade, slips of yew, (churchyard yew, mark that!) and cypress, and wolfsbane, and," with a pause of horrid delight, *' a branch of sycamore that
grew from a parricide's grave ; and this weed, whose name I trow not, but it grew fresh and ( fair on the grave of one, whose crime woman's tongue cannot utter — the, better for our pur¬ pose." . . ; " Pour them into the caldron, and cause the fire to glow," said the crone, who had tarried for them.' r ^ ; , J . " I will pour in mine first," said one of them, advancing to the caldron. " Thou /" cried the other, interposing ; " thou hag and witch from thy birth — thou to mingle thy paltry ingredients before m,e, — thou that never gatheredst herbs but from a common." , , j 0 ,* . / " And where hast thou gathered thine, thou wrinkled succuba!" answered her compeer, " that thou givest me terms so foul ?" < . , " From the church-yard-rfrom the vault— from the ruins where-murder hath been," rejoined the other beldam:?—".have I not been where thou darest not be — where wolves were tearing the dead from the graves ? — have I not grappled with them, and wrenched the
bones from their jaws ?;~where the; tjat whizzed past me, watched J not till I.-caught him ]by : his leathern.wing?—where the battened toad croaked from his hole, whose fingers tore him out?" ....... " Thou liest," cried her antagonist; "thou never knewest what it was to lame or dry up cattle, or to spoil harvest, in thy long and worthless lifetime." ■.-.',. "I have made/- said the other, in the ; miserable emulation of wickedness, "• I have made more wed-beds fruitless than thOu couldst for thy art, were thy master at thy back." I.. .'•; " Hag and fiend!" exclaimed the. former, darting on her with the springs and fangs of a > wild cat, and grasping her by.the.throat. I s> ".Forbear!—-forbear!";said she who had first sat beside the caldron.; and. rising, tyith difficulty she tore them asunder. .... a'- They stood panting,,ghastly, and menacing, at the opposite sides of the caldron ■■;' while she. exclaimed, A!.< Are you mad ?.-rare not; famine^ and faggot enough here, but Je will kindle- the eternal fire for yourselves before the time-r-^
see how bright and blue the flame arises!" — and whether from the ingredients supplied, or from some other circumstance operating on the ignition, the flame burst forth so darkly blue as to give the countenances of the hags who cowered round it a hue beyond all human paleness—a hue preternatural and even dia¬ bolical. The signal operated punctually on their associations. — " Haste and feed the flame," said the twain in a breath : "an' it had not blazed so brightly, she whom we tarry for had rated us like dogs." " I marvel what gave her tongue such li¬ cense," rejoined the other. " I marvel more what gave it such power," said the first; " for I have felt it thrill through blood and marrow; it is a sound I hate to hear, yet dare not disobey." " Wo to us since the hour we knew her !" said the other, and they suddenly exchanged their mutual hostility for a mutual whine of condolence. " Wo to us since that hour! — she rules us as a lord would his'serfs — it was
better times when the noblest and the fairest of the land came to our hovels with hands full of agnuses and bezants." " And so it was," said the other, busily feeding the flame the while, and nodding a ghastly acquiescence. " Ay, thou rememberest," continued the hag, " and so do I — there came the lady wrapped in her handmaid's veil to ask tidings of her lover — I knew her by her tripping tread and mincing voice. Ay, and the lord hid in the guise of his meanest serf, to ask his fate in some distant battle — crusades they called them, then fought against Pagans far away — crusades they call them still, though they now slay only their own countrymen. I knew him too by his proud tone and lofty tread. Gold, gold," she cried, " hath crossed this withered hand — the mother hath left me her last kid to tell the fate of her son gone to battle, and I devoured it, while I knew her stripling lay lifeless ere its limbs were seethed ; and the abbot, muffled above his tonsure, hath left me the value of his ring and crosier to.
foretell the fate of the mitred bishop, in whose stall he was fain to sit; and both have been cold in the earth, while my old blood was warmed by the wine that I purchased with the gift, to quaff healths that would have made their bones burst through cerement and sepul¬ chre to hear!" " Ay, those were the times that we have seen," answered the coadjutor, plying her task; " and now—and now, we are sent to gather weeds in a churchyard at her command. I tremble to speak of her when I know she is leagues distant; yet do I hate her deadly — deadly I Would/' added she, thrusting a bundle of weeds under the caldron, " would that this were the brand to light her stake!" " Would that it were," said a low, but deep-toned voice; and she of whom they had been speaking stood suddenly among them — " would that it were! But the brand that blazes for me will never be lit by thy hand." And without further notice of what she must have overheard, she continued, " To your task, to your task ! those are gathering around ye who
may rend you piecemeal for your delay!" The wretched assistants crouched around the caldron. Fresh fuel was added — the flame blazed bright and blue, sending a flitting light round the ribbed arches, and the inferior agents renewed their toil, and plied their task in silence. Meanwhile, their chief, who was no other than she who had rowed Paladour over the lake, and assisted at the secret councils of the Lord of Courtenaye, began to prepare herself slowly and, as it seemed, carelessly, for the fearful scene she was about to preside at; she threw off her large mantle, gave some herbs to one of the attendants, and a flask of medicated oil to another; and then drawing some other ingredients from her bosom, which she examined without showing to her associates, said, " These will avail — a few nights more of toil and of suffering — of darkness and de¬ lusion—and then ------ feed ye the flame," she added aloud, — " and quickly and fiercely, — for I hear the sound of steps that I must meet, and of voices that I must speak with." And
as she spoke, she placed a small triangular piece of black marble on the block of stone, and bade her assistants retire for a space. The hags arose from their crouching posture, muttering, more from inveterate habits of discontent and malignity than from any pur¬ pose or power of resistance. " Obey me !— begone!" said the mistress of the spell ■— "1 hear steps approaching." Steps approached — the iron door, low, narrow, and strongly barred, slowly admitted the visitors, — " and welcome," she said, displaying all the height and grandeur of a form naturally majestic, and now elevated by preternatural excitement, and the power of concentrated passions, to a kind of fiend-like grandeur, — " Welcome," to De Monfort, " thou glorious and gilded , butcher — whom men have girt in iron, and called a noble and a knight: and welcome thou (to the Lord of Courtenaye) who hadst always the heart to slay, but never the hand to strike tlie blow: — and welcome thou (to Paladour), thou predoomed murderer—the deed that is to ( be, must be done — avert not thy head, and
delay not thy step; but nerve thy hand and harden thy heart — for so it must be: but come not thou !" she shrieked, in more exalted tones, as the Bishop of Toulouse entered — "come not thou, lest the vault should split over thy head and mine, — never, never must we meet, till we meet at last on the verge of the lake of fire, and to its lowest bottom will I sink with a smile, if I may but see thee first weltering on its billows." The visitors, somewhat appalled at the language and gesture with which they were encountered, paused at the threshold, with the exception of the Bishop of Toulouse, and some powerful associations seemed to be awa¬ kened, as he fixed his eyes on the wretched female, who, from being almost convulsed, was now speechless from deep and terrible emotion. " Heed her not," whispered the Lord of Courtenaye to the rest, (dreading the disap¬ pointment of the purpose he had planned)— " heed her not — she talks wildly, poor distracted soul! specially at the sight of
strangers; but when : her:; frenzy hath past aivay—^as in brief space itvvill'—she will be¬ come communicative and tractable as one of your jongleurs that sing at tha gate, or sport in the hall, and predict successful chase to the lord, and noble wooers *to; the lady of the castle, faster than they know'how to tell their beads." It seemed as if he spoke truth, — the flash departed from the eye—the excitement and dilation from the figure of the object he pointed to —her very garments seemed to sink and subside into quieter folds, — her eyes lost all light, her features all colour, her form all expression, character, and power. •■-.; " I said it would be so," whispered the Lord of Courtenaye. — " Now mark her, —^ now the fit is o'erpast, — mark what will follow." The change did not seem more to the taste of the visitors, as the vision, for such she now appeared ! to be, with pale aspect, extended arm, and lips unclosed, 'waved them slowly and silently into the interior of the vault. They paused — but their character ;for cou-
rage was at stake — and they followed, all internally uttering vows, or searching their memory for counter-spells, but - Paladour. As they followed, the blue flame that glowed beneath the caldron, and gleamed on the arches of the vault, vvas extinguished; a thick smoke, or rather vapour, for it had no repul¬ sive smell or stifling effect, formed their atmo¬ sphere— they felt for each other's hands in the darkness ; and however divided in passions, interests, and habits, they were discovered to be thus linked together hand in hand, (all damp and cold,) when the triangular block of marble began slowly to effuse a pale and sulphur¬ ous light. As the light developed surrounding objects, it was seen that the bishop of Toulouse still stood alone, strongly fixing his eyes on the female, who now was seen, pale, calm, and resolved, beside her fearful preparations. De Verac and Semonville had walked silently for an hour up and down; at length the latter turned abruptly on bis companion, vol. i, v
—"A thought—a sudden thought hath struck aie deeply," said he, " That I should change my lilac scarf for one of crimson," said De Verac, stopping. " I tii ought of no such matter," said Semon- vkie, doggedly, ' 4 And of what else couldst thou be think¬ ing?" said he of the scarf. " Not of thy complexion, I promise thee,— but whether we should be sworn brothers or foes ------ *' " Foes! — wherefore should we be foes ? " " Nay, I know not, nor do I much care. I had as lieve be foe as friend with any man—I care not whom—such is my humour. I see how matters hie in this castle, whither I was sent, chiefly at my graGdames instance, to woo the Lady Isabelle. This Sir Paladour bears down all before him. He hath foiled De Monfort in the fists; he makes tbe Lord of Coprtenaye tremble at his board-end, if he but glaace at him. I have seen it" Ami here Verac was astonished at tlie
acuteness which fools often display in the observation of circumstances and manners. He recollected the Lord of Courtenaye had more than once shown terror aad aversion at the sight of Paladour, and he wondered at his not having first discovered and observed it — As he stood silent — " Thou art more busied," said the blunt De Semonville, " twisting the scarf into folds than in listening to my words, — yet I tell thee the foldings of thy scarf were merely scorned in the tourney." " Scorned!" repeated De Verac instantly, roused by a reflection on his attire. " Yea; and I tell thee, moreover, as thou rodest into the lists, the ladies said.'------ •" . " Said what? — What could they say? — My plumage was foreign, and of a most deli¬ cate fancy." Fool as he was, Semonville felt he was now master of the key to which alone Verac's feelings uttered harmony or discord, aud he pursued his advantage. " Dame Marguerite—I answer not for
her taste — Dame Marguerite likened your helmet to her fan; a handle of silver, and a forest of feathers waving above and around." " Malicious hag, she lied! The plumage was fair, curious, and well-assorted." " Ay, and so were thine hose the night before, when thou wert dancing, and yet men say there might be better legs than thine." " I defy them," said Verac, drawing up his hose, and showing a taper and well-formed limb. " I defy them ! I care not what they say of my form and feature — let them call me uncomely — any thing — but let them not dispraise my scarf and attire." " Do I not point out the way to work thy will, and meet thy wish?" said Semonville. " The 1 Lady Isabelle scorns us both; let us be brothers in arms for mere hatred, and suorn friends for mortal malice, —for methinks I w ould like to defeat that Paladour of his love." '" Thou sayest well, and I accept thy pledge," said De Verac, after pausing a moment, and ' then he grasped eagerly the proffered hand of De Verac.
At that moment a wild and horrid cry, tlie fierce yell of masculine agony, in its most horrid extremity, made Verac relax his grasp. " The work of hell is going on below," he cried, in the horror of sudden conviction: then, with an illapse of gallant feeling, which was indeed natural to him, " Could brand or lance aid them, I would hack them to splinters on the dungeon walls, wherein they have enclosed themselves; but no mortal help may avail them now" " Au I had my grandmother's spells," mut¬ tered Semonville, " I would no more heed fiends well-enclosed in a vault, (where I might deal with them roundly, provided they never passed their bounds,) than I would a com¬ munity of the heretics, whom I would in¬ deed give their choice of death by flame or sword, or as they might wish—for I always seek to be courteous in such matters — but in truth I will confess to thee, that mine hair stands almost upright. And I have no weapons," he added, half drawing his dagger,
" for such enemy as they are dealing with now." And he vvas hastening from the hall. " It were pity and shame to leave them in such strait," said Verac; his natural courage struggling with his superstitious feelings. An^ other horrid and indescribable sound burst¬ ing on his ears, made him catch Semonville's arms for support. . . " It were worse," said Semonville, pushing him out, " to have this huge hall crumble over our heads; — mine, I know, could never sus¬ tain the weight, however thicker skulls might fare.; . If this gear hold in the Castle of Cour¬ tenaye, I would sooner couch in my grand¬ mother's closet, which all know to be haunted, than in the chamber of the Lady Isabelle. If one must, needs be haunted, it were better by the ghosts of one's own family than by those of strangers. What, the devil, dalliest thou for?" " I doubt I have left a certain favour behind me," said Verac, lingering; " it was a knot, couleur-de-rose, which I always bore on
the sleeve of my purple tunic, since a fair hand- ------" " Tarry an thou wilt," said Semonville, hurrying away himself; *' perchance, if thou delayest, no fair hand, but a fiery fang, will fasten on thee another kind of favour." " The saints forbid !" cried Verac, darting through the passage. " Amen, Amen !" quoth Semonville, who was first in the flight. " Rapidly as they sought and gained their apartments, the fearful sounds they had heard seemed to pursue them. They paused — listened — the sounds ceased on a sudden — they plunged into their beds, and drawing their silken quilts high above their heads, muttered their night-spells earnestly under the quivering coverlet. END OF TIIE FIRST VOLUME. LONDON: PHINTED BY J. MOYES, GREVIME STftEET.
