Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The milesian chief: a romance
THE MILESIAN.
CHAP. I. Wise wretch, with too much loarmag to be taught, With too much thinking to have common thought, Yob purchase pain with all that joy can give, And die of nothing, but a rage to live. Pofe. ÍN the winter of -, the royal fa¬ mily of Naples were driven to seek for re¬ fuge in their Sicilian dominions. The pre¬ ceding autumn had been marked by un¬ common splendour and gaiety. The ap¬ proaching darkness of the political hori¬ zon seemed tohave no effect on the spirits of a dissipated court, except to contrast their strange and inauspicious brilliancy. But of all the fetes given at that period, vol. i. в
that of Lord Montclare, an English no¬ bleman, lately arrived at Naples, was the most distinguished. His villa, at a little distance from the city, commanded the most exquisite scenery of the bay : every recess of the apartments displayed chcrf- cl* œuvres of ancient art and modern lux¬ ury ; yet the splendid crowd gazed care¬ lessly on all these wonders. His daugh¬ ter had not yet appeared. This young female had been seen but once since her arrival in Naples ; hut report had already represented her as uniting in her mind and form the charms of all the muses and all the graces. She had appeared one night at the English ambassador's ; but some accident had prevented the exhibition of her talents ; when, after much importunity, she con¬ sented to sing : the indisposition of the principal accompaniment compelled her, after a few bars, suddenly to stop. A circle of literati then collected round her, and she was beginning to converse,
when the entrance of one of the royal family, who was passionately fond of dancing, put an end to conversation. She then stood up to dance, but had hardly joined the set, when her father, who was in the balcony conversing with a monk, suddenly fainting, she hurried away to attend him, and was seen no more : yet this imperfect display of her powers, the few words she had uttered, the few notes she had sung, and her figure, as it hovered on the verge of the dance half-ready for flight, had left such an impression, that all who could procure admission crowded to Lord Montclare's villa that night, in hopes of seeing hec again. Till she appeared every one was em¬ ployed in raaking or answering inquiries about her and her father. Of Lord Montclare little was known, hut that he was an English peer who had resided many years in Italy, married ац Italian of 53
rank, and was now a widower with an only daughter. It was said that since the death of his wife he had been immersed in melancholy. He perpetually changed his residence : he was pursued every where by a monk, whose presence sometimes produced the most terrible effects oo him, and that no object appeared to excite him but the cultivation of his daughter's talents, whom he had surrounded from infancy with the first masters, and in whose edu¬ cation he had required them to combine every thing brilliant, seductive, and com¬ manding:—to make her sing like a muse, dance like a grace, compose like a Sap¬ pho, and declaim like an Aspasia. At this moment Lord Montclare himself appeared, conversing with the very monk, and an English officer whom he had re¬ cognized as his nephew, and led him iato another apartment to introduce him to his daughter.
The monk joined a group of Italians who were speaking of their bost, and expressing their surprise tbat with such a daughter Lord Montclare could ever be the vietim of that dejection bis fea¬ tures betrayed. " Splendid talents," said the monk, " often cause more uneasiness tban tri¬ umph : she has too mucb genius, perhaps too much pride, to be bappy : ber talents and her sensibility have been refined tiil neither her own excellence or the applauses of others afford her any further pleasure·" The Italians inquired if her talents were reaily so various and powerful as they were reported. " Yes," said the monk, €t her talents are real, but her character is artificial· Nature intended her for a superior being, a genius ; but pride, flattery, and an ambitious education, have made her mere woman. There she stands," he con¬ tinued, suddenly pointing to the music- room, which was just thrown open, and вЗ
every eye instantly followed the direction of his hand. A young female, wbose exquisite figure seemed to exceed the maturity of her years, which could hardly he eigh¬ teen, was leaning on an instrument in the music-room. The blazing orchestra in which she stood strongly contrasted and defined her light but marked figure, the simplicity of her white dress, and dark folded hair, and the marble paleness and contour of her face : she was reading some music which a composer had just presented to her ; and the transient gleams of expression, and the imperfect movements of pleasure, that played like beautiful coruscations over her face and ; figure, as the passages she read struck or pleased her, developed resources in her figure such as could not he imagined from a first view of it. Her attitude and appearance were simple, yet there was a prophetic repose in her dark eyes when she raised them, and a kind of
proud consciousness, mixed with indolence and melancholy in her looks, that verified the character given her by the monk. Shortly after she turned to speak to the English officer, whom her father in¬ troduced as her kinsraan, and the Italians for the first time heard the music of her voice. The Englishman addressed some com¬ mon-place flattery to her, such as h« thought would please a vain, pedantic female ; but the hauteur which she sud¬ denly assumed disconcerted him, aud he was silent. She bowed to him witb something of female insolence in her air, and then glancing at her dress, hastened from tha room. " And does she always appear with this careless simplicity?" said the Ita¬ lians, surprised at the ligbt and girlish figure they had beheld. " Frequently/' said the monk; < f often at au assembly where her father wishes »4
her te appear, she enters habited as you saw her to-night, whilst the arrangement of her light drapery, tlie placing of an antique ornament, the very manner in which she folds her long hair, gives so exquisite a resemblance of some classical model, tbat sbe draws every eye from the sparklingsignoras around her." Two of the company, who had seen her at Rome, now joined them,and confirmed the monk's observations. * € I was at a musical assembly/' said «me of them, " where Armida was expect¬ ed, and we all waited anxiously for her appearance : she entered late, resisted all importunity to sing, and at length ascend¬ ed the orchestra with a mixture of timi¬ dity and negligence that confounded the spectators. She sung the first part of the air Solto Voce, and kept the hearers in a state between surprise and distrust, till almost at the close she uttered a few notes with so piercing, so potent an ex¬ pression, tbat the susceptible shivered and
wept, and tbe judges felt sbe was mistrest of all the wonders of her art."' " Often," said the other, " at wa as¬ sembly where the first literary characters were assembled to meet her, Armida has remained silent and absent till almost forgotten, when a single remark, an allu¬ sion, an illustration that appeared to escape from her lips almost unconsciously, penetrated at once into the depth of the subject of which the rest bad only been hovering on the surface ; and while the room echoed with praise, she appeared to retreat from those praises as if they were bestowed on exertions far inferior to what she was capable of, whilst her bending head; her silent deprecation, the retiring consciousness of her whole figure, spoke more pride than the most ostentatious avidity of praise." tc Such is lier character," said the monk. "Though her mother was an Ita¬ lian, she was born in England, and af¬ terwards educated here; and this accounts « ft
for the mixture of English pride and Italian indolence that her character ex¬ hibits, combined with a voluptuous me¬ lancholy, the result of both climate and education." The apartments were now full : the company, to avoid the intense heat, had many of them retired to a balcony that admitted the sea breeze. The English officer was standing apart, when a cur¬ tain, suddenly raised, discovered a scene of such beauty, that every one felt Ar¬ mida was the artist. It was a small apartment, which her paintings had converted into a kind of theatre, and to which they had given a range of view and a depth of perspective that delighted even the scientific Ita¬ lians. It represented tbe garden of an oriental palace: the sides filled with flowers, whose lofty and luxuriant clus¬ ters seemed to rise above the height of the apartment, and whose deep and sunny bucs were softened by the magic diffusion
of the lights; and the perspective, ter¬ minated in an arcb, beyond which was caught a view of the ruins of Persepolis. Charactered witb all the spectral gran¬ deur, the prostrate dignity of antiquity> they presented that mixture of deviation and decay that combines our admiration of greatness witb our interest in debility 'I The daring and gigantic style of the ruins seemed to realize the idea of the modern Persians, that the " palace of forty pillars" is the work of super-human hands, and the haunt of the spirits of former ages. The sculptures and relics were touched with a legendary truth that proved an equal knowledge of history and design ; but the luxury of colouring, the picturesque associations, and the fairy touches of invention, made the artist every where felt through the work. The perspective, prolonged through a range of pillars and arches, of fragments and foliage, was flushed with tbat rieb
and lovely light that displayed the powert of the most inspired imagination embo¬ dying tbe glories of tbe most resplendent climate. Armida advanced on the stage alone : she was in the oriental dress, and she b?d an instrument in her hand resembling the lute. Wandesford gazed with astonish* ment : tbe pale, slight, simply clad girl fae had lately seen was transformed into the most brilliant female in the world. The colour which applause brought to her cheek mantled richly through the tinge of rouge she had put on to conceal the effects of her exertions. She appeared as the oriental muse, and recited a poem she had translated from the Persian, sometimes accompanying herself on the instrument in her hand. The Scavane could easily discover bow much the poem was indebted to the trans¬ lator ; and the resources she displayed filled them with astonishment. The my¬ thology and antiquities »f the east were
touched on, or spared, with that familia¬ rity which implies volumes ; and the wonders of eastern fable were decorated with all the melodious pomp of Italian modulation : but the critics remarked that she dwelt much on description and little on passion, and seemed fonder of displaying the powers that dazzle the imagination than those that touch and enchain the heart : but aH power of criticism was forgot, when, at the close of the poem, she burst into a song of tri¬ umph to congratulate the victory of her hero. She hung her lute on one of the pillars of the scene, and, accompanied by a band concealed behind it, gave herself up to the display of those amazing vocal powers which she had suppressed during the recitation. The torrent of sound that she now poured forth, the height to which she soared, the rapidity with which she traversed intervals that con¬ nected the widest extremes of human voice, the precision with which she
marked their minutest subdivisions, and, above all, the ease of attitude and expres¬ sion which she preserved amid her exer¬ tions, like a skilful charioteer, who com¬ mands and enjoys the fiight of his cours¬ ers, whilst their speed terrifies the spec¬ tators, filled the Italians with a sensation which applause could neither express or exhaust. Armida retired amid these applauses overcome with fatigue and emotion, but still preserving a proud triumph of ex¬ pression through her faltering steps and exhausted frame. Amid the tumult of delight Wandes¬ ford alone remained silent. The first impression that he felt was that be had witnessed a piece of mechanism : the mu¬ sic, the paintings, the graces of motion, and the radiations of genius he had wit¬ nessed, seemed the result of a deception practised on his senses ; a kind of in¬ tellectual fata morgana, which he de¬ termined to watch and detect tbe first
opportunity : but bis resolution was de¬ feated in a moment by the appearance of Armida, who was discovered, as the cur¬ tain again was unfolded, in tbe costume of the Grecian muse. The local scenery was taken from Athens, and the partbenon and the tem¬ ple of the winds were sketched in the perspective with the boldness of a master, and tbe graphic precision of an historian. Among the picturesque and indefinite touches of the scenery the Italians ob¬ served almost every ruin of classic cele¬ brity, the pediments, the entablatures, tbe urns that formed the ornament of their cabinets, and the study of their anti¬ quaries. The antique truth of the pictures, the mellow light that was artfully effused over them, the severity of tbe architec¬ ture, and the chaster brilliancy of the climate, were a refreshing contrast to the luxuriant colours and lavish magnificence of the oriental landscape; and the per-
feet and regular beauty of Armida was more visible amid the scene that surround¬ ed her, anf! in the white, simple, statue¬ like, drapery she wore. She made a few remarks on the ancient drama, on their powers of expressing passions by attitude, and she alluded to some classical passages which describe a long and varied narra¬ tive, represented by the gestures of a tingle performer. The novelty of hearing the laws of the Greek drama discussed by a girl of eighteen with the elocution and grace of an Aspasia was forgot even by Wandesford, as he gazed on her beautiful figure, whose attit«des, like the chords of an instrument, seemed sus¬ ceptible of every modulation that the endless varieties of passion can give or require. Tbe Italians were delighted to behold those models of grace and ex¬ pression which had so long been confined to painting and marble revived in the furu re before them, with all the animation of life, and the magic graces of motion;
and they were amazed at the facility with which sbe passed from the rigid and breathless calm of a vestal to tbe luxu¬ rious frenzy of a bacchante. But she had reserved all her strength for the last exertion, in which she represented the story of Niobe. The spectators felt the very wounds, of which each seemed to pierce her through : they looked to every variation of the action as a respite from their sensations, yet each was more pain¬ ful than the preceding. But when the last blow was aimed, when her dark, speaking eye was fixed, as if by fascina¬ tion, on the winged death that approach¬ ed, when shrinking into herself she seem¬ ed trying to hide her last child within her very vitals, when with short and hopeless catchings she spread to more than its ut¬ most extent the vain defence of her robe, and the rigid agony of her limbs almost shewed the beginning encroachments of the stone upon the principles of life, a convulsive shudder pervaded the whole
assembly, nor was it till after some mo¬ ments that it was perceived she had fainted from her exertions. In the confusion that followed, Wandesford tried to recover himself. C M, selfish, unprincipled, and unfeeling, he had never suffered so much disturbance either from pleasure or pain before. The first sight of Armida had banished his usual indifference to female beauty : with the first sentence she ut¬ tered had ceased his usual contempt for female understanding. As her astonish¬ ing talents were developed, he expected to see some vanity, some female art, or weakness developed along with them, that would console him for the superiority he was compelled to acknowledge. He could discover none. Yet amid her raost bril¬ liant moments there appeared a melan¬ choly, an abstraction, a gloom of mor¬ tality, which, united with her beauty and extreme youth, made her the most inter¬ esting creature he had ever beheld. Al¬ most every one had now quitted the
apartment, eager for new pleasures ; the monk alone remained, and seemed to be observing him closely. He determined to profit hy this man's familiarity, and addressed him with the politeness he could at times assume: " Charming as your fair pupil is, she must have had many admirers." The monk assented. " And has she as yet declared no pre¬ ference ?" said Wandesford. " She has as yet felt no preference," said the monk. " What then can be the cause of that melancholy that I perceive every moment hovering like a cloud over the brightness of her talents?" " The very circumstances I have men¬ tioned," said the monk. " Armida has never loved, and the energies of her heart are too powerful to be wasted even upon acquirements as splendid as her's ; yet she does not suspect the real state of her mind ; she imputes her lassitude to de¬ clining health, or to increasing sensibility,
without imagining or wishing for other sources of happiness." He turned away frora the monk. The company, invited by the moonlight beauty of the gardens, wandered through them in groups, arid he joined thera: every where be heard the praises of Armida, but no where could he see her. He wandered into the remoter parts of the garden: it was midnight: he stood on the bank of a canal shaded by orange- trees ; all above was brightness, all around was fragrance, all below was calm—even Wandesford was touched: he thought of Armida almost with the delicacy of passion. At that moment the sound of a harp issued from the bowery clusters of an Arabian jessamine beside him. He turned, and saw Armida seated alone in a recess formed by its rich and odorous flowers: her attitude was that of fatigue and melancholy, yet from time to time she touched her harp with an impulse that seemed to echo some
musical tones that floated in her fancy. Her dress was changed again, and though negligent, it had a dramatic air that seemed the effect of study. Wandesford paused. It seemed so fair a vision, that he felt as if his approach would dissolve it ; yet when he saw the exquisite grace of her attitude, and that she did not move at his approach, he thought it looked like art, and hc said to himself, " She is a mere woman : she flies from crowds, because she thinks solitude more becom¬ ing : she is a mere woman : this is vanity, not enthusiasm." But as he attempted to speak, the consciousness of ber talents gave bim embarrassraent, and he only expressed a fear that she was exhausted by her exertions. " They have been overpaid," said she, bowing coldly. As he drew nearer, and saw the hectic spot that burned on her cheek, while all the rest was paler than the flowers that almost touched it, he felt something like
real emotion, and he repeated his fear that such exertions were too much for her. et I feel thcy are/' said Armida, calm¬ ly ; ce I feel they will perhaps be fatal to me; I almost wish tbey may." She paused, and looked up to the sparkling sky that seemed tremulous with the ligbt of ten thousand stars : " I wish to pour my last breath into a strain of music, and waken to the harmony which those bright worlds make to the ears of spirits— to pass to heaven from those scenes which this earth resemble heaven." " Talk not of dying to go to heaven," said Wandesford, with profane gallantry, " for where you are must be heaven." Armida seemed disconcerted at his warmth, and still more that she had been answered with common-place flattery. " Here," said Armida, " I wished to represent the difference between the east¬ ern and western muse : I brought my harp, and intended to have sung to it a
poem of Ossian's I had translated amid scenery that would have recalled the sombrous imagery and luxurious melan¬ choly of the bard, but I felt myself in¬ capable of further exertion." She con¬ tinued to speak of Ossian, and her figure, and the motion of her white arms, that involuntarily touched her harp, seemed to realize the visions of tbe " soul of song/' Sbe knew not that she was ad¬ dressing a man wbo had never read Ossian > in his life, and the whole of whose poeti¬ cal reading had been confined to political satires and bagatelles of the day. But though Wandesford was insensible to her genius, he was entranced by her beauty, heightened as it was by the scene¬ ry, the perfumed air, by au expression of languid consciousness, and by her rich seductive accents that rose like music on the night. His vanity too mistook the constraint which she laid on her natural indolence to converse with a stranger and ber kinsman for something of a stronger
interest, and he suddenly poured out his feelings with a warmth which even sur¬ prised himseif, and with an energy of expression that left Armida no power of mistaking it for that general admiration to which she was accustomed. " Let us join the cojnpany, signor," said she, calmly, but decisively, with¬ drawing the hand which he had seized ; " we have remained here too long." " Yes," said Wandesford, rising proud¬ ly (for he had knelt), " yes, I feel I have remained here too long, yeé I feel the impressions I have received here will remain for ever : you are impatient to join the company ; you live but for crowds and for their clamours. Pardon me, beautiful Armida," be continued, "pro¬ voked to speak with force, pardon me if I wonder how such depravity of taste can be united with such perfection of talents." ** If my taste is depraved," said Ar¬ mida, calmly, " I am not to blame, but
those who educated me: if they have taught me false pleasures and a false am¬ bition, let me retain them. Perhaps if you knew the lassitude, the gloom that succeed the most triumphant moments of my existence, you would not envy the few I enjoy. The refinement which has been the result of my acquirements has deprived me of their enjoyment, and I am like the bird, who, when he has filled his nest with perfumes, consumes himaelf with them and dies." W andesford was touched by this con¬ fession ; but again the selfishness of his heart returned, and he believed it only another wiie of seduction—the art of an all-endowed deceiver, who could com¬ bine the colours of raanuer as skilfully as those of painting, and pass in a mo¬ ment, for effect's sake, from the glare of talent to the soft shade of sentiment. Yet while he determined to resist her spells, he found their influence more ir¬ resistible every moment, and he delighted vol. i. с
ίο gaze and ta listen, while he believed every attitude the result of study, aud every word the dictate of art ; but he was deceived by Jiimself. Armida, always too proud for concealment, and too con¬ scious of great ideas to hide them, uttered merely what she felt in one of those gloomy moments which she owed to the very ex¬ cess of her talents, the companioníess and magnificent solitude of her mind. ' r I am wretched," she continued, " except in the tumultuous illusions of a crowd that make me forget myself, or those moments of lonely enthusiasm that make me forget the world." She at¬ tempted to quit him as she spoke, but Wandesford, whose feelings were ungo¬ vernable, again threw himself at her feet with the most rapturous expressions of passion, wliile pride, and even resentment, visibly struggled through hie reluctant homage. " Armida, angel, siren, sorceress ! un¬ equalled in brilliancy, unresisted in me-
lancholy, you are all enchantment, all inebriation—I yield to you. Command my heart, my fortune, my band ; fly not from me: you shall not fly, my homage is worthy of your pride. By the loveliest woman in England I have never been thus subdued : to the proudest woman I bave never knelt thus. Is a conquest which your whole sex could never achieve unworthy of you ?" " You distress me, signor," said Ar¬ mida, retreating and bending over her harp: "I am grateful for your senti¬ ments; but pardon me if I discover a difference in our characters that forces me to believe you have mistaken mine, or are deceived in the passion you think it has inspired. Go to tbe lovely women of your own country, they will be proud of their conquest : go and leave the weak enthusiastic Italian to her harp and her paintings, her morbid sensibility, her luxurious melancholy. If there are sources of enjoyment more dear, more β»
exquisite, let me not know them ; my pride tells me it would be too late, and my heart tells me it would be in vain." " Insensible, bewildering, yet most infatuating creature, how do you con¬ trive to charm by offending, and to make your very faults the means of fascination? What shall I think of the power you have obtained over me; what shall I think of you." " Think me what I am—a woman fond of the luxuries of mind, fond of them to madness, till their excess has destroyed the sensibility they were intended to refine; one, who, alternately under the iniluence of ambition and of enthusiasm, flies to crowds for applause, and to solitude from melancholy, yet finds in both that disappointment, tbat apathy, that chasm of the soul, which life is unable to supply." At this moment, the company, who had been seeking Armida, approached. Pride assisted Wandesford to conceal his emo-
tion, and Armida had none to conceal : he was mortified to leave her the next moment conversing with the Italians, with that mixture of ease and abstractioa that marked her manner, * Refreshments were dispersed through the gardens in recesses half concealed by flowers, and shaded with the foliage of trees, that seemed to shed their fruits on the tables, and mingle their fragrance with the rich wines that sparkled on them. Armida and a select party, principaliv musical, partook of ices and fruits ша the bank of the canal, whose breezes were the sweetest luxury of the night : it was here she felt herself, and was resolved to make all around feel her resistless. The moonlight in which she sat seem¬ ed to shed its own character on her form, and even her mind : she was more soft, more solemn, and more touching than the very light in which she sat. Fatigued by the efforts of the night, she made her cS
lassitude contribute to her graces : with her dark hair spread on her marble neck, with the glow of exertion yet on her cheek, with her voice almost depressed to a whisper, and her conversation confined io a few remarks, that Hke the copy of Homer in Darius's casket, breathed the «oul of genius from a vehicle of perfume, sbe exhibited a soft suppression, a veiled and waning splendour, not so dazzling to the senses, but more touching to the heart. Music resounded from various parts of the garden, accompanied only by ths echo and the stilly rushing of the breeze. Armida was pressed to sing alone: she declined it from the fatigue of her late exertions, but frora time to time she joined in the harraony with tones whose rich and tempered fulness was like the sounds of some invisible instrument ; and sometimes in the pause of the voices she executed a cadence so rapid, and sweet and subtle, as if a spirit in his passage
caught the ounds and carried them beyond human hearing. Wandesford sat near her in the orange bower, the only one there whose sensation was not unmixed delight : bis senses were indeed intranced, but his heart, or his passions rather, were agitated almost to frenzy : one moment he viewed her with rapture, the next almost witb hatred, and the elegant but haughty politeness which marked her manner when she spoke to him mortified him more than the most obvious displeasure. As the saffron light of an Italian sun* rise broke on the garden, Wandesford retired, repeating to himself :*— (€ She is a woman, therefore must be wooed ; she is a woman, therefore may be won/' The moment that the intense heat of the following day rendered visiting prac¬ ticable, Wandesford flew to the villa of Lord Montclare» In the portico all was silent and solitary: with difficulty ha procured admission. An old female c4
sortant was the only inhabitant of tht villa. " Where are Lord Montclare and his daughter ? " "This morning, signor, they quitted Naples on their way to France, from thence they propose to visit England, but never will return to Italy." Wandesford in silence returned to Naples»
CHAP. II. In erery sťaté of life I feel a frightful void. Af. Maintenox» ARMIDA IN ENGLAND. Fon several days Wandesford remain¬ ed in a state of reverie : at first he ima¬ gined the impression would wear off, and his pride for a moment encouraged him in this hope ; but after a few days ex¬ perience of tbat silent and restless tor¬ ment, which a spirit too proud for com¬ munication, and too impetuous for re¬ straint, feels when compelled to sufter, he determined to pursue her in spite of rejection. The restraints of his profession were soon removed by his interest and con¬ nexions, and taking advantage of the peace, he arrived in Paris, without a hint escaping him of the object of his С Э
expedition. His first inquiry was for Lord Montclare. On learning that his lordship and Miss Fitz al ban bad quitted Paris about a week before for England, his natural impatience broke out into fury, and be execrated Armida and her father with as much rage as if their invitation had brought him to France : but a few moments convinced hini that the absence of this extraordinary female, whom he alternately seemed to love and bate, rendered France as insupportable as Italy, and he resolved to follow her to (lngland, almost with a sentiment of re¬ venge in the pursuit. In the meantime Armida had been hurried by her father through Italy and France, without explanation, and almost without rest. Long accustomed to his sudden movements and rapid journeys, the felt little surprise at being compelled to quit Italy the morning after the splendid fête at Naples ; but she was terrified at tbe paroxysms, almost amount-
ing to insanity, with which her fatber was visited during their progress, and this mystery of her fate, into which she had never inquired, seemed already to menace existence with future storms, like those dark spots which in the brilliant atmosphere of the west portend the ap¬ proaching vengeance amid sun-shine and security. It was an auspicious period for her arrival in France. Paris was just then filled with the plunder of Italy : her galleries groaned with the weight of their paintings, their statues, and their busts: every where were scattered in¬ scriptions unexplored, and antiques un¬ defined: literature, furniture« women, every thing at Paris was a la grecq. Armida's form revived all the images of classic beauty : Armida's songs recalled all the wonders of the classic fables: Armida's genius realized the glories of classic antiquity ; but though delighted by the applauses she met in France, her
English mind and character were revolt* ed by their frivolity, and from every other sentiment hut admiration she re¬ treated with precipitation. But it was with strong emotion she prepared to visit England ; the country of her ancestors, the country of her birth, the country where the miud, alike of man and woman, neither shackled by slavery or distorted by superstition, is permitted to attain its full growth, and appear in its grandest dimensions. She arrived, tremblingly alive with the tumult of pride and hope, of ambition and solicitude: she had heard that the English were a reserved, phlegmatic people, slow in recognizing genius, and cautious in distributing praise. But conscious of her powers, she col¬ lected them with confidence, enlarged her acquaintance with English literature, but awaited in a kind of silent inspiration the signal to run her race of glory on a wider plai»,and before more ill ustrious witnesses.
But what was the astonishment, the horror, of the beautiful, intelligent, and ambitious foreigner, on her first introduc¬ tion to fashionable life in London: lost amid a crowd where beauty could not be distinguished ; stunned by a buz of nothings, where mind could not be dis¬ played ; elbowed by rouged, naked, dash¬ ing dowagers; suffered to stand unnoticed, or eyed tlirough a glass by yawning, lounging bucks of ton; sinking amid the crowd, to be permitted to help her- sAf to refrcbhrnents, or to want them ; to be without conversation, though a mis¬ tress of half the dead and living lan¬ guages, from her ignorance of fashionable jargon; to waik down a set with a part¬ ner who appeared to be debating whether it would not be high ton to drop asleep during the exercise—what a reception for a woman who had seen at her feet Italy and France contending to scatter the laurels of fame and the roses of pleasure. At first she shrunk back
almost in terror, till her pride came to her relief, and she determined to display her talents in spite of rudeness or apathy, for she stili believed she hâd only to display tbem to command in a moment that admiration of which the absence was insupportable, though while possessing if she bad felt its emptiness. Rut she soon fouud it was not to gaze on beauty and grace, or to listen to eloquence aud harmony, that the fashionable crowds of London were collected. In a crowded ball-room she could not di«p*ay tbe various phases of her beautiful figure, which required rather a theatre than an assembly for thei; exhibition. When she sung, the rage of gaming abated for a moment in tha adjacent rooms ; but after a few stare« and bravo«, tlie conversation turned on Moore's Ballads, or Biaham's Anglo- Italian songs. The connoisseurs indeed applauded, but not like the connoisseurs of Italy : there was no suspended respiration, no uplifted eyes, no out«pread hands, ai
if to support her in her ærial flights : notliing of that enthusiasm which gives the performer the powers it applauds. Her paintings gave still less delight, for still fewer are judges of good painting than of good music, and to herself they seemed as if their colours had darkened since she brought them from Italy. Her beauty was indeed admired by all, and her taste in drapery admitted to be ex¬ quisite ; but still she looked like none of the women of the day : her fantastic ele¬ gance was more the result of taste than of prescription: she wanted the uniform of the corps of fashion, that identity oť costume which for a season transforms the whole female world into the represen¬ tation of one figure. When she attempted to collect arv nnd her an intellectual circle, the diffidence of her fust repulse still sat heavy on her spirits, and she felt the difference be¬ tween addressing foreigners, superficial, ardent, aud fond of admiring} and Eng-
lishmen, slow in discovering talent, and jealous in critical honour. The enthusiasm wliich she despaired of communicating she at length despair¬ ed of feeling, A thick dark medium seemed to rise between her and her audi¬ ence: she struggled to collect her facul¬ ties to maintain her former reputation, to recall those images that once hovered round her like the attendant spirits of an enchantress,and tore-touch that language whose colours once glowed like those of her paintings ; but the very effort destroy¬ ed tbat imprompted facility tbat gives to genius tbe appearance of inspiration. Her thoughts, her language, became con¬ fused. She hesitated, grew embarrassed, and more than once retired that she might avoid bursting ioto tears. In those moments of dejection, amazed and shocked at the change iu lier existence, she began to fear tbat her faculties were impaired, and terrified by tbis apprehen- sion A the briUiant and haughty Annida
suddenly became the most reserved and timid of her sex. It was at this period that Wandesford arrived in England/ still eager in the pursuit that had led bim frora Naples to London : he expected to see the same splendid and commanding character that he had beheld at the Italian fête, whose scenes still floated before him like the visions of enchantment. What was his astonishment at being shewn into a crowded assembly, where all was gaming, frenzy, and riot; females fainting; beside ice-eating beaux, a chaos of roug¬ ed wrinkles, opera hats, quizzing glasses, and gossamor drapery. Armida, alone, unattended, unad mired, addressed by no tongue, defended by no arm from the crowd that bore her on like an uprooted llower in a boisterous flood, seeming from her beauty, and frora her loneliness feel¬ ing like tbe inhabitant of another world. Wandesford paused to assure himself that it was she herself whom he savv. He
pressed through the crowd to join herr there was an independence in her thus refusing to compromise her superiority for the frivolity of fashion that made her more congenial than ever to the pride md hauteur of Wandesford, He re¬ mained near her the whole evening : her character developed itself more fully to him ; and his tnind, well worn as it was with the objects of the world, was strongly excited by one so new.—A young female, so beautiful, so highly endowed # so ambitiously conscious of genius, so tremblingly alive to fame, yet so shaded by melancholy, and a kind of proud de¬ jection, like that of an abdicated monarch, turning forth the silver lining of her sable cloud of sadness every mo¬ ment, and gladdening the spectator with unexpected brightness, then again re¬ treating behind it, as if she mocked their admiration and her own lustre. Wandesford employed all his talents lb excite and to praise her's; and be
himself was not insensible of the pleasure of liaving all his faculties called out, and . tasked to support a conference with a beautiful female hardly twenty. Ar* mida's refulgent eyes flashed with the fire of awakened genius once more, and when thcy turned to him they shone through the brilliant dews of grateful sensibility. She was grateful fbr his at¬ tention, and, accustomed only to praise, felt herself involuntarily revived by his: she felt the pleasure of having a com¬ panion in the crowded solitude of a fashionable party : when she spoke it wa» with the certainty of one delighted listener, and when she sung she could distinguish tbe rapturous applause of Wandesford. Vanity and interest ena¬ bled Wandesford to act the part of an as¬ siduous lover for a whole winter, iu spite of his natural indolence and selfisb sur¬ liness : at the end of that period Iia oifered her his hand in the most timid language of respectful adoration.
Lord Montclare eagerly accepted his proposal, and urged them on his daugh¬ ter vvith an importunity scarce inferior to tbat of Wandesford himself. Importun* cd, flattered, persecuted, by Wandesford, her father, and the eternal monk, she consented ; but as she pronounced the words, a coldness, like that of death, seemed to seize on her heart, and amid Wandesford'» raptures «die shocked him by bursting into tears, j^ord Montclare, who had only waited her decision, im¬ mediately announced to Armida and Wandesford that their marriage should take place in Ireland, where he purposed going in a few days, and spending, he added in a faltering voice, the remainder of his days. Accustomed as Armida was to fly from one region to another, she trembled at the thoughts of the savage country she was to visit. Wandesford, who was anxious for the eclat of his marriage, suppressed his murmurs with difliculty, but at length it was arranged
that Lord Montclare and his daughter should set off immediately for Ireland, and that Wandeöford, after some neces¬ sary arrangements, should follovv tbem to Connaught, where Lord Montclare's estate lay, and receive the hand of Ar¬ mida in their ancient castle on the shores of the Atlantic,
CHAP. III. CVHara, (VMara, O'Mqrvcn, O'Morc, 0'Donofan.arra, Mac Millan, Gillorc, All houses so noble, so worthy, so old, One drop of their blood is worth ounces of golt!. Irish Dynasties. ARMIDA IN IRELAND. The next day at an early hour Lord Montclare and his daughter quitted Lon¬ don : the pomp and tumult of the equi¬ page, the crowd of servants, and the speed of their journey, as if Ihcy were flying to some region of happiness, formed a strange contrast to the gloom and de¬ jection of the travellers. Accustomed only to the eclat of a capital» and topass from one scene n f luxury to another, Armida felt a desolation of heart at the
prospect of the Irish journey she had never known before. She sunk back in the carriage, and covering her face with her handkerchief, resigned herself almost to despair. From the moment of their arrival in Ireland Lord Montclare's spirits seemed to re¬ vive, aud at (lie close of the third day's journey, as Armida, exhausted with fatigue and dejection, sat with her eyes fixed on the bleak waste of bog, scarce seen through the rain that beat heavily against the carriage windows, Lord Montclare suddenly said :— " Do you know, Armida, that you have relations in Ireland?" " Have I, my lord," was the answer, and nothing more was said for two hours : Lord Montclarc then, apparently forc¬ ing himself to proceed, added :— " Yes you have, and it is necessary you should know something about them " Armida appeared to listen, and ber
father, with many pauses of strong emotion, informed her that the estate in Ireland had been purchased from a ruin¬ ed Milesian family ; that going thirty years ago to take possession, his sister, who accompanied him, had unfortunate¬ ly become attached to the son of the ancient proprietor, whom he described as living among his tenants in all the pride 3 poverty, and sloth, of a true Milesian ; that immediately on her disgraceful marriage she had been renounced not only by her own family, but by her husband's fatber, who was irreparably oftended at his son marrying the sister of the man whom he considered rather as ihe usurper than the purchaser of his property. i( I quitted Ireland immediately," con¬ tinued Lord Montclare, " and the first notice I ever took of them since was in consequence of a letter I received from my unfortunate sister about a year ago, upon her death-bed : had I not known
the circumstances under which it was written I would never have perused it. She described the misery in which she and her husband had lingered through many years of indigence, the loss of most of their children through actual want of •ustenance : she entreated my compassion for her wretched husband, who had fallen into the lowest habits of dissolute poverty, and my protection for her two jujimng children, whom she described ¡pg, scarcely clad, beside ber få of straw." P^Armida shuddered. . " My resentment was appeased," con¬ tinued her father. <r I wrote to Ireland to inquire about them : I learned that the old savage had taken his eldest grandson to starve with him amid the ruins of his castle, tha¿ the second was running wild about the bogs in the neighbourhood, and that their father was living with any of the tenants who could afford to share the shelter of their vol. i, i>
cabin. Though I never could recog¬ nize him as my brother-in-law, or thera as my nephews, I did not wish to be in¬ sulted by their poverty ; I therefore ap¬ pointed him my land steward, and offered the young men commissions on condition of their immediately going abroad : the father gratefully accepted my offer for himself and his younger son ; the elder haughtily rejected it, and preferred starv¬ ing with his ridiculous, mad, father, who resides, I am toh ruined watch-tower on the border ^ ancient demesne. The younger brotbei went to Italy to join Wandesford's regi¬ ment, in which I got him a commission. I think you must have seen him in Lon¬ don ; he came one morning into the libra¬ ry to thank me. I dismissed him as soon as possible. His Ukeness to his mother shocked me," " And was he so near a relative," said Armida, *' and I knew nothing of it ? Oh, be was the most exquisite model of
Bathyl lus in Mojre's Anacreon I ever beheld." Lord Montclare viewed his daughter well for a nioment, but he perceived she was speaking with her imagination, not ?ier feeling : she was thinking more of the picture than of the man ; yet it struck hira that the removal of his nephew was not improvident, and that the figure of this forlorn boy might in solitude have recalled the images of classic beautv too strongly to Armida's imagination. Lord Montclare then pursued his invectives against the pride and insolence of the old savage granet father, the dissolute ab- jectness of the son, and the poverty of the grandsons, for it appeared that he had no other crime to object to these desolate young men. Armida mused in silence on the picture, drawn bya rough, unfavourable baud as it was : it was the first subject that occupied her mind during the journey ; the inflexible pride and high-thoughted poverty of the old d2
Irish prince ; the submissness of his de¬ generate son, who could accept an office, almost servile, within the walls of which he was horn to be the master ; and the two youths, her cousins, nursed amid the strife of pride and want, so favourable to the romantic spirit that appeases the gnaw ings of actual distress by listening to tales of high-seated ancestry, that comforts itself in heing compelled to inhabit ruins by tracing among them the remains of ancient palaces; that like the spirit in Otranto stalks amid iis ancient seat till it s Sel is beyond it, and stands forth amid the fragments dilated and re¬ vealed, terrifying the intrusion of modern usurpers. Again she thought of the elder brother, who persisted in remaining with his grandfather : the image had struck her—a young man thus clinging with romantic attachment, with ancient duty, to an aged relative iu want and abasement, in solitude aud sorrow, wast« ing the rich verdure of his youth aud
hopes on a comfortless and fallen tuin. Again she inquired about this eldest sod· Her father could tell her no more : he only knew that he had resisted the impor¬ tunities of his father and brother to quit his grandfather, and share with them the protection of Lord Montclare. He was proud, solitary, and repulsive, and de¬ clined all assistance from the gentlemea of the country. *' Such is the family," said Lord Mont¬ clare, " with whom till to-day you knew not your relationship." " And was it for the purpose of recog¬ nizing it your lordsliip took the trouble of coming to Ireland ?" said Armida. ** No, not for that purpose, not altoge¬ ther. The purpose for which I came to Ireland is not yet to be told/ 5 said Lord Montclare, with strong emotion. It was unobserved by Armida, for at that mo¬ ment the view opening on the sea drew even from her a cry of admiration· The character of the scene was gran- d3
de j г— -dark, desolate, and stormy gran¬ deur. The sea, troubled with rains and vunds, dashed its grey waves along a line of rockv coast with a violence that seemed even in the absence of a storm to announce perpetual war and unexhausted winter. The dark clouds, though they moved rapidly along, never left the ho¬ rizon clear, and seemed too thick for rains to melt or storms to disperse. The country near the shore, brown, stony, and mountainous, looked as if the sun never shone on it, as if it lay for ever under the grey and watery sky : tbe shore itself, bold, high, and sweeping, had all the sa* vage precipitateness, the naked solitude, the embattled rockiness, which nature seems to throw round her as a fortress, where she retires from the assaults of ¿he elements, and the approach of man. Yet Armida could descry on one of the boldest promontories, that stood forth like a bul¬ wark against the ocean, a pile of build¬ ings, which at first, from its dark grey
hue and giant massiveness, seemed like a part of the rock it stood on. A solitary tower or two, perched on a bare rock, and a few islands near the shore, appeared to be contending for their existence amid the loud and restless war of waters. To Armida, accustomed only to the sunny regions of Italy, or the cultivated fields of England, the effect of such a scene was like that of a new world. She shuddered at the idea of becoming tbe inhabitant of such a country; and she thought she felt already tbe wild trans¬ forming effect of its scenery. As the carriages wound along tbe steep road the castle rose to her view, a rude, shapeless, wide-spreading structure, the work of diflerent ages : part of it had been repaired for their reception : yet it still retained its old and warlike charac¬ ter, its bastions hoary with the foam of the sea, aud its battlements that seemed fit for the nests of eagles. As they passed beneath a broken arcb through a court о 4
strewn with fragments of its once embat¬ tled wall, Armida, looking backward on the precipice on whose very edge it stood, saw far below a number of people on a rock. Through the strait between them, steep and narrow, the sea rushed with a violence that whitened the cliffs to their summit: yet they stood, and Armida could perceive that their looks were fixed intently on the train that was entering the castle. At this moment the servants gathered round the carriage with looks of fear, and Lord Montclare learned from them with difliculty that the group consisted of the old Irish prince, support¬ ed by his grandson, and still attended by a few followers, who stood there to take a last view of their ancient seat, from which the arrival of the new possessor had excluded them for ever. Lord Montclare, throwing himself back in the carriage, impatiently bid them drive on : but at the moment his superb equipage and retinue entered the walls of the cas-
tie, a cry, the most bitter that ever pierced the human ear, burst frora the crowd be¬ low. Lord Montclare and his daughter shuddered, and scarcely thought them¬ selves safe within their castle. It was a sound that expressed all the wild feelings of a savage people, mixed with grief, despair, and agonized attachment. The rocks, the towers, and the shores rung again. The spirited horses that drew the carriage became terrified and ungo¬ vernable in a moment, and tormented by the broken pavement, they reared back¬ ward, till the carriage, driven v beyond the arch, hung on the edge of the preci¬ pice. Lord Montclare, leaping out, call¬ ed on his servants tot assist his daughter, in vain : the horses wheeling round, be¬ gan to gallop down the precipice with frightful fury. Armida beheld her death inevitable; but at the moment she gave herself up a figure darted from the opposite rock, and approached on the very side of danger
with a rapidity almost equal to that with which she was whirled along. Her ima¬ gination full of terror, she thought that the Irish prince was rushing forward to seize and dash her from the precipice ; and as the figure approached she scream¬ ed aloud to him to spare her life. Her senses failed her when she felt him snatch her from the carriage through the door, which was still open, nor did she recover them until she found herself in her fa¬ ther's arms : she had then a faint recol¬ lection of a tall figure bending over her, and a long curl of raven hair touching her cheek as in a dream. She tremblingly inquired bow she had been preserved, and learned that when her danger had driven even her father to a distance, the man who she supposed meant to murder had saved her life at the hazard of his own, apd after supporting her in his arms till her servants thought it safe to approach her, resigned her to them without speak¬ ing, and disappeared almost witb as
much swiftness as be flew to save her· No one knew who he was, but frorn his silence, his figure, and a romantic dress which none of thera could describe, all concluded him to be the grandson of the old Milesian. As Armida, pale and exhausted, was borne once more through the court by the servants, at a frightful distance below she saw the mangled horses wallowing araid the fragments of the carriage from which she had been snatched but a few moments before it was dragged down the precipice : again she fainted, and was carried insensible to ber apartment.
CHAP. IV. Though thy tackle's torn Thou show'st a noble vessel. Shakespeare. It was midnight before Armida was restored to perfect recollection. Broken, uneasy slumbers followed her swoons : at length she started up, and looked around her. The splendid furniture which Lord Montclare had ordered from England was not yet arrived, and the apartment she was in bore the aspect of precedine: centuries i its dark spacious- ness, its №^pK«of oak black as ebony, its '^^Ш^^^, and huge win¬ dows with sm^ÉÄ^ities, were scarcely seen by the lights that burned on a table of black marble beside her bed. Her foreign servants were sitting pale and aghast by an immense turf fire that burn-
<ïd on the hearth, for grates were un* known in this Irish castle. Armida inquired for her father : he had retired to rest, " And so have all tbe people in the castle/' said the women, f< except ourselves." "Has every one retired?" cried Ar¬ mida, listening. " What noise is that I hear then, so deep, and so continued ?" " It is tbe noise of the sea," said the women : " the tide is coining in, and the waves they say often dash against the walk of this melancholy old castle." Armida dismissed her attendants, who, wearied by their journey, gladly retired· She tried to compose herself to rest: it was impossible: her raind was agitated by the events of the day. She rose, and goingto the huge casement, which re¬ quired all her strength to open, threw herself on a seat beside it. All was still, dark, and vast. No sight of human habita¬ tion, no sound of human life—the sky, the rocks, the ocean, and the moon—nothing
else above or below. Her mind was awéd into a kind of pastiveness that resembled repose : and tiiough chilled by the night breeze, she continued to gaze on, till she saw a figure moving on the rocks below* It approached till nearly opposite her casement. Neither shape nor dress were distinguishable ; but the stature appear¬ ed more than human. A thousand gloomy thoughts of Irish atrocity rushed into her mind—What if the Milesian prince or his grandson were come to curse the usurpers of their cas¬ tle by the only light their pride would permit them to view its alienated walls by î For a moment sbe thought of call¬ ing for assistance, till the recollection that she knew nothing of the immense edi¬ fice she was in checked her. She watch¬ ed the figure in silence. In a few mi¬ nutes she saw another approach, whose stooping frame and feeble steps maiked extreme age. Armida could not distin¬ guish bis motions, but in a few moments
she heard the sound of an instrument, faiut, tremulous, and wild. It was the Irish harp, touched by a native on bit own wild shores, and accompanied by si voice, which, though broken by age, sounded like music in despair. Tbe taller figure threw himself at his lengtb on the rock, and seemed to listen to for¬ getfulness. The instrument was defec¬ tive, and tbe hand of the performer weak with age ; but Armida forgot all science wbile she listened to him, and felt the effect of the scenery united with the sound. The music, though unlike any sbe bad ever praised as excellent, had a charm superior to that excellence : it had a cha¬ racter impossible to define, but impossi¬ ble to resist : it appealed from rules to the heart, and its simplicity made the appeal resistless, as the inarticulate cry of infancy affects more deeply than the utmost eloquence of distress. Armida, nursed ia the classic elegance
of Italian melody, wept as she listened to the rude song of the Irish bard. Once, oppressed by a variety of emotions, she sobbed aloud. The tall figure started, and turned at the sound, and then hastily retired with his companion. At that moment the moon shone hright on the rock, and she distinguished tbe figure. It was the young Milesian, who had wandered forth under the shadow of his hereditary walls, attended by his bard, to listen to tales of other days, and feed his soul with visions of pride and me¬ lancholy. "Strange, inconsistent being!" said Armida : " he can hazard his life for a stranger; he can feast on the luxuries of midnight music ; and he flics from tbo sound of gratitude or sympathy." She felt no wish to remain at the case¬ ment after he was gone, and retired to bed, which she did not quit till sum¬ moned to dinner on the following day. As she entered the room, she observed a
person whom her father slightly menti¬ oned to her by the name of Mr. Randall O'Morven, and whom from his conversa¬ tion she soon discovered to be her uncle. Neither his past distress, the coldness of Lord Montclare, or the degradation of taking his place under the roof he was horn to inherit as a kind of upper servant to its present possessor, appeared to make the least impression on tbis man, who pos¬ sessed the worst kind of Irish character, a character of unfeeling, unworthy self-en¬ joyment, not destitute of affection, but wholly without dignity. He talked, laughed, ate and drank, with a vulgar ease, and seemed to forget both his father and his children, till Lord Montclare happened to mention his second son, who was in Wandesford's regiment, and with it was daily expected in Ireland. " Aye, my lord," said O'Morven, " there is a boy for you. Who would think that he was brother to that foolish boy who rejected your lordship's protec-
tion ? There he has shut himself up in a hovel with that old fool my father, and all my hopes of him are destroyed ; and it was not for my want of speaking to him either, for says I to him, as I said, f Why, Connel, where's the use of your refusing his lordship's kindness? Where did 1 get this good coat on ray back, and a seat at his table (for your lordship promised I should not dine with the servants)? and where did your brother get his com¬ mission ? Was it not from bis lordship condescending to take us up, and forget¬ ting our offence in being his relations ? ' And says I, ' Do you think that poring over an old Irish manuscript, or wander¬ ing over these wild shores, listening to an old harp with hardly a string to it will puta potatoe in your mouth, or give one stone to repair those ruins you live in, or bring you back your land to you again ?" Here Lord Montclare interrupted him by observing that Miss Fitzalhan was in¬ debted to bis son for the preservation of
her life. ** Aye, my lord, so I beard. The fellow is brave enough, but then so wild and so proud, that I'll engage he never stayed so much as to be thanked for it. Why you might as well get a word from one of those goats tbat are scampering on the cliffs there ; and he is just as mute and as active as them. Why now, your lordship would not believe that no power of mortal man could bring him once within these walls since your lordship purchased them : and, simple as you sit there, my lord, he considers you as an usurper of his natural rights, and would scorn to eat the bread frora your hand that I am swallowing now." Armida, wearied and shocked, now rose to withdraw one of the windows of the great Gothic hall in which they dined, opening on a terraced rock that had formerly been one of the ramparts of the castle. She wandered along it till she reached a flight of steps, which, after many windings, led to the shore, and when
the tide was in were often covered with foam to the topmost step. Tbe strand was now dry, the evening calm though gloomy, the heavy clouds level with the horizon. She walked on till she reached a solitary rock, covered with mosses, shells, and spars, vrhose green and spark¬ ling beauty amid such solitude made it seem like the throne of the spirit of tbe waters. Here she sat, and for some hours sunk into the deep absence of mind, tbat, though it precludes reflection, does not shut out pain. The strange destiny that in the space of a year had changed a brilliant native of Italy, surrounded by crowds, flattery, and intellectual luxury, into a solitary wanderer on the rude and barren shores of Ireland, seemed to chill her very mind. Her thoughts did not move; they lay under the load : urged by the pressure, her mind at length recurred to the image of Wandesford as the companion of her future life, as the only resource that pre-
sented itself to her imagination, wrested from all its usual objects. It was then she discovered the secret of her heart. His image was not the image to which the mind delights to turn in solitude. She thought of him with complete apa¬ thy, and in the desolation of her heart wept aloud. The encreasing murmurs of the sea at length aroused her. She looked round. During her long reverie, the tide coming rapidly in, already sur¬ rounded her, and completely intercepted her return to the shore she had quitted. In the first confusion of her fear she escaped through a shallow water to a rock, on which it bad not vet encroach- ed, but gazing round, she saw with terror the one she had quitted in a few mo¬ ments covered by the waves, which now almost rose to the summit of that she stood on : every other between her and the shore bad disappeared, and the castle itself scarcely showed its dim towers through the twilight, darkened as it was
by a gathering storm. The terror of her situation every moment enereased. The waves, though not deep, would have com¬ pletely exhausted her strength in the at¬ tempt to wade through them. The hol¬ low sweeping of the surge mocked every effort to be heard at that distance. The waves already reached her feet, though sh^ had retreated to the highest point of the rock that yet remaioed uncovered, and their sullen sound as they reached her seemed to announce that their next summons would not be in vain. Gloomy as life had appeared but a moment before, the thoughts of death, and of such a death, were beyond expres* sion horrible, She exerted her utmost strength to scream for assistance, and waved tbe shawl she had thrown over her; but the echo and the wind seemed to sport with them only to aggravate her despair. Far to the left there was a chain of rocks, stretching to the shore; but to
reach them was impossible ; yet she con¬ tinued to gaze on tbem as if they could help her, when she suddenly descried a figure bounding along them from point to point with an activity and force that seemed more than human. Strong as was her wish for life, the darkness, the perfect silence, the super-human speed of this figure, terrified her, and sbe shrieked, as plunging from the nearest point of the rock he swam towards her, with a bold and rapid arm, and the next ¿noment ascended the crag, where sh© still clung, caught her in his arms, and while she despaired of life, placed her beyond the reach of danger. They were still, however, far frorn the castle ; but neither rocks nor waves seemed to im¬ pede her preserver, who darted on with a speed that even terrified her, though it saved her. They were now within a short distance of the castle, when Armida at once felt the necessitv a f thanking the stranger,
and felt she was unable to do so : his silence, his repulsive character, and the circumstances of terror and danger under which she had twice met him (for she knew it was the young Milesian), awed and depressed her. Eloquent and po¬ lished as she was, she felt all the embar¬ rassment of ignorance ; and the strong pulsation ofhis heart, which she felt dis¬ tinctly while in his arms, whether caused by emotion or speed, seemed to commu¬ nicate its agitation to her own. In the confusion she produced her purse, ane % - timidly offered it to his acceptance· If was dark, and as the stranger stood at some distance from her, she did not see the haughtiness with which he retreated from her. She followed him, and only remembering bis poverty, repeated her request. " I am an O'Morven," said the young man, proudly, "of a race, who, though they have nothing now to bestow, have not yet learned ho*v to receive. To me
an act of humanity is no effort, nor could I risk any thing of less value to me than life." Armida, now insulted in her turn, hur¬ ried with faltering steps to the castle, from which the servants had been dis¬ patched in every direction in quest of her ; and when she reached her apartment dismissed her terrified attendants, who crowded round her, unwiUing to betray the conflict of emotions that divided her mind. " Let him go," said she, at length, when sbe found herself alone; " the proud savage ; let hiin go, since his pride can thus insult those whom hia courage and his humanity astonish and subdue, How he tried to degrade the effort he had made, that he might degrade the object of it: it was mere humanity, aud I was of no more value in hia eyes than a perishing mendicant; it was not so iu Italy." And the tears of pride and anger gushed fast from her eyes. vol, i t E
Yet often tbat night, the model of per¬ fection which his figure displayed visit* tå her dreams, |nd the rich and awful harmony of his voice, though she had heard it in anrer, came to her ear in the pauses of the storm that howled round the castle, and when she rose, she deter¬ mined to pass the day in writing to Wandesford, that she might exclude the thoughts that filled her mind too much with the stranger. The next day, how¬ ever, the visits of the neighbourhood, whom curiosity had rendered impatient to see her, left her not a moment's leisure. The impressions which she gave and re¬ ceived will be best described by the fol¬ lowing letters, the first of which was written by an ancient dowager, who re¬ sided a few miles from the castle. To Mrs. Margaret Malone. Morrión Square, Dublin. "WeU, I have seen this foreign wonder. I have been at Lord Mont-
clare 's : never was so disappointed in my life: as to her beauty, perhaps it cannot be denied, but then it is quite the fixed, lifeless beauty of one of the statues in her room, that with their nakedness and their dead eyes absolutely stare one out of couutenance. " As to her grace and expression that every one is raving about, I say it is downright affectation. " Her head is absolutelv turned with accom plishments, and taste and virtu, and all the rest of that heathenish jargon that her father taught her in Italy. ' ; Only think of a womau who lives iu a worid of her owu, among paintings, and poetry, and music, that lives with them, talks to them, says her prayers to them for ought I know: a woman that wastes her whole life poring over some odious naked antique, or working herself into fits of feeling with her harp, or lounging on an ill-contrived seat that she calls classical, while her maid twists J£8
her hair into the shape ofevery fantastical bust in the room. " And to what purpose is all this : has it made her happy: no, I can read strongly in her looks pride and melan¬ choly : it has not even procured her the advantage that a common education with good sense and the manners of the world ensures to an ordinary female : there is my grand-daugh ter, Lady Gabriella, ap¬ pears a thousand times more like a wo¬ man of this world, though their accom¬ plishments admit of no comparison. As to her dancing and singing, nobody under¬ stands, nor nobody likes it : I never saw any thing like it but a stage-play ; I never beheld such a scene in my life as she exhibited. The last day we dined there, when she condescended, as it was called, to display her talents, after en¬ treating an hour for a song, which she told us in pretty plain language we could neither understand nor enjoy, she rose at last and threw herself beiide her harp,
but such sounds as she tittered, it was not like any thing I had ever heard before : sometimes it was like a bird in the air, so wild and high, and sometimes so faint and low, just like a creature that was sighing their life away ; and her arms sinking from the harp, and her head declined, and her bosom heaving, really I could not help asking what pleasure there was in listening to what brought the tears into everybody's eyes : well, when that was over, she suffered herself to be prevailed on to dance. The carpet was rolled off, all the card-tables pushed away : I lost a rubber of five by it: 1 had the game in my hand, but when the dancing began, I never was so amazed : no performer but herself: we were all laid by for spectators. u I protest, she was more like one of those heathen figures in her apartment, those graces, or Venus Anno Domini's, one of those half-naked, half-mad figures that one sees in a fine painting, than any
thing human ; such attitudes, such move¬ ments, and what was worse, such pauses. She glided round the room as if she wanted wings only to fly, and at last she sunk upon one knee, her eyes thrown up¬ ward, and her arms extended. I really thought she wasfal';hg,and screamed out for some one to go and help her; then she sprung from the ground,declared it was impossible for her to display her talents w here she c?.\:li sot inspire the enthusiasm she felt, threw herself on the sofa, and did nothing but drink lemonade and talk of Italian sensibility for the rest of the evening: as to her sensibility, it is all romance, just mere impulse and caprice. I will give you a specimen of it.—You know Rose St. Austin, a distant relation, that I took from that foolish old parson, hrr uncle, gave her every advantage, suffered her to listen to all the instructions that my grand-daughter, Lady Gabriella, received from her masters ; well, at these parties the ladies met. Rose, by the
bye, is just as fantastic in her own way as Miss Fitzalban, so the meeting was con· ducted according to the statute laws of romance : they stared at each other, saw congenial souls in each other's eyes, and the way they fastened up their hair, embraced, vowed eternal friendship ; and almost without asking my leave, Rose has become an inmate at the Castle of Mont¬ clare; but mark my word«, Margaret Malone, Rose will never know what misery is till she has been there a month longer : the sublimities of false feeling will evaporate, and nothing but pride and caprice will remain. Miss Fitzalban has changed her plain name already into Rosine ; next she will proceed to change something else, her plain appearance into sonie of those naked antiques she is so fond of, or her plain bible principles into those wicked infidel notions she got abroad : now Rose will not bear that, for she has a good stubborn spirit of her own, and when it comes to that, after a long е 4
speech in French and two songs ifi Italian, Miss Fitzalhan will say to her in plain English—' Quit the castle, for I like you no longer.' Depend upon it this will be the end, as sure as I am my dear Margareťs affectionate friend, "GeRTKUDE KlLCARIUCR." "P. S. After ajl I am quite provoked at Rose leaving us, for she was an excel¬ lent foil for Lady Gabriella, who is pro¬ digiously improved, grown quite a beauty, quite a brilliant creature. I wish to heaven I could keep her from ramblinc: so much on the rocks where those ruined O'Morvens live : I dont like it. Burn this scrawl," To the Reverend Albert St. Justin. " You will he surprised, my dear uncle, to find me writing from Montclarc Castle ; and though I have been here three days, I am still as much surprised myself. Do you remember the delight
with which I spoke of Miss Fitzalhan'« arrival : the report of her character, her talents, and the contrast between such a being and the inhabitants of a remote countrv like this, filled me with the most vivid curiosity : yet, when the invitation arrived, and LadyKilcarrick declared her intention of bringing me, I actually trem¬ bled at my own inferiority, and would have given any thing to accompany them invisibly, or likeCinderilla in masquerade. I comforted myself, however, with think¬ ing that where Lady Gabriella was I might hope to pass unnoticed, and see the whole battle behind her shield. I must give you the scene on our arrival,—There was a large company, and Lord Mont¬ clare received us with that cold politeness that chills one into insignificance. He is a proud, solemn, sallow personage, who wears his peerage in his very look. I did not venture to raise my eyes till I heard him desire some of the servants to iuform Miss Fitzalhan of Lady Kilear- e5
rick's arrival : tbe summons, however, did not bring her: she entered late, spoke only to the few who were near her, and till dinner was announced my curiosity was tortured with glimpses of her figure and murmurs of her voice. At dinner by some chanee she placed herself next me : I would have retired, but she detained me with some expressions of politeness, of which I literally could not hear the words for the music. You will think me an enthusiast, dear uncle, but unless I wrote in poetry I cannot describe the etherial goddess-like character of her beauty, yet I cannot tell the peculiar charm that affects you : she has no natural colour, no vivacity, she speaks liltle, and her dress was the simplest in the roora. She was in white muslin, but she had some rich ornaments on her arms and neck, and the beauty of her dark hair, the taste witb which it was arranged, and her light dress, that seemed like drapery thrown over a statue, gave a kind of poe-
tical character to her figure that made it hardly seem substantial. Just opposite to us Lady Gabriella was seated ; beautiful indeed, and glowing with youth and spirits, but w ith her showy vivacity, her high complexion, and all the colours of Flora or Pomona in her dress : what a contrast to the Doric graces of Armida, She spoke but little, and only to me : her manners though cold are exquisitely polished, and they have a commanding ease, which, though the result of pride, gives her hearer a kind of confidence. In the evening there was some general conversation, and literature was men¬ tioned : then at length she spoke, and though evidently with no effort, it still seemed painful to her reserve and languor. After much importunity she was prevailed on to sing: I saw sha undertook it with despondency, as if wanting confidence in her hearers ; she could feel none in herself, VQt she began to sing, aad then I first lamented my
ignorance of foreign music, for though some passages made me shiver, and some made rne weep, I felt I was not judge enough to appreciate the powers she displayed. In some parts of her voice I ieit as if I was mounting a precipice with her, and grew bewildered and giddy with the difficulties of the way : after all, there was one low and simple song, which a connoisseur would laugh if he heard me say I preferred, but it came over me like moonlight after tbe glare of a burning day, and drew from me the sweetest tears that pleasure ever shed. " But not for all her talents would I feel the lassitude with which she retired to her seat, and seemed by some strange exemption to be the only one there who could give delight, but who could not feel it. She has been destroyed by flat¬ tery, intellectual luxury, and atoo strong and too early excitement of her sensibi¬ lity, that like a flower torn open in the bud, has withered before it has blown.
After her performance, tbink, my dear uncie, of Lady Gabrielia singing, and exhibiting her w retched drawings, which Lady Kilcarrick had brought iu the car¬ riage. Armida listened, and looked with painful politeness : her mind is too great for ridicule, or she might have ( fooled them to tbe top of their bent/ hut she has no female littleness of heart: if her character was more common she might be more happy : she must have thought both music and drawings execrable, but she bowed and was silent: after her, what followed was to me insupportable ; and while the company were occupied with Lady Gabriel la's portfolio, I was examining Armida's beautiful paintings with which the room was filled, till I was afraid of suggesting an invidious comparison to them ; and taking a book that lay on one of the tables, I retired to a little boudoir where the scent of tlie orange-flowers invited me, and forgotten by all, forgot myself, till I heard Miss
Fitzalb an 's voice, who had entered the boudoir alone, inquiring what employed me so intently. At first I was going to shut the book; but the next moment, urged by an impulse for which I could not account, I gave it to her, and pointed out the very passage I was reading. It was in the Adventurer, the beautiful tale of Almerine and Shelimah :— ( But Al- merine, whom arabition was thus ready to obey, who was reverenced by hoary wisdom, and beloved by youthful beauty, was perhaps the most wretched of her sex. Perpetual adulation had made her haughty and proud : her penetration and delicacy rendered almost every object of¬ fensive. She was disgusted with imper¬ fections which others could not disco¬ ver," &c. &c. After giving her the book, I stood before her trembling like a criminal before a judge. I felt I had behaved with unpardonable audacity ac¬ cording to common rules. She read the passage through witb an unbrpken voice;
and then returned the book to me.— ς The voice of sincerity ought to be pleasing to me/ said she, ' from its no¬ velty, for from my birth till now Ibelieve I have never heard it. You must stay with me. I need not ask you to be my friend, for that you have dared to be al¬ ready İnthe lesson you have given me to¬ night/ Whether my late temerity had exhausted me I cannot tell, but I made no opposition. Lady Kilcarrick gave an ungracious assent, and I have since re¬ mained at the castle. I know not yet how I feel, or what to thiuk of my situa¬ tion. At times the superiority of her character overpowers and dazzles mc, and at otliers her habitual lassitude and me¬ lancholy places me a thousand degrees above her in the scale of happiness. Lord Montclare is sufficiently polite, and any otber female humble as I am would be happy; yet at times, my dear uncle, I feel as if I were in some enchanted pa¬ lace, where destiny had confined some
beautiful fairy queen, and where the spell of enchantment had frozen up her charms, her graces, and her fascinations, and shed a gloom over all the grandeur by which sbe was surrounded. " Rose St. Austin," The following day Armida wrote to Colonel Wandesford. te You complain of my silence, yet what can be expected from the desert shores of Ireland. I appear to have reached the limits of human existence. I have nothing to communicate, for I have nothing to feel. Perhaps I have been always too much dependant on society for my impressions; but this depend¬ ance, if it destroyed the originality of my character, increased its resources. What would I give now for those applauses, those crowds, that gave my spirits a me¬ chanical animation tbat is absolutely ne¬ cessary to existence, where the real sensi¬ bility of pleasure is wanting.
" I am now sitting in a turret of this ancient castle : the waves of the Atlantic are roaring around me : the grey clouds are sailing above my head. I see nothing but the foam, that rises to the very case¬ ment : I hear nothing but the whistling wind and the solitary scream of the sea- fowl. In the calmest day the wind is heard loudly among these rocks, and ihrough the long passages of the castle. Sometimes tbe sun breaks out for a mo¬ ment, and sheds a green light on the dis¬ tant grassy bills, like a ray of imagination playing on a withered heart; hut I see far off the sweeping shadows of the clouds, that come to extinguish it, and feel it gone before it disappears. This solitude might be favourable to deep re¬ flection, hut I have so much real melan¬ choly in my heart I am afraid to think. In Italy, amid her roseate landscapes and purpureal lights, I often indulged a lux¬ urious melancholy, because amid such scenes there was no danger in the indul-
gence : it formed a kind of shade to the briliiant picture that was before me. But here there is no contrast between ray raind and my situation, and I feel like an enchantress who has gone beyond her circle, and dreads to raise the spirits she can no longer govern. ec Yet here I have met with a character that has no alliance with the climate, a young female, whose constant and natu¬ ral animation I admire, even more than the sincerity and simplicity of her cha¬ racter. I am amazed at tbe perseverance with which she reads, works, and sings, without any excitement, any impulse oí flattery or imagination ; how sbe flies over the rocks for exercise, and catches spirits from the breeze, whose coldness seems to chill my very mind. While reading only plunges me into reverie, and music brings images to me, like those of a dream, which I try in vain to define, Rosine employs every hour, though she hardly reads any thing but history, and
never has ventured to play or sing for company in her life. Her talents are mediocre : a thousand times a day I feel tbe superiority of my mind to her's, but what avails a superiority that does not procure happiness. " I am convinced I am an object of com¬ passion toher—have I then been mistaken, Wandesford, or have thosewho made me what I am been mistaken in their esti¬ mate of life ? Are genius and imagination the enemies of happiness ? Does intellec¬ tual luxury debilitate and disease the mind as it does the frame ? If it be so, if I must die of this atrophy of the heart, let me not die here at least. In that happy climate, whose luxuries feast both the heart and the senses, where the sink¬ ing column is hid with roses, and the brilliant air at once breathes melody and perfumes, there let me resign an existence which the talents that could not adorn may perhaps commemorate, and to which the sensibility that has destroyed it
has given at times an enjoyment exquisite enough to compensate its lois." Twice, on finishing her letter, Armida attempted to add something about the young Milesian, for she felt it like a breach of confidence to Wandesford to say nothing of the man of whom she thought so much, but she found her¬ self unable to write of him. As she finished, the castle clock struck tliree, and she τ as preparing to retire to rest, when she heard the trampling of horses on the rocky road that wound under her apartment, and the next moment the heavy jarring of the great gates, as ihey were slowly unclosed by the half-wakened domestics. Surprised by the arrival of any one at so late au hour, she hastened into the gallery, and at tbe opposite end of the vast hall into which it opened saw a figure in a military dress pass to Lord Montclare's apartment. (c It is young Mr. O'Morven, madam," said the servants, who saw ber leaning from the
gallery ; te he has come to announce the arrival of Colonel Wandesford : the regi¬ ment has come to Ireland. Mr. O'Morven came with the first detachment, and the colonel will be here in a few days." " Wandesford here in a few days !" re¬ peated Armida mechanically." A chill like that of death came over her, and at that moment the monotonous existence of which she had been complaining in her letter appeared happiness compared to the event of Wandesford's arrival. She remained for several minutes clinging to the gallery, as if it could have pro¬ tected her from her own thoughts, till the approach of a quick light step re¬ called her to herself: it was young O'Morven, followed by his father, who was persuading him not to quit the castie at so late an hour. The young man gently but firmly declined his father's importunities, who retiied in some dis¬ pleasure, and Armida then recognised the sunny locks, the heaven blue eyes
and the dazzling and etherial bioöra of the figure she had once seen in London. In the dim light iu which she stood he could only discover it was a female, and he bowed to her with au air in which military pride was mixed with youthful humility. As she bowed to him, she could not help contrasting his youth, spirit, and softness, with the gloomy pride of his brother, and she inquired of the domestics, who were still in the hall, why he quitted the castle at so late an hour. " To visit his brother." " Visit his bro¬ ther at this hour î " repeated Armida. ** It is the only hour they can meet," said an Irish servant : " the old grandfather won't suifer the eldest to set foot within these walls, nor the youngest to come near the old ruin wiiere he lives himself, so the poor lads can only get siglit of each other by night, on the bare rocks, aud it is there they will meet now." In the meantime, Desmond O'Morven was tra¬ versing the sea-worn path that led from
the castle to the lonely tower where his brotber resided. From the period that his father and he had put themselves under the protection of Lord Montclare his implacable grandfather had forbid the brothers to meet, and confined tbe elder almost entirely to the ruiu in which they resided. The night was dark, and the rough wind dashed the spray of an ebbing tide across bis path at every step ; but to Desmond the way was marked by traces he bad never forgotten. He climbed the rude natural steps that led to the tower with a beating heart. On a crag of the rock, against which the waves were beating their white foam, scarce visible from time to time in tbe moon, whose pale and watery ray touched his form with something like a supernatural light, í tood Connal O'Morven. The brothers rushed to each other's arms; but when Connal felt the weak and trembling frame *>f bis brother, and remembered his re¬ cent wounds in Italy, he reproached
L
himself for exposing him to this ear¬ less interview. (< Why did you wander out this bleak night?" " Only to meet one as bleak and comfortless aü himself : one who has not even a roof to lead you under; who has nothing but a bare arm to shelter you/' " It was to feel that arm folded round me," said Desmond, €i that I quitted a roof where, except that, I had not a wish ungratified." " Sit on this stone, at least," said Con¬ nal, "it is all I have to offeryou. This is a desolate meeting," said be, as he placed himself between Desmond and the cold wind : " I cannot even see your face : the moon has set, and I long to see it. I long to feel the recollections whicii your voice and your touch has awakened confirmed by your looks/' " They arc much changed," said Desmond in an altered voice : fc I am not the wild rustir tbat I was, burning with health and spi¬ rits; but thougli tbe hlood has aimosi left my cheek, I feel it as warm at mj
heart as ever this moment," te Des¬ mond, you sofreu mine too much," said Connal, turnir away. Desmond could not see the wildness ofhis expression as he spoke, but. he marked tbe sublime and daring character of his brother's figure, as it stood braving the blast like his na¬ tive tower that stood in the distance, dark, and stern, and desolate. Desmond felt his military enthusiasm revive as he gazed on him : he rose, and extended to its full length the giant arm of bis bro¬ tlier that hung on bis shoulder. " But you are altered, Connal, since we parted : even by this light I can see how much you are altered : hovv tall and strong you are: I feel myself like a willow be¬ side an oak." "Yes," said Connal, slowly withdrawing his arm, " I have grown, but not like the oak ; I have grown like the sea-weed on these rocks, or the foliage that has spread among the battlements of that oid tower, tall, worthless, and un¬ cultivated, to sigh to the blast, and VOL, I, F
wither on the spot . I sprung from." * f Commi," said Desmond, " this me¬ lancholy language gives me more pain than my absence from you." " I am seldom guilty of a murmur," said Connal, proudly recollecting himself: <c the only part left me is that of stern endurance ; yet there are moments, when, pressed by my hard fate, my heart, like Joseph in the Bible, amid all his constraint, will long at the sight of a brother, to fall on bis neck, and even weep there." He threw Inmself on Desmond as he spoke, hut Desmond, who was trembling with con¬ cealed emotions, eagerly seized on his brother's words to make a discovery, which since tbe first moment of their in¬ terview had pressed on his heart like a crime. " Yes, Connal, there are such mo¬ ments, and such are the present : I long, and s yet I fear." At the word fear, Connal gave his brother a look, of which ihe other felt the expression, though in
the dark. " I know not what I fear," said Desmond, tc for I have nothing to disclose. It began and ended like a dream, but such a dream, that I could sleep for ever to have it once more/* At that moment the slow-passing light of a meteor shewed to Connal 1иУ brother's figure : its youthful perfection, even at eighteen, and the pale visionary light that foil on it, gave him an appearance alunos* aerial: and though Connal saw those light, luxuriant curls of gold, and that waxen skin, unchanged by war or a fo reigu cli¬ mate, yet he saw Desmond's bloom was gone, and there was a voluptuous me¬ lancholy in his full blue eyes that spoke a premature change in his feelings. Touched by this expression, Connal spoke to him in a voice of encouragement, and Desmond poured out the secret with which bis young heart was full. tc In tbe vessel in wliich I came over there was an Italian ladv, who, with bet* family, was flying to England : I had ЕЙ
often seen her attendants, but never could obtain a sight of her or her daughter : that there was a daughter I was con¬ vinced, for sometimes of a miid uight I saw two figures moving slowly along the deck, habited apparently alike, and con¬ versing in whispers ; and the broken and mellow murmurs of their harmonious language, floating on the sea-breeze, were the pleasantest sounds that ever came to my ear. Sometimes, but very rarely, I heard the sound of a musical instrument coming from their cabin ; and onte, very late at night, while gazing at a beautiful star in tbe west, that seemed to shine on my native shore, I heard voices from below, of such rich, melan¬ choly, oppressive sweetness, that I almost thought as I listened the songs of spirits floated past me on the waters A few nights after, as I was walking on deck, thinking of all I ever loved, my father and you, I heard a sudden shriek from the opposite side : I rushed forward, and
heard that some one had fallen overboard. The vessel was making rapid way ; I could hear or see nothing distinctly, but I plunged overboard in a moment." Con¬ nal pressed his brother's hand with the silent gratulation of a brave spirit. " The object I had rescued was the daughter of the Italian lady, but the attendants crowded round ns, and she was taken from my arms the moment I reached the vessel. I then hurried to my cabin, where, without taking off my drenched clothes, or swallowing the spi¬ rits the sailor» pressed on me, I sat for hours thinking on the burthen my arms had just relinquished: it was but for a moment, and in the darkness and struggle I had scarce seen her ; but I thought the hand I held for that moment was the coldest, softest, whitest thing I ever felt or saw ; and the face, as it lay on ray breast for a moment, by the light of a common lantern, it seemed to have nothing like life in it, but nothing in life ever f3
was so lovely. When I thought of that hand touching mine, of that face resting on my bosom, a strange kind of trembling iei zed me : sometimes Ì wished the whoie scene would occur again, and sometimes I vvished it had never occurred at all. ** The next and for several days I was in a fever, hut it was more of miud than body: every day messages of in¬ quiry came from the Italian lady, and when I recovered, a monk, whom I had «cen among her attendants, came to in¬ form me that the s'gnora wished to re¬ turn her personal thanks to the preserver of her child. My breath seemed sus¬ pended while he spoke, and after some tain attempts to answer, I followed him to tbe signora's cabin ; and though I was disappointed, I was relieved by finding her alone. She rose as I entered : she was an elegant, beautiful woman, no longer young, but possessing that grace of figure and address that belongs to foreigners of rank. I was goiog to speak
to her in Italian, of which I just knew the forras of salutation, when she sud¬ denly addressed me in English, with a foreign accent indeed, but with the utmost fluency and elegance. Blushing at the praises she lavished on me, I at last summoned courage to inquire after her daughter , €s My son, sir/ said the lady, * will never forget the obligations he owes you ; and nothing distresses him more than hit inability, from the consequences of the accident, to offer his personal thanks for his preservation ; but he is a sickly, timid boy/ " I felt a strange oppressive sensation steal over me : I faltered out my regret for the indisposition of the young gentle¬ man, and after some vain attempts to continue the conversation, I retired to my cabin." " And saw them no more?" said Connal. " No. The following day we landed, же
and though I understood from the atten¬ dants that the signora was going to Ire¬ land, we separated immediately on de¬ barking, and I saw them no more." " Then think of them no more/' said Connal, who wished to avert his bro¬ ther's mind from dwelling on a romantic impression. "Oh! Connal, Connal," said Desmond, passionately. "I shall think for ever of that moment when I beid tbat form iu my arms, so pale, so soft, so motionless and believed it a woman's : the objeci of that moment, andthe Italian boy, appear to me two distinct beings, nor can I recon¬ cile the images of my fancy with the sound, ' it is my son!' You who are too pure and too proud for passion, who have lived secluded from women, and never knew the sweet madness of their iniluence, I cannot explain myself to you ; but if you should see Armida Fitz¬ alhan, who is now so near you, my Ian
guage would be no longer unintelli¬ gible." " I have seen her," said Connal. " And what do you thinkof her ?" said Desmond, eagerly, " Why sbould I think of her ?" said Connal, evading the question : " they say she is the proudest of her sex : a woman mad with pride, a.d abused capacity— that believes the world made only to wor¬ ship her beauty, or her talents. A thou¬ sand times rather would I encounter timt proud English peer her father, than meet her in her pride," " But is not she the most beautiful creature you ever saw?" said Des¬ mond. " I hardly looked at her." " But is not her voice music ?'' " I scarce heard her speak." a Gracious heaven ! but is not she a woman, and is there not dtiight in the very sound. Since I held that figure in г 5
my arms, I think I have loved the whole sex." (ς Romantic boy ť* said Connal, half sighing ; " but with you love is combined with hope and honour—«women love the brave, and young, and emment. None of those bright visitors must corae where O'Morven buries his blasted youth and ruined fortunes, amid the fragments of bis paternal home." " Connal, Connal, have I grieved you by my folly? ' said Desmond, peni¬ tently. 4t No, my affectionate boy: I sigh not to be the slave of either man or woman. But, oh God ! no arms, no fame, no hope for me." He darted from his brotlier as he spoke, and Desmond, who dared not follovv hirn, returned to the castle, as the morn was breaking through the grey clouds that bung on the shore.
CHAP. V. '* He dies and makes no sign." Armida was awoke the next morning by her servants, who, throwing open tbe curtains with looks of terror, exclaimed that Lord Montclare had passed the night in agonies, and was now dying. Armida waited not to hear them finish the sentence : screaming, and almost mad with horror, she threw on a loose dress, and flew to her father's apartment; but he gave positive orders that none but his attendants should be admitted till the physician's arrival, and he knew whether it would be safe for him to see his family. Accustomed to this exclusion, it gave her no additional pain, and she now hurried througli the castle to dispatch servants in every direction for physicians, though
THE MILESIAN* almost with adoubt whether any could be found in a country so savage. In lhe dread * ful interval that preceded their arrival Armida was aimosi in despair ; between her and her father there had uever tub- sisted either the affection of a parent or the confidence ofa child ; but hc had been indulgent to her even to profusion, and his sudden danger, conìbined with tiie desolateness of her situation, and the reflexion that her taients, thougli they gratified his pride, had seldom been ex¬ erted for his pleasure, were almost too much for a mind hitherto untried by cala¬ mity: at length the expresses that had heen dispatched to Galway and Lough- rea returned, accompanied by the phy¬ sicians. They remained for two hours with their patient. Armida walked up and down the gallery in silence, dying to listen, but starting frorn the door when¬ ever she heard an articulate sound ; at length they came out, and she savv her father's death in their countenances. Ta
the inquiring &gony of her silence ihey could only answer that Lord Montclare's disease was the gout; tbat in consequence as it appeared of some violent emotion of im-e.d. ii had heen driven into his stomach ; that he was in imminent danger, and the sooner hc saw his family aud settled his worldly concerns the betler. Armida rushed into her father's apart* ment, which she never quitted till his sufferings caused her lo be carried from it senseless : it was at this moment she felt the viiiue of Rosinc's inferior character, while the very impetuosity of her feel¬ ing made her mistake every order and confuse every medicine. Rosine with stciidy- gentleness palliated the patient's sufferings even to himself, soothed his impatience, controuled the distraction of the attendants, and repressed the execra¬ tion that pain every moment forced from. his lips: the paroxysm at length ended i u a deep sleep, such as in those cases cfiui precedes the approach of death.
Rosine was by his bed when he awoke ï slowly raising his heavy eyes to her, he demanded—Were they corae ? " The physicians, my lord, are still here," said Rosine. " I need no physician,' 9 said Lord Montclare, rt they can do nothing for me now. I want to вее those I have injured/' Rosine, believing this tobe delirium, was silent. "Where is Armida? Let her come tome," he continued, " i wish io tell her all." " Perhaps your lordship had better wait till they arrive," said Mr. O'Mor¬ ven, who appeared to understand him. €t No, now or nevjr," said the dying man ; " I have wound myself up to it; let me tell it wbiţş I live ; I will have no tales of me when I am gone." Rosine was then dispatched for Armi¬ da, who hastened to his apartment, but before sbe arrived be was senseless« Ro-
sine had forborne to mention his mysteri¬ ous expressions ; yet a weight she could not describe pressed on her heart, and she was involuntarily convinced that her father's death would be atter ded witb some terrible discovery. Sick with unspeakable forebodings, on returning to her apartment she threw open her casement for air, and sat beside it breathless with fear and fancy. It was now mght; all below was dark and still; nothing was licard but the light tread of a domestic, ora sound that frora time to time she imagined to be the moans of her father. About midnight she was startled by the sound of carri¬ ages, horses, and attendants, rapidly driv¬ ing into the court of the castle ; her casement looked into it, and expecting the arrival of more physicians, she lean¬ ed forward : by the light of tbe flam¬ beaux, with which the court was now illuminated, she saw alight from one of the carriages Father Morosini, wbo had left
them some months before they quitted England ; and from another two figures whom she could not distinguish ; a third carriage was full of female servants; and a number of attendants, who appeared to be foreigners, followed them into the castle. The sound of many steps was heard passing to Lord Montclare's apart¬ ment; the door was then shut, and total silence followed. Xo one came near Armida, who, though wondering, was too weak to make inquiries, and two hours elapsed before she was again summoned to her father. When she entered he was alone; physicians, attendanti), all had re¬ tired : the lifirhts were dim, aiid the dreadful silence made her almost think ii the chamber of death. " Come near, Armida, 1 have a secret to disclose/' said Lord Montclare; "I wish you to hear it from no other lips than mine while they can utter it : you have seen me for years the victim of iis Concealment, and î feel I shall not loner
survive its disclosure. I have already told you Ihad two sisters; the younger is the mother of Colonel Wandesford, the elder irreparably offended me by marrying that beggarly Irishman who is now my a*rent. I married in Italy—married without any object but tbat of exclud¬ ing the O'Morvens from the property which must have reverted to them in the event of my having no son. I had no affection for the unhappy woman I married, she was merely the instrument of my hatred against the O'Morvens: it has recoiled upon myself." He wiped the cold drops from his face and proceeded. " You were my first chiid, and after you I bad several daughters, who all died in their infancy. When nine years had elapsed, frantic wiih my disappoint¬ ment, I conceived the idea of confining my wife in some obscure place, spread¬ ing the report of her death, and forming another connexion. By the assistance
of Morosini, a crafty and avaricious priest, I executed part of my plan ; but scarce bad the report of Lady Mont» clareas death been diffused, when I was informed she was with child, and in a few months afterwards she was delivered in her retreat of a son. My misery was now compleated hy the very event to which I had looked as the sura of my hopes, for how could I acknowledge my heir without acknowledging my crime ? Determined to do both, I yet, with the natural irresolution of guilt, deferred it from year to year, and wander¬ ed frora place to place, in the hope of find¬ ing some spot where ray character would not be blasted by the disclosure : at length my agent, Morosini, began to threaten me : I flew frora Italy, but he followed me to England ; there your cousin Wan¬ desford proposed for you ; you may re¬ member the eagerness with which I press¬ ed you to accept hira ; it was because I had disclosed my secret to bim, for 1
wished to secure a witness to the identity of my son, if, as I believed, I should not survive the recognition myself. Goaded by my conscience, my broken health, and the harassings of Morosini, I determined on burying myself in Ireland, and making the discovery in a country tvhere I was little known, and where the judgment of my character was indifferent to rae from my contempt for its inhabitants. Here therefore I came, but when I heard Lady Montclarc and her son were arrived, that I must avow myself a villain, my suffer¬ ings reduced me to the state you see/* (i And are they then arrived ?" said Armida. " They are/* said her fatber ; " but ts it possible that you, wbo believed your¬ self my sole heiress, can hear of their arrival with joy ?" t( Oh, my dear father/* said tbe high- souled Armida, " how little do you know my heart/' Her tears appeared to affect and con*
vince her father, and he said feebly :—* " I have studied hearts too little ; yet there are some noble ones in the world. That young О f Mor ven, the boy to whom I gave the commission, and who was in¬ volved in the hatred I felt against his family, he is a good young man—he sav¬ ed your brother's life on his passage to England. He little knew he was pre¬ serving the only life that stands between his family and their inheritance. He will be a witness, and you, and Wandes¬ ford : but he has much to cncouuter. I dread that old savage, with his pride, and rage, and poverty ; and I dread more the low villainy of Randal O'Morven : but I am exhausted, and, oh ! if this should be death." He sunk back. " Let me support you, my dearest father," said Armida, " No, let me support him," exclaim¬ ed a foreign voice, aud Lady Montclare rushed iuto the room, with her son, the
priest, and young O'Morven. (( My mother!" cried Armida, bewildered with joy and terror. The awful circumstances under which they met chilled the energy of their feel¬ ing, and tbe mother and children embrac¬ ed in solemn silence. Lord Montclare then desired to be supported in his bed, in acknowledge bis wife aud son, and call on the trembling witnesses to attest the recognition, "Aud toyou, Desmond," he added, trying to raise his holİovv voice, " to you I commit this boy. Will you bo his protector ? Will you defend him if fraud------" " With rny life," replied Desmond. extending his arm over the youth, who knelt beside the bed, passive and almost senseless from timidity or surprise. Yet when Desmond spoke, he parted the dark locks that clustered on his forehead, and looked up at him fui a moment with an expression tha*
almost breathed the sublimity of devo¬ tion. " Oh ! * Desmond," said the dying fatber, * f remember your promise. He is a stranger. He has none near him but women, and I fear enemies. Endy¬ mion, embrace your cousin, and ask his protection. Desmond, will you not turn to bim?" Desmond, blusbing at the appeal, leaned towards Endymion, to whom however he could not raise his eyes : hut wben he felt those slender arms twined round him once more; when he felt that bosom sinking on rather than pressed to his, and that face hiding itself on his neck, while the rich locks of which he had so often thought touched his check, he felt a strange sensation : he shudder¬ ed : he w ished to shrink from Endymion and from himself; but his emotion was unnoticed, for Lord Montclare's groans drew every cne in terror to the bed. Tbe priest crossed himself; Lady Mont-
clare screamed aloud ; and his children sunk on their knees beside him. He raised his ghastly face from the pillow. tf Aye, this will haverne," he cried, €i this will have me. Theresa, am I forgiven ? Hold me ! hold me strongly ! I am not dead yet—not yet ! Oh, keep me back but for a moment/* Armida heard no more.
CHAP. VL On quitting her apartment for the first time, several days after, Armida found a total change had taken place in the cas¬ tle. The Irish and English servants had been all dismissed, and their places filled by the foreign domestics who had ac¬ companied Lady Montclarc : a general air of constraint pervaded the- whole household. Father Morosini appeared the major-domo again. Mr. O'Mor ven retained the situation of agent, and Des¬ mond, to whom Lady Montclare was lavish in her professions of gratitude, was entreated to continue an inmate of the castle while his regiment remained in its neighbourhood ; and but for those per¬ sons who were lately so indifferent to her, Armida would have believed herself among total strangers. Her mother, to
whom she had at first flown with all the energy of her disposition, received her indeed with the most fascinating sweet¬ ness ; but it was that kind of sweetness which we practise towards an enemy we want to circumvent or disarm, rather than a child whom we love. Her brother, the ruost pensive and dejected hoy that ever lived, she did not feel herself much at¬ tracted by, and if she had, he was so watched by his mother and Morosini, that the least intercourse between them was utterly impossible. Chilled and dis¬ appointed, Armida resigned herself al¬ most to soiitude ; and one evening as she sat in her lonely apartment, Lady Mont¬ clare entered eagerly—** My dear Ar¬ mida, I have charming intelligence for you : Colonel Wandesford is in Ireland, he will be here to-night," Before she could answer, the tumult in the castle announced the arrival of Wandesford. With all ber pride and insensibility, Armida trembled, and the VOL. I. G
tone in which she inquired if it were necessary that she should see him that night betrayed all the depression of her heart. But Lady Montclare wa* resolved not to permit her to retreat, and in a few moments Armida found herself in the presence of Wandesford, He im¬ mediately flew to her with the most rap¬ turous vehemence, and before she could even reach the seat which her faltering steps were seeking, persecuted her for a verbal and immediate confirmation of his hopes with such importunity, that Ar¬ mida, shocked, harassed, and abashed, again repeated her promise, and appealed to Lady Montclare for its confirmation. She then pleaded her recent calamity as an excuse for retirement, and returned to her apartment. The following evening Armida and Rosine wandered out on the rocks ; Wan¬ desford soon followed them, and Armida, though she saw his approach with re¬ luctance, tried to conceal it, and pointed
out some of the striking and original scenery around, perhaps to draw his at¬ tention from herself. Wandesford could not help allowing its wild, Salvator beauty, but he spoke the cold, technical language of a man whose claims to taste were derived only from his having been abroad. Armida in vain tried to com¬ municate to him some of the enthusiasm, the dulcía vitta of her mind. Wandes¬ ford, after whistling vacantly for a mo¬ ment, observed the extraordinary effect of the echo among those rocks, and coldly importuned Armida to sing for him. "Ah! it is impossible," said she, ťí to snake an effort tbat demands sensibility and imagination, while conscious that they do not exist within you, or within tliose who listen ut» you: I cannot sing iß this cold с limaU. I require to be sur¬ rounded, as I once wai, with groves of orange, wakened into fragrance by the breeze, and touched with the magic of moonlight, every pause filled with the a ä
murmur of waters, or the sighs of silent delight. Oh ! then I have felt the in¬ spiration of music : then I have resigned my whole soul to sounds, which, but for their effect, I was scarce conscious I ut- tered : then I have breathed notes that never will be heard frora these lips again." " But I was never more prepared to admire and to enjoy than at tbis moment," said Wandesford. (e When we prepare for the reception of pleasure," said Armida, " pleasure never arrives. Recollect any moment of exquisite enjoyment, and you will find it has had as little resemblauce to the mo¬ ments tbat preceded it as the meteor to the cloud that it brightens for an instant. A few fugitive notes breathed in a sudden pause; ao impassioned sentiment suggested by a withering flower, or an evening cloud ; an unfinished picture with some brilliant touches that make you think it will be raore than perfect when finished, and hide from you that its principal charm
ís its being unfinished—these are the true sources of pleasure: in whatever pleases man there must be something that resembles his nature, something im¬ perfect, that awaits a fuller develop¬ ment." Yet when she had uttered her feelings» she was so startled by the angry gloom of Wandesford's countenance, that she dispatched Rosine to the castle for her lyre, an instrument which was constructed by her order from the model of one found in Herculaneum, and on which she used to accompany herself ia the open air: but the cold and solitary praise of Wan¬ desford, the mournful echoes of the shore, and the rude breath of an autumnal blast scattering her fine notes on the desert rocks, formed such a contrast to her for¬ mer destiny, that, after a few bars, she paused ; her hand faltered on the strings, and sbe bowed her head to conceal the tears that fell on them. Wandesford, always incensed at whatever interrupted 63
his own indulgence, walked sullenly away. Armida remained alone with Ro¬ sine : neither of them spoke : no words could have conveyed their feelings so strongly as their mutual silence. At length Armida caught up the neglected lyre, and under that impulse which ge¬ nius derives from grief, and which, though not the happiest, is the strongest it cau feel, she struck a few chords. The notes were at first few and interrupted, but as' she sung, she mingled witb thera an ex¬ pression tbat at onee conveyed the bril¬ liancy of her former destiny, and her present desolation. There is a tone in music that has the power of conveying beyond language this contrasted feeling to the heart, where the dying sweetness of past recollection softens while it exalts present sufferings. As she proceeded, and the consciousness of excellence gave energy to her iones, there was a melan¬ choly triu' ph in them that seemed to *ay*—" My talents arc not lost, though
they arc no longer admired." A sigb, that did not proceed from Rosine, made her pause: she turned, she looked up¬ ward, and the figure that she beheld bending over her made her silent from wonder. It was that of a young man whose strength and stature rose almost to the gigantic, yet retained so much youth¬ ful facility, and harmonious modulation, that it seemed rather to constituie a new order of human architecture than to de¬ part from ordinary dimensions. He wore the ancient Irish dress : it consisted of ( l) drawers of a vivid yellow, closely adapted to the limbs, and terminating in buskins, whose complicated braids gave to the feet and ancles the appearance of those of an ancient statue. The vest ( the fillan of the ancient Irish) was of the same colour and texture, and clasped at the throat with a triangular broach. The mantle of regal purple, flowing back from one broad shoulder, displayed an arm that eeemed formed to bear the ensigns of war g4
or empire : the other arm, carelessly wrapped in the folds of his mantle, held the ancient Irish barret cap. But of ihe countenance, Armida, though she looked up oniy for a moment, felt that a single view was enough to stamp an ever »&·ί ing irapression : it was one of which the per¬ fect and regular beauty was lost in the expression. Less depth of Ihonght, İe c ç darkness of melancholy, less wild and romantic sublimity of expression, wculd Imve allowed more pleasure iu the con¬ templation of features, whose symmetry, combined with a deep brown complexion,. made them resemble the bust of a classic hero. His upper lip was darkened hy the hair which the ancient Irish suffered to grow there, and his hair, closely cut behind, so as to display tbe fine contour of the head and neck, whose very bend seemed io denote a proud submission. poured all its dark and wavy volumes to the front, and parting on the marble fore¬ head terminated in the coulin —tbe long,
loose curl, so much the favourite of the ancient Irish, while its clustering ringlets, shading the temples, and wandering on the cheek, seemed like foliage mantling over the polished surface of a pillar—it was Connal O 'Morven. He was bending over her as she sung with close attention, and as she turned, his face was irradiated with a sudden blush that proved it ca¬ pable ofevery expression, Armida trem¬ bled in every limb at his presence with a terror she could neither repress or de¬ scribe; but pride supplied the place of self-command, and she continued to sit, and even to touch her lyre, though her disobedient fingers could not produce a distinct sound. There was a mutual pause, till Connal, with a sigh like that with which we wake from a delicious dream, M'as slowly retiring, when, struck by the silence of Armida and Rosine, hc murmured an apology for his intrusion. Armida, ashamed of her embarrassment с 5
in the presence of a savage Irishman, coldly answered there was none. " Yes, " said Connal, his character invin¬ cibly breaking out, "yes, I am au intruder, for on no spot of these alienated grounds have I a right to set my foot ; yet I have wandered here every evening to behold 'vou, and when at a distance I saw your drapery like a cloud enshrouding some bright spirit—at a distance I gazed and worshipped. Butthose sounds: oh! what mortal could resist them: I followed them till I knew not where I was." <f Can you then admire Italian music ?" said Armida, with surprise. " I know not, for I cannot yet believe the sounds I heard to be mortal/' said Connal. "Ýet there are times when even Italian music sinks under my conceptions of the power of music," said Armida, on whom the feeling of her altered destiny rushed sadly.
cf I cannot feel its defects," said Con¬ nal, " for I have heard it only from your lips." tf I have sometimes thought," said Armida, " it wanted the power of ex¬ citing the melancholy, the deep and trou¬ bled feeling that is a source of the most exquisite pleasure. To a few, Italian music, as I have sometimes heard it sung by a pale, seductive, languishing Italian, fainting under a perfumed and glowing sky, and sighing forth sounds that seemed the natural language of the climate, the very spirit of the warm, voluptuous air, such music is perhaps the music of the senses; but I want the music of the heart : such music gives all the pleasures of sound, but I waBt its pains." " Oh, heaven !" said Connal, touched by her language, (i why have you not heard the native music of Ireland ? Oh ! there is a wildness, a passion, a tone of the heart in it that you have sought, and hut in it you will seek in vain: they
have little of the art, but all the soul of that exquisite science of which you ap¬ pear the visible deity^ Armida listened with incredulous con¬ tempt, and she spoke disdainfully of the sounds she had heard from the peasants of Ireland. " It is the fate of the Irish language and Irish music," said Connal, te to be degraded into the language and music of the vulgar, and when we hear it from their Jips we forget that it has been the language of the hero, the noble, or the poet. Fcr eight hundred years the har¬ mony of her language has ceased, for those who gave it harmony are no more : her chiefs, her bards, and her minstrels are gone. Her language, proscribed by England, and forgotten by herself, is now only the language of mendicants ; and in its day of degradation we dare to pronounce what it has been, when in¬ spired by genius, and modulated by harmony*" *
Armida, astonished at opinions heard for the first time, was yet more asto¬ nished at feeling herself awed by the mild but resistless firmness of manner with which thev were uttered. Accustomed only to obsequious concessions or extra¬ vagant praises, she felt embarrassed ; but sbe tried to collect her ideas, to put the vast forces of her mind in motion, yet her vindication of Italian music was feebler than she imagined. While she spoke she often paused, and often faltered fronťa diffidence she had never felt in thè crowded circles she had been accustomed to speak before; and when he answered, she felt that tones so rich, so broken, so pleading, might more than atone for the offence of resisting her darling opinions. She tried to listen, that she might refute ; but her determina¬ tion was lost in the thought that she had never beheld such a countenance as that which was now turned on ber, and in
wonder how the mild aud moon-like lustre of the effulgent eyes that were raised to her's could at once be so soft and so oppressive. Of all he said she only retained the last sentence— <f all other music is the production of science : Irish music is the effusion of passion, aud of the heart : our dirges were composed by bards, who hung round the body of their chief : our war-songs, amid the rage of a battle on which the fate of the min¬ strel and ofhis country hung, often amid the death-shock into which the minstrel himself, smote with the madness he in¬ spired, has plunged, and mingled the last sounds of his harp with his own : our love songs were composed in the very presence of the beauty they praised ; and oh! who," said Connal, " can imagine the inspiration of such a presence. This i& a difference which affects tbe very nature and spirit of music : it is not tbe cold and laboured imitation of cometh ing the
minstrel never felt : it is the rich and rapt effusion of a burdened spirit, tor¬ tured with the fulness of its conceptions, over-informing the medium through which it pours them, and by its inspira* lions forcing it to represent thera with a terrible fidelity that makes the auditors tremble." As he spoke of Irish music his habi¬ tual gloom was gone : his melancholy seemed for a moment to take aglow from his passions, like a dark evening cloud tinged by the setting sun. Armida no longer contended ; but still jealous of her superiority, she called on him to justify his praises of Irish music, and oflered him her lyre. Connal took it with the air of one who was above the trifling of importunity. His touch proved him a master of it ; and he sung the Irish air of <f The summer is coming," with the Irish words. The sounds he uttered had more affinity to
the murmur of the brook or the breeze than to any music sbe had ever heard. He sung with the passionate melancholy, the wild, fugitive cadences, the troubled pausings, the deep, low, and lengthened cadence of an Irish song : it seemed like the very groans of music. Armida walked to a distance to hide the tear which her pride and her science alike condemned. " What is the matter with me ?" said she mentally, " am I listening with anguish and delight to the song of a sa¬ vage Irishman, a native of this abhorred country, where I have been buried? It must be the d ejection of ind olence, of my neglect¬ ed talents: lam growing wild in solitude : Oh ! that he could see me as I once was ! " That moment it occurred to her that she had promised to shew Wandesford her paintingáthefollowingevcning^ndanirre- sistible wish to dazzle the prqud Milesian with the display of her talents seized her.
She turned to Connal the full lustre of her looks ; tliose looks the expression of which had always been equal to a com¬ mand, and uttered a wish that he should visit the castle the following even¬ ing. " My harp and my paintings are there. Like the prophet in the Old Testament I will offer upon every altar I used to fre¬ quent, and iiivoke the power which has forsaken me so long : if he descends, you shall hear all he inspires." It was now twilight, and she did not observe the agitated expression of Con- naľs countenance, till he falteringly an¬ swered : " Must I visit the castle of my ances¬ tors, to forget, while listening to you, that it is lost to me for ever !" The trembling and impassioned tone of these words could not hide from her the haughtiness of soul that dictated them. The proud blood of Armida
rushed into her face : she drew her veil over her burning cheek, and taking the arm of Rosine, turned haughtily away.
CHAP. VII. 1 loved thee well, but yel I wooed thee no!* Beaumont and Fletcher, Tue whole of the following day Ar¬ mida passed in an apartment which her fatlier bad ordered to be built on her ar¬ rival ; but when it was filled with her paintings, her statues, aud her music, she had only to sit down and sigh amid those memorials of a brilliant existence which seemed like tbat of a dream : obscurity and oblivion had stolen over the orna¬ ments of her cabinet, and over the highly- gifted mind tbat had adorned it. She had not entered it for some time previous to her father's death, and she now did so with a feeling she could not account for. Her ambition, her wish to excel and to delight, had returned as if by enchant-
ment; but with them came a diffidence, an anxiety to please, such as she had never felt before. When*Rosine entered the apartment in the evening she was employed in giving a few touches to a picture, which in sub¬ ject and colouring so much resembled one in the neighbourhood of the castle, that Rosine remarked it, and added a ro¬ mantic wish she had once heard Connal utter, that some spirit of the air would hang a thin wreath of clouds on the sum¬ mit of a rock that stood erect and bare inthe centre of the view, Armida, silently pursuing her task, manlied the peak over with a vapour of the mobt orient and fantastic hues. " Do you think he will come?" said she at length. " Colonel Wandesford ť He has not quitted the castle all day," said Ro¬ sine. " I do not mean him," said Armida, * c 1Цеая the brother of Desmond."
* r Did he not decline coming to the castle?" said Rosine. " True, true," replied Armida ; and she bowed her burning cheek over the painting. " íet him stay and solace him¬ self at home with the mouldering por¬ traits of his Milesian ancestry," " Oh l Armida," said Rosine, " how can you speak so contemptuously of a man struggling so nobly with his fallen fortune, aud all its humbling and bitter inflictions." " Teli me not ofhis virtues," said Ar¬ mida: "tell me of his haughtiness, his sullenness, his visible contempt of me : I felt them all," she added, rising from her seat. " How is it possible I should not hate that man ?" " My dear Armida," said Rosine, whose eyes began to be opened, " I neither wish you to hate or love him ; but are there not many whom one may approve, or barely tolerate?" "And do you think," said Agifida,
turning the full lustre of her eyes on Ro¬ sine, " do you think that Connal O'Mor- ven is a character to be barelv tolerated ? I feel he must be either loved or hated." " A detached figure always appears striking," said Rosine ; " but should you meet him in the world * ■" " I tell you I never met any thing like Iiim in the whole world," said Armida. " And can you," said Rosine, " accus¬ tomed to the polish of courts, prefer the singularities of one reared in solitude and indigence ?" "Your language is harsh, Rosine/' said Armida, casting down der eyes. " ï only repeat what I have heard you say ofhis whole nation," said Rosine. " But that was before I saw him," answered Armida, sinkiog into a reve¬ rie. Rosine reminded her it was time to dress, for she had on only the loose robe she wore in the morning· "No," said Armida, pensively; {< I
have a superstitious preference for this dress.—-Did'nt I wear this last night ?" " I believe so," said Rosine ; fÇ and at times I thought I never saw you look so beautiful " " Then no matter how I look to-night ; " and she walked to the glass, and gazed at herself for a moment with a look in which a proud consciousness of beauty was mingled for the first time with that timidity which is inseparable from a soli¬ citude to please. The family now entered the cabinet, and Armida, flushed, trembling, and dis¬ hevelled, advanced to meet them ; but trembling, flushed, and dishevelled as she was, never had she looked so lovely. Her loose black dress, thrown on without care, and still retained from a partial concciousncss of the touching and in¬ definite shade it gave her figure, was ut¬ terly at variance with the quick and trembling animation of her movements;
and ber downcast eyelids, that seemed sinking under tbe weight of some unseen object, had an expression quite different from that of the bright and almost spark¬ ling crimsom tbat dyed her cheek so deep Wandesford, her mother, the elder O'Morven, and the priest, gazed on the paintings, and while they lavished praises on them and their artist, who heard thera with indifference, Connal en¬ tered alone. Dazzled by the blaze of intellectual luxury which the apartment displayed, he for a moment forgot every thing but the brilliant enchantress before him, and the fairy palace she had raised and embellished : but he was soon re¬ called by the reception he met. The strangers s>Ured : Wandesford visibly frowned ; and his father, who Ct it an emo¬ tion of shame at tbe sight of his neglect¬ ed child, slightly said : c ' You are such a stranger here."
«* I feel I ain/* said Connal, with tbat mixture of mild and proud dejection that marked his character. Armida was pointing out one of her pictures to Wandesford : every one pressed forward to view it. Connal alone stood apart : he was gazing on the beau¬ tiful arm that held back the curtain sus¬ pended over it; so white, so undulating, it seemed like a marble ornament attached to its folds. The pride of the woman and the artist contended in the bosom of Ar¬ mida. The subject of the painting was Alex¬ ander weeping at the tomb of Achilles. Wandesford talked profusely of the mild and mellow brilliancy of the lights that were poured on the picture. Armida looked down : she was more desirous of the praise of sentiment than execution. " By that extended arm," said Con¬ nal, te that seems to supplicate the light to stay, did you not mean to tell the au- .guish of ambition at the recollection that vol. i. и
mortal triumphs are but for a day, and that when a few more suns had set the tomb of Alexander would be like that of Achilles, defaced and unknown ?" Armida, whose eyes flashed with the triumph of vindicated genius, turned the full moon-tide effulgence of her beautiful countenance on Connal, and taking a rose frora her hair, offered it to him, with a wish that it was the golden violet with which the bards of Provence were re¬ warded. « How difficult/' she added, " it is sometimes to be understood. 0 Connal took the rose without speaking, but hc bowed as he received it, not with the slight reverence of modern courtesy, but with the deep inclination of an eastern ¿Jave. When he raised his head, the lor tresses of the coulin bad fallen over h cheek ; but its burning hue could be set through its curls. A few .moments afterwards tbe pari
was struck by the sound of music issuing from a recess before which a curtain hung. It was withdrawn : within was a pavilion, built to catch a picturesque view of the shore. There was no light in it except what was poured in by the bright full-moon that shone just opposite the open casement. The wails were hung with velvet, covered with exquisite paint¬ ings from the antique ; but the forms and colours were mixed in a kind of sha¬ dowy repose. A transparent painting hung over the upper part of the case¬ ment, and the roses that clustered with¬ out sent in tbeir fragrance, and their flowers, tinged with moonlight, through the pillars that supported it. It was open, and beyond it were seen the full glory of the moonlight sea, the aerial rocks, and the blue, breathless sky : but within there was something still more lovely. Armida, who had quitted the room a few moments before, was extended on a couch и 3
with her harp beside her. Her white arms hung over the strings ; her eyes turned to the casement, as if she was unconscious there was a spectator near her ; but she was not ; her burning cheek, her attitude, her wild, aerial, yet melancholy beauty, shew¬ ed that she bad fixed on that moment to display all the wonders of her art. Her mourning dress was exchanged for an azure robe ; her arms were bare, and some wandering ringlets of bair were all that shaded her bosom : her dark hair, divided on her forehead, whose whiteness gleamed hke that of a star, was fastened by a crescent of sapphire. Her dress, in tbat visionary light, seemed more like a cloud, a vapour stealing round and en¬ shrouding her, than like mortal vesture : her form was tbat of some attendant spi¬ rit of the night, who had glided to earth on a beam of the moon, and was looking upward for her native sphere; ytt, when one viewed her steadily, tbere was a flush, a trembling, a touch of mortality in her
expression that made her still more lovely ; and her faint, ethereal garb was strongly contrasted by tbe vivid crimson of her cheek, and the lustre of her eyes, almost the only objects visible in that pale light. Every one was silent, and Armida sung. She had struck a few notes to call their attention, and she now sung one of the most soft and simple airs she could recollect, and, as if her fingers touched the harp involuntarily, a chord broke frora it frora time to time, among whose deep and numerous murmurs ber voice seemed lost for a moment. Her voice bad not its usual strength : it had the rich trembling of passion : conscious of her powers, and feeling that the pre¬ sent moment developed them all, she gave up her whole soul to song. She devoted herself with the impetuosity, the " sWeet madness" of her mind to the object of subduing and enslaving one whose supe¬ rior form and mind seemed to bid defi- нЗ
ance to her talents and her beauty: such as she was that moment, her powers aH awake, and blazing round her like points of light, and softened by a sentiment that gave its own rich languor to her at¬ tractions, she was "too bright for sense," and shü had placed herself in the magic of mooniiglit, for she knew that over melancholy minds that hour bas a power that commands all their tides of feeling, ì\ hen her' song ceased, the rest crowded into the pavilion ; Connai alone remained bchiud. Her eye, wandering over every other figure, sought for his : she savv him when alone take from his bosom the rose which she had given him and press it to his lips. At that moment she per¬ ceived it was black: it was one of lhe mouruing ilowers w hich she had worn the early part of the evening in her hair : her spirits, strongly excited, were overpower¬ ed by this trivial ciicumstance: she burst into tears. Connal, at the sound of her voice, eu-
tered the pavilion : she did not attempt to hide her tears, for she knew they en- creased her beauty. " When I am exhausted hy music," said ihe, " nothing relieves me so much as tears," " And you who can feel the soul of song/ 5 said Connal, " can you not sing Irish music ? Oh, sing one Irish song for me." She felt her power in those accents, and she was determined to triumph in it. " Not here," said she; " this place was made for other sounds : this foliage,these paintings, reflect the voluptuous light of an Italian bower: they breathe the lux¬ urious languor of Italian moonlight : if 1 sing Irish music, it shall be amid scenea suited to it, on a crag of yonder rock, with the waves murmuring at my feet, and the wind moaning through the strings of my harp. Can you carry it so far ?'» she added, smiling. Connal took the harp, with a faceelo- H é
quent with delight : he uttered but iwa words:—" Armida í Enchantress í" and Armida, who had been accustomed to the epithet, did not inquire why it gave her a sensation she had never felt before, She was advancing to a door which open¬ ed on a fiight of natural steps that led to the shore, when Lady Kilcarrick stopped her. This had been a most irksome night ; she did not understand paintings; she did not Hke music ; but when she heard Irish songs spoken of, she thotight she might declare her approbation of what she knew. She immediately followed Armida. " You think me devoid of taste, and so I am perhaps; I pretend to nothing, but I know what I like, and I like what I understand. Do now, Miss Fitzalban, sing me orle good song, it's worth all the foreign screaming in the world." Atthe words " foreign screaming, &c." Armida, casting a look of horror at the petitioner, hurried from the pavilion*
* f How can you bear those things so calmly?" said she to Connal, who sbe knew would follow her. ** We must bear with age and weak¬ ness," said Connal ; " but at such a mo¬ ment, the moment of inspiration, to be re¬ minded of mortality by such a monitor— it is at such a moment we require it—oh, bow much we require it at a moment like this." * f Your philosophy is enviable/* said Armida, haughtily. " It isat least necessary," said Conna?, " for one like me. Does superior feeling bestow any thing but superior misery? Self-satisfied as that weak woman is, how much more so would she be, could she but look into a heart that is cursed with feeling. How would sbe mock its agony I but sbe cannot : that is at least the privi¬ lege of such a heart; a privilege, that before it parts with, it will break/' Armida was at once touched and indig¬ nant at tbis proud and melancholy miud» h 5
Her wish to subdue it had become a pas¬ sion ; she ceased to struggle with it; she gave her«-elf up to it, till the resolution appeared to her almost like a virtue. She seated herself on the rock, on which Con¬ nal had spread his inaolle. Tiıe breeze lifted her longhair with a gentle motion : the moon, as the light clouds floated over it, touched her figure from time to time with a tremulous and indefinite light : one bright star was over her head ; she raised her white arm to it silently, and re¬ mained in that attitude, for slie felt tliat Connal was gazing at her. Siie did not encounter his eye, but sbe heard him breathe only sighs, and sbe felt bis bosom throbbing through her thin robe as hc lay at her feet. That was the moment she chose for her song : it was an old Irish melody, most musical, most melan¬ choly. · " It was such a song, at such an hour," said Connal, " that brouglit the spirits of those he loved around the bard of old :
its virtue is not lost; there is not a thouglit I have ever loved, tbat does not visit my mind tbis moment, and make it feel like heaven." Armida renewed her song, nor did she dare to ask herself why she felt more exquisite pleasure, seated on a rude rock on the shore of Ireland, and singing for a wild Milesian, than she had ever felt in the most brilliant circles in Italy. Connal waved his arm, <ζ AU around me," said he, " was mine, as far as the moon lights those broken shores ; as far as you see those isles like silver buds in the green floating field of ocean, all was mine ; and that castle, whose towers are reflected in the wave that breaks at your feet, was the seat of my ancestors ; tbe palace of princes, w hose view only bound¬ ed their territory : that ruined hovel on the left is my residence now, and that dark speck of land behind, without tree er shrub on it, is all my land : the terri¬ tory of O'Morven has shrunk to that
spot.—Yet, a moment past, and I forgot all this ; and I feel that I could sit thus, on this rock, for ever forgetting our fallen Iiouse, forgetting the cold world, myself, everything but you." Armida Busied herself the strings withal, To hide the tear that fain would fall ; and asked him faintly if her singing re» minded him of his native music. ** It reminds me of the strain the spirit of our ruined family is said to have pour¬ ed into the ear of him who is about to die," said Connal ; fť a strain so sweets that the rapt wretch forgets it comes to- warn him of woe and death." " And does mine tell no more?" said Armida, hiding her burning cbeek on her harp. " Enchantress ! yes," cried Connal, starting wildly from her feet, " it tells me to fly from you for ever." Lady Kilcarrick, after her defeat, had gone to Lady Montclare, and half com*
plaining, half advising, entreated her not to let Miss Fitzalhan remain so bng in the night air. Lady Montclare, who saw the sullen anger of Wandesford, im* mediately followed her daughter; and with a smile, through the sweetness of which no one could discover hatred or suspicion, told her they had fed long enough on sound, and summoned them to the castle to partake of more substantial refreshment. " Aye, dear Lady Montclare," said the dowager, " you are a comfortable, sub~ stantial creature, and I love every thing comfortable: all this wandering on rocks by moonlight is very fine to be sure, but I shall feel the effects of it in every bone in my body to-morrow." As they returned to tbe castle, Armida paused to point out to Connal a rock, over which a stream was dashing in tbe moon¬ light, and she expressed a wish to visit it tbe following evening. <* We will bring an Eoliati harp/* said
she, " and its sounds, amid those shores, will recall the thoughts of olher times." " There is but one harp has that pow¬ er," said Connal. They entered the castle, and Wandes¬ ford, who had disdained to follow them, came up, and tearing oiF the mantle which Connal had thrown over Armida, exclaim¬ ed, dashing it on the ground :-— " How can you bury yourself in those cursed folds ! you look like an Egyptian mummy with his hieroglyphics." Armida,, trembling at the insult, at¬ tempted to raise the mantle, aud as Con¬ nal prevented her, said— " I will return this, but I will keep the beautiful ornament that fastens it :—it looked like a fairy gem in tbe moon¬ light," and she tried to detach the cres¬ cent of gold aud amethyst that clasped it on the shoulder. Connal eagerly assisted lier : iheir hands touched each other. &Le raised her eyes witb haughty pleasure to Wan-erford; but the horrid imile
that divided bis ashy lips, as he looked at them, made her start : but her pride was stronger than fears; and though she trembled, she said to Connal :—- " How can I deprive you of this valu¬ able gem ?" " You have givea me one ten thou¬ sand times more valuable/' said Connal, pointing to his bosom, where he had hid the rose. As he wrapt himself in his mantie, she gazed on his heroic figure and romantic dress with a pleasure which she believed the same a fine picture used to inspire ; yet she felt that since she saw him pictures had become indifierent to her. " We shall visit you to-morrow/' said she, as they parted. " lam told that you sit on a solitary rock, and count the isles scattered round you, like the guar¬ dian spirit of the Hebrides viewing the tributary saints ofhis domain." " And to-morrow," said Connal, with unusual gaiety, (i I shall count an angel among them."
CHAP. VIII. Re called upon his saint, but not for life ; For you, unhappy woman. Beaumont. In the course of the following day, Lady Kilcarrick completely succeeded in making good her quarters at the castle. Her gossipping officiousness and bet rank were of use to Lady Montclare, who had every reason to strengthen her party in a country where she was only known as a stranger, arriving under mysterious cir¬ cumstances ; and knew that those who would not tbink of examining papers and parchments would be satisfied by the report of her being visited by the rigid Lady Kilcarrick. But Lady Kilcarrick herself bad much deeper plans in this visit : the wwhed to see bow affairs stood
in this mysterious family ; and according îo them to form a connexion for her grand-daughter, Lady Gabriella, with the young lord ; with Wandesford, whom she had no alight hope of detaching from Armida; of even with Connal or Des¬ mond, if she could succeed in exciting either of tbem to dispute the recent and dubious title of Endymion to the inherit¬ ance of their family. She submitted therefore to the polite importunities of Lady Montclare to make the castle bee residence, till the carriage was repaired t aud she even accompanied the party the following evening, as they wandered on the rocks, to adjust her plan of operations. As Armida approached the rock she had promised to visit, the figure of Connal» standing in the rich glow of autumnal suu-eet, and gazing with folded arms on tiie castle of his ancestors, appeared on its summit. He seemed at that moment fit to lead 4ť an hest angelic, clad in burning arms/*
Armida, who saw him first, appeared to read his mind. " Nothing but pride inhabits there," »aid she, mentally : " he has no passions ; he sees the seat of his family with emo¬ tion, but its inhabitants excite none : oh, that that proud form of his contained a mind less proud." She received him coldly; but when she heard the rich, firm music of his voice suddenly broken ; when he turned from the rest to her ; aud the faltering tone in which he offered to assist her ascending the rock, she forgot every thing but his presence. She had wished to defer this walk till moonlight, and she said some¬ thing faintly about its effect on the sce¬ nery, " Oh/' said Connal» " it is the sweetest ligbt; I always loved it, but I love it more than ever/' Armida felt the meaning of these words, and she drew down her veil to bide its effects on her conscious cheek.
The rocky path suddenly wound round an angle, and the cavern, with the ocean rolling beneath, burst on tbem in all the light of sun-set. Armida, as sbe still held his arm, remembeied the time when such a prospect would have suggested to her a flow of poetical sentiment and lan¬ guage that resembled inspiration. She wished to impress Connal with the powers she bad formerly possessed ; but after some ineffectual attempts to recall them, sbe said in a broken voice, " I once had feelings, that, like flowers, bloomed in the air aud suu ; but they have faded away. I believe I may say with Ophelia, —-They all withered when my father died ;" and she wept, but not for her father. " There are some relics of antiquity here," said Connal as they entered tbe cavern, " tbat go even beyond tradition. Oo vou see where those stones have been lately removed ? The other night an old harper came to my grandfather's door,
from which none of his brethren bave ever been excluded at night : he played on his harp, and sung i€ snatches of old tunes," some of which made my heart burn within me : among the rest was one which told of a battle between two rival chief» of our house fought он this shore ; they both fell, and were interred in a cave with all their armorial and princely in¬ signia. << My grandfather was roused by the tale, and he made the old man tell it again and again, till his aged faculties kindled with tibe feeling he awoke, and he declared, that though the tale had been told him when blind, the local description was so strong, that if he was led to the cave, he could point out where the corses lay. We went hy torch-light to the cave : some of the followers (1 cannot call them servants, for their service is gratuitous) attended us. I held a torch near theold man ; it was an awful sight to see bim« as the light glared on bis pale
face and withered hands that were stretched out to feel for the spot he said he knew. The light fell on him alone— all the rest of the cavern was dark ; at last he reached that mound : I toiled half the night to remove the stones that co¬ vered it." " And did you remove those stones?" «aid Wandesford, pointing to the masses of rock that lay scattered round the ca¬ vern : " you must be devilish strong." " I hoped to please my grandfather by my efforts,'* said Connal ; is and my pow¬ ers of body and mind have little other employment. Beneath those stones I discovered lhe skeletons : the dryness of the soil had preserved and bleached the bones ; they appeared to have belonged to men of formidable size : tbere we found the weapons of the slain ; and what de¬ lighted my grandfather still more, the regal ornaments of gold they wore on the day of battle. He added them to the vast collection of tbe relics of his house,
the only part of its wealth which remains to him, and one which he values more than all he has lost." Armida wandered on : the melancholy awe of the place had breathed itself into her mind, but it was the melancholy of passion, mixed with its own peculiar plea¬ sures. Far to the left there was a cavity, whose depth no eye could measure : un¬ consciously she had reached the very verge of it, and stood there with her ethereal form aud light vesture, resem¬ bling the first bright fallen spirit on the brink of chaos. Connal, suddenly dart¬ ing forward, and snatching her from if, exclaimed, " Wby do you venture to the edge of that gulph : do you imagine, like Curtius's, it requires the most precious thing in tbe world to be thrown into it?" Armida trembled between resentment and pleasure: she tried to extricate herself from his arms, but though his touch was as light as that of a spirit, she could not.
Desmond, who had followed them with Endymion, when he saw Connal throw his arms around Armida, struck hy a contrast he dared not even name, rushed from the cave, and threw himself against a fragment of rock at its entrance. In a few moments the voice of Endymion, who had joined Armida in a few simple notes, which the echoes of the cave made like fairy music, reached him. He imagined he was listening again to the sweet song of the Italian girl, as it floated on the sea-blast sweeter than the mermaid's. He was startled from his dream by Endy¬ mion standing beside him : it was twilight, a few stars twinkled inthe blueeast ; where the sun had set, a broad mass of san¬ guine vapour flushed the water with its deep dyes, and made it resemble a sea of blood. Endymion, after gazing on Desmond, as he leaned on tbe rock, and held up his burning check to the sea- breeze, while be felt no breeze could cool the fever that scorched it, approach-
ed hiin, and faintly asked if ihe sing¬ ing had displeased him. ' f No," said the agitated boy, €ζ it pleased me too much : I heard your voice." " Oh that sensation," cried Endymion, <f how often I feci it in your presence: at some moments, at the present, it almost deprives. me of breath, of sense : it is a delight that makes rne sick and giddy : tbe Italians, before an earthquake, bave a sensation for which there is no name ; such is the sensation I feel in your presence, that I could throw myself into your arras and weep, if you would let me." " Stop, stop," said Desmond, fC talk this language no more : if the sight of each other be thus intoxicating, thus ruinous, let us part, and see each other no more," Endymion wept. <( Oh torture me no more with this fantastic fondness," said Desmond, "so unlike what we ought to feel for each other : tbis female fastidiousness I cannot
hear. I wish to love you Hke a younger brother ; you treat me with the caprice of a mistress. F nd y raion, I cannot endure this. Never did I feel before these wild, these maddening sensations. I know not what you have done witb me; what strange influence you have obtained over me, but it is an influence that I must fly from to preserve my reason, my life." " Oh ! do not, do not talk of going," said Endymion, ringing his hande in agony. " Am I so lost tbat I cannot love or be loved without being guilty : is my affertion a crime, or a curse—why must I not love you? It is so sad, none can envy me ; none shall ever see me." He whispered, " If you will sometimes let me twine those bright ringlets on my fingers, or gaze on you, when your eye is averted from me, or touch your hand when it is unconsciously suspended near me-^and is that too much; can you refuse me that?" VOL· I. I
u I can refuse you nothing, and there¬ fore I must fly from you. I tried, but I cannot love you as a man : I know what it is to love a brother well ; for Connal I would die, but for you, Endymion, I would live : live, in you, for you, in your sight : dream life away in voluptuous and frantic melancholy : the feelings that op¬ press, that soften, that sicken me, even now while I speak to you I cannot de¬ scribe tbem ; I must not feel them ; no, not another moment. Oh ! untwine those arms from me ; you are making me wild ; my blood burns like fire in my veins : do not believe these hot tears that drop on your hands: tbey are tears of hatred — hatred of myself and you," " Oh, if you shed one tear I am happy," cried Endymion, clasping his hands with wild delight : *' if you shed oae tear you do not hate me." " Oh ! leave me/' cried Desmond, breaking from him ; " leave me, while I have sense left to tear myself away."
" If you drive me from you," said Endymion, sadly quitting him, " if I am forbid to tell you what no words can tell, or to believe that I tell it in these sighs, I will tell it to the night and tha stars; they are so calm and beautiful, they seera to listen, and to have compassion on me/' He spread his hands to Heaven as hè spoke. "I call thera to witness that I lovo you, that I will love you only, you for ever; tbat I am dying for love of you. Oh, while I leave you, and feel the rich and melancholy joy of uttering those words, I wiil not believe even you that í can be guilty, that there can be a crime in my love." He threw himself on Desmond: the light of the rising moon was reflected on his cold marble countenance; the tears ^tood congealed in his halt/closed eyes; his hand, so lately trembling with agony« hy on Desmond's shoulder white and
motionkss : be seemed, as he bad said, dying of passion, and Desmond felt as if he, held in his arms one who waa no шоге. He restrained himself no longer. M If that star," he cried, tc and he who bids thera shine, view my heart at this moment, they know its innocence and ita agony ; they know wby I am thus urged to impossible passion, forced thus lo tell you that I do love you, with a love passing that of women ; but never shall those sounds pass my lips again. Oh ! dry your tears, Endymion : am I not humbled enough ? am I not as weak as you could wish me ? Dry your tears, or I shall be more frantic, more guilty still. I have no strength while you weep thm helplessly on my neck. Are these tears of sorrow, Endymion?" ** Oh, no I pleasure so exquisite that I do not wish to survive it : no future mo¬ ment of life can be like that in which you said, eve» amid trouble and anger,
'I Iove yon ť and will you never utter it again?" "I love you," repeated Desmond. As he uttered these words a broad sheet of lightning quivered over the sea, and shewed the face of Endymion pale as that of the dead. He did not move, and Desmond for a moment believed bim struck dead. ** Endymion," he cried, in a voice of terror, " did you see that dreadful flash ?" " Yes," murmured the entranced boy* " and believed that my wish was grant"" ed— to die in your arras/' A loud peal of thunder followed, and the dark clouds, amid which the suu had, set, came rapidly on, spreading them* selves over the sky, anthquenching the stars that glittered over their heads, Desmond bore Endymion back to the cave, that seemed to rock to its recesses, as the thunder rolled above, and tbe waves, tormented by the storm, dashed i3
themselves against its rocks, and covered the wanderers with their spray. They were alone, but in spite of the terrors of the elements Desmond found that he dared rot remain alone with Endymion, and in the fir»t pause of the tempest he hurried him back tothe castle: all tbere was confusion and distress ; Armida, Wandesford, and Connal, had not yet returned, and Rosine mentioned that she had left them before the storm commenc¬ ed, preparing to visit an island on the shore, and in an open boat, "An open boat!" cried Desmond; ce and in such a night as this !" Aud in spite of his lather's intreaties, and the agony of Endymion's silent grasp, he rushed lo the shore again : few of the servants followed him. Thcy reach¬ ed the cave with difficulty. The spec¬ tacle was tremendous. The rocks were covered with foam, that terribly con¬ trasted the blackness of the raging waters, amid whose roar they could hard-
ly distinguish their own voices, but no other sound on earth. Some fishermen came hurrying to the shore, but tbey declared it madness td venture out in a storm in which no boat could live. " Give me an oar and I will go myself; I will go alone," cried Desmond, wbo with locked bands, and eyes bollow witb agony, was bending frora the rock; " Must I stand here and see my brother perish?" " You must indeed," said one of the men, " for there they are ; I see them myself." " Impossible !" cried Desmond, wild¬ ly ; "I must have seen thera first my¬ self." At that moment the rain seemed to overcome the fury of the wind, and the latter blew witb short and whistling gusts, and drove fast tbe scattering wrack across the moon, tbat pale, and, Hke a traveller, faint witb fear, went on t ât
her troubled way, now hid, and now shewing her discoloured face through the stormv clouds. In one of those glimpses Desmond saw" distinctly the boat, with the figures in it, and saw that their danger arose not from the storm. but from the state of their boat, which seemed to be going in pieces before it was possible for them to get to shore. Nothing could now restrain him from venturing out to save them. One man alone consented to accompany him. The intrepid pair embarked, and the foam of the breakers soon hid them from the view of those who remained on the sbore. Armida, Connal, and Wandesford, had quitted the cavern together. " Υομ compared my singing last night,!' said sbe to Connai, " to that of tbe ¡spirit wjio warns your family of *p* proaching fate : was it an image of yonr fancy, or yonr national superstition ?" "Of the latter," said Connal; "»
superstition the most richly tinged witb the mournful brightness of a poetical т^иа of any ever wove in fancy's loom. In Irish mythology every family is sup¬ posed to be attended by a visionary being, whose office is to predict the ca¬ lamity or death of its members. She ap« pears as an old woman sitting on the grave, or wandering near the house of the devoted family, and pouring out a stream of melancholy sound, half musi¬ cal, half moaning, to summons the wanderer home. Her song is peculiar to Irish modulation, that can combine melody with the wildest tones of grief and passion. Such is the talc of the Benshi ; it is, mke her. own music, plea¬ sant and mournful to the soul. Men love to have the discovery of the other world softened to their minds, and never was the curtain of futurity drawn by so gentle a hand. Amid those ruins," he continued, pointing to an isle to whieh the rising moon gave all tbe dim and i5
aerial effect of vapour, '* the spirit that attends our family is said to haunt." " And whv is she said to inhabit there ?" said Armida. * " It is the burial-place of our family ; and it only waits for a feeble old man, and two unknown young ones, to close on the last of the race, from whose graves no one will pluck a weed to discover the name they bore." He paused, and added in a firmer voice :— " On that isle the ruins of an abbey are still standing, surrounded by relics of high antiquity, pillars, crosses, and cromlechs, the memorials of an age in which the cross was yet unknown. Be¬ neath the walls of its roofless chapel is the burial-place of our family, marked with the only traces of sculpture those ruins preserve, ( 2 ) The representations of the buman frame are hard and un¬ couth, but our habits, our arms, our regal· ornaments·"*""-*"
Не checked himself. Wandesfordj in the absurd hope of detecting a boast in an account so simple, proposed visiting the island. They advanced to the shore : several boats were on the beacb. The isle, with its pale ruins, glowed mildly beneath the moonbeam like fairy land. " Let us visit them," said Armida, " by the setting sun. I love to see ruins on the sea-shore, rich with their dark green dyes, and mantled over with weedy clusters by that light." "If thou wouidst view fair Melrose aright, go visit it by the pale moon¬ light," said Connal. " Your's is the language of a painter, enamoured of lights and hues, but it is a scene to which I would rather bring my mind than ray senses : a tnind that when it visits the place of wonders, will not, like Alladdin in the tale, be content with the gems that sparkle there; but will seek the genius of the place, and learn his secret, and dwell with him
after v ards in the power and darkness of bim that bas mastered the spell." They had reached the beach as he spoke, and Connal, well acquainted with the language of the clouds, suddenly leaped from the boat which he had towed round, and drew Armida away. ' ( There will be a storm," said he. "And what if there is?" said Wandes¬ ford, who was proud of this temporary advantage : " we shall be at that rock you call an island and back again before it begins." <e I should not hesitate to accompany you, sir, any where/' said Connal, "were it not for——" " Are vou afraid ? sir," said Wandee- ford, provoked at the exception, Connal made no answer but by leaping into the boat, and Armida followed him, for she wished to shew this son of the rocks and waves that she was no tri fler, who shrunk from the elements. Connal, throwing back the mantle from bis
shoulder, began to row, and Wandesford steered. Their passage was calm and rapid. Armida was silent as she listened to the measured dashing of the oars. The stillness, tbe solitude, the soft light, and smooth motion, gave her a new sen¬ sation »a sensation enereased bv the con- trast between the towering majesty of Connal, and the humble employment he was engaged in for her. She watched bis dark eye as it was raised to the clouds every moment, and the faint sultry blast blew his dishevelled hair over them, like clouds obscuring stars in a wintry storm. He hummed a song as he rowed, of which the sound, though inarticulate, was so mournful, that Armida started from the feeling it inspired, and hastened to a sub* ject of conversation like those upon which she could once speak with elo¬ quence. She spoke of tbe rosary of Biscayners, of the vesper-hymn of the Italian mariners, and of the chromatic chorus of tbe Chinese boatsmen. Then
she mentioned the proceleusma of the ancients, and the high antiquity of naval music, of which she traced the origin to an imitation of the sounds that haunt the sea-shore : and she remarked the difference between the classical super¬ stitions that strewed the surface of the deep with the most beautiful forms, and even supposed a sensibility of sound to exist in its inanimate inhabitants; (з) and the gloomy dreams of the northern sgeald, who pictured through the clouds and storms of his native sky the terrors of the griesly wasserman ; or of the sea* snake, whose giant folds girdled the world. She again reverted to the moonlight music sbe had heard trembling on the shores of Naples, and a tear trembled in her eye, that was awoke less by past than present recollections. Connal said he knew no appropriate naval music of the Irish. " But tbe mv s " said he, "you have
just heard, is one whose marked melan* choly proves that it was no easy offspring of leisure and apathy : it was like most Irish music, composed under that strong impulse to which poetry and music both owe their existence : it is the cry of a wounded spirit that seeks in music the echo of its own sadness. During the many vicissitudes that our family under¬ went from the time of Cromwell to James, an old man, one of our domestic bards, wlio had been driven from it, returned after years of wandering to die under the shelter of our walls. The Irish are all more solicitous about dying in peace and a certain kind of dignity, than ahout all the comforts of life. He was blind, but his memory was faithful to the path that led him home. When he believed him¬ seif near the place of destination, he stopt, worn with fatigue and emotion, to rest himself among some ruins, frora which be heard the cooing of a dove.
He asked a passenger to whom those ruins had belonged, and was told that those walls were all tbat remained of a family seat of the O'Morvens, who had been driven from it when dismantled in the civil wars. It was one of our castles, for no part of Ireland w*as without them then: it was the roof under which he bad lived, and under which hc had hoped to die. But even this hope had failed him, and he felt his age more helpless, and his blindness darker than when he sat down among the ruins : the ruling passion was strong, even in death. Be¬ fore hc expired on the spot, he poured out his grief to his harp in a strain ad¬ dressed to the solitary tenant of the ruins — thç dove, whose notes the music seems to imitate. The words are beautiful, but I will not be guilty of doing thera into English : their intranslateable beauty is like what we are told of tbc paintings of Herculaneum, whicii preserve their
rich colours in darkness and concealment, but when exposed to the light and mo¬ dern eyes, fade and perish," As he spoke, they reached the island : they landed on the grey, furrowed strand ; and following a path broken by frag¬ ments of stone, which gleamed in the moonlight, and clusters of weeds and moss, thrt gave a gay barrenness to the scene which enereased its sadness, they entered the ruins of the abbey. The walls still retained the form of tlie cross. One tall tower stood yet in the centre of ihe ruins : the interior of the building was a mass of ruius. The light, piercmg through windows, as richly wrought by most fantastic foliage as they had once been with the tracery that connected their slender stone arches, shewed confused * heaps of crosses, and tombs, and mounds, over which the long grass waved like the bending form of die mourner that had once wandered and wept there. As Con¬ nal entered the ruius, he walked witb a
less lofty step. Armida, who was gazing on the huge grey walls that looked like a range of unhewn rock, saw the shadow of his tall figure bend as he crossed him¬ self, and murmured a prayer for the soulď of his ancestors. Wandesford was si¬ lent: he had no soul for these scenes: his common-place of observations was exhausted. Armida repeated the first lines of Volney's well-known address, beginning— " Je vous salue, ruines so¬ litaires." She thought that the appli¬ cation would convince Connal she was touched by local feeling, but he checked her with that wild energy, that while it offended filled her with admiration. if The nameless ruins," said he, " which are supposed to commemorate greatness now unknown, and virtues that have no other memorial ; ruins amid which fancy sits down at leisure to dream of wbat its tenants might have been ; such may sug¬ gest an abstract and indefinite melancholy —a melancholy without passion, and
without remembrance.'* His voice trem¬ bled as he added, " But here is a local genius : a spirit of eloquence and mor¬ tality seems to have taken up his residence between the living and the dead, and to interpret to one the language of the other. 1 feel who lies below : every step I take awakes the memory of him on whose. tomb I tread, and every hour seems weary till I lie down with tbem, and are forgotten," Armida's heart swelled with passion at this contempt of life, that seemed to imply a contempt of her ; but she called her pride to her, and tried to read by the moonlight an inscription in English on one of the tombs that besought her to " praye for the soule of Connal O'Mor¬ ven, prince and chief of the isles, whose nobile deeds and acheevements ■ «" Struck by the coincidence of the name, she could read no more : she turned to view a strong effect of the mooniiglit as it broke through the great eastern win-
dow, and shone like silver on the tomb below, while all around was black, from the foremost clouds of the storm that hung like a dark roof over the ruins. " Will you not take up tbe tale of no¬ ble achievements?" said Wandesford, sarcastically, (C and tell us what royal dust we are treading on ?" " No, sir," said Connal, haughtily ; " silence is all that dust demands from me: silence suits the memory of those whose lot is ambition without fame : let the last of their race bestow on them all he asks for himself—silence and obli¬ vion : if they were mild and brave, if they were loved by their vassals, and feared by their Ipcs, it bas followed them where no herald's voice can be heard, but on earth they were unknown—they were Irishmen : their courage, tbeir feel¬ ing, their deeds of war or of mercy, survive only in the songs of their coun* try—songs melancholy as the Eolian harp» and like it murmuring only to the winds."
Armida observed that there were per¬ haps countries, like the stars mentioned by Newton, whose light had not yet reached the world ; and when he bowed silently in answer, she still urged him to speak of himself: she asked hira whether he often visited that spot. ct Yes/ 1 said Connal, " I visit it often : often when the sight of the castle has awoke tbe bitter thought of my alienated home and rights, I come here to recon¬ cile myself to what I have lost by the view of what none will contend with me for ; and when I think that the proudest of those who hung their shields in that hall, or blew their horns on those grassy hills, are now a clod of the valley, I blush at the struggles of my proud spirit, and look calmly on the only home my fathers have left me : it is dark and cold, but as warm and bright as any the world has to ofler one like me. " Armida hid her silent tears with her veil, and she said to herself:—
<c Oh ! that he were less ahove nature, or that I was more so." Connal was pointing out to Wandes¬ ford the figures carved on the most ancient monuments: Wandesford viewed them with a contempt he delighted to express, and he eagerly compared those rude relics with the splendid monu¬ ments of Grecian art at a still earlier period. " The greatest works of antiquity," said Connal, sternly, " were the produc¬ tions of despotism or of superstition. At the tíme that Rome could boast of a Brutus, the temple of her principal deity was but fourteen feet in length, and with¬ out any light but what it received from the door : yet the name of Brutus has survived that of him who built the Pyramids. I had rather be seated in the halls of my fathers, open perhaps to every wind of heaven, with my bards and my warriors around me, thau be the supple, silk-clad pensioner of an English minister,
breathing an atmosphere thick and heavy with the curses, and drinking wine, into which their tears have dropt, and turned it to poison." Wandesford, reverting to the ancients, praised them with enthusiasm, and Ar¬ mida joined him, for she admired the ancients from taste and habit, and she wished to rouse the proud national Mile¬ sian to opposition. ' c I allow them," said Connal, " to have been perfect in the art of represent¬ ing the human form, but tbey knew Httle of the human heart: all that brings our mind in contact with the minds of those who lived two thousand years ago; all that makes us feel the electric thrill of humanity together, though at the re¬ motest jends of its cord ; all this we seek in vain in the writings of the ancients : their feelings appear to me the manufacture of policy and super¬ stition ; their pietas means something
very different from what we call natural * affection. Of love they appear to have known nothing, or worse than nothing ; friendship and public feeling they cer¬ tainly had, hut as cold and rigid as the marble that recorded it," " And pray/ 5 said Wandesford, " to what do you ascribe the change you imagine to have taken place in the human mind ?" " To that religion," said Connal, "that has given man a new heart." Wandesford burst ¡nto a savage laugh, but this did not deter Connal from vindi¬ cating bis faith with a power of argu¬ ment and of eloquence that tbe infidel shrunk from : he was silent, and Connal added with emotion :— "I am not advocating tbe cause with the powers or the views of a theologian : I speak with the feelings of a man, who would struggle sore for that hope which canalone render a life like his supportable,
ï cannot resign for a laugh the only refuge of my soul hereafter, almost its only refuge here." Armida's proud heart swelled at this preference, even of heaven, and she tried to recall her former powers, and convince him she was as much detached from earth as himself. She was leaning on a tomb-stone, and as the pale light touched her form with visionary beauty, bhe spoke of the scenery around, and of the feelings it inspired : she spoke of the dead, but her thoughts were on the living. " On such a night as this," said she, " te d ead speak to us in the very silence that sits on their graves; this dim light, these ruins, this stillness utter a voice to us—a voice that has no terror in it: the ghastlincss of supernatural feeling is no more ; we remember the dead no longer as the inmates of a state which man dare not behold : we remember them as those we have loved on the earth so well; and vol. i. к
their paleness, their coldness, we think of as we would of their faded looks when ill; and even while we lament their insen¬ sibility, we believe that they listen to us. It is a night and a hour," said she, her soul touched by Connal's devotion, * c to make an infidel adore. I wouid not resign the glow of religion I feel at such an hour for worlds : such feelings might become habitual to me, had I but a monitor/' As she spoke she turned her eyes away from Connal in proud grief, and fixed them on heaven, as if appealing from his coldness and desertion. Tbat moment, above all others of existence, tried the soul of Connal : all the armies of the eartli could uot have withheld him from throwing himself at her feet; butthe thought of his destiny came on his heart, and he stood silent, motionless, aud in agony, Armida, even in that dim light, perceived the conflict, and pursued hex triumph.
" Religion with me must be the re¬ ligion of feeling, the impulses of an hour like this, caught from f commercing with the skies/ the ocean, the moonlight, and the dead, since the living have no feeling." Connal struggled to answer her that he might recall himseif. " Oh ! your's is the language of a mind too much at ease. I have known beings whose exhausted strength could not bear them to the doors of their hovels ; being· upon whose black and wasted lips if the wind of heaven was to breathe it would destroy them ; beings upon whose sight¬ less eyes the sun and moon rose and set in vain: and shall those who cannot gaze on nature be denied the consolations of religion ? Religion is for tbe wounded in spirit, whom the worid cannot heal; leave it to them and me." Awed, humbled, offended, and enchant¬ ed, Armida was silent : tbere was a mild feeling force in all he said that made her, k2
poetical language sound weak and trivial. Her genius seemed to shrink under the masculine energy, sad and stern, that his character displayed ; yet still her pride hated his superiority, and she readily assented to Wandesford's proposal to quit the ruins before the storm approach¬ ed : justas they put oft' from the shore, it came on with a violence that rendered their situation in a moment full of danger. To get back was impossible ; the wind blew right from the island : Armida was startled from her mingled thoughts of Connal by the broad blue sheeted light¬ ning streaming in her face : sbe turned to Connal, and saw him in his dark strength of form and mind rising to meet tbe danger ; she felt raised above it herself. Anxious to make him believe her courage, she spoke of the superior rage and terror of the storms on the continent, which she had often witnessed, and she mentioned one at Rome, where the terrible colours that
streaked the thunder-clouds were re¬ flected on the faces of the spectators, some of which, tinged with green and yellow* and sulphurous red, and distorted by expressions of fear and horror, seemed almost diabolical. Connal saw their danger : he wrapped his mantle round Armida, and rowed with all his strength. Wandesford was loud in complaints, and curses of his own folly in accompanying them. ·* You should not have let us go," said be to Connal. <f Let us now think only of returning/' said Connal, calmly. The storm now grew terrible : the oars were useless : the wind drove than rapidly towards the shore, but it was a part of it where their boat must be dashed to pieces, even if it could live through the breakers, whose yellow high-wrought foam they could now see distinctly by the flashes of lightning. Their danger was now evident : the heaving of the boat &3
made it impossible for Armida to sit without support, and the waves, dashing over her every moment, drenched her through the thick mantle Connal had wrapt round her; yet she neither murmur* ed or trembled: she wondered at her own super-human courage, and knew not ihat tbe inspiration came from his pre* fence: she felt all her danger, but she felt more strongly the pleasure of cling¬ ing to him for preservation ; and whea by the pale and stormy light she saw the agony of his countenance when he looked at her, and felt his frame con¬ vulsed with emotion when a wave reached ber, she wished for Hfe. Wandesford Vehemently insisted on their getting to ihore : Connal in the pauses of the storm explained to him the danger of ihc direction they were impelled in, aod at the sarae time exerted himself to the utmost to row round a point of rock where a sloping shore made their landing safe.
' f 0h! then, for God's sake," cried Wandesford, "exert all your strength: you said your strength was great : strain it to the utmost and save us: you who could piie up the stones in that cave, can't you row to that place you speak of ? Damn every infernal inch of it : I wish they were all in the bottom oľ Hell before ever I ventured near them/' Wandesford was no coward : he had the reputation of a brave man and good officer: he had in fact the courage of thousands—the courage, that, stimulated by witnesses, or by military tumult, could rush on death : the courage of the senses rather than tbe mind. But this was a new mode of danger and death : he shud¬ dered at tbe tliought of perishing by water, or perishing in cold biood without witnesses, or noise, or pomp, or any thing to reconcile bini hy pride to the loss of life, and hide the tremblings of his own heart from him: he besought к 4
Connal, with the importunity of a child, to save them. Connal cast a look at Armida, and that impulse seemed to awaken all his powers of mind and body. Exhausted as he was, he again collected the whole strength of his adamantine frame. There was something of super¬ natural force in his look and motions, as at oue moment he raised his dark flashing eyes to heaven with a look between appeal and defiance, and the next bowed himself to his toil, his long hair stream¬ ing on the blast, like a signal of distress, and dashed the waves with the arm of a giant. As the moon gleamed through tbe driving clouds, Armida beheld him exert that dreadful strength which seems the last effort of nature. Tbe muscles of his arms and neck were swelled to tha size of cords : his dark hair, tbat he im¬ patiently shook back, was matted with the thick drops of toil : his teetli fastened in his quivering under-lip, his distended .nostrils, his eye-brows drawn to a point,
bis short respiration, the convulsed, elastic spring of his motions terrified her, though she knew her life depended upon them ; and when the fuller light fell on his face, she saw the dark, sanguine hue with which despair and fatigue overspread it, and his bloodshot and bursting eyes that seemed starting from their sockets. " Oh ! you will kill yourself," she shrieked, wild with pity and terror : tc and you cannot save us : let us perish, since we must perish, without this terrible struggle." " Are you mad ?" cried Wandesford, with brutal oaths: ir I tell you you are lost if you drop the oar a moment. Row on, row on, or we are lost/' Connal had not remitted his hopeless toil for a moment, but he now bent his breast to it with an agony of strength. For a short time the elements appeared to have some mercy on thera, and during
this interval, his exertions, almost super¬ natural as they were, seemed to flatter them with safety; but in a moment the gusts came down with doubling fury. Armida clasped her hands and gazed in horror on the waves, that, tossing in a thousand forms, seemed to rush on tbem like a bost of devouring monsters.. Con¬ nal called to her to cling to him with all her strength : she clung to him : the waves were scattered by the veering blast, and they heard them broken and howling at a distance like beasts of prey: there was a pause : they looked round aghast : the retreating wave advanced again like a sea in storm in itself. Wandesford, shouting with fear, started up and at¬ tempted to jump outof the boat. Ar¬ mida, who had lost all courage, involun¬ tarily stretched out her arms to him, anc) adjured him to save her, and Connal iu vain exclaimed that if he stirred he would overset tbe boat· Wandesford,
aHvc only to his own safety, brutally dashed her off, and in the convulsions of his fear overset the boat : they were plunged into the water. " Then we must perish," cried Ar¬ mida, faintly laying hold on Connal. He had already folded one arm round her, while with the other hè desperately pre¬ pared to swim to shore. "Not thus: oh! it were too blessed for me such a death/' She heard him murmur, but she knew not what he said : terror had deprived her of her senses. For a few moments; Connal struggled with the waves with more than the might of man, but in vain: the fury of the waves defied a single arm : the other was wrapt round her: the agony of feeling impaired his strength : he could have saved any one but her. At that moment Desmond's boat came up ; Armida was placed in it, slcll insen¬ sible, but Connal, though he clung to
the side, still refused to enter it, till be bad saved Wandesford, who was drifted near them, banging in delirium on the wreck of the boat that was floating with her keel upwards. Their struggle to reach the shore was short, dreadful, and fortunate : Connal was the last to land. Desmond, grasping his brother's hand., burst into an agony of tears, and hung on him for some moments with a boyish passion, which alarmed while it melted Connal : he only allowed himself to press the hand tbat had saved him from death, for Armida still lay lifeless in bis arms. A short debate was held, and Desmond intreated Connal to resign his burthen to hira, exhausted as he must be with toil and wet. " I am indeed exhausted," said Con¬ nal, (< and therefore let me hold this cordial to my heart ; so sweet, so rich : oh I leave her in my arms." Wandesford \ţu committed to tbe
servants, and Desmond flew to the castle to pacify Lady Montclare. The castle was near, yet Connal often paused witb bis burthen, though not from weariness« She now respired, and spoke at intervala, but her reason had not yet returned : he gazed on her pale, still corse-like beauty in passion and despair. " Once only !" be murmured; " will this be allowed me but once in life— and oh! how sweetly would such a life as mine be exchanged for such another moment." Her wet hair had fallen back from her cheek : he touched it with his lips : she sighed : his hyacinth breath, warm with life and passion, passing over her cheek was balmy to her returning senses : she seemed to see him in a dream. Her arm that hung on his shoulder now half-extended itself, and sunk again; the svU ímgcrs, with a tremu¬ lous motion, touched his neck: he felt every nerve in his body shiver : tbe
anguish of passion increased with its hopeless fondness : he held her to his breast in sweet and bitter ecstasy ; he felt her too precious to be possessed, or to be resigned ; he felt that he could clasp her to his heart with desperate love, and then spring with her from the rock he was climbing. The servants of the castle were now approaching in every direction. He an¬ swered them calmly, but he wculd not resign her to any : he bore her into the hall of the castle, where the family were assembled, who all flew to her with an eagejness that made them forget her deliverer. Connal watched them silently while they applied the usual means for recovery. As she opened her eyes, a smile of joy the most brilliant and ex¬ quisite flashed over his face, but he turned abruptly away to where his father, Lady Montclare, and Endymion, were hanging round the idol Degmond with blessings and praises. Connal looked at them for
a moment; he heaved a sigh that no one heard, and proud in silent anguish turned away, and cold and solitary, re¬ tired to his cold solitary dwelling without a word·
#"4Ï1 A T» »'V ЪПДГ, ΙΑ, Then to forsake mc for a slave î Phillips — Distressed Mother, Armida did not quit her room till late the following day, nor did Wandesford ; but neither were confined by indisposi¬ tion. He passed the time in sullen rage and stifled execratiou : she in a " Jong y long thought of Connal," in that vision¬ ary state, when the mind, worn out by vio¬ lent emotions, reposes on a beloved image that seems to appear by inoonlighf, faint, distant, delicious. She met Wandesford in tbe evening with perfect calmness, for a mind possess¬ ed with real passion sees every oilier ob¬ ject with indolent complacency. As tbe evening advanced she wished to see h im again до щ biuj before, the glow oť
last night's struggle had departed and left him dark and cold : she wished again to see him as he was last night; his pride, his coldness, his stern and troubled ma¬ jesty, all swept away and forgotten in the moment when he clasped her in his arms, and struggled for her with the elements, and would have died to save her. She grew restiess and absent, and at last, starting up, she proposed to Rosine to walk on the rocks. "To walk!" repeated Lady Kilcarrick ; " why sure you must be mad to think or talk of walking so soon after your adven¬ ture, and to the very same spot too : I protest I think there is something quite indelicate in going out so soon/' Lady Montclare, fixing her expres¬ sive eyes on her daughter, merely ob¬ served that the place might revive sensa¬ tions too painful and too dangerous. Armida felt all her mother's meaning, and, turning away with an air of haughty levity, said the terrors of laat night were
like the wound in tbe Grecian fable, that could only be healed by the weapon that inflicted it 5 and nothing but the sight of those rocks could give her tranquillity again, and sbe hurried Rosine away. Wandesford followed them : he had put the most favourable construction on her silence : he imagined that in her own terror she had forgot his ; and he be¬ lieved her acceptance of bis addresses too public to admit of her retreating in con¬ sequence of an obscure adventure. Their walk was a silent one : Wandes¬ ford was sullen, Rosine thoughtful ; and Armida's eyes wandered over the pros¬ pect, as İf bhe had not com.: out to gaze on rocks. Her silence and absence, how¬ ever, increased every momeni, and ¡»he was at last ι urniug reluctantly lo the caslle, when Connal suddenly appeared at the door of a solitary cottage, which was perched like a collage among the cliffs above. Armida at his sight started with an
emotion too visible to Wandesford. Hc looked at her, and his expression for a moment was so direful that Rosine eagerly proposed returning : Armida, with all the pride of her character, re¬ fused. Their meeting was cold and embar¬ rassed : she had expected to see him de¬ lighted at her thus coming to seek him, and she found bim distant, confused, and absent. His confusion too visibly in¬ creased wben Wandesford observed that that cottage appeared his favourite haunt. " I visit it fiequently," said Connal, hesitating. " Some uncommon, some secret attraction appears to reside there." " The prospect from it is beautiful," said Connal, bis colour deepening. Armida instantly turned her steps to¬ wards the cottage. Connal said some¬ thing dissuasive; but she pr ssed on with¬ out heeding him, and the rest followed. " I told vou," said Wandesford, when
they reached it, " it must be some secret attraction that draws Mr. O'Morven here, for the view is the most barren these barren rocks afford." Armida did not hear him : she was listening to the mournful accents of a female voice within the cottage. They all heard it, but none of them spoke. The cottage door was open : twice Ar¬ mida looked in, and twice she proudly drew back ; but ber passion was now too powerful for her pride. As they de* scended she looked back, and saw a beau¬ tiful girl, who was wringing her hands over an infant that lay in her lap. It was smiling at her, and there was a bitter > contrast between the happy inanity of the child and tbe conscious agony of the mo¬ ther. Armida felt her breath suspended · she fixed her eyes on Connal with an expression which, had he known any thing of the language of vvomah's eyes, would have told him more than language
could tell. His were directed to the un¬ fortunate woman, whom he viewed with such obvious, umninglcd compassion, that Armida in a moment felt it was im¬ possible be could thus pity what lie loved. She was now turning her beauti¬ ful eyes on him with a different expres¬ sion, when a burst of military music, that startled the echoes of tho desert shore, struck on their ears. Wandesford exclaimed it was the band of his regiment ; and a moment after a party of soldiers, emerging from the rocks, extended tbeir glittering lines along the shore. It was a detachment which had been ordered to quarters on the coast. The troops halted, and the officers ad¬ vanced to pay their respects to Wandes¬ ford. Proud of the opportunity of displaying the beautiful form beside him as his in¬ tended bride, he addressed them with unusual affability, int г duced some of tbem to Armida, and mentioned his resi-
dence at the castle, where, he informed them, Lady Montclare would be happy to welcome the friends of her future son- in-law. Armida, compelled by this reference to her, and by the officers evidently waiting for her to confirm the invitation, uttered a few polite words; but, few as they were, she hesitated, and wished to recall them when she thought of the sanction they gave to Wandesford's pretentions. The officers, who bad heard of Armida both in Italy and England, and whose curiosity had been still more excited by the report of her marriage, when they at length saw her so beautiful, so lightly attired, wandering along the rocks of a wild shore, almost took it for a fairy vision. She had uttered but a few words, but those few had conveyed to them all the charms of her voice and splendid ad¬ dress. They whispered their admiration
loudly to each other, and their congratu¬ lations still more loudly to Wandes¬ ford. Armida heard them, and heard them with a pleasure she could not resist ; flat¬ tery she had so long been accustomed to, that it sounded in her ear almost like na¬ tive music. Inspired by pride and love, she now displayed her long forgotten eloquence of language and attitude, pointed out the most striking views to the strangers, and accompanied her remarks with all the undulation of her beautiful form, for which admiration afforded opportunity, till in the mixed murmur of praise ancl de¬ light she missed the only voice for which she listened—the voice of Connal. She forgot what she was saying; and the co¬ lour of her beautiful face varied with fear and resentment. Wandesford urged her to proceed : her iride came to her relief, and she conti¬ nued to speak with fluency, but without
spirit, and she turned to another subject to recover herself. A stream of fresh water fell from the rock she was leaning on into a natural basin, at the bottom of which the colours of the plants and shells glowed beautifully tbrough the deep clear water. She could no longer speak with feeling ; but she spoke with art, and she passed from a description of the small shell found on the northern coast of Ireland, which yields so beautiful a purple, to the ex« traordinary aquatic weed that floats on the surface of the Rhine, whose spiral elasticity of stalk adapts itself with a sen¬ sibility like life to the various levels of tbe water when swollen by rains or other causes, so as always to preserve itself on the surface of tbe water : but still anx¬ ious to interest Connal, sbe pointed to the'weedi that clustered at the bottom of the basin, and said she almost envied the water spirit such a crown.
xt You deserve to be crowned with them yourself as the genius of the place," said Wandesford. (t No," said Armida with forced gaiety : " if I were the ¿sovereign of these isles I would bind my brows with nothing but a wreath of those yellow flowers that are waving on the top ofthat rock, as if they defied all human reach ;" and she pointed to a cluster of flowers that were but just visible from the brightness of their colour on the summit of a rock the most high and perilous in their \iew. Wandesford laughed at the idea, t»^d faid if she was the sovereign of the ч л it wouid be a good punishment fora rebel subject to compel him to bring her a wreath from that spot. He had hardly spoken, when Connal, springing forward, began to ascend the rock with frightful activity. Shocked and terrified at the consequences of her fantastic pride, Armida now called« sbt vol. i. ь
shrieked to him to forbear. He was al¬ ready almost out of hearing. The officers eagerly began inquiring who he was : his silent majesty had awed them while he stood towering among them, and thcy now revenged themselves by laughing at his desperate folly. But Armida, who felt this wild action speak, who imagined she heard him say— s€ Would the ephemeral beings you trifle with hazard life at your slightest wish like Connal?" following him with straining eyes from point to point of his terrible progress. Sometimes she saw him alight on a crag that seemed hardly able to bear the weight of a bird : some¬ times he sprung upwards by grasping at a tu ft of weeds, which, loosening with his touch, fell the moment he released it. At last he reached a ¡edge of rock, above which the flowers grew in all their beauty, as if smiling at the danger that surrounded them. They were within a few feet of him : be stretched out his
hand, suspending his whole weight on the opposite limb. The loose stones shook under his feet : they could bear thera distinctly in the silence below, tn- tent on his prize, be reached forward, and at that moment tbe stones on which he stood gave way—he fell. Armida'« sight forsook her, till roused by a shout of wonder, she looked upwards involunta¬ rily, and saw him grasp with miraculous dexterity a point of rock but a few feet below that he had fallen from. Every ooe now called to him to descend, and each pointed out a different way as the safest· 1 " Call to him," said Rosine, " oh ! call to him to be careful of himself-" " Do you call to bim," said Armida, gasping, " I have no voice." But Connal, the moment he recovered his balance, began the pursuit again ; and after banging for a few moments between life and death, as if by a single hair, seized the flowers, descended, and, bound¬ ing like an eagle from tbe rock, offered them to Armida.
Pride, and reproach, and love, flashed from his eye*, and his bronzed check, and bold, romantic figure, burning with toil aud emotion, looked like a mountain, on whose dark side the setting sun had flung a rich and umbered light. As he silently gave her the flowers, the haughfy 3 eloquent Armida was mute and abashed : she shrunk from his look ; but when she saw him turn away without uttering a word, her fear of his disdain renewed her spirits, and exclaiming that the posses¬ sion of what was obtained by his danger could give her nothing but pain ; but tbat no one else should boast that dan¬ ger was incurred for them, she flung the flowers iuto the sea, and taking Ro- sine's arm, tried to walk firmly away. As tbey returned to the castle, their eyes were caught by something white floating on a rock near them ; it was the dress of the young woman they had seen in tho cabin : she was sitting on the edge of a rock that projected into the sea : her face wa« turned toward them, but sbe did not
appear to see them. One band clasped her infant to her breast, the other was ex¬ tended to catch a white cloak that was flying off her shoulder : sbe caught at it often, but with such a vacant, helpless hand that s: ill it escaped from ber. Tbey passed : the woman did not observe them. There was an о ver wept wildness in her look, and a desolate absence in her whole figure, that seemed to have nothing more to do with mankind. Armida lingered. Rosine inquired why they did not go home. " I cannot go home yet," said Armida; « latterly I feel myself oppressed butin the open air : the cold wind that used to chill me, I love it now, and twilight, and these shores !" " 'Tis a great change," said Rosine. Touched by these few words, Armida moved hastily forwards, till the figure of Connal, leaning against the opposite angle of the rock, obstructed her way. He bowed, but did not attempt to fol¬ low them. Compelled to speak to bim as l3
sbe passed, Armida said faintly—" Why did you ieave us ? " " To escape from the sight of those men/* said Connal, impatiently tearing the weeds from the rock, and trampling thera under his feet. Armida looked amazed. * 4 The soldiers î the soldiers !" he cried with a sternness that frightened her : "can I bear to see those men, to know that they shall live in honour, and die a death bet¬ ter a thousand times than life, while I, the descendant of princes --------" His voice failed, and he hid his face in his mantle for a moment. " But I wave ray birth, my pride, my nation : I speak of myself as a man. My arra is as strong, and my heart as fearless as any of those men, or their leaders : I would plant my foot beside the firmest of thero, and when I shrunk, let hira call ray birtb a Milesian fable : yet I must wi¬ ther on a solitary rock, unknown, unre- membered, watching the fall of tuim tbat once were tbe seat« of шу anceiteri.
and, whenever I hear the sound of war or fame, almost wishing those ruins would fall on me and crush roe«" Fluctuating between pride and passion, subdued by his melancholy, but wounded even to agony by his indifference, Ar¬ mida, folding her veil around her, at¬ tempted to rush away, when tbe young woman, who had been sitting despairingly on the rock till this moment, with a cry that had the agony of death in it, plunged into the water with her infant in her arms« Cornial heard the plunge: he did not wait to recognize the object, but, tearing off his mantle, threw himself from the rock in a moment. Rosine, who had presence of mind enough to wish to spare Armida the ter* ror of the sight, endeavoured to interpose between her and the precipice : but Ar« mida, breaking from her, hung over the very extreme point of the rock with a look whose wild passion terrified her. In spite of the remonstrances of Rosine, who thought tbey must all perish, she
continued to gaze, till she beheld ham, after bringing the mother in safety to the shore, again plunge in after the child, who had fallen from her convulsed arms, and ât length swim to shore with one hand, while with the other he held the infant above the water. At this moment some of the oflicers came up, too late to do any thing but praise the fearless humanity he had evinced, Wandesford forced himself to join tbem, whilst he watched the countenance of Armida. She was gaziug on Connal, as he wrapped the chilled limbs of the babe in his mantle, and warmed them in his bosom. In the objects he had saved she beheld his mistress and his child ; and stunned and tortured by the praises of his courage and feeling she heard on every side, all self-command forsook her ; her high spirit failed, and, tottering forwards with an attempt to quit the spot, she fainted in Rosine 's arms. The party immediately gathered
round her. Wandesford silently exulted ; hut be had calculated weakly on the hope of Connal shunning her presence, for the moment he saw her faint he rushed to her, and resigning all care of the suf¬ ferers hc bad saved, supported her in bis arms. She recovered. Before she could see him she felt him bending over her : she struggled for breath : passion, which had deprived her of spirits, now renewed them : she repelled him, and leaned oa Kosine, gasping*. Connal retired without giving her ano¬ ther look. Sbe redoubled her efforts to speak with ease and vivacity ; but she was now worn out by the struggles of the evening. At some distance from the castle she wa» compelled to pause, and beg of Wandes¬ ford to get her some water ; from a ca¬ bin they were passing. While she leant on Rosine, unable to support herself, she observed the cabin was the sarae where she had seen the »tränger at the eem-
mencement of her walk. She darted in an eager glance : she could dis¬ tinctly see the womau stretched on a wretched bed, and attended by others, and Connal seated on the ground with tfae child still in his arms. He did not see her, but she saw him in all his beauty, for he had thrown back his long hair, lest the water that streamed from it should fall on the baby's face, and his open vest shewed the glowing whiteness of his bosom, contrasting the chill and purpled limbs of the little sufferer whom he tried to warm in it. She turned away, and, with an effort nearly equal to that of bim who smiles on the rack, walked to the castle without a sigh. The moment they reached her apart¬ ment, Armida threw up the window, gasp¬ ing for air: it was the same at which she bad first seen Connal tbe night of her ar¬ rival : she closed ît, and retreated to tbe farthest extremity of tbe room. Some tears stood in her eyes, but ahe repelled tbem with a con vulsive effort, and wben
the recovered her voice, signified her wish to be alone. Rosine had no spirits tojóin the party below ; and not happy enough to retire to her lonely apartment, she lingered al¬ most unconsciously in the gallery till she heard them separating· She re¬ tired as Desmond entered his apartment, and she heard the long, deep sigh of En¬ dymion as he passed his door. All was still for some hours: at length Rosine was startled from a broken sleep by a noise in her room : she sat up, and withdrawing her curtain, saw Armida standing beside her bed. " I cannot sleep, Rosine," said she, speaking with many pauses. " A strange thought has visited my mind, and made me restless. Who was that woman we saw to-night?" Rosine protested her utter ignorance. " Have you never heard of her before ? —never heard that sbe was ....... . . „„„ -" She hesitated, and' tlien added, in a still more earnest though feebler voice,
** Rosine, let me adjure yon to learn who that woman was." Rosine readily promised, for at that mo¬ ment the thought of Desmond occurred to her, and he had been famous for rur*u gallantry before he had left Ireland ; yet the next moment, blushing at the commission, she inquired what interest Armida could have in the inquiry. " Nothing:—perhaps my pride, per haps my curiosity," said Armida, retiring. She paused, and returning to the bed¬ side, and laying her burning hand on Rosinc's, sai d with solemnity— " One request more : never mention to human being what you have witnessed this night." Rosine promised, and, thanking hea¬ ven for her want of wealth, beauty, and talent, sunk to sleep. i:Ni> of vol. i. lï. Ci*AÄ*te, Printer, Weli-strcct, Lo»U<«.
