Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Midnight weddings: a novel
THE MIDNIGHT WEDDINGS. ——— «tegflaac— ■ ■ ~ ,: ? ???. L İ3İLVFJI, surely, was there an age in ?\ Iiicli novels wore more ?-??????? read tlian the present. New ones of every description, good, bad, or indiifercnt, are daily presentcel to the public ; therefore, certainly, there must be some likely to please even the most fastidious readers; and I own, as I think no author ought to loso sight of the moral such works are ? ol. χ. : ' η required
required to inculcate, I consider the lecture of them as a very innocent, if not a very profitable recreation. The best of people have their moments of ennui, and if they can beguile a leisure hour by sympathizing in the sorrows or pleasures of some imaginary hero or heroine, who can blame them for having recourse to a Circulating Library, from whence they mav now select cither the marvellous romance, teeming with gliosis and spec¬ tres, or the sat ν rical adventures of a political Quixote, replete with wit and judgment, or else the more simple narra¬ tions founded upon events within the bounds of probability, romantic love talcs being very generally discountenanced. In¬ deed I am of opinion the multiplicity of writers have rendered the sect of novel readers far more difficult to please, and, I must
must acknowledge, every subject has been long since exhausted. The pages of history have been ran¬ sacked to furnish materials for.the mar¬ vellous· Our modern philosophers have certainly afforded ample scope to the pen of the judicious eatyrist, among whom the author of the Infernal Quixote, in my opinion, claims pre-eminence. The an¬ nuls of fashion have afforded subjects for more fi ivolous authors. What, therefore, remains for an author to select, who is unwilling to take the liberties our im- ìnoital bard has done with history, and who, fiom not believing in ghosts, could not render such auxiliaries of ¿>reat use? nor is she enough within the vortex of fashion to exhibit the follies of its votaries to great advantage ; yet she w ishes to avoid the beaten path. Still she mibt give ? l 2 the)
the reins to her imagination, let it lead her where it will, or she must (which, as being a more competent judge than her¬ self of the prevalent taste, she ought to 'do) -consult the taste of her publisher. Indeed to secure their approbation is rather the general aim ; for should you fail of meeting with a purchaser, that labour you hope will immortalize you ? absolutely lost ; a most mortifying circumstance in every sense of the word ; and the gentle¬ men or ladies who sit in judgment upon the fine spun webs from the prolific brains of female authors, are very competent to decide upon the taste of the public. Whether tho writer of tbis, one of the most humble of the candidates for their applause, will once more hit upon a tale they think it worth their while to commit to the press, remains yet to be known ; · I can
can only promise I shall begin where most of my cotemporaries for fame conclude, namely, Avitli the marriage of my hero, though I am fully aware, should my work ever appear in print, my readers will ere this exclaim against the absurdity of the notion, as tending to lessen the interest of my story ; yet I am vain enough to think í have that in embryo that will make them some amends for my incon¬ gruous beginning, though, be it remem¬ bered, the well wrote ??? of the Times begins at a similar epoch ; but I do not mean to model my story upon that elegant production. On the contrary, before I celebrate this promised wedding I shall enter into a few necessary details respect¬ ing my hero's birth, his progenitors, in¬ tended bride, &c. which certainly ought to precede my account of his marriage; 13 3 there-
therefore, not to intrude any longer upon the leader's patience, I thus enter upon my task. The father of the hero, whose adventures I am preparing to transmit to posterity, was the eldest son of a country squire, who, having devoted the prime of his life to a succession of rural sports, such as fox* hunting, shooting, &c. and in summer, for want of better amusement, he delighted in angling, at the age of fifty reecllectcd if he did not speedily marry he should leave no heir to inherit his very impaired estate, or bodily prowess. To fine ladies he had ever had an aver¬ sion bordering on abhorrence ; therefore, failing into the contrary extreme, he married his cook, whom he had remarked, when she entered his service, was ad------ d -ι— fine woman, and only six-and-twenty ; and had
had she been of a more complying temper, ot less conscientious, he declared he should not have played the fool so soon, as he thought no man ought to dwindle into that tame animal, a husband, till he was no longer able to follow the hounds, when it was no matter how soon be came under petticoat government. How¬ ever, by the time he had nearly run through his estate, he became the father of t svo boys and a girl, whom he very soon left wiih their mother to shift for themselves ; that is, he died just in time to be spared the mortification of seeing his ancient mansion house doomed to the hammer, which it was within a few months after bis funeral, together with his whole lauded property, his numerous creditors thinking themselves fully justified in thus ii 4 enforcing
enforcing the pay meut of their lawful claims upon his estate. In consequence of this precipitate sule, his widow and her three children were obliged to take up their abode in a small market town contiguous to their former habitation, where, upon the savings she had contrived to make, and what she had been able to keep out of the reach of the creditors, and what she owed to the com¬ miseration they felt for her young family, she contrived to live not only decently, but comfortably, and soon declared her intention of bringing up her children as became their late father's situation in life. She therefore sent the boys to a grammar- school in the town, and the girl to a neighbouring boarding-school,* where they remained till some of their father's friends, who
who bad been among the most active to accelerate bis ruin, took it into their heads to exert their interest, it being the chcaDCst method thev could devise of appearing to wish to provide for those the j y liad so greatly contiibuted to render destitute. Their, perhaps, feeble efforts were crowned with success, as the eldest son was at the age of fourteen sent out a cadet to the East-Indies, and the youngest was bound apprentice to a country mer¬ chant, who also kept a banking-house; and much about the same time, with the mother's entire approbation, the daughter was taken under the protection of her father's only surviving relation, a very rich old maid, who bad been as saving as the squire had been profuse, though she would not have advanced him a shilling to have kept him from a prison ; and what ? 5 alone
alone induced her to adopt his daughter was her having been named after her, as she had never seen the mother, nor even the squire, since his ill-assorted marriage. The widow was perfectly acquainted with the antiquated virgin's notions, and had m?rely laughed at the contempt in which she affected to hold her, though policy induced her to name her daughter Pene- lope, in hopes, as eventually proved the case, of inducing her to notice the child. Having thus seen all her chilciren pro¬ vided for much beyond her expectations, she considered it no longer her duty to pay their father the compliment of retain¬ ing his name, therefore she, very soon after her daughter's removal, yielded to the pressing solicitations of a smart at¬ torney, (who had been in all her secrets, and vv ho knew she had that in her power would
would enable him to encrease his business) and exchanged the more illustrious name of Browning for the less souudinii one of Smith, and in a very short time, contrary both to his hopes and expectations, she presented him with first one son, and then another, till his rising family became so ¡serious an incumbrance to him, that he heartily repented his having entered the holy pale with so young a woman.
? ß
CHAP.
es
CHAP. IL Edmund browning, the eldest son of the late squire, bore a very strong resemblance to his father both in person and disposition, being very untractable, and remarkably obstinate, as from a child, whenever he had set his mind upon doing any thing, he persevered in his design in spite of every obstacle, resolved either to succeed or perish in the attempt. He was also by nature malicious and unforgiving to a degree almpst beyond credibility;
credibility ; but the weakness of his in¬ tellects appeared to act as a stimulant upon his fro ward disposition, which rendered him utterly unable to listen to reason ; therefore even the prejudices of his child¬ hood he carried with him to his grave, and at a very early age he was completely alienated from his brother Thomas; merely because, in consequence of a bo) ish quarrel,. his mother sided with her voungest son. though we must in justice rxknowledgc he was much the most to blame ; however, from that moment he disliked his mother, and almost hated his more favoured bro¬ ther. Unfortunately Mrs. Browning in¬ creased his vexation, by remarking some short time afterwards that Tommy would make the cleverest man, as he was far more 'cute than Mun, therefore would make his way best in the world. 6 This
This prognostic was infinitely too hu¬ miliating to be forgiven by the vindictive Edmund, though he rather strove to conceal the deadly hatred he harboured against Thomas, who was nevertheless by no means his dupe, and who saw him depart for India with secret exultation ; yet the rooted dislike Edmund felt for his more favoured brother induced him to exert every effort to convince the world his mother had not done him justice ; it was therefore in the end the occasion of what might be termed his rapid promo¬ tion ; for he no sooner arrived in Indostan than he devoted his every thought towards the best methods of defeating his unjust mother's predictions in her Tommys favour, his only aim being to become a greater man than this 4 çute mortal. The
The profession of arms was particularly adapted to his disposi t uni, as he was daringly courageous, and by no means to be detened from any dangerous-attempt or expedition by any sensations bonlering oa humanity, andas there was a brutal fero¬ city in his nature that made him delight in those necessary horrors of war from which men of equal courage but of mileler natures shrink with horror. But Edmund Browning, having once predetermined to be at the head of his profession, would have cut his way through an enemy's camp rather than have failed. Personal danger and inconvenience he set at nought, considering them as no impedi¬ ments in the way to glory; and as he early had an opportunity of adding prac¬ tice to theory, he soon obtained what he sedulously sought, the notice of his superiors ;
MIDNIGHT WEDDINGSr superiors; and whether owing to his skill, his rashness, or his acknowledged bravery, Fortune so constantly favoured him, that his rapid promotion appeared only the reward of his diligent zeal for the public service. Success spurred him on—he redoubled his efforts, and really performed such undaunted actions that he obtained the command of a regiment before he was six- and-twenty ; and as he was by no means scrupulous how he acquired money in a country where he considered every thing that fell in his way as lawful plunder, he soon amassed a considerable fortune, and, ere he celebrated his five-and-thirticth birth-dav, was denominated a nabob, as he was by no means inclined, like many of his equally lapacious countrymen, to squander his ill-begotten riches, having inherited
inherited his mother's saving turn, which ever induced him to be careful of th~ main chance, still resolving to outshine his hated rival in Mrs. Bnnvning's affec¬ tions. Having at last realized a fortune he was convinced would enable him to look dow n upon his detested competitor, after six- and-twenty years residence in índostan he resigned the lucrative post he thett held, and having been lately created a baronet, prepared to revisit his native isle, armed at all points to annihilate Thomas with his scorn, while he excited his envy by the splendid style in which he proposed to live. These reflections prevented him from feeling the tedium sucha voyage is apt to occasion active minds, as he knew his brother was still living, and held a small post
post under government ; but his transports greatly abated upon his arrival in London, where he learnt with infinite chagrin that Thomas had been far more successful than he expected, and had very recently ac¬ quired the patronage of a gentleman high in office. The reflection, however, that he was one of the liehest men in England, and that he bhould be courted by, instead of finding himself obliged to court the patronage of the present rulers of the nation, served to console him ; and as he soon learnt upon what terms his brother had conciliated the great man's favour, he felt himself equally inclined to look down upon the degraded wretch, as he now termed him. Indeed it must be acknowledged Thomas had rose much less honourably than him¬ self from the country banking-house in m hielt
which he begun his career. At the age of fi ve-and-twenty he removed to one of icreat note in London ; and as he was neither deficient in parts nor in his know¬ ledge of figures, he was soon noticed by his masters, who were frequently employed by the treasury to make different calcula¬ tions respecting the taxes, and as no one understood this part of the business better than Thomas Browning, they brought him forward so frequently, he at last contrived to out-wit his employers, hy accepting the post of secretary to one of the great men in office, who, by this arrangement, found it unnecessary to have any farther ìecourse to the banker, Thomas maintained his post during the ensuing ten years at the expiration of wbieh time he man ied a lady the cen« feorious part of the world were wicked enough
enough to aver had been kept by his patron, who, to reward him for his com¬ pliance, preferred him to a very lucrative post in his own department, and from that period till his brother's arrival in England, which happened within the twelvemonth* he had lived in a very superior style, and was now possessed of a handsome town-house, correspondent villa, &c. &c. and saw as much company as any man who kept up the same appear¬ ance within the bills of mortality, hi* guests affirming the suppositions respect* ing his wife's former situation were per¬ fectly erroneous. She had just lain-ia of a son when the Nabob arrived in Loudon, from whom Thomas entei tained no ex¬ pectations of encreusing lib fortune; relying therefore upon the promises of his kind patron, he resolved not to court the favour
favour of a relation whom he knew would glory in mortifying him. Miss Penelope Browning was still a spinster, though she had, soon after she entered her thirtieth vear, inherited the Jarsrc fortune of the maiden ladv who liad brought her up ; but having been an ab¬ solute slave to this lady's caprices during her life-time, it was rcpoitcd, that to make sure of her property she had actually taken a vow of celibacy. Mrs. Smith, the quondam Mrs. Brown¬ ing, the mother of this precious trio, had died i u child-birth of her twelfth son bv her second husband, who onlv wished she had departed this life rather sooner, so large a family having absolutely impoveiishcd iiim ; and as neither of the Brownings were inclined to assist his endeavours to bring them up to some trade, he had been
been forced to send the bovs to sea, and to place the guls in such menial stations, that shame, if not humanity, should have induced theit half-biotheis and sisteis to have clone som thin ς; for them ; but they were suffered to gi ov el on, uni egarde el hy the wily Thomas and the piudent Pene¬ lope, and as the Baionct had never wiotc to anv of his family fiom the time he left England, thou fiithei en tei tained no hopes of his dlsphiv nig moie gcneiosity ; he \?? therefoie, bv no means disappointed when it letter be addiessed to Sii Edmund, soou aftei his anival iu England, vas îetuincd him in a blank covei uuansweicd, the liai one t being too much displeased, when he found his own hi other íealK hold a soil of i espectable iánk in society, tt) feel at all inclined to piomote any other of his íela- tions, though he felt infinite satisfaction lil
in the reflection that the piofits of Thomas's place were certainly scarce adequate to his apparent expenditure, not being aware of the private resources from which the pensioner derived no incon¬ siderable part of his income. Curiosity, policy, and a sort of latent hope that exists in every man's bosom, induced Thomas to pay him a visit at the hotel where he had taken up his abode; but-though ho was a great adept in the science of dissimulation, and understood how to flatter the foibles of the great, his condescension proved of no other avail than to afford the Baronet an opportunity of boasting of his immense fortune, who kindly entertained him with detailing the various arrangements he purposed making, and the purchases he had in view, and then suffered him to depart without expressing
expressing the Slightest wish to see him again, fully resolved never to return his visit, while the mortified Thomas resolved to vie with him in point of splendour, and henceforth to consider him as an alien to his blood. Miss Browning, who was outrageously viituous, and nice to a degree of absurdity respecting her female acquaintance, had been, from the time of Thomas's marriage, one of the foremost rev ilers of his wife; and paiticulariy fearful lost Sir Edmund should countenance such a cieature, she wrote to him the moment she learnt his arrival in London, to request his company at Alton-House, the name of her seat, and to caution him against honouring the iu- trio-uim»; Thomas and the woman he had made his wife with his company. Her letter was verv flattering· to Edmund, because be
be knew she was in want of nothing he had it in his power to bestow, and because she appeared to be actuated w ith the same sentiments respecting Thomas. To Alton-House, in Nottinghamshire, therefore he hastened, whore he met with a most cordial reception, and was treated with that respect which was so eon- sonant to his disjiosition, that before a werk had elapsed he Hit a sentiment bordering on fraternal a ri eet io n fir ΛΙ iss Penelope, who certainly laid herself out with infinite skill to please this amiable brother; and as flattery was her foite she soon wormed herself into his confidence, and rendered herself so necessary to him, lie was in no ha-tc to quit her, to him, truly hospitable mansion, as they both equally disliked Thomas, from each Inning von. i. ? early
early conceived he was their mothers favourite. Penelope, after a time, ventured to hint bow dreadful it would be should a de¬ scendant from such a degenerate couple succeed to Sir Edmund's title and fortune. The latter the great man swore should never fall to the bastards bis drivell'ms: brother fathered, as, being all acquired, lie could dispose of it as he chose, and he woulel leave İt to found hospitals before such mongrel brats should benefit bv his exertions to procure it, and almost wished he had been only knighted, that his title might have died with him, when the gentle Penelope reminded him that he was only in the prime of life, therefore, should he marry, there was every reason to suppose he would leave an heir to transmit his honours
honours unsullied to posterity, and to disappoint Thomas's ambitious hopes. So very disinterested a piece of advice was truly acceptable to the Baronet, whose only aim still was to mortify and torment that brother he had not been able to keep sufficiently in the back-ground ; but then, like his father, he had ? sort of antipathy to fine ladies, and even Misses of any rank he aver. cd had pretensions that ren¬ dered them by no moans desirable as companions for life. His sister perfectly coincided with him, though she hoped he would not think of marnai^ beneath him- self; offering to select a proper companion for him from among her numerous female acquaintance; hinting he might pick anel ch usc, as no nobleman would object to an alliance with Sir Edmund Browning, particularly as money was not his object ; c í2 indeed
indeed she thought birth was all he ought to regard in a wife. The Baronet agreed with her, but re¬ quested she would not trouble herself to select him a partner for life, as it was all in good time, and he wished to look about him before he entered into any niatri- monial engagements. The fact was, much as he longed for an heir, he by no means relished the idea of parting with his liberty, particularly to a woman of rank, conceiving such an one would prove at once his ruin and his torment ; indeed, the hatred he bore his brother was his sole inducement to enter the holy pale. While, however, he was deliberating upon so very serious an affair, Miss Browning imparted every thing that had past between them upon the subject to her humble companion, who was the ninety- ninth
ninth she had had since the death of her relation ; but this one had, to the infinite surprise of the neighbourhood, spent five months at Alton, owing to her greatly surpassing all lier predecessors in the art of conforming to the most unbounded and unreasonable caprice; she was therefore still high in favour when Sir Edmund returned to England, Miss Browning having even been heard to rejoice that she had met with so deserving a friend. This toad-eater, as she was generally styled, being uniformly despised except by her patroness, was at this period in her thirty-seventh year, neither handsome nor what might be termed the reverse. During her youth she had seen a little of the world, and had certainly acquired the desirable talent of accommodating herself to the tempers and wiiims of all those from whom c S she
she hoped to derive any advantage ; and as she never lost sight of self-interest, and possessed a degree of cunning, which would in a statesman have been denominated poliev, she soon entertained very serious hopes of rendering the unsuspecting Pene¬ lope's confidence of material service to¬ wards her advancement iu life, us she had aheady discovered, that under all his rough pride Sir Edmund was even more open to flattery than his sister; she there¬ fore seized every opportunity to assail him with her well-directed encomiums; nor was she sparing of her animadversions upon the present race of fashionable belles, çîting various instances within her own knowledge of very amiable men who had been absolutely ruined by their wives fellies ; not forgetting to ridicule various pretenders to her haud aud heart, whom she
she had uniformly rejected, as she was resolved to die a spinster except she met with a man as averse to the absurdities of fashion as herself, and in whose supeiior judgment she could implicitly confide, having resolved to be an obedient wife ; and what woman of even common sense could bear to be dictated to by a fool ; but men of the description she should wish to select for a partner for life were of course as difììcult in their choice ; she had never met with but one, which she plainly, in Miss Browning's absence, gave the Baronet to understand was himself, well knowing that was that lady to have the slightest hint of her design, her im¬ mediate dismission would effectually pre¬ clude her. from prosecuting her design, as she was only the daughter of a surgeon who resided iu a neighbouring village, e 4 and
and who had with difficulty brought up a very mimerons family. However, notwithstanding her increas¬ ing precaution Sir Edmund was frequently so lav ish in her praise, that Miss Browning began to fe av their pure blood might be again contaminated; she therefore with difficulty contrived to keep her temper with the 7)ύη.ν, as she now styled Miss Milman, who had so slily wormed herself into her credulous brother's favour; yet to part; with her during his stay, she conceived, would be highly injudicious, as such a step would most probably only accelerate the event she dreaded ; but no sooner had Sir Edmund taken his leave, after pro¬ mising to pay another and a speedy visit to Alton-House, ere the storm which had been gathering in her bosom burst forth upon her companion's head, whom she accused
accused in the grossest terms of having sought to win the affections of her brother. Miss Milman not being absolutely aware of the progress she had really made in the Baronet's affections, as he had forborne to flatter her vanity, endeavoured to defend herself against so serious a charge; but nothing she could allege in extenuation of her conduct proved of any avail, Miss Browning being determined to part with her, which she did in a manner that might have been termed turning her out of doors, hoping she had by this means effectually crushed the aspiring slut's hopes, as Miss Milman's great anxiety to make matters up merely sei ved to hasten her departure. Having thus got rid of " the serpent she had cherLhed in her bosom, " a favourite expression of the spinstefs, she began to ? 5 hope
hope her-leather'would select ? partner for life froln some noble family, by v\hich means her greatest wish, namely, that of being related to a peer, would be com¬ pletely gratified.
CHAP. III. DURING the recent fracas at Alton- House Sir Edmund ani ved in London, where he immediately purchased a very elegant mansion, and having a strong pre¬ dilection for a coronet, he made his wishes known
known so adroitly, be had hopes given him that his former services would be rewarded by a peerage, a promotion he was the more anxious to obtain, as it would enable him to look down from a still higher pinnacle upon his brother Thomas, when, in one of his morning rambles, after nearly a month's residence in London, hestuitrbled upon Miss Milman. Astonished at meet¬ ing her thus unexpectedly, not having been informed of her precipitate departure fron Alton,' he expressed his surprise, which increased upon learning 1 she had left Miss Browning near 'three weeks. What could have occasioned their separa¬ tion was his next enquiry, his sister never having mentioned the* circumstance to him, though he had beard from her several times since his arrival in town. ? 6 This
This question afforded Miss Milman ari excellent opportunity to clear her conduct, who, we must acknowledge, had planned this very interview', though she had given it every appearance of an accidental meeting; she, therefore, with well-arlected reluctant modesty, deplored the unkind suspicions which had induced Miss Brown¬ ing to, treat her, with very unbecoming asperity, protesting she had never har¬ boured so presumptuous an idea as that lady had laid to her charge ; however, she hoped soon to convince her late patroness how much she had wronged her, as she could, like Viola, pine in thought, but ne'er reveal her love. For further parti¬ culars she must refer him to his sister, as their difference arose from too delicate a subject to permit her to be more explicit. U i ving
Giving himself inf nite credit fm' his ready comprehension, the flattered Baronet guessed v\ hat h«d occasioned their quarrel, therefore requested the fair fugitive would accompany him into Portland-Place, to see the house he had lately purchased, and which was then fitting up under his directions, as he was going thither, and really wished to ask her a few questions respecting her future prospects, &c. declaring be had supposed her irrevocably fixed, at least till she married, at Alton- House. She readily consented to his pro¬ posal, anel made so many judicious re¬ marks upon the house, and the taste of its owner, that he requested her to take a seat, and without any circumlocution to inform him what had really induced his sister to part with so agreeable a com¬ panion. With well-feigned blushes and 6 proper
proper hesitation she condescended to oblige him, laying great stress upon what she had advanced in her own defence, and declaring, whatever might be her private sentiments, Miss Browning had done her infinite injustice to attribute ii few unguarded speeches to the effects of design. Greatly flattered by these implied avowals of her partiality in his favour, the Baronet laughed at what he deemed his sister's preposterous notions, inti eating she would not suffer the absurdities of a foolish woman, who was jealous of her shadow, to affect her spirits, assuring her he would prove himself her friend in spite of his prudish sister, requesting her address, and hinting he should be as reserved respect¬ ing their meeting as Penelope had been respecting their recent separation. Infinitely
Infinitely gratified, Miss Milman readily gave him her direction, though, to her in¬ creasing satisfaction, upon second thoughts the gallant Baronet chose to seeker home, where they parted mutually pleased, as Sir Edmund thought his sister had gone very unjustifiable lengths in thus disgracefully discarding a young person in whose praise she had formerly been so lavish, merely because she was sensible of his trans¬ cendent merit, without considering that, upon what might have been considered a much less provocation, he would pro¬ bably have treated any of his dependents with far more rigour. Revenge, however, being his ruling passion, he soon thought he could not punish his sister more severely than by mar r ving her discarded com¬ panion. She was of a very suitable age, and, according to Penelope's account, a very
very excellent manager; and as for her being in love with him, surely she was more to be pitied than blamed; besides, by marrying her he should also defeat his hated brother s expectations ; he there¬ fore speedily decided to make her an immediate offer of his hand, though he did not mean to make their marriage public till he took possession of the noble house which was fitting up for him with truly eastern magnificence. Having once formed his determination, it was Sir Edmund's invariable rule to proceed to action; he therefore waited upon Miss Milman the following morn¬ ing, and after the first compliments he thus begun ;-—· " I am a man of very few words, you must have already remarked, Miss Mil- man. My sister was loud in your praise till
till her late whim seized her ; but, thank God, she has no power to controul my actions, nor do I sec with her eyes. I am going to begin housekeeping, and am so sensible of your qualifications for managing a family, I offer you the superintendence of mine, as î know I should be cheated and laughed at by the fellows and wenches J must maintain." By no means comprehending the real purport of this unceremonious speech, the fair lady felt very much mortified, while she stammered out— " I am exceedingly obliged to you, Sir Edmund, and very much flattered to find I stand so high in your esteem ; but you know the world." She paused. " What care I for the worid!" was the reply, " True,
" True, Sir Edmund ; but our sex can¬ not so easily se t it , t defiance—recollect, Miss Browning would be one of the first— ----" te I understand what you mean, and find you have misunderstood me, as I mean you to look clown upon Pen, if you are inclined to close with my proposals, and as my wife you w ill take the lead of her every where. Do í make myself clear, for I am a much better soldier than a lover : but vou know I mean well, and generally speak to the purpose; therefore you may depend upon my making a suitable settlement upon you if you will accept my hand." Need we add, that a very short time having been dedicated to blushes and hesitation, Sir Edmund learned his suit was heard and accepted with due grati¬ tude. An early day was therefore fixed for
for their nuptials, and they once more parted, each secretly rejoicing in their own superior talents. During the short interval that elapsed previous to his marriage, he received several letters from his wary sister, who was verv anxious to see him once more at Alton-House, though she maintained the same reserve respecting her late confidant. The Baronet followed her example, and at the expiration of a month he publicly announced his nuptials, and took possession of his new house, taking care to have his mamase insei ted in everv town and coun- try newspaper, particularly those which formed a part of MUs Browning's studies/ lt would be difficult to decide whether Mr. Thomas or the former lady were the most mortified. The gentleman rather consoled himself in the hopes that ther« would
would be no issue from this absurd match *, and as he was prevented from personally testifying his disapprobation of it to his brother, he contented himself with turn¬ ing this most foolish of all nabobs into ridicule among his friends. His kindness was, however, not lo&t upon the Baronet, ?? there were many people anxious to pay their court to him at the less rich Thomas's expence. Sir Edmund's rancour scarcely required these stimulations, as it had long since degenerated into the most inveterate hatred ; therefore, could he have devised any means to have ruined the offender's fortune, and totally blasted his character, no consideration of relationship would have prevented him from indulging his favourite propensity to revenge. While Miss Penelope s mortification and chagrin was, if possible, inci eased by learning
MIDNIGHT learning the marriage she had taken such pains to prevent through the niediuni of a newspaper, at first she refused to give credit to what she read, therefore wrote for an explanation to the bridegroom, who, in a very laconic answer, confirmed the unpleasant tidings, hinting that her unjust treatment of Miss M i iman had paved the way for w hat she appeared so fearful should take place ; however, Lady Browning, in consideration of their for¬ mer friendship, had authorised him to sav ah ? should be very happy to sec Miss Penelope in Portland-Place. This fresh affront, as the spinster deemed it, was virulently resented upon paper, as she dispatched several letteis to declare she never would be reconciled to the happy couple, whom she considered mon¬ sters of ingratitude. The Baronet never gave
gave himself the trouble to answer these reproachful scrawls, though the perusal of them afforeled him and his lady infinite amusement. Thus two months elapsed, at the expira¬ tion of which time Miss Browning read in the same paper, which had given her the first intimation of Sir Edmund's mar¬ riage, that his Majesty* had been graciously pleased to create him a peer, by the title of Baron Viimoie, £:c. &c. Her joy r was more than equal to her astonishment, though she reflected with infinite regret that she had declared, i u the vei y last letter slie had addressed to her brother, her elaborate epistle should prove the conclusion of their correspondence if he did not favour her with an immediate an¬ swer, and as her threats had proved of no avail, she hardly knew hov/ to address him without
without forfeiting her word, till she re¬ collected, that though she could not with any propriety have again wrote to him had he remained Sir Edmund Browning, it would be an absolute hi each of etiquette and decorum not to congratulate him upon his promotion. Indeed so anxious was she to be reconciled to the newly- created Lord, she almost sued for his forgiveness, declaring she had been too precipitate in her accusations, &c. &c. therefore only hoped Lord anel Lady Vilmore would favour her with a short visit at Alton, previous to her returning the compliment in Portland-Place. Lord Vihuore had anticipated every concession Penelope had been so eager to make, he therefoie pkimeel himself not a little upon his sagacity ; however, con¬ scious she had a very huge foitunc wholly at
at her own disposal, he condescended lo humour her fancy by spending a week at her seat, fiom whence, perfectly recon¬ ciled to both, Miss Browning returned with them to London, and, in concert with the Peer and her now beloved sister, !o*>t no ojìportunity of mortifying the less fortunate Thomas, whose pride and ex¬ travagance they all foresaw would prove his ruin. Soon after this amiable brother and sister had been thus reconciled, Lady Vilmore gave them hopes that a young Peer would put an effectual check to the ambitious hopes they made no doubt Thomas continued to entertain. Their joy, when made acquainted with this pleasing intelligence, knew no bounds ; Lord Vil¬ more appeared to tread on air, as his title was secured to his female as well as male issue.
issue, Thomas's chagrin could therefore only be compared to his brother's triumph, as he was frequently rallied upon his dis¬ appointment by those friends in whose company he had prognosticated such an> event was scarcely probable, though he acknowledged, that even in that case lie entertained very little hopes of coming in for much of his brother's property, except he should chance to die without a will. His friends were exactly of the same opinion ; nor did many of them scruple to assert Lord Vilmore's will had long been signed, as the connections both brothers had formed were of that stamp, who, as La Rochefoucault says, u Find something to rejoice at even in the misfortunes of their best friends," therefore never, per¬ haps, was there before an instance of two vol. ι. n * such
such very near relations being so very ill-disposed towards each other. To complete the Peer's triumph, bewas blessed with a son and heir before the enei of the twelvemonth, and a finer chiid, ??¬ ??? more likely to live, it was asserted, had never boon born. The happy father, mother, and aunt, therefore, scaicely ap¬ peared to have a wish ungratified, while Thomas experienced the very severe mor¬ tification of seeing his patron removed from the helm, as, though his dismissal by T no means included bis own, the place he held being for life, still he knew it woulel effectually prevent him from pro¬ viti ing for his family, which aheady con¬ sisted of two sons, and Mrs. Browning promised to mahe another addition to it ere long; therefore, large as were the emoluments
emoluments which he deri\cd fiom his office, they scaicely kept pace with his expendituie, paiticul.tily since he had endcavouied to vie with his brother in point of splendour; vet toha\e retienched even in the minutest aiticlc would, he knew, be arfoidin«· tiic Peer and Miss Penelope such infinite Satisfaction, he could not beai the idea of taking so wise a step, he theu'foie continued tosuppoit his usual st\ le, though e\ery succccifino· \ear increased his diftieuhics, and ìeudeied him less able to make any permanent provision for his chinchen.
D
CHAP.
????^???????????????^?
CHAP. IV. İ 5 IVE years after Lady Vilmore had presented her Lord with an heir to trans¬ mit his honours to posterity, she departed i)di life, leaving the Peer and Miss Br av ning to lament her loss. As for Th mas, her death afforded him a sort of momentary satisfaction, as he conceived he had at all events one enemy less, tho ;<rh he would have been infinitely more gutiiiicd had her sem preceded her to the grave. It
ît may be supposed, considering the terms the two families were upon, her demise was not announced in form to the younger branch ; but this wilful omission did not prevent Thomas from putting him¬ self and family in deep mourning upon the melancholy occasion ; this he considered as a debt due to the world, certain his con¬ descension would procure him no favour from the disconsolate widower, who, in fact, merely replied, when informed of the circumstance, Thomas would have given him a higher opinion of his prudence had lie saved his money ; and Miss Browning considered his thus proclaiming that rela¬ tionship they were so anxious to disavow as a sort of insult to her and Lord Vil¬ more, whose son was now become her tool. Indeeel neither pains nor expence were spared to render him an honour to d 3 the
the Peerage, for his obstinate overbearing father was, though lie would have scorned to acknowledge as much, but too sensible of his own deficiencies in point of educa¬ tion not to wish ?? son should enjoy every advantage his immense fortune enabled him to afford him; he was, therefore, at twelve years old, after having been previously qualified by a very learned private tutor, sent to Eaton, where, to make use of Miss Browning's own words, he took to his learning so wonderfully, neither she nor the Peer thought they could be too lavish of their presents to this future representative of the Brown¬ ings ; besides, they were convinced it was a very serious mortification to his uncle to see the young heir squander away im¬ mense sums both at school and at college, and to learn that he was considered as one
one of the first scholars the island had ever produced. It had once been Lord Vilmore's inten¬ tion to have sent him the errand tour, but neither he nor his aunt could bear the idea of losing sight of him for such a lenuth of time; besides, thev wished to celebrate his coming of age at Vi I more- Abbey (as his Lordship had new-christened" a fine old seat he had purchased soon after his return to England) with true old English hospitality. Nor did they wish him to be introduced into the beau monde before that period, which had induced them to spend his holidays and vacations either at Alton-House or the Abbey T , as they by no means wish. d to throw him into the way of his uncle, whom he had been absolutely fo ' idden to notice, should chance ever bring them together. d 4 His
His cousins had been brought up at Westminster-School, from whence tfiey had removed to Cambridge much about the time the Honourable Edmund Brown¬ ing had been sent to Oxford, their father particularly wishing to avoid giving the young Noble an opportunity of looking down upon them, a propensity he pre¬ sumed he inhei iteri from the Peer ; and, we must acknowledge, pride was Lord Vil- more"s heir's predominant failing, which, all things considered, was rather excus¬ able, as he had been so repeatedly told that he would one day be one of the richest nobles in the land, and had been also taught to believe that money endowed the possessor with every virtue ; he there¬ fore early considered himself as a sort of superior mortal, as he had never been at a loss for flatterers, whose encomiums had
had greatly increased his ruling passion, though it is but justice to add he had many amiable qualities to counterbalance his too great share of pride. He was, besides, deservedly classed among the fiist scholars, and in point of figure he had Ιοηί>· been cousideied as mi- rivalled, as he was far ab^ve the middle size, and so remai kably elegantly formed that he was cited for his personal appear¬ ance even from his childhood, it his countenance had an ν defect, it was lather too handsome for Ins sex^^rrTTn as he was a fair man, if he had not excelled all the youths of his age in point of agility, and giur» convincing pioofs that his courage w as of that nature which no danger can startle and no difficult} oppose, he might have been deemed, in point of feat ? es, rather ctfemmately beautiful; d o still
still be was so strikingly handsome that none but cynics bought to find defects either in Lis face or form. In point of character he possessed noble and gencious sentiments rathoi than fixed j ? flee ted prin¬ ciples of gooel naturo and friendship. In¬ dulged as he lu;d boon while at school and at ihe Univ ebit \% it cannot be Hippwscel that he was unninted wirh the fashionable ? iocs so pievaieut a mon«· V(/ulhs of large fortune at both places; but, if I ma\ be allowed the ex pi essi n, he dignified them instead of t L crii ticgiadirg him into any mean or auk cent action. As a scholar he had a g.eal degree of classical and a still greater of mode m knowledge, with ? disci liiuiuiting, and at the same time u de beato tuste. Such u as Edmund Browning w lien he left Oxford to etichi ate his one-aueL- tweiitieth
twentieth biith-day, which was kept in the urettest st\le at the Abbev ; i uleed, it wa> aíliruicd, moro gi*CNts w. rc rogaîed, and more prov İsbus w ei e consumed, than had ever been know n upon a similar oc¬ casion, not to mention the illuminations, balls, private theatricals, ke. which w eie exhibited duriim* the week allotted to this festivo piupose, and as the descriptions of this succession of /etes far ????????! the reality, Thomas heard of little eLc for near a month, though most of his ac¬ quaintance knew ¿bv subjects wcie less likely to amuse him, as neither him nor his children were invited ;o participate in the hilarity which pervaded every apart¬ ment at Vilmorc-Abbey ; and, in aelditioa to this mortif) ing circumstance, every íme who was piesent upon, the joyful occasion vied with each other in sounding the D G praises
praises of the hero of the fête, which repeated encomiums were wormwood to his despairing uncle, who fervently prayed some unforeseen event might hurl his brother from his present blissful state, as he understood it was already, in contem¬ plation to marry this favoured youth to some woman of very high rank, that his children might be able to boast of a long line of noble ancestors on one side at least. Indeed, to match this much admired youth so as to increase his consequence, had long been the design of his father and aunt, who had therefore planned a scheme they hoped would enable them to accom¬ plish this their only remaining wish, if we except the expectations they enter¬ tained of a numerous progeny gracing the match they had in view» By
By Miss Browning's advice Edmund was kept in absolute ignorance of their intention, who knew several instances of projected weddings having failed merely from the young people's having an idea that it was their parent's desire they should come together; she resolved, therefore, her nephew should merely be introduced to the lady they had in view during the fêtes at the Abbey, asserting they must then trast all to chance and circum¬ stances. Her will having long since become a sort of law to the proud Peer, he acceded to her wishes, and Eel m u n el was accord¬ ingly, without giving him any room to suppose he was expected to pay particular attention to the fortunate female they had selected for his bride, introduced to the daughter of a Scotch Emi, whas gude 5 bluid
¿ f t .'//was her only poi rinn, but she was too rit h in am est ι \ to lciu'et lie ? wat*t of foitunc a'l} obje t lion to LmíI \ r ilni'ue, whcíhad ì l"\ì in h ibits of iníimr^\ wh!i her father theEiilof'Du.n^ it)n, fbi s)ir,c ???!5, and had, clinii ζ ihc last twehe- Kionth, eníeicíl into the iwo i linciai agice- ments wiih him lespcetmg this niaich, conscious tlieic was a blot iu tfio family escutcheon would ef:eetualls pi echide his heii fi om lookin & so ???, or beimi: so difficult in his ? hv/ne ot ? wife as he could have ubhed; besides, all t i^gs considered, Lad\ Lconoia l\i k l)ougall was a woman many men might ha\e wished to have seemed foi a paitner for life: she was generally esteemed afh>t-iate beauty, and wa-> only one year Edmund s senior- Like most women of her iánk, she had bwcn biought out at sixteen; buthitheito her
her eleg'tnt per-on, though it had not remained unnori -vd, had not procured her a husb'ind, tiiouah few v.omen Lad made greater en'uvb to laic some mm of foitunc to ovcilook her Munt of ivmuy ; if nvy theiefore he sepposed u ith v. hat iiviility s!:e entcied into her tatlici s and Línd N'ihuoìc's plan, and tii.it she was hy no ???>? (íeíicitiit iu poibt of eudravouís to secute íhe he it of the young heir; nor vanhei success <? ail astonishing, as she r-Oisissvd e\e»\ rctju'bite for the under- tau'.i.g', and had to ilo u ith ?.?!?? a noxiec in point of g.dian.tn, who, not auaie of his tatlici'!» lutcntious, felt himself higldy fbtteied hy tht mai ked attentions of such a beile, who was icpeaudly thiown iu his wa\, till his giatüied vanity led him to suppose himself \cry much in lo\ewith the ckgiat îScoteh woman, and induced him to
to request Lord Vilmore would permit him to bestow bis hand upon the very woman he had so carefully selected lor his daughter-in-law; nevertheless he made no small merit of comply ing with his son's wishes, making every objection to the alliance he though it possible might here¬ after strike Edmund, whom he finally consented to oblige ; and as Lord Dum¬ barton was equally kind, in a very shoit time matters weie brought to a conclusion, and the wedding-day was fixed. Ο ι- Never had cither Lord Vilmore or his sister exulted so much in the success of any of their plans, as in having brought about this marriage, which they considered as a piece of policy which must immortalize their name, resolving to laugh over their dexterity with the young couple as soon as the knot was tied, and hoping their well- arranged
arranged plan would procure them their thanks and applause. While they were thus mutally congra¬ tulating each other, Lord Dumbarton, who held a post under government in the same office where Thomas Browning's talents were exerted for the good of the nation, wished, having leeeived a sort of application from his colleague tending to that point, to bring about a reconciliation between the two brothers, as he well knew how to make allowances for the youngest, conscious he was, like himself, obliged to have recourse to many shifts to support the appearance his situation in life re- quireel ; besides, were he to continue at Variance with Lord Vilmore, their ne¬ cessary intercourse would be rendei ed very awkward ; still he was well aware of the difficulty of the undertaking, knowing he had
had,Miss Prowning's prejudices to oppose lus kind intentions, in addition to the Peer's; besides, they would dei ¡ve so little advantage from extending the olive brauch, he al.« ost de^pdiied of" succeed¬ ing. Unwilling, uevcjthiless, to give up the point without making one attempt, he sei/id what he considered ?? a x^ry favo u ra' le ορροί tuniry, when alone with Lord Vilmore and Miss Browning, making arrangements for the intended marriage, to hi.it how desirable a general family reconciiiition would be upon so jojful an occasion, following up this opening with such hints i espeeting the world, &c. that Lord Vilmore scarcely knew how to refuse his request ; and the reflection that he should be secretly mortifying, at the very time he should be to all appjaruiice gratify ing his brother, made him
him decide to st nd him an invitation to the approaching wc deling, Miss Penelope making no veiy sei ious objections, though she absolutely set h-.r face against his wife's being invited ; nor did Loid Dum¬ barton attempt to overrule what he on the contrary acknowledged to be very well founded scruples. Thomas who had rather expected such would prove the fruits of his noble friend's mediation, was not so much surprised as might have been expected when he and his children received cards requesting their presence in Portland-Place upon the honourable Edmund Browning's wedding- day. Mrs. Browning greatly resented her ex¬ clusion from the party, and, had she been mistress, neither her husband nor children would have accepted the invitation ; but a$
as Thomas knew he might be a gainer, and was convinced that he could not be a loser, by appearing at the fête, he deteimined to go y as Loid Dumbarton, whose aehice he had asked, insured him a very cordial reception, and hoped eveiy past difference would be consigned to oblivion from that clay, which he looked forward to with nearly as much delight as Lord Vilmore and his sister, who had been incessantly occupied in making pre¬ parations for tliis great event from the time they had found their plan likely to succeed.
CHAP.
»■ ■ ■ " ' ,,. ,-- 1 -
CHAP. V. Τ last the auspicious day arrived on which our history propeily commences. A special licence was in readiness, as the marriage ceiemony was to be pci formed in the evening in Poitland-PIace, and early the next morning the bride and bridegroom, and their respective families, weie to set out foi Vihnore-Abbey, where it was intended they should spend a fort¬ night previous to their being presented at court, V
A
court, &c. Sec. and all the friends or acquaintance of either party were invited to dine at Vilmore- House pievious to the happy knots being tied. Edmund thought himself one of the happiest of mortals, as he felt a sentiment he fancied bordered on adoration for his beautiful bride elect, and be knew his mai liage would render him totally in¬ dependent of a very capricious, though, in some respects, an indulgent father; but Lord Vilmore was not of a character or disposti ion to inspire a son so much his supeiior in every respect with great deference; indeed, Edmund must have been wilfully blind not to have seen and felt his father's deficiencies, and there were moments when be would willingly have exchanged the immense fortune he had in expectation for a more respectable parent
parent in mere easy circumstances; how¬ ever, the respectable allir.nce he was upon the point of forming would, he trusted, increase his own consequence, and, at all events, he ought not to be blamed for his father's want of a proper spirit to support his purchased honours, which was but too visible in his every word and action. Mr. 'i bomas Lrow r nin;»·, his second son anel daughter (?? eldest was making what he denominated the granei tour, that is, he was qualifying himself ior the diplo¬ matic hue at Geneva) were among the first guests who made their appearance at Vihnoie-fJouse. The Tari of Dumbarton gave him the meeting in the hall, and led him into the grand saloon, where the reconciliation took place by a shake of the hand, and " Thomas, I am glad ro see you— my son the honourable Edmund Browning;
Browning; his intended bride, Lady Leonora M'Dougall." Thomas made a very appropriate speech upon the occasion, and then introduced his son and daughter, first to their uncle and aunt, then to the young couple, whose friendship they professed them¬ selves sedulous to cultivate. There was, however, more politeness than cordiality in the various compliments passed between this family part}-, who were very happy when more company broke in upon their laboured speeches. * At a fashionable hour the party sat down to one of the most magnificent repasts which could be devised by thobe employed upon the occasion, who were all among the first in their various lines^ The bride, rnost elegantly attired, at¬ tracted general admiration ; nor did. the bridegroom
britiegrooni receive less compliments per¬ haps of the two ; he was the most striking fi »'t ι re. ? To praise every thing upon such oeca* sions is but pa\ itig the expected price of the feast ; and never were therr a party less deficient in this species of coin, which "Charles Surface so aptly de/non.inates French plate. The greatest hilarity, in short, appeared to prevail ; even Mr. Thomas Browning felt himself enlivened by the excellent cheer, and the superior quality of the wines. The ladies having retired, some of t lie comprili v inquired when the ceremony was to be performed, and were told, be* 'tween tea and supper ; and shortly after. Lord Vilmore having left the room, every gentleman charged his glass to drink the founder of the feast, concluding with a vol. r. j; wish
wish that he might hail the birth of a grandson on that day nine months, and had just finished their three cheers when. Lis Lordship returned, and was informed of what they had been doing by Lord Dumbarton. The master of the house, resolving not to be out-clone in courtesy, instantly called for a half-pint tumbler to drink his thanks ; filling it to the brim lie tossed it ofT, declaring His felicity would be complete if their wishes proved prophetic; then turning to his brother, rather sarcastically inquired whether he would not be equally rejoiced ; but before Thomas could make any reply, the glass fell from his Lordship's hand upon the table, while he exclaimed, " God bless ine Ρ* falling back İn his chair as bespoke. , , For a few moments no one took any notice of his exclamation or action, every one
one supp05Ìng he had purposely broke the glass, and that so large a close at once had rendered him rather giddv ; but when they perceived the colour forsaking his cheeks, and that his arms appeared to hang lifeless on either side of the chair, they began to be alarmed, ami it was soon discovered he had fallen into a fit, if nothing worse was to be dreaded. Various remedies were instantly applied, every one present prescribing, as is generally the case ; but as he diel not revive so soon as they hoped, the very first medical men .were sent for to second their endeavours. During the interval he appeared to grow rather worse than better, therefore, before the physicians arrived, the greatest appre¬ hensions began to be entertained for his life ; nor did those gentlemen, when they had felt his pulse, and made all the usual e 2 enquiries,
enquiries, give any great hopes of lriá recovery, though they did not absolutely pronounce him beyond the art of medi¬ cine; indeed centiemen of the faculty generally like to assume some merit to themselves in fbe^e cases ; fur instance, if a patient, after they have shook their head, ami made use of a few ambiguous expres¬ sions, dies, it is no nunc than they fore¬ saw and prognosticated ; if, on the con¬ trary, he or she recovers, it must, after what they have said, be attributed to their superior skill. Be that as it may, so unexpected an event put a total stop to the gaiety of the company ; aud as it could not be supposed the wedding would be celebrated under , such circumstances, those of the quests who were upon the least familiar footing with the two families proposed taking their
their leave as soon as the physicians report that their patient was in imminent danger was made known. Meanwhile the Peer recovered his senses ; but as his reason returned, the spasms in his stomach be¬ came more acute, and from the coun¬ tenance of those who surrounded his bed he began to apprehend his last moments were approaching. Edmund, notwithstanding he had fre¬ quently blushed for his parent's conduct, was, nevertheless, very much affected at the thoughts of his approaching dissolu¬ tion, and sincerely wished any means could be devised to mitigate suficrinsrs he could only silently deplore, though he would readily have relinquished all his late happy prospects to have seen him perfectly restored ; but his apparent j: 3 anxietv
conscience in a manner against his in* cli nation. So strange a declaiation astonished e\ciy one present, though every one but tho. e he had so partieuiaily excepted imme¬ diately left the room, notwithstanding ??? Browning declatcd her brother was delirious, anel ought not to be attended to, desiring, in her turn, Mr. Thomas Browning anel the Eail would also leave the sick room, where her, or at most lier nephew's presence, weic all that was required ; but the sick man understanding what she said, insisted in so peremptory a manner upon his brother and Lord Dum¬ barton's remaining iu compliance with his ι cerne st, that he gave Miss Browning no further pretence to declare his intellects w eie deranged, she therefore only requested he would endeavour to compose himself,, which
which would be far more likely to ac¬ celerate his recovery, than entering upon his proposed narrative*, which, she knew, had better be postponed till morning. " I understand you, Pen," he replied; f ' but your hints wont do ! I fancy my¬ self commanded to unburthen mv con- science, and to make all the reparation in my power before I quit this vale of misery; for I find we can never fly from the goacb of a bad conscience—it makes cowards of us all, and mine has given me a foretaste of what my future sufferings are likely to be !" As his Lordship was evidently very much agitated, and frequently, though with increasing wilelness in his looks, gazed upon Edmund, who stood neai*"«t him, the young man took his hand, whk h ivas laying without the bed—*' My t» ..r e 5 íaíiur
father try to compose yourself—allow u* to------" " Hold!" he cried, while the fierce¬ ness of bis countenance awed every one present into astonishment ; fi address me no more by that title î -—X am not your father, nor do I know who your parents really are !" Miss Browning gave a violent scream, Hinging herself at the same time upon the foot of the bed, while she exclaimed— ít Oh poor dear soul, 'lis as I reared—· he is quite delirious!' 1 The astonishment of every one present beggared all description ; but the agonized Pc^r proceeded, in answer to his sister— " You know 1 have only declared the truth, Pen, therefore I hope the sincerity of my contession will induce the Loid to have mercy upon me, and to allow me to depart
depart in peace ! 'Tis your turn to triumph over me now, Thomas, miserable sinne- that I am ; but surely my sincere repent¬ ance will be accepted at the Throne of Mercy ! Thomas, who ahcady saw himself a peer in imagination, and heir to a fortune he knew to be immense, with difficulty ι (strained the joy which, unawares to him¬ self, sparkled in his eyes, and illumined etcry feature, and feaiful of betraying his transports he made no reply, while the neaily frantic Penelope was stamping about the room, and praying to God to restore her brother to his right senses, ?11 finding no one credited her assertions respecting the derangement of his in¬ tellects, she flew out of the apartment, unable to listen to his ramblings. e 6 The
The petrified Edmund, scarcely knowing what he did, sunk into a chair near the bed, gazing silently and in turns upon the dying Vilmore, the wondering Lord Dumbarton, and his supposed uncle, whose triumph was indeed but too legible in every feature as he drew near his bro¬ ther, to w hom at kist he spoke. 4i Surely, my Lord, I misunderstood the purport of jour kist speech ; you cer¬ tainly were not aware of the strength of your expression ; it can't be possible that the Honourable Edmund Browning, whom }ou so exultingly introduced to mc this very day, should not be your son !" i( 'Tis not only possible, Thomas, but 'tis unfortunately true; therefoie you will soon be Lotil Vilmore!" " God foibid, my Lord ! I trust you will vet recover, and live man v v ca rs to ij ? V tf enjoy
enjoy both your title and fortune; but pi ay ------" " Thomas, you lie 1" interrupted the dying, and as he styled himself, penitent, Avitb a sou of ghastly grin ; * k I can perceive yon already revel in imagination. upon my spoils! God wills yon should inherit my title, but don't fancy I shall leave the w o rid } our dupe—my conscience has forced me to disclose the secret of Edmund's biith ?' " And is il possible, my Lord," in¬ terrupted the angry Caledonian, " that you meant to have deceived both my daughter and me iu so shameful a man¬ ner ? Till this moment I have been tempted to believe Miss Brownings asser¬ tions that you were delirious ; but I am afiaicl \ou aie really and truly conscience- stricken l* " I hope
{( I hope your Loidsbip will have none of the same qualms when i u a similar situation," was the reply, ít tliough, Mieve me, the deceit you accuse me of having meditated against vou anel vour daughter does not give mc a moment's compunction; you wished to dispose of the giil to your own advantage 1 , and I offeied you a fair price for your commodity, and I am now ready to settle the fortune I piomised you upon my supposed son, whom I stand bound to make some provision for, after having brought him up with such ex¬ pectations," Edmund, whose inherent pi ide was all roused by tliis insinuation, stai ted fiom his seat, saying— t£ I wish to lie under no farther obligations to your Loidsbip» bounty; all I now ìequirc of you is to inforni me how I fell into y oui hands, and why
why you chose to deceive mc and the world into a belief that 1 was ? our son; Ai j surely you must know to whom 1 owe my birth í ' " No, faith, my brave fellow ! For your sake I sincerely wish my conscience would have suffered me to have let you have icmained in your error; for I have ever been prouder of my son than you had any reason to be of your father. There was a time when, I suppose, I might have discovered who you belonged to y but I purposely avoided taking any method likely to lead to the gratification of my curiosity; however, you shall never know the want of a friend. My sister-----" ? most violent spasm prevented the invalid fiom proceeding; but during a short in¬ terval of ease which succeeded, Mr. Thomas Browning (whose impatience to 6 know
know more made îi im dread bis brother's being snatched away before he had per¬ fectly elucidated this mystery) requcsteel he would unburthen bis mind, which would afford both him and the young man he must still consider as his nephew a melan¬ choly satisfaction ; besides, it might be of material service to himself, as he would then be able to compose himself. — ic Yes, for ever, Thomas ; I was aware of your impatience, and I can see that this injured youth feels more pity for my sufferings than you do; however, G oil's will be done, I repeat, while I once more solemnly declare, the supposed Edmund Browning is not my sem. Will that satisfy you? Penelope knows I have advanced nothing but the truth, though she could not stay to hear me confess our joint errors, or, perhaps, crimes 1" " All
14 All tliis may be, my Lord," rejoined Lord Dumbarton ; ζ ' but it İs necessary cither \ou or Miss Biowning should be more explicit ; though, as for myself, I can have nothing fuithu to do in the business, theiefore 1 wish, you all a good night" i4 Hold ' my Lord," cried the sick man, ' t witnesses may be ?·» anting, anel as ï have much to say, and as you are tiie joint acquaintance of both Thomas and myself, (for friends we neither of us ever had, or ever will have—wc were not deserving of such blessings) and sought to bring about a reconciliation, which I believe has acce¬ lerated my death., for ï have often wished the vengcv.ncc of the Almighty might overtake me ifi ever shook hands with the brother I hated from a child ; but 'tis no natter, all will soon be o\er with me!"— A more
A more violent attack than any of the preceding onc> made them all three fear they should never lear« the elucidation of liis st ran ire conti net f rem the barely half- penitent Lord Vilmore. The physician was obligeel to be summoned, who gave him something which rather alleviated his torments, and enabled him to request he would once more leave the room, but not the house, till hie fate was decided. The Doctor obeyed, and making an almost incredible effort, as the coki drops now" rapidly chased each other down \\\? palliti nice, he exclaimed— u Let me not lose the present opportunity !■— I wish Pene¬ lope had remained, as she; could have confirmed every thing 1 shall advance; but .she dare not de η v the truth of m v assertions; so it inat ten not, Edmund, or rather, as you called yourself when y ou first fell
fell into my hands, Octavius; I piry you from the bottom of m v soul, because I can see, anel am well aware of what I have made vou s« 'Ter ! Would to God I could tell you who your parents were; nothing, believe mc, would a fiord me greater satisfaction ; but the consolation is denied me, as 1 wished not to make the discovery, thinking my conscience would be less diétni bed by remaining hi ignorance of your origin, as I never intended to have thus deprived you of my name and inheritance ; but an irresistible impube compelled me to make the confession, which has stripped you of more than I can ever restore to you. Would I lud been prevented from executing my wicked design, how much better iL would Ime been for us both !—but I am leming tin", and fear I shall Inrdlv be snared to tell m r 4 *·
my story. The rooted antinathv I bore you, Thomas, led me into the commission of tiic cime which, upon this youth's account, I nio^t sincerely deplore, for I perceive Low much you triumph in seeing me thus humbled; but mark m ν words;. you have still a severe disappointment in store, though, could I hope to be allowed time, 1 would make gieat alterations in a will I have long had by me ; however* I trust, my clear Edmund, (for upon my honour vou are dearer to mc than ever) that my heir will provide for you iu the most ample manner; but tell'me*, can you, dare I h": ? vou will forsrive mc ? Remember, your pardon will render my last moments comparatively happy !" {i Thon God foibid I should withhold it, mv Loid— from the bottom of m v soul I fo'give vou !'* « Thank
<t Thank yon, thank you, my noble bov ; you possess none c f the failings of the Brownings! But be f ore í outer upon mv story procure me pen and ink, and <>i\e mo mv pocket-book."—Mr. Thomas Browning, eager to display his Zealand disiutercstedncNS; instantly complied with bis wishes, and even supported him while he filled up a chock, w hh h he presented to Kd munti, or, as we snail now call him, Octavius, saving·— tt This will nut vou in possession of what money 1 have Ivimr at my b.'mkei's, which will support you till, according to the tenor of my will, some permanent pmvision is made fol¬ yón." í( Your Lonlöhip must excuse ??," was the jeply. tt Then you have not freely forgiven » ? trie, Octavias! Remember, I shall consider your
your rejection of my offer as a wish to withhold the pardon 1 lune extoited from you ! Don't render me more miserable than I am at piesent! Ί he sum is but two thousand pounds; imt enough to place you above want ; therefore take it, except you w Uh to see me expire in tortures l' —With evident reluctance Octavius acceded to hia proposal, and received the ds.rn? Peer's trratefu I thanks, who requested he would further consider every thing in the house he had been taught to call his own ? s more so than ever, " for I here, in presence of my brother and Lord Dumbarton, confirm '"very gift of jewels, trinkets, horses, carriages, &c. I ever made you ; they are your right, for I have robbed you of more than I can ever restore you ; but may the Almighty graciously listen to my sincere prayer,
prayer, that you may be able to discover your parents, and that they may be in a sufficient stale of afiluence to make}on rejoice at my having disclaimed you for my son. I will, therefore, now give you every indication likely to lead to the desired end ; for it is solelv for vour satis- faction that I mean to enter into those details these gentlemen arc so anxious to ? hear; indeed 1 detained Lu-d Dumbarton that you might have a responsible witness, bhould you be obliged to go to law to prove your birth-right------but to give you my reasons for adopting and bringing you up as my heir.—On the 10th of June, Ì7 —j I lost my own son in the following manner: he was between two and three years of age, and had from his birth been ? remarkably passionate child, taking but too much after me ; and he was so intolerably
intolerably spoiled by his mother, aunt, ami myself, that we greatly increased hi*» natural bad temper; indeed he frequently wont into fits upon the slightest con* tiadietion, and many times alai med us for h ? 1 ife. Th e sc i v an ts w ei e l h crefoi e compelled to study aml gi atiry every whim and fancy v. hich e'amo aeiovi him; but on the dav í alludo to, vre weie going to leave tow n; oui hav elling suite had been sent foiward e.oly in the morning, anel our avant com ior had jtbt iode fiom the door; one footman only theiefore remained behind, whom I had ^ent to my banker's, while we were w aiuug for the carriage, in which Lady Vibnoie, my sister, the nurse» child, and my=elf, intended to travel. The footman had not been gone above ten minutes ^boii my sister came running into the dining-room with my son
soniti her arms, who was in one of his accustomed fi ts* owing to his nurse having done something ta displease him. l· had several times before threatened to kick this woman out of doors, attributing these visitations of the Almighty solely to her imprudence ; and having never seen him so dreadfully convulsed before, I flew to her, hardly knowing what I said or did, and, no doubt, perfectly unintelligible, my rage was so great, though I swore she should leave the house that moment, making an erTort to kick her out of the door. Conscious I was perfectly capable of rendering her a cripple for life, she flew from me with such speed I missed my aim, and having seen her -take to her heels I shut the door, giving the old woman, who always remained to take care of the house, strict charge not to admit vol, i % f her
r returned into* the dining-room, where I found my;wife and sister in tears, vainly jCndeayouring to recover the infant victim -of his ungovernable temper, who was a breathless corpse befoie any of us had recovered sufficient presence of .mind to •send for medical assistance, though it would probably have proved of no more avail than it has in my case; and we rejoiced afterwards we had been in a manner bereaved of our senses by this awful occurrence, which î ought to have considered as a warning ?? repent, and sin no more; .but my heart was hardened, and my thoughts ran too much upon the good things of this world to think of another. I was the first to recover from the shock this melancholy event of course gave us, and could not forbear bitterly «lamenting
lamenting the chance there now was of your inheriting my title. The bare idea rendered me almost frantic, and in the bitterness of my soul I cursed the, perhaps, innocent nurse, upon whom I vowed the direst revenge, declaring the certainty you, Thomas, Would now en¬ tertain of being one day a peer, gave me more concern than the death of the boy, fond as I had ever been of him. < But can't the misfortune" you so much and so justly dread,' said my sister, * be pre¬ vented ?' The question startled me ; but presuming she 4 had some plan in view, I eagerly exclaimed, only point out the means, riiy dear Pen, and I shall ' be for ever bound to pray for* you> Depend upon my concurrence in any scheme likely to answer the wished-for purpose. c Why, Ve' arcuali' alone,' she coiitinued, ' and if ^ » ' ·· Eg we
we can but have the dear infant privately interred, surely we might be able, by taking a little trouble, to procure one about his own age to replace him ; such things have been frequently done; and if we keep our own council I see no reason why we should apprehend detection.' The scheme did not appear so practi¬ cable to me, as I foresaw many difficulties likely to arise, admitting we succeeded in concealing the child's death ; but Lady Vilmore, who, I must say, had ever shewn herself ready to comply even with my most unreasonable wishes, foreseeing, perhaps, the loss of her son would increase the natural asperity of my temper, seconded Penelope's proposal, promising, though she acknowledged she should never love another child so well as she had done her own, to do her duty by any one I might adopt,
adopt, observing her ready pai ticipation in the plan was a sure guarantee fur her secrecy; and Penelope pointed out so clearly how every thing could be managed, I began to think her an absolute female Machiavel. By her advice, to which I ic* solved to conform, I met the footman in the hall, and dispatched him of another errand, desiring him to leave word at the livery-stable, from whence I had my post- horses, that I should not leave Loudon so soon as I had intended, appointing two o'clock instead of twelve for our departure. Having rejoined my sister, who had sworn to provide for every exigency, and to take the consecjuence of every thing upon herself if I would but agree to her plan, she observed there was no need to put any one into the ¿ecre t except the old. woman, who was to be left in charge of f 3 the
the house, and who lived upon my bounty, and therefore dare not but be subservient to my will. It was soon settled that Lady Vilmore and myself should set off, according to our original intention, for the Abbey, where we were to tell the reason we bad parted with the nurse, and that in consequence of the alarming and increasing Üts to which our son was become subject, wc had sent him into the north with his aunt, who, according to our arrangement, intended to make the best of her way into Nottinghamshire, w hither I was to send her servants, and where she intended to give out that she had placed the child under the care of an experienced nurse, who had unelertaken, provided he w a* left entirely under her care, to eure him of the bursts of passion which brought on these convulsions. This story, as she neither
neither 4ptendcd to, mention· -tbc nurse» name noi* her place qf ; bode, f»hc con¬ ceived, as welï as otuscdvc^ would pass- current, and I was meanwhile to use my utmost endeavours to procure a child to represent the one I had just lost, who, in consequence of my sister's story, might . be placed out at nurse till we thought it safe and prudent to take him home. I can't say I relished the idea of putting myself so much in Penelope's power ; but the increasing animosity I continued to harbour against you, Thomas, induced me to accede to her wishes, if the old woman would undertake to have the child buried as a relation of her's ; who had died a day or two after we left London, and would engage never to reveal the circum¬ stance under any pretence. Such poor wretches are ever ready to assist their f 4 superiors
superiors either in iniquitous or any other plans ; she, therefore, made no objections, well convinced it would be to her interest to comply with our wishes. The boy was in consequence buried at our own parish church, under his own name; and I know it was whispered at the time that the old woman was a distant relation of the family, as she gave out she came from Somersetshire as well as ourselves, and by no means denied the surmise, which, she conceived, increased her respectability. As to what cither my own or my sister's sei vants thought of our arrangements I can't pretend to say, though none of my people appeared at all surprised w hen they learnt how 1 had treated the nurse, who soon sent for her clothes and what money was due to her; but I really believe no suspicions of the truth were ever entertained^
entertained, as I am conscious neither Penelope nor myself were sufficiently beloved by our respective households to have induced any one individual of either to have kept their thoughts to themselves, had they entertained the slightest idea of the deceit we had been practising. Suffice it to say, we both reached our respective seats in safety, and after spendinga week at the Abbey to propagate the fiction we had agreed upon, I returned alone and ?? attended, except by my valet, to London, to commence my researches for a child to represent the deceased Γ dm und. If I met with one I though likely to answer the purpose, I was to decoy him away, if possible, unknown to bis parents, or who¬ ever might have the care of him, and to set of with him immediately to Newark, where my sister promised to give me the* f 5 încetini*
meeting, to convey the child to a farmer a wife in that neighbourhoexl, who would take every possible care of hini, and where he might remain till we thought he had ont-giown our servants' remembrance of him, except wc chose to part with all those who had lived with us when Edmund died, for greater security, which might he done by degrees, and so as not to excite any wonder or suspicion. From the moment Pen had hinted the possibility of pro¬ curing a representative for my son, α tho tight had come across me. w hich I did not nevertheless communicate to either hor or my wife, but left the Abbey as before mentioned, giving my fellow to understand I was going to town upon business of a piivate nature, hinting theie was a favourite ladv in the case, theiefore desired Imn to be as little scon as possible, 3 as
as I had promised to prescrv e the strictest incognito ; and in consequence of this in¬ timation 1 drove to a coffee house in Bond- street, where I was not known, and from whence I could go out and in without being notieed, and, should I chance to be absent one or even two nights, I desired my man not to be surprised, knowing if I succeeded in the plan í had in view it would take me some time togo and return from Newark ; and I had a child in view whose ill-fortune had accidentally thrown him in my way by mere accident, during 1 a short ramble my wife, sister, and myself had taken with our son only a few days before his death. The ladies took him an airing every day, and sometimes I ac¬ companied them on purpose to make them alight, that he might take a run in any- pleasant fields which presented themselves, f ? and
and on the day I allude to we stumbled upon a row of very pretty little houses, rather out of the high road, near Bays- water, and while w r e were expressing our approbation of one nearer than any of the rest, a sweet little boy ran down a small gravel walk in the front (which was paled off from the foot-path leading to them all) and put bis hand through the rails to shake hands with Edmund, whom Lady Vilmore was leading, and having done that, made a motion to kiss him, equally through the rails. The child's behaviour was so engaging we all felt a sort of irresistible impulse of affection for him, and when we pai ted from him my sister declared she had never seen two children so much alike, to which she attributed the little stranger's predilection iu favour of Edmund* They were certainly exactly ot
of a height, and their hair was nearly of the same colour, as well as their eyes; ??? I had honesty enough at the time to declare the little stranger was much the handsomest of the two. This neither my, wife nor sister would by any means allow. Be that asit may, this was the child I hack in view from the moment I enteied inta Penelope's plans, and for whom I laid in wait for nine daj s before I was able even to get sight of him, when one remarkable fine morning, while passing as usual, I saw him plucking some jessamine flowers which cove ι eel the front of the neat man¬ sion he inhabited. The gate was fastened to prevent his getting out of the little walk ; but as 1 saw no one at the w in- dows, with a palpitating heat t I raised the latch, and made the child a motion to bring me some of his flowers ; he instantly obeyed
obeyed my signal, appealing delighted he had it in his power to oblige me, when, catching hold of his hand, I led him very quietly to the end of the row, and then, convinced that the hedges concealed me from the lower windows, and seeing no one at those·above, I caught up my prize, and made the best of my way with him into the great London road, which I reached without having met any one, when, being provided with a key, I let myself into Kensington-Gardens by a pri¬ vate door, nearly opposite the lane I had come out off; and as no one bad followed me, I now conceived myself perfectly secure, and so it proved. Avoiding the company as much as possible, I soon reached the great gates leading into tbc town of Kensington, where, calling the fust coach, I stepped in with the child, still
still in my arms, whom I had amused with various little stories sufficiently en¬ tertaining to keep him in perfect good- humour. Indeeel he was so remarkably sweet tempered I had very little elifnculty in rendering him perfectly amenable to- my wishes. Need J add, this child, whom I thus wantonly stole to gratify my pique against you, Thomas, wa<* no oilier than yourself, my dear Octavius; for that was the name you gave 3'ourself, till I per¬ suaded you to lisp out that of Edmund, by giving you some sweetmeats. I had pre¬ viously provided myself with, every time. you repeated after me— t Edmund Brown¬ ing.'— I ordered the coach into Totten¬ ham-Court-Boad, where I alighted, and walked for some way tül I came to a stable-yaid, where I gave orders for a post-chaise, in which I set out for Barnet, not
not conceiving I run any great risk of being followed, considering the precaution I had taken. It was dark by the time we reached Biggleswade, where I slept, and from whence, early next morning, I sent an express to my sister, informing her how well I had succeeded in my enter- prize, and appointing her to meet me at Newark the following morning. She. readily complied with my wishes, being overjoy r ed to think I had procured sa amiable, and, according to appearances,^ so well-born a child, to replace the one I had lost, vowing the resemblance between' them was so striking we might take this one home at the end of six months with¬ out running the smallest danger of having the exchange noticed. I was, however,· resolved to run no unnecessary risk, but desired her topiace him for a twelvemonth certain
certain where she had at first proposed, requesting she would pay a most liberal piice, and order a servant to he retained solely to attend upon him ; in short, to take exactly the same piecautions respect¬ ing his welfare she would have clone had he been the person he represented, giving the farmer's wife the same reasons for placing him under her care w e had aheady detailed to our respective servants. She desired me to give myself no concern, as she had already arranged every thing in her own mind, anel should immediately place the dear boy, as she henceforth styled him, with a clergyman's w idow, who would be glad of such an addition to her income, and who, she conceived, would be a far more proper person, than the one she had at first thought of, to superintend liis sports, kc* and she liad already made every
every arrangement for bis reception, hav¬ ing had a child in view -might have an¬ swered our purpose, if I had not been fortunate enough to secure the one I hud brought down. She had my deceased son's clothes with her, in some of which she immediately dressed you, Octavius, and soon after we separated, she taking you with her, having won your heart bv her liberal presents of toys and sweet things ; indeed from the moment she received }ou from my hands, I believe she loved you even more than she had ever done her nephew. But befoie we parted, her re¬ marks upon your dress having rather led me to suppose you might be advertised, I made her swear not to look into a news¬ paper for six months, declaring I meant to practise the same forbearance, that we might never know to w hom you belonged, least
least the conviction of having robbed some? noble family of the child of their arfection should increase our compunction; and we also promised to remain at our respective seats for that time, though she was fre¬ quently during the interval to visit her nephew, whose place of abode, after a time, need not be concealed from her servants, some of whom had, upon the present occasion, left home with her ; but as she had only left Alton under the pre¬ tence of visiting a neighbouring lady, she had sent them back from her friend's, whom she had soon quitted to join me. Suffice it to say, we managed matters so dexterously no suspicions were ever enter¬ tained of the identity of the child ; and I believe, like myself, Penelope scrupulously adhered to her promise never to look iute? α newspaper, invariably burning every one she
she received, to prevent her servants from noticing any advertisement likely to ex¬ cite their curiosity. We are, therefore, both of us ignorant who you really are, my dear fellow, as I was at the moment I so cruelly decoyed you from those who had you under their care; for I fancy you were only at nurse at Bayswater, as your dress was so much superior to the appear¬ ance of the house I took you from, and you seemed unaccustomed to the words papa and mama, readily calling me so ; hut you were too imperfect a spokesman to make me understand who you resided with, your own name of Octavius and nurse being the only two intelligible words you then spoke, and of your family name you had no idea. But the papers I forbore——" Ilia
His Lordship was prevented from pro¬ ceeding by such excruciating toi ments, that he never again spoke to be understood,, though he lived till eight o'clock iu the morning, at which hour the preceding evening he had been first seized, when he expired in the greatest agonies, and, to all appearance, a very sincere penitent, repeatedly grasping the injured Octavius's hand, who was the only person he would euffer to touch him, and inarticulately murmuring out— it Forgive ! oh forgive !" ■—even with his lart breath, which he resigned in the arms of him whom he had precipitated from the height of bliss into a state bovdering on despair.
CHAP.
CHAP. VI. JL HE guests, who had so lately filled the elegantly decorated suite of apartments at Vilmore-Houses had all departed as soon %s their curiosity had been gratified by learning* the very strange reverse which had taken place in the prospects of the young man, whose nuptials they had come prepared to see celebrated with a style of magnificence suited to the ostentation of his supposed lather. As they received their
their intelligence from the pei son they all supposed would succed the Nabob Peer in his title and estates, who had, with Loni Dumbarton, left the dying mans room for a few minutes when they found he was unable to afluid their insatiate curiosity any farther gratification, they most of them wisely endeavoured to pay their court to the rising sun, at the same time that they congratulated Lady Leonora upon her providential escape from so ple¬ beian an alliance. • * . The veteran belle, as she might lie termed, played her part to admiration^ attributing to duty every action shecoiihf, not many hours before, have placed to tlie score of love, though she- hati nevet been actuated by either sentiment, but sokly by a wish to share the immense fortune she had been given' to understand vvchtícl devolve
devolve to the young man, whose affec* tions she had sedulously endeavoured to gain, without feeling the slightest regard for his superior fine person, &c. which she would readily have exchanged for a supeiior title, as she did not conceive her own gratification or interest would be at all promoted by marrying a man so generally renowned for his personal beauty, and only wished, while her father was preparing her for the downfal of all her late expectations, that the eldest of %lï. Thomas Browning's sons had been present, because» armed at all points as she was for conquest, she thought there might have been a possibility of his offer¬ ing to give her another chance of becom¬ ing Lady Vilmore. Shocked, however, as she affected to appear, declaring she felt very much ior the
the vouim* man she should so soon have considered it her duty to esteem, she readily acceded to Mr. Browning's pro¬ posal of taking a bed at Vilmore-House, where her abigail had been since morn¬ ing; she, theiefore, soon retired with Miss Bi owning, whose brother was sent home to communicate the wonderful alteration which had taken place iu his fathers prospect 4 » to liis mother, while Mr. Brown· 1??' and the ???1 returned into the dvinir man's apaiîmnc, where Miss Penelope never emce made her appearance, and where they rem f ned till the fiat was gone forth which iclcascd the suffering sinner fiom torments, the feeling Octavius hoped won hi, in some measure, expiate his crimes, and who, as lie disengaged his cu¬ cii cling arms from the breathless corpse of the man who had, perhaps, done him au voi., r. ?; irrepa-
irreparable injury, could not avoid men» tally ejaculating— tí .May the Almighty forgive thee as I have done !" He had, however, scarcely turned fiom the bed before the now Lord Vilmore ex- clained with an air of triumph—" Well, God's will be done ! I can't pretend to lament the death of a pci son whose whole study was to prevent me from inheriting what his cowardly conscience could not suffer him to withhold fiom me; for it w r as evidently against his will that he made tlie confession which has so com¬ pii tely reinstated me in my rights 1 But come, my Loi el, '* addressing the Earl, cc let us quit the melancholy scene ! Come, young man,'' tinning to Edmund, <f all you have to legiet is, that he who stole you fiom your real parents had not gone off in an apoplexy, in which case you would
would now, instead of me, have succeeded to his title!" Without making any reply, Octavius followed the two peers down stairs in silence. A servant they met informed them Lady Leonora and Miss Biowning w ere in the drawing-room. Scarcely know- ing what he did, Octavius pushed past the great men, and had got his hand upon the lock of the door, w hen the Earl called out— " Hold, young fellow! allow me to precede you into that room !—■Indeed, all things considered, it may be as well you and my daughter should never meet again !" " That shall rest with your Lordship and Lady Leonora," was the reply, as he retreated from the door, and was told by the feeling Lord Vilmore to step into some ? % of
of the other apartments till he was at leisure to speak to him concerning his future prospects, though the munificent presents he had received from the eleceascd precluded, in his opinion, the necessity of making any fui ther provision for him. Pride, wc have already acknowledged, was our hero's pi eel omi η an t failing, and it was never more roused than by these unmerited insults ; therefore, with a look sufficiently expressive of Ids contempt for tiie late speaker, he icplied—■ tr I neither expect, nor would I receive, any favour*»from you, Lord Vilmore; nor do I intenél to intrude upon your hospita¬ lity, still leas to consult you respecting my future prospects ! But I think myself mtitltd to request you, Lord Dumbarton, would suffer me to take a personal leave » of Lidy Leonora M'Dougall, whose hand I have
I have no longer the presumption to aspire to, though there isa possibility I ma\ vet discover that my origin is seat cely less illustrious than when I supposed m v self a Browning V' The Eat I smiled superciliously, saving— " 1 will prefer your request to w.y daugh¬ ter, but must take the liberty to add I am not ambitious, therefore, even admitting you were of royal origin, after the affront I have received (iu which I am candid enough to acknowledge you were very innocently implicated) I can't thiuk of becoming any nearer related to you." " My sentiments are so similar to your Lordship's, believe me, much as I love your daughter, as the change iu my situa¬ tion has produced none in my sentiments for her, I would not now accept her hand g 3 even
even if it gave me possession of a diadem A last interview is all I request !" Without deigning to make any reply the Earl entered the drawing-room, anc ivas followed by Lord Vilmore, whih Octavius remained rivetted as it were tc the spot where they had left him, undecideci whether immediately to fly the house he had but the day before considered as his ov/n, or to wait the result of his appeal to Lady Leonora's feelings, which he was vain enotïgh tö suppose were in unison W Y ith bis own, therefore feared she would feel more hurt were he to leave the house without seeing her, than by taking a per¬ sonal leave of him ; indeed he was not without hopes that she would give him the consoling assurance of never bestow¬ ing her hand upon another, admitting obedience
obedience to her father prevented her from fulfilling her engagements with him. During his reverie his own man, who had lived with him from tlie time he left Eaton, and who was particularly attached to him, (though he was generally beloved by every individual belonging to the household) came along the passage, and apparently in as melancholy a mood as his master, whose agitation was but too visi¬ ble to escape his notice, notwithstanding Octavius's inward struggles to maintain at least the anncarance of fortitude. <4 Had not you better go into your own room, Sir, for a little while?'' asked the honest fellow, vainly endeavouring to disperse his rising tears. " There is no lonsjcr anv apartment in this house, Jamos," was the reply, " I think myself entitled to consider as ap-' ? 4 propriatcd
propiiateei to my use; nor do I mean to pass another night undor this loof !" li I only hope you will suffer mc to accompany you wherever you go, Sir, and then, I am sure, 1 shall haitlly caie how soon you give mc orders to prepare for our dopartene." These aitless expressions of the poor fellow's sincere regard nearly 7 unmanned cur hero, who, with difficulty concealing bis perturbation, assured him he fully ap¬ preciated the kindness of his offer, as he must have learnt it could be no longer conducive to his interest to court his favour, adding— li I am really hardly myself, therefore very incapable of form¬ ing any plans for the future ; but come to me in the library half an hour hence, by which time I shall have come to some decision. " James
James bowed acquiescence, and Octa¬ vius walked down into the superb library, where he had early in life prosecuted his studies, which he began to pace, reflect¬ ing upon the strange events which had so rapidly succeeded each other during the last twelve hours. Had the recent dis¬ covery taken place before he had seen Lady M'Dougall, it would, comparatively, have given him very little concern, as he never conceived he derived much honour from his supposed relationship to the Brownings; indeed, he had frequently been tempted to despise the principles ot tiie man he considered it his duty to re¬ spect; still he thought him an amiable character when compui ed tobis successor, his dislike of whom he considered fully justified by the latters unfeeling be¬ haviour iu his last moments, and recent g ô treat-
treatment of him, who was, in fact, the only sufferer by the late Lord's duplicity. To subject himself, therefore, to any further insults from a man he had early been taught to consider exactly the cha¬ racter he had found him, would, he con¬ ceived, be merely degrading himself p yet he was too anxious to see his betrothed bride to leave the house till he had had an opportunity of assuring her the forfeiture he was fearful he must make of his pre¬ tensions to her hand was the only serious evil his degradation from the rank he had so lately held in society had brought with ât, and there were moments when, he fiattered himself, he might yet discover to whom he owed his birth ; and, surely, if his parents were not among the lowest classes, he might yet aspire to an union mth the woman of his choice* This, â however ;
however, must rest with her, though he would have considered it little short of treason to have doubted the sincerity of lier attachment towards him ; indeed, he feared she would be too much agitated to receive his adieus, as he was pei fectly sen¬ sible that the late occurrences demanded one line of conduct from him, and another fiom a delicate tender female. It was in vain to wisli the fates had reversed their decree, and deprived Lady Leonora of her rank in life instead of him, as he felt such an event would only have redoubled his regard for her ; but he knew, admit¬ ting the alteration in his circumstances had had a similar effect upon her, she would not be permitted to follow the bent of his inclinations; therefore it might, perhaps, be less distressing to both were they never to meet again, partieuiaily as he g 6* knevr
knew her Ladyship had no fortune, and the trifle he had so reluctantly received from the deceased, in aeldition to every valuable he thought himself entitled to call his own, was by no means sufficient to enable him to provide for a wife ; he shouid, therefore, think it very ungenerous to take advantage of the partiality he doubted not she felt for him, and even heroically resolved to prevent her making anv rash vows inimical to her own in- terest. While he was thus determining to con¬ vince his fair intended of the disinterested¬ ness of his passion, nothing doubting but she would put it to the test, the modern belle was listening with the utmost sang¬ froid to her father and Lord Vilmore's account of the demise of the late owner of the house, and to the request the degraded
degraded youth had thought proper to make respecting an interview—to which she replied, though she did not foresee it would be productive of much satisfaction to either, still as his vanity might lead him to suppose she had experienced as severe a disappointment as he had done, she thought it her duty to undeceive him respecting the state of her heart, as her duty to the best of fathers had alone induced her to consent to the alliance; still she would have endeavoured to have substituted esteem for love, had she given him her hand ; yet she certainly could not repine at what she must ever consider as the peculiar interposition of Providence in her behalf, though she really pitied the unfortunate victim of the late Lord Vilmore's and Mrs. Browning's duplicity, the latter of whom vvav certainly bound to
to make some provision for a youth they had probably removed so very far out of his sphere. The present Lord Vilmore perfectly agreed with her Ladyship; though lie could not help adding, he thought the least amends his sister could make him, for having advised and connived at the late deception (which had avowedly been practised solely to depiive him of his rights) would be to divide her own for¬ tune equally between bis children, as the handsome presents the spurious heir had received from the by no means truly penitent deceased, was more than suffi¬ cient to place him above want; hinting with more precipitancy than delicat y, that he should immediately recai his eldest son, who, he flattered himself, possessed qualities might tend to remove Lady Leonora's
Leonora's late dislike to the name of Browning. Her Ladyship replied, love alone should be her guide in a second choice. The Earl applauded her candour, ac¬ knowledging he had from the first per¬ ceived her heart was not in unison with his wishes; but as the young man bore a very good character, and Lord Vilmore offered him many permanent and solid advantages, he had been rather anxious to promote a match he flattered liim¬ self would secure his daughter's felicity ; though, had not the late reconciliation taken place, he shouid certainly not have acceded to the w ishes of the deceased. The person to whom this oblique com¬ pliment was addressed gave the speaker the just degree of credit which was its due, sensible he should have been equally insincere
insincere upon a similar turn of fortune; besides, he could not but reflect Lord Dumbarton had certainly procured him the invitation to which he, perhaps, owed the very fortunate discovery which had taken place ; anel as he foresaw his son would have no need to look for a monied wife, he was as much inclined to court the alliance of the noble Scot as his late bro¬ ther had been, upon exactly the same prin¬ ciples, namely, the hopes he entertain etl that it would greatly increase his own consequence. It was next debated whether Octavius should be summoned to learn his doom in the dra winsr-room, or whether her Ladv- ship should condescend to join him in the apartment whither he had retired. SI ? preferred the latter, hinting, she felt grea pity for him ; and that though she could but
but rejoice, she had not, situated as they liad been, disposed of her heait in his favour, btill she could not blame him for what he might, pei haps, consider as her want of taste. Attended, theiefore, by her father and the obacquioub Lord Vihuore, v ho enacted the master of t lie house, she descended into the library, where a servant had in¬ formed them Octavius had retired. James was standing at the door, the half hour his master had allotted to reflection being just expired ; but as he heard him pacing the room he hardly knew whether he ous.1i t to distili b him. The Earl inquired whether his master was in that room. Being answered in the affirmative. tí Then open the door," exclaimed Lord Vilmore. He
He was immediately obeved. They all three entered, and he closed it after them. Octavius had approached one of the win¬ dows, but upon seeing her whom he had thought ere this to have addressed as his wife advancing, he hastily stept forward, resolving to convince her his heroism equalled his love; but her frigid looks and measured steps enabled him instantly to form a very just judgment of the nature of her pretended attachment, and without allowing him to address her, she briefly informed bun, obedience to her father would have induced her to have accom¬ panied him to the altar ; she had, there¬ fore, thought it her duty to be perfectly candid with him upon the present occa¬ sion, though she had by no means wished to derive her release from an engagement, that could not have contributed to her felicity,
felicity, to bis total degradation, which had not made the slightest alteration in her sentiments towards him ; indeed, she felt a degree of commiseration for him, which rendered it necessary she should shorten an interview that became every moment more painful to her.—" My best wishes will attend you wheiever you go!" she proceeded. " Indeed I am truly sorry your untoward fate should have rendered you the instrument of the late Lord Vilmore's malignity towards his more deserving brother, who is, üke my¬ self, too just to impute any blame to you ; the deceased and Mrs. Penelope Browning are alone deserving of censure ; however, for both our sakes 1 am exceedingly glad his Lordship's death preceded our nuptials, as it really would have been paying a very severe penalty for having resigned myself to
to my father's will, bad I found myself also a sufferer by his treacherous conduct towards the present Peer V' For a few seconds Octavius's surprise bad rendered him motionless. Could he be listenin»' to the woman who, but the day before, had given him every reason to suppose her love was by no means in¬ ferior to his own ? Convinced, however, that he w 7 as in bis pei feet senses, and that the person who was addressing him was the very Lady Leonora M'Dougall he had fancied was an exception to her sex, pi iele came to his relief, particularly a» her unvarnished tale had completely annihi¬ lated the adoration he had so lately felt for this divinity of bis own creation, who had shewn herself so mere a mortal, anel he soon found he despised her, if possible, more than he did the triumphant Lord Vilmore,
Vilmore, who visibly gloried in what he considered so likely to increase the despair and mortification of the innocent youth, whom he ahcady hated for having very unintentionally stood for so many years between him and his present title, and for having, as he conceived, defrauded him ami his family of a very large sum of ready money, not to mention the jewels, canilles, Sec. he should be obliged to allow him to retain ; besides, he well knew the w oriel would expect be should make somo furthor provision for him ; he, how¬ ever, secietly hoped the proud boy would afford him an oppoitunity to quarrel with him, which he was fully resolved not to let escape. Lady Leonora having brought her very feeling harangue lo a conclusion, Octavius, with a degree of sangfroid she construed into
into an intention to affront her, thanked her for the permanent consolation she had afforded him, as he now sincerely rejoiced she had been prevented from bestowing her hand upon a person she had never thought deserving her heart. His sup¬ posed prosperity had not enabled him hitherto to distinguish who were and who were not his friends ; but he already found that adversity appeared to have created him many enemies ; however, far be it from him to wish to prolong an interview her Ladyship found so distressing; he meant immediately to leave Portland- Place, well convinced that a contented mind and a good conscience must render a man happy in any situation ; trusting, therefore, her Ladyship would be more fortunate in her next selection of a part* ner for life, he could only thank her for her
her plain dealing, which had removed a veiv sreat weight from his mind, as he had been novice enough to fear she would have been affected by what he foresaw would prevent their renewing their vows at the altar ; but it should appear every thing was οι elered for the best, therefore, far from repining at the alteration which had taken place in his circumstances, he began to think himself greatly indebted to the late Lord Vilmore's conscience, as lie was fearful her Ladyship would not have been equally candid had he remained the Honourable Edmund Browning. Piqued and confused, she was at a losa what to reply, when, by way of relieving her visible embarrassment. Lord Vilmore said— "You need not be in such great haste to seek another abode, young fellow ; as, not-
notwithstanding what the deceased has done for you, I think myself bound to pay some regard to the soi t of recom¬ mendation he gave me, his heir, respect¬ ing you ; and, in the first place, I am ready to give you a icasonable considera¬ tion for your cairiages and horses, and what jewels or trinkets you may think no longer suitable to your rank in life." Ci Then till that is finally ascertained your Lorebhip must excuse my declining vour very— verv considerate offer ! Nor do I wish to remain your inmate a moment longer than I can avoid it ; I shall, there¬ fore, take immediate arrangements for my removal, because, though a wish to relieve the mental sufferings of the deceased in¬ duced me to accept of v\hat you have convinced me you greatly covet, no con¬ sideration will ever induce me to lay in} self
myself under a similar obligation to his successor. ,? " Proud, insolent puppy !" retorted the great man, turning upon Ids heel, and leaving: the room with his brother Peer and Ladv Leonora, who observed, loud enough for Octavius to hear her, he can ied it off better than she could lia 1 , e expected.
vol. t. ? CHAP,
CHAP. VIL JLíEÍ'T once more to his own reflection·*, Octavius felt he ought indeed to rejoice he had escaped an union with such a woman; perhaps nothing could have been more perfectly calculated to reconcile him to his situation than her Ladyship's con¬ duct. His servant broke in upon his reverie, requesting to receive his orders. 11 I am going, as I before told you, Janus, to leave this house immediately ; there-
therefore accompany me into what I used to stile my dressing-room, ubere you shall assist me in arranging what I mean to take with me.'* The valet obeyed in silence. Having lookeel over the t linkets and jewels he owed tobis supposed father's munificence, he was convinced they woulel make no contemptible addition to h U little foitune; he therefore deposited them in his travel¬ ling dressing-box, making a separate par¬ cel of various anieles vv hich he had received from his supposed aunt, u hich he scaled, anti directed to Mrs. Brovning, resolved to appropriate nothing to his own tis'c but what the deceased bad pariicularlv .re¬ quested him to accept, which he w a-> in¬ duced scrupulously to retain, because he was sensible he could not take a luoic effectual method of mortif\in<; lib* mic¬ ii l J censor,
cessor, who, he knew, would attribute his giving anv thin«»; up to fear instead of «v. nei osi tv. He next chan «etl bis wed- ding-suit tor an un di ess frock; and having selected a few changos of clothes, linen, \c. he desi ied James to pack them in a ???:1 lravelling poit.nanU*;:u, ? Hing him he u ave hini all the iest of his wauliohe, v.hİch, it may bo ?^?????!, \\\? ot suffi- c'iCMt value fo render it no inconsieleiable pie^eut. He then p fid him his wages up t(^ tlie present time, and empoweied him to settle w ith e\ery other servant he had been accustomed to call his own, desiring that bis carriages, and boises might bo immediatol) taken to Tattersalls, to be disposed of, for just what they would fetch, the following morning; a favourite terrier being the only part of his suite he chose to retain. I u
\n vain tl id James request to be allowed to accompany him, as our lieto \ery pro¬ perly rcpiesmted to him, it would be albitrd in his present circumstance> to think of retaining; a servant ; promising, ne\eithelcss, should fortune ever smile is pon h i tn again, to engage him in ple¬ ieren ce to any other; and assuring him, he made no doubt but Mrs. Browning. who, h? could not help persuading him¬ self, had alwavs had a creat repaid ior hini, would, upon his recommendation, retain him in her service till he procured another place. " Well, Sir, I must submit,*' replied James; " though í had rather live with you for ten pounds a year than w ¡th any master í shall ever have who may give me fifty. But pray where are \ou going? n 'J had
had not you better allow me to procure you a bulging ?" 14 I dure say I shall Jbe able to pracure - ân apartment at. the Portland-Coffee- Ilouse," was the reply, ** as I don't mean to make any long stay there ; merely till I can cane to some dcehion respecting my future plans. But I should like to se$ Mrs. Browning before I bid an eternal adieu to this house; therefore, without mentioning my approaching departure, send my compliments to her by her woman, and my request* that she would grant me a few moments audience." James instantly departed, not without hopes the good lady, who, he knew, was very tenderly attached to his master, would induce him to alter his resolution, or that she would leave Vilmore-House with
with him, which, he presumed, was be¬ come the property of the present Lord. While he was^gone, jPcIayjusjrcflectcd ----- that his supposed aunt, for whom he had ever felt a much greater affection than for the deceased, might very pt)ssibly be able to give him some further clue to discover his real parents, to whom he was resolved, should fortune favour his researches, to make himself known, as, admit tino· thev were in low circumstances, v\ hat be had received from Lord Vilmore would cer¬ tainly make a very pretty aeldition to their income; and, assisted by their advice, he might be able to enter upon some active line of life, which would, intime, render him independent, as be conceived it next to impossible the excellent education be had received might not be turned to some advantage. ? 4 James
»Tames soon returned with a note from Mrs. Browning, containing her kindest lovo to 1er (h\ir youuo' f riend, w h om she was too indisposed to receive just then, but whom ri.e requested would pay no attention to the present Lcrd Vilmore, but, like herself, shut himself up in his apartment till he again heard from her, as mio hoped ίο see him in the evening, and to convince him he was as dear to ber as ever. As she did not conceive her brother's pretended penitence, vhich had induced him to deprive the child of their adoption of his /name, &c\ could be ac¬ ceptable in the eyes of the O i ver of all Goodness, at all events, she was resolved to evince her repentance in a very different manner, tis she was determined to make her dear Edmund ample amends for his late unmerited sufferings. " She
" She means well," thought Octavius, as he perused her affectionate billet; " though I sincerely wish she had suf¬ fered me to remain at Bayswarer, which I should most probably have done but for her suggestions ; and the deceit she prac¬ tised conjointly with her deceased brother was certainly inexcusable, much as I can suppose they must both despise the present Peer." Conceiving, however, he had nothing further to detain him in Portland-Place, he immediately left the house, accom¬ panied by James, who requested, as alast favour, he might be permitted to attend him to the Coffee-House, to see if he could be properly accommodated, in which ease he wou lei immediately return for the portmanteau and Juba, the terrier Octav ius had resolved to retain, and then, ? 5 with
with his permission, he would let him know, from time to time, how matters were going on in Portland-Place, as he did not suppose the present Lord Vilmore would dismiss any of the household till after the funeral.-------- —— ^— ______ i( Having been considered to be so particularly attached to my service,'' re¬ plied Octavius, " he may, perhaps, make an exception in your favour ; that is, I think it very possible he may order you, and every other servant supposed to com¬ pose my suite, to be immediately dis¬ charged ; however, at all events, I re¬ quest you would let uo one in the family:, not excepting Mrs. Browning, know whither 1 have removed. Your discretion in this particular will be the most con¬ vincing proof you can give me of your regard." James
James made every promise our hero could wish, and having seen his master accommodated with a very good room, which was all he required, took his leave of him, promising to return at dusk with the portmanteau and the dog. Hcrwa^ii^Hrøonex^goneJthan Octavius, the day being very fine for the season, set off for Bayswater, ruminating, as he walked along, upon the almost incredible alteration which had taken place in his situ¬ ation, and wondering whether he should ever be able to discover his real parents; at ail events it seemed impossible he could fall much lower—Fortune had not done her work by halves, her wheel had taken an intire turn. Well, adversity had its uses, and he could scarcely regret the transition he had undergone, when he reflected it had prevented his marrying ? ô' a w omaa
a woman so very devoid of every amiable quality, and even of principle, as Lady Leonora M'Dougall had shewn herself. He experienced no difficulty in finding the row of houses Lord Vilmore had so ac¬ curately described ; nay, he even readily distinguished the one he had been decoyed from, though none of the tenements had greatly improved in point of appear¬ ance since he had been so cruelly tre- panned from their eomfoitable shelter by the deceased ; but the jessamine tree still shaded the windows of his former habita¬ tion, and as it was the only one iu the row, he resell ved to knock at the door. With a trembling hand, therefore, he opened the latch, and his imagination may be better conceived than described, while, having knocked at the door, he waited for admission. An elderly woman, lame and
and deformed, though decently dressed, after a time presented herself and re¬ quested to know his business. " Can this be my mother r n thought the mort iiied youth, tt or is it my nurse?*' The first surmise increased his agitation so much, the good woman was obligeel to repeat her question of— tí Pray, Sir, what may you want?" " How long, Ma'am, have you resided in this house?" he was at last able to articulate. " How long have I lived in this house ! Why, pray, Sir, what is that to you ? I owe no one a farthing that I ha'n't got a -shilling to pay ; so give me leave to tell you, I don't like such questions ; but my husband is in the garden ; I will call him to give you your answer." " I shall
" I shall be glad to see him, Ma'am, as I am convinced, when he know r s why î asked the questson, which appears to have given you so much offence, he will be less tempted to suppose me actuated by any sinister design." " Why, ma} hap I was rather hasty myself, Sir; you don't look as if you had any evil thoughts in your head ; but there is no knowing who is who now-of- days; however, please to walk in." " No, Ma'am," replied Octavius, "with your leave I will remain where I am till you have answered my question. " '* Well, Sir, as you please; I did not mean to affront you ; and, to be sure, you may have reasons for wauting to know how long I hiv e lived here can't concern me ; so, t j satisfy \ ou ; why, you must know,
know, we have lived here going on of seven years." Octavius sighed, though he by no means regretted that this cross old woman bore no arfmity to him, while he replied— c< I am only sorry you have not been longer an inhabitant of this neat mansion; but you will greatly oblige me if you can inform me who resided heie eighteen years ago." '* Eighteen years agone, Sir ! why, the Lord bless me, there have been at least half a dozen tenants iu it in that time 1" begin¬ ing to enumerate those she had known or heard of '* You are very obliging, Ma'am," re¬ joined Octavius ; " but as none of those you mention appear to be the people I am anxious to discover, can you inform me where your landlord resides? possibly he may
may have it more in his power to satisfy mc." " I am afraid not, Sir; for he who built the houses died in the King's Bench, and 1 believe they have been sold a matter of three times within the last twelve years; at all events, I am morally sure there is not a person now li\ing in any of them who has been in this neighbourhood longer than myself/* In hopes, however, his singular story might have descended from tenant to tenant, as those concerning ghosts gene¬ rally do, he asked her if she had never heard of a child having been stolen from the veiy house she now inhabited about the tine he alluded to. She replied in the negative, but thought it possible some of the neighbours might be acquainted with the circumstance, or the
the folks at the Hen and Chickens, the ncaiest public-house· Thither, therefore, Octavius proceeded, but could gain no further information ; nor was he moie fortunate at several other houses of public resort in the environs, which convinced him it would be use¬ less to make any farther inquines of peo¬ ple so little interested in the circumstance he alluded to, and was in consequence dispirited and disappointed, retracing bis steps towards his abode, when he re¬ collected the deceased Peer thought it possible he might have ben advertised ; he therefore instantly resolved to scardi every newspaper likely to thro ν any light upon this strange atfair ; for which pur¬ pose he entered the first coffccdioibc he came to. The house had not been a,>- pioptiatid
propriatcd to public entertainment at the time he mentioned, their file of papers was therefore by no means of so ancient a date, and by their advice he proceeded to a very old established house in the same line, and at no great distance, where, to his infinite satisfaction, he was imme¬ diately presented with a variety of papers of the date he wished to examine, and, to his still greater joy, he soon discoveied two different advertisements, both of which he was well convinced had been inserted upon his account, though by different people, as the references were perfectly distant from each other, and the reward offered by one party greatly exceeded that offered by the other, though it was evident they doth tended to the very same point, which was to discover what had become
become of the child who had been stolen from Bayswater at the time he had been decoyed away by Lord Vilmore. Convinced that either one or other of the people to whom these papers referred would be able to afford him some infor¬ mation respecting hi> parents, he deter¬ mined to make an immediate application to them, and to begin with the one who promised the smallest sum in return for the desired information, who was a Mr. Cauldfield, an attorney of Gray's-Inn. His reason for making Lis first inquiries of this gentleman was, that the other ad¬ vertisement, though it held out a far more tempting bribe, referred, ' ' Whoever had any intelligence to communicate to the Count de Nieul, at bis Excellency's the Marquis de St. Florentine's, Ambassador from the Court of France to that of Great Britain;"
Britain;" and Octavius kucw that the present French Minister bore a different name, and was too young a man to be able to give him any information respect¬ ing the private affairs of the person ai! mica to in the advertisement ; indeed he was puzzled to know what this Count or this Ambassador could have to do in the business, till be reflected it was by no means impossible that he might owe his existence to a foreigner—Weil, and what did it signify, he considered, though, like many more Englishmen, be ¿í gloried in the name of Briton."—Still the French nobility vrere considered as the models of Europe, therefore, should he derive his oiigiii from any respectable family ofthat nation, he ought not to lepine, as he had frequently dune at bearing the name of Brown i n a;. A mark
A mark he had below his left elbow was mentioned in both appeals to the public, though it was not described in cither, for very good reasons, be presumed. liis supposed aunt had once told him it originated in a fancy of bis mother's, though to him it had always appeared the work of art rather than of nature, and in his opinion bore some resemblance to the plumes which ornament the crest of Bri¬ tain's heir apparent; lie had, therefore, frequently perplexed Mrs. Penelope by inquiring; what the deceased Lady Vil¬ more had set her mind upon, since it was so impossible to gratify her desire· ír Who could tell," the matron would reply, ίζ since it is to her foolish reserve you owe that mark, which will wear off as you grow up, therefore Ís of no signifi¬ cation, paiticulariy being so much out of
of sight," and with these satisfactory an¬ swers Octavius had been hitherto obliged to content himself. Not, however, conceiving it would be of much avail to wait upon the present French Ambassador, he ι eso! ved, as we before observed, to visit the lawyer : still, as he knew it was much past what are termed office hours, be thought he bad better defer his inquiries till next morn¬ ing, as he wished to take a little time for refiection before he entered upon such im¬ portant business ; he therefore returned to his lod «rings, where he resolved to dine, thinking it very possible James might have been to seek him during his absence. In this expectation ho was disappointed ; he theiefore sat down to his solitaiy meal, which he chose to take in a private apart¬ ment, with very little appetite, and felt sei iously
seriously hurt when a neighbouring clock struck nine before he had either seen or heard from his late servant ; however in Jess than ten minutes the faithful fellow made his appearance w ith his baggage and the clog, beginning to apologize for hav¬ ing made it so late, though he hoped he coultl so satisfactorily account for his de¬ lay, his kind master would be convinced it originated solely in his wish to bring him some intelligence of importance. -" I have never hitherto had any reason to complain of )our neglect,'' was the reply; tc therefore I can very readily make allowances for your having made it rather beyond your time; so let me hear what is going forward at Vilmoic-1 louse." James readily obeyed his master; but as he was not admitted into the cabinet coun¬ cils of either the Peer or Airs. Penelope, we
attend him in the drawing-room or admit him into her dressing-room, having been informed she had taken possession ot all the keys. The lady replied, she should not see him till evening, but sent a mes¬ sage to our hero, requesting his company in her dressing-room. She was of course obliged to be informed he had left the house in consequence of Lord Vilmore s behaviour, and was gone no one knew whither, James having strictly adhered to his master's orders in this respect ; he was, however, summoned into the angry matron's apartment, who, in his presence, vowed vengeance upon her brother for his inhumanity; and upon the faithful fellow's acknowledging he knew where to leave a letter for his master, she insisted upon his immediately delivering the parcel he had left behind him, directed to her, into his
his hands, with an assurance that she would write him a lon sr letter the moment she was able to hold a pen ; but, at all events, he was to intreat she might see him as early as he could make it con¬ venient the next dav, as she had manv things of tiie utmost importance to com¬ municate to him. James readily promised to deliver her message in the course of the evening, being unwilling to leave the house till he saw what would be the con¬ sequence of her so peremptorily disputing the will of her brother, well convinced besides that his master would not return to Portland-Place without an invitation in more form than the one he was com¬ missioned to deliver. He had scarcely left her pi esence ere Lord Vilmore sent ber a second message 1 , to inforco his former request, declaring ι '2 she
she must take the consequence if she con* tinucd bent upon refusing him admit¬ tance, as she could not be ignorant how much she was in his power, from not only having connived at, but even advised the iniquitous deception which might have ultimately deprived him of his brother's fortune and title. Provoked beyond endurance, Mrs. Browning returned him answer, that her seclusion by no means originated in fear, as she defied him to hurt a hair of her head, and he might depend upon her making him repent his having sent her so insolent a message ; however, accord¬ ing to her first promise, she should be pre¬ pared to see him, and any of his friends, nt six o'clock that evening, when she did not expect to meet with a disappointment. Lord Vilmore, who by no means bore his
his blushing honours meekly, returned word that compassion induced him to accede to the pi oposcd delay ; neverthe¬ less he required instant possession of the keys she had surreptitiously obtained, or her remaining in her own room till the time appointed forth^r interview, as there was no knowing what use she might make of the liberty she had so fraudulently ob- t tained to inspect the papers belonging to the deceased, Sic. . Mrs. Browning retorted, that she con¬ sidered both him and his unmanly threats as beneath her notice; nevertheless, it was not her intention to quit the apart¬ ments appropriated to her use till after she bad seen him, that she might not afford him room to suspect she had made any alterations in her deceased brother's will, or that she had secreted any papers or ι 3 deeds.
duds in which he might fancy himself concerned ; for which reason she was re¬ solved only to see him in presence of one or more of her friends, advising him to talce the same precaution, as she conceived there could not be too many witnesses of their conversation ; but as to delivering' up the keys till she knew by what autho¬ rity he made the demand, it was what she certainly should not do; he was there¬ fore at liberty to take what measures he chose ; she only beggcel leave to hint, she was prepared to repel force by force. These repeated messages presaged, in the servants opinion, an open rupture between the contending parties ; and as they conceived they had nothing to.expect fiom the Peer, they all openly sided with the lach·, averring she was in the right ti keep possession, and wishing she would authorize
authorize them to turn her brother out of doors, as he continued to give his orders as if he was absolutely master of the house, and among other acts of authority placed a servant of his own sentinel at his sis¬ ter's door, though he was condescending enough to inform her she might send her servants where and for whom she those, which .she in return assured him she should have done without soliciting his permission, and immediately sent a note to a very eminent barrister, who had alwavs done business for the deceased. and whom she requested would return with her messenger to Vilmore-House. The gentleman obeyed lier summons, and after a short conference with her, he sent for an attorney of equal celebrity, who was also in the habit of doing busi¬ ness for the deceased, and with these ι 4 gentlemen,
gentlemen, with whose arrival Lord Vil¬ more was unacquainted, did he and Lord I)i!ii:bariou find her, when, at the hour of six, they entered her d ressi n «r. room. Their apjicarancc diel not occasion his Lordship a very agreeable surprise, because, though his bi other bad mentioned his will in his last moments, he tlid not suppose his sister would have taken upon herself to summon his brother's lawyers before she had con¬ sulted with him. Mrs. Browning allowed him but a very short time for reflection, as the moment he was within the door she said— " My,.Lord, allow me to introduce you. to Counsellor Belford and Mr. Walden, who always acted as law-steward fnr my deceased brother, and who is of course perfectly acquainted with his affairs ; and as your several imperious messages taught mc to. suppose you was anxious to hear my
my late brother's will read, I sent for these gentlemen purposely to afford you that satisfaction." Without appearing to attend to what his sister said, the Peer requested the Counsellor and Solicitor would resume their seats, doing the honours of the apartment to the Earl, and then extending liimself with well-assumed consequence in a large arm chair, enquiring— ** Pray which of you, gentlemen, are in possession of my late brother's will t ,y " The original has' been in my hands for upwards of eleven years, my Lord," replied the Counsellor, " and I believe my friend here has had art attested copy in his hands for nearly the same time ; a third copy the deceased chose to keep in bis own possession ; a fourth was by his orders i5
orders delivered to Mrs. Browning; and a fifth is lodged at his banker's." tt You have held this will in your possession for eleven years, Sir ! You astonish me!" cried the Peer. " Then í presume you were, like this lady, in his confidence respecting his spurious heir l' tt I woulel advise your Lordship to be more guarded in your expressions," re¬ plied the Counsellor, " as your newly- acquired title will not exempt you from the penalty attendant upon unprovoked defamation. Till within this hour I was totally unacquainted with the recent events in your family; nor can they at all concern ¡ne, as the late strange discovery by no means invalidates the deed I hold." " Indeed, Sir I then permit me to say you must have known the supposed Edmund
Edmund Browning was not my brother's son." " Your Lordship appears inclined to give me the trouble to make you prove your words ; but I came here to read the wi4 of the deceased, not to enter into a Avar of woids with your Lordship, whom I defy to hurt my fame or my character, notwithstanding I haveever been in the habit of doing business for the Browning family V r " I beg you would pay no heed to his Lordship, Sir," said Mrs. Browning ; " he fancies a title has given hrm the exclusive privilege of being impertinent; but do you proceed to business; if the will does not meet his Lordship*» approbation we will allow him to dispute it, and accuse us of collusion, or what best suits his purpose." ι ? /' Why*
ct Why, can you suppose, Mis. Pene¬ lope Browning, I shall suffer youradopteel nephew to inherit one shilling under the deed you allude to? which, I presume, constitutes him the heir of the deceased ; indeed in) mother acknou ledgcd as much ; but how vou or this gentleman can con¬ sider such a deed as valid I can't pretend lo guess ; however, I have no objection to lieai ¡L lead, though 1 conceive it to be meieiv wasting time, as the late Lord Vilumi es confession has reinstated mein all my rights, which you may depenei upon my asseitiag in every court in Eng¬ land should the) be disputed." The Counsellor had, during this speech, having fust shewn them round, broke the seals of the cover in which the will was indolcii, and now proceeded to read akud It
It began in the usual forms, constitut¬ ing bis si-prosee! son his sole heir anel executor, admitting him to have attained his twenty-first year at the time of his demise. rt Now, pray, of what avail will this testamentary deed prove ?" asked the triumphant Lord Vilmore, his eyes spark¬ ling with delight. No one answered his question, and the lawyer proceeded. ír But in case the said Edmund Brown¬ ing does not live to attain the age of majority, or any thing should intervene to invalidate his just claims to my title anet estate, admitting these to be fully proved, I then give anel bequeath all my landed and personal property, houses of every denomination iu town and country, with every article in jewels, plate, and 6' furniture,
furniture, which may be in my possession at the time of my decease, unto my clearly beloved sister, Penelope Browning, spin¬ ster, whom I constitute my sole executrix and residuary legatee, upon condition that she pays unto my only brother, Thomas Browning, to whom, should she inherit my property, my title must devolve, the sum of one shilling, with which bequest I cut hi*n off from every other part of my fortune."* Never, perhaps, did the person thus kindly remembered experience a more sud» den transition ^ even the one he had un¬ dergone the preceding evening was trifling when compared to his present disappoint¬ ment, as he was but too well convinced every precaution the law could devise had been taken to prevent his making any claim upon the estate» and personal property
property of the deceased, who bad cer¬ tainly given him reason to expect the mortification that was in store for him. Unable even to vent his spleen, so com¬ pletely was every lately-cherished hope annihilated, he even bore the triumphant glances of the lawyers, and the more ex¬ pressive nods of Mrs. Browning, in silence. The lady's spirits appeared te> rise in pro¬ portion as her brother's failed him. She now iu an ironical tone wished him joy of his accession to the Vilmore title, which, she hoped, the emoluments arising from his place would enable htm to support with due splenelor ; declaring herself ready to pay him his legacy immediately; asking the lawyer what stamp would he required for the acknowledgment of so considerable a sum ; then turning to the Peer, hoped he would no longer dispute her
her right to hold the keys, and that he would permit her to walk about her own house without a sruard. These taunting speeches roused the crest-fallen Vilmore, who, swearing a terrific oath, vowed he woulel dispute this abominable will in every court of law in the kingdom, and that he would pro- secute her, even to the endangering of her life, for having been concerned in the late fauci. The Earl of Dumbarton had heard his late brother's confession, there¬ fore she might esteem herself very for* tunate if she escaped with transportation. Law and equity were both of his side, anel possession of Vilmore-House he was resolved to keep, in. defiance of her and her lawvers; forbidding her, at her peril, to touch any thing belonging to the deceased, and declaring he would have seals
seals put upon every closet or article of furniture supposed to contain any valua¬ bles, or papers of impoi tance, till a proper inventory could be taken. Mrs. Browning, conscious his threats could not invalidate tiic precious deeel, which put her in possession of the Nabob's wealth, merely laughed at his declarations, desiring him to do his w out, and hint¬ ing, if he did not make his exit quietly she would send for the nearest magistrate, as he might rest assured she would shew him no more favour than he declared him¬ self inclined to shew her. The dispute now ran so high that the remainder of the will remained unheatd ; nor was it of much signification. Mrs. Penelone was ably supported by her law friends, who promised to defend her cause, insuring- her success in even court the ,
tìie Peer might bring it before, and laugli- ing at his menaces respecting the prosecu¬ tion he threatened her with. Even Lord Dumbarton, who always sailed with the stream, thought Mrs. Browning might not be so much to blame respecting the exchange of the children as he had at fir.» t conceived ; nor could the transaction t;e hardly cJeemtd a fraud, since, aduliti ii.ir no chiid had been substituted in the room of the late Lord Vilmore's son, it did not appear that the present Peer would ever have inherited his estates ; and as for the title without the fortune, it was surely no great advantage, and to him it appeared that that would have been all he would have been deprived of liad the deceased been taken off suddenly; nay, the late Lord Vihuore might conceive himself as much at liberty to bestow his acquired title
title upon a third person, as he certainly was to becpieath his fortune and estates to his favourite sister ; and as for attempting to keep possession of Vilmore-House, it would be little short of insanity, and must end in his being obliged to relinquish his ill-founded claim. The Counsellor seconded the Earl in a yery able speech, observing, the fraud upon which Lord Vilmore laid so much stress was by no means put in practice to deprive him of any thing the lav/ would otherwise have awarded him, ?? it evidently appeared the deceased was resolved he should never inhei it one far¬ thing of bis property, as the will con- ciudeil by dcvbing the whole to various public charities, .should Mrs. Browning precede him to the grave; therefore to dispute such a deed would be absolute nud ness;
madness ; nevertheless, unsupported as hr found himself, Lord Vilmore persisted in his first intentions of going to law, though', after a three hours wrangle, during which both his sister and himself convinced their hearers thev had inherited no small share of their mother's vulgarity, his Lordship thought it most prudent to leave Portland-Place, though the being obligee to recite his recent mortifications to his expecting wife and family was not among the least severe of those he was obliged to bear with.
CHAP.
. , ..... .... .. -*»
CHAP. IX. JAMES dwelt very forcibly upon the events we have been recapitulating to his master, va ho he now fully expected to see once more reinstated iu ail his former splendor in Portland-Place. Octavius was more than once tempted to laugh during his recital, and rather enjoyed the unfeeling Lord Vilmore's disappointment; he however soon dismissed his faithful valet, with permission to sec him again the
the following morning before ten o'clock; at which hoar he meant to wait upon the gentleman of GraysTuu, to whom the advertisement refened him; but parti¬ euiaily* cautioned the honest fellow not to let ovou Mrs. Browning know whore he nnght be found, lie promised to be strictly upon his guard, and rather ie- luctantly rotiiod, as ho hoped Octavias would have permitted him to have once mosc entered upon his accustomed duty. He was no sooner gone than our horo began to reflect upon the intelligence he had biu»:ghi him, wondering whether tho deception which had actually been prac¬ ticed could authorize Lord Vilmore to iusritutc the prosecution he threatened bis sister w ith, whom he both blamed and pinod, resolving not to accept of any pecuniary favours írom a person who had so
so completely forfeited his esteem, though be was by no means sorry the deceased had made her his heir in preference to his far loss-desorving broiher, as be felt a sort of involuntary regaul for her, owing to her bavin»· ever humoured him in all his fancies, and having always appeared to love him with ? dog roo of affection, vrh i í h could not be assumed ; but his pride for¬ bade his accepting any further proofs ef her rogai el, though he resolved, should she wish it, to sc- j bor once more, as he thought she might he able to describe his infant dross, or to irivo him some other indica- tion that might prove of groat assistance ]ii the search he was resolved to make respecting his pai onts. It may be supposed, notwithstanding lu* "nad spent the preceding night in watching the departing Lord Vihnoie, he felt
felt very little inclination to sleep; he was therefore the first in the coffee-room in the morning, but had scarcely began breakfast ere James arrived witli a long letter from Mrs. Browning, who had sent for him the moment he returned the pre¬ ceding evening, to question him concern¬ ing her dear nephew, as she continued to stile our hero; and having learnt the orders he had left concerning his carriages, horses, and wardrobe, she desired the for¬ mer might not be disposed of till she b.ad seen her beloved Edmund, and promising to make Jarnes ample amends for the wardrobe, which she still hoped her dear boy would ugo/m appropriate to liis own use, as she was resolved to make him everv offer likely to induce him to con- tinue ? reside with her. James
James repeated all this to his master, Imping he would accede to her proposals. Octavius felt gratified by the anxiety she had shewn for his safety, &c. and easily conceived she meant to make him all the amends in her power for his late disap¬ pointment ; but how could she suppose he would ever become a dependant upon her bounty ! AVhat must the world think of him, were he to behave in so abject a manner !—why, they must despise him as cordially as he should do himself ! Yet he had no objection to see her once more!— He therefore broke the seal of her letter, which was worded so affectionatelv, and expressed so much contrition for the past, it not onlv induced him once more to pronounce her forgiveness from the bot¬ tom of his heart, but made him resolve to sec her that very evening ; he there- voL, ? ? fore
write to the relations of the deceased, who would, in all probability, be able to give him lhe desired intelligence. This was, however, holding out too re¬ mote a prospect to Octavius ; he therefore chose to pay the then French Ambassador a visit before he authorized this officious attorney to take any farther trouble in the business, thinking it very possible his Excellency might be better able to advise him how to proceed, or, at all events, to inform him whether the Count de Nicul or the Marquis de St. Florentine were still living, either of whom, he conceived, would be able to direct him to his parents; so telling the lawyer he should hear from him again, he proceeded to the Ambassa¬ dor's, who he was fortunate enough to find at home; he therefore desired the servant, that inquired who he was to announce,
announce, to tell his Excellency a gen¬ tleman requested to see him upon business concerning a French nobleman. This message procured him an imme¬ diate audience; and as he was personally known to his Excellency, that gentleman was not a little surprised to see the hero of the strange tale he had just been read¬ ing in one of the morning papers. Oc¬ tavius instantly, and with his accustomed politeness, explained why he had waited upon the Ambassador, presenting him witli the advertisement, and entering upon every necessary detail to induce him to afford some clue which might lead to the discovery of his parents or family. The Marquis de Rochegude expressed his surprise, but was happy to inform hiui that the then Marquis, now Duke de St. Florentine, was at the present juncture ? 3 prime
prime minister at the Court of Versailles, and the Count de Nicul was his first secretary ; from cither of them, he con¬ ceived, he would lcaru ' who were his parents, therefore advised his setting off immediately for Paris, promising to fur^ nish him with letters of recommendation to both gentlemen. Octavius gratefully accepted the öfter, assuring the minister he would set out the next day for France, and entering into various (lct- : · . "'' """'^ respecting the Browning family, which he fornici the Marquis was rather anxious to hear, who, being by no means so scrupulous in his notions as Oc¬ tavius advised him by all means to close with Airs. Penelope's offers, admitting he did or did not discover his parents, as he thought she had an undoubted right to prevent his being a sufferer through hers and
and the late Lord Vilmore's spirit of revenge, which appeared to have 'carried them to very unjustifiable lengths; and as the deceased Peer had taken such pre¬ cautions to deprive his brother of his for¬ tune, he thought he might have allowed him to inherit the title, especially as it was not of sufficiently ancient date to add great lustre to any family. Octavius's sentiments coincided with those of the Ambassador in the latter respect, though he felt by no means in¬ clined to follow his advice respecting Mrs. Browning's öfters ; still they parted mu¬ tually pleased with each other, the Marquis promising his letters should be ready by eleven the next morning, convinced one or other of the great men he was going to cross the water to visit would be able to gratify his curiosity. ? 4 He
" He walked leisurely towards his present residence, reflecting upon his impending journey, which he scarcely knew how best to perform, and was thinking of securing ' a place in one of the Dover stages, when, havine turned clown Bond-Street for the ? nearest way, his reverie was broke in upon by two of his former friends, who, arm in arm, were lounging along in the contrary direction, one of whom, the moment they caught sight of him, exclaimed— v " By Jove, here comes the very man we were talking about!" « Talk of the devil!— ali, Edmund," replied the companion; " but do tell us what all this strange story means ! why man, they say you have been clone out of a d ----- d fine.girl, and, what is still worse, 'that you have lost a title and a d ----- d large fortune !" « Upon
€i Uj)Oii my soul you were not beun under a lucky planet, man !" rejoined the second. " Now had an apoplexy stopped the old fellow's windpipe at once, why it would only have deferred your marriage P' <c Poh, d ------ n it, the old maid might still have squeaked," said the other ; tc for they say she was the contriver of the plot ! But do tell us, niy boy, all how and abemt it, that we may swear to the truth of our assertions ll Unfortunately their unfeeling request and altered looks and behaviour did not tempt Octavius to gratify their curiosity ; therefore, telling them he was iu haste, he continued his walk, while they broke — put into a horse laugh, delighted they had had an opportunity of mortifying a man they had liitlierto considered as an object of envy. ic 5 " This
c< This then is the way of the world !" thought Octavius, convinced that had he still bore the name of Browning these very two young fellows would have ac¬ costed him with apparent respect, and have dono all in their power to flatter his vanity, as he had proved himself the friend of both upon several occasions. He had scarcely lost sight of them ere he met three moie of his juvenile ac¬ quaintance, whom he had hitherto very improperly also ranked among his friends. These were all titled men, therefore of much greater consequence than the for¬ mer gentlemen, but like them were can¬ vassing the news of the day, as they all appeared surprised when they caught sight of our hero, and anxiously intimated his approach to each other. AVith two of these, the one the son of a Marquis, the other
other of an Earl, the Honourable Edmund Browning had long been upon the most familiar footing; he was, therefore, the first to address them; but slightly touch- ing their hats, they passed him without speaking, and as they would have done a total stranger of an inferior order who had intruded himself upon their notice. Octavius having made a sort of half- stop, he heard one of them say to the ether— " Poor fellow, I really pity him, as I foresee he will often expose himself to mortifications ! ' Had he given way to the impulse of the moment, he would have followed the speaker, and most probably have made him repent having uttered so impertinent a speech ; but a moment's reflection taught him to despise the narrow-minded beings ? 6' he
lie had so unintentionally gratified, by affording them an opportunity to display their fancied superiority. Convinced from these specimens that his"fashionable acquaintance had entered into a sort of league to slum him in future, he sighed, while he mentally ejaculated— - " I now perceive why iny society was so much courted, and .what dependance there is to be placed in such friends, who, though always ready to borrow while I had- money to lend them, would now suffer me to starve as beneath their no¬ tice 1 How truly iiiay I say with Gold¬ smith— "■' " What is friendship but a name ! &?. ,§ 41 Surely," he went on, " I ought m>t to judge mankind in general from the be¬ haviour
Iiaviour of Lady Leonora M'Dougall and these my supposed friends; at all events, my story will not be known iu France; therefore I may be allowed to walk the streets of Paris without being exposed to these unfeeling insults ! for could I pre¬ vent the nefarious deception which has injured me more than any other person concerned in the transaction ? Would I were already upon my journey! and, I think, once upon the continent, I shall be very indifferent wliether I ever again set my foot upon British ground, renowned as its natives are for their hospitality. Could I have treated any of these men $o, admitting the case had been reversed? No, if I know my own heart ! but, per- baps, these sentiments are a proof of my low origin P' Having
Having reached bis lodgings, he shut himself up m his own room to ruminate upon the ingratitude of his friends, re¬ flecting with no small degree of satisfac¬ tion that-— ** When misfortune comes slie brings along '* The biavett virtues j and so many great «< Illustrious spirits have conversed with woe, " Have in her school been taught* as are enough ** To cor.stcraie distress, and make ambition " Even wiih the frown beyond t! e smile of foitune." He therefore resolved to act with pru¬ dence, and never again to suffer his tem¬ per to be ruffled by the neglect or sneers of his former acquaintance, convinced that real magnani nity taught a man, when most provoked, to keep his reason calm and clear, ami to follow her dictates from a strong sense of what is right, as giving way to passion was frequently atteneled with
with very disagreeable circumstances; be¬ sides, ought lie, who had so many more important subjects to occupy his thoughts» to allow such trifles to occasion him a moment's uneasiness ? One of the waiters bad informed him a gentleman had been there twice in search* of him, who, he guessed, could be no other than Jame» ; nor was he mistaken, as he soon came a third time, so anxious was he to deliver another letter from Mrs. Browning, to thank him for having so kindly acceded to her wishes respecting an immediate interview, declarum· she looked forward with the utmost impa¬ tience to the appointed hour, and assuring him nothing should be wanting on her part to make Lady Leonora sincerely repent she had refused his hand, ? < t Mrs,
tt INÍls. Browning wishes to reconcile me to my situation,'' said our hero, after he had read her. note, '·' and I am truly grateful for her kind endeavouis, though 1 shall certainly decline her oiler*. This you need not tell her; merely assuie lur I will be punctual to my appoint¬ ment. " " I or.lv hope, ï'^v de?r master, you will take a shoit time for reflection. I a. u sure Mis. K kav n : ig is \ cry silicei e in her oiTeis, a ..i she κυ1\ takes on verv mudi about \.)u."' A/ t! \\)?\ she Einst be conscious mv recent inoi tinewtk a and disappointment originated in herself; theiefore she may think justice icquires she should ρι υ vide for mc; but I will never eat lb' bread of dependa ??, as I think that would be des» ι ad m g
degrading myself much more than the late Lord Vilmore's confession has done, though my former friends appear very anxious to give me a due sense of mv inferiority," repeating who he had met in Bond-Street, and the treatment be had experienced ; " therefore may Mrs. Browning enjoy the immense foitune she has evidently taken such pains to secure to herself, as I shall certainly not suffer her to diminish her income upon my ac¬ count, not chusing to afford the world real reason to look down upon mc; be¬ sides, I have some hopes of yet being able to discover my family, and, perhaps, ir.y parents; you must, therefore, suoposc I am too ansious to commence my re¬ searches to admit (supposing I had no other leasons) of mv icturning into Poit- S L· ? land-PUcc ; but ??. Browning may d< ; · iU l
fiepend upon my keeping ?? evenings appointment. You need not to her enter into any further detail.'* Still hoping the good lady would in¬ duce his master to alter his resolution, James returned home, execrating his false friends, who, he was fearful, had made him resolve not to accept his supposed aunts offers; nor dkl he scruple to hint his appréhensions to Mr&. Penelope, that she might be the better prepared to over- Vil !¿* r»*-— «?1?1?1?? C«.«« »mu w*<-é«t *v.'b«-¿t ββ1"?«. . v>.w iiU utl Ujv»v,Ji Wjlit/ WUO *tti lílVJiV UHU guine in her expectations than the valet, who well knew that his master had too much pride to accept that as a gift he once considered as his right.
CHAP.
CHAP. X, JnLAVING perfectly recovered his usual se ·:::::;, as me hep: he entertained of discovering his parents appeared to give fresh vigour to his frame, our hero re* ilected it was near dinner time, and accordingly went down into the coffee- room to give orders respecting his repast. While it was getting ready be took up a newspaper, when an advertisement, pur¬ porting that a Genevan gentleman, who was
was upon the point of setting out for Paris, would be glad to meet with a travelling companion, as he meant to per¬ form the journey post, but in his own carriage; therefoie wished to meet with a gentleman who was willing to bear half the expence i( Such a travelling companion will exactly suit me," thought Octavius, tak¬ ing down his direction in his pocket-book, and hurrying down his dinner, so anxious was he to enter into some agreement with the Genevan, as he knew he should feel himself verv awkward in Prance. Thon sli he had been frequently assured he spoke the language like a native, still he was, having never crossed tiie channel, so un- acquainted w ¡th Pre neh mannors and cus- E toms he was convinced he should feel ? cry
very awkward, and be at a very great loss w hen he reached Paris. He therefore hurried into Frith-Street, Soho, and caught the person he came in quest of sitting down to tea, who proved to be a Genevan watch-maker and jeweller, who bad been taking his rounds in the way of trade, and who, having purchased an English carriage, wished to find a companion to defray part of his travelling expenccs. As he was both polite and well-informed, and not more than six-aiid-twenry, a very few words sufficed to settle the business, and it was agreed they should set off the following afternoon, and sleep at Sitting- v' 't ? bourne, from whence, by starting early the next morning, the jeweller hoped they should reach Dover just in time for tho tide, which served about one o'clock, as he generally
this silent monitor to reveal the deception he had put in practice. The porter expressed his joy at his return, and his hopes that he was once more come to take up his abode among them ; and every other servant visibly participated in his satisfaction. Mrs. Browning was in the drawing-room, he was informed ; but she gave him the meeting upon the landing place, where, taking silently his hand, she led him into the room ; but the moment the door was closed she flung her arms round him, and burst into tears. Very much affected, Octavius returned hor almost maternal embrace, then sup¬ porting her towards the sofa, requested she would ender.vour to compose herself, while she repeatedly asked his forgive¬ ness, protecting she shouid never enjoy a moment's
moment's peace till she saw him reinstated in his former situation. She therefore hoped he would promise never to leave her again, as he would always be as dear to her as if he really had been the person he represented ; nay, she was convinced she loved him better than she ever should have clone the deceased Edmund, whose unamiable disposition would have ren¬ dered him a far less agreeable companion —" Therefore only say, my clearest Oc¬ tavius," she proceeded, tt you wjli con¬ tinue to reside with me. I have no one to controlli my actions, nor to prevent rny disposing of my property in favour of the child of my adoption and affection ; for ¿is such I considered yon from the moment I received you from my brother, who, since he was so pressed by con¬ science, which, I own, will sometimes make vol. ι. L itself
itself heard, ought to have made a second will wholly in }our favour ; I only mean to repair his omission in that respect, as I think vou have a far irrealer rmlit to his riches than I have. As for the present Lord Vilmore, he is unu ort In our notice; but it is my duty to place you in the same sphere 3011 have aiw avs moved in, and theit aie w av s and means of putting ? 011 into immediate posicssion both of mine and the foi tune of the deceased, and which will eifectually prevent Thomas from ever disputing jour right to either. But 1 know this is not a proper time to talk of these matters, while the corpse remains unbailed.'' In vain had Octavius attempted to break iu upon her discourse, the con¬ clusion of w İneli he thought rather enig¬ matical; at last, however, she allowed him
MIDNIGHT WEDDINGS. hím to assure her he had sincerely for¬ given her; and as he was unwillntg to put an absolute negative upon her press¬ ing intreatios for him to become her in- mate, he told her she must allow him a short time for refiection ; he could not immediately come to any decision; be- sieles, he wished very much to discover whether his parents were still living, their situation in life, and various et ??? t era ; requesting to know if she had ever made ??? ? inquii ios respecting his family, or if she bad formed any opinion concerning their rank in life from his infant appearance, or from any other, circumstance. *' I was fearful this idea would be up¬ permost in your mind, my dear Octavius, which was one reason why I was so anxious to sec you, as I wish to pom t out to you the little satisfaction I am of E '2 opinion
opinion you will derive from endeavour¬ ing to find out your relations, though I can't pretend to form any judgment re¬ specting their rank in life. You were certainly as handsomely dressed when we first saw you, and when jou were brought away, as ever the deceased Edmund bad been : still the house vou were taken from gave me no reason to suppose your relations were people of large fortune, though it might be only the habitation of your nurse 1 , in which case I should sup¬ pose your parents were capital trades¬ people, as they are often profusely ex¬ travagant in their children's apparel; or you might be nursed at their country retreat, a luxury many of our first traders allow themselves ; be that as it may, 1 can't think your endeavouring to find them out, even should you succeed, will be
be attended with any advantage to you, for, doubtless, they have long since con¬ sidered you as lost for ever, therefore have most probably divided their property,, or promised to do so, among their other children, who would certainly not relish the idea of parting with any part of what they must consider as their own, in your favour ; tliough I will agree, that when they learnt you were not actuated by any interested motives in your researches, as I trust you will always consider my pro¬ perty as your own, why they might vie with each other in courting your favour ; besides, I would have you reflect that it is, an even chance whether you have not tc> blush for these relations you are so anxious to discover, who, if they are in a low line, will stick to you like leeches ; this I know by experience ; therefore let me advise L 3 you
you to give up all thoughts of looking after them ; for depend upon it, if they are people of iánk or foitune, they will hear of your story, and be proud of acknow¬ ledging the relationship; and if they aie the reverse, even allow them to remain in their present ignorance, and suffer me to supply their places. I will enable you to keep up all your present connections, and to look down upon Lady Leonora, whose very name puts me in a passion : but I hope you have more sense than to fret after such a jilt, who only wished to marry you for your money, while there are women who would think you did them a very great favour in accepting their hands, though they have a princely fortune at their ow n disposal. However, as soon as the funeial is over, I will convince you I under¬ stand my duty better than my poor weak hi other
brother did his, who was, as I said at the time, more delirious than penitent; but I shall ever consider you as my heir, therefore you can have no objection to remaining* in a house which will one day be }our own." Octavius expiessed his gratitude for her Kind intentions, but assured her lie entcitained no fear of degrading himself, even should his parents belong to the lowest order of" plebeians; and he thought it his duty to endeavour to discover them, because, if they weic poor, the little he possessed would place them in comparative afiluence; and admitting they were the reverse, but had disposed of their property in favour of their other children, tbo piesent he had received from the deceased would enable him to sço into some line of h 4 business,
business, which might in time render him independent ; therefore all Mrs. Browning could obtain from him was a promise to do nothing rashly, and that lie would reflect upon all she had said, as he was well convinced, that were he to accept her oilers, his late friends would be among the first to condemn his want of spirit, and to propagate he was the son of either a dustman or a chimney-sweeper. However, as he grew every moment more anxious to get away from his would-be aunt's persecutions, who seemed resolved to make him a rich man even in spite of himself, he again promised to take time for reflection ; therefore fancying he began tø relent, she grew more reconciled to parting with him, but would fain have forced a very large sum of money upon him,
him, as she could not bear the thoughts of his being deprived of any of his accustomed indulgences. This proof of her regard Octavius ab¬ solutely refused, producing the draft he had received from the deceased as a proof that he was not in want of money ; but by way of softening his refusal, he promised to apply to her should he have any un¬ foreseen pecuniary calls he might not be prepared to answer. But before she suf¬ fered him to depart, she entered into various details respecting her fortune, re¬ capitulating Lord Vilmore's threats when he found himself so completely disap¬ pointed in his mercenary expectations, and repeatedly declaring she only con¬ sidered herself his steward ; informing him she meant to reside chiefly in future at her seat in Nottinghamshire, though she E ó should
should retain the house in Portland-Place for his town residence. Conscious it would be useless to argue with her just then, Octavius appeared to acquiesce with all she said, knowing she* might make what alterations she chose iu her proposed plan when she found he was gone abroad, fiom whence he meant to write her his future intentions, which would depend upon circumstances, and, he hoped, upon the wishes of his family. It was late before she suffered him to depart, and was even then anxious to make him promise he would meet her again the next day. This he begged leave to decline, assuring her she should either see or hear from him after the funeral, as he meant to leave town for a few days, till the recent discovery had lost the zest of novelty. She
She commended the notion, but wished him to have gone down to the Abbey, whither she offered to accompany him. lie begged to be excused, alleging; he should in that ease be only affording further subject for conversation to the fashionable world. Then she believed she should go there alone, but in treated him,. though lie evaded satisfying her respect¬ ing his piesent abode, to make use of his carriage (which she had not allowed to bo sent to Tattersalls) anel servants as heretofore, as she should ever consider them perfectly at his command. Octavius requested she woulel for the present suffer him to preserve his incog' nito, that he might not expose himself to any further insults. In a short time he should be able to come to some decision respecting his future plans, with which h ? she
she should be made acquainted. Till then he wished, if possible, to escape notice, and felt himself infinitely happy when he was once more without her doors, as nothing would have been more repugnant to his feelings than to have passeei the night under her roof. Once more seated in his own apart¬ ment, Octavius wondered what plan the old lady had in view, by which she meant to make him undisputed master of her for¬ tune. Did she intend to make it over to him during her life time ? that was very unlikely, after having taken so many pre¬ cautions to secure it to herself; and an expression which had escaped her, pur¬ porting that some women would think themselves honoured by his notice, not¬ withstanding they might have a princely fortune at their own disposal, led him to fancy
fancy she had intended to make him an indirect offer of marriage, by way of con¬ soling him for his recent disappointment. This woulel certainly be one method of making him master of her large fortune! ? ? the bare surmise excited his risibility ; but the more be reflected, the more he was confirmed in his conjecture, and he even awoke next morning with the absurd idea uppermost in his mind ; but unwiiliug to cherish a notion which must infallibly lower her still more in his esteem, be tried to divert his thoughts, by setting about preparations for his journey, which were soon made, lie then set out for the Ambassador's, who had given orders to have him shewn into his dressing-room the moment he arrived, where he pre¬ sented him with the promised letters, and strongly advised his hastening to Paris
Paris with all convenient speed, as the more he had reflected upon the advertise¬ ment which referred him to the two noblemen in question, the more convinced lie was he ought to make htmsc.f known to them, prognosticating they would be able to give him every information he coidd desire respecting his family. Octavius mentioned the arrangements lie bad entered into with the voun°* Genevan, which met his Excellency's ap¬ probation, who wished him a pleasant journey, hinting he should like to be made acquainted with the result of his applications to his friends. Octavius readily promised, as a small return for his politeness, to gratify his curiosity, and then took his leave Having to call at Lord Vilmore's banker's, and at several other places, he made it near two-
two before be returned to the coffee¬ house, where he swallowed a hearty meal,. and then sent for a coach to convey him- sciti his baggage, and his favourite dog y into Erith-Street, Soho, and had actually drove from the door when James, whom be had been expecting, and wished to see, called out to the coachman to stop. It was not Octavius's intention to let oven this faithful follow know he was going abroad, or even that he Irul quitted Ids late lodgings; he therefore contrived to conceal his ??^???-? at the bevt torn of the coach, as the sight ofthat would have led to questions he was by no means pre¬ pared to answer. The coachman of course pulled up when he heard himself called,. and saw James running, and beckoning to him. Octavius percei veti he had a letter in his hand, which he rather supposed 5 contained
contained a more explicit avowal of Mrs. Brow ή ing's matrimonial scheme; he there¬ fore took it without even looking at the direction, and not to lose time, as it was near three, began to inquire what was going forward in Portland-Place, and whether any thing particular had occurred since he had been there. i( No, Sir, I can't say there has," was the reply ; " and we all live in hopes you will return there after the funeral ; but a strange genileman has been there three times within these two hours to enquire for you, Sir, and having understood I alone knew where to find you, he re- quested I would conduct him to you; but as I had never seen him before, and he could not give me a sufficient reason for intruding upon your privacy, 1 did not dare to infringe your orders in his favour. This
This I told him ; so the last time he came he brought that letter, which he made me promise to deliver as speedily as possible, assuring me that would inform you why be wished to see ???. So thinking it might be of some consequence by his earnestness, and as he looked and spoke like a gentleman, why I promised to deliver it by three o'clock at latest, and as it wants near a quarter, I have been as good as my word." While James was entering into these details, Octavius was looking at the direc¬ tion, which was in a female hand, with which lie was not at all acquainted. Rather surprised, he asked if it required an an¬ swer. " I believe not, Sir,* the gentleman did not give me to understand it did." " Well,
tt Well, if it should 1 presume I shall diicover where to scud it. But how is Mrs. Browning?" (i She is going down to the Abbey for u fortnight, Sir, as the late Lord is to be buried in the famil v vault whore his father lie's ; ami she tells mo you also mean to leave London till after the ??????" " She told you truth, my good fellow; but this you may depend upon, you shall either see or hear from me in a very short time; anel if I ever should have it again in my power to keep a servant, and you are disengaged, I will give you the pre- í ere nee. ít But why not permit me to attend you as usual, my dear Sir, till you are more settled?—you will break Mrs. Brown¬ ing's heart if you refuse her offers !" u I hope
ft I hope not," interrupted his master; " but for the present my ai rangements are taken ; you may, however, rely upon seeing or bearing from me in a \ery short time, hut just now I am rather in haste, therefore if I should not see you again befoie I leave town fare you well. Coach* man, make the best of your wny, or I shall be beyond my time." Ci Heaven bless you wherever you go !'* sighed James, as the coachman drove off; nor did he move till he could no longer follow him with his eyes, as he had much more to say had Octavius been more at leisure to lieten to him ; and he had in¬ tended to have pressed him much more strongly to have retained him in his service upon any terms. He feared he was upon the point of leaving London, and soon convinced himself
himself be had not been mistaken in his conjectures, as the waiters at the coffee¬ house confirmed his suspicious, and even told him the ordeis the coachman had received. He did not know bis master had any fi lends, or even acquaintance, in Fj ith-Sti eet, Soho, therefore rather thought he had ordered the coach there by way of misleading them and him. Well, he must wait with patience till, according to his promise, he either saw or heard from him. Mrs. Browning was less chagrined than James when she learnt he had left London, and consoled him with assurances that his beloved master would certainly accede to her proposals in the end, hinting why he wished to remain incognito for a while, &e. But while she is endcavouiing to per¬ suade herself our hero was as fond of money
money as she had proved herself, and as little likely to withstand the alluring bait she meant to hold forth for his acceptance, wc will return to him, as being more im¬ mediately interested in liis concerns.
????+^ ? ? ?? ? ?^ ???? ^?? * ?- y
CHAP. XL
.AVIN G looked for some time out of the back glass to sec he was not followed, ■our hero again surveyed the letter, or more properly packet, be had just received. " From whom/' thought he as be broke the seal, tc can this come? perhaps from Lady
Lady Leonora; but in that case she has got some friend to write the direction." The bare idea brought a glow into his cheeks ; but then her language during their last interview very ill accorded with his suspicion ; he therefore calmly un¬ folded the letter, which, to his increasing surprise, inclosed a second, directed in the same hand to the Duke eie St. Floicntin, Prime Minister of France, &c. &c. Paris. " W hy, surely, this packet must come fiom the Ambassador!" he involuntarily exclaimed ; i( his lady has taken this opportunity of getting a letter con ve} ccl to this nobleman,'' turning to the one ad¬ dressed to himself, which he conceived would elucidate the apparent mystery, when, upon undoubling <i peculiar sort of fold, w hich rendered it impossible fin* any one to w bom it might be intrusted to
to read the contents, though it served as an envelope to another letter, a bank note fell out to the bottom of the carriage, which, upon picking up, he perceived was of five hundred pounds value. " Certainly," thought he, tt I shall learn what use to make of this sum, which I am probably to remit to the .Minister/* beginning to read as follow:» :—
r ζ s i R, Tho writer of this very ac¬ cidentally learnt, yosterelay evon 'mg, the strange alteiation which has so recently taken place in your prospects anel Cir¬ cumstances; and as the late Lord Vilmore, whose memory she fools tempted to ex¬ ecrate, thought proper to disclose from whence
whence he decoyed you, from having once been very intimate with some part of your family, she feels herself exceed¬ ingly interested in your future destiny ; she therefore requests (as she is withheld by motives even you would applaud from taking an active part in your concerns) that you would set out for Paris upon receipt of this letter, where she would have you immediately deliver the inclosed according to its direction, as the Duke de St. Florentin was, at the time you were so basely stolen from nurse, the most inti¬ mate friend of your father, who I think still lives, and I hope will readily acknow¬ ledge his long lost son ; but from that nobleman I am sensible you will derive every information respecting him. Should I, however, be disappointed iu my expec¬ tations, return immediately to England, and
and insert an advertisement in the Public Advertiser to this effect;—* O. L. is re¬ turned from Paris without having derived any satisfaction from his journey.'—That will give me sufficient information, and I will in that case make myself immediately known to you, and convince you I have a right to render you independent of that abominable old woman, who reports she means to continue to support you as her nephew. The incloscel trifle is merely intended to defray your travelling cx- pences, as I charge you, as you v« hie ?? peace of mind, to leave Paris immediately if the Minister does not give you a very cordial and a very polite reception, as I have other plans in view for you ; for though I had rather he would take upon liimself to bring you forward in the world, I have a suílicient deposit in my hands vol. ι. m to
to enable you to vie, as usual, w ith our first nobility ; and even should your father do -what I consider his dutv, vou will ever have a most sincere well-wisher anel active friend in her who dares only sign herself " Your Guardian Genius."
Twice did the astouished Octavius read over this strange epistle with increasing wonder and amaze, when the stopping of the coach broke in upon his reflections ; he therefore hurried his letters into his pocket, as his travelling companion gave him the meeting upon the pavement, telling him all was ready, and compli¬ menting him upon his punctuality. Octavius's mind was in too confused a state to allow him to make very coherent answers. , His baggage was however soon removed
removed into a travelling postchaise, and the coach he had come in discharged, when he recollected his five hundred pound note, which he thought he had better leave in England ; therefore telling his companion he had just recollected a commission he had promised to execute, and appointing to meet him at the bottom of the Haymarket, he hurried away into St. James"s-Street to get notes upon Paris for the amount. This done, he rejoined Jiis friend, with whom he pursued ?? journey to Dover. During* the first .stage, Octavius's mind was too much occupied respecti n !»■ his anonymous correspondent to ivuder him a wry gay companion. The lively Genevan, as they greu* more intimate, taxed him with having left his heart in London, bestowing some very just eneo- m C nuni; >
miums upon the English ladies, who, he believed, made the best wives inthe world. Octavius agreed he had given him room to suppose he was tinder the dominion of the blind god, acknowledging his late reveries might with truth be placed to the account of a lady, though whether she was old or young, a first-rate belle, or the exact reverse, he could not take upon him to say, therefore presumed his companion would no longer suppose she was his mistress. " Except, indeed, like a preux chevalier, you are in love with a beauty of your own creating ; however, I shall be happy when this unknown fair will permit you to en¬ joy the variegated prospects the county of Kent affords travellers." Ci I will endeavour to banish her for the present from my mind," replied Octavius ;
Octavius ; " but I positively received the strangest letter, just before I joined you, from a lady, who, I presume, had heard of my intended journey, therefore wished to perplex me ; and I must acknowledge she has perfectly succeeded/* The Genevan supposed he had turned her head, and that she wished to iuduce him to remain in England. Octavius suffered him to remain iu bis error, but was not sorry when they readied bittingbourn, which they did between nine and ten, as his unknown corre¬ spondent engrossed his thoughts too much to make him relish the gay conversation of bis fellow traveller. When be found himself once more alone, he began to reflect it was very probable he was not an Englishman, else how came the Duke de St. Floi entine to be so materially »i 3 concerned
concerned in his affairs. At all events his family must be of some iánk in the world whatever was their nation. The present he bad received, and the letter, did not come from the wife or widow of a trades¬ man ; and since Ins childish dresses were as handsome as those worn by him he had so long represented, he thought he might be of a more honourable, though not, perhaps, of so rich a family. At all events there appeared a possibility' that he might once more be considered as an equal by those young men who had convinced him they merely respected a man in propor¬ tion to his rank and fortune ; yet he could not believe he should have experienced a similar treatment from all his juvenile fi ien cis; for surely, as our great bard observes— « f It is a cinéit)· to load ? falling man." Well,
"Well, should he ever rise agaiig he should know better how to distinguish his rutin e friends. With this reflection he went to sleep, and early the next morning continued his journey to Dover, which, as the Genevan had foreseen, they reached just in time to save the tide, and after a wry pleasant passage were landed on the Gallic shore, whcie the young foreigner was quite at home, as, though he spoke English with great fluency, his accent betrayed his country, and he was not of sufficient consequence to induce the English inn¬ keepers to treat him with the same respect they did their countrymen. r Octavius, though a perfect master of the French language, found it next to impossible to understand them at first, they appeared to speak so rapidly; but m 4 before
before be rcadud baits his ear got ac¬ customed to their volubility. Ί be young OenevMi and himself agreed p j fectly, as the former was anxious to shew him every thing worthy a traveller's notice upon the road, therefoie, thougli tbc season (it being the second week in l:bluar\) was not veiy propitious for travUlivg, their journey proved veiy agieeable, and on the fifth evening they drove into Paris through the Fauxbourg and Porte St. Denis, which was at this time standing. As it was one of the least striking entrances into this then gny and magni¬ li ceti t city, Octavius expiessed his dis- appointment to his companion, observing, London was far berter paved and lighted« This the Genevan agreed was tiue, but added— i( Give me Pai is for a residence. Ihe
The nobility here arc lodged like sovereign princes in comparison to the British great folks; and I think, when you have seen the public gardens, noble beddings, &c. with which this city abounds, you will agree it at least equals London." Octavius acknowledged he had had too cursory a view as yet to form any decisive judgment. The Genevan was going to a friends, who, he hoped, (so much had he become attached to Octavius during their short acquaintance) would be able to accom¬ modate him also with an apartment and his board during his stay, knowing the gentleman, though i u the first line as a jeweller, was in the habit of taking gen¬ teel boarders of any nation ; at all events he promised to procure him a lodging in the neighbourhood, that he might be able M j to
to enjoy as much of his company as possi¬ ble during- their joint stay. Octavius was flattered by his kind offers, though he assured him his stay was very uncertain, as he might not remain twenty- four hours iu Paris, and he might spend as many mouths there ; but this depended wholly upon circumstances, be said, as it may be supposed be did not cluise to let him know what had really brought him over. Pie was also very particular in not laying himself under any obligations to a person he knew so little of, though he was very happy his friend, who was a German, could accommodate him with an excellent apartment and his board, as he conceived it would save him a vast deal of trouble indeed. He met with the greatest politeness from Mr. Bachman and his whole family, w ho,
who, presumi ng he was come to Paris more in search of pleasure than in the way of busi ess, ofìerc-d to accompany him to see every thing worthy a traveller's notice, desean l ing very gaily upon the French nation, who, he averred, were, all tilings considered, the happiest people upon earth Octavius thought there was much truth İn his leasoning, and was more reconciled than ever to the possibility that he was a native of this «' Gay spin htly land of mirtit and sccial ease," and retired for the evening, fully prepared to submit without repining to whatever destiny foitune had in store for him·
M ? CHAP.
CHAP. XII. JL HE following morning, during break¬ fast, our hero mentioned having letters to deliver to the Duke de St. Florentin, inquiring where he resided, and what was the most likely time for him to obtain an audience. This acknowledgment intfuced Mr. Bachman to form a very high opinion of his lodger, whom he presumed was some very great man, come over incognito upon 6 national
national business; he therefore insisted upon setting him down at the Minister's, who resided in the FauxbourgSt. Honoré, declaring he was going within a few doors of bis hotel, he would therefore leave his carriage to bring him home again, as it would be quite contrary to French etiquette either to go or to return fiom a great man's on foot. This was said in so gay a tone Octavius perceived he had not made the considerate offer by way of displaying his own con¬ sequence, nor could he suppose Mr. Bachman thought him at all superior to his travelling companion ; he was there¬ fore the more gratified by the urbanity of his manners, not once suspecting he owed no small share of his host's politeness to his being the bearer of letters to the Prime Minister; but during the reign of Lewis the
the Fifteenth, and our tale is of that date, your degree of consequence iu the eyes of your friends and acquaintance was icgulated by your being more or less connected with the nobility and the court; and at this period the Couit of Lewis the bien aimce, (well beloved) was i u its greatest splendenti, and generally con¬ sidered as the model of all Europe. The Parisians,ever indulgent to their monarchs, considered his amours as proofs of the re¬ semblance he bore his adored ancestor Henry the Fourth ; and certainly, whatever might have been his foibles, Lewis the Fifteenth, in the early part of his reign, was the wcll-belovcd of his people. As Octav ius was, however, by no means aware that bis implied business with the Duke de St. Florentin had increased Bach- man's natural wish to oblige, he attributed his
his unexpected politeness to his long intercourse with the French nation, and could not help thinking that good manners are to private life what good morals are to public, that is, the cement and security of society in general ; and as the desire of being pleased is universal, he thought the desire of pleasing (which he ever understood the Fiench nation were renowned for) ought to be equally so r as in fact it includes that irreat and fundamental principle of morality, of doing to others as we would wish to be clone by ; be therefore did not hesitate to place this wish at the head of the minor virtues ; nor could he help thinking the French a far more agreeable people as a nation than the English, without reflecting that he was in his present situation a very pre¬ judiced judge. 5 The
The jeweller's equipage was like his house, very handsome'; but his servants wore no liveries, as that was then the exclusive privilege of nobility. During their short drive, as he lived in the Rue Koy ale, he had not much opportunity to expatiate upon the beauties of Paris ; but the Minister's hotel struck Octavius as being particularly magnificent. There the jeweller also alighted, having told him in confidence he was going to receive the orders of the monarch's present favourite sultana, Madame de Pompadour, who in¬ habited one of the most supeib houses in Paris, a little farther on, on the other side of the way, promising he would piocurc him a sight of her enchanted palace, which certainly vied with the one the poets de¬ scribed as the habitation of Armida. His carriage and servants were ordered to wait for
for our hero, as he intended to walk home. Bather at a loss how to proceed, Oc¬ tavius first inquired for the Count de Nieul. i( lie was at Versailles," he was very politely informed. This afforded him an opportunity of declaring he must in that case intrude for a few minutes upon the Minister, as he was the bearer of letters he must deliver into his own hands. The Duke was engaged for the mo¬ ment, but if he would write a few lines explanatory of the business lie came upon, they should be immediately delivered. Thinking it very possible he might not be favoured with an audience before the great man knew rather more about him, he had come prepared with a note, in which he
he had as briefly as possible detailed what had brought him to Paris, not chusing to trust the Ambassador's or his unknown friend's-letters out of his own possession. p Jhis be gave to the secretary who bad addressed him, rather pleased it had been required, as it would spare him the dis¬ agreeable task of telling his own story. In less than ten minutes he was ushered into the Minister's presence, who, though he gave him a reception perfectly calcu¬ lated to render him still more partial to the French nation, eyed him so steadfastly he greatly increased his natural colour. Having requested he would take possession of an aim chair, the Minister said— tf I owe this visit, I think I understood, vouns: gentleman, in vour note, to an advertisement in the English papers; and vou are the bearer of letters from the Marquis
Marquis de Rochegude and a lady with whom you are unacquainted." " Exactly so, your Grace," replied Octavius, presenting his credentials, tak¬ ing care to put the incognita s letter upper¬ most. The moment the Minister caught sight of the direction he exclaimed— " Good Heavens! is it possible!" hastily breaking the several seals, the lady having taken every precaution to prevent its being read. His countenance varied several times as he proceeded. The letter was very long, and appeared to be written very close. The Minister paused several times, but at last came to the conclusion, when he exclaimed— il How wonderful are the decrees of Providence ! I am no longer surprised at your
your features having been so familiar to me from the moment I first saw you ! How sincerely do I join the writer of this letter in execrating Lord Vilmore !—but you were upon the point of marriage, I understand, at bis approaching dissolu¬ tion, which induced him to confess his misdeeds ; but I must have your whole stojnom your own mouth. My friendly correspondent refers me to you for a vast many details she is unacquainted with, though we neither of us entertain a doubt of your being the identical child who was stolen from Bayswater ; but to set my mind perfectly at ease, allow me to inspect your left arm." " Upon which I bear a mark I can only compare to the Prince of Wales'* plume," replied Octavius. " A very
u A very just definition of it !" rejoined the Minister; " but I must request to see it—you have no objection to taking off your coat in my presence?" <c Certainly not," said Octavius, begin¬ ing to strip while he was speaking. Having turned up his shirt sleeve, the Minister instantly exclaimed—· *' Enough, my young rriend ! I am perfectly satisfied, as I myself affixed that fleur-de-lis upon you, which bears the elate of your biith, and the initials of your father's and mother's christian names, which no one but myself could have discerned !" tt Then pray, your Grace, to whom do 1 owe my birth?" asked the impatient youth. " Are my parents still living? Will they, do you thiuk, acknowledge me ? Am I of English or French extraction ?" " You
<( You must allow me a short time to recollect myself, my young friend," re¬ plied the Minister, turning to one of the windows to ruminate upon what he justly thought a very strange adventure, and by way of gaining time he read the Ambassador's letter. tt All is not right yet," thought Oc¬ tavius, " else why not have satisfied my curiosity ? But, perhaps, I am a natural child after all ; nay, the son of this very Duke, as he was evidently in England at the time I was born í The letter I brought might be from a friend of my mother's.' — what if it were from herself?—he was sufficiently agitated while reading it to warrant the suspicion, and now, perhaps, he dares not acknowledge our relationship ! Well, at all events he will most probably place me in some line which may render me
me in time independent ; and had I re- maineel in England under Mrs. Brown¬ ing's protection, I should have incurred his and my anonymous friend's contempt— and what, after all, is ancestry ! I should scorn to borrow merit from the deael !" During his reflections the Minister turned to him once more— " I wish with all my heart, my young friend, I was absolutely at liberty to resolve your late very natural questions; but this is by no means the case ; though this I will venture to assure you, that you will be amply provided for, admit- ting I am never permitted to be as explicit respecting your family as either vou or I could wish ; but I have great hopes I shall be allowed to satisfy your curiosity, and to gratify your feelings, when
when next ite meet. Where do yon lodge ?" Octavius, though greatly disappointed, readily satisfied him. " Then you are under the roof of a very honest man, whom, I trust, you will soon have it in your power to reward as you could wish ; but let me see you to* morrow evening at seven o'clock, when, I hope, I shall be enabled to clear up all your doubts. I perceive you are not quite pleased with this delay, but, be¬ lieve me, it io unavoidable ; I can there¬ fore only advise you to vis-it some of the numerous curiosities with which Paris abounds during the interval. I would appoint an earlier hour for our interview, but I must go to Versailles this evening, and I don't expect to return before* to-morrow
to-morrow afternoon, as the King holds a council in the morning; but believe me when I assure you you will henceforth find mc your firm friend." And with this assurance Octavias was obliged to content liimself; therefore promising to be punctual to his appoint¬ ment, he made his parting bow, and was rather astonished to find the Duke's politeness led him to accompany him to the door of the anti-chamber, where he took so distinguished a leave of him that the servants scarcely knew how sufficiently to evince their respect for him, and his carriage was instantly called, to which several of the Minister's footmen attended him with a degree of obsequiousness he had never been treated with, even while he bore the name of Browning. vol. ι. ν During
During his drive home he was more than ever inclined to suppose he was tbis nobleman's son by some English lady ; and as he certainly seemed disposed to acknowledge him, be entertained no doubt of his fulfilling his promise of providing for him ; and at all events, while he retained his present station, even his natural children would be treated with politeness by this courtly nation ; and degrading as this notion was in some respects, he rather rejoiced at the idea of having, ?? he hoped, found a natural protector. His unknown friend had merely given him to understand in her letter that his father was living ; his mother was, therefore, very likely, no more. Again, if he was the Minister's son, how came be to remind him of some other person, which he certainly had done from
from the moment he entered ; and as he could not discover any resemblance be¬ tween himself and the Minister, as he was much taller than that gentleman, and what is termed a fair man, whereas the Duke was very swarthy ; but, perhaps, he took after his mother in point of com¬ plexion : still, the more he reflected, the more he was perplexed ; he therefore re¬ solved to follow the Minister's advice respecting the disposal of his time 1 , not wishing to give way to reflection till he was rather more au fait of his family history. His travelling companion, ν ho \\ its rather curious to know what business he could have with the Prime Minister, hoped he had been favouiecl with au audience. ν 2 t< A verv
ίζ A very short one," was the reply 5. ec but I am, byway of making me amends, to be honoured with another to-morrow evening; therefore I &İH1 dedicate this day and to-morrow morning to seeing curiosities." 4£ Then suffer mc to be your cuiele about Paris," was the reply. il Not to fatigue Bachman's horses, we will hire a remise, (glass-coach,) and I will under¬ take to find you ample amusement." Having thus arranged their plan, Octa¬ vius endeavoured to withdraw his thoughts from the approaching interview, but found it a vain attempt, though he made shift to conceal his restless anxiety from the family he resided with, and at the ap¬ pointed time he was again in a manner compelled to make use of his host's coach, which
which was, as before, to wait his return. Not having wished to disguise his im¬ patience, he reached the Minister's Hotel a few minutes before the appointed time, and was ree'cived with so gracious a smile he began to hope he should deiive more satisfaction from this interview than he had done from then last. fía ving taken a scat, the Minister thus be^an :-- ít As I am vre il aware of the impatience you must foci, my amiable young friend, I will come to the point at emce, as í am loally anxious to relicv e y our mind. Since we parted I have seen your father, unto whom I of course communicated the letters vou bioudit me, and what had past between us; and as the proofs I was enabled to give him of your identity weie of the moat convincing nature, he is not N 3 only
oulv 4iMsfed that you are his loii£-lost son, but he is e\en anxious to make your H J ationdiip public. Yet, impatient as he ÍlxU ίο see and embrace the son of a lady "whom ho adore el, but who is no more, it ? not in his powci to gratify his feelings this evening; but I hope I shall have the satisfaction of introducing you to each othei befoie to-morrow noon." Ci But could not I go to my father if----- ' *' It is impossible,'* interrupted the Miniver, " yon should see him befoie the time I mention. He is my best friend indeed ; I have been in his confidence from the time of your birth. The ex- pi essimi hr s startled you, I perceive, but 1 hope you will be reconciled to what ? past lecak As I am authorized to enter into a few details ícsperting your birth, which
which your father would find it rather un¬ pleasant to mention, I must acknowledge you were not born iu wedlock; still, as the laws of this country allow of such a proceeding, your father means to have you legitimated out of compliment to your mother, and will of couise provide for you accordingly. Nei man has more ample means, and I will venture to wagci you will be pei fectly reconciled to what I know must rather have wounded vour A/ feelings by this time to-morrow. But, to icturu to my story : before you were born, so anxious was this parent (whom 1 know you will both love and honour from the moment you are intioduced to him) to provide foi you, that a veiy large sum of money was by me placed iu the English funds solely for your use, and that is now doubled, as it has ever been held sacred, in n 4 case
case you were ever found, or that your father .should have heen called away. That money you will be immediately pat in possession of, though, depend upon it, you u ΠΙ receive many farther marks of parental affection ; lam, therefore, u ell i>>Mirtd you will never have reason to repet ebe immense fortune you expected to have inherited." " I can only regret I have not a more legal claim upon this father, whom I am fully prepared to love and respect, since he deigned, even before he could know how far I might prove deserving of his bounty, to provide so amply for my future wants. But, pray, who is he ? " A Frenchman, and a man of family, who chiefly resides at Versailles ; but he ui^es to see vou before I enter into any further details respecting his rank iu soei et v,
society, though he wished you to be made acquainted with what I have already hinted to you, desiring me at- the same time to assure you, you are far dearer to him than any of his legitimate children.'* " He is married then ?" said Octavius. " He is a widower." " ?1? mother was an English woman I presume ? As she is no more, I suppose the letter I presented you with was wrote by some one of her female relations, who certainly evinced a very great regard for both mother and son, as her letter to me, not to mention her noble present, was truly kind and affectionate ?" ·' She was your mother's best friend ; and though she could not, upon many accounts, have openly avowed her regard for you, she would certainly have shewn herself every thing she professes, had your n S Either
father been prevented fiom acknowledging you, 01 liad he en tei tained any doubts of your identity; i will, theicfoic, take upon myself to convey any letter, you mav wish to wiitc, to her Ladyship, for she is a woman of the first fashion in England, theicfoic would not be supposed to be acquainted with your birth for fear of leading to suspicions respecting )our mother, whom you will judge, from my acknou lodgment, was not of low extrac¬ tion ; but the great, you have already ex¬ perienced, are as liable to act wrong as their inferiors ; in short, no one who gives the reins to their passions can say, I will go such lengths and no further, par¬ ticularly when there aie real obstacles to impede our gratifying them in an honour¬ able way, wdi ich, I can assuie you, was the ca.se in the instance I allude to. Vour mothei,
mother, I have already given you to un¬ derstand, was a woman of the first rank, who was sent to Paris at fifteen to com¬ plete her education. To say she was hand¬ some would be paying her a very poor compliment—she was beautiful in the extreme ; her eyes, hair, teeth, and com¬ plexion she has transmitted to her son, thoutrh vou have vour father's feature and manlv figure; however, she might have captivated a loss accurate judge of female beauty than my friend, whose only study, from the first moment he saw her, was how to inspire her with a passion equal to his ov, n. As he possessed some power, he contrived frequently to see her. His exterior appearance was then, nay, is now, strikingly captivating; iu short, he suc¬ ceeded in obtaining her heart, and I need not add what followed. I don't pretend n ? to
to exonerate him, as it certainly w r as a very criminal attachment, since he knew lie could not lead her to the altar. She was not so wise; but enough of the sub¬ ject ; suffice it to say, when she was sum¬ moned to England she was unfortunately three months gone with child. The only reparation your father could then make her, as she resolutely refused to continue their criminal intercourse after she found her lover could not marry her, was to prevent her family and friends from dis¬ covering her situation, that her reputation tnisrht not suffer a stain he knew would tempt her to terminate her existence; she was, therefore, strongly recommended to Madame de St. Florentin, who had ac¬ companied mc to England, and I was also put into the secret, iu hopes that between us we should be able to concert measures to
to conceal her pregnancy; therefore, when we began to fear her increasing size might lead to suspicions, Madame de St. Floren¬ tin, who was become very sincerely at- tacheel to her, prevailed upon her father (her mother had been dead some time) to allow her to spend a few months with us at a villa we had taken upon her account,. about twelve miles from London, while he went down to his seat in the north· You will guess the rest. Neither the doctor nor nurse ever saw her face» In short, so well did we manage matters that I am convinced no suspicions of her hav¬ ing become a mother ever entered the mind even of her most intimate friends, as she did very well, and joined her father in the north at the time appointed, while you were put out to nurse to a very re- spectable couple, for whom I took and ? furnished
furnished the house you was stolen from. As your foster father was a very decent tradesman, a maid servant was added to their little suite, solely to attend upon you, as I gave them to understand you ????? my son, the fruit of a private amour, anel that I had some intentions, havine: no male legitimate children, to make you my heir. This accounted for my apparent extravagance in providing for your wants. You already know how you was trepanned from Bay swat er, and, I am sorry to say, your mother for some time suspected I had been the robber, thinking it very probable your father wished to have vou brought np under his own eyes, and also knowing the degree of attachment I had ever felt for h ini. This occasioned the two advertisements concerning you ; and what was rather singular, your father entertained
entertained the same suspicions of your mother she did of me, as he feared she wished to bring you up in absolute igno¬ rance of the authors of your birth ; but her deep-rooted sorrow for your loss, which brought on a fit of illness it was greatly feared would terminate her exist¬ ence, convinced him of her innocence, and his affectionate assurances of his own and mine, added to his solemn promise to make you every amends hi his power for the little stigma affixed to your birth, should you ever be forth-coming, acce¬ lerated her recovery, though she ever pined after her beautiful boy ; and I be¬ lieve your father never experienced greater satisfaction than when I informeel him you were not only forth-coming, but in France; and I am sure he will glory in the
the fine fellow I am to have the pleasure of introducing to him to-morrow." Octavius assured him he looked forward to that moment with infinite impatience; and then, fearing he might prevent some other person from obtaining an audience, or keep him from business, he rose to depart. The Duke pressed him to stay supper with him, but he begged to be excused, alleging he should be incapable of enjoying even the best society till the impending introduction was over. The Minister assured him he fully un¬ derstood his feelings, and wished it had beeu in his power to put an end to what must be a very iiksome state of suspense that evening, but requested he would do him the favour to take an early breakfast with him the following morning, as he wished
wished to be upon the road by half past ten at latest. He readily promised to oblige his Grace in this respect, and was then reluctantly suffered to despart, and not this time contented with seeing him to the anti- chamber, the great man even attended him to his carriage. " If he is thus polite to an acknow¬ ledged illegitimate child," thought our hero, " how does he treat my father's avowed heir?—indeed, according to him, " Far nobler blessings wait the bastard's lot/* who was, I can believe, " Conceiv'd in rapture, and with fire begot/* and I shall be inclined to say with Savage, having apparently far less reason than he * had, poor fellow, to regret I was not born H A dull domestic heir," that
that a natural son " Shines eccentric like a comet's blaze, ** And lives to built!, not boast, a generous ι ace, «« No tenth transmitter of a foolish face ! '* By the way, my father, if I am to believ e the Minister, is a remarkable handsome man, therefore I ought not to repine at our resemblance, but endeavour to con¬ sider myself a very foitimate mortal, as' certainly ** My dimensions nre as weil compact, '* My mind as generous, and my shape as true ** As honest madam's iisue." At all events, I feel very much inclined to love this father, w ho is a man of the first rank I am convinced from the Minister's behaviour to his natural son, therefore I think he ought to have given me to understand what post he holcL under the Grand Monarque."
Thu
.>
Thus reasoned Octavius as he drove back to the jeweller's, whom he meicly told he was going to Versailles the follow¬ ing morning with the grenat man, when, he hoped, the business for which he came over would be brought to a final con¬ clusion. This intimation made them re¬ double their respect to their boarder, who, they hoped, would devote a short time to pleasure as soon as he had finished his business, which, Bachman agreed, ought to take place of the former.
CHAP.
CHAP. XIIL 1 HE thoughts of the approaching in¬ terview effectually prevented Octavius from enjoying much repose, though he highly approved of the French laws, which permitted a father to legitimate his natural children ; yet, he feared, should he ever return to England, he should be still considered as a bastard, though the obloquy attached to the name might be removed in France. Well, and if he never returned
returned to Great Britain, who had he left behind whose society he should regret ? Why, he should have liked to have known whether all his school and college friends would have treated him like the five he had stumbled upon, because it would be very unjust to form a judgment of all his friends from such a specimen, as he had had some who bad never flattered him, and to m hom he bad been far more at¬ tached. The generality of these were now upon their travels, therefore he might have an opportunity of putting them to the trial. One of his greatest favourites was the only son of the Marquis of Tre- lawney, Lord Fitzhayman, whose fag he had been when first entered at Eton, and with whom he had renewed his intimacy at College, though the former had set out upon the grand tour soon after our hero was
was entered at the University, and as they were not in the habits of correspondence, he did not know where he now was ; yet, he tlattered himself, this nobleman might still deign to acknowledge him as a friend should thev ever meet a»ain, which it was very possible might never happen, as he thought there was but little chance of his ever atrain visitin«* England. The ap- pioachiug iuteiview, however, for the present wholly engrossed his thoughts; and though unacquainted with hi» father's rank in life, he presumed, since he had boon triven to und( istand he was a resident at Versailles, that he ought to adorn for Ins visit, though he was totally unpro¬ vided with gala suits, having left several he had had made upon his approaching marriage for James to make the most he could of. A handsome morning frock was
was therefore the only dress he could assume; and as few people were less in need of borrow eel ornaments, he bad, pcihaps, seldom looked to more advan¬ tage. He was at the Ministers rather before than after his appointment, and after a hasty breakfast, to which Octavius did but little honour, they set out for Ver· saí lies. \?? shall not pretend to desciibe our hero's sensations during this hour's eh ivo, though he several times tried to induce the Minister to enter into some details respecting h'b father; but all invaili, as that gentleman meicly told him his father was a titled man, and of sufficient rank to ennoble even his most distant relations. Then, at all events, thought Octavius, I shall
I shall be more respected as the acknow* ledged illegitimate offspring of such a man than had I remained in ignorance of my parents—a dependant upon Mrs. Brown« 1 ing's bounty, and the supposed son of a beggar, which would have been indubita* bly the casc; still he thought it rather an humiliating circumstance ; but as he had no prospect of returning to England, he trusted he should in a short time be more reconciled to what was at all events un¬ avoidable. While he was thus reasoning with him¬ self, " they drove into what was then termed the Cour des Ministres of the magnificent palace erected by Lewis the Fourteenth, wbieh Octavius allowed, upon liis companion's asking the question, was, in point of appearance, far superior to St. James's,
James's, but begged leave to decline giving his final opinion of it till he had seen the inside. The Minister was pleased with his an¬ swer, observing, it was a convincing proof he derived his existence in part from a native of England, as a Frenchman of his age would have been in rapture with t lie glitter, which rather lessened than added to the eílcct of the building. Havini? leel him through several magnificent apart % ments, toward those styled the private ones, appropriated solely to the use of the Monarch anel his particular favourites, he scratched at a door, the only one they had yet found shut, which was imme- diately opened, the person who admitted them silently leading them into a most elegant boudoir, where he left them /t : /e- à-têic, vol. i. ? The
The way they had gained admittance appeared very strange to our hero, who could only suppose it was peculiar to the French notions of courtly etiquette ; but while he was lost in admiration of the elegant, and at the same time magnificent decorations of the small apartment, which commanded an unbounded view of those celebrated gardens, which were considered as the chef dœurre of Le Notre, a gen¬ tleman, apparently between fortyand fifty, magnificently, dressed, and wearing the insignia of several orders, enteied b ν a door nearly opposite where our hero stood. The stranger appeared very much agitated, though the «lances he addressed to the O D Duke were expressive of great satisfaction. 'The Minister appeared scarcely less pleased, but instantly leading Octavius towards , ???, said— " It
? It rests with you, Sir, to name this young gentleman, while I feel peculiarly happy in being permitted to introduce him to a father, and our well-beloved Monarch !*" The astonished, though, wc must sup¬ pose, gratified Octavius, giving way to his first emotion, fell at the feet of his royal parent, who instantly raising him, gave him a most fervent paternal embrace, and, while a tear glistened in his eyes, said— " My dear Octavius, I adored your mother, and I feel I shall transfer the affection I bore her to her son, whose kiss I most bitterly deplored, and whom I shall
? 2
bc
be proud of \'icknowledirino\ certain you v. Ül not disgrace the blood cif the Dour- bons ! My gooel friend here has given you every informai ion respecting your birth. Believe me, I have ever regretted my rr.nk prevented nie from leading your mother to the aitar; it shall, therefore, be my care to prevent her son from suffer¬ ing for my indiscretion, as I trust you are already convinced your late matrimo¬ nial disappointment will eventually prove a very foi tunate circumstance. 'As ?? legitimated son, you will rank next to the princes of the blood ; therefore you cer¬ tainly can't regret having been deprived of a purchased title, and a fortune by all accounts not very honourably acquired." Octavius's reply was perfectly calcu¬ lated to endear him still more to his royal parent, who foresaw this fine young man would
would do him great honour, and turning to his Minister, declared he gave him infinite credit for his discernment, as he fancied he could trace some of his own features in the animated handsome coun¬ tenance of bis son. We shall not pretend to detail all that passed between the enraptured father and his no less delighted son, who was given to understand that the money then in the British funds should be immediately transferred to his name, and that it would amount to near ten thousand a year, irt addition to which the King meant to bestow a large estate in France upon him, and several places, the emoluments of which, aeîdcd to his private fortune, would enable him to support the rank he was to hold in society with proper splendour; for instance, the Monarch supposed he o J would
would have no objection to entering the lists for fame, as every Frenchman of any rank was in the army; his extraction would procure him the immediate com¬ mand of a regiment. No proposal could have been more agreeable to Octavius, who had studied tactics with uo small degree of application under the deceased Lord Vilmore, who once had an idea of his entering the guards. This he told his father, who was astonished to fn\d him so well versed in the art of war, and still more pleased .when he discovered he might he ranked amoniîr the first scholars of the asre ; but advised him to make a still further study „of the military art under the Maréchal de Beizers, brother-in-law to the Minister, whom the King had pitched upon as his sou's introducer into the beau monde, and his
his instructor in French manners and etiquette, the art of war, Sec. telling Octavius be was for the present to take up his abode at the Hotel de Lelzors, that nobleman having very lately lost his son, whose apait ments he was to occupy ; a proper suite was already provided for him, and in a shot t time bis establishment should be formeel· upon the most liberal plan—" For the present," continued the Monarch, " I shall content invsclf with conferring the title of Duke de Valen tinois upon you, as your mother bore the strongest resemblance to Diana, Dutchess of that name, and favourite of Francis the First, I ever remarked between anv two people. You will supply all Octavius Lewis's pecuniary wants for tlie present, Duke; and you can assure him, for I 6 perceivé
