Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
More ghosts
MORE GHOSTS!!!
CHAF. XXL
* "\ ??^ aun ^ was a ver y e ^ e s an ^ wô ^ -Lt -?, man, of about forty ; and as I had been enjoined to pay attention to her advice, I at leaft took care to learn to what it tended, * ζ You, my miftaken brother, will fup¬ pofe it was to go to church on Sundays, wbich was at that time a cuftom very common even in genteel families-—tp vol. ii. ? íhun
íhun coquetry, as the beginning of H- centioufnefs^—-and to make both ends meet.—I will inform you better. « We roib at eleven, (confider the difference of faihion, at that time eleven was almoft dinner-time with the vulgar) breakfafted, and dreiied by one; our mafters until three, which time Lady Trevor fpent in ihopping, vifiting, and airing ; then the Ring, and coquetry and detracting until four; dreffing till five; dinner till feven ; from which hour until two next morning, you may be certain was filled up with dancing, gaming, the play, opera, and a late fupper, " Thefe were the bleffings of week daya only. Sunday, by the ridiculous laws
laws of England, we were miferable. I often ufed to fay, Why prevent public diverfions on Sundays ?——The actors muft of courfe make „us pay more than the amufement is really worth on the days they are tolerated, or ßarve, hy way of keeping Sunday holy. The fame of every thing elfe ; but while prieftcraft ? encouraged it will be thus, that we may be compelled to fill their churches, through the want of any other public place,, and left we, of the higher order, mould not be fuflicient to give thofe confecrated aflemblies a crouded appear¬ ance. The other cîafles are alfo forbid to work on this day, in order that they may nøt be prevented fvomßevu'mg thenp- ßh$s in tbeir beft cloaths. ? % f" My
u My aunt would obferve, that it was well enough for old people and people in the country to go to church, but that her health was too delicate, for ihe had only been once within the laft three years, and then caught a violent cold, which kept her from the next birth-day, though her cloaths were made up. 4( The old lady, however, in general, xifed to fend us by the time fervice was half over, for our edification; and on our return to accompany her to the Ring, pick up one or two friends to dine in the femiiy way, and play a game at whift quietly in the evening, which, at that time, narrow-minded people called abfo¬ lute wickednefs. But we made it a rule to go to bed early, that we might be the * better
better prepared for the excefles of tb* following week* " Now, pray, Mr. Morney, how was I to learn any of thofe things you tdl me are fo excellent?—Your religion, your morals, and fo many other fine things, that, in your judgment, yonr Af¬ ter ßould be eminent in—As hovv j ! !— Where were my inftructors, my oppor¬ tunities ? <ζ But I feek not to write an apology* I am not accountable for my actions ; and I acknowledge that thofo you moft ftrenuoufly difapprove fprung immedi¬ ately from my own free-will and full in¬ tention. Nay, much as I have lately fuffered, were the fame circumftances to ? 3 Qccun
mrm agna, I would ?? m the like mm* »ι ???? the event to ttat røwer Uni rules ?! ??^-~€???. t% ?? aum, J have feid, mm «Jcgaat and dìffii^cd ; hef daughter, Miá Tre¬ vos w» jaft nøt ?$?, sotdeforiöed, yet fte ???? the eye ? firft, hy the careful ???????????? of her drefs and pirnner. What worker î tbej were her «?&?? Sudy j and to my frøprbe, I, ?? my ????????? beauty and fuperior under¬ ftanding, was hardly notiert by my «^ jour ftupid fex, except a few elderly men, and one young perfon, who feemed pleaf. ed with me at firft for my appearance, fo difterent from the herd of women. But as they were not people whom I frifted to encourage, the repulfivenefs of
difeTöce ; i« Lctìtk obferved ?? «???? only adrantage ?? coafin had ovar mm was her fmßim ; hut the thiag- htaåéi msšky ????&? tite to her €?$?? te ? indebted for the attention ol" the men, and her eooccit grew ?1?1???? e^exï to Laíiy Trevor, who ima ??, 1?? thc inclination for coquetting berfeîf, though fo difgufting in m elderly Aô» tni» ; fo I was refolved to make aa «£» fort at other weapons befide iÈmfe ??*~ ture had fo well endowed me with. i€ Hence, withont confulting any owe but Letitia, my maid, mantua-maker, and frifeur, I appeared in Lady Trevor's drawing-room, where a large party were affembled to go to the opera, in a com- B A pleat
pkæt M. of tbe moi: elegantly fashion¬ able àtei®* ** Lady Trevor looked pleafed at my manœuvre ; I perceived that fee prefer¬ red being eclipfod by any other perfon. than her own daughter, who abfolutely turned pale, {for Sa thofo days no woman of character wore rouge) und found fault with every part of røy arm, which I gave myfelf no trouble to defend, nor had î any occafion ; for now, the gentlemen beginning to perceive I was not quite a mope, turned out for my champions, and I begm to triumph over them and Mifs Trevor. et When any of thofe flie had info- lently ftyled her-danglers, quitted her chains
mtf f —My way was always to ertcmiîage their firft advances, until the filly crea¬ tures, intoxicated with my cündeícen- fions, would make abfolute propofals tö me; then with pride I would difmifs them, and inform Mifs Trevor oftheir impertinent offers, my haughty rejec¬ tion, with my hopes that now they might asiain enroll themfelves in her fuite. I have fecn her ready to burft with ill- concealed vexation. " Young as I was, many gentlemen, hearing of my eftate, made the moft fe¬ rious propofals even to my father, who wrote to me not to engage myfelf, for that he had fomething in view which would be infinitely preferable to me of ? 5 any
any offer I had yet received, I aflkred hi«! that I had not^ met any man worthy of my thoughts, lb all went very well between us. ·" A yoimg Captain of thc Guards ad¬ drefled me with all the vivacity and vola¬ tility of youth—But men are always treacherous; and oft when they carry the greateft femhlance of though|leflhefs, have the deepeft defigns, " Thus was I, Mary Morney, to run off to Scotland with this fpark, becaufe he wanted cafh ! I !—Such impertinence merited fomething more than contempt. I feemingly confented—and my youthful hero, one morning about one o'clock^ handed Letitia into a poft-chaife and four,
???$ and írt off io groa fpirits for Gust¬ ila . nor did be difcover his ?????? un¬ til fix bours hard driving had got Mm many miles from London ; then his fur¬ prize broke ont, in the r ãfml fenubhs maimer of «preffion, that mm have adopted to conceal their want of ideas ; there were oaths and damme's enough to mount a guard with. α Letitia told him civilly, that as I had changed my mind, fhe thought it would be a pity to* difappoint him, and at the fame time lofo an excellent opportunity of fettling herfelf for life; as certainly he would aot> have had thc temerity to propofe for Mifs Morney, without being confcious of pofieffing fomething very ?. 6 pretty,
pretty* either in land, or money* or goods, or—* ** She was proceeding» when the gal¬ lant Captain, ftung to the quick with rage and difappointment, foiled her by the week, m if he would ftrangle her, which m'as obferved by two decent looking far¬ mers, who were on horfoback, and feeing the transaction, called to the poftillion to ftop, for the gentleman was beating the lady, u Upon this the Captain quitted his hold, and Letitia fcreamed aloud for help, telling them that théjöfed wicked man had forced her into a chaife, in or¬ der to oblige her to marry him in Scot¬ land,
land, and becaufe fhe refitted, had ufed her in the manner they faw* " Dear, good gentlemen," faid ihe, " make him leave the carriage that Imay return in fofety to my weeping friends." " The two farmers faid that was but reafonable, and only demanded of him whether the lady was his wife. This cal¬ led forth another volley of oaths and curfes that ihe was not ; upon which they made thc fweet fellow alight, to re¬ turn on foot fhould he think proper, while Letitia rode home in triumph, and as we were at breakfaft, entered the room, and gave us an account of the matter, which ferved for converfation at all the parties we frequented for a full week. :" The
*· The kdies blamed mc much 5 but tbe Taen— who will appropriate envy to females I — ? declare^ that I faw more en¬ vy, in the delight with which they heard and recounted every circumftance, even with additions and comments of their 4 own invention, upon this occafion, than exifted, I belicvej, even in fhe bofom of Mifs Trevor. " He, poor man, did not fhew himfelf^ except on the parade, any more that win¬ ter ; and I ufed fometimes to go there in a large party, on purpofe that he might not lofo the pleafing remembrance of one for Whom he had profefied fo great a paffion. You will think that, by my haughty demeanor and" coquetry, the men, 'm a fhort time, would give over their.-
. their pretenfions—Not fo, their own va¬ nity prevented that ; each man knew my qualifications, and likewifo conceived a good opinion of his own, to hope for a better reception.
\_/O.A.Jr.
1 ..... "■4ΗΓ"#?ρι ....... CHAP. ΧΧΙΓ. *' ??^? enough of London, left by re- ■*-^ fleeting oh my then towering fituation, enlivened by the beft hopes for the future, and contraft it with the ultimatum of my prefent, my brain ihould madden, and I finiih my days a complete victim to the laws of men ; againft which, whilft I have fenfe, I ever will proteft. <ζ Indeed, we were hurried from that foat of gaiety, where I reigned more ab¬ folutely than a Princefs, by a letter from Scotland,
Seotfcmd, informing 1?? Trevor that her only foøj Sir Charles Trevor» wae fo extremely ill, as to render his Hie prc- cariousc w It was hard upon me to be dragged away upon a matter of very little con¬ cern to myfelf but my father defired me to remain with Lady Trevor, to affift in fupporting her under her atrliction, and to aid in nurfing Sir Charles, adding, that he could not think of taking fuch an advantage of my filial affection, as to deprive me of the example of Lady Trevor and her daughter, as at the Ab¬ bey I ihould have no fuch opportunities of accompliihing myfelf by the improve¬ ment of my tafte and mind.
" Truly,
^Tf%» ι wfe« «ii ?? ute- JwlfifX-O-MMifli: ?? irti Λ JBlrdfrt rjrni uff' 'Trn JiiMnit mimé- ?«? ?? a'— ilfi /j«, ^» jÆ^il·^.». , -« -. in-uil.. ,¡ ___. ??? ?????? ??^??????, ι© ? iiaisj^røef ??? fe ??1 « » f d?»e& Yon foe I heå ?> dfeöbe* brni I wonld ????????, lis that iriig&i ïn^liaife a dear« of rity, tóicà I alwajpf avoided as aa act of ? ??????%?$?- 3 and compMne^ sfotti/, «htI ?? ÜMfjr taeviæe üie fopcriorky í>f my fonum en te ^ fo true b ? ?? ? philofopher can extract ??» fet from t fa» moft calamitous circum- ??????*. ** My father tor>, to talk of før for an example! ! I—-Parents are too carelefs on that fcore, yet expect their children to be ferfiã copies—of wbat I —themfelves ! " Lady
u iady Trev4^i^ eager to g» down; 1er jointure wm fmall in compari fon with her wants ; the houfe ? Iteram iw» Sir Charles's, uníeis he íhould othcrways difpofo of it. Young men oiften dk witb- out trills, and then what belmes of Umi pom- difconfolate mothers ?—It was hard to truft in daughters, at leali fnch da^İK ters ? Mifs Trevor ; we man tíien bfo no tune to fof this ??????«! young «an ???? ? &<*, fhould fuch be tb wiü of #f We were not defined on the mtf* ¿nd ia three days foimd ourfelves ? Scotland, where the family feat, which was Lady Trevor's jointure houfe, pre¬ fented the richefi and moft beautiful views, but was itfelf much négkcted.~<p My
?? Lady had not been able to hear thè reading in a place which reminded her of her ikmafed —her Charles ; fo ihe was forced to be at the expence of a villa in Surrey; only her fon delighted in the haunts of his boyifli days, and feldom pafied a fummer without going down for a few weeks. ** At prefent he had been ordered to it by the phyficians, to drink goats whey, and in hopes the air might reftore his health, which declined daily ; they ima» gined it was á confumption, but I found afterwards that his diforder was a hroken heart, owing to a difappointment in love, of which a farmer's daughter was the object, and who Lady Trevor found means to have married to a young attor¬ ney,
ney, who was captivated by her beauty and conduct, which, as I have been in¬ formed, was exactly fuited to her ftation in Hfe, and for the propriety of which ihe was much indebted to the care of her brother, a young man of refined fen¬ timents, cultivated by an excellent edu¬ cation. " I did feel fentiments of compaflion for Sir Charles, and found no reluctance at paying him all thofe little attentions fo confoling to a wounded heart, " I was affifted in my cares chiefly hy Mr. Wellers, the brother to that girl I have juft mentioned, for whom Sir Charles fuffered fo much, for Lady and Mifs -Trevor lay in bed late in the morning, from
fmm a want of fteep, as they fmit and retired early through fatigue at the tire- fomenefs of a country fife ; and were be¬ fides quite worn out with diftrefs at the fight of poor Charles, of whofe recovery they ftiïi feemed to entertain the moft fanguine hopes. " I was quite vexed one day to hear their wonder what could occafion fo re¬ gular and abftemious a young man to be fo ill before the phyfician. * c Lord, aunt," faid I, " the thing is very plain ; Sir Charles was violently in love with Mifs Wellers, and you know ihe is now married to another, and my coufin·—*'
"Hold
« Hold your ihoeking infinuations/ 11 faid Lady Trevor, forgetting her ufual equanimity. u 'My fin, Sir Charles, could sot ftoop fo low. Such girls can never be wives to men of rank, and I had rea¬ fon to believe ßie would not be his mi£ trefs; fo î —fo fhe—-I mean fo they, that is, her father, on his death-bed, made her promifo to obey me ; and fo I con¬ vinced her—that is, I got her a very good match. u Well," faid I, " I am very fure, that had you gotthe proper match, Sir Charles would now have been in perfect health«" " Ridiculous! Mifs," faid fhe, " men never die for love. I am convinced that his complaint proceeds from fome very different
difterent caufo.«—Do not you think fo, Doctor Γ The Doctor was not quite fo well bred as ?? Fhyz. for he ihook his head, and iaid, that he had always feared his pati¬ ent's diforder was f ited in the mind. " And I muft tell you, my Lady,** zdded he, tc that where fo deep a paffion ? taken for a worthy object, the parent who vio¬ lently tears them aftmder, does it at thc rifk of life to perhaps both parties." He quitted the room, and Lady Tre¬ vor attempted a fneer, but could only ar¬ rive at a grin of contempt at the phyfi- cian's wonderful folly, which ihe now plainly pei cei ved to be the reafon why her fon did not mend fo iaft as flie wifli- ea a
ed, but flie would fend for her own phy¬ fician from Bath ; and as to me, if ever I uttered fuch injurious expreflions con¬ cerning Mifs Wellers, I ihould be re¬ turned home to keep houfo with young Mrs. Morney, as fhe fpitefully called Mifs Meadows."
^ox,. ?. ? CHAR
$? ??? E GHOSTS. ■■ mo e'zfiøgteH » ' ..... CHAP. XXIIL '* 4TOUNG Weilers, I have faid, pof- -*- feffed the advantages of a good education. He intended to go into the church, and was only detained from pur¬ fuing his ftudies at thc Univerfity by his fincere affection and folicitude for Sir Charles, who could not hear to have him abfent, though fenfible tiitit nothing ihort of the moft tender friendfhip could make him endure the treatment that Lady and Mifs Trevor often beftowed on him, even before his face.. . " «But
<ζ But I often related to Sir Charles that which they were liberal of at other times, when they would Indelicately and unfeelingly hint at legacy hunters and toad-caters, though, certainly, young Wellers was an independent man fn every refpect ; but his mind was fof- tened by the affliction of beholding his friend a martyr to love for his fifter ; and he bore all with a patience that furpriz¬ ed, and likewife convinced me, that his friendfliip was more pure and difintereft¬ ed than either the maternal or fifteriy Jove of his perfecutors. i( Indeed, I often have feen the abfur¬ dity of fuppofing that yery near relations love each other mßmcJively. Very few parents love their children, and, of courfe, ? $ there
fide.. ;; : ;.- : '..,.: ■;:.. tt Wömeri are filled with love of piea¬ fure and vanity, to the feclufion of all Ipve to individuals, excepting fenfual love—rand Man S$ a compound of every thing whi$h.'.he ; himfilf denominates vice. _ I..except;a very few. * 4 Wellers was very grateful to me for my notice pf him* and, I believe, more fo for my aftiduity to his friend, who at times appeared to revive a little from our care ; but I fancy thofe were efforts he mádé to prove his gratitude by giving us pieafure» ·'. ■>■' -'../': V I dare'·
MORE GHOSTS.' " I dare fay I ihould have loved Sir Charles had I found him in another fitu¬ ation ; but his affections were confofledly wedded to another, and I only felt friend¬ fhip. Befides, always in company with Wellers, no other man to follow me'and divert my attention, or footh my pride; he too handfome, agreeable, infinuating, fhewing the amiablcneis of his difpofi¬ tion every day, nay, every hour ; Sir Charles conftantly extolling his good qualities, added to my innate refolution of pleafing myfelf, no wonder that llov¬ ed him ; and then, indeed, the alacrity with which I attended Sir Charles be* came tenfold. çe Thc poor patient very foon perceiv¬ ed the fituation of my heart ; and when - ?? I ufecj
I ufed to betray myfelf, accidentally on ptrpoß, frequently fmiled at rny fuppof¬ ed inadvertency ; fometimes directing a penetrating glance towards Weilers, who would bluih fcarlet deep, which í knew to be a good fign m my favour. t " My fathers pms books now wert often in my head % my lover was. bafiV ful —I inexperienced; and yet it muft be my lot to make the firft advances to ib difinterefted a man. I could almoft have wiihed him like my Scotland going Captain; <r However, not to dwell upon s icenes you have nothing to do with, I did at laft, with the intervention of Sir Charles, fucceed in making him acknowledge his love
love for me, and foon proceeded to pro¬ mife that nothing íhould induce either * of us to wed any other, fo long as death fpared both. u I was willing to marry him at once, nay, defirous of it. My warm imagina¬ tion was not to be fatisfied with words- and vows ; but the fear of incurring his contempt, kept me within boimds ; and he, good foul, had not an idea that I could poffibly intend downright matri¬ mony, without my father's fanction too, in fuch a time of mourning. t( However, we did not want oppor¬ tunities to fiy every thing; for Sir Charles, convinced of the fallacy of am¬ bitious and interefted matches, hy his ? 4 own
own experience, and wifhing to fecure Wellers a happy lot, did every thing we could defire ; he even compofed a very pathetic and elaborate letter to my fa¬ ther, imploring his confent to my union with a man, to whom he gave all the epi¬ thets of an angel, when thc letter was produced for my approbation« 4i Wcîte, enraptured at this eloquent proof of afteôion, hugged his friend m t he ought to have hugged me, snd faid he was willing to abide by the refult of it $ hut I had more prudence, nor would giv® permiifion to fend it, knowing my fa¬ ther's intentions were decided upon my deftiny ; and that this letter would open his eyes, but not alter his refolution, " AU
i ίζ All this time Lady Trevor thought me paffionately in love with her fon, whofe danger, now that his will was compleated, İhe would not fee ; nor did any thing feem to raife her anger fo much as a hint from any one jrelating to his apparent decline. She formed flatter¬ ing ideas of our union, and was moft happy when it was in Sir Charles's apart¬ ment.
? 5 CHAF*
í· ^ ■s. CHAP. XXIV. « QIR CHARLES died ; the fcene *-^ was affecting, and I fincerely felt for the lofs of a real friend. Lady Tre¬ vor too could not but be unfeigned in fime part of the grief fhe difplayed upon the demife of a worthy young man, a dutiful fon, and whofe end, though ihe denied it to the world, her confcience, (the beft monitor) I am furc, whifpered to her heart was accelerated by** her means, « Sir
< c Sir Charles had left Wellers joint executor with her Ladyfliip, To her jointure he made an addition, ana\ to Wellers he left five hundred pounds per annum·, the large remainder, excepting fome fmall legacies, to his fifter, who could not conceal that her fatisfaction at inheriting his wealth obliterated ail for¬ row for his lofs, ζ< But to hear the united clamour they raifed againft poor Wellers, for the to« ken of efteem and gratitude bequeathed to him, made the difcuffion of the will one of the moft indelicate and difgufting feenes I had ever witnefled. α Sir Charles*s memory was not fpar¬ ed, for giving the bread out of the mouth C6 of
of his Own relations, as Mifs Trevor faid, and Weilers I thcy always fufpected what herwas hankering for. If it was to be lete to ftrangers, how many others bad a better right ì But there was evident foul play. tf Then there was an attempt made to perfuade me that my poor deceafed coufin ought to have left me, who did not want it, that legacy which I know he only confidered as a trifiing token of efteem to one who as little fought for,, as he greatly deferved it ; but that you fuppofe did not fucceed equal· to their expectation. ** I never faw Wellers fliew any ap¬ pearance but at this time ; and now his whole s
whole form affumed a graceful dignity ; and his countenance, which grief had rendered pale, a luftre that made him a moil ftriking figure. " Madam," faid he to Lady Meadows, " when I accepted of the office of exe¬ cutor to my deceafed friend, it was in the hope of alleviating your feelings at the facrifice of my own, and thereby ho« nouring his memory, as I loved his cha~ racier ; however, as mine is now fo un- juftly traduced, by thofe I could have died to ferve, I refign that charge, con* fcious that had my friend forefeen my prefent fituation, he would not have forced me into it. I refign my legacy, happy in the reflection of having deferv¬ ed it in his opinion—but to your Lady¬ ihip's
fhïp's pleaded poverty I beftow it, re¬ quefting only in return his picture in full - length, hanging in the gallery." " Notwithftanding the foornful tenor øf his words, Lady Trevor now was all goodnefs to him ; that or any thing elfe he pleafed to aflc ihould be at his fer¬ vice; ihe always knew him to be a young man, who would fcorn to take advantage of the weaknefs of another. " Call not the fpirit of generofity by fo unworthy a name, Madam," replied Wellers, with manifeft anger in his coun¬ tenance, a retain the gift, my fatisfaction will ever remain a fufficient recompence, "as I fhall never ceafe to efteem myfelf for having met with a mark of friend¬ ihip,
íhip ftom fuch a man as was Sir Charles Trevor." " He rofe, and was leaving the room, but Lady Trevor's grief never overpow¬ ered her recollection; ihe called omV taking her handkerchief from her eyes-— iC Mr. Weilers, Mr. Wellers, you will fign me a deed of gift" ^ ít Undoubtedly, Madam," faid he, and left the houfe. " Notwithftanding the generous facri¬ fice he had made, it was far from reftor¬ ing peace to the family ; for Miís Tre¬ vor, whofe large acquifitions had only rendered her avaricious, took it extremely ill of her mother, that flie ihould appro¬ priate
, priate to her" own ufe the annuity be¬ queathed to Wellers. She faid it was fhocking thus to impair the eftate ; and was, befides, a reflection upon herfelf, as if fhe would not always be happy to af¬ fift her mother in any thing neceflary or reafonable. tc Lady Trevor obferved, that depend¬ ing upon children was both unnatural and dangerous ; 'and exulted in her fuc¬ cefs over Wellers, which ihe attributed to her doughty menaces. i( However," faid ihe, ίζ we muft butter him up with kind looks and civil fpeeches until he figns the deed ; and as for his romantic demand of the picture, it is only mine for my life ; every thing here, at my deaths goes with the reft of the eftate." " There
u There was a worthy, honeft woman f — û woman whofe precepts and example í was ordered to copy, for the improve*· of my morals, the enlargement of my un¬ derftanding, and thc refinement of my manners;—and then, if I erred, tho blame was upon me in not having better attended to her 'ufeful inftmâíons and falutary advice í To this fcene in the honfe of death I could not help paying great attention ι and from my obfervation was more and more confirmed in the idea that felf-gra- tification is the primary object of every perfon ; and that morality, or religion, is ufed but as a cloak to cover the difpo¬ fitions of the heart, to miflead the worId > and feed vanity, « But
tc But my contempt for my aunt and coufin could only he exceeded by the rage I felt at the meannefs of their behaviour to Wellers, whom I admired for his fpi¬ rited behaviour, only regretting that Lady Trevor íhould reap the harveft of it. When I next met him I befought him to give* up the legacy to an hofpital or a Sunday fchool, or any other one than fuch a fordid woman ; but he told mc, that having engaged his word, he muft keep to it, (C I was likewife prefent at his pre* fenting Lady Trevor with the deed, which fhe received with great affability, and encouragement, affuring him that ihe- would always be happy in feeing him ι and moreover, ?? a proof of the good
good opinion ihe had of him, ihould cer¬ tainly remember him in her wni. " Wellers reminded her df the pic¬ ture, and ihe told him that during her life it ihould be his, but that it was an heir room (which I took care to inform hira of before) ; he bowed, and faid, that not expecting to meet with any precifion of dealing in the family, now Sir Charles was gone, he had prepared for that de¬ ception, and ihould only ??? the origi¬ nal until he could procure a fkilful artift to paint a copy. " I dare fay," faid I, with great readi¬ nefs, « that my aunt will be at the ex- pence," « Mif*
* f Mifs Morney/' faid ihe, c< yon fpeak ridiculoufly, nor does the young man expect any fuch thing; iure he may keep the pleure while / ihe" « Well," faid I, « then, Mifs Trevor, yúttm&y perpetuate the loan of what ought to have been a gin.*' ** What for I ? aid Mifs Trøør/ " « My dear Madam/ 1 faid Weilers to me, <* leave me to ??? the beft of my bargain ; «I would fcorn to accept of any gift from either of the ladies, fave only that picture, nor that without making eompenfation ; with thc copy I will be content«" « You
<ζ You arc a nohle fellow/' faid I, s warmly» u He bowed, and his eyes thanked me* but he would not traft his lips, Jeft, as he told me fince, he might haye been as rafh as I was, who had looks of fur¬ prize and anger darted at nie, by both aunt and coufin, which I Uttle valued· I only aimed at not heing found out and prevented m the execution of my plan, " They were only retarded by waiting for the deed, being refolved to go to Scarborough, to recruit their fpirits, an<t make «p mourning, which they conld not thi^ik of procuring in the ???$??>
€ζ Mifs declared that if her mother did not haften, fhe ihould be obliged to fot out without her, as the houfe where her poor brother had breathed his Iaft was not a proper place for one of her fon- iibtlity.- w Lady Trevor paid great deference to what Mifs thought proper to fay, as, I fuppofe, fhe apprehended lofing the handfome allowance that was paid for her board. cf I obferved that the more the mother t gave up, fo much more the daughter encroached; but I believe that to he quite natural, as their mutual avarice generally prompted them to oppofe each other, ' * « All
u All this time I feigned ficknefs, which, at laft, by the timé they were ready-to fot off, I made to enereafe fo, by recourfe to various little artifices in which Letitia had inftructed me, that I was not only confined to my chamber, hut kept my bed. cf My aunt was at her wits end—To ftay would kill her ; to leave me would appear unkind—-Letitia hit upon a me¬ dium, which, indeed, I had planned my¬ felf. This was, to remove me, if poffible, to the Parfonage, where, for a moderate fum of fum of money, the Curate and his wife would, no doubt, gladly accom¬ modate me; and under whofe prudential care, I might acquire ufeful inftruction and advantage, * «Lady *
** Lady Trevor was delighted at the ^ropnia!, and complimented me on fug- ¿efting fo eiceflent an expedientan the as ihe faid ftie was fore that Mrs, Green would be more capable of paying me proper attention than herfelf, in her pre¬ fent dejected ftate. (( Her Ladyfhip, notwithftanding, de¬ clared, that íhe ihould be very uneafy until I joined het at Scarborough ; nay, if it did not foon take place, or ihould I get worfe, ibe would certainly return to me. " 4 would n^t -appear to) much dated by &?»$?<$$ of my fcheme $ but was certainly very glad when Jbady Trevor returned
returned from the Parfonage to acquaint me with her fuccefs in the bufinefs ihe had fo cheadully engaged in ; that tbe Greens had joyfully afiented, and the bargain was concluded.
1
vob. n. D CHAP,
CHAP. XXV. u T Took care to remain very ill, ra- ·** ther worfe every hour, until the re¬ moval of my aunt and her family to Scar¬ borough ; nor did they prolong the in¬ terval by uttrieceflary delays,, w Wellers only enquired for me in the parlour, as I did, not dare to entruft him with my plan ; and had I admitted him, it would have been impoffible to keep the fecret, which I knew not bnt in his , quaint, romantic way of thinking, he might
might fruftrate, and thus difconcert our propofed meafures. w Thus, though Letitia affured him that I was in no danger, he was very for- rowful, and ufed to compofe fuch letters and fonnets as I then thought moft elo¬ quent, which rendered me more impa¬ tient to throw of the reftraint I had im¬ pofed upon myfelf. ct The very day that my aunt depart¬ ed then, when he entered the Curate's neat little parlour, to his great furprize he beheld nie fitting there, attired in a moft becoming undrefs, compofed òf white muflin and black filk, with every other decoration that could add to its neatnefs. è; D % (( I mean
u I mean not to defcribe our iov T e fcences* only to tell the refult of them, which was, after fbme time fpent in rea¬ foning on his fide, and pleading on mine, befide certain tenderncftès that pafîëd, and more plainly convinced us of the ne¬ ceffity of the cafe, that he confented to marry me privately, fwearing not to di¬ vulge the matter, until he had my pei» miffion to do fo. a ît was not quite impoflible to pre¬ vail upon the Curate to give us the nup¬ tial benediction, without even acquaint¬ ing his wife, nor had we any witneiìès but Letitia, now become of more confe¬ quence to me than ever, for it required all her cunning and afliftance to aid my receiving Wellers at nights without fufpicion ;
fufpicion ; and I was fo refolved not to live without him, that had í not had fuch a friend, I ihould certainly have be¬ trayed the whole by the imprudence of my conda β. a We were both happy at that time ; I never enjoyed myfelf fo much before or fince ; and I believe that had I re¬ tained my love for Wellers, I might have been a happy w r oman ; but the natural ficklene^ of human nature prevented that, and occafioned ??? of my fubfe¬ quent misfortunes. tt Neverthelefs, I have fpent foma joyous intervals in my life, for which I have to thank my own daring fpirit, that when my happinefs was at ftake would D 3 ever
ever prompt me to purfue my own dic¬ tates regardlefs of any others. a At that period I enjoyed a fortnight moft gloriouily; fo thoroughly was I wrapt up in my love for Weilers, that I could almoft have become a religionift to pieafe him ; nay, had we never fepa¬ rated', it might have happened ;> at leaft I veiled my fentiments before him, only in one point, which was my averfion for priefts, and with difficulty prevailed upon him not to take orders. * ( Weilers believed that my diflike to his entering the clerical profeffion, only arofe from an apprehenfion that he would become more ferious, and combattcd me for fome time, but it was the combat of love,
fovc, and I being moft ardent, gained the victory ; fb we fettled that he fhould live upon his little patrimony, until I got pofleifion of my eftate, which wouki not he until I was twenty-one years of age (I was at that time only feventeen) and then we would declare our marriage; for he was fixed in the determination of not accepting any thing from me in the mean time. " My aunt had written an account of my illnefs to my father, and I, from time to time, wrote ihort letters to each of them, mentioning that my health was returning by degrees ; that I felt myfelf happy and comfortable in my prefent fituation, and that I wiihed to continue in it. D 4 But
í( Butîïiy father had now changed his plan, and mine therefore was to be de¬ ranged. He judged it necefíàry to have fome regard to appearances ; and as Mifs Meadows was near îying-in, he removed her to an elegant houíè in the town of -—— ; and, perhaps not approving of my refiding with my Curate any longer, wrote for me to return to Morney for the Summer, and prefide in the houie, giving me to underftand that he had not any other companions. * c I was fo grieved at this feparation, that it was thought I ihould have no need of counterfeiting illnefs. I was quite fíck at heart. As for Weljers, he belought me to remain with him, or al¬ low him to accompany me, and break the
the affair in the moft humble manner to my father. 6i For," und he, ' ? yonr father loves you, and as what is paft cannot be re- caPed, I truft we fliall not find him im¬ placable ; but fuppofing the worft that can happen, how happy, my Ifabelia ' would make mc by confenting to fhare for the prefent my little income ; it would, perhaps, give her a relifh for thofe ami¬ able, calm pleafures I am beft fuited for." ** I convinced him that it could not be, for my father would not only, in all probability, endeavour to break our mar¬ riage, but likewife have it in his power to alienate my eftate ; for it was fo fettled, that if í married without his confent be- D 5 fore
fore I was twentv-one, he íhould havo t m* f that power ; but by means of Letitia we promifed to correfpond frequently, and, perhaps, meet fometimes; his agonies at the feparation were moft afflicting, but I was nothing bebind him on that fcore, as my own feelings could^iot be exceed¬ ed—however, I tore myfelf away.
tskiAky .
CHAP. XXVI. (ί Τ Loitered on thc road as much as -*- poffible, wiihing to get a little over my violence of grief before I ihould en¬ ter my father's prefence, whom I now feared more than loved ; was it not na*- turai ?—He alone was between me and happinefs. " You were at home for the vacation, and may remember how my fpirits were deprefíèd. It was attributed to my in¬ difpofition, want of companions of my D 6 own
own fox and turn, and the dullnefs of the country. <c George and you were very attentive to me, and I felt a grateful affection to¬ wards you. My father called in a phy¬ fician, but I grew worfe. " In a few weeks, Letitia, who had more knowledge of the world than me, hinted that I was carrying within me the fruits of my marriage ; my eyes were opened to a new misfortune, for I was very far from wiihing to rifque my life and conftitution by bearing children ; nor could I ever foe all that mighty piea¬ fure fome young mothers pretend to feel for having given birth to creatures that, perhap, ?\\ caufo their moft bitter mis¬ fortunes ;
fortunes ; but in mý fituation, to haye a little odious being intrude itfelf to reveal what I would have kept inviolably focret, was painful for me to think of. " Under thefe afflicting circumftances, I took the beft meafures I could think of to conceal my fufferings, forced my¬ felf to appear lively, faid I was recovered, took pains to fet off my perfon, the bet¬ ter tö carry on the deception ; and fet my wits to work to infure fuccefs in fu¬ ture f the exertion was of fervice to me, though I ftill wiihed for the arrival of the time that was to unite me for ever with Weilers, et I did not, however, find it fo necef¬ fary to give way to grief; î Could now read
reaé with attention other things befides his letters, which indeed were fenfible and tender; but fometimes my heart would whifper to me that I had acted haftily to incur fo much danger for an inferior. " Abfence you know impairs love, efpeeially love that has been gratified. But my attention was moftly occupied in concerting a plan for the purpofe of bringing forth my burthen in fecret, and concealing my fhame and forrow from the world. " I had read and heard of many young women having been eleiivered 'without a figh or groan ; and though I # need not fmg at the moment like Jane of Navarre, why
why not bear my pain with as much he¬ roifm in filence ; the difficulty was to manage the infant ; but even that, with the affiftance of Letitia, who ftill re¬ mained my undeviating friend and con- fidante, I entertained a hope of being able to overcome, " You know the dilapidated ftate of Morney Abbey at that time, and that one wing of it had not been opened for years, I believe I may fay centuries. I fpared no pains to find a paflàge to this part of the manfion, and fucceeded at laft through a door, which is concealed by fome tapeftry, in a room which I made Letitia occupy, on pretence of wanting the one before allotcd to hçr for my own ufe. "We,
" We, by our faint efforts, broke open this door, and traverfed together the range of defolated chambers, going By thc way of the long gallery, leading to the extreme apartment of that wing.«— We difoovered a winding ftair~cafo, Which we afcended, and found ourfelves in an extenfive range of apartments that muft formerly have been efteemed hand¬ fome, and which ftill pofíèflèd fufficient accommodations for the purpofe I meant to appropriate it to. " We fixed upon a room that con¬ tained a bedftead not quite fallen to pieces, and dragged from an adjoining one a large old chair, which had only bft one arm by the manner of our re¬ moving it. "It
tt It was alfo managed between us to bring proper bedding at different times from the inhabited part of the houfe, which the houfekeeper mified, but little fuppofing who really had taken them, and not knowing where to ground her fufpicions aright, I believe at laft attri¬ buted the extraordinary difappearances to certain ghofts, which the fervants faid occupied the locked-up apartments, I was glad to have thefe ftories revived, as they might miflead in other matters of great importance to me to have mifun¬ derftood. " Letitia fwept out the room, and put every thing in order ; and we Began like- wife to be very charitable, particularly to a poor labourer's wife, who had a large , family*
family, anil was near lying-in. We got patters of what they call haby cloaths, and cut out and finiihed a great quan¬ tity, of wbich you may fiippofo I laid fome by; but all thefe meafures were the work of fome months. <<? My father, in the mean time, often appeared to examine me with the moft forutmking looks, which raifing a con* fufion I could not conquer, gave him thefe very fufpicions I had taken fuch pains to obviate ; and his coldnefs to me would have hmt my feelings not a little a year fooner, but I had now other af¬ fections to^engrofs me befides hmjlif. tft I do not believe that aught but his pride was wounded now, for his fondeft ' love
love was fixed upon Miís Meadows and her brat ; however, he ufed to order me to ride, and even hunt with him, which vvas a thing he had never before required of me. " I am now cor. inced of his motives,, though I did not at that time under¬ ftand them t but all the confequences enfued that he had propofed, for the littfe one never faw the light. " I made as light as poffible of my ill¬ nefs ; my prudent father did not infift upon calling in a phyfician, nor did he ever after aik me to accompany him on horfeback, though he ftill kept a very watchful eye over all my actions.
I could
6β HORE GHOSTS. a I could not be- without perceiving- his fufpicions; but as he fpake not, was fatisfied to let them proceed to the ut¬ moft rather than acknowledge being mar¬ ried. " Affairs remained in this ftate for near two years. At thc expiration of which time we were vifited by Mr. de Burgh and his fon, Thcy had both been* abroad fome years, as the father did not think it beneath him to attend his fon in quality of Governor, wifely conclud¬ ing he was more interefted in his welfare and the fuccefs of his education, than an* indifferent perfon, however well quali¬ fied by talents, whom he might engage for that purpofe.
«Mr.
w Mr. de Burgh and rny father had been upon the moft intimate footing of friendihip ; and it fèems the fon had formed the fame union of fouls, as you call it, with George and you. ίζ I felt myfelf impelled by an irrefift¬ ible impulfe to love bim. But then, Weilers! IS— Wellers was very well to love in fecret ; but he was too tame, too obfcure, to reflect luftre upon me.— While, on the other hand, De Burgh was accomplifhed, brilliant, lively—and ardent like myfelf. Oh! De Burgh, I would often exclaim, why are we thus feparated ì " From the moment I ñtt\ converfed with him, I began to loath the very name of
of Weilers; and how did I rejoice, how greatly felicitate myfelf, that I had no child to form an additional tye to the unfortunate one which already too fa¬ tally enchained me.
CHAF*
CHAP. XXVII. ** !Vr 0W ' mciee<i » }■ ω matter ??- 1 * -*· ^ cient to occupy my thoughts, iind all my converfation with Letitia. She agreed with me that it was probable Weilers might be deterred from claiming me as his wife. * f I now wrote but feldom to him, and in anfwer to his love-fiek expoftulations, Vould reply coldly, that years brought prudence, and the dictates ofthat fhew¬ ed me how ridiculous our intentions of marriage
marriage were, which never could be happy, even if realized between people of fuch a difproportionate condition/—* u That I w r iihed him happy with one who fhould be my fuperior in every thing elfe, but more his equal in ftation," 4< I concluded by offering a pecuniary compenfation for the embarraflment he might imagine himfelf entitled to feel for the lofs of me, and hoped his own good fenfe would enable him to coincide with the juftnefs of my determination. " Such were the heads of a letter I took the pains to write to Mr. Weilers, who thought proper to anfwer it in a moft indignant ftile, difclaiming any of my öfters, and refufing to acknowledge my
my power to deny being his wife. He did not glance, as I expected, upon the ruin of his fortune, which he had been obliged to break in upon to fupport him¬ felf, at the fame time that I had prevented him from purfuing his intended profef¬ fion ; but that was his pride ; and be¬ fide, his letter was very fevere in other refpects. " In fhort, I thought myfelf entitled to aflèrt my dignity by a contemptuous filence; and a letter that came from him about a week aftenvards, I returned un¬ opened. (i All this time De Burgh was court¬ ing me in the moft impaflioned terms ; our fathers had long fince agreed upon vol, ii. E our
our union, and mine was, I believe, fin- cerelyglad to ?? rid of me. fc We were married privately, and foon after, accompanied by you, left the king¬ dom, to make a tour iu France and Italy, whieh occupied us three years, at thc end of which we returned, " You know how tenderly De Burgh loyed me, and that I returned it with equal fervency. Certainly, I required all his attention, but had I not an undoubt* ed right fo to do ? ? I had almoft forgot that fuch a be¬ ing as Wellers exifted, or remembered it only with felf -congratulation upon his filence, and my own adroitnefs in keep¬ ing
ïng abroad fo long, that I fuppofed he muft, before that time, have ceafed ta think of me. ie My father and George were hoth dead, and you were married to a good kind of young woman, bnt all this you know. " I was now rather defirous of having a fon, as De Burgh fo earneftly expref¬ fed his wiihes for children, and was not difpleafed to find myfelf in a likely way to gratify him. . * t Morney again was our fummer re* fidence, as old Mr. de Burgh lived at his feat near it, and I prepared every thing there to ly-in with fplendour, very dif- E % ferent
ferent from thofe days when Letitia and myfelf were ftealing neeeftaries into an uninhabited chamber, where, without medical affiftance, I expected to give birth to a little' unàíked^for being. α Letitia was now married, and in the fame condition as myfelf, fo I could not have her attendance ; but your wife was kind enough to promife to remain with më until my recovery ; you, to my for¬ row, ftaid too. <ζ Do you recollect how happy be Burgh was when my fon was prefented to him?—How your own eyes glif¬ tened, while thofe of your wife flowed at his raptures !—How he talked of his obligations to me, and his -unceafing love !
, love !■—-Yet h^s that man caft me off, difclaims myfelf, my fortune, my \ove s and even abandons that beloved child, becaufe it is in my care. <c In the eye of reafon, who İs my huiband, but De Burgh—the choice of my maturer years, the father of my child, the poffoffor of my heart ? " WejlersH.'—My inclination for hint was ill-founded, tranfient, and îom>fince paft ; I cannot live with Wellers ; yet he would haunt me, and rum my peace for ever. You know by what means he compafìèd the fatal event that has driven me from my huiband, my home, my eftate* my fame, E 3 "I have
** I have written the abm r e at different intervals* and in different countries, I uow direct it to my brother Reginald Morney, but am undetermined whether he will ever fee it, u There are many events in the courfe of my narrative, which, as I committed them to paper warm from my beart, I may have exprefïèd myfelf more freely upon than is either proper or neceflary, for even now they ftrike my view in a doubtful point. I will beftow attentive confideration upon fome things, and then judge of the propriety of entrufting any man with a retrofpect: of my Hfe. ** By what name is the exiled heirefs of Moi ney permitted to fign ?—That of Wellers
* Wellers, which I abhor, was never adopt* ed by me in my fondeft moments—-and that of De Burgh is torn from me !—-No matter, I am ftill « I. MORNEY." Leghorn.
E 4 CHAP,
CHAP. XXVIII.
/^ REY had fat up all night to read ^"* the foregoing ftory ofhis mother; and found, in addition to that part writ¬ ten by herfelÇ tlie following papers, in the hand of Mr. Morney. ^ X»EAR GREY, (( WHEN I reflect upon the uncer¬ tainty of life, it always renders me dili¬ gent ; for fliall I, who am unaflured of the next minute, put off until a diftant day that which is material to the welfare of
of an individual lefs dear to my affection than you arc. " Now then, ¡n full vigour of mind, Ict me compleat a taik begun by my fif¬ ter, your unfortunate mother ; that of putting together the feries of errors that have eventually ruined her peace, and nearly your fortunes. Poor boy ! this İs your birth-day—All here ßoufd have been your's by undifputed right " It is well that my Mary promifes to be good and amiable ; that will, î hope, more than compenfate to }ou for being under a feeming obligation to the wife, who, in fact, will only bring you a fart of what might have been your's, but, at the fame time, enough to content you E 5 both,
both, if you purfue the plan I mean to / lay down. " My fifter's ftory is brought down to your birth. α My wife and myfelf were propofing to leave Morney as foon as our own fa¬ mily particularly required her prefence, for flic was truly a good mother, and amiable in all her deportments; nor w as our refidence at Morney to her any more than a vifit of charity, whilft Ifabelia fliould require the affiftance of a friendly female, for my fifter was too prond in fpirit, to court or even to accept of friendihip from the equals of her own fex, fo ftrong, yet weak, were the preju-- dices fhe had early imbibed. " My
'" My wife often lamented, that, with fuch advantages as fhe pofíèflèd, her mind íhould take fb terrible a prejudice againft religion. Indeed, we could not fuppofe it had been carried to fo great a length as her actions have fince but too/ plainly teftified. " De Burgh did not regard her fyftems* in fo ferious a light ; he even appeared much inclined to adopt them ; for reli¬ gion, even among thofe that are looked upon as good people now, is fo flightly inculcated into young minds, that it rarely gets any foundation, fo we had no^ hopes of her becoming better ; and fitu¬ ated as ihe was, could not fuppofe flie would ever commit any flagrant breach of hunian or divine laws, merely from E il want
want of temptation; for De Burgh loved the very ground İhe trod upon; and ihe,. though fometimes her violent temper would make even him uneafy, yet dif¬ covered the moft ardent love for him, i( But thofe who defpife the monitor within, and trample upon the facred laws of religion, will foon evade thofe of hu¬ man inftitution, and by degrees violate them all ; of which my fifter is an un¬ happy proof. u She had been brought to bed of you, •Thomas, five weeks, and was fitting in her tireftmg-room, in the duik of the evening, expecting to fee the Lady ilie called Letitia, who had been married a few years to Mr. Moretón ι and being like* wife
wife recovered from her lying-in, was expecte4 every minute, with intent to ftay at the Abbey., as my wife and I were preparing f ? leave it/ " You, the reputed heir, was in your mother's lap ; De Burgh and myfelf were at a window, talking earneftly. " When the door opened,. Letitia ruihed in, as if purfued by murderers* exclaiming, <c He will come ini— He would follow me ! α My fifter turned deadly pale, and demanded, " Who ?" in apparent terror. " Your huiband î —Lord blefs me, he is here!"—and Letitia funk into a chair, and
and covered her face, as if afraid of be¬ ing recognized. u De Burgh was ftruck with the agi¬ tation my fifter was feized with. I ima¬ gined it might be fome ftory founded upon the ftiperftitions that prevail fo mueh among the uninformed, but which î knew If ibclla laughed at ; hut wc had very little time for reflection, as Wellers was foon in the room!—pallid, emaci¬ ated, fomething wild in the exprcifion of his features, but nothing ferocious ! in¬ deed, he was an interefting object. " He flew to Ifabelia, who averted her face, and motioned with her hand to re¬ pulfe him, but he embraced her knees, nor could wc feparate them without hurting
hurting her, fo faft had this diftracted young man clung to her. " Ok! my wife," faid he, u look upon your Weilers ; behold what you have brought him to—poverty, ficknefs, and a diftracted mind—Yes, I have fuffered much—much, indeed. Thefe hands, which again clafp my Ifabelia, have been manacled ------ 0? I have been feverely ufed. Then turn to me, you are mine, and all the world fhall not again divide us, You know your father is dead— Look at me, my wife—Am I fo changed by grief, that you forget your Wellers ? Behold the refemblance 'of yourfelf, that you tied round my neck—I never parted with it ; indeed, I always loved you, thoî you ufed me un worth ily .** « De
α De Burgh now aflumed a calmnefs I could not have fuppofed poffible ; and forcing Letitia to uncover her face, de¬ manded, in a folemn voice, what flie knew of this tranfaction Ì —while I en¬ deavoured to perfuade my fifter to un¬ fold the truth, little thinking how bad that truth was.. " Weilers heard me, and arofè. " The truth!" faid he, " Afk her for truth !—Why, fhe is perfidy itfelf; fhe ruined her huiband, her love!—Now,, ƒ will ihew the truth. 4 Here are her let¬ ters to me-—all whole, although wetted with tears of tendernefs, aching tender¬ nefs, becaufe I thought I could never love her enough. Only this·—-look, this is
is torn ; hut I kept the pieces—it ftung me ; fhe bid me not think of her, after forcing me to become her huiband— And there ihe fits, with a child on her knee, but it is not mine—But, do look on me Ifabelia, and all will be well." s( My fifter, who fow by the counte¬ nances of De Burgh and myfelf, that we could not but believe the teftimonials her unhappy victim had hrought to prove her marriage with him, no longer at¬ tempted to conceal the fact, but faid, that ihe would abide by her actions, and acknowledge no man hut De Burgh for her huiband. u Ifabelia," faid he, u not for worlds, much as I adore you¿ would I wrong that man
man intentionally in fuch a point. He claims you—you are, you cannot deny it, his lawful wife.—Oh, Ifabelia, yott have ruined all our happinefs. * c My fifter then became outrageous. Wellers ftill afierted his right to her; De Burgh, with deep affliction, acquief¬ ced ; but we both judged it expedient to take her from Morney, and to a diftance from Welters, who was not in a condi¬ tion to guide her, and likewife out of the way of remarks her conduct might draw forth, which would only irritate, without correcting her. ζζ Perhaps, we acted rafhly, but we meant the beft. I ordered my travelling chaife to be got ready ; and after having foothed
foothed Wellers with, alas I falfe hope» that all would be well, and given him to the care of the houfekeeper, De Burgh, with much agitation, embraced her for the laft time, thanked her for the affec¬ tion ihe had teftified towards him; Si which now/* faid he, " I grieve to fay Ä muft be turned towards another object.** u He then urged the neceffity there was for her departure to avoid the far-> cafms of the world, and, if poifible ta prevent them. " My fifter ftamped, raged, curfed all mankind, but moft of all Wellers, She refufed to go, and dared us ίο infift upon it ; but I thought, not only for her own fake, but that of every one concerned, it would
would be the moft prudent meafure, and reprefented it fo ftrongly to De Burghs that he affifted me to put her into the carriage, promifing to fond Mrs. More- ton as foon as poffible after us r witb cloaths, and at my defire, the cliild ; for I thought it would be cruel to keep that from her at prefent, and hoped for fome good effects from the tendernefs ît might excite in her. « De Burgh would ftill ad as mafter of Morney, 8cc. until we could arrange things with lefs confufion. cf It was very difficult to retain my fif¬ ter in the carriage for the firft hour ; but when ihe had exhaufted herfelf I repre¬ fented forcibly thc difgraceful fituation flie
fhe was in, and that the only Way not to become a mark for fcorn was to fhun the public eye; that an accommodation be¬ tween her and Wellers might much bet¬ ter be effected while feparate than when in his reach, and that being fo near De Burgh's family, fuppofing him to leave his country for her fake, could not but con¬ ftantly wound her heart. £C She heard me, and in füllen filence acquiefced. Convinced of the high no¬ tions De Burgh had of honour and fe¬ male delicacy, flie had no hopes of ever being his wife, whatever circumftances might take place in future, therefore made no farther oppofition to what I thought proper to dictate; nor did I take the high tone of a brother. Juftly offended
oífended by the difgrace fhe had brought down on herfelf, I only fpoke as one fenfible indeed of her mifoonduct, but wiihing to ferve her, by leflening thc evil confequences refulting therefrom.
CHAP.
ι
CHåP. XXIX, ^X/OUR arrival the day after w r ç -*~ ftopped at Harvyich did not ap¬ pear to move my fifter. Her maternal affections appeared to have died away with her happinefs ; but hoping the beft, I took care not to fail without you, for whom I likewife provided a careful nurfo. We—but no matter for the route we pur¬ fued—I fixed my fifter at a convent in Liege, where I was acquainted with the Abbefs, and which was a fituation, I thought, preferable to any other, as ihe * might
have fociety when fhe pleafod, and yet without being intruded upon at thofe times when I hoped conviction would come to enlighten her faculties; befides, I wifhed, now her mind was depreffed, I cannot fay foftened, that it might be touched with thofe religious impreffions which nuns, in general, know how to adapt to their fubject, as I always would prefer a good Catholic to a Deift ; fo í fettled every thing for her, and haftened to return to join my wife and friend at Morney. ** De Burgh met me. His manly countenance expreifing the moft violent ftruggles between anguiih and an endea¬ vour at fortitude. Our converfation was at firft painful; but we both exerted ourfelves,
ourfelves, and overcame in part thofe emotions. " As for Wellers, he had been vio¬ lently outrageous through the night and day after his interview with his wife, but was now quite reafonable, though in ra¬ ther a defponding ftate. ζ< This unfortunate young man, feem¬ ing to have forgotten what had paflèd, it was judged proper to keep him ignorant for a time of being in her houfe ; and although there were many circumftances I wifhed to difcufs with him, yet for¬ bore, left he ihould relapfe. However, I wrote to his fifter¡, whom he mentioned one day as a perfon that would be very vol, u, F anxious
anxious for his welfare, to come and af¬ fift us in taking care of him. His me¬ lancholy was profound; I thought it would never be eradicated. (C De Burgh left the houfe, refigning every thing he had got by my fifter into my hands, and parting in perfect friend¬ ihip with me, returned to his father. ίζ Mrs. Davies arrived as foon as I could expect, and was much fhocked at feeing her unhappy brother fo ill. From her Ì learned the following particulars« " After my fifter had, as ihe men¬ tions in her own account, returned one øf his letters unopened, he ftill, unwilling to
ίο forego his hopes of happinefs with her, wrote to Letitia, requefting her to inforni him what caufo had produced fuch a change in a woman who had given him fuch ftrong proofs of love, and which he had ever returned with the greateft fin¬ cerity. He begged lhe would be very explicit, as rather than bear the fituation he felt himfelf in, he woukl appear before her at Morney, and demand a perfonai explanation. tc Letitia wrote a very artful anfwer, infinuating that my father fufpected Ifa¬ bella's attachment to him, and watched her fb clofely, tliat it was not in her power to do otherwife than ihe had, without at once revealing every thing ; that the was as much afflicted as himfelf, F 2 but
but that a few years of patience would fot every thing right. ■ €C This a little foothed Wellers, who endeavoured to believe the beft, and lull himfelf into fecurity; but as months paf¬ fod without any letter from either his ivife or Letitia, he went to Morney Ab¬ bey, ; <f There he was at once ftunned with the tidings of her recent marriage, and departure to the continent. As foon as he was able to exert himfelf, after the ???? of this intelligence, he determined to follow her, and to that end returned to Scotland, mortgaged his farm, and collecting her letters, with a certificate Irom the clergyman wbo had performed the
the fatal ceremony, fot off for Paris, hav¬ ing been informed that was the place ihe had fixed upon for her winter refidence. " We were there even at the very time when the ill-fated young man was occu-* pied with traverfing the ftreets, examin¬ ing, as near as he was able, alî the car¬ riages that pafied him, queftioning every one about the abode of that wife, who, in the mean time, was revelling in every pieafure. <ζ Hardly an evening paflèd that he did not vifit fome Speãack, rationally fuppofing them to be places of her refort, but was not fortunate enough to find her ; he then wrote to a friend in Lon-* don to procure her addrefs* Alas! by Fa the
the time it arrived, ihc was on the road to Italy, <c Thither he wandered, hut alwavs traced her too late, I eften thought her reftlefs, for fhe never could bear to ftay in any place a fufficient time to permit me to^ftniih thofb obforvations upon re¬ markable places, which I deemed to be the chief end of travelling ; but I fuppofe fhe poor woman, though apparently fur¬ rounded by nothing but happinefs, could not help feeling the ftings of confcience. ** Poor Wellers, however, ftill purfued her with aftoniihing perfeverance, until heilig taken with a violent fever, at Al¬ cona, he was obliged to give it up, and tltcn lofing all traces of her,, returned to England,
England, ftill weak from the remains of his fever, and the anguiih of his mind. He relapfed, and his whole foul being engroffed by one idea, he loft ev*,ry other, and the poor unfortunate Wellers was confined in a private mad-houfe for feve¬ ral months. cf At iaft it pleafed Heaven to granì him a reftoration of fenfe, and he re* turned to his fifter in that ftate of mind which we often meet with, that cf being clear and collected upon every fubject except that one in which the derange¬ ment had its fource. ( * He felt himfelf a burthen to his bro- r ther-in-law, (who, indeed^ did not treat him with that delicacy his misfortunes F 4 merited)
merited) and was, therefore, refolved to quit his houfe. This he effected one morning early, withont the knowledge of any perfon in the houfe, " After fbme time purfuing a wander¬ ing track, without any ñxed purpofe to determine what path he ihould take, he again thought of vifiting Morney, in the pleafing hope that he might there, at leaft, behold the place where his much- loved Ifabelia had once refided, and where with her he had fondly anticipated countlefs days of happinefs, '* He penetrated even to the great court, and was gazing around him, not knowing how to go forward, yet deter¬ mined not to recede, when Mrs. More- ton
ton arrived. At fight of her his frenzy revived ; he ruflied after her ; the few fervants who faw him were not collected enough to know what ftep to take, and the fcene I have defcribed followed.
F δ CHAP.
v. GHAP» XXX. - €( ? WAS obliged to leave Morney and lwell erS tothecareofMr S .Davi eS , (who I found to he a very proper perfon to entruft) as my own affairs abfolutely required my prefence ; a few weeks after which I received a letter from Wellers, my ill-fated brother-in-law. <( In it he firft apologized for the great trouble he had brought into the family; the abruptnefs ofhis appearance he attri¬ buted to his deranged ftate of mind ; s though,
though, he added, motives of honour and confcience would, in his cooleft mo¬ ments, have urged hini to claim his wife from the arms x)f a Prince. As to her fortune, he utterly renounced every right the law could inveii him with, unlefs that of İnfuring it firmly to herfelf, which he engaged to do im mediately t " He blamed himfelf for having clan- " deftinely married her, befought her for¬ givenefs for every evil he had occafioned to her, and defired mc to aiïùre her, that after the privation of her affections, and voluntary love for another, he had no , defire*to be with her; but, as he felt that his days would be few, conjured her to live as his wife, or otherwife ihe would heap upon herfelf a ftill larger portion F ? of
ofthat repentance which he hoped his conduct had awakened in her heart. <c I was much affected by the difinte- reftednefs of this young man's beha¬ viour, I blufh to acknowledge that I had felt a fecret vexation at thc thought of his claiming fuch large pofleffions from any part of my family^ and that without any reftridions, " I anfwered him immediately, addref¬ fing him as my brother-in-law, and ac^ knowledging that his moft proper ftep would have been to fly when be found the charms of my fifter fo fafcinating ; that his error was very far from heing in¬ excufable even in that point, but in every other muft be acknowledged nohle and difinterefted,
difinterefted, and highly creditable to his feeling3, Cf f heggcd of him to confider that the moil noble fentiments might be carried into a blameable extreme, and that his total refignation of what belonged to him in right of his wife, was a delicacy the moft generous man in the world would not commend, particularly as flie had prevented his purfuing the profeffion to which he was inclined. ({ I propofed a medium ; and approved ofhis intention of living feparate, as, from the violence of her temper, I knew they could not be happy together, I likewife wrote to his fifter, requefting ihe would avail herfelf of the arguments that were moft
moft Hkeîy to fucceed in perfuading hím to retain fome property in his hands, if only fufficient for an annuity to render himfelf independent. » " To this, however, he would not con¬ fent—Every thing was by his fottlement given up to Ifabella's difpofal, I made him offers from myfelf, and with much difficulty at length prevailed on him to accept of a finecure place in the county, which I made him believe 'was procured by my intereft alone. * έ I was unwilling to entruft my fifter with the knowledge of her independence, for ihe was one of thofe^ to whom power is dangerous ; and I dreaded her return to England in all the effrontery of pride and
and felf-confequence, not carittg what heart was wounded fo that her own was gratified. "Notwithftanding, I informed her that Weilers refufed to benefit by her eftate; but added, that unlefs ihe could prevail upon him to make a fettlement on her¿ ihe could not command any thing.; tho* I could aílure her, at the fame time, that all her reafonable demands would be im¬ mediately anfwered, fo long as her con¬ duci íhould be what we had a right to defire of her. " î knew that her haughty fpirit would not bend to aik a favour of any one, much lefs of him whom ihe had fo much injured. "For
€( For fome months- fhe remained ín the convent; but never having been ac¬ cuftomed to a fife any thing like what fhe was obliged to pafs there, removed with Mrs. Moretón and you to Vienna ; w r here, if I may judge from what fhe was continually drawing for, her time was fpent in the moft diffipated manner. s< I wrote frequent remonftrances, and at laft protefted a bill, for I wifhed to bring her to reflection, and likewife to put an end to the enormous credit fhe had obtained of the bankers. if I ufually heard from her once a month, but at length two months paflèd in which I had no intelligence, and be¬ came anxious to kpow the refult of my manœuvre,
manœuvre, when Mrs. Moretón, in deep mourning, appeared before me* « Ah !" faid I, « ihe is dead ? <r Mrs. Moreton ani vered only with tears, 4 ts And the infanti" rejoined I. * t He is in the next apartment," re¬ plied ftie; and ftepping out, returned with you, a fweet little fellow, I prefled you to my heart, and in the fight of Heaven, vowed to become a parent to you. The particulars of your mother's death were not remarkable. She had a fever, md
and through impatience refufed to fufe* mit to what the phyficians enjoined, ané fell a martyr to the obftinacy of her own opinion. ** Her debts were large ; and fhe had given to Mrs. Moretón a promtifory\note ofa thoufand pounds, which I immedi¬ ately paid f mât ipdeed, ilfonght her for - vices and attentions for fo hng a period jnftly entitled her to the reward. <t I blamed her for not informing mc of my ftfter's illnefs and death fooner, and gently hinted at t1ie 4 imprudence ihc was guilty of hy neglecting it; but the poor woman exculpated herfelf by telling me that ihe iherfelf, before Ifa- ?? was pronounced, in danger? had caught
■är , on my fiûer, and was confined %mM af-t ter it had been found neceflary to bury the deceafed, si I wrote to Mrs, Davies todøre her to foften the intelligence to Wellers* and thought, that after grieving -a*; ürü with more aeutenefs, he ψοφά ? ?? end íbffer lefs than while ihe was living from him; but his fhattered conflitalio» and weakened mind -could not beat 1 thè ihook—he died foon after. <€ The very day .that Mrs. Moretón had arrived, I rode over to De Burgh, and informed him of the event. He had been married near a twelvemonth fo a lady of his father's ehoofîns, wbo tirged him
him fb tenderly to confult his own hap¬ pinefs, by Idling the remembrance of an unworthy woman, in the fociety of one who appeared to be every thing that was eftimable, that he confented to pay his addrefles to the objeét of his father's re¬ commendation, and finally married her; but that ardour which had fo delighted my fifter was ??, and a kind of tender complaifance was all he could fhew to this ????, who, in confequence, took a diftike to every thing that could recall the remembrance of Ifabelia ; hence I foon perceived that I was not a welcome gueft to her ; though friendihip for De Burghj which had fufFercd no diminua tion betwixt u§ through the mifconduct of my fifter, prevented my appearing to take any notice of it. * I rightly
4ζ 1 rightly judged that fueh an object as you would be an endlefs caufo of jea* loufy ; and, therefore, privately informed your father of the circumftances of your mother's death and of your arrival at Morney. " His paternal feelings were exceffive, and with difficulty I prevented his flying out to fee you ; but recollection return¬ ing, he fighed for your fituation, fo much the reverfe of what it fhould be^—Sighed did I fay !—The torrent of anguiih flow¬ ed down his manly cheeks—I had never feen him fo overpowered—I locked my hand in his, and repeated my vows of being a parent to you through lifo, and not only of being the guardian 1>f your prefent infant ftate, but that your future provifion
provifion íhould be equal to that of any of my own children. We then con¬ certed what meafures we ihould adopt in future. " Upon my return, I afiembled fuch of my fervants as had been at Morney at .the time of the memorable eelaircifte- ment, and for the fecond time required of each of them to take an oath never to divulge the particulars which had tran- fpired relative thereto, afluring them of my refontment in cafe of difobedience, but, on the contrary, my lafting favour, íhould they deferve it by their filence. " I informed them of my lifter's death, and my intended return to Morney, to take pofïèifion of it ; and that my object ihould
fhould be to make them all happy in tbeir feveral fituations. cf I alfo engaged Mrs, Moretón by fo¬ lemn promife not to reveal to any perfon, without my confent, who were the pa¬ rents of little Thomas, to whofe chrif- tened name I added that of Grey, no lefs for the gratification of my own feelings than to prevent the jealouly of Mrs. dq Burgh, " I could by no means brook the thoughts of perpetuating the ftory of my lifter's faults, of which no trace now could be faid to remain, excepting only this boy ; for which reafon I endeavour¬ ed to hide as much as poifible from the world his near reiationfhip to me ; but not
not being very excellent at inventîort > nor a lover of fiction, yet I thought con- ceaiment might fometimes be neceflary, and therefore did not attempt to fet up any ftory in the room of the real one, which Ifupprefted, a I enjoyed my good intentions, and in the integrity of my heart could fore- foe nothing but happinefs to him and my daughter as the confequence of the plan I had laid down for them ; but I now perceive that my defigns were arbitrary, though unintentionally fo ; for, bred up as they have been together, taught to k>ve one another, where was the free¬ dom of choice ?—And more than all, I now fear for the energy of his mind from his belief in ghofts ! 1 !—What a protec¬ tor
tor for a timid woman !—What weak* nefs does it argue I " No, Grey-»~Go among men who are your fuperiors both in information and experience ; from their wifdom you may firengthen your own, and expel from your mind, by degrees, the timid credulity, that can only lead to bigotry and fuperftition, and which my too in¬ dulgent education may have occafioned. <ς You will eafily perceive that this laft íheet is recently added to thofe papers, which fome years agol arranged front the packet brought from niy deceafed fifter by Mrs. Moretón, and others written hy myfolf, in order that if death, or other mifcarriage, ihould take from you your VOL. II. Cr ??
belt friend, documents of your birth fliould not be wanting, fr I fliall now add, that De Burgh foon found it neceflary to entruft his wife with our focret, which I believe ihe has never betrayed, but has made it a pretext for avoiding the ufual vifits to my family, left you and Mifs De Burgh ihould fall into a criminal paflion. u I pity De Burgh for being under the neceflity of yielding to fuch ridiculous whims, though, perhaps, they were ne¬ ceflary for the peace of his family, I do not Jove him the lefs for it, as I know his heart ; and I am not one of thofe who yield to fufpicions of their beft friends, "So
cc So now, Grey, you have your hif¬ tory before you, judge whetherI deferve your bad opinion ; but credulity is-your great "fault ; guard againft that,, and tliink of me as I fhall deferve. REGINALD MORNEY.
X5a CHAP.
???? feelings of Grey upon perufing -*- the foregoing papers were ? fo va¬ rious and complicated, that an attempt to reprefent them with effect would be fruitlefs and unavailing ; a faint fketch of fuch as appeared to make the greateft impreflion upon his ductile mind will be fufficient in refuming thc chain of our hiftory, which has been fo long inter¬ rupted by the hiftory of Mrs. Wellers, though it was too intimately connected w r ith the other incidents, and eflential to the
the eclairciifoment, to omit laying before our Readers. Grey felt fo much compunction for his weaknefs in being led to form fo vile an opinion of a man good and amiable like his uncle, that nothing but a foar of incurring-hîs further refentment pre* vented hirø from returning to the Abbey the next day, where, by humble contri¬ tion, he might have wiped away the of¬ fence of his tranfgreffion. On this point, however, he wavered fome time, doubtful which way to pro¬ ceed ; but* at length he concluded, that an implicit obedience to the will of Mr. Morney would be the beft way to infure hh future efteem. G3 The
The firft knowledge he had acquired of his mother's character was no way calculated to imprefs him with venera¬ tion for her principles 5 yet the opinion he had formed of her was, perhaps, more harfh than becoming of him as a child ; he ventured to pronounce her a very wicked woman. He thought her like ^lifs Morney in perfon, but hoped Mary bore no refemblance to her İn mind. Revolving this in his mind, he faid— u Can this be owing to the errors or pre¬ judices of education?—Or, is there a propenfity to evil born with fome, while an angelic fpirit refides in the bofom, and fways the actions of others ?—And, furely, continued he, Mary is of the let¬ ter kind, emanated by a divine principle, and
and communicating happinefs to all around her !" Again, he would fometimes be fluftb ed with the romantic, or, at leaft> difin¬ terefted ideas, fo common to youthful lovers—*That were Mifs Morney as poor as Job, or a heathen philofopher, (beg¬ ging Job's pardon for introducing bin» into fuch company) and he as rich as Crœfus, or poflèfied the unknown trea¬ fures of Golconda's mines ; or, to bring the matter clofer, that were he the heir of Morney, and all its appurtenances, he would convince the world that he held happinefs beyond fplendour, and only valued them as they might be acceptable to her—That the higheft condition in life would to him be but fplendid mifery G 4 without
Without her, while, blefled with her hand, the lowly cot of poverty would tranquil- Ike his moments. In fliort, that he would do what a plain man calls ßkifiing the eUigâtibn. Ue lamented the enhajipjr fate of poor Wallers, land feemed hy fympathy to irøftmifenle hk fäte, premätttnsö by ill— ruttai l©v& lo an early ??. Whife thus reviewing thefe various mätters, Miå Bolton had efoaped his re*. feøUe&tøxi ; hut he now recurred to her with entire and downright di%aá ; for it truck hini forcibly that fhe had learn¬ ed from her mother, who wndouhtedly was the Lethk fo often mentioned, the particulars of his unhappy birth, and only
only ufed them to miflead hitn ; think¬ ing, perhaps, that Mr. Morr)ey woujtd never have given the explanation ; a.nd it is very natural to fuppofe that hy the fame means fhe had procured the frió- ture and the Jknowledge of the private room. But then the bell, the apparition that his own eyes had beheld, were circum¬ ftances that ftill kept him in ffufpenfe concerning the reality of a fupernatural interpofition ; for as to the warning* it might be upon Mifs De Burgh's ac¬ count ; or, perhaps—and there he paufod and fliuddered, agitated by a multitude of reflections.— Mifs Bolton might .he r a concealed child of one k of,bis parents.
G 5
Mrs·
' Mrs. Bolton's actions, indeed, as re¬ lated hy his mother, warranted iuch a conclufion ; befides, all the warnings were given through her medium, or in her prefence ; and on the fatal night of the ghoft's vifitation, it even approached the ¡fpot where hoth were, perhaps to force them aftmder. Yet, in fpite of all, he was drawn in¬ to an action that now glanced over hrs mind with increafed horror ; it was an action that impelled him to defpair of ever calling Mifs Morney his own. Grey had not taken the leaft nourifh- ment from the time of firft opening an hiftory fo interefting to himfelf. It was now near the dawn of day, and wearied Nature
Nature would not allow of any further exertion. He felt reft neceflary, and re¬ tired to bed, where to the enjoyment of his dreams we for the prefent leave him —at the end of this fhort Chapter.
G ? CHAP. -
CàlAP, ????. OUR hero, as I may call him fome¬ times for variety, met with no acci¬ dents out of the common run, and ar¬ rived fafe at Oxford, the place of his def¬ tmation. He had letters to two gentlemen in the neighbourhood of that city, who haying received him with politenefs, paid him every attention due to the recom¬ mendation of fo refpectable a gentleman as Mr. Morney, After
After fome days.paífod i^chearful hof¬ pitality, ihe was, through the care of Mr. Tindal, fixed in — ----- College, and made as comfortable as the rules of the femi- nary would permit, but he found his lifo there very different to what he had been -accuftomed to lead at Morney. At that place learning had been made pleafant to him hy the care of Mr. Bol¬ ton, who had fufficiently inftructed him to be matriculated at the Univerfity; hut there was only Grey to inftruct at Morney, and Mr. Bolton's attentiomwas occupied in watching his difpofition, the «various hendings of'his temper, and fok- ing the favourable *me1hüd of his mind, ????? ftudy and pieafure went ???? in hand. In
In College the mode was very difte¬ rent; a certain fot of rules and difci¬ pline are eftablifhed^ and # invariably ob¬ ferved; they muft be equally, adhered to by the grave and gay, the dull and the fprightly. Then, the duíneíš of the room ; no chearful Mr. Morney, dif¬ penfing happinefs by his fmiies and jokes ; no lovely girl joining in the innocent hi¬ larity ; in fliort, no remains of his for¬ mer happinefs, except, indeed, the fight of Joe, his fervant, who was certainly an old acquaintance, being fon to the butler. His favourite occupation, at firft, was to write long letters to Charles Morney, which I have feen ; and really they were ^ery explicit, 'giving an account of every thing
thing he faw, even to ?? very number of houfes in the town, and of every thing which tranfpired, down to the bon mots of a certain youth, who was the Jack Pudding of his College, but which were much excelled by the dry jokes of a Mr. Shclton, Fellow of the fame College, who, neverthelefs, was not ever feen to fmile when he looked round for applaufe. Thefe letters may hereafter be formed into a feparate publication, without in¬ jury to this hiftory. They are an epi¬ tome of a college life, abound in excel¬ lent fentiments, remarkable anecdotes, and interefting biographical iketches, no lefs creditable to the head than the heart of the writer. In
The letters of Grey abounded with the moft fervent declarations of regard for Charles and reverential love for Mr. Mor¬ ney ; though there is little doubt but they would have flowed more from thc heart had he been allowed to addrefs its effufions to Mary; but, notwithftanding he was precluded from this pleafing pri¬ vilege, he flattered himfelf ihe would hear of fome of their paffages, and per¬ ceive his improvements. This iilea en¬ couraged him to profecute his ftudies, enlivened his imagination, and firengU^ ened the energy of his expreffion. In time, however, his baflifulnefs wore off; and inftead of fhunning, as at firft, he would feek the company of his bre¬ thren, whofe overtures had been frequent to
to have him on a familiar footing with them, to which the eafinefs of his temper* at length gave way. Can we wonder theii at feeing him immerge jnto drinking, gaming, and all the other excefles of gentleman ftudents '- -excefles which the ignorant may con¬ ceive cannot ußd their way into an Uni* verfity governed hy falutary laws and fage rulers, Yet fo it is, that vice fbme*. times extends its baneful influence to the very fanctuary. The innocent recreation of paffing thc evening over a diih of tea, and a walk afterwards with Mr, Higgins, his tutor, was now furrendered to the votaries· of diifipation ; while the morning, exhauft¬ ed
ed in repentance and fickneu, left but little time for the better occupation of ftudy and writing home. Good refolu¬ tions were often formed, but feebly adopted ; for Thomas felt within himfelf the impoiiìbiìity of withftanding the rail¬ lery of Edwards, the fneers of Jones, the remonftrances of Edgeworth, and the loud laugh of the whole. Nothing lefs than fome ferious difafter could prove a monitor to his follies, though more the offspring of weaknefs of refolution than depravity of heart, He had been now nearly two months at the Univerfity, and was become fuch a proficient in college exercifes, as even t? make amorous advances to his bed- maker, who was certainly not a beauty, being
being fomething crooked, large headed, and far beyond the bloom of youth, though the y oung eß lady admitted within the College walls. She had not, it is true, reached her grand climacteric, for her years were not many more than forty. Tom might mean nothing more than frolic, but the poor woman become much in love with him, and the ftory ferved for diverfion among his companions. He was regaling them with fome ridi¬ culous jeft relating to it one morning, when a letter was brought to him from Mr. Morney. His blood forfook his face at the fight—What a thing is con¬ fcience !—A - month before. he would have
have anticipated nothing but joy at ?? epiftle ftom fo benevolent, fo uncommon a friend. Thus is jt often with the moft thought¬ lefs and diffipated, that while even in the career of moft profligate excefs, fome trifling or unexpected incident will call forth the reproof of the internal,monitor, and feem to fay in the words of the old ballad- Learn to be wife by others harm, And you will do full well. Thus really was it with Grey, wbo fo¬ lemnly, protefted, that perceiving Mr. Morney's hand-writing on the fuper- icription was to him like the found of ihe iaft trump» recalling every tranfgref¬ fion
fiion he had been guilty of to his memory, with a dread of fome deferved punifH- ment annexed to it. In fhort, he was fo agitated on the receipt of this letter, that it was fome moments before he could examine the contents.
?
CHAP.
??^?? letter, indeed, was a little fe- -*- vere in itfelf, but more from the facts alluded to than any expreffion of the writer's. By this epiftle Grey was informed, that Mifs Bolton having been difcovered to be in a ftate of pregnancy, fhe had, with much confufion, and many tears, declared him the author of her misfor¬ tune ; that fhe had reprefented his con¬ duct as remarkably cruel ; and that, tho' ihe
ihe was in an unguarded moment fe¬ duced by his pimcftations of love, and vows of marriage, reflection, which foon returned after the completion of her ruin, told her his intereft, or, perhaps, love, might point out Mifs Morney as a more defirable acquifition, but fhe hoped death would put an end to all her woe, and all her fufferings. Mrs. Bolton was outrageous ; but the poor Doctor, whofe forrow was too pain¬ ful for expreffion, looked the picture of grief. Mr. Morney energetically lamented his depravity : he regretted that fo young a man ihould be fo funk in iniquity ; that he ihould, under the very roof with his
his daughter, nay, almoft in their fight, feduce an unfortunate girl, and that while under a voluntary engagement to another. However, as that was paft, Mr, Morney requefted to be acquainted with his account of the affair, and likewife his intended proceedings thereupon. While Grey was reading this letter, all his companions, except Mr. Edge- worth, were called out. They had ob¬ ferved his dejected countenance, and cried out—" Poor Grey !—No remit¬ tances, no cole— the old buck's too fliarp —-Farewel, my boy ; Edgeworth is rich, -fee'}l lend," So faying, Hayes, and thofe Other trufty friends, gallopped away. Edgeworth remained, and to him Grey communicated his griei^ and related all his
his misfortunes, crowned hy this moft: difaftrous event. Edgeworth contrived not to break out while Grey was relating his ftory, but when finiihed, he laughed heartily, and, however improperly, made a jeft of thc whole. ςς Sir," faid Grey, "had I thought you capable of fuch unfeeling conduct, my room had never been open to you, much lefs my confidence." Edgeworth ftill held both his fides with laughter, until he was fatigued with the violent exertion ; and, at length, with fome difficulty compofed his mufcles, and fat down by Grey, who repented having vol. ?. Η chofe
chofe a new acquaintance for the depo¬ sitory of his fecrets. r< My dear fellow," laid he, K you muft forgive me, but your ftory is fo full of furprising events—your ghoft, and your child—and } our prudent modeft be¬ haviour to Mifs Bolton, are fo out of the w r ay, that I could not help fmiling a littk." ** Smiling!" faïd Grey, (£ you have laughed as if it hiid been for a wager, ever fince I began to reveal my diftreffes to youj which convinces me of the infin¬ cerity of the profeffions you have fo fre¬ quently made, and of my own credulity in believing I had found a friend to coun^ fol me," <f Excnfo
tf EKßufo me, my dear friend/* faid Edgeworthj, (taking great pains to avoid a relapfe of laughter) but for the blood of me I could not help laughing at the account of your amours. Now, come, as to eounfeh Let the wench fwear the child, then you will have it at your dif* pofal, and pop it ihould go, were I the the happy father, into the Foundling Hofpital." " Sir,'* faid Grey, w your abfence will at this time be more agreeable than your ill-timed jefting, which only diftracts my mind from reforting to expedients that might palliate, if not make atonement for my pail ill conduct.
? % « m
' ? III conduct l* repeated Edgeworthj, & you cannot mean relating to Mifs Bol¬ ton, Why, man, you behaved nobly in that affair. Had holy Jofeph been in your place, my life to a goofeberry he had done juft like you—Think you not, you grey fellow, that you would have left a piece of your coat behind, fuppof¬ ing you had the advantage of cloaths and fituation, rather than make yourfelf a little agreeable to the young Lady. ------ Go, you are more of a Saint than you think-—Not even Mifs Morney— a Oh !" interrupted Grey, " name her not, to fpeak of her in this loofe way is criminal ; but I muft never think of her, unleíš as Adam did of Paradife, after he had loft it." " Perhaps
" Ferhaps then," anfw 'ed Edgeworth, you mean to marry Mifs Bolton ?" " Were it any other girl I migrn^ for thc fake of reftoring peace to the mind of my revered tutor, and myfelf to the good opinion of Mr. Morney, and the fociety of his angelic daughter; but Mifs Bolton, thc caufe of all my mifery, ï can never marry—No, I cannot—Be¬ fides, I have great reafon to believe ihe is my fifter." Edgeworth endeavoured in vain to chear up Grey, and perfuade him to make one of their evening party, then left him to his reflections, and fought the other lads of their fet, whom he, un¬ der promife of fecrecy, diverted highly H 3 with
with Grey's hiftory, and therefrom he acquired the nickname of Ghoß Seer, which he retained among them during his continuance at College.
CHAP,
-...... ????! fl) «j ?. f¡ ???» CHAP. XXXIV. GREY, as foon as he found himfelf alone, wrote a penitential letter to Mr. Morney, accufiag himfelf of being the moft guilty and unfortunate man in the world. He bewailed bis ingratitude towards Mr. Bolton and Mifs Morney, and moft pathetically deprecated their hatred, which he acknowledged he but too much deferved. Tom denied having made any promifes to Mifs Bolton, or even intending to fe¬ ll 4 duce
4Íuce her ; and declared, that couid he, by any action but wedding, make her the fmalleft atonement for his crime, he would moft gladly encounter any thing than refufe what could be demanded of him. He protefted that his heart hoå, aen from childhood, been filled with the image ofoncj whofe wry name he dared not profane by mentioning ; and that, though by the arts of a wicked girl, he had loft his hopes, he would never give give up her idea. Such was the fubftance of his letter, which having written and difpatched, he feemed to feeï a little eafier, as having fomething to hope from what it might produce ι
produce ; but, neverthelefs, he was very miferable at the thoughts Mifs Morney muft entertain concerning him, and the grief he had brought upon his worthy tutor, whofe image was conftantly be¬ fore him. Next day a letter came with the Mor¬ ney poft mark, but directed in a ftrange hand ; his fears then returned, and he trembled while he opened it ; but there was nobody near to interrupt him, and. he read as follows— " MY »EAR tommy, c( I know your heart, and am fure you love me. How often have you called me your dear Betfey I —How kind you ufed to look at me ?—»And even if you do nol H 5 love.
nity to allow me to be renounced by all the warld for your fake» which I ihall be if you refufe me the juftice of making me your wife in the face of men, as I already am in that of Heaven, w Confider, Mifs Morney has given you up—confider my poor father and mother ; and confider the vehemence of my love for you ever fince I had the fenfe to love any thing; likewife, though I blufli while writing it, let the babe I bear plead for its unfortunate and un¬ happy mother, whofe only crime was that ef loving you too we!l; and who, fhould your approbation fanctify her wifhes., would be bound, by every principle of both gratitude and aflection, fo fer as her power
cbltífüíof WÎVjÊS* * ζ I could write to ?? dear Tommy for ever; but fearful left I fhould be . thought too importunate, conclude with fubfcribing myfelf, Your moft affectionate E. Bolton." This tender epiftle, though couched in the moft feeling terms, ferved only to irritate Grey more violently. ** Her babe plead for her, indeed/' faid he to himfelf, i( · I love her, forfooth'—I call her my dear Betfey I—The ferpent, I bate her, and wifli I had never feen or known any thiivg of her, for ihe has deftoyed my peace." II ? After
After debating thm fome time with himfelf he could not refift the fatisfac¬ tion of reproaching her by letter for all the misfortunes fhe had caufed him; his own* letter will he the beft proof of his fentiments. MISS BOLTON. cf MADAM, * e The delicacy of your fituation would, I think, have been better maintained by filence than fuch a letter as that now be¬ fore me. I have bnt little acquaintance with your fex, and can, therefore, only compare you with one that is without fault, and who would have been mine but for you. Yes, Madam, you were the feducer, and I, neverthelefs, ??? the greateft fufferer. « I would
* 6 1 would lay down my life to reftore your father's peace, but cannot think of pafling it with you, who I look upon in the moft diíàgreeable light. It is true,. I once had a friendihip for you,, but it was merely reflected from that of Mifs Mor¬ ney. I loved every thing ihe had an)i value for„ t Content yourfelf with having fo well accomplifhed my ruin. Were it poifible I could be brought to efpoufe yon, I am convinced the next minute wouldfoeme my own executioner. Your's, &c, Thomas Gkks.T After he had font off the letter, he re¬ pented his having added by it to tha mifery
miffery of her condition*--" For," faid he, & though her love for me has been more lata! than her hatred could have proved, yet I ought not to turn it againft her in fo crnel a manner. Î»oor girl, had I been a ftranger to her, fhe had been vir- tnous—How unfortunate that I ihould haye infpired fo violent a paflion*" He was now in the moft anxious ftate of mind that can be imagined; and it was not until after a great many folicita- taons, that he could be prevailed upon to join any of the joyous parties that had been fo agreeable to him ; and even when engaged in them, his dejection was an inexhauftible fource of mirth to his companions, who very often after the early part of their merriment was over, wonld
would fit and tell long ftories of ghofts* until fome of the valiant fot would be afraid to explore his own chamber unac¬ companied. They bought fome hooks of legendary tales, replete with thc hiftory of appari¬ tions, flafliing lights, dreams, and all the long train of fabulous invention. But they very often over-fhot the mark, and, in fpite of appearances, many of them wifhed for a bedfellow, by way of pro¬ tection from thofe fpirits they were fo prone to laugh at. As to Mr. Edgeworth, he was a mofk hardened young man ; he acted the part of a ghoft fo often, and in fuch frightful fituations, affifted by no other than the old
old Colfege cat, that he excited the fear of many an aftoniihed beholder. Grey was often in doubt concerning what he faw and heard; nor is ît certain whether he did not attribute fome very ¿ι natura! circumftances to'other more aw¬ fol foundations, Edgeworth, notwithftanding the natu¬ ral propensities which he too freely in¬ dulged in, had a pleafing manner, and a good difpofition in the main ; and after tormenting his friends, would laugh them into fuch good humour, that he never loft one: Many people who dö not abfolutely beheve in ghoft% will in particular cafes, give
ghe credit to fortune-telling. Nor may it be out-ftretching probability to fuppofo that fome of our fair Readers have before now anticipated future events through the aftrological calculation of Mrs, Williams ; for even fome doughty ¿he¬ roes, who have avowed their diibelief of the Gofpel, have been found full ready to credit the predictions of this fcience. Inftances have certainly occurred where¬ in thefe fage connfellors have foretold aright, but whether from their fuperior knowledge, or artifice, has not been fo precifely afcertained. , A young lady having once loft a fiker fpoon, confulted a dumb conjurer, whom ihe preferred to a deaf one of the fame place, thinking him the beft of the two* On
On giving hpá half a crown, he told her name, age, and the bufinefs flic came upon. Knowing this herfelf, flie defired to know if the fpoon was ftolen, and how to recover it. This be promifed to do on her depofiting another half crown, Afíèntmg to this, after confuHing his books, he informed her a witch had got the fpoon> but that he would make her drop it at the church door, at twelve o'clock that night ; and advifed her to ??? horfe*fhoe to the door of her dwel¬ ling immediately, left thofe who had taken the fpoon fhould make free with fomething elfe. On the following morning the lady went, according to his directions, and found it in the place he had defcribed. It
It is, however, worthy of remark, that the fum fhe gave him for the difcovery, ex¬ ceeded the value of the fpoon. Thie ftory is inferted chiefly with a view to introduce a circumftance of fup¬ pofed witchcraft, which occurred to the hero of thefe Memoirs, and to ihew that he was not fingular in his ideas, however weak they may be thought. Grey one day obferved a woman of ra¬ ther extraordinary appearance, with an high-crowned hat, and a black velvet cloak, who ufod to crofs his path every time he went out, and again at his re^ turn home. She ufed to fix her eyes upon him, and mutter. One time ihe attempted to crofs the path to which he was
was advancing, but flopped fhort. She tried again, ftruggling as it were to move her limbs, but apparently with-hcld by fome inward agitation. As Grey ap¬ proached, fhe befought him, in a fup¬ pliant tone, to reach a ftraw to her that lay near his foot. This he complied with» though not without obferving it lay acrofs another : on receiving it fi-om his hand, her. ufual agility immediately returned, and ihe nimbly crofted the path, muttering as ihe had before done on fimilar occafions. Grey was ftruck with her uncommon appearance and manner, and imagined that her fenfes were difordered. He walked on pretty quick to get back to his mom by the time he was ordered to meet
meet his tutor ; when, to his great fav* prize, upon entering the College gates, he met tins identical woman coming out, and without any appearance of hurry» She looked ftedfaftly on him, and faid, in an inward voice—" Thomas Grey broke one charm Í" This dwelt upon his mind, and he in¬ tended to ftop the woman the next time they ihould meet, and endeavour to find out her real character ; but he never faw her afterwards, nor could thofe he quef¬ tioned give any account of her ; and he had foon far other ideas to occupy his attention.
CHAP.
CHAP. XXXV.
LETTER FROM MR. MORNEY. ** MR. GREY, U Τ?"Ά£* a f° n °f ? ? own behaved "*"-*· in the manner you have, I ihoule difinherit him, or, at moft, only leave him a decent provifion ; and there¬ by curtail his power of doing mifchief, and diflionouring the character ofa gen¬ tleman,
Upon
" Upon this principle, î deem it expe¬ dient that I ihould alter every plan I had laid down* in your favour. Prepare, therefore, after remaining a term at Ox* ford, to be bound apprentice to a mer¬ chant ; in this there will be more re¬ ftraint upon your actions, which I find neceflary to your well-being, as it has been my too great indulgence that has emboldened you to give way to thofe principles which I find have too power¬ fully fwayed, and difgraced your con¬ ducta vC I had hopes that you would have fought, in fome meafure, to repair the wrongs you have brought upon poor Bet¬ fey Bolton, by marriage. She was al¬ ways a very good girl, and might make a good
a good wife ; and you ihould recollect, that unlefs you marry her no other per¬ fon will ; fo tlmt me, poor thing, will lofe at once her ftation in fociety beyond the hope of recovery, or profpect of fu- turé eftablifhment $ her father, I am afraid, will break his heart ; and if I do not affift the reft of the family, they muft become indebted to parochial relief for their fupport. <f But all this, perhaps, is nothing to a fine young rake, who imagines all t things were created to be defpoiled for his pieafure ; or elfo, I fuppofe thc more victims the greater triumph. u I rejoice that I never took that turn ; nor did I bring you up, as I thought, to it;
it ; but, though I would not réflectupon* the dead, I muft fay that you have a fpice of your mother, (i The income I meant for you ihall be divided fo as to leave you two-thirds, the next ihall be for Mifs Bolton and her child ; and at my death I fliall fe¬ cure her a provifion out of what I in¬ tended for you, as it is only reafonable to provide for expences that you have occafioned her to incur. But how, or in what way, will you repay her for her loft peace, character^ and friends ?*—How heal her confcience, which muft be cru¬ elly wounded at the forrow her delufion has brought upon her parents, vol. u. I * 4 You
ζί You may yet retract, and reftore her and them to comfort; and if fuch is your intention, write foon, as lam going to London in a week; if not, your filence will be moft acceptable to, Your's, he. REGINALD MORNEY." u What avails my ^obtaining his fa¬ vour," faid Grey, throwing thc letter on the table, iC if it is the total breach of my vows to Mifs Morney ?—No, that would be a greater crime than any I ever committed. I will never wed any but thec, dear Mary, beloved maid," added he, raifing his eyes to Heaven, brimful of tears. " Let Mifs Bolton get all that was my mother's ; fhe is welcome, and Ihy
î by my exertions may ftill be able to look to Miís Morney, and through my conftancy recover my funk character in her eftimation. She is formed all per¬ fection, and will ftill love her Grey, I care not for the controul with which I am threatened. Alas ! it is now Mr, Morney is deceived in me. If he knew how little I merit the appellation of fe¬ ducer, his expreffions would not be fo fevere." Grey, however, could not think of be¬ traying Mifs Bolton's weaknefs : he con¬ ceived fomething due for the facrifice flie had made to him, and was apprehen¬ five a knowledge of her depravity, would hurt her father's mind more than his pre¬ fent belief that ihe had been feduced. Ια He
JEïe unbofomed hirafelf by a letter to Charles Morney, confiding to him his forrows and his hopes* He befought him to become his advocate with Mifs Mor^ ney, , if only to prevent her hating him though in the next paragraph he exulted in a confidence of her fidelity. „Since he had left the Abbey, Grey had difcerned how very poflibie it is to in¬ trigue with two or three, and even hav¬ ing a young family by women., without any intention of efpoufing them, or baulking a young gentleman's future eftablifhment in life; not but he acknow¬ ledged the wickednefs of fuch maxims, and carefully avoided them, hut ftill he was not forry in being countenanced by others in his accidental mifdemeanor. He
He ihut himfelf ήρ to brood over his unhappy fate ; and making an excufe of ficknefs, was not feen out of his room for two days, when Edgeworth came into his room with the Oxford Paper in his hand, laughing, and reading aloud the> following advertifement— tí Thofe who wiih to dive into futurity £( huve now a favourable opportunity of (i confulting the real Mrs. Williams, who fi is juft arrived upon a vifit to Oxford, Ci and will, with her ufual readinefs, com lf fuît the ftars for fuch of her friends as " may wifli to be informed either of the S4 future or prefent events of their own " livesj as weli as thofe of their abfent i( relatives or friends, in whatever quarter iC of the world they are." I 3 ." Zooks!
** Zooks î Grey, you are a lucky dog," faid Edgeworth, after reading the above; tf we'll go and enquire if your precious babe will be a boy or girl." , w I fhall know that too foon," faid Grey, rt but, ferioufly, if I thought there was no harm in it, I would aik a few queftions, juft for fun." "Harm l* faid Edgeworth, "there you are always weighing actions, as Be- nignus's beggar-woman did the crumbs. Well, now for the pro's and cons ; I mar¬ vel which will turn out heavier!. Harm, indeed ! in laughing at an old cheating woman, who cannot poffibly perform what ihe promifes. We'll go to-night, Tom, at ten o'clock, when every foul will
will iuppofo us ihoring. I caft find a way to go, and ftay too, without being mified— how elfe åo I vifit my pretty Su¬ fan fo often ?" Grey aflcnted, and fpçnt the interval in debating if there could be any depen¬ dance on what a fortune-teller faid ; but, at any rate, he determined on afking no material queftion, left fhe fhould be ca¬ pable of anfwering them properly, Precifely at ten Edgeworth came« in, with a bundle under his arm. " Here, Tom," faid he, 4C ftrip, you are a very good figure for a woman ; it will be a pleafant joke to hear the old woman pro¬ mife you fweethearts and hufbands by the fcore. Here's a drefs for you." I 4 Tom
Tom iras diverted #fch the idea of the (rofic^ thinking it would be a good cri¬ terion to judge of the lady's fagacity. Edgeworth fpeedily attired him in his fe¬ male drefs, though fomething aukwarji at the emoioyment, but often ftopped to laugh while about it, obferving that he had undrefled women in fo ihort a time^ that he ???? not have thought there vps to niuch difiicnlty in dreffing them. At length every thing being adjufted, and Grey*s eye-brows properly corkpd, the better to diiguife him, forth they fal¬ lied, not together, for, upon fome pre¬ tence, Edgeworth ftaid a little behind, enjoying within himfelf the difficulties Çrrey would have to encounter in his new drefs. It
MORE GHOSTS, 177 It w,as now a quiet hour in the Col¬ lege, and he was making his wöy pretty well, until met by one of the Froelors, who had been indulging himfelf over a bottle, and was now returnmg to his apartment, when he faw, as he thought, this beautiful damfelf. He, at firft, very properly and fternly demanded how ihe came there, and was raifing his voice to call aiftftance, both to puniih and expef the wicked harlot ; when Grey, frighten¬ ed at fu ^ an expofure, in imitation ofa male voice, begged pardon, and promiied never to trefpafs on the College limits again. The Proctor, feeing no third perfon near, became ibftened by the pret- hand and fweet voice of his fair fuppli¬ cant, and ordered Tom to follow him inta his room.- " For what, your Reverence l* I 5 quoth
quoth Tom. "For what? faid the worthy Proctor, " a pretty queftion truly. Pray, my good maiden, what did you come here for ? I am going to examine into that, and if I find that I may favour you, it may be the better for you, thats &lh Grey was isnpieafantly fituated, fear¬ ing difcovery, not only as it would ex¬ pofe him to College cenfure, but to the ridicule of his fellow ftudents. In this dilemma he had hardly power to refift tir Proctor's eftorts to draw him into his room, when Edgeworth, with a démure lookj and a book in his hand approach¬ ed; but on beholding the fituation of the two, be laughed moft immoderately, and ckpping the Proctor on the back, ap¬ plauded
plauded his tafte, and exhorted him to introduce the cuftom of accommodating Ladies within the College walls, as it woukl tend t civilize the Fellows. The Proctor, much confufed, attempt¬ ed to explain now he met the young wo¬ man, whom he was going to fend .quietly off, in order to prevent fcandal to the Univerfity, but feeing incredulity pictur¬ ed in Edgev rth's arch countenance, he ran into his room in a rage, and left the two friends together. Grey wifhed to return for his own cloaths, but Edgeworth difluaded him from it by the affurance that nothing but difguife couid fave them from difcovery and promifed to leave him no more. He I ô told
t-- told every one he met that Doctor H-— had commiffioned him to turn out tliis fad girl ; and enjoyed the fimdry tricks, jefts, and teizings that every one accofted the Lady with. \t laft, however, they got into thc ftreet, where Edgeworth left his friend, promifing to return quickly, which he did in his fervants livery. So »ow they were both difguifed,
CHAP.
CHAP. XXXVI. TTtDGEWORTH was the conductor j -*-— and foon led his companion to a large old houfe. They rung a bell at the door, which was eafily difcovered by the glimmer of a lamp juft above it. The door opened, as it were, without hands, for they neither fow any perfon, nor heard any found, except the creak¬ ing of the hinges, which had no fooner admitted them, tban by a fudden clap it clofed, and left them in a long pafiage, without a fpark of light, rí This
u This is a very odd admiifton/' faid Greys " the door has certainly been opened in confequence of our ringing, and yet we are left in darkneíš, without any creature to conduct us." « Why," faid EdgeWïirth, <r this is not the regular hour for eonfukirg the con¬ juror, and perhaps all the devíb arc not yet apprised. The porter devit was vigilant enough ; I wiih the waiter devil were as alert." * f Let us return," faid Grey, foftly. «* No," faid Edgeworth, " let us call for light." And he fent forth a moft vociferous halloo, that refounded fright¬ fully through the long echoing paflage. Grey
Grey would have felt for the door to regain the ftreet, but found- himfelf de¬ tained by fome invifible power, that would neither permit him to advance nor retreat, until by Edgeworth* s aifift¬ ance, and his own exertions, all at once he found himfelf liberated ; and at the fame inftant heard a noife clofe to where lie ftood, like the falling of a large maffy ? chain. Edgeworth kept his hold of Grey's hand, and led, or rather dragged him up the pafiage, where, by groping, they found a turning on the left. Here the darknefs was made more awful by tho partial reflection of a fiery hand, the fin¬ ger whereof pointed to a door, on which was inferibed, in illuminated characters of old Saxon— Enter. Grey
Grey wiíhed much to retreat, bnt Edgeworth pofitively refufed to accom¬ pany him hack ; and he did not like to go alone through the enchanted paf¬ fage. They knocked then at this door, which, like the firft, opened without the ap¬ proach of any one," and when they en¬ tered, clofed with an equal üoife t but 4 they were not now in darknefs ; for on the hearth blazed a wood fire, clofe by which fat a woman on a very low ftool, employed in ftirring with a fhort thick ftick fomething in a cauldron, not upon, but immediately before the fire. She did nót ftern to notice their en¬ trance, but continued her employment, muttering
muttering incantations ; wbieh/ how¬ ever, in a few moments ihe broke oft but without turning her head to look at them. " Welcome, Auguftus Edgeworth/* faid ihe. * " What the devil," faid he* tf do you take me for my mafter, old dame V* " Welcome, Auguftus Edgeworth/* continued íhe, tf though clad in livery. Welcome, Thomas Grey." Grey uttered an exclamation, whieh induced her to turn about ; and then. ftarting in her turn—
if Welcome*
(S Welcome, welcome/* faid ihe, u Thomas Grey í favoored^f the dead—* vifited hy the departed ghoft of her who is moft anxious for your welfare—I efteem myfelf honoured by your pre¬ tence * arid am your ilave, ready to obey your commands." This fo aftoniihed Grey, that he was »ear finking to the ground, but was fupported by his friend ; who at the fame time whifpered— '* Don't give credit to her ; ftie fpeaks at random, or othewife in her travels has picked up fome ???? about you." But Grey was convinced that ilie had more than natural knowledge, ehe how could
could fhe know him in his difguife, even without looking at or hearing him. When a little recovered from his fur¬ prize, he advanced towards thc forcerefs, and aiked her what fhe conld do for him ; u For," faid he, if you already know my difficulties." $c Do !" faid fhe, " I can make a charm, that ihall enchant the maid you love, and give her to your arms upon any terms you pieafe." At firft Grey rejoiced at the idea, bnt recollecting himfelf, and wifhing to he fatisfied in certain points, yet fearing to offend the forcerefs, he ftammered a wiflx to know whether this powder Was of
øf fimple ingredients* or if it muft not fee through fte aid of infernal agents. u Yon íhall foe the procefs," faid íhe, u and then judge. But firft I muft havo a confideration, my fpirits will not work without," Edgeworth drew out half a guinea; Grey followed his example; and ihe took hoth with an appearance of indif¬ ference % nor deigning to obferve what they were, threw them into the cauldron, which ihe again ftirred violently for a while, and then threw in large handfuls øf fait frpm a bag that hung near the chimney, and refumed ftirring and mut¬ tering incantations.
? Now,"
f€ Now,!* faid íhe» ** to Edgewortb and Grey> « ? this cauldron." They endeavoured to obey her ; but what was their aftoniíhment to find it abfolutely frozen fo hard thatthey could not movent ; it was filled with ice, and furrounded by it, though before a large blazing fire. tt Enough," faid ihe, ce your gold is accepted, elfo I could do nothing." She then lifted the cauldron herfelf 4vith the greateft eafe, and fot it in & corner. Then taking a hand of each, i( Now," foid flie, " we go to work ;** and led them towards the door, difre« garding the rueful glances they caft at each other, (for Edgeworth now feemed alarmed.)
alarmed,) They approached the illu¬ minated door, hut did not go through it ; for íhe ftamped her foot thrice, and all three funk through the fioor foveral feet, where they found themfelves again in darknefs. " Mother," faid Grey, (f it is enough ; I am fatisfied with your power, and would return." u Son," faid ihe, " I hail the name, and am willing to adopt you. But what have I yet done for you, that you ihould fo foon acknowledge your fatisfaction Ì iure you cannot fear a woman." Grey, being unwilling to confefs the contrary, was now led on, through a long
long pafiage, which brought them to a fubterraneous place, lighted by three lamps, which gave å blue ghaftly light, and rendered the place only more horrid by gleaming upon feveral frightful ob¬ jects, which made the blood of our heroes creep in their veins. There was a black cat tied by the leg, and a black dog hanging by the neck ; but ftill more frightful was the ikeleton of a woman, juft oppofite to where they ftood. The forcerefs threw a large faggot upon the hearth, and lighted it ; fhe then took fome of the hairs off the dog, and fprinkled them over the hearth. " Come," faid fhe to Grey, " you muft bear a part."
Grey
Grey, bad been trying to collect him¬ felf, and Was refolved not to be drawn in to perform any action to hind him·* felf, for any confideration, thinking it better to lofe Mifs Morney, than poffefs her by a diabolical meansï He now ftarted, and afked what he was expected to perform } « Take this oat/' faid ihe, " and with this knife cut out her heart, yet alive, and burn it to powder ; it will be our principal ingredient." She put the knife into his hand, hut he, with an involuntary motion, threw it into the fire. u I cannot do fo cruel an action," faid he> " nor will I have any of the powder. Let us begone, Edgeworth." " With
? <t With all my heart," faid the other, "for I am devilifh fick of the bufi¬ nefs." She looked mortified ; and kept filence, in the attitude of a perfon liftening, for a ihort time; then faid, f< Go ; why do you ftay ? Auguftus, while you are here in your man's cloaths, he is in the arms of your miftrefs." Edgeworth laughed aloud, thinking it only uttered in re¬ venge ; which exafperated her to fwear vehemently to the truth of what ihe had afierted. «" Well/' faid he, carelefsly, «the fel¬ low, no doubt, has been fupplied with fome of your dead-eat powder." Vol. II. ? She
She told him that the time would come, when he would repent of his in¬ credulity, as his companion would of the contrary fault. (c When," faid ihe, c{ he finds himfelf the huiband of another man's miftrefs, and obliged to father an¬ other man's child, then will he with for my affiftance. Her name begins with a B. She then allowed them to drpart, but not by the way they came ι for fhe led them through fome dark wirings, after which mounting a flight of ftone fteps, that feemed to crumble under their feet, they breathed the frefh air, and by the directions ihe gave thera, foon gained thc ftreet. Here they agreed that their beft plan would be to get a bedchamber at the inn, where Grey might remain till
till later in the morning, while Edge- worth ihould return, by fome fecret means that he boafted to poifofs, to the College, to prøcure fome clothes, as he could not expect admittance in his fe¬ male attire. They were foon conducted to a room, where Grey was left by his companion, to indulge ín meditations upon the wonderful feenes he had wit¬ nefled.
? 2 CHAP.
»••4??
CHAP. XXXVII.
WHATEVER might be Grey's thoughts on the feveral preceding events is uncertain, though we are affur¬ ed, that his body was fo fatigued, and his fpirits fo much exhaufted, that he fell afleep immediately upon getting into bed ; and the next morning, when his friend Edgeworth came into the room, fo little was he refreihed by his over¬ night's number, that it required fome pretty loud acclamations before he could be rouzed. - Cafting
Cafting his eyes towards Edgeworth^ he perceived an unufual ferioufncfs in his countenance, which alarmed him at firft, left he ihould not have not got fafe: back to the College ; he was, however, fatisfied upon enquiry, in finding all was right fo far, Edgeworth having made his appearance at morning prayers, and mado an acceptable apology for Tom's non- attendance ; and having informed him his man was on the way with his cloaths, he faid— (C And now, my boy, tell me what you think of the laft nights affair." <ζ I fhall be cautious of telling you/* faid Grey, tc after the fpecimen of atten¬ tion you thought proper to beftow on me once before, befide the many pleafant pranks you have been in the habit of ? 3 playing
playing upon me fince, though I have not thought fuch things fufficient caufo for difagreement between friends ; yet it can hardly be though that I fhalj fur* ififh cudgels againft myfelf.** Ct By your wife ipeech, right wbrihip- ful Signor," replied Edgeworth, " I per¬ ceive you put faith in Mother Williams «—Your colouring is ftronger confirma¬ tion than twenty oaths would be from fuch a rattle-pated fellow as me. But now know, for your fatisfaction, that I, Auguftus Edgeworth, from a moft or¬ thodox diíbeHevcr in fortune-telling and witchcraft, as you know by experience, ï —I—begin to waver." " Oh," rejoined Grey, ír there is fome new jeft coming." i; N4
" No, indeed," replied Edgeworth, " I have no reafon to laugh at prefent, I affure you. Incline your ears towards me, that I may pour my ftory into them. You recollect Mother Williams's cau¬ tion to me laft night about Sufan, which I then regarded only as her method of revenge for my evident incredulity, as it was with difficulty I refrained from laugh¬ ing out at the dark pafiage, illuminated doors, freezing pots, and magical words. However, being in the habit of paying my nightly refpects to Sufan, when I can contrive to flip out, and having a key that opens the back door of her mother's houfe, who is a very worthy mantua- maker, I thought of fpending half an hour or fo with her upon leaving you lalt night. So, Sir, away I went, opened ? 4 the
the door, and crept up to the chamber where Sufan repofes, being the beft bed¬ chamber ; and, without making any dif¬ turbance, arrived at her bed-fide without moleftation ; there fitting down, and put¬ ting out my hand to lay hold of Sufan's, a rough voice, which 1 knew to be Jack's, called out, Halloo! —I was rather m a bit of rage, and not knowing any better way of teftifying it, took my handker¬ chief from my pocket, and defired him to He ftill, or I would íhoot him, which, Lord knows, I could not do, as I littïç thought of providing piftols to go and fee Sufan ; but that ferved to intimidate the youth, added to his guilt ; fo I knotted my handkerchief as boys do, and throw¬ ing oflthe bed-cloathsj laced him fmart- Iy ; even Sufan, I fear, got a few thumps j ftill
ftill I kept crying— Peace, »r you are a dead man; but, at length, I was fatigued, and he became reftive, fo I ordered him to rife, and carry his cloaths into the ftreet, and drefs himfelf. I ftaid a few minutes after him to take leave of Sufan, whom I feverely rated for her infidelity. I then returned by my private way to College, and lay upon the bed without un dreffing for about an hour; nor could I get Mother Williams's prediction out of my head, for I had not informed Jack of my intention of going to her, and he, feeing I went out with you on another expedition, could have no idea of it." « Well," faid Grey, " I am not forry for your difcovery of Sufan's treachery, fince I think it affords grounds fufficient ? 5 to>
to juftify a fort of belief in things, which, though we cannot poflibly comprehend, are not only poflibie but certain." " What then," faid Edgworth, tí you are fatisfied that your wife will be an¬ other man's miftrefs, and your reputed child not your own in fact." t( No, I am forewarned, that İf I do not take care, it may be fo. Do not you think " know whofe name begins ivith B. and that knowing, I will avoid her ? I might, only for Mrs. Williams, have been ftill drawn in ; but now, indeed, it would be weaknefs to allow any confide¬ ration to induce me to a union with Miís Bolton—Have you difcharged your man yet ?" "No
" No, hang the fellow," faid Edge- worth, "he knows I dare not; this comes of erecting fervants into confidants; the] 7 are then your mafters. He came to me this morning, quite recovered of his fright, and told me, that if I blew him he would blow me, and as foon as his wages were in his pocket impeach us both. Knowing this would be unplea¬ fant, I chofe to keep him on ; befides, though he is a rogue, a young fellow at the College wants a perfon of that ftamp about him, to perform twenty odd jobs that are not allowed by the ftatutes. Come, here is your round-headed fellow, put on your cloaths, and fend this fe¬ male garb to Sufan, who is the lawful owner, and we'll fmuggle you in."
Thus
Thus ended this hazardous adventure. Grey got home unfufpected, and a little elated tbat he had withftood fuch a temptation, as a powder to bring Mifs Morney into his arms. fi No," faid he, vi I will owe that happinefs to her truth, her innate goodnefs and fidelity. She may fee in time, that though I have fallen into one fnare, the reft of my conduct has been and fhall be what it ought." ** What a fine cordial is felf-approba¬ tion !—This one little circumftance ferv¬ ed as an antidote againft the grief which had before taken pofleifion of his foul. But a thought of Mr. Bolton would fometimes come acrofs his mind; and now and then he would fancy he faw him before his eyes, all pale and melancholy. For
For this he had no remedy. To clear himfelf, he muft have criminated Mifs Bolton—hence he was doubtful which way to determine—By difcovering the reality of the ftory, fo much the more would the good Rector be wounded in fpirit, by a knowledge of the wickednefs of his child.
4
Ì
\*sAS.jti.£ β
CHAP. XXXVIII. "I yJTR. MORNEY had now conceived -LtJ. an \¿ cñ offending Mary to Lon¬ don for a fhort time, that fhe might par¬ ticipate in the fafliionable gaiety and va¬ ried amufeqients of the metropolis, in full confidence that her prudence would be a fafeguard in thc moft trying feenes, though there, new to thc Town, ihe was to meet with all thc flattery that beauty, aided by wealth, is hire to infpire, with¬ out any one to controul her ; for Mr. Morney had too high an opinion of her difcretion
difcretion to think flie ftood in need of it ; nobody to introduce her, for he, ftill fingular in his goodnefs, averred that the generality of females were more likely to introduce her to evil than good. He knew, from experience^ that Lady Tre- vor had not done any good to his late fif^ ter ; but as ihc was in town, and like- wife her daughter (now Lady Newet) he could not with propriety prefer any other Ladies as guides to his daughter ; and not approving them, would rather truft to her prudence, and his own warinefs, and a pretty bufinefs they made of it, as will hereafter be feen. The young Mr. Morneys were at Winclfor, on a pleafurablc excurfion, with a party of young men, in which manner they
they fpent moft part of their time, but feldom refiding a great while together at the Abbey ; and, indeed, they are fo little concerned in the main incidents of this hiftory, that there is feldom occafion to recur to their names. So foon as Mifs Morney had got pro¬ per fuits from the moft fafhionable and expenfive tradefmen in London, her fa¬ ther propofed to efcort her to the opera, which flie thankfully accepted of; and drefied in her beft attire,ornamented with a vaft profufion of jewels, fhe was hardly feated before fhe was noticed, and at¬ tracted that portion of admiration dueto lhe beauty of fo charming a girl. They fat about tlie center of the pit ; and Lady Trevor and daughter were in their own box.
box. They were regular fubforibers, and confiant attendants at this place of fa¬ fliionable refort» Lady Newet was what her mother had been defcribed in Mrs. Weilers' narra¬ tion, fafliionable, and forty; fhe was like- wife inclined to the en ??? point* and juft to the tafte of a certain young Noble¬ man, who was her confiant dangler.— The Ladies agreed that ihe had more pretenfions to beauty than in her youth ; in ihort, that ihe tmderßoodhow to make herfelf up. Lady Trevor reluctantly acknowledg¬ ed herfelf to be fomething older than her daughter, but would not admit even that to be perceptible in either her drefs or manner.
m anner. The latter affected girlifhnefs ; the former was always in the extreme of fafliion ; ihc had fine teeth, of thc neweft invention, and her hair flowed down her back in a profufion of beautiful ringlets ; her rouge was of the very beft: quality ; l and thefe Ladies never appeared in public without a large train of the gayeft young men ι but this was fuppofed owing to Lady Trevor's keeping a Faro Tahk·, befides, Lady Newet gave elegant entertainments, was noticed by the Prince, and often honoured with his company at her parties, Mr. Morney was recognized by the Ladies, but thcy were ftrangers to the perfon of his daughter. Thcy agreed be¬ tween themfelves, that i r was impoflible he
he could think of bringing out his daugh¬ ter in fuch an aukward manner, when he might have infured her of their coun¬ tenance and afliftance, which would be an advantage gladly embraced by any perfon of common fenfe. Could it be his wife ?—Yet then, no doubt, they ought to be firft apprized of fuch a relation be¬ fore ihe made her debut, as this was cer v tainly a firft appearance; befides, his daughter would then add another to their tête-à-tête party. There was only one furmife probable, tbat he had acted like his father, and chofen a young miftrefs for himfelf. They had juft fettled this point, when Mr. Morney defcricd his aunt, and made her a bow ; ihe only re¬ turned a dignified bend, with a frightful countenance. Sorø«
Some of the beaux that furrounded her, and had already been ftruck with the beauty of Mifs Morney's appearance, and the unaffected blufhing timidity that is apt to pervade a young ingenuous girl, upon finding herfelf, for the firft time, in fuch a brilliant afternbly, now eagerly demanded of Lady Trevor who that young beauty could be that had thus fuddenly made her appearance ? i( Young beauty!" repeated ihe, with affected furprize, " where, pray ?" <( Lord, mamma," faid Lady Newet, with difdainful affectation, " he means that country looking creature, that fits near Mr. Morney,"
How
" How often," replied Lady Trevor, c have I requefted of you, Lady Newet, to give me my title ?—-Mamma!—how infantine and vulgar !—Nobody owns relationfliip now." <c True, Madam," faid Mr. Sacheve- 'rel, " as you obferve, or I ihould have faid that Gentleman refembled you afto- nifhingly, and might pafs for one." " Heavens ! I believe fo," faid Lady Newet, " why he is nephew to my moth —I mean to Lady Trevor." ** You are remarkably facetious to¬ night," obferved her mother, "and would poifofs every body with an opi¬ nion of my heing quite an old woman, though
though there is not fo much difference between your age and mine. I was only uåeeii when your Ladyihip's firft cries delighted my ears." " Dear Madam," faid Lady Newer, laughing, " we will not difpute about years ; you fhall be youngeft, if you pieafe ; but you know that has not any thing to do with Mr. Morney, who, I underftand, is my coufin. You know you are not obliged to be fifteen years older than him, " No, certainly," rejoined Lady Tre¬ vor ; he is fon to my eldeft fifter, who was married whilft I was in my infancy, fo young, indeed, that I can hardly re¬ collect it." «But
" But the Lady, Madam !" faid Sa¬ cheverel." " I know nothing about fach Ladies," returned Lady Trevor in a pet. This was hint enough for thc young men, who congratulated themfelves upon fuch an acquifition, as each in his own mind flattered himfelf with foon poflef- fing a beautiful girl, quite new, and in keeping by an elderly gentleman of Mr. Morney's appearance. Some of thefe difinterefted votaries of fafliion, made their way to the bench where the innocent young Lady fat, en¬ joying the fcenery, the mufic, and the brilliant appearance of tlie company.™-« She
She was fo fully occupied by whatever furrounded her, that it is doubtful whe* ther fhe had a fmgle idea even of Grey at the time. Some of the gentlemen entered into a converfation with Mr. Morney, while Sacheverel devoted his attention entirely to the Lady, to whom he paid tlie moft flattering compliments. Neverthelefs, this made fo little impreffion upon her mind, that fhe internally regretted Sa- cheverels having fqueezed himfelf be¬ tween her and a clergyman, who had amufed and improved her by fome very appofite remarks upon the opera, the performers, and the audience. This in¬ trufion deprived her of a great part of her pieafure, without offering any thing like
like a compeniation; and yet Sacheverel was handfome, fafhionable, and fpright¬ ly, but not well dreffed, for that would be vulgar, ζ£ What a cruel angel you have been," uid he, cr to hide thofe charms fo long in lhc country !—-You have much to anfwer for, and nothing lefs than your heart will be thought an equivalent by me." " I believe, Sir," faid Mifs Morney, (feeing he waited for an anfwer) ίς that your tranflation of the recitative is nearly accurate; but you need not trouble yourfelf upon my account, as I under¬ ftand enough of the Italian to perceive the bufinefs of the drama.
vol. ?. L ίζ The
" The devil you do!" replied he, " I tim furc I do not ; what I faid was a grave fpeech upon my own account- but pray tell me, is Morney jealous ?" α Who do you fpeak of, Sir ?" faid Mifs Morney, <f Why, of Huncks heve, your what- d'ye-call'um friend, guardian, Mr. Mor¬ ney—Will he allow any handfome young fellows to vifit you as his acquaintance ?" " Not fuch 1 imagine, Sir, as begin it with rudenefs." u My lovely girl, eafe is now all the ton ; even the ladies of character^ as thcy call themfelves, do not exact any thing elfe
elfe now ; all freedom, no flarch, except when imported frefh from the farm-yard -— Ha! hai ha!—Faith that was not bad —So give me your addrefs, and to¬ morrow you ihall fee fprawling at your feet the moft devoted of your flaves— Where is your ticket ?" "Sir," faid Mifs Morney, «1 came 1 ere to attend to the entertainments ; permit me to fay that your converfation is an unwelcome interruption ; and if you are a gentleman, I ihall expect to hear no more of it addrefled to me." " Juftly obferved, Midam/' faid the Parfon on the other fide of Sacheverel, " no Gentleman will intrude his company or converfation where it is not thought L % agreeable.
agreeable. It is a violation of ail kind of decorum," 6i Smoke the qubl' wbilpercd Sache¬ verel. ír I fuppofe Cantab was preferring his prayers to you jull now, and i& vexed that 1 fliould ftand in his light," Mr. Morney turned about, aiid obferv¬ ing his daughter look vexed 5 and Sache¬ verel apparently exulting in lier confu¬ fion, aiked him if be had taken that Lady for an acquaintance, as if not liis manner feemed rather too familiar, and entreated him to difcontinuc it— ίζ For though not young/ added he, with good-humour, u I am yet equal to the protection of that Lady againft the prefumption of whoever dare offend her." Sacheverel,
Sacheverel, wifhing to ingratiate him¬ felf with Mr. Morney, made a lively an¬ fwer, and joined converfation with them both between the acts, but Avithout any diing particular to Mifs Morney, except chagrining her hy treading on her toes, and fpoiling her white fattin flippers.— This he thought was making love, and ailiduoufly kept between her and the Parfon, which ihe confidered as an act of unpardonable rudenefs ; and to complete tlie evening, he forcibly laid hold of her hand to lead her to the coach, which he preffed in a painful manner. It is only neceflary to detail this mi¬ nutiæ, as fuch unmanly behaviour is com¬ mon with thefe pretenders to breeding, who, in fact, have nothing of man about L 3 them
them but the mere animal ihape.—-This is far different from old Ovid's way— but how few read Ovid now ? The Parfon walked after them, fixed his eyes moft tenderly upon Mifs Mor- nc}, and bowed moft profoundly. She teturned his compliment, and pulling up the glafs, the coach drove home with them.
í
CHAP,
CHAP. αλλΙΧ· MISS MORNEY, notwithftanding all thc admiration fhe had attract- ed, did not look quite fo healthy, as when her days were pafled in the ihades of retirement, in the calm tranquillity of a country life. She had pined, fecretly pined, at Grey's inconftancy ; and, at onetime, conceived herfelf the moft mi¬ ferable of all girls, to have her promifed hopes of happinefs blafted by thc infide¬ lity of her lover. Indeed, apprehenfion was entertained left ihe fliould die of a L 4 broken
broken heart. She at times blamed her¬ felf for thus defponding, antl on compar¬ ing her own cafe with the affliction of Mr. Bolton and his daughter, thought flic fhould make herfelf contented. Young Mr. Morney frequently u fed to laugh at her hanging out the willow, (as he ciiiled it) when ilie appeared to he diftrefled, while Charles foothed her, and reprefented Grey as confiant ftill, though erring. Her father very properly deter¬ mined to change the fcene. Mif3 Morney refolved, if poffible, to overcome her paflion for Grey, and to prefervo the freedom of her heart in fu¬ ture, concluding, after fuch ? fpecimen of ihe fe\, that thee could not he one worth)
worthy a fincere affection ; befide, the indelicacy of loving a fecond time was fo repugnant to her fentiments, that ihc almoft conceived it to be criminaL Impreffed with this idea fhe determin¬ ed to feek amufement in every place where propriety would admits though more with the wifh than hope of finding it. Her beginning at thc opera was fomething fuccefsful ; infornuch, that af¬ ter ihe got home, not one figh to the re¬ membrance of Grey efcaped her bofom till after fhe had adjufted her night-drefs. Next morning Mr. Morney told her that he fhould be in the city all the morning, but recommended her to take a walk in the Park, as a fubftitute for her L 5 accuftomed
accuftomed air and exercife, but enjoin¬ ed her to take Daniel, the old grey¬ headed butler to attend her, which flie duly complied vvith. Daniel was rather advanced in years, and his hair perfectly grey, which he wore without any adventitious ornaments, combed ftraight over his forehead. The Morney livery is fplendid, but rather old- fafliioned according to the prefent tafte, Mr. Morney not caring to alter the cut his domeftics had been fo many years accuftomed to ; there was nothing fpar¬ ed ; the waiftcoat flaps reached down to the knees, and the pockets were capa¬ cious enough to hold an immenfe weight, uot like thofe of the prefent day, into which the unfortunate wearers can hardly in tro luce
introduce a finger and thurøb. Daniel was not fo lightly arrayed when hé walk¬ ed behind his yourig Lady. She had not taken many turns before Sacheverel prefented himfelf and enter¬ ed into his ufual'familiar converfation—■ i( This is enchanting, fweet girl/* faid he, "to exhibit yourfelf to your adorer fö early—why it is only twelve. None but the moft enamoured fwain s are out oí" bed at this hour, and they only leave it for want of the company thcy like— What might your motive be ?" " My motive for coming here, Sir, was Mr. Moniey's injunction ; but as I have met with company ib ill fuited tó my choice, 1 ihall' return.*' L ? « Silly
ít Silly fellow !" faid Sacheverel, laugh¬ ing, " fo the beft he can do is to fend you out with this double-coated Argus at your heels'. Ah! leave him, for me; you will find an immenfe difference." Mifs Morney, with an indignant look of contempt, was turning to leave him, but he laid hold of her hand, and en¬ deavoured to put it under his arm, when Daniel interpofed, faying— (i Sir, you muft leave my Lady alone, I fcorned to take notice of you fooner, thcugh I heard you abufc me by the name of Double-coat liero —May be that may be as well or bqtter than half-coated as vou are ; but, nevertheiefs, that fig¬ nifies nothing-—in a few words, I fay, let
let my Lady alone, or my Mafter, will make London too hot for fome people." " What, will he fvvcat me down in his livery, think you, friend ?—That muft be hot, indeed—" Mifs Morney now entreated that he would let her go, as the people began to collect about them. Daniel lifted his club in a threatening attitude, as one holds up a rod to intimidate a child ; while Sacheverel began to wax a little angry, and what he had begun in fport refolved to purfue through malice. In the midft of this confufion, who ihould rufli through the crowd to Mifs Morney's fuccour, but the very Parfon who
who had been fo agreeable the night be¬ fore : he drew Sacheverel to a little dif¬ tance, faying— " Is this like yourfelf? Does Mr. Sacheverel mean to offend that amiable fex we are all bound to protect ?" " A Parfon protect!" quoth Sacheve¬ rel, α petticoats to petticoats—the blind lead the blind, eh !—and fo both fall into a ditch together—You fee I can quote a little Scripture, Mr. Parfon." ÉC Or rather mifquote it moft deplor¬ ably. But, come, allow this young Lady to walk unmolefted—there are hundreds who would rejoice in your company." The Parfon was prevented from finifh¬ ing his fpeech, by obferving, as he caft a glance
a glance that way, Mifs Morney pale and trembling, leaning upon Daniel's arm r who held it out as fár extended as it* length would admit, in order to preferve a refpectful diftance, even at the inftant he was affording her the moft efîèntial fuccour. The Clergyman approaching, begged to have the honour of fupporting Mifs Morney to her coach, or to procure a cîfair for her. She very thankfully ac¬ cepted of hjs arm, and began to recover a little, being glad to fee the difputants feparated. For now-a-days, no fooner have gentlemen a trifling difpute about a Lady, a Lord, or a dog, than an ho¬ nourable appeal, as it is falfely termed, in made to the fword, and the life of ond or
or both endangered. An apprehenfion of her being the caufe of a duel, was the reafon of Mifs Morney's fpirits being fo agitated, that ihe would never have for¬ given herfelf had any fatal confequences happened. They were proceeding quietly on to tlie coach, but had only gone a few paces when that troublefome gentleman, Sacheverel, ran up, ancl addrefling the Parfon by thc name of Seymour, aiked what he meant by taking the Lady from him in fuch a manner r" " From you, Sir!" faid Mr. Seymour, mildly—" Have you any authority over the Lady ?—-Any claim otherwife ?" "Let
" Let the Lady go, Mr. Parfon," faid Sacheverel, " or I ihall demand fuch fa¬ tisfaction as you will not like to give. Your petticoats ihall notproteci yon any longer." " I wiih, friend, they had protected mc until now," replied Mr. Seymour, u from yoir icurrility ; but now, that you mny without fear give yourfelf what li¬ cence you pieafe, know, that my prin¬ ciples will not permit thc giving you for fatisfaction the pieafure of a meeting, that has murder for its object. When I am attacked, or called upon to defend an opnrcfied perfon, whether male or female, my arm fliall be ever ready to vindicate their caufe, but on no other account fhall it ever be raifed, Now, Sir, you know my
my mind, take your meafures accord¬ ingly. Good morning to you." Mr, Seymour made a how to Sache- verei, who let them pafs unmolefted, ex¬ cept by a few oaths and fomc threaten¬ ing looks, which operated on thc fears of Mifs Morney fo as to make her keep tighter hold of Mr, Seymour's arm than ihe had done at firft. Daniel brought up the rear, and his courage being in¬ creafed by Seymour's countenance, he of¬ ten turned back to ihew Sacheverel he could alfo look fierce Mifs Morney declined a chair, as flie couid not think of any other method of afking Mr. Seymoi to accompany her hou.¿ than by - walking. The Parfon went
went along with her as happy as a Prince· quite delighted with his precious charge, and bleifing his kind ftars which had fb fortunately directed his path ; and, un¬ der his protection, fhe reached home without further moleftation.
CHAP.
*β <3t»e*aa»*«— *
CHAP. XL.
'R. MORNEY received Mr. Sey¬ mour with great politenefs ; and when he heard of thc protection he had afforded his daughter, fliook him by the hand, and requefted thcy might become frieuds in future. Seymour's eyes fpark¬ led with joy at this hearty invitation ; and Mr. Morney, when he departed, at¬ tended him to thc door, faying— tf If this bluflcrer fliould he trouble* forne, and think ofa challenge, only let
know ; it İs my quarrel, and would not be proper to be taken up by one of your profcifion. Let me have but informa¬ tion in time to be your fecond, ancl, by Heavens, he fliall not hurt a hair of yonr head l " I hope," faid Mr. Seymour, fmiling, " he will not make thc attempt, for I fliall certainly never accept a challenge," " Nay," rejoined Mr. Morney, ei I do not think you can do better than appoint a deputy, who may effectually filence him by a good drubbing. You would not like to be ftigmatized as a coward ; for though much courage is not expected from a Parfon, you woulcl feel a little aukward upon fuch an occafion." « Sir,"
" Sin" laid Mr. Seymour, ¿t I think I fliall ihew more real courage and mag¬ nanimity in acting according to the laws of duty, than I fliould by weakly falling in with man's moft barbarous cuftoms, In that cafe, I fliall be too likely, per¬ haps, to have occafion even to convince the world, that my backwarduefs pro¬ ceeds not fropi perfonai timidity^ ; for I have generally obferved, that thefe va¬ liant challengers ahvays feem moft ready to infult fuch as thcy think either unable or unwilling to cope with them. Now I acknowledge myfelf both, which î think far from cowardice, as I expect it to pro* duce me numberlcis affronts and brave threatenings ; but neither the one nor the other fliall induce me to alter an iota of what 1 am perfuaded is right.— Thcre
There are ways, my dear Sir, to avoid duels without the fmalleft fymptoms of cowardice ; and when I put on this re¬ fpectable garb, it was with the fulleft in¬ tention of performing the functions there¬ of, without being deterred from its faith¬ ful difcharge through the foar of any man." Air. Morney prefled his hand, and they parted for a few hours, he having promifed to return in the evening to efcort them to Drury-Lane Playhouíè, Mifs Morney having cxprcfled a defire to foe a play. Her father informed her that he had called upon Lady Trevor to announce their arrival in due form, and that the next
next day fhe would doubtlefs come to fee them. " But," added he, " my dear Molly, iC although thcy are relations, I do not look upon them as friends, nor even very creditable acquaintance ; there¬ fore, I defire you beforehand never to ex¬ pect my permiffion to your frequenting their gay parties; it would break ?? heart to fee you a modern fine Lady."
END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.
