Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The three brothers: a romance
THE THREE BROTHERS.
С II A P T E R ΥΠ.
I ine D. ipine pror rietPM uf ı И, ¡•..forti I .peak, o. ik uiitoU Πι» t.lc I «nuli ns |П Drink d-ei )oıır fissio« anuj„te, Putton far mc . ie Although idlenefs be not the root of evil, it certainly favours its growth. In an inañive body the blood, üke ilag- nant waters, will become impure; and tranfcendent mud be that mind which vol. in. в
_ nn rel il th ι „,.,.., m thus it Ámuld leun thit d In ii, Ily alpeel ι, no imun. Merih'e tellin m ,1 virille li .hiilly not V Umih nis, ,1 In (km, itiiliu.Ui Cinipi u 1, e 11 mı, „, „I t.,11141- "HtV, tin.' ill I by 1,(11 (fiul , but po¬ llute I I V It I, V. Ί .' » 111 Ile 'm t . 1 l'I 14 . Iti e. I V ' ι e 11 I К 1 "ire til' 'eu but , 1 bille ι, le, ν „„h, , ,, ' .,!. - Ιο t i] Mts 111 le Ι 1,1.1e e I llll I, 1 1 , bv leiliietiii; lv, vill I , llll ι и lirth I lilt 1İV VKe I 1 elen e .' till We.ll.1 1,1, in ,,,,,,„ ,.Ι, II 1 .11 loi ill diaion be I , 11, .ill 1 u t, , It pillllles lilt tl, ll llltll 111 l' Γ V 1 'l llll. fi.41 till HlUelle llltll 1 ' tillit il hi. ,ι \ hie Ί il.e. limitinin, | i' n null hive, vent ell.. 1 will ι mil n uho ι, I umili, , ,],) , V ihlu с m us abon hım the ni lı'ılı, bu iul multai, hurte ot nn, ul. utlun nui.
lu tim, e\<e].t m cil il ι mf im¬ mite ll.prilllV, Ul lirll llle'ul ente 1, an mien >i mifel il, lrii the pıo- 1 orti π that ciglimi, h v 1 tui vvhtt- teel ti .l.tllll ι proľpcclivc objcel, dll- gult will I. 11 'w а tonu lı.ın ... ıı ııı I piıhıy an ıMiırıuiıt tl t 11 . ť ! if nol u t lu n ti U Ιι
1 ' ıltı H.' 1. 1 r ll ln 1 I 11 V llll 1 liki Vill. l' v v Ull 1 llll unu nt ,wl 'l, u tU l\ hl I. U hnev. 111 ell I lhe . ilet n .'ılıı İle e' re^ w 1 1 ille 1 1 , Jın .Ы1 I fi I 11 le í II ni II ι t 1 Hl n vpi i il π u , tl ν u lly n u 1 luminiti 'vi I <\ fu ıhıl pil' ıı t' it İle I I ι ι cum lir.ni.it mul r t . tl , il e ¡li lui p luv .1 ли tm Ι ι, , Whieh istilli 1 ekil I ' ,1 , bt leir I U .111 lie, the 1 Iv NunitluUsljlilllllts le|eeu!ıll otlu
world, and art incontrovertible witnefles in its behalf, not the lead of thefe is fhame, an artificial feeling born of fo- ciety In many men it is the fubditutton for virtue , and that it muft attend the detection of а vicious action is the toreknowledge t! at often prevents their perpetration of cíe It 's the lad good quahty that lingers in a depraved bread its abolition evidences the abfence ot every virtue, as does its preftnce the prefence e f itte, to which it is i" ob¬ vious companion, thereby making it ob¬ noxious to detection But to folitude it is a dranger, and thither n.en do flee it. '1 hus without the pale of public fo- ciety evil propenfmes (land uncorrected till they become uncontrollal It Such independence of the world cannot but be productive of ill, as his reputation, which is fo valuable an hoftage in the public hands to infure the well doing of an individual, thereby is withdrawn.
• How much of thi· is inftanced by Ihe catholic fyitem of monachal fcque- Itration' Though the paffions of pncfts be diininilhed in number, they ire llrcr.gth ened in violence How nnnv ol them, 1 1 eh as pride, hatred, envy, mulice, rr il t , nnd avance, concentrate ir tl at moti fir. us imbitton, winch ur s levond every moral bound the g^iai diferent of their order ' Nor is their nature fub¬ dued, though mortified ever wakeful foi opportunity, its ebullitions then defy the Inbits of celibacy, and are riotous proportionably to the hazard Such is luhtude—the nurfery of paflion—« the cabinet of contrtvtnce— a pandar to the novice—a confident to the veteran in guilt With this perfuafion, who but muft be piteous or the misfortunes ot the chevaher Henri? a _oung man in the
»3
Uncinuti ι ,ηΙ luviiiiliiv iiiimuied with¬ in ılıt г tkj ι ι ι il remt . 'ıııı- t,t Π. D'ile etl t.l h tve intituled I .1 1 1 I III to tVelV l|)Ctlls t t II 'il - 1, Il . 1 I 1. Ill 1 Ι , 1 e 11 lilit Ills ' t , Wtle Ulite veiv lhe pit К art, ,ιη.Ι the lolle t. İrem Iıı, ıı me v eilsllJ . Л lew hours toei cert.unlv UlltrUeied lum hit 'ev ıh, , ,ulel nit enik ι - 1 lie II 1 11 1 ι ι inn пеш, ι ι 111, 111.1, 1. 1,4 re u. el is I .V, , tl Hilled the ip , inim . I« 1 Η ι. lhbthlillit.il Olluin ' iil.lle..l li',» Ul li» lutali, uhiriui tlie vmuu, pillions (in.ve lor milieu, liuk tlie 'n d ni¬ ti .mina orv ι bt nud the iletinin t lı.ın alio it tie luoveille lumi uu ι ι I with canine· phrtiilvjbeit 1 ь limi vu li ııııldıreettd lpttt ν ι nil ti e tbJurau
vi , , 11 I 1 ιιι„' lubdued by Ills own I I, II I I Ills lllll punì il, he riehd ι' ι le 1, η' ι ν 1 ι minnil u .111 ,ц|| I hls lel| lie Wl luene' I ] 1 e Ilı in I Sii ρ ι rept чг I li e , inel il ι 1 hl I İl 1,1 , 1 le, I Ui 1. t. lllell VI- 11. t m v t ılım ем! it , ill We 1 V 1 111 „ I 111 HC I- ,, ι „, ,1 ι „, ,, , -псу, νι 1 |Κ), Ι e 14 ι, lllll U li ι lililí ,1 lltllllVluUlelllCll , 1 ,, Ιο nmei , 1 , 1 tli V ptelellted ι lelli I impi I lille e ] e 11 ni In, I nielli 111 lilll llll.pvll И 1 1 111 il i|IL ι I cieli epp ılıttım Hiele 1 İt ι (irilir I , th lllll Ull İl İV livelle, lllll VMllle İle hv ip ıı ıhı li neh, Ilı ι ıhı illi ι ,lt ins iv , luminisi th 1 I, where 111 ol s leilien 1 .lie 1 ip i turis attr lete d hu 1 ellllJll Hiele ıdllUttcd Λ fulllCICIlCy в ι
ofhghtand air,vhi<htheeruelarchit el ha J denied the plue, and Hetin joj- íully unarmed that one of tl em wis wi I enough f ír tlie pafiugc ι f hb boti) U readv di 1 his fpirim, f¡ int (ly out in I foreaé 1 the eircumltanccs otrMern vi tory, when it (uddciilv was cuib ! I v th confiderajjn ılı it, lovveier lucccisiü' force without might le, utility was th principal requifite within, as tite uch I altitude of the dungeon feemed lo defy «he afcenfion of any thing unq ι ilified with the teractty of a lly But, as n i"ht be expected fiom his unpituofity, Henri refufed to exereife that reatou which could teach hi η the va uty of his pro» jcci, and this he principally learned from a uolent contufton, which attended his downfal from the nckety pile of fur¬ niture he laborioufly act umulated As is common with folly, the irritation of his body inflantly afiecleil his mind, md fired him to a paflionatc repetition ol his attempt Thotich this only multiplied
his thf гз -es and injuries, he would not dcfid, until a noıfy approach to the door of his cell ll amed htm into quiet A (hange uncouth man, in menial at¬ tire, entered lie brought to the che vaher a fiender allowance of food at the coarfc quality and fafhion of oaten cakes, and to motten them a jug of cold water. Had his fudenance ocen ltfs homely, Henri would mod likely hive been vain enough to perfuade himfelf that his dignity, fo far from being debafed by co ifintnient, was exalted by fuch a proof t f hn enemy's fears But futh an Uea could not p fiibly exift in a body fubfid¬ ed on the victuals of a convict, fo th it, whether molt dif ppomted in pílate or mortified in felf fııflâcıency, Henri averted his f ice Irom the in ruder Ihc jailor was verv civilii liisvvav, and replj ed the iurni urt v ıth an : '- nefs win fi Ihevveıl hım to bt not unie- cudonud to his oftice , but Henri was only to be mollified by his own fulfer- » 4
ιιι„ , nul In, p Mh uU Oi t le,lutili i, 1. ,' il,|
11 u ituni
iki
Ol lupéiul] 1 I 1 1 ι , , i lile- pmdcKub i Iliin ül tii OUtilcicil tilei' 1, i l nu ii til İlip 1 bl I V li 1 lei i„ Is thru III thltqi r 1 i, I 1 tO llb^ricK Wl llolllUK e up I t ι tl ι me mnci ol il e ] ι ми n 11 к hll.dcl 1) 1 H 0 1 111 lililí i i II-
Il 1 Ι ι! tl I , ill liléit ι '1 nuh ν uh III I ev 1 lllll lil Hi ν I, IV ,' le llı'ıl 11 1 IV W İteli I d n«! , «nI, ! , enih m, l ti, ι id С, lip 111 Ipil!' V lllllie İl I HV linu ill b. lie leu to be 1 , el ' l'etili tını ť iei i 0 e 1 ıpıl ut '
\iid he 111, I u, n iin pui muu the Il ι πι wl, I. i u in ihe wail lhe |1 Ih I И I Ui) |1Ч1 , Ull ι Ι, , ■ ι el i n el Ih. ι ΙΊ , , il i Ι in, u. li Insiliti ι ml 1 , ,11, with İlip ρ "el .s i i ,, i tl Ι ч i ıı I ,. ..... ι n II пи. 1 lil 1 11 tv, I I , , ι I 1 ι 1 ι Ι ι b 1 1 I II i I I t , II I t
Ί lil , , nI ι i i ι i il ι tun 1 ι η, Ι ι I 11 ι I ι ι I ι ι with li к , til', pil 11 II li li 11 1 , le mi' ili li ι ι intuiti bui ili üt i II I le I t I M, I UU, 111 t 1 leiıl lell II I 111 , ,- olle u Ι. el luin b iţei luncii tun .!>
he had factificed to us tranfports what alone could afluage his fevenlh drought Thus proceeded his moments, alter¬ nate folly and repentance nor was the latter of uncullomary continuance, for it foon heat " to defpair lhe afternoon wis much advmced, when he v as aroufed fr mi a defpondent atalude by the filent opening of a door, framed with undifc ι er able trt on the wall through it entered a comely youth, bearing a covered tray Hem ι diilinguifhed in his drefs the Indies if л {elea page, and received him with much furpnfe, becaufe he judged from hi' crrcumfpeftion that the vifit was a» im¬ portant as it was clandefline 1 he page having relieved himfelf from his burden, ¡efpecrfully prefented a billet to the che¬ vaher Henri s attention was attratted by the peculiarity of the feal, which might reaf mbly be imagined to be the favounte dvVic of fome fair cyprian votrefs
But the mtereft excited by the ex. tenor was greatly heightened by the contents, which, fairly written, ran in this dyle —" A tribute from fympathy and admiration to injured delervednefs The chief gratitude to a giver is the appro pnation of his gift " It was deftitute of figliature hut how¬ ever Henri, in the drength of his pruh, might have revolted from the favours c f an anonymous bentiattor, yet now he faw the table befprcad wi h many of th· leafon's delicacies every repulfive deter minati n relented, md he mcmallv argued that tl e 1 uter words of the epiltle made acquieleente his duty Jmlnd, the lad fubdantial me il he had eaten being in the in< rn of the preced" g day, an inter¬ vening night had not a little contributed to whet his appetite, wlu h was very flie rt e I bein^ lat iteel, or even appeafed, by the mdigeili food that he ecently had fvvallowed Defides his olfactory nerves claimed ancient intimacy with
forne ol ihe chilles Ιι ι ι il, fo Iitti g .lovin to I ılı inaili rilutti I Us t, leun i,! Ilı I. Il lollıı llllllh, l.e ih V III , Ι Ι ν ι 1 11 liti t ulv nI nu, itin t 1 ilt dll putin . | ι le,, I tl, ι 1 . Wit', I I I ',t „1 lllte VIU. ,1 11 I Ud 1 tlledll e diel 'l VI I ι Ιι e, t i l„ ι ,' , , WH IlllelU.I ill il. ue el 11 lill 1 .1 1 lu , .vh II. he V Ilir l.UlUii ,|Ί ll ν Ilel Seti .111 11 bl I 11 llellee ill il ,1 t ] lu' ι 1 II hl ι 1te I t t 11 1 1, I I III- lell I, 111 ill'l II lill Util linai ' ι 1 ılı 1 ι v ni I I Ine' neis ti t ne 'nu 11 ι t tn ui ι il tilldel I ' li I Ibi pılı, "I I 11 η .Uitoin, lill I ell n,, uni I e'' 10 innove lile dilli a η ι Ulu pilled leiVtUl t Itili 11 V lllell 111 Ipokt vvitli a wuuiin u t'. il nielli
vv iv ib ш t 1 ivithiirivi b> the 1 Ulle vv ly Vvllelebv h elllele.l, Ile е.ИЦ.И e 1, O I Vvh 11' eh hl lill. hell Ul ol V 11 III,' '· leih .1 elll|l He .hellen ele V Ul- Ile. lll.'l.leltlleel.V I. 1 , VV ,. l'ielle t nui te I iielh.iiilell.il .е. Пен mas ,1 I 11. I ell I lit ill lie Is Ю btallL t J le,, II ,11 lilis lll.lll„t (Htlllltll e, v'llell .'lui ее he I s elltél l Ullin lit ve l'i li el vinelli .1 hv II mieli, lor Инн., win' .1 1 bh, lu peleen. 1 , lie,!, Ι ι ,Ι.,ι II /elei, I li ks.lllj 1 ,|el llll V , 1 Ile .peli e lllelll vwth mint, ni . I rthoinjil, U1VI10 ι .lei 1,1, .1 1.1 llll .1,11 1 V I 111 111 lied 11.11 1. I V 11 1 111 ι lllll Ils lit J lll[ ,I,l|i V 'l e'l ele] leieel 1 10111 lile IV Ι , |,,,e, b ll.lle.llly \ m à he l. eie prilllUltllUlsOl le . n η 1 ι li Ι , ι,.Ι,η ili boni- I | .11 I .1 il tliellelltlll'ellb V , . ul ,1111 elüli» legend ,
v/rittenby fanaticpens contemporarywith thecrufades, and thronged with warhke and fpectral imagery They wet e ad¬ mirably calculated to inflame the ro¬ mantic mood of the chevaher, who, being already exhilarated by the wine, caught the fpi it of thofe ages during α perufal of their records, and was ule illy tranfported into that grand the ι re of religious contention Paleftine He there tranfmigrated into the moft renowned warriors , difcomfited immenfe holts of Saracen magicians and ccmbatants, ftretched the ha id of (laughter as dit! Godtrey of Bouillon when he deluged the immortal fepulchre with motletn blood , then fealed the bulwarks of far- fancd Arre in the perfon of leonine Richard From imagining himfelf in the condition of tncient heroes, his fevenlh bram in the end wrought a pei fuafion th it ancient heroes were revived in turn , bounding from his fe t, he out¬ cried the fignat for onfet and the peals of
confilo , meanwh le tilting with a dif- jointed pole, till the demolition of his object, and the fphntering of his weapon, produceţi а victorious fhout and α necef- J iry cclfition lie then had recourfeto reading, but foon h iv mg exhaulled the monotony of the books, he opened fome of the loole papers they were manufenpts and con¬ tained ι poetical and profe niifeclliny , among which were fome effufions of an exuberant imagination, compolcd in the Sipphian ftyle Ailur'dly no fpecicb of compofition can be more pernicious bei aule none more I ifcm King, than tint whciein an author contrives to conve) a depravity of fentiment in a chaflenefi. of cxpreliion Nei a few nake nords the criterion of ideal excellence, 1 1 overlook all injury to their m r 1 111 the fit faction of their critical t lite other» ir reare, whole delicacy extend only to language, and who no' unwillingly fee tt made a
pandar to vinous thought» vvlnli ы the youthful many, ihc memory, lui , heated by Wanton re uhng», elicei» ti mediant irritation to teli il impuni) How j^ri uly tluu is it the ι ut ν ι writer to avoid am lunin' | ubi ι ι ι as the imli hiel ılı it ini nılın. u ι I y Olid lill noi J il 1 Ij Clllipil ι ι lb finale »likidini» nuv U u ιιι,Ι ι 1 nuo tiu nunii 1 1 ι million, jiu ι l 'e many con tni ıhın» in ti dnpı liti и ol yo ng iun win h clu m 0 lıt iv ι hive 1 in donn uit li ıı Iı ılı nun» Lafenelle» lı.mvın 0 tl i. ılı ıth» it ıs, that the blaıl ι it ılı ,u I vue ,v 'uelı isille Llovvthılı il) ı^c», hl» bee lille the pr utne of one for the huni-n bt ut nou imbibi» llrong pu voi i iv , to vue by lhe cscruli ol tiu undei Handing Henri »confined cJui uioubinuitli In, (hallow fuller's eve hail not in ti e le ill tended to opin his comprehend и, iul iherc wa» a degree ol equivoque in tiu- compofition bifore Inni, which lu v ul
in imbuiti tuentrnp Ins minti fiuti I lvi the η muir ht milulgtd m ι с «ι¬ ι tiurd ími.iudtľ), by whith he vv ts l t. nukj t ι the re il L,rol,iiels ul the t u .Jit bv th tunc 1 e penetrate! ι 1 It tills duely Wellled Is Uli eh 1 İt ui] ir illuni, il quitti, it loi the l- ι ι Ile. lui, he. kll mu j piobuiel fl ep, iliii ing vv luth tht fun es tl vmic Next 11101 II U ', t ll _11 ík illat ptLLt led l'è. enn Ulte ι tile ul. r vv ini! the I eu ll hls I ere ι reip 1 idel et, aud ılı VV 1 ,ull tl ,lle bel. r tilt 11 1 1 Пер- I id mv mis with tht diurnii .ili ivv nit ι ' lue ul nul water, lht iiiipruviil ¡tee .1 Hi_i.it bul kii the loud of yeiluJiy eXptfeel tU 1İİL II .ICC !>f till Jlll.ir, VVİ10 could ill ice nuk the uulily lo kuf lu, prillimi wnh luth lignsol lus abltmuiic. however, b 'he ellevdller ituod pi Hiilly dluof, he loi bort qucftion or ftricture ,
and having trimmed the lamp, which burnt conflantly, he retired Once more alone, Henri began to perforin freaks flill more foolifh than hi· frenzies, fince they were unexcufed by paflion He threw the cakes on the ground, then danced over tf em till they were nearly pounded Λ et the r c chil lifli pranks, though far from b ing honi rar/ to his wifdom, were in fact healthy to his body , for they kept it in exer- cife, which ıs the fureíl antidote to de fpondency The chevalier's ftomach underwent a long penance while awaiting its new caterer, and expeňation vexed rather than comforted it From the length of time that went by he conjefured his dinner to be the relics of tome banquet m the caftle probably he was not mif. taken, for it was late when their fragrant (team ufhered in the difhes Laurian agam appeared he attended Hein as
before, fave that his fervices now feemed to be neceffitated by duty, whereas the day Before they denoted their impuTe to be inclination The chevaher was too hungry to re¬ gard fuch an alteration, which was lefs likely to mfpire anger than mtereft, for 'he page polftfTcd a form and coun¬ tenance, that, by their delicacy and fweetnef compenfated for the abfence of digm y, an endowment denied to his low birth I lis age did not exceed fix- teen years 10 the capncioufnefs of youth might his conduct therefore nave been attributed, had not the gloom which unnaturally overfpread his ifpeft fhew- ed it to fpring from fenous motives. Wf-»n Henri was mellowed by the grape, 1 e perfe-uted the page with en¬ quiries to whom he wa» mi'ebted the 1 mer betrayed a perturbation inftead of an anfwer, which exceedingly amazed the cheviller His curiofity «vas now doubly luflamtd, for perceiving Lau-
nan's emotion was conneded with hu benefaftor, he perfiflcd to queition, with the hope of being informed m both points Ihercfcrw of the jouth was •unconquerable, and plainly the merit of obedience, \ct his features Jtflindlj re¬ vealed othet с tres than thofe of et neni ment; the binili, then ι il ml , lud alternate and trmi tiu d uunon over his cheeks But wl n ilt t het li r heated himfell tottui 1 li.Ji ext 1 ment of,and motelli n ot 11 tli tli nue regard for, his feiret frunţi, the Imi s agitation grew iingoverniblt, ind, с itch¬ ing the end ot his fifii to h s e\c , 1 с hung his held ami u er· ( hagrin at his ilifajipointmtiit li) the mourner's obilitncv rcprcHc I in Henri that kind condolence which he other- wife would hive fhenn , and he fa ¡u- tiently (lill unul the fobs of his attend mt ceafed. Although the donneati looks of the page befpt ke how punlul it wa. to him to be ngarded by the ι hevalier,
yit, notvvrthltindmg his liberty to go, he ftudied delavs fo long that Henri prcfunted that he was unwilling to fhew his tue while it was blurred and dif- (..ти id by trying. Hut what moft of nil perplexed him w is l un nil's conduct his t'lpnrtiirc It rip. ttitlly wis .bill t t) lildnfs lum, wllelll Is ι uimgt is olteii 1 il il, md Ii ipmtrtng lips rtl i'til 1 1 uit th 1 ť oui of his henri. \t kn Ί ' went out, bu' Htnn law t nt he wi e ulum 1 ly fome hulden s riel, ııı Vilmu lui Ί' vv ι imphi iteti. Ilus wis mut i nt icUttlion for а wh ie , hut ts the. m tiv e s were ιην. Iv Cel in JVkiiel , li I i h с ipini ment lefs ibllrult , nul lu tutl .tion tang 1 r.iih per er tel b lb 11, n'umili tht murni iiidint,sii vtlltrdd). Ihiy nuvi fee.lleei il.leitul of thtir unliľ;ui у , nt 1 id, 1 ein. fh irpr-ntd tn ι inle nt η ι Ί ι , he. η vv Inutili no n ott il 11 vil ι- ν π ιι uv tu mi) trt ι ¿dl t i tht thought , w. ť. iiiniiv of whnh ht
began to fympathife, for nature was awakened, and taught tum that joy could fpring from other fources befide combat and generallhip He Jlarted from an unchafte reverie, to relieve the fiercenefs of his fancy by pacing around But vafl and hidden was his furpnfe to difcover that the fecret entry was partly unclofed He was absolutely confident that the page had not left it fo undoubtedly it was opened while he ivas poring over the papers, and for what other purpofe than his egrefs ' By the brightnefi of the lamp he knew the day to be on the wane, wherefore he hefitated to brave the penis of fubterra nean darknefs but confidering the pe¬ culiarities of the friendly unknown, he fuppofed the prefent opportunity to be of his contrivance, and relmqmlhed every fcruple againil profiting by it A narrow paflage, channeled through the rock, prefented ltfelf to the adven¬ turous Henri he groped onwards, until
his krot ftruck againft the 'iwermoft ftep of a fteep flight which he cautiouflv afcended , and found that the pafldo", with d gentle acchvitv, reverted ove- that below. He luun guelTed th it 1 e was arrived at the upper (turns, for it the remote end a feeble ghmpfe of dny- light was ditti nubi lhis wis his beacon, and he hiftened tow irds it it fell through a gnpuig door, which he pufhed open, and with aini/enietit be¬ held an elegant apartment. It was not extenfive, or uniformly II itely, but of dun ι finns thnt beft nd mt ol ornamental vaniti Ile coup ďccil wis abloliittly enih in ing, fır ι fanciful tdltt had exhnultul tierv ait and invention, to beiutify it to the per¬ fection of a voluptuous pnv lev After Handing for a ttw moments on the threfhold as thourh he -.ppreheniled α profanenefs m intru ling, the C hev al er intered. A cloud of frankincenle, which kindled fie m faniaític celliers, vol. ni, ь
was hi, tallite, and the inflai.i afur lie inhaled if, a pleafant kind ol dehnt u ulurped uver hie leııfts. lhis Wds worthy d forcereis , and if beauty be her prin¬ cipal requifite, nature was faulti tor cen¬ tering lo many charms in the Itmale »ho now lettered llenn s fijtit She reclined in а poiture cf rtpok on а canopied couch. Her flumbcrs were the "nare whereby Henri was enthraled, for his eyes took licentious hberty, until thty fettled on the face ot Lanna. Aftonilh¬ ment numbed his faculties, and he was unable to move, but remained fledfaflly gazing on a woman, whom heaven had adapted to harmonife mankind, but hell had tainted for their ruin. I he digni¬ ties of htr (tature were perverted to the refinement of her wanton attitude,which beamed indiftritable fafcination, for the drapery of her attire did not reject ihofe indecent glances, w hich feek in vain to pierce the drets that is a modeft vv oman 8 fanctuary. Yet waj the inexpeiitneed
ν in th awed imo diffidence b) rhe na iv Itatihnefb of her limbs, unlike the im¬ bevile bűneit, (lie would hut ttilu'td his clones on tht dilcenilinir thunderer licitile her pilli vv r-lteil t dulnm.tr of txquilite ineeluiiilin , inilin bnoks wert lading near, and m tht exp miltet le iv s ot one ul them, the chev а nr lurv ι v id tht prelude to her ilumbtri It was a canzonette with which he was not un- aequ unted, and it w is txctllent v ad ipt- . d to infpir dreams eorrefponJent with her iluneanor, nor did thele unpin l.ls i\prillnn to hei countentnce, lor it gl ην ed ν uh an ardour tint rcbuílcd tury iiiiulition of art Hei lvvelling lips wert curled liv finding fantafies, nul lelt many dimples for love to choole his ainbulhm, while he. e^es ferenely llcpt lienta h thtir tranfparent lids; and lur dark hair (Iole ferpent-hke over hır brow.beingdiľcompoftd Irom its flowery wreath by one of her arms, whtih, care- leľsly thrown above her head, expanded С 2
the f duflıons of her bofom Such a woman fııggcfted te Mahomet his lemi nme piradile wi h fuch a wi ιηαη the οι untai zealot promifis h infilt ctleftial lenfuahlv, when he braves the phalanx of ( hrilfjan chivalry iuch was Julian s wilt, Henri'» teniptref» 1 he mind before the fenfes ought to be the objecl of ¡ove'» generalilup, as the woman, who chiefly addreile» the litter, filali find herfelf esfily lepulied , and,even in the contiary cafe, can claim no mole praift fir ι vicforv ι blamed through iuih writchid auxiliarii» ıs in- accent arts, thin can one man den е а reputation lor conquering mother vvh in he prev loully inebriateti Larin ι » at. feition not being a phantom which chail ly flies the touch, (lie thought to тЛе Henri's love receive a bi th from the like fenfuality, which ever is eventually ι > death Mark the abor¬ tion ' It is true, »hat in the firft mo¬ ments Henri was foigeďul that Larma
was an ioimoc.il parrieiJe, ani m ι dubiul le iilulterefs. He law nli h ι lovelimrs cilindered only it» portelli η, when a noile, wl h a link tın e bifore he had indillin tiv hear 1, returntd, aud undecen edin reliance 1 1 op-cırtıilıt) 1ь liliels i íihe amt rous ,sai wire finular the ( ontcfli flincd, unelolid hcTi)ci, and rescued the ditcompoiurt ot her in ml No 1 me,^r unleen, tie fluiti ot (hame rekindled on the Che¬ valier's checks , and he difdam ully (luted awas from her, whofe flecp he now kn v w ıs пеЪиоич 11 e rt pe¬ tition ot the ut ile illuni trom t cui tamed ale ive the С uteli l unicii re ill) dil uracil, but Henri, dil uileil by her full contrivance, ami .ipprchenhvc ot ι Ic cond, ruflied from the apartment, anii lepaired to the dun^eoi When fomeiihat calmed, he renewed the occurrenees of his lituition. Ihey no longer were ui ac turntable furpnie and conjecture weie now fupplantcJ b) <- 3
perplexity and indecifion 1 he äff et un ot I arına was the Iule fource of the minions he had found ш pnfon , (lie hkewife fought to (trauen lhe con¬ nection , yet was fhe not wile to the tv rant who humbled him to her charitv ? might lhe not be a confidant of lib op· predion ? nay, an abettor of it, with the leeret intent to derive gratification Irom its circumftances ? Nothing were more piobable. i ben how to conduct him¬ felf through this difficulty, and transform it to his own advantage, was the la¬ borious ftudy of the С hevalier However abundant Hcnn mentally couidbein projects,bt fetn s pariiculirly unreafonable in thofe he (elected, for they alvtavs required the fupport of abilities above mediocrity. His prefent plan certainly was fpecious , but, who¬ ever knows the arts of a defiring wo¬ rn n, will defpair ior the youth who hopes to baffle them. 1 he chevalier rc- folved neither to incur the refentment
«f 1 arma by a blunt rijefti n c t h r ad vanees, orto ixiomi ι vietiin t« tliem with ι heaullrt n ' lellinee on his coi lineine, he ¡Ulpoledll elude tur liti II alluri nient till an aulpıcınıı m m ut ■houUnnl ι 1er e ι er love lib.er l il It. lus tel lie Rethth ι tn tin fune 1 I n v 'v hldcpllttul, tivi e 'l tule litt hilf ľ J ene, ions «Inch w re· liiu'imiih ıı tiineet , but the rcconlider t 1, I I becoming the g ill int of 1 απ 11 ht fli tultl, m realite , become her flue, s lhe then wont I tie niivor iblv ml r. ( it in lib leeluii m tor her ν m! it ι , confirmed linn in his firil kh is His ignorarne h vv tlet) 1/ he w ι ι ι 1 t ,| m the inti e of ť et ntel J Inni 1 1 prefumptirn , but his uitellee uil and conítiíuiional temperaments were aire ' ly contaminated by the Ιιικ fpiccry ι i lier diíhcs, and the yet more inflammatory poetry. Henri wís not шкп'.Ые to the с 4
danger pf future intimacies with the latter, and refolved to deftroy it. Could he have been the fpeilator of his own reluctance when undertaking that tafk, he would have been the more thoroughly convinced of the propriety of the performance : but his eyes were unable to revolt from the love fraught pages. Wherefoever he opened, the poetic fafcinadon prefented itfelf; and being at length violently agitated, he read aloud, Svecci w. min ,ι th* fııım'ı mortal g »ife, bent tinten lu e/vc loreU 11 uf l'arati л This rhapfody deferved a laugh, nor did Henri whithold one, though pro. t.ably his mirth was not diffinular to that bubbling of a brook, whith proclaims the abforption of vvhatevei be caft into it. Mod likely the author cared but to llir the fpirits, well knowing tv w eafily theii frifkinefsmay be perverted : that the att of contrail was not flraüge to him,
what followed was an indifputable tefli- mony — aVereevtyileaf reuh h th wotlliffrU 1 f|rnglroiTi г vf a titi f h I u s h i b У, üitld tmling Г 1 tt ι too Г tül I 1 l 111 I Λ π *ti! Itt a¡ ι et dağı t ılug the mind J 1 lenrı'spaffions negatived the qucíli η belore his reafon could altert Hielt Could he have digelted his thoughts into cxpreflible order, he would have declared an opinion, that al cinate fatisfacìton ought to be accorded to the mind and the heart in him ť*ey fo little fvmpa- tluled, that to fulfil only the U nyngs of one, muft occafion nea ly an entire neglect ot the other His hearty earned with amorous wifhes, which prudenceai» firmly oppofed, us fuccefs was but partial, for the facnfice of the poetry was poftponed, and the latenefs of the night only caufed him to discontinue the perufal of it. Next morning the jailor entered be¬ fore he was arifen. Silence was mutual, c 5
but the man was nothing lef» than fpeeehlefs when he beheld the writings, which the chevalier s nocturnal «carinéis had neglected to remove however, he filently re ired, noi was Henri aware of the dileonry A voluptuous inch knee enervated his hn bs, and he lay abandoned to fancy till the noontide fun illumined the place. fhe flug¡,ard then arofe 1 he heat of impure love raged in his breaff, and each moment added fuel to it He did not feel the refinement ot individual affection, but figtnng for the fex, imag ned it to be an aggregate of Larmas As neither hope nor defpair predominated over his wifhes, he was not inattentive to о her cravings, and being fufpicious that his table would not be del cately fet οι t that day, he condefcended to ap¡ ea r e las αρ. petne with i s fimple ? low nee yet he ate very fpanngly, and was not unpre¬ pared for his dinner, when, as ufual, it appeared Laurian wore an unfocial countenance.
and fhrunk from the obfervation of the chevaher with fymp oms of dillrefs , the more diftingiuOiable on account of the gay light fhed bv tapers, which were difpofed on the table in an unprece¬ dented number Being ihirfty in the courfe of hu meal, Henri afked for wine the page prefented to him a brimlul goblet on a falver, but his hand fo trembled, that it was with difficulty the Chevaher pre¬ vented it from be ng overturned. Ί he unexpected appearance of the feaft had foftened Henri to complacency 1 fo .ie compaflionately addreflêd the young at¬ tendant, and defired him to fit down till he was recovered. He then proceeded to unb bc the wine, but lus kp» were yet unbathed, when the boy ftarted, with- held the hand wl ich bore the fatal bever¬ age, and, disfigured by a hue of hvid palene 1 », prefented the imagery of im¬ mature guilt Henri's r es wandered over him with amazement, ihe glancing
round the glafs, his narrow ïnfpeftion detected feveral grains, irdubitably no- ous, adhering to its rim 1 he little ti ind does nothing witho it parade, fo the Chevaher mod funoufly dafhed the poifon away his next aim was to be retnbutory but the miferable boy funk upon the earth into which his face feemed to be feektng a grave for its grief and thame. Henri's motion aroufed him , be clung around ι is knees, and the former heard, "Oh, merry' pardon 1 ' ejaculated m fobbing murmurs I hett attitudes, fo grateful to the Chevaher s haugbunefj, were at length changed by his curiofity, which demanded the motivo or provocations to fo diabolical tn attempt. Thrice he ra fed fhe weeping boy, who u often returned to a kneeling pofture A fourth attempt was too violent to be unl'uccefcful " What paflion can be pleaded for your apology ' ' faid Henn " would hatred make you an aftaum?" A
thoufand expreflions fled over the fac« ot Laurian , but they were fucceeded by a deep blufh, which crimfoned even his polillied neck Henri s late experience had quickened his penetration, he knew fuch to be the beauteous tokens of one paflion only, and by his manner he dif¬ covered his underftanding I.aurun'« eyes invited 'he (hade of his dark -Ш, till his heart heaved forth it» enamoured mj fiery m a mighty figb, anu his agitated frame lell upon the brealt of Henri, at once the confident and mat of his lovte 1 he Chevalier's pity was taken by fur- prife, for he felt the fevenlh cheeks of the lovefick mourner glow through his veil, and his bofom tuiiniUuoufly pant ; nor could love have afiumed expreflions more delicate, unlets it had (truggled with the pudency ot a virgin indee i, there was only wanting to hir feminine appearance the projecting botbm As little as Henri imagined who was the authorefs of thefe tranfports, as vafl
wa> his aftonilhment to hear (he was Larina. In fpite of his previous refolu¬ tion«, he really was much fhocked ; while the page miftaking his emotions, with clafped hands and l.reaftung eyes re¬ peatedly cried, " Oh do not take her from me ! Ine! 'ed 1 mile«. ' I love her fo dmi+r, that Ufé would be a preferable Mi." Henri va» much deranged and faid, * Doei the kaow of your attachment >" " 1 could not conceal it from her," «h« page anfwered : * 1 grew fo thin and fo pale, and could neither ear noi Heep, yet every thing around me feemed like a dream ; my head was fo hot, that my eye» were a« in a furnace ; then I had a kind oi choking fenfation in my throat, «hich would take me at unawares, fo that I could not keep my tears, and my heart beat fo violently, 1 fomctime* fancied that I could hear iti I did not know what to do with myfelf. Every clac« «и doleful «hence my fweet
midi ell was abfent , yet when with her, 1 was alraid ot her piercing eyes ull tlie remarked my conltaney ш avoiduig them ' " She could learn your pallio α butto blau e it," fai«! Henri "Oh, Die his g > idncfs winch will not hurt even bv words," replied the page ' How kindly did (he advife me to repofe in her the leeret ot my dillrefs ' and to relieve my embariaflinent, with what a tender archnefs did Ihe conde- fcend to profels tha* it was not unknown о her W er I to live a thoufand years, remembrance of that hour would warm my blood, and mfpire old age ' " What ' you then wen completely happy } ' aiked the faltering Henri " Happy ' raptured ' inadd-ned '" ex claimed the page ' Could 1 be other- wife i 1 have not a heart of done Could 1 be otherwife ? No, no, no ' I dared, and m a whirlpool of ecflacy was loft ' The effeäs of tbs dileourfe were
hurtful to the Chevalier, and the laft fpeech agitated him lo unrtafonably, that he liar .ed to and fro in a frantic pace. The page continued " Until jou came, I was ellrangcd from pa η But you, you, 1 fear, will make me irre¬ coverably miferablc. . et hear me, and confider—I implore you to confider— Larina ıs my more than wife All my prayers to God are m her behalf, yet lhe has no fault fave that ot loving me, while my greatefl virtue is adorati n for her. She »thefource of ev ry ] fant thought 1 have, and her name is the lift found that departs from my deeping kps. Oh, could I but inform you how wonderfully I love her, you would not feek to difunite us 1 1 God )0u'll break my heartflrings if you do Ί et don ι deceive yourfelf, it ıs her pity has over¬ come her She his tmflaken the tenor of her feelings, ami whit (hill be the confequences it (he perceive her errot
t о lati í nmorfe in herfelf, upbraiding» of you Htr heart cann it be weaned from me y ou catch but its ovei flowings, but I tor long have drunk at the very Ipnng of her alléchons She Knows that fhe is the idol ot my devotion, and Ins feen me 1 ife my fenfes a hundred times, when in ner arms Hunk then whether flie can quite forget me, and ceafe the vain endeavour ' Ί hat propriety may fometimet fpnng from a fpecies of vice wa» inftanced by the Chevalier his vanity, being pampered bv this bef eching ace irded fuch an anfii r, as tn another would have pro¬ ceeded from ι heart aflecled to fee a south of fo L,reat promfi bh n hted by an untimely palfte η Under the pr-tence ot tran [militimi I aunan's fears ot r vatry, he uttered fuch contemptuous ftricture» on the frail unworthinefs of Launa, whom he affefled to defpife rather than admire, that the boy was exafperated to owe to the Chevalier s opinion of Ьм
mittrefs's undefervednefs, what he hoped would How from his gencrofity, and (loud boldly fonti, and gave vent to the feelings of tus bread in her vindication and eulogy. Henri was a heedlefs liltener, till he bithought him to enquire how ibe ρ ige became fo convertam ui Larma s def igus as it was improbable that flic could hai с the efftontery to delegate hnn on then behalf". Laurian betrayed great agony at thu queition, by which he uas dif- couraged from a renewal of his amorous cxtolment. What Henri difmifTed for an improbable furnnfe was really the fad Larma, in the feduction of the young page, had not been incited by any af¬ fectionate ardour , but derived much wanton entertainment Irom the fpeclaclc of a juvenile paffion ftrugghng with re- fpeû. On Laurian Hie practilcd eveiy art with the mod retentlefs and inventive cruelty, till the boy'· f or beai ance was vanquithed. Ια an incautious moment
the was humbled to his arms, and he derived Irom her natutal pronenefa grati¬ fication as unexpected by him as it was unintended by heifclt A confiant co¬ habitation had enfued, merely fenfuat on the female part, but not unlupported by fen imént on the part of the page. Though he lived in the aciuai difo- bedience of a divine prohibition, Laur an was only injured in mnocence the con- fequence of his bodily contamination. The principles of hit mind remained un- debauched, for within him love was not a vicious gueft, though its indulgence w as adulterous I his was the cafe when the an iv al of Henri de Souvncour in- fpired lorina with ambition to achieve a fécond conque!! That delicacy wu extmguiflied with her virtue was proved by hır fubfequent conduta. As her own heart was indifferent to Lauraa, the was carelefs of his , yet, fenfibie to the double afcendency the poflefTed oru him as nuftreis of his heart and fortunes,
ibe determined to make him an agent in her licentious plans. In his firft vifit to Henri he was unconfcioufty her pandar : but his confternation was indefcribable, when he afterw ards perceived the motive and defign ot her conduct, which (lie wilfully contrived he fhould do. Not- witnftandmg her depravity, he thought but of her lofs, lo live without her feemed impoflible, yet between abfolute pofleffion and abfolute deprivation he knew no medium, though the Contefla meditated one -, for the faw nothing to r' ner hun from relinquishing a moiety of her favours, and bung content with alternate enjoyment. Such an arrange¬ ment infured variety to herlelf, and thole fcruples, which were ftrange to her Blind, the wa» incoafiderate of in others. The page felt it impoflible to reveal thu ; he dreaded its effects on his rival ; «nd befides he would rather have under¬ gone a feventy of bodily torture, than uttered the derogation» of Lanna, which
yet he was unable to credit. Where¬ fore, in anfvver to the curious Chevaher, he returned an account of his having furpnfed him in the apartment of the Contefla. "Yes,' added he, " I wa» con¬ cealed within the alcove Unfeen myfelf, I faw your boldnefs, and prevented it. Ye», I prevented your momentary in¬ dulgence, to fave myfelf from an eternity of gnef Before that fatal hour 1 wilhed to aci as I now have done, and place my reliance on your magnanimity , but that fight thwarted my intention, and cor¬ rupted mc with hatred I could not, alas ' I cannot forgive the libenmifm of your еуеч О God ' how hot was I to avenge the audacity of your fingers. I thought myfelf capable of your de¬ ftruciion—I vowed it—yes, I, who really tremble to annihilate a worm I knew no other means than poifon, for I am very feeble, and lliuddered to medi¬ tate a blow beddes, the idea of feeing your convulfions ilupified me with hor-
ror I determined, after convev ing ileath urto your noanfliment, to leave you to the dungeon till it became your fepulchre How nearly this was perpetrated I tremble to think Had my defign been fulfilled, great God ' what could you have been at this moment ' О fi , he rejoice· m your exiflence who fought to (horten it mod religroufly he doe* " Henn cud not withdraw his hand, which the page had fervently grafped, though a horror chilled him, becaufe he faw that the tove mad laurian was not to be tnifled, as future jealoufies might make him retentlefs One mode there was to fatisfy both, and Henri propofed it The page reddened with delight, for, indeed, the advantage was recipro cat, one hoping a liberation from con¬ finement, the other from nvalmip T hey then fohcttoufty difcufled the mod pro table plant, many of τ hich the timid boy declined, for though he never could be more wdhrrg to acquit tnmfelf та
lıantly, yet h« was naturally diffident of the tell trom what paffed, Henri be- ¡,αη to think that more alfilfance was m- difpenfable ' Are you without rela¬ tions or trıends m the calile "' ' faid he " no father, no uncles, nor bro¬ ther'' " No, not one, the page replied with a mournful ligh. " I am father- lefs, and all my relations are difperfed I know not where " " How long has this calile been yotrr abode '" afked Henri " About three years I was chofen to fill the place of a former page, whofe difappearance, though it promoted me, I often have lamented with tears ' " Ha '" exclaimed the Chevalier · " how was he named ? " ·' We called him Claudio," replied the page, m whom Heari infbntly gueffed the identical boy, of whom his friend had made affectionate mention, Laurian continued <» ] had a fnerd
who wa» very good to me, and might have alio 'ded you material fervice, but, unluckily, he went forth in a late expe¬ dition, and, by what 1 can learn, is ■ailing with feveral other» He certainly did not return with the train that accom¬ panied their malter yeflerday ' Henri enquired if the Come was arriv¬ ed. An affirmative anfwer funk him mto defpondency, for fuch was his ap prehenfion of Julian, that the mere cır cumftance of his neighbourhood con founded h't meafures, and routed his hopes. On recollection, he afked " K I arını, when he faw her the day bet ire, w as aware of her hufband's ar .val '' Launan anfwered, " No for I ex- cufed myfelf by faying that I came to announce it She appeared difpleafed at the new», though flie expected it, yet went into the balcony to bow him а recepuon, which I really ttunk hım to be unworthy of. '
" Indeed '" faid the chevalier " and pray what do you know of him ? ' ' Iirtli, infwertd the page " I am very ft Id sm fom the apartments of inv dear muiréis , beitilis, I alvvtys Tin (raid to lpeak about him But I know th it he treat» the Contefla with flights or rudenefs Is not that а crune defervmg abhorrence ? ' lhe Cheviller could hardly refrain Irom Imihng at the earncftmfs ot the lomplainer, whofe rcifon feemed to be hi ι bed by his ρ ilhon fri arma Nor vv ts his tear ol |ulnn heightened by "^t the loninleration how puerile ι ι union had fupplan cd h m in the mat intoniti ecilafics 1 hat the fiilihmeil may be in jureü with impunity this- was α proof, io rccovenng from his confufiui, Henn renewed the difcourfe on his freedom At length they were fatisfied that a fe¬ cret way might be unravellid through the vaults contiguous to the cheval 's dungeor , but they were unable to de voi m. d
vife any expedient for pafling the out¬ ward walls Laurian afttr fome fuf pence, propofed to feek and engage the friend whom he menu ned , and who, perhaps might be arrived without his knowledge, as he had not yet been among the newly returned retinue Ihey both relied on his fuccefs m meetinľ with this important man, and were about to con elude the converfat мг with pi afure, when an indidinci rumbling in the pn vate door way didrafted their equani mity A momentary lu r pence f illowed Henri then darted inte the paffane , but the noife was now transferred to the upper end flill tl caufe was invilible, and it human, the party alertly fled the detector ol his eaves dropping 1 he chevah r was undetermined whether or not to purfue, but having failed to afcertain the object of his purfuit, he fufferi-d himfelf to be deterred by the terrors of Laurian, whom he endea¬ voured to perfuade that the alarm was
entirely innocent, being merely the eflUt ot confined air. Ihe pag- wastnrd.y tobt diverto, of his fears ot difcovery, however, Henri at length prefumed that he Ind luccetd- ed, and they igrecd to piit When going, í uman pointed to the h^htb, Ai.d .раке thui» " I \lvl\ e than b) my n iltrcie,'·, order whit cm ht, hu inten¬ tion I il ire not 1 irmife Bm hearken ' he r ur C( mpu> reciprocii í dilitv Mme Ihill he the put ot activii), \ours oi r eh immun therefore, btwire' for it is my love will iccelerite tour free* I m , and hunous mufl he the mariti nule tint aluilta me in my love It \ou Ih mid— n »t— tli-ir— -vou— or—1— ι an hope it, tet it )ou flıould lee la- run, think that rudente to her will hi friendflup to me After uttuing thele монЬ with mmh folemnitv, he affec¬ tion itel) added, lt God in heaven profper \ou'" and turned from the dungeon, his auburn ringlett» ítreaining down his baek. r> '
Henri nounftied a vain elalon thit he could be preferred to fo much lovih neb , and this counterbalanced his anger at the parting remonftranee He conti¬ nued to walk aboi t lor a cinfiderablc length ot time, is the moiit u ol his limbs camı rdıd with, yet appeafed, the tumult m hi» breift 1 hough the pre¬ ceding conference obviated evtry kind of conncñion with the Contei! ι, it nther had aggravated than calmed his paillons. What ι in be tnofe furet tranfpoits wh th could Air а boy to murder ? was а quiíhun uttered 1 у the chevaher a thouland Iiinib, and as ι fun his fpnng mg hcirt taught him that he wab onh practically ignorant lhe night had gained that htinefs which is congenial with guilt, and from Bine immemori il h ıs been devoted to its unhallowed dciigns, when Larina en¬ tered Henris dungeon lhe youth's furprifc was the lealt of his emotions, for as lhe railed her vul, he atkı ow-
ledgtd her to be no lel lovelv thin Wllen filet 'tel 1П pieteille 1 l dililit Г Her eyes were hvelv, aul hır uri¬ li mk, Ihı threw kvi у ıı ι her İpe ti mel tont, ..r u lini Hit um idi red ıh t pathos dild lciltuneitt w ulj bt Ulilels ч her cauft " Well,' fai 1 flic, " diali I, as re- fponfil It holt I , welcui.it \ou to my houfe, or, as a gui'i to this as yet un¬ un e 1 put out, tunica neitoine trom you " " So lodgul,' Htnn infwcrul, " you will inlult me by an ofltr ot tht firil. ' " And you, mv friend, ' adjoined I inn ι, " will ollend me by a negletì ot the fécond " " 1 hcauily wifh, ' rtfponded the Chevalier, " that an opportumty for either had never octurrtil " " 1 trull that all our wifhes do not run fo oppolitely," faid Larina, inviting an indelicate retort. D 3
" Oppohte as our fex, Henri re¬ turned " Which are create I but to mingle, ddjotned the Contefla " Ytu wl о to fo eminent a degree are gifted by uiture, afluredly cannot be ındılpofcd ю her ordinances Htnn felt pltiltd, though confufed , and obferving th it Lanna feemed defirous to receıv e fom hım the compliment of a feat, he turned a chair for her accommodation " Is it not a pity,' faid the artful Conteffa, " that politenefs fliould fo en. croach on affettion, as to make many actum equivocal which once belonged e-xclufively to the latter ' Henri found this lomewhnt em nnt- ıcal indeed it »as one of th fe excentric propofiuons which the w uty devifer only can folve ' But it really is the enfe," continued his temptrefs, who carele sly flung her inn upon the b itk of the elidir, whereby
th'V ıh vv re (t ilim,, ud Jet lincei tht Chtviher s hi 1 betitith lnr n lv I lui ' Ye my pretty In n !,it ie lly is the t if , whenct it t mts ılı it ılı ι timte iv η vv avat nI vt lhe b 'α vi uroi il fliľull ι r ıs. ver Iubii ti le inifionltrued mio rrcrt comf1 i- fance , and what cod his fenfibihty a painful effort to make, ıs trıfltd with, becaufe the tendernefs of the motive does not fhme through 4 ince then fo many tokens of amorous inclination arc wrefl- ed bv urli nity, be the expreflions of love | roportionably improved Uncloud the mien of referve, and do not permit coy nef, to curb thofe figns, which urge then own revealment No words art like the vibrating pulle or gl nice de¬ vouring him for whim your heart has intered 1 о make fenfe correfpond wuh fenfe, belongs to the r n pathy of youth fulnefs like ours vVherefore do you blufh, my amiable confident? If my thoughts be blameable, it is I fhould c 4
blufh , yet knowing how impracticable is their reftramt, I dread the anger of your eyes, and cloke my face in youi bofom You cannot repulfe an apptal to the heart " A lovelv woman nelllinf in his bofi m, fo far from being α conteinptibfe temp tation, was of a'l the moft difficult to parry , but Henri was fortified by tic leflrttion that in every diltmetioii ihc page had preceded him Wherefore he remained like a fiatile, till Lanna reltn- quiihed her inanimate pofition, turned her eyes upwards, and apjiroached his with a fafcinatmg gaze, while the foltly continued a fimilar language inter minted and accented with fighs " 1 never have loved," faid Henri bnfkly, as though he had found an in drfputable reafon that he nev er would " Oh, how happy are you to have efcaped the misfortune of a Narciffus · the Contefla exclaimed lhat one allu fion to the amoious legends of Ovid
fuggerted to her memory many of the pithetie arguments ufed by his flighted lovers arguments which flie often had re id with acquieicence and admiration. butttfiivelv fhe rehrarltil the pleadings ot \lyrrha, Bybht, Saluiaci», and many more, whole diflimilaiitv oi conditi m to hır» Iht ni ule of fo much ufe, as to found thci on a bewailing that Henri could de¬ cline an innocent attachment, when he heard lo much laid m favour of thofe th it wtrt cnminil Nay, io that love were ihe theme, (he notimi ; cared how m lpph- слЫе wik the relt ot the lubjccl, where¬ fore, fire aflailed h m with the words of [u¡ iter, Apollo, Pin, Sec. ι ι tht hope ot reahfing the feduelions which they had been fabled to make but Henri prtferved fo much of tht Chn"ian, ai to remain un onqutred by thofe pagan divmitits He ftood a datut ot htr own making, while this fanale l'ygmahon, to melt him into bve, forgot the fex tor "J
whiih fhe was labouring, as did Ver tumnus when he vifited Pomona Appropriate anion mud hav t rendered Larina fo bewitching and leduclive, that it fanly may be iniigmed, tint indif feience could only Ipnng irom α |o- fephean temperament, fndtflerencewas not the cafe with Henri yet the druggie he maintained with his own feelings dif fatisfied the C tmelil, who defired tint he would rudi to her arms in an impil fioned paroxyfm. Impatient t f his ι e- framment, fhe difengaged htrfe'f from his involuntary embrace, and had re¬ courfe to arts lefs violent but more certain. TheChevaher waselated with triumph, and being fecure of its continuance, he did not dee hne to renew the ι onverfa- tion with Larina 1 his was fupported with the utmoft fpnghthnefs by the lat¬ ter ; till, noticing the literary furniture of the place, the exprefled her curiofity
to know which were the productions Henri admired. The Chevaher was not very prompt m his aniuers, but La- rma's penctr ition was not to be bafited , lor as flie turned from poem to poem, and continued her queltioning at each, he iiinvittinqli returned an approbation of that winch was not fallitici» in the point ol indelicate íreeeíeitli. The Contefla gaily detlared that die would cnticife his tille, and difpoftng hern.ll m а negligent attitude, flic read aloud- ΙΟΓΕ 5 rvPlRC HI' .mil I l., .ıh, tut l.tru aret 111.1t> Seul ihi.liln r , mtil.e illumining, t me .en p. 101, liliom (ime .tolt. fl..·. Cl nI I...J il routii ã r, oa eailh, m fci, ü tril)< »aml ılı ι[λ» ul human fur, Al. If,,,,,< ot lhe UH. il I LL lliouiligleiy fie!. ıı ılınıl tum ľulj lb« Ie.ltl1un.1th hı> ipi ful», ] ln . 11 him hy lus godi) 0. 1 Tt. ln. le the hurt, ) it nut lo lill , Bırıııl İMİ. with Ы.Г., m tell .fiel €1 leAr bright linıkb, foui-fil eet fighi
And move defpair without unrcft» In h-ipilcflikf:, to bi mon bl 11. Othou, utlifeandjiythelmth, Or lifi· »ere not or nothing worth ' Infpin nebtaut) tr» to (bow Whcnte thi fixes'fo i! u-, íl ™ Bcautywh.nntbouliv fttríhi ud, Angthc íhape but huimn π nd A form that, rooming to be dumb, lorefpcaku the ftudy of the toiigii» , A Oirmking »aiJl, д bol hr hn irt, I hat Ьеаче» a challenge to be preft , Dazzling hmhe that /heil a light, And make a mufic to the fight, To clot ie the neck m naturi a fi ¡te Sun-gold trcllee undulate, But, «UiKi tİKirnı.jiftj fcinefti«-, Wriath) cuılslovı* a bhllom,blo« , Such (.¡rt mtift havei ufi d¿uu ejť Thit htartsthiy burn they puniy, With crefeent brow s cmboí d jbo»e, Thefeateft m.rn ry of lott , Chukethit blithtrt tontnft ihow, Summir nd with ' intr> fimw , I ips tl at thtat th< fi ilaeks ot blifs, Pout and inttitirt tU kih Charmif.Miiou, to intoni A mind fubli ii'd 'L ovi. ι irew th norm ( Cet. r ив Ait, f İt fici d hrt, That diíUnt gUdö but íi-un-hcs Digher.
A lounterpart υιι boljir Tule Olmi Um rve imi« !«. Hie milt N iw tliv liliji poM.rtodill'Uy \\ ľni IV eeilrilclm-iol Jiy, Vi Iure t mil (leu. fi n luim II« fie., Λ ul II gır ini ıhı < neuf tjct, T ıı Mı IKm muıuteh, ц).11у pıııuıl (VI ılııltothecl.dılnrıUlheıltı»!!, T ılılle Uluslu »il m pm ly Ile uli of «Hıkı fu uglily, ln j. r nul К ul jue witli t ipir bliebt, Aml dulimu Ь> ıhı ι unn ligin, Siili il 1 lellinein, tyr, T., v. U, j, lóriit iiiuietl.au t nıpl, Tl , purpl. ,U,ı lo amule, (İrime, "i ·Ι"ιι. "Г lunik, Oivehufe, Autln lull luv. Uli, tu ir. Am upu (urlili ι ι t 'i lurei ьто -τι, Aml pli itu ln m mi ml nul. Th. Hun.' r il tin ililpiilUhruat, Will. min. trilla her lyi wiru, Ir, i flutes ι ι f.e ln I k. ligi» exp rt», Y.t lluitjiipmlli и ) ur, Abtliou 11 it lp m h ι „Hultin re Γιιιηιΐΐι. lliy lee lii.eirui. ι „.„ge, Tliiuit'i liljriiii инат, th. y range, lVnligo.il, l.virn <« (...урле Mun'anillieenaiitn.iuincl <e, Till, thit uutlp.fl, the tr ipiight!> lect Spoit I th' air, and killing meet
But clipi he f >r ι gimriumt· wir, Their lock» they free from llrivt tiar, From trailing robes thur ft run игкщсс ι Of -»reit ur pimmy fheen, From rainbow f.ib, Τ<ηιη \cfi, How m.thth \'ri b,\ 'trwl ι lutft Forriothts foprei y , I, 't Diftnŕt the ».глин ti ι ι ", Which prize·« m Ì л ki с' of il, fit Wh.rem hu. и Href с' <П btij.hf, Aml tm thi* Juf Ufi fi tl lu tU) Wherr be nitt fi tm·, t » Unii nrik I» \fiit \o Is of Ilı lv t' ırth \\ hire mountii.H n ι Л tiu iU tu nrtl , Alnnpl s«htmem шгь г к /n memory of bk fi pirw'ífi, Induri groves v, here Mrjuisln.nl In flowtry /oncu ищи the waif!, Beyoml the ni*w regime »I Spun Whire fincitd lileabtltiot tht m nn, Lovt. Ί exempt from k>nl rult, Which, ere it fanttian», lets it с.н»1, And honed naturt ne ir ι tn twtrve Whilft frie her luigmgr «f ih-- mrv- — Where? Sol atui I ¡um cotqi il buru, To poUr vaiti of frolt we'll tun . Where ni^ht ufurps whole mon ha from day, And pulkha* glide by boreal ι ly Though thaoe theri be half rfftor'd, Nature owns thee ftill her lord,
ţ n li» . Humi u ai · fi im mrn dt> Я m Vit II III II 'И 411 llll[l llllIIJľlt till lilt ftltil , N'. Iiiii Unn 1 nelit u lem ılı cl ırms, Nu funii чг lint 1, lovcis arm-, In «tnll vol 10. ilm-í- tnuluit 1 1», I,t,ici.|-tutn,,,i II« г Ui — Γη CI 11 limittim ııı 'II rılr ¡tiiilf, Ul . pimlfr- ımkt ιιι'ιι,,ιι Milili·, A.liiit ..tii.ťilinn.lnuíinifi-, I i « thlul bi unt hit »ith their U«', \ I uli un, b) lumi lyr ra-itrnm'tt, Λ tl mil nul nii„l,b!iiih.it hith ftvm'il Ιΐμ,.ϋ-ηη m ,l„|i Miuint Itu« ,11 Ulli th. tai Hit's Ihn m VV!,,,,,,,«., epifilli m , ,b f c. Ml Ull,,,,,. , IP l,u,l,b,m', ,ιι,ηρ,· Uh η I, rotsiin. Ult I hu ni lu, I 11 Ull fltlttl ΚΙΙϋΐΙ,Ιΐί,ι,,,Κ,Ιιι,ιι, I i, ЮНГИ.), ifılnih.eiiU, Tu, ι, ...... ir risiiti' Λι mu Л ι tilles ni ι 1 n .tuľňmfiits, Ulm Inull ıh, ıhııııl ıııflrııımııb' Sol. ılı instili num, hm |,,ц l, ŕ ht, Ilmi Γι ',s luim tumli il ι tındır mani •liiriliionilhirliiïuMiiiiutlt, Anti, buljili ,1 |,y tiu ι Wilt it ploran, How iiitabeountu itHu, ,'οι,ιη, Anıl f.ıthır monks putut ılur km Daurlittr min, tu ineiltuous win ¡
So of their fworn celibacy It born a tree polyjnmy. But mot love tries ability At fcalti of antic revelry, Where »if« tl night the face dif^um Anri'iver»' beatona дгс thtirejt^ Which, liquefied to ttndcrtlcws, Heart ь .пГгАюл round ctTuít — Thu Thou, thief lanmtt of the IV . - ' Succrcd'ft mankind to ıVmınıtr , Otir fcxual dtíčord fu t Iţ provict; It meint for .larmony tn loving, Elle in Vtnd had dilìer' Ì и e And llnr'd tigilit. unit) Religion, 1< v ( , thtn jrţ. (> пс Пяте, Hcaf'nlycil net, tarthly rane The fweetntf» wi h which the ContcÎÏ ι delivered this poem confirnwd the I iîiİl of the Sirtii* ; fur Henn uaa fo «ы{« in the pleafure whit h his iuifcs rt-ctntd at the expencc of hts n_afon, that he rt* mained in an alttutixc attitudL fir i nu moments aiter its cunciudon. No wonder his delight was great' Larina 's voice included every note that theuarhuns could require, and with fo much 1Ы1 flit
modulated its powers, that her tones were mieli j,ent to Henri if meanings, which he bef re hid ncgleäed, but which he now could not ceafe to admire Her countenance alio gave llluftratious lo the lenle, and lpake in duuibneis, while her heart danced fyinpathetically «uh finamente to which herfelt was authored Nicely obfervant of the Che- ν aher, with joy (he faw his wild fenfa- tions, and greeted the approach of triumph She reacted every apurement feminine ingenuity could devife Henri, notwuhltan ling then indelicacy, refilled not her blaniØiments, nor long forbore to return them A thoufand provoca¬ tives to vice were exchanged by the adulterous pair, when a deep drawn figb„ pariaking cl the mournfulnefs ot a groin, burft on thur ears It was a gafp ot expiring friendflup friindlhip car ful of Henri to the lall, which now interpofed to refcue him from
ruin. Awful as unevpečled, it thrilled the lovers, and difunited their embraie Though fear efs of guilt, I anna was not indifferent to difcovery hillily c\tin- guilhing the light», fhe relmqtufhed her endeavours of feduction, and forfock the youth, corrupted for her pleafures. Welcome was the morning that endid this tirefome night, for throughout it the Chevalier wa« tonnented withreftleffnef». In the et riled hours of daybreak, the opening of the fecret paflage warned him of a vifitor. His confcience was unpleafantly moved when the page entered. Laurian alleged a fufficient reafon for his unfcafonable mmifion, and Henri, with joy, received the prou îfe of being delivered the coming night. He would have cnouired much con¬ cerning the mode , but Laurian was no more talka ive than what was neceflaiy to prepare the Chevaher, and bufied himfelf in gathering up the fallen tapers; a fenice he executed with an awkward-
nefs tha» was not unoccafioned by mental diforder His perturbation could have 1 aifed miftruft in any perfon more con¬ fidente than Henri, but the latter faw him depirt without harbourmg any con¬ cern, fave what it was impoflible but he mult feel, when told, that midnight vv ould be propitious to his eicape. Would it were come' was his favourite с aculation, till а vifitor from the cor trary fide interrupted him. It was the I ilor He would have retired without inentionable occurrence, had he not trod upon tome fragments of the glafs, which Htnn had fmafhed How it could come ti eie wis a confidtration that caufei' a vtry viliblt furpnfe on lis features, h iwever, he dilapi eared vv ithout making а icmark His retreat was productive of much flee in the ( hev aller, w hofe mirth found a Iti ili mal food İri m the whimfical idea of the amazement which would attend the dileovery of his flight. 1 hough he
had no reafon to cherilh a perfonal am mofity to the poor jail r, ) et a» the latter was acceflary to his immuren cnt, he fpitefully hoped that the blame ot his cfcape mi 'ht fall heavily upon hi» head Huh thefe thoughts, vai led mto nu¬ merous fliapes he drove to divert him¬ felf and wear out the palling hou s Asno dinner was brought him, he fed on hi» pnfon allowance At length the lamp, fixed in the dungeon, ceafed to fade before the ftrmgth of daylight, and, as it began to Ihine with unrivalled beams, he gucfled that lhe (hades of evening were hung abroad Each mo ment now feemed pregnant with his fate, and he underftood that he was on the ver) crifis, when his young guide ар peared Laurian did not enter, but re¬ mained on the verge of the dungeon, (landing within the hidden avenue m his hand he bore a torch, which, being agitated by the guflung wind, rolled а dulky cloud of fmokc, that dimmed his
dfpefl, and enveloped him with the ihade of myftery Henri ftarted with preci¬ pitation and pleafure to join htm , but the welcome that hung on his tongue was prevented by Laurian, whofe attitude injomed filence Ufhered by the page, he went up the paflage towards the fleps, which he before had afcended , on the central one was a narrow door, and going through it, they found themfelves m in extenfive vault Its various recefles contained other door«, which led to the fub rra- nean 1 iby rinth 1 he page haftily tripped tow ards one, oppofite to that by which he had ente ed , it turned readily on its hinges witl» ut figns ofdifufe, and dif clofed a weanfoine length of arched paflige Henri who wds behind, neg- lecied to recloft the latter door, equally did Laurian forget to defire him, confe- quently, they were not advanced half a dozen paces, before, being impelled by its own weight, it fwung gratingly to,
with a violence that elearified them both, and awoke the ujroar of fur rounding echoes Thu accident put an end to their taciturnity, for Laurian, though un willing before to look Henri in the face, turned leproachfully to hnn " You will ruin youtfelf and mc, ' faid he in a faltering tone Henri affected to jed on the unlikelihood of any found travelling to the nhabited parts of the с id Ic " Are not the apartments of theConteila ne ir it hand ? * faid Launan " for God s I ike becircumfpeä feat nify prompted hun to add, " Lut you know your own in fiuence, and dread not the h mı v 1 I would fill on me " Henri profefled to dre id no otlei harm befide oppofition to hi deliver ance , and refolute not to forego the at tempt pufillammoufly, he afked tlie pai,e whether he had not provided arms laurian told him that thty wtre un neceffary , and dilcontinumg their con
verfe, they proceeded Their path was directly before them, deftitute of obvia- tions, and they preierved one melancholy pace for a considerable time, till, being come to the mouth of a paftale, which, as many bad done before, branched to the right and left, they faw, с г conceived that they faw, at the top ot it, a remote ghmpfe of light 1 he appearance was inftantaneous like a olalt of lightning u inotnentallv blazed on the diftant wall. laurian s difmay, while it occafioned, weikcne 11 is outcry , but Henri, though n it interi r in concern retained his p u lencc, and apprehenhve that his own hc,l t n lght reciprocate the difcoiery he puflied t u lingering boy onwards Being paifed, tl e\ compared their ideas each pcrenipt niy aiferted that it was not his vifual error, yet Henri expostulated on the improbability of their being dogged, and endeavoured to perfuade himfelf, that it was the moltenfivenefs of fome lunar beam, juft then intercepted by a
ttragguog cloud The circumllaiue ot the fun penetrating his pnfon he con¬ ceived to be a confinnation The page affirmed that he was totally miflaken in that opinion " ťhis tlümat place;" faid he, " has for vears umi t- monal been appropriated to theconhnc- inenr of the viäims di I lafcano, and, doubtlefs, it was conflructed with inten¬ tional feventy. Ihe dungeon wherein you were, neighboured tht lake, ami was hollowed into the rock to ι dtpth below its furfvee , fo tint the li ht, which fhone through the hilure' ot v . ur vault, arrived from fpiracles cut li.to the piai* above. But here we are le le mul m the interior, impenetrable by am but amfia il light, and fuch me It cert inly, was that wejud beheld ' Henri felt tht aflnght of connexion, yet a&ed m an incredulous tone, by whom could tt be borne ? " Alas' ' replied the page, " I, I, I, know not. Whence it came is a long
paflage, parallel and m all pomot anfwer able to this, wherewith it к conaecìed by feveral morter one», which, u you have feen, run crofswile. That paflage lays between this and my miflrrfu apart¬ ments " " You cannot fufpeft her to have knowledge of our intent ' ' aflted Henri, widful to throw ridicule on the fop- po litron I aunan was hurt to fee him fo un daunted, but his fufpicions, if he har. boured any, were unrevealed, for marti с ülately faying, " Hide,or our Mend will give us up,' he refumed the guidance of the Chevaher But the boy*· effort· foon exhaulled fıs ftrength t and faint m mind and body, he leaned againft ttie roughly hewn wall Though it wa» ua ural in Henri to feel impatient of detay s while the outlets to liberty were thronged with danger, vet his behaviour to the drooping page did no honour to his heart but rather denoted it to be vol in t
deftitute of gratitude. For a while he rudely reprehended the ftnfibdity which he ailUnned effeminate be then made tome awkward tender» of hit arm and fupport, which Laurian refufed with fymptoms of difgi ft too ftrongly marked to eicape the Chevalier, whofe feelings, had (bey been tenderly ftrung, would have inftri ûed hım, that the prefent wa» not the only time in which Laurian wat, or had reafon to be, offended by hi» conduci With increafing chagrin he peram bula cd up and down, prolonging his courte and time, tilt he defcried the end of the long avenue wherein they were That difcovery he hveldy communicated to the page, backed with Annulations to proceed, but fighi »ere the only anfwers h* received Hi» refrainment w » now wailed away grafpmg the hand of Lau¬ rian, he mliPed tl at ıhtır mutual fafety fhould not U hazarded by ficklmefs or tııjıidıty. Centrar) to t a t»i citations,
though accordant with ha wiflvej, the page fhook off hu dejection at the expe¬ rience of this ufage, and, with a firmnefs founded on indignation, moved to the top of the paflage, which narrowed and terminated in an iron grate. The glare of the torch brightly fell through the iron bars, and fretted the pavement of the place beyond with their long fb·· dows, but the obfcunty of the diftance l ung unenlightened, was drearily dif- e oui aging 1 aunan was manileftly relucían! to proceed, and relapfcd mto his recent in¬ decifion , but Henri protefted againil trifling with time and furio ully fhook the grate, intentionally to open it " I have a key,' faid the timorous page, and produced it. " Why delay to tell me fo í" cried the Chevalier then matching it, he turned the lock " You know your way' ' he aiked as he pulled open the grate. " We are quite right," was an. fwered by the page, with an emotion that E 1
gwt ıh· -W to Ы» tongue. Henn furveyed itM «irti a forprife that changed into fton», u Lunan fearfully averted hi« «_>«· TheChevaher would have put la» ibrward, but he hung back, endea- vottnd ro look cheerful, and faid, that be would take charge of the grate to p t a vt at any more accidents. С omphant «Mi dt» arrangement, Henri flept be fit», ana defcended into the vault by a gradual declivity, which ferved m the place of (teps He then turned to quick»» Launan, whom he wa» amazed to behold in the very fame place, holding the grat« m Ы* band, his entire f ame tremulou» with defign His blood-de iVrtedcouMaBaace alarmed theChevalıtr te fi» high a degree of mifdoubt, that he woald bav« «tunnel, Apprifed of his inteation, Launan found himfelf on the verf vergi of deftruction _ and (training hi» nerve» to the fudden effort, inclofed the afttninded Henri '•all the lock wu infecure the latter knew it, and
rulhed upwtrdi juft u Liuti» turned the key, ind anticipated hu attempt But hope was not withdrawn from the Chevalier, fo Ιοηςιβ the key remained , and the boy's terror» truflrating his endeavours, he forbore them, fo foon as Henri pulhed his arm between the bars Winged by his fears, I aunan turned to flee , but what muft ha\e been his de (pair, when jerked backwards, he found himfelf detained by hn robe being fliut in wuh the grate At thit moment the Cheviller had introduced h>t hand mto the rmg of the key, and the enfunrgone wu big with the fate of Launan, had he not defperatery flamed the torch on Henn't fingers, and rendered their la¬ bour abortive Though merely fcorched, the Chevtfaer eimtted ι melancholy cry, white Lionan drew forth the key, ind Tending the tUrtt of his garment, tore himfelf away, but enfeebled by the eon- tell, and drflolvrd into tears of feefmg, «3
be Sank upon the ground at a thon diftance Henri did not ceafe to employ this opportunity in entreaties and expodula- tioni : he burdened hu tongue, and dunned ttie boy with promifei of fortune, forgivenefs, favour, and gratitude ; w uh thefe he mixed an inkling of leproach, by reminding him of hi· promife to fer him free. The latter words aroufed Laurian, who, difclairned any intention but to fulfil hit promife, and the Chevalier'» delires. " Tou cannot defire your freedom mote than I do," added he; " but to-night it it not in my power to give it you. 1 have been unable to gain tidings of my friend, er procure otfvrr affidano ; for all the fervaws, are .engrofled by tht ňiange deatji.of on« of, the contrqUetc, who wa» ,fqund,drowBfd¿his гоотод. But nfeerefwre (hould I offer excufe ŕ — You стул tieaehery i» a fufficient one—
(hat ha» made me unfit for any company while thus my eye« are bloodfhot ' " What do you mean Î' cried Henri " 1 hat you fhould accufe yourfelf, ' continued Launan, " you who know that you have deceived me, yes, de¬ ceived and fupplanted me " (then hurtl¬ ing into violent foba). " Lanna was with you laft night " " In God ι name' —faid Henri. " Do not profane further," inter¬ rupted the page " God won't hear you, neither will I believe you. She paffed before me m her return ι I faw her dif¬ order j I know that it could fpring but from one caufe No I will not forgive you , here you (hall remain ' When the chevaher found that it was in vain to aver his innocence, he blended threatening with fupphcalion, till con¬ vinced of the inenkjcy of either, he paf- fionately wept Laurian was fhocked, and fo much choked with anguifh, a» lor long to b*
ιιηαΠ to fpeak At laft be ailiculatid, 1 , it м impofube that you fhould ft Ι α thoufandth part of my grief, you ril\ wtep water, whereas my heart wring» blood, and then it feels fo largely, I almoft fear it will burd my bread. Ah, would I were dead ' 1 am without father, mother, or kindred fo that, now you have robbed me of my miftrefs » affections, no one cares for me. Yet it is impoflible fhe Humid ceafe to love me. I adore her ' I would bleed to death for ber good ' It i» impoflible flie fhould c«ate to love me. Ye», шс will think you gone, and heie you fhall abide untd I can find mean» to releafe you entirely." The Chevalier'» interruption wa» frui't- lefs. " Heie," refumed Launan, " I will furmfh you with fultcoaace, nor mall you want for any thing. Alas ' I cannot be fo cruel a» 1 Ihould. You never will be fo jght for here, nor can your loudcl)
voice br ng afliftance But reft confi. dent in a future deliverance. I now muft teav e you , and with the light Nor mufl you complain of perfonal inconveniences, when fo wretched a being as myfelf is of your own creation " Ihus conclud¬ ing, he turned and fled from the im¬ ploring Henri Wc h tve long known this young man to bc want ng in fortitude , and he muft 1 ave been confiderably endowed with it, to bear this miladventure with equa¬ nimi» Surrendering himfelf to paflion, he d idled his body againlt the grate, ut¬ tering, in tones hardly human, curfes of I auriin, and vows of revenue Now I e dul wiih for difcoverers more than he feared them bcfoie , and to attract them ht loiidlv v ici'eraied but his cries were unan'v cred , ind knowing how h ng а trait he haJ paffed, he refigned himfelf to dehnir While fltipifiiel 1 у his misfortune, a 1, lit foot tell withe at the vault on the ï 5
fide advcrfe to that »here he flood he was (lartled , but eamellly looking whither the nolle arofe, he perceived feveral gleams of light, which (hone through the crevices of the door, and of the antique wood work that formed its frame. Intcretl kept him quiet, and he heard feveral failenings thrown down , then the door was (haken on its hinges by fome one whofe Arength feemed un equal to the tafk of opening it A lolt voice defired him to aid his own releafe , he forthwith flew to the fpot, and applied hie Ihoulders, the mafly 1 amer to hb freedom gave way, and he flaggere J into the arms of Larina. Henri's joy wasfo exuberant, that he lavilhed very numerous tokens of it on the Contefla, and thofe in a ftyle th it could not but be gra eful Λ mutual extravagance of caniles fucceeded, in whieh the Chevalier diilmguiihed himfelf with fo much ardour, that 1 anna was
quite charmed, and took his hand to lead him from the dreannels whereby they were encompaffed. 'I he t ontefla, aflilted by her native ftirewdnefs, had foon lound reafon to diltruft tht unhappy Laurian. ihence proceeded her contrivance to overheai his converfation with Henri. However affected (lie mitrht be to hear his pro- tell шоп« of unquenchable love, her 111- dit,natnn was predominant, when he prop It 1 t itnfr nchile thi othet Hav¬ il g liarrowlv tlııılcd dtttclion, flie re- folvtd, lo fır from facniieing Henri to lauriaiis delicacies, to aflault his vntues thai very înmiit with how İmle luecef* has been defenbed Her defeat flie attii- butid to Laurian, and detained him lo tondantly mar 1 r | trion, that he could not Imd α momtnt's leifuie to go down among the fervant, for that ttd, without which he could do nothing His lubfe- quent attempt to fequelter Henri trom.
her knowledge lhe, bemg alarmed by his untimely motion, had watched. Hers was the light which allnghted them, and Henn'» cue» had guided her to his refcue In company with the partner of her heart, Lanna unravelled the fubterra¬ nean meander»; ofrentirae» paufing to play a momentary embrace Ί he Che¬ vaher'» fpirit» were fermented fo highly by the favourable turn to the midnight occurrences, that for a tunc they irre- п!ЪЫу pointed toward» the Contefla , but, during an interval of dalliance, re¬ ih lion revived, and perfuaded him, iát no opportunity ι ould be like the prêtent to fulfil n» defign of render¬ ing her eager kive fublervient to hi» releafe. Ihe comtat he mamtiincd with his «wn inclinations dnd I .r tntrtaties tir- mmattd in Ins favour Sue accorded a taut cordent , and lutning from the door
w 'lerethrough (he would have taken him, they went out by another in the fame place Ί his brought themtoalefs fpacious chamber, that was but partullv furnifh- ed and provided with the appurlenances, of a pnfon 1 here the conflict was re¬ newed , for Hiding mto a feat, (he pulled the Chevahei into her lap, Ilified him with killes, and fettered him with her limbs The youth dreaded to bicorne her prey, broke from her, and infilled on liberation She promifed to fatisfy him, but plead¬ ing the inability of fatigue, recommended a mutual reft, and pointed to a leat Henri bridled his importunity , and fee¬ ing that it was the only feat befide that which Ihe occupied, he took it, not¬ withstanding it, repulfive peculiarity It was a large hit,h lacked chair with arms, conltruöed of iron, and fealed with plates of the fame metal it was ol er\ ancient appearance, aud wa« pro-
vided with re/Is for the limbs, into which they naturally inclined Hardly was Henri feated before he faw Larina'., eye· glillen with inconceivable delight, and, jumping up, (he fprang with the fwifteft celerity to the centre, juft. oppofite to the Chevaher, who was motionlefs with aftonilhment. '1 here (he (tamped, and iterated it on a precife part, a harfli rattling proclaimed fome myftıc ma¬ chinery, and Henri inftantaneoufly ex¬ perienced the confinement of h's legs and aims within the fcales of the reib, which were worked by a complication of ffruigt, originally actuated b/ Larin i. This phenomenon confounded him he tried to twifl himfelf away, but 'twas im¬ poflible, and the whole was too firmly rooted to be overturned Ihus entrapped, he underwent tortures of a very dînèrent uature to thofe de¬ figned to be inflicted on wretches lo fi- tu*ted. k fki eyes were not made to fry
ш their fockets by brazen b. wis, but by the ni tenie ("peculation of a wanton, whom fight could not behold undazzled, nor were dıiTolıed metals inftilled into his body, l ut his own blood was caufed to b il his marrow to liquefy inltead of 1 ь Ueih being harrowed by lhe piercing claws ot torturous ínftruments, it was fondly indented by fingers of ivory , and nothing worfe ol fire did it fuffer, than the prcilur ot two burning lips, which leit r fy seliges of their intemperance n r otier bl »s en ountcred lus brcali ih m ihc I ic,h heavings of a luxurious bolom, which revived the mutiny in his own As he familiars of the inquifition arc laid to have tainted at the fight of the agones the) wrought on their vie- tuns, fo the t omelia » as maddened by her own arts flic impetuoufly recoil- cd, threw b/ fome hangings, and de¬ clined upon а с uch within the recefs ¡Ac j idled a knob ol brab that projette 1
from the wall, »nd gave him liberty He wilhed to flee. She feared it, but rivetled him by her in ploring gellurts· He trembled, wavered , (he extlnguifhcd the divinity of light, and he ·-------Alas, poor Henri' Snithyfclfdiuli Troper ilcfurm tj fecmi n t ι tl с fie id 80 t urna ai ш woman
Henry awoke to the fame fcene which had ľaluted hım the foregoing day», but no longer he confidered it as a rugged inclofure, exchidmg »II that was defir- аЫе he now contemplated it with a lover's eyes, and appretiated its conve¬ nience for thofe delights, a doubt ot which repetition could have rent hun with dıfiraftıon. * The reader is referred to the note at the ci t] of the iS.apter
Being cncrv.· I b> hu noelurnal tranfports, heirntmued upon hi» pdlow immcrfed iu à kind of dofe not devoid of ft u por. '1 he morning pafled without any figns tf the jiilor, and the firil face Heuri welt omed was the lovely one of Larma. 'liity lprung to each other's arms with mutual e.igeinefs, but when the Con¬ tefla could ddeiigage herfelf, lhe con¬ ducted him mto her apartments. In the one Henri had iirit vifited, a table was fet out with the nebelt viands ; another, near at hand, bore a defert. every thing was orderly arranged, fo that they could djfpenfe with attendance. There the Contefla reiterated affurances of their fecurity and privacy, and defired him to refign himself to pleafure. The Chevalier could not be damped by fear, after fuch encouragement; fo gaily avow¬ ing his wilhngnefs to link his fate with hers, he took a feat by her fide. Never
was a meal m re truly genial Each fc letted the choieeft picceţ for the other, and »tied a thoufand little levine in re¬ ti ling and perlilling A tcndernefs lurk¬ ed in all they laid or did , and the en¬ livening fmile hung upan their lips ripe to approve what the ot rr might fay lhe beams from numerous lulties bright¬ ened the animation of their eyes, and their glowing cheeks found frequent pre¬ tences to meet. They drunk out of the fame cup, which they filled with the fprightheil wines , and as the humour ferrsd, they alternately fung light gleet to a ftyl« which mcxeafed their feftivity Being fausfied wth the indulgences of the table, they fought other amufement, and mindful of her accomplifhments, Henry rcquefted Lanni .0 favour him with fome mufic the politely complici with this Arietta—
Bl.nJ C..p,il 11 apolli, li es. lini pour» ¿ pilii.uM теш, Olt t I 1 .Г. ,...1 ..t 1 »le ς_ Hh Inil.i.lii.lit li.i.TOľelllf'l'i·, Λ. If K'thisjin'meml«!.·! \\ c'.I hinec unite ill every ve.al.t. .\L .ς i'.e temine, ilime ıhı tu il. Iler voice did not poffefs that energy in finging which her colloquial tones in¬ duced you to expeci ; but it was not de¬ ficient in melody or archnefs, and by the Chevalier it was rapturoufly applauded. Αι the night (hut in, the Conteffa ad¬ vifed to go into a room beyond. Henri acquiefced, and was atone for a few mi¬ nute«, as Larina lingered to order the removal of the banquet, which the con¬ trived fhould not appear lefs than the relics of one. She then rejoined the chevaher in an elegant faloon, from the windows of which they overlooked the lake. Henri opened one of the cafe- ments with the intention of iffuing on the balcony; but Larina checked him
in a playful manner and communicated her apprehenfions ot budikon ry by ihc cenimeli, who might look down fiom the fupenor battlements. Henri was fenfibie of her prudence, and rehnquifil¬ ed hut defign the Conteffa reclined her head upon hts fhouldcr, and tenderly whifpercd in his car. It was a fcene cvccllci ily adapted fe r the contemp a molli ver Ihciiiijit was folemn, but krene, the undimuulhed moon flione with frofty bnghtnels through a cloudlets firmament, and fhed a long train of twinkling beams upon the waters, which were unreftrained by ice, but wuh a confiant dafhing againft: their rocky boundaries lulled the pair iato a voluptuous reverie , from which they were recalled by the blafts of a trampet, which were mellowed by the rcmoteneii. After t few minutes of ftedfaft gue, they defened three fuc- ceflive barges approach the caftle. The lunar rays, which played on them with
dazzlmg bnghtneľs, indica'ed that they were manned «ıth men at arms rude fhnuts mingled with the harlh bra) of warlike ınltrument» foon burft the peace of night 1 hev now came withm the power ot vifual discrimination, and nu¬ merous oars were feen to ruffle the (lnnmg furface, over which the boats glided with α rapidity that permitted the row ers an interval from labour Dated bv the merry uproar of the foldıerı, «ho lung in con tit with the claih of arm», md mufic of which the only merit was loudnefs, Henri proudly clafped the l inteira, and wifhed the prefent were an opportunity to exhibit his valour before her I anna did not mifunderftand hi» tttltntr , nor ılı I Hit difapprove them, if her anfvvcrs to his tnqinrits might be milled Dimm, the dileourfe, fhe inf irmed the Chev ahır that thev w re filihe s re t ırnın 'írom f nit expedition which they had pci f ımcd to the forth r fide of the
lake. Henri aflted of what nature was the expedition, but the declined a con¬ tinuance of the fubiect, and made the (harpnefs of the air a pretence for her renting from the window. As the barges were advanced fo clofe to the will that any view of them was intercepted by the balluflrade of the mterdicicd balcony, Henri complied , but tardilv, for he lingered with anxiitv to hear the parley which pafled between the fore mentioned fcntmels ind the boannen below. '1 hough he was a read) feholar in the Italian language, he was ignorant of the prefent dialecl in which their con verfallen was carried on , but from the joyous cries that concluded it, he prt- fumed the arnnl of fome plcafant intelh gence, and this fuppofition was con¬ firmed by the tumult that attended the debarkation He now returned with I anna into the anti room, wherein they had feafled It was ftript of every fign of the banquet
ín the place of which was fubftituted a delicate aflbrtment of confeciionanei, preferves, and wines, but thefe remained untouched, for in the arms of each other they found all they could defire. Long did they prefs the guilty couch, till dew\ laflitude enfeebled their tranf- ] orts, and inclined them to repi fe. Henri being hardly perfuaded that hi» happmefs could be real, oftentimes flarte 1, and 1-amng over his lovely iniflrels, reco/ered fr m his fantafies by t irufing the beauties of her form as It lay cnirinccl by his fide During one of his hts of admiration, a node, fo gentle that though it reached it could not be faid to alarm his cars, fufpended linn in an attentive poh ion. So mute a iilence followed that he was aihamed of lis tmfapprchenfion, when the door of the leeret padage »herelo he heed, opined with an inperceptible motion, and α human vifige appeared through the vacuum An apparition fo unexpected
«tl ипаесоамаЫе, though it did not coadaae a doable ibeond, froze the CbcnHer whh terror. Larina was alahned by the cold contraclion of his limb·, aad af-évMonarety enquired what ailed him : for fome time the was unan- fwered, but M length he revealed to her the reafon of his affright. Mutual apprehenfion kept them filent for t few moments, during which paule Larina recovered, or pretended to re¬ cover, her courage, and endeavoured to rally the Chevalier out of his belief. Thit was impoflible, after the evidence of hn eyes ; but as he deduced from her manner an impeachment of his equani¬ mity, he thought that It neceftarily Ihould be aflerted. He fprung up, fnatched л banquetting blade, which was the only weapon he could find, and ran to the fecret d ."' ; it was clofed, and as it had been left nfaftened, being invifibly framed in the wall, no fign of any one's ¡ntrufion was difcernible.
He was now exceedingly perplexed, and his imagination reverted into a ciannel that ho fuperdmon was not unufed to do the Contefla alfo was furpnfed at his obdinacy in maintaining what every appearance difproved " You have feen fomething fpeclral," f ud fhe jedingly " It was of a whitenefs which mt 0 ht caufe me to think fo," returned Henri " It remained fcarccly hall a minute, but at the found of your voice mdantly vanifhed If human, it doubtlefs lurks clofe at hand let us then fearch ' He opened the door, beyond which all was peaceable, and taking a wax taper from its ludre, he would have inveri gated the paflage but his attention was fuddenly arreded by the alcove, which fo clofely neighboured the fide of the door that any perfon could have eluded hi» obfervation by a tranfition from one to the other He fo f ully relied on tl is being the cafe, that he figmfied to Laiina, voi mi r
to rotire, and placed the light upon the floor, then firmly clenching the knife in one uplifted hand, he with the other haftily undrew the curtain. Though extravagant m his expeäations, he un¬ veiled an objecl more horrific than fancy had dared to pitture it was the corpfe of the lovelorn Laurian hanging in his own fatti Pall emotion was nothing comparable io what Henn now felt he was con¬ fcience ftncken. 1 he İtmek of Larma recalled him to reafon, and cuttmg the fatti, he received the unhappy fuicide into his arms his tkin curdled beneath the loathfome burden, and calling it along the for», he fhuddered with a violence that agitated every fibre lhe hope that life was not yet extinct, prompted Henn to fllake off that tremor, while Larina whofe little dregs of af¬ fection fled before his disfigured features, furveyed them with apathy Carelefs of the wretched end of him who had
known her for his uti iod joy, (he flood by, while the Chevalier unloofed the mortal circle which had deformed that neck, once fo perfect the (kin was torn and difcoloured, and the blue veins, no longer fmooth and frehcfome, were burded or bloated into knots. Henri foon alcertained his death, and woulc have tefttfied fomething like to forrow, had he not harrowed himfelf with the idea that the boy s departing foul had fhed its firft difembodied glance on him. He never confidered that the very circumdance of Laurian being irreco¬ verable, was a proof of his having been a long time hangmg doubtlefs the de¬ fperate act was perpetrated while they were dallying at the windows that over¬ hung the lake As theConteffa was much lefs affected than the Chevalier, (he was the firft to confuti prudence in the removal of the body (he recommended its being left in one of the fubterraneaa vaults. When f a
Henri could collect fpints to think on the fubjecl, he advifed to fink it m the 1 ike, which was conveniently near, but to this propofal Larina objected the finn lanty of a circumllance which (he had heard a partial account of the day before, and (he pioti fled her aflurance that fo far from preventingobfervation, Henri's plan would promote it her own there- tore was embraced, and the Chevalier prepared to tranfport the body to its tomb But jull then being tender to the flighted circumftances, he Ihrouded the face, left a cafual glance by furveying its horrors (hould diftraci his mind Ha\mg taken this precaution, he de- fcended the (leps, and preceded by the Contefla, who carried a light, fqueezed through the fame door which he had pafled the night before with a living guide m the breathlefs body he now bore They proceeded through the lault, determined to find it a remote rotting
plice, as they reflected that a putrid carcafe could be but a lorry neighbour acxoidintjy they continued up tht avenue, ulla profpect ottlu grati I vault ι eittil Henri, when he flung down tht t n pfe, to prolane u wuh a vengeful Ipurn belore he retrod the vv ty to the dtps. 1 hire L inna rt| relented the necifliry of their parting, and, giving her light to Henri, they feparated. The lattei entered his dungeon with а dididen' dep, and found that the lamp was burnt out, as the abfence of the jailor had caufed it 1 1 walle throughout the day, ytt did Henri imagine that he could diftern traces of an uncommon vifitoi, but theft being very fornt, faded before the revival of hi» fuperditious fancies. An injury is trebly ftlt whtn the au 'юг ι contemptible Such was the Umging reflection of Juhan, who, habituated to the practice of univerfal difdam, was en- 1 3
raged to be abafed by his wife s lewdnef and rendered an object for denfion to the prefumptuous nunion who partici¬ pated in her guilt His w s the face u hich had feared Henri Apprifed by the dutiful jailor of his obfervat on», Julian refolved to vifit the dungeon He was an azed to find it vacant, and Itili more lo to difcover its connection with the Conteffa s apart¬ ments , an intercourfe till then unknown to him The fubfequent fcene had fwoln him with paflion, and he with difficulty fuppreifed the eirotion that mitigated an inllant facnfice of ihe lafcivious pair Such a man who dares accompany to Ins fecret chamber '—his evil genius only by whofe uiftigalion horrid pr j fts re volve withm his mmd, befide a thoufand phrafelefs thoughts which he fears ven tunng to arrange His chamber quaked while in impious fury he reviewed de figns inconceivable by others, and pe·
cuhar to the revengeful inightincfs of I is mind defigns to eternize his vengcan e ind that they were not unfupported by hope was evidenced by hi» frequently ejaculating, " Yes, flight as he and many may efleem his crime, I know it to be monllrous, I know it to be inexpiable, thanks to the ordinances of God, 1 know it to be unpardonable " Ί his allufion to fome unnatural rayflery, wherein the unconfcious Chevalier was implicated, Julian vented through his gnafrung teeth, while his clenched fingers bored their palms Deliberate calmnefs at length fucceed- ed the (form of paflion and prepared by art to confummate what m frenzy was defigned His vengeful onfet was the difpatching of a fummons for Htnn the lat cr came wi h tremblings to Ju¬ lian's prefence, but the affability where¬ with he was received foon tranquillifed his fears 1 he Conte ordered that he ihould be lodged fuitably to his rank, M
and entreated him to fufpeud any am mofity that he might hare conceived agamft him, and to confide in the fu¬ ture for a fatisfaciory explanation and atonement This the Chevalier frankly promifcd , and, as Julian had forefeen, beha. ed himfelf w ıth great complacency Ь or liberty to quit the calile his amour diftnchncd him to demand, and the Conte, to put a (lill thicker varnifl on his artifices, the fame day went through the farce of a formal mtrodutlion of the Chevalier to the Contefla Reekkfs of Lanna's charms or aflec nons, Julian permitted the intimacy bt tween I er and Henri, yet fo rigidly con trolled it by rarely allowing them oppor tunnies that their pleafures preierved м unabating rehfli, and were conducted with a circumfpeclion and privacy which fa isfied J ıhan that his reputation was fecure from any publicity of the malter So did that extraordinary man, who oierflowed with arrogance and auda.
ci lufiief, ei ndelcend to p'ay the covert j andar to h s own difese But thev, whole p'ans are unnatural, are necel- fitjted to advance them ly unnatutal means Weeks were fpent by Henri in indo lence and debauchery, till from that inert life he was aioufed by Julian, whole ilileouifts rekindled inclinations of а contrary nature, which fo long had I un dormant 1 he wdy Conte « as unfatislied with the hold he alreidv had of Henri, as he wiitly knew no female ch inns to < χ (I that might not nail, wheref ire he relolied to involve him in α coil fo fubtle, that any wuh jf franchilenient Ihould be hopelels He was directed and encou¬ raged bj the paflion he perceived m Henri fir military renown lhis he fanned with fo much art, that the Che vaher vv is fpirited into (^uixotilin Julun hei ις ever feafonable in his topics 11111 1 knu mu duolle div after d ty , ι ιι ι ι lefii hutr won hm to Ii [ ar r J
pofe : m fact, to volunteer his aid to a body of men who were about to under¬ take fome dillant excurfion. Thefe, with all the pomp of national war, were marfhalled beneath the u indo w whereat Henri and Juhan fat So fpecioufly had the latter diifembled the heinoufneh, of the reality, that Henri's fcruples fainted away, and he departed from the caille to difgrace the caparifon of a Soldier by the purfuit of a robber.
NOTE. IN jutticc lo ihc put liflier cf Ih s r nun t I mufl dedare, lhat the л xi\t ch ijiltr n it ıı ıh h i cıııUııe atcuro|Hni,JL> it tumulali e I . ref amnion İMltıı traumi, i ι , Ι í 1 1- vicc, knowing tull ».И ihat ai > | о I lame would cemre in m)4İÎ, ì- his rhota tti wa·· t j tìighli ellîtt tt I r tr m> |чг1 π it» ni | !t u ! m Ihiiii iras, ni I ic Ι ι plia,!» I Ibyan к no» il 1 till 11 «1 I w iks 1 nalure Bin I ш ι ir 1ч ю ι Ι Ih« li ιιαι ι 1 1- lile h« fcn.| ti I lid tın ııyı«»p ııı ıı 1 ·», conlcquentiy t 1 ıtıi ıo а 'inibii wuliiii U t eoni.
pafj of ж note my motives for th«. önkiiül ипеп- tion and preli nt publication of Ih ili. patlağı t By which .-unduia Itrufl onundsjceıvıng aııv ıdta thit either I wifhed t indulge an evil talle in mjftll, or to cultivate one in another It mamitlily *. my intention to fhow b) t lu chanic\er wf Henri, how produŕliv· folly may le made of viec In lajing out (he progniliventla of the u ork I appropriait J the hhh chapter to the vulganlİnş his manners, the feventh to the corrupting his |>crfon Therefore, the particulars of the latu r chapter lprung from the fiibjeft, the fubjitl not being in the flighttll manner flrnnal iur the ι jjmiihon Sull, fome miy quefìiun my 1 milimi, m adopting f odious a fiagt of lus de- pravation Su h 1 i u г fui my autru rity to the hil turus ( t malefaŕl гь in wh ch it Duli be fuun 1, tl it ι imi ui uut ot twiiily of thofe unfortunate wret Ii made inur 1 libiti tlrctch towar 1, the í аГ 11 in tilt loe , ty et l а 1 w ш η λ\ ell then, being υι enl tikte! υπ tina lub] t, and my in - tive virtu I «.(alte. to b< It r η ulcus m whit manner Ι ι 1 Ir U it and, ιι letd with un e rcaf, n fri nlirlere I tli tt tli m rc ιΊι 0 U m «r fuch funia arc malı tht leld l< 1 irt v. ihtj j i- fibl) rould U I mull re I twr> kin I I rrup- lion í 1 lutei tl )oui¿ manu illen 1, l^nt hım Г rhi= f od nit lupaat !да ts lor ln* , щ г tammeni effeminate ţ oe t r/, for l и coni} dny an in-
Munit rimale, |. } h« durnir«! I m(1anc«i more lljikinglv thvi tm tboufind Armonihi.w ruinous isthcítiiJrucj ofcithţr Thoutţfi и Бе in m> ца- ture tt, cum- «fe to tht (»И rmiit of my imagina¬ tion, m this milance I reriitfcrf to !*> borne awiy ^y its current, but fo far prefided over my fubjerl, ач to rrnder il mtrodafiory of more morality than as vet has aj j ean d m any one chapttr Why ihould th )f e f< timtnls be written on viuom |>ubJicaliom > io ali ι ihe r adtr to condemn me ' \S here Γ rout I îıe moral, thLre I 'vai fo ccrtainlj it w ıs not with tny pLafure that the argument afterward» ici fire to the pxpreffions. From the moft exceptionable I art the beli inftruŕiion ma) be den· ed 1 ht íiib- yÔ. wrung the rem from my ha id, elle I had paufed to obferve, that there are ri rtain moment» in our lives which contain the feed of future hap- j nefs or mifery had Henri frtcd himľiif fr< m Larina when (he had freed him Irom the chair, the enfmng chaj t rs muft ha\e been tm) 1 κ<1 ly fomething elfe than the detail of hit nufcondurt He wat within one Uruggle of \uUil and profpt - nty, and how many thoufan 1= arc at thn moment in the like dik mma ' The reader olili not queilion the fuicentj oí this vindication, if he will confider trat this chapter n Jingle m its nature, ytt it ıs íhortt r than many lhat pürede and all thai follow it, that it is ablulutt fy tfltotial to th· progrtis and « ucidaUon gf the Uury,
clfc it mur hd been mtrnduitd, that it isnotajţ- gravdtfd 1« rekindle an intcreft wh».h had been lut· íŕu-d te Lu>l JS tht author tul even mor* re 1 urcts in Ins imagmatiuii thin In could potľMy i\hiull in tht· fiiocrodiiis part». It iimcclTary to the с ni iront ion uf the Romance, whith on that accoun· ought no more to be objeflul to than the human hguic, betault all parta of it are not с jually dettnt N< itr-er τη 1ht aatl ι τ Vgc that he wa" hu- | riftd into τ ltory ttľenňvt χ 1 is ι tluirj, finet a ligimi uf danger hu rxtu hungabroat. iu tht im »i
CHAPTER VIH.
Advine tl ■ h nth t the hott le banner stand 'U tudi wu br ght luttre tcathe th· vernil Und Of rotut ind brandi keen Ightcn ountle« ЬЫ ', Of eye notkein all «rength befgte .ťmf d< , Loud trun.pt fr m hell the fienili of wir u s. , Battal ο 1 1 cali j r oía n ť the godly »kies Cbth ıhı İdi стаи iwordi atrial deithi thrill s пш, No man can bout hit fite t nut on die w ng Yet dilmdfst »U for tho gh d ath str u к they ift The d.rt. event but tkeletun rankt iirni e H ro i th i > *,ih Hl ow. к d to gorge th ear h'
1 HE band which Henri accompam d rather than directed, were numerous, we'l piovided with arms offenfive and defciifive and moun ed m a fupenor ftyle nor weie they elcltitate ol dil- ciphne Iheeihje tof heir cxpedm n was an ancient monailery nub fonie 1 among the mountains ' hey hoped an
extravagant iccompence for their fa¬ tigue and hazird m the approach and attack, as it was famed to be exceedingly enriched by the votdry gifts of many noble pei funs, w ho thertin were fanc- tuanfed during former (tale turbulencies. 1 hey wi re not difappoint d A portable booty of great value was haftily felected , and the terror befpread by their noc¬ turnal enterprife, blunted any fcrutmy into t.ieir force or order, which might have been obferv ed to charaiterife them fupenor tu ordinary defperadoes I he itratiguu which conveyed them withm tht vv lis of the monalttry, lut¬ eet ded b the tumultuous fdcking of the platt, Lure lo warlike dn dfpttl, that Henri was in t mtrtly reconciled to the dilli-, but rt illy ttijoyed it Nor vva3 he in he lull ftdrtled dt the impiety of the p ucecilmc,, fir during their Ii tlidit timtuis, hi uiuntry nen being uild Ле to ι ppule ι ur enenit s in he em' mied held, oftentimes lud ecourfe to the in-
glorious praûice of predatory warfare ; in the profecution of which Henri was not unaccuitomed to fee religious and fecular habitations miftreated with fimilar violence *. The precipitancy which diítinguiíhed the retreat of the band, prtferved the de¬ ception ; and the Chevalier, highly fpirited by their fuccef.ful elufion of purfuit, imagined them of great capa¬ bility ; and revolved the likelihood of his making them, one day, his followers in
the quarrels of Ins country They reached the terntones di hafcano by funftt, but prudently refr lined Ύοιη rt entering the callle till the dttp of midnight A two-day abftnce made Henri's defire to fet Lanna uncontrollable, fo he devild many little plans to mtroJuee himl If mto her dpartinents, none ot which could have fucceeded, had not Julian been m the humour to m J alge his wun.es. rhe Contefla was not uuap. prifed of his conduct, about which (he little cared, provided his perfon and amorous preference were her own his prefent footing in the caftle pro rufed her an aflur ance of their future poflefhon, and fhe lnduftnoufly fanned his enter- pnfing mood. Henri henceforth heaitilydiftinguilhed himftlf in every excurfion, and thefe mcrcafed in frequency as the fprmg matured Julian omitted no art to entrol him in the fnare íle conducted
hım round the bulwarks of the caftle ; pointed out the concordant excellencies of the fortifications, enumerated the force of the defenders, dupla)ed lus arfeml of arms a d armour, the per¬ fection of his ftud, &c &c In (hort, left him not m ignorance of an) property he pofTcffed, at the fame time, wilily fmothering every reflection wh.ch might arile concerning the mode of their ac¬ quirement, or the perverfenefs of their appropriation In truth, Henri was little inclined to morahle on thofe matters. For that dignified pageantry which his father of late years had unaccountably neglected, he had contracted the keenifl relilh, and much was he difgulted with its ceflation fo that till he alfumed a military emi¬ nence his life wafted in an undiflin- guifhed privacy, diflbnant to his inclina¬ tions, his hereditary honours and eftates No wonder that the feudal pomp of Juhan infatuated lum' He faw- him
esercite de r potifm in will and deed, and his flighty imagination traced his gradual attainment of princely power, and ac¬ know ledgcd independence 1 ν er did thele phantafms recoil on himlelf, as often did he put the felf interrot,atory of what withhel 1 him from the like His van ty conltantly gave the anfwer, blind as he was to the ν lit abilities of Julian, to whom he fanei d himfelf an equal, becaufe as futh diitmguiflied by the wife nay, he dared to prefui le a fuperiority in peí fonal intrepidity from Juhan s not ac oinpanying the band But his prefumptıon foon received a check, attended by circuii Itances won¬ derful and myftenous Intelligence was brought to the caftle of a noble prize, which was to pafs, thp fame evening, among the mountains at no very gre it dill mce It w is α τι ifs of eafure that w as jou neyin ' to fome magnificent prelates, who weie neceffi. tated by ecclefiaftic?! concerns to fix
their temporary rtfidence in the famous city ot 1 rent As t) ro id had acquire 1 an ill name fiom the marauders that in felted it, the efcort was gueffed tobe ftrong , and thoľc appointed to utaek u were chofen men of confuınmıte u da- city Though e\ttnpt from ill bonis of dutv, Henri was unwilling toevelude himfelf from fo didinguidieda klccti η , and he enforced the avow al of his rclo- lution to accompany them with fome blafphemous jeds on the plundering the minutry of Heaven jeds which indanced the corruption of his head and h^art Eveiy preparation completed, Julian retired after reviewing tne men, and Henri departed with a vain contempt for the backwardness he attributed to pufil lanimity The band quitted the caftle in fmall divifions, and filing through difierent paths, rendezvoufed towards tht clofe of ev ening in а lonely vale circu Jarly embanked by mountains Al¬ though the fky above them ftill wai
bright with the weftern rays of the dt. dining fun, the depths were wrapped in twilight lliades, congenial to the runds of thofe who fought their fhelter. Along the craggy fide of the chief eminence ran the road, through which their prey was expected to pafs , and a few being polled as watchmen on the heights above it, the reft betook themfelvs to repofe fome reclining on the high and flaggy grafs , many Itated upon the valt trunks of the tempeft fallen trees Among thofe who preferred the latter convenience was Henri, near whom fate two of the band lhe Chevalier s im ι alienee for action would not allow him to meditate, and being every moment in expedition of a fummons ftom the fentmels, he kept his eyes on thein, till, wearied with fruitlefs obfervati n, he (jldnced them on other obj els one of which riveted them A figure armed cap a pie was apparent through the trees which fkuted the oppofite fide of the
vale Henri s mental remark on its dif- fimilanty from his comrades was a (light Л А -че of aftonilhment, compared to the bebaviour of the two men befide him. They were engrofled by the fame objecl, for one ct them leaning forward, pointed it out to his fellow, exclaiming at the fame time in pleafurable furpnfe, " Ί here it is again ' You fee it' d n t you' I here, now it moves ' By St Diabolo ' 1 thought it had taken a dcferter's good b) e of us. but there it is, iure enough ' * Henri could not refrain from quedion- ing their knowledge of that fohtary per- fon Their anfwer was firangely per¬ plexing , for though they did not deny fome acquaintance, they declared it only to be vifual, ami added, " As for per- fon, why truly it looks 1 ke one of us , but for real flefh and blood, nobody believes it to be of either the one or the other ' 1 he Chevaher was amazed fi r- ther to learn that the objecl of his curio- fity was generally imagined to be of an·
other world His fuperdmon caught the jdea, and imparted it» own fancie« of a being purely fpirttual to the figure tx ťe hım He thought a thicker gloom was died by the confcious boughs, and, in his credulity of its more than mortal proportions, he was inconfiderate how much its apparent height was attributa¬ ble to a fw irthv plumage, which waved above the helmet 1 at it wore he hke- wile perceivtd а ly * nous dignity in its flirtiteli movement, and when its vifored face was turned towards him, he conceited the fuflerance of fupernatural fcrutiny, without the ability to avoid or retaliate it I he la ter unpleafant fenfation he en- deavou e J to divert by renewing the dif- co rfe with his neighbours 1 hey told Inn thai the uihnjwn was ufed to at- t nd hem in their exrurfions, in which their ĺ. tat mid- lud yielJed luch fatal proti» 01 his in efifti' hty, that hut pre¬ fence was »e-w confidered an indubitable
omen of their fuccefs Ihe Chevalier obferved that it was unfeen by hi n till that tune. " It only choofes important occafion«," continued Rodrand, the firft fpokefinan. " Lately, that is to fay, fince our return from the hurty burly at Genoa, it feemed loft to us, which was the reafon of my furpnfe when I ufi now difcerned it But it looks ex acllythe fame as before, don't it, Micho' See, Signor, what a length of rapier it carries, and its armour, Signor , not¬ withltanding the dew, you fee it is jright and gloffy, as if new from the Isaii of the burtuiher Henri could not .efufe this circumllance the veneration due to а miracle, and when his feelings would permit hun, he afked « hethtr thty had ever endeavoured to examine this ftrange bemg " Samts of heaven Signor I flıould a» foin thmk to catch a comet by its tail ' Lxamine Л ' lhe v ine hım whu trould dare ' For myfelf, Д 'd rath r
thrult my nofe into the Grotto del Cane, than go within arm'» length of it Be¬ fides, the Conte very wifely commanded u» never to molett it " " lhe Conte' 'exclaimed Henn with mcreafed mtereft " lhe Conte then Vnows ol it f " " Lord, Signor ' knows of it ' why nothing efcapes the Conte he knows every thing we do, and I believe he knows every thing we tlunk too does n t he, Micho " Micho s thoughts might m that mo- ι nut be id|udged inimicai to the Conte, tor a lurly coiifufion roughened his mlvver 'twa not m the neganve ' Oh yts, Signor ' continued Rod- rand, " we were all too (lartled to keen it a leeret from the Conte, and he hun¬ kit t ndefcciidu to come out with us I r the purp ile ol detecting it But, la ' the cunning thing knew as well what we defined, and difappomted us all, by refufiiiL, openly to appear, though I
could have fworn to the feeing it, in a jeering attitude, among thofe dark olive tree· that branch over the garden wall they form a fmall but thick grove, Signor, juft beneath the northernmolt turret Ί here it was that we alwav s loll it, for we have often watched it following us to that fpot, whence it conflantly vaiuihed At thefe latter words Henri wildly darted, for hejuil then obferved the oppofite pi ice to be vacated by the marvellous figure Though awed, he eamellly defired its re appearance , ot which he was allured by the loquacious Rodrand Henn enquired if the Conte had perfevered in his endeavours to fee it " For feveral nights, ' replied Rodrand, " but with no better fuccefs. Indeed, we moil of ui allowed it to have verv good reafom for avoiding him Ί ou muti uaderftand, Signor, к ıs by a fenfibie majority thought to be the fpirit of one of our band, who, a little time before this apparition firil haunted us,
I aft hi« lift in а treafonable attempt to deltroy our matter It feems that thefe fervices are the atonements for his criminal end, and that he is fo con detnned as a difma' warning to thofe who were inclined to walk in his ways You remember, Micho, twas ftrongly repotted that he was egged on by a wicked pack of pi it ters ' Micho s darkened afpcct deno ed that part of his rememtrrance to be prolific of unpleafant apprehenfions, and had not folly been a manifeft ingredient m Rod rtnd's compofition, it might have been conjectured that he fpoke rather at than to Micho His expreflions, how ever, pafled unnoticed by the fpeaker, who proceeded to inform Henn, that the hft mentioned was not the general opi¬ nion ' ť ir fonie, Signor, now afHrm it to be the fp-ctre of the former Come, and their chief reafon for thinking fo is, that « w ıs feen fime weeks ago by two of the band, to enter that fame fummer-
houfe, which has been locked up tvei fince the old man died in it ' *' Ha'" exclaimed the Chevaher, " It was dogged, I hope " No," anfwered Kodrand, " they were toodutiful to act in fuch direct dif¬ obedience to the Come s orders , for though half incredulous to our reports, he was pleafed to be careful of our fe¬ curity, and, as I faid before, enjoined us never to venture near it If thofe men had, the Conte would foon have puniihed fo flagrant a tranfgreflion of his com¬ mands , for it is quite aftoniftung how furely he finds us out in every thing all plottmg and grumbling are ceafed, and he rewards or difgraccs us after thele actions, with as much certainty as if he were in them himfelf Yes, Signor, he does.' Rodrand concluded with an abrupt exclamation , and when Henri turned to afcertain the caufe of his alarm, he ftarted involuntarily from his feat,for within two
fpears length (lood the fprite Iheir neighbourhood did not continue, for a long acute whiflle from the watchmen fufpended every other concern , and the figure vanifhed through the trees with a fury that hardily clanked the fcales of its armour, an audible difproof of the lupernatural properties afcnbed to it The band being inflantly collected, and difpofed in a preconcerted pofture for attack impatiently hltened to the loud tingling of the bells, that adorned and amazed the laden mules the gloom which pervaded the road, was foon di verfified by the bright refleäions of infinite torches borne by the muleteers, and the ν hole caravan gradually filed trom an obltrucled and narrow avenue into fight 1 he αν idity of the men blinded them to the ftrength of the efcort, and raifmg a favage (hout, accompanied by an irre¬ gular difcharge of fire-arms, they af- eended the uafe of the mountain, and '- 3
poured into the road 1 hough furpriied the men who compofed the eieort fui- timed the attack with fortitude, with fortune, fo long as they were capable of ι connected defence, but when broken by the unexpected vollicj fr< m the crags above, they were obliged to fight fe. paralely, and duel their aflailants, then were they overcome by fupenor prowefs Whde the majorit) of the band were thus engaged, others, more rapacious, forced through to the ti calure, and dif¬ perfed the poor muleteers but their triumph was dimmed m its zenith by a irefli company of men, who rnfhed un¬ feen towards the con eft, through the fame defile the caravan had patfed I his reinforcement reflored а fuperiority in numbers to the defenders, and the ag. greüors, in fpite of their furious un- dauntednefs, were repulfed from the road, and the capture lefcued Iheir new adverfanes, prefumptuous in victory or irterefted deeper than mere defence
refolved to follow them , accordi ìgly, they defcended mto the dep'hs, fupported by the fohhers of the efcort, who caught the enthufiafiii of their auxiliaries In dignant at purfuit the band dildained further to retire, and exercilcd their utmofl intrepidity to ren v * the condici ihe leene of battle was pregnant with horror The muleteers in their flight had, many of them, call their torches among the bumes and underwood that begirt the vale, and thefe now burft into a crackling conflagrati in that torment. ed the atimfphere vu h fparks The athletic figures of the mcrcilefs com bâtants glanuntr through the embers m defperate flight or ardent purfuit, the red gleams which denoted the deadly exchange of blows and tl e moi tal lightning of the fi e a-ms, thronged the place with imagery appalling to thought the lamentable moans of the wounded bealls, among which fell accidental bullets, were echoed by the furrounding ' 4
hills of darknefs, that were men I y filvered towards their ft mmits by the mildnefs of anuncloutet moon, which redrained its beams from the f inguinary depths of the vale In the uciflitudes ot the encomile-, Henri fnewe I himfelf no tobe inferior in courage to his coir rades, though much inferior in ai,e ai tl conditutioii At length he incurred to fevere a dan¬ ger, and prudently fled f om а threefold oppofition He efcaped, and to an un¬ expected fpeflacle, for before hun was the armed figure engage! with a couple of adv erfai ics Superili ι n déterre i ln approach, and he crou 1 e 1 upon il e weedy earth,the f if r to til em the h,ht which was themortperuptibli.asitw is acted on the boi ders of а burning thicket Il was furious, and nemed а fiendly ар реагапсе from the freflı tuelid flames, iv Inch boiled aloft, md lhen defeende I in fhowers of g! wing illie«, that enve¬ loped iht mtag mils n fire At the
moment of de ifion, when the figure was evident!) the Iupenor, one ol thoft who had idly chafed 1 letni turned to the fuccour ol his comrades and dil- chargeJ а camine at their opprelli r No argumentcouldh ne ptrfuaJtd the (. hev ılur that the being Infort hun w is othirwitt thanfupernatur il, when,unhurt bv t^t bullet, he fave it indici α fatal blow on tin poor wretch for whofe f tlvation the piece was levelled, and tumble his body aim ng ihe flames H was inconfiderate to the likelihood of α faulty aim, or of an impenetrability of trinour, of which a mortal of fuch magnitude would be quite equal to the fupport he furrender ed lus reafon toa Luttai! ie' influence, ond forgot evtry thing e ,r e. while contem¬ plating the apparition A ring of com¬ batants now crowdid near to hi, con¬ cealment, and he was neceltitated to en¬ gage Ajjiin he was put to flight, and when he ventured to look bark, he law the late bufy Ipot dcfcrteJ 1 \ friend in 1
foes the former were fwiftly fccking fhelter in the lhady environs, and the latter, with Ihouts of exultation,as fwiftly followed Convmced that all was decided againft his party, the Chevalier ian among the trees the voices that burdened the gale urged him onwards, notwithflanding the impeding fteepnefs of the moun am, which upper part was deformed by the fliapelefs mouth of a cavern to this he fped Ί he ν cat uproar was foon loll in mdifcnrmnate murmurs, and tl e noıfy bells rung a difcordant warning that the caravan was on the move 1 hele Were welcome founds to the Chevaher, as they infpired him with hope thai 1 til would f ion be remote As he remained undillurbed for ι few moments, hope improved to confidence, )et ) arcely did he take a ftep to quit the forlorn pri vacy, before unnnovvn voices (h eked hn ears, and the inimical fpokelnun ap peared ctofe at hand Deprived of all
prefence of mind by the abruptnefs of the danger, Henri returned with many Humbles to the aperture purfued by the men, whofe eager cries and brandifhed blades betokened their difcovery I he Chevahei fought the gloomy in tenor of the cavern its bottom afcended with a decree of deepnefs that retarded his precipitation, but the vaulted roof continued friendly hit.h \fter doubling two or three angular turnjigs in total darknefs, he difcovered at the further inc. of the drait excavation wherein he was, a mild gleam of light it was a lunar ray, which as a beacon, attracted finn to another outlet The cave was the labour of nature's fantadic hand , and this outlec gape 1 into а weedy deh e, that was funken in the furtaee ot the hill As Henri api roaehed and inhaled the Uiicontammated air, he fancied that he had gam d the dart confiderably, foi the voices of his purfucrs were become boarfe and low , but he was uiftantly
undeceived by the revived clearnefs of their tones, which warned him of their entrance into the fame channel in which he was. Winged by terror he over pafled the obviations that were inh Ipi tably planted about the entrance, and would have fled the fubterranean tua/e, had he not beheld, where the moon beams fell on the chalk white foil, α fliadow of valt, though human, dinien fions Surprife checked his career, but horror ufurped the doinm mon ov er lus mind foon as he identified its fimilariiy to the marvellous figure, for though the teinfic reality was unfeen, its Ihtdovvy image glided to and fro before the rude aperture,till its waving plumage emerged from the black Iliade ot an impending crag, by which «t firft it h id been ab forbed Henri was tl oughtlefs that his own motives might poihbly aciu ite this fpirit, and imagining that he had ν lolat- ed lis h-unts, refufed to quit thein, as the firft ftep would have planttd hi u
on the (hade of fo tremendous a bemg 1 very mipulft was vain, he feared to be eternally nvetted (hould he tread the ground fo bevvitcht 1, and trembling between а double danger, he withdrew into a recefs that hollowed the internal lult ot thecivern 1 hei e he was invi hiili 1 1 the forcmoft of the foldiers, who, miltak ημ, hım to be gone forward, in vited his tinirults by а loud halloo to follow, whilt himfelf ruflied outvvirtis Htnn inxttufly abided the event of the man s ralhnefs, which he was con vmced we ulti be latal, when the Haftung of fvv ords denoted his engagement with the I c,urc His concealment afforded h in an t bhqut but tr tnlicnt view of the mta 0 onifts, whenever they moved in that direction , whith was repeatedly the cafe, s the foldier fluiteci his „round in difmay , ftinnking from the refifllefs fabre of his adverfary, which, defcendmg m ternille career pared away the ft ales of hi armour with the flefh they were
jointed to defend, and ftruck from the flinty bofom of the earth charañe nltie fparks of fire A deadly groan btlpi ke the mortal decifion of the duel, anj the expiring wretch ftaggered ju I within the boundaries of the cave, and fell upon the rugged fragments that belpread the ground Henri contracted Ins limbs, fcarceiy breathing as the vindiitivc iprite rulhed within a yard of his hiding \ lace, and fheathed its point in the hjwels of the almoft breathlefs body, which it con¬ tinued to wound in wantonnet. But this horrid fport it forfook, when the dead man's friends came up, and, in its flight up the outfide of th»· cave, fhook down fome fepa able projections, which ftrongly difproved its unlubftan tuhty The rage of the men, when they dif¬ covered the death of their aflociatt, was lavilhed on the ill (tarred Henri, who endured iheir unjuft accufattons without the power to contradict them, fo dif-
mayed was he with the misfortune of hn detetlion i\o mlult lhort of curporeal injury was omitted by lis apprehend. ers Ilı uroldiie illdult on the pnetlly treafure tl ey altnlied to 1 utfy, infide¬ lity, and tnnuty to tht holy crois. Ни iiilkxi к liltntt rtlpcelinij his comrades, tliey relented with the к ereil torture of burnt ι e, vet ikhv ert d their fentiments in lo arm'ant antl Iupenor a Hyle to what murht be expuicd trom common foldiers, thit Henri uns perplexed to afcertain their reni condition. 1 hey re conducted him ihrough the ian, at the tirfl mouth of which ihey wen joined by minyof their corps,whole tortile convinced Henri ot his captivity bv the olhcer, of julttce 1 h it luch was their authority he had difbthtved, when during the conflict ht was fummoned to furrei der in the name of the Hate, and he had then rt plied with the derifton which he thought a contemptible force deferved. Ihe leader, who now ap-
peared, enjoined a (triti guardage of their prifoner to thofe who had taken the Chevaher, and with the grief which an exclufive misfortune heightens, Henri «as conducted acrofs a pathlcfs countn, quite a dillinei way from the track m which the caravan was gone In truth,thefe men »ere not anncxtd to the efcort of the caras m 1 hev had been difpatcned m confidcrable loi ce to fcour the iicinity of l\e roads, and refcue them from the incurfions of lhe banditti, whofe ferocit) rendered travel- luag frightful and perilous In the exe¬ cution ol this commiffion, the leader wifely availed himfelf of the treafure at that time journeying acrofs the moun¬ tains , for he doubted not that fo bril¬ liant a bait could tempt the robbers from their undifcoi érable haunts, and hurry then unronfcioufly into his power His elation at the fuccels of his plan WÍ3 equalled only by his furpnie at the numbers and comluti of thofe whom he
encountered their appearance was fo enurely diffimilar from the antagomfts he fought lhat only their rapacious ag- greflion coul I have authonfed him, m lus own opini 11, to ut ick them bager to ìnveftigate the concerns of lo ill ange a body , he expreiled ι (trong fohcitude for the apprehenfion of fome one of them , but he at hrlt had he mortifica¬ tion to fee them all efcape, leaving fe¬ veral bleeding tellime mals of their intre¬ pidity, 'vhile their own lofs was flight. 1 he fubfequent capture of Henri revived his fpirits, but as the genteel mien ot the youth difpofed hnn to exp-ñ uncom mon information, he poftponed interro gatones, and tilenced the curiofity of his men Ihus was Henri abandoned to his own refleciions, w hteh were galling and coinfortlefs The tenth hour of the night was nearly run out, when their learch for a habita¬ tion promifed a conclufion From tne brow of a bleak hill thev difcerned a hjjht not a hundred yards before them.
A cautious defcent brought them to the threfhold of a cottage, which, neighbour ing a nearly difufed road, was dignified with the rule of Albergo lts lotai ad vantages were all it could boad for fo fcanty were its accommodations, as much to difconcert the corps, whofe leader en quired whether other habitations were not m the vicinity He was anfwered, that a cottage ftood deeper in the valley about half a mile didant 10 this he difpatched the majority of his men, with drift or¬ ders to attend him early the enfuing morn Thefe gone, and thofe who re¬ mained retired from his prefence he opened a difcourfe with the Chevalier The fulltnnefa of the latter at length ruffled his humane equanimity , and be ing accuftomed in hs official capacity to deal with every kind of difpofition, he ordered Henri to be led from the bettei room to that wherein the men were huddled this was contiguous on the fame floot, us chimney was cheerlefs, and its walls admitted the winds
Henri pafled an anxious hour in tins difagreeablcnefs of place and company , though he was undillurbed by the latter, who were all drowfy from fatigue. At the expiration of that time, the cottage was alarmed by the wheels of a vehicle, which approached and flopped before the dooi , and the loud knocking an¬ nounced travellers of importance A tumult of voices perplexed the ear, till that of the Captain overpowered the reft, and audibly waved his prior pofTeuion of the houfe, into which he humanely m- vited the travellers, while the bufy hoft backed him with vehement affurances of every convenience that quality could re¬ quire. 1 he languid tones of a female fweetened a paufe in this vocal not, and Henri conjectured her to be thanking the Captain'» politenefs, for the bufile being tranfplanted from without to with¬ in, he was convinced it was not re¬ jected Iron the noife, which was renewed
at the door, it feemed that the newly arrived Cavalier was iffumg orders for the lodging of his horfes and equipage, to which, m reply, the holt pompoufly mentioned his pofleflions of a penthoufe and two flailed fiable A loud braying from the latter aflerted the native rights of an humble afs, which, notwithiland. ing wasfupplanted with very little cere¬ mony by the nobler animals, and ex¬ pofed to the inclemency of the night, with the additional lnjuftice of a chaflife- rnent from its malte/, who angrily re¬ lented its inopportune uproar Henri wat heartened by this bufile, and refolved to attempt an efcape 1 he colloquial tones of the Captain being foftened from the (ternnefs of command, had abated his fears, and the relapfe ot his companions mto a ftupid dofe offered a propitious moment lhe filence of the firft loom convinced him that the Captain and Cavalier were not there from the charity of females he had every
thing to hope Opening the door with a cautious hand and palpitating heart, he tripped over the interfpace, u hich was a paflage with cupboards to either hand, and let himfelf into the chief apartment. I lady was feated befide a blazing chimney. lhe appeared languid, and fupported on her hand a face wJuch none could behold without an aflec tionate ınterelt lhe violence of her llart, and the palenefs which defaced her cheeks, foon as (he beheld the in¬ ti udir, betokened that (he was not un¬ warned of him Indeed, the Captam, when performing the honours of the hre fule, had given her tha informa¬ tion, with a further aflurance of hi» fe- cunty, or flie would not have conlented to remain alone. Henri being fhockcdt/ her emotion, was irrefoliitc whether to approach or remain the former he more feared would excite her to an utterance of her tei ror», which would be a decifive ruin
of his plan In an imploring attitude he therefore flood, entreatng compaf fion with glance and gefture His man ner» afluaged her affright, fìlli was (he fo uncollected as to be unable to artı culate Butas Henri was encouraged by her afpeŕt, he ventured forwarder, and with clafpcd hands and lowly genu flexions, fupplicated her to facilitate his efcapr In tones, the fame which before had charmed him, the lady faltermgly anfwered, lhat her inability mud ex cufe the Tejeciion < f his fu t Henri aflerted that the pow er wo I h ı\ e birth with the will, and reprefente 1, tl it however prompted Ы the latter, ι mo ment''s dehy mightpreiint her generous interference The humane nterefi which the lady felt for a culprit, whofc crimes •ere fo likely to partite of juvenile folly, was now but weakly oppofed by a certain diffidence of the propriety of taking an relive part m his releafe The latter confederation faftly declined, as
Henri, who roticed her wnvenng, en¬ forced his fuit with expreflions, for w hich he had no concomitant feelings Prefuming his auditrefs to be of rank, he conceived that an avowal of his own quality could not fail to ftrengthen her inhered in his favour thus—Miferablc Henri ' —Difgrace to the name de Souv- ncour'—Indelible flur on nobility ' &c &c burft from the lips of this young man whom we have feen apoflatifing from his morals, parentage, and coun¬ try He prided himfelf on his art when he noticed the lady to be exceedingly at¬ tentive to his ejaculations, yet, an un eafy throb dillurbed hi' brea t, as (he repeated his titles in a flyle that denoted her acquam'ance with them , and, but for the diflreflee of his fituation which blanched his cheeks with apprehenfion, he would have blufhed while affirmative lv anfwering the interrogatory, If fuch were in truth his quality So hopeful were now his expectations, thai he
could not refufe to fatisfy her further euquny of. Whence did he come ? 1 he Calile dt Fiafcano hung familiarly on the lady s echoing tongue, and a trickling tear betokened her uncommon interdi m what paffed To the renewal of Henri's entreaties (he pathetically exclaimed, " Aflifl you ' Oh, doubt me not ' To aflifl vou ıs my duty no lefs than my inclination Aflifl you' Charity, love,and friendflup, are my facred incentives to aflifl you "' Though fo propitious to him, Henri w a» fomewhat (lartled at her enthufialm , and as he reviewed the young and lo\ ely utterer, wonder and vanity conteiled for predominance. But fear foon refumed its fway over both, and flimulated lu¬ ttant flight. This was impoflible , for through &e front door he dared not to venture. 1 he cottage was a (Iruäure of fuch deformity, dom rooms having been added on the ground floor to compui fate for the deficiencv of an uj per
il ry, l'ut it was Impracticable for a tirander to hx on any precife outlet, as may bt done in buildings of regular dt mentions Wherefore was Henri necef- fita'cd 1 1 praclife a conjectural fearch, which concluded in his remarking a third door obfeured b* fome bed hang¬ ings through tin» a culinary deam was bigun to fume Suffocating аз was the v ipour, had n ithm¡, ille iflucd from the kitchen, Henn might have triumphed but his dejection was inconceivable, when the door opened, and the hollefs came out emblazoned w itn grcafc Soon -ч fhe decried Hcnn at large and unattended, her coun tnaiice exhibited а nonpareil of woet il gimiace, and (he dropt upon her knees the lady fenfibly availing herfelf ot her mute afln^hr, befoughcher to diluiifs her lear, and participate in'he elthvery of the vouth Hie hrd put it this defile fucceeded n the pitjudice of the lecond, for with htr сшгце th w nn ι u r fun ed h voi ut ıı
fuperftmon " I deliver a th ef ' Bleffed Jefu forbid ' 1 hisejtclamation put Henri on the lack and he paflionatclv figncd to her foi filence, himfelf rcfufing to fpeak, ftep, almoft to breathe left thofe within fhould be awakened But the loquacious woman pcrfift d and nega¬ tived each remonftranee of the lady by oppofing her felfifh cr hderation ot, What would ' is excellency the Captain fay' Soon as the confequence ot her abo¬ minable (hnllnefs was the dcilruction of Henri's hopes, rage nerved him to her harm , and he flew at her with ludicrous fury lhe mtcrference of the men rctcued her from wo fe than tw о or mort 1 uffets for which ihe was not ill leafoned by her hufband. Ihe madnefs of the Chevalier caufed him to be pinioned, md durmg this dif^raceful pcrlormancc the woman permitted no rcltraini to her virulent tongue " I hınk to delude me ' ' at laft faid (lie—" Hunk to delude me into ingratitude to li s nobltft ol
noble excellencies the C aptdin ' and for л thief too ' But 1 know tht bttter lhm n ' —and I am fure 1 'd give my little finger to entrap that unkmdelt villain who hamltrung my hufband's mule t'othet night—that I would, and fav 1 came cheaply by him too Why thieves ?re the pefts of tne s hie if I were to releafe one, 1 fhould i\pett to anfwer forali the j ret viiektilnelles he might after ν irds commit 1 il ould fear, that nt the lait dav of judgment, all the bignors and Sgnor is and their little I xcellcnciev to bo I, th it he hail killed, the legs and inns he hui iut oil, nnd the poor dumb animils he hid niaitntd, would every ne с une open iiioulhid againft me О dedr, I think I he tr em cry ' Dame Man Hi's to bin ie ' Dime Marian's an attomphct ' II ly Apoltles' Signora' I J m t m irvcl th tt yon be fhocked , for nuli no prolj eet с in be more uncom- 1. itable thm a b!a7ing purga oiy " I he 1 uly '- e n mon wds indeed pretti
vifible, though Dame Marian had wide'y mifconceivetl its motive She exchanged piteous glances with the Chevalier, who foon vas taken from her preftnce Ί о the great exultation of the tongue inde¬ fatigable hollefs, who allured him that did he know his own good, he would fubniit quietly tc his fate, for that no breathing man could go to heavtn with out the helping hand of a pneft and Iht very well knew a thief's acquaintance with a pncft onlv commenced on the fcaftold. Then chiding the men for the remiflnefs ot their watch, fhe jeftmgly threatened to punifh them by a latenefs of fupper , and 1 ighly exhilarated with her own impertinence, retreated to the cookery. Henri was led to the inner room, and there his companie ns began to vociferate for a fire, declanng that thev would prefer the heals of purgatory to the dampnefs of the place in which they were to fpend the night. 1 heir bolder-
oufnefs fubfided, when they dilbnguilhe I the voice of their Captain enquiring into its caufe foon as he learned it, he ordered that it Ihould be complied \i ith, and the hod obediently brought in a heav) faggot lhe large chnnnev foon blazed, but not more fiercely than the paillons of the holt and hollefs, « ho alio entered to excrcife her induflry or fpleen A warm contention actuated this amiable pair, for the man, who was a rigid formahft, and accomphlhcd in native fervihty, was alarmed by fomething jult dropped among the nobler companv, which he overheard, and which now caufed him to cheek hi» wife for her in¬ decent behaviour Now Dame Marian of all fpecies of difcouife mod dilliked reproofs, and fo vehement w as íhe in hci affirtion of this, her antipathy, that Henri wab like to be fully revenged by the le^al hands of her fpoufe. But the theiaher was othernife too highly m- terelted to attend to the vulganfms which "3
were uttered and threatened by either party. The door, near which he ftood, was carelefsly lelt a jar, and from the outer room he diilinguifhed words of a difcourfe which related to himfelf It feemed that the Captam was again abfent, ind trom the feel lenels ot the tones he conjectured, thit the lady was the fpeaker atten ion gnve him aflur nee that flie was fo,a id he hnrd the enchina lions -Imponible' Henri' Henri de '■ouv- rtcour ' Li ft youth С dftle di ľíafcnno ' &c ejaculated by the maft uhne v oice of hnn, whom her confid 1 ce diftinguifhed to be the partner of he 1 „n у Ih ft excldin uions marked the pn j,refs of her detail of her I te int mew with the С he¬ valier , and I nd the latter dared to truft Ins ear=, he w ι uld hive found it 1111 poflible 1 1 с nt 111 I lit nilhmen' it them Iht l ravvili t J hım ]. ernııttt 1 tittle in re ot th ι utu rd colivei lation to att un l ıs hear 1ц b it the ev 1 ft on after ceafed, ovvin^ t the hubnnu's r
framinent, which w ai not the efltft ol uxonoufnels, but of a tender care for the opinions oi his gueíls He retired, and was followed by the woman Henri renewed his hftening, and now heard the voice of the Captain in eiger colloquy with the lady and the t hevi lier, but the doors being cloLJ litt I w ь audible , )et from ihat hule he in bibid gnat hoj ıs, that intnn.il ons m hb ía\our win. then irukin^ to tin Captain 1 he frequent mirana of ıhı noft with the lupper of the men, tflordid hini many opportunités to gather as much ıs caufeıl hım toriK on this biing the cafe , ind b\ the converfa ion being carried on in pure ľufcan, he was ap- pnfed that it was meant to be concealed irom thi commoners, w ho fpake an un· couth ilialcft, as did the people of the placi Henri awaited with the utmofl anxiety the fuccefs ol his binefactors Λ length и +
of tune pafled away unditturbci!, fave t y the guards, who, outftretched before the warm hearth, fnored away the lumes of a voracious meal, but a fìuiilar noife echoing from without his heart fank with the idea that the whole cottage were ret ied to repofe In this cc nceit he was undeceived by a gentle milling outfide the door it was flovvlv opened, and in the perfon of a deliverer Henri beheld the good hearted Claudio His forlorn fitu ticn could not reconcile Henn to an interview with the latter, whofe 'ridilli alpect alfo denoted fıs mind not to l e 11 re t iuti Nt t a fvllable was exchanged t laudi > fif nıfied lhat the way out ol the cot age »as free , but Henri w ıs del lined by а cord, of which one end ρ 1101 1 his ar is, an I the other was wc ι id tbotit the vvnll cf dicotili ι rl vh tl us had pi vided agallili anv un II 1* d itiempt tl e Chcialici iicjtct J thi» «1 h full fur
prife, he nearly had ruined himfelf bv awakening the man, but С I tudio quickly divided it with his fvvord When they were come mto the firil room, the C hevalier releafed Henri from lhe nit e f his diľgraceful bonds, and for the hi erty of fpeeeh dicvv him to the eott С.С door, which was unfiltened and с penid There he endeavoured to ad- drefs him, but his ľenfations furpaíľed e'eliv ery, and, " Henri, a robber ' only tľni eel his lips I or the firň time the C hev iher heard tin» fhockmg truth from α e iirieous tongue he fhrttnk from the vvcrcl with a tonfeious inability tl coa- tridtfti n, yet to к reluce in a pride th it rehile itt ρ 1 ite H »vv ev er, the exrla- ıı au n 1 il C hev ılıer ν as ι reproach Ι e it uld n ι tn hue , it ν tu iti I his rati ι ile wi h reľeiitinent , m I jerk ng lus hand Ire m hts friend, he unthank fui') Ilid and lolt all filarne in the night's dır nefs lhe wonder of Claudio was much 11 J
lefs than his grief, when he unde-dooj the criminality of Henri But idle la mentation were not his fault bis good- nefs was active to refcue the youth from legal difgrace, and this he compafltd by dint of argument and appeals to the Captain s reafon and humanity 1 he ignorance of the latter concernine, his captive,Claudioenhghtened, and frankly revealing the real rank of Htnn, endea voured thereon m his behalf He rt prefented the ill confequences which would enfue any public chaitileuient t the fon and heir to one of the nol led families in France thefe he affirmed would bc inevitable brills between the Venetian date and the I rench monarch Claudio reminded his auditor thu Trzncis more th^n any brother fol erciyi in Europe had the reputation ot his people at heart how unlikely therefore was it, that, with fuch a f| int, he would permit the onlv fon ot a n ibleman, who formerly having be n a didinendin 1
ıcmber of hi*, court, no dou' ftill lived in his remurbrance«, to be diihonoured with impunity , and that too by a government ot whi*.h he had ancient jtiloufies, that would welcome fo juft an opportunity to declare, thunfelves As the utmoft tenor υί publw. torneiti was ilikt infufed into the Venetian ftatefman and fubjtčr, the С ïptain w s conliderably ftaggered by luch rcalon- m^ Claudio reinforced н Ну combating his private fcruples, and aiking, If the pun-iilious difcharge of his coinmiflion were to be put m competiţii n with ihe in tereftsofhis country ? "No " was the patriotic ani wer "Andean vou imagine, fuch beiP T the cife, thit your honefty eould wail )ou agamft the with tl jour iellow eıtı/en^,\vhen thty ín artcd under »he cvilb of its mfl xibili y * " No *11κη, ' conÎima 1 tl e inendi) ] leader, * ) u muft not infringe the tenor ot voir ippointment, which 13 to purify he country írom 1 Hernii fpoilers, nut
to inundate it with hofls of ı irugner« ' Bcfide thefe argu nents, the Vmctian was aflailed by lhe fweet eloquence of Camilla, who fupported with winning energy the intercfl of her he (band 1 > α lady pohlcncls fanciioned jfTcnt, and the Captain gallantly fumuderid ill joower ovir the fate of Henri His gi- nerofity enjoyed a fince,e euloı ν , alter which it was arranged th t he ihould not appear m tt e bufıncfs of tli C he- valier's efcape,but more prudmtK Ι ι η ar t r and Ke, et towirüs he men \ n it fhould be dikov eJ lo ıh e ι large qu intitv ot intoxn iting 1111 I iju rific drink accontami l ti ni li , | ir, mil drowned ihem m ıhı 11 ι ¡i w luh was propitious to С laudiu's ι ndoct as before defenbed It was not ıhı intuit of the latter to free Henri to tlie ob ι us danger of a relaplt , but, on the eon trary, to pre\ail on ι mı tojouniiy to a town a lew leagits dilljnt, uhcri he might retnam fceure irom dtttclion, till
rejoined b\ him r tlf Ihb projeft was counteraded b) the precipitancy of tl e Chevaher, who mad y fled from his mournful friend, and the com emence of a horfe which С laudio had provided for him In vain the Chevaher leapt into the fit! 'h, ind purfutd him lftiiri fou 'lit the tin kct-, with the deli er ¡tion of а (ihm , and ( luulin, ifriid к Ihoiit, retuinul cle fpoiieli ι th to the cot. Ihe fugitive lienu rcafcended the hill, and, bcinir ren le t il by 1нь ìnflam- in itt rv paíhons almoft invulnerable to the night's intemperance, roan. 1 m- cefiantly about, in ho|n thit neh mo¬ ment houe/ht lum nearer о the ciltle oi Ins lovelv miilief. Ilıt ı'avvn ot morning reJihed In·, ol en dcuous liep, .md difclofid to hım the foletnn henery of the fanguinarv vale Ihc к mark- able ciiruinltaiiiis that there lud com¬ menced, difgulted him from the fpot, and he fvvtftl) eroded it to retrace the road that bro.ight hnn from the caftle
di Fiafcano I he dtfcourle of men was welcome to his ears, as he imagined them to befóme of the band dill linger mg in the depths, but bitterly he re pented the impetuofity which hurried him into the cudody of freebooters who wire feveral of tieni, examining ani expati ting on the blood thlc loi rtd grafs Their tncouth garb and mien prepoffetied hi 11 in thur distavour foon as he beheld his midake, but, whin they boifleToully arreftid hun, he ftared the extrémed of his adierfities were yet to be encountered Fortunately the meni ion ol the Conte di l ukano afled asa chum in his beh ill, and refeued hnn from the t rocitv t the robbers The piiflanee ot Juh n wasjultly a motive ot tern r or envy to the environ ing province In none wis the lormer feeling more deeply gral ed, ıhan m iholt mountain tutliw^, vvhoft preca nous fubl dente was the plundir they wrung fro n tht vvaytorn travtller A
pretence to fcour his own territory and the circurnpcent vamities ot thefe bri¬ gands, was the cloke to Julian's own il¬ legalities. , not that it was merely a prt- nnce, fi r he had frnnetimcb inflicted ın- cxor ible feverities on thofe unhippieft of wretches who fell in о hi» handb, but, of late, he hid with iupenor defign en¬ gaged thein to recruit his own band Ilts rmgiiifieent rcputition as a Condot¬ tar, t willed л nurrcroub company of armed retainers, a: d w ib likew ile a grand attraün n to -\ 1м uturers in fame or for¬ tune Ну hib fpirit the robber;, were uiunimouil) lehuted to pttition Henn, who nii^iuiied his own import nee to infurc then relpc£t, thut he would intro¬ duce md reeomnund the n to the ferviee of the < onte Henri did not hefitate to compi) with their delires, tor ¡к noted them to be ot in irti il and piefumptuoib figures e (tunable by Julian. With glee¬ ful afpeds they then proflered to guide
hım by an unfrequtn'cd track to the caftle di Tiafeano. The company was final), being terribly dimimfhed by a late encounter with fome travelleis, who biavely defended and pre ferved thnr property A cafual bullet levelled their С iptam, ind with htm were flain fo many of the prime, tint the furvivors wereabfolutely difpinted lhe uproar of the afore night s Ikiriiulh m CTiafcd their terrors, ami ttuv nultr ably (kulked within their lurking depths until the ftullnefs of the mommi, allured them of the ρ tcification and depirture of the contenders they then ventured to feek the place of combat, with the fordid hope» ot booty ltom the caréales ot the deal I heir choice was a road lo circuì ous, that before the C hev iher arrived at the gates ot the cadle, the eırlıell hours ot the night wtre conluming His alio ciatee much furpnfed the fentmels, but
Ins wild unhurried their adiiuflion. ■submiffive to Henri's orders, they halted in the court of guird, while he Ipeeded in the chambers ol Iulian A repeated knocking was entirely dilregarded, al- ihough the pages averred that thar mader had lor long been retired to red. At length Htnn forbore the unavailing difturhance , and after commanding that victuals and lod 0 mgs (hould be provided for ihe men, repaired to his own apart¬ ment His difappomted deliri to revint the Ce nielli, luteeedetl 1 ν ι i İtici» n ■- inory ot thcprtetelu ' rtttney ι lailieu- turc, were ¡кием inti totes to fleep, and caul J lum to neglect his pillow. Ihe mild rihancc of a el null s ınoon at¬ tr icìcd hım 1 1 the ramparts on which lu» chamber opened , and in a co ittnipl i- tivc pollure he retlmtd yanılt the pi- ripe while it oveihung the sırlın» Ilı» eves vv uulertel over thtir various cx- tenl've h rtieultttre, ami his thoughts
recurred to the account of the martial apparition that had betn feen lo gloom the fpot bc*brc bin. '1 li it this was no knavilh fable he funn liad the evidence oi lus own figl t, «huh fell ι η the uh liticai fuhjeft of Ins ru nm it ι η At urli he w.s mciiiliilous t ι its h ing more un jm tint tn η ι ti ılı ht illili« i or m iiinunir) plimi Ί , buf ι nu nun: wr.mrht lus oiv. ion li vi i» m Ι ι I tiu h s ur , ι ι t( ι U» 1 1 Ululiti .ι, Hatılı ıı 1 m 1 ' Immiti η, which filent!) ц1 'ul lu m uh the wall ıh it fup¬ ported tl ι horroı ilricki η IK nn 'I he proj ebon ol a 1 uttrel» erhpul Us onun ous career , and, chattering with apprc bei Γιοη, the Chevaher retreated to fib chamber. I arly as the fun he arofe. foon as the Conte was fhrrmc he waited on lum, and they togethtr penmbulu d the battlements, which wa» a daily cullimi with Julian for the purpofe of liiipeetion Xhc latter felt extraordinary furpnie
ind affeftcd extraorcliniiy [ leafure, rt the return of Henri, vvh m he interro¬ gated concern ne, the occurrences t f his аЫепсс U the Chev ılur I id ref hed that no menti n of l I ι e > fhould [ aľs hls Ιιρς, he wilhed to 11 t tl e il itances or h s q preli il n It ι e ! er, ai d to ful ltitu e an ıı ııı I tli 1 t and vv indenni, l ut it I ne 1 tl it his nu crtin was n t u kn wn t) the Lunt , for ttie ten iene) tli el quines waslïflian ely ι' e e to ir, that fiei π, unable to devife ev ifi sn, w is с mpelled to lpeak on the difagrceable f^ Of his efcape, however, lie menti ned an artificial detail, and he wa tjad, unde¬ tected, to rcj n th it | irt of the truth which rcfpcctcd his mulm., with the men w hi in he h lír u^ht to tlie e dll On the merits f th I le d L,rclliJ into a lon s ex, aliati ι, nil otkn eiy priluincd en heir acq ire nei r th t Inhan, ilthou h le ppre d n 1 11 i,iged them, rebuked h m H, a lut tlijt
future liberties of tint kind fltoultl r.< t bc excufed by the ι value Henri s pruil t u fidered repre f m niitit, aiul at litat time ht conceived a lpint of hitred th it did not | r mile to he donnant I he elifindin tion ot Juh in | revented lus com erfmg with 1 arnia ft r the three or four enfuing days but, durmg fo confidernble a lime, the paflions of the youth became fo impetuous, that the Conte was compelled to connive or uu pede hım openly As the lovec t iten experienced thefe temporary mortifica tıons, the oniy notice the Cometía he flowed on tht uncultorrary length ot this, was to upbraid Henn with coldnets of endeav our to fee her He foon con vmced her of her nuil ike, and was not remıfs to inculpate Julun As Lanna was unfufpicious that htr hulband did not opopfe her pkafures, iht fiand the rigour by which he rtguhted them to proceed from jedlotily Her tent r •f Juhan, nnd love for Hetn, were
much increafcd oí late and both paffions urged her to flee tiora l|K>ufal fub- le^lion. fílele were the reaions that nutated her to chide Henris return to the eailh, when (lie was acquaint¬ ed with his adventures, wluch he re. lied to lur with a fumlar caution 'n n training Irom any mention of Claudio. Iheir uncontrolled dalliance was only practicable without the iphere of Juhan s tl inumtion , fo that bitterly Ihe regret¬ ful the Chev ilier's abufe ot an opportu¬ nity ot which hid he wifely availed huniéit, he would have connived means to invtte and alTilt her finular deliver). 1 i 0 er to extenuate himfelf, and alle ν ι ite her chiariti, Henri encouraged 1 arını to expect an early recurrence of ι finular opportuna), iupenor ulfoinuch that he would better know how to em¬ ploy it Ihc) then deliberated that a mutual cnlar b cmcnt (hould be backed by hei divorce from |uhan, her allémon ot hei heiethtary el inns to ihc efhitc di
bafcano, and ber inveftiture of H»nn in thofe privileges of a hufba id untane tifìed love did not authorife On thi» plan Henri beftowed a heir'felt appro nation , h r the command Lanna would entitle lum to exercife, foothed that im patient ambition, which had latterly in uted fonie unfihal wifhes 1 he d >m uns dirialianoconfliiuti 1 a lit le fouinante in his tyts , and fhouhl ht Ixfielts cernie early into the lnhtritantt of his 1 ırth dom, he doubled no tint tht uni in I lo much I v iv in tl t h ιι Is ol one 1 )>ипц, r ull n .uit luu on tl vtrv l unia ! η 1 1 ч il η i Sı ciı vi rt the r v r Ι tl ν ι in, wl while he vi ι pr tin ι mi[ fimle in ileţ eiitltnte, 1 1 1 v t ! ι η hi ıbfo- lııteılııeıt circtiiiitinc Inh n tht poor lui Ilıtın s for r altı rot fmııd, were ι t ι eni al ıı ι ι ι η ι ι Ι ι flexible ο κ ι'ν aml ipti u le t . e f о nd mn i tl ρ Я, nt lili II] if thci itt hi I 1 ι ut 1 ııı
«nut thefe qualities he would have pre fented the mêlant holy phenonenon of an intellectual walte, Iterile of idea, ρ inciple, feience or aeconi, hfhnient. even thofe paillons, not only inherent to humanite , but infiparable from exiftence ihiouehout ill fgiecits, needed in him an luxili ircallint, f >rth, for ilthou^hhc pol leffed tliem as inf 1 imma! le, as pern clous too, as wir piweler, v et was ! t iin 0 ilttd thron h ни Ι ι ce mp ifition with a fin It Ipark t к I th m t ırth Ilı Ί ı nt vas a'eve tiers m lis own oy uut n, li wa he i tl iw them in reality, Ins harieltrl m ι I 1 ink, his powers au- i miatt nt m ılı m ' ır's h md , hi nature the enrol th r ııitn s l'ıps, the monkey ι! other men s uii 11 s Mod ridiculoufly loe» hi coiului* which fo bug hts liten the r ípv ot 1 ther«, now pretend to linke 1 it f r itľell , ηανν, alter bein r, lui' in I lell eel bv i knes ot foul ori¬ nili v ml lis mine, if lo baft ird a jlleetı. n e 1 ide ı m iv be dignified vv uh
that denomination, grown dronger in every thing fave wifdom, directs hun to fupplant Julun in property as well as bed. A week (hewed the fallacy of his re- hance on a facility of enfranchifement, for m two -xcurfion» lhat were fat on foot, he was prevented a participation Whether Julian were aware of his in¬ tent, midrudful of it, or merely cap tlous, conjecture could not decide cer tainly the former feemed highly impro¬ bable, Henris oifcourfes with the Con tefla being conducted with the dncled (ecrecy Difappointmcnt adiltd to his boldnefs, by neceflitatmg hi» e\ernons, and he propofed openly to Iemand pır million to leave the caltlt 1 his he h id great expectation of obtauiu g, as lit thought that Julian, howiver mentally adverfe, would grant it rather th in ven ure forcible and unexculed dum tion 1 hus prefumptuous, he addrefled the
Conte in premeditated terms that im- parted to a petition the energy of a com¬ mand. Senfıbly alive to indignity, Ju¬ lian was inexorable m his refentment of its flightel experience , and he m ule a giant s (Inde to hurl the ρ tl) ofender trom the ш proti it dr upart, c η which dı//v verg th ν dool But |ulun Iw iv 1 win reti ¡reite 1 monari'is ir lil, his g .etliment емеее'ес! th* 11 -fl lu um s . I th 1 ill, it was 1 111 Ι Ι ι h more ti iti tu in pal¬ li 1 lene ν I I» '1 in 1 il к uld ht Λι Ι ραιΓι ι I he I It of ant u ι omn ; I' rt ıs irréel um ible , bui |il ία ν ιι ill fl ν ns w η anel, like the fi 1 us |ove pred Ic ovei his own il inJer 11 vv 11 11 ulloufiy WIS this 1 w ri 11 1 ie I Ir although lu, h rnbly vuuİKtıve ni'ute required not liidin 1 provocation to enrage him 1 und the Chtviher, whom he mylte- nnuP) hated, )et was the prefent pre¬ hriatím af ihe litter afcrıbıble to the vot tit 1
mhuman malignity ofthat hatred, which difdaining the contentment of an or¬ dinary facnfice, indefatigably brood¬ ed fome eiquifite refinement in revenge A ferocious blow could only inflicì a momen ary pang, only yield a momen¬ tary fatisfañion ; how lnfufficimt to ap peafe him, whofe only limits to re venge w ere f Jtiation ' Thofe horrors of vengeance dormant m îutuie fince her creation— for never had poet, whofe vanity prilunied on the utribute of all feeing, ihpieltd , or philofopher, gymnaftic or fıcerdotal, m his reillcib cafuiltrtei combated their e\ fici ce , —thofe h ггогь, moll like the lull's chariot, which confumcd who ufed it, as yet reitrivted to the deep oi hell and 'he will ot hell's tenantry, Julun in an dacious ouynahty η ην conjı re 1 up like a fiend from the centre A w uder in exterior lov eh' efs, a moniter in mental deten ty, was he o[ pofed to Henri а mediocrity in ether liicimprehenfibly
grew Julian's deteilation like the twin- giants, but 'hat no corporeal frame could endure to its gratification he angrily knew, and his fyfLma ic cruelty tranf- ferred its inflictions to the mind He glutted on device to bait, to lacerate, and madden it he explored its affec¬ tions, its tendernifles its bif otrits, and conctp ions he traced its fympathies w uh the Helli by indefinible diflecbon, ind gloried ovei its fupcn ir qualities of endúrame, as do the domeflic tigers ovei their prey his only alloy was, that the body being coinbuftible by internal anguilh mull be haficned in its diffolu· non, jet the expiration ol life he elif¬ ti lined for a period to his revenge, but in diabolical ] hantifics puifued the dif trailed foul ot his victim to the judg ment t» rors, and triumphed in its re¬ jection, and immortal condemnation for the criminality ot defpair himfelf had bred 1 hus did Ins bram minuter to the 1 2
vilenefs of his heart, and the nughtinefs of his natui e engender ideas which could have dnven other men fo delirium, with comparative temperance. His paflions were as a furnace to enclofe him, and, like a falamanďi , he lived in them un confumed and nounfhed Henri palpitated bineath 'he gl mce of Julian, and declined In, eyes which were dazzled to b luid the h htniiu, it its fource, Itili mete wis he ilili ml with the fubfequent 11 nenient lie tr in quilhfed, as the Contt, who never v unprepaitd tor jdverhtus ,* llibli lo le forefeeii by real in, ndtreil a Ititer, which lit Ircvv Ir un about hnn Heim conceiving ils ce nteiits to be anlvverablt Io hts (uit eai,erlv unftltled it, and, with terror and alloniftiment, ptruftd a refpectiu! but juridical fummons to tht Conte dt liafcano, to deliver up to per fons nominated by the civ il power a certain youth of hi., fuite, whole guilty agirci
uni of the nuls had cilt hım into the hands ot the ollıttrs of juillet, from whom he hid ifterwards elcaped Hie deftnptionvvas too nunutelyaj pli cabL to Henri s pt rit n tor hope to dwell on а poffioihty ι í ipen cvafion , anil u - ivact formiltty ot the lublcrqtu ι ni fign Uure dt priv ti' hun ot the com I ot difhehef 1 h ic tht ban I wtre uniueii- tioned he afertbed to 1цпогапсс ol iheir flure 1 1 the tranl iä in , for they had generally efcaped, an 1 he had jierfidcd m an obttma e ticiturnity relpečhng them His delivery by C laudio he now thought to be no other than the defpe¬ rate venture if fnendfhip, but how he hil been traced to the cadle engroded I s vv n I t \ hit 11 tınım· 1 α e lov er the litter, I 1 n Iti u miied tie ieerecies ol his h ι t illim illy as though he had created u, »ud e t ıtır thai evtr he faw how ibundantly it llouiilheii t b e feeds of wickedneli Its inclination to feel pub- Ì
licity the chief inconvenience of guilt, and its compatible aptitude to venture much to prevent impending ihame, were too prominent to be unobferved by a moderate degree of fhrewdnefs , and Julian determined that Henri fhould fink а ftep deeper than himfelf, and blot out his laft claim on Heaven's merc\ by the dye of murder The fear and indecifion which diflorted the Chevalier's afpcci when he turned t upwards to Julian, perfuaded the latter that the moment was near at hand in which to confummate his view», and when Henri repeated his wifh to leave the caftle, which almoft wa« unintelligible from importunity and con¬ fternation, Julian's promptitude in the like inllant conceived and arraigned the fmful procedure " 'lo leave the caftle, " he coolly anfwered, '* would be nothing better than an act of furrcnder to the officers, for it were unreafonable to fuppofe them fo ignorant and fo un- ìnterefted in fervices ot this nature, as to
have neglecicd the prevention of his flight No doubt the caltle was in fome meafure inverted, nor would the man who ha · brought the fummons and who remained within the walls, fail to apprift them mftantly of his departure ' Henri s fpirits fell as Julian fpike " Was then an agent of the magiftiacy fo near ? ' 1 he aniv er was affirmative, and was delivered with an ur of careleflhefs, which, as was intended, threw Henri into a melancholy hopelefs dependence on his own fohtai y refojrees One, lefs fkillul than Julian, would precij itately have propoled to his victim the fintul mode of txtricatu n from thefe d flicu ties, but the former s ρ hey re quired a thorough conviction ot Henri » acquieicence before he ventured its re- c inn nduon, ind as the fureft mode ot fucc fs, 1 c itrfooÄ him to brood by tumf If on what had | dlftd tor Julun wtll conceived thdt an evil completely known is half overcome, as what the ' 4
undtríiarJ ng gim, In e appreheBfi n lofis His mad h m fear that were H-nn at once ltquiinttd with the word, he mi^ht colkct fpirits of fortitude, and become ob lurate not only to rtpreln ta tiens of ihe el inger, but allo to the itline how to avert it lo prevent tin , he provided hnn with a fohtary interval tor the rack of imagination, conjecture, hope, or defpair, which he was aflured »ould alternately vex and debilitate the mind, and in the ıflue render it fubuuffivt to his fwav, and ductile to his defigns He therefore quitted the miferable Che¬ vaher with an air which repulfed any intreaty to intered himfelf actively in tht bufmefs Scarcely could anv one be more- affected than the C' cvalter confeiente had flept lo heavıh m h s bel m, that it needed f ικιι,η chances to aroule it, and his firft idea of faultmefs in his aQions, now proceeded írom the dilemma int ι which they had hurried hnn Bitter w is
1 1, regret that he (hould ever have incurred this danger by fervmg Julian, who, if he broke a cold neutrality, feemed more inclined to act againfl than lor htm But this opinion came lefs fio n lus judgment than from an inn- d at'monition that he deferved no buter limer J, the profpect of afcalfold of ill is tl t beil calculated to cenare a man s thout his, aiul brinir him acquaint¬ ed with him'ell κ ι» probable that Henri never i i ıh eouiie ot his life reflected π n li tl than now, when reflection, in all ¡nbatihty, was entirely ulelef». Hut m U if on we know to be the frailty ot tin v lung man, whofe four hours' coni I r iti m ended as it hail begun, in palli nate 1 imentations at the peculiar fivtrii) vi fortune m bringing lum to extremity at once. If an idea of amend¬ ment croffed his mind, it Ihıl over its furfacc without taking а determinate root, for he found that the future could not obliterate the pall. 1 S
Towards evening it was figmfied to him that the Conte was at leifure Henri went to his apartments with a (lep as doleful as though it had fupported him to the dreaded tribunal he was received with a filence which himfelf was necefli- ttted to break. Thus the crafty Conte acquired a great advantage to his game , for f raûıfi.ıg in mutilated fentences and myftcnous muendo«, he obliged the Chevalier to piece and interpret them himfelf as often as he queflioned if fuch were their meanings By this art the Chevalier was often inveigled to commit himfelf irretrievably , and Julian was empowered, had the former lhewn any abhorrence of the difcourfe, to difclaim thofe ideas which reali) deferved it, and even to retaliate the charge on tl e vicious underftanding of Henri ( auti n at length was fausfied, and Juhan ν inul hit method agreeably to the virutio is he perceived himfelf to 1ше wrought 111 the Chevalier, tie now oegan to ex
hort, or rather civilly to command, the latter to come to a fpeedy refolution, hinting, quite unequivocally, that he could by no means be expeäed, nor was he at all dilpofed, 1 1 endure delay in an atlan which laid his own character t pen to flnctures and mifreprefentauons by the lntrufive fellow who was then in iht caftle An infult, fo cruelly couched, galled Hcnn the deeper, as he was not 11 a condition to defend himfelf, or oficiul Juhin, fır which very good ι eafon he difmifTed his mc! nation to do both, and humbly profcfled himfelf ready to act exactly what he fho_ld be advtled lluswas Julian's aun, to wind I lei π to а pitch of paffion which might be bent fubferv lently to his defigns Still no eagernefs anticipated certainty ; as was his art inexhauftible, fo feemed his patience, and, like the wary moun¬ taineer, he firmly plante i one foot before he ventured to rear the other. Repulfively cold, he anfwered, " That
к wai hu fault to recommend from his heart, without confideriiig how ill iucli recommendation might be adapted to another lhat it was a fault he had not yet correQed, being unprovided with opportumties, as none among thou, who knew him, \entined to aflv advice of irhich they kne« ihemfelves imdi quate to the performance " Among a'l the knavifh policies that hnvee\ er pallid between man and man perhaps thire never occurred a more artful e\ iin n nor a more artlul appeal to the ruling impetuofity of а youth limn s pr ılı and prefumptıon took, inli mt fue ıhı one burned indignanti) at i di ul t ι f his courage, the othır kmi'lid α rılh perfuafion mit η )tlunt, ihould iletir Ima from Ihewing hui kit an excipti η In 11 the Contc's pufıılanıınous mu η iti- , ι ν from riling to higher than an cijiuht) even with the latter, by achitvii g wh t he might only dare to project. In t'us mtemperature he chaUtnged Julian to
propofe the teil fo arduous to valour and ability , adding, with a contemptible rafhnefs, lhat were it unworthy hnn, he would foon evidence what he dated to do luhan's pltafure it this fpeech wis alloyed by his intuiti n ol vvl it ¡nfled in Henri s nunti İhı knovvl il^c tint m fome nieafurt he w ıs tkl diva (tripling, who arrog ted to himf 11 the advantage in ι companion, w s not to be b ooked by one ν Ι ι new hunk I to I ivt lttdined in unni I eil 11 niludof 1 in nn aiidicity His itudy w ь n rt ti ¡Quiily Ins chir cltr 11 o htr ' won kr t n in i s Idi ilittls, tiiutfurt tht .. iskut opportunity t cintre in II nn 11 the (,u it of in evil detun, bv per- i ittuij, lum to en tel his ov n b al , was ι ot tu bt j ut in competition with th fe \ incipks ι f t ride which du Idintd I u luitt is an il iftnitnt Ль men luulil not anfe to hi» level, neither would lie fink to theirs. For though vile,
never would he be mean though he lived in univerfal hatred, yet would he live in univerfal dread His ambition was not an empire over men s bodies and coffers, but over their minds which he gloried to humiliate beneath the con blation of their own vanity Supreme as he was above others, yet w as his pride difeontented unlefs as he arofe they funk, and mat wiekednefs which made him he ufed to unmake the u fo was he exafpi rated with the ( hevalier s pre¬ fent prefump ion, that he the more fiercely meditated his debafement, and mentally refufed him the common pn vilege of manhood, an authority over his own actions In his very villanies Julian determined thit Henri ihould be b t an agent, and although refponfible to Heaven as a man, unbetittmg a man Ihould be his flavery , yet each fhould aggravate the othei Thus ran his thoughts, while the terrors of his brow impreffing Henri with timorous awe,
reptunged him mto comparative infigni- hcance, and could the fentiments of Julian's foul have found their appro¬ priate tones, they would have delivered themfelves in Indian thundtr. Though Henri rtad in Julian's coun¬ tenance the approaching trial, )et he awaited it with a defperdte obftindcv 1 he lattei fuddenly grafped his arm, and drew him to a remott window " Do vo fte that man ? afktd the Come Henri looked more fledfaflly, and dc- knowled^cd that he did fee а fohtary perfon walking in a melancholy ftyle to and fro ' lit appears to be a dranger, ' added he , " but the duik of the evening prevents my obferving his lcatures " " No matter,' a 1 joined Julian , " you will have opportumties fuiHcient to be- t nine acquainted with them He is tht in¬ truder I told you of ' Henri fhivered, and vvh it he wasgoingto remarkinarticu- htely murmured through his chattering teeth. " Is the man dead that fpoke juft
now ?" faid Juhan It requires the de¬ livery of a lunan to juftify the effens of this fimple interrogatory. Words ftnke through the enrs to awaktn the del beratii n of the underftanding but rones of voice, and featu ed cxpreihom, linke at once on tht pallions luth ţowci had ihofe of Jul an to whom the youth mi paroxyfm of rekindle 1 fury nn- fwtred, 'Ύ on finii judge " "Yourmttnt cat no. but fcbeluvv vvh tt 1 could wifh,' contn uid the (enti " Ilı wever, each one in j roportton to uis tbihty If y υ ι be rift Iute lo defy a whi к II iti through ts tmiflary, ero' Iht m η tv tits му anfwer to his lummt ns, I it it ι , mil 1 commiffion you toikhurit ' While ¿lying this, he prilled the Ipnnti Ι ι cafket beftde hnn it npei id, ι ' ihi- clofed ftrtral choit t br ti i f pill. 1, When Henri kit tht il. ithiul tule, his good genius tnatlt its f trt v el efl rt , but it was baflledby i look of tiled unit, wbch exhibited a fmihn^ pity through
all its indefinable lindes down to con¬ tempt Henri was imal le to fúltam it, imi he li fook the pieltnte. A Itatr- 1 ife terinin ited ii the pl uform, and he w α, bei Je theOiheer befire he had tune t think ln ılı t orlıeer ht retogıufıd the С ptıın, miel ı^uıı he was ítnggered. A ıntm 0 laurii from tht fiuıd above re- t ıe 1 hım, md ht jırtferrttl the wrath 1 1 d il tu tht fctirn ot num lhe w h île vi the horrur ot a moinei t — d coıtvul- íivt 1 uund was the unly motion of the victim, md bifore tht leiuik.l txplu- liun tedkd tu ring mhis tais,lleim had re entered tht aparţinu t I ins he lound idcdtit , and the diildiit Hutting of a dt ur 1111 ounctd tu hım lint Julian was ritning tn his chamber m example dut hi tilde iv urei ti 1j4. v, but hts e itu iun wa 11 n i u 1, t h nii'iook 1 e wav , ai 1 Ins U ps, under ılıt mud¬ ante ul toniuui e iet ı d to the plar tum IL quickly reıuıkd trum lhe bloody fpot, ior his tyts, which hdd
often confideied huge piles of (tain fot- diery were as though feared by the pio- fpecl of this fohtary corpfe He at titnpted to flee along the ramparts, but his trepidation necellit ited him to defire fupport from a fentinél whom he over¬ took , and hanging ρ werlefs on a me¬ ni il arm, he entered 1 is chamber There he found it painful to be alone, for Heaven, to avenge hts vio'ation of trs ftrißeit ordinance, vifited his fancy with infupportable terrors in the fcreeches of the night birds he Imagined the upbraid- ïngs of the murdered fpirit, and in the apartment's gloom he conceited ghmpfes of thofe fiends to whofe level he had funk himfelf Taus haraffed, he en¬ deavoured to gain unwitneffed admiflton into the chamber of the Cornelia but fortune was adverfe , and thw rted in every attempt, he defpamngly retired Julian rightly conceived th t Henri's prefent motive was mental more than phyfical, and as rightly judging that
the terrors of confcience revive with ad¬ ditional ftrength after any fufpenfion, he decided that it was his better part to ne- ceflitate Henri t) enduie or Ititlc them. In their infancy he knew this to b» puc- tieable, and he loon had an indi r putable evidence in the Chevaher P iring а long night, Henri unable to appi if or elude this internal monitor, no longer delayed to combat it, and betore morn¬ ing fo hardily did he fet it it defiance, that he arofe triumphant in fin, the aban¬ doned of Heaven It may have been obferved that greater abilities are manifcltcd m vice than in virtue , and that a ftrength of wifdom is not an abfolute neeeflary to the latter As wiOlom is not the gift of natu e, but a ftudious acquirement unattainable by myriads, therc may be ù me truth in this Yet, although guilt mav exercife the underftanding (as m the cafe of Ju¬ hani, there is no certainty that it will fliarpen it, of which Henri is a notable
difproof lus nitke Juels anıl I 11 len" not only ıııfeparıbı, but the ι ne luu dament tl of the u her \ t tl» very ti . he flung the,antl t it it vintirtlu 'ut, and betnnit .n i.l . ihe K í r . I hm t he WIS 111 tilt llle'l 1 eet 1 ι eiy to Julian. Let us inici¿uie tht С ine tu be exult¬ ing at his own dii, fuextidoril n mlv lui - cefsful whtn lo e. lily to be peiittrdttd' Let us conjecture that art to hut ar¬ ranged the ftory which provoked liuu' to an mexpiible crime' We fluii not then hefitate to pronouncethat the whole was a fiction ; the letter a forgery ; the Ciptam a prifoner made in one of the late excurfions which Henri was re- finuiej liom accoripamitiL, , and t! ľ Julian lu Iported with hi, hie to ike ι e. tht youth With this с invielion,picture tin pn r dupe olteiit ııı mili paradin ıht ram parts, anel ик1и1„1Пц m tiv vviklill an ι citations of impuidmg dignity buppole
İnin 11 bc tranlporied with Julian's hint, that thi ougli it» reprefentative he defied au entire ft ite , and from this one act of contumacy tracing Ins progref» to its overthrow, a li_at itvouiablc to hi» countrv, alke u» adniuaiion and it» tnv% With α luv lintiiiiint» ulåtne to 1 in 11, anoint th lithe ihallow ag¬ ii id Instil ιι,ΐιι , u Ul con ι. ııpt bi ι t ιι uni ip İl il imi ıtıuıı tluv ex¬ em, us m U h n r Winn I unn ims nil mn d bv her 1 ι i U ι' I r 1 unu Une ,, lur iliiif en ι m w rilli ui 1 ицге! lor lijs iı urn to lhe calili itluiwilc flic was in 'Huruit thu ıhı hm I flu puliul had deilt ι liiurdirou» blow But whin a difpafli m ite moment came round, ind İhı eealıd iltogetlur to for f t the mur direr in the tn in, τ tinder riilcihon nn his I ıfıtv llimulateil her t > enqune wlu- tlur ivtry thriatening of dinger had died with the Captam ? Hır manner di noted her fiucere ignorance of the whole
bemg an untruth, and the qucftion caufed Henri to bethink him, that Julian had fupiiofed a party to be aw ailing their leader without thegates He mentioned this, and, as an affurance of his entire fecurity was needed to fire igthen the bafis of their feheme they af,rttd t , podpone further ronfultatiors on thele till fatisfied m the firil ltiftante At the earhtlt oppor uniti, Henri re prefented to Julian how appiihcnfivc I was about th feinen Had net fúlj ι ι n been dead within him, it muft hav e been routed by the Conte's cquvocation ft was the drift and uf if,e of the latt r ever to leave fome refouree for future trill , accordingly ht anfw tred Henri in term» that tended to delude hun inti the mil Ыле that the detachment was with drawn , or rather, that he did ne t choofe to avow having deitrovtd it 1 hi» was tn infinuat'on fo agreeable to th C hevalier, that he gave it indant credit, .ute' endeavoured by hts looks to ag r rife
the Conte that hts fccra was not un¬ known Juhin wis excellently amufed, and nothing lels than the compieteli lonieflion could have induced Henri to forego the ide t 1 his confidence he communicated to Larm ι , ind bo h agreed that Juhan had fhe un hun fo gi eat α favour in flieh an arlı n, tint it would he imprudent t 1 deier the bringing his kincine Is to an other teft by α retention of Henri's de¬ files t ι le ive the calile 1 Ins bung ι e- termııied ι n, the ( liei ılı r, entirely re¬ li mt 1 n the ľicufs of his ipplii mon, 1 m 11 portuned the tonte lo his e mt lete diíeomfiture, the reply was a cl eifive—" Nn 1 ' which at once fi lineici lhe uile cf entri ity or remon- firai cc Henri was now fenfibie to the adver- fnv of |i Inn, which hfmayed and con- f uiiilctl liuu the more, is he was uncon iuocis ol ever having given him ollencC jreuous to the lormers aggreffion m
impnfoning him of thofe fince he could not but fuppofe him ignorant, as no public wrath evidenced his knowledge Whether evil would enfue this lait de claratıon, coiijulurc filled to decije , as it was, he no I muer null 41k the calile to be In idhtr than in amplii eJ dungeon Soon as 1 π n was m lot ι il il their инь »m 1 allied in ılı t qi inu, (he 11 Idly ded iu 1 ılı it ıhıır tmie noi ι fhould nit puil! ι um ulv ab t>, I fhould liflime ι ι юге il im 11 thod Afira lon„ dilemimi, it » ι r okul to attempt an ihenation of the ii n til l the band from the Conte , ind then I \ prefiní and promiffory tcniptfu is ot ι pecuniary mture,to f minia t tinin to hj injury 1 his pi m h id thi fai ilt pr ι f peel of fuccefs, and its nid itv t, ι e additional hope tint it nn^ht mature ι η fufpected by Juin t whole fili irro mu and difdam fii ılıt abi'itv of ι ther w ere prime cırı ııııflances m their fai our
1 henceforth love refigned the exclufive employment of their interviews. lhe fupenor talents of the Contefla fv amorous intrigue diftinguifhed her in this more arduous one, and, docile to her tutorage, Henri made great advances with courage and circumfpeclion lhe с inierfation of the two nun, when fird he beheld the inexplicable ligure, lived frelh in his memory , and the charactei 1 tics of lum, the lefs talkative one, hid takın lo liron ι hold ot his mind, that ot η 1 he rei tted t η them, lo often would he exclaim—' He of all men is the fnrelt auxiliary ' A mutual under- lt anding being die objecl, ttie C hevalier regulated his conduct accordingly He much affected to look intelligibly on the 1 un, until an interchange oi glancéi became habitual, and thofe of JUicho vv ere lively with curiofity Henri then 1 llened his referve, and proceeded to mutter half fentencis whenever they palled thefe had the defired efttct, f ι V ill к
the robber one time pretending to be¬ lieve, or really believing, that the Che¬ vaher wu addreffing hun on forne cuf- tomary bulmefs, refpectfully Hopped, bowed, and afked hu orders. " Give me a right to ıflue orders, bid Henri. " My lord forgets that I am but a fervant " returned Mic'io " Ha '" adjoined Henri, " need any man remain a fervant who wears a dag ger, and whofe mailer ever fleeps ' ' " W hat figmfies a blow," faid Micho, " when it only can caufe a change of mailers'" 'Confider of it," faid Henri " for once you may find your fuppofition wrong Prefume the fucceffor to be a young, lement, »nd bountiful miftiefs " Said Micho, " I mud be aflured of that beforehand ' " You now are,' < on- tinued Henri, who dropped a purfe at hu feet, and in the fame inflant call a much weightier into the moat Micho s pleafure at the one action was allayed bv his furpnfe and regret for the llrange-
»efs of the other, and his venality broke forth in a loud exclamation. " Peace 1 " cried Henri, " and reflect that the hand that can refign its valuables to a ditch, will not be mean in reward¬ ing defert J ufi at this time the ap- proach of foldiers interrupted the dif¬ courfe Ί о avoid miftrult, Henri fpoke audibly on fome uttnn| ortam mattéi , and fignıficantly glancing on Micho, withdrew, with а mental curfe on the intruders 1 he judgment ol Micho proved to bľ well founded, for the latter intention illy em ountered him the firft opportunity ; ind a tivv confidential words drew from bm а profeflion ot fincere earneflncfsin the Chevalier's tivour I itile pafTed between them, as they mutually dreaded obfcrvatiun, but, bett re they parted, Micho undertook to lound the majority 11 the band, and to difcrumnate the real adherents 10 |uhm from thole who Were kut apparently h
Both Larma and Henri impatiently expected the intelligence which was to remove every anxious douot of Mieho's fmcenty, and to confirm or confound their plot but circumfpeclion the more was needed the flronger thur fohcitude, and the Chea aller faw himfelf invited by Micho to a conference lotit, bef ire he dared to accept it the appointmint ot his coili itor to patr I the battlements in the vi nitty of hi chamber was the firil opportunity Henri wclcort d, and he took pains to benefit from it In a nocturnal conlultatit nMicho con ftffed that his feruti iv had not been verv txtenfive, as he had earlv experienced the difficulty to be grt it he excuft I himfelf by arguing, lhat it would hav t lhewn an imprudent lnlatuation t have proceeded in the alfurtnce that not t ne, among the numbers he addrefled, vv ould have the cunning to peretivt his dnlt,or the fidelity to dilcloft it to his malter Htnn aflentctl to tht truth of this, α
the fame time inwardly remarking, that Micho, as yet, feemed to give no proofs of fincer.ty, and perhaps had invented tins reafonable excufe to ainufe hnn. Such was his defire to implicate the mm feriouily m the bufmefs, tint he IniJIy t niel conceal hi chagrin at vvh t h iimheaid, but his interdi incielici! 1 Micho pi осее lel t tell htm, lint lıeın^ thus ctrcumlcnbe l m lus mve'tı g iti ns, lie h id pr i rred а more parti ciliar attention to the π Ι bers, whom he, the l hevalier, hid introduced Ihefe being d ficıent in awe or attachment, w ere the Jefs referv cd, and freely murmur¬ ed their difeontentment So fenfibly they felt the difappomtment of their expecta¬ tions of prolit and comfort in the Contc's fenice, that the) cheriflied a degree of ammodi) aguni! Henri for having grati fiLd their inclination to enter it ' This is fivourable 1 ' exclumcd the Chevaher ' 1 his fpirit can readily be turned to our favour * He then tutored к 3
Micho to tnfmuıte to them, that their prefent mortification wa» not more keen¬ ly felt by themfeWe» than it was by him, who uw, wuh indignation, how flavifhly they were mirtreated by Juhan, to whom So warmly he had recommended them. " Tell them, ' continued he, " that at I confider myfelf to be rcfponfible for the inhofpitahties of their reception, the time fhall not be remote when t will indemnify them foi every unpleafant en¬ durance , but that at prefent my abihtv, aot my will, is weak, and my promife« ■wart my power, for I cfteetn it a fa¬ cred obligation to fulfil them Add, that the Come not lefs having injured me, I am their brother m difeontentment In¬ duce them to contrail Juhnn s contempt and my admiration of them, that the one idea never may exift without the other I ıkeuıfe ufe every art to perfuade them, that were matters as I and the Conteffa wifh, an end would be to every one's fervitude By many other inltruñions,
Micho wa» perfectly accompUflied for the part he had to play at the fame time he warned Henri of thofe men who were known to be m the confidence and inter¬ ed of Julian, fuch were they who had brought him to the caftle, and wtho ri¬ diculed their comrades as fuperftmou» in their dread of the ghoft of Gervafc A few days completed the feduûıon of the robbers to Henri β caufe, and the latter rejoiced over the confuinmation of a plot which was to elevate him to early dig any. The proud fecurity of Juhan boldened the confpirators to act with th« molt impofing audacity, mid it feemed that their many daggers were fufpended but till when they chofe the wound So near the crifis, Henn fwel'ed with pre- furrptuous ardour, and, contrary to th« prudent advice of Lanna, infilled on, and contrived, a lecrtt convention of hi* factior 1 his perverfenefs may the lef« be wondered at, when it fhall be confi¬ dered, that he never yet had peifonally ľ 4
converted with any one of them fave Μι cho, through whom each fide communi catedwith the other, and probably he was riot wrong in the idea, ihat ftiinuhtii ns ot his own utterance would be the mc ft effectual fprmgs to aition But thele were more his excufes than his n otu < f which the chief was a b villi ambiti n to prefidc over adehberitionon ti e ru ι (fa fupenor ai d to receive in advance fome ofthat homage w inch wasfo fl only to become his due It was more difficult to mdulge this vanity than at firft was expected and not till many obftacles were removei cot -Ια it take place The fpot was fe lefted with great judgment it was α difufed cazern at the bafe of an un- svıtched tower, remote from the buly parts of the caftle Any light was in¬ terdicted, left it fhould betrav them the hour of meeting was caretu'ly calculat cd, that they all afluredly might be free ■from their refpeftivc engagements at the
exact time the whole procedure wis put under the fupennteiidenee ol Micho Henri remained in his chamber till fonie minutes pall the appointed tune when he ventured to quit it, the court» were unpeopled, and he Lcurcly tra- v erfed them at а cautious diilance from the fentmels All within thecazernbc in;); dill as death, he paufed on its threfhold with a fecret dre id thit the meetm h agam was prevented, or that the pirty had difperled in cefpair of his с nuniţ But as the dooi was opened for his adrnmincc, thefe apprehenfions chinged into admiration of the duct order obferved The door was reclofed and fattened by Micho, who replied af¬ firmatively to the Chevalier's enquiry if all were congregated As the night was n (ly, and no light was introduced, the company were quite m the Ihaile , no one being vifible ex¬ cept he palled а dilapidated embrafure. bs figure tbeu became difcernible, but к S
ftül hu afpeŕt was not to be diftingui (li¬ ed A momentary buz ran round me affembly when they underftaod that their leader wai among them, but it fubfided into filent attention to his fpeech The exulting Henri prefaced hu argument with a circumlocution that could have puzzled the veneft logician , and he hardl) had entered on that part where he ihould have begun, before an exte¬ rior interruption came, the leali expected or welcome Soon u he could recover his powers of annulation, Henri aiked Micho, in a whifper, 'f he were aflured that each member had been admitted a pofitire Yes fpread general difmay, as it no longer might be doubted that difcovery and ruin were impending. Meanwhile the fummoni grew impatiently loud. The defpair of the party fpirited them to fell mor lives dearly , but as they com· municated thu relblution from one to the other, tbeaoife was transferred to
that part of the outfide beneath the em¬ brafure. Ί here they knew wei e feveral fragments, and an unfteady trampling denoted that fome perton was mounting them 1 he inunr л re werenot unprepared ror the daring head that would appear, and inevitable death awaited the man, had he not, juft before he fhewed him¬ lelf, haftily faid, " In the name of bt M j-k, why am I kept waiting out her* m the cold '' No anfwer bemg returned, he pertly continued , " Come, come, I know that you bc all here, and fo would 1 bave been, but for the devil and his chances Curfe on your filent tongues ' one of em wa» nouy enough when I firft came to the door, fo don t think, to make a fool of me any longer. As for y ou, Barthoto ' u you don't let me in immediately that I get down, I'll, damme it 1 don't ' put a tongue into your dead child's mouth, and to god¬ father you, that you lha'n't again neglect Rtuhn"
After thi» threat he difappeared, and Micho iterated, " Raulm ' Raulm ' why Rauhn wa» one of the firft 1 admit ted, wrapt up ш a cloak and fullennefs Raulm I fpeak for yourfelf A furly voice, to which that of the impoftor without wa» not diffimilar, anfwered, " Here '* to the terror of all, as they had allowed themfelves to hopt that Mitho might be miflaken. "It is ev ident, ' faid Henri, " that tin' man и a fpy, who, being miti učled in thi formalít v of gaining admiffion, prefumes to con to the hearing of our cinfultatiim lie fuppofe» himfelf to precede t! e man he perforiate» , but hu incautious impor tunıty would undoubtedly convict hun, even were the true Raulm yet abfent ' Every one aflented to this, fo that the noıfy ftranger wa» difcovered, although he fo clofely imitated the fpeech, tht ftyle, and impatience, of Raulm Bar tholo could have added fome perniimi remark» on the umilanty
*' Suppofe we receive him on the point oí our ftilettos," f«ud one of the conipirators " W hofoever hae deputed him, w ill remain in ignonnce till to-mor¬ row тогшпц, md before then much can be determined " 1 his charadtenftic pro- pofit being approved, the do r was pre cipimJy opened, without an^ previous endt. ivour to ticertain wheth r the Itran- цег folely rclnnt on h s irti Псе, wtre unni unaccomp uiitd Luckily ror thtin- IcUes, he was alone , and hardly could the unt irtunate man enter, before he \\ is ferocioufly difpatched by a multi¬ tude of daggers that quarrelled m their ра,Пце to his heirt Ihc door igám w s birricdded, but the deid body re- named within lln¡» ineident fpurted tiiem to decide on the moil probable mode of removing Julian, and, after a fliort dilcuflion, the i'agger obtained the prelerenee but the guldur-e of that dagger was the dangerous lenice, as it required more than an ordinary Шаге of
audaaty , а quahty, however, in which none of the robbers had yet feemed de fuient, nor would any one plead an in¬ feriority to his felloii s , fo that chance was appealed to, as choice was reftHed. At this crifis Henri was prodigal m his promifes to the company in general, but he vowed, lhat the future could only fulfil his gratitude to that particular nan by whom the mafter-flroke wire g ven Having determined on the moit 1 m¡ le mode of election, he ordered tl un ι > form nearly as poflible a circle, vi I irli done, he carefully walked mun I, coi nt ¡ng to an appointed number As he mounted towards it the mtereft c f the mutineers proportionably aróle, and when he uttered it—· Who is the man was the queition from every tongi e It was out of Henri's power to anfwer, f r the perfon on whom it fell retreated from his unfufpicious hand, and when he threw it out to arreil him, it unfuc- ceftfully dropped through the place th«
fellow had occupied in the ring. When he complained of this treachery, a low murmur ran round, and immediately afterwards a dozen voices were loud in felf acquittal, for no one would bear to be fufpected But Henri was not fo eafily to be mollified, ind he m erroi. ited the men on either h nd Ihey can hdly duLrtd thunfelvts, but averred an en¬ tire ignorance of him who had flood be¬ tween thtm which was ι erv probable, each min s ľtcntion hung too muth en- grofled by h , own part in the election to think of his neighbours Strange ' thought the Chevalier " W ho among you is deknded by a cuirafs ? " No an¬ fwer. " Such a piece of armour 1 am fure I touched, ' continued he, " and fuch ι piece of armour muft be worn by one of you " I his imprudent vehemence ofllndid the pirty, whofe indignation ran much higher when he threatened to fearch them individually. Convinced, that to deteä one шш he muti affront
the whole, Henry relinquished the de¬ fign About to repeat the trial, he un fheathed a poniard, and vowed that a fimilar treachery (hould undergo its de¬ ferved puni(hment, with lels calmnefs than before, he then proceeded roun 1, and when he attained the latal num ber, rudely grafped the man on whot ι it fell Fhe voice acknowledged him to be Mi¬ cho, though hardly could Henri reeog- »fe it, f ι faltering were become its ulual ftrength and confidence Hut this change was an infignificant motive of furpnfe, compared to the manner m which he re quelled a private conference of Henri the necefiity he pleaded was înconipre- henfibl« to the tatter, whole confent was incited by wonder and apprehenfion As it were unfafe to hazard α difcourfe with¬ out the cazern, it was propofed to the reft of the company to w thdraw into the entry , and this they did with repeated injunctions from Henri to prelerve an
unbroken filence Micho cauïouily er sluded them , and h tv ing diminillietl the ihnncesof hu benig iverheirtl, lit feit ivv ird» rhe f hei ah r, ivho uas limoli 11 untiate vv th xpeetat eilt This eh nged t e mu tl n ns Muho, with Ilım· 11 r I it ei, c inte lied thit fedi vv 1 а 1 Και ticluind the С hailler. Mielin vv ıs ıııortıtıed by his iccent, nnd npeatetl tie conk ih in , but with an oath that his tenrwas of nothing morta' Of w hat then can it be ? Henri wilhed to afk, but aftonifliment fufpended his faculties, nnd he dumbly hllened to Mi¬ eho's further dtfavowal of will or nbthty to undertake the talk allotted lum by fortune " Why Hand the tell?' at length faid the С hevalier " To fıtısfy my comrades, was üv· anfvver " they are undaunted m t! eir ignorance , and had the еквюп fal'en on any one elfe, ignorant he fhould have remained ' ОС what nature Mieho's knowledge
could be tow became Henri s fohcitude, and the fonner, after a pi eface which might have intimidated the hardieft, be gan to inform him " You cannot have forgotten, Signor, a converfation that took place between you and a foolifh fellow, one Rodrand, fome weeks ago, when on that lucklefs enterprife. Hcnn acknowledged that he had not " Then you remember that he hinted at a plot which was thought to have once aimed at the exiftence of the Conte, and to which the appearance of that mcon. ceivablengurethathauntsus isafcribed " " I do ditUnctly, ' faid the interetted Chevalier " Rodrand," continued Micho, " wa» unconcerned in that plot, indeed, none but thofe active in it, were acquainted either with its fupporters or its circuiti flanees —I knew of it, whifpered he, as though he feared the very ftones could hear and betray him " Were I to exift an eternity, I could not forget it yet
tio 1 a fécond lime unagine the death of the tyrant ' It is now a long time, four years or n ore, fince Julian came to the mafterfhip di Fiafcano 1, with many there, fince carried ofl by flaughteroul encounters, aflifted him m the furprifal of the caftle, and we reafonably ex¬ pected to benefit from his elevation, but it is impoflible to defcnbe how much we were difappomted he entered on hu new dignities with the eafy pride of an heir who fucceeds to an hereditary right, and funk us at once into an ig¬ nominious fervitude Some of ι s, who thought ourfelves the moft ill ufed com¬ municated our fentiments to e ne and another, and ret procally ftrengthened ou rage, till blind to the danger, we refolved on revenge How to compafs th s I int, perplexed us, for Julian, of all the men we ever had known, was the lead to be trifled with , as there is, you well know, a formidable fomething about tum that chills even in familiarity
At lall our determination was the oi e I tonight, br t) flab Inni fie pm ; ν thoUL> tu lid theiaiictl It Wu i time, Sign i, fcfure wt were uta n t us in thi many were ic ι 1 1 ι 11) une mole li thill (,et\ 'e, wl I been lutk), p r 1 How hul leie ι coiilmt tl (,en ılı, bıijiı r, w ι ti m m wil ι vv ıs ol lie,cd b) 1 ι to ц t ıı the I ulıncis , and had )i u 1 en his un wilhngncls to uiiilcrlakc u ν ι we 11 haiciworn the fjint of piopheev ua work within him " " Well ' well ' exclaimed Hcnn, whofe hair arofe with the an ıcıpatıon of fome cata/lrophc of furpali ne, horre r Micho continued w i h еа 0 ег and ¿\ moil breathlefs ınterelt ' lhe chofen night came round It was the even t f а wintry feit v il, and in our ide peen harly favourable, all the dómenles be¬ ing dead af сер from the afore night's vigils We had not obfeivedany thing that (hould difcourage us, and our fj ints
Were uncommonly bntk at midiiight ivecrolfed tht frolty courts, and fecretly ^nlered the nobler wing all was filent ıs we could wiih, the night lamps fiientllv flione, but the rooms were de- lerted ind firelefs We quickly reached the coi ridor that leads to the Conte's clumbers thepirt cuhr one mwhieh he fit 11, we had preci ncertcd the means of tp ниц, and fe on а we w ere approached will in a prudent dill икс, Gervafe was ni iti ml pi on 111 ut, li each mo¬ li mo del v hi /αϊ lut ui hves he was Ιι ι irJ tliet 1, Signor ι ipattently virune, the (lilettu tr tu hi haud, .md ueuled him liv i iv looks of f urhleuneis uni eovv trille 1 lus rej roaeh lo galled hun, for he was i t ι coward oy nature, that he к took the weapon, and with a ilt (pirate (true Je went the way,in which 1, bignor, vvuuld have preceded him, hail he lingered а few moments longer. \lter he dtlappeared, we remained like io many ftatucs, every fenfe changed into
ear ; but no immediate found cheering us, this filence grew too painful tor en durance We longed to hear fomethin 0 lef» mournful than the puliation» of oui own hearts, and our eyes communed before a word was fpoken V fudden variation in the countenance of Marcin was fo remarkable, that at any other time it could have diverted us, but, in the very den ot the lion, it filled us with affright In an inflant all were infected , the terror of one's comrades confirme I ones own, andali eves dwelt on the f une objects By the wonders of hell Signor it lights ever burned fulphure cufly blue, then did thofe above us ' Here Mieho's remembrance outr m us aolubihty, and his tongue filenced f r his feelings to reacl the fcene he de fcnbed Laying his damp and tremulous hand upon the nearlv as much difcom pofed Chevalier, he gathered fpirits ful ficıent to continue " I can't expeel, Signor, that you fhould be able to coji
ceive a tithe of what we felt, yet how flight were thoft fenfations to others a minute later ' He had nearly approached us before we had power to obferve that Gervafe was returned Indeed, our firft. glances refuľed to acknowledge him, fo miraculoully he was changed It feemed that he was moved by fome fpint inde¬ pendent of himfelf, for be came down ftiffly as a jomtlefs corpfe, and mani- fefted fcarce ftronger evidences of life his lower jaw was funk, his eyes were glazed, his hair was darted up, and his face had conttafted a like fulphureous gtufthnefs U that moment we fancied tht hirrors attendant on the act had overcome lum dill hardly did we dare to prefume on fuccefs, or even on a Cue retreat from our enterprife, and when we found that his extended hands were unarmed and bloodlefs, we Ihrunk from him in horror and defpair As he came up, feeing his eyes roll with the endea¬ vour to remedy the fufpenfion of his
tongue, we were affurcd that fonie tre inenduus circumfldnce h id w rought him to fuch a fpeclaclc Accordingly we re ceived him into our aims, and provi dently bore him to a neighbouring apart ment 1 here w e adminiltercd whdt was in our power, and dwaited his recovery with feaiful nnpatitnce , but ihe unfor tunate man was never to know health agam in a convulfive mtena! he bardı regained fenfe fufhcient to furpdls ι ur wildcft conjectures, and petrify our blood, by ttlhng ns, lhat he h d been ίο fhocked by an иппашы! appcaran t m the Conte's chamber Julian, lie faid wa» flumbeung on a fot ι eno m¡ aíTeil by ilove», and this ìndilbncì fotntthing lio. d near hım. We were unablt Signor, to draw from hun any further explanation iecolleciion renewed his delirium, and he began to howl and mutter with dn unintelligibleharfhnels, which we »tie convinced mult alarm the houfehold lt was in vain we attempted to Another
his (bricks, they only became the flror 5 er his outrages were thofe of a maniac, and we foon agreed that though it were practic ble to carry him off, we fhould but fave an involuntary accufer, as m his frenzy he knew not w hat he faid the danger were equally threaten ng in caft widbinlontd him in our difpair, wc relilvedhi hf could not be other thin our enemy in prekrtnc to Ids I idden mentis, vve therefore c fl hım from a w indivi ot d giddy height, mil fhivired his bin s on the pneniint below Such, η ι w ıs the nccefldry end ol Ger- v I , t 1 İneli ι the caule that his fpirit n w h u ni thi cilik ' An 1 h iw c i ne it that his body did n t kad t v our detection '' aiked Henri, who was forcly troubled with the fimi¬ lanty of his ow n danger to that Micho defenbed " 1 hat I cannot fatisfactonly anfwer," returned tht latter " 1 he death of Ger- i ife was afcnbed to the defpair of unfuc vol m L
cefsful guilt, for his dagger found in the chamber of Julian bore accufation againft him But whether the Conte were really unlearned in the part we took in the at tempt, or backward to avow his know¬ ledge, left curiofity would explore ihc way through which it camı , 1 anı unable to refolve ( ettam it i» my ci inra It» have fince i Hen iallly oil, liilotnueli that I hive long full tele t f mie con¬ trivance at the bottom of thefe e. fptrtte fervices, to which they were f ( míen¬ la ly appointed Save two or three who have deftrted, I am the lolt luruv r " And whit were your inJueeiiicn s to remain '" " Aflurance of my ability tofurmotmt any peril to which they might appoint me , attachment to lome damfel» of the family , preference to the place , antl, flronger th m all thele, а fecret infatuation that 1 Ihould fome ome οι other creel my fortune with the wrecks ofthat о the tyrant. Ilus Uitwas my motivi
for conferring with you. Were I to prefer to the inquifition an accufation of Julian for unnatural knowledge, driä as that tribunal is, backward would it be to offend one fo renowned, on the im¬ peä hmcnt of one fo mein \ our nobihtv, birth and demefiie, are what wtre wanting to patronne nit " \ dawn ot Mieho's project enlivened Hi in, who, earned to comprehend the wl lc, eordmgly qutltioned lum He loon leu nut that, confaou» Jus former ri un 1 t tecul in m were too flight, Micho hid artfully contributed towards the like attempt, in Inpe that the like ν ι ulti be the ei nlequtntes If fuch were th cite, an inquifitional enoutry mi,lit be lehed on Ilı» election to the Ieri tee, which moll ol ill he had reafon 10 dread, was the reafon of his preci- I it iney in unfoldino- the aioretold ii rrible fad Otherwife he confidered that the laenlice ot one poor wretch was sLlolutely neceffary, and would have L ι
retained the difheartening truth unk.no» я to all, till it were confirmed by the ex¬ pected teflimony bc)ond dilcredit It was his intention then to difcovcr all he knew to Henri, and mfpire him with renewed confidence m the power of the church. Ihus had ht preinedit ittel α diilinguifhed and profitable part K r himfelf Л double choice пои was offend n Henri, an immeiha с appeal to the in· quifition, or to prefeneit foi a rei urte in cafe of the failure of his efiort to (lay Julian. As Micho faid, in the firil inflance the evidence would be uu- perfeu, but then, on the other fide, [he vattnets of the peril was appalling nit withfbnding its many advantages in thefe reflections his mind arr nged the circumftances obvious on oll er fidt. and he demanded of Micho, If it really were his confidence that t e fpirit t i Gervafe haunted the caftle ' The anfwer was folunnly affirmative
' I haie feen it, ' added he, " perform fcts to which thole ot no man, no not esen ot Julian lumlelt cu ra com [jiiltn lnngiiic Si 0 nor, tl e utmoll ι man like the С ι ntc can do, ami Ц) it the beine; that lurpalle» htm can be mmil ' 1 Icuri was η sw cune to his ri ht feules, aud he fpoke of Julian is he de. ferie 1 Micho ci ntinued, " A ilcihlcis fkelett n is the poor remainder of Ger- vale's corpfe, which w ıs i^noininiouily enetilin ilto a branch of one of the olive trees beneath the noi them turret ' "Hi' interrupted Hcnn " 'i ou remind mc that Rodranl mentioned u s cultoinar) difappearance Irom th it fpot " With truth, adjoined Micho , " and is notti at a conlirmation fufhcient to conlound the incredulous 1 onnerl), indeed, we know that there was a fub- lerranean outlet, commencing from an obfeure dell in the garden, by which the 1 cfi»ged inijjht fally forth I lirough it L 3
Julian privately entered on the lad day of the old Conte's lift, and bv the fame way, we, his followers, were и 'triu'td to lurp ife the unwary caftle 1 ut, il n ; tune palt, ihat pafla/c was thokid up by t he foundations of fome ne w buihlin , whith form an angle of the Conte's lodgings. " I cainot dtfcrtbe what 1 ful," fud Htnn , " but it Itnkes me that my ate and this phantom are drangely allied. Were it prefent, methinks 1 could fpeak to it." " Ch, I would not for a univerfe ' ' cried Micho. " for fure my words would change to confuming thunder "HuftT 1 " whifpered the Chevalier after a Hilly pault, he aiked Muho, II fe mit'mg had not rudled by thtm ? Micho'» .mili r was unintelligible, hu v bung intercepted bv his teeth , ι and, wluch lhe Chevalier had , was mo It with damp jurfpiri , and his pulle was inditlinguilhatih·
trom the general ague of his flelh. Henri in the moment became afpen like, for directing his eyes, he at once was ac¬ quainted with his comrades terror and his own rum the vifion of lhe pcdce- lefs Gervafe ftood between them and the etnliralure, awful in darknels, and eliituriiuijT the atr with it, unlettled plumig Had the contrary fpeeheles of heaven and hell difel >ie 1 theuiielvcs on either hand, they would have failed to unfix the flare of Henri's limiting eyes from this tremendous appari ion Hand m hand with Micho he mechani¬ cal l·. fhrunk backward, till he fullered a fevere concuffion againft the llmty wall. I Ins and a movement of approach per- eeptible on the part ot the apparition, allnghted Henri to an effort of flight, and by а fingle itruggle he difengaged himfelf from his companion As he ftaggered over the body of the fictitious Raulin, which thwarted the entrv, he was frozen by a long lingering groan, in 4
which the unlucky Miel о I re itheil 11 latt lhe next inflant he m im 1 I own death was foreboded 1 ) ť e r itti ι of armour, and he rulhed agunfl th door , burflmg it opm, he hur id through the mutineers, v. ho,al mned pr portion iblv to their ignoratici fpeedily difperfed Henri flopped tot until he reached his cha nbtr, wherein he 1 arncaded himfelf but his principal ti tmentor could not be excluded, it being re flection, which revived the horrors he had undergone No ghmpfe of comfort was vif bk , foi hope ltfelf was eel pfed by myflcrv, nunele, and terror tie beings of the grave feemed to fi^,ht the battles of |uhau, and agamft fuch, art or force were alike inefleíluil Uncertainty urged him abroad the next morning he | afled through the neighbouring courts without occurrence or obferv ation to infpirit or deprefs him , but a dreadful fpectacle awaited hırı ш
another part of the caille, where in an cxtcnfive area were dif| la)ed the hcad- lefs corfes of the mutineers furrounded bv crowds of tile band and houlehold. Henri's defpair was fo great, that in its firil paro\)ims he was about to cait hiinfeli headlciig int > anaqucducl, which fupplied the caille loitunatelv, this u ei с oled, and us expreflions cleaped n iet , die it would haie proud lels d lie eilt to ci nqucr his own feelings thin others' curt in) In α filtering vi iet, he iciituicd toenqi ire, \\ tut were the cumes π puled to the Inderer» ? It и ts minerei!, İh it ¡hev b tibaroufly had niurd 'td m ancient iuleiier of the bind — Muli , and t nc if their own corn¬ ia к — Kutiin limn' ftirp ile was le trui) Id., in til le ılı n his i rr, and hır llv (ould he „tther e roııury to aft. further lie w„s ι Id tint tluy had flat , th Ь idles int ι n 1 11 ι ivern , and hb mt π i ml aditeti 1 i at lhe deed was as un ice juu alie as it was Пюеюпд. L 5
The mode of their deteclion he was unable to defcnbe, as he only knew what indeed he had witnefled, which was trur unexpefted fcizurc in the various parts of tht callle, and mllant decapitation without permifhon to utter a word of deftin t lur lur her intelli¬ gence he relerrt 1 iht Chev htr to tht executioners with whom Henri w is not in the lealt inclined to tonununc, when he defcried thtm to be thoft ruffi ins from whom Micho had warned hnn, as they were fuppofed to be in the con¬ fidente ot [uhan anothtr proof ot their diftinctton was the fear in which thty »ere beheld by thur ftllows, fo that the man provided fir his own curiofity at the lame time he utored the Chevalier's The word was hardly more to be dreaded than the torture of fufpence , and could Henr have gained an eafy admiffion to the Conte s chamber, he would boldly have entered it but his former hopes and prolpecls had fwoln
his deportment to fuch prefumptuous mfolence, that Julian had lor fome time cut fhort their familiar intercourfe, and repulfed him with dignified referve. Ile paced the ramparts, widful for the important interview, but the Conte was invilible throughout the anxious day In the evening Henri attempted the .apartments of bin η a with a refolution that could but be openly combated She hltened to his dory with wonder, and to its catadrophe with forrow, but his fubfequent liberty revived forne fpirit ot hope, and Henri partaking it, mentioned the deceafed Nhcho s project, at the lame tirr^ adjuring her to avow if ever an idea of her hufband s preternatural knowledge had anfen in her mmd She folemnly replied, That it w ould be vanity to give a confufed fufpicion that haunted her fancy the mem ot fuch an idea, but that moft certainly her cohabiution with the Cont had been difeon'tnucd on account of an indefcribable redleimefs
the had been unable to endure in their nocturnal intimities Henri emitted an exclamation of joy and aftonilhment, and earnefllybefought her to reconluler if any particular circumdance had ·. any time come to her knowledge w lit etrom might be inferred more than mere con¬ jecture None of importance lived in her memory , but (he obfei ved, Ί hat as the expreflions of Julian s afpeft were fo unlike any fhe ever had feen, the emo tıons of his mind mull be equally un¬ common , and that the flaming convul¬ fions of his cy es, when they gazed on the vacant air, were oftentimes fuch as ex- orcifts pronounced to charactcnfe a com¬ munion with the beings of immortality To thefe remarks I 'enn added the adv en¬ ture of the crois, which hail fignahfed his original meeting with Julian but the preceding difappomtment was too frightful fo early to give way to other purpofes Befides, the very fojnd ition of their new hopes threatened to bury
them m deltruâton , for were Juhan ca¬ pable oí the luperlattve guilt of which thty wiflW to impeach hnn, how was it poflible their machinal ions could efcape him. 1 hisconfideration di quie eilHenn; and 1 anna, ftarful of his 1 aekwardnefs, endeavoured to iveiken his dread of Ju¬ lian s pi wir witliiut cooling his de¬ pene' net 1.11 lis 1, imnului fo hap- pilv flit ptrftéttd hu defign, that Henri cv e n undertook to v entui e. to afcertain the reality or the ìnipoi tion ot the lpectre of Gen ile Intoxicated wuh temerity and wine, he quitted the artful Lanna, aiiel, without loitering, went towards his own 1 i.igmgs. It was tht i'ctp of the mi,ht, and every domJl e m ik w ıs huíhed V\ hen he palled along tl e gtlliry, which ran about tht nid bit I all, dtlcnbedby Claudio to open on the g irdens, а lingering lound, rendered uuintelh n ible by the itormy fhnllnef s of the winds, arole from among the tolumns that compofed the fubftruc-
tion of the gallery. It came beneath the fpot where Henri was nvetted by terror and attention, precifely as the neigh¬ bouring clock chimetl and tolled the hour that knell» the death of α il iv , and the roaring undulations yet flioi к the belfrey, and dealened the e irs if the Chevaher,when In, cafual ¡,1 nu с ton aids the vcftibule Lit on ι till Injure that glided outwards Its pallide vv is fo in ftantaneous, that to the then tene ι of his thoughts might be afertbed his con¬ ception of its refembbnee to the fpirit of Gervafe, but, earned to fattsly his· tremulous curiofity, he ran to the vv in- dows, and looked tlirough the central one, which commanded the lawn before the veftibule. The Gothic tbicknefs ol the painted glafs, and the inteilunir darknefs without, at firil difappomted his hopes, but palling his eyes to and fro, he at length fixed them on a large pool, that was fituated nearly beneath the windows, through which the night.
lamps (hone, and fhed on its rippled waters a tapering width of Iparkhng light —the more admirable on account of the ambient gloom, brom the Iktrts of this gloom emerged and (lowly glided over the herv furface а fliadow, reprefentive ot the coloflal proportions ot the fpirit of Gervafe Satisfied that he was not mif- tikin, Henri hillilv i m on, refi lute to w iteli the cquivocil being, which he ri sped would m t e] ni the gardens before himl II dercenelcd into them hy а dilapi- d iteel biiţtrcls 1 his pro|ectcd from the viili e ele to his clumber, whciefrom In ilei u α ρ ur of pr ned (tilli ttos, he e niti ulli lowered luinfclt down. fhe temped, vv'neh hid fermented fince the evening, was now begun in 1 oil vv thitnelerinps that rolled on the winds, md be! ire h с ul 1 get half-way to the fummer houfe Henri was fo en¬ tirely dtfeompofed by the elemental tur¬ bulence, tint he turned afide to take flielter in an artificial cavern, that was
fee ped into a mafs of granite, to con¬ clude by an intique wiltlntf» iht profpect up the chief vifla lhe ıı iutii f the cavern was fkirtcel hy cvprellts thickly roo ed in dudu u dui rıltr , and thele, beat on by the iuiious wind , inclined then lup¡ile dem» lo e. mpk elv ithwart the entrance, that Henri it hrll vv s per¬ plexed to dilti ver it, and vi hen lodged was molil ν incilini in dirkml» 1 lie uni nifi rt lbleiitfs 1 1 li uiie'ition was ill ad ipted to encourue hım, and the terrors of the e'ements wtrt frijol 'lully relative to lhe . 'jett ol his purl it In the blaft ,whithiun 0 tlm u, h the cran¬ nies 1 1 ihe io к, nul Iroin lhe mouths of the quiily weeds, he cmecitul l voice of warn n, I in hi, | rtlu.nptit η , but he wis net detlel I to 1 ri.10 It belt re' ideal dtleour cements were fut planted by real ones Av Hty tit thunder rattled beneath ihe litav lis fo tieiiitntloufly haliti, ıh it the fut el ι n» ι f n ture flood at a paule, аь though devottd to the
powers of ikilruñion , the winds were niiiintiitdlly trineed , and the trees, ceaf- 111, to bem', ihltloltd tht portentou» 1) nti f Gin к 111 nearefl approach to tin ruelsil his concealment It came on in compamonflnpwith the (1 tin the lightning flaflied abovi fut- 1 hurtoufly, ds thout,h the firmament re¬ flected the ebulhti ms of hell, the jutchy clouds ftoopcd towards the earth denfe and black, as though they chai loted the demons of evil Htnn nothing doubted his neighbourhood to d preterhuman be¬ int, , yet did that aflurance, by (hewing hini how delpciate was his extremity, invigorate hnn lor an encounter ine¬ briated by the fumes of I anna's wine, he ma lly ^raípul his d t^^tr , but the awful h litnin ilarttd al mg tht blade, an J w remlim^ it into an titkucekU form, Ipht oft in Haiti s of glory tint fcrutimled the cavern, and bl ided his tyts Won. ihrfully lu efeiped eierv bodily inj iry not lo his mmd, half f ι envied by the
la'e incidents it prompted hnn to pro- ftrate and adore the being 1 1 mtraeulouPy defended But this ecftily r ilimd with the temped, which, as if litislitd with its chadi emtnt of his tenieritv, failed to a diftdiice In the fucceedmg mo¬ ment he vvas left alone, for the fibule quitted the cavern. Henri w ıs η ην at liberty to recede from his enterprtfe, but a (trance mf tuation urged htm to perftvere m it per¬ haps he thought that the peril he fafely had undergone could not be furpaffeif. Notwithd tuding the fheets of nm w hich fuddenly fell, to which thou n h he was indebted for the privacy ofhts own deps, he kept the figure in ey e till the ev entful fummer houfe cime to vitvv It thtn vanifhed, and the Chtvantr d ι ,.rej A bluifh dream of h,ht al ruptly flione agunftthe latticed wm I w u 1 duly brightened to a red and p v triu' illu mulatton, that poured on the n i hb ur¬ ing parterres lhe Clcvalur wis re-
aflured by the lyht, and α doztn İtride» bri ught hım t ) tht vtllibule, the anti- r . 1 is Wert d irk, tht mnermolt, in whith tht luck.ifs Conte had endured his 1 Λι vv is btnured by manly foot¬ marks, vv 1 h pointed to а cleft in the centre 1 1 tht flooring, wheiethrough art Ie а quivering li¡,ht that involved the celling in fnioke. It weakened while Hum approached , and by the time he afcert uned the myftery of a trap door, its lall ray lingered on the lowermoll tltp of d Ittep flight, which, indented in the natural rock, defcended to a drear fub- terr mtv He had not leifure to weigh tl t dinger in perfifling on, or his deci- fion 1111 ! t have come too late as it was, hi merely с ulii lee to defeend without I η nil rill Iv he vmtured to pe¬ nmate tht pnvitiis of а lone building, 1 1 ν hi h the frelh t otmarks above cu- lente I I me ι ne was preceding hun , ml uhu e « lil tint ene bc but Juhan or
lus areni, ıs ılıı кич« f the piohibitri' porti! »iu ш 1 isj ι 111/ 1 11 Henri ji (I t, nul il ι 1 olt mı tını* enough to bıllıl t 1 l rull İte „IllllJ r e , and making it his benőn, h I AU g un¬ cii on the bearer boma he cuie 111 fight of hım, he reeogııı 1 th fictie acıoutrcd as bel u , m I ble | ш |K Henri was then ware of lhe ciak ol Ju han, the deteflion of whole gh iftly 1111- pofition at once folved the dilin ılı n of Raulin and Micho his torch li^ht he conjectured to be kindled bya ihemtia! compofition. Still his reverence for Ju¬ lian was little abated from what he fad felt for him as α fpečtre, for in follow¬ ing the man who dared to trouble the night with Jpimual mockery, his İtride involuntarily fliortened Ihus was one fuperflitii n funj lanted by another, for could an errand be hi neil in that noxious hour into the entrails ot the earth ? was a qutliion Henri otu.11
ftarted, and each time negatived his imagination prilunied Joli ni ab sut to en¬ act fonie di the lic.il vviiehery that necef- fitated unhalloiied lohtude. ì et could not this frightíul fuppolition app il hım back aiţain the lenijtii and unric u y of а dark rétrogradation wis little I İs ı'ıf- torıııiıl ible than to pri eeeıl bellile,i mid he furine the honors he nuj t vviin Is, he hoped to till ι t ile that IlıouıJ amu.e the moft toipiil Member ol ihe Inqui- f'linl Iiibunil lul| η m 1 bv this reflectie η, he f. (Ter¬ ed lunile Η tobe induced through thi· ν uil e I e\c nations m rocks fuml ir 'о ι hoh m vil ι Ί he li ul Leen nnpriloncil ; until Juli m It ipped, and fluck his torch ipiie,!tly m α cievne in ine ground, placi ig beiid it α bra/en sclTcl, which Henri's tanév mı nulled to а cauldron filled with the hells ind roots rcquilttc to work the lpell 1 his velici he doubt¬ lefs had taken up in his paJage through
the fummer-houfe, for 1' could not have efcaped unnoticed by Henri when they were together in the cavern Julian began to remove the ponderous fafteninr,s of 1 door , anil Hum, imme¬ diately on hearing the clatter n" fa fahen bar, fuľpeíled that he 1 tint to fcclude himlilt in one tl t e leeret chambers with \ 1 ah the | laci il un I ed Such α dili nit in 1 full cunt rei fon to dread , vnd he 11111111 oulli ap¬ proached Iulian, the bitter to ík 1 n what he w ι ainut lbs lootfall betr i) eil hım, and hardi) h id he time t ι al f 1 ei belind a malin с colunia, lef ri 1 I ι , alarmed Iro nI s I ib ur, ııı I t ι p 1 ι torch, and fli it pail hun 111 errili^ pur fuir Hin 1 s ht art iluturtil ni lcis, fi 1 he thought himfelf fırftkcn to ıncvtrı cable darknels , but from this (hoikin" idea he was recovered lv а e limmering of light, that quivcrid through α door half opened by Julian beneath an oblique
archway. Henri's curiofity was pain¬ fully carnelt to fcrutuule the my (tenes beyond this door, jud foon as Julian's footfteps fainted on the ear, he ¡nithtd it open with α hand too dclperate to be Cl Itllllls. lt muely difilo r eJ a circular dun¬ geon, m no wilt more rtinarkabb than that w In rein himltlt hid fpent lome elejieteil Imitis , a fimilar lamp was lulp ι hil tının the luuf, which r.iysbut I'ltnlv peiieti u J tlie oble ure ruertes ·' it .Ι ι imul its rutiinilta. At lirit he filili .1 aminul wuh liiue'l dil.ippoint- nieiit , 1 ui a more acute iiifptclion dif. i.ivireil in one ol the recedes d retem¬ blante to the human lonu, huddled in the pie. e mul remnants of а mattrefs. His uillantancius ennieption was ad- vtrlt to Lanni, fır ι lro/t his afftcìion to her. She is an ufurper, thought he; I have found out the tomb of her yet hun, tither. He fhuddered, and vias bound to the .pt t , bu eon ρ ilhon g»vc
way to the eminence of horror as the re¬ collection ftarted in him, that an human carcafe is an ingredient eflential to fome magical compofitioiu. Although no fetid llcnch evidenced the mortality ol the body, yet his fenfts ν ere not iiuiif- fended ; and he further was aflured in his apprehenfion by the unfdvourable- nefs of the place to the r c pof j of the aged, and more partitutaily by the noilc Julian had tai'ltd at the tntry, whieh ι fiore times over wa, lufînıınt to ihltuib any fenfibie perfon. '1 he pally . f terr. r yet fliiv ered through lib hinbs, when a brighter light glittered on the paiement »t his feet than vv.is emitted by the met· hanging lamp: the imperial trt.ul nl Julian then v.. ь audible ixpieì.mt ita feene furpafliiig 'he utmofl pieturings ol fancy, Henn flirou.liil lumielf within tile favourable duťkinefs of a cav itv, whence he could lee without hazard of bting feen. Julian came in with looks of keen
furpnfe , he took up m empty vefľel th it was in the dungeon, imi re] ic lit bv the one he hal brouirht , then Ih oline, fierce glances on the mo unlets figui-, in accents of fur) thit nullit hive untonibed the dead, he b t h it ci forth Io the ifbnifhmcnt t II un, a meagre (li ipe, fiai ting as fr > ıı ι tamined I tlıırgı, re íred its alinoli flcflilefs and 1} inted limbs ajanut he flint) rugged I t f thi w ill, when ııprı 0 lıı, preletu ıı through the ^1 un ol tlie ret ef, ore lhe evidence ot in аррап ion than ft a bodied nim \g un Larina loft the t hc\ tiler's heart,while her itone bearteli hi lb mil fpuimd lu fo Itv juls tie hutler) wretch, ti whom he exhibit id ilpeels ot various meanings, mcon eeiv ible as they were frightful a paufe, eniplo)cd in thefe fienilly diiloitions ol feature, haraffed the foul of Henri, who loon had caule to deplore the fcieruy of his own fate, as Julian retired, anu left him a fellow to the care-thinned vol in. u
tenant of this comfortlcf» confinement boi n as ihc dtp» ol the receding tyrant ceafed to babble through the fubterra¬ nean my Herses, Henri ventured from his et net ilinti t Imigiuation contrafled the (. nt h 1 loft mo in the luppy and ¡,ΐιπου» tl vs of his dipinti, vitli the enervated and leareely anima ed l«.elet n that novi was devouring with thanklul appetite the fcanty diet accorded hnn by the black ufurper ot thofe detnefues, on which fo often he had leaded the un¬ friended and the moncylefs he who had meekened his ft udal dtfpotifm by the gentlenefs of his own Ie ntiments, the munificent and the jull, now evidently prolonged an mconfolable extdt nee on the charity of a creature, tainted by imputations of guilt worfe than an ordinary criminal could deferve How barbarous muli his fuffermgs have been' how iniquitous his períécutors ' Henri's heart contracted with the latter idea, and bu lips difpofed themfelves for the
under modulations ol comfort, but f > new were thty 1 1 tht ears he aJdit kJ, that, joined with the abı uptntfs ot hi. appearance, tlie.y overcanit the linter ble old man, w hoft terr irs brol tht lılenet of his foul in a weak İlinek that cıoııı- panıed hı> downfall ini li e Loathlome ıs »ere the. h 11 111 the Ikın of the wretch, Herri ould n it ue- ilme from aflıltıng him Itili, whin he raiftd him from the ¡,r mil hi lands d nitd their office , h r 1 umne lo lud bared the bones ot the ( ont , th it the moft caretul touch conceived the dil^ult ot я dilTtcti 111. Henri, as he lull knelt, r lid the fullerer's head on his knei, arid turned hrs fice upwards, tht better to recover hun from the fwoon In α moment afterwards the vviek of the lamp, dimly confumed to а cinder, fell, and lett the flame to taper with rekindled bn 0 htnefs. Henri was dividing the malted trelies of his hair, which was glued by the (lime m 2
of reptiles on his face, juft as the ligt* uneli udcd its features, and develtped a uuth that revolutiomfed his feelings from humane fympathv to filial poignancy. Гну to the С nte withdrew to ihe grave, ν hieb, in r ihtv, long had lepulehrcd htm İletin was al ve ti more evqil fitt с irts , it was hi f tthtr ht bort — Ins faihtr, gie vv n grey lioin hardfliip— who had lhared with hinililf lhe enmity il Julian , ai d, und ittd ot t ıs rank, lingered a dreary fufptnfitn of every comfort m the burrows of а robber, an unknown, а,а —l»ngu gewants thewon!. What enfued this uittreding diftovery is eafuy conceived lhe Marquis did not long continue in the nultake that it was other than his living fon ht bthelil, for reciprocal communications elucidated the guileful villainy ol Juhan , and Claudio was fully vindicated by the teftimony of him as whofe murderer he had been condemned It appeared by the confeflions of the Marquis, I hat, de
prived of all fortitude bv the imarın u y death of Henri, he hul lullend 1 ikil io be enticed by Juliin hrll to Genr ι, and fubfequenily to the < lille di 1 1 ıl- eıno (Λ. Ciucile luv he ρ bhc 'y embırVıl on ι tempoi ly ev urlu ıı, rec inmended by nis tre le ι -Oils h )il, wit Ie lnrchiie,s drowned 1 nu in a deep tl n,y tv the ttreng lupe r lies they t 'elle. 1 i j lisi d, md, ııı the duik ri the evei 11)5 1 í tlie fune d iy , 1 rouant lu 11 ι u iteli b ek to recover his knfeS 11 tile lililí lille he lllll been maile topine 111 iur lince lhole lurelu ^s Henri gueffed to be the 1 1 1 e confidenti I wretches ol w nom much airea ly has been bid , and to tliem dune the im¬ murement of his lather coulj be 1 now 11, or it mutt hive bien communicated to him by thole with «hum he inutinoufty hud been concerned it feemed that the farce of the Marquis's departure was fo perfectly afled, as to deceive all whom it was intended to deceive 1 lie. latter m ^
concluded with a lamen able detail of the treatment he had experienced I iving m the fufiocating corruption of his own feces, vvhiih feluom weie re moved , Ins tattered g rnients in xon- tminl dripping Iron the humidity that trickled down the fides, or lell irom the r of in fil il drops on Ills un] Г ttCfet! 1 α Ι , »η ι li ι lì ti I nn trels he ν t ıth, I ılv et il aft t v el ι , ııtarlv t ι 1 e tt ι fe o li lin bs h tl 1 июни I r nnpnefs , erwated in 1 » 1 i le» il h ai el 1 arnig 1) in , tin» 1 ης r hunn, f vvlith t h lemmet funie ited the wrath e ľ lit in, chit v le w s fuipriftt! att e κ ι animent ot tie Marepus m h mentii n e t 1 ι ' 1 was tiu , tha lo o t ti as 1 ν is lleeellltated lo utter th t odu us η ne, his tt ncue laltert ' Ι ınpa- tht icilly with the tremulou i s of hi» heart dill no aetiuionv accented its pr - nui eı t i t tiller tini a ingle matiieina Лес л , it pi ut lv fetlings mı r
poignant than deteltdtion debilitated the powers ot his utterance Henri s Hory cculd ι ot boaft ot this forbenruit , as ht w v it th. Iiitklu' rtlliants· Indiei, tonlum» how nounous 'и itt ons Wtle. to me pr ııd prıııti|l<s ol lis luhu, lit wds ci ehil tu ıkın them to tilt tni ute¬ li ut il I t 'i.k iu n 1 lus t ι, 1, ι ι ι d ııı. i i h. Is and mif tprtt nt ti ι , thit η util hun írót i nm moi t lu us ııı ııı nu ri han tuit ol I 11 lhe. anu ut Mirqii s comyilctily w i pi jiidm 1, md co il 1 ht Invi Ut work tır 1 1 li ııı, ht vv iki have .blini-rul hım ihe tempt r md intention tl ıkllroyer ul tht uulottiite ol nis unfufpicious fon I wo or three ungu mied tjieul itions pnucffcd Henri of lus htlicrs thoughts, and he ventured an inquiry of vvl а hail rendered them the objecl, 11 lo rcknt- lefs а pirfttution Immediately on ihe queition, tile dfptci of the Mdrqub bo¬ ld 4
came as diflorted from terror as Julian'« < İten had been from fury , pruenting to Hinn the characters of an injunflion to everlaftmg filence on that head, unlef« he preferred, as really threatened to be the caft, to confign his father to an in- liant grave. Ί his was conclufive , fo was Henri left to his own conjeflun, tl at an enmity unprovoked by hn liilt intill bi infieriti 1 It 1 1 Iu fuller How ver, there it U was much to un¬ fold, exclufive of ıhı mighty origin lo ìnfcrutably concealed, Julian's revenge, or démonian fpirit of cuifelifs hate, not being vulgarly barren, for, from time to tune, he had obliged the Marquis to fubfenbe his name, and alfix his figna ture to papers tint impowered lhe pof- fclfor as by his delegation, to receive an exorbitant proportion of hi» revenue In this craft was perceptible [o deep a laid plan to defpoil the lord and his heir by repeated extortions, that а fliallovv mind might le mduced to prom unce
avance to be the chief incentive to Julian s foreatled bafenefles But fuch could be the jud rmuit of one only who nev ei hul w mullid hım , tor his imperial mien evidenced the lu<Ji- wiought iublmutv of hu (oul to be in¬ flexible to baltniile» ot pail < n, though ıdoptıve ul tholi arts hy w huh th. technos ol hi» villnis inull punlully could be ννηιης. AI'er their iirit ti.inlports anıl ciirii- lıtııs were ailuageil, Uuin comnienied an aılıve rcfeareh for fonu favourable outlet , winch lonılmlı i in ι lu dcfp.ii- dmt conviction, th tt ι Iı ipe ι efe nu. piflibli, iiiilef» ailiitid hy fonie uncom¬ mon el ame lhe firii hours of hurcol ιραηιοηίΐιιρ wtre chi end bv this elimiin, which ap¬ peared to them m its pro) er h,ht, after а vilit ition by Julian. He came on his ulual errand, wh ch he aitcd fiercely as before, unoblervam of Henri, who flunk away to hi» original concealment. An· M 5
Other trial to force the door, tftrou 1i «hich It* reti id, was inutil« аз tefere rlsfaiknin-rs v e e al í lately infra ible, nor feemed here he rciiiotelt hkeliliiod that art could weaken them wuh fo much ikill thev were confuted Ihus acquainted with the horrors of their fituation, the chance that had brought them together was bitterly lamented by both Hcnn, naturally impilici« of reftramt was efpecully f > ata juncture wben he conceived himfelf to be on the point of aftoniftung the world by lus accufaticflu and difcoi enes but how may be exprejTed the dittradion •f his wonder, when lnjomed by the Marquis never to purfue the plan αϊ ready mcthodifed, nor to aft, or even imagine, a tuture moleftauon of Julian ; The heart of the youth palpitated from remeiabrancc of what he had done too «ffaieuly for thofe cucuniitances longer Ú be concealer* and he uedetitood ttom tht lagosa*, of hia paternal auditor,
how great was the peni he had incurred. Though apprehenfion and alarm racked the reflétions of his brain, he was often on tht pi mt of giving the latter utterance, which would eertunly have been tht tafe, had he polfefe 1 the facility ot ечртеПшп Then how vv luid this credulous lather have felr, when itn- penoufly challenged to develi pe the myílem us motives of his nijunctu us, and fubmit them to tht juduivnt of Ins fon, who, as ycr, coni d red ıhcın to be no worthier flun the d ıitarılly brood of a broken fpirit, bale in the nitlvei, and unappropnate t»i tie reltiitu utt his owa dormir ? I uekily, the unhappy Marquis efcıjıed the avo·* a! of thefe fentnuent», which w luid hi -е over- whtlmed hıra with alilidion, -nd Henri's perpltvitv ind ınlıgnıı n it future ^тиагюпз were iafüy fvv allowed up by prefenc horrors. In dtfpire of all hu rautron, he faw «Mnictf each tune nearer a discovery by
Julun, whofe allowance to his father be· ïrg too fianty to fruity a double appe¬ tite, nude him, 111 the delj-cratum of hu hunger, al nod inilnlereiit to a detec¬ tion 1 he cot i itetnetit ι ί α few day s traced its h in'tl ips fo viliül; on his per¬ fon that the Mtrqtus could not con¬ demn, though he chid, the defpair that incited him to projtct an allanit on Ju¬ lian, when next he came. But w hen he perceived him apparently с irneft in lo piefutnptuous а defign, whetting the dilletto he had brought, and ftudying thrufts, he fenoufly befought hnn to re- hnquifh his temerity, and deltroy hb weapon ' But Henri retuled compliance, m anger to be denied the confidence of his father, before whom he unduttfully perfidul in his unreafonable geftures and boafts. While the haplefs Marquis was pa¬ thetically deploring Ins difobedience, the audible approach of Julian appalled both father and fon. The former drooped on
the pav ement, faint with difregarded cn- treitv, whilft the latter, weakened in courage at the critical moment, retreat¬ ed, but with figns of deadly refolution, to the cavity When |uhan defcried the Marquis in forrovvful 1 ngth along the earth, he fud¬ denly Hopped with his countenance averted from Henri, who in his att*. tude read uncommon emotion A hol¬ low fij^h from ihe proftrate mourner re¬ covered him from his mifapprehenfion, and he placed the lood on the ground, with motions indicative of indignation at his own feelings I his was not a mo¬ ment propitious to the fuit of the Mar quis, who, inconfiderate to aught that unconcerned the life ot his fon, fo fure to be forfeited by his ralhnefs, took an imploring hold of the fafh that begirt the loins of his tyrant, to whom he raifed his blood Ihot eyes, dim in tearful an¬ guilh , at the fame time, addreffing the languageof entreaty in faltering enfeebled
tones that reached Henri in dolor us mdtltmcl murraunngs. An audible ex¬ clamation, " Oh ' pity t pity '* reached bis ears, and (hook his heart with mán, nam vibration» u the. ibifement of his father, whom he heard lo tei minate his melancholy beleeching He,whomhe petitioned,feemedto have been call in fome obdurate mould, un- teinpercd with mild ingredients, fo \nvaz mgly had he at will the mott terrible di play of thofe violent feehngs, by which the parlions, more Irequendy than the Heart, are arçıta ed ' Piry " re-echoed the contemptuous cadences of his voice " Pity ' and for thee '" and as he fpake, he fcowled from his proud pre eminence on the lowly fupplunt " lor thee ' he thrilling accents unnerved the limbs of the Marquis, who r^lapfcd on the ground, while Henry rehxed the ìe- vengeful clench ot Uis ftilletto. Juhan s darkened exterior rebuffed the claims of mitery, more ftaaliy than a*.
vuice which hoarltlv laid " AJdrefs the fttinrs that pilkavv thee , lor hard as thev are is mv heart to thee It в not mv fault thou deleri eft no better lm- pei dm.; over the Marquis, he proceeded in hurried tones, as recapitulating cir- cumllances unnaturally lainih ir to them both , but not a word could the curious tar of Henri underltand, for fuch wa» their tnoultrous import, that echo wa» allnghted from her function He faw his I uber writhe like the tortured fuf- terer of a lurgical ìnufioa , but on Ju¬ lt in h iman fpecııtatıon dared not dwell. the evil t f his fpeech was charactered by drong and variou» geftures which ap¬ propriated the magnine proportions of his foi m to their filent eloqoeu e Henri fhuddered, and more when Ju¬ lian, receding ол ample dride, prefented a countenance I ell flufheel above the pictumigs of imagination. The venom of his fpint feemed apt to fpirt through every pore, and ehffulc its rancorous af- pcrfion» hi» body palltomtcly fluvered ι
white his already gigantic limbs appeared to fhoot anew, until they furmounted thj extreme of human height 1 he light died on his dieadlul transfiguration, anj left him trulya den on of darknefs Henri was congealed mto an attitude of falcına tion, and fcarttly could he filence the fhriek of Ins terrors thev ıhımı ed Im eyes, and deafened his ens to wh it fur ther pafled between Iulian and the Mar¬ quis. At length the ret ι mof filence fome what reaflured hım, fir wiljly Anking his forehead, he looked with freiheiuJ light.and rejoiccdat the ablence ol |uh in. Soon as Henri could recover from tl г effects of this fcene, he moved to lus f . ther, who dill lay along the , round Among the Marquis's feelings, vv luth wereexqurfitelypoignant,vvas the meant r one ot difappomtment in his ex|>c¿>atioa that Julian, in the courfe of his palhona e upbraiding, would have revealed the myftic truths, unconle jus of an ovei. hearer in Henri, whom they were the fitteti calculated to transfix wuh awe and
liirbearance However, the latter being fallen from his boafts, the monotony of their imprifonment was uninterrupted by repetitions of the like. The interval of the vifitations of Ju¬ lian, which had feldom exceeded three days, was prolonged to the fourth after his recent appearance Ui ijipeafable hunger was the late of the melancholy ρ ir throughout that iiiouinlul day, which was fucceeded by one, m win h ihey felt their utmolt experience or idea of nufery to be outdone Tace to face they fat, but at an uufociable diftance, for kindred affection was lod in felf tor¬ ture, their bowels were gnawed by fa¬ mine, th ir minds were delolate of he pe, η η ι crumb of food remained, 01 nature mud hut vvitneffed her tendered alto. ctated el ildren m heart bleedtnţ, coliteli for α pi ir morie], ne t α half hour's refpitc troni in pending death As h n n as Henri could drink deep cr.u¿hts ol water, he mocked his Ilo»
mach with imaginary fudenance ; buc when the vedel was erhaufted, and the feier of drought added to tht wringings of hu icer, his reafon partook of the η¬ ν u. es if his conflit ition Abandonei to ťtliiioui tranfports, he ic'ted a thoti- fnd e\t! in an is, and run » tht dun- t on with pıtı 1 fhrıels, Itto inmate t'e Ihım li 1 , or m It iht u uit) nau, but hei lııufıdcl m d ilot marticitlite nica ıs·, as with rávenni, frenA he drink h s tee h mto tlie llcíhy tendernefs of his arm, and fucked the blood through the laeet ited Ikın But this unnatural nnurifhmtnt ft iretly did more than crimfon the borders of his mouth , for hts domach rejected its loarh- fomentfs with painful retchings, that ex- haufted and weakened him to tears, ol which a fpint humbled thovver concluded his paroxyfms I or fome hours in the early morning of the fixth day (the third ot famine - * fo death-like a ftillnefs reigned ш the
dungeon, that an outward hltemr would hue apprehindul its woe worn tenants to be p ill relief No e\pcriment ot that luid was unde foi thepifljgts to the ilun n enn remamid ui tr id by |uhan , and by the wivinn ' h b lu ot ıhı unre- ırıııted lnitp within, were dirai) vifiblt t'u lulur and fin, who h tJ pif'ed the η Ί t in mute defpair ol hb innal 1 к Minier 1 ıılıd himfilt from the m ttreß whereon he long had flrctched τ t 1 pidemi Ιι π of fus impending fate, ini ii 11 ln Henri to юте lo hım. l'in nth, l'iitilileiiiigwuh the idea diat In pirtut wiíhul 10 bre itile his lall in lini univ, tınuıllnif'ly obeyed; and was t hl by the hmtin 0 Marqui , lhat hi 1 ul I ied not to depart lor the all- |ud nig tribunal, unlus it wire difbur- thined of that criminal fecrecy m whiih hmiftlf wis imphi ned w ıth Iulian Henri now he id this deci vr и юн with fielin n s little more 'han indirttin« to ir imi· ed, it w ıs no wonder that his ınterelt ш
other's concerns ihould bi chillid by his own anguilh, or that hi 'hould be thoughtlefs of what coi 'a adı 11 tage a future life, whii he w ıs hoj . Iels to furvıı e another day lhe ein tıons of the Marquis wen nidi crib d > bitter, bung a compile moa ut incut 1 and bodily agonies, and u w s wi ι much difficult) til u he firug hdtli u ι an exordium, though lan f u ι ι u ι í ternary to hım was products Li tK li jeâ, while the attentif Ilımı w llruck aghaíl with horror at tin i j nefi of that eternity, into which hi i- ther exprefled fo much repugnan« ι > be launched, lhat relucí mee implied an unaccountable diead of [uhin, bit his recovered breath enabled him to 11 lume the folution of thofe pir^lexitn , and he reminded Henri of an unioni. nately deformed )Outh, his rial but dil ai owed brother, Arnaud ln the ful Ί of a Catholic, the Marquis then con lefled, that that young man was not un
injured by him, on whom he naturally poflefftd tile molt abfolute claims. Added he, " Whatfoever were the wrongs he fulfered, 1 long fince have expiated the crime of their infliction. |uhan has amply revenged them |uhan, in whom the lpint ol Arn md his grown h Uile to my repok, fratricidal to thine. Ii is impuliti le that I fhould now outlive the fixih vear fince my nııicrv wound up tovv tul, tin wretched crifis Its lotiinienciiii nt wis incredible I was t ne nn nnng rep. ling in my chamber's jriiaiy, when my tufi acquaintance v i h the ninniler of vengeance fprung up in Ins brupr entr nice."—At this iniieal moment, pregnant with i dil- ciolure thretteinng to the wits ol either, d no ft around dillurbed even the ıleıfened tar of the Marquis, w hoft afpeä became diítrefsful from fear of Julian's approach and penetration into his laithlcls rcveahncnt But as the noife conţinutei long without his ap
ptarance, U ftruck tht better damını- nating organs of Henri is not at all to refemblt the echoes of footfttp At times it wa» not unhke the remote rumbling of thunder, then it would found more acute, or reach the ear in one enplofion 1 he terrors ol an earth- quake vifited the pruoners, ol whom the elder flunk beneath his mattrels, while the younger «as nvetted clofe to the doorway He who long hith brooded on lome favounte projeel, foregone much to lor- ward it, and tatted e irneft of its fuciel - fui naturi«, may (lightly conceive the fbock which the dilappcarance ol Henri gave to the diabolical hopes of Julian. All fear of his machinations, how ver dangerous they might be, was abforbed in darker ınterelt Actuated by an uiiac countable fiercenefs of hatred, he had fought to ruin that luckkf» youth both
m this world and the next lľhis relo- lution we have often obferved to with¬ hold hi» death dealing hand, vvlien ready to tall on tht inlolent head of Henri. lo further this, hi tutlcred himfelf to be ibuied with impunity, to become en- ompaflid by ifi ilhn ind even when |i vol ed to pelinih thtm, he fpared inur leader, and wlullt hishetn was 1 iiehetl by wrath, eoiidefeen led to act equne с illy, becaule he was vvifhful tint Henri II ould be lite to inunelh himfell in inexint ible criminality At the tune vvlien he was triumphing on the near confuinmation of bib views, lit duettéi! ıhı ıbfence of I lenn. Vain weit all hi, enejuines and refearches. I arım, being fulpıcıous of fuhan's iathomlefs craft, was mindful to conceal the plan to which herfelf had prompted Henn, who, die did not doubt, was fallen into the mares of her hulband. How totally the reality was unfufpeñed by Julian 1 for Henri s footmarks in the
fummer-houfe were confounded with his own, or the dungeon muft hav с inclofed a fcene unparalleled throughout tht world. Naturt efcaped her (hame , but the Conte, though for the prefent com¬ pletely baffled, treafured in his brealt an additional flore of torture lor the youth fhould he ever regam hun ln a very few davs after this circum¬ llance, a holt of troubles all lulled tht tranquillity of Julian, the more k a "m£ to his arrogante, on account of his prt judice that Henri airead) was an active enemy A İmali part), who had been detached on a diftant excurfion, reap¬ peared before tht time prefcnbeil fur their rtturn , fleeing batk 10 the tallit m a precipitate diforder, thai infringed their malter s flern injunction never to en- dangei its peace by fhowing it to be their afvlum Scarcely did the gates include thein before the treble force of their purfuers appeared at a fhort diftance '1 hey ga¿ed at the fpacioufnefs of the
walls with earned furpnfe, and for fome time were apparently occupied ш noting down obfervation» of their ftrength and conftruñion , they then colleftea their (tragglers, and (lowly retired between the mountains The fugitives were feverely puniihed by the directions of Juhan, whom they vainly endeavoured to mollify by a pitiable ftory of their inidiap in falling into an ambufcade He was made in¬ exorable by their difobedience, white threatened o mv olve him in fenous con- juences, for during the next three or I ur d n s, ν arious companies of dranger« were difcovered in the bufmefs of re- onnoitnng the Caftle and its vicinity the pcafa ltry hkewife jud at that time, fuddcnlv ceafed to bring their contn lutions to the gates, and though Julian, who alway s was prov ident for contingen¬ ts, had furcharged his magazines for the long fudenance of a great number of re¬ iner?, vet he were unwilling to feed on VOI I I s(
this rtlource Bung angry and indig¬ nant dt the defluii ol his valtals in their fealty, he ordtred preparation» to be made lor ftom mg the ttrntory, inten¬ tionally to ihallilc ihem by ixtortions ot thur deficiënties, with ean.elts of future punciuiluy. ihe morning lhat he approprn'td to this fenice, opened damp mil ln(,gv with (heeled exhalations from the lake. At an early hour the ct mpaiiit which were to accompany him, r to move in the directions lie had arranged, wire marfhalled in tht areas. f ıhıır pu. ul u /ards. Julian w as difpuifing command» to the feveral leaders, by whom he * is refpectfully furrounded, when, ι fteimng miracle' he was cleftnned by the loud difchargľ of a cannon, fo near as to ring its peals throughout the f ibric, while ite balt fhdtteied a turret that (hot upwards from a tower above the chief entrance, near the innermoft portal of which he was (tanding.
This diladtr de niv ely warned Julian from lus pn pofe, i it convinced hım that while h w ıs projecting inodes of external adı m his own roof was in а date ot fie, e Ilus hrll rep ir the compimcs re¬ re v cd as the Ι ι! of 11 it h , ac ι iilmijly thev ι in nel through ıs it lets m the ratilt urt there th dann * their ι liters, which viliblv was ín- it tei bv ile luliltqtitnt cvplodons, I nal a | un ılır .utjiour lhe rink«, iul mime li it ly il < < fl le. vv ıs m i II tt 1 t mm tion 'lit Ipıl vvht nee th t I hiet ılh td v as Hill t n tilei by the ţ, win h ul d the r ln mce to be veiled it random ,1 ι the 1 il s whidled itr nil mils eiror, md mt re roa- touniltd ι! an ι ijurcd llovvevtr, the tnn 0 vvi kıpı up wi nn thi r intervali lian tht I I if nuil an nadi, until the loann. I m t. \ ι id the thin ob- leunt/ of tlie vale anil j relented to the new а battenm, tram it artillery, m-
trenched fome way above the foot of ti t oppone mountain Iheir difeoviry was inflantly announced by thofe on the Watch, and the extremen pinnacles of the many barb cans wire forthwith thronged with the fpectatirs of this phenomenon, foaitomfbnigl) conltrucied in the compafs of a fummer s night Julian averted from fo unplcafint a profpečl, with the remark that its de¬ fenders hardly exceeded the number of thofe requifite to ferve the „uns , where- foie he ordered his officers to rejoin their companies without delay I Ie then difpatched fcouts abroad, and pcrfonally conducted a ftrong party through the fubterranean maze, fuppofed by Micho to be choked up by the ne ж erections, which, it now was feen, were conltruöed for the purpofe of concealing and Se¬ curing it. 'lhis pa ty fa lied forth be¬ neath the Iliade of the olive tiees that gren about the northern ramparts, and which fcreened them from the fury of
thefe, vvhof flank ihey neat lv turned 1 ie they were ilikovcred li that in nient Juhan beheld the irultration of th rtntciptife, for a rocket ftom the ndm e tr d butery el uted defence, an 1 Ii eminences of the mountain imine Ii t 1 h lire ι with uixiliar irim i t 1 ι me Γ ie he wis ι t it I sis ie I n ιι I il ti il thw s t r lv 1 in t t lisen ; ι e ι ti in tl it , r Ι t t th neture lie had e нее ved liojits oí more nupi rtn ι events, which quickly wert 11 ted by the pitcipitatt retreat of his n en, who very narrowly eluded the dan 'ir ot an interception Scarcely were they fhcltered before thofe unhappy fellows, who had lflued abroad as fcouts, reappeared in defperate flight from them by whom the caftle was inverted Very few re-entered the gates fome reached them only to expire on the thiefhotd , others were flain at diftances diftmft to the fight of their comrades on the walls ; ^3
fai wht ι they addrellei imploring gei¬ ti u-, iiiefľeclcal .. were their lupi li c t ons to their citen tes, who itilpateheil thtm with relent efs blows, depict ve t f their refolution to w ir;e a war of c\Ui linnatien againft this io loni undileuveied horili of robbers. lilt ttiierc.Ief'crnťii' ti lur (inutil l'ai fl e 'tl ι ., . , '., ι ν ι ce, .m' \ m ι Ve li- ι Ι te 1 , ened io il uv cu ι ; c f Ι ι ι Alıeady had lhe Contelui, while \o\ tv as the idea that enraged hnn, climbed the kftiell terrace near her cl amber, to contemplate the ftnji, th and dJpofition of her deliverers. At firft die was heed. lef» to aught but the check μνεη to hci hufband's dreaded armipotence in the lepulfe of his fally , but her pleafure foon fubfided into alarm at the furious whizzing of the balls which dillurbed the atroofphcre. Confidcrate that the power of her love could not regulate tbc once diichaiged rage of bis engmerv,
fhe corrected hei imprudence juft in nme, fir ftai tely were (he withdrawn, whtn α (hot ftruck the balluftradt on ν huh (he had rtehntd, ind Ihivered its alnın lie fculpture lreinbhng with tur r, flie deleei ilfd to iei chamber wl eh lie ok lui»ath the fiorir ol Juhan, w' ο ι teľcdby iitv|c( ed -. He n td ок he irtpidation for the С 1 ui uinefs ot how guilty were her delirts , and aggravate I it 1 v el nces green tellerini, fri ııı 1 is heart, till he appalled her by exciaiimng, ' Madam, your million is returned in arms it is n у defile to forward you to his greeting " lit ttaniried his foot, and the guards entering, difrefpectfully tranf| orted La¬ nna to a pnfon tower that was mott eit- pofed to the fury of the befiegers, who thither pomted the major weight of their artillery Though Henri did not actuate this at¬ tack, its real motives were not lefs hodile to the falety of Julian Long had the N4
furrounding country bled beneath his i'fvaftating fcourge, and extortion and cruelty preceded the ftepi of hii felf commiffioned powr His latter pre lunipiuous abufe of its fanclion and authority had not aluais efcaped un heard of by the (late, which wa> the chief leafon of its livelv luterei! in the recent detection of his trcafonable mil ipplicanon of lhe force he pretended to embody in providence lor Из w ulike exigences, to the и »Ltifible рчгч s о I iior ι·*; с tu ι t nel Aí lhe \ tnetian coiinnl w^ic exempt flum foreign contention or eun alterca¬ tion, ihey hailed that the fnteft ume for the quelling their undunful lul jifts, anil, ever wife in their decifion, relulved m the downfall ol the Conte di liafi-no They »ire confident that the deftruciion of a min eniloned with might and at hty beyond the companion of any con'emporary noble, and to whom all t ondot iiri looked k r example and
fanclion, could not but difpirit and appal thofe traitors who fuiularly inverted the ínftruments which their country h 'J allowed them to aflume for its defence, fo is to render their reduction a bufmefs ot much inferior dignity Ihey dilplayed the lame character for promptitude in thtir private dilleiifion , wluch fo often has animated their public holhhtits, lor ι İmali legion of their lılıhery, thit was bnik in tinrth to а pru leut garrıfon ι n the Brefeian fr li¬ tters,was countermanded byaiwilt poder, while baiting m th*· ancient town ılı Garda, whence theme were wuh II poflible celerity einbarkiil,ctniiyeil ov r the lakı, landed, ene up 1, antl in¬ trenched, btneath the priv icy of тцЬг, hefeire that Caftle, w lm h mader had harboured but a four da/ confeioufiiefj of detected difloyalty In tht bringing up of warlike neceflanes, the orders 11 the date were obeytd with equal ^ood will and diligence, mfomuch that tfe
artillery was ready fer the trenches foon as the latter wtre formed A more formidable force was hkewife prtpared, for r ghily it was jid;ed that Julian would be mexpt ^nable by lefs than an exceeding gnat majontv of number» acco dingly many reinforcements of the orderly military were drawn fiom their dilVetem cantonments, 41 d eiucentrattd with the leading corps immediately on it» arrival lur ther meafures were takın to rt heve the (late from its prm ipal appi henfıons of а procraflma id fie e, bv applications to the neighbouring chu! tains, fome of whim refciitmi, Juhan s pride ai 1 difdoiii, other» mtueltul to difguifc their fimilar offences Lv prife t patriotifm, volunteered an aaxilury af {alage lhe fame of Julian recoiled to hi» onn detriment, for н aetuared nnny to abet his overthrow, whom he had not perfectly oflcndcd 1 he camp of hi» adverfariti was thronged by thofe uho
either coveted α fhare in the partition of his wealth, or malignly hoped to exult amid the wreck of his fortune who had d rndttl them in every competition, or Itr vet, partake the glory of a viclory over him Irom whom a man could tell his defeat wi hout ignominy not a few among the latter were yountr gentlemen, who came to cftabhfh ! *yond ihfi redit th tr inebriate fanfirroindev, by con Idling with the preeminent m prowefs, Jul m Ilıı h Ь ir m itives were \aiiou«, tí eir i ¡matu ıs and emk uurs wire one their luxury or tc ıpınnıe was trriiihcdt the rich n I tief me food thit w ıs ut ] he 1 then in pruiiift n by th 'ev 1 ι 1 v i' 1 , ml tl i) wire m- rlrui\ 1 m tit ! ι luns l пом ις to alluili, 1 j ι e f thefe ι Ιι tets whim M ' ι menti u 1, id who now etme f i h ti (leep hi pift llipihue, in lon- iii il al'mı n II π vv ıs the ficrce- nef olacıu ade inítituteil ja ι (1 |ılıır,
befare «bofe devoted wall« the boo of Venice emblemed defiance,« u paraded aţeucsd, and (beamed on the clamorous blafti of the patriotic, the politic, the «rancjout, the envious, the renegade, and the rafli a prouufcuous concourfe, disordini ш armour, arm·, and dif- ciphne, cemented by one fangumary re- {aluuon, backed by a martial force, and commanded by a knight of the chivalnc order of St. Mark. It » impoflible to depict the feelings infpired ш Jukan by thu tremendous horabtr They cannot be fuppofed timorous, for we hare forefhewn that bad all men been endowed like him, language mould not have poffeiTed fuch a word a· fear, bccaufr fuch a fenfation could never have difpinted the human bread. Contranly did he fuller, and the bed-piercing difcernmtnt might have read m lut unguarded deportment, cares more intcrefbng than the prefervation of bu calile and domain·. He (talked a
thoughtful flur on the fur face of day, and feei'ied long to meditate fome rran- fcendently horrible purpofe thrice did hi· poniard leap fron u peaceable (heath, and hu (torching eye· outdare the radumce of a noontide fun ; as often hu confcience held parly with his wrath, dtfengaged the weapon from his grafp, and afluaged him, but not to calirmefs or contri ion He glanced o\er the ambient profpect, which was bright with arms Iharpened for his rum , and his foul dilated for an encounter worthy its mightuufs with thofe men collectively, who indivi¬ dually tnuft have mouldered at his touch As long as the lake, on which fide the caille was weakefl, flowed unruiued by mimical p*ows, Julian mentally derided the per everance of the befiegeri but his exaltation was not of continuane» , for, towards evening, feveral barque» darkened that view, mooring within a
frort diäaace of the wall·, and commuai. cattag fuccour and confidemce to the camp. But every daager, feort a» forefeen, wat couoteraäcd by Julian , who grap¬ pled h» boati together «ıth iron chain·, aul overbud them «ub platform» for the convenience of hu men ; of whom he felecied the bed, a» a kind of forlorn hope, to which all pofubdity of re Teat wu denied by the demolition of thofe bridge«, which, theretofore, connected the terrace· of difembarkatron to the in- tenor gates. 1 hefe, and other works, divided the night m project and labour Meantime the bulwarks on the land fide were dilapidated by the ihunderou» hoftihty, from wluch they never before had luffered injury. Ihough modermfed by Julian, according to the improve¬ ments m fortification mvcnted during the continental wart and the fuggellions of hit own genius, m»ny delects had efcaped lum, which he now lamented
toısubıİBytorenırY. »sVwasmerrhW ю behold the detente« crunMltig away, ani chafms «ideiung, wherethrough the ищет courts were raked by the balls of deftruciion , for thefe were «ot yet quabfied to overfly the extréméit pin¬ nacles of impedirne«., m* Vilit the inner· moft recents with fhowers ol bombard. nient. Ί he befiegcrs were much exhilarated I y the mifchief of their cannonade, which was continued throughout the night, when the opening of day difc ofed ľ to their fioht 1 hey joyfull regarded the fpacioufhefb ol the chief breach at paffable and its vicinity to the grand portal convinted them that the im¬ portance of that quarter were worthy everv defperaaon of aflault Such was the opinio* of the commander m chief who (énfi bly felt the danger impended over him by the mťepidlty and enter- prife of Julian, who was not an enemy before whom delay might be ventured
He bkewfe кое* Ьл owb power to be tb« bell adapted for impetuous meafures, compounded, at it wu, of miftruftful and turbulent Nobles, at infubordinate 10 hit command ai they were deficient m the art of enforcing fuborduutwn among their raflais, and a concourfe of young men, whofe intemperance for military fame was rei,ardlef> to peril fave u a zeli to the acquirement, but whofe impatience of control and poflponement might be feared to termmate their fervice by a difguttful alienation. Thefe were bit realona for hazarding an attempt, to which there were numerous obftruction» that could not be calculated Mo fooncr were the camp apprifed of hu intentions, than it rung with approv¬ ing acclamation« each man haltened to hu rank in arms for manual combat, cheerful with hope« of plunder, honour, or preferment, while numberlefs ban- nerollt were diftnbuted among the eager cavaliers, with promtiet of priority mho-
Jiourable mention to the (tate of him who would firft implant his enfigli within the breach. Every ma'ter regulated, the vo¬ lunteers poured down the mountain in prefumptuous difordcr, preceded by л menial number, laden with tlie machinery for a bridge over the moat. The fudden pacificanon of t 1 e battery, and the ν ocal uproai that fucceeded the vplofions ot its ordnance, alarmed the watehful с 's of t tl tn , aud he inflantly 1 et ok ! ι its tlie b tt tiiicii.s. Readily he cujeeìared where would burft the gathering ftorni, and illutd order» to them aroundhim with heroic compofure; for, at the fame time, he de fened the formidable barques to be thronged by foldiers, who filed irom the bank beneath his eyes, launched into the lake, and awaited the fignal to at, ack. 1 or their reception he was prepared , fo he would ha e been by land, had he not fea ed that the (trengthening of one part Ihould have turned the aflault on another, but
now that tt was certam where their pre¬ ference lav, he remedied each u fufli ciency with inllant pretence of mind, and marthalled his band on tht cndangert I ramparts, with directions ι > bring then artillery to bear on the outvv ard fuppoı ι of the bridge, which the w nrkmen had already mudi much propre'« in cuPIng» but with a pofitive prohibition of the firing of a fingle piece till his own voice commanded it. The borders of the fofle were now lined by the enemy, whofe archery and mufquetry fo inceflantly fwept over the rampam, that the defenders fcarceiy dared to (hew their faces. full Juhan undauntedly abided the bringing of hi accoutrements ¡ and it feemed that while contemplating the multitudes againft bim, their mightinefi united m his own Servet, for with agility his admirable limbs worked that ponderous armour, which was borne to him in feparate
piece«,eachoverburderung to the llrength of his fquires. 1 he btidge i an joined the walls, and the affollanti, in deep phalanx, approach· ed , toen promifcuoufly mounted it foon ¿t the frame creaked beneath their weight, Julian fanteticed their deftruc¬ iion , 1 >r his tatal vuiet was echoed by I.» с iinou, winch ihnicrcd many a daring (on. lhe band clearly faw the grand fuccefs produced by this re· frommeut, which they fecredy had con¬ demned , for tlie balls centering in one fpot, divided the van, which wat for. » ird on the bridge, from lhe rear, which was neeeflary to fupport rt, and be ' га the interfpace with mangled ι .«. But this advantage was coun. tetbalanced by their own lofs ; for the wonkuig 'hi* artillery expofed them fo unguardeuiy to the minile rmTchief of the foe, that they at length forbore to fire, notwirhflandmg the perfuafivc dif·
patches from the Conte, who befought them not to telax in their duty Julian himfeii way feen to haden witl an Achillean dride to the breach, which he reached in the fame moment that tl с temerity of a young cavalier tranfported him within iti limits he had no more than a moment's confcioufncfs of fupenor deferti, for Julian bowed down his heael and convinced the long d fcredit of furi energy in man, by fundering hım lo л аз the middle had not his ponderous labre been intercepted by a done, к would hare been difcontmuous tilt the body were fpht into two. His appear¬ ance was kindred w ith hit armipotence, being as much too awful to be beheld as the other was too potent to be withdoo L A martial wrath fwetted the vems of his countenance, till they were ready to burli through his vifor, his eyes wound¬ ed fader than his fword, and their or¬ gans (eemcd to accompany the expret
Γιοη» , his lips reeked with blood, and through them were vented thick exhala¬ tions of labouous breath , his really beautiful teeth feemed transformed to the fangs of a monder , and he fhook lu» locks a» the hon (hakes hi» frothy and gory mane Valí wat the horror which his action and mien mfpired m thole who were in front bitterly they lamented their for- wardnefs, but vainly they attempted to retreat, for thofe behmd them, being afraid to reure acrofs the range of the ar¬ tillery, continued to puth forward. The effects of Julian's approach were truly tragical, for many actually dropped into the ditch, rather than venture an en¬ counter with him , yet cowardice could not be then ailment, or would they have rifted a watery death he rather feemed to defolate their intellects, to entrance their minds, and tv w itch them with a panic, in which the nobler exiftence vf a man expires, and the faculties of
the body are fetfalun to unregulated vaga rit». Yet, however mighty may be the pow. et» of a combatant, the invention of fire¬ arms renders it impoflible for him to con¬ trol the viciflbudes of battle by an- unin¬ terrupted progrefs of perfonal conqueft , elfe could net Julian have fufftred rebuff, a« he now did, from the (hot of the ene¬ my l'inno fired from cither hand obliquely athwart- tht bridge, to (lay his purfuit of their fugitive brethren His armour though· it were invulnerable to a mufket (hot, wu indented m many places, his tltfll empurpled with contvifions, and the giafp of hi« battle-axe fplmtered he indignantly (tept backwards, and ittraenechlHmfelf beneath the impending cr»»» of the wall, which was breachtd aKhwIfe The foe ient up -а tumultuous fhout of jov, and eneour»ged each other again todare-thefuryofjulian who,crouched among the· fragment», could not for α
long tinjc exalt hi· creft, but a· an aim to the numberlefs márkimén. After fonie reluctance in thofe expected to lead, the ranks reioined, and rulhed in¬ wards with palpitating defperation at the f remoft, precipitated by the tul y of their career, leaped ov er the rubbifh of done, that was heaped to obviate intru- fion, (uhan reared his gigantic form thi influx of warriors divided, but, bemg unable to retrograde, they rulhed pall him m difmay, and were wi dly dif¬ perfed about the inteiior, uncollected in Ipmts and force Thefe efteemed them¬ lclves devoted to daughter, for the de¬ fenders ol the ramparts plied them with well-directed archeiy but Juhan being recalled Irom his pod by this inner com¬ motion, left the breach unguarded ( at lead his party gave way 'o the fierce re¬ iterations of the aflailanu. Ί he Caftle groaned with the tumult of Ihouts, fhneks, execration·, defiances, entreaties, bravados, commands, threat·.
tacMn-igement», groan» of the dying, wailmg» of the «rounded, intuits of the viôoriou», bellowing» of ordnance, clat¬ tering of fword» and fluetds, the bray¬ ing» of trumpet!,reverberations of drum», flapping of (tandırdı its courts, in which the lineage di Fiafcano for ccn turies had dwelt in haughty peace, were now flooded with the blood of the robber and the mercenary Their prefent ma¬ iler, who by the fword had acquired them, te the fword feemed on the point of ftnrendenng their pofleffion, which Larina, wnofe wantonnefs had inveiteti bm with digmty ш compliance with the fame paflion, befought Heaven to defime hi» downfall 1 rom thi « r ite of her tottering tower (lit f;a?ul with cruel eye» on the contenţii ι tlironf , caretei» of the carnage, uve when rie prowef» of her hufband added to it, Iht then fhuddered at hit triumph with adul teraa» apprehenfion» lett Henri fhould have been fo ill fated as to come withm
the fcope of hu fword, for in vain (he fought to difcrinunate him from among thofe warlike youths the moft confpi cuous m the crowd nor was Julian lefs curious, or more fuccefsful, for ever a,s the young in dature fell befo -е him he rent away the helmet, in hope to view the hated face, or examined the dud- humbled bamierol for his approprute device As condantly he was difappomt¬ ed , and wl tie roving through the fight, no voice druck hun to refemble that of Henri Individual enmity foon became more extended, for, enraged at the va- I iur an 1 perfeverance of the enemy, he e.ileel himfelf cap a pie in unbattered ar¬ ın ur, and braced on his aim a fpacious fliielJ, embofled with the ancient pike defer b ug fiery circles with his fabre, re- I I ibi by none, he cried aloud to give no quarter and replut 6 cd amid the holtale i uliude lhe confidente ef viclory argued by this bloody decree, which fo eafily voi m o.
could be retaliated difpinted the enemv, and heartened his own men he alfo re- fotmed his generaldiip, for as yet he had prefumed on the poflibihty of at- chieving the extirpation of all who were entered, and with that barbarous defign had inclofed them, but he now w as aware that then courage was heightened by defpair, and wifely directed ihe par- ticular company which he hail (lationed at the place of cntiance to open its Tanks, amt more to moled than oppofe their retreat. This pohcy was fuccefsful, for the ene¬ my, being prefled in front by Julian and his fquires, fadly availed themfelves ol an opportunity to fall back, which ihey did fo ìmprovidently, that the outlet, in the courfe of ten minutes, was cram¬ med, without regard to diflinclion or о der 1 he me ft horrible fcene in the fatal variety e f war was here depictured, in a fugitive tumult and a rclentk!» purfuit ,
for (light was demed, and flight once be¬ gun is well known to rob the bread of all refolution In the fphntered projec¬ tions from the fides of the breach they experienced enemies obdurate as Julian, who was unconcerned by their expoftu- lations and befeechings for mercy, but trampled them down with fupenor ftrength Refitlance was ímpraŕticable, as the weapons were fallen from their hand», which were benumbed by the preflure of fellowfhip and of the foe. The air fhuddered with their unpitied flineks, and they madly endeavoured to efcape futfocation by mounting on each other. Their fupphcations to man and prayers to heaven, being unanfwered by mercy or miracle, were villamfed to ex¬ ecrations and blafphemies All was de¬ lirium and defpair The fervitors of Ju¬ lian were not unmoved by the circum¬ ftances they derided, for they were caught in a vertigo of horror, which dafhed them feafelefs along the earth. o t
Juhan melted not, but inexorably called to thofe of his men who were on the ramparts above, with direftions to make ev ery exertion to fink in the upper rums of the breach, as thefe were already loofcnedby the balls overnight, and flill more by the prefent nether commotion, he foon hail the delight to fee them precipitated in one lingering crafh on the mifcrable heads of thole beneath, who, at once, were (lain and entombed. Piercing were the ihricks that nlucd from the duiky thickueis of the fmokc, as thofe which ol yore were imagined to characlerife a gulph of hell As the day was fultry, and fcarce a breath ol wind abroad, it was long ere the fuflcters were perceptible at length they were difcovered , many o f 'hem crufhed by the rums, labouring on the ground 111 th* |afl moments of exiflence, while then furvaving fellows, defeatured by bruifes, by dull, bv blood and fweat, (bove to difengage themlclves to flee over the
bridge PoflefTed of their fleetnefi, but not their confternation, Julian, ltillantlv the place was paflable, puibed on , un¬ feeling for the wretches that ftrewed the vviy, whom he trampled under his tiet, and caufed to writhe with renewed an¬ guilh Overtaken by his bl ule, the iu gt iv es Were ihllracitd to fe 1 thimfehes Vit unrid of their mere lefs enemv vv th outilretched arms tliev petitioned fuc¬ cour from the rear wird compirne ,ννίηιΐι were ilruck agh tit it ι elu ld them re turn thus dif omľt 1, wh ι, hilf an hour bef re had forcei the place, wi h figns ot triumphing in its reduction Terror wa» dillufed throughout the ranks , and thofe parties which had attemp ed efca- lade in quarter» of the calile unproteñed by the fole, becaufe they were deemed lnacceffible, were now furpnfed by Ju¬ lian, and cut off with extravagant (laughter Wherefoever he moved only the backs of fugitives were to be feen durmg the о 3
contefl ho wai unmatched in prowtfs-, aed nature was mortified to witnefi fo many of her fom wiped away by the hand of him, m whofe conquefU (he did not dare to exult. Being convinced 'very chance of tene» mg the attack fuftaining one was pall, the commander l'ifpatclied his military bands to preteči the retreat of the defeated , and foon аэ thev could evacuate the valley, he directed the t tt- tery to play Julian was perfuaded l у the balls that furrowed the earth belitle hım, that the cannoneers made lum their mark, and collccled his men La¬ rma was tormented with hate and dıf ip- pointment to fee him retire uninjured, recrofs the drawbridge, and file through the portals in triumph. Meantime, others of his inci demo- lifhed the artificial bridge conflrucied by the enemy, ίο that the victorious repulfe of the aflailants feemed perfect, for the difparity ш the numbers of the flam was
amazing , it being obferved in the court of battle, that for one corpfe of the band there was a pile of half a dozen of the lanquifhcd. However, it was doubtful whether Julian s lofs were not the worfe proportioned 1 1 his ftrength , and tidings were now co nmunicated, which unde- ciivul him in his prefumptıon of decifive fueeifs , for hallin 0 in conf ejuence to the fouthern ramparts, he therefrom witneded a fpectacL that ftaggered bun, with forrow Ihe conte ft by via er had terminated as fatally m his thsLvour as that by land had to the contrary They with whom he manned the float had con- fi-med his appretiation of their gallantry, and defended themfelves with unparal¬ leled intrcp dity , yet, being attacked by a treble fuptnoriry with much (kill and bravery, an 1 bung unaflifted by the firing from t ie walls 'o which, as they vv ere figl ting hand to hand with their affiliants, they were ahke expofed, they о 4
had fucceffivcly fallen : the multitude of their mangled carcafTes prelcnted a counterpart to the (laughter in the breach, for the water, «hich vv.b (h.-llou in that part, was put in a (late of narra¬ tion by the crowds of loditf and d,- fevcred limbs; alfo iliíLolourcd I j blu, ,1 and entrails. Ne! her hail the c· injJir. ıs obtained а bloodleľs viťo ; , f ,1 Ju! 1, with gloomy malice, d.íLiii 0 ui lied il u fide of the float on which tluy chiefly had br arded to preponderate with the weight of their flain, many ot vvht m were alfo immerged in the flood. One of their barques, being (battered by an accurate (hot, iva, fuundereJ, and the top of its mad could only be difcovered above the furface of the lake. Still thefe circumftances were of flight comfort to Julian, for but (lightly they deprefled the victors : indeed, contraued with their routed comrades by land, thefe were fo magnified in th,ir own etcem, lhat they made the little fquadror re-
found with blithe vociferation, though its decks were not difburthened of their dead comrades, they decorated it with ftreamers, and fleered in defiance juft without the fcope of the cannon Julnn underftood that the ıflue of the day was againft him and his arrogant fpint, unapt in refignation, mutinied 'gainft the parti ihty of fortune Could he have protracted tl fiege to the laft hour of h s lite m ıfl willingly he would, dnd never have defired the reitor ition of peace f г it nounfhed him to breathe the air unpregned with exhalations from i f inguinary field but defeat now Hired 1 im in the face , ignominious defeat, and forci! le deprivation of his ill acquired ind ill employed property (Inly ont hope lingered among his willies, it was not unreafon ble , he determined to execute it, and depend his fate on ith event throughout the day this refolution was enforced in the marfhalhng the »5
bfaveft of hu men, arraying them in the bell-tempered armour, whettmg their arms to make a repeated ftroke unnecef- fary, anj fitting them with the finefl- mettled deeds in his (lud. He was un- cahn with expeclation, and anxioufly watched the app-oach ot night, which let ¡a around the walls cheerlefs as their defbny. In the mid hour of darknefs he ordered his men to be awakened from the repofe which he had recommended them to take, and he faw them mounted without hurry or tumult. When all were m their faddles heart high with curiofitv, he avowed to them his auda¬ cious refolution to furpnfe the befieging camp. Many a weapon trembled in the hand while its mıdır murmured an hypocritical approbation Julian haj preconceived their objections, and mth fuccefi endeavoured to fubdue them, by arguing on how ι uch iupenor a long lene· of mJnigh isploit muil rendir them to then- enemies, the majonty of
whom v. ere unverftd m other nocturnal encounters than thofe attending fereiiades and mummeries. He then delivered them to their leaders, whom he fufftred to depart in doubt whether he meant tu accompany or follow them. Iht cav al¬ cade pafľed over the drawbridge, and filed along the moat obediently to Julian's orders, which were, to make л wide circuit, and attack tht с imp in 11 ink. H irtlly was the tram perceivable by thofe of the b uui and houlehold who nuintr- oufly thron, td the battlements, there fort it vv ts unliktty that u foon fhould be difcovered by the enemy's out guard . Hit trampling of the horfes gradually lottentd on the ear, and at length dif- com nued m the fleclnefs of a gallop. Notwiihit niding the unfcafonable in¬ clemency о he iught, which was dreaiy with clouds th it mizzled rain, ev ery on« m the callle at liberty to climb the ramparts, was there to bt found, gazing abroad with hopt and terror. ľamXui
was their fufpenfe, and tedioufly pro- longed bodements of evil were not un- ihnught of, and conjectures of the worlt were folicitoully difcufled Ihe latter hours of the night tolled t rdily during this imerval, affecting the ear with the harm vibrations vented through the mattered belfry the refponfes of the twelfth hour yet fufpend d converfe among the interefled ferv nts, when they »ere flartled by the did int clangor of a trumpet, feeble at firft but imme¬ diately fwelhng in concert with fionlar war breathing ínftruments Whence thofe angry founds proceeded no one queflioned, but, with a palpitating heart and a mute anxiety, awaited more deci¬ five fymptoms of his fnends' progrefs One of the puges only, ambitious to recommend himlelf to the С onte, fought hım for the purpofe of communicating this news, but he returned in difap¬ pomtment, and with great furpnfe pro claimed that his lord was not to be
found , neither was his favourite war- horfe, which, leady capanfoned, had flood m the northernmolt ward all the evening The truth wis immediately gueffed , and the hopes of all fettled into confidence, when th ν conf dered that Julian was then wielding his fword, the arbitrament of their fate and the fvv iy of battle In the enfuing minutes Julian's nughti¬ nefs pubhfhed itfelf in characters more fplenditt than all the labour of human extolments, for he invaded the dark regions of night with unquenchable columns of fire, that dimmed her twinkling ctinflellations, and tinged the fcudding clouds as trophies of his con¬ queft In vai the firmament glowed with angry reflections, bs flaming de fiance lnc-cafed not creeping along the face of the earth, but intuiting the ikies with iparkhng eruptions Who then among he houfehold would Sot hav- become a Juhan ' fuch was the
fui ι i\.x of ci tluifiafm communicated to thur ortalts by thii refulgent fpeflacle. Л· the lininle camp was pitched on the further fide of the moui tain eminences, ¡It prudent fccurity fiom the cannon on the wall», it» tents were not diiluiguilh- able by the moll elevated fpectators, yet (ome there were on the giddy brows of the loltıcıt turrets of the calile, who maintained their perc ption oi figures buftlmg to and fro, and even aferted a recognition ol their equellrian friends. Durmg me controvetfy between thofe who perfifted m judging of the c mbat, and thofe who would not bear to have their feelings the fport ot allettinoli, the fire was giadually afluaged, and foon difplaycd no brighter ligna of exiflence than faint dallies and fciniy emiffions ot ted cinders the impending denfenefs of the night haflened its extinction, and clothed the top of the mountain in fcvirer darknefs As the luminaries of triumph decayed»
fo did their prclumptuoufnef» ι hour of alternate hop and ι fucceeded, unchcered by u.. Julian. By the period of ılı ι in e, the trumpets and muiquetry were con pletely hulhed , and many torcheb, borne by invifible perfonb, emerged fiom the ridge of the moun am, hailcned down the dechvit), and conven i near the battery The third minut ι as yet un¬ expired, when the woi b о night was rent by α gen ral explofion, which, by the rumutib ι verthrow t f a prominent barbacan, announced the dcilruction of the party lhat had tallied forth. Con¬ fternation and grief fpread throughout the caftle , and the pet pie, (linking from the rampai ts her led in defpondent and bcwaihug group s A tonlidenble length of time was paffed, when the watch on the northern i ampa«» imagined that they heard the toicec famourner arife from the o tinrd bafe of the wall As the depth and the
darknefs prevented their difcer ment of any perfon, they leant on their arms in filent attention, until they were con vmced that it wis not conceit, but really the tone of aneuifli, in which opinion they were fupported by otl ers of then comrades, who had ¿ithered «buut them They now balanced thci delves over the parapet, held thnr t rf и s low as their arms could fink, and l'nrft flnmed their eyes out of thetrfockets ro dtfc ver the inférer, but in vim, for the h^ht was hinmtd by its twn wrtath of fmoke and tould not dilpe fe tht dark¬ nefs m rt than half w y dow n the fteep perpendicularii of the wall As th v were npprehenfiv of the ftratagems of the ci ι my, ihey d ired not venture out from the portera , but, at the fame time being cunoufly interefttd for the prefervation of any one of their Inends,they procured ropes, and lowered a fupport tor the aitlicti d perfon 1 hev quickly found that he hid availed him-
felf of their ingenuity, and many an arm toiled with his burthenfome weight, till in that precarious fufpenfion he nearly furmounted the prodigious height. 1 hole vho »ere difengaged from the ropes, [ eering downvaids, encouraged their » ur ules by announcing his having in u il tiu red circle of toichlhjht re- licetcd Irom the flines, which all be) ond »ere involi ed in dubious brown . their 1 1' uur » ь no» foon at an end , for а rinewtd tllort lodged a gigantic figure 111 armour upon the lofty fumirut. All eves that fought him ilil.red »ith fuper· llitious terror, lor in hflleis length was flrctched the itnpoflor fo long dreaded as a difcmbodied fpirit. Though a torch- beam glared on his face, its livid palenefs and inhuman expreflions did not unde¬ ceive them ; but with ал erted afpccìs and receding íleps they forfook him unfup¬ ported on the verge of the battlements, endangered by the lead motion to a
downward precipitation, that mult have (haken hım piecemeal. His voice, hollow as his fortunes, re¬ called them ftom their conffernati n to an amazement that kept them ftupidly gazing on his creft tern helmet, over- fiiadowing his baleful afpeŕt , his d< faced armour, well nigh fepulchral to his body as well as grandeur, and 1 is fteely hand, throughout tenacious of the inaffy fword. As he defcended ¡n proud dejection, aach brealt torgot ıtfe'f m wondei at his overthrow , each, confcious fo profound a downfal could have made him nothmg, marvelled to find his awe and reverence undimimfhed. When Julian ought to have been debafed m fortune and re¬ putation, he denoted himfelf to be fu¬ penor to both . fo that the morahft on human uiftability would not have chofen to implant conviction m a pupil, by pointing out him as a nuierable image of an unprofperous reverfe , for to re¬ ferable him thoufands would court mif- fi nunc.
С II Al'TE R IX.
VV , ι,·· mo lUn'aiiMuithtbe ¿rch'U heaven 0 n them re. . citind, ■red, vv"'!·' ι 'l 'l' ipbt* tårth -Ъотп, ¿rìl 0 Jj4,a U J lis. by ni lb» are nm d. υ. ι '-ir; h eft hive .г, .nI »1 .c Ji« ιιι.»«ρι, d S b liC. Where inerii 1 .1 motueii. ,ltl luesorel. Il UIC Wltbl»
* HE midnight excu fion Julian had partaken and fupported in α difjuile he conceived to be the bed ad,, че u , .1 that occafion, to hearten his me η , t learn and defeat whofe nuthiuati 111. n i f .uoliy he had affumed it. For fo.nt ι . e !..* expectations were realifed ; K. the firing ol the camp, which he erruu oui., prefumed to be tin, zenith of viclory , ι e.
vea'ed the comparative paucity of his nun bers to the military part ot the be. Uger», who, convening at their alarm ρ lis in tolerable order, gave i mc de- cif ve difcharges without rei ar 1 to their viluntccr inemls, палу t w h jm were 11 in with the folli weis of Julian Ilı ι felf, demounted, defeated, and haralled fblely efcaped, or lolely wa» able to re- gam the calile lhe triumph of the v äors was not wafted in boaflful eluun Ihey endea¬ voured from the batiery lo cut off the retreat of the fi ?mves, and when this ceafed to be a reafonable mot vi , they battered the calile fo indefatigably that morning rewarded their perfeverance by the difplay of an enlarged and apparently indefenfible breach While a fécond aflault was del berated, (hocking intelli¬ gence came in relative to a body of the auxiliar vaflalage, who were diftantly pofted to inveli the calile Thefe were reported to be olmoll all flaughtered in
their obdinate oppofition to Julians efcape, which, however, they no other wife could prevent than by the cutting off his companions, a misfortune that left him an undefended fugmve, ob¬ noxious to apprehenfion Munificent excitement and promîtes were ufed to urge the men to this undertaking, but terror of Jul an 8 prowefs a long time combated avarice, and thofe who at length did fet forth, went in a crowded con pany, more 1 hcitous of mutual de¬ fence than exclufive atchievement of the piey and the reward Ihe pillage of the caille was alfo a tempting bait, from which they were not eafily to be alienated , and the martial throngs hecn- tiouily poured to the attack Ihofe ttithin the caftle, diltrafted to find them fell es forfiken 1 y their mailer, difagreed what anfwer to return to the fummons of hisi ipicK us n ultitude, who clamour ed for admittance, with the moit hor nble threats in the cafe of a refufal
Son lardly (ludied concealment and 1 t while other« projected a truce, ti ìcipal gate was opened by a felf- tii к ufed few. Their claims on mercy ν ι re not allowed, for they were favagely lai nhced by the revengeful victors, foon ai thefe recogmfed the unbuned bodies of their comrades, yeflerday flain, bruit¬ ed and pounded by the hoofs of the horfes, which, the night before, had paraded in the court. Such a fight in¬ flamed them to un*ppeafable fury, and they became murderers where the pre¬ ceding day they had acted the part of heroes. Some hours accurfed in rapine, flaughter, and demolition, the knight of St. Mark triumphantly entered. He found that the volunteers, infatiate of blood and plunder, were irreducible to older, therefore, appointing military guards to the places that merited a tem¬ porary prefervation, he turned his atten¬ tion to fupenor concerns. The moil
important of thefe was what regarded I anna During the foregoing anarchy, fhe narrowly had efcaped worfe than ïn- fult, and fhe now befought the com¬ mander to refcue her and her anceftral dwelling from thefe deftruciive mad· men, agreeing, at the fame time, to leave thein in undillurbed pouefiion of what they had dlready gained, and to relian the reft of the portable wealth of the caftle to his own appropriation Rich as was the bait, his in egnty was not to bc corruptid, and, obedient to his m- flrt itions, he waved her proffers in a manly anfwer, nor promifed nor per¬ formed any thing more than an lflur- ance of hei fafety and the appointment of a place for her refuge To this (he was ft rthw ith conduited through domeflic feenes involved in not, horror, and defolation Her mind was uncalm with reflective perturbation when was communicated the importunity of an officer to be admitted to an interview
Hope brightened her features, and the words faltered which directed his intro¬ duction. Her heart palpitated prophetical of Henri's entrance, but (he was bitterly difappomted to behold a cavalier llrange to her expectation, though not to her memory. Had not difquietud* dimmed retrofpection, (lie would immediately have identified the favourite page of hei girlifh days, who, m confiant fnenť- (hip to Henri, interrogated conccrnin 0 his fate. The queihon alinoli dii U led her from anfwering, for the certainty that her lover was not her cfempion in this ruinous fiege, wounded her moP. bitterly. What (he at length fpoke w dictated by her former ignorance, a J her doubts of Henri s fate, and Claudi haltened from her prelence, to Terminile every icccfs in the cattle ajiplic ible le tyrannous fcqucflration With the wonl of author») lie с leéled feveral foldier% provided ti eu with the neceffary implements d r leb
terranea» opemrrotis, and chote tor İni director a domeflic prifoner, whole fucceli was to be the ranfom of his lit«·. Ihey fhiewdly examined many a build¬ ing, fuppofed to conceal the depths of un mûrement , and numerous ano ivvtut wtre thi ir difcovenes ot thofe mvflte dungeons, kitherto unvifited by lb ps ol coinfirt. Abltrufe labyrinths of paf- fagcs, in which numbirs had been ab ıtı- d med to pcrifh , arched chambers, e.011- tnved to mork thi ftiflenr with his own "roans, an.l miilv ulj lis, vv here.lovi 11 jioer vvre tht hid I tin lowered 1 ito а Inni' grave ihefe, iel tluuliidhn- ibi the buil lm„ vv incil..! the fi ml lv ui emi ty e f the nchiteils, lut lunk the inbits, who e mk! titl. 11 t ıı ..it¬ lini lien, li uh th 1 Innenit liv prtih m Ilıt f ırımr 1 ni ııı unnt f Henri underwent a finn! ir ltftarth us empty dari nefscontnlUd with thearior- ous leene that p uned С la 1 lio's me¬ mory , and he turned from it with a VOL. III. i>
heart-deep figft, lefl the Chevalier's pro- grelBons had been from the w armth of Laruu's arms to the chillnefs of the grave. 'l о explore the ful ter-anean maze, he then alcended the Heps m the private communication with ihc < on tila s apart- ments tu them the benign (¡anus liad already extended the puni nunii iluy fo much needed, and wen fiercely de¬ vouring the vulupt tous and effeminate fun.iture, lhat were well feakmed to their reception. 1 he ( i\ ilicr, repelled by the hiat, and «ware ol tin deviation Irom the purpled truk, returned to the door on the central it ur, through which lie m ule lu w y to the vault nu lì memrrable in the adventures of Псин, whoielatehil li li mi! lobi tl it of the corplewhuh ibviued hi |rignis lhe am hunt putru u ce was (ou lleiifive to be encureet I) iuilis u ι ii] ported by friendflup like to t n uu », wh , while Us followers Ihı unk IickI) aback, hung
over that fliocking pi ce of mortalitv, and dudied its proportions by the finur il gleams of a torch lhe lateli ilidin- guilhable vedige of a hut ι in corniti ι ince was 1о1ц momind away, inel every trace of its once animation wit icliawu with the loul itfell, ytt were the 1 nibs enlpituoue, and tlie ihm mfenoiiiy of 'ıtır liatine in а little mealure tin Je¬ tivé I the Civ iher s İt irs With ш di- nurifhed intered hi proceeded to infoici th puhti ol ihe il .tht which timid- el the bolv , but lib lund, (minibus uh h rr r of tht I uliiuls, pitilid upon 1 1 unfubd intuii reif' , with its wit ierul eltment it tltcaved from the touch, ind finerers lunk into tlie tneihv entrails, 'u wer dıİL,u(iın n ly prolific of reptiles. tie fhuddered , uid more when, dıfeiı- j ı b ıng hnnlell, he drew forth the por- tran oi 1 aruu, to which adhered a worm, fat vwtli its human fuftenince, that tivinca round hi ι utters in clammy titele . Η tjod almoft powerlefs to
fllake it ой, till a naturii fupcrdition minded hım to rclpecl it as a relic of his friend's human llitt, now tnilowidwith a momentarv tranfinigiation o f Ins fpirit, to implore the rites ot ili'eriiitnt bv an appeal In emblematical ot thur lunner ■unity, when thtır lııeııülv In e.s v He often enrin,til togethtr Iltsl.eirt vtjiu ed with this idei, and he к iiriitd u to ltsnuivity , unconluous thit in piyine, a miflaken refpeet to Henri, h , m n- ahtv, was thieharging a debt of ^ ruitinle to the afltfl ointe hov ıvlın ι ine temle d htm when univi rf illy dtleittd— ıhı pilt 1 ively I aun ti. So ninth vv ь ht ι vu tome with the milconctp ion t'nt Iu learch foi tht Chtviher vv ι nudlidul in the tlileovery ot his corpfe, th it it was neceffary to tranfport him Irom the fcene , ye dul he refule to emerge to-day without the body, which was acco tlmgly borne from the vault, and dtpofited m fafety above. Thence he difpatched an enuifary with
her portrait to 1 anna, accompanied with the fevered expiefliotib of his deleita u n. lhe picture ν,α» returned to hım with .1 Itroiig ehtivovt tl t f its ever bavin > been ι gift to Печи at the fame ti iu lon с ot ttie de nit Hu, dill u lind m tlie inore durtble pirts cf tlie dre' , the 1 lilacs c f the ( ι tile's ρ , and İs I umus dn q [e unu h 1 btn ıh t pie el CCI I iel I lis ionie , U VV 1 agreed among them, th it lus 1 ite w ıs it length aľcert ıııetl 1 j lis corpL lidou them. While Chu ι was thus relieved from híj puntul ι it ike, the himmel¬ in ufe md i s ittenit n' mv ler.i , л ь İt irted ııı« ne th tin mts ' tl iretl .bout tin b tv lut u hi pv vv ret. h s, Ipireil bul 1 r tl ι pi 1 v ln e! hil lenices, cırın «K tnliivtu.i.lt . ι Г с ι. trev lv thill iveit oils, in I 1 ниц ıhlpımeıltliı torri to he thu ,11 nn, thev mum ud JiibinN lu η ıı tt tu¬ tum o' ant ine tnteiın 0 the luotan r-
houfe, as a reafon why that building fhould not be left unftarchcd I'urfuant to this advice í I indio re paired to the fummer houft, which wa yet untouched bv the rum that w av clofing around He entered it bv force, and palling on, memory fmote him to the heart, when he beheld the room into which the old tonte had entered never to re appear to him its pavement and the faded hangings ot а ccuch were be- fprmkled with ihe blood tl at had gulhcd fiom his internal rupture or ex ernal wound, and it evidenced one motive for Juhan including the place in inviolable folitude Iht hope that his о her motives were conntéìte' wuh Henri s fecrecy, invigorated the Cnalici, atti bv his direction the íle с ring was torn tıp, and the tuv admitted mto the realm it night Claudio was the firft ılı it dıreıl the rocky ınt'icacıes , tie fit ft tli t delcrıed the prilcn-dotr, and thou 1
Kundreds had difputed with him, (till would he have been the full to embrace the defpairing Henri The embrace returned by the Chev a her was not puiely of fncndlhip , it was alloyed by t wild gratitude, that would have taken to his arms the vilelt oí earthly wretches, who fo brought reitet and liberty 1 he nerv es of the tamilhed Marqui9, overftramed in his attention to the tumult of Chuche 's appr lach, had tailed hnn n the moment of delivery, and he was rehpfed upon the floor m a deathly torpe r 1 henee he was tendei lv borne, and when with I is Ion I rought forth to light, they prefented the еьаЛ imagery a painter would have ftudted to fuit the lurroundmg horrors of devada non lhe feu de j< ie, juft then dıl- charged from the 1 îrques on the lake, flartled the leeble Henri, who, in the mountain reverber u ns gueű d the uproar that had 111 eked his ears when attentive to ¡us father's tale tint the 1 4
prier oantiotaade of the £egc had «oiled uii'k »jd was imputable to the Apth of the dungeon s .ntermenr, whieh m*le it deal to aU cRtersal node, till us aunucs w r tent oper by Claudio Henri would have paufed to gaze Sround, but he was halt blinded by the ludden tranfition trom vifible darknefs to the rej glare of names that drove w th tl с nud day fun. His condition «as te о miferablc· to permit exultation, and he fit wly followed the body of the Marqui , m wh m it were doubtful w' ether 'ife or death prei'oimnated In the laltft and remoled pait of the calde he noble G uls wert lodged , and, whit Henri s more vigorous e rgarts deiou ed the fo tl t iät was lupphtd hnn, medicinal appli¬ cations were u adt to the Marqui , down whole throat rich juices were mflilled through jaws incapable ot madie mon Meantime Latina, appnled ot her lovei's refcue, would have I rav ed the conflagration to reach him, bu' that Ihc
ivas ılı tamed by a Uriel guardage (he theiittre ihl| itthtd to limn an cpiftle reeking liom lur heart it contained no u iimmt 4 enlorie α torli mey fhe dou ned no , 1 ut was written tn ι (train that maile the cxpreffion, pichiiefque of It vc an.l all ι vv un n s doting 1 he in ter en nee ot ( lu dio weakened ι « c*l il on Henri, who, ıı lied, pirultd it with 1 ıks tu, id ι hs I loo I, whith wi, ι hille i liv hi unim ıı ent to canlı i ıiıK 1 1 the С unteli ı, vvlı ι ι he no lon u v llued f r hır 1 t fortunes ir pall en¬ di irnienti I Ile 1« ir 1 w V e ununfwer- ıbıy г pulit , t ıı nit ι ι inlim t wnh anul. r 1 t cr, mutuili ilt lini" le be- t vien| ri t ini utihnili t vv ıs noto- noti (liiil ι t\uied Inni II 1,1in, im it funi ι' ubi .f Ih in 1 1 Ity than с mietuti ι I it 1 ir tl ιι,,ΐι lit ν ifheii ind Ilıtın thered il ν vv ıs he ama/ed it tut ( hevılıti s híí q îthy on this occafion Λ third le t r, ι ichtcd by the a'"iiv.tion of prêtent nucfhtlts,-
tender m appeal and lavifli of prottuft, was nega ived as bcfuit Claudio, neareraffectvd than he would thew or could even approve, quitted the l hev alter to hib edacity, and betook himfelf on the behalt ol Linna to tht knight of St Mirk lolmreprefenta. tıons of her prefent dtllref», and enquiries of her impending late, the С oniniander lephed, lhat on the latter ht was unable to inform further ılım tint hi, orders from the fiate were to imn tht caftle, even to the eradicating its foundation, and to tranfport the chief captives to Venice, where it was prefumptive a con /iLallon of her entire domains would b w decreed That the detention ot Lanna wa» doubly import int, as her hufband had efcape ι ut that her treatment being at his uılcretıon, he was pleafed that far as was convenient, it Ihould remedy the lofs of her hbcrty He the.n turned to a young volunteer noble, re- •fueled him to fee to the handfomc
Contefla, and parted with a fraile at hi« readinefs in the cominilTion. Λ few minutes afterwards, palling where Larina was lodged, l laudio beheld her on the balcony attended by the noble Her eyes were impcarled by tears and her checks defaced of colour, yet was fhe the mo damţirous in а forro nat meek- eneil the fierccneis of her beauty , and the ch m s 'i able af] ι θ if the youth befide 1 er darnicii his- inward combuftion to be hinlly lcľš vi lent tinn that of the « ilihncs they were ga/ing on W hen ( I Hi lio returned t > the Cheva¬ lier, he found hnn j id ceafed from his meal, fram which he h d bt n alreadv twice fuinuioned to attend his father be- f jre he could pcrfuadc hnnlelf to quit the victual« thev repaned together to the Marquis, who was reco* ered to the power ot fpeecn, which he imme¬ diately ufed to defire lus mitant removal from the caftle txpoftulattons were vain , his feeblenefs of body was momen·
tarily invigorated by the horroı ot his inulti, antl it was propoled by Claudio, and rtl ilved bv Henri, to voyage down the lakı lhe ıhoııelı t arque was n- IpeCtfully allotted tor iheir paffare , and as all tf callle ports of embarkation were muled, the Marquis was earned in а litftr to the outward banks whtnee he was f tlely tranfported on board ind con- venienced as well as halt an hour's pre¬ paration would allow, or α few hours paflage required lhe rowers plying thin oars, the barque quickly lelt the fliore, and forth¬ with launched into the lake its di V commanded an entire view of the caftle circularly expanded on the banks, the buttrefled towers furmounting the hill¬ tops beyond, the forts and bulwarks, were dil(. 'ayed like a fcene of the theatre to tht wondering fight. The glories of the building invaded by fire and nolluted by fmokc, pained hi» thoughtful mmd, yet did the Cavalier review the memor·
able pl ice till it faded away from his light, atid thi. v itìori jus llames, that were climbed abı v e ι ie lofttelt fpıres, a one rem uned vifible He refpircd a heart-deep figli in his remembrance ot the oail, and turned away from what he had beheld fi r the lall time , for ft> laborious were t ic tonqucrors, that, with, the ilhll nice of the united vaflalage,. thev effaced every veilige of the flructure from the earth io that the acutelt traveller of thefe tu es would rmllpcnd his lludy to alcertain tilt precife fpot by any tr ce ot us erection , the contiguous chapel that was it firil pioufly lpared, being Ion;, fince entirely dilapidated, and crumbled ulto the duit u was intended to faiiduaritc Claudio def ended into the cabin, where the Marquis w«s retired to repofe. He found lum in а deep flccp, and the Chevaher fo completely wearied Willi the n onotony ot his v gils by the couch, that it vv as propoled to have recourfc to
wme for the exhilaration he fo much needed A few glaflet fo far refrefhed and heartened Henri, that he no longer evaded to difcourfe on perfonal topics, but brought himfelf to fpeak openly ot hu adventures m the caftle Of Julian he endeavoured to fpeak contemptuoufly, but, m fpite of him, a falter enfeebled bis tongue of Lanna he affected to be mconfiderate, yet did his vanity indulge ltfelf in infinuations Claudio rtturned bis confidence with a detail of all that had occurred fince their reparation in the myftic chateau His journey to Languedoc, adventur» on the road, con fequent nuthap at Rivemont, tranfition ю Genoa, thence to the Caftle 01 Fiaf¬ cano, his imaginary parricide, and final deparo re Of luhan's pretended con- fanguinity ne wa» dumb, but fo tender m his mention of him, that Henn was fcarceiy lefs aflorufhed at Claudio'« for¬ bearance than he had been at that of hu lather.
Τ he v avaher, having brought hú narration to the period of his flay in the domam« di íiafcano, prepared Henri to hear the fubfequent adı entures he had undergone. ' Your father fleeps," faid he *' and the voice of my *brrows will not dilturb him Lilten, my friend, I am now about to uuiold a Itory that flutt make your humanity tnbmary of many pangs ' He pondered a moment, and dıgeitıng its heads into their natural ar¬ rangement, began the mterefling detail Ihus inevitably yet innocently mi¬ ferablc, profcnbed m one place as your murderer, m another us a rebel, I looked towards the abode of I 'on Philhppo as my only refuge. Almoft a year had clapfed fince I faw him , fo inclination, not lefs than neceffitv, was the fpur to my fpeed. 1 arrived at the villa to find it folemn m the filence of death , fuch had been lhe fate of Don Fhihppo fome months back, vt ho, I was informed, lud
hngermgly died of in afflicted h art 1 pra) ed and w ept ov er hi» omb, to whom, a» my benefactor, I owed ever) nfput, but to whom, as the father ot my Camilla, wen lavilhed ill înv t ais 1 had no more to weep m) wn misli rtuiit, fo cut otf, as 1 was from mankind , my ancient ties of kindred fu d uil) lifli Ived, and included 11 mcianchi lv li litui с amidfl ι bulli ng worl I Whether bc hef of mv death in lhe linóit; ι mba·" of Ceriioles, as ni) captivity I ) )ι u tiu obilicles ot war had prevente 1 ui) com nıunıcatıng, or any о hu tdia nu lit have bmiTed him, 1 know n . , bu it feemed that Ins vifl property was gone to endow lome moııılUrv Into tin valuhiy of the ile 1 Ι ι t» neither em powered by riiţlir n r care to h rutinde the entire wialth ot that Indies vvhiih had ennched him, I would hive given for а dream ol his lovely daughter Shortly after while w mdenng in deep
ilijtibon, 1 perthanct met the confeflcr of DonPhilippo .i pneli who had alfumed that capacity lome fhort time ifter th-t unluppielt ot m munts when I v is p.i the ev ot ili ılı nupti ils tit it »ut ti nuke mt thief bltlt lit Harled t . le mt liv t , aml th it lurpriit u ijuiittJ hım ııı n y t j unun ot anv iiljuítlte to me in lu ubin um¿ th.. dil, о. Ioli) n ľlul [ - I o's firtuiu, whith he was duubtlcis empowered to do, as during that noble- n an s decifive illnefs he had clofely at tended hnnboth as a lurgical and fpiruual immlttr lhegre.it enrichmint ol his ι uinallery h it lomtwlut cllatcu the i 1 1 ι hty 1 1 lu, eîeıııe mor but thit w ıs a lofs h ly ι ınıpcnfatıd t > mı lu lus abılıtv to dileourfe on tht k liibjeíts at once the gi levante aml tomtoris of ny loul , and lo lolacing w is his c-mpinv, that I yielded my fed tnttrelv to his con¬ duci in an enterprift fiom which I was. not dil incline J by nature.
The ammofitv ot the Barbary (late of Algiers had long been a thorn and an intuit to the fouthern part of ( hriften- dom, and, about the tune of which I am relating, their cruelties to humanitv, and mockeries of religion, furpatt even the rapacities and infidelities of tht I efbia^ pirates, the two Barbaroffas Ast hatles the Empero, had fiercely chaltifed the younger, Hayradin, when ufurper cf 1 ,. is, and for the fake of glorv expofed himfelf to rem'hrone a worthieb prince, it was not at all furprifing th<,t he fhould be aclive for a fécond vengeance, when the motives were the fuíTerings of h 6 bpamlh fubjeíts, «hich wereextenfive as their (horcs A political calm, thon c h b) moft thought but a prelude to frelh warfare, fpared him the majority of hi< forces, and n reducing Algiers it was feen that he would befides gratifying his fubjecls, greatly plealure himfelf, for towards Solyman the Ottomite, «ho w.s
paramount of Algiers, he had recently received an icceih η of enmity and m iligiiatioii, from that fovcre gn having t ik n in the kingdom of Hi ngar) by the moit flaunt pcitidv , vv Inch kingdom и ι» the claim ol 1 er Un md his bn thu 1 lu grandeur 1 1 hi» preparations ni¬ elu led the cinleavi urs ot every true Catholic, and ihc piicilhooJ generili) beftirred »here religion was lo deeply mtcrellcd llilJebrand fowastl epriell win 11 1 hive mentioned named, enthu- failtcallv deten lined to accompany the expediţii l, a id,attentive to his exhorta¬ tions, I lore! uvtd, formy heart boiled at the prof] eel of fighting arm to arm with the countrymen of thole »retches win, m ili ılı u, ( tinilh.h id robbed mc of the J ) t 1 e líielice Our reíoluttoii was no fouler taken tuan executed W e embarked with a dillinguiihed crowd ol Italians, and after an ι npleafant pifla b e w re landed on I e Urnan с aft at the lune time with
moft of the fi rees that compofed the gallan expédition»* Tht ftrength of our army wis fup pofed to ha\e wed 'he enuii) in m my oppofition to our dťbarkítuín, Kr ( u muiters wtre to tht number < t fi 11 26,000 men , a fo ct mtompir it It it 1 its diltintti as oi nobilit), Val ir, and fue ce, ind mconttítiblt l ) К Г thin the fiercLİl adverfity of tin, Uluiluc·. The general of the imaded, by n mie
Haften aga, was an emafcubud rene¬ gade, whofe double dereliêlion of bu- maiuty and religion lud, a long tune be¬ fore, recommended Imn to the govern¬ ment of the city and the piratic il jpph. tauon of l-S powers, a trull he had rifen to from α fubordmate baíenets m the eoi lair B u baroda s fenice. His crue'lv, rapuitv, and faithlelhitfs, outdid all i\- ainplt, e\ui of his ferouous inalltr, but Kıs le irer tliaílilunin' leenıed iiietit- ıblı, notwithllandtiiľ hi ability and de- ıptı uiun 111 wai, 1 1 iliipiiiporlion Ut was ıhı I. ret ht loınııımdeıl, it being а dif- ıi 0 ınıltd iflunbla/e of lif» than fiooo link-, ind Muís natnts οι rtfugces In m («iin dt Ilıt liirntr conqutit 1 t ılıt I UU1I1.111 Barbai ıfl ι, w hm it the litad if ( ι ,οοο men, b\ .in uittrior llringtii to ¡fiat we now m rihiil, war¬ ranted our prefumptıon nt \ utun , anti we loudl) reproached the temerity of Hafcen's haughty aud defiant anfw er to our fummons.
Thefe hopes were the more eflential to our cheerfulnefs, as the external pro- fpefl was gloomy m a furgy flrand and opponent fortifications, overhung by a turbulent fky, which threatened a hurri¬ cane in all the bodements of that climate Our approach to Algiers was unmoleft ed, except by the light armed Arabs who ikirnufhed along the wings, but notliinc, more could be done that evening th in the poftirg the troops »hen tht tern pefl, thit had brooded durmi, ι r voyage, began to declare itigli, bui ι, ufhered by а hemy ram ani an iui| tit ous wind. Our fuflinngs, τ« the nii^l t wore, were enough to fulxlue any 1 in tude , for our baggage mil с -inip em ι page being yet on fhip li írd we u ι totally unti eltéred from il c /t π I il dorm lhe winds, that guíhtd upi n us, »ere only rtlifhble with ıhı iflillance of our (pears, which we fluck in the earth to (lav us from falling , while the rain, flreatmn¿ down the mountain at
the foot of which we were, foal ed our feet and clogged t lem with hea| sof mud and land. Ihefe feverities of bodily fa¬ tigue, aggravated by lear for the faiet) υί the fleer, we endured till the d ιννη of morning, when our misfortunes were iharpened by the enemy. Hafeen, too crafty to mill ike oui condition and too mertilefs to fpire it, made а vigorous fally. His lolJicrs, nervous trom feeure relt and confident in otti everte, buril from the city por- tiK, ami rtilhctl dotili upon the ad v inted poll, vvliidi was loimed of Ita¬ li ins, am 11 w h n 1 w ь benumbed aiul ivhaullii! as we ννιΐ',ιι vvasnoflunie to flee 1 r 'uee ur, which we prouul- etioully did to a ltation 111 our r ar. 1 here the lolthers h id tune and cour¬ age to drip ie themfelves in a defenhve pi (ture, and, (trikin^ in аш ng them, I affillcd their eliorts to repi lie the Muf- fulnie t, who pur r ued then firft advan¬ tage nth hoind and impuus vocile a-
nons. But urenta! valour without bo¬ dily might was lnefletlual. deprived of the ufe of our mufquetry by the extnc- tion of the matches and the dampnefs of the powder, we were braved to our teeth. Ihe combat became that of fabre to feitueter, and terminated in the triumph of the lurks, for our aim» fcarceiy had the power to ujiraife them felvés, much lels to inflict and f dun the fierce drokes of death Amid this tumultuous dnle ol ferotity and tlelp u Hildebrand was a onipicuotis ob^ct the hardfhips of his order had ftaloiieel him tor the weather, ami hi» own cnthu fiafm inflamed him to the fi, lit Hi crucifix he carried was often as fırın the battle as our military burnir, mil tended to inflame both pani s at lent tl , atter much bloodlhtd in hi» relt ue, the men refolutely barred the purfuit of ihe infidels, and I iffered themfelves to be almoft unrefid ngty flau¿htered, in order to fecure hi reure.
By this nme the whole army was routed, and the major part of it, under the perfonal conduci ot the Emperor, dtew out to check this handful of her- banans. They retreated, but more m caution than in obligation ; and w e were indignant to fee them triuinpha 'ly re¬ enter the črty g ite frte from our .etaha- tion of the lol thev 1 id occafioned. Our lament mon over the killed ind the wound.el wtre lei n lufpendtd by e thci nt efts nul ithei lifliler,, for the di) was now dıicbl ,1, it that coulil be с ill I tin wluch rtpi I uted a teniptftuuis tvvilit_.hr I he uproar ι f the octan now ] drilled our evts, as dttung lhe m 0 ht it had ltunnctl oui cais, ind ve beheld the hrive n iv v, m vihi h vv ι t ν cry ne. ciíUrv for felt conv t metu t and uňcnfivc ope i un n, hurkel t i u f (ro, according tithe . apnee, f the vv ι e MI lhe cviK ι liuinuuty Itemed multiplied on our heael in a flint fpa e of nule , foi afte] ι fie ι, moit ol it el itnrhoi. I οι dil ι ι 1
mailed, had combated the elements wuh aftomfliing art and intrepidity, many of the chief dups of war were dallied piece meal upon the rotks, and a couiulcl» number of tranfports ftiandtd or foiindir- ed. It is int nctiv ible with what de¬ fpair wc ga/ed on thele borrir, viiii.e the Moors etovvtletl ılıtır rainparls to triumph in our diltuflts, uid iddctl t then poigiiantv bv in . ami inocktrit», at the lime time their vv ııı kını, putu murdered in our li„lu thole . 1 ihc llnp- wreeked nuriiiers vili > ι; until tht (li irt Conimunit tu ıisol hm our UllllUet n between the lieti nul ılı ıııııv vurcnn- piaetlulble , lo Hut'u V шок of reli I couli' le il tıııpted t ι lhe former thill the dili au lung ot tu ,> alu 'the Ilion, to Kielte time who ilta t 1 the Ii г., from the -vsrii e lut' Лг il » 1ht d ty vi s Ι , ƒ linte Ilı m ht ςΐοοπιν 1 our ft il , v luth V ere t! Util lliippiii-iivircen ire ly dellr lyeil, u il oui felice aban lotted tu I unnte or thi li .
1 iont this dngui li ol ignorance and ιιηα- 1 in mon we were the next day relieved by 1 boat that mn le (luit tu attain ılıt Ilı )*x with information from ıhc atinin al 1 1 tus bting dru in runott froin tht umy (. ipe Mitil 1 , whither it w , hb ıh tt ıhım 1 Ih .uld bt minim! and Hindarku!. Immediate movement, weie mailt ir i ni ji. uiu, uui vv ι turned uur backs on ilt tin 111 vilu. h tiptuie we h 1 1 h iped 1 u ι 1 nun h J ν 1 lie pains ul 1 1 r 1 mli vv re ем line, tor all tht f Iiii me we hil brought on fliore t. uı- ılrtadv txh miied, our thitf .ulı- 1 len ι I r thru diy s wis tht wild ro.th c f the countrv, of whieh the 1 tt.'i г I lectlfi ily I uied the refule t e u h ot' er. lhe 1 nıperor wai as pre ıı.ıuıuıt nth. quilines ot Ins mind .1 11 ''uk ol h.s birth, and greatly u kdte.l himfelf by his cires and tllort, ; dill ılımını; borie Iklh among the troops, I whom the molt vig rous he made to 4. 2
occupy the pods ot peril m the van and rear, but the fafer centre he compofed of thofe enfeebled by wounds, fickml», or fatigue Haraffed by the enemv, wc marched through ways almoft mipalbbly benured, and thece mpanv I was in bemg the conelufioit of tht armi, afforded tne fpectaclcs ot thin с nihti in» who went before , fome e f whiih were Ι > fl otkili as for a moi lent to ι blu r ne tl e fenfe ot one's own ι ι' imities ί he fl nuls tin- ufually mc eiledbj the runs, t verft wel their limit' ind n any, h ning dr | pi d wľh fau¡,uc while attcm| tın t with, were drowned the traili w ь bedrevved with arms and am ur , the emaci ited bodies of the deid ind dv ing, I me 11 whom hiving thrown them! 1 es ıle- fpurmijly down, rejeel d all entre uv to arife, inil were coiiftqiieiitlv bandı neti to death, which however neir, v cruelly hiltentd 1V the poniards of \r I tha' followed All this time Hildebrand adl rett t<-
ine in mi dan 0 cro is duties, difplay mg a tort tu le ái\S pr jinptľtiidc tx mplary even to tlie fultlitrs, honí he animated by hio fpi ihes ivi ilt vetuan wariiiirs were illeviatiiii, their langue oy the ť rovvin 0 awiy f lit ıı vveipoiis, he, though i n uk, elevated hi crucifix, nul peı- fıded in u difplay, notwithftandi ig our expollulati ns on the danger as it tir vv down upon us the liciccft t f ht ınfı lels, whofe fev ral hordes attackt I us as we entered thtir countrv Irti II th ft (kirmilhes we came oil with 1 il tv ai 1 honour, until а m re regular ti -н e t Moorilh cavaliy ip¡ it ulied juft ее came to ihe banks ol а nur whieh th. trmy had fordet! the с vve were obli e l 1 1 halt, ami с ppole ar ire e tha bi t u n an mllant Mr 1 1 mullet m Ic u ite r, İt tri! v ere il Hot U 1, Il Ue ι ni vv U fr m t yiill, vil , 1 u ιι ι И n ι ν ,ι rt ıhıl t- taektl lu itn n uihel M r 1 lie tumult of the ti ιΐ,,ι, id the tireni«
1' inces of tl ι eneo mer le] ar 'ul ι t t lucii а ılı 11 Ke lu n u ν ce u j u ι , ılı it tl en 1 cenne kn lu ılı u be i n the Λ Ι "ι m-i m in ih .li iiiinanp íl cf Ulti lee ¡unti un 1 Ile lupe ri liti .ut ne, vvhi was о loot. wb n ι but ıhı n, thit had returııej ui tie ι ppofıte buik to our au!, cica ludden dtfehargí our the rtvei the re port alarmed his cnurfer fo much, that it Humbled ovci the roughncfles cf tfu ground „nd threw 1 nn It would I ave been extremely l afe to have availed mv¬ felf of the adv-rnge fueh an accident gave me over а man uho not only had behaved with а gercrous gallantry during ι ur contefl, but, even when t liltiae c n the ground, ftudied delei ее, and, aiti. cip ıtıng my fuminoli , uieil .loud in the bj uufli tongue his Jiiuain ot fubiuillion A e'liferent obici t cngrotlcd niv minil , and in its ımmedııt execution í ¡eipt mto the faddle he nad loll, then givit g the lems to 'he horfe, vamlhed from his
ΐι,Ι t nulii lus f i'l w ι» who, having h iii md ti the nli ii if lib miih ip, ir te lipte 1 tO pi 1 fill 1 It w ι tl Π' Ι 1) intuitu n to return
it 11 η π ii\ ml mi p if ι (1 ι , but lhe lileiu ι I the ι u' [ i) c< iu leul nu tint Ι ν sı' priv d ol the Hubme ι I n ι о up iii ι mr ly ılıtır cfcıp" or dcPiuítim Another plan w ,s iu ceflary , andas to penetra e th couutrv ' where the river uas ¡noil likel} ι > con tinuc paiTibli, w ıs wha. I dul no r il ire, 1 rifoUulto regain us banks lower down toward» the fea. Accordingly, I made a 1 r r e c.rele to tv nd the Moors, who weie iriumpl ng it the ford, and find¬ ing ni)felf cbvtnis o lhe ilra nft ling Arı'ıs, I ileufed an ι iqeiuous expedient 11 ılıl ί 'e mv С lir ılım app ar ince A fplc.ı ıJ m„rı le wu ıh «η over the flanks ot the ln r e, of winch the M.ı r had pr .batıl Inj I luniijf, asiinped- ing hi»aa.viti in th < mil cl, in this I accoutred imlclf, and dilengagm the
coloni- from the (lall, brai.Ud them ari lully around my head they 'eprclenteel а tui bant ot nn interim die ; ¡о that wiih the flail in ny hand as a fpcir, which it really was, and the chief ad- itu.tage of a courier brilliantly capari- foned in lhe ftyle of the country, 1 boldly rode near feveral of the enemy, who were not curious in my countenance, as they venerated my appearance too high¬ ly to fufpeft its impofition. My attempts to pafs the river tailed as often as they were made ; yet I conti¬ nued along the fide, notwithflanding its increafing width, until I arrived on tlie coaft of the fea, into which it difein- bogued. Nigbt was now thickening, and fatigue fo overcame me, that I was unable to preferì e my laddie, Irom w hieb I difmounted, and fecarci! the horfe by a withered branch. Ihe Itormy whitt¬ ling ot the winds urged me to feek flielter ; and all inland lieiiung ri (telile valle, deftitute of mn.it, I attempted
the fands at the confluence of the river and the ocean , and, the tide being down, doubled the peint of the chik wluch opened for the river, and came unwet upi n the Urami The rocks were there tiemendoun to ttie tpprehenfion ; set, tempted to an eventful late, I, with the aid ot toy naff furpafled many ob- ltacles, and pcmtrating a wide cas em, th it n irrowed as it alcended, fat mvfelf ' within ι cuit), lhat was loftened b) а protuli η of fea weeds 1 there m- leiifit ly fell aflecp How loll), I flept my flor) mult determine, but the reafon ot my awaking was extiemely ftrange, it being the weight of fomething that iuddenly dropped upon me. However, my e 1rs were the lenfe chiefly alarmed ; for the loud dafhing of the furge pro¬ claimed the fall influx of the waters ihrough the cave, and .ounted for the colletbon of weed« on which I had thrown myfelf, carelefs to the being Í« allowed up by the wave, or their own 4.İ
dampnefs, which, during my dumber, had infecled my limbs with in ague But other horrois obliterated thefe , for recovering my hands to remove the op- preftton I have fpoken ot, I chilled m every vein to feel it a dead and naked body That the title had vvafhtt! it tht ther was imponible, as the fame wave mufl have abforbed me in a finular fate, but my perplexity was mflantlv hived by the harfh touts of ptrlons clofe to mv pnvacy, and f cretly peeping lurth, I defcried, by the Hunt ol tht moon that fell through the perforations of 'he rock», three bhck men in poflures of ceflation from labour What that 11 bour was 1 refufed to think, for tht li ath fome burden ititi was ftretched upon me , and I was planning how to nd my¬ felf of fuch difgulling company, when one of the negroes called aloud in a Ian guage rugged as his deme or, and as unmufical an anfwer reverberated from the interior, which I no longer doubted
to be their haunt 1 was in one of thofe fituations when the rudefl promp. titude out values all (tudy , fo, in defpair of better means, 1 gradually rofe beneath the body, which I elevated till it (lood upright At the like mom -t a fourth negro lifued from an angular recefs, bearing a kind of orch, and its beams, in themfelves awlul, falling on the corpfe added inex clfibfy to its ghafl- hnefs All the negroes darted 11 fu- pcrltitious terror of its felf actuation ; and when the boldelt darted his fizgig mto its bread and they beheld it rer-ain upright, they hooded their eyes and fell on their fares Mow was the oppor¬ tunity of my unfeen cfcape frt m the ca¬ vity into which I recad the bodv , but, as the ocean flooded the cavern nearly up to where I dood, my only way was to penetrate further on, which I imme¬ diately did, with fpeed defperate as my fortune, for ruining up the paffage, by which the negro had defc ided, I found
myfelf entrapped into the tery dwelling e/the wretch«« I fled Λ negrea of repulfive ughneA, and W infant of European countenance, Aarted at my entrance the uoiuan ap¬ peared to homage my appearance, while the child ran g'adly towards me, and, taking hold o. r the mantle, bur Л into a grievous crying, ihat йгиск me as pro¬ ceeding fi om difappomtment, when t looked ui my face. However, I was ' j flurried to attend to other than my own bitty, to for*aid whwh I ran to mc Begret», and, embracing her hands, gefticulated my entreaties Uiat (he would conceal me. She ftroai.d my cheeks, and teftified her admiration of their variance ш colour from her own, nil her companion« audibly approaching, (lie burned roe into a reed» fcreened by a juds nutting of fo toarle a texture that it permuted me to be a fpeuator of what- Cvernajfed. Tkf plate I looked ιΛ»ίΐ a large
ciicular cavern, evidently defigned by nature, for the dome was overhung with vall unpen lmg crags that threatened to crufli all beneath Not far from the recefa in uhich I was hid was а iballoir cavity that ferved as a fire place, it bemg then bla/ing w ıth wood 1 hefe remark» »ere hardly completed before the four negroes entere ι 1 hey redoled the из; after tbcin, with muiiifefl fymptoins of that с mfternatıun into *hıch my im¬ portare had thrown them , al d to the conlequent mterrogatii ns of lhe negrefs they returned a vvonderous account of what they had experienced, as was de- monllrated by their ex| r r ıve geifuns. It feemed that the negrefs received fome gieat diiappointment from then difafter, lor (he appeared to upbraid their puliU laninnt), and the), to appcafe her, took а rude grafp of the child, an propofed it a» a fubftitute for what they had loft. What could be their defign was at firft lncomprehcnfible, but extreme was my
horror to ft- them ftnp the pretty inf nt in evident | repantton for its flaug! ter Having done that they elev ited it an а broad projection juft befide my conceal ment, an ι ictrograded to the oj pofite fide cf the cave, where each | ι ed his infallible dart to transfix its ten kr body Unable to refrain, I raiftd mifilf to a chafm clofe above where the mtant was, and, lowering my arm, Inntchedit t tny bread juft as the firft dart wouii 'ed the place whtnee it afcended In this th n 1 was too confpicuous to be miftikrn for any thing fptrittitl, and the ncgr is with one will aimed tow irdstht matting, but the regrefs, who for forni reafon hid oppoftd the child's death, row pi evented mine by expanding herf If before inv pnvacy lhe wretches wavered, and all "iy hope depending on the negri fs, I refolutely difcovered tm felf, and ad¬ vanced forth Seeing their female carefs me, they approached with looks of at¬ tempted foftnrfs, that wnnkled into
frowns foon as they beheld the mantle ; but agam calmed when they confulted in) countenance I was now examined as to how 1 became pofteffed of the mmte 1 anfwered, by contelluig the ov.iitr As this w,sa dileourfe of figns, m> ι ifulc in ι mule my i\| reliions am¬ biguous , for thty tiuleonceiveJ that I bad ¡lam the Moor, and.juytully linking tlmr hands, they w hu lul round ηκ in а delirium ot in un¡ li ind approbation, tl it dtnoted how i iarci'cd tliey were in ılı s un ike I bey continued to opprefs ine with tokuis tit ıhtır favour uid pointing tt> the clnlil, cndeavouied to паке me undciilind thu its rtlitionfhip to ihc Mt οι ш ule it a p ıper faenfue to iheir vengeance But this Ι ι blinately re'ufed to со ι prehend, and retained the poor hale creature m my arms they at length w ived their fohcitude for its de¬ livery, and began to f urnifh forth a table wi,h tne bell of their cheer. Of this I declined to partake, for their indulgence
m liquors proved them not to be ot tha children of Mahomet, and the horrible idea fucceeded in my minJ, that they were of the worfhippers of fire, and in¬ tended the infant an offering to that fuppofititious deity. 1 his con|tct ure, to¬ gether with the naufcous flavour and ap¬ pearance of the flelh »hey put before me, difgufted me frem their company , and, fitting aloof, 1 contemplated them while they fed witii a voracity fivage as riieir exterior Their tact» were ifthedeeptft Ethiopian dvi, featured in the utmolt ot Ethiopian deformitv, and ravaged with difeafes common to them all Mem time the child which was a boy near two years old, drooped into a lound deep, notwithltanding the vociferous re velry of the negroes 1 hefe, at length, drunk themfelves into a drowfinef» pro¬ pitious to the negref» who, whde fufler- ingwith the ccmpetiuon of their tender- Bedes, had fecretly figmfied to me her preference of mine She budled them
to their (lumbers m another part of the e ivi, and quickly rtturned o me with wild lool s of pleafure. Whde fhe was aillent I had difpofed my fleiping nurf- hng on the ground, and now I h iltened t . uncióle the way , but f <· chei ked me as 1 paded, and fignıficantly threatened, il eicape were then attempted, to recai the negroes 1 knew myfelf at her will, but endeavoured to glo¿e that know¬ ledge with a fmile. She refleeled one as extraordinary in its ughnefs as mine w ıs in bitternets , and, to my extreme fu^fafe, heaped fref faggots to reflore the fire fhe then, to my extremtft hor¬ ror, tried the edge of а knife, and catch¬ ing up the child, approached me with unequivocal invitations to banquet on it* umoe tit flelh By this action was t ich ıııyfte'y c\ pounded. Ihe circuinltance ot the lie id body, probably fome fhip w -ikid nu-iner, the fubfequent attempt on the cluld, and the ftrange qualme ot tl e
Aedi thev had wil, hım ıııttü^ıbk was ill tin , ι ' m I pc cene I ni)felf tu be in the iu let\ ot IlllKrcUlts, win preicd upon their own miatt' wh r food was their difeafe, chin hed I \ ι ι feeiitti s ot in elei urfe with this one wo¬ man How rcvericd was n.) cftunati u of her behaviour пом its principles-Were detected' lhat Ihe was peeufh when her gang of paranours entered empts · handed, that fhe was willful to poltpone the death of the child, and that (he re¬ frained from eating the (hare allotted her at fupper, « ere now accounted for, by her complimenting me with a delicacy the- had wilhed to referve tor our fecret epicunfm My rejeftion of this offtr e\pofed me to mitant foln.it iti ms not 1 Is difguflini, but m) h "r r w ıs t о invincible to be dıfguıl d, and the dil appointed wretch beca ne the fpectacle ot a fury, fo venom >u> weie her look Ever as 1 moved contrary to her choice, ¡he pettified me b) preparing to ar ;ufe
tlie negroes, and when flie petulintly I led tny aitempts to toueihite her, nel hgiK d to nie that I Ihould f ,ΙΙονν tei ιην bed, I did not dire to eh'pute her will, although to forfake the child cut nt deeped of all. bhe led me mto a lefs divifi m of the ι vt, where her drunken companions vv w e ftretched in а row before а fplendid ti ime, each entirely covered by Ns ma', as the humidity of the roof defcended in Iar¡re drops, bhe motioned me to lay down, 1 obeyed, and, cov ring me with my mantle, head and all, (he left me I he pecuhanti'S of my fituation ν o ild not permit compofure. I could onlv (eel to feir the treachery of the ne- ¡ ref», nor think of elfe than the defeat of tint treichery My incompetency to . ntell lo ni mv neetflitated a recourfe to d atageni, ml, filently nfing, I ex¬ changed coverings wi h the negro that flept next to me, then, leaving hun, I
went to the other end, and couehed bc ueath the mat I had taken lhe uiidoin ot this behaviour was foon wofully confirmed, for peer ι ţ, through a vent in the mar, 1 dcfcried the negrefs creeping in a cautious pace towards her diiţruiied countryman I he knife was m hei hand already pointti!, and, when 11 e was approached within a convenient diftance, ti e bounded on hei prey, griped bis head between her knees, and penetrated his bread with four or five dabs in fo immediate a luccefîion, that the creature expired without a mur¬ mur. To my great comfort, (he then retreatetl, and the body remained co Vered, but while I was ftuiiying how to anfe, the fide ot my coverlid w as loitiy í e ated, aad the murderefs ľ.iel u der, an I couched b, my fide, ¡,η il ed wnh lier bloody bufhiefs, ind i 0 norant of her el ublc midake in her ν clini aid gil lint Ihepaflìons that hit. atrempied
me, were not at all dirmniihcd by the rnurder that lud av enged their fcornful treatment, but my cars were engrofled by moans of a remotenefs and acutencfs that denoted their u teraiue by the dear little infant, whom I feared the impaf- fioned nnfcreant befide ine had left in lonu poigmn torture On her thev had no effect, tor die was juft ab nit 1 1 em¬ brace me m her loithi mit in s, whin my natu-r, hardened to her own barla¬ rı y, was guilty of г deed fituation ale ne coiltl extiile I turned on ihe wi man and Ί - loullv tţralped my hands .bout her thr iát 1 ht y were mailed with ir n "auntlcts and her breath, unable to el ape in the lead leunid, writhed her lie ly in com allions matlntls could only retuft to ι minitene ŕ t length her notion tr lnqiulhl 1, and I arole to I tl tht litttrelt pint, I ever in my life fel' t fi„ht of a 1 rtathlels be ly I I iiliWul it its h imet dsfigiiremm m I fpte 'ılv betook myfelf to tin 1 r
compart ment of he cavern remorle immediately fubfided, for I thtrc beheld the poor child in utter nakednefs, its little limbs expanded and fecured on a boaul, which wds placed at fo artful a diltance from in extravigant fire os could infure us ben g roaíted to diath lhis fpeäicle fubdued all my гаце, and I could no' retrain from tears 1 ihlui- gageu it, afliiai,eil and footlud its pun , and ran to the place of t,refs luir, whether 1 had forgotten the e\ael f,i t, or the itone was íminovc II bv a Im r lt hand, I ciuld not determine tertun it w as all 'hat my mielit was v un,thon, h in lhe end that mig it buanie dclpiir One only reh uree now offen tl, vv İm li was to return thn u^h the eavetl ι poft, ind (tek an outlet th re, ι η nt appt red w herun 1 was I 'is να m audacious ine dure, but there vi i n ılıtma tve, fo Utrdim I vinii tli 11! I, 1 retrod tht w αν My pruq ılınıl it Ike to lave been iitinuu , t t I e in
uno lhe preltiiie it lhe iiegrues belore I noticed them to be jiifeii di.d buly .but the limale, vviiuíe difiiül gio.ins lulpakc the difficulty, but certuni) of her diltoluti >n. iheir eves palled with inn erneut ii m mvlelt to the iiianl.e, until t' ev I. he Iti cimi' civ bv plucking ι 1 e Ilel illlelVelllg the CorjlcU- Ileľh VI 1 11 thev gl .1 en with lüol s Ul" Il el hy VVrUh 1 '.ИГ 1 l UMI tO le ι lllell Chilis dll.ulvid 1İ10 pctri- hetiollof 11. tienes, 111.1 I il led По' tO deliberate α dei nd no paflage was ι fille In v\'i n I u uhi efcape, fave a ringed nuis nm п.е without hefta n 1 rin nito lins, it feemed to hive ln η iliiliurul by lune earihipiike, ud il mim, up ihe m le ituies et its τ ky 1 ', , 1 απ ι .ι ' ihe cüinıııeııee- iiieiitil . mlel) ne tul galici v, w hich 1 ite 'lv uleiul the eive ni а fpiral Imeti ıı t .i svei) im, nut Vp this 1 11' 1 m li le I e ei tl m nladnels, f, ι liti ρ Ulti licei İlle 'l Miti 111 1 l/dli!
and difficulty, my only guide being the unfteadv flatties from the fire below, that redly gleamed acrofs my track 'gainft the perpendicular rock on my other hand , and this rock often ob¬ truded into my path fo terribly, as 1 1 force me to its ui'ern-eifl brink where it overhung the mteuor of the civ t В it I ceafed not my dep till anotl ir w ıs impoflible , for an end was p it to in pr grefs and my hopes by a cırcı 1 r chafm, on which vert,e my ferpent ı e path concluded, and whth crow neu the central roof ot the cave the cave being ol a conic form, this chafm blunt I its pinnacle The firft glanet down n t > the cave terrified me trim rev it w m ι depth fo infumi, thit the fpectacle btle w were furpriln glv dimu Ilici I iccoiled m mental in I I ufual m n ıı Ilı, f r the exclamations ol ırv j ui fliers w re thofe of allured triumph, and ι v arm were almod nervclcfs to wield my lghty fwo d However the Iptt 1 ol
my defpair being fwifter than lhe fpeed of their revenge, I had a moment in which to determine on a return to "ie hit narrnwnel. of the path, there to confita thtm to the laft Had fuch a conflitl taken place I yet fhiver to reflect on the probable horrors o' its event, as the part 1 had dttern ined on was not a yardın breadth and was entirely un- deftnded bv any thing to prevent one lalle Hep Irom launthmg you into eternity, In iu iinmcafurabit precipită¬ ri n doviiivv irds to а loti with tht dead bodits but I w as doomed to anothtr lite, ftr in halting to tht plate, 1 inftn- liblj pau'ed en the edge of α hole three nr four lt"t m diameter, »luch wat funken into the ground \\ hy I (looped 1 could hardly tell, as I had Ihot patt this place btfore w ith a de„rec ol aringhi , 1 ut furelv it w is ıht mltınct ot ıııy eye* which nvetted ılıt .ıltives on the Itııer- molt interior ot the holt, and obliged ine to obferve that it was enlightened by vol tu R
the torch« of my enemie«, who were threading the circle to wind up to me It was evident they »ere pafling juft ender where I ftood , a« ev dent was it therefore that this hole was perforated from the floor of my paflage to the root of theirs, the intermediate reck not being many yards thick I his difcovery was followed by a telolution, of which the idea and the execution were fhorter timed than can be the narration I dt termined to defeend bv the hole A moment'»dthly would be inevi'ably fatal, as the negroes we t faftly ene t \ aflinL, the cave, wh ch rotundity fliortened with the height, yet how to difpofe of the child who, enfeebled by thi rapidity of my motion, by motionlefs on л у arm I had mentally fworn its par nerthip of my deftmy and I renewed mv oath neither to forfake or yield it, yet, befide that my arm was benumbed with its weight, I now abfolutely required the complete liberty of my limbs, and heaven
furely infpired the happy expedient which I adopted, for, pafling the infant beneath the belts that croffed my brcaft. I uicafed its extremities within my vetture, and fo fecured it next to that heart which glowed for its deiner). Thus precioully fraught, I lowtred my- elf down the itk It wai ot the exact /e to itlmit ie wuh lahti, and the fs< rtlcuifi s ot it fides denoted it to be, ilike the relt of that wondrous cave, the irchiteeturc of nature m one of her lubterriiiein caprice» its crookedne!« ıleıvıl lieliicnded my defcent and my t crccv Never fhall I forget my joy when i heard th. nerrroes rufli ove! iti upper mouth with (bouts of their cun- v uhon that I wasinextrtcal Iv entingled it the top, to whith thci were рго- ee ling boon is tht y paifed I dropt ('in ugh on rhe lower paflage it was of a Ihallow height, and the concavity where 1 fell preierved me from tumbling over Λ new fpint leapt into mv vein*, 2
and 1 ran down lhe way I had arifen exhilarated almoft to inebriation Hut as the circle brought me o poftte to rhem, one unanimous acclaim of dil covery was thouted by the negroes. As I had the (tart fo much, they being it the uppermoft chalni, a doubt of my out- flripp ng them lei med unrea'onaMc Vait was my amazement as to delay my progrefs, when, inltead of retreading the Ipiral way, thev, one aftei the other, fprung through that in h htiul chatin, and, notwithltanding the w Jetiiiigof the cave, dropt, (lid, or bounded, fiotti crai' to cleft and cleft to crag, with in al nolt mvifible celinu, thai half perni ided me 1 was contei ding with aerul demon My nope to trinshx them with the ι own arrows, while in mid air lufpcnlicn, was confuted by thci' delceut equalling my own. I ga»ed around the cave with the frenzy of a farewell look, bi t w Ι ι before I had overlooked, the varyui¡
ims low dıfıovırıd u was ai ορ· ] slite cutlet, Ule belide the hre cavity. Alth< ugh ihe negroes' were alighted be¬ tween me ami the ) lace, I (hot pall t uni Ivvtltly 111 the cluni they threw athwart me. \s 1 rulhed by the ваше, I caught at a projecting piece of the nnng, to ' 'ht me through the future darknefs. Whether u were unconnected I neither du' confider or obferve, but it proved to be the Item of a branch, and the mad lorce with which 1 dragged it iway brought after me the principal part of the flames Ί hey inimedi itely choked the entrance, and 1 ifurmountably de- barred the negroes whole outftretched 1 tnds almol' dwelt upon my lhouldcr 1 wrenched fc rth α 1 lcbiand with u erlort that impelle I me breathlefs againlt the fide of the palfigc lhe loolencls of the military cartouche I wore haiim peded u y activity I knew it to contain tome charges of powder , lo, plucking it irom tht bc' , I pitched it among tlie R 3
conflagration Its exp fonwasiccon panted with fhneks, of terror or tii)iirv I could not particulars fi r agam I had recoii'le to my feet I plied thci ι through all the variations of the nan w ferpentme paflage, till the purfuit ot my enemie» echoed m mv e rs and tl e gleams of thur tordes brightened the roof bVore me At that inftant the paflage exrmd^dinto a cavern, on which oppofite fide a momentary ghmpfe w t difcernible Abriereoffrcfliair gufhcj paft me immediate ly, fa- as I could, I threw my torch down a long excava tion to my right, and as the negroes chafed me by its light, they doubtlef were milled Гог myfelf, I rufhe 1 towards the oppofite place, though it w as now darkened The fenfation which had vexed me, of being brough' by my incautious hafte to the verge of fome gulph, was now partly realifed , for my ftep was miftaken in its prefent confid ence, and I funk, but without falling,
mid-deep m water At the mitant of my misfortune the moon was di elted ot clouds, and the furface of the waters was enlightened by her beams 1 re¬ cognized the identical recefs where 1 had flept, whence I had madly flown to the danger» 1 hid ene wnteicd, an whither I was now moil fortunately reconducted for deliverance, a canoe of the negroes being rifen with the tide. In th· bot'om of this I depofited the infant, and, no'. withstanding the oppofition of the tide, forced myfelf out of the cave by the ftrength of my arm ag unii the craggy fidea. But when I doubled the mouth of the cave, the power of the open fea had nearly ruined me agamft the cliffs, on which I could barely prevent my being dallied by the intervention of a paddle, and oftentimes of my hands. Ihus ι coafled till the river opened, up whic'i the inland current tranfported me with a rapidity almoft terrifying. My paddle fphntered and ufelefs, tht M
barque was abandoned to the force of the waters, and when the morning dawned I found myfelf advanced up 'he river fir beyond my yefterday's know¬ ledge. 'I he day enlivened and fhortly dif¬ covered to me the vicinity of a fplendid caftle, of which the garden terraces ae- fcended to the border of the nver, w here а gay pa/i"'onwas peninfulated by th» abrupt turning of ihe channel M hile I vas gazing on this grand fpcclacfe, and my infant companion was denoting a joyful recognition, the canoe drifted on fliore At the tune I climbed the bank, a 'oud harmony of trumpets, cymbals, and ínftruments peculiarly African, an¬ nounced а clan of cqueftri in Moors 'I hev were returning from triumph int purfuit, for they galloped from tint quatter whither the ( tırıllan armv had marched and haltened towards the caftle. Preceded by his harbingers rode the Mooriih chieftain whom I had com¬ bated. Ί he child rapturoufly extended
its little hands and fprung towards him lhe train paufed, w hile the Moor viewed the infant and mvfelf with mute amaze- mert Ihofe who hid githered from the calti« to gratulate his approach, dif- relpecitd all five me, from whom they difengaged the child, and prefented it to the father with fome bitter accufa- tion, which, however unintelligible in us language, was not to in its effens i was bonn J, wi hout liberty of defenoe by v ord or deed, and was intuited in both , tor thev held meat the portico of th rath, thar, is the cavalcade filed inward, each migi t fpit upon me as he ρ tiled Η ν could 1 have borne this drt idful humiliation, h id I not beheld among the C hnil in ipi ils a bleffed cru¬ cifix ' liereneed d not deliberation to relnţn me to . lat my G d had pcrfon¬ ally and now emblematically endured . my laft paflionate emotion was reflected to Hildebrand, who rode a wrathful captive in the iriuinphant proceflion.
Not more than an hour wa« fpent m filent imprifonment before I wa» con¬ ducted into the prefence of Orafmyn lie was encompaffed by a princely attend ance, and among them flood the execu¬ tioner» of punithment With a tolerable fluency of the Italian language, he ibtmly qucfticmed me as to my poflef¬ fion of hu child I anfwered with a cır- eumftannal narration He »as mollified, a» it appeared the child had been miffed from the garden terraces at an earlier hour than that of oi r encounter The blacks were hkewife notorious from their former flavery in the callle, of which thar hornd conduct was doubt¬ lefs the revenge The Muflulmen, whofe bigotry was difappomted by the acquittal of a Chiilhan, were obliged to acquiefce m lts juftice , and hardly had I con eluded my directions for the difcovery and feaure of the negroes, before Oraf myn defcended, and took me 13 his arms with gratitude aid affection. Said
he, " \ ou have revived the emprefs of my foul and the mother of my infant give a tongue to your utmoft defire, yet (hall it be outdone ' I foliated my li¬ berty. " ' fif yours," was exclaimed 1 fingled Hildebrand from the Chnftian captives who were arraigned at a di¬ ltance, and demanded the like for him. " G ranted," returned the noble Moor " but not that al ne " He then ap¬ pointed our refidence, and ordered Haves tc attend us, and we feparatcd with a cordiality at which the fupenor Moors fcowled with mingled anger and envy My extolment of Orafmyn was impa¬ tiently interrupted by Hildebrand, who impeached its truth, and denounced hu own and Heaven s vengeance for the im- pietv of his captivity and the blalphem- ous difplay of the crucifix It was impoflible to afluage him, for he curfed with facerdoul lervency the land, the manüon, its mailer, mul ut inhabitants.
Thus were employed the hours, for the meridian fultrinefs confined us to our lodgings, from the lattices of which we beheld, with furpnfe, the indefatigable labour of numerous workmen, who were conftructing a circular building, fimilar to the lilts of a tournament Neither was its purport unlike, for we were in¬ formed that the folemniratton ot the Moorilh victory was intended that even¬ ing this was a frefh aggravation ol Hildebr-Jid's rage, and he contemptu¬ oufly rejected the invitation which I ac¬ cepted. Ihe delicacy of Oralmyn, in wiflung us to enjoy as a fcitival what elfe might hdve feeintd a triumph ov er our misfortunes, ftruck me much , and 1 wondered how an unfocial African hail imbibed luch urbanity of fentiment. However, 1 after» ards found the ar¬ rangement of the ceremonies abfolutely ttquired fome conduct, which life, I «as fure, he would have excluded, as it was offeniive to шу fetungs.
for the preliminaries to the game» were the oftentation of the catholic ■'biljards, which vve-e trailed around the hits m humble contrad with the victo¬ rious crelcent the red of the pillage en- rued amidit the vociferation of ? multi¬ tude ot lingers, who, 111 alternate chorus and recitation, lauded the mv inciblenefs ot Mahomet λ\ hen th'! odious com¬ mencement was pilled to the great de¬ light ot 'he menials, Orafmyn and his coucubints brilliantly apparelled, be¬ ca ne vifible e η an exalted and canopied hat I was beyond lhe power of nice dilenmination, being accommodated on tne reverie o! the barnei, among the t hr 'tian captives and llaves , the latter of whom wert fo numerous, I could not conceal а contemptuous furpnie at their having omitted to attempt a tiehv erance, whtn their guards wtre fo detached and the army ol their countrymen fo near. I hey anfwertd my reproach by laymg, Orafiny η had done more julhce
to thar courage than did I, fur he had lodged them in a fecurity which pre¬ vented it» exertions My wonder and attention were then engrolled by the ap¬ pearance of the three negroes, who, in· dead ot the fetter» they deferved, were dignified with turbans and caftans, and ш place of executioners were accompa¬ nied by Tuikiih men I foon under¬ ftood that the pover and bigotry of the latter had reprieved the negroes from an inllant fate, and conditioned an en¬ tire pardon to attend tbeu- abjuration of idolatry and profeffion of 1 urcifm an offer the wretches gladly embraced, and which was fancboned by the mother herfelf, before whom the profelyte» were now brought, to pay the homage which 1 noticed the chief lady to re¬ ceive My exclamation againft the Ma¬ hometan bigotry that could pardon fuch nufcreants, wa» checked by a liflenmg flave, «ho told me to afcribe it toChriftian mercy. He continued, " The mother,
who pardons them, и a Chriflian " " An European Chnftian î ' ·* \ et ' A feniation ilmofl agonifing rent me, as I mentally remarked, how might my be- loved Camilla be like to that woman. Juil then the negroes retreated, and dancers fucceeded Ihofe voluptuouu Fandangos, the relics of the MoorıûS predominance in Spain, which, although «hey are chaftened by Chnftian referve, Mill are indecorous m a great degree, I now beheld in heir licentious originality. My eyes were fhock-d, but my heart was lightened, for 1 felt that Camilla would never lend the fanclion of her prefence to fuch flagrant indecencies, that however ibe refembled that woman m misfortune and mercy, a praife· «orthy du' milanty exifted in her de¬ licacy. 1 he performances varied to fporti of agility and courage 1 w tnefled equei- tiian proficients, in \;hom fhould have originated the fable of the Ceatauri, run.
nere, whofe flettnefs took away the breath of lookers on ţ ¡capers, who ap¬ peared to hover in the air My gaze was rivetled on them, but my thoughts were ofien occupied with the image of Ca¬ milla More arduous deeds enfued. Men aud boys grouped themfelves in pyramid- teal heaj · : fome heaved ponderous weights, and hurled them to a diltance ; others, of a phrenetic demeanor, tore large ferpents through their teeth, gorged them while living, and pretended to imbibe numment where the ignonnt imbibe venom. To this ditgulbng ini- pofition followed feats ot linte Anarti- 6cial encounter took place, fo clofely rt- fembung the reality that feveral of the combatants were m extreme peril of their limbs Wrellhng was now proclaimed. An anxiety to approach the Chnftian lady had all along dilquieted me, but bow to gratify it occurred not till that moment, when a loud mout accom¬ panying the overthrow of one of the
vvrtftlers I determined to difputt with the v iítor tor the pn¿ which was be. Itowed at her 'eet With this idea I wa ftepping forth, when the flave with whom I had con¬ verted detained me, to »ík If I were fo mad a» to thmk of oppofing fuch a com· bnution of ftrength and (kill í The queition irritated me to fterner refolu¬ tion, and I wa» confronted with the triumphing wretller, before I noticed him to be the luflieft of the negroes The fignal clarion founded, and we fprung to each other's embrice, with ferocity ι η his part, emulation on mine The ceiiflict was brief as it was awlul Three times 1 loll my footing, and was uplifted in the arms of my finewy antagonist, b it vain were his endeavours to cafl me, for I adhered to him like the c 's of an· adder The fourth tune, while m that fiate of fufpenfion, by an extraordinary effort 1 dafhed him beneath me, accoro. panying his overthrow, till that infured,
I bounded upwards, and alighted with ι ly feet on his fenftlcfs breafl I he tl outs of app hult bung confined to the Chnftian fpectators denoted the bigotry cf the Muflulmen had difpofed them in favour of the converted negro A fur¬ ther proof of this wa» their macerano- а ous feiaure of me, on their remarking the deathly ftillnef» of the fallen mif- créant , and the forfeiture of the life of that Chnftian by whom a Mahometan »night be flain was fignıficantly tetlif ed to me Orafmyn, fupenor to every feil¬ ing but thofe of the heart, defcended his «mmence to my defence tue pried» re¬ tired with the negro, when he caft over my fhoulder an eltn i«ble handkerchief, an inviolable pledge among the Orient. alili» , then tboaking hi» beard, he fwore by the Prophet and the Koran to fulfil my liberation of a dozen of my captive and enüaved countrymen, on whomfo- arer my choice might fall Meantime be invited me to enjoy the wreath of
viclory, and the benevolence of her tht mother, whofe offspring I had faved I railed my mquifmve eves, and m that identical mother, the voluptuoufly ap- ptrellcd concubine of the Moor, I be¬ held Camilla horror petrified ray fune lions, but the modell refrainment of her gaze lekindled all the memory of our former love. I fhrieked abroad the an- guifh of my heart. She penetrated the perturbation that difguifcd me, refpond· ed a cry of terror , ftaggered, drooped, and frooned into thofe arms which prevented all others. I wai blind to aught hut her, carelefs for aught but our reparation My tone was frantic u I exclaimed, " This is my choice ; ever, of all ending womankind, the choice of Claudio '" Orafmyn'i fctmetar wat returned to its (heath when I declared my name, and he echoed it in anguilh The attendants gathered to liberate the yet fainting Camilla, but I eppofed them, and demanded of Orafmyn the
performance of his oath that it «a» in- violable as irrevocable, I appealed to the tmen. Ί heir lookswcre thofe of malicious bigotry, and at the fame in It ari t Camilla wai releafed fromme. I raved, t wept, I implored Orafmyn, who wai fcarcsly fu- penor In condition. 1 attempted to de« rain the palankeen, on which mv manı. mate love repo fed, and, when exhaulled 1 th-ew myfelf on the earth before the bearer», who cruelly trod over me That indignity inflamed me to a burning fun , and, anfen upon my feet, t darted to¬ wards the Clinician fpectators, and called " To arms " Ί he trophies of arms and armour were ínítaitlv turned to a deathly purpofe, and a fcattered combat co¬ vered the fo late gay plain Myfelt, with a tew others, forced tlirough the throng that deb rred us from the palankeen , but when I would have laid my hand upon its trappings, a Moor interfered The wild ftroke 1 ga e was wardtd by Orafmyn, whom I madly all.uleJ dtadly
wue my aims towards his heirt, yet wa» I fenfibie he acted the part of a repeliam, and curbed tháťikill to which was my breafl often expofed unguarded At length my wrath was refiftlefs, fave by the fubtilty he adopted, for turning from me, his blade fiercely waved above the ex nullite head of Cannila Left, ma as myfelt, he actually would ftnke, I remained motionlef., unul the palan 1 een, accompanied by Orifmyn in tlu- hkc threatening attitude prohibitory ot purfuit, dtparted from my fight My fui es died awav as it difappeared, and tl e firft ι bfervition of their renewal was 1 fore hi carriage by two of tht ne- g ts, tht lecond, my confignment to a difmal dungeon I relapltd into a numbering infcnfi., bihtv, in which I wa» gently dillurbed by a noil y motion befide me a gleam ot light di/zlmg my eyes, they reclofed berorc their aw aking could be difcerned by Onlniyn, uho »as pacing within my
pnfon, a dtwn ftrord m hi« hand A fécond glance atqiuttod bun of any muntemi» defign, for hi» fwarthy afpecl «a» \ fpedacle of tearlef« anguilh The fudden drreenon of hn glance encoun tered mme, and tbc next moment we ftood opponent to each other He pre vented my upbraiding by a fign for filence, and an invitation to follow at the fame trnie, to prevent rrty hefitanon, he gave hit fword Ό my hand We pafled through aa outer porch, in which were the two negroet aflecp, and when 1 came into the open air, I found the night had long fet m There I flopped, and afked Orafmyn To what exertion of fa» ty-anny he would lead me > In an indignant mode, he declared his inno cency of my evening captivity, which wa» folely afcntnble to the Imen, whofe zeal had determined my pamful death, fhould the negro die of the injuries he had fuf fered m our wrefthng Clearly 1 under tood my obligation to Orafmyn, whofe
conduci won me the more a» I could perceive m hım a Item attachmeat to hi» faith, from which cruel mnufters, at perd of their cenfure, he wa» delivering me Yet had I earlier known that not reraorfe, but magnammity was his mo¬ tive m my liberation, I flıould have re¬ jected it, but, thu» furpnfed mto grati¬ tude, 1 returned him hi» fword, half aihamed to have taken it, and attempted to utter my thanks He was deaf to my addref», and a fimple repetition of " Fol. low me'' were the only words he fpoke. We continued through the caftle, till, entering a marble court, ornamented with fculpture and refrefhed by foun¬ tains, wc mounted a gallery by which it was encompaffed, whence you might mfpect thofe apartments which lattices opened into the ga lery Before the duet lattice Orafmyn paufed, and then defired me to look within. I witncfled a fplendid ap- invent, wherein were many hantllbme Oaves, who were labouring
with the needle and Aiutile, nccordnig to the directions о a beautiful youm, girl her mien wai volatile, and her apparel Iuxunoully ncntal A« I turned «way, Oralmyn kindly bad me look again the lovelmefi of her perfon vane I accordmgto her expreflions and geftures, and, mindful of Camilla at her age, I tenderly fighed Orafmyn miftook my feeling» ι юг griping my hand he told me She wa, his filter, charming as an h lyfian houn, and as amiable too He prelfed the tighter as with emotion he added, " Become my brother, »ho ar now my rival O ir hands were imme diatelv (eparated, for 1 exclaimed, 1 h ir hu fword might reach my heart, but love for other than Camili 1 never could 1 he darknefs (kreened hi« countenance, but the voice was ftiere which pro nounced, " Yours may be a bloody ob- ftiiacy " He told me unul morning was given for my deliberation, and we parted I inditing on bt oath, he Шеш1 y refcrved
When I came to my lodgings, Hil¬ debrand receia td mc with expressions of his knowledge. Our conversation was warm, for he persisted that tenderness to tht Moor were 'mptous, it being mj duty to rescue Camilla, at any rate, from so unchristian а life of concubinage, her salvation depending on it. M/ heart was disposed to acquiesce with his argu¬ ments; and the mght was employed in devising how to cbey lhe ι. The next diy occurred my inter¬ view with Orasmyn He beard my re¬ jection of hi« sislir, and of his every other proflcr wuh than hty gru f tint ι illy pattiul mc, till lit iu«vicred to my pltadmg the invilii ilion of lib oith, .Then rcrcive her is «he ι« for other- |vvisc never «hill she pn fiom mc. loy Inmgeil meto i «leía cucii drove, vvhilhcr lie puniteti, but, vvh it icre my чеп-а- t on« when opening th it alcove I beheld ιι ν Camili i, in the habiliments of ves- tertlav, a dcitl cnsaiiguiiitd body > On ¡VI, ,1, s
her besmeared fiice I ga¿cd myself mio stone, and became the st itinry of α corpse. From this elimination I wis recalled by Orasın) n, who einigen! mc in pity to the air, loudly crying, Ihe whole was an innocent subtilty, and no worse than the dbfigurement of a decci id flave Had Orasmyn in ılı it moment demanded my decisive rcnunciition of Camilla, ' 'hould have granted it, such was the honor of my sell rt proach when I mistook her to be dind. But he pur¬ sued a dtfttitnt, though not Itss effec¬ tual modt, fordr living me to the stim¬ ulit of а I )fty minaret, lie bule me re view the cue uni inibitili country I «ivv it lo be lulliini 1 1 у ond my expectations ol Ah ic igt culture or le rtthtv grovt ..nel fountains aml Iı ıhıl Hu n«, hunnin? cd the central province, winch «ceint to have emergiti by migic Iroin th dreary ivjstt s that ciiconip seed if, ,ιιιιΙ bounded the hori7on I spoke my thoughts Those dreary vv.istt«, repi c.
Orasmyn, once enclosed this f ibnc, all was sterile whence these pleasant per fumes гье. Camilla hath donc this, 'tis she hath made this spot one might) cen¬ sor to the God of lleaicn , antl will )ou give disturbance to this work, so for¬ warded in thirty moons' My heart sick¬ ened within me, but, dropping my eyes, I noticed the outermost side of the mi¬ naret on which we stood, to be aimed « ith blades ot cruel forms, and they re¬ minded mc, that I had heard it was a mode of punishment in the enst, to hurl the unfortunate vietim from the loftiest summit, so that he might be rent to piccea .n his descent Ag un I triumphed over the cruelty of Orasmyn as unvvor- tly of С mulla, but he guessed my thoughts, ititi untlercivc 1 them, for he told me the agi in in changes I behild, were si ght to those m his pun iplcs and habits W lure now )Oti stanti, said he, no Christi in cvci stood, but on the eve ot execution, jet hundred!, came, fori
and every Saracen, so revenged tlie mas¬ sacre at Tunis. But now their bloody use is It vt, and they remain harmless emblems of svvect Clarinca's triumph. Clannca I found to be Camilla's local name. My silence w.is really that of inferiority, when he asked, W hat could 1 display in competition with his claims to Clarmea's love ? Your breath, added he, is the gift of her jou would debase: Go, you have my leave to thank her for it. The confidence he bewrayed hurt me more than I was pleasured by this permission, yet I lelt hım, and in я few moments was with С imilla. The parti¬ culars ol our interview are iiidcscnbdblc. suffice it, lhat she heard the death of hor father with d griel hardly nppcascablc, as »he attributed it to her captivity What I would have argued .igauibt Ora nyn on that score, was |neventcd by the bringing in her ihild, whose enes ex plained its appetite for th.it nutriment mothers, by the decree of Mahomet, pn>-
long to the end ol the leeond year 1 he nfant testified 1 tender knowledge of mi, mil Cinnlia filtered her thinks for its preservation 'l h it th inks should be rendered mc fir lesctuiig 1 ehiltl of her, to who«c offspring 1 h ul hoped to be pi- tcrnal, distracted my thoughts but her matronly action drove me quite out from her presence Hildebrand encountered me in the garden Camilla'» lost' for ever lost' cried I The Moor affirms him inori. deserving thin myself, and she admit» the alhrimtion The Monk attempted not couvlort, but inflated with religious vvrilh Yvepirtcil, antl ouiwhclmed with Illese nttictiois, I underwent an uituusi u ıs huur At tbc period uf tint tunc d slut invitt I ine lo tic pavilion, forem ntıoı e 1 to [ 1 i)tet into tht river, uni there Or ismy n pirson ilK appiised me of its nil liment for my abode ! surlily asked hun, tor huw long he meant to infringe his oath' A tierce contro- s 3
\crsy arose between us in the course ol which I understood, that, so lar from Camilla living in a state of pirticipatcd concubinnge, hirrci'mtioii toOiasm)n a will had been sign I ¿cd by tic entire d ¿mission if bib sifglio, in w'iiili bhc 1 Mil uuualclcd bv mutis or eıın'ielın, but piru iiount thltc over his heart and fortunes, and that, comforted in her child, and gratified in the liberty of ex¬ tensive benefaction, she was resigned to a state, which only wanted the s-inction of Heaven to make it consummately blessed lhat perfection the opposition ot faith oi lv piciented, for in all beside Oi.if.ni) n wát ι Catholic Mi mtvlii itionion lut-, di>.<oti^c were inteiriiptid In ¡lildibi nul, who ι pi ι ly entend ,ιοιη Cimili ι liehui « lue- - ed, loimrsil mil deputei' wil ι her, as a ni in, τ Inn 1, and α icigionist As lhe li* , he had denn d her the pri¬ vilege of ioiife-ei m, and had prolistul her father s soul to lie hell doomed lor
lur il pilliti Ilı I uli ilini hır ρ rrı- ıı le ι ipostili' h rlit' mil ïdullrissl η ums w hu h t ι U n lm ri Ц it, struik. int illist Co. un id hi, I dipute I to lur unitili tji 1 il u one, w ln si hur ıs gııuıiKil ail s ι ted with t 1 >. obbdill s OÍ bulis, Iliiül CJC lds, bions, nul ι luik=, «1 -bdi) anıl p. lm. oml il il», ne dvid, ι il i su i.u cil, ml pitihed, and tiun ned, ıs lhe stuue» ot idolatry one, vv In se 1 nath is not lier own , who r*sp ie» hi г own voluptuous. tics», viliosc tuiuiús otniment au 1 «ot ılısg tu lm bi uu, , whose dress ıs vıorsc tian ıı kıdness, insuliini h tint it js ment to sluw oll that n milne bucii m οι ι, su I I, w is tiu Ji?tlicl 1 1 aforetime, uulmu h iu ι m ıs Ui whom I mM is. What ( mli nullit think il me, il 1 s , „ k«, tli it I hid p r- sualeil the \Ionk thus t ir, I dared not (onctnc, ml 1 smolline I the rebukes of m) n di„iijti π lo tuquia lloiv had she iq 1 id ' b'ie ,uo»c with sul'cn giief, s 4
and demandei), Wliethei d vvonun nc cordmg to his ılı ι rıptıon, ıı ıs ıltsırıbk by »Uth a man as( Inulto tic Sautillât i What he blamed, she h til assumed ııı obédience to the \\por> »hy hen to that Mooi let htr be abinidoncd ^ou have destroyed rue ' cried I. The re¬ verse 1 answered Hildebrand her'» was the рамюп of remorse, shame, and con¬ scious unworthmesa Then flee to her with comfort Assail her with all your present loie, and her's »hall be rekindled Farther urged by his re¬ ligious exhortations, I h stentd to Cd- Inilld s evening retirement I urged every j ersi asion that my heart and hand were nt th it moment as sa credi} her» as it Ihc ttjrtiit ot her rdvishinctit Ι ι о hl not aw it lu r in ewers, but with ι si ml ir fervour to that of my coiirtslii), t ingdgcd hır in ny arms, and absolutely sobbed my tei iler ness Fot ι moment she was my own Caınılh, but that moment was bitterly
succeeded , for relcisi ig herself, vild emotion wriin^ the hands that nere com¬ bined with mini while si e declared The harlot which Hildebrand had entitled her, with me she alone coi hl lit, for that by » spon«al devotion to Orismyn, she hal faith to marry herself in the eves of God, although unm rrud liy Ihc forms of church What H Mehr ind void I have cursed I diplored My prayets α 1 1 d< (incitions I cai not ii|nt She wept most coptouslv, but declinili to insvur «nd I left tl с loom Tht door- vv ty wa· tingitani il anıl prostrate on tht th csholri, Ι Ι ν in mint ti rture Lach of the moni« she uulibly vented, was recorded by а blooildrop fiom my heart and thus ι a sed a consult nble t шс, until ome οι с, not at f rst lo be ru ignizcd through the sh ide ij ρ о u li¬ rd where I lay As he passiti ι slet ılır lattice, the moonlight glistened on the features of Orasmyn, whose couiitrn,iiii t manifested hts purpo e I started up, »5
and t iking hım bv « ırprı~ı ) mined h m against the vv 11 I vv ι« ι ingor iteti bv m) tlc'pair, oi he ueiv iteci bv his scn- suiihtv, ind '-ttiliing m) fingers ι mitt the hilt of а digger in Ins girlie, I ■matched it ft in the scabbirtl, buiding hni wc r, II it night and thentehuth to rcf'iin fio ι the couch ol Lamilla. Cam Hi herself, attneted hy ihe dirturb- anee,ciis in£ uaheel the latter worth,, lor, sod '•It, Yciu may poniard Ojsmvn, but not con'rol h in Her nitirp ι ition «incmcrccl hoiv 1 ttr lv the effusion of her c)es h id ч( mu 1 her diet k« ind the Mooi u r Hl fully <lt mintiei! V\<re I the Cfluse > Onnilla with impi ionu rheiv us within tl e ch inibir, n hero slu d idős¬ ed the cruciti titeen from Ililclibnuel Ilı s sh h.ut rescued from ılıt 1' .mı, anıl buiding her kne s bel in it -he ıt- ttstctl iht \ mighty originii She then pre tcsUel hci ы If to lie ari iti Игеьь ι four dispute, nid solemnly eled red, lons as to а>1 men hed be, and lo Heal cri
alone her looks of love till Heiven sant- tioned thtm to min nei omp ıny ing these htler vv ir Is with the action of veiling her hce Miny a woman have I »cen accept the veil ılı it for ever clouds thun fiom the worl', but never with like avvc, as whin Cullili ι enclosed her ft -turt s her simple gr.ii t exceeded the pompofliirini'itiis, mil, unable tospeak diastiisnely, Orasmyn with myselfdrop- pid on our knees, embi icing each a hand, and submitting to hu ilerrec When I itlutd this to Hildebrand, 1 ч< tih nt ι ι χι I nun I hi · she h ith passed hır sın uut of divorce from the Moor, hy ileihiating htr I ite to I Inven · а minister of Hiavi n im I, in 1 n lua- vcnly gilt sii ill Cin ılh bt to yıııı I hese infirmi ıs li 11 ji ivu ι to ninkt nie piss я slıeplı sujlt .ml Hil Icbr.uid surprisul me ere 1 iv s linoni bou, he addressed me, my pill ην thoughts hivt iutifici! that ont single bon 1 insinus Cim lid to this infitkl hutl, .ind .Idratili» vou other s 6
bve. t besought his mcaaing. You shall know, ond your answer shall be your sword, concluded he, and disappeared. My suspense wis but momentary, for he entered, roughly hearing the infant m his arms. Supie ion was Horribly vcn- licd by h s pressing its sacrifice to pttty and luve IStvcr were piety and love so vilhfitel ' and th it I told him. A spuri¬ ous infidel ' cried he of Camilla and yourself, the breathing sh mie aml adver¬ sary ' yet dispute the fitness of an early death ' it is oiilj possible reprieve frinì Util ι 1 not only dis| uted but confut. ed alt he s„ id , am! the little Otlunu» lift was twıı„ sıvı 1 by mc. Hi ilibrand cooitd towards ίιο, but fired tht more in his fin tit ism, in I ofttti was lit tlo- stttel with С unul 1, over whom he ac¬ quired in ascendent v vvhiih he vamly cnduvourtcl to c\ nl to Orasmyn, whost iispcct for Cannili s religion did not debilitate lus attieluneut to his own. But nutttrs now glided ou in а sutcts-
sion not to be particularised The more extensive my observ itions, the more des¬ perate tny hopes W hen abroad 1 saw Camilla s to be the ipint of industry, of freedom, of alacrity, that tilled the fields, and reared their riches her s might be с died tne cherishing air, that before idly blew, ami sweet as her ь it was. She was the consort of the widowed, mother to the orphan, and daughter herself to the great ballier ol Good, nurse to.all those hipp) children befo e squill ' anıl finished, 1 w ек 1 I r ipttirotisl) have call- el her, had sle hcisell bet ι childless. B) the slives uituc or с ptiie, she was idoli/ed whcrciT she wis expected, they beset the path, md vv ılı flowers of the sweetest twturc tliey bestrewed hçr habitud vi lUs \ı hotne the cotnht and unpi ivtiiient of tli и cenili ion were her studes, so in lhe viitiie of her power »ıs lorgotten ihe vice of its ac¬ quisition Of «nit hal I to offer in comparison with such a life, my heart
w»s oftin questionili) , and I half detest¬ ed the lite lhat had brought me to its interruption Oiasmvn's vvoidsover the corpse, Otherwise thin so nevtr shall »he go from me, weie the instant knell of any hope, neither could I nt hi irt condemn lum, for so ficrccl) dul I love her, the hcrieniss of his love scemili ικ· cuseablc How obstinate his ¡ifftction, was strikingly evinced in his imhoratid manners, »hen naturally ferocious and his acquisition ofachnsttin ling age, but what he gamed m himself he lost m others, for his ufhicrs beheld С .mill 1 s influence with envy, and the prusts w ıth bıgotrv . In the sonety of С mulla ür ıs- myn and 1 forgot our nul-hip, and admiration was the mutual fiel tig and expression of oar licirts and hfis but this society soon recuved an addition Alone «uh Camilla, she, aftir an nuo¬ tion unintelligible to me asked, If I thought that hnppinc«» was 'dfish, anil the heart could enjov unpartieipated feci-
ingsî I sighed mi answer. On »Inch she arose, and told ine, ľhat sigh should have an celio, for that from her hand I should receive, m beauty and softness inestimable, one vv litise heart overflowed with love, md for me the inspirerò! that love. Bifore I could express myself, she introduced, and plactd in my hand, the blush nfr sister of Orasmyn. Camilla whispered me her own demerit«, and the othtr'^ pciftPtiims, and she endeavoured at a gniet) in her tone; hut it «ss a su¬ perficial gmety, so penctr ible, thit hardly could I have wished for less equivocal tokens of her dftei tıons, than when sho was persuading our eternii disunion. This now seemed inevitable, tor with how sh.imt lui а entinten mrc «hould she reappear 111 the countrv of her nati¬ vity :mil iilitionslup, was a constant confide ration with Caini 1 1, too bitte-r tir me to trinqtiillire To her present behaviour I submitted, for that Orasmyn to his attachment should sucrihee his
African pride, »as a transcendant ge¬ nerosity, and so dissimilar from any in my power, that, to prevent my humih. •tion in the comparison of our loves, I decided to endure the allurements of his sister, and, by withstanding them, to prove tbftt Camilla was inexpugnable from my heart. But I » as assailed m an unexpected mannt r. Jemilly had all the beauty, and all the arllessness of youth-, she was made to love and to be loicd; and already prejudiced for nie as the preserver of her brothel's chilii, my conduct at the games hid wholly won her, when »he understood me to bt that Claudio, of whom in their solitary con¬ versations Camilla had unrestrvetlly »poken. An amorous curiosity into these conversations inclined ine to Junilly, who bashfully confessed, Thit from what passed in thim, her imagination had executed an image of mc, which the had cherished in her heart. We cannot chill to those so warm to n s aud
curiosity becamemorethecx^use thanthe. motive of my nisi parable comjiantonship »ithJimilly The approbation which Cannili cndciionrcd to express of our kindnesses, of which she received an ci- aggented iccount f om the innocent Je¬ milly , wat, I could distinguish m tpite of her with to disguise her feelings, not only painful to herself, but reproachful tome Alas' she knew not that my tenderness to Jemilly was not more in· constant to herself, than u he inconstant who venerates the portrait of hit mit¬ tres», for of Camilla Jemilly was в breathing portrait Tutoied b) Camilla for two susceptible years, her sentiments, her citri ige ind behivioiir were imita¬ tive of Cimtllu b) her nistru ted in tho Il h 111 tongue, her tones, expressions, accent, and deliver) wire complete Ci- 4iilla s ilikc too »as her drees, and all, as С mill ι lo berseli but 111 loie sho »as »hit Cannili li id been, not what t nu s'ic »a» Ho» have I sorroweu ia
that idea > Unpnsuming in herself, I often have uirgot ncr in her resemblance, •lid poured my heart before her, enjoi- mg sigh for sigh, and lo,e for love, in ι delicious mısappıılıen-ion. Huis, by imperceptible dıgıee«, Jemilly jiquirul au exclusive portion ol my esteem, lor my eye« fled irons the reproach of Ca- »»dla, »ai the haughtiness of Orasmyn, and reeled on ber'·, which reflected »ympa thy »nd love. Still could I not mhnquish my claims on Camilla, al¬ though I (t4 bow frail were those claims; »either did Orasmyn ште than tacitly «lare the imiolalion of bis oath But an QCcumulrtion of calamities soon over¬ whelmed the delicacies of our suiti- mente, and obligated prompt and firm decisione 1 was observing the splendor of some Ambiaci cavalry, »clict in men and horses, »huh had escorted mto the ι is- tle а superior chieftain, acconipm ed bj magnificent present», when 1 и ıs чип
moncd to a private conference with Oras¬ myn To the s ranger he previously hail •ucordcd isolemo audience He received mcwith his habitual statelmess, but every opposition of fortune, faith, or birth, was obliterated from my heart, as he unbo- «omed his own It seemed the newly. arrived stranger was Ambassador from a (.oiciitLmir of ibe Desert, between whoso progenitor· and those of Oraamyn bad> been long accustomed an alternate afi¬ ance of the daughters of the one tnbe t» the sons of the other The fame of Je¬ milly ι as unconfined to her fraternal province, and attracted by those repre¬ sentations of her beauty, the Emir had now so'icilcd a renewal of the allı nee in the union of himself and her. With cviry rispeet the I mır deserved, Oras- ni)n hid njicted his suit, and now to mc was cxp'aued the sacrifice he bad made to my passion for Jemilly, in re¬ fusing a Prince whose power was so well calculated to befriend or to avenge. 1
heard with astonishment for vain woultl it have been to insist on the reality of my sentiments with regard to Jemilly Orasmyn, insusceptible of those f»cl ι g.5 lhave descnbed interprete 1 their indul gence to an exclusive passion for her, •nd, joyful to think me »caned from Camilla, he generously resolved to per¬ fect my lecond love, who so miserably bad ruined my first. Thus was I has¬ tened into an ideal engagement, which »till I knew not how to avoid without in¬ gratitude The innocence of Jemilly due tosed her f lory »nrl hippine я in her mugmnry achievement of my heart, ind «he lavished on me в thousand ca¬ resse» for preserving her from nn tin on from which she was tot illy disincline) ftrsuided Ι ν her brother of my attach ment, and by hnn sanctioned in her own, she wiw bountlltss in heraffecti η when in company wuh Orasmyn or С ι ■mila, separately or together, but the ktter «voided our presence, or endured
it with a frctfulness I would have given the world to trace to its source Cham¬ bered with Hildebrand, she conse-rated her hours to religious meditation, and the superiority of the friar kept nbreaft with his imbilion Being secure in her protection, he fabricited an altor in a se¬ questered nook of the gardens, whereon he eleviteli his crucifix, and enclosed it with a bowery eh ipcl, and thither he often resoited with Camilla The dis- approbat on Orismyn insinuated, more thin a\wiul, fur a religious publicity, which wai»certain to alienate the already disaffected priests md officers, passed disregarded Camili ι seemed sincerely to have dropped the veil bctiveen her and the vvoild, and nsOnsmjns love for her incrcised, so did his hate of the Friar How soon wis that hate nt the ut¬ most' Our pleasant societies, which nei¬ ther dancers, singers, jugglers, or fabu¬ lists, were required to enliven , in which
Orasmyn complaisauth/ resigned his pi|ie and opium, and »c as compljisaiitl) ac¬ commodated our palates to his country banquet, sherbet, pilaw, fruits, and con¬ fectioneries , these had gradual!) discon tinued, so that it w ıs ıvıtn α general sur prise we found ourselves, on a pleasant evening, assembled in a kio*quc, with greater surprise «its remaikcd the un¬ usual sprightlincss of Cil nllj, »hose hu¬ mour, alw i)s uillueiieing ours, now com tnuuicatcd good spirits aroui el Hilde¬ brand, though gencia I) an exception, на» gay be)ond hibit, or even oui un¬ derstanding, lor niiiijjid with hn, gant) wasas It elation, loi which was no osten¬ sible came When the little Othmir was introduced, be, with the eamc hand that 1 ad oilcred his murder, gesticu¬ late ί blessing on his head, and, in ete ι of the customary repulse to his infa tine playfulness, salutul hım by the name of lnılıppo he then consigned him to Canalia, who ci hoed the ¡ike de
notmn ition I could perceive Orasmyn attend to what passed with a surprise that only awaited the conclusion of our festivity, but, before that conclusion, entered the calamitous eiplanation Into the kiosque suddenly intruded the Sheik» ot the 1 urkish priesthood, accompanied by a fanatical trdm The chief haugh¬ tily approached Orasmy n, and with the conlielcnce of an irresistible claimant, slcrnlv required the inslant delivery to toiture ol tho'e christian blasphemers, who hid baptised я child of Mahomet Our he irts ρ lined us as he spake, nnd our eyes followed the direction of his till tl ly settled on Cannili and Hildebrand, whose dismay of countenances vended the ch trçr loo true it was, that in compii nice with the scruples of the lai- ter, Otlun ir was become а Christian the preceding night, and that his baptism, being pcrlormcd in fhe gaiden, notwith¬ standing the local and nocturnal pnvacy, had been observed by the emissaries of
the suspicions linen. As Orasmyn re¬ covered from the consternation of Ihe moment, he darfed a glance of Afncin wrath towards Camilla, from » horn he passed it to Hildebrand, when he ob¬ served the moist end pallid poignancy of her terrors. The horrible lot «he had incurred seemed inevitable, for the priest attested the Almighty spirit that had dic¬ tated the Koran, and, display mg that for¬ gery, demanded of Orasmy n, Were he so advene to its tenets as to skreen their violators ? Silence was the only answer it was the silence of conviction, and Ihc tmunphant bigot waved his hauti for the bloodhounds from behind, who fleppcvl forward to seize Iheir prev Ihe pite¬ ous shriek of Camilla provoked tny siio.tl from its sheath, and rc- mun iteti the functions of Orasmyn Threateningly he commanded their reverence of hei, who alike was their mistress as his 1 hty retorted a contemí tuous exclamation of Mistress 1 nnd rctntnded him of his oath
ta me, whose elione of С imilla at the game, they protested to have withdrawn her from his sphere of immunity, and placed her within theirs of infliction Ghostly became Orasmyn, for well he knew he elired not the infraction of his oath , therein he beheld himself entan¬ gled beyond the ability of self extrica¬ tion while I in amazement stood to feel Camilla for an instant completely mine, vet mine but is n gradation to sacerdo¬ ţiul il tortures My heart palpitated with its résolution, tor releasing Camilla Irom her rrlutrc ni my onns, I solemnly ad¬ vanced towards Orasmyn 1 he grandeur ol my sicnfiec inspired a grandeur of ettort, and placing her hand within tint ef t Ik* Moor, I ab| ired all my pictcn- sions, and unconditionally renounced her It was the absolution of his oath, and of my !юрс His eyes flashed, and Behold in her my luturc wife ' thuuder- dcrstruck the Imcn and mvself lhe ossemblage of inquisitive domestics awed 41 in τ .
them Iroin the violence tliey perceptibly meditated , anil, with mil imiii.iloiy and reproachful mutters, they turned lioin Camilla to Hildebrand Hım they ra vished away unopposed, for Orasmyn wai· inexorable lit his anger agutist hnn I wis so overcome with the oblyati m t > pronounce ınylelt tl e resign ttiou c I С ι nulla, Ih it I relire Ι ι ι ι ι lulgc mi tcel logs, notvvilhktinili _ lei locks pılı tioticd my stıy ıluııı ь I ci disumisi with fhe Moor, from whom (.he, no doubt, expected upUdiihng bhe did ι ol uns judge hu», for fiotti JeimJIy, uho soon after came to mc, 1 learnt that he nul passionJtcly shewn how extensive was tlie mischief which hid source in Olliinari. baptism 1 he genici she Ιι 1 1 stud ed tor hnn in the succeeding moi hi, he w ıs en tırely rut olt from in the one prêtent, lor his Christianity irremediably prevented his inheritance, and condemned him to a beggarly existence amid a flourishing birthright. .Camilla was immersed iu
sono» b) this instruction, ind to Oras¬ ın) 11 s cl uni·, of her hand hei silence was mfcipiitid 3S ic |Uicsceiit Jcmill/ so I icul hır onn inguish with the prospect ol double nupt il , on which she cxpi- tuted with her usu il шшмлшл, until the su'ijiet so dii(|iiicte I me, tint I was e impelled rather h ir h') to nd myselfo her suuit), from nhi.h I retired to the liiiillui, Riflu lue grel içte 1 11 111 opiate, uil hillui inc into i stupil ictioii, from »inch I was ironini b) a liiinli.r t IScfiri ine stoni Ilildebriiiil, aul Οι tanlly appciicd lhe three nevões lhat he sli ul I I с thus Uten ed begat ι pıt) th it и 11 ti niaient »lieu I rcio\cicd ni). sell to oberie tint hu lie 1 1 was Un¬ billed s mil ulj to the ni_i ies on tl ur conversion , his 1) ι ly clothed with as si¬ milar ι iiilineiil , ani Ins countenance as mui h deformed Irom pission, ae thens ľuim n tun, 1 so absolunly was amazed at а tr iiisloriii ition, m hım, a τ 2
Monk,the most wondcrous.that I could not prevent the conception which pained my breast, from rushing to my tongue, and, Hildebrand turned apostate! found utterance. Were he as guilty in prin¬ ciple as in dress, he could not have- evinced more perturbation at my accusal, to which he returned an indefinite an- sw'tr ; but improving in confitlcncc as he spoke, he apprised me that that night the Imcn quitted tlie castle indig¬ nant at the adversity of its master j and that the purchase of his (Hitdebrand's) delivery from а torturous death being my delivery to the.r disposal, 1 must instantaneously prepare to partake their journey. My horror of this sacci dot al compact startled mc from the couch, whereon I was immediately resti ainecl by the negroes, who furiously threaten¬ ed with their poniards. Continued the· Monk, Your lenunciat'ion of Camilla luth degraded you below my compa¬ sión; yet, if my aesurancc can comfort
v u be assured that never shall Catho¬ lic t imilla become tlie wife of Ishma- htish Orasmyn Some obscure h n s 1 1 ι forcible prc\entK)ii intervened, un¬ til he adjoined, buch ıs the invincible resolutu η of the Imcn and myself' they likewise are determined that your am¬ bition in presuming espousak with a daughter ot this tribe, shall be avenged by the very Prince whom you have au¬ daciously rivalled Го the l mır, who »ought her in marriage, they will this nyht transport Jemilly from the dege¬ ne r ite brother his pretensions they admit, and his love they will sanctity Hiunting in tier love sickness the pavil lu n of your repose, Jemilly has saved them the hazardous Irouble of entering her ipntment, and she is drcady in the boa 1 hereto must you repair lor )our in pending fate I canrot answer , I ut thus fir goes ni) consider ition in )Our liehilt, that better were it tor you to die the de ıth ot ι dog, than to marry
with an infidel, and brood blasphemv and mcreduh'v Illese words con eluded our discoursi, and 1 forthwith »as earned to the boit, whciini sat le Bully, sdenced by thn «eniiigs against me in cise she cried aloud Ihre its to revenge on her my niistänee, eiju illy pacified me, and swiftly we λι va^ed up the nver, which beciiue the liss serpen tine as we approacl cd its sounc Ji muly being separate I from me the ci¬ tu« length of the boat, she sitting at the prow, 1 at the stern, nor the least com¬ merce was practicable betw cen us, nei¬ ther can I pretend to b-vve desired it for, now that I again seemed etern il y divided from Camilla, all the frenzy ot my former love revntd, and Jemilly became as nothing in the ion pans n Aj the pitchy darkness of the mg! t t ten deceived the rowers igroui d, i w as convinced that the frequent sii dlows ot the river might befriend my escape when we again struck, I stil'v lowered
mv sett over the stern, and sunk up to и у vv ust in w itei , the st lashing of the ous overpowered that of my uiinicr- joii, and the bo it Ilo ited onw ard w itli- i ut int How cai ly n у absence was discovered ' know not, unless the ilimour, audible on my Irst asctiiding the shoie, wa» so ι tuse I l'uisuit was vain, u attempted , loi 1 swiftly retui li¬ cei ttivvareh, the castle by the guid net ol tlie river. The swiftness of my \oyage occasion¬ ed a fatiguing journey, and some hours were intervened since my departure from the province of Oiosmyn, befe re I regained it In the immediate vicinity or the castle stood a 1 uilding, whence p-otxeded masculine vuiecs. ihc curio¬ sity, tint inclined me to hsttn, became amazement, when I recognized the tones of the then speaker to be those of llildc- branel but that amazement subsided in breathless interest, as my understanding opened to the subiect It vv is a conspi. 1 4
racy against Orasmyn, contrived, di- lected, antl about to bc enforced by Hil¬ debrand. From what passeei, I learned the Christians c.iptived in the expedi¬ tion were exclusively concerned ; and that their project was, that very hour to enter the castle, which was lett en¬ tirety unguaided by Oiasmyn, who was pone witli all his followers in pursuit of tl.e Imcn, thtnee to embark with Ca¬ milla, ami progiiss ilovv-ii towards th» \ег. lhe thought that my arrival a few minutes later would luve been useless, was so terrible, that had 1 dai ed, 1 would have burst in among the conspi. rátör», and reminded them how un¬ gratefully they were mistreating him, who so generously had pardoned their hostility at the games. But thi» wish stopped short ot a resolution, for again wa» my attention attracted by a conspi. rator's voice demanding myself .is a ne- cessary auxiliary. 1 he reply ot Hilde- brand w ıs setn ι lions ¡η accus ilions of
nn digen пел, which Ilesini 11 u ' vi debilít itu! im tuurini 1 detun I to retute h s unsure, ln the ixcrtisi ι 1 that e iur lire idveisely tu lus treachtrj , dii.uihii-ţlv 1 İleti to the quirter, where d ııd d the C hustím slms. Ot thein I dvvı.kı sivual (mm their tibi.is, aiti tu nullit thur excitions in bini i'ilence to Ot ıstııy ıı tııelC mulla, vit dul I 'on¬ te il the ui umst mtial truth, ur the stringeniss ut my opp isinj, instead ut issistiiig the diluai ut t iiinlli. .n J.t hivt confounded thur ukas f hur n t tilnik and lttithmt t to tho ι , toi vvlıust sakts I ruusu! tinnì, cquailtdmy vv n u d thjs, by uin ut ılıt m ι t r- pusin r ıevolutıtıns in u tıJ ı' il. i niy pımııpns ol lige mc to İr pa s ι n ıı y ılltetıuns lhe ıtıeıt ¡ i t lwas plıy- П1Ц bunt; ılı с ulv hutut il 1 dťcu Utilet iu tui vv ud lt to а luni u iu ixtiss My inthusitsiii tu surpiss the Ul ılın tt 1lı- \ ti UIC lif liliali tının Lv , rt sı Kıt! I t uı lontrıst Ill\ llltll t Οι ι ıııy n with
the faithlessness of others, ivtnif l"i milla, whose affections and sintimu ť* I wished to prcrpmitc to the suit I muh rated, and, tn the case of succi ss, msiir mountably to surpass the Moor bv evincing how bravely I te uld sacrifice to honour even her, to vili in he sacri ficed every consideration 1 he port ib being entirely unsecure and unguardtd, as almos' all t'ie domestic suite were de sérted with the Imcn, or en pi y cd in their chace, I quitted the slues to their business m barricading them, ind singlv intruded the apirtment of С amilh I affected an intoxication of delight, as 1 told her the moment was come, in which our mutual dehvcries were not only practicable, but facilt Η<τ imo tion w ıs propitious, and f ılding my arms about her w aıst, I îrresistib у trans ported her to the garden I ess w is her opposition in a ger than in η e desrv, and I found my sett on the margin ot the river, Camilla, ttie dear Camilla
in my arms, at my feet a capicious w eather-proof boat Wlnt а con lition for а min, who loved, who doated, like mc ' the beautiful wish of his lite ten derly tremulous on his bosom ' and no interference to prevent our cvcrlistmg union' But the forlorn struggles ot that honour I so painfully tasked, urged me to invent my own impediments, ac¬ cordingly I recovered her nom the swoon, of which I did not dare believe she intended me to take advantage Still my ambition to know whether I yet possessed her love, inspired me with ч rapid eloquence, by w Inch I laboured to provoke her acknow tedgement 1 or- turous wis the strife twixt love and ho¬ nour, that what the one most wished, the other most should dread As she refused speech, 1 entre ited action, and would have urged her to the boat How she trembled ' and how did I ' for had she complied a step, a sinsjle step ' then would honour have been vanquished by τ 6
love, and poor Oiasmvn fumisi id w uh the bitUrcst cause to bewail the aposta cus ot the night Still was I not com¬ pletely conqueior, for my feehngs as¬ serted themselves, and starting back, I outstretched my anus, exclaiming to her, 1 lee to this Jicrrt, and never шоп shall it resign thee ' Whether hır liesi tation concluded in love or tear, racked me with indecision, for it the \uy moment her breast commui icated with nune, at that very moment was burn an uproai, that lutanti) lnituied in cliniarous vocifcr itions lhrough the dimness were visible the dark dimen¬ sions ol men agitating to mil fro, as it m search of some one I fiaiul the l\T< nk h id > irctd tlf í, des, while 1 so tallibk lud nuli uouied my own ig- grindistincnt 1 limitine no longer re- tuded the exercise if wrtiu, but pro tested im honoui toOimmn, nid ie¬ le ising ( amilh is ι lovir, 1 prepared lu delend l.er as a inimi .\ 0 uiist l'.^
most prominent 1 directed my sword, and sprung with a loud exclamation. His Turkish dress did not caution me, as I knew Hildebrand so to be appa¬ relled: him, therefore, I thought it was, and him I was resolute to chastise ; but the first attempt was repulsed by a skil¬ ful parry, and its renewal pacified by the voice of Orasmyn, whom in mistake 1 had assailed. Unhappy as might have pioved my mistake, one, scarcely less grievous, possessed the Moor. At the precise time, when in despair of over¬ taking the fugitive priesthood he re¬ turned from their pursuit, Hildebrand and his conspirators were hostilely ar- lived before the grand portal, 'l'heir astonishment to find it barricaded and garrisoned, was lost- in terror, when Orasmyn and his company galloped to lhe contested threshold. But the deceit of Hildebrand was too habitual to for¬ sake him ; and he pretended to Oras¬ ti;) n, that in attainment to him, he and
his foliowen wert enterprhtm; the re^ capture of the castle from those villain¬ ous slaves, who had taken advantage of its unguarded weakness The uncer tainty of night, the plausibihtv of the Monk, and the scoffs from vt ıthîn, all conspired to delude Orasmyn, whose vence was too rugged with wrať·, to be recognised in his command of ad mission He » as at first refused, but shortly obi-yed, for the slaves learned whom they resisted, and with penitent pleadings of their misapprehension, un¬ closed the entrai ce Then it v, as that every imputation of gudt centered in me By his treacherous disavowals of his treacherous conspiracy, Hildebrand persuaded the sb\ cs I had practised on their credulity for my own purposes this imposture w as the more successful, as I had left them umnstructcd in par ticulars The absence of Camilla from her chamber, added to the di traction of Orasmyn, and my subsequent assault
on hım confirmed his prejudice of my guilt Neither could Camilla speak in my defence, or she would have seemed implicated in the eye» of the Moor, w ho listened to my vindication with an air of Incredulity. Thus was I sunken into the profundity of abasement by the very scheme, and at the very time I projected my glory in the admiration ot e\ ery one, so d ingerous ıs it to at tempt aught extraordinary, even tho' it be in virtue Although 1 preserved mvself from Orasmyn's resentment, I could not com¬ pass my reinstatement in his good opi¬ nion he ceased to consult me on his concerns, and avoided my presence Hildebrand likewise displayed a repul¬ sive demeanor, and that communication I disdained, he affected to refuse Ca- mdla wore a countenence of confused expressions, which 1, Orasmyn, and Hil¬ debrand, were at liberty to interpret ac¬ cording to our different interests.
Meantime, Orasmyn appi ¡sed how Jenaľy lud been tiansporttd to the powtr ot the Finir, picpaied а mission to him. Mj prctencts to his sister being now cancelled İroni his hurt, in whieh they had solely oiigiiuted, there was not shewn to mc tlu least respect in ex¬ cusing, or the least elclieaiy in coiiiial- ing the object of tho einbajsy. It w .as to solitit the lTi.ittii 1 eforc rejected. Though appointed sui. ibiy to the dig¬ nities of him who sn t il, anıl him to whom it was sent, yet vvxs its net ption unworthy tither. 'U.c luir lehulled it unseen and unanswered. Oiasii yi 's indignation, vv hen lit saw it dt-¡ in .1 cntly return, was very hyh, .mil th. more bitttr, as he daud not vmt it iu revenge; for so general had letti tl.c detection tit hi» troops, t lut scııcıly could he n.usttr а resi utal Ic ganis.. n tor his own castle: how i.ttle, tlurtlon, was he empowered to ini udi α poj ul. /us princedom/ particularly, a., that pniice-
dom was recruited by his loss, for thi¬ ther the priesthood had retired, and in vited those of their party lhat the Imcn meant to reside in peaceable e^ile no one could credit Orasmyn sensibly is ribed the indignity of the 1 mır to their influence, which he dreaded, was even extended to the giving him Jemilly in marriage In that case, Orasmyn w as aw-ire the l' mır would stand in im- mediate succession to his province, and would welcome, perhap» hasten, his death nay, it was impossible to deter¬ mine if the Imen had not planned to deprive him of his power, ai a punish·. ment for using it adve selv to their bi¬ gotry, and so to rewaru the attachment ol the Er ir 1 his apprehension v as an additional rcuon lor his immediate union w ıth С .unilla , and to legitimate their future offspring, the nuptial cele br mon was prepared with as much iiiigniliceiH as the time would allow 1 he third d ly w is to determine the fate
of Camilla, and of me In the interim, every oriental luxury was pressed into use, in ention and profusion went hand in hand Wheresoever the eye gazed, splendor and gaiety solaced it w 'к it soever hearkened the car, ilo ited the melodious bicathings of aerul iti ru¬ mente wheresoever the tuot trod, sweet lutured Sowers acknowledged the pressure with, odorous exhalations — Alas ' all were waited on me, for my tenses wer« deadened by affliction , and I excepted it > voluptuous solemniza. bem, so otntrary to the chaiteness of a Christian matrimony. As Orasmyn and Camilla, seemed obstinate in absence, I had very htde opportunity to observe their behaviour, to that Hildebrand at· most exclusively engrossed my atten Uon He hav mg been the primary causer of the recent calamities, it was astonishmg. what predominance he af¬ fected, and realty possessed in the castle Towards Orasmyn he shewed a sutpris
mg complaisance, which as surprisingly was .eturned. His austerity seemed not only relaxed but disused, and in its pi ice was subsl tutcd the characteristics uinti ary to a religionist he agreed with the Moor, that evtrv symbol ot а reli- „ion deservid rt verence, accordingly he bowed to üıt cıeseent alike as to the ti oss lus attire continued 1 urkish, and when in society, феге appe-red in him a total metamorphosis. But 1 was assur¬ ed that his bigotry was tndehble, and I suspected that it then was brooding some terrible catastrophe, in which it vv ould denote itself the severer for its nvoluntary suspension , for voluntary it could not be, Lise, why should he, when he thought himself unobserved, luve indulseti ti outrageous gestures, md hoarse inuiiiiuimgs' although the latter wtre inarticulate, the former bodut their frightful meaning. Why did lie pluck tlie turban from his head, cui se and trample it f V\ uy pollute his
neh vestments with dust and aslies ' Often have I seen him act thus, when our solitary perambulations through the gardens have brought us into neigh bourhood Yet a distant footfall suf ficttl to recall tum from his madness, and to replace the coverings he so mis¬ placed , but not «o readily could be tranquillized the furies of his feaiur lhat he was n mysterious league with the absent Imen, 1 was persuaded l y tl compatibility of many past and inter vening circumstances · yet, from tl t heartiness of the passions I have dc scribed, it fully appeared that he was exclusively interested in his project but on whom the storm would fall, ш «hat manner, m w liat place, and at what time, deceived my conjecture though, certainly, hardly an hour pas ctl without my expecting its terrible otc rence, unut the impending mam ige ab sorbed every other consiucration, save the desperate wish, that, vlutsoevei
form of horror and calimity it might assume, prevention might step in I hail no longer the benefit of repose, for by night, as well as by day, the bn- d il imagery floated before my eyes, anil, worse in my dreams, it appeared with c\ery ag^rivation So persuasive \v is my vision the night preceding the solemnity, that my sense» joined to de ce iv с ι ie , and to the ideal spectacle of l mulla tluy give mc w aketul feelings of her hands engaging m ас, and her fircwcll breath su lusing my cheeks. 1 he anguish of so perfect a dream gra¬ dually awoke me , but with my sleep did not dissolve the dominu n ot f ıncy, which still extended over my body, al though excluded my mind my hands still seemed in ( imtlla's, my cheeks still Seemed warm from her breath I con ι iv cd mybclf to labour under the com mon disorder of the night At length, 1 opened \rtf eyes to istonish them with a figure ol the sweetest temutine pro-
portions, that sat besnie tue, towards the foot of the couch Where 1 lay was so dusk), that what was real could make but a shadowy representation, the only light being the distant glimpses of the moon, which merely illumined »here they fell, for of other objtcts were only di cover il le the outlines, the rest being involved in an ambigue us twilight But that it detained my him' with a familiar pressure, I might h ivt venerated it as something preternatural tor to much was I confounded, as at first to lay unable to mov e С an it b Camilla ' thought I Tht question ¡, vt me spirits of motion, and mv hai ds, hitherto passive, returned tlie prcssuie fhe figure clia»ttly fled the pirtilleni brace, and darted towards the turthei «nd of the pavilhon, wluch was dark iimilarly to where 1 lay As it passed the central window, which was open, its white raiment, w inged iøf the bnc/.e, expanded it beyond itself, it assumed
the magical appearance of an angel voyaging'its ascent on the moon-beams, and I half fancied it to dissolve into the light it tracked. I put my hands to my checks, and felt them damp with tears, which, my eves being un¬ bathed, I knew could not be of their -shcddin 5. (. an spirits weep » thought I. Alas ' judgmg frum w hat 1 felt, no be¬ ing in Heaven or earth, could be ex¬ empt from sorrow. When I arose, and viewing the sun, reflected, that when it set it woulddeave Orasmy n a happy bridegroom, I was so afflicted, that the pre^-ding occurrence vanished from my mine! as entirely as it it rever had happened. Fastmg and chce.lcss, I moaned away the morning within the pavilhon, afraid to stir abroad, as truly I knew every place to bear ornamental tokens of my grief. I likewise »as abandoned to the company ot my own sorrows, for every person of the castle was active in his part m
the nuptial scene. I became so ν tporish as to conce« a sympathy ot sob for sob, and sigh for sigh, from an invisible be¬ ing. At length approached footsteps fa¬ miliar to my ear, their lightness darted to my heart a persuarton, which my un¬ derstanding resisted . I w ouhl not allow thit it could be Camilla, but her en- trance convinced mc, although Camilla never could be more unlike heisclf. Her copious tresses, which in the days of her innocence were used to dis «p ite about her shoulders in w»vy undula¬ tions, were now cruelly writhed with gawdy bandaget. ; and a coronal of gold crushed the upper ringlets, which wire surmounted by the less worthy plumes «olen from the ostrich, or bird ot pa¬ radise, ťven her feet were ingcmmcd so profusely, as to deceiv can ignorant e)e into the idei, that they were en¬ chased by fire. While the rest of hır dress shone with a gemmy magnilictnce, that could have perplexed the most ex
perienced lapidary to ascertain the vin¬ ous species of its precious jewels, but the fashion of its make, and of its put ting on, was licentiously moorish I con¬ ceived that Orismyn had commissioned her to insult my condition , and unrea¬ sonable as was this idea, it averted my intended salutation Claudio ' spake her tremulous voice, while from the motion of her ap proach aromatics clouded her with their evaporations Claudio, a single hour past, and your behaviour will vary from affliction to rudeness your treatment of Camilla will not befit the wife of Orasmyn Turn then to me vv hile yet I am Caimlla Orasmy п'ь v. lfe I shall be too early 1 oo early ' echoed I, catching up her words Can Camilla think herself too early wedded to pomp, to power, to Africa ind Orismyn ? ah' how could 1 be persua led that her tears were genuine, when the hdj through which they oozed, were tinctured Ш VOL III U
studied brilham y. l'o reply affirma. lively, sobbed she, would be ungrate¬ ful to the geneious confidence that permits this last interview. Is if oui list? Cimili i' b it our hst' \ct do you entitle him generous who ordains it to he oui last ? Mie was silent, and 1 pioeee.led to sent niv grief in up. braidings ot Oiasrmn. In \. un she u tempted to interrupt mc , 1 mirwhchľ- ed what she advanced with .1 torrent of speech; and finished I y telling her— With how wreteh .1 a ¡;ηιι_ chu Ιι. · tongue deny the tuumph so OotcusiU; emblazoned on hci liun . Ah! slid she, p'urcc lie vnthymr svvoid, lather than with words so cruel; and unjust as they are cruel Orasmyn's choice of all this spíc r Jout makes its assumption my duty , an.l suitably am I decoriteli to !..s will, it. my condition. Alis' would u beseľi me to appear at a heathenish altar n. ■the Uke to that modest Christian hak-
liment I w ore, w hen you Claudio were to receive my virgin hand' The re¬ membrance displaced my senses, and my heart conceived her sentiments more than my ears admitted the words, in which she told with how sacred a vene¬ ration she had treasured those habih ments, as reliquaries of her love and innocence Oh when you sec them, said she, you will peruse the record» of my miseries, for their original w hite- liiss is now disguised by the multiplicity of my teats those tears vihtch mno- uiilly shed left no trace, how visibly hi guilt dyed thein She then ap¬ pi isid me, Ihat I should receive them when the ceremony was over, loi thit to review them with hei habitual feel¬ ings would misbecome a wife but it w ıs her wish that I ntier would part with them Great God how poignanth did 1 suller ' how impetuously did 1 renew 11 \ iciusitions it Oristnvn But Ca·
milla now ¿temnicd the fluen j of my invectives with а spirit that injured mc as much as it behoved her She averred the good qualities of Orasmyn to be so venerable, that, notwithstanding hei ruin, she could not Inte hım, whom, liad she met him in α Chi ısımı land, as а Moor, an infiliti, nul an спешу, she would luve itiin ned She oestred n t to consider how helples ly she hail lun in his power , the custom ot his c< tin- try, the mumper nu t ot his inturt, the tetttts of his tilth, ill instig itions to which she could ι j po e but arguii ent and tears No vv mutt ι he vv ι j;uılıv, and she wretched \et hul tht hi toiy of her misfortunes vvakcntd the sympathies ot his heart, ititi attuati 1 lus endtavours to alına for her violi tion, by tleviting her to in exclusive .oncubiiiigt, that ilnusniils of nativ btautus ναιηΐι stru^lcd lo Utam In so doing, hi eliti all that lit then tlarid , and »ere she to late him for not cloin^
all that she desired' 'n the moment she w a rifled of her miocene it th t moment she consieleie I fortune to di¬ vide her eternally f ioni t ic luth mo¬ ment she di . veied ln cit toi imo tier, it that miment he ι ı s Juut prov nience to ilçenle hu ' ııı it; С ι · myn 's lhe lite she vv ıs les'irvvinp- tl ч r»,iiht il her oui , ι 1 'iel lunedio atlvat 11,; ıh ısı t ul ir · hipp the piopl , for wl m s\e v . ι . ing a future in istu Ah, Henri' wh 'личи ť . to lose' Resignation, M 1 sln,\ a, the substitute for hipj ness umu ji ur wondious arrival In the d Uverer t f my den Othmir I ureiteil my deir r lljiidm How did 1 wish thn I hul го chill' I hen cínu t ie combit be¬ twixt love to vou and gritituelc to Orioiiiyii, inclinati m to escip" and sh une to retin n İt 1 should ι turn, rhoight I, how lgnonnnioi sly shall I be ι ι tieated' with what contempt and
and. disdain by mj equils' t h what disrespect mil riihiulc by niy niftiiors ' Ah' Clam 111, 1 felt thnt I did not dart return, mtl I tle-tciniiu 1 to avoid those 'i licit lions In whith Itltubti.l my it blb'illl Itrt, .11 sCC nnd tOtnelse With y u sunul ts ч tul to 11 у bun-, nul tu 1 oure thit gritiflc«tit 11 without im¬ propriety, I, w th а blttiling heirt, la¬ boured to attach you to Ien illy. But, much, my friend, ns I had suflcrcii from your ibsencc more, indted more ' did 1 buffer from m 1 ¡tes 1 ce I'ildebrand harisccd me with denunci itions of ι ι гье than puigit.ry, unie s, ni recon cı.ıatıon to Coti, I made 1 sacrifice uf Orasmy n's life BI oil I tk -iteti to hive the power to nc rule me to God, and Ililtkbrai I wulu'rcv, the recom¬ mendation, anı' 1 '.aimed its sincerity lo his arguti 1 11 11. favour < f Othmar's biptism I * as su' 1 i\e,liutth vent plunged n с into ilesp.ii lhe occur¬ rences of the night confuted it, and
»hen you surpi z-d mc 1 was enervated by inguish 'i ou eiiibr iced me , \ ou trinsported me to t'ii uvei , ioti dis¬ covered to nu i b ut , you ti iul to шс that 1 was at Ii'xitv 1 lu mil km ot \our recent con lint the letiop Hon of our loves, n v pr si tit ture of ι nn 1, and the conce i t tifi ht, Hi ni ed to assail, to de ıhta ι, in 1 tiveiluruiv my resolution. I t r eml ctl, for I wa¬ vered, Idioop tl into Miur arms, foi, oh, shame' 1 wis -vanquished Λ о, Claudio ' had you ben eo.itent to take mc without my b mg unieni ninei) ac¬ tue, οι hl 1 you bv a h vei s ci tleltv given me excuse tin ei,uiescei cc, hid you said, Cu inii, 1 lov ι \ou, inste ul of lamilla, ilo you lovi nit 1 h il infil- hblj ecnviji , md tiu шоп ut Пе- v.er ci uld h ivc соли Madness di öiden il ni) ııı derstaiid- ìng, aid I dirttd to crush hci to mv throbbing heart, while un tonque, in rryration of its former error, insime· «4
tiveh/ echoed, Camilla ' 1 do love you' She interposed the arm, < n which de¬ scended the crutbtm veil of marriage When l laudo, sud sic, woultl have misused the alieciioiis it ( alımlı to swell the tuumph ot his honour, he more etlectuill) renounced her thin hid he done before lie moreeticctually per suided her ui ι η with Ora„m)n, thm could all tile latter s eloquence, by treat¬ ing her with а disrespect, that cannot be attached to a wife I then resolved to deliver myself from the chance of future humihations Now, adjoined she, w ıth a repulse to my impôt tunıty, Now do you find, that in Cannili honour is as sincere as in yourself so is the triumph mutual As l ai ulla 1 see you for lhe last time, as Orasmvn's wife never stull I bihold you already has he sut fered too much from our violations 1 1 Jus count! ν 's ni r Is, tor me to continue them With how superior a fortitude cou'il
I have hearkened to the cruellest con- ilemmtion ' 1 sto id absolutely petrified, till Camilla apprised me, That the clay of her man tage she hut decided to be the diy of freedom to all the Christun slaves such v. is her fust prerogative ľhrtn ¿h an unclosed lattice which oierii oked the river, she pointed out one ot the bartres, tint was to convey them from the cistlc, alieidy moored lor thtir emliirkinon 1 tdtuttlied it to be tlie verv birjre ntir whith 1 had wasted ι precious, opportunity never to return I will the lathtr thin go ' was my cxtliniitton. Just then w u, disch trebil а piece of ordu ince to ayiitty th t the hymeneal proces ion wai maisliallinir Camilla un lusto > 1 it, fm htr e/is kindled, and hır che ks piled 1 irewell ' lare well' Cimelio, huvvell' she exchnn ctl As she turned I tlctlliiul hir, tiy. mg, Cannila ' givt ne soine token of remembrance—an embrace ' Never shall " S
another efljcc it from my bosrm — Hut embrace would be adulterous, she answered l!ut bc mi last words impressed on your meinorj ------Ah, Henri' tli y ate nulchblv impies» d ileath omy can rradii ite those blessed words l laut о de Santillana, how dear that mme ' 1 'ove you with all a wonu s love , ¡adore you with a saint ly adoration You were the husb md of my soul, and of my fithcr's smction For your sake I panteil to be a 111*0, ft r your sake I abhc r 10 bc а wife i ! ougli dceOrated, I go а victim of ill omen , for were n у ! rea t ihsseettd ai the αϊ tar, it would bc found destitute of a heart Bc that heart my token ol re η «mbrancc Dear Claudio, I leave it with you A scioiid exj'osion hastened her step ard 1 v speech С milla' tr J I, beloved t amilla ' you wire the b 1 er halt 01 11 у infancy, юу adolescence, nd nuni eıod Tou were my wakirgami
sleeping joy, my hope in heaven, and my good on earth With increase or btiuty and des it, you are now the re- vtrst except of heaven, indeed ' where may be reconipenicd this horrid separa¬ tion Ytt, tiepirt not unionscious of y iur posscssii n All my love, my am¬ bition, tny carts, and pit isurts, go with you nay, my txistence too, for what is life devoid of them ? A t hint explosion knell I in our ears We move 1 tow и els th- vtstibul ,vvhn- 'iv illowiii ; 1 у tears, I irtitutite I, lhat nc ei w 0111111 In uld ^nrc n у heart or my eciutl \ ou tioubtid, s ilel I, ť it 1 loved Jim ly t ml suspici n' I ne¬ ver I /e 1 b r I hite mys li and Je miilv ihityiu ver simuld hivethougli' 1 lovt I lur IJnliippy expressions' wlnt n ingei elui tluy wound' fir soo 1 is tliey re ut 1 ч1 a si^h le 11 of v/01 pinguini s ι 111 о vu, rst 11 our eirs It was i>lu wet by ι dy in; falt in а small rehuni nt bt-tde uj l) 6
Shocked lest our discourse had been Overheard, I leapt towards the listener, and beheld, faintly stretched upon the pavement, Jemilly , in whose carew orn whitechd figure, I truly guessed the spectre of the night. I was so completely confounded with the unexpected spectacle, that I stood like one entranced, powtrless to succour the girl, tir tu note tht oisappcarancc of Camilla. Whether s'ıc lud recognized Jemilly was my first consideraţii n, and I flew with swiftcsptcd to perform my duty in getting assist nice, because it flatteicd my inclination toovtrtike he ι But 1 was disappointed, (or hardly cou il I distend from tin , irl .u, bereut α g - ntrJ peal ol oi Ji нее eleen i lied my neivis, nilani stai ι yii phory of vo¬ cal aml irs'iiiii ι ι ι il ily strutk likt lee tO i У t Ιι. 1 kl w the pl Oet sion to bt lt,',uii, le t и ou, Ί the lites wtre rtu itily visible io trust nt uten 'nrs oi ι aiade, ature, and Laimucd iltviev.
A minute after, Hildtbiand came up, in company with those Christians who had joined with him in the conspiracy. Ihe river was their destination, their design being to embark, for, as he passed, Hildebrand sneeringly asked if 1 meant to accompany them Before í could answer, he dtsircd m« to follow hun, uttering, as an inducement, the nune 11 Cannila «uh so alarming an ri.ipli.isis, that I nitchinically obeyed. It seemed thit he h nl something im¬ port mt m mind, which he would not communicate I II the instant of his de¬ parture , for he ur.; d the men to dis¬ pose themstlvcs, and unmoor the bont , al d ht saw that he w as obeyed before he wou! 1 n ply to my importunity At length, whtn thty only waited lor him, he withdrew mc Irom thur observation behind α buwt r some yards renoved. Ih re, as heuntokU.it himself, his fea¬ tures beidi ie lit up with l inancısın, and lusgtsturts propoiticmauly outrageous.
He attested the benevolence of hu creator, as a reward for fulfilling his promise pledged to Don Pfinlppo on the latter*s death bed, which promise was, that should he ever disco\ er Ca-· milla, never -would he desert her What could I comprehend of his present bc- rftviour, particularly «hen he boasted* how infinitei} he was repaying those benefactions, w hich 1 knew to have been lAfinite But when came the explanation, how did he repay them why, by using an hypocrisy of Turkish nunncrs to gain him an unscruplcd admission into the mosque, for the purpose of infusing ihto the nuptial beverage a poi on the most invetrnte lhank mc, comludcd he, that she docs not die a harlot, though she shall not e*ist a wife lie left mc dwrutcd with these hi rrible cotncidencis , and whil- the ripplu j; < 1 oar announced hibdtp.rturc л tri ht ftil disi ord ot fchrieks md lotiftut t ns prochuned the late of C mulia. 1 ¡Ut
as though petrified, nor did the painful stiffness of my limbs relax, urtil some person» clamorously approached me, u to whose arms I actually tainted In a moment I found my sell at the height ot the lohtest minaret, and beside me Orasmv n, whose countenance cxl l bite 1 the worst distortions ot гце I noticed the rr niret to be tliat one adipted lor the cruellest of extcutions» Alas ' thou 0 ht I, she is gone, who. chinged this bloody place to an hirm- less spectacle and its wretched use will bc restored to avenge htr death »es, 1 filt how spetiously I wis implicated in her destruction, and having i о wish for r urvtv jl, I pre «red to sutler as her mutilirir Orismyn commanded me to overlook tl с province What wa» my astonishment at its devastation ? The hibiuuois, the groves, ılıt pro¬ duce, that had enripturcd me is Ca¬ mili 's work, when formerly I ga7til fitom that ¡.ame minaret, seemed to par-
take her ruin, being fired, rooted, and crushed, by a ferocious invasion. The inhabitants, deténteles» and suri ι bed, lubmitted or detened to the foe, w hile a few only faithful to their Lord, bur¬ ned over the plain, and thronging into the castle, stunned it with their cries and lamentations Ihus had I been de¬ ceived with regard to С amili ι, who nei¬ ther was divorced from life nor from me, the marriage ceremony being dis¬ turbed in it» commencement lhe glad¬ ness that animated my fc itures, inccn cd Orasmyn to an accusatici of my rejoic¬ ing at his nun lhe Imen, he said, had excited the ïnur against turr, who exasperated by his refusal in fa- Tour of me, no doubt was relentless in determin it ion nay, the powers of the innermost desert lie protested to be stirred up m the cause of the priest¬ hood , for, like clouds of locusts in mul. titude, he could discern them in the diatancc. Orasmyn's sight was truly
Arabian, for he discriminated that to be an army of cavalry, which really ap¬ peared to me to be no other than a dark eloud or stieik on the border ot the In nzon But the ease of mind » hich pernutttd this remark, was ruffled by the Moor, from whose nature Л the civilization ot ( amilla seemed to be ob¬ literated by this cal imitous fortune I now saw hım in his genuine disposition, which might be likened to the ferocious grandeur of the hon , and I conceived, that much as he might induce you to love mm, much more he could make himself feared You, cried he, you and your companion the Monk have caused this He proceeded to load Hildebrand with curses Continued he, Wretch that he was' to infringe the content¬ ment of Ciarme ι But how much worse a fool to thn к tint sin was na¬ tive in th child > or that а sprinklire; u su fliiunt to clean»e the fitc, cculd be mag cai in punfving an unknown soul'
O villainous friar 1 would that the Imen had racked lum to the latest sense of life ' nor received his profession of our faith, who was so punishable in hb own Yes, Henri, II ldebrand had rescued his body at the hazud of his soul, by αρ< >- tatuung from the religion of Chn e to that ol Mdiomet, anil this conduct h d not only delivered turn from the wi h of the lmen, but stationed him in th ir confidence, as they found in him a con genial bigotry it likewise had defended him from Orasmyn, w ho was obi ged to respect his conv eruon By me w ai all his present rage engrossed, as Hilde¬ brand, whether he cxptcted it or not, precipitately depaited from the tattle as. the imasion was announced be enee Orasmyn, they luve so beleaguered us, that succour, should it come, cannot enter It was too true ' Multitudes ι f cavalry had now ovei taken those plun deters by whom they were piecedcd, ani the whole in one extensive mcor.
¡oration, were advanced so near, that not only could be ascertained their va¬ riety of arms and streamers, but the sipuals of the trumpet, and the responses ol lhe numberless itabal» were audible At lin'thwedisccincd three harbingers c,illrping towards the great portal, at which a parley was sounded Orasmyn brightened up, and exclaimed, This is my reason for sending for you hither Christian, he continued, you bitterly have offended the Imcn should they have sent to demand you ? —I will go, adjoined I, if tint sacrifice will content them lou have released me from a painful command, said Orasmyn, as we descended to examine tho»e who had entered 1 hey commenced a daunting enume¬ ration of the various tribes that were marshalleu against him, at the samo time depreciating his powers of resist¬ ance with the most insulting allusion* to the deserted state of his castle, and
•e the fugitive concourse that beset the courts Orasmyn commirdcd them, as they estimated tl cır j er«e nal safetv, to desist from furtlur ctrium! cution They, in the name ι f the gr tut I mır, thtn demanded the reste r„t ι η of It milly, who had escaped from his palace Orasmyn's ignorance of her fate ν as equalled by hu indignat t η at the inde lıcacy of the dem mt t ut, by ci !ı n l t- tntng one, I sui pressed the other, αϊ d «'c haitened towards the pavilion Jemilly was already recovered Ire m her swoon by the assistance of Camilla, Who, sustaining her head upon her knee, was whispering in her car words of comfort or of information Orasmyn and I gazed w ıth mutual interseness on a spectacle mcompaiably beautiful at d Intcr-sting At 'tngth Orasmvn avert ed his eye, and desired Jemilly, were »he a wife, to veil her fcitures from ob «ervation 1 he poor girl was sıleı t in «peecli, tho ırjtı not in sobs and moans
Her brother continued, The Emir has demanded you, it is proper you should act according to your duty, though it lie contrary to your affections. Has he a right to demand y ou г Her agitation was now so hystciical, that Orasmyn's paternal affection relaxed his sternness, and he took her hand ind blessed it I would have indulged my feelings by embracing the other, but he prevented ine, ind 1 only felt th it it was death like uld ind inanimate lhe deficiency of her tongue was runedicd by Camilla, who with tears informed us, tint the perfidious Emir had nude himself a husbind w ithout the ceremony, that lemiUy had connived to escipe from his seraglio, and, after a f itiguing and hun¬ gry w andering through the desert, had reached the castle on the preceding day, when, ashimed to meet in eye of re¬ cognition, she liad secluded herself in the most retired pirt of the pavilion Orasmyn':, horror at this information
vas so extreme, that every body shrunk from him except I But he rejected my consolation, and ev en that of Camilla, and disturbed the place a ith d hrious outcries Never lud I so complete an ldia how greatly I was indebtid to Orasmyn for having once w arr inte I me to many into his family, as now tl at 1 sivv ι dis honour to that family could duv с hnn to distraction His frm¿v bafilul all remonstrance, and in his own language lit gave a command inhuman in its t'e Bvery and purpose In lie ensuing minute, we saw the three harbingers hurled from the brow ot tht η miret ot exetution they wtre torn j< int from joint as they descended, and were so en tirely shared to pieces, tint nothing but their blood and entrails reached the ground This action was iicompamed by shouts ot enjoyment anil probation from those within, antl those without the castle For me, thou, h I abht rretl the deed, I could not othel vv ье tiun re
epect the feelings of Orasmyn as virtu¬ ous in their barbarity But my preju¬ dices in Ins favour were soon to under¬ go the severest trial A faithful soldier appeared, and announced the motion of the enemy to assault the castle , adding, lhat its defence seemed impo sible, as the garrison was every moment de¬ creased by desertions to the Imen, who rode about the walls invoking the men to then party Hciring this, I offered mv seivices in le uling the Cl ristians, who, thou h emancipated from their slavery, were not yet depirted from the castle Orasmyn again rejected me, and that rudely After the first exer cise of his revenge he appeired less fun ous, though it could not bc said that he w as le s awful, for a gli omy determina ti n gave а darker shade to lus aspect, and vv e ill shuddered as he sp ike, though Ins tones were gentle He called on Je¬ milly to approach him, if yet she had the virtue to look lum m the face. She
faintly obeyed, and we beheld the bro¬ ther and sister beleed in each other's arms , their tear) so mingled, that they seemed to be flowing from the same source. The beholders sympathised in the pathetic ardor with which he em¬ braced Jemdly, while the latter was vi¬ sibly comforted by his goodness Wc all crouded around the pair n ıth tears and mutterings of delight, but imme diatelyne were repulsed by ι piteous groan from Jemilly, who shrunk from Orasmyn's breast, and shewed her own to be pierced to the \ cry haft of his po mard Hi ippcared to rejoue that the thrust was moita!, as though he dreaelcd the necessity ot Из repetition , and com¬ posing her in his auns, that the liSj painful might be her dissolution, he continued to gaze on her « ith the most earnest affection, notwithstanding the dying vicissitudes ot her countenance but she passed her ejes from his, and, for the first time \ lew ing arov nd, di
vided tier last look between Camilla and me Ihc dismal silence in which thrs fiichtful tlectl vv is dchlieratcd and exe¬ cuted, was first broken by the perpetra¬ tor, when his hapless victim expired He raged till he actually formed at the mouth , avut, tiv his orders, the corpse of Jtmilly vv as r used on a bier, by which P'ccedeel, he, vv ith every member of the garrison, salheel out on the foe. Ihc lutei viere alike surprised and daunted bv hi temerity, of which he exhibited such ign il proofs, that the nearest bands were overborne, md reinforcements flocked from those more distant, vv hich quitted the Walls they were preparing to force, in order to oppose the outer war. As 1 gizctt from a lofty tower, it was beneath my observation, and I saw that it w as not a bloodless contest, xs is usual among the Arabians, for Orasmyn's strokes wtre those of death, and by equal resolution only could he be op- VOI HI. X
posed But, for a time, alt opposition was \ain, for with the most frantic Na¬ lar he overthrew every one, and widen¬ ed a passage for tht bier into the adverse host, v. Inch closed on it as it ad\ anccd At length, w hen completely unbosomed, the bearers were si un, ind the bier sunk down 1 hough the bitr ltsclt became invisible, the spot vv here it fell was easdy to be distinguished, on account ot tht slaughterous agit mon that beset it, tlirough v. Inch you might catch glimp ts of Orasmyn redeeming himself from the hostile throng At b-ngth lic \\ as carried by tht stream of tlie enemy, still fight ing amid them, round a distant angle of the eastit, by which he was instantly eclipsed, but the noise of the light con¬ tinued to proclaim lus heroic actions. My indignation at his refusing me a »hart m lus sally,wis effaced by my sense of his dreadful danger, compircd to winch my pt feet possession of ehe cas- tU, of Camiih, and of the nvcr, was an
me 'tetu I consideration I descendtd, and recalled the Christians fiom tie ramparts, to which I had sent them to deceive the enemy with the resemblance of а garrison According to my u june tıons, they were all armed and while some cautiously e peiicd tl с chief portal for the admission of the fugitives from the fight, the majority accompanied me through a mysterious outlet close to where Orasmyn was driven The first object that encountered my sight, was one of the Imcn, who, imagining him¬ self in full security, was fermenting that strife he dreaded to share As he acted so unlike a priest, I had no reason to ve nerate him as such, I therefore sprang towards him and woultl fain have cut hun do« n when the negroes interposed The shouts of those around Orasmyn being triumphal t in loudness, I forsook the Iman and pushed forward to Ins succour Tl is unexpected attack so con¬ founded the enemy, that they shrunk X 2
in disorder still so great w as the cop- course, that neither could I tbeern Oramvyn, or even ascertain in what pai t of the crow it he was At lengi ti, guidi d 1 y the поле and the tendency ot t combot, I burst into the circle his intre¬ pidity· had farmed, i hough this arele Tañed every two or three minutes, where I found lum was already bestrew¬ ed with broken blades of »arnctars, with darts, aad lances but with how good a ektH these had been employed, « as w o- fWIy endeneed by Orasmyn'» dress, which wa» purple with the life-blood from his own and the enemy's veins. The circle reclosed on mc, and 1 fought around the Moor long before th- Chris- Hans could succeed in cuttinpr their рачч age through AVhen they appeired, w ith every one a blade recking tu its hilt, the enemy lied, and I proflered my assist¬ ance to Orasmyn, who was enfeebled even to unsteadiness hy loss t f blood Indeed his rescue seemed marvellous,
considering the multitude opposed to the Christi ins, whose gredt success wds chiefly iscribtable to their periection in pedestr an warfdre, from which their Arabian idvi sanes were so disinclined, that nothing but its being absolutely ne- cessuy in the assault ot the castle, could have persuaded them tor a moment to dismount their horses As I could pu¬ tene that those, hitherto disengaged, were rallying the routed, and that the w hole w ould soon charge us according to their ia\ ouritc and truly formidable mode of attack, 1 besought Orasmy n to retreat He presen cd а haughty silence, but began, slowly to con t ly It being impossible to rigain the sally poit, we moved towards tht great gitts, but, bunt; sipiratid on our way tluthtr, I ρ issu! by tht bier lhis, with its un tojtunatt burdtn, I ardently wished to deliver from the pro ible insults ot the enemy but I was alike dttuvul in tny «ttempt and my judgment, for while * 3
engaged in the exploit, m w hich I was at length rebuffed, 1 was once so ι car the acoompuihmeat of my design, аь to Witness, recumbent on the bier, a very young man of noble nuen and splendi I dres«, who «raj indulging all a lovci . de*pwr orer the body 1 hat 1 с w as t he Emir, who had been her suitor, 1 could have no doubt, and the mingled afthe tion *»dremorse he exhibited,convinced Me, that in the savage inmdi of the Imen had originated the sister s ravish¬ ment, and (he brother's invasion Whe¬ ther their success in the first might not greatly have been owing to the de· praved ideas they might give the f.mir of Jemilly s connection with me, 1 had not time to consider but certami! was, that no sooner did one of those evil Imen identify my person, and point it out to the Emir, than the latter ceaged his lamentations, and sprang through the soldiers after roe 1 he combat he tought, I tbould not have declined, had
he come fairly on unaccompanied. However, wc exchdnged two or three snokes, in which his inftrioiity ol skill w as grtat as that ot age, and a minute might hive determined hu. fate. His sensibility of this torced hım to refrdin, ds vv ere his troops obliged by the missile w tapons from tht wall», undtr which protection we tnttred tht gdtt. 1 found Orasmyn in the outermost court, around him those ot his soldiers that had escaped the carnage, of whom he was taking a mournful review.— When I appeired, he sta ted thence, and hurried towards the terraces of embark¬ ation. I followed him, tortured with the apprehension that he meant to flee with С amilla, tor I observed that already sht was there \\ hen wc wert gathered on the spot, Orasmyn sulkltJ Itss from tht anguish of lus wounds than from the emotions ut his he irt, foi how noble was the conduct which threw tht wo¬ man he adored шш tht «ruis ul ami!
I could not give speech to my gTatitude, 50 was it mingled with astonishment, neither would he have hearkened to it, for he turned from me with a disdain¬ ful haughtiness, lhat denoted how tri¬ umphantly he ftlt his own magnanimity to have surpassed mine, after so Ii ng and equal a competition had esisted be¬ tween them. When so just in action, his thoughts were pardonable in their injustice, but while his pride triumphed, bis fortune was reversed, for the w ildest uproar yet raised by the enemy, rung in our ears The garrison were seen run¬ ning to and fro about the ramparts to repulse the first assailants, but the force of the latter-was sure in the end to pre¬ vail, so said the solďcr who came to ap¬ prise Orasmyn of the assault. Although Camilla was reclining in my arms, I could not bear the idea ot leaving him in this distress, accordingly I offered, in concert with the Christians, to defend the castle to the last drop oí my blood.
Гог the first tune Orasmyn met my tyes I luvt tyven you elamica, sud he, whit mort reward would the mcr ctfaiy 1 buur tor' 'i our happiness 1 sud 1 411 vv ti it ι look he pass vi from 111c to t aludi ι , it w ıs fıcrv with ıceu- sati m and anguish A look the more notable, as it was immediately contrast¬ ed by the tenderness with wluch he greeted the infant PhUippo, who wa» brought to his protection by the af¬ frighted nurses 1 was transporting Ca¬ milla to the boat, w hen the boy tlisco- vered her, and calledon her in the most piteous accents Against the mother 1 h id no party in Camilla s bosom, there- fen e I attunptetl not to oppost her iarc- w ell cnibr ice But tht shocking appear. an t of Orasmyn, in whose tlitst a targe wound was now discernible, so awed Iur that she irmai J, and tainttd in ıny arms ľa I Or ismi n follow et! Ins ıfftc- tıons, an I come to htr succour, had he faced шс with ι softened countenance.
so entirely »as I melted by his heroi m, Lamillas despondenc\, md the sur rounding inhumanities of battle, slaugh ter and tumult, that I do I heve, to Ime induced him to accompany us from the castle, t could ha\c renounced С ι milla I tremble to reflect how rea ty t he frantic words were on my tonpoic , but they were prevented utterance by his disregard, and the outrage of the assault Never did 1 suffer more ' The enemy were seen attaining the battlements, from which the defenders were precipi tateJ by { ree or terror The air seem ed alive with darts and lances, ι f which a dozen were leen to convey each a death mto one victim I he w omen and children ran through the gardens, w uh shrieks appalling to the hardiest, of whom a surviving faithful few cona ened around Orasmy n to make a last despc rate stand God, it felt unmanly not to join one's fate with thevrV but the Christians, by this time arranged in the
Vents, were claniorou tor my emli ırk¬ ın >n, anet4 w ıs forced to obey AVıth l dimih s nsılıss on my lap, I took my st it , 1 ul was 111 two or thrtc nut litis w ilel tit 111 tht view ot Orismyn, ot l'Ini ppo, 11 el tl t sold us who wert to 1 kt l'un tt But tht uproar it 11 j until us Ii 1 long ind each moment 1 1 lie st irteli hi ceiti|cetuie that by th t tune the nussurc ot Orasmyn anil 1 rtst mu t bc doni.? A short time 1 ι ιι,τΙ t us within provpci t of а gilhy, whieh liv at the mouth ot the river, where it hid betn driven and confined ! v the ci niinuil tet pistuousntss of tht wtitlur Hit situinoli it this vessel h u' 1111 ¿ bun known in tht castle, as tl ptrftclii 11 ot Ilildt'irmil's consii- r icy w sto attım ir Whit wtre his s nt ments on my amvil, t did not titillile mijdt to tuhom , foi niy acti¬ vity wis innrei seel With the lonvelll- 111 и ¿ of tamilia, and my thoughts with the fatt of Orasimu As night
ihiikcncit, the deck was cr ıkıl to be¬ hold a distant pyramid ot ι* , and no one could doni t ť it Orjsmvn s dwell ιης vv snow lus tuntr il jilt It ι г- tinucil to bl 1-е with a fi ry thit is lourcu iht skits, while ť s nie v Ile tint fri-ihincil it, swell 1 ι cr s 's v t deputi I tint ti uturv ot vil, 1 launche I nite tht Spim h m m
AiH .V lie
