Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Gaston de Blondeville: or, The court of Henry III, keeping festival in Ardenne: a romance: St. Alban's Abbey, a metrical tale, with some poetical pieces
GASTON DE BLONDEVILLE; OU THE COURT OF HENRY THE THIRD, KEEFING FESTIVAL IN ARDEN.
TOL. III.
ñ
THE SEVENTH NIGHT.
Here was miniatured a stately chamber, in part richly illuminated. Under a canopy, was a long sleeping-couch, but no person appeared there. In another part of this spacious room, where the light prevailed less, sat one, who leaned thoughtfully on a table, his hand covering his eyes ; another figure stood near, but so obscurely drawn, that for what designed could not be certainly known, Images, holding lamps, were pictured in the chamber.
GASTON DE BLONDEVILLE. THE SEVENTH NIGHT, That same night, King Henry signed the death-warrant of the merchant ; and he gave notice, that, on the morrow, he would depart for his palace of Woodstock. And that same night, as was said, the pri¬ soner thought he heard again his death* warning; the same song of peace passed hy his turret, as at this hour of the even¬ ing belure. Others there were, also» about the castle, who, that night, heard strange sounds, and witnessed more than they could well understand.
я 2
Amongst these, were the u autours oí* a [Miteni, near the north walls, who re¬ ported thev heard grie vings, and, more than once, saw some one pass, almost л\ libili nach oí' their sinkes. When they spoke the watch-word, it answered not, and, \\ hen they raised their spears, it fled. The same appearance, though not the same inoanings, was heard of those» who kept guard on the east ramparts ; and the groom wayte, it was said, as he sat within the porch of King Henry's lodgings, on a sud¬ den, saw some one standing still before it. Hi* had not heard a step, hut, on raising his head, perceived that figure. It was sus¬ pected he had been slumbering, and had dreamed of the strange accident, which had befallen the day before. But, whe¬ ther this appearance were a reality, or ouly an impression of his fear, certain it is, that, being on watch alone, for his master
had never pi|K?tl the fir>t hour, мпсе the night of his alarm* he had ík·! onirage now to s{>eak, or even to step forward, till the object of his terror had jmssed aw ay. Then, he eatne forth oť the ¡югсЬ to little pur¬ pose ; for, all without \\я< ьи\1 and lone¬ some, and nothing to be distingin>hed, save the huge shadowy towers around the court, and the stars twinkling bright above them. But he also heard, at times, a strain of mournful music, and thought it was a re¬ quiem in the chapel. RememJ>ermg the late strange occurrence in this very court, as he had paced his round there, he be¬ gan to think this was in very truth the Prior of Saint Mary, come again on some secret erranti oť mischief to the imprisoned merchant ; and straight he wended to the keepers door, in Cæsars tower, to give alari n .
But no one heard him there, the keeper being, at that very tiine, in the King's hall, waiting his command. Then he went to call the ancient wayte, his master, who was sleeping out his sleep in his own lodge; and, hy the time he саше hack with his groom, this unknown person was no where to be found. If these men, in the midst of the castle, were confounded with fearful thoughts, the poor prisoner above, distant, forlorn and distressed was no less so ; for, as he lay, in watch¬ fulness and sorrow, ruminating on the extraordinary occurrence in the field of Tournament, suddenly he thought a voice, without his door, called upon his name. He would not turn at the sound, fearful of beholding behind his grate the dim visage of the Prior of Saint Mary, as he had seen it on a former night. He knew that malignity alone could lead him hither; and, dreading even the sound of his voice,
he drew his cloak over his head, and co* vered himself close, hardly daring, at the moment, either to see, or hear. A loud knocking, and then a call roused him, and, at la t >t, he heard his name spo¬ ken ; when, instantly turning at the sound, he perceived, behind the grate, not the dark countenance of the Prior, nor the stern one of his keeper, but that of his beloved and unhappy wife. Kardly dar* ing to trust his senses, he held the lamp nearer, before he became convinced it was her very self. Without question, or one word of endearment, she called tremu¬ lously upon him to save himself by flight ; and, repeating his name with hurrying fear, entreated him to unfasten the door on his side, telling him that means were provid¬ ed for his escape, but that he had not an instant to lose, ere the keeper might re¬ turn. Then, almost swooning with apprehen-
sion, she undrew the outer holts, and was so much exhausted hy the effort, that she clung tu the hars of the grate for support. Woodreeve did not now, as on a former night, hesitate to undraw the inner holts : no ; with the eagerness of hope and joy, on this unlooked for meeting and intelli¬ gence, he forced hack the holts, and ex¬ pected, such was the enchantment of his elation, that the door would open. He had forgotten, that the keeper's key, or the Prior's, was necessary to unfasten it. With this recollection despair returned, for, all his strength was not sufficient to force the lock. When he had ceased his efforts, and had somewhat calmed the distress of his wife, he inquired hy what means she had heard of his situation ; for the messenger he had despatched, he w r ell knew, could not, in so short a time, have reached her. He asked, also, how she had gained admittance to his prison. To these
questions, she answered« that sîıe had re* eeived a fonner letter, mentioning the time of his landing at Hull, while, u ith her sis¬ ter, living in Gloucestershire; und had writ¬ ten by the carrier, to tell him she would abide there, till he should pass thither on his way home. While there awaiting him, she liad heard of what had passed at Kenilworth, from one who being at War¬ wick, when the King took wassel there. had returned almost in his train to wit¬ ness the festivals at the castV. There, hearing the name »f the prison¬ er, whose extraordinary accusation of the Baron de Blondeville had become known over the whole forest and county, he had relinquished the expectation of fine sights, that he might hasten to acquaint her with her husband's danger ; and it was by his contrivance, that she had gained admit¬ tance, and had hoped to effect an escape ; that, for two nights, they had walked в 5
about the castle ; and, when all was still, she had sung aloud, in the hope, that he might hear her voice, and know that she was near him. He now doubted not, that he had heard this, when he thought he listened to a warning of his death. She was then proceeding to give him some particulars of the plan for his escape, when they heard footsteps ascending the stair. She made no attempt to conceal her¬ self; for, since all hope for her husband was gone, she had nothing more to dread, and she awaited the expected appearance of the keeper, with indifference. The keeper— for it was he— came on, with lamp in one hand, and a parchment in the other ; and, seeing a stranger at the chamber-door, he surlily demanded who she was, and what she wanted. Her answers told part of the truth ; on which he seemed somewhat softened, not refusing her admittance to the prison-chamber of
her husband. Then, the poor prisoner saw enter it, at the same time, his beloved wife, and the keeper bearing his death- warrant ! Happily for her, she saw not this ; she saw only her husband, and ran into his arms, and wept upon his breast. What he then suffered, who saw not only the evil prepared for himself, but for her, none may tell. When Woodreeve could recollect him¬ self, he made sign to the keeper, to con¬ ceal that dreadful instrument from his wife, and to withdraw awhile, that he might prepare her for what was to come. This man so far respected the misery he witnessed, as to yield, and leave the cham¬ ber. Then, Woodreeve, calling forth all his fortitude to bear him with composure through the relation of his adventures since he had landed on English shore, led her, step by step, to the knowledge of all that had passed. But, when he came to
relate the manner of his trial, and all that had happened during it, all his endeavours to prepare her for the sad result were of no avail to his distressed wife; who, be¬ fore he could come to his sentence, was gone beyond hearing, having swooned, as if dead, by his side. The keeper, who was brought up to ♦he chamber by the cries of Woodreeve for help, was moved at л\ hat he beheld, and aid was administered, which slowly brought lier back to consciousness. Soon as it did, they conveyed her out of that chamber, while the keeper showed to the prisoner his death - warrant, which gave order for his execution early on the mor¬ row. It were vain and cruel to dwell upon the misery of this innocent man, thus brought into jeopardy by the repeated crimes of others. How to break the un¬ happy message to his poor wife he knew not : yet know it she soon must ; and he
thought it mere better she should know his sentence from his oim month ihan from any other. Bo lately met» after long absence* and now to part far ever ì lì v desired the keeper to bring her to the chamber, soon as he thought she had re¬ covered strength enough to hear, without destructive suffering, the truth he mu>t unfold. And here a dark veil of misery falls ujMm a scene of pangs, too acute, too searching, to be made known. And to manv others in the castle was this night dreadful î To the young Lady Baroness, and to the King himself! How changed, indeed, was the whole ap|*ear- ance of this castle, from that it vore on yester-eve ; where, if the inhabitants were wakefid, it was only from the restlessness of joy, and preparation for the grand fes¬ tival of the morrow î Where were now the mirth and music, with which these walls had rung? where the feast, the dance,
that had made every minute pass so quick¬ ly to the poor mortals, whose hours were fleeting away beneath these princely roofs ? All was changed to grief and silence. The footsteps only of attendants were heard along the halls and galleries ; no voice spoke there ; it seemed, indeed, as if every one were fearful of speaking. When, per¬ chance, the door of a chamber was opened, no burst of merriment or song came forth, no harp sounded, no hum of voices. The impression of this whole change may be l^est signified by conceiving what one might feel on another change, on a smaller scale ; that in one hall, for instance, of this same edifice, which should have been late¬ ly deserted of its splendid guests, where the few lights still burning might serve but to show its lonely grandeur, while one heavy step proceeds about the tables to extinguish these ; and then the long sound of the closed door denotes the vastness and the emptiness of all that space.
Now of the King's condition and the things, that befell, on this night, there go divers tales. The truth were difficult to hit, because of the closeness, that guards a King from eye and ear, within his private chambers. Yet there be occasions, when the strangeness of occurrences, that seem not of this world's ordering, surprize and thus overcome the fidelity of servants, nay even the prudence of others, most con¬ cerned in them, and they speak of many things, which, at less pressing times, they would keep safe locked, within their secret thought, to feed alone their own fear and wonder. Thus might it be, on this night. There went forth many strange tales. This, which followeth, was much received at the time. Nay there were strong wit¬ nesses of some parts of it in the attending pages, and even in words dropped by the King himself, to warrant the passing of the story. But, be this as it may, I tell but what was told, in the Court itself.
It was said then, that King Henry, after signing the death warrant of Woodreeve, dismissed every one from his presence, and retired to his chamber for ali night. There, he would hardlv endure the neces- sary presence of his pages, while he imder- \* ent the usual ceremonie? of his wardrobe. No sooner had they divested him of his mantle and surcoat, and helped him with his night-robe, than he would permit no further intrusion upon his melancholy and vexing thoughts, Full of sadness was he and of self-reproach, it may be believed, for the premature death of one he had loved and esteemed, and for wliose fall he blamed himself, since s had he not so long delayed to execute, what he called justice on the merchant, whom he was still wil¬ ling to think a false accuser, the Baron, he held, would be still alive. He sat thus ruminating, while all was stÜl around him ; and what he heard afar
was not likely to change the tem|»er of his mind—sad ami solemn music it was, min¬ gled m he thought, with lamentation. Пе listened» aud distinguished a choral chant of voices, faintly пае and fall. It wa¿> the dirge, which was performed in the rhajn*! for the departed Haron de Blondeville, in that vt rv rhiuu'I. where, so few dav** lie- fore, his nuptials had l>een solemnized, in the King's presence, and where strains of joy, and hope and benediction had lately ascended. Now, ever and anon, the trumpet ц-оап- ed, and, in dismal and interrupted strain was sung, " Darkness is my 1кч1 — the worm is my sister. I am covered with the mist of death, nor may the sight of man behold me. *' The King went to an oriel-window, that looked towards the chapel» and heard the chant of the choristers swell with these words, '* Eternal rest give unto
him '" Arid then the faint response con· eluded with, * % Rest in peace !*' Then, the instruments sunk low into a murmur, and the voices were no more heard. Now, the tale goes. that, when 1ш Higli- rtesH distinguished these words of the re¬ quiem» he мач overcome with the sad thoughts they brought forth» and he sat down in his choir, and even wept» leaning his arm upon a table, without noticing what lay there. When the King took his hand from his eyes, he ticheld a sword-— the very sword worn bv the Baron de Blondeville, and which Woodreeve had claimed, as the weapon of his murdered kinsman; the same, of which a resem¬ blance had this day l>een raised up before the King, by the stranger knight, in the field of tournament, who had there pointed it, with deadly power, against the Baron. On seeing this, his Highness was great¬ ly amazed, marvelling how, and with
what intent it had tiren cfmvrvtn!. While yet he ga/ed» the blade Iterarne dull ami cloudy, and larice >\h>t* uf nut began to ap2>car, w hie!; turned : * a bloody hue. Then lib Highness terrified by what he saw, and thinking it the work oť sorrery, looked towards the ante -гоош, where lay the esquire> of the body» with intent to call them, una pereeivtd some one, as he thought, passing along his ehaoiber* The silver Images, which had held lights, stood not there, and a gloom, nigh to darkness, spread through this spaeious eft am Iter, save just where some one seemed to wat eh. To that side the King directed his voice, and then rose up to learn the truth. Now» the hangings of this chamber were storied \v ith the famous siege oť Aeon, where the first King Richard performed such valourous deeds, and the light so fell on that King on horseback, that to the King Henry he seemed to be verily riding out of the arras,
and the sword he held to be gleaming to and fro. This was but a passing phantasie of the King's own mind, as was afterwards de¬ clared : but that, which followed, was said to be no deceit of his fancy. He had risen to discover whether any person was in his chamber, where there had been that appearance of some one passing ; he saw a gleam of light, like unto the glistening of Richard's sword, yet nei¬ ther substance, nor shape, there. Again and nearer, that light appeared, and did not vanish immediately as before ; and, before it faded, it assumed a form and countenance ; and the King again per¬ ceived before him the stranger-knight. Having now lost all power to summon to him those who watched without, his Highness only heard these words, *' The worm is my sister ! ' The King gasping in breathless terror,
said, " What art thou ? Wherefore art thou come } * The voice answered, " Give me rest— the worm is my sister. The mist of death is on me I o The King again said, ** Wherefore dost thou come?'' to which the phantom an¬ swered, tť Give me rest f ' " How may that be ? M " Release an innocent man." ** How may I know him to he such ?" said the King. " By the sword of justice, that lies be¬ fore thee. A knight-hospitaller was slain by tlìat sword ; it has, this day, slain his slayer, Gaston de Blondeville. The Prior of St. Mary's was his accomplice. Punish the guilty. Release the innocent. Give me rest!" The King, as was said, had now suffi¬ ciently recovered from his surprize, to de¬ mand proof of the Prior's guilt, on which
the vision answered, " I will call up one, who may no more deceive," It is said, that tlie King's courage here- failed, and he called out, " Forbear !" " Recall your warrant, then," demanded the spectre solemnly, " ere it be too late to save an innocent man." At that moment the matin bell sounded. íť My time is short," said the vision ; " if he perish for my sake, he shall not fall« alone. Be warned !" While these words still vibrated on his ear, the King again heard the chant from the chapel, and knew that they were per¬ forming the second requiem. " I am summoned," said the vision ; " My bed is in darkness ; the worm is my sister. Yet my hope------" The King, on looking up, saw only the dim countenance of the knight ; his form had disappeared ; in the next moment, the face too had passed away. But who may
speak the horror of the King, when, In its place he beheld that of the Baron, but as in death ; an expression of sok nity and suffering overspread his visage; and the King heard the words, ** My guilt was my doom ; I shall beliold you no more. The prisoner is innocent. The Prior of St. Ma¬ ry's is gone to his account. Be warned!" At these words cold drops stood on the King's forehead, and his eyes remained, fixed on the vacant air, where the counte¬ nance of the Baron had just appeared. At the same instant, these words of the dis¬ tant requiem rose on his ear, ** I go unto the dark lane ; that is covered with the mist of death, —a land of misery and dark¬ ness, where is the shadow of death and no order. The eye of man may no more behold me." Then the King lost all recollection ; his ear was closed against every sound. How long he remained thus none knew ; only
it w r as yet early morning, when the es¬ quires, sleeping in the ante-room, were roused by his summons. Then, his High¬ ness despatched one to the constable of the castle, with command to attend him in his chamber, another to St. Mary's, to know how it fared with the Prior, and yet an¬ other to bring the Earl of Cornwall to him. For my Lord Archbishop, the King as he believed of himself, wished not to disturb the repose due to his age ; but in truth he liked not to see him ; for he had spoken truths, which his Highness now too heavily feared it had been his duty to listen to, The messenger, despatched to the Priory, had no sooner passed the castle-ditch, and gotten on the outside of the great portal, than he espied carts, drawn up under the walls, in waiting, to cany away the poor merchant, ere those in the castle could behold the sad sight of his removal for the
dreadful purpose, that had 1к?еп deter¬ mined upon. He spied, too, under the gloomy dawn, the whole of that dismal assemblage silently watching to take away their prey. The page rued the juryV sentence on the prisoner, and he went on his way, with heavy heart ; for the mer¬ chant was pitied of many. When he reached the Priory, the bre¬ thren were at matins ; and he was told the Prior was in his chamber. Marvelling, as they did, at the King's early message, one delayed, as little as might be, before he went to acquaint the Prior with it. He struck upon his chamber-door; and, re¬ ceiving no answer, he went within, and the Prior was found, as had been foresaid ; he was lifeless in his bed, stretched grim in death. lie, who beheld him thus, descended the stair, with all speed, to acquaint the brethren then assembled, with what had vol. in. с
happened» and found them in consterna¬ tion great as lis own, though from a dif¬ ferent cause, The tapers were dying away, and the only light, that glimmered strongly on the walls, came from a spot, where stood the armed figure of a knight hospitaller. His shield threw a deeper gloom around it on the tombs and even on the tapers of the monks* He pointed with his sword to the ground he stood on, and exclaimed mournfully, " A murdered knight hospi¬ taller lies below ; search for his bones, and save an innocent man from death !" The figure stood for a moment; and, as it raised its shield, the flame thereon flashed, within the hollow helmet, and showed the stern, yet mournful counte¬ nance of the knight, such as it had ap¬ peared before the King. Then sunk the figure with the flame, into the earth.
For a while, the brethren stood in utter silenee and amazement ; then they began to look upon one another, and to ask what this meant ; and, even while they did so, a thrilling voice groaned from beneath. Then, without further hesitation, they sent for him whose office it was to dig graves, that search might straight be made, where that sound had seemed to be heard. Such of the monks as, in this tumult of fear and wonder, had time to understand, that their Prior was said to be dead, now has¬ tened to his chamber to learn the truth— others remained in the church. Some of these dared to approach the spot, where the spectre had appeared ; and found it to be over that nameless grave, near to which the poor merchant had found refuge ; and where their deceased brother, Anselm, had borne witness to a super¬ natural appearance. When the lay-brother, the digger of the graves, came, who had с 2
not long been in office, he pored over the stone, marvelling that one so little an¬ cient should have neither name, nor date. nor inscription of any kind, on his tomb. There were some standing by and observ¬ ing, who, if they had been so minded» could have told, that it had not been always thus : but they held their peace. On raising that stone and turning up the earth beneath, a coffin appeared, bear¬ ing this inscription :—- " Reginald de Folville, Knight Hospi¬ taller of St. John, slain in a wood of Ar¬ denti, rests here ! " There was neither taper, nor visible flame of any kind, over the grave, yet was this distinctly shown, by a strong light. The coffin-lid, which was of stone, like the receptacle, and was cut in shape of the head and helmet, being removed, there lay exposed to view the figure of the dead knight, in the armour in which he
was sìain, and such as had but now ap¬ peared on the grave; the shield was οι his breast ; hut no sword was at his side. At this spectacle, some of the brethren shrunk, overcome with so sad a sight ; others pressed forward, and bent over the grave with intense curiosity. The features of the knight were entire, though shrunk and changed in death. They were of a noble cast, and bore the very countenance of the apparition. Оц the forehead appeared the death-wound. While yet they looked, the appearance of the knight began to change, and the coun¬ tenance to shrink and fade away. Some said this was only an effect of the living air upon mortal features so long shut up in death ; others said not so, but that it was, like all the rest, to bring truth to light and administer justice to an innocent man. Then the coffin lid was replaced, and that awful spectacle of mortality was
hidden from view, for all time. During this, still music was heard in the air, like unto a requiem, hymning some blessed spirit. The brethren, while they listened, were hushed in holy peace ; some knelt over the grave ; others stood, with hands and eyes lifted up, as if following the sound with their attention ; and others, drawing the cowl over their eyes, bent their heads and wept in silence. Without the church, the old oaks, swaying in the wind, mingled in high and solemn harmony with the lessen¬ ing chorus, till their murmur alone remain¬ ed. Those, who had heard that soothing strain, long stood, as listening, still rapt in the quietude it had breathed forth, till, at length, their peace was enlivened into cheering hope. The grave-digger, who had withdrawn to some distance, was the first to recover himself, and the sound of his footsteps
drew back to present life the thoughts oí the holy men around him. Then 3 they recollected the death of their Prior, and that the Kings messenger was yet waiting for the tidings, which his Highness, by his extraordinary anxiety, appeared to have foreknown. One of them returned to the castle with the es¬ quire, who, when he came near the gates, looking anxiously to see, whether the poor merchant was yet gone to his doom, perceived, that the carts, with the whole mournful apparatus of death, w r ere already departed. On perceiving this, he struck his hands together, in sorrow and des¬ pair, with a force of action, which drew the observation of his companion, who soon learned the occasion of his honest emotion» and suffered with him. How much more would each have suf¬ fered, could he have witnessed all, that had passed within the prison-chamber,
while those marvels were passing in court, ami Priory, as already told ! How much inore could thev have seen all the strug- gles of Woodreeve, for composure and re¬ signation, and, yet harder task ! his en¬ deavours to prepare and reconcile his \\ He to calmer sorrow. Of late, she had re¬ fused to allow it possible, that her hushand could thus unjustly and ignominiously perish in the cause of humanity ; and she would have forced her way to the King's presene» 1 , there to have pleaded the truth, nothing doubting she could have convinced him of his mistake, had not hars and holts withheld her. Por the arguments of her husband, on this subject, they were as nothing with lur, in this state of despera¬ tion. And thus passed the heavy hours of this night to those poor sufferers, till the keeper erme to bid Woodreeve prepare for death, the guard being then in waiting to carry him away. Then, the poor prisoner
perceived, what until this moment, he hnú heen unconscious of, that hope, in >pite of reason, had lingered at his heart; fm\ now only was it, that he felt the full pang of despair. And, when he heard the summons afar off, that deep and dismal beib he stood trembling with horror, unconscious where he was—unconscious even that his wife lay senseless on his pallet î Again it call¬ ed, that hollow murmuring death-sound f He heard not the footsteps ascending the stair, nor the bars of his prison withdrawn ; that shuddering sound alone crept on Ыь ear. lie perceived, however, the keeper standing now not in the room, hut near the door; and he began to recover his re¬ collection, like one, who has been stunned by a blow ; yet was there a gloomy and dreadful stillness at his heart and over all around him. He turned to his wife, and e 5
leaned over her, without shedding a tear, or uttering a groan. She was pallid, as a corpse ; his own cheek was of the same hue ; yet he called not for help. ne x\ccjpci auvaiiCcu iiHO tne I ООШ , others, as if from respect for misery, waited without, at the door. Perceiving the condition of the poor woman, he sent off some one for assistance; and, taking Woodreeve by the arm, he looked upon him, as if he wished, yet feared, to speak. But the prisoner saw not this; for, he raised not up his eyes. Then, the keeper shook him by the arm and spoke ; but he heard not the words ; he only answered, that he was ready ; and then, turning to give one long, last look to his poor wife, he found his eyes could not well distin¬ guish her. He groaned heavily, and was departing ; but still the keeper told him, and, in a
voice less rugged than usual said, " Read this paper." " I cannot see the letters,** answered the prisoner ; " my sight is gone ; and it is also useless to read my death-warrant." " Can you endure to hear it read ?" said the keeper. "Why not?" replied the merchant; ** What have I to fear, in this world ?" " Have you nothing to hope ?'* On this the prisoner lifted up his coun¬ tenance; his sight began to return, and he looked at the keeper; his soul was trembling in his eyes. Then the keept ' ventured to call out " Respite Γ —-and instantly the whole as¬ pect of Woodreeve was lighted up, like one called back from death. But this spirit was short lived ; in the next instant he called out, " My wife ! my wife !" and bent over her in an agony of
woe. "Is no help tobehad?'' cried he. "She is gone! your respite comes too late/ 1 But, while he so spoke, one, who had been sent for a restorative, returned, and, after long application, she revived. Then Woodreeve, when his first joy had subsided, began to consider this was a respite, not a release, and that his suffer¬ ings, perhaps, were not ended, but post¬ poned. This respite, which now began to be viewed by him with doubt, had well nigh destroyed his wife with sudden joy ; to her mind it brought, not merely hope, but certainty of life for her husband. A con¬ vulsion followed, and she was, for a short time, in as much danger as before. Hard¬ ly had she recovered from this, when an order came from the constable to give Woodreeve his liberty and a chamber in the castle better suited for him. Assured of this, he drew his cloak over his eyes,, and stood, for some time, weeping in si-
lence, save that his sobs were audible; then he raised his hands and eyes to Hea¬ ven, and bowed his head. His wife re¬ mained weeping on his garment, till he took her to his heart, and then they left that prison-chamber, hand in hand together. When the King had heard of the Prior s death, he was struck with marvellous dread, and with conviction of his false¬ hood and of the merchant's innocence. He bitterly repented of the favourable opinion he had so long adhered to, respecting the Baron de Blondeville, and of the weak credulity, with which he had listened to the artful suggestions of that false Prior, rather than to the arguments and to the strong conviction of the Archbishop of York. But the former went with his passions, the latter against them ; and he helped to deceive himself. Yet, when he did find out his error, he was warm and generous in counteracting it; and, now
that he was assured how unjustly the poor merchant had been made to suffer, he loaded him with present kindness, and prepared to repay him hereafter by cer¬ tain grants and privileges, that made Woodreeve the most wealthy merchant of his guild. Nor did his Highness forget the forlorn widow and children of the deceased knight, whom he fostered and nobly supported. The miniature of that knight and the gol¬ den chain he had worn he returned to his family; and the Jew, who had forsworn himself, at the instigation of the Baron, was punished with heavy fine and im¬ prisonment, the fine being amongst the King's gifts to Woodreeve. But, though his Highness found it now his chief de¬ light to do kindness to the merchant and to the family of his unfortunate kinsman, yet could he not endure to behold him,
nathless the expectations of most in the court. And now that the Prior was dead, many things came out, concerning him 7 which had not been suspected. He was of birth so low, that no one could learn whence he had sprung ; but it appeared, that, not many years before, he had been in arms, and in the class of a follower of Sii* Gaston de Blondeville, one of the re¬ tainers, whom the latter was obliged to produce, on receiving his gilt spurs. He was conjectured to have come with him from Gascony ; for, he spoke that tongue, and had all the craft and soaring vanity of that people ; but he was not born there ; he had no foreign sound in his dis¬ course. How he came by his wealth in those lawless times, and the use he made of it to procure him power, may be easily guessed. And it appeared this was well
suspected by my Lord of York, who had never looked upon him with a favourable eye, and had constantly endeavoured to counteract his pernicious influence. When, hereafter, his messenger returned from Exeter, it appeared, that none in that neighbourhood had ever known the Prior of Saint Mary's, such as he had described himself to be. The arts too, practised by this Prior with certain of the brethren, who remembered the interment of Reginald de Folville—and with certain people of Ke- nilworth, who recollected his story, were now all exposed. Those, who, from edu¬ cation and station, might not have been suspected of such baseness, were now brought to truth, and were fain to hide their heads for shame. The Prior's me* mory was thus condemned to detestation. Be it remembered, he was no true son of the church.
THE EIGxITH DAY.
THE EIGHTH DAY. Here was a drawing, divided into two compart¬ ments. In one, ivas presented an Archbishop, kissing the hand of a crowned King ; in another, was the sole portraiture of a Prince ; who, from his mantle, and the feathers embroidered on it, appeared to be a Prince of Wales.
THE EIGHTH DAY.
ON this day, the merchant and his wife departed from Kenilworth, where they had suffered such extremes of good and evil. They departed, carrying with them joy and blessings. But it was not till they had gone a good distance through the forest, that they felt themselves fully at liberty. Then, as they looked back, and saw afar off the grey towers of the castle, above the tawny woods, nay, that very prison-turret, perched over all, which Woodreeve had never expected to leave, but for death, their hearts overflowed with thankfulness, and tears of joy fell fast.
Yet, turned they suddenly from view of it, and then went forward, even faster than before. After leaving these woods of Ardenn, they journeyed homewards in peace. And many others departed from the KingV court homeward, on this day ; es¬ pecially, my Lord Archbishop took solemn leave of his Highness, who gave him all due honours, for his wise counsel, regret¬ ting also, that he had not sooner followed it. The Archbishop, pleased with the re¬ lease of Woodreeve and with the bounties since bestowed upon him, bowed himself, with willing homage, to his lord the King, and bade farewell to the young Prince Edward, with affectionate respect and with lofty hopes of what he might here¬ after prove himself. And, this day, left Kenilworth, the un¬ happy lady, Baroness de Blondeville, con¬ veyed away by her noble parents to their
own castle, there to pass in quiet shade this season of affliction. And those, who have mourned with her in this chronicle of her sad story, may haply like to look into the glass of her futurity. There, may they see many dt.rk years of grief and sadness, passed within her father's towers ; hut onward they will see the gleam of hope and joy striking athwart lier patín and further still, the calm sunshine of happiness settling on her home, where she is married to a nobleman right worthy of her. And here we veil this mirror of futurity, and come back to the passing time. And, on this very day, the King his-self, who now loathed Kenilworth, broke up the court, and departed in all state with the Queen, for his palace, at Woodstock. The eventful days and hours of a very short period had wrought great change in the King's mind, and in the views [and
hopes oť many in his train. Some had profited in wisdom by what they had ex¬ perienced j or witnessed; others had suf¬ fered truth to glide before their eyes, with¬ out attention enough to derive one lesson from it. And now, the King and all his court passing away under the battlements of this stately castle, in the pomp and order, with which, eight days before, they had ap¬ proached it, his trumpets sounded their last to these towers, which echoed back the farewell ; and then they were left to solitude and silence. This was the last gleam of courtly splendour, that lighted up the walls of Kenilworth, in this King's reign. And now the fading woods strew¬ ed yellow leaves on the long cavalcade, that wound below, whispering a moral to departing greatness ; and their high tops, rustling in the blast, seemed to sigh over
those, who were leaving them for ever to their own quietness. The Kind's banner still waved on the Keep, till his Highness had reached the end of the furthest avenue, the last spot, from which he could look back on the castle, standing, with all its solid masses of tower and bastion, amidst the rich and varied hues of autumn. While he gazed, a cloud overcast it, and then a gliding light showed every battlement and turret, wall and bastion, window and loop dis¬ tinctly in succession, nay, the very grate and spikes of the port-cullis, hanging in the arch of the great portal, under which his train had passed. Just as his Highness turned into the close woods, his banner on the Keep bowed homage, and then was lowered to be no more raised till long in after years, when the King's camp lay in Ardenn, and Prince
Edward planted the royal ensign over the sons of the rebel Montfort, and restored Kenilworth to his sovereign lord and father. This vision of the living world, which had so suddenly appeared in these wild so¬ litudes, which had, in so short period, car¬ ried the joy and mourning of human pas¬ sions, beneath these shades of Arden n ; which had banqueted and striven, had hoped and feared, had plotted and punish¬ ed, had fretted and triumphed, had shown the extremes of princely grandeur, and of domestic misery, of deep villany and ge¬ nerous humanity, of supernatural power and mortal weakness, of human craft and of controlling, over-powering justice—this vision was now all vanished as in air, to be no more seen, or traced here, peace and silence closing over the towers where it had been. The halls, where late the banquet re-
veiled, or the sceptre of justice threaten- ed, now echoed only to the straying steps of ancient menials. In the courts so lately filled with princely pomp and tumult, where the hurrying foot passed incessantly to and fro; where the many sounding hoof trampled, and the hum of voices rose, all was now so still, that, when the soli¬ tary sentinel ceased his measured pace, you might hear only the shivering of the ivy, or the distant echo to the closing door of some deserted chamber, murmuring through empty galleries, which, of late, to have looked upon would have filled you with marvel of the high dames and gaudy gentils passing through them. These courts now spoke only at certain hours, when the watch-word went its round, or a single trumpet of the garrison called to¬ gether the few armed tenants, stationed at gate, or rampart, and the guard was changed. vol. in. Ό
Thus cpűckly passed away this courtly vision from these woods of Ardenn. And so from before every eye departs the vision of this life, whether it appear in lonesome forest, in busy city, in camp, or court,— where may he pressed within the compass of a few short days, the agitating passions, with ail their varying shades and combina¬ tions, the numerous events and wise exj>e- rience, that make up years of ordinary life and the seeming ages of a cloistered one ; for there, pale moment, lingering after mo¬ ment, like rain-drop following drop, keeps melancholy chime with chants too for¬ mally repeated to leave, except on very few, the due impression of their meaning, and with slow returning vigils. Yet even here life is still a fleeting vision ! As such it fades, whether in court or convent, nor leaves a gleam behind—save of the light of good works ! ШЪ tţţua muctïï tf)í¿ Creíü Cfromţur.
CONCLUSION.
WiLLOUGHTON, long before he had fi¬ nished this " Trew Chronique," had some doubts, as to its origin. With the enthu¬ siasm of an antiquary, he was willing to suppose it a real manuscript of the monks, in spite of some contradictory circum¬ stances. The illuminations it exhibited, with the many abbreviations and quaint- nesses in the writing, only a few of which, however, he has preserved in this, his translation, and those few but here and there, where they seem to have gained ad¬ mission, by their accordance with the mat-
ter then in narration, these traits justified, in some degree, his willing opinion. Perhaps, one better versed in antiquities would have found out, that several of the ceremonies of the court here exhibited, were more certainly those of the fourth Edward, than of the third Henry, or the second Richard, and would have assigned the manuscript to a later period than that of the title, or than that afterwards al¬ luded to in the book, whether written by monk or layman. And though that same title said this chronicle was translated from the Norman tongue, by Grymbald, a monk of Saint Mary's Priory, it said nothing of its having been composed by one ; and the manuscript itself seemed to bear evidence against such a supposition, by the way in which some of the reigning superstitions of Henry the Third's time and of the monastic life in general were spoken of. He must have been a very bold man, at
that ¡>eriod, who had dared to utter even from under a cowl, a doubt, concerning the practice of magic, or witchcraft. ît is, however, to be acknowledged, that, on some other points, his notions were not unworthy of a monk of the thirteenth century, that is, if he really credited all the supposed incidents of the hall, and of several other parts of the castle. The way, in which he speaks of the melan¬ choly monotony and other privations of a cloister, seem to come from heart-felt ex¬ perience ; yet, if it had been so, he might not have ventured thus to have expressed his feelings. But at whatsoever period this " Trew Chronique" had been written, or by whom¬ soever, Wiüoughton was so willing to think he had met with a specimen of elder times, that he refused to dwell on the evi¬ dence, which went against its stated ori¬ gin, or to doubt the old man's story of the
way in which it had been ťound ; and he was about to enter upon another of these marvellous histories, entitled "A trew historié of two Mynstrells, that came by night to the commandary of Saint John Hospitalier, at Dalby sur les Wouldes, and what they there discovered." But, behold ! the beams of another day springing on the darkness ! On drawing aside a window-curtain, he perceived the dawn upon the horizon ; and, who ever yet beheld those first pure tints of light upon the darkness, more touching, more elo¬ quent to the soul, than even the glorious sun-rise, and turned abruptly from them ? The towers of Warwick castle soon be¬ gan to show themselves on the east, their mighty shadows raised up against the in¬ creasing light in peace and stillness. The morning-star alone rode bright above them, trembling on the edge of a soft purple cloud, that streaked the dawn.
The heart of Wiüoughton was deeply affected by the almost holy serenity, the silent course of order and benevolence. that he witnessed in these first minutes of another day ; he looked up to Heaven, and breathed a prayer oť blissful gratitude and adoration ¿ and then departed to his rest. f To-morrow to fresh fields ami pastures uew."
NOTES.
о 5
N OTES.
Vol. I. page 91. " Corn." Leland mentions from a Manuscript in the Cottonian Library, describ¬ ing the entrance of Henry the Seventh into York, during a progress, that, íŕ in divers places of the citie was hanging out of tapestry and other clothes, and making of galaries from on side of the strete over »thwart to that other: some casting out of obles and wafers, and some casting out of com fetts in «¿Teat quant itie, as it had been hay lestenes, for j oy e and rejoicing of the King's comyng." When the same King visited Bristol, and was publicly received there, the same account says, after the description of a very ample procession ; i( And then the King proceded towarde th' Abbe\ of Seint Austeyns, and by the way ther was a baker's \\ iff cast oute of a wyndow a great quantitie of whete. crying, Ci Welcome, and good luck !"
Ibid. " Before the castle gates." Of these gates, or of the ramparts, or of the moat, that once sur¬ rounded them, there are now no traces left. All that remains of Kenilworth, is already noticed in the introduction to the Manuscript. Such, at least, it appeared in the autumn of 1802, when the writer viewed it, with a mixture of admiration and dis¬ appointment. Vol. I. page 140. " These were in that great oriel." The great oriel here mentioned, was proba- hiy that made by order of Henry the Third, the ex¬ pense of which is recorded to have been six pound« sixteen shillings and fourpence. Vol. I. page 140. " Voide." The following cu¬ rious particulars relative to this distinguished part of ancient entertainments, are from the articles or¬ dained by King Henry the Seventh, for the regula¬ tion of his household : " Thirty first of December, 1494 ; printed by the Society of Antiquaries, from a copy in the Harleian Library." " As FOR THE EVEN OP THE DAY WHEN A VOIDE shall be had."— <r In the even of the day of es¬ tate, it is the usher's parte, and it please the King, to have a voide; then the usher must warne the servant of the spicerie to make readie for the spice- plates for the King and the Bishoppe, and for the lordes and estates, after as they bee ; and after as
yee see necessarie ; and abo to warne the King's servers and esquires, which must wayte that tyme, and the server of the chamber, for the Bishopp's spice-plate; then yee must goe to the servant of the seller, and warne him to make readie the King's cuppe and the Bishopp's; and as many festeres of wine as yee thinke will serve the people. Also yee must receave the pile of cuppes, and bring them upp, and sett the Bi- shopp's covered cupp above them, if yee seem it be¬ fore to doe. Alsoe, yee must warne an esquire for the bodie, to bring the King's cupp to the cup¬ board, and an esquire of the howsehould to bring the Bishopp's, if the usher will. Alsoe, you must warne the server to fetch the spice-plates for the Kinge, and a server of the chamber for the Bi¬ shoppe, and bring it to the cup-board. Alsoe, you must appointe for everie plate, an esquire of the housholde to serve the estates and lordes, as yee thinke best. There what time yee thinke the King is readie to take his voide, then yee must assemble them together, and bring them to the cup-board ; the usher goeinge before, making roome to the cup¬ board ; then the Chamberlainé goeing to the cup¬ board, taking with him three of the greatest estates, delivering to the greatest the towell ; the second es¬ tate the spice-plates; the third estate the cuppe;
and when they come to the Kinge with it, the Cham¬ berlainé taket h the covering of the spice-plates, giving assay to the bearer ; and when the Kinge and Bishopp have taken spice and wine, then the lordes deliver it to the officers againe ; then the usher to appoint esquires to serve the lordes -md the people largely. And lett the Bishoppe's spice-plates bee served forth amongst others, without it bee an Arch- bishoppe ; then this done, the usher to call in cuppes againe, and sett them in order as they came ; and so bring them forth out of the chamber, like as they came; and if it bee in the night tyme, that you must have light at the voide, bee right well advised how many lights you must have, and how many shall goe with the King's spice-plates and cupp, when hee shall drinke; вит ever look there bee oud in number at the voide." —Royal Household Ordinances, page 113. Mr. Pegge, in his " Dissertation on the obsolete office of Esquire of the King's Body," says, <c A voide was a small collection of spices (a term at that time including all sorts of sweets of the confec¬ tionary kind) and rich wines frequently taken by the King and Queen after even-song, which on great festivals was attended with much state. I have no better guess at the meaning of the word, than that it is a transfer of the term from the uten-
sil to the ceremony, a voyder being a kind of tray still in use, under that denomination, for the pur¬ pose of moving glasses, &c. from one room to ano¬ ther. Time seems to have contracted the word a little, though its meaning has been enlarged so far as to imply the whole ceremony. * After which there was a voyde/ occurs frequently in accounts of ancient high festivals. But what most favours this derivation, is a passage in Sir George Buck's f Ac¬ count of the Coronation of King Richard the Third.' — ť Lastly/ says he, * after dinner came the Lord Mayor of London and the Sheriffs with a voyder.' The Lord Mayor of London is chief butler on a co¬ ronation, and serves the King with a cup of wine, and this formerly might be a branch of that office." —Curialia, pages 15, 16. Vol. I. page 141. " Maister Henry." Of this per¬ sonage, there are several memorials in the records of the reign of Henry the Third and elsewhere. The treasurer and chamberlains of this sovereign were commanded by writ to pay to Master Henry, the King's poet, a hundred shillings, due to him for ar¬ rears of his stipend, and that without any delay, or difficulty, although the Exchequer should be then shut. At another time, " By virtue of a Writ of Allocate, directed to the Treasurer and Barons, al¬ lowance was made to Peter Chacepark, keeper of
the tvardrobe, of several payments by him made, to wit of xL to Master Henry the Poet, of cixč. to Alexander, King of Scots, for his corrody upon hie coming to the King of England's court, and return¬ ing back again/*—See Madox's History of the Ex* chequer, vol. L p. 391—voL ih p. 202. A corrody, it seems, was nearly synonymous with a pension, though it sometimes meant a separate gift. War- ton, who notices some of these donations to the poet, calls him Henry of Avranches. Vol. I. page 142. " The four Esquires of the Body a*' This attendance was due to the sovereign as a knight. Other knights had two ; a knight sovereign had four esquires. The Household Book of Edward the Fourth, before referred to, says, fi Esquiers for the body iiii, noble of conditions, whereof alwey ii attendaunt upon the King's person, to array and unarray hym ; to watche day and nyght ; to dresse hym in his clothes, and they he callers to the chaum- berlayn, if anything lak for his person or plesaunoe ; theyre business is in many secrets, some sitting in the King's chaumbre, some in the hall, with'persones of like service, which is called knyghte's service, taking every of theyin for his lyverey at nyght di' a chete loffe, one quart wyne, a gallon ale ; and for wynter lyvery, from All Hallowentyde tyll Estyr une percher wax, one candell wax, ii candells peris',
one tallwood and dim*, and wages in the countyng house ; yf he be present in courte, dayly vii ά. ob' and clothinge with the houshold wynter and somer, or xi. s. besides his other fee of jewel-house, or of the thesaurere of Epglonde ; and besides his w*ach- yng, clothing of chaumbre of the King's warderobe. He hath abyding in this courte, but vii servauntes, lyverey suificiaunt for his horses in the countrey by the King's herberger ; and if any squier for the body be lette blode, or elles for watched, he shall have lyke lyverey with knyghtes, litter and rushes all the yere of the sergeaunt ussher of the hall and chaumbre ; oftyn tymes these stond in stede of ker¬ vers and cupberers." Of carvers a former section of'the same book had spoken thus :— α A kerver at the boar de, after the King is passed it, may chese for hymself one dyshe or two, that plentie is among. The King will assigne a dishe to some lorde or straunger in chaum¬ bre or hall, elles the almoner woll see to straungers in suche rewardes, if it seme hyme worshipfull, elles all at the Kinge's boarde goethe to ahnesse. In the Noble Edwarde's dayes*' (in household books tliis always means the days of Edward the Third) "worshipfulles quires did this servyce; but now thus for the more worthy. Theis kervers and cupberers pay for the carriages of their harneys
and other in courte. Them needcth to be well spede in taking of degree in the schole of urbanytie.'* But this office of esquire of the body has given occasion to a work, thaa which scarcely any is more copious of particulars, relative to the domestic habits of our ancient sovereigns. It need hardly be added, that this is the Dissertation of the late Mr. Pegge. The following large extract will be pardoned by those, who have the book, and doubtless well received by those, who have it not. After mentioning the du¬ ties of this officer in the day time, the author says, (t Thus much for the office of Esquire of the Body by day ; but the principal, most essential, and most honourable part of his duty, was at night ; for when the King retired to bed, the esquire had the con¬ centrated power of the Gentlemen Ushers, the Vice- Chamberlain, and Lord Chamberlain, in himself, having the absolute command of the house both above and below stairs. At this period (the reign of King Henry VIII.) and till the close of the last cen¬ tury, the royal apartments, from the bed-chamber to the guard-chamber inclusively, were occupied in the night by one or more of the servants belonging to each chamber respectively. The principal officer, then called the Gentleman (now the Lord) of the bed-chamber, slept on a pallet-bed in the same room with the King ; and in the ante-room, between the
privy-chamber and the bed-chamber (in the reign of King Charles II. at least) slept the Groom of the Bed-chamber. In the privy-chamber next adjoining sJept two ot the ¿шг Iìentlemen of me i-rivy- ен amber in waiting; and in the presence-chamber the Esquire of the Body, on a pallet-bed, upon the haut pas, under the cloth of estate, while one of the Pages of the Presence-chamber slept in the same room, without the verge of the canopy, not far from the door. Ail these temporary beds were put up at night, and displaced in the morning, by the officers of a particular branch of the wardrobe, called the wardrobe of beds. Beyond all these in the guard¬ room was the watch, consisting of a certain number of the Yeomen of the Guard. After supper, previous to the King's retiring to his bed-chamber, the proper officers were to see all things furnished for the night, some for the King's bed-chamber, and others for the King's cupboard, which was sometimes in the privy« chamber j and sometimes in the presence-chamber, at the royal pleasure, and furnished with refections for the King's refreshment, if called for. After this, the officers of the day retired, and committed all to the charge of the Esquire of the Body. This domestic ceremony was called The Order of All-Night ; the nature of whicli I shall now give at large, from an account preserved in the Lord
Chambbrlaïn's Office. The writer, who was himself an Esquire of the Body to two successive Kings, goes circumstantially through the whole of the Esquire's business of the Night ; from whence it will appear, that, even so lately as the middle of last century, the office was of so confidential a na¬ ture, that no dispatch, letter, or message, could be communicated to the King in the Night, but what was brought to the Esquire on duty, and by him carried in propria persona to the King. The ORDER of ALL-NIGHT, As described by Ferdinando Marsham, Esquire of the Body, To King Charles I. and King Charles II. « The ORDER of All-Night for the King was antiently as followeth :— " The Gentleman Usher, Daily Waiter, having the charge of constant attendance upon his Majesty until nine o'clock at night, called to the Yeoman Usher attending at the guard-chamber door, for ten Yeomen to attend him to go for All-Night for the King. The Gentleman Usher went oare-headed, and the Yeoman С Usher J to the pantry for bread — to the buttery (i. e. butlery) for two flagons of beer —to the spicery, for sugar, nutmegs, &c—to the wine-cellar, for two great flagons of wine, and drank the King's health in both cellars, causing
all to be uncovered going and back, having a Groom of the Chamber, carrying a lighted torch before the Gentleman Usher, until he returned inte the presence-chamber, and lay all the services upon the cupboard there ; and so delivers all to the Esquire of the Body, and takes his leave. The esquire then takes the inner keys and charge of All-Night, calls to the Yeoman Usher, or Clerk of the Cheque, for the roll of the watch, and the page of the presence, with a silver bason, with a wax morter, and sizes, attends the esquire into the privy gallery. Then he (the esquire) takes the bason, &c. and carries it to the King's bed¬ chamber, and stays until his Majesty goes into his bed, and tuen goes himself to bed, under the state in the presence-chamber, in a pallet bed, sent up from the wardrobe. At eight o'clock in the morn¬ ing there was the esquire's breakfast usually brought up to the waiters chamber, where the Gentleman Usher attended with the quarterly waiter to relieve and discharge him, and to take care of the daily tvaiting t and to see the presence and other rooms made sweet and clean. The breakfast was a good piece of boiled beef, cf four¬ teen pounds weight, with bread, beer, and wine; and sometimes a boiled capon, and a piece of veal or mutton.
íc There was a silk traverse hung up, and drawn by the Page (of the Presence,) and the chain turned, and the page lay on a pallet-bed without the tra¬ verse. " After the Esquire of the Body had carried the morter into the bed-chamber, and received the word of the King, with his treble (triple) key, which the Esquire in waiting always had, he locked the outward door, leading into the privy-lodgings, and then went into the guard-chamber, and set the watch, and then returned into the presence-chamber, where he lodged under the canopy, being the chief OFFICER OF THAT NIGHT. " In all the time of my duty and sendee upon my Royal Master, his late Majesty of blessed memory, I, being Esquire of the Body, did always come into the King's bed-chamber, without asking leave of any ; and I did every night, having my sword and cloak on, bring in the morter into his Majesty's bed¬ chamber, and stayed there as long as I pleased, which was commonly till his Majesty went into bed ; and, having received the word from his Majesty, I set the guard, and after All-Night was served up, / had the sole and absolute command of the house, above and below stairs, as his Majesty did declare upon several occasions to be the right of my place. And in the time of war, upon all occasions that required,
I went into the bed-chamber, and awaked his Ma¬ jesty, and delivered all letters and messages to his j.'lujK.oty, uiiu. шалу ьиисп, uv ina aííujcolv » клуш- mand, I returned answers to the letters, and deli¬ vered orders. And I remember that, coming to the King's bed-chamber door, which was bolted on the inside, the late Earl of Bristol, then being in w ai ting, and lying there, he unbolted the door upon my knocking, and asked me what news ? I told him 1 had a letter for the King ; the Earl then demand¬ ed the letter of me, which I told him I could deli¬ ver to none but the King himself; upon which the King said, * The Esquire is in the right ; for he ought not to deliver any letter or inessage to any but myself; he being at this time the Chief Officer of my House ; and, if he had delivered the letter to any other, í should not have thought him Jit for hi& place.' " And, before this time, I never heard that any offered to hinder the esquire from coming to the King, and I have frequently brought letters and messages to the bed side when the Duke of Rich¬ mond was in waiting. By me, " Ferdinando Marsham." It may be pardonable to extend the encroach¬ ment upon this interesting part of Mr. Pegge's book,
so far as to say, that, from the Notes annexed to it, Air. Marsham appears to have been a collateral ancestor of the earl of Romney, that " sizes" are still the denomination of certain allowances of bread, beer, cheese, &c. in the University of Cambridge; that a silk ff traverse" is a silk curtain ; that the earl of Bristol was of the name of Digby, which family be¬ came extinct, as earls, in 1698, and that the Duke of Richmond was Lodowic Stuart, which title ceas¬ ed in that family in 1672 ; and that Chaucer was probably an Esquire of the Body to Edward the Third. Vol. I. page 143, <e Knights of the houshold." The Household Book of Edward IV. says, ic Knights of houshold xii, bachelers sufficient, and most va¬ lient men of that ordre of every countrey, and more in number yf it please the King ; whereof iiii to be continually abyding and attending uppon the King's person in courte, besides the kervers, as above sayd, for to serve the King of his bason, or such other ser- vyse, as they may do the King, in absence of the kervers, sitting in the King's chaumbre and hall, with persones of lyke servyse, everyche of them have etyng in the hall, and taking for his chaumbre at none and nyght, one lofe, one quart wyne, one gal¬ lon ale, one percher, one candell wax, ii candelles peris', one tallwood et dim', for wynteŕ lyvery, from
Allhaiowentyde tyll Estyr, rushes and litter ail the yere of the sergeaunL ussher, and for keping of theyr stuff and chambre, and to purvey for theyr stuflfe ; also at theyre lyverey in the countrey, amonges them all iiii yomen ; after tyme vii of these knyghts be departed from court, and the three yomen to ete dayly in the hall with the chamberlaynes, tyll thejrre sayd maistyrs come agayne ; so that the number of knyght's servants be not incresed when theyre mais¬ tyrs be present. Every knyght shall have resort¬ ing into this court iii persones wayters ; the reme- uant of theyre servants to be at theyre lyverey in the countrey, within vii myles to the King, by the herbergers sumciently lodged ; and it may be ii knyghts togeder ; oho they pay in this courte for the carryage of theyre own stuife, and if a knyght take cloathing, it is by warrant made to the King's warderober, and not of the thesaurer of hous¬ hold. Sometymes knyghts take a fee beer yerely of x marcs, and cloathing, but because ray cloth- inge is not according for the King's knyghts, there¬ fore it was left." This exactness, in specifying the quantities and sorts of the food and oth matters, to be receive d by the knights of the household, conici not be thought degrading to them, since it prevailed in the cases of their superiors ; the King and the royal vol, Ш. E
family not excepted. Many of our sovereigns, from Edward the Third, to William and Mary, had their own " diett" described, with nearly as much parti¬ cularity in their own household b^oks. That, for Ed¬ ward the Fourth was, " The K) ¿ for his breke- fast, two looves made into four maunchetts, and two payne demayne, one messe of kychyn grosse, dim gallon of ale. Item at none for his bourde sitting alione viii loves with the trenchers ; his servyce of kychyn cannot be expressed at certeyn, but the no¬ ble Edward the Third in comune dayes feriali, be¬ ing no prees of lordes or straungers at his bourde, was served with viii diverse dishes, and his lordes in hall and chamber with v, his other gentylmen in court with iii disshes, besides potage ; and groomes and others with ii disshes diverse. Then the King's meate, two pichers and dim wyne, ii gallons ale. Item for his souper by himself, viii loves, with the trenchers in all the kychyn, after the day, or after the stuff that is had within forth, ii pychers wyne, ii gallons ale, besides the fruter and waferer. Item, bred and drinkinges for the King's person, betwixt meeles, cannot be ascerteyn- ed but by recorde of the usshers of the chamber. Item, nyghtly for the bed making, one pitcher half a gallon measure." With the same accuracy other matters were distributed. ( (<r Item for the King
and his chamber also, when the day shortneyth, and no prees of grete straungers, iii torches, one tortays and iii pricketts for the table and cup-boarde, if it be not fasting day ; vi perchers, x candells wax, for the sizes of the chamber, ii mortars wax every nyght ; and at the festes, or cumming of lordes or other straungers worshipfull, it must be more large by the discression aad recorde of the usshers, by oversight of the chamberlayn and others. Item for his own person, one chymney brennyng day and night, xviii shides, viii faggotts for wynter season ; and if there be more nedeful chymneys to brenne for the King's honor in the grete chamber, then as the chamberlayn and ussher think reasonable ; and dayly all things to be recorded by the ussher into the countyng-house. Item for the beddes and pay- letts in the King's chamber, all litter and rushes of the serjeaunt of the hall by ovyrsight, for all thinges that growith of the thesaurere of household his charge, must be overseen the expences thereof by the styward and countroller." Among the curious circumstances of these extracts is the orthography, the same word being differently spelt even in the same line; and this in a book, which must have been frequently referred to by persons of rank, and doubtless had been seen by the King himself—in fact, a state-record. б 2
Vol. I. page 1J8. ťí The sayers' art. The narra¬ tives chiefly fictitious, but partly true, related by the sayers, or Tale-tellers," who frequented the banquet halls of old times, were often the subjects of poems sung by the minstrels. Vol. I. page 178. It was probably because the custom of listening to these narrators came to us from France, that our ancestors denominated them by so literal a translation of their French title. In the extract, published by Mr. Ellis, from R. de Brunn's translation of Wace's Brut, containing an account of Arthur's coronation, we find " Disours enow telled fables.** In the list of those, who afforded entertainment at the feast, these disours are mentioned last, as are also their rewards from the King. " Unto disours, that telled them gestes, He gave clothes of wild bestes." Vol. I. Page 101. " Until the Wayte piped his se¬ cond watch in all the courts." A Wayte was an esta¬ blished officer in royal palaces, and probably in other mansions. His duties and privileges in the palaces of Edward the Fourth, are thus described in the Household Book, which has been already referred to. t( A Wayte, that nyghtly, from Miqhelmasse till Shere Thursday, pipeth the watche within this
courte fower tymes, and in somer nyghte* three tymes ; and he to make bon gay te and everey cham¬ bre door and office, as well for fyre as for other pi¬ kers or perilles. He eateth in the hall with tht* minstrelles, and taketh liyverey at nyght dimid' payne, dimid' gallon ale ; and for somer nyghtes two candelles peris', dim' bushell cooles ; and for wynter nyghtes hälfe a lofe, dim' gallon ale, fower candelles peris', dim' bushell coles ; and dayly, if he be pre¬ sent in the courte by the chakker rolle iiii£, oh. or iii et. by the discression of the Steward and Thesan- rer, and aftyr the cunnyng that he can, and good de- servyng ; also cloathing with the houshold yomen or minstrelles, according to the wages that he taketh ; and if he be syke or lette bloode, he taketh ii loves, one messe of greate mete, one gallon ale ; also ho parteth with the generall giftes of houshold, and hath his bedding carryed, and his groomes togeder, by the countroller*s assignement. And under this yoman a groom wayte ; if he can excuse the yoman in his absence, then he taketh clothing, mete, rewardes, and other thinges, like to the other groomes of hous¬ hold. Also this yoman wayteth at the making of Knyghtes of the Bathe, watching by nyght-tyme upon theym in the chappell ; wherefore, he hath of fee, all the watchinge—clothinge that the Knyghtes should weare uppon."
Vol. IL page 4L "A special Suttletie." At banquet given upon great occassions, it was usual to have several " suttleties," in every one of which was a representation, or mimickry, of some part of the even then celebrated. Vol.II. page64. "The whole court." For a court- festival in a later reign, and for the practical jokes, which were rewarded by general laughter, see the account in Leland's Collectanea of the banqueting» and other rejoicings, on the arrival in England of Catharine of Spain, ultimately the wife of Henry the Eighth. Then, Henry, his father, had caused the walls of Westminster Hall, " the which is of great length, breadth, largeness and right craftye building, to be richly hanged with pleasant clothes of arras, and in its upper part a royall and great cupboard, to be made and erected; the which was in length all the breadth of the chauncery, and in it were sett seven shelves of haunshes of a goodly height, fur¬ nished and filled with as goodly and rich treasure of plate as could be scene, great part whereof was gould and all the remanant of silver gilt......When the King and the Queene had taken their noble seats under their clothes of Estate in the said hall., and every one of the nobles were ordered in their places convenient, then began, and entered the following
goodly and pleasant disguising, which was convayed and shewed in proper and subtile pageants ; the first was a castle right cunningly devised, sett upon wheeles, and drawn into the said hall by fower great beasts, with chaînes of gold. The two first beasts were lyons, one of them of gold and the other of silver : the other two were, one of them an hart with gilt homes, and the fourth was an Elke. In each of thesse foure beasts were two men, one in the fore part, and another in the hinder part, secretly hid and apparelled : nothing of them w T as seen but their leggs, which were secretly hid and disguised after the proportion and kinde of those of the beasts that they were in. Thus this castle was by these foure beasts properly conveyed from the nether part of the hall to before the King and the Queene, who were in the upper part of the same hall. There were within the same castle, disguised, viii goodly and fresh ladyes looking out of the windowes of the same. In the foure corners of this castle were iiij children, that is to say, in every square of the castell one, sett and appearing above the height of it. In every of these turretts was a little ehilde apparelled like a maiden ; and all the four children sang most sweet¬ ly and harmoniously in all the cumming of the castle, the length of the hall, till it was brought before the
King's majestie ; where when it had been conveyed it was sett somewhat out of the way towards the one side of the hall. ,4 The second pageant was a shippe, likewise sett uppon wheels, without any leaders in sight: the same was in right goodly apparel, having her masts, toppes say les, tackling, and all other appertyenances necessary unto a seemely vesseli, as though it had been sayling in the sea ; and so passed through the hall by the whole length, till they came before the King, somewhat besides the said castle. The mas¬ ters of the shippe and their company, in the coun- teynances, speaches and demeanor, used and behav¬ ed themselves after the manner and guyse of mari¬ ners, and there cast theire ancl.ers somewhat besides the said castle. In this shippe there was a goodly and a fayre ladye, in her appareil like unto the Princess of Spain. Out and from the said shippe descended by a ladder two well bescene and goodly persons calling themselves hope and desire, passing towards the rehearsed castle with their banners in manner and forme as ambassadors from the knights of the mount of love unto the ladies within the cas¬ tle, making great instance in the hehalfe of the said knights, for the intent to attaine the favour of the said ladyes present ; making their means an intreaties as woers and breakers of the matters of love between
the knights ami the ladyes. The said ladyes gave their finali answere of utterly refuse and know¬ ledge of any such company, or that they were ever minded to the accomplishment of any such request ; and plainely deuyed their purpose and desire. The two said Ambassadors therewith taking great dis¬ pleasure, shewed the said ladyes, that the knights would for this unkind refusali make batta) le and assault, and so and in such wise to them and their castle, thatitshould be grievous to abide their power and malice. i( Incontinent came in the third pageant, in like¬ ness of a great hill, or mountain, in the which were inclosed viii goodly knights with their banners spredd and displayed, naming themselves the Knights of the Mount of Love, and passed through the said hall towards the King's grace, and there tooke theire staunding uppon the other side of the shippe. Then these two Ambassadors departed to their masters, the knights, who were within the mount, and shew¬ ed the disduine- and refusal!, with the whole circum¬ stance of the same. The knights, not being there¬ with content, with much malice and courageous minde, issued from the said mount with their ban¬ ners displayed, and hastily spedd them to the re¬ hearsed castle which they forthwith assaulted, soe and in such wise, that the ladyes yealuing themselves E С)
descended from the castle, and submitted themselves to the power, grace, and will of these noble knights." Thie affair ended, as might be expected in a dance, during which, *' the three pageants, the castle, the shippe, and the mountain, removed and departed. In the same wise the said disguisers, as well the knights as the ladyes, after certaine leasure of their solace and disport, avoyded and evanished out of light and presence." Then, occur two bass dances, which appear to have been minuets— one between Prince Arthur and the lady Cecil!, the other betweeu the Princess Ca¬ tharine and one of her Spanish ladies, in Spanish dresses. t( în the third and last place, the Duke of Yorke. having with him the Ladye Margaret his sister in his hand, came down and daunced two bass daun- ces. Afterwards he perceiving himself to be accom- bred with his clothes, sodainly cast off his gown, and daunced in his jackett with the said ladye Margarett in so goodly and pleasant a maner, that it was to the King and Queene great and singular pleasure. Then they departed againe, the duke %o the King and the ladye to the Queene. This dis¬ guising royall thus ended, the voydee began to enter in the maner of a bankett, exceeding the price of any other used m great season. Before the
voidee, came in five ecore couple, Earles, Barons, and Knights, over and besides Sqiiiers, having coi¬ lers and chains of gould, every each of them throughout, bearing the one of tht»ra н spicchiate, the other a cuppe, beside yeomen of the guard that followed them with potts of wine to fiU the cuppes. The spice-plates were furnished in the most goodly manner with spices, after the manner of a voider ; and the cuppes were replenished with wine, and universally throughout the said hall distributed. The number of the said spice-plates and cuppes were goodly and marveylous, and yet the more to be wondred, for that the cupboard was nothing touched, but stood compleat, garnished and filled» seemingly not one diminished, " Vol. II. page 83. " Arabian jongleur." The Ara¬ bian jongleurs were said to practise a kind of natu¬ ral magic, and by some means of chemistry to raise up false appearances. Vol. II, page 88. " His Highness himself had once proof." Matthew Paris records this strange charge made by Henry the Third, in full council, against Hubert de Burgh, his justiciary, Earl of Kent, that Hubert had taken by stealth, from the royal trea¬ sury, а stone of the highest value, which had the
eíFect of rendering him (Henry) invincible in battle, and liad traitorously sent it to Leoline, King of Wales, his enemy. Vol. II. Page 100. « Silver warriors." Statues holding torches were usual in palaces on the Conti¬ nent. Cellini, the celebrated Italian artist of the six¬ teenth century, tells us, in his Life, of twelve silver statues, several feet high, which he wrought for Fran¬ cis the First, for the purpose of holding lights round his table, at grand entertainments. Such images represented various characters, sometimes satyrs, sometimes warriors, and sometimes foob, or court jesters. Vol. II. page 104. ft As he had sitten, at Winches¬ ter." Thib was in the year 1249 ; and in the hall of the royal palace, when he commanded, with such im¬ petuosity, that the doors should be shut, for the pur¬ pose of detaining the accomplices of robbers, Tiho refused to point them out, und when he loudly ex¬ pressed his indignation against the whole neigh¬ bourhood, as abettors of them. Vol. II. page 105. <( The Lord of Warwick." John de Placiti s, or de Pl esset, who received the title from Henry the Third, as the husband of Margery, sister and sole heiress of a former Earl. Vol. II. page 109. " Cedars." Many noble ce-
dars are now growing in the grounds of Warwick Castle, whose silvered branches show beautifully among the dark flakes of their foliage; but we must not venture to fancy, that any o± these ever shaded John de Placitis, Vol. II. »age 110. " Maria, the French Poetess." Mr. Warton, in noticing Hawes's Temple of Glasse, (first printed by Wynkin de Worde, in 1500,) which he considers as a <f Copy of the House of Fame of Chaucer," says, " In the mean time, there is reason to believe, that Chaucer himself copied these imageries from the Romance of Guigemar, one of the Metrical Tales, or Lais of Bretagne, translated from the Armorican original, into French, b) Marie* a French poetess, about the thirteenth century." Of this lady and of her works we have a better record in the ample and curious Dissertation on her life and writings, written by the Abbé de la Rue, and translated by F. Douce, Esquire. From this it appears, that she was probably born in Britany. f ' The Duke of that province was the Earl of Rich¬ mond in England: many of his subjects were in pos¬ session of knight-fees in that honour ; and Mary might have belonged to one of these families. She was, besides, extremely well ver^ I in the literature
of this province ; and we shall have occasion to remark, that she borrowed much from the works of the writers of that country, in the composition of her own." Notwithstanding her foreign origin, the subjects of the greater part of Mary's poems ч г еге chosen by her from " the Romanœs of Chivalry," amongst the " the Old Welsh and Armorie Britons,"— a selection, the policy of which is obvious, since it appears that she was patronized by Henry the Third and his court. Some of these stories she had learned only from having heard them recited. " Pìnsìers en ai oi conter Nas voii laisser ne oublier." *' Her lays/* says the Dissertation, '* were ex¬ tremely well received by the people. Denis Pyra¬ mus, an Anglo-Norman poet, and the contemporary of Mary, informs us, that they were heard with pleasure in all the castles of the English Barons, but that they were particularly relished by the wo¬ men of her time. He even praises them himself." Vol. II. page 131. " Robin Hood." Although bal¬ lads upon the subject of this person are said by Dr. Percy to have been popular in the reign of Edward the Third, such were known before that æra. One,
whicli he considers ns " of much earlier date," is in print ; and it appears, that there was a Robin hood iu the reign of Richard the First. Vol. ÏL «»«"* 1-Ч7- " Robert of Gloucester." A monk of the Abbey there, in the time of Henry the Third and Edward the First.
К NI) OF TUK NOTES.
ST. ALBAN'S ABBEY: Λ POETICAL ROMANCE.
ST. ALBANS ABBEY.
Spïhît of ancient days.' who o'er these walls, Unseen and silent ¡lohl'st thy solemn state, Thy presence known where the gloom deepest falls, Ami by th' unearthly thoughts that on thee wait ; Descend, and touch my heart with thine own fire. And nerve my trembling fancy to aspire To the dread scenes that thou hast witnessed here í Teach me, in language simple and severe, (Such best may harmonize with ruder times) With place and circumstance of awful crimes. To paint tii' awakening vision thou hast spread Before mine eyes~~—tale of the mighty dead !
m
But give thy elder words, whose sober glow, Like to th' illumined gloom of thine own aisles, Touching the mind with more than light may show, Wakes highest rapture while it darkly smiles. Presumptuous wish ! Ah ! not to me are given Those antients keys, that ope the Poet's heaven, Golden and rustless! Not to me are given ! But, if not mine the prize, not mine the crime Lightly to scorn them, nor the simple chime, Though tuneless oft, when to the scene more true Than flowing verse, bright with Castalian dew. Like Grecian goddess, placed in Saxon choir, Is the false union of the cadenced rhime And measured sweetness of the tempered lyre With subjects darkened by the shroud of Time. As Gothic saint sleeping in Grecian fane Is ancient story, shrined in polished strain ; Truth views th' incongruous scene with stern fare¬ well, And startled Fancy weeps and breaks her spell.
CANTO I.
THE ABBEY. ι. Know ye that pale and ancient choir, Whose Norman tower lifte it's pinnacled spire ? Where the long Abbey-aisle extends And battled roof o'er roof ascends; Cornered with buttresses, shapely and small, That sheltered the Saint in canopied stall ; And, lightened with hanging turrets fair, That so proudly their dental coronals wear, They blend with a holy, a warlike air ; While they guard the Martyr's tomb beneath, And patient warriors, laid in death ? II. Know ye that transept's far-stretched line, Where stately turrets, more slenderly fine, Each with a battlement round it's brow, Win the uplifted eye below ?
How lovely peers the soft blue sky Through their small double arch on high ! Deepening the darkness of iťs shade, And seeming holier peace to spread. More grandly those turrets, mossed and hoar, Upon the crimson evening soar. Yet lovelier far their forms appear When they lift thei/ heads in the moonlight air ; And softening beams of languid white Tip their shadowy crowns with light. But most holy their look, when a fleecy cloud O'er them throws it's trembling shroud, Then palely thinly dies away, And leaves them to the full bright ray. Thus Sorrow fleets from Resignation's smile ; The virtue lives—the suffering dies the while. III. And, as these moonlight-towers we trace, A living look, a saintly grace Beams o'er them, when we seem to hear The midnight-hymn breathe soft and clear, As from this choir of old it rose. Each hallowed thought they seem to own, Expressed by music's heavenly tone ;
And patient, sad, and pale and still, As if resign'd to wait Time's will. Such choral swell and dying close Stole on the Abboťs hour of rest, Like solemn air from spirit blest, And shaped his vision of repose. The pious instinct of his soul, Not even slumber might control : Soon as he caught the distant lay, His gathering thoughts half woke to pray ; Celestial smile came o'er his brow, Though sealed in sleep the lid below ; And, when in silence died the strain, The lingering prayer His lips forbear, And deep his slumbers fall again. iv. Bold is this Abbey's front, and plain ; The walls no shrined saint sustain, Nor tower, nor airy pinnet crown ; But broadly sweeps the Norman arch Where once in brightened shadow shone King Offa, on his pilgrim-march And proudly points the mouldered stone
Of the high-vaulted porch beneath, Where Norman beauty hangs a wreath Of shr } » elegance and grace ; Where slender columns guard the space On every side, in clustered row, The triple arch through arch disclose, And lightly o'er the vaulting throw The thwart-rib and the fretted rose. Beside this porch,, on either hand, Giant buttresses darkly stand, And still their silent vanguard hold For bleeding Knights, laid here of old ; And * Mercian Offa and his Queen The portal's guard and grace are seen. This western front shows various style, Less ancient than the central pile. No furrows deep upon its brow The frown of seven stern centuries show ; Yet the sad grandeur of the whole Gives it such a look of soul, That, when upon it's silent walls The silvered grey of moonlight falls,
And the fixed image dim appears, It seems some shade of parted years Left watching o'er the mouldering dead, Who here for pious Henry bled, And here, beneath the wide-stretched ground Of nave, of choir, of chapels round, For ever—-ever, rest the head. v. Now know ye this pale and ancient Choir, Where the massy tower lifts a slender spire ? Here forty abbots have ruled and one, Twenty with pall and mitre on, And bowed them to the Pope alone. Their hundred monks, in black arrayed, The Benedictine rules obeyed ; O'er distant lands they held their sway ; Freed from Pe* a ťs-pence were they ; The gift of palle from Pope they claimed, And Cardinal-Abbots were they named ; And even old Canterbury's lord Was long refused the premier board ; For this was the first British Martyr's bier, And the Pope said " His priest shall have no peer ;" Now know ye St. Alban's bones rest here. vol. Ш, f
VI. Kings and heroes here were guests in stately halls, at solemn feasts. But now, nor dais, nor halls remain ; Nor fretted window's gorgeous pane Twilight illuminated throws Where once the high-served banquet ruse. VII. No fragment of a roof remains To echo back their wassail strains ; But the long aisles, whose holy gloom Still mourns and veils the martyr's tomb. The broad grey tower, the turrets wide, Scattered o'er tower and transept, guide The distant traveller to their throne, Wbere they high-seated watch alone, And seem, with aspect sad, to tell, That they of all their Abbey's power Remain to point, where heroes fell. And monarch met his evil hour, And guileless, meek, and pious, bowed To doubtful right's victorious crowd.
VIII. Now, if this cloister, fallen and gone, Ye fain would view, as once it shone, Pace ye, with reverend step, I pray. The gras3-grown and forgotten way, While murmurs low the fitful wind, Winning to peace the meeken'd mind ; And Evening, in her solemn stole, With stillness o'er those woods afar, Leads in blue shade her brightening star, As spreads the slow gloom trom the pole, And these old towers their watch more awful keep, (Where once the Curfew spoke with solemn rule) And the faint hills and all the valley sleep In misty grey beneath the " dewy cool." Yet, if a worldly heart ye wear, These visioned-shades forbear—forbear î To thee no dim-seen halls may gleam, For thee no hallowed tapers beam On the pale visage through the gloom Bending in prayer by shrine, or tomb. Turn thou thy wearied step away ; - Go thon where dance and song are gay, F 2
Οι where the sun is flaming high. And leave these scenes to Evening's sigi*, IX. But ye, with measured step and slov\, Whose smile is shaded soft with woe ; And ye, who holy joy can know, The glow beyond all other glow,— Ye, whose high spirit dares to dwell Beyond the reach of earthly spell, And tread upon the dizzy verge Of unknown worlds ; or downward urge. Through ages dim, your steadfast sight, And trace their shapes of shadowed light. О come íť with meek submitted thought,* With lifted eye, by Rapture taught, And o'er your head the gloom shall rise Of monkish chambers, still and wide, Л> once they stood; and to your eyes Group after group shall slowly glide. And here agnin their duties ply, Л-* they were wont, long ages by. The twilight broods not yet so deep. But we may trace where now they sleep
Beneath the sullen turf, aloof, And where each solemn chamber's roof Drew it's strong vaulting o'er their frames, But urged on human praise no claims, Nor always bore their living names. x. On yonder brow, that fronts the West, Where glimmering beams in stillness rest, Once rose the Abbot's Hall of Right, That wont to view Ver's stream below And shallow valley westward go To farthest hills, that owned his might - And from those farthest hills were seen, Through oaken boughs of stretching green» The fretted window of that hall, The piiinacle, that crowned it's wall, And seemed to watch it's portal grey, With crimson light tinged by the setting ray« xi. Thus rose the Abboťs vaulted Hall, Where he, in virtue of the palle, Spoke doom to all his vassal throng ; For life and death were on his tongue,
And scarce less ready to fulfill His worldly, than his better will, Were peasant, vavasour, and knight. From London's wall to Beechwood's height. His weighty robe of velvet fold Was 'broidered round, and clasped with gokt A Prior helped his office to sustain, A humlred monks did dignify his reign. Pale were they and closely shorn, Heedless they were of human scorn And arts *hat wait on human pride ; In patience each with other vied. J Mong such had Matthew Paris stood, Pious, learned, wbe and good. Though shrouded in a bigot's hood. хи. Here, where the deeper shadows fall^ Once echoed o'er the paved hall The weary step and staif of him, Who, at this lonely hour and dim, The last chill hour of eventide, Had heard from yonder bleak hill side^
Where once stood Roman Verulam, Faint o'er the wintry waters come The bell of Compline, chiming slow From forth this Abbey's unseen tower, And spied, amid the shades below, The hearth-blaze in the stranger's bower ,· For here the Pilgrim's Lodge arose, Whose porch and hall and parlour warm And well-closed chambers of repose Received him from the rushing storm. XIII. And, when he reached the cheering î laze, How sweet to think upon those ways, As the shrill wind and sleety rain Against the casements strove in vain. But crowding thoughts soon chased repose, And nigh to sacred rapture rose, As now he knew himself so near The object of his long career, And, safely placed, where all around Was ancient, consecrated ground ; The precinct sought o'er sea and shore,—
The grave of him, whose sufferings o'er Had now their glorious triumph found ! xiv. There the Scriptorium spread it's gloom, To dead and living, like one tomb ; The lining there like dead might show. So mutely sat they, ranged in row ; Scarce seen to move, from hour to hour, Copying the written folio rare, Or tracing bird, or curious ilower, Round blessed Alary in her bower, In splendid gold and colours fair, On missal leaf, with painful care, Or portraiture of Donor good, That, closely kept and seldom viewed» Still fresh and glorious should lie For century following century. xv. Others there were, who volumes bound In silk, or velvet, 'broidered round And 'bossed with gold and gems of price, Enclasped with emerald palm-leaf thrice.
On the high window near would shine, Transparent, the memoriál line Of him, who once had wrought below, With patient hand and earnest bmw ; Him, whose small pencil thus enshrined In book of Golden Kkgoiuj true, The image and the noble mind, Aud thanks to benefactor due. There shadowed Kings and Abbots pass, In crowned pomp, or sweeping palle» Like spectres o'er some wizard's glass. There, as the lifted pages fall, They rise to view und disappear, x\s year steals silent after year, Till came the blank leaf, turned o'er all ! Even o'er him, while here he wrought On the dull page the living thought. In after-time were here impressed Those wondrous characters combined, That stamp upon the paper vest At once, the image of the mind. The second Abbey this in all the land, ťhat stretched to learning a preserving hand. F 5
XVI. Here cloister-walks, in spacious square. Showed sacred story, painted fair. And portraiture of famous men. Who seemed to live and speak again, In golden maxims from the walls. Nobly these cloisters ranged along By chapels, chambers, courts and halls, Dividing from the cowled throng, As with a dim and pillared aisle, The Royal lodging's stately pile. There the Queen's parlour, and her bower, Hung o'er the sunny southern glade ; And here the place of monarch-power Gleamed through the Abbey's farther shade. The foliaged arch, the well-carved door Of chamber, hung from vault to floor With storied scene, or cloth of gold, Or 'broidered velvet's purple fold, Rose beauteous to the taste of yore. And slender shafts, entwined with flowers, Lifted their high o'er-arching bowers, Traced forth with mimic skill so true, Kings seemed their Windsor's groves to view.
XVIt. The high-carved chimney's canopy Spread broad о er half a blazing tree, With pinnacle and mitre wrought And shielded arms of ?*iercia*s court, Three royal crowns ; and blazonry Of many an abbot lying near In choir, or cloister, on his bier. High in the midst a m »»ble form Stood in it's tabernacle sbade, Pale as the gleam of April storm ; Oft was the passing monk afraid ; So sternly watched the downcast eye ! Yet hardly might such monk know why On the brow a kingly crown it wore, In it's hand a Mercian sceptre bore ; 'Twas Offa stood there on his fretted throne, Whom these holy walls for their founder own. Who Charlemagne for foe and friend had known. And in that chamber, not in vain, With mullions light and roial pane, Ro.se th' oriel window's triple arch, That pictured forth the solemn march Of Oifa, with his pilgrim train.
XVIII. Within these walls there was one scene, Where worldly matters were discussed ; It was the Prior's cloister-green ; There ruled he, by the Abbot's trust. For not amid the noise of men, Disturbed by their familiar \en, Dwelt the Lord Abbot ; his recess Was little easy of access ; No : by the southern transept rose (The shelves with store of learning fraught) His Lodge and Cloister of repose, His bower, where all apart he sought, From convent-state and homage free, Leisure and learned dignity. XIX. Lost now that Study's farther shade, Whose peace no stray step might invade, Nor any Mimid of breathing life, Save whui the Choir, in faint, sweet strife Of voice an ' eitole offering Praise, sucl as Angel-bands might sing,
in lessening chorú«, on their way, Ascending to Eternal Day. Were heard with joyful murmuring, Their pure, harmonious strains to bring. Iťs deep, perspective shade is gone. That led, where the rich oriel shone, Whore golden gloom the stained glas« ^hed O'er the lone Abbot's bended head, As, sitting in his ebon chair, Lulled by sweet harmonies afar, He mused on death and life to come, The dawn of peace beyond the tomb, Or called back years, that o'er his head had rolled, And knew himself for one, whosk talk is told î So still his form, so fixed his look, As dwelt his pale eyes o'er his book, 80 true, so clearly might you trace The lines of thought upon his face, He seemed some shade, that loves to dwell Where late it's mortal substance fell- To linger in the living scene, Where erst iťs cares, iťs joys had been ; The while each shuddering sigh of air, That breathed upon the ivy near,
Passed o'er the Vision's patient head, Like whisper of the spirit ned. XX. Far distant rose those walls upon the light, The stately walls, with tapestry r;chly dight. Of th' Abbot's Banquet-hall, where, as on throne. He sat at the high dais, like prince, alone, Save when a Royal guest came here, Or Papal Legate claimed a chair. Here marble platforms, flight o'er flight, Slow rising through the long-lined view, Showed tables, spread at diiferent height, Where each for different rank he knew. And, with pleased glance, adown the hall, Saw r Bishops in their far-sought palle, The Abbey's noble Seneschal, Barons and Earls, in gold array, And warrior Knights, in harneys grey. There was the Prior's delegated sway. The grave Archdeacon sat below, And th' hundred Monks, in row and ron' ; Not robed in dismal sable they
Upon a high and festal day, But all in copes most costly and most gay. There, too, the Abbey-Marshal shone, And there, beside the Abbot's throne, Chaplain of Honour from the Pope, alone. XXI- Thus the Lord-Abbot, were he proud, Might muse upon the chequered crowd ; Nor always did his mind disdain The worldly honours, though so vain. His board with massive plate was laid, And rare inventions it displayed ; Each sewer-monk his homage paid With bended knee and bowed head. And Latin verse, half sung, half said On every platform, as he rose Through the long hall to it's high close. Where frankincense from golden urn» In light wreath round the Abbot burns. The chaunted Latin grace was sung With pomp of instruments, that rung The arched roofs and screens among. And, when а Royal guest was there, The Abbot, rising from his chair,
Blessed, with spread hands, the ordered feast, While reverend stood each princely guest, And fur adown the hall might see Knights, Bishops, Earls, on bended knee, XXII. And when came up, at old Yule-tide, The boar's head, trimmed with garlands gay. With shining holly's scarlet pride, And the sweet-scented rosemary, О ! then what merry carols rung, What choral lays the minstrels sung ! Marching before it through the hall. Led by the stately Seneschal. This was the joyous minstrel's call, ín Leonine with English strung: i( Caput Aprì defero, * * * * " The boar's head in hand bring I 4 ' With garlands gay and rosemary ; " I pray you, all sing merrily, ζί Qui estis in convivio." XXIII. Then, every voice in chorus joined Of those who sat in festal row.
Vou uiight have heard it on the wind^— Heard it o'er hills of desert snow. Thence might be seen, iu vale below, Through windows of that Banquet-hall, The mighty Yulje-Clough blazing clear, And the Yule-Tapers, huge and tall> Lighting the roof« with timely cheer. But, ere a few brief hours were sped, The blaze was gone—the guests were tied. And heavy was the Winter's sigh, As those lone walls it passed by. xxiv. Now, ere the Abbot's feast began, Or yet appeared the crane and swan, The solemn Carver, with his keen Knife, and well armed with napkins clean, Scarf-wise athwart his shoulder placed, And on each arm and round his waist, Came, led by Marshal, to the dais. There every trencher he assays, O'er the Great Salt makes flourishes, Touches each spoon and napkin fair. Assaying whether ill lurk there,
Ere he present it to his lord, Or oiler it at the Rewabde» The Sewer. Wf-knecliug on his way- Of every dish receives assay e At the high hoard, as guard from guile. The Marshal watting by the while, And ancient carols rising slow From the young Choir and Monks below. And thus, as every course came on, These pomps an awful reverence won. xxv. Soon as the last high course was o'er, The Chaplain from the cupboard bore, With viands from the tables stored, The ALMS -Dish to the Abbots board. And ample loaf, and gave it thence, With due form and good countenance, That th' Almoner might it dispense. Next came the Cup ¿earers, with wine. Malmsey and golden methegiin, With spice-cake and with wafers fine. This o'er, when surnaps all were drawn, And solemn grace again was sung,
Came golden ewer and bason, borne ln stute to the high board along, xxvi. liut, ai high tide, ere all wm past, .Marched the huge Wassail-bowl the last, Obedient to the Abbot's call, Borne by the Steward of the hull ; The Marshal with hm wand before And streamers gay and rosemary, And choral carols sounding o'er. Twas set beside the father's dais, Where oft the Deacon, in his place, Who bearer of the grace-cup was, Pilled high the cordial Hippocras Prom out that bowl of spicery, And served the Abbot on his knee ; Then, sent around to every board This fare well-wassail from his lord. The Abbot, tasting of the wine, Hose from his chair, in wonted sign The- feast was o'er ; yet stood awhile In cheerful converse with high guest, Who from the tables round him pressed
Then, with a kind and gracious smile, The wassail and the board he blessed, Ere yet he left the gorgeous scene, And sought the tranquil shade within. xxvn. Here, with proud grace, did Wolsey stand, Signing forth blessings with his hand, And oft the grace-cup had allowed To move among the willing crowd. Grandeur sat on his steadfast brow, 'Mid high Imagination's glow ; He seemed to feel himself the lord Of all who sat beside his board, And, whether Peer, or Prince, or King, 'Twas meet to him they homage bring ; And homage willed they, since his pride Had genius, judgement, taste, for guide. Whicli held it in such tine control, Pride seemed sublimity of soul. XXVIII. Short while the Abbot did repose, When he had left the Banquet-hall ; For soon, where his arched chamber rose, Would other pageant-scenes disclose
On days of convent festival. Here, on the Martyr's annual feast When Obits at his shrine had ceased ; When Give-Ale and the Dol в were o'er ; When Robin Hood had left his bower, And in the Convent's spacious court The morrice-dancers ceased their sport, And on the rout was closed the Abbey-door ; Then torch and taper, blazing clear Within the Abbot's evening room, Banished the heavy, wintry gloom : And Mysteries were acted here. Then, Chronicle of Kings, pourtrayed From England's story, long gone by, in mimic garb and scene arrayed Awoke the brethren's solemn sigh ; Such as we breathe o'er these, our theme. Whelmed in the ever-passing stream. ХХТХ. Here, too, the Minstrels' chaunted song Told of their sainted Alban's fate ; But, oft the measure wound along With tales of Chivalry's high state,
Of knights, of ladies and of love, Ambition's eagle, Beauty's dove, And many a lay of Holy Land, Of Richard's and of Edward's band. The harpers, in the noble train Of Abbey guest, oft joined the strain ; And, as they woke with fire the lay, Or bade it's moving grief decay, Each silent monk, with look attent, His head, unhooded, thoughtful, bent. Then might you watch, in the stern eye, The busy, fretful passions die, Such as in gloom and loneness dwell, Gnawing the bosom's vital cell, And spreading poison through the soul, That yields to their malign control. xxx. 'Twas sweet the softened mind to trace Beaming upon time-hardened face, Won by still harmony to rest ; And all unconscious of the tear, That, stranger to such brow severe, Upon the closing eyelid pressed.
But sweeter 'twas to mark the smile Of the blind Minstrel o'er the strings ; Darkness, nor want, he knows the while. As wide the storied verse he flings ; For Music can all wants beguile, With bright perception chase his night, And can awake that glow of heart, Affection's dearest smiles impart ; For Music is—the blind man's light I The beam, that does to mental ray Image and sentiment display, The world of passion, living thought, All that the mind through sight ere sought. Then sigh not, that he dwells in night, For he hath Music for his light ! xxxi. This vaulted chamber once was lined With arras rich, where stood combined The story of Cologne л Three Kings, With other far-famed ancient things. Yet oft, on solemn festival, A deeper tale spoke from the wall, Such as might aid the mimic show Enacted on the scene below :
Where the raised platform, near the Bay, Served well for stage. That oriel gay Kose with light leaves and columns tall, Mid roial glass and fretwork small ; While tripod lamps from the coved roof Showed well each painted mask aloof, Lanfranc and Saxon Edward there, Watching the scene they once could share. XXXII. That oriel shed bright influence And charm, by its magnificence, On all there told by eye. or tongue* Morality, or Mystery, Or Founder's boon, or History. In front, the velvet curtain, flung In foldr, aside, not then for shade, Or shelter, as when winds invade» Made graceful ornament between The roof and the fictitious scene. How different from this festal grace, How fit it's blandishments to chase, Were the long vistas, ranging here Of the Great Cloister's pillared square.
XXXIII. And when could festal joy e'er vie With the calm rapture of the sigh Breathed in that Cloister's solemn shade, When the lone monk would muse and read, And meditate on ancient lore, Or view the warrior on his tomb, With raised hands seeming to implore Of Heaven a mitigated doom ? So shaded would such figure lie, Tall arches pointing o'er the head, That, though a window, placed on high, It's gleam through distant colours shed,— So dim would lie in shades below, That, whether living shape, or dead, The monk, who gazed, might hartlly know. And often, at the midnight-watch, (The shrine-watch in the aisle beside) His ear attent low sound would catch, That stole along the tomb and died, As though he had some holy word In whisper from the marble heard î vol. Ш. G
Followed a stillness all profound ; Was it some spirit from the ground That breathed α spell of death around ? If the monk watched some little space, Life would seem trembling o'er the face ! The pallid stone would change it's hue, And tremble to his doubting view ! XXXIV. Gone is that Cloister's shadowy walk, Where the more aged would pace and talk, Or, resting in the well-carved nook, Leisurely read the rare lent book, Turning each page with reverend care. Th* illuminator's work to spare ; Or tell some legend of a saint, Or allegory, little worth, Of monkish virtues pictured forth In leonine, of Latin quaint. Whate'er it were, 'twas fine repose, In cloister-shade, at evening close. To lean along that oaken seat, And, all enwrapt in quiet gloom,
Hear the still Vesper, rising sweet From sainted Oswyn's shrine and tomb, Or Obit from the chantry near Of the good Abbot Delamere, Swell faint and die upon the ear. And solemn 'twas and sw r eet, the while, To mark upon some distant aisle, Seen through deep arch of transept-door, The streaming torch-light break the shade, Strike the tall arches over head, Or, slanting low that long aisle o'er, Show, some dim sepulchre before, The lonely, duteous mourner there, Kneeling and veiled in watch of prayer. xxxv. There, ranged around in silent guard, Seventeen kings yet watch and ward The good Duke Humphrey's mouldering form, Here rescued from the earthly storm, Raised by a rival—now a worm ! And, when the midnight chaunts were still, Strange sounds the vault below would fill. g 2
A ghastly shade, with mitred head, Has stalked, that lonely tomb around^ And knelt upon the honoured ground. With hands upon its white palle spread, In seeming prayer and penance lost ; 'Twas guessed this was a murderer's ghost, Condemned to wander round the grave Of him, whom kindness could not save. There were, who in that shade could see (Or 'twas the moonbeam's mockery) Beaufort of cruel memory î Such look as dying he had shown. When hope of Heaven he did not own, And Horror stared beside his bed ; Such grisly look this visage had. xxvi. And, at such hour, was sometimes seen, Veiled in thin shadowy weeds of woe, The image of a stately Queen, Near the cold marble pacing slow. The crown upon her hair gleamed faint, And more of heroine than saint Was drawn upon her lofty brow.
The proud, heroic graces there, The grandeur of her step and air. No softer charms of pity share. Alas ! that such commanding mind Were not with truth and mercy joined ! Now, were her look, her eye of tire, That once could warlike bands inspire, Dimmed with the tear of vain remorse : Far less hac? been a kingdonťs loss, Than loss of holy innocence ; So said her fixed and anguished countenance. XXXVII. But Margaret's moan, nor Beaufort's word, Was heard at Vesper's hallowed hour To musing monk, in cloister-bower ; Pious sounds alone he heard, And listened oft, with saintly smile, When Autumn's gale swept o'er the aisle, And bore the swelling hymn away Up to the realms of heavenly day î But, when the tìtful gust was gone, Rose that strain with a sweeter tone ; The hymn of Peace it seemed to be— Her hushed and meekest minstrelsy—
Her welcome to the Just, when free From this short world of misery. The monk, who listened, many a still tear shed, By trembling Hope and blessed Pity fed ; The listener's self how soou among the dead ! xxxvm. But who the changing scenes may tell This Abbey's ancient walls have known ! When London tolled the Plague's death-bell, Justice here held her courts alone ; Here, in this nave, was placed her throne. An earlier age showed scenes more dread, For shrines and tombs around were spread With bleeding knights and nobles dead. Next age, the latter Henry's hands Each consecrated altar spoiled. Seized on the Abbey's ample lands, And recklessly for plunder toiled. Then, nearer to the living day, Here other spoilers bore the sway, Who, feigning Reason for their guide» Indulged an impious, bigot pride»
ЛИ arrogant in their chicane, They dared these reverend walls profane. Then Cromwell's hands on grave-stones lay, And storied brasses tore away ; The sculptured marble tombs defaced Of those, who, nameless, sleep below ; That the tall arch, with web-work traced That shadowed form of Prophet graced, Was shattered by their impious blow. XXXIX. Of all this Abbey's ample bound One outer arch alone is found, To mark the Convent's stately port, The entrance of the western court, Beneath whose arch have passed the trains Of Kings succeeding Kings, when strains From trump and clarion, as from tort, Have shook the massy walls around, And startled with the warrior-sound The penanced monk, in distant cell, (He had his long beads twice to tell, Nor knew what form he muttered then,)— While forth, to meet their Sovereign,
The Abbot and his convent paced, With time-worn banners, ranged in haste. XL. Then from the convent-hall within Faint might be heard the joyous din Of minstrel-harp and choral voice, That for the royal-guest rejoice ; And then the painted window bright, Lighting, on high, the murky night, And showing portraiture of Saint, Kind signal to the Pilgrim faint ; But to the robber, in his ceil Of giant-oak, it told too well, That richly-dight and jewelled guest Would late return to distant rest. The darkened vale and subject-town Viewed such bright vision with a frown. And murmured, that the tyrant knell Of iron Curfew should compel Their homes to sink in sudden night, When e'en the turret, whence it spoke, Insulting those who >wned the yoke, Lifted it's brow, 11 ruddy bright, Flushed from the Abbey-Halľs strong light.
XLI. But, though these lighted halls are gone, And darkly stands that tower and lone, The sacred temple still endures ; A truer worship it secures. And, though the gorgeous shrines are o'er. And their pale watch-monks now no more ; Though torch, nor voice, from chantry-tomb, Break, solemn, through the distant gloom ; Though pilgrim-trains no more ascend Where far-seen arches dimly bend, And fix in awe th' admiring eye Upon the Martyr's crown, on high. And w^atch upon his funeral-bed ; Nor hundred Monks, by Abbot led, Through aisle and choir, by tomb and shrine, Display the long-devolving line, To notes of solemn minstrelsy, And hymns, that o'er the vaulting die Yet, we here feel the inward peace, That in long-reverenced places dwells ; Our earthly cares here learn to cease ; The Future all the Past expels. q 5
And still, so solemn falls the shade, Where once the weeping Palmer prayed, We feel, as o'er the graves we tread, His thrill of reverential dread. XLII. Thou silent Choir, whose only sound Is whispering step o'er graves around, Or echo faint from vault, on high, Of the poor redbreast's minstrelsy, Who, perched on some carved mask of stone, By lofty gallery dim and lone, Sends sweet, short note, but sparely heard, That sounds e'en like the farewell word Of some dear friend, whose smile in vain We seek through tears to view again ! Thou holy shade—unearthly gloom ! That hoverest o'er the Martyr's tomb ; Ye awful vaults, whose aspect wears The ghastliness of parted years ! The very look, the steadfast frown. That ye on ages past sent down, Strange, solemn, wonderful and dread. Pageant of living and of dead ;—
Thou silent Choir ! thou holy shade í Ye walls, that guard the Martyr's head, Meet agents are ye to inspire The lone enthusiast's thought of fire; High ministers of Alban's fame, Ye are his tomb, and breathe his name. XLIII. And when, enthroned on field of war, This Abbey's walls are seen afar, When iťs old dark-drawn aisles extend Upon the light ; and, bold and broad, The central tower is seen ť ascend, And sternly look their sovereign lord, We feel again such transports rise, As fixed that way-worn Palmer's eyes. When, gaining first the toilsome brow, Rose to his sight the Shrine below, When, as he caught it's aspect pale, He shouted " Alban ! Martyr í hail Г And knelt and wept, and kissed the long-sought ground. END OF THE FIRST CANTO,
CANTO И.
THE NIGHT BEFORE THE FIRST BATTLE.
I, Amidst these old abodes of peace Did War his crimson banner rear. And bid the heavenly anthem cease, While his stern trumpets rent the air ? Here, in each cloister, hall and walk, Where sandalled feet unheard went by, And voices low, in reverend talk, Feared to disturb it's sanctity, Did here the Warrior's iron tread Shake the cold slumber of the dead. Call murmurs from the vaults below And the long whispered sigh of woe ; Stalk o'er the helpless and the good, And print the hermit's vest with blood ?
Yes ; blood the hallowed pavement stained ; And blood the shrine of peace prophaned ! The ring of mail—the clash of steel Through choir and cloister sent their peal To chambers dim, where Silence slept, And pious men their sabbath kept, Who, long secure from sense of ill, And well subdued in mind and will, Pondered Futurity's high theme And this world's strange and fleeting dream. II. О day of guilt and bleeding woe í Year after year shall mourn in vain The countless ills, that from ye flow, And hardly hope for peace again— The day, when York and Lancaster First loosed the tide of civil war ; When hostile brothers of the land Met face to face, and hand to hand, And sunk each other's lance beneath, And breathed each other's dying breath !
III. The eve before that battle day, The camp of either army lay Beyond where now the straining sight Can reach from Alban's utmost height. 'Twas leaning on this very tower, That Alban's Monks watched hour by hour. They, who lie dark in death below Yon fallen walls, in silent row Gazed, as you gaze, from this high brow. The cowl and helmet, side by side, Watched from this height the bannered pride, And marked the gathering storm of war Hang dark o'er all those hills afar ; And, in dread stillness of the soul, Heard the low, threatening thunder roll, That soon would, in it's cloudy course, Burst round their walls with lightning-force. IV. Camped o'er those green and northern lands, There lay Duke Richard's way-worn bands ; The pale rose on their ensigns stood.
Southward, where now the clear sun shines, Watched Royal Henry's warrior-lines, Surmounted with the rose of blood. His vanguard lay beneath these hails, And round St. Stephen's neighbouring walk. To Cashio's vale his centre spread, Where the King pressed a thorny bed. His legions stretched toward Stanmore's brow And Harrow's-lofty sanctuary, Whose spiry top you just may know, Crowned with many a stately tree, Where now the gleam falls fleetingly. The lights and shades of Fortune's power Fell not as Nature's at this hour. Her storm frowned on the southern scene ; Her smile shone o'er yon flowery green. Those distant downs, now dim and grey, Those misty woods received her ray. v. While the Monks from this battlement Their glance o'er the wide prospect sent,
They watched the western sun go down 'Mid clouds of amber, edged with gold, That did their splendid wings unfold, And seemed to wait around his throne. A monk, who marked them, dared foretell, That gentle Peace would here still dwell ; But the bold guess and Hattering ray Sunk alike in gloom away. One crimson streak of parted day Lingered where Henry's army lay ; Till o'er it spread the night's dork hue, That veiled awhile each camp from view. vi. Then, gradual, through the deepening gloom. Torch and signal-ures relume The war-lines on the hills and dells, Leaving wide shadowy intervals ; Yet marking to the distant eye How broad and close those camp-lines lie ; Gleaming as does the Ocean's bed, Wien sun has set in stormy red, And surge on surge rolls crested bright, Beneath the glance of parting light.
VII. The other camp, of smaller force. Concealed it's boundary by the course Of heights, save where one hill retired ; There was the dusk with redness tired By casual watch-torch through the gloom ; And there lay York, like hidden doom, Waiting to send forth nameless woes. High o'er that hill the blaze uprose Upon the darkly-sullen sky, Here reddening on a livid cloud, There glancing like the fancied crowd, That ride the northern hghts on high. Duke Richard watched upon this hill, While his camp-field was dark and .still ; But that a guard-tire, here and there, Lifted it's lonely fitful glare, Where steeds and warriors lay around In harness for the battle-day, Half-slumbering to the frequent sound Of steps and weapons on the ground. Preparing for the morrow's fmv·
Hi» scouts near Henry's armv strolled, Anjl to his gathered Council told Where lay it's weakness, where it's hold. But Henry, trusting to his force, ^/У/ЪТ«1~*ЛГ* ť?»* rt I* *4rt*l*Í> rtrtWAŰ Λ»1/Ί ĎOAVuf /Wllľviť* Mvuiitvu øuvu ucun, vtfclvo ¿ъжлчл oltiťt ν-Λ /iiå^V" VIII. So near the outer posts approached, That each on each at times encroach'd, And speech of taunt, or civil cheer, Mixed with the clink of harness-gear. Was heard ; and each might view the flare From Alban's topmost round in air, That made the tower, in lurid gloom, A more gigantic port assume. And, silent, on the rocky steep Their watch o'er hill and valley keep. Each, too, might see dim forms on high, Glide, where the beacon touched the sky : For there it's flame of sullen red Flashed on a cowded monk's sable head, Glanced on the Abbey-knight beside, And showed his plumy crest of pride.
On the night-breezes dancing gay, As though in sun and chivalry. IX. That monk and knight, with steady gaze, Watched where the far-off signals blaze. O'er many a ridge of wood and down, From heath and camp, from tower and town ; From ancient Hadley's cresset-flame, That peered o'er hills, an eastern star, (The beacon-turret still the same) Bearing this sign of iron war To Cashio's close-surrounded vale And Gorhambury s turrets pale, And nameless lands, in shade unknown. The nearer scene they looked upon, Glimmer'd in varying shade and light, Thrown from the Abbey's beacon bright. x. it gleamed on stately bowers below, Tinged porch and transept's dusky brow, Glared on broad courts and humble cell^ Glanced on the crystal Oriel,
And cast deep shadow on the ground From gates and turrets ranged around. There, Abbey Lance-men slowly paced, Where scarce the portal-arch was traced, As fi ashed the blaze along the air, And quivered on each Warrior's spear j Long, shaded walks it showed, that led Where cloister-plat and gardens spread, And monks, wrapt close in sable weed, Passed to and fro, with fearful speed. The gloomy light was thrown so far, It reddened dark St. Michael's brow. Frowning on Roman foss below, And tinged the bridge and streams of Ver. xr. St. Alban's town, with wakeful eyes, Viewed the red beacon sink and rise, And, sought to spell each signal sent To good King Henry's distant tent. And, while they gazed, the changing glare, Broad on each roof and lattice-bar, Showed every visage watching there For tiding of the threatened war.
Upon Queen Ellen's pile of state, That crowned the town and mourned her fate, The trembling gleam touched shrine and saint With light and shade, so finely faint, The form beneath each canopy Appeared to lean so patiently, As if it bent o'er the loved bier, That, once for short time placed here, Had made the spot to Edward dear, And listened, while the Requiem's flow Shed stillness o'er the mourner's woe. XII. Patient upon the Abbey-Tower, From Vesper to the Matin hour, The knight and monk the first watch kept, While few beneath their vigil slept. Later, within the turret-head, The monk from the chill night-wind fled ; But never from that platfiirm's height Strayed the due footstep of the knight. With patient eye and measured pace, He turned upon the narrow space,
And listened each imperfect sound, That rose from camp, or road, around, Or noise of preparation made Below in porch and arch-way shade. The massy bolts and ponderous bars Of studded gates, that, in old wars, Against the rebel townsmen closed. Had now so long in peace reposed, So long had been unmoved by hand, They now the Warder's might withstand. Often was heard the mingled din From clink of smith and voice within, From footsteps heavy with the weight Of chest, that bore from shrines a freight, And altar-tombs, to secret hold Of jewels rich and cups of gold ; Though yet was left some little show To check, if need, the plunderer's blow. xnr. And, when such busy sounds were o'er, That Abbey-knight might hear once more From the still street, in echoing swell,
The watch-word of each sentinel Pass on it's far-extending range From post to post, with ordered change, Now low, now sullen, and now high, 4 Health to the King !"—then " So say I." And sometimes, too, a distant drum, With stealthy murmur seemed to come, Then rolled away, and sunk afar Where slept the thunder-cloud of war. From roads was heard and doubted ground The watch-cry of patrols around, Mingled, at times, with one slow note, Swelled solemn from the cornet's throat, And answered faint and fainter still, Like echo from the distant hill. And, when such solemn sounds were past, When slumbered e'en the midnight blast, The due hymn from the choir below Through the high tower ascended slow,, While round the bands of Havock lay, Waiting but for the morn of May To light War, Death, and Treason to their prey.
xi v. The Knight sent frequent message down, That all was still, No sign of ill Drew nearer to St. Alhun's town. The while the Ahhot, in dehate, Sat with his officers of State, And Seneschal, Judge of his Court, Discussing every new report And message, sent from scouts afar, That told the visage of the war. Vainly for some they waited long, Perplexed Duke Richard's hosts among ; Others came, horse on horse, so fast, That every quarter-watch that passed. Brought rumour fresh and woud'rous tale, Bidding now hope, now fear, prevail, And still most wond'rous t»ver was the last. xv. The pious Abbot, Whetehanipstcd, Of learned men the learned head, Closed a late council, and withdrew, Needful, though short repose to woo ;
But still the Prior and Seneschal Waited the worst, that might befall, Ready, if enemy approach, rflr COUiicu ιιτ tne /vüuui a coucu. He, wakeful long and anxious still, Lost not in sleep his sense of ill, For then, in slumbers, touched with sorrow, He saw dim visions of the morrow, Saw round those walls the battle bleed ; Heard the fierce trump and neigh of steed ; Saw wounded Henry, in the strife, Borne down and pleading for his life. And, starting at the piteous view, He woke, with chill brow bathed in dew. xvi. That night, few monks their pallets pressed, And scarce an eye was closed in rest ; Most were from slumber held away By terror of the coming day ; Yet some there were, who, fond of change And slaves to envy, wished to see vol. m. h
The battle take it 's direst range, Though round their walls it chanced to be ; And some, who, fired with worldly zeal, Would fain, with casque and sword of steel, Mingle in royid Henry's train ; And others Richard's plea maintain. But each, by prudent council swayed. Or policy, their chief obeyed. The ordered chime was hourly rung ; Each mass was duly said and sung ; And, at each gate, though armed band Obeyed an Abbey-knight's command, And o'er the posterns had control, Yetj at each station watched a cowl, And still on tower^ half hid in hood, The pale Monk with the Warrior stood. That Monk had heard the Vesper-bell Call every brother from his cell ; Had heard the bell of Compline sound, And followed every service round ;
And as he heard each chaunt ascend, Silent and meek, his head would bend ; Each word th' accustomed mind supplied, That distance to his ear denied ; Though absent he, by painful need, He joined the prayer and dropped the bead. And oft, in silent orison, He prayed, that war might spare this town ; Timt all who dwelt within these walls Might duly own Religion's calls On the unknown to-morrow's night, Now trembling on his darkened sight. He prayed, too, that no blood-stained grave Might wait that watching Warrior brave, Whose spirit frank and free and kind Had calmed and cheered his boding mind. XVIII. Still Jerome leaned on Alban's tower, And thoughtful watched the solemn hour ; All tilings lay wrapt in fearful gloom ; Time passed in silence toward the tomb. h %
Nor watch-dog's bark, nor charger's neigh, Nor pass-word went the distant way ; Nor swept a breeze upon a bough Of the high leafy walks below. The holy hymn had sunk in peace ; Now Nature's breathings almost cease. In the deep pause alone might come The sullen, faltering pant of drum ; So faint th' uncertain sound in air, It seemed like pulse within the ear. XIX. He viewed the dawn steal o'er the wold. Paling each beacon-tìre afar, Till, wan and dim as twilight star, The warning tale no more it told. On the green woods that dewy light Shed sleepy hues all chill and white. That cold fresh light, that tender green, Dawning through »11 the lonely scene, A sweet and quiei sadness wore To palmer, journeying at such hour Through the wild path of forest-bower,
Well suiting with his humbled mind, In holy grief to Heaven resigned. If it recalled the long-past thought, It soothed to smile the woe it brought : Like touch of some fine harmony To one endued with sympathy. XX. With pious thought and tranced eye, St. Alban's Monk, from turret high, Beheld in silent order rise Tint after tint on th' eastern skies : First, cold rays edged the night's black sluroud ; Then rose, then amber, changed the hue ; Then slowly purpled the soft cloud, That stretched along the upper blue ; Where, hanging o'er its shadowy throne, The star of Morning watched alone ; But soon more gorgeous tints appear, And tell the mighty Sun is near ; Till he looked joyous o'er yon brow, While slumbering War lay stretched below, Whose shrine shall dying thousands stain, Ere that gay Sun look up again !
xxr. War's grisly visage there was seen, Engarlanded with May's fair buds ; Hie couch—her meads of springing green. His canopy—-her fresh-leaved woods ! Her fragrant airs around him breathe, Her music soothes his dream beneath. But soon May's blooms their snows shall yield. By hostile struggle lowly laid ; And soon her young and lightsome shade Shall hide the blood-stained casque and shield, Now thrown in wilder'd flight away : And many a tortured wretch that day, 'Scaped from the battle's mortal strife, To scenes of Nature's peace shall hie ; And, while all round is breathing life, Sink on some flowery bank and die ! XXÍJ. The Monk might* at this hour of dawn, Have traced each army faintly drawn, Through dewy veil, on hills around ; And viewed St. Alban's glimmering bound AU rich with blooming orchard ground,
^Vhere crowded roofs and turrets lay Obscurely on the brightening grey. How dark and still the Martyr's tower Stood on the reddening dawn on high ; How solemn was the look it wore, The peace of age and sanctity í Till each dark line stood sharp and clear, On gold and crimson streaks of air. Flowing upon the early breeze, The Royal banner Warwick sees Wave homage to the rising beams î And, while that banner lightly streams. With scornful eyes he viewed the town, 11 There will I rule ere sun go down !" XXIII. The Knight and Monk, who watched on hi Beheld these rising beams with joy ; And lost, with joy, the beacon's flame, For now relief of Warder came. Scarce would the warrior pause to tell, That all near Alban's wall was well ; Or change a word of what had been From his high station heard, or seen.
And, with the chilling hour oppressed, Jerome, too, sought some welcome rest, And left, exchanged, a monk behind. To shiver in the breezy wind.
END OF THE SECOND C'AITO.
CANTO III.
THE DAY OF THE FIRST BATTLE. ι. The day had risen ; the song of Prime Swelled soft, as ceased the second chime ; When now was heard a distant drum Through the wood-lands high to come ; And, fierce though faint, one trumpet-blast Hurrying upon the light wind passed. It was not fancy—'twas not fear. That caused those glittering helms appear, And triple-glance of marshalled spear, Upon the high wood's shadowy side ; 'Tis there the barbed coursers ride; η 5
And, mid the light-leaved shadows go The battle-axe and lance and bow ; And banners bright and pennons fair Bicker upon the fretful air. Now, down St. Stephen's woody stee ο , The warlike bands due order keep. Winding in glimpses to his eye Who watched from under hood, on high, And sadly lost all doubt, in fear ; While now the 'larum-bell he rung, And now o'er battlement he hung, Viewing the lengthened train draw near ; (< Ten thousand,—less there could not be ; Ten thousand of the enemy ;" And thousands yet he might not see ! II. His glad companion smiling heard The panic marvels of his word ; But all in vain he promised good, Though, as they flashed from Julian's wood. The knight well knew those armed h amis, And brandished high his gauntlet-hands,
And shouted welcomes on the gale, ,ť Live—live King Henry—Henry hail !" And waved his banner on the wall, Urging the loud, rejoicing call, " hive —live King Henry—Htnry hail !" Till his parched lips and utterance fail. in. And then was heard the various pace Of young and old, in toilsome race Up gaileried wall and winding flight, Aiming to reach this, topmost height. But soon th' embattled roofs below Proclaim, that few may gain this brow For, resting there in sable row, Many a brother breathless stood With pointing hand and falling hood, Gazing upon the virion dread Of warlike force, tlirt hither sped. IV. Now, loud King Henry's clarions sound. The many-tram pling hoofs rebound, As, issuing from St. Stephen's shade Upon the near aud auiiiiy glade,
Blazoned shields and helmets gleam, While light the red-rose banners stream ; And knights on barbed coursers bear Their monarch's standard through the air. And gentio Henry might you know, Though harnessed close from top to toe- Before him, herald-trumpets sound. Proud chiefs and nobles press the ground ; And, where his ordered thousands throng, Winding the woods and vale along, Each bannered knight, as he drew nigh, Was seen to lead his vassal-band, With statelier march and aspect high, Expressive of supreme command, Though courting kindly gesture from his Sovereign' hand, v. Loud and more loud the trumpets call, Аь they draw niih St. Alban's wall ; And other trumpets answer clear, And u Live King Henry !" rends the air From every guarded barrier.
Straight, at the sound, in street below, The thronging shield and helmet go, While busy knights their men array, To line their Monarch's onward way, The van-guard, that, on yesternight, Watched here, upon St. Alban's height. Above, each roof and lattice showed A fearful and a curious crowd, Though forced within their homes to stay, Hoping for glorious wonders, on that day. VI. And now adown the street appear, With better banners, high on air, The Martyr's sons in wondering fear, With chaunted anthems, grave and sweet, Pacing their Sovereign lord to meet. The Abbot is not now arrayed, As he was wont, to meet his lord ; His brow no jewelled pomp displayed, Nor from his shoulders now floats broad The scarlet cope, nor robe of gold, Nor the rich velvet's shadowy fold.
But he, enwrapt in woeful weed, Suiting his habit to the time, In sorrowing penance seems to plead Forgiveness for some hidden crime. That threatened to draw judgment down Even on St. Alban's shrine and town. But pages hold his mourning train, As when arrayed in robe more vain, And all his oflicers of state In order due around him wait ; While, marching on the crowded way, His Abbey-knights their band display. VII, Far down the bteep of Holywell, The chaunted anthem гоье and fell. Soon as was heard the solemn song, And seen the dark advancing throng ; That busy street, then closely pressed, With bow und pike and demi-lance, Where charger reared, whe*e waved high emt, Was hushed, at once, аь if in trance ; The crowd tell back, in order grave, Ere Abbot's guard the signal gave,
And, as the Abbey-Choir went by, In reverend row you there might see Each warrior on his bended knee, With upward and beseeching eye, And thus, through files of lance and spear, The pious fathers, without fear, On to the southern barrier move Safe in clue reverence and love, vi r г. And now within the barrier wall St. Alban's sons await their King. And hark ! what nearer clarions ring ! What shouts around each turret call (( King Henry live í —King Henry live í Every Saint a blessing give ; King Henry live í —King Henry live í Abbot and Prior blessings give." Then burst the loud, acclaiming voice From battlements and towers aloof, From cottage-thatch and lordly roof, Of all, who in due rule rejoice.
IX. Then, first from forth the barrier-arch Deep and dark, in solemn march. The Herald-trumpets come j Their blazoned coats and pageantry And banners beam upon the eye, Like sudden blaze of witchery From depth of midnight gloom. Behind, a pale and gleaming band. As if by glance of moonlight shown, Stalked^ in silence, hand by handj With threatening crest and visor's frown ; The stately forms of men unknown. In cold dead steel anatomized, As in Death's very image 'guised. x. Following this heavy march were seen, On the armed charger's stately sheen, Many a Baron's youthful son, v By lofty Somerset led on. With stately step his courser trod ; His casque the British lion strode ; The triple plume was nodding by ;
Through the barred visor might you spy The warriors dark and fiery eye, Though not the mien his visage bore. Proud was his air, his stature high. Above his ringed mail he wore Coat-armour, blazoned bright with sign Of princely birth and Henry's line, And 'broidered with devices fair ; Portcullis-bars in gold were there. Two Squires, beside his stirrups, bear His shield and axe and new-shod spear. There marched in stately grace before, With trumpets that high summons gave, His Poursuivant, Portcullis grave, And Henchmen next, some derni-score. Fearless, he sought the battle-hour ; Here he beheld not castle-tower, And well he knew the prophecy, That under Castle he must die. xi. Behind, as far as eye might go, Paced barbed steeds and banners slow, Till Henry's standard stooped below
The barrier-arch, and borne along By royal Banner Knights a throng, St) heavy was the ample fold, That hardly could the knights unfold The crimson silk and blazoned gold. Again came Heralds, four abreast, With blazoned arms and \t41ow vest, Sounding their silver trumpets sweet» While silver drums before them beat. Followed а gorgeous stately train, Who scarcely might their coursers rein, Esquires and Yeomen, two and two, Accoutred at ail points, most true ; Knights of the Body, brave and gay, Who ushered Henry on his way, While 'compassing, on all sides, came Chiefs and Nobles, high in fame. xu. Thronged lofty spears and shields around, Where the King's charger trod the ground, And, deep behind the barrier-arch, Plume behind plume insohmn march,
Α lid eyes that seemed to frown with fato« Προη their monarch's progress wait. " Then gentle Henry might you know, Though harnessed close from head to toe ;" For, though arrayed for warrior-deed, lie sat not cheerly on his steed ; Though England's lion on his brow Claimed homage of a Nation's bow. XIII. Soon as St. Alban's sons he spied lie drew his rein, and '* Halt !" was cried ; And when the reverend father kneeled, He pressed his iron beaver down, And would not let his visor frown, liut all his countenance revealed, And stretched his gracious hand to raise The aged man with gentle praise. And when the blessed anthems pealed, He would himself have stept to ground, And with the Abbot, side by side, Have yielded up all kingly pride, To pace the Martyr's tond) around.
But fiery Tudor near him rode, And instant close beside him strode, And whisper'd somewhat to his ear ; Which Henry, faltering, seem'd to hear^ And slow and silently obey. Yet, though his stately seat he kept, He bade the father lead the way ; And patient, as they stept, he stept, Listening to their slow chaunted lay, With due respect and bended head, While toward the Abbey-gate they led. XIV. On as that martial pageant drew, The Knight on watch would point to view, Each banner and each chief he knew. fi There rides the high Northumberland, Leading his hardy northern band, The son of Hots]iur, whose bold hand So oft the prize of victory won. There pass the Cliffords, sire and son ; And more of truly noble fire Ne'er glowed than in the hoary sire !
There Stafford goes ; there Buckingham ; And fiery Tudor, still the same. Sir John de Grooby you may see, With new-worn honours vain and brave ; Just knighted by King Henry he, О may he 'scape an early grave ! Whate'er his fate, he cares not now ; The plume exults upon his braw." xv. Now Clement flies right speedily, And, mounting on a turret-way, Through narrow loop begins to spy, The varying struggle of that day ; For, figured underneath his eye, While fearless he of spear and dart, Lay street and road, as on a chart. Close looked this Saxon turret down Upon the four ways of the town, And on Queen Ellen's shrine and green, (The garden-plat alone between) And, broad and straight, the way then spread To old St. Peter's towered head ;
Closing the far perspective there, His battlements were drawn on air. xvi. Below, the roads, and streets, and green, Su crowded were with shield and pike, That scarcely was there room between For lance to poise, or sword to strike ; But the chief turmoil of the scene Was on St. Peter'« spacious way, Where, in the centre of the green, King Henry and his kriiglits were seen, Around his banner floating gay. 'Twas planted for the battle-hour, With the full pomp of warlike power ; 'Mid clarion's and trumpet's sound, And sliouts, that rent the air far round, Making old Alban's shrines to shake, Aud tremble deep her crystal lake. On Peter4 street that standard stood, Summoning hill and vale and wood. While the King s orders went, to keep The wards and barriers of the place
With strong watch ; for, noar Alban's steep, York now advanced, in quickened pace.— XVII. Advanced so fast, that, when the King One moment at the shrine would spend, ITh chiefs arranged themselves in ring Around, and urged him to suspend His pious purpose, till that day Were ended, and that battle-fray. JWettk Ilenr) yielded with a sigli, And something like a frown Came darkening o'er his tearful eye ; But soon, with patient look on high. It died in smile of piety, Such as blest saint might own. Then, turned he to the humble door Of Edmund Westby, th' Iltmdredor ; There his head-quarters were prepared By those, who with him more than sliared His· power ; there ho resolved to wait Whate'er might be the battle's fate, Or welcome peace, or lengthened hate.
XVIII. In terror from the turret-arch, Was now seen Richard s rapid march, And signal given and larum call, Rang round about the Abbey wall. Now all are up on gallery-tower, To scan the enemy's dread power O'er the wide fields advancing round From meadow-slopes, where woods had been, But now no sign of oak is seen ; Archers and pikemen step the ground ; And down the glade, that spreads below, Arrayed in many a gleaming row, They stand beneath St. Alban's brow. But chiefly on the eastern side Key*s Field displayed their bannered pride. There most St. Alban's feared their blow ; St. Alban's—ill prepared for war, Though thronged with arms and warriors bold ; For no broad bulwark seen a f .r. Nor stretching rampart, proudly told Defiance and a mighty hold ;
But simple wall and barrier-gate Warded for old St. Alban's fate. XIX. Wide o'er the northern fields afar Still marched Duke Richard's lines of war, Whose white-rose banners, gathering nigh, Gave silent signal to the eye Of more than he had dared to claim— Richard of York's yet secret aim. White blossoms in each cap were seen, For unblown rose, the sweet may-thorn, From banks of freshly-blushing green By gauntlet-fingers rudely torn, And placed on high, a smiling crest, O'er brows by iron vizor pressed; Device, at once, for the pale hose, And for the name that gave him sway, Who gaily on his warrior-brows Bore the bright bloom Plant-a-gknet. XX. The warders scanned the outspread force From tower and turret still in vain ; vol, ш. i
Richard of York, in double course, To shrouding woods extends his train : And who may guess what numbers there In silence wait and watchful care, Ready the battle to sustain ? To inexperienced eyes, and fear, His hundreds, thousands thus appear, Now lost and seen in grove and field; While Henry's thousands cooped in street, Seem but to threaten self-defeat, Incapable their strength to wield. XXL Morning on day had far advanced, And not a spear in onset glanced ; But lingering messages were sent To Lancaster by York, the while, Who, trusting less in arms than guile, By aid of gold was still intent Some captains of his foe to gain ; His numbers might, he judged, be vain, Though the great Warwick ruled their course, To grapple Henry's loyal force.
XXII. Unawed by sense of treachery, Richard now dared, irreverently, To call on Alban, as his saint, To hear him vouch his true intent— * ť In verie knowledge of his trothe To witness to his loyal oath, To honour Henry as his king, Should he to instant justice bring Those false suggesters of his will, Who wrought his kingdom only ill." Yet Henry's oath he would not take> That speedy justice should awake ; But, on the moment, made his claim That every noble he might name Should to his camp in fetters come, And there receive their final doom: This done, he would disperse his men. And bow to Henry's power again. But well he guessed such claim would wring Only defiance from the King. ι 2
XXIII. And this was Lancaster's reply, That rather than to him betray His faithful servants, he, this day, Would for their sakes, fight—live or die ! And, though long pressed by i( great disease" And heaviness of heart, He swore by sainted Edward's peace, He would not thence depart Till every traitor of that hour, Who should persist in strife, ïf placed by battle in his power, Should forfeit there his life. This while the virtuous Henry said, A tear of anxious grief he shed. xxiv. The morn was gone, noon nearly come, Yet was not heard the 'larum-drum ; Still Richard held a double course, And Henry still restrained his force. Now. while full many a fearful eye From Alban's tower looked eagerly.
And none knew what delayed the blow, They marked again, in street below, A white-rose Herald blindfold led, Where high the bannered rose of red Waved duteous o'er the monarch's brow. King Henry, ever duly slow To draw the desolating sword, Piteous and mindful of the woe, That might ensue from slighted word, Greeted the wily pari once more, And long the message pondered o'er ; For show of hope and peace it bore. xxv. And now a guileful sound of peace Swells faint to those, who watch on high, Bidding their care and terror cease. But wherefore, to their-straining eye, Yon shifting glance of helm and lance ? And why those sudden trumpet-sounds, Mingled with tremour of the drum, Gathering in loud and louder rounds, Like burst of gaunt and ravenous hounds ?
Twas those without St. Alban's wall, Raising the treacherous onset-call, While yet for peace their Herald treats And " Peace !" is shouted through the streets. And now St. Alban's monks descry A shower of arrows falling nigh To Key's Field, o'er that barrier-lane r Where the besiegers strive in vain To burst into the guarded town ; While doubling and redoubling come The trumpet's shriek and roll of drum, And shouts that rage and havock own. xxvi. In street below raged to and fro, In wild disorder, men-at-arms ; And heralds sounding loud alarms ; And knights, close braced from head to toe, Uncertain where to meet the foe ; Whom, though they heard, they might not see For houses and for orchard-tree, Till signal from St. Alban's tower Pointed where pressed the threatening power.
Then Somerset, with brief command, In order ranged each 'wildered band. The noblest and the bravest stood By the East barrier, near the wood, That led to Sopewelľs Priory, Where watched, in sad consistory, That fair and trembling sisterhood ; For thence the loudest turmoil came. But noble chiefs and knights of fame Crowded St. Peter's high broad way, Where their liege-lord, King Henry, lay. xxvu. And soon from other quarters blew Clarion and trump without the walls ; But even on tower they had scant view Of those whose 'larum thus appals. Those sounds called every foot to climb To battlement and tower sublime. Then not a brother stayed below, Whom age did not forbid to go ; Or who around the shrine kept ward ;
Or some sad priest, at Chantry-tomb, Saying long Obits in the gloom, Pale with expectance of his doom ; While, listening to dread sounds abroad, His station in the aisle denied To view the course of bat tie-tide : And oft the blast in turret nigh Mocked his impatience with it's sigh, As if some whispering friend drew near To share with him his half-told fear. XXVIII. Fiercer and fiercer rose the bray, Till, every shrine (save Alban's) left, The chantry of iťs priest bereft, The silent dead forsaken lay. Even he, who, worn with last night's watch, Would fain some little slumber snatch, Now startled by the trumpet's breath, Calling as with the voice of death, Uprose and sought the turret grey, That eastward o'er the Chancel lay. The strength of battle pressed that way.
This little watch-nook hung in air O'er the great window of the Shrine, Forming a canopy most fair For the carved cell and image fine, That knelt with upward aspect there— St. Clement, in his fretted cove, The namesake of the Monk above. This 'battled summit seemed his crown, Who had for ages knelt thereon. Seeming to feel with those below, Whose choral voices, murmuring slow Round those sad mansions of the dead, Would strive a saintly peace to shed, xxix. While Clement thus his fears obeyed, And sought this barbican so high— This raven's nest so near the sky— More awful rose the battle cry ; Steel clashed, and trump and clarion brayed. It seemed as though the deafening sound Rose straight below on Abbey-ground ; But distant was the place of war, Beyond the Eastern barrier, о
And partial seen, by glimpse aloof, O'er many a high and crowded roof; For thwart the Abbey stretched the way Of Holywell, and screened the fray. Yet -was Duke Richard's farther host In spreading shock of battle traced;, By the near, unseen, impulse tossed, Like circles from a centre chaced· XXX. And o'er this swaying of the stormv Incessant hissed the viewless form Of arrows, shadowing the air, Or lightning glance of hurled spear ; While keen, below, the restless rays Of shield and casque and corslet blaze ; And Key's Field broad displayed the course Of Richard's and of Warwick's force, Neville of Salisbury fought near,, Unseen, close at the barrier ; But firm-set pike and arrowy shower Failed to make passage for his power ; For aged Clifford stemmed his way. And scattering, as he went, dismay,
Fired young and aged, knight and lord, And every hand that held a sword. xxx I. But whence the shouts so thrilling now ? Why do the townsmen, on each roof, Rise earnestly, even on the toe, And rashly hurry to and fro, As if on level ground they go, And mount the chimney-tops aloof, And bend far o'er the depth below ? Those ridgy roofs and chimneys tall, Crowded with heads, like leaves on tree, From Clement's anxious gaze hid all He climbed this lofty perch to see. But soon the arrows fell so near, The gazers shrunk below with fear, And left each summit-station clear ; He then, in safe and shrouded nook. Upon the place of war could look. ΧΧΧΤΙ. There yet a narrow Green is shown, That eastward runs behind the town—
The place where Richard pitched his tent ; Small paTt of the broad space, that went By name of Key's Field ; close it bent To Sopewell lane. The barrier nigh Did long the enemy defy. The princely Somerset fought here ; And, had his spirit e'er known fear, That fear it would not now have owned, For here no fateful castle frowned ; And well he knew the prophecy, iC That urider castle he must die." While the stress lay round that barrier, (Clifford within and York without) So often swerved th' assailing rout, That Richard's overthrow seemed near ; But who 'gainst secret aid is sure ? What force 'gainst treachery may endure ? хххш. O'er beds of peaceful flowers he came, The Knight who flew to Richard's need, With he) m aud shield on barbed steed; Onward he pressed, at utmost speed,
Glared on his lance the red war-flame, Knights and spearmen fast succeed. On full six hundred helms appeared His badge in gold or silver wrought— A rampant bear, with staff upreaťd, And this the boastful tale it told— " He wins whom I uphold !" Fierce was the trumpet's blast—the war-cry burst ; " A Warwick ! a Warwick ! Warwick is here !" In Holywell road he was the first Where valiant De Clifford kept barrier. Though grey his locks in his cap of steel, Yet a hero's fire glowed in his eye ; His spirit glowed for his country's weal ; (< In Henry's cause may I live or die !" XXXIV. « My Lord De Cliíford, Warwick's foe ! Warwick calls on you now to show, Why meeťst thou not the ragged staff r Tlie Bear would foin thy life-blood quaff. Hast thou forgot thy daring taunt, That thou through life ray steps would'st haunt '"
My Lord De Clifford ! here am I, Avouch thy boast, or it deny I" Soon as his voice De Cl i Hord heard, No halt made he for taunting word, But cheered the knights of his command, And rushed to meet him hand to hand. Strong as Disdain his well-nerved arm. Loyal his heart, all true and warm, He sprang to meet his mighty foe ; " Who vainly boasts let this day show !" Where л vas his son at this dread hour, When Rage and Hatred o'er him lour? He fights not in his father's band ; Afar he holds some high command. But numbers round Do Clifford fought, Who Danger's vanmost heroes sought ; Whom zeal and reverence and pride Held close embattled at his side. xxxv. When Clement from his post looked down Close on this quarter of the town, And viewed the fateful turmoil there, Scarce could his mounting spirit hear
To loiter here, secure and free, While cries for doubtful victory Pierced to the very vault of air ; But тонки below, on battlement, Who watched how the fierce contest went, Of these, scarce one but blessed the day When he to Abbey took his way, And bound himself to shun all battle-fray. xxxv r. Hark ! Warwick hath hurst the barrier, And in the surge of combat there, Which rolled not on, but to and fro, Alternate swayed for friend and foe, Kach individual form was lost, So mingled was that mighty host. No eye might now De Clifford trace, Nor eager Warwick's lofty grace; Yet knew where each the conflict held By fall of horse and crash of shield. And oh ! what mingled sounds arose Above the trumpet's fiercest call ! The yell of havock—shrieking woes Of matrons, from the latticed wall,
Watching unseen in houses nigh, Who view a son, or husband fall, And under trampling charger lie, In deep, expiring agony ! xxxvn. Now arrows thickening in the air, With hiss incessant, shrill, and ndfcr, Warned from each open battlement The crowding monks that o'er it bent. But Clement, in his turret-cell, From evil hap was sheltered well ; Yet wounded was his sight hy í low Of human blood in streams below. Not so the raven's o'er his head, As muti» he watched the slaughtered ; Unseen companion í stern and sly, Waiting his banquet of the dead, Impatient while the dying die ! xxxvm. And now, behold the barrier-guard Pressed back into the rising street ; Where houses hide their slow retreat From Clement's view, though hitherward
The rage of war came nearer still ; For, on this steeply-mounting hill The Abbey stood, part screened below By wall and gate and orchard-bough. And, while afar bold Warwick's force Beyond the barrier he could watch, Yet might our Clement sparely catch Glimpse of the nearer battle's course. At times o'er wall, or waving branch, Appeared high plume on helmed brow, Or iron hand upraised to launch The battle axe, or sabre blow ; The threatened blow he well might see» But not it's fateful certainty ; A falling horseman he might spy, Or a freed charger passing by, Or warrior bleeding on the ground. Even just without the Abbey's round. xxxix. The battle's strength still slowly pressed Up Holywell, on Warwick's side» When Clement from his secret nest Heard 'brums new and shoutings, wide ;
And looking northward, whence their course, He marked a troop of Henry's horse Led on by Percy's self, at speed : They came at Clifford's utmost need, With fierce and threatening cries afar, And checked awhile the tide of war. 'Twas Percy of Northumberland, Kode vanmost of the gallant baud ; And Buckingham and Stafford's earl Led where the crimson flags unfurl ; And many a knight and baron bold, In battle and in honours old, And many a youth, who but that morn Had first his knightly emblems worn. XL. To Clement it was dreadful sight, This press of noble chief and knight ; For now more deadly raged the fight. And here the place of war outspread, Showed him their armour streaming red, And almost every wound, that bled. And down the charger's panting side He marked the gushing slaughter-tide î
In vain the shaíľrone guards his face, Or neck the mailed mainfaire shields, Or breast-plate lilis it's ample space ; Such garniture poor shelter yields. Х1Л. King Henry's bravest warriors move, Great Warwick's hardiness to prove. While, closely urged by foeman's spear, The wounded coursers plunge and rear, With outspread nostrils raised in air, And fiery eyes, that shoot despair ; They trample back the crowd behind, Who, upward on the steep hill forced, Press other troops in street confined ; Then chargers fall, and men unhorsed O'er their own dead and dying go, Nor horror, nor even pity know, Conscious of nought but hate and strife, Reckless of quickly-ebbing life, Fighting on foot 'gainst horse and lance, Meeting in vain their foe's advance j Till, 011 the heaped anã nameless dead, They reach their final gory bed.
XLIL Now other trumpets, blown with might, North, East, and West, spoke triple fight ; But loudest strains swelled from the way Where their liege-lord, King Henry, lay. There York himself the barrier burst, And on St. Peter's Green was first. And now, on summit of the town, Where stood Queen Ellen's shrine alone, King Henry's troops make their firm stand χ As if each man thought his sole hand Fought on that spot for the whole land. And from that summit of the town» On the four main-way s looking down, At every bar, save one, they see The archers of the enemy ; And crowding helms, and ill-spurred horse, Trampling o'er the new-fallen corse, And forcing back each barriei-guard, Mount where that Shrine had long kept solemn wai xliii. That Shrine, where Silence wont to dwell, And listen to the breathing spell
Oí midnight hymn; or the lone psalm Of monk thus wooing the soul's calm ; Or tho liHiff «sxťť'Pt) t\f tvintpr'« wind. Like sigh of disembodied mind ; Or winter wind, or summer shower Falling on leaves of Abbey-bower :— That shrine of Edward's lasting love, Where reverend steps alone might move, Which every eye with tears survey'd, While every head it's homage paid, Where tenderest thoughts still hovered round. And gentle visions blessed the ground. Wearing Queen Ellen's mien and smile again, Who sucked the venom from her husband's vein. xliv. Upon the steep of Holywell, The strife of death had ceased to swell ; 'Twas tilled with slayer and with slain, And there alone did Warwick reign ; Yet slowly mount his conquering train ; For hardly may they make their way, So heaped the bleeding bodies lay,
Even the war-horse, when near the dead, Trembles before the life-stream red ; Bristles his horror-lifted mane ; fíís tossing nostrils speak his pain. Still, with distorted side-long leer, He views the object of his fear ; At last his shuddering feet uprear, At last the spur assails in vain. The warrior on his back feels less, Though better might that warrior know The signs of suffering and woe, And his own doubtful fortune guess. But poor ambition, thoughtless pride, Bear him, scarce moved, through battle's tide. XLV. Then Clement left his raven-nest, And to a Saxon turret pressed That o'er the northern transept rose, Where all around Queen Ellen's bier He wide might view, and all might hear/ Even till the battle's close. As he approached that turret-stair, Lone were the Shrines and Chantries near ;
No shadowed form on Offiťs aisle Stole o'er the drear length of the pile, But all so hushed the scene beneath, it seemed the hall and throne of Death, XLVI. Clement had gained the turret-floor, And pressed the massy oaken door : Surprised he found himself among The Abbot and a younger throng Of monks, whose sight could pierce afar. And tell the varying tide of war. From their full window he withdrew. And to the sister-turret hied, That looked on the same northern view, Commanding o'er it far and wide : Here—though a crowd of hooded heads Darkened the double Saxon arch, Fled from high tower and open leads,-— Here might he watch the battle's marci.'. XLVII. From blessed Peter's tower on high To Ellen's shrine of sanctity,
No thwarting roof-tops then concealed The broad way of that fateful field. The long green vista stretched below, Straight as an arrow from a bow. There, close around that ancient tower, Incessant fell the arrowy shower ; O'er graves and charnel vaults it flew, It cleared the streets in Clement's view. Duke Richard's self, commanding there, Had forced the northern barrier ; Waged war o'er the long-buried dead And blood upon their homes had shed. And many a youthful warrior brav*. în his first armour dressed, Fought even upon his very grave, His morrow's final rest. XLVni. From that dark tower the long broad way Was thronged with Henry's bands, ("lose pressing where their monarch lay. And where his banner, floating gay, Richard's full force withstands.
Clement could not De Clifford see, Nor Somerset's high blazonry ; But Buckingham's pale plume he knew, And his white armour's silvery hue ; And, while he gazed, he saw him bow, Then rise and totter in his seat, And rein his charger to retreat. A shaft has pierced his iron brow ; He sinks to earth ; the dark streams flow. xlix. Stafford, his noble son, fought near, But saw not when his father fell ; And soon the battle's onward swell Checked, though not turned, his own career. For, vain the terrors of his spear, A fatal dart his gauntlet caught ; 'Twas pain, not danger, as he thought, And, heedless of that pain, he fought Till, fainting with the bleeding wound, He falls on henchmen pressing round, Who bear him senseless from the ground. vol, in. к
ι*. But, yonder, on St» Peter's way, With long sweep and resistless sway, The surge of battle rolls along, And threatens even the household throng, Who watch their King, this fateful day. And now, behold his banner there Bow low and totter in the air ; And now, from forth his guarded hall, St. Alban's lofty Seneschal, And Henry's self, appear. Yet feebly did the King advance, As tanding to some dire mischance, His vizor close, his sword in hand, And guarded by a noble band And crowds of demi-lance. 1Л. He mounted on his battle-horse, But turned him from tlie battle's course. Or would have turned ; the warrior stomi Showed daring high for other deed. Long did his stubborn neck disdain To bend him from the trumpet's stiaiu.
With prancing foot and curvet high, With spurning heel and arching mane. He bani ed still the guiding rein. He would have borne his lord awaj, Aud plunged him in the thickest fray, But that a friend, though loth to yield, With strong arm bore him from the field. Lir, Yet hardly tlirough the gory street, So thick the dead and dying lay, Could the guard find a safe retreat Fur Henry, or pass on their way. Then Lancaster's sad heart sunk low, 111 could he brook such sight of и oe ; Shuddering he turned aside hiss head, While hi.s steed stepped among the dead ; But still to his averted eyes Other grim shapes of horror пье, And íť Peace, O! blessed Peace," he cried, While knights, who warded at his side, Could scarce restrain their rising pride, к 2
And, when their lord secure might lie. Swore round his Rose to live, or die. LIII. And had our sovereign lady, Dame Margaret, the Queen, been here, Her cheek had crimsoned o'er with shame To view her husband's fear ; Though sorrow and disease oppressed The princely spirit in his breast. Not thus she fled, when second war Dyed Alban's field with blood, But, high on Victory's iron car, Rushed through the purple flood. But pity tempered not her ire ; No tear-drop dewed her eye of fire ; No hallowed fear her conscience held, Nor piety her proud heart quelled ; These virtues, that ambition thwart, Drew not upon her course the rein ; Brought not the pause—the second thought» That passion's impulse may restrain : Rapid and fierce she pressed her way, Though Truth and Mercy bleeding lay.
So, Gloucester, thy red grave might tell, When mourned for thee St. Alban's knell. LIV. Danger, when braved, like coward flies, And safety, sought, oft way ward hies ; And this King Henry's heart was taught, Even while he humble shelter sought. For, ere he reached a cottage-wall, An arrow-wound had made him fall, But that his band close round him throng, And bear him on his steed along ; And, wounded, bleeding, fainting, slow, A thatched roof shrouds a Monarch's woe. LV, Return we now to Ellen's shrine, Where, thronging through the four street Ensigns and plumes still wave and shine, And falchions flash and helmets blaze, And flights of arrows dim the air, Rattling like hail. On shield and mail, in chorus with the war-shouts there.
And stili, where blessed Peter's tower O'erlooked Plantagenefs chief power, Still, in Sir Philip Wentworth's care, Proudly the Royal Banner stood. Bui now, while onward swept the flood, That standard trembled in the air, And foremost fled the traitor-knight, Sworn to maintain that banner's right. He iied, without a single wound, He fled, and cast it on the ground ! Then, scarce opposed, York's special guard Made dreadful havock down the street ; And, though below their way was barred, 'T was there their whole force thronged to meet. vr. Long did the noblest of the land Round Ellen's mournful bier withstand The triple-guided force Of Warwick, York, and Salisbury ; Oh ! it was dreadful truth to see The battle press it's course
Up every way to that high place, Where, crushed into a narrow space> The band of heroes fought For him, who meekly wore the crown From sire and grandsire given down> By his own will unsought. It was a gallant, mournful sight To see those warriors few Die for the cause which they thought right, —Allegiance ti x*% thought due- LVII. And now the rumour faintly spread, That Henry wounded was, and fled ; Kay, lay in humble cottage dead. Then first his faithful knights knew dread. But, transient was such sense of woe, And, " Vengeance ! Victory !" they cried ; " His son shall triumph, though he died.'* Richard of York, the while, had sought Where the King wounded lay, And soon to his low roof was brought, And claimed the prize of that fierce day.
Henry, though captive, then might see His conqueror on bending knee, With feigned suit and bold pretence, Protesting truth and reverence. In wily words, with poor deceit, York said he never meant him ill ; That he had only armed to meet Those foes, whose dark, ambitious will Had ruled his councils and the realm, And shortly would his throne o'erwhelm, But now, those enemies overthrown, If Henry would their acts disown, And rule the English land alone, His true liege-subject he would prove, And henceforth only seek his love. LVIII. And thus swore all York's subtle band ; But, adding still a new demand, They claimed to guard the King from foes, Lest evil council should dispose His virtuous will to vengeful deed, And, by retaliation, lead
To future discontents and woe. Now, this urged Richard's subtle train ; And further " safety to maintain," They asked he on the morn would go To London, in their duteous care. And choose with them a council fair. 1ЛХ. And thus, with humble look and word. The Duke his loftier hope deferred. Though Victory was on his side, He secretly might own, Time had not brought on the spring-tide Might ^ear him to the throne. To win this venturous battle-day, Such arts had now been tried As could not claim continued sway, Nor long his fortune guide. But, for the moment gratified, He left to future hour his claim, That surer he might work his aim ; And therefore did he lowly bow, Though victor, to Ins captive now. к 5
LX. Hoon did fair speech King Henry gain, While his heart, filled with grief For others' jeopardy and pain, In words now sought relief. ť Spare, spure my people's blood," he »aid, " This moment bid the slaughter rest, ï\Iy will shall then by your's be led ; My pardon take for all the past. Load me within the Abbey walls ; This scene of blood my heart appals !" LXI. Straight, Warwick bade the carnage cease, And bleeding strife was hushed in peace. That fateful moment who may paint ! Meet instant for the joy of saint ! The sword upraised withheld the blow, That might have laid a brother low. Then, sire and ьоп, in armour clasped. While almost each the other grasped, And strove against the other's life, Heai d the low ¡strain, that stills the strife.
They pause ; the steeled mask they raise ; They gaze ; they shudder, and they praise ! The song of Peace is on the air, Her snowy signal floating there ! One moment stopped the woe prepared, And death, remorse, and horror spared. Oh î may that saintly moment be Enshrined in high eternity ; And there to blessed Henry give Such joy of Peace as he bade live I
ΣΝΙ> OF THE THIRD CANTO*
CANTO IV
THE HOUR AFTER THE BATTLE. I. Now to St. Alban's shrine was led The captive King with royal guard ; While Richard at his side kept ward, And Men-at-arms, with stately tread, Encompassing about him went, Beneath the Abbey's battlement. But, who King Henry's woes may tell. As he passed on the blood-stained way. Where half his gallant nobles fell, And yet untouched, uncovered lay. Scarce cold, upon the gory heap, Fixed in their last, unbreathing sleep I — The friends, who on this very morn, Since when but few brief hours had sped.
Had high sway in his council borne ; Who^bent with him the thoughtful head ! Whose living eye by his was read !— Now, ever closed their earthly dream ; All vanished, like a phantom's gleam ; The veil withdrawn—the vision fled ! II. The Abbot at the Abbey-gate The victor and the vanquished met ; And thence, with bands in formal inarch, And monks arranged in order long, Led to the farthest eastern arch, With mourning chant from the full throng ; Where Henry, on St. Alban's tomb, Sought to disperse his mental gloom. III. Such Vision still is seen to mourn. When e veiling-twilight falls, By him, who on that day's return Stands silent by these walls— The vanquished Sire, the victor Chief, The mitred Abbot pale in years,
AßQKY* Whose cheek seems furrowed o'er by grief, And sanctified by Pity's tears, The pious fathers, side by bide, And the whole Convent's choral pride ; Three times beneath the Chancel's gloom. They move around St. Alban's tomb, Through open arches that appear, As once they wont above the bier, But. when the dream has passed away, Close, and are seen as at thi* алу. iv. It is a strange and fearful sight— The Vision of that dreary night ! —To watch those shadows crowding by, Each moving in his ordered place, Like living form, with deathly face, Distinct, and busy to the eye, With gesture true of solemn rite ; Yet not a whisper heard, the while, Of step, or voice, upon the aisle ; —It is a strange and fearful bight 1
v. But other scene, on that midnight, Has shook the sexton with affright, While passing o'er the glimmering nave, By the dim flame his lauthor u gave, Sudden, on each low tomb around, A bleeding bier has seemed to rest, Where stern in death а warrior frowned, With funeral watch-light o'er his crest. Where'er the old шап turned liis view, lias seemed such face of livid hue. But feeble age has fancies strange I Youth may, on that sume midnight, range Through choir and aisle, and nothing see, Rave Norman arch and gallery, And tb e brass-bounden grave of him, Who sang the warrior's tiving hvmii. But, leave we now such idle dream. To mind the past, jet real theme- Vi. bow at St. Alban's tomb the\ knelt, The Conqueror and his Kiug,
The Monarch hushed the pang he felt ; Nor did the victor sing Memorial for the battle won, But, decent, mourned the slaughter done. Then solemn, from the Choir below, The hymn of Vespers rose. And, while meek Henry's tears fast flow, Breathed balm upon his woes ; But, transient was the sad repose :— It ended with the Vespers' close ! VII. Just where the King did lowly bend, Lay Gloucester in his grave î His truest counsellor and friend, Whom yet he failed to save From Margaret's hate and Beaufort's guile, All unsuspicious he, the while, Of the fell hatred that they bare His kinsman—and their murderous snare. And of his own progressive fate. Had good Duke Humphrey ruled the state. His truth had been his Sovereigns shield Oaittst trea^m, open, ut concealed.
Good Gloucester slept within this space, And Henry, sufferer in his place, Stood o'er his grave, in sanctuary From his own rebel soldiery ! Oh ! who may dare unfold The darkening thoughts that o'er his spirit rolled, And from his memory threatened soon to sweep All paler records of long years, that weep, While, thus a captive, with his foe he bent Silent o'er bleeding Gloucester's monument. VIII. When service in the Choir was o'er, The Monarch and his train Passed onward to the cloister-door, Led bv the Abbot, as before, With the full chaunted strain, To rest in royal chambers nigh, The honoured Abbot's guarded guest, Beneath the velvet canopy, Whose couch he oft in peace had pressed. How different is his present state From that he once had known,
When Westminster proclaimed his fate Was France and England's throne ; When, passing from the tapers' glare, Just cumbered with his crown of care, With infant smile he laughed to see Such crowds and blaze of pageantry ! IX. Ah ! had he dimly then perceived The secret of the gift received, Stained with the blood of former times, And thickly set with deadly crimes, Gleaming with woes and passions dire From 'mid Ambition's smouldering fire, How had he shrunk, and wished to lie ťf In shades of quiet privacy ! " And, ere he wore it for his own, Renounced at once his father's crown. Now, all it's terrors blamed, confest, And peace for ever left his breast. Yet might he not his path retread, And give from his anointed head The diadem his fathers gave, Which fixed him for a party's slave.
X. Ì lard was the heart, and stern the mind. And to it's own contentment blind, That could unloose a kingdom's woe^, Within that painful crown confined, While firm it circled Henry's brows ; That could a selfish, slumbering right Rouse from it's lair in Time's dim night i Cry " Havock !" and pursue the prey But for Ambition's holiday î Hard was the heart, and dark the mind I Such his, who Henry's path beside Marched where the convent-train inclined,* Beneath the Transept's vaulted pride. XI. And thus was ranged the stately march, VVhen the King passed the Transept-arch : On his right-hand the Abbot walked, Mitred and in his cope of gold, The pious monarch's gift of old ; And on his left Duke Richard stalked. Straight from the place of war came he, Nor moment spared his casque to free ;
Aloft the white plume proudly rose, But soiled with crimson were it's snows, And Henry paid a bitter tear For every gore-drop speaking there. Beneath, the lion-passant crest His royal lineage professed ; And vizor up might darkly show The meaning of his anxious brow ; While Richard's form and stately grace, His stature high, and martial pace, Decisive look, and eye of fire. Steady, though keen, and quick and dire, Gave contrast to K: ig Henry's air, Who, wan from wound, from grief and care, Moved with unequal step and slow, With wearied countenance of woe, And weeping, with uplifted eye Of meekness and of piety. XII. The reverend father, by his side, Though pale and bowed with care and age, Still showed an aspect dignified,
A look of mildly-tempered pride, Such as doth love and awe engage. As some tall arch, in fretted state, Left lonely 'mid the wrecks of fate, Though perished be each gorgeous stain That coloured high the storied pane ; Though broken be the moulded line, That flowed with grandeur of design ; Though shades of many a hoary year ^Vtth lights of silver grey are there ; Th' awakened mind yet moke supplies Than Time has stolen from our eyes ; And o'er the ruin's desert space, That arch throws high and shadowy grace, Wraps us in pleasures almost holy Of reverence, love and melancholy. хш. Through the great cloister passed the train, Where the carved trefoil windows glowed With many a rich illumined pane, By living Whetehampstede bestowed. karge was the verdant plain within, High the arched walks encompassing.
Now darkened was that long-stretched way With Alban's hundred monks ; though gay In scarlet copes went Chancellor, The noble Steward, Seneschal, And officers in the rich pall They wore on solemn festival ; In snowy state, each Chorister, Chaunting before the mournful King, Till he had reached that guarded door, Where, tall and light, the arches soar That lift the Chapter's vaulted ring, XIV. Then part the King and priestly band. Who, in long line, on either hand Bend loM T Iy, as he moves along, Smiling upon the cowled throng, To the last murmur of their song. Still marched Duke Richard at his side. And still the Abbot was his guide. A diiferent train received the guest. Soon as he moved from his short re^t : - Soldiers, with helm and pike arrrayed, Lined the long walk of cloister-shade>
That lay between the abbey aisle And royal lodge, a stately pile. A royal homage still they paid In the meek hymn the trumpets played. How felt the King, when close he viewed Hands drenched with his good people's blood, And looks that said they held in ward, And still would hold, their sovereign lord ! xv. In the King's Parlour waited now Poor banquet, served in saddest mood, Where pages round their monarch how, And captive knights indignant stood, To view their injured King bestow His speech upon his subtle foe, Who wrought this day of blood and woe. With starting tear of gratitude And pity, good King Henry viewed 4 His faithful servants near him stand, And here attend—a prisoner-band. Not Richard's truth, nor courtesy, Had placed them here, but policy.
And Henry, though not thus deceived, Such art instead of truth received. Fill not for him the wassail-bowl, Strike not the minstrel-string ; These may not o'er his saddened soul Their brief delirium fling : For he has passed among the dead, And Truth's great lesson there has read, As from each face the mask she drew, And showed what phantoms we pursue í While to his wandering troubled eye, Life's strifeful progress seemed one sigh ! XVI. But short repose the banquet gave, Ere Warwick and Earl Salisbury crave Audience of him they still call King ; And many a wily guest they bring. Straight from the field they came in haste. Informed on all points to the last. Now to the Council-room repaired, With harassed mind, their wounded Lord, To sign his pardons, and reward The traitors, who his life yet spared.
The Abbot to his chamber drew (His heart to Henry ever true) To gain a quiet pause, though sad,—- Perchance an unseen tear to shed, And lift his thoughts where oft they fled. xvn. Then order to the Steward went, That hospitable cheer Should to the Abbey gates be sent Of bread and meat and beer ; And to each soldier, friend or foe, Dole from buttery-hatch should go ; But other store of food was small ; For thousands thronged in Alban's wall, And every townsman's board was spread For victor, or for conquered. Now, at each postern and low gate, The Monks dispense to all, that wait, What fare they may : but, who can show The groups that, gathering below, Now stood beneath the reverend tower, Emblems of battle's bleeding hour ? vol. πι. L
Wan were their features, fierce, though faint Prom toil and hunger and dismay, Just 'scaped with life the deadly fray ; Their o'erstrained muscles quivered still ; Their eager eyes, suspecting ill. Were watchful yet of all around, Even on this consecrated ground. The broken armour's crimson sheen Showed what the owner's lot had been ; There grimly did the cap of steel Dint of strong battle-axe reveal, Or cuirass, bearing sign of spear, Proved Death had threatened entrance here. All were so changed with dust and gore, Their nearest friends had passed them o'er ; And their strange, rude and broken tone, Not wife, nor courted lass had known. xvni. While thus beneath St. Alban's shade, Panting, these bands of Havock stayed, Round crowded porch and postern nigh.
Some outstretched on the graves are laid, On lower wall some rest the head, They ne'er again may hold on high. And some within the sacred aisle Lean on an altar-tomb the while, And, flinging down the bleeding sword, Instead of offering humbled word, Greet with an oath the watch-monk there, Whose low-breathed hymn and pious care, With kindest awe and gratitude, In all but basest hearts ill passion had subdued. XIX. Some, too, there were, whose evil eye Scowled on the Monks, as they supply, With kindness meek, due sustenance, Sweeťning the bounty they dispense. " Well may they give of ample store, Wrung from the land and famished poor, To bribe us to forbearance now From plunder of their shrines, I trow î Methinks our swords have something won L 2
From lazy Monks, who live i' th' sun And roll in riches of the land ; While others, by hard toil of hand, May scantly live from day to day. Yet, listening to their cunning saye, Henry and Richard bid us * Nay.' Let such folks in a convent stay ; But, by St. Alban's crown of gold, I would not—I—for them withhold From treasures now within our reach, Though Kings command and Abbots preach." Then, rousing from his sullen mood, Such soldier snatched his comrade's food ; And so displayed to humblest sense The motive of his fair pretence.
END ОГ Tili; FOURTH CANTO-
О А ХТП1Л \Т V.; ¿А. ГЧ X \J V .
THE EVENING AFTER THE BATTLE. SCENE—WITHOUT THE WALLS OF ST. ALBANY. I. In angry gloom the sun went down Upon St. Alban's bleeding town, While sadly many a Red-rose knight, Escaping from the ruthless fight, Traversed the woods and wild hills round ; And ever sought he tangled ground, Pathless and dim and far away From peasant-foe, who might convey Notice to Richard's scouts and bands, Prowling for prey o'er Alban's lands. п. Oft would the lonely Warrior start At glance of arms, shot through the shade, Where bright the western sun-beam played, Judging some foeman watched apart ;
And strange it was, 'mid brake and bush, Where only might he guess to see Sweet violets sleeping to the hush Of southern breeze, 'neath oaken tree,— Strange there to spy a warrior's casque, Or cuirass gleam, or steely mask ; An eyeless horror, stern and still, Amid the peace of leaf and rill. It was but harness, thrown aside Whose cumbrous weight had stayed the flight Of some sad comrade of the fight. In the late scene of evil-tide. These armour-signs, if spelt aright, Might tell whose footsteps he might trace Along the rude and desert place. III. Oft would he pause on woody hill, Listening if all were lone and still. And oh ! how still it seemed and lone To one escaped from battle-bray, From raging and from dying moan To Nature's grand and peaceful sway !
How calm her breathings, pure and clear, Among the linden foliage here ! How fresh and gay it's blossomed spray ; How sweet and good her smiles appear î Sublime her ordered laws and true Moved o'er the landscape's evening-hue, And solemn in the thunder spoke, That, far off, on the hill-tops broke. Sublime her stormy lights and shade, Which all the stretching view pervade. Her storms no moral evil show, To work—like human tempest—woe ; But health and goodness from them flow, Quickly and sure as tears of Spring The Summer's fruit and beauty bring, IV. The Red-rose Knight, who from the hill Yet watched where wood and vale were still, Had 'scaped, though wounded, from the strife, And hardly 'scaped with limb and life. He fought, until King Henry's host. By treachery foul, not weakness, lost,
Were pressed, at all points, on the town^ Deceived, betrayedj and trampled down. This loyal Knight of Lancaster, Though not in Alban's prison bound, Was not yet free from anxious fear For friends, who fought upon that ground ; And yet he lingered on the hill With parting look, and listened still, As if his eye, or ear, might glean Tidings of that now distant scene. v. He heard, perchance, faint trumpet-strain Marshal for watch some knightly train ; Or neigh of charger, high and shrill, And sounds perplexed and dubious thrill ; Or 'larum-drum and shout afar, The dying tremour of the war ; Or, deep and full, St. Alban's hell Roll on the breeze the warrior's knell. And he would gaze, with sad farewell, Where yet the gliding splendour fall«, Along those ancient towers and walls.
VI. Throned in the vale and pomp of wood, The Norman Abbey darkly stood. And frowned upon that place of blood, Beneath the lowering western cloud ; Till the sun, from stormy shroud, Looked out, in fierce, yet sullen ire, And touched the towering pile with fire. Below, each battled turret seemed The Martyr's crown of flame to wear ; While, through the airy arches there, The sun's red splendour streamed. But transept-roofs and aisles between Lay stretched in darker tint and mien, As if they mourned the slaughtered dead, Laid out in blood, beneath their shade. Slowly the vision changed iťs hue, In sullen mists the sun withdrew, A ball of lurid fire, from view. Yet curving lines of burnished gold, (Traced where light clouds their edges fold) Through the red haze, his station told. L 5
Then Evening fell o'er all the vale, Faded each tower and turret pale ; Tül, shapeless, huge, obscure as doom., The Abbey stood in steadfast gloom ; Vast, indistinct, and lone, Like Being from a world unknown ! VII. While the worn Warrior gazed his last. The death-bell spoke upon the blast. And now, while he beheld afar— Himself secure^—that place of war, And heard again that deep death-bell Along the evening breezes swell, Each moment waked a tenderer fear, Each toll made one dear friend more dear. He marvelled how he could have fled, Uncertain of their fate ; And back resolved his steps to tread, And seek to know their state. Then, through the gloom he bent his way, hea by the Abbey's solemn lay. High music on the soul it played Of thoughts beyond this earth's low shade.
VIII. Though on St. Alban's tower and town The shadows of the tempest frown, In softened shade, along the vale, Peace seemed to dwell in twilight pale. O'er the long, fading forest line, Village and hamlet, hid beneath, Sent up on high their silent sign Of evening cheer, the thin grey wreath ; Village and hamlet, that by day Veiled in the sleeping shadows lay, Or, in blue distance, gave faint show Of roofs and social scenes below. Ah ! treacherous to their own repose í Such wreath betrays to watchful foes, Scowering the hills and heath-land nigh, Where dear, though humble, treasures lie, And the bright-blazing hearth may share. Though not the crimes, the woes, of war. To other eyes such blaze might speak Of succour, that they vainly seek, For bleeding wound, for ebbing life, For fainting nature's last, last strife.
Vain hope, it fades upon his sight ; The Warrior's eyes are dim in night î No arm his sinking head may prop, No light hand dry the chilly drop ; The danips of death are on his brow. Oh î for some aid—some comfort now i That now is passed, he breathes no more , Unseen—unheard—his pangs are o'er ! IX. Where were his friends when he sunk low ? Knew they no strange presaging woe ? Felt they no instinct of that hour, No touch of sympathy's deep power, Run o'er the shuddering nerves, and wake Tones from the heart, that anguish spake ? Like to that lyre's prophetic call, Self-sounding from the lonely wall, Whose only utterance was a sigh, To hint when death, or woe» was nigh. Ah, no ! they talked, or laughed, or sang, Unconscious of his dying pang. No eye wept o'er his lowly bier, The dew of heaven his only tear ; And sighs of eve alone were here,
Bustling the light leaves o'er his head, As if they mourned the Warrior dead ; Making his stillness seem more still ; More sad the shade of grove and hill. x. Here shall be rest till distant day. In the deep forest's untrod way, Coffuied in steely arms ahme ; And, for curved sepulchre of stone, And foliaged vault of choral-aisle, The living oak, with darker smile, Shall arch iťs hi jad leaves o'er his fonii. Poor shroud and guard from sun and storm ! The wood kirk shall his requiem sing, Perched high upon his branchy tomb ; And every morn, though morn of Spring, Shall o'er him spread a mournful gloom ; And every eve, at twilight pale, His chantry-bird shall sweetly Avail ; And glow-worms, with their watch-torch clear, Wait mutely round his grassy bier, Keeping aloof from his dark rest Reptiles, that haunt the hour, unblest ;
Till other Morn her cold tear shed, And 'balm anew the soldier dead. xi. There was, who, from her distant bower, Watched all that day St. Alban's tower, As if its visage could have shown The dreadful tale it looked upon, And told to her the doubted fate Of him, on whom her fears await, Who joined King Henry, on that morn. Oh í shall he to his shades return, And through the oak's broad foliage view, Once more, the vale and mountains blue ? May then their peaceful branches wave High welcomes o'er his knightly plume, Or, shedding deep their saddening gloom, Murmur low dirges o J er his grave ? XII. Pale with anxiety and fear, She in her silent bower must wait» Her playful infants came not there ; Her spirits ill their songs could bear While doubtful of their father's fate.
At times came messenger from far, With various rumours of the war, " His lord had late been seen in fight !" So told the fleetest of the flight. Another had beheld him fall, When Warwick burst the barrier wall, A third, report of fell wound brought ; A fourth, that vainly he was sought. Slight rumours all—yet each some dread of ill In heart of lovely Florence did instill. XIII. In oriel and in alley green By turns she sat, or walked, unseen. Th' unfolding buds of Spring were there, Breathing delight upon the air. Health, life, and joy, by song of birds As well are told, as if by words. Those opening buds, that breath of joy, That song of birds did but annoy Attention, that for faintest sound Listened from Alban's fearful ground. Oft on the calm there seemed to float Murmur confused—a trumpet's note,—
Dull beatings of a charger's hoof— The sharper clash of arms aloof— Tumultuous shout—the onset cry— Signal of some, that meet and die,— Whose summons heard she in that call ? Oh ! at that moment who might fall ! xiv. Attention each fine sound pursued. Till doubt and distance seemed subdued ; She listened then, as if he/ ear Could bring each phantom of her fear In real shape before her sight. There glowed the terrors of the fight ! She saiv her loved lord wounded sink. And slowl\ from the battle shrink, With not a hand his arm to stay? Or help him, where he bleeding lay. Farther she dared not—could not, think. xv. Aghast and motionless, in trance. While such terrific visions glance, She rose up from lier pale despair, His fate to soften, or to share.
A. ud she, who from a summer shower Would íly t j covert of a bower; Whom thunder tortured with alarm, Though sheltered in his faithful arm ; Wiio lived in privacy's safe round, And jo)s in cares domestic found (The cherub-smile of infancy, The look of love, still watching by) ; VVhose heart would to best music move— The music breathed by breath of love. The music of Affection's eye— That varied world of harmony î Even she renounced all feeble fear, Pressed by a danger more severe ; And felt the spirit of the brave, When her mind caught the hope to save XVI. Till near the falling of the sun, It was not known the fight was done ; And then, that lady's messenger, With face, that spoke before his tongue^» Of horrors, that round Alban throna.
Brought heavy news of Lancaster ; But tiding of her lord came none î A dreadful silence wrapt his name— The pause, ere falls the lightning's flame, Might be just image of the same. Without a tear, without a sigh, She read dismay in every eye. Unbreathing calmness o'er her face Now veiled, with melancholy grace, Her courage,—moral courage,—love> That soon their truth and strength must prove. XVII. One ancient servant, faithful found, She chose to guide her on her way, And search with her the blood-stained ground, Where dead and wounded still might lay. In vain that humble steward sought To win her from such daring thought, And told the dangers that await Wide round St. Albans bleeding gate ; And she, who ne*er had viewed the face Of slaughtered man, how might she trace,
llow bear to look upon the field, Where their last breath the vanquished yield Ï How search for face of her dear lord, Or, finding, live and aid afford ! XVIIJ. Florence a forceful sigh suppressed, " Haste ! not a moment may we rest. Such aid even now he needs ; away ! He bleeds—-he dies, while we delay .'"— '· How, lady, шау you reach the town, On public road, unseen, unknown ; And seen and known, how, nùmn-free? Escape the grasp of enemy ? A ehort er path perchan^« might lead O'er open ground of heath or mead; But that was viewed hy every eye : While through the forest's closer way, The dim paths far and widely straj * How reach the guarded harrier "*· And, lady, how might you endure The weary path ; or how procure The pass of posted warrior Г-—
" My pur^*e such posted guard ishali gain» My palfrey i>ear me, while ht may ; My purpose vtill шу $±е{т мшШт ; Away—to horse ! away, away !* 3 В* вены* of J ,ty thus upheld. By strung arftîctiou thus impelled, Florence umst quit her sheltered home, O'er desolated tracks to roam. In chamber» gallery» orieled-hali, Her home w&» dead! v stillme»s all ; But stillness without |»eace—-more drear Such stillness, tliaii the War's career î It seemed, as through the hall she passed, Murmured a mourning trumpet-blast. She turned, as sad it died away· And, while the blantiiig western ray Played through a casement's ivy wrtattb. And touched the armoured shape beneath, That stood, like guardian of the hail, By stair, where fearful shadow й fall, She thought the corslet heaved, ass life Was there beneath, with death at strife.
Perhaps, 'tis glance of ivy-leaves Trembling in light her eye deceives. XX, Short pause she made within the court ; Her steed received her as in sport, VVhen fresh fram cheer of green-wood shade ; Though now no soft caress she laid Upon his glossy neck, or face, Nor gave him word of gentle grace. Yet did he know her, though the 'guise Might wrap her from a Granger's eyes ; And pawed the ground, in mantling joy, And sirched his crest, and turned his e^e, And chain ¡нч1 the bit, with nostril wide, ^nd laid his playful head aside, As asking welcomes from her hand, And suing for its light command. XXI, Old Leonard ied through forest-way, And Stinted where St. Alban's lay, With look of grave and anxious thought The sun those lofty turrets brought
Pull on the eye, that, at their sight, Sickened and darkened, as in night. Yes, though she felt the western blaze, Strange gloom, all cheerless, met her gaze. She saw the sun—she knew his beam, Yet seemed in dimness of a dream ! With mingled grief and terror filled, Her spirits scarce their task fulfilled ; Yet did her will it's purpose hold, As might the boldest of the bold. Right onward, as the path might go, She pressed, to meet the coming woe. The fanning^air her frame sustained, And firmly still her steed she reined. Though on the Abbey-to wer her eye Was fixed—that tower would seem to fly ; For, though at utmost speed she went, More distant seemed it's battlement ; And, though she knew her palfrey moved, That he went forward was not proved. XXII. Though true and good the long-loved steed. His weary limbs relaxed their speed.
He marvelled at the pace she hied, And would resent the whip she plied, (Unused to feel the goading pain, And fretting with a high disdain,) Had other hand but held the rein. Often would Leonard now implore That, till the forest-shades were o'er, His lady, for his master's sake, Some caution for herself would take, Nor tempt St. Alban's dangerous wall, r s Ere deepest gloom of evening fall. The sun was yet upon the towers. And lighted yet her roofs and bowers. XXIII. Florence once turned her weary sight, And, in the landscape's beamy light, Viewed the peaked roofs and glittering vane, Where slept, in peace, her infant-train. A sigh—the first she long had known- Burst from her breast, and fell a tear ; But 'twas not grief she felt, nor fear : 'Twas desolation, hopeless, drear ! She seemed in this vast world alone ;
'Reft of her joy, her guide, her might, Even life itself was desert night* xxiv. St. Alban's, onward as they drew, Spoke fearful symptoms of the war ; Tumultuous murmurs, cries afar, Wild roar, that distance did subdue ; And oft, from path unseen, was heard Horse-tramp, or shout, or solemn word ; And heavy sounds of woe and pain Led to the steps of wounded men, Unhorsed and plundered of their arms, And jealous still of new alarms. These Leonard questioned of the fate Of friends within St. Alban's gate, While Florence, with attention dread, Apart, in silence, hent her head. Little he learned ; for scant they knew, 'Wildered in tumult of the fight, Of what had passed beyond their view ; But in one tale they all unite- The plundering fury of the foe
On those whom they o'ertake in flight. And their relentless, coward blow; All urge the strangers to beware, Nor Alban's fatal barrier dare. xxv. Then ancient Leonard urged anew The dangers would her course pursue ; And Florence yielded now her ear, By truth warned, not by idle fear. He led where steed might hardly go Under the stretching, beechen bough, A scene of deep repose and gloom, Hushed as some lonely aisle, or tomb— So hushed, that here the bird of May Amid the leaves began her lay ; Not the known lay of joyous mom, But midniglit hymn, sad, sweet and lorn ; Yet sometimes, as her cadence feli, Strange mournful murmurs seemed to swell Sounds indistinct and dark, to wail, Or darkly hint, some dreadful tale. vol. ш. M
xxvi. Sudden, where opening branches yield, Florence beheld the tented field, Beneath St. Alban's walls afar, Spread with the various lines of war. Broad, moving masses she might view, And hurrying bands of gleamy hue Preparing for the coming night ; And trains of horse, whose armour bright Flashed radiance to the western light ; And trumpet-signals faint were heard And far—halloo and shouted word. All that there lived, seemed strong in strife, But 'twas for comforts, not for life— All that there lived Î —alas, that thought ! What strife of hope and fear it brought ! While o'er the scene St. Alban's tower Looked sternly on the passing hour. xxvu. To this wild scene of war*s array,— Where busy atoms of a day, Entrusted with brief rule, had proved By what slight springs their force is movedj
Opposed—great Nature tranquil lay. Though on the hills, far to the West, Dark thunder-shadows awful rest, There power and grandeur seem combined With stillness, as of brooding mind. The purple gloom lay deep and wide, Save where the umbered splendours glide Broadly and silent o'er the vale, And touch with life the forests pale. xxviii. While Florence watched, beneath the shade. The camp in Key's-Field now arrayed, She shrunk, as danger seemed more near, Yet found impatience conquering fear; And, urging on a rapid flight, Ere hindered by advancing night, She looked, perchance, upon the way, Where now her dying husband lay ! Urged by such thought, she paused no more ; And, as the Abbey's guardian roof Might shield him, should the last be o'er^ There would she seek her first dread proof. m 2
xxix. She turned her steed, and gave the rein, But checked awhile his course again, As from by-way and near she heard A slow wheel pressing the green-sward. It bore, beneath the veiling shade, Some wounded chieftain lowly laid. In dread attention Florence sees, As the light steals through parted trees, The mute train turn the jutting bank, (Where the high beech, of silver rind, Caught the slant sunbeam ere it sank.) And through the deepening forest wind. The level radiance, shooting far Within the shadows, touched that car : And, glancing o'er a steely crest. Flushed the wan visage in it pressed. Too distant fell the slanting light To bring the features forth to sight ; But played on falchions drawn around, Guarding their chief o'er dangerous ground ; And gleamed upon the silver badge, Of lofty servitude the pledge.
XXX. Florence restrained the impulse strong, That would have forced her to that throng, And Leonard hastened to explore Some signal of the Chief they bore, While she, within the deepest gloom, Watched, as for sentence of her doom. She marked, when he o'ertook the chief, No gesture of surprise, or grief. Soon, where the broader foliage shed It's gloom o'er woodbanks high and steep, Beyond the warriors' way there creep A sandaled group with hooded head, Silently from the umbrage deep. This pilgrim-band might scarce be known, Clad in their amice grey, From tint of boughs with moss o'ergrown ; But that some clasp, or chainlet shone, Ana ruddy tinge their faces own Of the full Western ray. xxxi. As from the pass that shadowy train Sought Albany sheltering aisles to gait^
Unknowing that the war's sad course Had thither brought Duke Richard's force, Sudden, the wounded Chief they meet, And, doubting, wondering, pitying, greet. Leonard, while he drew near, o'erheard The meeting Pilgrim's hailing word, And question, on the spreading war, xVnd who was borne upon the car? There lay Earl Stafford, wounded sore, Whom Buckingham must long deplore : Then prompt gt d wishes they exchange, State of the roads and pass declare, Give news of war, and counsel fair How best the Pilgrims may arrange Their distant way, through secret path, To gam, ere night, some quiet hearth. ЛЛЛ 11 * Leonard asked tidings of his lord From all who, round that bleeding car, Halted with watchful eye and guard. And various rumours of the war They told, of chiefs slain r saved, or fled ; Clifford and Henry too were dead :
Brief and unsure was all they said. Baron Fitzharding ? He was slain— Some told, and some denied again. Leonard, on mention of his death, WitJi eager look and trembling breath, Straight to the Chief himself addressed His question ; who, howe'er distressed, Upraised with patient courtesy His languid head, for brief reply : — " 'Twas said, that, early in the strife, Fitzharding fell, yielding his life To Richard's sword ; but then such tale Should not as certainty prevail ; For those engaged in ardent light Know not who falls beyond their sight." хххш. Ere yet the hasty talk had passed, Swelled on the calm a clarion's blast ; Then sudden and near shout thrilled high, And pain and terror's mingled cry. The Earl gave »ignal to proceed ; And wishes warm the conference close
For life and health and safe repose. The car then moved with feeble speed. Fixed in dismay the Pilgrims stood, Till Leonard, pointing through the wood, Told where a little dim path wound, Remote from Alban's fatal ground. Then bent he with the fearful tale To Florence. How may he prevail To lead ber home ? How soothe her woes, When his dire news he shall disclose ? xxxiv. While she had watched his steps with doubt, She heard the faint pursuing shout, And marked where trailed the distant rout. But, even here, where all seemed lone, The dreariness was not her own ; At times came nearer voice, and yell Of wandering bands, or bugle's siveli ln signal-call, от laughter loud, Horrid to her, as voice from shroud ! others there were who shunned the road, Anxious to reach some safe abode,
Ere yet the brooding tempest fell ; For so the gestures seemed to tell Of men, who, on the wild heath turned. And pointing where the red gloom burned., A moment paused, as if to say u How dark the storm comes on our way ľ' xxxv. Sudden, while Silence slept around, Her courser listened, as if sound Disturbed his watchful ear ; With feet outstretched and rising mane, Averted head and eyes, that strain, He gazed, in stiffening fear ; Then reared, and, with ft restive bound, He bore her from that fearful ground, Ere she had aught perceived for dread, Or sound had heard, that terror spread. Vainly she tried to rein her steed ; So docile late, he keeps his speed, Though now they meet a haggard group, Who, with fierce gesture and wild whoop, Would check his rapid flight ; 5Í 5
Trying, when near, to snatch the rein ; To chase, when passed ; but still in vain ; He bears her from their might. XXXVI. Pencil alone ma> trace such woe As darkened faithful Leonard's brow, When he had reached the oak's lone gloom Where Florence dared to meet her doom, And found her not ! But, while around He searched the close embowered ground, A form terrific fixed his eyes. Sheltered within the thickest shade, There lay a pale and dying head : In blood an armoured warrior lies í It was his lowly, faltering groan ! His casque, where a stray light had shone, And might give glimpse of ghastly face, Betrayed him to the startled steed ; Who bore his mistress off at speed, Ere she his cause of fear could trace. XXXVII. Ere Leonard, 'neath the darksome bough, Might the dead form, or feature, know.
A fearful sound and shrill and high Upon the rushing breeze went nigh. A shriek it seemed—· again he hears The voice, that summoned all his fears. Once more he listened, but the breeze Rolled lonely o'er the bended trees, And died, but, as it swelled again, Brought on iťs tide that note of pain ! Leonard, ere yet the plaint might close, Turned his good steed the way it rose.
END OF THE FIFTH CANTO.
CANTO VL
THE EVENING AFTER THE BATTLE- SCENE—WITHIN THE TOWN AN» ABBEY OF 8T. ALBAN'S.
Î. Though now, within St. Alban's wall, Was hushed the turmoil of the day, The crash of arms, the Chieftain's call, The onset shout, the clarion's bray, The stillness there was scarce less dread Of those, who, looking on the dead, In voice suppressed and trembling spake. As if they feared the very sound, Or, that it might disturb, or wake The victims stretched around. Yet, sometimes, 'mid this calm of fear. Rose sudden cries of woe most drear For friend or kinsman found. But, though the slain filled all the ground.
No brother yet dared brother move, Or close his eyes with pious love ; And, though amid that ghastly band Lav chiefs and nobles of the land, Yet might no man his pity prove ; Nor herald take his fearful course, To know and name the new-made corpse. II, Earl Warwick ruled that woeful hour. What were compassion 'gainst his power ? How many, fallen upon that heap, Warm and alive, hut succourless, Had there unnoticed found the sleep His will might never more distress .' While he disputed, planned, arranged Ambition's little dream of fame, Or with his peers, or knights, exclianged Some narrow points of rival claim. And thus it went till even-tide ; And then the mitred fathers' cry, That those who had, on each side, died, Should rest with equal honours here, Was coldly granted ; while a tear
Of saddest pity filled his eye, Who pleaded for such ministry. The monks, too, asked an armed band Might round their Abbey portals stand, And yet another guard their way, When they their pious dues should pay, And step amid th' unhallowed troop, Who o'er the dead and dying stoop. III. Then went the heralds on their round, Proclaiming forth the dead ; And, following on that blood-stained ground, York's plundering lancemen sped. And then, sustained by courage high, Pale brothers of the monastery, Solemn and still and sad went by ; Nor shrunk they, with an useless fear, To do their awful office here. IV. Then straight were borne to Alban's aisle, Rescued by guard from wanton spoil, Dead chief and prince and noble knight.
High plumed, and harnessed for the fight, To rest, all in their steely gear, In consecrated chapel there ; Knights, who that very morning rode Beneath the Abbey's tower, And hardly owned the earth they trod. Or any earthly power. So light in hope, *»o high in pride, Pranced they to battle, side by side : Now under Death's dim flag enrolled, Their transient story now all told ; Still, comrades, side by side, they go, And side by side, though shrined in brass,, Must soon into oblivion pass ; Scarce word shall live, nor sign, to show What spirit's dust sleeps there below. v. 'Twas well Duke Richard granted guard; Much need had they of warlike ward-— Those hooded monks and lay ; Since armour rich of men they bear The conquerors might strive to tear From the dead corpse away.
And hardly did the guardias sword, Or written sign of Richard's word, Deter from bloody fray. And scarce the palls the Abbot sent To shade the noble slain, While through the open street they went, Could hide bright casque, or chain. Oft would a sullen murmur run From lancemen rude the porch beside, That the rich armour they had won Should be preserved for chieftain's pride ; That they, who braved so much of toil. Should share not in the hard-earned spoil. They laughed in scorn, when it was sai d í Such spoil would in the grave be laid, Fit shrouding for a warrior dead. Forty and nine of dead alone Then bear they through the gate ; And many wounded men unknown, Their pious care and pity own, Too oft in dying state.
VI. How mournful was the scene and dread Of monks around those warriors dead, Laid out in aisle and nave, When, through the western window's height, The red sun, ere he sunk in night, His last sad farewell gave ! His beams a darkened glory threw, Tinged with that gorgeous window's hue, On every vault and arch on high ; Glanced on each secret gallery, And half unveiled it's mystery ; While shrine and bier and form of woe Lay sunk in shadows deep below. Grand as the closing battle-hour, Vet gloomy as it's fateful power, Hovered that light above the slain, bast light of their last day, and vain. VIL 'Twas at this hour of twilight pale, When curfew-bell gave heavy wail, A Pilgrim to the Abbey came Brief rest and timely aid to claim.
While seated in Refectory Thus did he to the warders state, That, trusting to no hravery, But to his honoured weed, his fate, He passed alone the tented line Of Richard's camp, his outer guard, And the town harrier's watch and ward. Now, when the Ahhey-hand asked sign, And answer due to their watch-word, He ne'er before their pass had heard. Then other means he tried to gain The warders, and tried not in rain ; His gift bestowed, he pressed his way, Where dim the convent portal lay. VIII. Lofty and dark that porch arose, By fits the vaulting shown, When the tossed torch a red flash throws O'er thick-ribbed arch and crowning rose, And hooded face of carved stone r While passed the dead and dying through. There watched the Pilgrim, hid from view,
Within a turret's dusky stair, Whence he might note what corpse they bear ; He watched, with fixed and tearless eye. The warrior's death-march crowding by. IX. Under the gloom of portal door, On bier and shield while soldiers bore The hopeless wounded and the dead, Pale monks with lifted torches led, And Abbey -knights in silence ward ; Following came lancemen, as rear-guard. The dying forms, then passing by, Showed every shade of misery, Mingling with warlike pageantry. Some lay in quilted brigandine, Others in polished armour shine, And some in surcoat blazoned high. Some were in 'bossed and damasked steel, With threatening crest and plumed head ; These the closed helmet-bars conceal. On others the raised vizor shed A shade athwart the eyes more dread
Even than the wounds it might expose. And some there were, whose shroud-like mail Binding the chin and forehead pale, Would all the dying look disclose ! О ! that poor look, that sinking eye, When glanced a light from torch on high, Held by some mute o'erbending monk, Of ghastly air and visage shrunk ; Wbose wanness, though of diiferent hue From his, that lay beneath his view, Yet, seen beside the living tint Of men, who bore the corpse away, Seemed but a fleeting shadowy hint Of one, who had lived yesterday, As with still step he passed along The wounded and the dying throng. x. Once, as the grave's dark guests pass by, The Pilgrim's sad and bursting sigh Betrayed him in that shaded nook ; And, as the sound fell on the ear Of monk, attendant on the bier, He raised his torch around to look.
it show. d him but the portal-roof, The studded gates, long battle-proof, The low-browed door and iurret-stair, And not the dark weed resting there. \nd, had he spied that pilgrim-weed, The form beneath he might not read, Л т ог guess the world there hid, the fears, The trembling thought, that sees and 1 n ars, In every shape, in every sound, Image, or hint of grief profound ; The fian«, tlu.t seeks the worst to know, Yet shrinks, and shims the meeting woe, Affection's pang, o'er-w atching care, And, sickness of the heart 2 despair. Yes ; it was Florence there who stood, Watching each passing coi pse, And waiting till a linner mood Might bear her on her course. xr. And, when the mingled crowd was passed Of living and of dead, And the great portal, closed so fast, Echoed no sound of dread.
On noiseless foot pale Florence paced The Abbey-court—and cloister traced And hall and chamber's gloom, Forsaken gallery, dim stair, Remote from steps of ceaseless care, Fast thronging round the tomb. No voice through stillness stole, no sound Through all the widely vacant round. Door after door, in long display, Still led where distant chambers lay. Shown by fixed lamp, or taper's ray. XII. By such ray, trembling on the gloom, She passed through many a vaulted room ; In one she paused, flung back her hood. And, with an eager frenzy, viewed What, silent, in the centre stood. The board, that feasted living guest, Behold ! was now the dead man's rest í For banquet-cloth—it winding sheet ! That, lifted by the face and feet, Veiled, yet made known, some form of death, Laid out, unwatched, unwept, beneath !
Honour had watched hi« liring cour*e* Terror and Pity wound his corpse, But Sorrow bends not by his bier î Though now, perchance, her steps are ntjar хш. A shuddering instinct yet withheld Florence from seeking, who «as veiled . And even the dread uncertainty Whose countenance she here might se** — 1'ven this seemed momentary shield From truth, that might be there remdtni. With eyes fixed on that winding shroud. Powerless she stood beside the dead ; Саше o'er her sight a mtoy cloud ; Through all her frame a tremour spread , A stillness of the heart—a trance Held her, like statue in advance ; One hand just raised to lift the veil, But checked, as life itself must fail, If one loved face should there lie pale. A moment passed—she raised the shroud, Fell o'er her sight a darker cloud '
No cry &he uttered ; dropped no tear ; But sunk beside the Warrior*s bier. There by a lay-nvmk was she found, When pausing «n his wonted rtmnd ; Tîıere, like a broken lily» laid Half-hid. within her pilgrim-shade; And thence, with hopeless care, conveyed. XIV. Though closed the Abbey's outer gate, 8tül* through low ţmrch and |Mibteni-door. Pikemen the dead and dying bore To the i.ear aisles, where monks await, And watch around th* expiring chief, With aiding pit) , silent grief ; And every form of horrur view, Yet calm their duteou* tas>k pursue. Clement, the Monk, was, on this night» Shrine- wat cher on the southern aisle, Pacing o'er brass-bound graves the while, By the pale, sickly, waning light Of yellow tapers, ranged in state O'er tombs of the departed great
Under the transept's shrined shade No victim of the war was laid ; Vet, as with slow and heavy tread Passed on the bearers of the dead, Clement a prayer of requiem said. xv. From these new relice of War's rage Turning, it did his pain assuage To look on marble sepulcîıre, And ponder Latin register Of those, who ruled here in past age. He thought of Frederick the Bold, Laid out in monumental brass, Who, casting off his cope of gold, Armed at all points stood in the pass, When Norman William came of old ; And, sprung himself from royal race, (Canute, the Dane, spoke in his vein) Defied the Conqueror to his face. Clement now almost saw his form- That warlike Abbot, rising dim vol, m. N
From the grave's sleep, as roused by storm Of battle, then approaching him ; And could have thought his armour's gleam Did through the chancel-shadows stream ; Nav that his verv shape stood there, With face all haggard, wan and spare, And plumage staring o'er his crest, As if wild horror it expressed. xvi. Was this a vision that he viewed, Wrought by o'erwatching of the mind ? It seemed along the shade to wind, And rest in thoughtful attitude. All in the aisle was lone and still, But from the distant nave a thrill, A murmur deep and stifled broke ; Where monks, as they the dead laid out, In voice of strange lamenting spoke, As if half fearirig, half devout. Clement, the way that moaning came, One moment turned his eye : What was it shook his lofty frame ? What wrung from him that sigh ?
He drew upon his face his hood, Deep rapt awhile in thoughtful mood ;— When able to lift up his mien, On the choir-step that vision stood, That unknown shade, so dimly seen. So woe-begone and stern it's look, The Monk with sudden terror shook. He signed himself, and passed the way Where other shrine-watch yet might stay. xvii. It waved him back with lofty sign, Then trod the aisle alone, ín stately step, to Catherine's shrine. And spoke in stifled tone. But Clement, still o'ercome with dread, Before that warlike image tied. It was no phantom that stood there^ But a true knight of Lancaster ; Who, 'mid а crowd of monks, that bore A warrior through St. В lar у 's dooi Had here a dreadful refuge ta'eu Among the dying and the slain. N 2
He craved of Clement secrecy, That he might here in shelter be, Having escaped, at midnight hour, From those, who watched around this tower. л VIII. The Monk, well pleased with fear to part, And aid Lancastrian Knig v ! distressed, Welcomed the stranger to his heart, And freely granted all his quest. He pointed to a little stair Wound upward o*er the transept there ; He pointed, but they heard, remote, Dull, measured footsteps fall, And saw through Mary's portal float Slowly, a sable pall. Distant, upon the aisle it turned, Where Gloucester's chantry-tapers burned. The stranger stood, with brow intent Upon that mournful vision bent : So pale and still, though stern, his look, Image he seemed, forsook of life, But that hie cresting plumage shook, And told of passion's strife.
All reckless of himself he stood, While on the bearers drew, Till Clement roused him from his mood, And led him from their view. XIX. Within a little secret door Of this side aisle, they now explore A stair, that goes within the wall To galleries on high ; These run behind close arcades small Along the transept nigh. The arches round, the pillars short, (With capitals uncarved and square,) Changing each single arch to pair, Seem by rude hand of Saxon wrought, Or Norman William's earliest train : So massy is their shape and plain. Hid in these galleries, unknown, A stranger long might be, Yet on the shrines and tombs look down, And all there passing see« Such channels run, in double tier, Through every aisle and transept here ;
Yet goes not one, unchecked, the round And hendings of this mystic ground, But, broke by window, arch, or pier, The narrow way is often found. xx. Within that little secret door, A few steps of the Choir before, Clement the mournful stranger led, While passed, upon his funeral bed. Unwept, unknown, that warrior dead. The pall had shifted from it's hold, And showed a casque of steel and gold, A lion cassant crest ; And, just beneath the vizor raised, The eyes, for ever fixed and glazed, A warrior's death confessed. Two men-at-arms stepped slowly near A Poursuivant, before the bier; And, as they passed, the Knight could hear The watch-monk, Clement, feebly say* íť Who passes to his grave, I pray."
The herald deigned not word to give, Save (ζ Live King Henry ! Henry live !—" The Knight then, in his secret cell, No longer might his feelings quell ; But stepped upon the aisle to learn, What friend or comrade he must mourn. xxr. The bier had passed away the while, The herald at it's side, And, as he turned upon the aisle, Where nave and choir divide, The stranger did I'outcullis know, And princely Somerset laid low. With bended head and downward eye, He mused in grief to see The Chief so oft of victory, Whom last he viewed 'mid banners high And trumpets 1 pride and shout of joy. While thus the warrior dwelt in thought, The Monk, respectful of his pain, No word of consolation sought, Impertinent and vain ;
But wдtched him, with a low-breathed sigh, And look of gentle sympathy : Till the Knight, fearing further stay, Turned round and signed the Monk away ; And Clement led him up the flight, That opened on the gallery height. XXII. The beams, that rose from shrine and tomb, Broke on that stair-flight's distant gloom, As now the Knight and Monk ascend ; And, seen beyond low arches there, Tall fretted windows rose in air, And with the transept-shadows blend Dim form of warrior and of saint, Traced gloomily by moonbeam faint. These words the Monk at parting gave, " Sir Knight, whatever you may see Within this hidden gallery, Sir Knight, be watchful, mute, and brave ; The way is little known, And you are safe from human ill
ïf you shall secret be and still :— " I leave you not alone !" The Stranger yielded to his will, But answer made he none. Yet much he mused on the dark word, That might some inward hint afford Of those he feared, this night, to see Changed by Death's awful mystery. xxm. Within the pillared arch, unseen, He stood and looked beneath ; Transept and aisle lay deep between This angle and the Nave's long scene Of suffering and death. Obscure in that far distance, lay This scene of mortal misery ; And, where tall arches rose, Each arch, discovering the way To what beyond might passing be. Did some dread group disclone. Pale phantoms only seemed to glide Among the torches there,
N ,J
And stoop upon the tomb's low side. In busy, silent care : Unseen the deathly form below, Unseen the pale, reflected woe On miens, that each woe share ; The sable cowl appeared alone, Or glimpsa of helm, or corslet, shown By the red torch's glare. XXI. Distinct, no sound arose, nor word Along the vaults and arches spread, Save that low murmur, shrill and dread, Which in the Choir the Warrior heard ; While still the heavy march, afar, Brought on new victims of the war. Down the long south aisle swept his eye, Upon whose verge two hermits lie ; Athwart that aisle, in farthest gloom, The frequent torch was seen to glide, Borne by the heralds of the tomb ; And, hurrying to the cloister-side, Lay-monks oft bore upon the bier,
Into the dormitory near, Bodies where life might yet abide. And; ever as the Knight beheld Those mournful shadows go, Terror and high impatience swelled, The fate of friends to know. xxv. Then sadly he withdrew his eye From scene of Death's dark pageantry, Shaped out in garb so strange, And bent it on the view below, The southern transept's gorgeous show, In long and ordered range Of chantry, chapel, and of shrine, Where lights for ever were to shine, And priests for ever—ever pray For soul of those, whose mortal clay Within the still, cold marble lay. On high, the broad round arches rose, That prop the central tower, Where, north and south, the long roof goes, That either transept grandly shows In full perspective power.
Dimly those arches hung in night, Interminable to the sight. While rose the massy piers to view, The distant torch their shadows threw Broad, dark, and far around. Like Warders o'er this gloomy ground, Those Norman pillars stood and frowned. xxvi. On either side, in transept-wall, Where rise four pointed arches small, Now silent, dark and lone, Four dedicated chapels lay, Receding from the open way, Whence rose due orison. Tapers beamed on each altar there, 'Mid image carved and picture fair. In one the priest sang nightly prayer For Tynemouth's Prior, Delamere, Once ruler of the Abbey here. Not that within this chapeľs shade, His coffined bones were ever laid ; But hi the chancel, graved on brass, His stately form, with mitred head,
Still guards his low and silent bed, Where he such happy hours did pass. Cahn is the countenance and wise, With lids, that shade the thoughtful eyes. So exquisite the graven plate, So fine the form, so old the state. Oh ! may it long be spared the fate Of other sad memorials near, Torn ruthlessly from reverend bier Of abbot, knight, of prince and peer. xxvu. As now the Stranger caught some strain, Memorial of the newly slain, Or heard the tender notes that plead For spirit freed from mortal weed, Pity and grief his eyes oppressed, And tears fell on his warrior breast ; Such requiem might his father need ! He turned him from the moving strain, And paced the gallery dim again ; With quick unequal step he paced, And oft that gallery retraced.
Once, as he reached the farther end, Another pathway, low and small, Winding within the eastward wall, Seemed fiu* away to bend.
END OF THE SIXTH CANTO*
U A IN 1 U VII. SCENE IN THE MONASTERY.
ι. The Warrior stood, and marvelled where The secret way he spied might go. Whether to turret high in air, Or to some penance-cell below ; When, as he looked, a beam of light Pawned through the gallery's long night. He passed upon that silent way, And came where many a darting ray Through the broad Saxon mouldings stray Of a deep, jealous door, With massy iron studded o'er. Unclosed it stood, yet nought between Of cell, or winding stair was seen.
II. He paused, and anxious bent his head» For a faint wailing seemed to rise, Like that of mourner o'er the dead : He would not mourner's tears surprise- But soon the murmur died remote, Nor any sounds on silence float. It might have come from hearse of death, In chanceUaisle, unseen, beneath. He passed the jealous Saxon door, And stepped upon a covered floor ! Within appeared α chamber small, Crowned with a vaulting, rich and tall, With slender central staff for stay, Whence the traced branch of leaf and flower Spread, like a shadowing summer-bower. Where evening's slant beams stray. ш. A velvet-curtain, drawn aside, Showed bay-recess, of fretwork pride, Where, on the window's stately brow, Vision of angels strove to glow, As waiting orison below ;
For there an altar was arrayed, And consecrated tapers shone, That such poor feeble homage paid, As mortals pay by forms alone. Beneath that curtain's sweeping fold Were ancient reliques, set in gold ; And, open on the altar, see A missal, gold and velvet bound, And on the step, just pressed by knee^ A cushion 'broidered round. The down had not regained it's sheen, Where the low bended knee had been, Yet there no living step was seen. IV. The moon kept her still watcli on high, 'Mid surges of a stormy sky ; And, on the fretted window's pane, Illumined the rich pencilled stain Of groups, that wake and die, As sweeps the varying shadow by. Now, as those angeLforms appear And vanish iu the shaded air,
Most strangely seemed each transient face Some guardian spirit of the place. v. A moment stood the Knight to gaze Upon this chapeľs circling bound ; The blazoned walls showed helpful phrase, And the high scenes of holy ground. O'er an arched door, that caught his view, St. Andrew's shielded sign he knew, Carved on the stone, and, close beside, This Abbey's mitre-crest of pride, Another shield, with wheat-sheaf, near, Spelt of the Abbot ruling here, Wheathampstede of the lengthened days, A moment stood the Knight, to gaze Upon the bending form above, As watchful in its fretted cove, The sainted ЪЩор —Bishop Blaize. VI. Another form, of air serene, Above the Saxon door was seen : Saint Dunstan, he, whose harp all lone Sounded in such celestial tone,
As if from airy choir, at eve, Whom mortal eyes may not perceive. With careful pause the Stranger viewed That Saint's enraptured attitude» A crystal lamp, suspended high, Touched with keen light his upward eye ; As if a beam of heavenly day Fell, while he watched a seraph's way, And listened, in mute ecstasy The slow ascending strains decay. So fine the passion of his eye, It seemed to speak both tear and sigh ; And the fallen drop upon his cheek Spoke mare than words themselves may speak. VII. He passed the door with cautious tread ; It to a vaulted chamber led, With storied tapestry dressed around ; A screen of carved oak was it's bound. in lofty oriel, light and rich, O'ercanopied, like mural niche, King Offa, as the moonbeams glide, Glimmered, in pall of purple pride.
Above, tlie trefoil-traced pane Displayed, in bright and varied stain, Th' allusive arms, or cognizance, Of Abbots, long departed thence. This bay looked on the platform green Of Abboťs cloister, that was seen In streamy light and slanting shade, By the tall transept's turret made. From it's bowed roof a silver light Hung, and a trembling radiance shed O'er the worn brow and hoary head (With snow of seventy winters white) Öf a lone form, that sat beneath Pallid and still, as shape of death. The Abbot, in his mitred chair, Wearied with grief and watch, slept there. And, from such deep and kind repose, Such seeming peace of heart as now Beams blessedness around his brow, Oh I must he wake to former woes ? VIII. To the armed Knight who near him stood, He seemed a Saint in tranced mood,
Or who had breathed his soul away, And left below the pallid clay Impressed with sign of heavenly bliss, Instead of mortal haüDİness. X X On the high desk beside him lay The blessed Sriptures, shown by light Of waxen tapers, branching there— The study, that had closed his day, And calmed the terrors of the night With heavenward hope and heart-felt prayer. His crown of earthly honour stood Behind him, and a purple hood Half shrouded, in it's stead, the snow That slept, like moonlight, on his brow : His vest and tunicle of gold, His ample train of graceful fold, And all the pomp, that had arrayed His presence, when the King was by, Now dropped as cumbrous pageantry ; He wore his robe of evening-shade, IX. The Stranger, careful, watched this vest ; Scarce breathed the sigh, that heaved his breast,
Nor even the gauntlet-hands ungrasped, That, on his first approach, he clasped ; Nor did his lifted step advance, Lest any sound might break the trance, That spread it's blessing veil of peace Upon the sorrows of that face- So rapt the Warrior stood and still, His very plume obeyed his will, Nor waved, nor trembled on the air, But watched, like mourning honours, there. x. Clianged were sleep's soothing visions now ; A frown shot o'er the father's brow. He breathed a deep, yet feeble moan, As if his dreams had sorrow known ; And shuddering with the muttered tone, The fancied grief, his senses own, He starts. A knight in armour there ! In silence by his sleeping chair ! How has he passed, unheard, unseen, By those, who wait without the screen— The page and chaplain waiting there ? An armed knight before his chair !
XI. He gazed, with startled, anxious eye, Yet marked, as soared the plume on high, The mimic red-rose, blooming by, And, where the vizor overspread Eyes, whose keen fire, through Pity's tear, A softened, trembling lustre shed, (As stars through fleecy clouds appear.) By that red-rose and gentle tear He knew a knight of Lancaster ; And by that glance, those features bold, That gallant air, that warlike mould, He knew his race and lineage old ; And, while his knee the Knight had bent, And reverently, with humble head, Craved shelter in his Abbey's nave, Meek from his chair the Father leant, And, with spread hands, his blessing gave And words of kindly import said. " Baron Fitzharding ! welcome here.--" The Abbot paused in generous fear> Sl Welcome ! alas í that may not be, In lodgment with your enemy.
Ill-come ! I fear, in this sad hour, Where you may rue Duke Richard's power ; For here, this night, his court he keeps, While royal Henry captive sleeps." XII. Now, when he heard his King was there, Fitzharding all things well could dare, To see and greet his royal lord. But soon the Father's solemn word Assured him the attempt were vain. Duke Richard's guard and courtier-train So closely hemmed the conquered King, That such adventure might even bring Death on himself, and dread to all Sheltered within the Abbey wall. Nay, if the Baron here were seen, Request and bribe might fail to screen From 4ichard's sudden rage the life, Sought by him foremost in the strife. kui. Fitzharding felt a flush o'erspread His cheek—and sternly raised his head,
At mention of request to shield His life from him he sought in field ; But checked his speech, and nmjlled his pride. While he stood by the Abbot's side. The Father spoke with pit} ing sigh, " in secret cell ) ou safe may lie Till the dark storm has passed by ; And such a shrouding cell is nigh, But must be sought without delay, For even here 'twere death to stay." And, while he spoke, he looked behind And listened, in his chah reclined—» 'Tw 'db but the hollow moaning wind. And then he asked by uhat dark way The Knight this chamber did essa) p XIV. Again a sound ; and now w as heard A hea\y step dravs nigh ; He left unsaid th' attempted woid. And backward turned his o\ e, Where, distant, stretched the oaken screen, And paler grew his pallid cheek, VOL. III. О
While his dim eyes the footsteps seek Of one without—unseen. He signed Fitídiarding to depart And wait within, till signal made : But the firm Warrior's swelling heart, His liiigering footstep stayed. xv. From the carved screen and ante-room A Monk, with countenance of gloom, Came forth with feeble pace and slow, With frequent pause and stated bow ; The shaven circlet on his head No scapulary dark o'erspread, Kor dimmed the pale lines on his brow, Or the faint downcast eye below; Yet, as he came with sullen tread, No word of fear or hope he said, Till he had reached the Father's chair, And bent him low in reverence there. Then faint he spoke—" Duke Richard sends ; He my Lord Abbot's will attends."
XVI. Scarce had he said, when martial stride, Quick, firm, and true, was heard without ; A page the folded door threw wide, And then arose a distant shout Of men exulting in their choice From court beyond ,* and nearer voice Affecting to restrain the cheer, As ill-timed and unseemly here ,* Then steps again, and ring of steel From chainlet and from armed heel. That voice burst on Fitzharding near, Like trumpet on the charger's tar. And even the Abbot's warning glance Might scarce restrain the Knight's advance ; Till the pale Father waved liis hand With look of absolute command, And pointed whither he should go ; So panted he to meet the foe. Who held his royal master low. Ko time for speech, or word, of grace ; So near and rapid was the pace, o2
He scarce might close the Chapel door, Ere the Duke trod the Abbot's floor. Such present haste became him well, Whose lengthened councils und debaie So long had made the Father wait, And kept him from his nightly cell He\ oud the hour himself had named, Fur urging rights himself had claimeil. XVII. Now, where small Gothic window drew It% open tracery in the wall ; Fitzharding, all unseen, might view Duke Richard in th - Abbot's hall ; And, with stein interesi, survey How he had borne the battle-day : — He, whom, Li*t seen in narrow space, Fit/harding challenged face to face; And surely had him prisoner made, But for his henchmen's sudden aid. Now by the Abbot's quiet chair He sat, with proud yet troubled air; His plume and casque were laid aside, For lighter cap, of crimson pride,
Graced with the budding rose of snow : Dark was his eye, and Hushed his brow : III pleased he seemed, though conqueror. As if but loftier sutferer ; And weariness his face o'erspread. Rough was each word, and hoarse, he said ; For loud command, ilobate and fray Had worn his voice, through that long day. xv π I. He came to claim the Abboťs word, That he would not in secrecy Shield a Lancastrian enemy ; And some were even there, he heard,— Some, he well knew, were in these walls, Ready anew to stir up brawls : Each such he claimed for prisoner ; They had provoked the cruel war. The Abbot, mild, yet firm, replied,— The Church must shelter those, who sought For sanctuary at her side ; Not mock the laws she always taught. He would not, dared not break her laws, However high the temporal culise.
If such men were these walls within, Here must they rest, unsought, unseen. He craved the Duke would not profane The rights his duty must maintain. XIX. Richard gave prompt and brief reply, That lightly he would ne'er defy The Church's right of sanctuary ; But these were times when such Church law Would loose the chain, that held in awe The guilty and the dangerous man. He would not answer for the end, How strict soe'er his orders ran, If his men found an enemy Were screened in aisle or monastery ; Then must the Church herself defend ! Twere better silently to yield, For once, the sanctuary's shield, And point where foes might lie concealed ; Lest blood the Abbey-pavement stain, And all the Church's guard were vain.
XX. He paused—the Father silent sate. Reluctant to provoke debate^ Though scornful of Duke Richard's threat ; And, when his look the threatener's met» His trembling limbs confessed his ire, And, im eyes flashed with transient lire, That glowed an instant on his cheek, And thus his thronging thoughts might speak ; " If blood on .sacred ground be shed, The punishment is sure and dread." xxr. The prudent Abbot ceased awhile, And calmed his eye and smoothed his brow ; For he liad seen Duke Richard's smile— Dark smile of scorn ! portending woe. " I will not vouch my soldiers' grace, No, not in Albans chariest place ! His very shrine may be profaned ; His very shroud with gore be stained : Yield then my enemies in peace, And then all fear and care may cease."
XXÍI. The Father, rising from his chair, In horror of Duke Richards speech, And heedless of such fear or care, Disdained all words, that would beseech ; And thus he said, (i An instant doom Falls on the wretch, if such there be,, Who violates St. Alban's tomb, Or trespasses on sanctuary ! Of all St. Alban's sons, not one But would avenge his Saint, or die, And triumph in such glory won, Aud yield his life without a sigh í And, for the rest, if soldier dare Rive private door or private stair, Or climb, in sordid search of prey,— For the last Ran let him prepare, The Ban I shudder but to say í Think you, my lord, I will betray My church, or break her smallest law ? Her thunders still her foes shall awe. To her high power then, yield the sway> The power, that even kings obey î
With reverend step tread honoured ground ; With proud submission guard her bound." xxnr. Faintness came o'er the Father's £iee ; He paused ; then said with milder grace, Vť My lord, you granted Abbey-guard .; Oive us not mockery for ward.— Now, spare my age and wearied state ; Spare me yet longer-drawn debate." xxiv. i( Lord Abbot ! if, within your walls, By monkish hand one soldier falls, Blood will o'errlow your aisles, your halls : Revenge will then be soldiers' food !" Here Richard curbed his angry mood ; Then coldly said (< he would not keep The Father from his timely ^leep. Doubtless the guard would still prove good, While it was viewed with gratitude ; But certain chiefs, whom he would name, It was his firm resolve to claim : о 5
They were now hid, as he had proof," And sheltered 'neath his Abbey's roof : Those dangerous men must be resigned, As the good monks would favour tind." xxv. Fitzharding, in the chapel near, When he Duke Richard's lofty word, Demanding certain chieftains, heard, Felt shuddering dread for kinsman dear. Breathless attention now he n.ùâ To hear each claim, that Richard made. At first, as every name went by, This was the Father's prompt reply, il He knew not that such Chief was here ; He might be—laid upon his bier." Duke Richard then Earl D'Arcy named, And the Knight's sire for prisoner claimed. The Abbot paused ; then faltering said, " He lies within the Abbey—dead !" xxv i. In sudden shock of grief, the son Clasped his strong gauntlet hands on high,
And moved with hast/ step of one, Who every fortune would defy. Duke Richard turned a distant glance ; Iiis looks his true surmise reveal ; u JMethonglit I heard the clash of steel !" That voice recalled the Knight to sense ; lie checked the footstep in advance. Ill might his dread the Abbot hide» Or the Duke's searching eye abide, As sternly from his chair he rose The lurking danger to expose :— vC I pray—Lord Abbot—pardon me, If I suspect an onemy."— " My Lord, no enemy ь near, Whom you have any cause to fear. Pass not into my private cell, Forbear, my Lord !—it were not well." The Abbot's voiee with terror shook, But prudently he ruled his look. xxvu. Duke Richard paused, and turned away, Awed partly by this just reproof; But he had motives, too, aloof
From such as on the surface lay, For yielding to the Abboťs sway. i( This sudden crash of hidden arms," He saidj u might justify alarms."— lf No hidden arms are here, my lord ; And trust, I pray, my solemn word ;" (The Abbot spoke to be o'erheard) ' ( Who first that sacred ground assails, Be he or enemy or friend, On him the Bau of Church prevails ; And he beneath that scourge shall bend." xxviii. Slowly the Duke resumed his chair, ({ 'Tis well !" he said ; c{ so let it fare ; For that same chief, whom last I named, In this day's fatal business famed— For him, he rests within your wall, But not beneath the funeral pall ; He lives within your Abbey gate ; In chamber near, perchance, may wait."— He viewed the chapel-door, and frowned, Where the son sheltered in it's bound,
Thrilled by conflicting hopes and fears, Those words of unmeant comfort hears. xxix. Vainly the Father might deny Such Chief were here in sanctuary ; As vainly Richard spoke of proof, That he now lived beneath this roof. The Abbot told of monks, who viewed The body stretched upon a bier, And borne through aisle and chancel near ; Such solemn proof could not delude ! The corpse passed Abbot Hugo's tomb, At evening-bell, through twilight gloom, While chantry-priests bewailed his doom ! XXX. These words o'crlieard, swift to the heart Of the pale son their poison dart. But Richard's accents, once again. Assuaged the keenness of his pain : He almost loved his direst foe, Who thus threw hope upon his woe : '*' How might they view," Duke Richard said,
" The visage of the warrior dead, If o'er it evening-gloom were spread ?"—- Thé Abbot sadly smiled, and sighed, And falteriugly, again replied : " The tapers on that chantry-shrine, As solemn witnesses, did shine Full on the dead man's brow ; So those who chaunted requiem, know." XXXI. Duke Richard said, i; That wight not be- He had himself strange certainty-— Strange tale !—he would not farther speak Of that, which made the bravest weak, Of Superstition's gloomy spell ; But clear and simple fact would tell." And then he spoke of (i certain men, Pikemen, on guard within the porch, (The curfew-bell was sounding then) Who saw that Knight, in arms all plain, March by and pass beneath the arch, Or saw him rather run than march,— They saw him by their own watch-torch !
He went before a warrior dead, Yet heard they not his iron tread, Though clad in arms from heel to head. It might be that he stepped so light To 'scape unknown the pikemen's sight. They did not challenge him, 'twas true ; But he passed clearly to their view. His vizor up, his beaver down. Disclosed the hxtness of his frown ; Yet could they not his face have seen, Like ghastly shade," they said, " between, (Richard gave smile of satire keen) But that a warder dropped bis pike, Which he might think just raised to strike, And, as he turned a sudden glance, Seeming to couch his demi-lance, Their torch flashed full upon his brow, And showed the frowning e\ e below. Yet checked they not his path, through dread Of thwarting spirit of the dead ! But, Hxed by terror of his eye. Watched him in warlike inarch pass by.
Thus to their Knight they story told Of spectre of a warrior cold. Such strange and wa\ward humours sway Blen, who dread nought, on battle day !" XXXIf. He ceased, while grave the Abbot sate, As pondering on some tale of fate ; And on his face an aw ful thrill Spoke, more than words, some dread of ill. Duke Richard felt that thrilling look ; His mind with wondering doubt was shook ; And, though he scorned each monkish spell, A secret dread he might not quell Lay on his soul, like sullen gloom On hillh, ere yet the btonu is come. He spoke not ; all was still around In the wide chamber's dusky bound,— So still, you might have heard the sound, Far off and doubtful to the ear, Of that low, sullen thunder growl, From clouds, that on th' horizon scowl— The herald of the storm's career !—
So still, you might have heard a cry Of faint lament from distant aisle ; Or step, in secret gallery, Stealing upon some deed of guile ; Or whisper in the Chapel nigh Of the lone Knight's heavy sigh* XXXIII. Still mused the Sire in deepest thought, His look with fearful meaning fraught. (( 'Twas strange !" (at length he raised his fi Such Avarlike port and silent pace ! And strange that soldiers at a glance Should stand appalled, nor step advance To thwart a living warrior, From whom in light they would not stir." He mused again, with brow intent ; While Richard, silent, forward bent. The Father raised not up his head, While, pausing oft, he slowly said, " If such an image they have seen, I guess it wore not earthly mien. It might be spirit lingering near It's mortal corpse, borne on the bier.
And that same hour of curfew, too. Tended to make the tale seem true. That the guard failed to summon, straight. Some reverend priest to th' Abbey gate I marvel much : for such good men Were gathered round the wounded then, Whose presence and whose single word Had strenger proved than pike or sword." xxxiv. Duke Richard checked a scornful smile, And said, with meaning fraught with guile, * f Earl D'A су lives ; his son, perchance, May rest here in some mortal trance, And, by a strong similitude. Have caused his semblance to delude. But, if he live—that younger Knight, Who sought me in this morning's fight, Baron Fitzharding I would claim, Though fire and sword should thwart my aim. Nay, wife or kinsman 1 would take, Till he surrendered for their sake !"
XXXV. iC It could not be such knight, my Lord—" The Abbot checked his thoughtless word, And paused confused ; then tried to speak While sudden crimson flushed his cheek ; And, when again he raised his brow, He met Duke Richard's searching glance, Fixed, watchful, o'er his silent trance, And reading all his fears might show. " That knight," said Richards " in the fray, I drove in headlong flight away—" Guileful he spoke— (C He fled my blow, And fell by other hand, they say" Again the Duke his dark eye bent Upon the Abbot's nice, intent. xxxvi. But, ere the Father might reply, The Baron's step in Chaj el nigh Confirmed his fearful agony. Not tamely could Fitzharding hear Richard's false tales of flight and fear. His heart and every nerve throbbed high
With indignation and disdain Of yielding to so foul a stain. He turned towird the chamber-door (So, for a moment, did he err) To dare his artful slanderer, And grasped his <*\vord— but checked his rage ; For shall the Father's chilling age Be shocked with view of human gore, Shed—even his feeble sight before ? And—for himself— w as this a time To seek a contest, when no crime Could seem so great as victory, Or rouse such fell malignity, Or place him in such jeopard) ? xxxvii. But Richard had that footstep heard, And, while his eye with anger burned, He sternly to the Abbot turned, And claimed again his solemn word, Trul} and promptly now to tell What footstep paced within his cell. He guessed that place did foe conceal, For surely it w r as foot of steel.
He grasped his dagger while he spoke. So did the thought his rage provoke. 1 he Father, that the Knight might hear, Spoke loud— " My Lord.» upon this ground You have not enemy to fear ; N r o man so desperate may be found To threaten life, or draw blood hero." The Duke's dark aspect proved too well He read the Abbot's warning speech, And that he judged within the cell el ser " c ssens , ι · ι · ι ens t An enemy lay in lw> reach. He answered, ť< Ere from lienee I go, You must yourself, Lord Abbot, ¡show Who clad in arms, what warrior bold, Makes a monk's cell hb beeret hold. He bears, perchance, some noble name, And has achieved high deeds of fame , Yet—him for prisoner I claim !" XXXVIfl. While to these words his taunting eye Gave double point and energy. He rose, aud uear the Chapel drew ; But with deliberate step he went,
And gesture made, as if to sue The Abbot for his full consent 5 A nd signed, that he should lead the way, And from his cell dislodge the prey. The Father, seeing it were vain Longer the struggle to maintain, Sought only to ward off the blow, And warn the sheltered Knight to go. Toward the chapel, lingering slow, He paced, and spoke in lofty tone Duke Richard's name, and would alone 4 /¿ive passed ; but this increased distrust, And Richard, straight, the portal burst ! XXXIX. All sullenly he gazed around The pillared Chapeľs lighted bound ; A gloomy fire flashed in his eye, The lightning of n stormy sky Knight, priest, nor warrior, there was found. But, when he saw St. Dunatan's door, Be strode athwart the solid floor ; And, with a firm, impatient grasp, Struggled to force the iron-clasp.
St. Dunstan seemed the pass to guard, The Saxon door held faithful ward. XL. The Abbot, now no more subdued By terrors for the Knight, Quickly regained his tranquil mood, And stood upon his right Of undisturbed possession there, Whether of chamber, cell, or stair. He grieved intrusive step to see, ©Beiser wisPpofane his private sanctuary. Dienst Duke Kichard coldly said, " 'Twas plain His enemies had not been thought That sanctuary to profane, Or here they had not refuge sought/* XLL He spoke ; and pointed to the sword The Knight had laid, with pious word, Upon the altar nigh, When he had there himself resign v »d. Where only he could comfort rind., And balm for misery î
Duke Richard held the sword aloof Before the Abbot, in sure proof He there had screened some enemy ; That sword the Father might not see But with a mingled agony Of gratitude, respect and fear, For him, who wiib, alas 1 too near. XLII. With saintly smile the Abbot viewed This offering of a mind subdued ; Duke Richard, in amazement, frowned. And every generous thought disowned. Home way he hoped to find, ere long, Might reach tho.se hid within tlicse walls, Whose .shelter he thought bitter wrong. " Lord Abbot ! whatsoe'er befalls, Blame not the deed.-, may hence ensue ; These deeds have been provoked by you !" XLIII. With haughty e\e and cheek, that burned, Straight to the Abboťs hall he turned, Bearing the falchion of bis foe, While vengeance dark sat on his brow.
A parting gesture slight he gave ; Stately the Abbot stood and grave, Nor sought, by look, or argument, To win his passions to relent. And, as he drew near to the screen, The Abbot's page, with humble mien, Brought message brief from Warwick's lord,·— Required Duke Richard's present word On subject high, that might not wait ;— The board were sitting in debate. XLÏV. Straight, Richard to the council went ; And thus, in mutual discontent, Parted the victor and the sire— The victor, with disdainful ire, The Abbot, with a meek desire To save Fitzharding*» threatened life, I* ;id keep from sacrilegious strife, From envious and irreverend search, His Abbey-precincts and his Church. He sought the Knight ; but still his guard, The Saxon door, held sturdy ward. VOL. Ш. ť
Ko voice beyond in gallery Gave to his friendly call reply ; And, with a weary sigh, he sought His cell, though peopled 'twas with thought, With spectre-cares of many a day, Still thronging where he silent lay ι There he resolved awhile to lie. Hoping Fitzharding might be nigh. XLV. Wearied and worn with grief and fears, Vainly he mourned, that at his years He took the burthen up again Of Abbey-honours he thought vain, And had resigned, foreseeing crime And tumult m this fearful time ; But, weary of a long repose. He, whom, his grateful monks re-chose, Resumed his honours at life's close, To be the lord and slave of men. And now was come that evil day, When the land bore divided sway.
Behold him now, in mitred chair Of rule, of honour and of care ; Behold his trembling age reclined On thorny pillows, 'broidered o'er With pageantries, that ceased to blind The vanities of years before ; And hear him mourn his comfort lost, Wisdom, o'ercome by love of power, The peace of age by worldly passion tossed. XLVI. Yet kindly conscious was the thought That his last toil had not been vain, To save from rage, or thirst of gain. His Abbey, nigh to ruin brought. His care had rescued her from woe, And bade her former grandeur ^low ; Repaired her walls and cloisters grey, And o'er them thrown the tinted ray {Through windows traced with legend story) Of tinted lights of Melancholy ; Such as she loves to muse beneath, Whether with rose, or cypress wreath, ρ 2
(Rapture and sadness meek, in emblem there) When the last, western gleam Shoots a long, trembling beam O'er the bold Norman arch and walks afar ; And Evening's choral hymn, the while, Swells high, and falls along the aisle.
END OF THE SEVENTH CANTO.
CANTO VUL
SOLEMN WATCH WITHIN THE ABBEY.
I. Fitzharding, when his steps withdrew (Hard triumph gained !) from Richard's view, Resolved, while through the gallery's shade Indignantly and sad he strayed, To learn at once his father's fate, Nor the securer hour await ; And o*er the aisle he bent to see If there the Monk, his guide, might be. II. Changed was the solemn scene below, Where monks with stillness, to and fro, Had borne the dead to place of rest, Or shrived the spirit, while possest
(Though with so transient potency) Of frail home of mortality. Now from the aisles the crowd was gone : By the death-torch, the Watch-monk lone Stood dimly o'er the blood-stained bier, Seeming some shadowy shape of Fear ! While that torch strange, a grisly hue O'er the dead warrior's visage threw. Now heavy-falling steps around No more disturbed the distant ground ,* The bearers from their toil reposed ; The cloister's distant door was closed ; From chantry-tomb and chapel nigh Was sunk the soothing minstrelsy : All in the aisle was hushed in death, When Clement ventured from beneath. in. He ventured on the secret stair To warn Fitzharding to beware ; For, 'mong the bands of Richard's host, Who round the Abbey-porches lay, Short words, o'erheard at whiles and lost. Proved, that they watched Lancabtrian prey.
Their enemies, they said, had found Refuge within the Abbey-bound. Church-law with taunt of scorn they named ; Talked of " good sword" and " Churchman tamed." Then earnestly he urged the Knight To rest in gallery that night. IV. Fitzharding paused not, ere he said, Too long had he the torture proved Of hope and fear for those he loved, To suffer any weightier dread. Concealed he would no longer stay, But search where dead or wounded lay. Then asked he if the Monk had seen A lifeless warrior-chief borne by St. Hugo's tomb at dusk of e'en, When priest sung in his chantry nigh. But Clement at such hour had ¡dept, Worn out with vigils he had kept. The chantry-monk, who loquiem sung, Dwelt in St. Julian's subject-cell ; And there had duly gone, when rung That cell's accustomed evening-bell.
V. Again the Monk Fitzharding warned, Dangers unseen might not be scorned ; And there were brothers in the aisle Would willingly his steps beguile, If a Lancastrian knight they knew ; But, if he still the worst must dare, A monkish garment he would spare, Might shade him slightly from their view* The Baron liked not frock and hood. As covering for a spirit brave ; But fully spoke his gratitude, And, farther, did the watchword crave. VI. In earnest speech then craved the Knight The counter-signal for the night. " € Peace be on earth !' shall be your guide, And shield you through this Abbey wide ; But if, as knight, you rashly show Your rank,—though cased from top to toe, You cannot 'scape the secret hate, That dwells in our divided state»
Duke Richard's soldiers are abroad ; And where, Sir Knight, is your good sword ? VII. Fitzharding, as from dream amazed, On the disarmed scabbard gazed ; And now, of weapon's aid bereft, (No other means of safety left) He yielded to a proffered guise ; And o'er his stately harness threw The Benedictine draperies Of ample width and sable hue. He doffed the plumage from his brow, But kept the casque of steel below ; O'er which a monkish cowl was thrown, That hid his visage in it's frown. VIII. Clement, ere to the aisle he led, These parting words of warning said : — " Now mark the way 1 bid you go, And step with prudent care and slow, For warrior's step may ill agree With cloistered man's tranquillity. ν 5
Pass not athwart the nave, I pray, Though there may lie your shortest way ; For in the cloister-pier, beside. Darkling, a watch-monk doth abide j Nor pass the choir before the shrine, For, there the wonted tapers shine, And watchers in the gallery wait, And guard that place, with solemn state ; But by the shrine of Humphrey march, Then onward, through the eastern arch That leads behind St. Alban's bier ; Then through our Lady's Porch, and here Step quietly, like sandalled man, Or charnel-monk thy gait will scan. Our Lady's Shrine go thou not nigh ; The chantry of St. Blaize pass by. The Altar of fouk-wax lights shun, And the East turret's lurking stair ; The Abbey's northern porch beware. Without, Duke Richard's soldiers wait— Our guard, or—as may be—our fate !"
IX. tť Then turn thee on King OnVs aisle> Who, from the roof, shall on thee smile ; Pause not, nor look, till thou hast gained The Transept at the western end, Where shrined Amphibalus is laid :— Then, speed thou to the deeper shade. Eut if thy steps are watched, then wend Where Michael and St. Patern bend. To guard the northern transept's bound ; Within a turret-stair is found, That leads to thin arched wall, on high, Where thou, as here, secure may'st lie. So fare thee well ! I bless thy way, And will assist thee as I may." Ere hasty thanks the Knight could pay, Clement upon the aisle looked out ; No shape appeared of priest, or scout. He signed Fitzharding swift away. x. Long watched the Monk, where, on the aisle- The Warrior trod in his dark weed ;
Ill might such stalk his rank beguile, Or figure be for monk's received. He watched him by Duke Humphrey's tomb, Where, írom the roof's light filagree, Blazed tapers through the vaulted gloom, While voices sung his obsequy. He watched hira through the eastern arch, Where once St. Catherine's story shone ;-— The Knight has turned on Mary's Porch,— The monk is to his pallet gone. XI. St. Mary's Porch the Knight has turned ; 'Twas well the tomb-lights dimly burned ; They showed not even the windows tall, That graced, in fretted state, the wall ; Nor yet St. Alban's Chapel there, His arches pointing fine in air, Of loftiest grace and beauty rare. Eastward Fitzhardmg cast his eye, Beyond St. Mary's portal high. That showed her in her distant shrine Of lily and of eglantine ;
Beneath appeared a dismal sight— Her altar, hung with sable hue, Where yellow tapers xanged to view, Shed forth a melancholy light. Fitzharding sighed, who, all too well, The language of those lights could spell ; And that of the faint strain, that rose, With voice of soul, from chapel nigh— The Sequence for the last repose, While yet the dead unburied lie ! In silent thought awhile he stood, With folded arms and shading hood, And deep moan rent his breast ; Then slowly o'er the gloomy ground He drew, to catch the nearer sound Of " Rest—eternal Rest !" XII. Sudden, from forth a darkened nook A dreary voice spoke near, " Beware Í" Then paused, and seemed to say, " Prepare !" It might have come from grave forsook,
So strange,, so thrilling was the tone. He looked the way that warning came, Low lying waved a dark red flame ; He saw that dusky torch alone, Until iťs lengthening gleam made known, How thick the new-made graves were strewn Beyond. He trembled at this sight, Musing for whom these graves might wait ; What gallant comrades of the fight, What friend, what kinsman, here this night Alight come unto his last estate ! The grave all still and patient lay, As if it knew, though long their stay, They might not cheat it of it's prey. Sudden, Fitzharding thought, that here Would rest, perchance, his father's bier ! With horror struck and deep dismay, He turned him from this scene away. XIII. His step called forth that voice unknown ; ït muttered in sepulchral tone, *' Beware ! the earth is heaped around ; The graves are opened on this ground !"
Sullen and dim a form appeared, And the low-lying tofch it reured > Showing a face to him unknown ; It reared the torch» and showed it's own. A form so tall, so spare and gaunt Might have been drawn to image Want ; And well the ghastly face supplied The look of one for food had died ; So livid, pale, so grim, so shrunk, The visage of this charnel-monk í Ardent and haggard were his eyes, And full of evil dark surmise ; Yet gleamed, at whiles, all fiery red, Just where the cowl its darkness shed. His figure, draped in weed of woe, Did a bossed symbol grimly show, Bones and an eyeless head. This shape of terror, with no name, (While on their wormy verge he stood) As home and empire seemed to claim The graves, o'er porch and chapel strewed-
XIV. He held the torch before the Knight ; And, whether glance of helmet bright From forth his veiling hood might stray, Or that the cowl so baffling lay. It seemed suspicion to excite, He claimed the watchword of the night. And \vhen Fitzharding said his soy, And from the porch had passed away, That Monk stood on King OnVs aisle, With folded arms and steps astride, And watched him with a lowering smile, As though he muttered, (( 111 betide !" The gilded spurs, too sure, I ween, Beneath the Knight's dark skirt were seen. xv. Now when Fitzharding reached the end, Where Mercian Oifa from the vault Looked down, and seemed to bid 1dm halt, He turned u backward glance to send. The Monk was gone ; but, in his stead, Leaned forward from a pillar's shade, A gauntlet hand and helmet head ;
Another yet behind stood near, Who in the gloom might scarce appear, And cautious gesture made. Far were they from the guard's last torch, Just where the Abbey's northern porch And Mary's Ante-chapel met ; Beyond, Duke Richard's guard was set« XVI. Abrupt, then in the shade they drew, As if to shun Fitzharding's view. The Baron well bethought him then Of the Monk Clement's charge :— " Pause not, nor turn to look again, Till you have gained the marge. Where the north aisle and transept join." He judged this charge important sign, And, instant, passed upon the way, Where the dread nave and transept lay. As o'er that scene a glance he gave, Where every tomb and lowly grave And altar-slab and dim shrine near, Was now a warrior's bleeding bier,
He checked his step, lest suddenly Some face beloved he there might see. xvn. He had been in the front of w r ar, Nor ever feared the deadly scar ; Had seen hia comrades fall beside, And shrunk not from the battle's tide ; Intent alone the foe to stem, He felt not for himself nor them ; But now, when zeal, nor passion, bore Their wonted sway his thronged mind o'er ; When stilly he might see and know Each written character of woe ; And view, perchance, some well-known face, All changed and shrunk from living grace ; Unconquerable dread arose, To meet what Death might thus disclose ! The animated look—the eye, That had so oft, all smilingly, Dwelt on his with a kindly joy,—- How might he view, now stern and dim, Bend not one beam of soul on him ;
Nor turn, at sound of step, or voice, So oft its signal, to rejoice ? xviii. Scarce could Fitzharding's limbs sustain The burden of his shuddering pain ; He stood, and on a pillar leaned, While some brief moments intervened. Brief must they be ; for, even then, Behold ! far oft' in OnVs aisle, With stealthy step, those armoured men, Whom he well knew for watchful guile. Mindful then of the turret near, Pointed by Clement's prudent fear, He tlirough the northern transept stept, Where St. Amphibalus long slept. In passing by that gorgeous shrine, lie to the watch-monks gave the sign— is Peace be on earth !" He spake no more ; But sought that little turret's door Deep in the angle, where it lay And shaded from the shrine's strong ray.
XIX. He stood, and watched, some little space, On the sad threshold of the place ;— That circling stair was still in shade, By thickness of the old wall made. But, could he gain the gallery, The shrine-lights through the tracery, Darting so high a feeble ray, Would guide him on the narrow way. Fitzharding sought that narrow stair, And trod it's gloomy path with care, Yet, sometimes, 'gainst the narrow bound Struck his steeh-d foot, with startling sound ; His harnessed shoulders broad would graze The strait walls of these secret ways. Twice round the newel had he pressed, When his foot found a level rest. From high poured forth the midnight air, Through loop-hole of the turret-stair. He traced not now the second flight, For, at short distance on the right, Faint ray amid the darkness streamed, And through an arch the gallery gleamed.
XX. Soon as Fitzharding passed the arch, He stepped with calm and firmer march, And backward threw his baffling cowl, And looked and breathed with freer soul. But now the narrow gallery Had nigh his venturous footstep stayed ; The pillars' base so close did lie, Scarce might he pass behind their shade. That course of pillars still is seen Along the massy wall, With rude, misshapen arch between Each pillar short and small. It fronted then the shrine and tomb Of him, who shared St. Alban's doom. XXI. Here might awhile Fitzharding wait Till Richard's scouts their watch abate ; And, from this transept's southern end, Above the nave itself might wend And pass above the western door, Behind the parapet's high breast ;
Thence glance the long, long vista o'er, To farthest shrine of Mary blessed, Seen through the pointed arches near, That rose above St. Alban's bier. Thus far the Knight may range, and view The death-scene many a heart shall rue, The battle's prey—the mighty slain Stretched out, and watched on marble plain. Whence then that gallery might go Around on high, or deep below ; Or leading o'er the cloister walk, Where the unconscious monk may stalk ; Or to the Abbot's secret room, Where Richard late decreed his doom ; Or to the inmost cell, wrought there,' Or to deep winding fatal stair- Few living in the Abbey knew. For, hidden far from searcher's view, Was many a flight and passage dim To vaulted hall and chamber grim ; To crypt and sepulchre and sbrine ; And prison cells, that undermine
The cloister-walk, and seem to spread Almost to lowly Ver's old bed. XXII. Just where nave, choir, and transept met, And Death with splendour was beset, Fitzharding stood and looked below O'er all the scene of varied woe. And thus it lay beneath his sight— The western aisles were stretched in night, Save the shrined transept's rays Threw the full splendour of its blaze 'Thwart the choir-steps and 'slant the nave. There, every altar-tomb and grave, As that long line of glory fell* Showed its dead warrior, all too well. Before those steps three altars stood Arranged in row—Oswyn's the good, St. Thomas, and the sad Marie, Now 'reft of pomp and imagery. There priests kept solemn watch around Three knights, in bleeding armour bound.
xxm. The silver censer, burning near, Sent incense o'er each marble bier ; And poursuivants, in tabard-pride, Stood mute those warriors beside. No 'scutcheon blazoned high was there ; But tattered banners on the air, Sad witness of their master's fate, Now, as mute mourners, seemed to wait. Rose not the stately canopy, With crowded lights, o'er hearse on high ; While troops of mourners, watching round, Might creep to hear the Requiem sound. Not such the solemn watch held now, No lofty hearse— no mourners bow ; Nor blaze of tapers high in air ; Nor likeness of the dead was there. The dead, each in his arms arrayed, Exposed to many an eye was laid, Forsaken save by heralds vain, Nor mourned, but in the death-priests* strain.
XXIV. By presence of the state-watch due, The Knight his dead commander knew; But, who are those on either hand, Censed and laid out on altars high ? Nobles they seem of Henry's band, Whose poursuivants are watching by. Vainly Fitzharding might assay To read each visage where it lay, Or spell the armour, crest, or shield ; Their glimmer only was revealed By the long slanting ray. x£v. The farthest aisles and westward nave, Where only gleamed upon a grave A watch-torch dim and lone. Gave solemn contrast to the choir, Which beamed as with celestial fire, Like to half-clouded sun. From Alban's glorious shrine that light Streamed through the chancel's gloomy night ; For, though the Abbot's prudent care Had moved each jewel rich and rare, vol. πι. α
Brought far, as pilgrim-offering, By noble knight, or prince, or king, Yet, trusting to the love and dread, That blessed Alban's shrine o'erspread, It's pillars, laid with golden plate, Fixed in the pavement, that sustained The crystal canopy of state And golden bier, firm-set remained ; And specious show, with truth that vied, And blazed amid the tapeťs beams, The pendent lamps and torch-light gleams, Was left to soothe the Victor's pride. xxvi. That rich and lofty canopy, With ever-burning lights crowned high, Supported by four golden towers, Seemed all within as crystal bowers Branched o'er his coffin laid beneath ; So richly spread each dazzling wreath í Below the centre arch of three, That opened to the ehapeiry, Were scrolled, in silent eloquence, Lines from the dread hymn of sequence,
Where late his golden crown had been ; His priests and monks, in band around, Watched, patient, o'er the honoured scene, And Abbey*kmght8 in armour frowned» xxvu. St. Cuthberťs Chapel had not lent Its wide screen then to veil the choir, Where now it bounds the nave's ascent With the carved niche and Gothic spire: Nor rose before St. Alban's shrine, In lofty state, as now is seen, The altar's more elaborate screen ; Of fairy-filagree each line, Web-work each canopy and cell, Where many an imaged saint might dwell : Light are the flowery knots, that twine Round slender columns, clustered fine, That to the fretwork cornice go, Where flowers amid the foliage blow, And wheaten sheafs and roses spread, Spell of the Abbot and the King Who raised^—to guard St. Alban's bed— This rich and glorious offering. q 2
xxviii. Not then this beauteous screen appeared To hide the bier the pilgrim sought, And cause the object of his thought To be more tremblingly revered; But veil of silk, or cloth of gold, Hung high and broad in sweeping fold, Ou days of chief solemnity. There only this night might you see A mourning drapery, like a pall, With ample grace sweep from the wall, iu solemn memory of the dead, And half conceîd the Martyr's bed ; And seem, like evening-cloud, to throw Its darkness o'er day's gorgeous brow. XX! λ\ Westward, the nave, in deeper night, Brought Jittle certain to the sight. Yet, where upon itn lengfchen'd gloom Was seen to glare a fixed torch-light, There lay a corpse upon a tomb» Or on some altar'« nmrble pr-ide ; And there a monk sat, close l mue.
Krom one the glittering casque was gone, Whose wounds made known his fate, And stood, high-plumed, on altar-stone, Beside the warrior overthrown, As though it mocked his state. And many a dead form, from this heigiit, Seemed semblance but of marble knight Extended in his sculptured weed, With ensigns high of daring deed. Nay, sometimes; side by side were laid The substance and the mimic shade, The marble knight and warrior dead : Now each alike unconscious lay, And which was corpse 'twere hard to say î XXX. There might be seen, too, side by side, The slayer and the slain. Those hostile hands, that shed life's tide, Still crimsoned with the stain Of either combatant's last blood, -Tow powerless lay, as stone, or wood. Mute now the voice, whose piercing sound Had sent dismay o'er distant ground,
Whose high command was loved and feared ; Not even its murmur now was heard. xxxi. And there, oh, sight of piteous woe ! Lay gallant sire and son below. Who, hand and heart, for Henry's right Did, horse by horse, that morning fight. And there lay son (oh, thrilling view Î) And father, who each other slew. Forced by the fate of civil strife, They struck, unknown, each other's life ;— And, as they sunk, no more to rise, Each turned on each his dying eyes, Wailed the sad deed, and mixed their last drawn sighs. XXXII. By the north pillars of the nave, Four dedicated altars stood ; Each bore a victim for the grave, And now was stained with noble blood : They faced those arches, sharp and tall. Where Oifa and his beauteous queen, And Edward of the saintly mien,
And mitred Lanfranc still are seen, Bending from carved capital, As watching o'er this mortal scene. Now, listen ; for 'tis fearful ail— All, that beneath Fitzharding's eye Lay, as he watched in gallery. He saw monks to this spot draw nigh, And o'er a pallid figure bend, And search again, if living breath Might linger in such shape of death ; Then, silently, the limbs extend ; And—by the glare the torches threw On the gashed face beneath his view, Upon St. Scytha's altar laid— Saw them the countenance compose, O'er the glazed eye the eye-lid close For ever—ever ! in Death's shade ! And, while he marked that awful sight, It seemed, by thrill of sympathy, As if cold fingers did alight Upon his lids, and on them lie. Á horror ran through all his frame; But this more painful pang o'ercame·**«
It seemed to him, that his sight now, While resting on the form below, Might view his father laid in death ! With frenzied gaze he sought to know More certainly the face beneath— In vain ! The torch's wavering glare To gallery high, through depth of air, Showed but a wan, dead visage there* XXXII [. In very ecstasy of dread He turned away his straining eyes ; When, near him, through the gallery's shade, Where faint the altar-beams arise, A face—the phantom of his fear- It seemed his father's face were here. A something like a helmet gleamed, Figure or substance none there seemed Amid those shadows deep ; Sad was the look, and asby pale, As it would speak some dreadful tale, Yet must dread secret keep. Was this a face traced on the eye From the brain's fiery ecstasy ?
A vision sent to warn him, now, That his dead father lay below ? A trace of soul—a look alone— A likeness, but as wrought in stone^— So fixed, so absent, and so wan, Was all that met Fitzharding's sight, In glimpse, through shadows of the night ; When soft the requiem from afar, Breathed blessedness upon the air, And at the sound it seemed to fade, And vanish in the distant shade. XXXIV. bong gazed the Knight where it liad beeiu Such lool· of woe he once had seen Dwelling upon his father's mien. Long gazed he on the dusky space ,* Then drew the cowl upon his face, And closer folded his dark weed, And strove that phantasie to read. Then, bending o'er that gallery, He sought, once more, the face to see, So wan in death, below : q 5
Features came faintly to his eyes ; But memory, more than sight, supplies His father's reverend brow. xxxv. To end, at once, his torturing dread, He straight resolved to quit the shade ; When, lo ! from forth King Offa's aisle, With look and step of cautious guile, He marked two armoured men draw near, And rest them by that warrior*s bier. So frowned the helmets he had seen From shade of that aisle's pillar lean ; So bloomed the white-thorn for their crest ; So gleamed the badge upon their breast. He knew them for the enemy, And guessed they meant him treachery : But, wherefore by that bier stood they F Was it a Yorkist there that lay ? xxxvi. They bent, and gazed some little space Upon the warrior's deathy face. Fitzharding watched if they might show Gesture of triumph, or of woe.
Steadfast they stood with bended head, Nor speech, nor gesture ventured. Then did the Baron surely know The warrior had not been their foe. A Yorkist thus, it seemed, lay here ; And, losing his most pressing fear, He judged it prudent now to stay, Till passed Duke Richard н scouts away. And oft he marked them watch around. And draw within the shaded ground. xxxvii. In solemn memory of the rlead Now from the choir the low notes spread Of midnight dirge and requiem ; And to Fitzharding might they seem As hymn of some angelic band, Who on those honoured towers might stand To guide the spirit from below, And soothe with hope the mourner's woe. But, hark ! a full and deeper sound Now answers from the cloister's bound í Soon as that mournful chaunt was heard, A gloom o'er all the choir appeared ;
While slowly o'er the high shrine fell The foldings of the funeral veil, Placed for the warriors* obsequy, And dropped, at midnight Dirigs 1 XXXVIII. Murmuring far, where vaults unclose, The melancholy strain arose. The gallery where Fitzharding stood Fronted that cloister's northern door : Not one of heavy carved wood, With scroll ill-fancied covered o'er ; But that most richly carved and light, With slender stems and foliage dight, As 'broidered with true leaf and flower, And traced with Gothic pointings tall, And canopied with fretwork small. Issuing beneath this mitred-arch, The fathers held their solemn march ; Where the long vista-walk withdrew, Their taper lights gave them to view, And played upon the vaulted roof, And showed each fretted line aloof;
There stood the tabernacled Saint, Blessing the porch. Each corbeil quaint With it's carved visage, looking down On all, who passed the arch below, With smile fantastic, or with frown, From under helmed, or mitred brow,— Was graved in light and shade so strong, Where the gleam waving passed along, That, as the fleeting shadows roved, You would have thought the features moved. xxxix. The fathers came with solemn dirge And midnight chauntings for the dead ; And, as they on the aisle emerge, Sudden their lifted tapers shed Long gleams upon each altar-bier, And showed the warrior resting near. Each monk, as to ¿he choir he passed, A glance on the dead soldier cast. How various was the countenance, Thus lighted by the taper's glance ! But, oh ! that words each line might trace Of that appealing look of grace.
(But words may not that glimpse define,) Which beamed from many a passing eye Of the cowled throng then crowding by— The look, that would to Heaven resign Each object of its sympathy ! XL. While the choir-steps the train ascend, The silver censers steam on high ; On them xvith frankincense attend The Prior and Sub-Prior nigh. (The aged Abbot stood not by.) They paused upon the marble bound, Where now St. CuthbertV screen is found, And, ranging in half-circle round, O'er princely Somerset laid low, Their hundred lights, raised high, appear A curve of Hame, wide round the bier ; And they, to organ's solemn flow, Sang Dirige and Placebo. Whene'er their mourning voices fell, Stern spoke above the sudden knell, And then the farthest choir's reply Came murmuring, till, with finest swell,
The loud notes filled the vaults on high, With &rand and mournful harmony ; And these the words that hymned by, XL!. TUB CHOIR. " In regions of eternal light, Where Truth and Mercy never cease, Oh ! may each summoned soul delight, And rest ! for ever rest ! in peace ! I heard a seraph-voice speak nigh, And thus, in thrilling sound it said, ' For ever blessed are the dead, Who faithful and repentant die !' " After high chorus through the vaulted sphere Had slowly sunk around the warrior's bier, This strain from monks in demi-chaunt arose, Witli many a solemn pause and touching close. SUNG ROUND THE ΒΠ«3Η· To thee I lifted up mine eyes, To thee, upon the mountains throned ! To thee, who spread the boundless skies, And hung them with thy worlds around."
The fathers ceased, and, from the choir again Swelled o'er the organ this resounding strain. THE CIIOTIl. Cf 'Twas mine to hear a seraph-voice, And thus in thrilling words it said, *' Repentance bids the soul rejoice ; Repentance sanctifies the dead/ " The choral sounds sunk tremulously fine, As closed those solemn words—in hushing sign Of tender awe—sorrow by faith subdued— Stillness of spirit—meekest gratitude. Then the full grandeur of the organs rolled, Then soft, as if by pious peace controlled, Low murmured, while the mingled chorus passed From choir and bier, and calmer sadness cast. XLII. While rose this chorus soft and slow, The Knight, in trance of deepest woe, Listened till all was stili below. And long, it seemed, that pious strain Lingered below each vaulted roof, And died, in murmurs far aloof, Lulling the first keen sense of pain.
Silent, the watching Warrior grieved"; Tears dimmed his manly eye, While the close corslet frequent heaved With many a deep-drawn sigh.
CANTO IX.
AMONG THE DEAD. ι. Now when the midnight chaunt was o'er, And through the cloister's mitred door The monks had passed and gone, Came a pale vision on that way, 111 suiting with the morn of May, Ere long about to dawn. It came not, like the lark's gay voice, To waken Nature to rejoice ; It came to mourn her perished bloom, Untimely gathered for the tomb, In summer prime, in wintry age, The ruddy youth, the silvered sage ; It came the bitter tear to pour, The silent ranks of death ť explore.
11. Long had that anxious train, apart, Watched for this hour with fearful heart ; The hour when plunder's toii might end, And trembling relative and friend By feeble torch-light might discern The truth they sought, yet feared, to learn. The hour was come ;-~and where so late The trumpet's thrilling voice spoke fate ; And charger's tramp o'er barrier-stones, And rattling arrows and wild groans Fiercely in dreadful chorus rose :-— These, that had troubled the long day, This tumult all had died away, And left the town in deep repose. For, not the watch-word heard afar, Nor measured step of guard of war, Humming the tune he might not sing, While pacing near his captive King, Nor feeble wail borne on the air, Through lattice-bar, .rom widowed fair,*— Not these disturbed the stillness near ; They gave it character more drear.
And sometimes Horror's self would fling Her death-note from the raven's wing, When, from his watch-tower, perched alone, With ravening eye and ardent frown, Downward he flapped where none was by, To cpmff the gory channel nigh. III. 'Twas at this hour of dreary rest, Mourners around the Abbey pressed. Fitzharding viewed those forms of woe Among the slaughtered warriors go ; And, with dread sympathy, beheld, Of every age from youth to eld, Those mourners throw the searching glance For friends fled from their mortal trance Of fleeting turmoil here below ; Friends, who had felt what these feel now, Ere their stilled hearts were cold, The pang, that friends alone can know, And never may be told I IV. He marked somo rush with frenzied liaste ; So swift from bier to bier they paced,
It seemed they had not time to know The wounded form of friend from foe. Yet, where the lawn lay o'er a face, Distorted sore by wounds and death, Thore would they pause some little space, And shuddering view what slept beneath. Others passed on this solemn scene, With firmer step and calmer mien. With stern fixed brow, where patience lay, As if themselves and Misery, After long strife for mastery, Were old companions on life's way. v. Hut, who is he in sable weeds, Whose heart in deepest sorrow bleeds ? Who o'er yon warrior bends the head, Now laid upon his marble bed, Near princely Somerset outspread ? The shading cowl has fallen aside, Aud shews the mourner's martial pride. He kueels beside a father's bier; While the priest brings the censer iiea^
Takes from his boy in snowy stole The golden-plated incense bowl, And on the burning embers throws Myrrh and nard and eastern rose. The mourner rises from his knee, Prepared what most he dreads to see ; He lifts the lawn from oflf the face ; The cap of steel has left its place, And shows the honoured looks of age, Around a visage calm and sage, Profaned with many a gory trace. VI. As t>ends some sculptured form of woe Upon the twilight-tomb below, And may nor sigh nor tear bestow, Nor any living symptom show,— So viewed the son his father's bier Mutely and fixed, without a tear, While his cheek took the pallid hue Of the lorn face beneath his view. That look, reflected on his brain, Held and possessed him with its pain.
His sinking eyes grew pale and dim, Yet still they seemed to gase on him í Cold dews upon his brow prevail, Tremours his every nerve assail ; Till consciousness and sorrow fail ; And stupor dwells on all his soul With heavy, terrible control. VIÏ. Fitzharding watched one mourner long, From bier to bier among the throng, Till he paused o'er a warrior dead, Disguised by wounds, distorted, dread, And mangled so that none could know. The helmet was not on his brow, Nor shield upon his breast was laid; It rested 'neath the tomb's low shade. But from that guardian shield beneath, From forth those shadows drear of deaèh, Mute and forlorn, a dog crept near. No antics spoke his grateful cheer ; No ehort quick bark, no stifled cry Pealed, as when step he loved was nigh ;
But by the stranger sad he stood, And upward looked, in doubting mood. VIII. A little spaniel dog was he, All silver-white his hair, Save some few spots of red-tawxwy, With forehead high and fair. His lively eyes were hazel bright, And mild and tender, too, And full of sympathy's quick light. Artless and warm and true. Full often gaily liad he run In sport o'er field and wood, With his dear lord, round Alban's town, Now—crimsoned with his blood ! And, all for sport, had sought this day His master's step afar, Till, coming where he bleeding lay Upon his bed of war, He knew him, through his dead disguise, And owned him promptly with loud cries ; Then, silent, crouched him by his side, Faithful the utmost to abide.
And when the monks саше 'inong the slain, He, with quick paws and angry рЫю, Half bark, half howl, in efforts vain Still tried to guard his long-loved friend From stranger's foot, from stranger's hand. He saw them bring the gory shro.ud, And bear that helpless friend away ; Then, fearless, 'mid the trampling crowd, He followed close—lamenting loud ; Nor threat, nor blow, his steps could stay, Nor fair words his forbearance buy ; And now beneath his bleeding bier, Though he might shed no mourner's tear, He paid him sorrow's obsequy. IK. Now, as the stranger turned his view, He his lost son's companion knew, And then the shield, from which he crept, Where he for hours mute watch had kept ; Then was the mournful truth made plain A father could not doubt again í He saw his dead son resting here* vol, Ш* it
And checked no more the bitter tear. The dog, w ho late had drooping stood With fixed and earnest eye¿ Soon as the stranger changed his mood To sorrow's ecstasy, Owned his dear master's sire in grief, And sprang, as if to give relief By sad responsive cry; And even strove those tears to dry, That now came rolling by. Stronger no human tongue could speak, Soothing and comforting, Than his, who dried the mourner's cheek, With tender minisťring. The eye, that never tear had shed, Knew well that sign of woe ; The lieart, that never his pang had, Could sympathy bestow î x. Deem it not trivial that so long Has paused the solemn funeral song For tale of poor and humble friend, Where truth and simple goodness blend ;
Since gratitudej wherever found, Fidelity, sagacious love, In whatsoever shape they move, Claim praise where griefs abound. And 'mid this scene of mortal fate, Of raging passions, pride and hate, Oh ! soothing,—soothing was the sound Of artless love and gratitude ! Sweet as, in pause of tempest rude, The warble of some lonely flute. That seems its empire to dispute Awhile—but swells, and dies away At last, beneath the tempest's sway ! Thus sweet and sad the memory, О ! poor and faithful friend, of thee ! XI. Still round the dead the mourners stray, Pause oft, and stoop upon their way, Till some known crest, or visage dear To changeless grief changed hope and fear. Sunk by degrees the moan of woe,* From those, who claimed the dead below. n 2
Step after step departing fell, Paused at the porch, in last farewell, Till ali is lone by tomb and bier, Save thai a monk sits shadowy here, Or man-at-arms, at interval, Havock's and Death's grim sentinel, Muttered strange phrase ungenial. Now rolled the thunder, that had broke O'er distant hills, since curfew spoke ; Now the forked lightning, passing by, Awoke the angel-form on high, Beneath the crystal tracery, And showed each secret gallery, Where, starting back into the night, Many a visage shrunk from sight. xir. Fitzhardmg, by the thunder roused, Thought of the sufferers still unhoused, Chased from their ranks to heath and wood> By civil treachery pursued, Plundered of arms and harness gear, And hiding from the murderers near.
Then came the fear, that there might stray His father on the wild heath-way, Old and alone, robbed of his arms, Listening each step to new alarms ; Till, worn by past and present toil, He sinks upon the bare, damp soil» And, stretched low on earthy bed, This tempest mock» his hoary head. Then came the fear—ah no, the hope Himself might with such evils cope ; Then filled his mind this chiefest care- That he his father's fate might share ! XIII. These thoughts awoke impatience high ; He turned to leave the gallery, His father's fate elsewhere to learn, Though yet below Duke Richard's train,. Feigning to guard a warrior slain, Guileful and still, wait his return. As his eyes o'er the gallery glance. Seemed a dim shadow to advance, Scarce shaped upon the twilight pale, And faintly bade Fitzharding hail.
'Twas Clement, who, with ready care, Came to enjoin him yet beware Duke Richard's scouts, on watc'i below. Where, he had secret cause to kno л, They stood to give a dagger blow To one, who yet their search had fled—■ Lancastrian knight—so was it said. And Clement pointed where, in guile, Those men in arms within the gloom, Who traced the Baron down the aisle, Still lingered near St. Scytha's tomi). XIV. Since, then, Fitzharding here must rest, He mournfully the Monk addressed— i: Wilt thou, meanwhile, the aisles explore. And make strict search the corpses o'er ? These are the signs thy search shall lead ; Mark them, and then away, with speed ' Tall is my father's form, but age Has bent it with a gentle sway, Drawn on his visage wrinkles sage, And strewn his locks with silver-grey-
And tin's the fashion of die steel, That may, alas ! my sire reveal : Plain, plaited steel ; no inlaid gold Is graven round each clasping fold ; His helmet, all of iron proof, Is golden-damasked ; and aloof The leopard for his crest is known. His visor shows three bars alone ; His gilded spurs have motto bossed— * îiopaït tl)ougí) Jfi'fľO anti Щопс Ы Ьш.' " xv. While thus Fitzharding, with a sigh, Pictured the warrior's pageantry, While each ren. nibered sign he drew Gave his sire's image to his view, He paused, o'ercome with sudden dread, As if he saw his father dead. The Monk in listening silence stood, With look that spoke his mournful mood, And bent his head iu meek assent, And on his solemn errand went.
xvi. Fitzharding from his station viewed His friend pass slowly on the aisle. Whose steps his anxious eyes pursued, Watched every gesture, attitude, And pause, however slight, the while. The ordered biers he moved among, And o'er each corpse inquiring hung. As slowly on the forms he dwelt, Fitzharding dread impatience felt, Mingled with anger and surprise, Aa pauses bade new fears arise. (i Oh ! need he doubt ? a single glance Might prove my father's countenance. Even now upon his face, perchance, He looks ! Ah ! now he seeks the crest, And now the shield upon his breast, And now the golden spur he spells, Still on the motto there he dwells ! Would that my eyes their light could lend ! Oh í will these moments never end ?" He passes to a farther tomb ; Fitzharding felt as saved from doom.
That farther bier too distant lay To give his doubts and terrors sway ; He sought to calm his troubled mind, And wait the truth, with will resigned. xvn. Though now were gone the mourner-train, One weeping form appeared again. A figure, wrapt in pilgrim fold, Passed as with desperation bold ; On as she stept, went close beside, A Monk, as guardian and as guide. She glanced on every warrior's face ; And, though she passed with frantic pace, Yet was there in her gesture grace, That gave to sorrow dignity, And drew and fixed Fitzharding's eye, He sighed to think, that frame so slight Must meet affliction's rudest blight ; That sensibility so een Had dared to rush upon this scene. Where nerves, that had sustained the fight, Shuddered and shrunk, and shunned the sight.
lt She seeks, perchance, a husband slain ; If found—how may her heart sustain The dreadful truth ?" 'Twas thus he said, '* How may she view her husband dead?" xviii. Struck with a solemn sympathy, lie groaned, and watched what she might see A softer pity touched his breast From contrast, as this strangers woes, And Florence in her home of rest, Upon his fancy rose. île thought what her state might have been, Had she been doomed to this dread scene, And blessed her in repose. Her fears must all aside be cast, If safe his messenger had passed. XIX. Some likeness in their grace and air, On Florence still detained his thought, And, as he marked the stranger's care, A deeper pity for her wrought. She bent upon St. Scytha's tomb, That lay beneath Fitzharding's eye.
Viewed the dead warrior through the gloom. And, reading respite of her doom, She looked, iu thankfulness, on high ;~~ And, as the light beamed o'er lier tace, The Baron could her features trace. Upon his mind, like sudden spell. Terror and consternation dwell ! 'Tis Florence ! 'tis herself í his own Venturing among the dead alone. XX. Short was the spell, that fixed him here : Forgotten every danger near, Save those, that might her steps await : Forgotten even his threatened fate, He rushes on the aisle below, And clasps that pilgrim form of woe. His voice recalls her fleeting sense ; She lifts her eyes, but sight is gone ! Her trembling lips, that would dispense Affection, comfort, joy alone, Murmur but with a feeble moan. Fitzharding called aloud for aid, And would have borne her from this shade
Through every danger of the way, Even where the watchful foeman may Seize on him for his instant prey. XXÎ. The monk attendant, late her guide, Warned him of ill, that must betide From Richard's bands, these walls between, If there Lancastrian were seen. Then to the cloister straight he hied, And soon his ready zeal supplied Such aid as twice recalled her life, From joy and sorrow's various strife. 'Twas he, who found her senseless laid. Long since, when she a form surveyed, And, having raised the veil of death, Had caught the ghastly glimpse beneath. Which brought to her half-wildered mind The very form she feared to find. XXII. Grief may be painted ; 'tis of earth : But joy, which iu of heavenly birth,
Of spirit all—celestial fire— May not be known, Ivi ay not be shown, Save in the smile its beams inspire. Such smile spoke thoughts denied to breath ; Such smile on Florence' lips was seen ; It lightened o'er this world of death, And with its glory ve'ueà the scene ! She saw alone her husband saved ! Horror and grief had vanished now ; Present and future ill she braved, Might but her steps with his steps go. She viewed not shape stand watching by» With curious and with cruel eye, XXIII. How different was Fitzharding's state ! No joy beamed on his anxious mind ; But terrors for his father's rate, With fears for Florence now combined. Even at that moment, suddenly, Might lie his father's image see Stretched on some marble near î
Ere Florence might be spared such sight, Or shrouded fr'>m Duke Richards might, How might he seek the bier ? xxiv. To save hei from this scene of dread And chance of various ill, The cloister gallery he had fled Seemed place of refuge still. But her sole fear on this sad ground, Was loss of him so lately found. Prophetic seemed it to her heart------ If now they part—they ever part î All other danger, light as air, Claimed not with her a single care. Sure of his life, her peace was sure ; What need of safe retreat for her ? 'Twas not in shrouding solitude ; Far distant woe might there intrude. 'Twas even at her husband's side, That safety was—whate'er betide ; For, come the worst, they share it all, Toge ther live—together fall.
XXV. Fitzharding thought not thus:—Ho dared Meet woe alono- not woe thus shared. But, dreading now again to [»art, His judgment yielded to his heart ; He caught the courage of her love ; What she feared not he thought not of. Then, while he bade, with tender care, Florence for dismal sighb prepare, Her only answers were a sigh And smile of sadness soon passed by. She drew the dark hood o'er her head, And followed closely where he led.
KKD OF VOI. ill.
