Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Gaston de Blondeville: or, The court of Henry III, keeping festival in Ardenne: a romance: St. Alban's Abbey, a metrical tale, with some poetical pieces
MEMOIR OF THK LIFE AND WRITINGS OF MRS. RADCLIFFE.
VOL. I.
b
LIFE AND WRITINGS or MRS. RADCLIFFE.
The Life of Mrs. Radcliffe is a pleasing phe¬ nomenon in the literature of her time. During a period, in which the spiiit of personality has ex¬ tended its influence, till it has rendered the habits and conversation of authors almost as public as their compositions, she confined herself, vvith delicate ap- prehensiveness, to the cirt le of domestic duties and pleasures. Known only by her works, her name was felt as a spell by her reatlers. Among the thousands, whose life-blood curdled beneath her terrors, many little suspected, that the potent en¬ chantress was still an inhabitant of this " bright and breathing world." Even her romances, forming a class apart from all, which had gone before, and unapproached by imitators, wore a certain air of antiquity, and seemed scarcely to belong to the b%
prosent age. Having long ceased to publish, bhe acquired in her retreat the honours of posthumous fame. Her unbroken retirement suggested to tliose, who learned that she still lived, a fancy that something unhappy was connected with her story, and gave occasion to the most absurd and ground¬ less rumours, respecting her condition. But, while some spoke of her as dead, and others represented her as afflicted with mental alienation, she was thankfully enjoying the choicest blessings of life— with a cheerfulness as equable as if she had never toucheti the secret springs of horror, and with a humility as genuine as though she had not ex¬ tended the domain of romance, for the delight and the benefit of her species. In drawing aside the veil from the personal course of this celebrated lady, her biographer can¬ not exhibit any of the amusing varieties, which usually chequer the lives of successful authors: here are no brilliant conversational triumphs ; no elaborate correspondence with the celebrated, or the great ; no elegant malice ; no anecdotes of patrons or rivals ; none of fashion's idle pastime, nor of controversy's more idle business. Even the great events of Mrs. Radcliffe's life, the successive appearances of her novele, extend over a small part only of its duration. A stranger, witnessing its calm tenor of happiness, would little guess to what high and solema iu ven tions some pf its hours had been devoted; yet* tbe ; пдоге t attentive observer
would perceive, in her ordinary reflections and pleasures, indications of the power so marvellously exerted in her works. Fortunately, the means of watching the development of her faculties and tastes in her daily pursuits are wpplied by copiou·* memorandums written or» several of her journeys; in which, among rich and vivid descriptions, many characteristic traits of sentiment and feeling are scattered, and her moral excellencies shine forth in a lustre which warms, while it enlighten-** Mrs. Radcliffe was born in London, in July 1764, She was the only child of William and Ann Ward, persons of great respectability, who, though engaged in trade, were allied to families of independent fortune and high character. She was descended from the family of the De Witts of Holland. It appears, from some of the document*- hi the hands of her friends, that a member of thi* distinguished house came to Fingland in the reign of Charles tbe First, under the patronage of Go¬ vernment, to execute a plan for draining the fens of Lincolnshire. The project was interrupted hv¬ the political troubles which ensued ; but its author remained in England, and passed the remainder of his days in a mansion near Hull. He brought with him an infant daughter, named Amelia, who was the mother- of one of Mrs. BbdclinVs male ancestors, Her paternal grandmother was the sister of dieselden, the celebrated- Surgeon, of whose kindness her father retained a lively recol-
lection. Her maternal grandmother was Ann Oates, the sister of Doctor Samuel Jebb, of Strat¬ ford, who was the father of Sir Richard Jebb ; and she was related, on her mother's sick, to Dr, Halifax, Bishop of Gloucester, and to Dr. Halifax, Physician to the King. She was instructed in all womanly accomplishments after the earlier fashion of the time, but was not exercised in the classics, nor excited to pursue the studies necessary to form the modern heroine of conversations. In childhood, her intelligence and docility won the marked aôee- tion of her relatives, who moved in a somewhat higher sphere than her parents, and she passed much of her time at their houses. Her maternal uncle-in-law, the late Mr. Bentley, of the firm of Wedgewood and Bentley, was exceedingly partial to his niece, and invited her often to visit him at Chelsea, and afterwards at Turnham Green, where he resided. At his house she enjoyed the benefit of seeing some persons of literary eminence, and many of accomplished manners. Mrs. Piozzi, Mrs. Montague, Mrs. Ord, and the gentleman called " Athenian Stuart," were among the visitors. Although the quickness and accuracy of* Mrs* RadclimVs powers of observation were early felt by her friends, it does not seem, that the peculiar bent of her genius was perceived till after her mar¬ riage. She had been educated among members of the old school, in manners and morals, whose no¬ tions, while they prompted the most considerate
kindness towards their young charge, did not per¬ haps tend to excite precocious intellect, especially in a female of diffidence, approaching to hh) ue**. Something of the formality derived from education may be traced ia her works, supplying a mas*- sive but noble and definite frame-work for her sombre and heroic pictures, There was also, iu the feeling of old gentility, vvhich most of her rela¬ tives cherished, a natural repugnance to author¬ ship, which she never entirely lost even after her splendid success was ensured, and she had found herself the creator of a new class in English ro¬ mances. In the twenty-third year of her age, Miss Ward was married to Mr. WiUiam Radcliffe, a graduate of Oxford, who, at one period, intended to follow the profession of the law, and, with that view, kept several terms at one of the Inns of Court, but who afterwards changed his purpose. The cere¬ mony was performed at Bath, where her parents then resided, and she afterwards proceeded with her husband to live in the neighbourhood of Lon¬ don. Encouraged by him, she soon began to em¬ ploy her leisure in writing ; and, as her distrust of herself yielded to conscious success, proceeded with great rapidity. Mr. Radcliffe, about this time, became the proprietor of " The English Chrono cle, 7 * and took an active share in the ménageaient of the paper, which, with other avocations, obliged him to be frequently absent from home till a late
hour in the evening. On these occasions, Mr». Badchlfe usually beguiled the else weary hours by her pen, and often astonished her husband, on hi» return, not only by the quality, but the extent of the matter she had produced, since he left her. The evening was always her favourite season for rom position, when her spirits were in their happiest tone, and she was røost secure from interruption. So far was slie from being subjected to her own terrors, that she often laughingly presented to Mr. Madeline chapters, which he could not read alone without shuddering. Although Mrs. Hadch'fte was as far as possible removed from the slavery of superstitious fear, she took an eager interest in the worfe. of compo¬ sition, and was, for the tiine, completely absorbed in the conduct of her stories* ^TJií? pleasures ,οί" painting huve been worthily eeiebrated tyy men, who have been devoted to the art ; but these eau ?*careely be regarded as superior to thç enjoyment» of a writer of romance, conscious of inventive pow¬ er. If in the mere perusal çf toveis we lose, рш painful sense of tlţe re,aüties ojf " tlus, unimaginable world,* and delightedly participa^ j» )t^e s sorrows, the joyş, and the struggles ä of t|e ptt-s^nSj^w^ar more intensely must an f authoress Цке^М^р, Mad¬ eline feel tbat outgoing of the ЩЩ$> Щ Vjph in¬ dividuality is multiplied, доД, we ,ц-щ to pass a hundred lives 1 She spreads ouţ| т|щ tl^rea^s of
Ίο p e' * '
sympathy and lives along every line. The passions. the affections, the hopes of her character are essen¬ tially her's; born out of her own heart; figuied from the tracings of her own brain ; and reflecting back again, in shape and form, the images antl thoughts, which work indistinctly in the fancies of others. There is a perpetual exercise of that plastic power, which realizes the conceptions of the mind to itself, and gives back to it its own ima¬ ginations in " clear dream and solemn vision.' 1 How delightful to trace the dawnings of innocent love, like the coming on of spring ; to unveil the daily course of a peaceful ^^e, gliding on like smooth water ; to exhibit the \ assions in their high agitations and contests; to devise generous self- sacrifice in heroic thought ; to pour on the wearied and palpitating heart overflowing happiness; to thtow the mind forward to advanced age, and through its glass to take a mournful retrospect of departed joy', ahd pensivelyunderstemd a mild antl timely decay! No exertion of the faculties ap¬ pears more enviable than that of forming the out¬ line of a great Îàlc, like " The Mysteries of Udol¬ pho ;* bringing out into distinctness all the hint.·** and dirti pictures, which have long floated in the mind ; keeriih^ in' view the catastrophe from the first, and the rblaciohs to it of the noblest scenes and most complicated adventures ; and feeling al¬ ready, as through all the pulses of the soul, 4 the curiosity, the terror, the pity and the admiration, bă
which will be excited by the perusal in the mind* of thousands and thousands of readers. Incited by the intellectual recompense of such a pursuit, Mr». liadclifte gave her romances in <¡uick succession to the world ;—her first work, ** The Castles of Athlin and Dunbayue,"" was published in the year 1789 ; the " Sicili-au Eo- mance," in 1790 1 the " Homance Ы the Forest," iu 1791 ; ťť The Mysteries of Udolpho»" in 1794 ; and <e The Italian," in 1797. It is pleas¬ ing to trace the developeraent of her resources and her gradual acquisition of mastery over them in these productions. The first, with a goodly number of old towers, dungeon keep% sub¬ terraneous passages and hair-breadth escapes* has little of reality, or life; as if the author had caught a glimpse of the regions of romance from a£ar, and formed a sort of dreamy acquaintance with its re¬ cesses and glooms. In her next work, the " Sicilian Romance," she seem» to obtain a birdVeye vkW of all the surface of that delightful .region—she places its winding vales and delicious bowers «İlâ sum¬ mer seas before the eye of the mind—bat is ae yet unable to introduce the reader individually into the midst of the scene, to surround him with its luxurious air, and compel him to shudder at its terrors. In the * Romance of the Forest,? «he ap¬ proaches and takes up her very residence in the pleasant bordere of the enchanted huad ; the sphere she chooses h small and the persons limited $ but
here she exercises clear dominion, and realiies every thing to] the fancy, The " Mysteries of Udolpho" is the work of one, who has entered and possessed a mighty portion of that enchanted land ; who is familiar with its masaive towers and so¬ lemn glooms;—and who presents its object? of beauty, or horror, through a certain haze, which sometimes magnifies and sometimes veils their true proportions. In the ' r Italian," she occupies a less space; but, shining in golden light, her figures have the distinctness of terrible pictures; antl her scenes, though perhaps less astounding in the aggregate, are singly more thriUing antl vivid. This splendid aeries of fictions became immedi¬ ately popular with the numerous class of readers, who seek principally for amusement, and soon attracted the attention of the finer spirits of the age. Dr. Joseph Warton, the Head Master of Winchester School, who was far advanced iu life wheai u The Mysteries of Udolpho" was published, told Mr. Robinson, the publisher, that, happening to meet with it, he was so fascinated, that he could not go to bed till he had finished it, and actually sat up the greater part of the night for the pur¬ pose. Mr. Sheridan sjwike of the same work in terms of the highest eulogy. Mr. Fox, in a letter written iro an intimate friend, soon after the publi¬ cation of '*The Italian," spoke of Mrs. RadclifiVs works in terms of high praise, iind entered iato a
somewhat particular examination and compari¬ son of the respective merit» of the " Mysteries of Udolpho" and " The Italian," The author of die Pursuits of Literature, uot much given to com- mend- dti^riİM»« h^*** as " The mishtv ma¿£aciau of The Mysteries of Udolpho, bred and nourislied by tbe Florentine muses, in their sacred, solitary caverns, amid the paler shrines of Gothic super¬ stition, and in all the dreariness of enchant¬ ment: a poetess, whom Arioso would, with rap¬ ture, liave acknowledged as ---------La midrita
Damigella Trîvulzia al sacro чрего." The pecuniary advantages, which ehe derived from her works, though they have been exagge¬ rated, were considerable, according to the fashion ofthe times. For the " Mysteries of Udolpho 4 * she received from Messrs. Robinson £500 ; a sum then so unusually large for a work of fiction, that Mr. Cadeil, who had great experience in such mat¬ ters, on hearing the statement, offered a wager of £10. that it was untrue. By the Italian, although considerably shorter, she acquired about the sum of £800. The reputation, which Mrs. Radcliffe derived from her writings did not draw her from the re¬ tirement, in which they were written. Although, as she had no children, the duties of a family did not engross her attention, she declined entering
into the society чпе was so w , . calculated to adorn Nothing hui vimre reciproci ty in all the «сг«^;- ¡leminentH of society could -satisfy her idea** of the independence it became her tti preserve. Sh* W OU tu, îniıCeıı t 11» Ve -Ciniit rrvt» iKn-rtHi·" «ПС« «»»KíüíU- tion on any circle, which she could prevaľ on liei self to join; but a scrupulous ^If-re^peeî, alrøt ^t too nice to be appredated in these day**, îndın\4İ her sedulously to avoid the appearance of recep¬ tion, on account of her literary none. The very thought tif apjiearing in person as the author of her romance*** shocked the delicacv of her mind To the publication of her work-*» she was con¬ strained by the force of her own genius; but nothing could tempt her to publish henelj ; or to sink for a moment, the gentle woman in tbe noveHbt. She felt alïso a distaste to the increa^ng familiarity of modern manners, to which she had beeu unaccuatomed in her youth ; aud, though re¬ markably free and cheerful with her relative* ала intimate friends, she preferred the more formal po¬ liteness of the old school among strangers. Be¬ sides these reasons for preserving her seclusion, she enjoyed, with peculiar reli-sh, tlie elegant plea*- sures it gave her the means of partaking with her husband. She chose at once the course she would pursue, and, finding that her views met the entire concurrence of Mr. Radcufte. adhered to it through life. Instead of lavishing time and money on en¬ tertainments, the necessity for which, according to
.
her feelings, wm connecte*·. « rh a partiri pa tion in general «Kîiety, &* smight the comforts of resi¬ ding in airv and ph -yrøt situation*?, of unbroken leisure and frequent travelling; ami as her in¬ come wae increased b v die death uí relatives, she retained the «ame plan of living, only extending it* *юз|!е of innocent luxury. In the summer of 1794, subsequent to the pub¬ lication of " The Mytterie«« of Udolpho/* Mrs. lladcliffe accompanied her husband on a tour through Holland and the wesUrn frontier of (Ger¬ many, returning down the Rhine. This was the first and о idy occasion, on which t*hc quitted Eng¬ land ; thnugh the vividnos of her descriptions of Italy, Switzerland and tbe -south of France, in whidi her scenes are principally laid, induced a general belief, that $be had visited thor*»e countries. So -«trongly was this conviction impressed on the public mind, that a recent traveller of celebrit v referred to her descriptions as derived frotn per¬ sonal observation ; and it was asserted in the " Edinburgh Review" for Mav 1Я25, that she ac- companied her husband to Italy, when he was at¬ tached to one of the British Embassies, and that " it was on that occasion she imbibed the taste for picturesque scenery, and the obscure and wild su¬ perstitions of mouldering castles, of which she has made so beautiful a use in her romances^ After their return from the Continent, Mr. and Mrs. Radcliffe made a tour to the English Lakes, aud
were highly gratified by the excursion. On these journcvs Mrs». Radcliffe a!must invariably employ¬ ed *?natcht> of time at the тпъ -»heri* »he rest«], in committing to paper the iiuprt ^um^ amf event» of the da\, which hhe couhl afterwards review at leisure—-a happv mode of prolonging tho**e vivid pleasure-** of hfe, for w híí h **ht· had a fine relîdt Such a habit, when it doe*» not Income tt*o fre¬ quent I v intro>p4"tivc. ol* ** sit'klv oer" «»tu enjov- ment** with " the |м!е ca-^t of thought," teutis to imparta unity to «шг intellectu*d lH*ing. It enables Uh ti) Гп a over again the unbroken line of existence ; to gather up the precious drop» of happiness, that they lie not lost ; ami, in the last moment- of feel¬ ing and thought, to find * v a gla-*** which shows uh many more. 1 * After Mrs. Radcliffe^ return, she wai» prevailed on to give to her note* a regular form, and to publish them in a quarto volume, which met with a favourable reception. The subsequent excursions of Mr. ami Mrs Radcliffe were of less extent, and chiefly directed to the southern coast of England. Always once, and generally twice in the year, they took a jour¬ ney through some lieautiful or interesting country, limiting themselves to no particular course, but en¬ joying the perfect freedom, which was most agree¬ able to their tastes. Mrs. Radcliffe continued her little diary of these pleasant roving», but without the slightest idea of publication, from vvhich she ge¬ nerally shrunk as an evil Some specimen of these
journals are now tirsi pre?4inted to the reader, which u ill exhibit her mind in its undres»-— shin? her tWtiugK as they were undisguised —and display her tact of observation and decripti ve power, m емат- mg м in ply for hır o*« n gratification. She ahvav·** travels with a eonsiderable number of bíioks, íWid generally wrote, while Mr. Radcliffe domed iuuuseinent from reading them. Tht* following notes are extracted from memo¬ randa ma<le on a httle tour to the coaM of Kent, in the autumn of 1T9T. Thev пр|м*аг to have Invìi written at the Inn at Hvthe, whik* Mr. Rad- «'liflo nule to Folkstone. *** September 1st. Begun our tour to the sea¬ side. Between Grave.send and Rochester, the road, though farther from the river than about Neath- fleet, commands delightful views of it, extending to great breadth, aud iu length reaching towards the Nore ; ranges of distant hills in Essex and Kent h nally close the prospect. The shores given and rich, aiul the water covered with suiìs tacking in ГУ all directions. Svveet afternoon. Continual vil¬ lages ; neat and pieasant country houses, with lawn* and .shrubberies and high-walled kitchen gardens. Views of the river. The dignity of these views now much increased ; the distant hills run out into long »'HÍgt'S, and fold one behind the other. The river often seen between green- dipping hills, and then opening in vast majesty» Descended towards Rochester: solemn appearance
«»f di ť cattile, with its square ghastly wall* and their hollow eyes, riMiig nver а hank of the Medway, l^rvy aiul ni.tssive antl ihwrlcvt ; nothing remam* ing but the .shell From the bridare looked on the right, up the Medwav, winding broad Ы- tween wcxkIv pietiirestjue heights, MHiietiine8«ihelv- ing iutt) fKHiits, On the taft, the river busy with .shipping, as И winds rotind the town, toward« the Thames, antl very broad. " Made our way in the gig through the kmg nar¬ row street«» ami then, leaving Chatham «m the left, iiUHmted a very steep road, having wide view* of Chatham, the dockt and shipping, the new liarraoks'—a town 1ЬетьеЬч*?4— rising up a hill, with fortifications ab>ve its green à« anında, with гапшт &nd two small artificial hills with flag**. A great prospect, but too broken, ami full of stars and angles of fortifications antl other building* and of excavations to be quite pteuMiug. Fur¬ ther on, mounted Chatham lull; the view wonder¬ fully .grand and variou*. The vale of the Med¬ way, sweeping from Rochester to Sheerness, antl the Nore, with the Ensex lulls beyond the Thames, hounding the scene to the north-west; tme of the richest green lautiseapen, vvith wood and villages, I ever »mw. The Thames itself visible for many utiles ruiming sometimes ulmost parallel with the* green» rich vale of the Medway, till it pour*** its broad waves into the ma opposite Sheerness. The fortress \yinpr low ujkw thie side of the Medway,
with its shipping distinctly seen by the help of a good $\ть ; the sea, animata! with ships levond Southend, visible on the Thames opposite to Sheern**ss, almost щ*т the open sea : kne* a coopto bv one, which we had seen sailing an the Thames bv Greenhithe. Príneetkci to Siitin·-- lx>uni, throuíľh orchards, pastures and fragrant г-. 'f f* villages; the rtxixl frequenti v ruse and fell, but the prospects were not inniMderable, except at Sk- tinglwiurn, an oţi-en, pleasant town. 44 Septemlx>r 2.—-Set out alx>ut eleven for Can- terbury. The road very hilly, but through a most rich country of orchards, hop-grounds and pas¬ tures villages and pretty houses, with lawns and gardens frequently occurring. Feversham, a mile on the left ; saw it with its arm of the sea, and the sea itself, at a distance. Soon after began the long ascent of Houghton Hill ; the summit re- warded us with a prodigious prospect. The hill itself wild with fern and coppice wood. Many- woods also in the near prospect, intermingled with surprising richness of pasture, orchard and hops. Descending the other side, saw the tower of Can¬ terbury cathedral, cresting a hill beyond ; the body of the cathedral and the city not yet appearing; the tower became visible again at intervals, and, at length, the city, with its ancient gptcs and build¬ ings. The cathedral itself looket! very tall and solemn, like a spectre of ancient times, and seem¬ ed to hint of what it had witnessed. As we ap-
proached the gate, supported by octagonal towers, a long line of horses and soldier«* ixt-ured from the high narrow arch. 'Yoceeded, after dinner. to D ι *er over Barbam Down«*?. Views into rich little valleys on the right ; each village having itn tedi grev steeple. Noble mansion* and }>arks fre¬ quently on the rising ground*. " September îi.— Walked on the lícach, watch¬ ing the retiring and returning waves, and attend¬ ing to the bursting thunder of the surge. " Afterwards stood on a fortified pomt below the castle, immediately nnd high over the beach, com¬ manding a vast marine horizon, with a long tract of the French coast, a white line bounding the blue waters. Below, on the right, Dover curves picturesquely along the sea-bay ; the white and green cliffs rising closely over it, except near the castle, where they give place to lulls, that open to a green vallev, with enclosures and a pretty vil¬ lage, beyond whieh it winds away- The most grand antl striking circumstances, as we etood on tlie point, were—the vast sea-view—the long shades on its surface of soft green, deeţ>ening exquisitely into purple ; but, above all, that downy tint of hght blue, that sometimes prevailed over the whoie scene, and even faintly tinged the French coast, at a distance. Sometimes, too, a white sail passed in a distant gloom, while all between was softly sha¬ dowed ; the cliffs above us broken and encumbered with fortifications ; the sea viewed beyond thera·,
with vessels passing from behind ; the solemn sound of the tide, breaking immediately below, and answered, as it were, at measured intervals. along tbe whole coast ; tbis circumstance inex¬ pressibly grand ; the sound more solemn and hol¬ low than when heard on the beach below. A fleet of merchantmen, with a convoy, passed and spread itself over the channel. " Afternoon.*—Walked towards Shak speared Cliff; the fleet still in view. Looked down from the edge of the cliffs on the fine red gravel margin of the sea. Many vessels on the horizon and in mid-channel. The French coast, white and high, and clear in the evening gleam. Evening upon the sea becoming melancholy, silent and pale. A leaden-coloured vapour rising upon the horizon, without confounding the line of separation ; the ocean whiter, till the last deep twilight falls, when all is one gradual, inseparable, undistinguishable, grey. " September 4.—Morning fine, calm, but lie- come slightly cloudy. Walked to the topmost point of Shak speared Cliff, which appears a huge face of chalk over the sea. The way through fields ; the path constantly rising, and leading near the edge of the t..iffs; leaned 'sometimes over the railing, and looked down the precipices and on the blue sea ; little boats and a sWip be¬ low. Coast of France visible ; thougn always most clearly seen about sunset, vvhen the west-
ern rays strike horizontally upon it, and light up all its features. Proceeding to the point of the cliff, had no longer the protection of a railing ; bushes of hawthorn, mossed with yellow, alone fence the precipice. Putting our hands on the ground, vve peeped over, ledge below ledge, abrupt down. Many of the ledges hung with plants and bushes. On the east, Dover—the bay—the castle —cliffs beyond—the boundless sea. In front, France, (Calais not visible,) a long tract sink¬ ing away to the West, and leaving a wider sea. Westward, charming view towards Beachy Head, the high and farthest promontory ; black points of land, or rather low promontories, run¬ ning out, one beyond another, into the sea ; hills retiring to some margin, wild, heathy and broken ; then the coast makes a fine sweep; and, after forming a vast bay, stretches out in the long, low point of land, called Dungeness, on which stands a Hght-house. Within this fine bay, Folk- itone was visible, with Sandgate castle and village on the margin ; then Hythe, a little more removed and higher ; then an old castle, higher stiU and further from the shore ; Romney, with its long marshes, beyond ; and far beyond all, the high lands of Beachy Head, so eminent and bold, ae scarcely to be known for a continuation of the same coast. The cliffs decline towards Folkstone, and there are none beyond, on this side of Beachy Head ; but at some distance*} from the shore, rise
broken and wild, though small hills. The best cir¬ cumstances in the view are, first, the fine dark points and then the noble sweep of the coast, the dark levels of the marshes contrasting with the blue sea they skirt. Crows took wing for their nests in the cliffs below us. Thought of " the mid¬ way air ;" no sea-fowl. The white surf beating far along the curving margin below to where other chalky points uprear themselves. Within land, the hills are brown and bleak and broken. The castle Ы1Ц on the land side, scarred by roads and far from picturesque ; steep chalk hollows among the heath. "About half past five in the afternoon, set off for Hythe, ten miles, chiefly along the high sea-cliffs, except that about a mile from Dover, we wound among brown hills, and, the cliffs sometimes sink¬ ing a little, we had catches of the sea and of France, between green dipping heights. Near Folkstone, descended a very long chalk hill, whence an en¬ chanting view towards Beachy Head ; the hills, retiring at some distance from the shore, open a curving bosom, and show towns and villages at their feet. Glad to get through the narrow steep streets of Folkstone, though the town is well situ- ated. Proceeded in the dusk for Sandgate. De¬ scended upon it—-a white, new village, straggling along the beach, on each side of the wide road. Green hills rising all about ft, and the place wide and free and pleasant ; the sea beach appearing at
every step between the houses, on one side, and as easy an access to the hiUs, с the other side. On the beach an ancient castle, of ^ eral round towers, ivied and clustered together, and built low üke Sandwich castle. Soldiers on guard at the gate ; thick walls ; cannon ; all on the outside was green sod. The village being full, proceeded through deepening dusk to Hythe, a mile and a half farther, the road leading along the beach, at the foot of green hiili ; the sea appearing to flow even with us. Cottages by the road side and people straggling ail the way. Came late to Hythe, and slept there. Its ancient church stands high, is a sea-mark and a picturesque object, its grey towers and gothie windows appearing among wood* and having a hill behind them. 11 In the autumn of 1798, Mrs. Radcliffe, accom¬ panied by her husband, visited Portsmouth, the Isle of Wight and Winchester. Her journal on this little tour, which she seems to have particu¬ larly enjoyed, is too minute to give entire; but we select the following sj)ecimens. " September 20—-Set out in a beautiful afternoon for Portsmouth. Ascending to Esher by twilight, heard the bells sounding, with most melancholy sweetness, from the summit, and strengthening as we approached : every thing pensrve, and tran*· quii. " September Sl, 1798* Sweet foesh morning. Left Cobham between seven and eight. Passed
under a picturesque bridge uniting the grounds of Pained hill ; high, rough, broken banks, topped with lofty trees, that hang over a light rustic bridge. Then enter upon a wide scene of heath, skirted here and there with rich distances ; after¬ wards, many miles of heath, of a dull purple and dusty iron brown, vvith, sometimes, sudden knolls planted with firs; sometimes distances let in be¬ tween bold hiîİs. After Guildford, a large neat old town, and pretty Godalmin, at the end of a green level; steep hills to Haslemere and beyond it, but opening to vast prospects :—again, many miles of purple and rusty heath, with -scarcely a tree or a hut. Nearer to Horndon, the coun¬ try, though it continues to be heathy, is upon a grander scale, opening to distant ridges of high swelling hills, that probably overlook the sea ; the hills in Hampshire, on the right, more culti¬ vated ; those in Sussex vast, sweeping and downy. Fine sunset from under clouds ; the strong gleam almost blinded us as we descended in a hollow ; the high, heathy banks receiving the full efful¬ gence, while all below was gloom. The rays had already beeome much fainter, as we wound up a chalky precipice of great sweep and length, with steep downs rising over it ; sheep on the summit showing themselves against the t*ky. A fine moon rose, and lighted us over the downs to Horndon. Heard enly the sheep-bells, as the shepherd lad
was folding his flocks, and they came down from the hills. Slept at Horndon. " September 22. Showers, but cleared up to a fine morning. Passed over two or three miles of the beautiful forest of Bere, the most picturesque of any we have seen in Englanti, breaking in sweet woodland glades, all arouutl to other hill« and valleys, with patches of green-sward antl heath ; and to the bold ridges, that extend to the sea. A cottage, here and there, under the trees, with its grey curling smoke. As we mount Portsdown hill, views, on the left, towards Chichester and the bay of the sea ; on the right, towards Soudi- ampton ; retrospect of Bere forest in the valley, and ascending among the Hampshire hills most beau¬ tifully. Having reached the summit of Portsdown hill, the channel, the blue, high, sweeping ridge of the Isle of Wight, Spithead, Portsmouth, with its long embankments and spacious harbour, spread before our eyes. This view, though very grand, was not so striking as I expected. The hills do not advance near enough to the shore to hang over it, nor are they bold and broken in their shapes. We are not allowed to look down abruptly on the sea and the Isle of Wight ; but view the first at four miles distance, after the eye has gradually passed over the flat lands below, and the land¬ locked harbours, which break the scene with com¬ parative littlenesses. The shipping at Spithead appearetl beyond the town, on the left, where alow vol. i. с
coast extends to the Chichester river, and towards St. Helens on the main sea. The Isle of Wight rises immediately in front of the picture. Farther is the chalky ridge, that sinks towards the South¬ ampton water, anu admits withm its concave a tract of low coast, that extends towards the chan- iv. 1. " Descent!, and pass through the village of Co¬ bham, at its foot. The road now becomes ani¬ mated, and shows symptoms of a populous place ; carts, coaches, horsemen, private carriages, sol¬ diers, frequent signs antl dusty air, instead of the lonely wilderness and breezy freshness of the hilb and forest. Pass Portsea bridge, fortified and guarded, and so to Portsmouth, between other fortifications and tbe deeply-arched gates of tin* town. The ditches, the turfed embankments, crowned with rows of trees, reminded me of Bom¬ mel, in Holland. On the right, a view over the harbour, with huge, black prison-ships moored upon it. Passed through the long dusty old sub¬ urbs. The town itself old, level and somewhat mean, except the High-street, and about the sea¬ ward ramparts. Drove to the Fountain, a large and good inn, but could hardly get a room to dine in, as a West India and a Lisbon fleet were wait¬ ing to sail in a day or two. Went to the ramparts over the sea, crowded with officers of the army and navy, their wives and friends, and many well- dressed people attending to see the guns fired, in
honour of the coronation. From this place the shipping at Spithead in front, and the Isle of Wight, with the whole channel, arc enchanting. Returned to the Inn. "After dinner vve left the horse and chaise at the inn, and walked down to the busy, dirty place, called the Point, where we got into a wherry, and so went over the harbour to the decked passage- boat, that was to carry us to the Lie of Wight. Ad¬ verse wind, but not much of it. Sat on the deck ; a fine view of the Xow n, the hospital, the forts and harbour, as we sailed out : the sea not rough. Hear the he-hoes of the sailors, afar in the chan¬ nel, and the boatswain's shrill whistle. Passed through a part of the fleet ; saw Sir Sidney Smith's fine .ship, of immense size, with many other large ones round it. A cloudy sunset, but a gleam came out that fell upon the distant town and har¬ bour, lighted up the sea, and touched the dark polished sides of all the ships; glanced athwart the western hills of the island, of which we were now gaining a view. Sailed down the channel for Cowes. The breeze gradually sunk, and we were becalmed. A full September moon rose, and shed its radiance on the waters. Glided along the woody steeps of the island, and saw many a sweep¬ ing bay and obscure valley beyond. Reached Cowes about nine ; the approach to it, in a beautiful Ыу, btriking, with its summer lights illuminating many windows, and its houses seeming to rise
steeply from the shore ; many vessels at anchor in the bay; its slopes of scattered wood and pas¬ ture traced darkly round the bright clear water, and opening to an obscure valley. Landed at West Cowes, and went to ihe Vine Iun. " September ЙЗ. Loveiy day. W r aiked down to the shore and to the castle, a low grey tower tm a rocky point, washed by the title antl shadowed by lofty elms; sentinels pacing under them, round the fort ; fine view of Cowes and the bay. Thence mounted the rising ground over the shore, and walked a mile on the Yarmouth road, the views opening between trees and hedges to the dark lines of the New Forest ; the Southampton water just opposite; eastward, Portsmouth faintly seen and the shipping at Spithead ; the masts of the ships at Cowes caught among the trees below ; the scene changing at every step, with the winding road ; sometimes quite shut out, then smiling in the softest colours. All was in gradual shades of blue ; the calm sea below, the shores and distant hills, stretching along a cloudless blue sky. In¬ numerable vessels and little sails, whose whiteness was just softened with the azure tint. It is im¬ possible to express the beauty of those soft melt¬ ing tints, that painted the tlistant perspective, towards Spithead, where sea and sky uniteti, and where the dark masts antl shapes of shipping, draw¬ ing themselves on the horizon, gave tbis softness its utmost effect.
" Returned to dine at the Vine. Hired a good sailing-boat, to take us to Ryde ; and, alter din¬ ner, sailed from the harbour. The points, that form the horns of the crescent, are of rough, dark rock and shrub. On a brow, over a wood, rose the picturesque tower of a modern castle, which we heard had lately been the residence of a sister of Admiral Maebride. Glided vvith gentle breeze along the quiet and beautiful shores of the islanti, undulating in gentle slopes, covered with woods, ' to the water's edge ; sometimes the lighter green of meadows and pastures stretched to the very bank, with here and there a cottage, a village church, or some ornamented house on an ascent among trees, above which rose the main hills of the island. The shore seldom runs out into points, but winds into easy bays, hung with woods, some¬ times opening into sweet valleys, at others, ad¬ vancing gently, with all their " green delights," to meet t u e passing sails. The coast immediately opposite is uninteresting and flat; the chalky ridge of Portsdown too distant and uniform to be grand. In the retrospect, indeed, the New Forest spread a dark line along the sea, and the western hilh* of the island, near Yarmouth, waved along the horizon, and two pointed summits of the Isle of Purbcck folded in behind them, making it diffi¬ cult to di.scern whieh vvere the different coasts. Sea-fowl showing their white wings in the sun, as they circled over the waters. The breeze increased,
itnd we sailed finely among the now roughening, yet still green autl almost transparent waves, along the shore. About half way, the coast returns into a green recess, and the waters wind away among the hills verdant with thick woods and enclosures. Here the Governor has built a picturesque tower above his woods. Hence extend along the shore the fine woods of the rector of a village on an ascent, where the tower of the church, almost hid in wood, insists upon being painted. Here imagi* nation has nothing to do ; we have only to preserve the impression of the living picture on the memory, in its own soft colours. "Vessels of all sizes in the channel; the sailors? Ãe -Ло, the shrill whistle, and the rattle of cordage, as the sails were altered. u Reached Byde, about sunset. The town, among trees, rises from the shore up а long hill. " At the inn, though very neat, accomodations were so inadequate, that we resolved to proeeed in an open boat, which was about to return to Ports¬ mouth. After taking a hasty dish of very good tea, went down a rough causeway, where many recopie were hurrying to the same boat, and such a crowd collected as alarmed me, A small party was, however, soon made up for a second boat ; when, with little sails and two oars, we launched among the peaceful waters ; tinged, on one side of the horizon with the red glow of sunset, and brightening on the other, under a broad moon
rising over the ships at Spithead. Passed through the fleet. Heard voices talking far off over the dim waves, and sometimes laughter and joviality ; especially as we passed near a large ship, where lights in the great cabin high above, told of the Captain antl cheer. Distant lights appearing from the ships successively, as tho evening deep¬ ened, like glowworms, antl dotting the waters far around. As we drew near the shore, the music of French horns sounded with faint and melancholy sweetness ; discovered at last to come from Monck- ton Fort. Landed after an hour and a half, at the rampart steps. Walk by moonlight ou the ram¬ part. Supped and slept at the Fountain, after л day the most delightful of the whole tour." From Portsmouth Mr. and Mrs. Radcliffe pro¬ ceeded by Winchester to London. The following i$ her notice of the approach to Winchester, of the City and the Cathedral* " Saw the City lying tleep among the hollows, «heltered from the wintls by bare lulls, vvhich half conceal the town at their feet. The King's house, once really a palace, with new houses, conspicuous on rising ground. Found out at last, through the dusk, the venerable Cathedral, vvitli it's long roof* and very low tower, among fine old elms ; а ге-сеьь deep aad retired. The streets clean antl quiet; not a student visible. This decorum and neatness form «a curious contrast tt) the bustle and tumult of Ports¬ mouth, sending forth her people to the whole workl ;
while AVinchester seems to be so much withdrawn from it. Went to the George, a noble inn : sat in a part of the Assembly room, severed off. An¬ gelica Kuuffman's drawings at each vnd, Walked by moonlight up the High street ; good, terminated by a fine old gate. Led by the sound of martial music to the com t of the barracks in the old pa¬ lace. The suburbs ohi and narrow. " September ÍÍ5. Su eet morning. Hose soon, and went, before breakfast, to see tlie Cathedral, a very large ancient fabric, not highly ornamented without. Walks round it of most noble, tall elms, forming almost a perfect archway and as high as the roof ofthe Chureh- Old men employ¬ ed to weed them. Thi* Cathedral, we were told, is fifteen feet longer than any other iu Kngland, but it did not appear to the eye so long as that of Canterbury. Nave of great height ; painted win¬ dows poor, hut the choir affords the most beauti¬ ful coup fľwil I ever saw ; the carving of the dark stalls, antl of the pulpit exquisitely fine; but the white filigraime-work of the altar is as delicate to the eye as point-lace. The altar-piece, liv West, i.s Lazarus rising from the dead. The face well ex¬ presses the wanness antl sharpness of death; hut it might have been much more descriptive of reviving life, beginning to steal upon the langour of death; and of surprize and joyful hope, on behohling our Saviour. The attitude of Lazarus is indeed such, that he might be taken for a person dying lather than one returning to life. The counte-
nance of om* Saviouk is full of placid benevolence; but the action »should have been more expressive of command------of command, without effort. The principal female figure, vvho siipjiorts Lazarus, ík ekar, beautiful ami natural ; she looks up to our Saviolr, with tears of awe and gratitude; but the grief and anxiety she 1ms suffered are not vet entirelv chased from her countenance by joy antl thankfulness ; their impression was too deep to be suddenly effaced, though the cause of them is removed. The faces tif the spectators do not suf¬ ficiently speak astonishment, awe and adoration, except that of tme, seen remotely and obscurely* as if pressing forward more fully to ascertain the fact." On the 10th of July, 1800, Mr. and Mrs. Rad¬ cliffe left home on a tour to the southern coast. The first evening they reached Capel ;—after this the Journal proceeds. " July 11th.—Fine airy morning. Set off at ten. Hilly road, often narrow and shady. Upon the eminences views over the tops of oaks to moun¬ tainous hills and promontories, covered nearly to their summits with thick, woody inclosures ; when¬ ever the bank-trees opened, caught blue, peeping hilltops, or mountainous lines, coloured with a lovelv blut ish haze, and seen enchantingly beyond the dark, tufted foliage of majestic oak. Passed several open, pleasant villages. Every where, ve¬ getation seems in tlie utmost luxuriance ; every с 5
cottage-window arboured with rose, or wood¬ bine. The South Downs, at a distance, heaved up their high, blue lines, as ramparts worthy of the sublimity of the ocean, from wliose power they seemed to guard the island. Dined at a little inn in a village—Billinghurst. Terrible road after this ; flinty, sandy, and over frequent hills, but with some recompensing prospects. As we drew nearer the South Downs, distinguished the smooth green of their swelling summits from the dark woods below, and in the hollows of the hills, over whicii tbe evening sun threw rich lights агд! shadows. Abundance of wood round the villages ; good gardens to the cottages. " Came at length to Bury, only four miles from Arundel ; but our horse wanted rest after so toil¬ some a road, and we drank tea, before beginning to mount one of the prodigious hills we had long seen. Came at last to the fine downs on its summit, whence a world seemed to lie before us. Gran¬ deur, grace and beauty united in this wonderful view. We could just distinguish doubtfully in the twilight, at great distance, the channel between the coast and the Isle of Wight, a line of light upon the scene, with faint cloudy lands of the is¬ land beyond. We soon entered upon the domain of Arundel, the road winding fi'ucly among its poinpous woods and rough forest lawns. Partly by the tediousness of the ascent and partly by our delay upon the summit, these four miles occupied
an hour and a half. Wc did not see the castle from the road, but tlu* woods and the remains of old gateways were perceptible. A church of great exter , apparently old and grand. The main street of the town fearfully steep. Reached an excellent inn, about half past nine. " July líž. Fine day, but very hot. Went in the morning to see the castle, which stands on an eminence, near the town, about four miles from the sea. An irregular avenue leads to a solemn old gateway very deep and bending like those at Mentz, which, with the ruinous tower over it, man¬ tled with ivy, looked well in the dark perspec¬ tive of the trees. Low arched doors in the irate- way, at the sides; loops for archers and abun¬ dance of room for theiu in the immense thickness of the walls. ťť The library is in a long gallery, where hang some portraits ; among them James the Second ; his first wife, Lord Clarendon's daughter, hand¬ some, but with an air of discontent ; Elizabeth of Bavaria and her husband; two Cardinals, one of them a Howard. In many of the rooms, the walls, wherever a window occurs, are lined with dark mahogany, which forms the cases into frames, as it were, for the landscape .seen through them, but in general looks brown and poor : little wood vi¬ sible from this side of the castle. W r e passed through several noble apartments, not quite finish¬ ed, and others indifferently furnished ; the walls of
several, however, wainscoted, chair-high, with beau¬ tiful mahogany. The pillars and Gothic arch-work of the music-gallery exquisitely carved. "Monday, July 14.—Cool, cloudy morning. Set off, at eleven, for Worthing. A flat, uninteresting coast. Drove partly over the ^ands, the tide being down. Larks singing among the corn, near the shore. A sea-gull fishing in the salt-pools, near the sands. AVithin a few miles of Worthing dis¬ covered the sweep of grey downs about Brighton, that form a back-ground to the large bay ; within which, Brighton, Worthing, &c. are seated. Soon after, distinguished the dark masts of vessels lying before Worthing, some of which, seen upon the liirhter ereV of the distant hills, forming that fine bay, were picturesque, and seemed to he of conse¬ quence, but proved to be only small sloops. Horses and a carriage upon the sands informed us of our nearer approach to Worthing, which stands well upon the beach ; the tide out, and a fine plain of sand spread before the village. It was animated by groups of the busy and the idle ; little boats along the edge of the tide, others at anchor : alto¬ gether it was a very lively and amusing scene. A fleet of ships, said to be transports, convoyed by two men-of-war, came upon the distance, and clouded the horison for some time, but луеге too far off to be interesting. Dined at a pleasant hotel near the beach, with a grass-plot before it. Amused with numerous parties, who had come
from Brighton in sociables, chariots and gigs, to dine, and vvho exhibited themselves on the grass- plot under our window. After dinner, and after seeing the tide flow up the beach, veiy high, set off for Little Hampton, liy an inner road, through pieasant, shady lanes, between corn fields, with a range of distant hills on one side, their feet dark¬ ened with wood. Delightful afternoon. After a sweet ride, met the sea again, at the Beach House, where vve drank tea, supped, and slept. " July 15. Lovely day. Left Little Hampton about one for Worthing. Could not go by the sands, the tide being too near. Stopped to dine at the village of Terring, at a small house with a garden. After dinner, walked up a high hill to see a celebrated prospect. Gained the suunnit of the sheep-down, and stood on the top, whence we saw tbe whole comp ss of the horizon and such a stretch of sea and landscape ! The whole south¬ ern sky, and the blue sea, extending from the Isle of Wight (its faint blue-lands rising towards the west) to the white face of what we took to be Beachy Head, but afterwards learned tt) be Sea¬ ford Cliffs : beneath, lay sloping towards the sea, a landscape of exquisite hues, of corn and thick hedge-rows of woods and intermingled villages. Within the scope of the bay, towards Beachy Head, Worthing, Shoreham, Brighton, on the sea edge, backed vvitli downs. Farther on, the hills begin to whiten, and rise into the high face
guarding the entrance of Newhavcn river, which seems to fall into a fine bay. To the west, Little Hampton, the woods, town and castle of Arundel ; further on, amidst a long tract of woody country, the spire of Chichester Cathedral: further still, the high point of Portsdown-hill, but not Ports¬ mouth. The whole of the Isle of Wight clearly within view ; the ridge of hills divided into three parts. Spithead may be distinguished, it is said, at times. To the north, we looked down into woody valleys at the feet of the Downs, and saw Mr. Shelly's new mansion, among his fine woods* " Went back to our cottage inn delighted. Went to Worthing to tea. The tide just turning, the blue sea iiowing almost even with our windows. Parties again from Brighton at our inn. Lovely evening. When the tide was lower, the sands were gay with fine company. In another part, a cricket match going on upon the sands. Fishing vessels at anchor. Saw the Isle of Wight under the evening light, more distinctly in some respects, than before, yet like a dark cloud rising out of the sea." From Worthing, Mr. and Mrs. Radcliffe went by short journeys to Seaford. The following re¬ flections, prompted by the " melancholy greatness of nature," on a little excursion by the shore, will strikingly illustrate the thoughtful and pious cast of the writer. i{ July 19.—Went to see the rural village of Al-
friston, over such a road as I never saw before ; and leading over such hills í Two men helped the chaise down one of them. Some finely spreading oaks about the village, which stands on an emi¬ nence in a ffreea vallev hacked bv erey downs. Dined at a very old inn ; had seats brought on the ground, before and after dinner. Walked the greatest part of the way back to Seaford ; saw the sun set behind one of the vast hills. The si¬ lent course over this great scene awful—the de¬ parture melancholy. Oh God! thy great laws ΛνΐΙΙ one day be more fully known by thy crea¬ tures ; We shall more fully understand Thee and ourselves. The God of order and of all this and of far greater grandeur, the Creator of that glorious sun, which never fails in its course, will not neg¬ lect us, His intelligent, though frail creatures, nor suffer us to perish, who have the consciousness of our mortal fate long before it arrives, and of Him. He, who called us first from nothing, can again call us from death into life. " In this month, on the 24th of July, my dear father died two years since : on the 14th of last March, my poor mother followed him ; I am the last leaf on the tree ! The melancholy greatness with which I was surrounded this evening, made me very sensible of this."" From Seaford the tourists proceeded to East¬ bourne, and visited Beachy Head. The journal contains the following short description, which
places a striking scene before иь, with a few strokes of a masterly pencil. " July 2<).—Dined at the little village of Fris- ton, seated deep down between immense hills, in a valley, that about a mile off opens to the sea, at the dangerous place called Burling Gap. A Prus¬ sian captaiu, whose vessel had been wrecked at the foot of Beaeky, as our landlord called it, had been nine weeks at our poor little inn. The village had been almost buried in the snow T , which came down upon the village from the steep sides of the hills ; then the thaw nearly overwhelmed it. From the summit of a hill, on our way to Eastbourne, immense retrospect of sea and land. Surprising appearance of the sea, which seemed to rise so high, that it could scarce be distinguished from clouds; ships looked like birds in the sky. No¬ thing seen but great and .simple objects—the round sea—the huge uncultivated headlands.'" The ascent of Beachy Head, and the view from it, are described at some length in the Journal ; but the following scene on the shore is more pe¬ culiar and striking, " July £3. Walked to the shore and along it, with a hope of having ^ome sight of the sea—front of Beachy Head from beneath it, though four or live miles off. The beach impassable by any sort of carriage. A shore of ruins under the cliffs, which gradually ri.se from what is called the Wish- House, a small white building standing sweetly
near the beach, to the summit of the Cape. Large blocks of granite imbedded on the shore, and ex¬ tending to the waves, which rage and foam over them, giving one dreadful ideas of shipwreck. £2-.«.^*а~-..,.л w-.nt ^.Ι.,ι.-- Ж.Г i*t<nľŕii *r алпл л*« vi£> ril timt ОЧПИ'ИШ 1 î») р<ИЛ IIV О \п. ^ПИЧ1у .mi.v., wi jiiuuuø. soon ending against masses of granite, or chalk, between which it is difficult, and not always possi¬ ble to walk ; some of them must be stepped upon. Within half a mile of the great front, unable to proceetl farther; sat down on a block, wearied out, desiring William tt) go on ; he was soon hid by a turn of the cliffs. Almost frightened at the solitude and vastness of the scene, though Citarice* was vvith me. Tide almost out ; only sea in front ; white cliffs rising over me, but not impending; strand all around a chaos of rocks and fallen cliffs, far out into the waves ; sea-fowl wheeling and screaming ; all disappeared behind the point, be¬ yond vvhich, is the great cliff; but we bad doubled point after point, in the hope that this would be the next, and liad been much deceived in the dis¬ tances by these great objects ; after one reinóte point gained, another and another succeeded, and still the great cliff was unrittained; the white pre¬ cipices beautifully varied with plants, green, blue, yellow and poppy. Wheat-èars flew \ψ oñen from the beach : Chance pursued them. At length, William returned, having been nearly, but not
quite, iu front of the great promontory» Slowly and laboriously we made our way back along the beach, greatly fatigued, the day exceedingly hot, die horizon sulphurous, with lowering cloud»; thunder lolled faintly at a distance.*' The same afternoon, Mr. and Mrs. Radcliffe continued theii tour to Hastings, The following is the picturesque view of their journey from Bex- hill to Hastings, in the evening*. " From Bexhill, descended between the high, shrubby banks of lanes, so narrow, that tlie wheels seemed to fill the passage; in some places a horse could not have passed ; we met no carriage, ^a* we must have backed a great way. Breathing honey¬ suckles on the banks ; deep twilight. Heard tlie sea frequently on our right when the wheels stopped. We had before passed Pevensey leveb and thetown, with its fine old castle; towers in ruins* On our approach, it reminded one of New¬ ark castle. Near eleven, before we reached Hast- ings; no moon; starlight; milky-way very lucid ; seemed to rise out of the sea. Solemn and pleasing night-scene. Glow-worms, iu great numbers, shone silently antl faintly on the dewy banks, like some¬ thing supernatural Judgment of Shakspeare in selecting this image to assist the terrific impression iu his ghost-seen*. May be called earth-stars. The coast patrole passed us. How far to Hast¬ ings? Three miles. Farther on had a narrow escape : horse and chaise suddenly plunged down a bank into the pebbles ; nearly övertuned. Hap-
píly our horse stood quite still, after the shock, and until we had ascertained the rugged course we were in ; I walked the rest of the way. Pass under grand, dark rocks, disjointed and starting up in splintered point**, and huge masses. The-se rocks, near the beach and over the road, continue to where the houses open." From Hastings Mrs. Radcliffe proceeded along the coast to Dover, to which place <he was ex¬ tremely partial, and thence by Feversham to Lon¬ don* After minutely detailing her little adven¬ tures, she thus concludes her journey :—* " In all our tour saw nothing so fine and beau- tiful as the views of sea and land from the Downe over the East Bourne. The sweet repose of the landscape and sea-bay to Hastings, and tlie grandeur of the various views, on all sides be¬ tween the valleys of the South Downs, and even above these summits, circling nearly the whole horizon, with soft blue waves." In the autumn of this year, Mrs. Rudcliflb spent a fortnight at Little Hampton, and return¬ ing by Haslemere, thus describes the country immediately southward of that plaee. " Three miles of continual ascent, or descent of almost tremendous hills, long and steep opening to vast distances, now obscured in ruin, but sub¬ lime in their obscurity—·
* These hi^h, wild hill-, and rou-j-h uneven roads, Drng out our miles and make them wearisome/ {\ МВЫЛКБ " This is the country, from which Collins drew his fir4 ideas, and fed his early taste for the wild and the grant!. ' О ! vale« and wild-woods, would he say, In yonder grave your Druid lios." Coi i iní. " llave never seen such wild woody mountains before in England ; they resemble the forests of Wette ravia more than anv I have seen, but with this difference, that there the mountains are more pointing, abrupt and rocky, and that here the road often winds round the edge of the hills into deep and most picturesque glades, vvhere com¬ fortable cottages lie snug beneath noble trees, and ruddy children play under the branches, among tlie huge timber felled on the ground, the Wood¬ man's implements and the thatched hovel. Sylvan, or other rural industry appeared in tvery ham¬ let. Clouds of smoke from places, where wood was charred, sometimes darkened the air. This, is the most woody tract in Susbex, and probably in Eng¬ land. The eastern end of the country has no wood: the immense hills stand bare in all their grandeur." The following notes are extracted from the Journal of a Tour, made in the autumn of 1801, to Southampton, Lymington, and the Isle of
Wight, The two first days* journey supply no matters of interest : in the afternoon of the third day, &)th Sept. the travellers thus approach the beautiful neighbourhood of Southampton : " At length, the blue hill tops of the Isle of Wight appeared faintly on the horizon, over the stretching forest masses of the near scene. At the sixth mile-stone, entered a part ofthe New Forest; beautiful woods and glades ; thick trees shadow¬ ing the road ; v\ herever the woods opened, espe¬ cially on the right and in front, other rich masses and others still beyond, rose pompously. One of the perspectives in front particularly fine, as we saw our road descending among the deep woods, and other woods rising up the hills and crowning the bold summit of an eminence, that seemed to rear itself over all the forest. The deep gloom of stormy clouds and fleeting lights of sunshine ex¬ tremely various ; the sun often shedding a misty glory over the solemn woods in the west, while sudden and awful shadows dwelt wide over other summits. Passed a most picturesque hamlet of green mosseti cottages scattered round a little lawn, where the woods opened, but closed again in thicker shades. Four miles of this sweet scenery, when vve entered upon heath, and came upon a high level common, extending a mile, or two, that opened upon a vast prospect on either hand : in front, all the hills of the Isle of Wight, from east to west, swelled along the horizon. On
the right, the wavy woods of the New Forest bounded all the western and northern view. The richness of this vast mass of tufted woods is in¬ describable. Part of the Southampton water was visible on this side, flowing between wooded banks with villages on its edge. On the left, the view Over the vale was not so grand, but more diversi¬ fied by the Hght green of pastures and by fre¬ quent villages and white mansions among the woods, that spread among the gentle slopes. Showers and sunshine alternately dimmed and brightened the hills. The splendour of the sun fell, at times, upon the forest, in the west, while a heavy shower darkened an open valley in the east, softened the verdure of the nearer hills, and spread over the woods and meadows and villages a gradual chastening tint, that was enchanting. At length, the spire of the great church of South¬ ampton appeared over the woods in front, while the town was yet unseen." After a short notice of Southampton, where Mrs. Radcliffe remained only two nights, the Journal proceeds :— " After breakfast, set off for Lyndhurst ; passed along the head of the bay, and by Millbrook, then the long bridge and causeway After a fong hill, descend upon the New Forest, and pass be¬ tween open lawns and woods, capping every little eminence, and spreading round like those of Ken¬ sington Gardens. Longed for the speed of a stag
to bound along these lawns and endless forest- glades. Dined at the Crown, in a parlour oppo¬ site to the inn, which was full; some forest-com¬ missioners here. The Princess Sophia of Glou¬ cester expected at the King's House ; shown to us by an elderly woman. Good rooms ; ancient fur¬ niture. A wood fire on the hearth of the Princess's room and on that of the dining-room below. All these rooms look under thick lofty trees to the forest woods, that rise close over the village, to¬ wards Brokenhurst. Oak-benches at the upper- end of Ruf usihali, where the forest courts are held—the most ancient part of the building. A large iron stirrup, called Rufus's stirrup. " From Lyndhurst, the ride to Brokenhurst is through ñ\ r e miles of pompous forest groves, of which grandeur is the characteristic, mingled with great beauty. The forest crowds over the road. Ouly two spots the whole way where the trees re¬ tire round lawns. Hence to Lymington : the coun¬ try is inclosed ; but still the lanes are forest-lanes. Passed Boldre, leaving Mr. Gilpin's a mile on the left, and soon came in view of the Isle of Wight, with Lymington, and its neat cupola- church. Came in at dusk ; made our way in the market-place, between waggons and cheese piled up for the morrows fair. " Oct, 3. Left Lymington at half-past three, in the packet for Yarmouth ; after viewing the fair, and the fine booths of trinkets and plate. Passed
many charming residences among the woody banks on the left. Glided smoothly under a light sum¬ mer air ; the evening splendid, and the scene most loveiy. The Needles are vast dark blocks of rock, tall, but not pointed, standing out from the island in tİıe sea. Hurst castle, with its dark line of peninsula stretching athwart the Channel. The Needles become more huge seen against the light, with the point of the Alum Hock in shade. These objects, with the high line of the Isle of Purbeck, faintly grey beyond, composed a perfect picture, with most harmonious colouring. The light silver grey of the sea first, met the eye, then the dark Alum Bock projected to meet Hurst Castle, whose towers were pencilled in deep grey beyond, which softened away to the heights of Purbeck, that closed the perspective. After sun-set, streaks of brightest crimson appeared on the sky, behind clouds, black and swelling; the upper shores clear, thougii dark. Approached Yarmouth, under this sweet twilight. The western shore of Yarmouth goes off in a darkly wooded point, with many white houses, or cottages, among the trees. Land¬ ed on Yarmouth quay, small, and crowded with people. Dutch sentinels on the little fort over the quay and rampart of the old casle. Our inn built by Sir Kobert Holmes, governor of the island, on the scite, I fancy, of Henry the Eighth's old castle. Our horse and gig came in another packet.
" Oct. 4. After breakfasting at Yarmouth, set out in a bright morning for the Light-house above the Needles. As we rose, the Channel and the English coast, from Portsdown Hill (known by its long chalk-pit) to the shore near Pool in Dor¬ setshire, lay before us, bounded partly by the New Forest and thick inclosures, and .spreading with towns and villages and innumerable seats and farms, with a vast extent of the northern part of thelsle of Wight, and with Southampton Bay, to Lymington, here and there a white house on the shore, snug under trees, and other hou se-tops peep¬ ing out, almost wherever I directed the glass, above the forest. Di.-5Covered Lyndhurst steeple, with the large white house at Mount Royal, ť liosomed high in tufted trees/ The whole country, from the neighbourhood of Southampton to the West, rises gradually from the shore into a line of hori¬ zon little varied ; but the richness imá cheerful beauty of this widely extending amphitheatre, seen over the calm blue Channel, with here and there a white sail and a ship oi vatr .it anchor, permit no desire for greater variety. As we rose upon the down, this scene enlarge! : the Isle of Purbeck became more majestic ; its outline is more mountainous than that of the Isle of Wight, with a range of high awful cliffs below. It was now tinged with misty azure, but the ¡-un brightened all the sea before it. Two of its -•uv-íL.it*-* appeared finely in the perspective from Cowi--' 1 Point. The VOL. Г. Ό
effect of the sea so close ou either hand of this vast western promontory, called the Needle Point, or the Alum rock, running out upon the ocean Hke a long narrow causeway, is awful You have a wonderful and rather a painful sensation uf the narrowness of the earth that bears you, though it may be halfa mile, or more, in width. As the Needle rocks were not visible from the Light-house, we left the chaise, and descended the down half a mile, and looked upon them. On their summits, vvhich now seem sharp, and splinter¬ ed into ledges and points, perceived with the glass numbers of dark birds quietly seated ; not one took wing, or uttered any cry. Perhaps it wab owing to our great height, that the Needles disap¬ pointed us, and appeared insignificant, compăreţi with the grander objects around us: listened to the surge breaking below, round the feet of these rocks. Did not venture near enough the edge to see into Alum Bay. Drove to Freshwater Bay. The inn at Freshwater Gate in the bottom is a little cottage, with two or three rooms apart on the beach. A ruinous and desolate shore spreads and rises on either hand, Mounted a promontory, which confined our view from the inn, on the right. Greatness and desolation. As the tide was coming m, could not see a cave in the cliff below. Re¬ turned to Yarmouth at five." The following is Mrs. RadcHffe's account of a visit to the tract called Undercliffe.
" Oct. 6. Set off for the Undercliffe, a tract of shore formed by fallen cliffs, and closely barri- cadoed by a wall of rock of vast height. Entered upon it about a mile from Kniton, autl found our¬ selves in such a scene of ruin, as vve never saw- before. The road is, for the most part, close tt) the wall of rock, which seems to lie in loose hori¬ zontal strata, vvith frequent perpendicular fissures, which threaten the trravelle vvith tlestruction, as he passes sometimes beneath enormous masses, that lean forward. This is the boundary on one side of the road ; on the other side, is an extremely irre¬ gular and rugged descent of half a mile toward* the sea : on this side, there are sometimes what may be called amphitheatres of rock, where all the area is filled with ruins, which are, however, frequently covered with verdure and underwood. that stretch up the sides, with the wildest pomp, and shelter here a cottage, here a villa among the rocky hillocks. We were two hours and a half in going from Kniton to the inn at Steephill, five miles, W. leading the horse almost the whole way : a Druid scene of wildness and ruin. Some¬ times the road led us into vast semicircular bays of rock, filled up entirely to the eye with wild wood and broken hillocks; the sea below appearing to stretch so from point to point, that it seemed impossible to make our way out, till the road led us under projecting crags of the promontory into other recesses, and, winding under these threaten- d 2
ing walls, again led near the sea, on which ï looked down, not without terror. Descended upon the romantic and sweet village of St. Lawrence, among thickets on a hill, near the shore. Beauti* ful cottages, covered with ivy even to the chimney tops, with each its gartleu, and some with little orchards hung with golden fruit; clear, gushing rills passing under the shades to the sea. A mile beyond, the beautiful village of Steephill, in the same style. Went to the New Inn, standing on a hill, with a wide sea view in front, half a mile off, and at the foot of St. Boniface Downs, whose steep green sides rise to a tremendous height be¬ hind it, having below them, on the other hand, the little woody village of St. Boniface, vvith its beauti¬ ful cottages and villas. 11 The remaining memoranda of the visit to Steep¬ hill, are too l mg to be extracted, but contain some beautiful descriptions, and several vivid notices of the effects of light, as for example :—■" The sea in gloom, with gleams of cold silvery light upon it, where the clouds beo-an to break : these lights finely marked the distances on the grand surface of the ocean, as they fell in blue lines. 11 Again, " Sun¬ lights on the sea, and, now and then, bright green >pots between black shadows;"—in the evening " a-fîery sun-set with sullen clouds." The follow¬ ing short recollection of a storm is full of feeling and power :— " АПег dark, a storm, vvith thunder and lightning;
listened to the strong, steady force of the wind and waves below. The thunder rolled aud bur,>t at intervals, and often the sound was .so mingled with that of the wind and waves, as to be scircely dis¬ tinguished from it. No complaining of the wind, but a strong and awful monotony. Lightning, very blue, showed at moments the foaming waves far out ; utter darkness between the Hashes. Glad to hear from the other side of the house, cheerful voices talking, or singing. When the storm sub¬ sided, the thunder rolled away towards the Subsex coast. This display of the elements was the grand¬ est scene I ever beheld ; a token of God directing his world. What particularly struck me was the appearance of irresistible power, which the deep monotonous sound of the wind and surge conveyed. NoLhing sudden ; nothing laboured ; all a conti¬ nuance of k sure power, without eifort.*' From Steephill the travellers proceeded to Ryde, where Mrs. Radcliffe made the following charac¬ teristic remarks :— " Rejoice to look again on a peopled sea, and prefer this point of the Isle, for animateti and beautiful scenery, to any other. The back of the island has very extensive views ; and, for that extensiveness, may be called grand ; but there are no mountain lines, no shapes, that overwhelm us with admiration : the want of wood forbids them magnificence. The undcrcliff is wild and romantic, rather than grand; but the sea hori¬ zon from it, is often very grand. Upon the whole,
I prefer rich beauty to wild beauty, unless accom¬ panied by such shapes of grandeur as verge upon the sublime. Lovely sun-set ; a roseate, melting into saffron and shades of blue ; some light purple streaks. Below, the dark woody line of shore bend¬ ing tow r ards Cowes ; the bay at its feet, purpled from the clouds. All this seen from our bed-room windows, above and between lofty trees." Mr. and Mrs. Radcliffe returned by Salisbury. We extract from the journal the approach to Salisbury and the description of its Cathedral " Oct. 13. Rainy morning; cleared up to a love¬ ly afternoon. Left Southampton before twelve, for Salisbury. Turned out of the road, at the village of Totting, and soon entered upon the skirts of the New Forest, but saw no avenues there, no lovely forest-glades, rather forest-land, than forest; but we had often rich woody views into the vale, near Southampton on the right, and continual forests rising on the left ; and a few miles from Piaitford, came upon some of the sweetest scenery of the New Forest, Upon a wild glade, touching effect of misty light, beyond its gloom. Sometimes an opening in the near copses showed a distant perspective of deep shade. About five miles from Salisbury, gain the summit of a high ridge, and look at once upon a new and grander ridge large and .sharper hills rising to a great extent, with the vast Cathedral and lofty spire of Salisbury in front. W r e had fingered so much oh our road,
that as we entered Salisbury, a new moon gave us faintly the shadow of its sublime Cathedral, vvith its pointed roofs and its pinnacles and its noble spire. How could Mr. Gilpin prefer a tower to it í Saw, as we passed, the moonlight shining through the windows of the aisles and touching aslant the lofty spire, while the elms beside it were in deep shade. Had entered the city by a deep Gothic gateway, and saw others lighted up in perspective, in a street, out of which we turned to our inn, the Antelope—a very good inn. " Oct. 14. Went, in the rain, to the Cathedral ; entered it just as the organ and chaunt struck up, very fine, but not so solemn, as at Canterbury. The church most light, beautiful and elegant ; but it did not affect me, like the solemn simplicity, the awful roofs and grand perspective of Canter¬ bury. The tone of the organ, too, very good, but did not listen for its swelling and dying sounds, as through the vast aisles of Canterbury ; there is not space for them to roll in, and murmur afar off, as there. Was much struck vvith the effigies of the dead, laid out on each side of the great aisle, from pillar to pillar. Having been brought by Mr. Wyatt from St. Mary's Chapel, that termi-* nates the choir, they have been placed on a raised step, that seems indeed to have been originally tlesigncd for them. The pillars of this Cathedral are in Gothic clusters, not of the slender form, ihat afterwards prevailed, but, as Mr. Gilpin says,
"when Saxon heaviness first began to give way."* Their effect is elegant. They are washed of a stone colour, as are the walls and roofs ; the last are without tracery, and are marked as if of brick. The arches are obtusely pointed, having one nar¬ row vein of open work running near the outer euge^ which gives lightness to them." After an attempt to visit Stonehenge, which was frustrated by a violent storm, Mr. and Mrs. Rad¬ cliffe returned, in the leisurely manner which they preferred, to London. In the autumn of 1802, Mr. and Mrs. Radcliffe took a journey to Leicester and Warwick, and re¬ turned by AVoodstock and Oxford. From the journal kept during that tour, the following de¬ scriptions of Kenilworth, of one or two scenes in Warwick Castle, and of Blenheim, are perhaps most worthy of selection. Both Warwick Castle and Blenheim are described with great minuteness ; but both these mansions are so generally known, that it İö thought sufficient to extract such portions of the accounts of them only, as are most charac¬ teristic *of the writer's feelings and tastes. Kenilworth. " Left Coventry at half past twelve, and passed through a pleasant well-wooded country to Kenil¬ worth. Almost every village over-topped with lofty trees. Passed for some miles over Kenil¬ worth Chase, by a straight road of noble breadth,
bordered with forest. Part of this forest was, in former times, cut down, in order to dislodge rob¬ bers. The gate of the castle, to which vve drove up, is in the grey square tower, built on a high rock, by Leicester. This gate being now a resi¬ dence, the former entrance by it to the court of the Castle is stopped up, antl we passed through the garden, at its side, into the green and open area, that was once the grand court of the ea&tle. Hence we looked up to the noble masses of ruin, that still stand proudly, and form three broken and irregular sides of what was once the inner court. Of the buildings that formed the fourth side, there are now no vestiges, except the knolliness of the ground, where they once stood, may be called such, and except part of the buildings still called Leicester's, these having been built by him. These are a fine mass of ruined walls, covered vvith thick¬ est ivy, on the left ; on the right, stands a more noble mass, with three lofty arches in a row, going the whole depth of lhe wall, sixteen feet : this is called Cæsar's Tower, antl, though the oldest part of the Castle, appears, on the outside, the freshest and newest. It is of a greyer and more solid stoni 1 than the rest. This, too, is finely hung vvith iv\. Between these masses, in perspective, forming the third sitie of the court, is the most picturesque remainder of the castle, though Cæsars Tower is the grantlest. This was once the great ludí, ov banqueting-room. Its three beautiful pointed i) 5
window-frames are there still ; and the arch of a Gothic door, most elegantly twined with vine-leaves, all now hung and clustered with the richest dra- nerv of ivy. The trunk of some of this ivy is of great thickness, and it is so old, that in some places, tlie branches are sapless and leafless, and the grey stalks seemed to crawl about the ruin in sympathy. Other remains of buildings partly connect the three sides of the court, and are inter¬ mingled and crowned with alder and ash plants. This view of the ruin was very striking ; the three chief masses great and solemn, without being beau¬ tiful. They spoke at ouce to the imagination, with the force and .simplicity of truth, the nothing¬ ness and brevity of this life— fc generations have beheld u«* and passed away, as you now behold US and shall pass away : they thought oi' tfie generations before them, as you now think of tin m, and ñ< future ages shall think of you. We have witnessed this, yet we remain; the voices that revelled beneath us are heard no more, vet the winds of Heaven still sound in our ivy.' And a htill and solemn sound it was as we stood looking up at these walls," Scene* in Warwick Ca-vtle. u After leaving the great hall, went, on the left, ¡nto the chapel—a plain memorable chapel, lined with oak ; then to the armoury, a long, narrow gallery, or rather a suite of narrow rooms, com¬ municating by small Gothic doorways, and ex-
tending, perhaps, nearly the whole length of the Castle, with tall windows of painted glass, bowing out into the court of the Castle. The walls of this armoury were covered vvith weapons of various kinds and sizes, from the Indian war-spear, to the Highland dirk, with a knife and fork tucked into the same sheath. But what struck me most was near the end of the gallery (when it makes a sud¬ den turn into the tower that terminates the cas¬ tle), where appeared before me a broad, yet dark staircase of oak, and at the foot of it, as if guard¬ ing the passage, a large figure in complete armour, the beaver down, and a sword in its hauti ! The general twilight, vvith the last western gleam break¬ ing through the painted window at the foot of the stair-case, antl touching the bronze, gave full effect to this scene, and heightened the obscurity of the stairs, in perspective. This armour came from Ger¬ many ; our conductor knew no more. Saw the brass coat, shot-proof, worn by Lord Brooke vvhen he was shot in the eye during his attack upon Lichfield Cathedral On the opposite side, a com¬ plete suit of black armour, the knees with pro¬ jecting points : could learn nothing of its history. Left the building with regret. Paused again in the court to admire the beautiful lofty acacias and other noble trees surrounding the lawn, and the most majestic towers forming the grand front- The octagon tower, rising in the angle of the walls near the house-door, the most beautiful
a» far as regards proportion ; the one nearest the house the most venerable and warlike. Near the summit au embattled overhanging gallery, vvhere formerly, no doubt, sentinels usetl to pace tluring the night, looked down upon the walls of the Cas¬ tle, the rivers antl the country far and wide, re¬ ceived tho watch-word from the sentinel, perched m the little watch-tower, higher still antl seeing farther in the moonlight, and repeated it to the soltlier*- on guard on the walls and gates below. Before tho.se great gates antl underneath these towers, Shakspear-A ghost might have stalked; they are in the very character antl spirit of such an apparition, grant! and wild and strange; there -diouldp however, have been more extent. Stayed before these grey towers till the last twilight. Blenheim. " Lovely da\. At eleven, walked through tbe Park. The triumphal arch, ;«t the entrance, has too much the air of a merely handsome gateway ; the fonven'ant division into passages» in the ordinary mode of considerable gates, leaves nothing ap¬ propriate to Fame. The view of the Park, with the turrets of the palace, of the mass of wood beyond, the verdant sweep of the intermediate ground, that descends to the water, vvith the water itself and the Palladiau bridge beyond, is very striking, я few paces after the entrance. The palace ibelf, though here seen beyond and
over clumps of trees, appears to greatei advan¬ tage than vvhen more distinctly viewed : its nmny turrets, uow beheltl in clusters, have an air of grandeur, which thev want when separately ob_ servable. As vve advance, the groves on the left thicken and have a forest-like shade; but the view on the rising ground, including the ce¬ lebrated pillar, is too much broken into parts. Though the ground rises finely, its great Mowing lines are spoiled by too many groves ; there should have been one, or two, grand masses of wood, and the rest sweeping lawn, This park is not com¬ parable vvith that at Knole, either fov swell and variety of surface, or for grandeur and disposition of wood ; no such enchanting groves of plane and birch and oak, as there. But a very grand ave¬ nue extends from the Oxford gate to the palate. On entering the garden, of finest turf und abade, pass the east front to the lawn of the back front, opening to a view of distant hills betweeii the high groves. The back front of the house much (hebest; more simple, and, seen in perspective, very good. Parterres in the flower-garden, with basket-work round them, in the prett ν fashion of the last century in France. Hence, through deep shade to the riieep-walk, where the light opens upon the country, and then soon look down upon another bridge and water. This walk continues on the brow, for about half a mile, very sweetly, and leads to a sloping lawn shaded with the noblest
trees in the garden. More struck with this spot than vvith any, except about the large lake. First, two poplars of most astonishing height, much larger than those in the avenue at Manheim. At their feet, the light green spray foliage of these deciduous c}"prc-sses hat! a most charming effect Near the poplars, a lofty plane, but inferior in height. Near this, a surprising Portugal laurel swept the ground, and spread to a vast circum¬ ference ; a very extraordinary tree for size. De¬ lighted with the steep green slope, the water and bridge below, the abrupt woody banks opposite, and, above all, the grandeur of the shades. Pass the bridge : on the right, the massy rocks of the cascade, but no water; on the left, the water winding beyond the woody banks ; a highly tufted island, with a wooden building near its margin, very picturesque. " Over a sofa, in the dining-room, a large family picture by Sir Joshua Reynolds. The Duke seated, and turning to the Marquis of Blandford, when a boy, with an air and countenance in which the nobleman and the good man are blended ; more pleasing and dignified than Romney's portrait of him. The Duchess, of pleasing countenance, and much sweetness in her eyes. Of the children, the most striking is Lady Charlotte (Nares), five or six years old, playfully holding a mask, and laugh¬ ing behind it, as she frightens her sister, who draws back in doubt and with some apprehension
but calmly. The figure of Lady C. has all the natural, playful grace of a child, though the atti¬ tude is rather overstrained. Vandyke's portrait of Charles the First's Queen is not so fine as his picture of her in the domestic drawing-room at Warwick Castle. " It is in the superior colours and cxpres.sive drawing of the tapestry, that Blenheim chiefly ex¬ cels the interior decorations of other great man¬ sions. That in the state room is from Brussels, and most exquisite ; presented by that city l о the great Duke. It entirely covers the lofty walls. Each compartment displays a different siege or battle, and the distance, fading often into blue hills, is so finely shaded, that the whole seems almost a living prospect, and that you might step into the scene. The figures in the foreground are nearly as large as life, and chiefly portraits : they are admirably grouped, and the action not only spirited and natural, but often full of charac¬ ter. The Duke is alvvays on horseback, and has the same air of countenance—attentive and eager ; the features somewhat thin. The face of a French spy, under examination before the Duke, is ad¬ mirable; watchful, sedate, and firm. In the next compartment is a very spirited figure of Lord Cadogan, on horseback, his hat held off at arnťs length, receiving orders from the Duke. His eagerness, proud submission, and impatience to be gone, while he bends to listen, and can scarcely
rein his impatient charger, are all conspicuous. His faithful dog, that would be near him in every battle, and that returned safe home at last, is wait¬ ing beside bini." In June 1805, Mrs. Radcliffe went to see Bel¬ vedere House, the seat of Lord Eardley. The following is an extract from her account of that mansion. " The park entrance from Lcxden Heath is through a low, iron gate, beyond vvhich is seen the gravel road, winding like a path, among the turf, under the stately branches of clumps of oak, &c. Neither the house, nor any good prospect is visi¬ ble here; but, as you advance along the elegant plain of the park, a blue tlistance of the Essex hills appears beneath the low-spread branches of oaks, where there is a seat; on the right, the Grecian portico of the house, among the dee]) shada-s, vvhich exclude all other view. Tbe en¬ trance is to a light, elegant hall, or vestibule, of French grey stucco, as are all the extensive pas¬ sages of the house, the floors covered with oil¬ cloth, of a small pattern, in shades of blue. On the right, through an ante-room of elegant simpli¬ city, pass to a dining-room ; the walls of French- grey ; silk-moreen curtains, orange; chocolate-co¬ loured fvinp;e. Ovei the door, two exquisite views of Venice, by Canal tti ; the Alchymist, Teniers, in a corner near the fire; then Rembrandt (by him¬ self), looking out qf the picture, with a broad
smile, a coarse but arch countenance ; Van Trump, the Dutch Admiral, a bluff countenance, as if the habits of a seaman predominateti over tliose of the oiiieer. After seeing several other very fine pictures here, pass some smaller rooms and elegant passages to the red draw ing-room, the finest in the house; hung vvith crimson damask, bordered with gold; curtains and chairs the same, and a most rich carpet, in crimson antl black. A iinelv stuccoed carved ceiling; a large bow-window looking upon the woods of the park. In a shaded corner, neir the chimney, a most exquisite Claude, an evening view, perhaps over the Campagna of Rome. The sight of this picture imparted much of the luxurious repose and satisfaction, which we derive from contemplating the finest scenes of Na¬ ture. Here was the poet, as well as the painter, touching the imagination, and making* you see more than the picture contained. You saw the real hght of the sun, you breathed the air of the country, you felt all the circumstances of a luxu¬ rious climate on the most serene antl beautiful landscape; and, the mind being thus softened, you almobt fancied you heard Italian music on the air —the music of Paisiello ; and such, doubtless vvere the scenes that iuspired him. Passed into smaller rooms, and by the ьате elegant lobbies, to tlie bummer drawing-room, vvhere the bowed win¬ dow looks down upon a noble sweep of the Thames, with the well-wooded sloping hills of
Essex in the distance. The noble simplicity of this long bend of the Thames, and of the whole scene, is very striking. The eye passes abruptly, bet ween the hanging woods of two jutting eminences of the park, to the green level below, which forms in front a perfect bow of several miles. The woods near the house are so planted, as to conceal the entrance and exit of the river upon the plains below, leaving nothing of it visi¬ ble but that line of perfect grace antl grandeur wliich it marks between the two green shores, while the vessels seem to steal upon the scene, appearing and disappearing, on either hand, from behind the woods. The dark verdure of these, the lighter green of the plain beneath, the silver grey of the river that bounds it, the white sails and various shades of the fleeting vessels, ships with clustering top-gallant sails, sloops with the stretching and ele¬ gantly sweUing sails at their heads and above them, and skiffs, or other boats, with their little sprit- sails, too often bending low :—these, with the hills of Essex bending into bluish distance, form alto¬ gether a soothing harmony of tints and objects.— Among other pictures that struck me, (especially the family of Snyders, by Rubens,) was one of Wouvermans, representing the dark gate of a fort, with cavaliers on war-horses, waiting impa¬ tiently for admittance, their horses rearing and prancing ; upon the high, shadowing walls, shrubs appear against the light sky, and above them is
seen a high embankment, with a cannon pointed downwards, and near it a tree, down which a man is hastily descending, as if he had been overlooking a skirmish on the plains below, (not in view,) whence the party without the gate seem to have made a precipitate retreat. They are, perhaps, waiting till he has reported to the guard at the gate, whe¬ ther they are friends or enemies. The impatience for admittance of those who think themselves likely to be pursued, the cautious apprehension of those within the fort, and the unseen and doubtful battle, hinted at by the man on the tree, render this a very interesting picture. " The grand staircase, by which we passed to the room over this, is remarkable for its lightness and elegance. All its light is received from a raised frame of glass, which crowns a most richly stuccoed roof, that forms a broad border only round it. I was much struck with the lightness, proportion, and elegance of this staircased hall, and indeed with the numerous long passages of the house. In the family dining-room the pictures are all portraits. One of the late Lady Eardley, when young, is a profile of most exquisite sweet¬ ness. ŕ Softness and sweetest innocence she wears, And looks like Nature, in the world's first bloom.' Strong countenance of a tutor of Lord Eardley. No view, but of the Park, from any of these rooms; nor from the library, opening by pillars from a
kind of ante-room, or vestibule. Before a cone at the upper end, is a most noble mahogany library- table with drawers. Betweeii the windows are semi-circular inlaid tables, with tleep drawers for maps ; some valuable modern books, but no old ones. The art of giving effect to the finest views, by permitting them to be seen only from the rooms whence they may be observed without interruption and in their perfection, is carried very far here ; ft)i*, as you advance through the grounds tothe house, the eye is confined by the woods ; and is suffered only once to catch a glimpse of distance under the spreading shades, sufficient to touch the imagination and excite expectation of a scene, whose grandeur and simplicity, when at length it does appear, fully repays the impatience of curi¬ osity. We did not see the woody grounds ex¬ tending very far along the brow over the Thames, nor the tower of the Belvedere, nearly at the ex¬ tremity of them and on their highest point. This must look down suddenly upon a new scene of the river, vvhere it spreads into that broad bay, whose eastern point projects opposite to the broken steeps of Purfleet, and comprehends within its curve Erith, vvith its ivied church, and the hills around it, varied with woods and villas, and whose west¬ ern point lie.·, near the foot of this eminence, con¬ cealed by the woods. But from a window of this lofty tower I doubt not the eye extends to Graves- end in the east, and probably further. Its south-
em window must look athwart the back of Shooter's Hill to tlie Knockholt beeches on the ridge near Seven-oaks ; and its northern one over Epping Forest and a ûTcat nart of F.^sev Wherex or the w(KHl-walks open, there must be a glimpse of the river, and white sails gliding athwart the vista." In the autumn of 1807, Mr. and Mrs. Radcliffe visited Knole House for the second time. The following is a small portion of Mrs. Hadcliffe\s re¬ miniscences of the house, and especially of its pic¬ tures. " We were astonished at the extent of this mansion, and at its vast collection of portraits. Warwick Castle has the greatest number of Van¬ dyke's pictures ; Blenheim of Rubens's ; Knole of Holbrir's, v.ith many of Vandyke too. The old porter at the first gate had lived about the spot fifty years ; w f as there in the time of the late Duke's grandfather: those were grand times; the late Dukes were very good, but things had got dearer then. When we were going, he desired Mr. R. to write our namesin the book, that niy lord might have the pleasure of seeing who \ad been there. * ·* * #· * * At the upper end of the lofty and noble hall, where the high table stood, is now a very large statue of Demosthenes, robed, with buskined feet and a book or scrowl in bis hand ; the attitude composed ; the countenance expresses nothing of the energy and fire that characterize hiselrquence.
It was bought by the late Duke in Italy, for seven hundred pounds. The brown gallery is al¬ most covered with portraits by Holbein, the great¬ est assemblage of famous persons I ever saw. In the little closet of entrance, the countenance of Giardini, the composer, gives you the idea that he is listening to the long-drawn notes of his own violin. Holbein's Erasmus, in the gallery, must be truth itself: the keen and quick, small eye; the humorous, though serious smile ; the thin, finely-pointed, yet bending nose ; the thin-drawn lips and chin, are all exquisite. In a picture con¬ taining three portraits, that in the middle is of Luther. His bluff, blunt, strong habits of ex¬ pression ; his dauntless antl persevering mind ; his consciousness of the truth and importance of his cause, and his resolution to maintain it, art well ex¬ pressed : strength antl resolution in tlu* chin. On his right is Melancthon, reasoning, acute, amiable. On his left, Fomeranius; a somewhat sly and monkish countenance. Queen Elizabeth and se¬ veral of her Court : Salisbury, civil, sagacious and fastidious ; effeminate ; very fair : Burleigh, with a steady, penetrating, grey eye, high forehead, with black hair ; a cast of humour : Leicester, sturdy and crafty. " Lord Surrey, the poet, young, thin and melan¬ choly. No very fine pictures in what is called Lady Betty Germain's room, which looks delightfully upon the green and stately alleys of the garden.
High state-bed ; dingy white plumes crown the bed-posts. In the dressing-room are three Earls of Dorset, and drawings by Titian and Michael Angelo, In another room a state-bed, presented by James the First. In the dressing-room, among many fine pictures, is one of Sir Theodore Mayerne, physician to James the First, and to two of his successors, by Vandyke : he is seated in an arm¬ chair, and his right hand rests on a human skull ; his own head is grey, and he look.s at you with a mild and sensible countenance, turned a little towards his left shoulder ; the fading look of age. without actual weakness. " In the great dining-room below, HoppneA copy of his portrait of Mr. Pitt, a strong, and. I think, not a flattering likeness. Fletcher, in¬ telligent, thoughtful, and tender ; brown com¬ plexion, acute black eyes. Beaumont, florid, with light blue eyes; of an open, cheerful, handhome countenance. Near the windows is a group of portraits, painted by Sir Joshua Reynolds, with one of himself, in the midst of these his familiar friends, now all dead. On his right is Doctor Johnson, drawn bareheaded—a severe deduction from the harmonies of any frame : it is nearlv a profile; intense thought and anxiety press down the benevolent brow. On the left is Goldsmith. painted in the same style, a strong countenance, but of very diflerent expression ; coarse; the eye¬ brows not bent, like Johnson's, firmly and evenly
over the eyes, but only towards the nose; the other end highly hoisted, as if with caprice; unpleasing countenance ; nothing of the goodness of Johnson. Garrick, with a most pleasant and living look, piercing eyes fixed upon you, with perfect ease and kindness, as he leans with both arms on a table ; older than the portraits I have seen. Burke, vulgarized by Opie. Betterton, the actor, manly, sensible face. Pope, old, wrinkled, spectre-like. Swift, gentle in comparison with Pope. O t way, heavy, squalid, unhappy ; yet ten¬ der countenance, but not so squalid as one we for¬ merly saw ; full, speaking, black eyes ; it seems as if dissolute habits had overcome all his finer feelings, and left him little of mind, except a sense of sorrow. Dryden, in lus velvet cap, younger than usual Addison, mild. Waller, thinner and older than usual, with scarce a spark of his fire left $ but still a courtier-like gentleman. " In a small, domestic parlour, leading into the book-room, is that fine picture of Lord Gowrie and Vandyke, by the latter ; the finest portrait I ever saw, except one of Rubens, by himself, at Buckingham House, and another at Warwick, in the cabinet that terminates the long suite of state¬ rooms. " In a blue room, a domestic drawing-room, Lord Whitworth, a shrewd and comely man of the world, with spirited and penetrating 0 ' y eyes; an expressive but somewhat clouded brow. The
Duchess, in a black velvet riding habit, with a hat and feather, by Opie; a pleasing picture: you do not think of her in this portrait as of the Duchess, which is the obiect of one in the drawing-room.* hut as of a happy wife and a good-natured, sen¬ sible woman ; a little too much care in the attitude. '* I u one room a head of Louis the Fourteenth, all flutter and fume. *' £ The rooms are so numerous and the suites of them so long, that, though I have seen them twice, I could not now find my way through them, and cannot even recollect them all. All the principal rooms look upon the garden, with its 'awns and lofty shades. Scarcely a spot of brown earth is visible : so many various tints of green ; tbe trees sometimes bending their branches down to the shrubs and flowers. " In the Park, abounding with noble beech groves, is one, on the left of tbe road leading to the house, whichi for mass and overtopping pomp, excels even any in Windsor Park, when viewed as you descend from the Park gate, whence shade rises above shade, with amazing and magnificent gran¬ deur. In this mass of wood is one beech, that stretches upwards its grey bVbs among the light feathery foliage to a height and with a majesty that is sublime. Over a seat, placed round the bole, it spreads out a light yet umbrageous fan, most graceful and beautiful. With all its grandeur and luxuriance, there is nothing* in this beech heavy or vol. î. <:
formal ; it is airy, though vast and majestic, and suggests an idea at once of the strength and fire of a hero! I should call a beech-tree—and this beech above every other—the hero of the forest, as the oak is called the king." In the autumn of 1811, Mrs. Radcliffe went again to Portsmouth and the Isle of Wight. The following extracts bear but a small proportion to her entire journal of this little tour.—" Passed through Bere Forest, on the right, with many seats and woods and spires, around. Almost dusk. An horizon of glowing crimson lay behind the woods on the rights where the sun had set. Delightful to catch the different saffron, crimson, or fiery tints among the purple streaks. All the prospect lay in sullen twilight from Portsdown Hill, and it was quite dark when vve reached Portsmouth. Could just discern the high rampart walks, vvitli trees, before we rambled under the deep, fortified gale- way of Portsea. Went to the George Inn, a very large handsome house, with many galleries and staircases. Handsome furniture and excellent ac¬ commodation, except that you could get nothing when you wanted it. We had fish brought with¬ out j dates, and then plates without bread. All this owing to a vast throng of company, two hun¬ dred vessels or more being detained by winds, besides many ships of war. Nothing but ringing of bells and running about of waiters. If you аьк a waiter a question, he begins a civil answer, but
shuts the door before you have beard it all. it was very diverting to hear the diflerent tones and measure of the ringings, particularly about supper rime, and the next day about five, when every hody happened to be dining at one and the same time, to hear them all ringing together, or in quick succession, in different keys and "measure, accord¬ ing to the worn out, or better, patience of the ringer. These diflerent keys enabled me to distinguish now often each bell was rung before it was an¬ swered ; also the increasing impatience of the ring¬ ar, till, at the third, or fourth summons, the bell was in a downright passion. There was a mis¬ chievous amusement in this, after vve had gone through the delav ourselves, and liad gotten vvhat CÌ .1 7 о we wanted. Such life and bustle is inspiriting, for ι little while. Before supper, we had been down to •iie platform, over the sea- All was indistinct and vast; the comet high, but no moon; calm. Heard the falling of the title—monotonous, not grand— camion all around antl sentinels; some old seamen. "Oct. 11.—Cloudy, vvith silver gleam?*. In the afternoon, sailed in the packet for Ryde. The wind being contrary, though moderate, v\e were two hours and a half on our passage ; bad a de¬ lightful sail, festooning among all the fleet at Spit- head. A passenger asked ŕ What brig is that 'r as we passed a nmn-of-war. Λ midshipman, who leaned over the side, made no answer. ' Wliat brig is that, sir Τ — ŕ The Rover. 1 Eveiy body v о Г. о
admired this vessel Two ships of 100 guns, one of 74, and many of other tlegrees of force. It was a grand and glorious sight, this anchored fleet, at various distances on the gleaming waves, some in shadow, others upon long lines of distant light, of coldest silver. Amtmg other passengers were two Missionaries going to Sierra Leone in the brig Minerva, belonging to Mr. Macaulay : the eldest Wilhelm, a German, the younger a Persian ; nitidest, sedate, well-intentioned men ; had some knowledge of Greek ; one of them was taking his vvife with him. The captain of their ship, on board, seemed tt) be a good sort of German. Another captain of a trading ship was a passenger, Cap¬ tain Reynolds, going to his ship, the Crescent, Ixiund for the Mediterranean : a plain, steady, grave seaman, of the old stamp ; good sense, with a pious tender heart. Saitl he had carried, or that he was then about to carry, several hundred copies of the New Testament in the modern Gretk, to be distributed under the direction of agents of the British and Foreign Bible Society. Captain ——, a Cornish man, going to his ship, the Commerce. These two captains had met " on stronds afar remote," and now, by accident, on board this packet. One of them accosted the other vvith an apology for some apparent inattention at Malta, where they had last parted—-his ship haviug been "so far to leeward." They talked of parts of Smyrna, Constantinople, and other ports beyond
the Straights, аз familiarly as they could of Lon¬ don or Bristol Mr. V/------, a London tncrchanr, having a seat somewhere in the west, a tall thin man, about sixty, with a fioriti face and white hair ; an unassuming well-bred man. The taji- tain of the packet, formerly a pilot, had a keen, steady, dark eye, with a brow low-bent, from at¬ tention to distant objects, and a countenance quick and firm, that seemed to say he was master of his business, and proud of it. " Landed at Ryde, after a fine sail, through a grand and interesting scene. "Oct. 15.—After a foggy night, a clear antl cloudless day, with the warmth of June. At Steephill ; saw the skirts of the fog clearing up the steeps of Boniface, like a curtain, and the sea below brightening from misty grey into iťs soft blue, and the whole horizon gradually clearing, till all was cheerful warmth and sunshine, about ten o'clock. About twelve, we set off to walk to the Signal-house, on the highest steep of Boniface, not visible near the house, nor indeed till we had gone a long way, being on the eastern side of the down. Followed the steep Newport road, for л mile or two; looked down on the vast sea-line, and on the huge promontories and broken rocks of the Undercliffe. Then, leaving the road, turned into a field on the right, with heathy steeps antl downs, that would have been capped with clouds, had there been any. The air keen, and the cli-
mate considerably different from that Mow. The Views astonishing and grand in a high degree. From these ridges we looked down, on one side, over the whole interior of the island: but the sublime view was that to the south; where, as we seemed perched on an extreme point of the world, we looked immediately down on hills and cliffs» of various height and form, tumbled in con¬ fusion, as if by an earthquake, and stretching into the sea, which spreads its vast circumference be¬ yond, and its various shades of blue. This soft blue, thus spreading below us, was, in general, deeper than that of the cloudless sky ; and the sky itself was paler at the horizon than high above, appearing there like tbe dawn of light, and deepening as the arch ascended. This might be the effect of vapour, drawn up from the чеа. Found our way at length over nearly trackless furze and heath, to the Signal-house, which looks down on the steeps of Boniface, and tiie rocks of Bonchurch, and over to the sweep of Sandown Bay, then all over Brading Harbour and the long coast of Sussex, which, in clear weather, may be seen as far as Beachy Head. " In returning, we endeavoured to follow a path down the steeps near Bonchurch, and to find some steps, cut in the precipice, by which to desceñí!. The look down upon the shores and sea tremen¬ dous—steeps below steeps, to the surge beating and whitening below all. Followed, for some time
without dizziness, till vve lost our little track, and >aw all arouutl and beneath us scarcely any thing but pathless descents—tremendous. From the fear of coming tt) some impracticable steep in this wild descent and being unable tt) find the hewn steps, we re-ascended to the Signal-house, and st) re¬ turned home. The sea a desert, except that a line frigate sailed majestically at a tlistance, anil one brig was also in sight. " How sweet is the cadence of the distant surge î It seemed, as we sat in our inn, as if a faint peal of far-off bells mingled with the sounds on shore, sometimes beard, sometimes lost : the first note of the beginning, and last of the fulling peal, seeming always the most distinct. This resounding of the distant surge on a rocky shore might have given Shakspeare his idea when he makes Ferdinand, in the Tempest, hear, amidst the storm, bells ringing his father's dirge ; a music which Ariel also com¬ memorates, together with the sea-wave :— * Sea-nymphs hourly ring his knell, Ding, dong, hell !* " This chiming of the surge is vvhen the tide is among the rocks, and the wind, blowing from the sea, bears and softens all the different notes of the waves to a distance, in one harmonious cadence ; as in a concert, your distance from the orchestra blentts the different instruments into a richer antl softer harmony.""
From several walks in the neighbourhood of Steephill, we select the following :—*· " Passed Lord Dysarťs beautiful cottage. It stands at some distance from tlie shore, and has several distinct roofs, well thatched : a large con¬ servatory stands on a winding lawn, vvith a fine beech grove antl a long and richly coloured copse, bending along down, and afterwards along the feet of cliffs below. The crimson berries of the haw¬ thorn gave exquisite tints to this coppice, among the brown and various shades of the autumnal woods, and appeared in abundance every where among the trees and wild shrubs of the whole Undercliffe. The little church of St. Lawrence, perhaps the smallest in England, stands on a knoll, and terminates the cultivated valley ; im¬ mediately beyond which, we entered upon a scene of extreme wildness, grandeur and solitude. Many of the ruinous precipices of the upper cliffs pro¬ ject in horizontal strata, yet have perpendicular rents. Some of the shattered masses give most clear echoes: we stood before one, which re¬ peated every syllable of several passages from the most sonorous languages, w r ith an exactness of tone that was truly astonishing. It seemed as if a living spirit was in the rock, so near, so loud, antl so exact ! ' Speak to it, Horatio V I could have listened to it for hours. How solemn is the voice of cliffs and seas ! How great the style of Nature ! how expressive í Ä Speak to the rock !' and again it gave every word, as if in sport or
imitation, but with trutii itself. How long had it slumbered in silence ? We returned by the course we had come, the yellow sun lighting up seas and shores with the warmth of May, and the birds singing every where. " Oct. 19.—Left Steephill. Sailed from Cowes in the Southampton packet, about half-past five ; the Naiad frigate lying before the town. What particularly struck me in the passage was, not only the sun actually appearing to set in the sea, but the splendid amber light, left upon that long level perspective of waters, and the vessels upon it at various distances, seeming dark on this side, and marking out its extent to the eye. Tbe grace and majesty of an anchored ship, tot), lying vvith her stern to the eye, though at less distance, is in¬ describable; showing all her shrouds and yartls lessening, like a pyramid, as they rise upon the light. How tranquil and grand the scene lay, beneath the gradually deepening shade ! Still the dark shores and stately vessels kept tlieir dignity upon the fading waters. How impressive the silence, and then how according the solemn strain, that died upon the waves from unseen antl tlistant bugles, like a song of peace to the departing day í Another of those measured portions that make up our span of life, was gone ; every one vvho gazet I upon tbis scene, proud or humble, was a step nearer to the grave—yet none seemed conscious of it. The scene itself, great, benevolent, sublime- powerful, yet silent in its power—progressive and
certain in its end, steadfast and full of a sublime repose : the scene itself epoke of its С reatou." In this year Mrs. Radcliffe visited Penshurst. From sonic very extensive notes upon this an¬ cient seat of the Sydneys, vve extract the follow¬ ing :— " As vve drew near, the woods began to thin ; and an oltl latticed wooden gate ¡showed one en¬ trance into a park, now in ruins, for the grass is tall, scanty, and intermingled with taller fern. No deer appeared on the rusty lawns, or under the scattered trees, or decaying groves, of this once rich domain. Penshurst lies in a small valley of its ow n, that hangs upon the ridge of hills which form the .southern boundary of the grand valley overlooked from Riverhill. AU its heights are hung vvith its own woods, vvhich shut out every distant prospect from the house, except from the turrets ; and even from these, at least from the one I climb¬ ed, the view is not extensive ; but it is a pleasing .scene, with here and there an intermingled spire and ancient mansion. After following for a con¬ siderable time the paling of this extensive park, au elderly woman admitted ич tt) it through the chief gate, and the ancient mansion immediately appeared over a rough lawn, surrounded with groves. The house i.s much in the style of Knole, but more irregular, and not of half the .size. It is of brick and rough stone, with now a tower, antl now a turret ; high lozenge chimneys, an embattled
wall, and, above all, the long peaketl roof of the great hall. In the court, over the arched portal, is a row of five shields of the family arms, in stone. The great hall is on the opposite side: it is grand, but gloomy, showing the dark rafters of the roof; the tall, pointed windows below shed but a subdued light on the pavement, vvhich is of brick. The rafters have been blackened by the fires of two centuries, lighted on the centre tif the pavement, wiiere the bricks, raised half a ftx)t, form a small octagon, on which, perhaps, Sir Philip Sydney and the knights his companions have often stood round the blazing fagots, piled upon the same iron dogs, of enormous size, that still remain there. I think I see, in glimpses, the strong blaze of the wood flashing on their visages. The armour of Sir Philip himself, vvith helm (the vizor closed), stands at the back of an obscure gallery, and close beneath a high window, whose small frames admit a blunted, melancholy light. It stands Hke a .spectre in arms, watching over the scene it once inhabited; and is admirably placed to touch the imagination, but not to gratify curiosity, its distance being considerable. A partial Hght, thrown more strongly on the head, wouitl give it very fine effect. It is best seen from one of the doors, that open from the raisetl step at the upper end of the hall, where the high table stood. " The hall being so lofty as to seem shorter than it should be, and than it really is, one of the late
owners, to remedy this defect, had a painted per¬ spective placed at one end-—a most unsuitable ex¬ pedient in so great and simple a scene ; but the drawings of knights in armour, larger than life, between the windows, are well done. Several very rudely carved wooden images, now whitened and probably brought from some other part of the house, are placed in front of the gallery, as if look¬ ing over the railing. " Airs. Perry, the grandmother of the present Mr. Sydney, who changed his name from Shelley, was a niece of Sydney, Earl of Leicester, antl co¬ heiress with her sister, Lady Howard, of the Penshurst estates. The old housekeeper, who at¬ tended us, lamented much that Mr. Sydney did not now live here, but hoped to see him return. She had been all her life on the spot, and told us vvhat fine times she remembered vvhen Lady Perry used to drive to the gate in a coach and six, and come down vvith such e a sight of servants/ All the tenants used to come to meet her, and * ree girls' (the speaker was a grandmother) used to stand all in a row to meet her. Such noble liveries í antl then the poor woman shook her head, and bustled about, vvith emotion. The bells were a ringing all day, and there were such goings on. * Was she Lady Perry P 1 ¿ Yes, sir, 1 rather sharply, as if asto¬ nished that vve could doubt it. ŕ Was she a Lady by birth ?' ' Yes, sir, 1 more sharply, i she zeas a Lady indeed. 1 She led us down a modernized
winding staircase into a small hall İn the thief part of the mansion, opening into the garden. We passed a fine Gothic window, that gives Hght to it, having painted shields of arms ; among tbem Queen Elizabeth's. From the great dining-par- lour, a staircase leads past many rooms lined with oak panels, worm-eaten ; among them the nur¬ sery, which the housekeeper pointetl out, vvith a strong regret of old times—not those of Sir Philip Sydney, but of Lady Perry. And there were the children's playthings ; there they were all—with some sighs. As I humoured her, she began, in the midst of her regrets, to apologize for her dress, and to lament that she had not had time to appear better. ť Do the stairs near the nursery lead to the top of the turret?'—'I don* t know, ma'am, but I'll see.' 1 I foUowed to the small platform, and looked over the battlements upon the wood and the valley. The view was pleasing, but not impressive, or extensive. " She led us through the great hall, to see the kitchen ; one suitable to such a hall, with a lofty, raftered roof, enormous chimney, and long old tables of oak, not nearly so thick as those in the hall at Coventry. Here the good woman was at the climax of her regrets, and she shook ber beati and sighed often. ť It is a dism. ' place now, and vvhat do I remember it in Lady Perry's time ! I remember, when all them hooks/ pointing to rows of them that run, at a great height, over the wide
and lofty chimney piece and round the roof, k were hung with sides of bacon ; ay, I ha* seen them all hung vvith bacon. And here was such a sight of servants running about, some one way, some another.' 1 She then reverted to Lady IVs coach i\nd six, and the rejoicings that were to take place when .she came down, and '* tve girls used to stand all in a row.' In short, one would have thought that nobodv had ever lived in this man¬ sion but Lady Perry. Ал to Sir Philip and the rest of the Sydneys, thev were never thought of when she spoke of oid times —a neglect which at first somewhat endiarrassed me, who thought of them and old times as inseparable. She took us into a smaller kitchen, to -diow us the stoves and die iron plates, on vvhich, in her old times, tea- cakes and crumpets were baked, and related, vvith pride, that .she used to assist in tun.ing them/' In October 1812, Mrs. Radcliffe visited Mal¬ vern. The following is her note of her walk to the summit ofthe hills:— " Oct. 21, 1812.—Having slept at the Foley Arms hotel, an excellent inn, delightfully situated, we walked out, about eleven, hoping to reach the highest point of the Malvern Hills. By the zig¬ zag turf-path, we reached the little Well-house, vvhere we came upon the wild turf, and began to ascend the higher steeps of a mountain. The hoary crags, in vast masses, looked out from among the brown and red tints of the autumnal fern, and
from the green earth, but the cíaos* ceased below the summits, which were smooth and still grecii. Our view here commanded the vast expanse to tlu eastward, which we had seen from the inn : but wc now saw over the broad Breedon hill, w hit h there bounded the horizon in one türet tion; and many lines were now visible beyond it. This \\ v w is great and comprehensive, but not sublimt , tht elevation reducing the importance of other height*-, -so that no sHiixl' obiet t remains suffît íciitiv sínk- ing, either in form or character, to arrest attention, and bieak the uniform harmony <>*' that nth лт\ woody scene, the vale ofthe Severn, wlm-e w a tei s were visible onl) here and there, in little flimmer- mir threads of Hobt. At the summit, we tould pist diseci n them near Bi istol, tolling in gnatei breatith From the Well-house, we soon reai luti л good winding path, tut in the turf, wlmh h d us round tme mountain, overlooking other craggy or green steeps of Malvoin, till we t-aught л first glimpse of Iltrefoidslurt and of the hills of South Wales, over the rîdgt , to the west. They vvtu more distant, antl less broken and individu d, than I had hoped, but grand imt withstanding Hav¬ ing, at length, turned mto a sort of mtrenchmetit, which runs up to the summit, and divides Wor¬ cestershire and Herefordshire, we walked in this sccurelv, and with some little sheltet fiom the winds, til) we reached the highest point of Mal¬ vern, and beheld a vast hori/ou circling at out
feet. Thirteen counties are said to be visible from this summit, which overlooks the other heights of Malvern. It is indeed a defect in the scene, that there are no other supereminent heights, except those which are too distant to have a fully impress¬ ive effect. Even Brecdon-hill, that broad feature iu the vale of the Severn, was here too much low¬ ered. Towns and villages vvere often distinguish¬ able chiefly by the wreaths of smoke that spread from them along the vale, but sometimes by the broad tower of a church. On a more intent view, white mansions and woody parks would frequently appear ; and rich meadows, hedge-rows and groves filled the vale, ascended to the hills of other coun¬ ties, and often spread over their summits too. Few of the mountains of South Wales were sharp, or very bold, at this distance. On this .side of them, the square mass of the tower of Hereford Cathe¬ dral was perceivable ; and, far more southward, the high, level downs of Clifton. Bristol itself is sometimes seen hence. The broad Gloucester hills—the Cotswolds^—and the city of Gloucester, with its noble cathedral, are in the nearer vale. From this spot, vve could distinguish, merely by turning round, three great cities, vvith their cathe¬ drals—Gloucester, Worcester, and Hereford, to say nothing of the fine abbey-church of Tewks- bury. The tower of Malvern church, once a priory-church, i.s also a venerable feature in the včelie. One of the most striking circumstances
was the vast sweep of shadows and lights thrown from the clouds over this great prospect. The mottled expanse of moving lights over the surface of the wide vale sometimes resembled the billows of a sea, on which you look down from some lofty cliff. The lights brought out the villages and mansions on the knolls of Herefordshire surpris¬ ingly ; and many are most charmingly seated." Mrs. Radcliffe was particularly interested by Kenilworth Castle, and spent much time in explor¬ ing its history after she had visited its ruins. The subject struck her imagination ; and in the winter of 1802, she wrote the tale of Gaston tie Blonde¬ ville, now for the first time given to the world. After this, she undertook no work of magnitude, but occasionaly employed her leisure in composing poems, from which a selection has been made for these volumes. In Romance, she probably felt that she had done enough ; and, feeling it impossi¬ ble to surpass her " Mysteries of Udolpho 4 and her " Italian," declined ¿gain to subject herself to criti¬ cism by publication. Though gratified by a sense of the enjoyment she had provided for multitudes, and justly proud of the honest antl blameless means by which it was produced, she rarely alluded to her novels. At first, tht? sums she received, though not necessary, were welcome ; but, as her pecuniary resources became more ample, she was without sufficient excitement to begin on an extended
romance, though, had the first effort been made, the pursuit must have been delightful. Even Gaston de Blondeville was not intended for the press, and, having amused herself and her husband, was laid aside, so disinclined had she become to publication. It is curious that several years after this tale was written, Mrs. Radcliffe, having forgotten many of the incidents, perused it with nearly the same in¬ terest as if it had been the production of a stranger. It was again laid aside ; and in the latter part of life she repeated the experiment, but it did not absorb her attention as before, the former perusal having stamped the contents on her memory. Secluded as Mrs. Radcliffe was from the world, « she was tremblingly alive to every circumstance which could, by the remotest possibility, raise an inference injurious to the personal character she valued far above literary fame ; and, as nothing could induce her to appear before the public in any sort of contention, every thing of this nature preyed long upon her mind. She was much affect¬ ed by a passage of Miss Seward's correspondence, which .seemed, to her apprehensive feelings, to con¬ vey an imputation that she had allowed the dramas afterwards avowed by Miss Baiilie to be attribut¬ ed to her pen. Miss Seward in one of her letters dated May 21, 1799, after mentioning the plays, gave the following quotation from a letter of "her literary friend and correspondent Mrs. Jackson"— " Before their author was known, I observed st»
much ofthe power and defects of Mrs, RadcHffe's componi tions in these tiranias, as tt, believe them her's, and I hear she owns them. Mrs. Radcliffe, in whatever >he writes, attentive solei \ to ihe end, is not sufficiently attentive to observe probability in the means she uses to attain it. She bends her plan—or, ifit will not bend, she break*, it, to her catastrophe, by making it grow out of the preced¬ ing events. Still she always takes hold of the reader's feelings, and effects her purpose boldly if not regularly. Her descriptive talent, used to satiety in her novels, is here employed vvith more temperance, and consequently tt) better purpose.' 1 The imputation thus conveyed was, perhaps, implicitly removed by two letters of a few months later date ; in one of vvhich Miss Seward, speaking of the Plays on the Passions, says, " My literary friends now assert that they are not Mrs. Rad- clifiVs;" and in the other, "The literary world novv asserts, that the Plays on the Passions are not Mrs. Radcliffe*» ;" for, if Mrs. Radcliffe had really owned them, it is scarcely probable the li¬ terary world couki so soon have discredited her acknowledgment, while the real author remained unknown. This implied vindication from a charge, which perhaps no one ever regarded, was not sufficient for Mrs. Radcliffe's delicate sense of pro¬ priety and honour. She made inquiries after Mrs. Jackson, the lati ν mentioned as Miss Seward's
informant, in order that she might trace out the origin of her rumour. Having learned that Mrs. Jackson, after residing at Bath, had removed to Edinburgh, she requested Mr. Davies, of the firm of Cadeil and Davies, who had ample opportunities of procuring information respecting the literary society of Edinburgh, to ascertain if Mrs. Jack¬ son was still in that city. In the result of these inquiries it appeared, that the lady, to whom the report was ascribed, had left Edinburgh ; that her residence was unknown; and that she was not even supposed to be living. Under these circum¬ stances, Mrs. Radcliffe was obliged to leave her vindication (as, in truth, she safely might) to the tenor of her whole literary course ; for no one ever felt, or expressed, more repugnance to facti¬ tious praise, or more strenuously declined to avail herself of the warmth of private regard in softening the rigour of criticism. The prayer of the poet, 4 О grant an honest fame, or grant me none !" was the language of all her actions. She even took pains to prevent some, who, she knew, were desirous of expressing their sense of her genius, from writ¬ ing eulogies on her works, as she could not endure the conscious degradation of being exalted even by the genial quackery of friendship. It is scarcely necessary now to assert, that the supposition of her having laid claim tothe authorship of the Plays on the Passions, or voluntarily endured the ascrip¬ tion of those powerful compositions to her pen,
was utterly groundless. Rich as these works are in passion, and richer in fancy, they could not tempt the author of the Mysteries of Udolpho, even if she had not been restrained by any higher feeling than pride, to claim them—not because they would have been unworthy of her, if she had written them, but because the secret sense of merited reputation must alone have created a distaste for eulomes which she did not deserve. Anxious as Mrs. Radcliffe was to repel the suggestion, she felt that, as she could not discover its author, it would not become her to intrude on Miss Baiilie a denial of the report t which ¡die had not sanc¬ tioned ; and the same susceptible dehcacy, which made her feel it so deeply, compelled her to bear it in silence. The subject, which was always pain¬ ful to her, is rather now alluded to as an instance of the singular appreh ensi veness of her moral sense, than as at all required for the vindication of her character. Another circumstance, of a more trivial nature, gave her uneasiness, though in a less degree. In one of the published letters of the late Mrs. Carter, was a passage of a eulogistic nature, alluding to her works ; and to this a note was appended by the editor, showing that " Mrs. Carter hati no personal acquaintance with Mrs. Radcliffe." This statement was literally true; but to her sensitive nature it seemed to bear the construction, tliat the excellent lady referred to would have avoided her
acquaintance. The fact, intleetl, was exactlv the reverse; for, in the spring of 1799, Mrs. Carter sent lo Airs. Radcliffe a letter of introduction fron' a lady of high respectability at Bath, and proposed by note to wait on her on the folio whiff dav ; but Mrs. Radcliffe, being engaged to leave town in the morning vvith her husband, whose health re¬ quired country air, was obliged respectfully to de¬ cline the intended honour. The correspondence appeared i.i the Annual Biography for 18&4, with a short Memoir of Мгч. Radcliffe ; and produced from Or. Pennington, the writer of the note, a most handsome letter, in which he earnestly disclaimed even the slightest idea of disrespect to Mrs. Radcliffe, stating that he was not aware of the little correspondence, or he vvould have mentioned it with pleasure. Dr. Pennington also avows, not merely with candour, but cordi¬ ally, the admiration and nersonal respect, with which Mrs. Carter thought and spoke of Mrs. Radcliffe. With more reason, Mrs. Radcliffe was amazed at au absurd report, that, haunted by the images of fear, with vvhich she had thrilled her readers, she fiad sunk intti a state of mental alienation. A more unphilosophical foundation for an untruth was never imagined; for it is obvious, that through all her works she holds entire mastery over the terrors whicii &he employs, and even sedulously prepares the means of explaining them by natural causes. J t .seems, however, that the authoress of
a Tour through Kngland, in noticing the Duke of Rutland's venerable and romantic seat, called Had- don House, asserted that it was there that Mrs. Radcliffe acquired her taste for castles and ancient buildings, antl proceeded to liment that she hail for many years, fallen into a state of insanity, and was under confinement in Derbyshire :—the fact being, not only that the main assertion was false, but that all its accompaniments vvere desti¬ tute of foundation ;—for Mrs. Radcliffe was only in Derbyshire on two occasions, for a few days each, after her marriage, and never saw Iladdon House at all. This report, the falsehood of which might have been ascertained by the author- ess, on a reference to her own publisher, was copied in л larger work of more recent date; and to complete the fiction, a plate and description of Haddou House, as the scene of Mrs. RatlcliffeV eariy impressions, were annexed by way οΐ illustra¬ tion. It also supplied materials for poetry ; as in an " Ode to Terror," with other effusions, pub¬ lished by a cleigyman in 1810, Mrs, Radcliffe is beinoanetl as having died in that species of mental derangement failed " the horrors." Some of these rumour« reached her ; but she couhl not en¬ ti ure the thought of writing in the newspapers thatshe was not insane; and, at la.st, learned to -mile at the pity of tho.se, vvho thought her in con¬ finement, and the charity of others, who had kindly permitted her to finti a release in tkat h from her •uipposcd intellectual sufferings.
W r hile tht fate of the authoress of Udolpho was thus considered by the world as sealed, she was τ joying her wonted recreations and studies, with -utire relish. As, however, curiosity was sa¬ tiated vvith exploring all the finest country within 100 miles of London, and she became more at tached to the comforts of home, she contracted the sphere of her excursions. Instead of making journeys of length, Mr. and Mrs. Radclifle hired a carriage for the summer months, in which they were accustomed to make frequent trips to beau¬ tiful spots in the neighbourhood of London, where they dined and spent the day at some good inn, antl returned in the evening. Esher, Stanmore, Rich¬ mond, Southgate, and Harrow, were their favourite places of resort, especially the latter, where they chose the room, not the largest, but which com¬ mands tbe richest prospect, and vvhere Crawley Wood, near Ash ridge, could be often distinctly seen. Mrs. Radcliffe also was much attached to St. Alban's, the antiquities of which she explored with unwearied zeal, an' 1 aie historical dignity of w hieb she has vindicated in her longest poem. From 1812 to 1815 inclusive, she passetl much time at Windsor and its neighbourhood, and foi med an intimate acquaintance vvith all the recesses of its forest. tc She knew each lane, and every alloy jxreen, Dingle ov bushy dell of those old woods, And every bosky bowei* from side to side." She often vividly described the beautiful spots
of this regal domain. There was scarcely a tree of importance, with the peculiar form of vvhich she was not familiar, and the varieties of who.se aspect in light and shade she could not picture in words. With reference to their age and to the analogy she fan¬ cied to the lines of monarchs, with which they might be coeval, she described the trees separately as Plan¬ tagenet oaks, Tudor beeches, or Stuart elms. At this time, she expressed her feelings in verse, rather than in prose, and the reader will find them chro¬ nicled in several of her poems. One night-scene on the terrace, however, deserves to be inserted ; and may be compared with the descriptions of castellated heights, which abound in her novels. " Wc stood in the shade on the north terrace, where a platform projects over the precipice, and heheld a picture perfect in its kind. The massy tower at the end of the east terrace stood up high in shade; bnt immediately from behind it the moonlight spread, and showed the flat line of wall at the end of that terrace, vvith the figure of a sentinel moving against the light, as well as a profile of the dark precipice below. Beyond it, was the park and a vast distance, in the faint light, whieh spread over the turf, touched the avenues, and gave fine contrast tí) the deep shades of the wooded precipice, on which we stood, and to the whole line of buildings, which rise on the north terrace. Above this high tiark line the stars ap¬ peared with a very sublime effect, No sound but vol. i. ƒ
the faint clinking of the soldier's accoutrements, as he paced on watch, and the remote voices of people turning the end of the east terrace, appear¬ ing for a moment in the Hght there and vanishing. In a high window of the tower a Hght. Why is it so sublime to stand at the foot of a dark tower, and look up its height to the sky antl the stars? " What particularly strikes at Windsor is the length of terrace in the east, thus seen by moon¬ light; the massy towers, four in perspective; the lights and shades of the park below, the obscure distance beyond them, the low autl wide horizon, which you seem to look upon, the grandeur of the heavenly arch, which appears to spring from it, and the multitude of stars, which are visible in so vast ν ¡ind uninterrupted a view. Then the north terrace stretching and finally turning away from them towards the west, where high dark towers crown ¡t. It was on this terrace, surely, that Shakspeare received the first hint tn the time for the appear¬ ance of his ghost.— ζ Last niíçht oť all, When yon same star that westward from the Pole Had made his course to illume that part ofheaven Where now İt burns, Marcell us antl myself, The bell then beating one·—---------' " From inclination, Mrs. Radclifle was minutely attentive to her household affairs, probably think¬ ing with Schiller, that, after all, one of the best enjoyments of life arises from the exact perform-
ance of some mechanical duty. Although by no means disposed to parsimony, she kept an exact account of daily disbursements, until a very short time before her death. Much of her leisure was spent in reading the literary productions of the day, especially poetry and novels. Of the latter works she always spoke with an entire freedom from jealousy, and devoured the earlier Scotch novels with all the avidity of youth, although she felt deeply a slighting expression in " Waveriey, v towards herself, which the author might have spared. Sir Walter Scott has, however, made ample amends io her reputation by his elaborate eriticisin prefixed to Ballanti ne 1 « edition of her ro¬ mances. Tt) music she was passionately attached, and sang herself with exquisite taste, though her voice, remarkably sweet, was limited in compass. At the Opera she was a frequent visitor, and on her return home would sit up singing over the airs she had heard, which her quickness of ear enabled her to catch, till a late hour. She was peculiarly af¬ fected by sacretl music, and occasionally went to the oratorios, vvhen they af fordet I her the opportu¬ nity of listening to the compositions of Handel She sometimes, though more rarely, accompanied Mr. Radclifte to the theatres; antl was a warm admirer of Mrs. Siddons, whom she recollected at Bath, when herself was young. She used to speak with much pleasure of håving seen this great ac¬ tress, before the commencement of her splendid /2
career in Loudon, going to Church with her little *tm Henry, and was struck by her exceeding dig¬ nity and grace. When she visited the theatre, Mrs. Radcliffe generally sat iu the pit, partly because her health required warm clothing, and partly because, in that situation, she felt more withdrawn from the observation she disliked. She v\as fond of listening to any gootl verbal sounds, and vvould often desire tt) bear passages from the Latin and Greek classics, requiring at intervals the most literal translations, that could be given, how¬ ever much the version might lose in elegance by the exactness. During the last twelve years of her life, Mrs. Radcliffe suffered at intervals from a spasmodic asthma, и hich occasioned a general loss of health, and called for the unwearied attentions of her af¬ fectionate husband. In the hope of obtaining relief, she visited Ramsgate in the autumn of 182&, and, deriving benefit fiom the air, recurred tt) her old habit of noting down her impressions of scenery. The following is the last she ever wrote. "Ramsgate, Saturday morning, Oct. 19 5 18S2. —Stormy day, rain without sun, except that early a narrow line of palest *ilvei fell on the horizon, showing, here and there, tlistant vessels on their course. Ships riding in the Downs, exactly on the .Nca-line, over the entrance into the harbour, oppo¬ site to our windows, were but dim and almost shape-
less hints of what they were. Many vessels, with sai It set, making for the port ; pilot-boats rowed out of the harbour to meet them; the tide rolling in, leaving the foaming waves at its entrance, where vessels of all kinds, from ships to fishing-boats, appeared in succession, at short intervals, dashing down among the foam, and rushing into the har¬ bour. The little black boats around them often sunk so low in the surge, as to be invisible for a moment. This expansive harbour, encircled by the noble piers, might be considered as a grand theatre, of vvhich the entrance and the sea beyond were the stage, the two pier-heads the portals, the plain of the harbour the pit, antl the houses at the enti of it the front boxes. This harbour was not now, as some hours since, flood etl with a silver light, but grey and dull, in quiet contrast with the foaming waves at its entrance. The horizon thickened, and the scene around seemed to close in ; but the vessels, as they approached, though darker, became more visible and distinct, the s:iils half-set, some nearly whole set. They all kepi away a little to the westward of the west pier, the wind south-west, then changed their course, and dashed round the light-house pier-head, tossing the foam high about them, some pitching head foremost, as if going to the bottom, antl then lolling helplessly, and reeling in, settled in still waters. A lofty tide." Although the health of Mrs. Radcliffe was im-
proved by this excursion, she was much affected by the severe cold in the beginning of the ensuing winter. On the ninth of January, 1823, another attack of her disease commenced, which ultimately proved fatal. At first it appeared less serious than some of her previous .seizures ; but it soon became alarming. On the eleventh of January, Dr. Scu¬ damore, to whose care she had formerly been in¬ debted, was called in, and did every thing for her that skill and tenderness could suggest ; but in vain. A few days before her death, an account, which she had accidentally read, of a shocking mur¬ der recently perpetrated, pressed on her memory, and joined with the natural operation of the dis¬ ease to produce a temporary delirium. From this, however, she completely recovered, and remained sensible to the last. On the sixth of February, she did not appear to be in any immediate danger, though in a state of great weakness. At twelve at night, Mr. Radcliffe assisted in giving her some re¬ freshment, which she took with apparent satisfac¬ tion, her last words being, " There is some sub¬ stance in that," She then fell into a slumber; but, when Mr. Radcliffe, who had been sitting up in the next room, re-entered her apartment, in the course of an hour or two, she was breathing rather hardly, and neither he nor the nurse was able to awake her. Dr. Scudamore was instantly sent for ; but, before his arrival, she tranquilly expired, at be¬ tween two and three tŕcloek in the morning of the
^eventh of February, 1823, being in the 59th year of her age. Her countenance after death was de- iíghtfully placid, and continued so for some days- Her remains were interred in a vault in the Chapel of Ease, at Bayswater, belonging to St George's, Hanover Square, As, since Mrs. Radcliife's death, the story of lier mental alienation has been revived, in reference to her later days, it has been deemed right to apply to Dr. Scudamore for an authentic state¬ ment, which he has kindly given, and which must set such idle reports entirelv f,f rest. It is as follows : " Mrs. Radcliffe had been for several years sub¬ ject to severe catarrhal coughs, and also was осся- sionally afflicted with asthma. " In March 182S, she was ill with inflamma¬ tion of the lungs, and for a considerable time remained much indisposed. With the summer season and change of air, she regained a tolerable state of health. " In the early part of January 182S, in conse¬ quence of exposure to cold, she was again attacketl with inflammation of the lungs, and much more severely than before. Active treatment was im¬ mediately adopted, but without the desired relief; and the symptoms soon assumed a most dangerous character. At the end of three weeks, however, and contrary to all expectation, the inflammation of the lungs was overcome ; and the amendment
was so decided, as to present a slight prospect of recovery. " Alas ί our hopes were soon disappointed. Sud¬ denly, in the very nioment of seeming calm from the previous violence of disease, a new inflamma¬ tion seized the membranes of the brain. The enfeebled frame could not resist this fresh assault : ьо rapid in their course were the violent s/mptoms, that medical treatment proved wholly unavailing. " In the space of three days, death closed the melancholy scene. " In this manner, at the age of fifty-nine, so¬ ciety was deprived of a most amiable antl valua¬ ble member, and literature of one of its brightest ornaments. " The foregoing statement will, I hope, afford all the explanation, which can be retpiired, of the nature of Mrs. RadcHffe's illness. During the vvhole continuance of the inflammation of the lungs, the mind wab perfect in its reasoning powers, and became disturbed only on the last two or three days, as a natural consequence of the inflamma¬ tion affecting the membranes of the brain. " Previously to the last illness, and at all times, Mrs. Radcliffe enjoyed a remarkably cheerful state of mind ; and no one was farther removed from **** mental desolation," as has been so improperly described of the latter part of her life. " She possessed a quick sensibility, as the neces¬ sary ally of her fine genius ; but this quality wouitl
serve to increase the warmth of the social feel¬ ings, ond effectually prevent the insulation of the mind, either as regards the temper or the under¬ standing." Mrs. Radcliffe was, in her youth, exquisitely proportioned, though she resembled her father. and his brother antl sbter, in being low of stature. Her complexion was beautiful, as was her whole countenance, especially her eyes, eyebrows, and mouth. She was educated in the principles of the Church of England ; and through life, unless pre¬ vented by serious indisposition, regularly attended its services. Her piety, though cheerful, was deep and sincere. Although perfectly well bred, and en¬ dowed with faculties and tastes which rendered her a delightful companion, she wanted that confidence which is necessary to mixed society, and which •Лш could scarcely acquire, without losing some¬ thing of the delicacy of feeling, which marked her character. If, in her retirement, she was some¬ times affected by circumstances vvhich would have passed unheeded amidst the bustle of the work!, she was more than repaid by the enjoyments, which were fostered in the shade ; and perhaps few distinguished authors have passed a life so blameless and so happy- Mrs. Radcliffe may fairly be considered as the inventor of a new style of romance; equally dis¬ tinct from the old tales of chivalry and magic, and from modtrn representations of credible incidents /5
and living manners. Her works partially exhibit tht charms of each species of composition ; inter¬ weaving the miraculous with the probable, in con¬ sistent narrative, and breathing of tenderness and beauty peculiarly her own. The poetical marvels of the first fill the imagination, but take no hold on the sympathies, to which they have become alien : the vicissitudes of the last awaken our cu¬ riosity, without transporting us beyond the sphere of ordinary life. But it was reserved for Mrs. Radcliffe to infuse the wondrous in the credible ; to animate rich description with stirring adven¬ ture ; and to impart a portion of human interest to the progress of rom untie fiction. She occupied that middle region between the mighty dreams of the heroic ages and the realities of our own, which remained to be possessed ; filled it vvith goodly imagery ; and made it resonant with awful voices. Her works, in order to produce their greatest im¬ pression, shonld be read first, not in childhood, foi which they are too substantial ; nor at mature age, for which they may seem too visionary ; but at that delightful period of youth, when the soft twi¬ light of the imagination harmonizes with the lux- Г"· О urious and uncertain light cast on their wonders. By those, who come at such an age to their pe¬ rusal, they will never be forgotten. The principal means, which Mrs. Radcliffe em¬ ployed to raise up her enchantments on the bor¬ ders of truth, are, first, her faculty of awakening
emotions allied to superstitious fear ; and, secondly, her skill in selecting and describing scenes and figures precisely adapted to the feelings she sought to enkindle. We will examine each of these powers, and then shortly advert to their devclope- ment in her successive romances. I. The art, by "hich supernatural agency is insinuated, derives its potency from its singular application to human nature, in its extreme? of weakness and strength. Simply considered, fear is the basest of emotions, and the least adaptetl to the dignity of romance ; yet it is that, of which the most heroic heart sometimes whispers a confes¬ sion. On the other hand, every thing, which tends to elevate and ennoble our feelings, to give the character of permanency to our impressions, and impart a tongue to the silence of nature, has reference to things unseen. The tremblings of the spirit, which are base when prompted hv any thing earthly, become sublime when inspired by a sense of the visionary and immortal. They are the secret witnesses of our alliance vvith power, wbich is not of this world. We feel both our fleshly infirmity and our high destiny, as vve shrink on the borders of spiritual existence. Whilst we listen for echoes from beyond the grave, and search with tremulous eagerness for indications of the un¬ earthly, our Curiosity and Fear assume the gran¬ deur of passions. We might well doubt our own im¬ mortality, if vve felt no restless desire to forestal the
knowledge of its great secret, antl held no obsti¬ nate questionings with the sepulchre. Wc were not of heavenly origin, if we did not struggle after a communion with the invisible ; nor of human flesh, if we did not shudder at our own daring ;—and it is in the union of this just audacity and venial terror, that we are strangely awed and affected. It is, therefore, needless to justify the use of the ¡¿u pernatural in fiction ; for it is peculiarly adapted to the workings of the imagination—that power, whose high province is to mediate between the world without us and the world within us ; on the one hand to impart sentiment and passion to the external universe, and make it redolent of noble as¬ sociations; and, on the other, to clothe the affec¬ tions of the heart and the high suggestions of the reason with colour and shape, antl present them to the mind in living and substantial forms. There are various modes, in which the super¬ natural may be employed, requiring more or less of a dextrous sympathy, in proportion to the depth and seriousness of the feeling, which the author proposes to awaken. In cases where the appeal is only made to the fancy, it is sufficient if the pic¬ tures are consistent with themselves, without any reference to the prejudices, or passions, of tliose, be¬ fore whom they are presented. To this class thelahle? of the Greek mythology belong, notwithstanding their infinite varieties of grandeur and beauty. They are too bright and palpable to produce emotions vt'
awe, even among those, who professed io believ e them ; and rather tended to inclose the sphere of mortal vision, which they adorned and gladdened, with more definite boundaries, than to intimate the obscure and eternal. Instead of wearing, then, the solemn aspect of antiquity, they seem, even now, touched with the bloom of an imperishable youth. The gorgeous Oriental fictions and mo¬ dern tales of fairy lore are also merely fantastical, and advance no claim on faith, or feeling. Their authors escape from the laws of matter, without deriving any power from the functions of spirit ; tliey are rather without than above nature, and seek ouly an excuse in the name of the supernatural for their graceful vagaries. Akin essentially to these are mere tales of terror, in which horrors are accumu¬ lated on horrors. Beyond the precincts of the nur¬ sery, they are nothing but a succession of scenic re¬ presentations—a finely coloured phantasmagoria, which may strike the fancy, but do not chill the Blood, antl soon weary the spectator. It is only the " eye of childhood" which " fears a painted devil." In some of the wild German tales, indeed, there is, occasionally, a forcible exaggeration of truth, which ■strikes for a moment, and seems to give back the memory of a forgotten dream. But none of ihcbe works, whatever poetical merit they may possess, have the power to fascinate and appal, by touch¬ ing those secret strings of mortal apprehension, whicii connect our earthly with our spiritual heing.
In these later days, it, no doubt, requires a fine knowledge of the human heart to employ the su¬ pernatural, so as to move the pulses of terror. Of all superstitions, the most touching are those, w r hich relate to the appearance of the dead among the living ; not only on account of the reality which they derive from mingling with the ordinary busi¬ ness of life, but of the cold antl shuddering sym¬ pathy we feel for a being like to whom we may ourselves become in a few sliort years. To bring such a vision palpably on the scene is always a bold experiment, and usually requires a long note of preparation, and a train of circumstances, which may gradually and insensibly dispose the mind to implicit credence. Yet to dispense vvith all such appliances, and to call forth the grandest spirit, that ever glided from the tomb, was not be¬ yond Shakspeare's skill A few short sentences only prepare the way for the ghost of the mur¬ dered King of Denmark ; the spirit enters, and wc feel at once he is no creature of time ; he speaks, and his language is " of Tartarus, and the souls in bale. 11 Such mighty magic as this, however, be¬ longed only to the first of poets. Writers who, in modern times, have succeeded in infusing into the mind thoughts of unearthly fear, have usually taken one of these two courses : either they have associ¬ ated their superstitions with the solemnities of nature, and contrived to interweave ihem in the ν ery texture of life, without making themselves re-
sponsible for the feelings they excite : or they have, by mysterious hints and skilful contrivances, exci¬ ted the curiosity and terror of their readers, till they have prepared them either to believe in any wonder they may produce, or to image for them¬ selves in the obscurity fearful shapes, and to feel the presence of invisible horrors. Those, who seek to create a species of superna¬ tural interest by the first of these processes, find abundant materials adapted to their use in the noblest parts of our own intellectual history. There are doubtful phenomena within the expe¬ rience of all reflecting minds, which may scarcely be referred to their mere mortal nature, and which sometimes force on the coldest sceptic a convic¬ tion, that he is. "fearfully" as well as " wonder¬ fully made." Golden dreams hover over our cradle, and shadows thicken round the natural descent of the aged into the grave. Few there are, who, in childhood, have not experienced some strange visi tings of serious thought, gently agita¬ ting the soul like the wind " that bloweth wheie it listeth," suggesting to it holy fancies, and awakening its first sympathy with a world of йог- гол«/ and of tears. Who has not felt, or believed that he has felt, a sure presentiment of approach¬ ing evil ? Who, at some trivial occurrence, fct striking the electric chord by which we are darkly bound," has not been startled by the sudden revival of old images and feelings, long buried in
the depth of years, which stalk before him like the spectres of departed companions? Who has not shrunk from the fascination of guilty thoughts, as from " supernatural soliciting ?" Where is the man so basely moulded, that be does not remem¬ ber moments of inspiration, when statelier images than his common intellect can embody, hopes and assurances brighter than his constitutional tem¬ perament, may recai, and higher faculties within himself than he has ever been able to use, have stood revealed to him like mountain-tops at the utmost reach of vision, touched by a gleam of the morning sun ? And who, in the melancholy calm of the mind, sadly looking into its depths, has not perceived the gigantic wrecks of a nobler nature, as the fortunate voyager on some crystal lake has dis¬ cerned, or fancied he discerned, the wave-worn towers of a forgotten city far in the deep waters ? There are magic threads in the web of life, which a writer of romance has only to bring out and to touch with appropriate hues of fancy. From the secret places ofthe soul are voices more solemn than from old superstitions, to which he may bid us hearken. In his works, prophecies may be fulfilled ; presenti¬ ments justified; the history of manhood may an¬ swer to the dreams of the nursery ; and he may leave his readers to assert if they can, " These have their causes ; they are natural." Let bini only give due effect to the problem, and he may safel · trust their hearts to supply the answer î
The other mode of exciting terror requires, per¬ haps, greater delicacy and skill, as the author purposes to influence the mind directly from with¬ out, instead of leaving it, after receiving a certain clue, to its own workings. In this style, up to the point where Mrs. Radcliffe chooses to pause and explain, she has no rival. She knows the string of feeling she must touch, and exactly pro- .portions her means to her design. She invariably succeeds not by the quantity but the quality of her terrors. Instead of exhibiting a succession of magnificent glooms, which only darken the ima¬ gination, she whispers some mysterious suggestion to the soul, and exhibits only just enough of her picture to prolong the throbbings she has excited. In nothing is her supremacy so clearly shown, asin die wise and daring economy, with which she has employed the instruments of fear. A low groan issuing from distant vaults ; a voice bearti among an assembly from an unknown speaker; a little track of blood seen by the uncertain light of a lamp on a castle staircase ; a wild strain of music floating over L.oonlight woods; as introduced by her, affect the mind more deeply than terrible in¬ cantations, or accumulated butcheries. " Pluck out the heart of her mystery V я —tell, at once, the secret, the lightest hint of which appals—verify the worst apprehensions of the reader ; and what would be the reality in common hands ? You can suspect nothing more than a cruel murder pcrpe-
trated many years ago by an unprincipled monk* or an avowed robber ! Why should we suffer all the stings of curiosity on such an issue ? Human life is not held so precious, murder is not so strange and rare an occurrence, that we should be greatly agitated by the question whether, two centuries agt), a bandit destroyed one of his cap¬ tives ; but the skill of the writer, applying itself justly to the pulses of terror in our intellectual being, gives tragic interest to the inquiry, makes the rusted dagger terrible, and the spot of blood sublime. This faculty is the more remark¬ able, as it is employed to raise a single crime into importance; while others of equal dye are casually alluded to, and dismissed, as deeds of little note, and make no impression on the reader. Assassins who murder for hire, commonly excite no feeling in romance, except as mere instruments, like the weapons thej r use ; but, when Mrs. Radcliffe chooses to single out one of these from the mass, though undistinguished by peculiar characteristics, she ri¬ vets our attention to Spalatro, as by an irresistible spell ; forces us to watch every movement of his haggard countenance, and makes the low sound of his stealthy footsteps sink into the soul. Her fa¬ culty, therefore, which has been represented as melo-dramatic, is akin to the very essence of tragic power, which is felt not merely in the greatness of the actions, or sorrows, which it exhibits, but in its
nice application to the inmost sources of terror and of pity. It is extraordinary, that a writer thus gifted should, in all her works intended for publication, studiously resolve the circumstances, by which she has excited superstitious apprehensions, into mere physical causes. She seems to have acted on a notion, that some established canon of romance obliged her to reject real supernatural agency; for it is impossible to believe she would have adopted this harassing expedient if she had felt at liberty to obey the promptings of her own genius. So absolute was her respect for every species of authority, that it is probable she would rather have sacrificed all her productions, than have trans¬ gressed any arbitrary law of taste, or criticism. It is equally obvious, that there is no valid ground of objection to the use of the supernatural, in works of fiction, and that it is absolutely essential to the perfection of that kind of romance, which she in¬ vented. To the imagination it is not only pos¬ sible, but congenial, when introduced with art, and employed for high and solemn purposes. Grant only the possibility of its truth, which " the fair and innocent" are half disposed to believe, and there is nothing extravagant in the whole machinery, by vvhich it works. But discard it al¬ together, and introduce, in its stead, a variety of startling phenomena, which are resolved at last
into petty deceptions and gross improbabilities and you at once disappoint the fancy, and shock the under*: .anding of the reader. In the first case, the reason is not offended, because it is not consulted ; in the last, it is expressly appealed to with the certainty of an unfavourable decision. Besities it is clear that all the feelings created up to the moment of explanation, and which it has been tht; very object of the author to awaken, have obeyed the influence of these very principles, which at last she chooses to disown. If the minds to whom the work is addressed were so constituted as to reject the idea of supernatural agency, they would be entirely unmoved by the circumstances arranged to produce the impression of its exist¬ ence; and u The Mysteries of Udu pho" would have fallen still-born from the press ! Why then should the author turn traitor to her own '* so potent art ?" Why, having wrought on the fears of her readers tiil she sways them at her will, must she turn round and tell them they have been awed and excited by a succession of mockeries ? Such impotent conclusions injure the romances as works of art, and jar on the nerves of the reader, which are tuned for grand wonders, not paltry discoveries. Thi.s very error, however, which injures the eifect of Mrs. ItadciihVs works, especially on a second perirai, sets oif, in the strongest light, the wizard power of her genius. Even when she has dis¬ solved mystery after mystery, and abjured spell
after spell, the impression survives, and the reader is .still enger to attend again, and be again deluded. After the voices heard in the chambers of Udolpho have been shown to be the wanton trick of ã prisoner, we still revert to the remaining prodigies with anxious curiosity, and are prepared to give implicit credence to new wonders at Chateau le Blanc. In the romance of Gaston de Blondeville, Mrs. Radcliffe, not intending to publish, gratified herself by the introduction of a true spectre; and, without anticipating the opinion of the public tm that work, we may venture to express a belief, that the manner, in which the supernatural agency is conducted, will deepen the general regret, that she did not employ it in her longer and more elaborate productions. II. Mrs. RadclinVs faculties of describing and picturing scenes and appropriate figures was of the highest order. Her accurate observation of inanimate nature, prompted by an intense love of all its varieties, supplied the materials for those richly coloured representations, which her genius presented. Without this perception of the true, the liveliest fancy will only produce π chao.s of beautiful images, like the remembered fragments of a gorgeous dream. How singularly capable Mrs. Radcliffe was of painting the external world, in its naked grandeur, her published tour among the English Lakes, and, perhaps still more, the notes made on her journeys for her own amuse-
ment, abundantly prove. In the first, the bold¬ ness and simplicity of her strokes, conveying the clear images to the eye of the mind, with scarcely any incrustation of sentiment, or perplexing dazzle of fancy, distinguish her from almost all other descriptive tourists. Still the great charm of sim¬ plicity was hardly so complete, as in her unstudied notices of scenery; because in writing for the press, it is scarcely possible to avoid altogether the tempta¬ tion of high sounding and ambiguous expressions, which always impede the tlistant presentiment of material forms. To this difficulty, she thus adverts in her account of Ulswater. " It is difficult to spread varied pictures of such scenes before the imagination. A repetition of the same images of rock, wood, and water, and the same epithets of grand, vast, and sublime, which necessarily occur, must appear tautologous, though their archetypes in nature, ever varying in outline or arrangement, exhibit new visions to the eye, and produce new shades of effect on the mind. 1 ' In the journals, as no idea of authorship interposed to give restraint to her style, there is entire fidelity and truth. She seems the very chronicler and secretary of nature ; makes us feel the freshness of the air ; and listen to the gentlest sounds. Not only does she keep each scene distinct from all others, however similar in general character; but discriminates its shifting aspects with the most delicate exactness. No aerial tint of a fleecy cloud is too evanescent to be
imaged in her transparent style. Perhaps no writer in prose, or verse, has been so happy in de¬ scribing the varied effects of light in winged words. it ib true, that there is not equal discrimination in the views of natural scenery, which she pre&ents in her romances. In them she writes of places, which she has not visited ; and, like a true lover, invests absent nature with imaginary loveliness. She looks ■it the grandeurs and beauties of creation through t soft and tender medium, in which its grace·, art heightened, %ut some of its delicate ν λ -ties are lost. Still it ; s nature that we see, thougii touched vvith the hues of romance, and which could only be thus presented by one who had known, and studied its simple charms. In the estimate of Mrs. RadclifiVs pictorial powers, we must include her persons as well as her >cenes. It must be admitted that, with scarcelv an exception, they are figures rather than charac¬ ters. No writer ever produced so powerful an effect, without the aid of sympathy. Her machi¬ nery acts directly on her readers, and makes them tremble antl weep, not for others, but for them¬ selves. Adeline, Emily, Vivaldi, antl Ellena, are nothing to us, except as filling up the scene ; but it is we ourselves, who discover the manuscript in the deserted abbey ; we, who are prisoners in the castle of Udolpho ; we, who arc inmates of Spa- latro's cottage; we, who stand before the secret tribunal of the Inquisition, and even there are
startled by the mysterious voice deepening its hor¬ rors. The whole is prodigious painting, st) entire as to surround us with illusion ; so cunningly ar¬ ranged as to harrow up the soul ; and the presence of a real person would spoil its completeness. As figures, all the persons are adapted vvith peculiar skill to the scenes in which they appear;—the more, as they are part of one entire conception. Schedoni is the most individual and fearful ; but through all the earlier parts of the romance, he stalks like a being not of this world ; and works out his purposes by that which, for the time at least, we feel to be superhuman agency. But when, after glaring out upon us so long as a pre¬ sent demon ; or felt, when unseen, as directing the whole by his awful energies ; he is brought within the range of human emotion by the discovery of his supposed daughter, and an anxiety for her safety and marriage; the spell is broken. We feel the incongruity ; as if a spectre should weep. To develope character was not within the scope of Mrs. RadcHffe's plan, nor compatible with her style. At one touch of human pathos the enchant¬ ment would have been dissolved, as spells are broken by a holy word, or as the ghost of Pro- tesilaus vanished before the earthly passion of hi,-. enamoured widowa As the absence of discriminated feeling and cha¬ racter was necessary to the completeness ofthe effect Mrs. Radcliffe sought to produce, so she was rather assisted by manners peculiarly straight-laced and
timorous* A deep vein of sentiment wouid have suggested thoughts and emotions inconsistent with that '* wise passi veness, " in which the mind should listen to the soft murmur of her " most musical, most melancholy" spells, A moral paradox could not co-exist with a haunted tower in the mind of her readers. The exceeding coldness and pru¬ dence of her heroines do not abstract them from the scenes of loveliness and terror through which we desire to follow them. If her scru¬ pulous sense of propriety had not restrained her comic powers, Mrs. Radclifte would probably have displayed considerable talent for the hu¬ morous. But her talkative servants are all very guarded in their loquacity ; and even Annette, quaintly and pleasantly depicted, fairly belongs to the scene. Her old-fashioned primness of thought, which with her was a part of conscience, with all its cumbrous accompaniments, serves at once to render definite, and to set off, her fanciful creations. Romance, as exhibited by her, ťÉ tricked in antique ruff and bonnet," has yet eyes of youth ; and the beauty is not diminished by the folds of the brocade, or the stiffness of the damask stomacher. These remarks apply, in their fullest effect, only to " The Mysterie* of Udo/pho," and ** The Italian? in which alone the chief peculiarities of Mrs. Rad- cliffe's genius are decidedly marked. In her first work, ** The Castles of Athlin and Dunbaytte" it is scarcely possible to discover their germ. Its scene vol, î, g
is laid " in the most romantic part of the Highlands of Scotland, 1 ' yet it is without local truth or strik¬ ing picture. It is at once extravagant and cold. Except one scene, where the Earl of Athlin pur¬ sues two strangers through the vaults of his castle, and is stabbed by one of them in the darkness, nothing is delineated ; but incredible events follow each other in quick succession, without any attempt to realize them. Those, who complain of the mi¬ nuteness of Mrs. RadclifiVs descriptions, should read this work, where every thing passes with head¬ long rapidity, and be convinced of their error. In some few instances, perhaps, in " The Mysteries of Udolpho, 11 the descriptions of external scenery may occur too often ; but her best style is essentially pictorial ; and a slow developement of events was, therefore, necessary to her success. The "Sicilian Romance'*'' is a work of much more " mark and likelihood ;" and, very soon after its first appearance, attracted a considerable share of public attention. Here the softer blandishments of our author's style 3 which were scarcely percept¬ ible in her first production, were spread forth to captivate the fancy. Transported to the " sweet south," her genius, which had shrunk in the bleak atmosphere rf Scotland, caught the luxurious spi¬ rit of a happier clime. Never was a title more justly applied than to this romance ; it reminds the reader of " Sicilian fruitfulness." In tender and luxurious description of natural scenery, it is surpassed by none of Mrs. Radcliffe's productions. The flight
of her heroine is like a strain of " lengthened sweetness long drawn out ;"—as one series of deli¬ cious valleys opens on us after another ; and the purple light of love is shed over all Still she had not yet acquired a mastery over her own power of presenting terrific incidents and scenes to the eye of the mind, and awakening the throbs of sus¬ pense by mysterious suggestions. The light seen through the closed windows of the deserted rooms —the confession of Vincent stopped by death—the groans heard from beneath Ferdinand's prison— and the figure perceived stealing among the vaults, are not introduced with sufficient earnestness, and lose all claim to belief, by the utter incredibility of the incidents, with which they are surrounded. Escapes, recaptions, encounters with fathers and banditti, surprising partings, and more surprising meetings, follow each otaer as quickly as the cha-nges of a pantomime, aiid with almost as little of intelligible connexion. One example may suf¬ fice.—Hippolitus enters a ruin by moonlight, for shelter ; hears a voice as of a person in agony ; sees, through a shattered casement, a group of banditti plundering a man, who turns out to be Ferdinand, his intended brother-in-law 7 ; finds himself, he knows not how, in a vault ; hears a scream from an inner apartment ; bursts open the door and dis¬ covers a lady fainting, whom he recognizes as his mistress ; overhears a quarrel and combat for the lady between two of the banditti, which ends in the death of one of them ; fights with the survivor,
and kills him ; endeavours to escape with Julia ; finds his way into a " dark abyss," which is no other than the burial-place of the victims of the banditti, marked with graves, and strewed with unburied carcases; climbs to a grate, and wit¬ nesses a combat between the robbers and officers of justice ; escapes with the lady through a secret door into the forest, where they are pursued by her father's party ; but, while he fights at the mouth of a cavern, she loses her way in its recesses-, till they actually conduct her to the dungeon where her mother, who had been considered dead for fifteen years, is imprisoned ;—-and all this in a few pages í There are, in this short story, incidents enough for two such works as " The Mysteries of Udolpho," where, as in that great romance, they should not only be told, but painted ; and where reality and grandeur should be given to their ter¬ rors. In " The Romance of the Forest" Mrs. Rad- clifFe, who, since the dawn of her powers, had been as one " moving about in worlds unrealized, 1 ' first exhibited the faculty of controlling and fixing the wild images which floated around her, and of stamping on them the impress of consistency and truth. This work is, as a whole, the most faultless of all her productions ; but it is of an inferior order to " The Mysteries of Udolpho" and " The Italian ; M and can only be preferred by those, who think the absence of error of more importance than original
excellence. There is a just proportion between all its parts ; its mysteries are adequately explain¬ ed ; it excites and gratifies a very pleasant degree of curiosity; but it does not seem to dilate the ima¬ gination, nor does it curdle the blood. Its open¬ ing after a sentence of marvellous common-place, is striking; the midnight journey of La Motte and his family they know not whither, and the intro¬ duction of the heroine, under extraordinary cir¬ cumstances, to their care, rivet attention to all that is to follow. The scenes in the forest where they take up their abode are charming. This seems the most delicious asylum for the persecuted out¬ law ; its wood-walk s and glades glisten before us with the morning dew ; and there is something in the idea of finding a home in a deserted abbey, which answers to some of the wildest dreams of childhood, and innocently gratifies that partiality for unlicensed pleasure, or repose, which is so na¬ tural to the heart. The whole adventure of La Motte and the Marquis is sufficiently probable and interesting ; and the influence, which it ultimately enables the more resolute villain to exercise over the weaker, is managed with peculiar skill, and turned to great account in the progress of the story. There is here scarcely any hint of the supernatu¬ ral ; but the skeleton in the chest of the vaulted chamber ; the dagger, spotted with rust ; the manu¬ script of the prisoner, which Adeline reads by the fitful light of her lamp, and which proves to be
written by her own father, possess us with the ap¬ prehension of some secret crime, which acquires importance from its circumstances and its mystery. There are some highly-finished scenes; as that where Adeline, in her solitary chamber, dares not raise her eyes to her glass, lest another face than her own should meet them ; her escape with a man whom she supposes to be the servant she had trusted, and who startles her with a strange voice ; the luxurious pavilion of the Marquis, to which we are introduced after a frightful journey through a storm ; and, above all, the conversation, in which the Marquis, after a series of dark soHcitations, understood by La Motte, as pointing to Adelines dishonour, proposes her death. This last, as a piece of dramatic effect, is perhaps equal to any passage in the author's works. The closing chapters of the work are inferior in themselves to its commence¬ ment ; but they gratify by affording a worthy·' so¬ lution of the intricacies of a plot, which has excited so deep an interest in its progress. " The Mysteries of Udolpho" is by far the most popular of Mrs. RadclinVs works. To this pre¬ eminence it is, we think, justly entitled ; for, although " The Italian" may display more purely intellectual power, it is far less enchanting. Of all the romances in the world, this is perhaps the most romantic. Its outline is noble, it is filled with k majestic or beautiful imagery ; and it is touched throughout with a dreamy softness, which har¬ monizes all its scenes, and renders its fascination
irresistible. It rises from the gentlest beauty by just gradations to the terrific and the sublime. Nothing ean be fancied more soothing tothe mind, fevered with the bustle of the world, than the picture of domestic repose, vvith which it opens. We are dwellers in the home of the good St. Au¬ bert, who has retired to a beautiful spot, once the favourite scene of his youthful excursions; and sharers in its elegant and tranquil pleasures. Next come the exquisite journey of the father and daughter through the heart of the Pyre¬ nees, where we trace out every variety of moun¬ tain grandeur ; the richly-coloured scene of vin¬ tage gaiety among the woods of the chateau ; and the death of St. Aubert in the neighbour¬ hood of a place, which we understand to be con¬ nected with his destiny, and where strains of un¬ earthly music are heard in sad accordance with human sorrow. When Emily's aunt, to whose care she is consigned, marries the desperate Mon- ' toni, we feel that the clouds are gathering round her progress, and we shudder at the forebodings of approaching peril. A littlo interval is given among the luxuries of Venice, which are painted with exquisite delicacy and lightness; and then the work of terror begins. Nothing can be more picturesque than the ascent of the Apennines; mountain seems to rise above mountain in gloomy stateliness before us, till we skirt the inmost valley, far shut out from the world, and Montoni, breaking a long silence, utters the charmed words, " There
ís Udolpho Γ The ideas of extent, of massiveness, and austere grandeur, conveyed in the description of the castle, have matchless force and distinctness, and prepare the mind for the crimes and won¬ ders, of which it is the silent witness. Every thing beneath " these dark battlements" is awful ; the slightest incidents wear a solemn hue, and " Fate in sullen echoes" seems to " tell of some nameless deed." Not only the mysterious appearances and sounds appal us, but the rushing wind, a rustling curtain, the lonely watch-word on the terrace, have power to startle, and keep curiosity awake. The whole persecution and death of Madame Montoni seem prodigious, as though they were something out of nature ; yet they derive all this importance from the circumstances, with which they are in¬ vested ; for there is nothing extraordinary in the fate of a despicable woman, worried into the grave by her husband, because she will not give up her settlement. The mysteries of Chateau le Blanc are less majestic than those of Udolpho, but per- * haps they are even more touching ; at least, tlie visit of Emily to the chamber where the Mar¬ chioness died, twenty years before, not without suspicion of poison, and which had been shut up ever since, is most affecting and fearful. The faded magnificence of the vast apartment ; the black pall lying on the bed, as when it decked the corpse; the robe and articles of dress remaining as they had been carelessly scattered in the life¬ time of their owner; her veil, which hand had
never approached since, now dropping into pieces ; her lute on the table, as it was touched on the evening of her death ; would be solemn and spec¬ tral, even if the pall did not move and a face arise from beneath it. This scene derives a tenderer interest from the strange likeness, which Emily seems to bear to the deceased lady, and which is artfully heightened by the action of the old house¬ keeper throwing the black veil over her, and by her touching the long-neglected lute. Such are some among the many striking features of this romance ; its defects are great and obvious. Its mysteries are not only resolved into natural causes, but are ex¬ plained by circumstances provokingly trivial. What reader would bear to be told that the black veil, from which his imagination has scarcely been al¬ lowed to turn for three volumes, conceals a waxen image ; that the wild music, which has chanced to float on the air, in all the awful pauses of action, proceeded from an insane nun, permitted to wan·- der about the woods ; and that the words, which srtartled Montoni and his friends, at their guilty carousals, were uttered by a man wandering through a secret passage almost without motive; unless the power and sweetness of the spell remained after it was thus rudely broken? " The Itaiiarr has more unity of plan than " The Mysteries of Uldopho ;" and its pictures are more individual and distinct ; but it has far less tender¬ ness and ba-auty. Its very introduction, unlike the gentle opening of the former romance, im-
presses the reader with awe. Its chief agent, Schedoni, is most vividly painted ; and yet the author contrives to invest him with a mystery, which leads us to believe, that even her image is inadequate to the reality. Up to the period, at which he unnaturally melts from demon to man, he is the always chief figure when he is present ; and, where we do not see him, his spirit yet seems to influence all around us. The great scenes of this romance stand out in bold relief as in com¬ partments ; of which the chief are the adventures in the vaults of Pallozzi; the machinations of Schedoni and the Marchioness, for the destruction of the heroine ; her confinement in the monastery of San Stephano, and her escape with Vivaldi ; her terrible sojourn in Spalatro 4 s cottage on the sea¬ s-bore ; and the whole representation of the Inquisi¬ tion, which fills the mind when Schedonfs suprema¬ cy ceases. Of these, perhaps the very finest is the scene in the church, where the Confessor makes palpable to the Marchioness the secret wishes of her heart for Ellena's death: the situation is essen¬ tially fearful ; and all the circumstances are con¬ trived with admirable effect to heighten, vary and prolong the feeling of curiosity and terror. The dreary horrors of the fisherman's cottage are ad¬ mirably painted ; but the effort to produce a great theatrical effect is very imperfectly concealed ; and we cannot help being somewhat dissatisfied with the process of bringing a helpless orphan to such a distance, merely that she may be murdered with
eclat ; with the equally unaccountable delay in performing the deed; the strange relentings of the ruffian ; and the long preparation, vvhich pre¬ cedes the attempt of Schedoni to strike the fatal blow. There is great art in the scene, to which all this is introductory ; and the discovery of the portrait к a most striking coup de theatre; but the art is too palpable, and the contrast between the assassin and the father too violent—at least, for a second perusal. Not so, the graphic description of the vast prisons of the Inquisition; they are dim, prodigious, apparently eternal ; and the style is solemn and weighty as the subject. Mrs. Radcliffe alone could have deepened the horror of this gloom hy whispers of things yet more terrible ; and sug¬ gest fears of the unseen, which should overcome the present apprehensions of bodily torture. Of the tale and the poems now first presented to the world, it would scarcely become us particularly to speak. The verses, scattered through all the romances, are so inartificially introduced, that they have little chance of being estimated by an impa¬ tient reader ; but, when examined, they will be found replete with felicitous expression and with rich though indistinct imagery. In her own peculiar style of eompt sition, Mrs. Radcliffe has never been approached. Her success naturally drew forth a crowd of imitators, who pro¬ duced only cumbrous caricatures, in wdiich the ter¬ rors were without decorum, and the explanations ab¬ solutely farcical No successful writer has followed
her without calling to aid other means, which she would not condescend to use. The Author of " The Monk" mingled a sickly voluptuousness with his terrors ; and Mat urin, full of " rich con¬ ceits," approached the borders of the forbidden in speculation, and the paradoxical in morals. She only, of all writers of romance, who have awed and affected the public mind, by hints of things un¬ seen, has employed enchantments purely innocent ; has forborne to raise one questionable throb, or call forth a momentary blush. This is the great test not only of moral feeling, but of intellectual power ; and in this will be found her highest praise.
The Editor of the present Publication, who is not the Writer of the preceding Memoir, is aware, that it would be unbecoming for him to say more of Works, wntten by one so dear to him, than may be necessary to give the Public an early assurance of their authen¬ ticity ; and that fact, he apprehends, will be suffici¬ ently proved by the distribution, which he has resolved to make, of the whole purchase-money ofthe copy-right. Every part of that produce will be paid, as it shall accrue to him, to some public charitable institution in England. The Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells, and Sir Walter Stirling, Bart, iu consideration of the utility of this purpose, allow him the honour of say¬ ing, that they will audit his account of that distribu¬ tion.
GASTON DE BLONDEVILLE; Oit TUE COURT OF HENRY THE THIRD KEEPING FESTIVAL IN ARDEN.
VOL. L·
В
GASTON DE BLONDEVILLE.
INTRODUCTION. " Well ! now are we in Arden," said an English traveller to his companion, as they passed between Coventry and War¬ wick, over ground, which his dear Shaks¬ peare had made classic. As he uttered this exclamation of Rosalind, he looked for¬ ward with somewhat of the surprise and curiosity, which she may be supposed to have felt, and with an enthusiasm all his own, on beholding the very scene, into which the imagination of the poet had so often transported him with a faint degree в 2
of its own rapture. He was not, it appears, one of tliose critics, who think that the Arden of Shakspeare, lay in France. But he looked iu vain for the thick and gloomy woods, which, in a former age, were the home of the doubtful fugitive, and so much the terror of the traveller, that it had been found necessary, on this v r ery road, to clear the ground, for a breadth of six acres on each side, in order to protect the way¬ faring part of his Majesty's liege subjects. Now, albeit the landscape was still wild and woody, he could not any where espy a forest scene of dignity sufficient to call up before his fancy the exiled duke and his court, at their hunter-feast, beneath the twilight of the boughs ; nor a single 4 beech, under the grandeur of whose shade the melancholy Jaques, might "lose and ne¬ glect the creeping hours of time," while he sadly sympathized with the poor stag, that, escaped from the pursuit of man, came to
drop his tears into the running brook, and to die in quiet. Not even a grove appear¬ ed, through whose deep vista the traveller might fancy that he caught, in the gayer light, a glimpse of the wandering Rosalind and her companions, the wearied princess and the motley fool, or of the figure of Orlando, leaning against an oak, and listen¬ ing to her song : lie could not even catch the last faint echo of that song, in a scene so different from the one his fancy had re¬ presented to him for the forest of Arden. " Alas ľ' said he, " that enchanting vi¬ sion is no more found, except in the wry heart of a populous city, and then neither by the glimmering of the dawn, nor by the glow of evening, but by the paltry light of stage-lamps. Yet there, surrounded by a noisy multitude, whose cat-calls often piped instead of the black-bird, I have found myself transported into the wildest region of poetry and solitude ; while here, on the
very spot which Shakspeare drew, I am suddenly let down from the full glow of my holiday-feelings into the plain reality of this work-a-day world." Here ensued a conversation on illusions of the imagination and on the various powers of exciting them, shown by English poets, especially by Shakspeare and Mil¬ ton, which it is unnecessary to repeat in this place. Such was its length, that Mr. Simpson's part in it had gradually become less and less active, while Willoughton's increased earnestness had rendered him less and less sensible of the deficiency of replies. At last, on his asking, rather peremptorily, whether his friend did not recollect some fine effects ofthe towers of Windsor Castle upon the imagination, Mr. Simpson, fortu¬ nately concealing how nearly he had ap¬ proached to a nap, answered, " No, no ; I do not recollect any thing of what you tell me ; but you were talking a little while
ago of Hamlet and towers ; now, if you want towers that would do honour to Hamlet, go to Warwick Castle, and if we reach it, as we hope, this night, you can walk from the inn while supper is prepar¬ ing, and you will find, on the terrace or platform before the gates, towers frown¬ ing and majestic enough. If the moon is up, you will see them to perfection, and, as you are so fond of ghosts, you can hardly fail to make an assignation with one there." "I shaU delight in the advantage," re¬ plied WiUoughton, laughing : " Thougii I am not so fond of ghosts in general, as you seem to think. It is only for a few of par¬ ticular exceUence, that I feet a friendship ; for them, indeed, I am willing to own even an affection." Willoughton, not receiving a rejoinder, observed, that his friend had fallen again into his nap ; and he returned to the busy thoughts, to which his first view of this
land of Arden, the ground of Shakspeare, had led. Sunk in reverie, he was no longer in the living scene, but ranging over worlds of his own, tiU a jolt ofthe carriage awoke his companion ; who, shaking his head, and looking out of the window, with the sudden alertness of one who thinks he has been losing time, now supposed himself bound to brush up his thoughts and to talk to his friend. WiUoughton could well have spared the interruption, tiU a remark, dehvered with an air of self-satisfaction, touched the string that recalled him willingly to the present scene. " There now is an oak," said Simpson, " that may have been of Elizabeth's time, by the hóUowness of its vast trunk and the state of its branches." " Ay, long before her time," said his companion, " and perhaps Shakspeare's eyes have dwelt on it ; perhaps he has rested
under its shade :— О ! we are coming now to something like the Forest of Arden : see how finely the woods rise in the distance. and what a rich gleam the western sun throws along the ground, beyond those low-hung boughs on our left." As the traveUers advanced upon Kenil- worth-chace, the country assumed a mo-re forest-Kke appearance, and a new train of ideas engaged Willoughton, on approach¬ ing the venerable ruins of the once magnifi¬ cent castle, at one period its prison, and at another, the plaisance of royalty, where Edward the II. groaned under the traiter- ous power of Mortimer, and his abandoned Queen ; and where the crafty Leicester entertained Elizabeth, with princely splen¬ dour. The domain of this castle, with its parks and chaces, included a circidt of nearly twenty miles ; and when a sirrrcy of it was taken in the reign of James the 1.» on its forfeiture by the voluntary exile
and contempt of Sir Robert Dudley, the son of Leicester and of his first wife, the Lady Sheffield,—the woods alone were valued at twenty thousand pounds, accord¬ ing to Dugdale, who observes of the castle and its territory, that " the like, both fnr strength, state, and pleasure, was not with¬ in the realm of England." Recollections of the long and varied his¬ tory of this castle, crowded upon the mind of Willoughton, and he looked out, with impatience, for a glimpse of its stately towers in the distance, and then of its mouldering gateways, in the sun gleam, be¬ neath the woods that now rose round him with majestic shade. Here, at least, was a mass and pomp of foliage worthy of the noble ruin he was approaching and of the memory of Arden ; and, when he first caught a view of the grey wails and turrets overtopping the woods, lighted up by the evening sun, whose long beams, slanting
now under the boughs, touched with a golden flush the bending trunk of many an old beech standing deep within the shade, he uttered a note of admiration and curiosity that discomposed Mr. Simp¬ son, who immediately directed the posti¬ lion to make his way to the nearest gate. Soon afterwards they found themselves in a valley, whose woody slopes excluded all distant prospect, and confined their attention to the venerable reUque, which seemed to characterise, with its own quiet gloom, the surrounding landscape. They observed the several fine and detached masses of the castle rising on a lone rock in the centre of this secluded little valley ; and, as they drove towards the only en¬ trance of the area of these deserted courts, near the square-turreted gateway, which Leicester built for the grand approach to the castle, the impatience of Willough¬ ton became tempered with a gentle and
luxurious melancholy, and he forgot even Shakspeare, while he was influenced by somewhat of the poet's feehngs. But a cerise of real Hfe broke in upon him even in this scene of solemn grandeur, and it required somewhat of the patience of a philosopher to endure, in the fidi glow of his present enthusiasm, the clamorous impetuosity of idle children, who, on the first sound of wheels, were seen running to assail the strangers from every cottage on the neighbouring banks. The visions of quiet solitude and of venerable antiquity were, in an instant, dispersed ; the chaise was surrounded, and the travellers, having alighted, made their way with difficulty to the little gate, that led through a garden beside Leicester's ruined tower into the area that was once the lower court of the castle, foUowed by a noisy troop, whom neither money, nor command, could for some time disperse.
The tower—the gateway being now closed up,—was no longer accessible to curiosity, nor could gratify it by any traits of the customs of former times. No war¬ der's bench lurked within the gloom, nor portcullis hung in the arch. The war¬ den's chamber for those, who, by military tenure, kept guard on certain nights of the year, was transformed into a light par¬ lour, and the whole building changed into a modem habitation. From the green and broken square, anciently the lower court¬ yard, the traveUers looked up to the no¬ ble mass of ruins that yet stand proudly on their rocky knoll, and form three ir¬ regular sides of what was once the inner and grand court. Of the fourth side, which separated the upper from the lower court, are now no vestiges, save in the inequality of the ground where their foundations stood, and where the walls, faUen from above,
may lie buried under the turf and briers, that now cover the spot. On the left, the shattered walls of that lofty pile, built by Leicester and still call¬ ed by his name, advance proudly to the edge of the eminence thai overlooked the lower court, hung with the richest drapery of ivy ; on the right, stands the strong square tower, caUed Cæsar's, which, though the most ancient part of the castle, appears fresher and less injured by time, than parts that were raised some ages later. This was the keep, or citadel, of the castle ; and the prodigious thickness of the walls ap¬ pears through the three arches in front, proportioned and shaped like some whicii may yet be seen in aqueducts near Rome ; the walls here show a depth of fifteen or sixteen feet. The stone, of which this no- Ые tower is built, is of closer texture and of a greyer hue, than that in any other part of the building; and this hue har-
monizes beautifully with the ivy towers, which overshadow its arches and door¬ cases, and with the ashlings and elder crowning its summit, which highly over¬ tops every relique of this once magnificent abode of princes. " It should seem," said Willoughton, " that no human force could lay low walls of such strength as these ; yet, as one side of the tower is destroyed, while the other three remain nearly entire, it must have been assailed by some power more sudden and partial than that of time." " Yes, Sir, yes," said a man, who had been standing by, observing the strangers with attentive curiosity, " that part was pulled down by Cromwell's soldiers, and, if they had had more time on their side, they would liave pulled it all down ; as it was, they did a mort of mischief," Willoughton turned to look at his in¬ former, and saw a tall, thin man, who ap-
peared to be a villager, and who, without waiting for encouragement, proceeded : " I have heard say, they destroyed all that stood between Cæsar's and John O'Gaunťs tower there, at the end of the great hall, and a deal on the other side of the court, between the Whitehall and Lord Leices¬ ter's buildings." " Are those walls before us the remains of the great hall?" inquired Mr. Simpson, pointing to a picturesque mass of ruins, standing on the third side of the upper court and seen in perspective between the other two. " Yes, Sir," said the man, " that there was the great banqueting-hall where"— " Leicester entertained Queen Eli¬ zabeth," observed WiUoughton. " How beautifiiUy the ivy falls over those light Gothic window-muUions and that arched door-way, so appropriately and elegantly sculptured with vine-leaves ! The sun
now slopes its rays through the arch, as if purposely to show the beauty of its pro¬ portion and the grace of the vine that entwines it." " Ay," said Mr. Simpson, " many a pit¬ cher of wine and many a baron of beef have been carried under that arch by the kings yeomen, when Henry the Third kept his court here." " I doubt whether by yeomen," replied W T iUoughton, " for, though yeomen of the household are mentioned, about this time, yeomen of the guard, a part of whose office it afterwards became to carry certain dishes to the king's table, do not occur till the reign of Henry the Seventh. How¬ ever, it is probable, that, before the ap¬ pointment of the latter, yeomen of the household might peiform this business on state occasions, and in that very hall may have stood before the long tables, in dou¬ ble row, with wine ewers in their hands."
" Those were times worth living in," observed Mr. Simpson. "' Ay, those were jolly times ! Sir," said the stranger man ; " it 's lonely and sad enough in that old hall now ; nothing but briers and ivy. Why, there is an ivy tree now against that old wall there, partly as old as the wall itself. Look, Sir, it is as grey, and almost as sapless as the stone it crawls upon, though the trunk is such a size, and hardly shows a green leaf, spring or summer." The travellers made their way among the briers to take a nearer view of it ; and, if verdant festoons of younger plants had charmed them, Willoughton, at least, was no less affected by the withered si¬ news and grey locks of this most forlorn and aged tree, which had itself become a ruin, while adorning another. He climbed over hillocks of briers and weeds, which now covered the ruins of walls, fallen into
this court-yard, and he looked down into the area of the great hall, through a door¬ way which had once led from it by a vestibule towards the white-hall, of which latter hardly a vestige remains, and to Kiiig Henry's lodgings. Here he distin¬ guished the upper end of that magnificent banqueting-room, the very spot where the deis, or high table, had stood, which had feasted kings and princes, its lords, or vi¬ sitors ; where Henry the Third had sit¬ ten, where John O'Gaunt had caroused, and where Elizabeth had received the homage of Leicester. At one end of this platform were still the remains of the large bay-window, open¬ ing upon the grand-court, where the cup¬ board had stood, and the golden plate was piled ; at the other end, a windowed recess bowed out towards the spot, where there had been a lake, and to woods, that still flourished. This also, on state occa-
sions, had probably held a plate-board, or cup-board, and, on others, had been oc¬ cupied as a pleasant seat, commanding the finest views of the park. The four walls only of this noble haU marked its former grandeur, not a frag¬ ment of either roof, or floor, remaining ; the ground, upon which Willoughton im¬ mediately looked, having been the foun¬ dation of a chamber, or hall, for domestic and inferior guests, under the great one, which was eighty-six feet in length, and forty-five in width. Those waUs, where gorgeous tapestry had hung, showed only the remains of door-ways and of beautiful gothic win¬ dows, that had admitted the light of the same sun, which at this moment sent the last gleam of another day upon Willough¬ ton, and warned him, that another portion of his life too w 7 as departing.
The melancholy scene around him spoke, with the simplicity of truth, the brevity and nothingness of this life. Tliose waUs seemed to say— ťť Generations have beheld us and passed away, as you now behold us, and shaU pass away. They have thought of the generations before their time, as you now think of them, and as future ones shall think of you. The voices, that re- veUed beneath us, the pomp of power, the magnificence of wealth, the grace of beauty, the joy of hope, the interests of high pas¬ sion and of low pursuits have passed from this scene for ever; yet we remain, the spectres of departed years and shall re¬ main, feeble as we are, when you, who now gaze upon us, shall have ceased to be in this world !" " W T hy, here is a stone bench yet in this old window," said Mr. Simpson ; " and a pleasant window it is stiU. This homely
bench has outlived aU the trappings of the castle, though, I dare say, it was little va¬ lued in their time î " " You see, Sir,'' said the old man, " it belongs to the wall itself; else it would have been carried off long ago." WiUoughton turned at the now repeated voice of this stranger, whose intrusion he did not entirely hke, though his knowledge of the castle might be useful, and his conduct did not appear to be iU-meant. To an inquiry, whether he hved in the neighs bourhood, he answered, " Hard by, Sir, in Kenilworth. I saw you was a stranger, Sir, and thought you might like to know a httle about the castle here; and, unless you hap to Ught on such a one as me, you may go away as wise as you came—for, you wiU know nothing. No offence, I hope, Sir." " No, no ; no offence at all ;" replied Wüloughton ; " and since you are so weU
acquainted with this spot, let me hear a little of what you know of it." " Ay, let us hear what you have to say," said Mr. Simpson. Wüloughton, turning as he heard this, perceived his friend seated in the recess he had before noticed. Much remained of the beautiful stone-work of this bay- window, and it now showed itself upon the glowing west, where the sun had just descended, behind the dark woods of the vaUey. He advanced into it, and looking out upon the scenery, was interested by the stiUness and solemnity that began to prevail over it. At some distance down the steep bank on which the castle stands, he could distinguish fragments of the waUs that once surrounded it, with here and there some remains of a tower, or a banqueting-house. The ground below seemed marshy, but pasture of a better green stretched up the opposite slopes,
and mingled with the woods, that, on eveiy side, shut out the world! This valley seemed the home of a composed melancholy. " But where," said WiUoughton, " is the noble lake that, in Leicesters time, surrounded this castle, on which, as you may have heard, Queen Elizabeth was welcomed with pageants and so much flattery ?" " Ay, where is it ?" echoed Mr. Simpson, looking at the old man with an air that seemed to say, " Now we have some use for you, and will put you to the test/' But WiUoughton, without giving him time to reply, proceeded :— " I am doomed to disappointment in Arden. For many mües, I could not dis¬ cover any thing Uke a forest-shade, that might have sheltered a banished court, or favourite ; and here not a wave of the lake, that delighted a festive one, and
which might have supplied me with a floating island, moving to the sound of invisible music, or to the shells of sur¬ rounding tritons and sea-nymphs. Nay, I cannot even catch a gleam of the tor¬ ches, which, on such an occasion, might have thrown their light on the woods and towers of the castle, and have quivered on the waters over which they passed.'' " No, sir," said the old man, " it would be a hard matter to find any thing of all that now. Cromwell's people would have knocked all that o' the head, when they drained off the water, if such things had been there then." " Cromwelľs people again ! However it is as well to remember them. What had the venerable scenes of Kenilworth to do with politics, or freedom? But thus it is ; if even the leaders in political agitations have a better taste themselves than to destroy, for the mere sake of destruction, they let vol. i. с
the envy and malice of their followers rage away against whatsoever is beautiful, or grand." So said Willoughton to his friend, who smiled, as he perceived that the indig¬ nant admirer of antiquity had allowed himself to speak of a military operation, as though it had been a popular com¬ motion, " Where went the line of the lake, my man of KenUworth ?" asked Simpson. " Why, Sir, it flowed round two sides of the castle, as I have heard say ; it went from the tilt-yard, all along the valley here, for half a mile, and spread out at the foot of these banks,—as wide as to tht* woods yonder, on the hill side." " What a noble sheet of water," ex¬ claimed Willoughton, " with lawns antl woods sloping to its margin and reflected on its surface!" " Yes, Sir, aU that on the opposite side
н-яс π deer-park then, as l 've heard from the account of some book, except that low ground further on, and that was pas¬ ture for cattle." " For cattle!'* exclaimed Mr. Simpson, —" how they would poach such ground as that !" " But what a beautiful picture they helped to make from the castle windows here," said Willoughton; " when, on a sum¬ mer's noon, they lay under those shades, or stood in the cool waters of the lake." " Ау, л said Mr. Simpson, " to such as did not value tlie land." " It was just opposite the Pleasant, yon¬ der/' said the aged historian. "The Pleasant Г " Yes, Sir ; if you look this way, I will tell you where it stood:—it was a ban- queting-house on the iake." " О ! the Plaisance ! " * It stood on the walls there, down in с 2
the vaUey, to the right of John O'Gaunťs tower here, and not far from the Swan Tower; but it is so dusk now you can hardly see where I mean." WiUoughton inquired where the Swan Tower stood. " Further off, a good way, Sir ; but there is nothing of it to be seen now. It stood at the corner of the garden-wall, just where the lake came up ; but there is nothing to be seen of that garden either now, Sir, though we know the place where it was. Queen Elizabeth used to take great delight in the banqueting-house, as I've heard." " It was pleasantly seated;'* observed Willoughton. " Yes, Sir ; but there was rare feasting and music too, I reckon. She used to be fond of sitting in this very window, too !" " How do you know aU this, my friend?" "Why, Sir, the place is called Queen Elizabeth's turret, to this day, because she
took such a fancy to it ; and it was plea¬ sant enough to be sure, for it overlooked the widest part ofthe lake ;—this bench had velvet trappings enough then, I warrant.'' " I have no pleasure in remembering Elizabeth ;" said WiUoughton, as he turned to look for his friend. " No !—not in remembering the wisest princess that ever reigned?" said Mr. Simpson. " No : her wisdom partook too much of craft, and her policy of treachery ; and her cruelty to poor Mary is a bloody hand in her escutcheon, that will for ever haunt the memory of her." _ ' "You are too ardent, M observed Mr. Simpson ; " much may be said on her con¬ duct on that head/* " She inspires me only with aversion and horror," replied WiUoughton. "She gives other people the horrors, too/* said the villager. " How do you mean, friend ?"
" There are strange stories told, Sir, if one could but believe them ;—there are old men now in the parish, who say thev have seen her about the castle here, dressed in a great ruff about her neck, just as she is in her picture ; they knew her by that." Here Mr. Simpson, giving Willoughton a look of sly congratulation, on his having met with a person of taste seemingly so congenial with his own, burst forth into a laugh, or rather a shout, that made every echo of the ruin vocal, his friend smile, and the old man stare; who, somewhat gravely, proceeded------ " They say, too, she has been seen sit¬ ting there, in that very window, when there was but just light enough to see her by." " A ghost in a ruff and farthingale !" exclaimed Mr. Simpson, in exultation ;— " that is, surely, the very perfection of pro¬ priety in the ghost-costume;" and again the roar of laughter rolled round every turret of the castle.
tť Why does that strike you as so ab¬ surd? 1 'asked Willoughton; " this is only a ghost representing the familiar image of the person when alive. Can it be more ridiculous than the Scotch plaid for the supernatural being, whom we call a witch ? And yet, when you and I used to discuss the taste of ghost-dresses, you did not ob¬ ject to that appearance; but justified it, as one with which popular superstition avos familiar." "Yes," replied Simpson ; ** but though the ruff and farthingale accompany our idea of Queen Elizabeth, it is of her, as a living character, not in that of her apparition." " And yet," rejoined Willoughton ; " if you remain in this ruin, half an hour longer, till you can scarcely distinguish the walls, you will feel less inclined to laugh at Queen Elizabeth's ghost in a ruíľ and farthingale." " Perhaps I might," said Mr. Simpson, ¿í if you had not let me so much into the
secret of effect in these cases. Yet I ques¬ tion whether it would have been possible for Elizabeth's picture, arrayed in that ri¬ diculous court-dress, supposing it actuaUy to appear, to extort from me any thing but laughter." " They say, Sir," said the aged man, " that she looked solemn and stern enough as she sat in that window, just where you do now, leaning her head upon her hand, or something that looked like one. She sat quite still, for some time, and old Taylor sat quite still looking at her, for he couid not move ;—but when she rose up and turned round, and made a mo¬ tion with her hand—thus—as much as to say, 'Go about your business !' he thought he should have dropped, and would have gone fast enough if he could." " Ay," said Mr. Simpson ; " there was the characteristical in manner, as well as in dress. This must be a true history !"
" WeU, friend," said WiUoughton, " and what foUowed ?" " Why, Sir, then she went down this steep place you now stand upon, into the hall there, where he could not have gone, in broad day-light, without risk of his neck ; she sank down, as it were, and he iost her awhile, it was so dark ; but pre¬ sently he saw her, aU on a sudden, stand¬ ing in that door-way there,—and I can almost guess I see her there now." "You are a silly old man," said Mr. Simpson; and he looked immediately to the door. " You would not like," said Willough¬ ton, smiling, " to inquire minutely into the difference between purposely avoiding to look, and purposely looking in the midst of this story ;" but—turning to the old man— u what next ?" " Why, Sir, she stood in the arch some time with a very stern look ; but I с 5
never rightly understood what became of her. Old Taylor said she passed away like a cloud ; but then afterwards he was not sure but he saw her again, in a mi¬ nute or two, in this very window." " And have vou never been fortunate enough," said Mr. Simpson, " to see any of those sights ?" " No, Sir, no ; I hope I have no need of them ; though, if I was that way given, I might have thought /saw things too sometimes. Once by Mortimer's tower, down in the tüt-yard, I as good as thought I saw a man standing with a mask on his face, in a moonlight night, with a drawn sword in his hand." " That tower," remarked W r iUoughton, " was doubtless named after Mortimer, the paramour of the infamous Isabel?" " They say, Sir, some king was once shut up there."
" Ay, Edward the Second, for a short time." "And they will tell you a power of stories of what was to be seen about that tower, before it was pulled down, and after too ; but I don't believe a word of them. People are always conjuring up strange tales when they have nothing better to do. I have got an old book at home full of them, enough to make ones hair stand on end, if one could but make it ail thoroughly out. I showed it to Mr. Timothy, the school-master, and he could hardly make it out neither; but he said it was no matter, for it was full of no¬ thing but nonsense. He read me some of it, and I could not get it out of my head again for a week." " Ay, it met with a thriving soil," said Mr. Simpson, " it's weU you got tlie nonsense out of your head at all But
how happened you to buy a book in a language you could not read ? " " I did not buy it, Sir ; and, as to the language, I could understand that well enough, but I could not read the letters ; and Timothy himself bungled at the spel¬ ling." Willoughton inquired where this book was met with; and whether he could have a sight of it ?" " Why, Sir, it was dug out of the ground, where an old chapel once stood, belonging to the Priory hard by. " О ! I remember," said Willoughton ; k< there was formerly a monastery of Black Canons at Kenilworth, founded by Geoffry de Clinton, lord chamberlain to the first King Henry, and the founder of this same castle too : but go on." " The place is used for a burial-ground still/' resumed the old villager ; " and it happened, that as Guy, our sexton, was
one day going to dig a grave there, he lighted upon a coffin, or the chest, or whatever it was, that held a many things besides this strange book." "Indeed!" said Willoughton, eagerly; " let us hear a Httle about this." " We shaU not get to Warwick to¬ night," said Mr. Simpson, gravely. " Why, Sir, it was one day last autumn, —no, I believe it was as late as November; I remember it had rained hard all morn¬ ing ; but whether it was October or No¬ vember, I cannot be sure." " That, I should suppose, does not much signify," said Mr. Simpson. " Come, now," said Willoughton, " do let him be as circumstantial as he pleases." " Willingly, willingly, only remember, we are not to sleep at Kenilworth " " Weli, Sir, I cannot be sure exactly of the time, only it had been a dismal day ; but the rain was over, when old Guy came
running to me in as great a fright as ever I saw a man, and said he had found some¬ thing in the ground, he could not teU what, but he never felt any thing so heavy in his life ; he could not move it, and desired I, would go and help him to raise it ; and he stared, as if he was out of his wits. When I heard it was so heavy, I thought we might as well have my son to help us, for he was a stout lad. Guy did not much like this, I saw, for he was thinking he should find a treasure, and Guy was always a close one, and for getting as much as he could; it was only two years before he got bis money raised for toUing ; and there is not one in the parish has liked him since. However, I got my son to go with me, and we set to work, without saying a word to any one ; and it was so near dark that nobody was likely to see us in that lonely place." " Well I but if it had been treasure· it
would have belonged to the Lord of the Manor,'* said Mr. Simpson. u Yes, Sir, I know that well enough ; but you shall hear. We raised it out of the ground at last, and what should it be but an old oak chest. It was so large, a man might have lain down in it at full length; but what helped to make it so heavy was the iron bands that held it to¬ gether, and three great iron locks, that fastened it· Now, as the place where it was dug up was the east end of the church, Guy took it into his head it contained church plate, that had been put there, in troublesome times, by tlie monks of the priory. If you had but seen him ! he thougiit his fortune was made ; he threw away his spade, and cut a caper as high as a wall. I thought myself there must l>e something worth looking at o'the inside, but by this time it was so dark we could hardly see what we were about ; so I sent
my son home for the lantern, and then we tried with old Guy*s crow to get the lid open. We got it off at last ; and what do you think, Sir, we found ? Why, no¬ thing but old parchments ; some with seals dangling to them, and some old books, dropping to pieces with the worms, though the leaves were thick enough, too : at the bottom of the chest was a great heap of dust.'* " Did you find nothing else ?" asked Mr. Simpson, fixing his eyes on him. " No, Sir, nothing else," said the old man, with a little hesitation ; " nothing eke, except an old staff, with a large head ; and there was a little silver on that and on a book I have at home." Mr. Simpson inquired what had made the chest so weighty. " Why, Sir, it was made of solid oak, six inches thick, I warrant, and had a great deal of iron about it. I took a fancy
to that book, though I could not read it, for I could not make out the letters ; but there is some pretty pictures on the leaves, and the colours are as fresh as if they were just painted ; and some of the great letters are done all over with gold as bright as the sun." " A manuscript, üluminated probably by some monk of the priory," said Wü¬ loughton ; " can I see it?" " Yes, Sir," replied the old man, " I have it at home; but what made me wonder most was to see it look so fresh, after it had lain aU that time in the ground; to be sure it was well wrapped up in parchment, and the trunk was thick enough, for that matter; but some of the other books dropped to pieces as soon as the air came to them." WiUoughton asked what had been done with the parchments ; adding, to his com¬ panion, that they were probably the leiger-
book and some other muniments of the Priory, hidden when the terrors of Henry the Eighth first prevailed in the monas¬ teries, and afterwards pretended to be lost, first from some hope of their future utility, and then from a fear of avowing their concealment. " When Guy," resumed the old man, " found what sort of treasure he had got¬ ten, he was ready to throw himself into the old chest, to be put under ground with it again ; but I said there was no need of that; so we took out some of the best of the books, but none of the others had pic¬ tures ; and Guy took the old staff, and then we did lay the trunk in the earth again." Willoughton made many inquiries con¬ cerning the parchments with tlie seals, and the seals themselves, and whether his in¬ formant could find again the spot where they were deposited.
" Come, come," said Mr. Simpson ; " let us leave this place ; it is almost dark." The old man said he thought he could find the spot; but that would be of no use ; for it had lain so deep in the ground, that there had been depth over it for graves, and it was now beneath them, WiUoughton, shocked at this circum¬ stance, said no more on the subject ; but the old man proceeded. " Among other things in the book, Sir, is a view of this old hall. I should never have found it out myself; for it was no more like what it is now than nothing: but Timothy Crabb, our school-master, knew it at once by this very window—and he read something about this window, too, —and by a door»way in the wall, yonder." " How does it appear in the drawing ?" asked WiUoughton. " Why, Sir,—but you shall see the book,
if you Üke. The hall had a high roof, like a church there, and a gallery ran all along the bottom of it, and such a chimney ľ'— " Ay ! like the remains of what we see here now, I suppose," said Mr. Simpson. " No, Sir, as different as can be." " О ! perhaps," turning to Willough¬ ton, " it was such an one as we saw at Penshurst ; a raised hearth, with irons t<^ hold wood, in the middle of the hall." "No; that style," observed Willough¬ ton, "was of later date than chimnevs in English halls. It came in, I apprehend, with the castellated mansion, of whicii style is Penshurst, the more ancient part of the building at least. In the hall of the older castle, a chimney sloped back from the line of the wall into the thickness of it, and let out the smoke through a loop above. Thus, the raised hearth, on which the wood-fire blazed, projected into the
chamber, and was sometimes overhung by a canopy of stone-work supported by piUars, that gave it a resemblance to a gothic porch, such as adorn some of our finest cathedrals." "Yes, Sir, this in the book looks like something like a church porch without the sides, the top comes so far over the hearth. Then aU down the haU are rows of tables, with gentle-folk and ladies sitting at them, and—" " I must see this manuscript," inter¬ rupted Willoughton; "it apppears to be a curious one." "Come," said Mr. Simpson, "it is al¬ ready so dark, we can hardly see our way hence. There is scarce a gleam of light left on the horizon." " No, Sir, but the moon is rising yon¬ der, and some gentry have a fancy to see this place by moon-light." eí О ! we have seen enough of it."
GASTON DE BLONDEVILLE. " I recommend you," said Willoughton, " to avoid looking, just at this moment, towards the door at the bottom of the hall, lest you should see the stately fori.i of Elizabeth in the arch-way ; I had a gUmpse of something like her just now ; nay, I am not quite sure that I did not see the grave physiognomy of Leicester, under his smaU black velvet cap and feather," " We shall not get to Warwick to¬ night, said Mr. Simpson, fretfully. " They talk of the patience of a painful anti¬ quary ; think what the patience of hb friend must be." " í have not the honour to deserve the former title," said WiUoughton. " Between us, we approach to it ; the painful part of it, you will aUow, belongs to me." tť In the old sense of the word," said Willoughton, " you do not claim it ; and, as to the new one, your jests recompense
you for your pain : I have all possible in¬ clination to deserve the title, in its best sense; at least by cherishing those in¬ quiries, which make us intimate with the characters and habits of our fellow crea¬ tures in past ages, which show them to us in their halls, their ceremonies, their tournaments, their banquets, their do¬ mestic usages and even in their monastic retirement. These picturesque visions, in which the imagination so much delights, and every discovery, however remote, awaken a peculiar kind of interest and of sentiment no less delightful, which ren¬ der antiquity, of aU studies, the least lia¬ ble to the epithet of dry, though dull and dry people so liberally bestow it. Antiquity is one of the favourite regions of poetry." " Nay," said Mr. Simpson, " your woods and your meadows are the region for that. Who ever thought of looking for a muse in an old castle? But come, let us re-
member, that we are on the road for Warwick," "Before we go, my friend here must show me his old manuscript ; and I must see this fine ruin by moonlight." " By moonlight !" exclaimed Simpson ; " would you really stay for so romantic a purpose? We have seen it already by sun-light, and almost by no light at aU ?" " The moon is rising, now, Sir," said the old man, " and by the time the gen¬ tieman has seen the book it will be risen high enough to give you light от, your journey." <c Meanwhile, the horses will have no objection to a little corn," remarked Wil¬ loughton ; " nor the postilion to a little alé, if this good man will direct him where to get it." Mr. Simpson having added, that he too should like a little Warwickshire ale, the old man replied, u The ale they sell is not
much to brag on ; but, if you please, gen¬ tlemen, I will direct the lad where he and the horses may rest themselves, and, if you wiU step with me, y r ou can taste some of my home-brewed, and see the book at the same time." Tiie travellers assented, and their con¬ ductor, after having directed the posti¬ lion to a house, accompanied them to his cottage, where he produced the desired manuscript. It was written on veUum, and richly iUuminated, and purported to be an account of what passed at Kenilworth, when Henry the Third there kept the feast of Saint Michael, and of some wonderful accident that there befel, " liiere is a title-page written almost in the form of a triangle," said Willough¬ ton, " and that about as closely as if it were printed. The date, which forms the apex of the reversed triangle, I cannot VOL, i. D
wholly make out, but it is twelve hundred and something." At the heads of chapters and sometimes on the broad margins, there were made drawings of parts of Kenilworth Castle, as it had appeared in the time of Henry r pro¬ bably, with some of the scenes which had tliere passed, and sometimes with single portraits of the chief persons engaged in them. These gave vivid ideas of the cus- toms and manners of that period, and were traced, vith more knowledge of perspec¬ tive and more attention to proportion, than WiUoughton expected. Among them was a procession of knights and ladies, led by numerous harpers, returning from the tüt-yard to the great hall, which showed a high sloping roof, while the windows be¬ low, at a considerable elevation from the ground, had round-headed arches, instead of pointed ones. The door-way, leading into it, accorded with the place wiiere one
stiU appears; but the arch was differently constructed, and the receding mouldings seemed to have been ornamented with chevron work, or zigzag, instead of the elegant vine now sculptured there, which latter he had no hesitation in assigning to the time of Leicester. Another drawing gave an inside view of the hall, as mentioned by the old man. The roof was of great height, open to the rafters, and with pendent beams below, formed into arches, ornamented with inverted pinnacles, nicely carved. Another drawing gave the inside of a chapel, of which there are no longer any remains at Kenilworth, The original style of the building ap¬ peared very ancient, but this was mixed with one more light and elegant, hke that of the pointed arches of the windows ; and WiUoughton conjectured this improvement to have been made by Henry the Third, who is known to have repaired the chapel в 2
of the castle for his own use, during his occasional residence there. There was a representation of a mar¬ riage ceremony in celebration at the altar, where a numerous assemblage of dignified persons were arranged in state. A king was giving the hand of the bride to a young man, who was decorated with many military insignia, but who was so far from receiving the gift with joy, that he appear¬ ed to be struck with consternation, while the lady, by her attitude, seemed to be fainting. In the margin was a portrait of a king robed and wearing a crown of gold, which seemed intended for Henry the Third, to whose statue in brass, in his monument in "Westminster Abbey, it bore a considerable resemblance. At the head of another chapter was an inside view of a tower, where a man was sitting alone near a lamp. In the back.
ground a face appeared at the grate. The same chamber was represented afterwards, with a man stretched upon a low pallet, but whether asleep, or dead, was not expressed by the drawing. The lamp had gone out, and, instead of a face at tbe grate, the moon appeared through a window beyond, and threw a pale light on the couch. Another drawing gave a view of a cha¬ pel, or haU; Willoughton was not certain which : there was, however, something like an altar at the farthest end, near which stood a figure alone, the face concealed in a vizor, the left arm, upUfted, held a shield, the right a lance, but the feet were in a position of rest, though another figure near a door was departing, as if with the fear of being pursued, his hands outstretched, and his face turned back over his shoulder- There, too, the moon appeared through a window, and the light fell upon the lifted shield.
While Willoughton was musing what this could mean, the old man, looking upon the leaf, said, " Timothy Crabii, Sir, maintains this is a picture of the Priory- Chapel, he is sure, as it stood formerly. I should never have found it out myself, there is so little left of the chapel ; but Tim makes it all out fine enough." "Does he teU you what that figure means ?" " Not as I remember, Sir ; but the book tells that, I reckon." Willoughton turned over the leaves near the drawing ; tbe language, the orthogra¬ phy and tbe characters were all so an¬ cient, that he hesitated much. What he did make out, however, fixed his attention so deeply, that his friend lost the small re¬ mains of his patience, and declared he would set off without him. Willoughton then told his humble host, that, if he was wiUing to part with the manuscript, he was. disposed to rgive him his own price for it.
4< Why, Sir, I like to look at the pictures sometimes, and the gold is so bright it is a pleasure to see it ; but the book for other matters is not of much value to rne, though it may be to other people, seeing as I can't make it out ; and, for that mat¬ ter, if I could, I do not know any good it would do ; for, what Tim did read made me as foolish almost as old John, and afraid to go near the castle, for some time, after dark, though I was always counted a little more sensible than some. But I see no good in such things, not I." " You are a sensible fellow," said Mr. Simpson, "and I wish my friend here had a little less curiosity, and a little more such wit as yours. And now, Harry, do leave the book and come away." " No, I shaU first console myself for the mortification of your compliments. What shall I give you for the book, my friend ?" " Why, Sir, I don't know, I am sure ; I don't know the value of such things.
Tim Crabb said it might be worth its weight in gold for aught he knew ; but I leave it, Sir, to your generosity." " It is well you do not leave it to ι nine," said Mr. Simpson, " for I should make a low reckoning of it." The sum WiUoughton offered accorded with his own estimation of so curious a reliek, rather than with the expectation of his host, who heard it with exclamations of thankfulness ; while Mr. Simpson express¬ ed not merely surprise but reprehension, and the vulgar proverb of " Fools and their money—" was nearly audible on his lips. " What other books did you find in the same place ?" asked Willoughton. " Ah ! bless you, Sir," replied the an¬ cient villager, " I wish I had a score of them." " Well you may, my friend, if they would fetch you such a price as this ! " was the ready remark of Mr. Simpson.
" It is his honour's own generosity, Sir, and I suppose he thinks the book worth the money, or he would not give it." " Come, Hany," continued Simpson, " here has been folly enough for once ; let us be gone." " You are sure you have no other book like this?" inquired Willoughton. " There is another or two, that do stiU hold together, I think," said the old man ; " Tliey have got no pictures ; but then they have the same kind of letters, that cannot lie understood." — He went for thern. " You will tempt the man to steal the parish-register, and offer it to you as a curious reliek," said Mr. Simpson ; " and indeed it wiU deserve your money better than this." The old man returned with a small quarto, printed in black letter and bound in real boards, which had been guarded at the corners with brass; the marks of d 5
clasps remained on it and those of н lozenge in the centre of each board. ie Though this is of later date, much later date, than the manuscript," said Willoughton, " I see it is one of the ear¬ liest books that came from the press in England. It appears also by its contents, to have been intended to assist the pur¬ poses of the monks of that dark age/' " A Boke of Sprites !" exclaimed Simp¬ son, with a shout of exultation : ** a boke of sprites, with the signs they may be known by, and divers rules to keep you from harm : the Hke was never known before!" " Excellent ! excellent !" said Willough¬ ton ; " and here is another black-letter volume. Well, friend, without looking further, what shall I give you for them ? " "This is past endurance!" said Mr, Simpson ; w my patience is out Í"
* ť О Sir ! I will give you these into the bargain," said the old man, smiling ; an offer which Willoughton would not accept, who paid the old man what he thought they were worth. Mr. Simpson, then tak¬ ing his friend by the arm, desired his host to direct them to the chaise. " I must see the ruin by moonlight,'' .said Willoughton ; " but I will not detain you many minutes." " No, no ; you will see the towers of Warwick by moonlight; which will be much finer." " My good friend here," said Willough¬ ton, "will order the chaise round to the gate where it set us down ; and, by the time it arrives, I shall have seen what I wish to see." " Be it so," said Mr. Simpson, with an air of resignation ; " one is sure of you when a journey is to be begun ; but never when one would end, or hasten it. I have
not forgotten our midnight rambles about Stonehenge ! Doubtless we were the first human beings, who had appeared there, at such an hour, for many centuries ; and what astonished me afterwards, more than any thing I saw, was, that I myself should have been conjured there at such an unsea¬ sonable hour; I, whose brain never hatched any of those * high and unimaginable fanta¬ sies,' as your poet Gray calls them, É which distract the heads of some of his readers." " Ay ! those shadows of the moon at f ull," said Willoughton laughing, as they walked towards the min, his friend re¬ monstrating with him on the imprudence of this passion for antiquities and on his credulity. "And can you really hold.'* said he, " that these books were found in the manner related ; and that any of them, especially the ť Boke of Sprites,' ever belonged to the library of the priory ?"
" It does not seem probable," replied Willoughton, "that the old man should have invented the story he has related of the discovery of them ; but, be that as it may, the books themselves announce their own genuine antiquity. The manuscript is laboriously illuminated, and it is weli known, that such works were chiefly performed by the inhabitants of monas¬ teries. The Boke of Sprites even wa*» likely to have served the purposes of the monks. We know that the libraries of monasteries contained a most hetero¬ geneous assemblage : Ovid, the Romance of Charlemagne, Guy of Warwick, and the Rimes of Robin Hood, have been found on the shelf with Homilies, and other books ; which, although they might be tinged with the corruptions of the Pa¬ pal school, ought not to have had such companions. You may recollect, that War-
ton, in the interesting sketches of ancient manners which he gives in his History of English Poetry, mentions this very fully ; and that, among others, the library of Peterborough contained *Amys and Ara¬ dion,' ť Sir Tristram Merlins Prophecies,' and the c Destruction of Trov :' and books ur of this sort were not only copied, but often invented by the monks, sometimes for their amusement, sometimes for worse purposes." " One of the old books you have relates to their castle, I think," said Mr. Simpson, looking up at the shadowy masses ; which, shown thus faintly by the rising moon, seemed more majestic than before. " Yes, and I perceive," continued Wil¬ loughton, " that even you feel a curiosity to know what may have passed so many ages back, on the spot we now stand upon." " Why," acknowledged Simpson, " when one looks up at the very walls now crumb¬ ling into ruin, that were once so magnifi-
cent, and that inclosed beings with passions as warm as our own—beings, who have so long since vanished from the earth, one can¬ not help wishing to know a little of their history and of the scenes they witnessed ; but, for your legend, I fear to trust it." " It speaks of the times of Henry the Third," said Willoughton, " those were lawless enough to permit many adven¬ tures ; and, if the citizens of London were then robbed in the streets even at noon¬ day, what could travellers in the forest of Arden expect? But this Manuscript seems to tell of princely feasts given in the castle, and of adventures passing in the presence of the Court." " Ay, if one could but believe them." " A great part of the castle," pursued Willoughton, " which then existed, is now gone ; and much that we look at, stands in its place ; but that noble hall, and Cæsar's tower and several other towers,
such as those where the moonlight faUs, beheld the very court of Henry the Third, ay, and Montfort, on whom he had be¬ stowed Kenilworth, and who added in¬ gratitude to treason, by holding the for¬ tress against his benefactor and liege lord." They stood for some minutes in silence, looking up at the ruin and listening, as the breeze rushed by, to the shivering of the ivy, that overhung it,—all the shining leaves trembling in the moonlight. The pauses of solemn stillness, that followed these sighings of the air among the old branches, were very solemn, and the sound itself— so stiU, uncertain, and sudden, Willoughton could have fancied to have been the warn¬ ing murmurs of one, who, in his mortal state, had lived within these walls, and now haunted the scene where it had once re¬ velled, or, perhaps, suffered. It seemed like a voice imperfectly uttering forth some dark prophecy, and telling of the iUusion of life
and the certainty of death. To Willough- ton's recollection this spectacle of the re¬ mains of ages past, now glimmering under the soft shadows of moonlight, brought those touching lines of Beattie— <( Hail, awful scenes, that calm the troubled hreast, And woo the weary to profound repose, Can passion's wildest uproar lull to rest, And whisper comfort to the man of woes." Willoughton stood so wrapt, that he heard not his friend's inquiry, whether he meant to pass a night at Kenilworth, as a sequel to a former one at Stonehenge ; nor was he immediately aware of the nearer approach of his aged conductor, who said, in a tone somewhat tremulous, " You are now on the very spot, Sir, where Mortimer's tower stood ; it was the main entrance to the castle, when there was a lake, and it opened from the tilt-yard, tbat ran along the end of the water into the lower court : you see, Sir, it was quite on
the opposite side of the castle from Lord Leicester's great gate." Willoughton surveyed the place, but not a vestige of the building remained. " Here then/' said he, " the unhappy Edward the Second was, for a while, imprisoned, before he was removed to Corfe and Berkeley Castles, his last abodes." " If you please, Sir,' 1 said the man, " the chaise is at the gate ; and, if you will take my advice, you will not stay here long, for I cannot say I like it myself ; I shall begin to think I see that strange figure again, and I had rather not." 4ť Well, let us go," said Mr. Simpson, " or I shall begin to fancy something of the same sort, too. What did you say, it had a mask on its face ?" " Yes, Sir, and a drawn sword in its hand ; but I don't like the place, Sir, let us go."
" Ay, ay," said Mr. Simpson, " let us go ; we—we—we shaU not get to Warwick to-night*" A laugh from his friend, which he too well understood, both vexed and ashamed him. " I did not think it possible," said he, " that I eould have yielded to the contagion of this folly thus; remember, however, it is not Elizabeth in her ruff and farthingale, that I fear, nor any thing else distinctly." Willoughton laughed again triumphant¬ ly. " Better and better ; your feelings are true to my arguments, in spite of your own. I desire no farther proof of the ef¬ fects of time and circumstances—of soli¬ tude and obscurity on the imagination." As they passed by Cæsar's tower, and inquired where the line of the castle-ditch had been traced, he observed, that proba¬ bly the chief entrance had at first been
over a draw-bridge to that tower, though now no sign of it could be distinguished. When the travellers were once more seat¬ ed in the chaise, Mr. Simpson betook him¬ self to sleep ; whUe, on their journey of four miles through the checkered moonlight of woody lanes to Warwick, Willoughton did not lament the süence of his friend, which left him to the quiet musings of his own mind, and to the peace of nature, re¬ posing under this soft and beautiful shade. The air was so stiU that scarcely a leaf trembled of the lofty boughs that oversha¬ dowed the road; and when the postilion stopped to make some alteration of the harness, the breathing of the horses alone w as heard through all this scene of night. There is a peace of the spirits, which has surely somewhat holy in it. Such is the calmness which the view of a midsummer- dawn communicates, or that of moonlight
on woods and g^een plains ; and such Wil¬ loughton experienced during this short ride, tiil he drew near Warwick, when the beautiful towers of Saint Mary's appear¬ ed on the right, and the more lofty and distant ones of the castle on the left of the perspective; and these awakened the stronger interest of expectation. Having readied the inn, and Mr. Simp¬ son, late as it was, having ordered a good supper, they walked out to take a view of the castle. Finding that, at this hour, they could not gain admittance by the porter's gate, they went to the bridge over the Avon, on the outside of the town, and thence had a fine retrospect of the castle, with all its towers crowning the high, woody bank of that peaceful and classic stream. One vast, round tower of most warUke air, looking down upon the pred¬ nice, delighted WiUoughton more than any
other. A part of the edifice, repaired and adorned in the time of James the First, containing the state rooms, which run in a long line upon the steep, was not in har¬ mony with this tower, and gave very dif¬ ferent ideas of the character and man¬ ners of the respective ages to which they belonged. The moonlight touched this tower with a fine solemnity, and fell on the tops of the dark cedars and other trees, @I that clothe the precipice, as it glanced to d Shakspeare's stream below, where it rested in all its silver radiance, as if pleased to claim it for its home. WiUoughton leaned over the bridge, and looked upon the scene in silence. The brightness of the river, the dark 5 clear shade of the woods, reflected on its mar¬ gin and rising with majesty up the steep, with the grey towers, in softened light, crøwning all, formed a harmony of tints and of objects such as he had not often
seen, and which recaUed to him that state of holy peace he had so lately ex¬ perienced. Amidst the stiUness of this scene, there arose a strain, as if commanded by Shaks- peare's wand, and to which his words might have been applied. " О ! it came o'er mine ear, like the sweet south, that breathes upon a bank of violets," It was the music of French-horns, sweetened by distance and by the water, over which it passed, accom¬ panied by a few voices addressing the river and celebrating the bard in the well-known song of Garrick and Arne, —" Thou soft- flowing Avon !" Nothing could exceed the beauty of some of the cadences, prolonged by the deep, mellow tones of the horns, or of the chorus, and of the close, that gave these words :— iť The fairies by moonlight dance round the green bed, For, hallow'd the turf is, that pillows his head."
They brought tears into the eyes of WiUoughton, and drew from him a deep sigh long after suence had returned. Mr. Simpson looked about to discover whence this charming tribute to the me¬ mory of the loved poet came, and perceived two little boats stealing along the margin of the stream, under shadow of the bank that rose to the castle. The white awning of the first betrayed it to his eye, before it ©i w emerged on the moonlight ; and now the D measured trampling of the oars told its departing course upon the waters, till once again that chorus died along the air, and then the steps of the oars were heard no more. The traveUers remained for some mo¬ ments, as if speU-bound, in thoughtful silenoe ; and they left this enchanting scene, and returned to their inn, without having uttered a word. Thb was an un-
usual mood with Mr. Simpson ; he had caught it from his companion, rather than from the scene ; and now, on the entrance of supper, he rejoiced to get rid of it, and to return to the more substantial pleasures of this world. WiUoughton, when he had retired to his chamber, and had, as was his custom, looked out upon the night, now overcast with gloo¬ my clouds, sat down to examine his manu¬ scripts, instead of seeking repose. Bound up with that of the " Trew Chronique," was another, entitled " A Trew Historie of two Mynstrells, that came by night to the Priory of Saint Margaret, and what they disclosed, and what one in the convent by his art, proved them to bee," This " Trew Historie" was more difficult to be deci¬ phered than the " Trew Chronique," and Willoughton left it for the present, and took the " Boke of Sprites." VOL. I. £
As he turned over the leaves, curious to see the thraldom of superstition to which the peolpc of a remote age were liable, he often smüed at the artless absurdities he discovered, the clumsy inventions practised upon the fears of the ignorant by the ve¬ nality of the monks. Yet he sometimes found his attention seized, in spite of him¬ self, by the marveUous narratives before him ; till, at length, he began to feel that he was alone, to recollect that it was past midnight, to ooserve that all around him was stiU as death ; and gradually to think he might as weU lay aside the " Boke of Sprites" tiU day-light should return and the world again sound busily around hhn. He did so, and again took the " Trew Chronique," desirous of ending his long day, with some new traits of an age so distant from his own and of the style, in
which they might be shadowed forth. The mere speUing did not render this so diffi¬ cult, as the character in which it was writ¬ ten, with its abundance of abbreviations and contractions. The foUowing is a modernized copy, which he afterwards wrote out for the amusement of a friend, who was fond of the subjects it touched upon, but had not industry enough to work his way through the obstructions of the original. In this copy, while Willoughton endea¬ voured to preserve somewhat of the air of the old style, without its dryness, he was often compeUed to regret, that much of the effect of the story was lost, with the sim- pücity, brevity and quaintness of the an¬ cient manner. However, he often retained the old words, where they did not seem to form too glaring a contrast with the mo¬ dern style, and, now and then, somewhat e 2
of the tpiaintness of tne original, the title of which ran thus :— U 15s)Kr, Conten*» tige a trcüı chronique of íoíjat jpasacK at Btllíngujortlj, m -Hrticnu, tøljcn Θ\ιν Sobemi Eor-ö, tfte Штх$с, ítrüt tţer fyä Uät of j^fn^t ίΜίφίΙ ; Uiít i) m marbe*L)lou£{ acfíHmt, tijat tljer befel, at t^e йо^ hmpivíöáa|íon ot tï>c marriage of raoton tie -Blonïie&iUe. raít^ -Ötbrrő tîjtıto;·^, гш n'ouö' to Ы knoten, thereunto űurtapnv tuo;. Ша\) an account of ti)t grete Curnrj?, фег Relief in tije cm MCCLVI. Cljangeï out of ti^e florman tongur Щ ^r-öntbalU, flUûnk of ô-mtt -fflarie priori in îltUtngaiortţi.
THE FIRST DAY.
THE FIRST BAY. Ат the head of this chapter was a drawing, of the King and Queen, with their train, passing under the towers of Kenilworth. Near the King rode a young knight of a very spirited air ; in one hand he held his cap, bending towards the King, vvho seemed to be speaking to him, and with the other he reined in his fiery courser. At some distance, was a man pressing through the crowd, with eager gesticulation and a wild countenance, towards the King. The royal banner, on the tower above, was tinged by the setting sun, and the arms and caps of the soldiers on the battlement there gfistened with the rays. The cap of one of these, who, as if to obtain a longer riew of the King, appeared to have stretched too far forward, was faUing on the multitude below ; some of whom were laughing.
FIRST DAY.
It was at the feast of Saint Michel, that King Henry, the third of his name, with his Queen and sundrie of the nobles of the realm and a marveUous train of estates and gentils, came to keep court in Ardenn, at his castle of Kenilworth. The day was drawing to an end ere they ar¬ rived: and it was a goodly sight to see this noble company coming over the fo¬ rest, tiU then so lonesome; and the last Ught of this day s sun ghttering upon the helmets and lances of the King's guard ; likewise on the gorgeous appareUing of
their horses and trumpets, with their ban¬ ners unrolled, that went before his grace ; also on the litters of the Queen, covered with cloth of gold and with tapestry of rich colours, brought from her own land beyond the sea. This noble train, with aU the spear-men attendant on the King, was like unto a little army covering tbe paths and tracks, for many miles, as they wound amongst the woods of Ardenn ; or like unto some mighty river, that flowing along, appears, where the shades open, in shining bends upon the plain, and is lost again as they enter beneath the gloom ; but yet may you judge of their course throughout all the prosiiect. Like as you may the bro¬ ken fines of the great aqueduct, stretch¬ ing over the plains of our dear father of Rome; which, as we perceive its distant points athwart those soUtudes, we connect in our minds into one great whole, grander
in its sweep than it inight have shown when it stood complete. Tliere went before the King a hundred archers in pairs, sumptuously apparelled, and having the feathers of their arrows stained with green ; the horns sounded before them through the woods : then fifty demi-lancemen, two abreast ; then fifty pike-men ; then trumpets, with their banners also displayed ; then officers at arms, in their sur-coats, the Serjeants with their maces. In the midst was borne up the royal banner, by six of the standard- bearers : the pipes of it were of silver, and were slided along the banner-staff; which was held with horn in a girdle of white leather, embroidered, worn by the King's chief standard-bearer. The King's Highness came riding on a noble grey, 'widely encompassed about with pikemen, and attended by divers nobles ofthe realm and by knights and gentils, е 5
without number. His Highness wore that day a cloak of purple velvet, lined with yellow satin, and furred with martin and ermine ; on his head was a cap of black velvet, bearing a sable plume. His coun¬ tenance was goodly and gracious, and he often turned and spoke to those about him. On his right hand, rode the young Prince Edward, holding in his fiery charger, yet looking as though he would fain spur him to the top of his speed. Next to him rode the Archbishop of York. On the King's left, was his brother, the Earl of CornwaU. The Bishop of Coventry would have been there, but he was then lying sick on his bed ; but the Prior and divers of the monks attended on the King. First amongst the knights, that waited on his grace, was Gaston de Blondeville, a young Provençal; whom King Henry had raised, for some daring exploits in his do-
minions beyond the sea, to be a knight of his household. He was of comely person and gallant air; and managed his proud charger with such easy grace, as a lady might, with silken bandage, 4guide a fawn. He wore a cloak of pale oUve, lined and guarded with rose colour ; his cap was of velvet like to it, and he wore his feathers in the French fashion : for he was of the Queen's country, and had aU the gaiety of her nation in his countenance and 'ha¬ viour. Yet were there some in the court, men of English ground, who liked him not ; it may be, because he was a stranger in our land, or that he bore a proud defiance in his eye, or that they envied him his favoui· with the King. Some way before the Queen, went fifty oí the foresters of Ardenn clothed in green, sounding their horns. She was in her fit¬ ter, tapestried with cloth of gold, and she
was compassed aU about with her ladies and her nobles and esquires. Her lit¬ ter was borne by two brave coursers, right richly trapped with velvet, and led by pages apparelled in sumptuous liveries ; other pages, in 'broidered doublets, went beside her, or following. Then came her master of the horses, leading her palfrey, very richly appointed, the bridle and breast-chain studded with jewels, followed by another qf her palfreys, led by a page. Her Highness was adorned in a close gown of velvet, 'broidered about with pearls, and bearing upon her head a great hood of black velvet, richly sewed with large pearls. Following her Highness, came her ladies and gentlewomen mounted on fair palfreys, richly appointed and apparelled ; a goodly company. Then came her Highness's chariot emp¬ ty, drawn by six horses, led by pages in jackets of scarlet damask, with the Eng-
lish crown 'broidered on their backs. They bore in their caps a white feather ; drop¬ ping aside, in the manner of France, where¬ at the people murmured, and well they might ; for such a sight of strangers, from her own land, the like was never seen ! But the Queen bore herself so graciously to¬ wards the people, smiling upon them with her comely countenance, that she won away their discontent. Other gentlewomen of her court followed her car, mounted on palfreys. Next came Eleanor, the widowed Coun¬ tess of Pembroke, the King's sister, now Countess of Leicester, in her litter, with a sumptuous train : and then Cincia, the Countess of CornwaU, the sister of the Queen, right freshly apparelled, and sump¬ tuously attended by nolile dames and gen- tils ; and a sight of people followed, in the different liveries of their masters. Before the Queen, went her mynstrells
of music ; who, when they came nigh to KenUworth, began to blow upon their pipes, and to strum their stringed instruments with most sweet noise—so that the beUs of a village there, which were rung for mirth, could not be heard so far. Amongst the damsels attending the Queen, none were so fair as the lady Isa¬ bel, daughter of the Earl of Arundel, and the lady Barbara, daughter of the Earl of Huntingdon ; who foUowed her Highness, on white palfreys. Ychon of them was beautiful beyond thought: the lady Isa¬ bel was the more stately and carried a higher brow ; but Lady Barbara's smiles were blyther than the morn. Soon as the towers of Kenilworth show¬ ed themselves upon the West, which, if it had not been for the glowing spears of those on the battlements, would hardly have been known from the dark wood- tops,—soon as they appeared, some half-
score of the foresters rode forward with their bugles, to give sign of the King's ap¬ proach ; but were straight sounded back by the trumpets, which blew up a blast, that filled the forest, and echoed to the very castle walls, ere the proud trum¬ peters would stop. Then his Highness eomteously com¬ manded, that those who had come forth so many mües, to welcome him on his way, should be appointed to proclaim him at the gates. They waited not for second bidding; but, tuning up so clear and sweet, set spurs to their hobbies, and flew swiftly as the arrows from their own bows. All the way hence to Kenilworth was lined with other troops of foresters in green; who, at certain distances, saluted the King, as he passed, with their bugles, in spite of the trumpets, that charged so loud and shriU their minet-flourishes : and
they foUowed in the Queen's train. The King's pike-men and lance-men going after of all. At the first sound of the bugles before the gate, you might see the great banner of England raised upon the keep of Ke¬ nilworth. Then, the chief wardour of the castle appeared upon the turret; though he stayed not long there, but went down to join his lord, in their service at the gate. The archers behind the battlements stood in order ; other bow-men and the lance- men ranged themselves behind the tower- walls, and the trumpets there answered the summons, with a blast, that shook the forest, and made the fair waters of the val- iey tremble ; roughening the portraiture of towers and woods, which had seemed to sleep upon their surface, as in a glass of chrystal. Then the Lord Constable, coming down from the keep, followed by a posse of his
officers, took to horse and went out to meet the King. As he turned out of the gate, he met the Prior of Saint Mary's, with the twelve canons, and a long train pro¬ cessioning, all in fuU ceremony, bearing- precious rcUques, to welcome his Highness ; after them came the priest and sundry of the parish-church, singing. The press of people, from aU the coun¬ try about, was so thick, that hardly could the monks make way among them. The castellan, a man proud and jealous of his high place, was not well pleased, that they should try to present themselves to the King, before himself; but tliey were soon right glad to follow in his train, for strait as he appeared, the crowd was forced back, and they passed, without difficulty, in that wise, full three furlongs. The castellan, coming in presence of his Highness, leaped from his horse, and, on his knee, presented him the keys of
the castle, on a rich plate ; the which his Highness readily delivered to him again, with a gracious speech, bearing, that they were weU in his custody. Then, the Prior and canons of Saint Mary's showed them¬ selves in procession, with banners, and chaunting sweet anthems, and his High¬ ness looked kindly on them ; after which they went on to the Queen, and, paying duty, attended her to the castle. But my Lord Constable, remounting his horse, rode bareheaded before his Highness, to the very gates. Immediately before the King, was borne his sword of justice, by the Lord Hubert de Lacey ; where, on the sheath, you might behold, in letters of rubies, these words, " Truth and Right." As he passed aU the people cried out, i( King Henry, King Henry, long live King Henry ! and bless¬ ings on your sweet-favoured visaj*e!" Then, they threw forth on the air, for
joy, among other tokens, corn and flour ; so that many of the nobles of the realm, nay, some of the King's guard, liked it not, for the flom'-dust, falling on their garments, disguised them Uke unto grin¬ ders of corn: but they held their peace, as needs must, passing on in solemn state- liness. Before the castle-gates, a great show of the King's bow-men were drawn out to receive him, and the courts within were lined, and every tower and battlement was thronged with his soldiers. There, too, were the foresters ready at the gates, who, on the King's approach tuned up their merry bugles, with might and main; as though one breath sounded through the wiiole of them. But, when the heralds passed under the towers, their trumpets took their revenge, for they gave many blasts, that made every court within shake for joy ; and showed more like a triumph
of war than a flourish of festival. They on the ramparts now seemed to take the hint, and joined them with such warrior- sounds of fierce disdain, that the clear bugle seemed but as a shepherd-pipe be¬ neath them, and, for a season, was not heard at all. Certes, the noise ^ the trumpets and cornets, the clanjşing of bells, the tramp¬ ling of horses over the bridge, the striking © of swords upon shields, with, ever and Σ anon, the shouts of the multitude, as¬ tounded cattle and fowl in the woods, far and wide. Old wives and they that might not leave their homes for sickness could hear the mingled uproar ; and could know as surely, when the King reached Kenil¬ worth, as those, who had journeyed thi¬ ther to behold him. And many an outlaw in the forest, who feared to show his face among the crowd, lay hearkening in his den, or stalked under the old oaks, while
he watched the minutes of the coming twilight, and reckoned on the booty he should seize from careless traveUers, re¬ turning, at night, to distant towns. Some too there were, who, in the path¬ less holds of this forest, heard the far-off voice of j oyan ce and society, with bitter grief; finding out, too late, they were not made for that lonesomeness of heart their thoughtless vices had condemned them to. Alas ! for such, let them shrive and betake themselves, as penitents, to holy cloister. When the Queen's litter came near the gates of the castie, her minstrels of music sang with most sweet glee, and the bugles saluted her as she passed into the barbican, or first tower of defence ; but, soon as she appeared on the draw-bridge, the trumpets from the ramparts blew up a flourish, and then the minstrels stopped, though they had not finished their fit. And they did weU ; for hardly could there be heard the
trampling of the horses' hoofs upon the bridge, nor the distant music in the courts before the King. The walls and turrets, thronged with faces, seemed to be alive, and to shout, as with one voice, " Queen Eleanor! Queen Eleanor! long live Queen Eleanor!"—but some few were heard to shout, * c Away with the foreigners !— away with aU foreigners !" which the good Queen seemed not to hear, though she guessed in her heart what they said ; and many a noble knight and lady near her knew well. She, with unchanged counte¬ nance, showed only sweet smUes to those numberless eyes, darting from the waUs and battlements, all turned upon her litter, as it passed over the bridge, glittering in the last beams of this day's sun, and then entered beneath that deep and dark arch¬ way of the great tower, leading into the base court. Beyond, in the sunshine, could be seen
the King's Highness, preceded by the Lord Constable, and having the Archbishop on his right and Prince Edward on his left, passing forward to the upper court ; where, on the steps, stood the marshals of the hall, the stewards, the esquires ofthe household, with many officers of the castle, waiting to receive him, some with chains of gold on their necks : the royal banner waving over all. They stood so thick, looking over one another's shoulders, face above face, on the steps there, that they seemed Uke a ram¬ part of heads ; while, below them, in the same court, the lance-men and yeomen of the household stood waiting to receive the Queen. And truly it was a pleasureful sight, to fiehold that vision of light appearing be¬ yond the deep portal, under which stood, on either hand, the wardours in their ni¬ ches, to the number of eight ; so dim, they showed like shadows more than substance,
albeit, they did not lack of that. And a more deUghtful sight it was to behold the Queen and aU her train, winding through that dark arch into the beams beyond ; the rich trappings of steeds and* men, their breast-plates and spears and steel caps, aU glancing in the setting sun. There, too, you might see, through the higher bars of the portcullis, the wmdows of the great chamber hung out with tapestry of silk and cloth of gold. But that, which caused some surprise to those who watched without, was a sudden turmod, that appeared around the King in the court, just as the Queen's Utter was advancing forth of the arch-way. A man was seen forcing himself among the guards, towards his Highness, who turned his face backwards in the sun, as if to see what was going on ; and seemed to rein in his steed, whüe he held forth his right arm to Sir Gaston de BlondevUie, who, with cap
in hand, leaned forward on his courser, as if receiving some command. The while, the heads and spears of soldiers gathered round, moving in tumultuous hurry, rising and faUing incessantly, like unto those stormy white tops coming on over a dark¬ ened sea. On a sudden, the King disappeared : some thought he had fallen from his steed, struck by the hand of the stranger ; and then, such was the throng of people beyond the portal to get forward for more cer¬ tainty, that hardly could the Queen's guard keep them back, tffi his Highness was seen ascending the steps of the high court. At last, out of the midst of the confu¬ sion a shield was seen raised upon the tra¬ versed spears of six soldiers, and borne towards the outer gate, having upon it a man stretched, as if dead. But at the great portal the soldiers stopped, aiid drew aside to make way for the Queen; his VOL. i. f
Highness, meanwhile, with his nobles and young knight, had withdrawn into the state apartments. ЛУЬеп her Highness was gone by, they brought the man upon the shield into the free air without the walls, and lowered their burden on the grass ; but the tumult of the people was so great, (they suspect¬ ing that he had attempted the Kings life) that the soldiers with their spears had о л @Be much ado to save him from their fury, or Ws * Die to keep a little space open around him. He w T as a man of goodly appearance. that lay there, seeming without life. Anon. he began to stir himself, and in a little while opened his eyes ; the which, when the people saw it, redoubled their fury : and they demanded, that he should be had to prison, for " he has assailed the life ol our good King !" With that they made such a roaring, that the shouts of the soldiers, who wanted to set them right,
could not be heard, the women brawling louder than all of them together. Thus it went for some time ; and then, the noise being hushed, they found out the man was innocent of what they had suspected. When the stranger had recovered him¬ self a little, he stared wildly ; and, rais¬ ing himself up, he looked round him, as if examining the countenance of every one, whom curiosity or anger had made to bend over him. And so he looked again and again, tiU they asked him, if he thought he saw the countenance of any one there, whom he knew. Then he fetched a deep sigh, and said, " I as surely saw him as I now breathe, but he is not here." Divers present then asked him, of whom he spoke, but he only muttered to himself, " I could not be deceived ; it is impossi¬ ble for me ever to forget him." Then he f 2
shook from limb to limb, and was nigh going oíF into a swoon again. The peo¬ ple, meanwhile, pressed upon the soldiers to know what all this meant ; and curio¬ sity and pity began to take the place of rage. The tale went, that, as King Henry had approached the entrance of the second court, this man, who had passed the portal amongst the King's horses, at the risk of © Be Wiss his life, came beside him, and, having fixed De his eyes with the greatest attention upon a knight of the King's household, cried out 9 " Justice ! most noble Henry." Then, as if unable to utter something he woidd have spoken, he fell down in strong con¬ vulsions, and was nigh being trampled to death. His Highness, seeing the condition of the man, had commanded he should be taken forth of the court, and aid ad¬ ministered to him ; and this was aU the soldiers could teU.
There were some amongst the crowd who thought they had seen him before, and questioned him of his name, and wherefore he had presumed to approach the King in such manner ; to all whicii he would nothing answer ; but seemed heavy at heart, and as if his very sadness would not let him speak ; only these words he uttered, once or more,—" It was he himself! I should have known him at Cairo !" Some stiU said they had seen the poor man before; naithless he proved to be a stranger in KenUworth. When he could walk, he was led back to the little hostel, where he had taken up his lodging, and there he remained closely hid from the eyes of every one, all that night.
THE SECOND DAY.
THE SECOND DAY.
Ат the head of this chapter was a view of the tilt-yard^ at the end of the great lake, witli the towers of Kenilworth above.—In the lists were two armed knights, on foot, each poising his spear at the other. They were cased in complete steel ; their visors closed, each bearing on his helmet his * plume and crest. There was somewhat very im¬ pressive in the station and in the whole appearantv of these armoured figures. Each stood vvith his right foot advanced ; the right arm, holding the spear, was raised high, displaying at once the strength and grace of an accomplished warrior. At the end and along one side of the tilt-yard, were galleries hung with tapestry, where sat the Queen лпа her ladies, and the King and his nobles, waiting to behold the encounter. The opposite sides were open to the lake, the woods, and the castle.
THE SECOND DAV.
In the morn, next after the King came to KenUworth, there was tilting in the great yard of the castle, at which his HigiV ness, with the Queen and her court, were present. This was the day of Turney ; but. although this noble company made a goodly show, they were not appareUecl with that splendour they showed on tbe chief day as will be hereafter геЬе-агмк!. Among the ladies of the court» mmt ьт~ passed for beauty the lady Bartiara, daugh¬ ter of the Earl of Huntingdon and a fa¬ vourite damsel of the Queen ; her the King intended to bestow in marriage, during ľ 5
hh sojourn in Ardenn. She was innocent and graceful, as the fawns that bound in our forest, and excelled in aU tbe accom- plishmrnts of the court. She had fixed her heart on Sir Gaston de BlondeviUe, a young knight of the Kings household, wht» had entreated her of her father in vain ; for, though he wa* of a gotnl family, it was a foreign one, l»emg ofthe Queen s country, and he had little lje<ides the favour of hb master to dcjiend on. The youth was of a comely jKTson and gallant tearing; well practised ш aU martial excrases of war. td* which he hail given Mime proof in ex¬ ploits, and had latterly so much disjUayed himself in a fierce adventure against some of King Henry ϊ» reliellioub subjects, beyond sea, that his Highness had ancori tinen tly advanced him to Ik.· one oi his own knighb. Moreover, the King* t)ii hearing of ¡аь di¬ lari ng suit, had tak* 11 that mattéi* into im special cogiuzantc ; aiid the King kntv*
so well how to command the earl, that he consented to give his daugher to the knight, and iiis Highness determined the marriage should be solemnized forthwith. But, on this very fìrst day, after his ar¬ rival, his spirit was ruffled by a strange accident. As his Highness was return¬ ing from the Tilt-yard, accompanied by the Queen, and attended by the whole couit, his harpers playing liefore him, a stranger «ame forth of the crowd, and falling at his feet, called out boldly for justice. Many there present knew bim for the man who, the night liefore, had showed such striking 4igns of a disturlied mind ; and now, noting his unseemly vehemence, they stopped and asked for what offence he demanded justice. Tbe King, too, remembered him ; and listening what he should say, the man, observing that, addre^ed his looks and his voice eagerly to him, and exclaimed, that he demanded justice u¡K>n robbers and
murderers who infested the highways of his kingdom with more violence and fre¬ quency than was ever known before, so that none of his peaceable subjects were safe from them. The King, seeing the wildness of his look and the strangeness of his gesture, guessed the man was not rightly himself; yet he commanded him forthwith into the castle, there to wait, tiil he should speak with him, or order some others to do so ; and the procession passed on. Meanwhile, the King determined not to leave this matter, till he should have seen something more about it, with his own discernment. He went speedily into the white hall, which was the court of' justice, keeping only a few of his nobles and other attendants, where he summoned the stranger before him, and had question put to him, who he was and of what par¬ ticular grievance he had to complain.
The man answered, that his name was Hugh Woodreeve, a merchant of Bristol : and then he told his story—that, three years before, travelling with a very large sum of money in his possession, and, being in company with three other travellers, two of them merchants of good repute, and the other a kinsman of his own, they were attacked in the forest of Ardenn, when about two miles from Kenilworth, and robbed of nearly all they carried. They did not part with it quietly, it was so much. His kinsman, however, was the only one of the party that had good arms ; he had served in the wars, and he now manfully resisted the ruffians, who direct¬ ed most of their vengeance to him; he was murdered on the spot; for the rest of his company, they escaped with some hurts. No one of the robbers was killed, but two or three were wounded. Here the merchant stopped and seemed
ready to sink. His Highness, having de¬ clared his indignation at this villany, as¬ sured the merchant, that justice should be done upon the guilty, if they could be found, and asked whether he could swear to them, if he should see them again. The stranger straight replied, that he could truly swear to the murderer, and that he had seen him in the very court, nay, that he saw him at that very instant, standing even beside the King's chair. King Henry, struck with astonishment, fixed his eyes sternly on the stranger, for a moment, and then looked at those around him. On his right hand, was his son, Prince Edward, and, on his left, his young favourite, Gaston de Blondeville, upon whom all eyes were fastened; for to him the answer pertayned, and to him the accuser pointed, with a look of horror, which convinced every one present, except his Highness, he did indeed believe he
saw before him the murderer of his friend, whether his fancy deceived him, or not. __ ** For the King himself, he inclined to think the accuser was either disordered in his mind, or that, from some unknown cause, he was the enemy of Sir Gaston ; and his Highness knew well of the unreasonable and deadly abhorrence, in which many of his subjects of Britain held some of those strangers from France, who had risen into favour. At the boldness of this accusation, Sir Gaston stood, at first, Uke one stricken with dismay; then, moving his hand towards his sword, he said, " but for the presence of the King, my master, I should soon avenge me for so foul a slander." To which the merchant, now much more tranquil than he had been, said, " The same reason must restrain all ; but I do not need it : I wouid not set my life
against that of an assassin! I ask for justice from his Highness." At these words, Sir Gaston was hardly withheld from his accuser. King Henry commanded silence : and, as soon as all noise had ceased, he turned with a severe countenance to the stranger, and said, " Know you not, that he, whom you ac¬ cuse is a knight of my household, ad¬ vanced to honour for his valour ?" " Yea, noble King Henry," replied the merchant, " I have heard so ; but, I re¬ peat, he is the man who killed my kins¬ man ! I never can forget that face : if I had met him in a distant land, I should have seked him for the murderer !" The King, more fully convinced of the unsoundness of his mind, said, " Your passion has deceived you ; thus far I am willing to pardon you ; if you go farther, you must be taught what it is to disho¬ nour a gentleman and a knight."
Upon this, the merchant fell at the King's feet ; and, with upUfted hands, again cried out for justice ! Henry, hardly less astonished at the resolution of the man, than that one of his household should be thus accused, (although he might have bethought him of the law he had himself found it expedient to make heretofore at Kenilworth, respecting robberies then com¬ mitted in a very extraordinary manner on the highways)—King Henry, though asto¬ nished, began to doubt. He fixed a look, in which there was somewhat of inquiry, upon Sir Gaston, whose visage was pale, though his eye was fierce ; but who may say, whether fear or anger maketh some men pale ? The King held it to be the last ; a momentary doubt had entered his mind; but he promptly dismissed it. His High¬ ness was commanding, that the stranger should be removed ; and, for the present,
confined in the castle ; when Prince Ed¬ ward, who, young as he v/as, had closely observed all that had passed, craved hum¬ bly of the King, his father, to suffer the merchant to be further questioned; and the King consented thereto. Then the man was asked, whether he could tell the year and the month, when the robbery he spoke of had been com¬ mitted. He was ready enough with his answers, and said it was on the eighteenth of October, in the year tweive hundred and fifty-three, and on the chase ; that he was sure of the time, because it was within three days of that, when he should have paid to a goldsmith the most part of the money, whereof he was robbed. Upon this, the King seemed to consider awhile, for he knew, that, about that time, a ramp lay in the neighbourhood of War¬ wick and on the edge of the fbrest, and
that Sir Gaston was there, he being then serving as esquire to Sir Pierse Mallory. At the last words of the merchant, Sir Gaston moved towards the King, as though he would privily say something; but bis Highness reproved him with a frown; and asked the merchant at what hour the robbery was committed, and what were the array and appearance of the robbers ? The knight interrupting the reply, then said aloud, "Sire! I entreat you, be mind¬ ful of the condition of disgrace, in which I must stand, if you seem to give coun¬ tenance to this scandalous accusation. I know not, that I shall be able to breathe, if it be thought, that your Highness could, for one minute, think it possible I could have committed so foul a deed." King Henry, looking kindly upon him said, "It is right you should be cleared with those, who know you not so well as
I do ; and chiefly with those, who love not men of your country; and, therefore, would I examine this witless charge to the uttermost." His Highness then made all his questions over again. The merchant considered awhile, and somewhat of his boldness seemed to for¬ sake him : he then answered, " the num¬ ber of the robbers was three ; they were most of them tall in stature ; they wore cloaks about them, and had masks on their faces." " Masks ?" said the King. " Masks !" murmured the courtiers, with one voice. The King, daunting the accuser with the anger of his countenance, said, " You could swear to this knight, as one of the robbers, and yet you say, he had a mask on his face ! I suspect you now for an ünpostor more than for a moody man. If it prove so, tremble ! for I swear by my
sword you shall not escape. I give you one more warning, to stop before you to¬ tally plunge into your ruin." At these words, delivered with vehe¬ mence, the paleness left Sir Gaston's face, and he made a profound obeisance, show¬ ing his gratitude to the King. The ac¬ cuser, dismayed, could not immediately find his voice, as it seemed. Haply, he could not so speedily send back his thoughts to the rest of his story. Incontinently, the most of the assemblage began to look ychon in other's face. By-and-bye, the merchant said, that in the struggle between his companions and the robbers, two of the vizors fell oflf, and so he saw plainly the faces of the robbers, and he perfectly remembered the face of the knight. His Highness, without telling his thoughts on this, which many there present scrupled not to hold an after- invention of the accuser, commanded him
to begin his tale anew, and to tell, one by one, every particular he could bring to mind of the alleged adventure ; but be¬ fore he began, Sir Gaston, surveying him, asked whether, about four years back, he was not at Embrun, in the Dauphiné. Denying, that he had been at that place, the accuser then renewed his story, which purported, that he and his companions were traveUing, about the close of day, through the forest, or chase, of Kenilworth, when they were attacked by robbers. He was bidden to repeat the number of them and of his company, which he did, without varying his tale. The King asked how long after sun-set it was when the assault began ? which he could not readily tell ; but said it was so nearly dark, that hardly could he see the figures of the robbers under the shade of the woods, from which they burst : the merchant paused a mo¬ ment—■
" Go on,"' said the King, impatiently :— " But I could, afterwards, see them plainly enough by a torch I took from my companions, who had lighted it, at a smith's in a viUage by the way-side ; an iron-smith's." The King asked him if he knew the name of this viUage, but he knew it not ; and whether he should know the smith again ? and he answered, he thought he should. Then he was ordered to pro¬ ceed with his story : " My kinsman," said he, " was the only one of us, who was weU-armed; and a braver spirit never lived. He fought with his sword that man, who now stands be¬ side your Highness ; it was a trusty wea¬ pon, and had done him good service in Syria, where he had it for booty, after a skirmish, as I heard. When my kinsman first made up to that man, I foUowed him with the torch, and to aid him, as I might,
with an oaken staff I had än my hand ; but I received a blow upon the arm, that held the torch, which was knocked to the ground, and the vizor of the man feU also, that very man, who now presses behind your Highness's chair. The torch was not extinguished, and, by its light, I plainly saw that same countenance, that now glares upon me so vengefuUy. I saw it while he aimed the blow, which pene¬ trated the head of my unfortunate kins¬ man, Reginald de FolviUe." The merchant paused, seemingly over¬ come by the remembrance of this event, while Sir Gaston exclaimed, — "Was it Reginald de F^oiviUe ? He was esquire to a knight of Saint John, and was then at Lydda t so much for the truth of your story in that main point." At the first words of Sir Gaston, the King and the courtiers had turned their faces upon him; but though his words
were so strong and sufficient, they beheld in his countenance paleness and consterna¬ tion. But he soon recovered ; and, asking pardon of his Highness for the emotion with which he had spoken, accounted for it by saying, that Reginald de Folville had been bis earliest friend. "Your father's friend, you must surely mean,** said the merchant ; " for he was at the wars at a time, that would have made that possible. Ybu must have been a child, when lie went there." " I was then a child,'' said Sir Gaston, averting his eyes from the stranger ; " and I must ever remember the kindness he showed me after the death of my father ; I owe him much. lie went from Pro¬ vence to Syria ; I heard he fell in battle there. Sure I am he never returned : he died in battle there." " He died in the forest of Ardenn," said the merchant with solemnity, " and lies vol. i. g
buried in the priory of Saint Mary here. He died by your hand : that is his very sword by your side ; I remember it now." The audacity of this assertion struck all present and none more than the King him¬ self. His Highness desired to examine the sword, and asked the merchant why he had not sooner challenged it ; to which he answered nothing. Sir Gaston, as he de¬ livered it on his knee to the King, said— *' If I know my accuser, which I think I do, he is no stranger to this weapon : he knows well that I usually wear it ; but it never belonged to Reginald de Folville. My liege, it was my father's sword ; he won it in the plains of Palestine." The King examined it with attention. If was of eastern shape and finely wrought. In the hilt were a few jewels. Prince Edward, as he leaned over it, pointed out to his father a motto in an unknown tongue ; and then, at some distance below
it, a date, with the Roman letters, H. Α., ι*ί>ΐΎΐηνΙί"ΐη*ηρ fbot iwnknl-ihr fbŕicn l^ffore íll- 1 V..441,. ».licit VlIUľ Ш^Л. VUim/İ J 4*»>^k^.w' »^j*í*»w»4' 4VÌ» luded to some exploit achieved in the year noted. The King addressed himself to Sir Gaston for the meaning of the motto and of these letters ; but he knew not their meaning, and said they were as when his father won the sword from his enemy. Then the King addressed the merchant with the same question, observing, that, as the sword seemed to be familiar to him, he probably had been told the signification of the letters on it. With that, the merchant was hastily advancing to receive it of one, to whom his Highness had delivered it; vvhen he suddenlv drew back, covered his 44/ J eyes with his hand, and stood immovable. Those near almost expected to see him fall, as he had done before in the castle court on the night last past. Sir Gaston, at the same time, stepping forward, presumed to take it, and to deliver it again to the King, с о
with these words : —" Your Highness will not tempt the villany of tliis man by putting him in possession of the sword he falsely claims." But the merchant claimed it not ; nor could he even endure to look upon it. Heavy sighs burst from him, while with eyes stiU covered with his hands, he said,— " That was the sword, with which the vil¬ lain murdered him ; and can I endure to take it in my hand, and to look upon the blade, on which his life blood flowed ?" and he groaned more piteously than before. There were some in the hall, who in¬ stantly thought this sorrow of the mer¬ chant was a mimickry, and asked how it could happen, that his kinsman was killed by his own weapon ; to which, soon as he couid recollect his thoughts, he made an¬ swer, that the robber, on wrenching th*· sword from his friend, struck him his death-wound with it. The King, return-
ing the sword to the young knight, bade him keep it forthcoming till he should de¬ mand it of him again, and then said to the stranger these or such-like words : — " You, a man unknown to me and to mine, and without a name, except as far as you have declared one, have dared to come into my court, and to accuse to me one of my own servants, a gentleman and a knight, of a crime most foul and in¬ credible. You have related your story, and I have waited patiently for some evi¬ dence, that the murderer of your kinsman, if, in truth, he were ever destroyed by vio¬ lence, was Sir Gaston de Blondeville. I find none, except your story. And in this you have not scrupled to affirm, that you would have seized him for the murderer, even in a distant land, though you also say, thai your knowledge of Ids coun¬ tenance was obtained only from the sud¬ den (and, therefore, the uncertain) light of
a torch lying on the ground, at a moment, when the danger you were yourself ex¬ posed to, might, it may be readily believed, have prevented you from closely observing any face whatsoever. You must be held unworthy of credit; and I commit you into safe custody, tiU it shall be discovered who you are, and who those are, who urged you to this base accusation,'' When his Highness had ended, they were going to convey away the merchant from his presence, but he craved leave to speak, and it was granted. " My liege," said he, " at any other than that moment of horror, I might have seen the face of this stranger, without remem¬ bering it the next; but the impression made, at that moment, wiU remain with me, as long as the strong feelings, which then struck me, shall return with the re¬ collection of my kinsman's fate. On see¬ ing the same face, I was seized with the
same horror; your Highness's people can lie witnesses, that yester-eve, when I saw that knight, I fell into convulsions, and was carried senseless from your presence." His Highness, remembering what had happened, and, on inquiry, finding, that this was the very man, who had then fallen senseless, perceived, that the mer¬ chant had not spoken this untruly. He asked again whether he was known to any person in Kenilworth, also whether either of the merchants, travelling in his company, at the period of the alleged murder, was at hand. The accuser stood, for a while, bewildered, and then repeat¬ ing, that he was a stranger, having only passed through the place, a few times, on his way to or from Coventry, said, that of his two companions one was dead, and the other following his merchandize, in a distant land. M Then," said the King, " it appears you
cannot bring any evidence of the truth of your story ; even so far, as that a robbery was actually committed. Your accusa¬ tion of this knight is, therefore, likely to be impeUed either by malice, or by some other bad motive. If it shall prove so, dread the punishment that awaits you." " My liege," said Sir Gaston, " I think I know the man, and also his motive. He wronged my father at Embrun; and now his malice,—but this story is connected with family circumstances, that should only be divulged to your Highness ; and, if you will suffer me to unfold them in private, I shall prove, not mine innocence only—for of that your Highness does not doubt—but that man's former and present guilt" At these words, the stranger fell again on his knees, and besought aloud justice on " a villain." The King looked long upon him and
upon Sir Gaston, and sat pondering awhile. He then turned to the merchant, and, bidding him rise, asked him, a second time, if he were not known to any nne person in Kenilworth? and received for answer, " Only as a traveller." " An adventure as remarkable as that you have related," pursued his Highness, " must have been known here at the time it happened, and must be remembered now. It is strange, if there be none who can recollect you also/' " My lord," observed Prince Edward, * k he said his friend was buried here in the priory. If so, the prior must know him and his strange history. ,, "Said he so?" quoth the King; and, turning to the stranger, he inquired how it happened, that he was not known to the prior? and who it was that commanded the burial of his kinsman. The merchant said, he had himself or¬ ci Q
dered it, and had conversed with a monk and even with the Prior himself. " Then you are known to the Prior, at least," said the King ; " he will surely re¬ collect your story : let him be sent for. It is strange you should have said you were unknown : you are either guilty of false¬ hood, or your senses are unsettled." The stranger raised his hand to his head and sighed. " I recoUect the Prior," said he, " but he may not remember me." " We shall see !" said the King, calmly, as he rose from his chair : " If you are innocent, fear not ! if you are guilty, you will lose your life, in seeking that of an innocent man," As his Highness left the hall, he looked somewhat sternly upon the accuser, and commanded, that he should be held in close custody, while more inquiry should be made. He then ordered Sir Gaston to attend him in his privy-chamber, and so
departed forth of the haU, leaving the accuser speechless and dismayed. As the merchant was led through this court of the castle to the tower, where was his prison, the lady Barbara, sitting in her bower-window above, saw the pass¬ ing crowd, and inquired the occasion of it ; but none would inform her. While she gazed with curiosity, she observed Sir Gaston going to the King's privy-chamber ; he looked not at her window, but went his way with a hurried step, and with such a countenance as she had never wit¬ nessed iu him, tiU this time. At length, word was brought to my lady, her mother, of what had passed before his Highness. The Earl, her father, was promptly ûUea with disgust ; and thought the occurrence would be sufficient to prevent the marri¬ age, which neither his English heart, nor his pride of ancient blood, had suffered him to approve. His daughter, the lady
Barbara, was differently minded ; she would not believe hhn she loved capable of even a dishonourable action, much less of so foul a one ; and, assured of his in¬ nocence, she wouid have thrown herself at the King's feet, had that seemed aiways, as it did at first, proj>er, to urge his High¬ ness to clear Sir Gaston instantly from the suspicion. But truly the King needed no advocate for Sir Gaston de BlondeviUe ; and so she thought, at last. His Highness's own in¬ clination was sufficient; and so angered was his generous spirit by what he held to 1ю not only a false, but a malicious ac¬ cusation, that he had determined after proof of this, to give a signal warning by the accuser's doom ; and this not only to prevent other false accusations proceed¬ ing from private motives, but to reprove and caution those of his subjects, who had a public prejudice against strangers, and
were too likely to delight in the ruin of ¿uch especially as had risen to honours. The King, therefore, willingly gave au¬ dience privately to the young knight, that he might explain to him the circum¬ stances, which should assure him of his innocence. What Sir Gaston told his Highness was never assuredly known ; some reports went on one side of the mat¬ ter, some on the other : there was not one witness of what passed. Who then might know, unless they could guess by the coun¬ tenances, and by what passed, when the hearing was over ? But, if they had gone by no other guide, they woidd have been all for the knight, since he had made the King quite convinced ; and moreover, the Earl of Huntingdon was summoned to the closet, where the King promised him the honour of the young knight would always remain unsullied in his opinion ; and so commanded, that the marriage with the
lady Barbara should lie solemnized, as had been before appointed, on the day- next following. The Earl besought, nay, as some say, dared to remonstrate, that the marriage should t>e postrmned tiU the stranger should have km lawfully convicted of falsehood; but his Highness said, " Nay; lest it should seem that the accusation waj* probable enough to require such de- « iay. It is already well-known, as a matter agreed u]Km, tliat the nuptials are to lie held on the morrow, the preparations are nearly aU made, and they are public. It is necessary for the honour of Sir Gaston de BlondeviUe, that tbe ap|wintment should tie kept. If you are not convinced, still you will not be required to make dis¬ avowal of any thougiit you may have ; for I myself wiU lead your daughter to the porch, and wiU so, by my presence and by tbis act of parental kindness, show røy
estimation both of the fair bride and of him who shall become your son. Farther proof of my regard shall not be wanting hereafter." His Highness was peremptory, and the Earl, swayed by his master's positive opi¬ nion, and, it may be, by that promise of re¬ gard hereafter, at last obeyed. Wiiile these things were passing in the King's chamber, the unhappy merchant was taken to a turret of the castle, called Cæsar's Tower ; and there, with nothing but a pallet and the bare walls, was left to think of his jeopardy. What his thoughts were I know not ; but he was heard sorely to sigh and groan, and with good reason ; for, if he knew himself perjured, he knew also, that he should find no mercy from the King ; and, if innocent, he could expect little justice against so great a favourite* But, whatever were his meditations, they held not till night, for he was called and
led forth of the tower into the presence of the King ; and, before even-song, the Prior of Saint Mary's was in attendance upon his Highness. He was not an aged man, yet was he a stern one. When he was asked whether ever before he had seen the mer¬ chant, he answered resolutely, that he had no knowledge of him. The same question being put to the merchant, touching his knowledge of the Prior, he returned a like answer. At this seeming self-contradiction, the King could scarcely command his anger, till it was discovered, that a Prior of Saint Mary's had died, since the time when the murder was aUeged to have been commit¬ ted, and that it must needs be he, whom the merchant meant. "But, where is the monk, with whom you considted ?" asked the King ; can you tell his name?" " His name was Ewdwyn," replied the merchant.
" He died yesternight !" said the Prior. At this there was a pause, and a dead silence throughout the chamber. Sir Gas¬ ton looked darkly on his accuser; his accuser directed his eyes to the King and then on high ; but, in a short minute, he feU down, as though he were a dying man. The King, touched at his sufferings, com¬ manded him from his chamber, that aid might be administered unto him. And then, that he might know whether this ac¬ cusation of Sir Gaston were through malice, or mistake—for now pity inclined him to think the last—and also, that Sir Gaston might have mistaken, when he took this for the man, of whose deeds at Embrun he had talked ; that he might know the truth on aU this, he ordered the Prior to make in¬ quiry in his community, whether the body of any person known to have been mur¬ dered in the forest of Ardenn, three years before, had been deposited in the chapel, or in the cemetery of the convent. Like-
wise, he commanded the Prior to have inquiry made in Kenilworth, whether any person remembered such an accident, or any house had received the dead body. And this he ordered, that it might always be seen he had desired to have justice done towards the wretched merchant, as well as for Sir Gaston de Blondeville. This being appointed, the King departed to his great chamber, there to keep his state; the Prior to his convent, to resume his spiritual musings ; the accused lover to his mistress ; and the merchant was con¬ veyed to his prison tower. The King kept state, that night, with the Earl of Cornwall, the Archbishop of York, the Bishop of Winchester, the Bishop of Lincoln, Henry de Wernham, his chaplain, who also had the custody of the Great Seal, the Earl of Norfolk, the Earl of Here¬ ford and a number of other nobles of the realm ; but the Queen kept her state apart.
The King's great chamber was marvel¬ lous to behold. There were twenty-five wax-lights held by esquires of the house¬ hold, all in the King's livery, gentils as they were; also twenty-five wax torches were fixed high up over the tapestry. The walls were, that night, gorgeous with the story of Troy-town in ancient tapestries ; there you might see the flames burning and the towers falling, and old King Priam, with beard as white as snow, his crown upon his head, and his Queen Hecuba tearing her dishevelled locks for grief. And there was that renowned son, who carried off his aged father, with his little child holding by his garment, and his wife following, all disconsolate. This was a piteous sight to see pourtrayed ; but that it were nothing save a heathen story. The floor of that chamber was not strewed either with rushes or with litter of any sort, but was laid in little cheequers
of divers colours ; and, where his Highness sat, under his cloth of state, was spread a silken carpet of full crimson, fringed about with gold, as likewise his chair and canopy of estate. But the finest sight was the cup¬ boards, piled up with plates and cups of gold and silver, in readiness for the King, when he should take his voide. These were in that great Oriel, which his Highness had newly made in this chamber, before the bay ; and which was closed about with painted glass from the highest cup-board to the arched roof, where hung a silver lamp, that made the whole glow with its light. There were, that night, playing in the chamber, the King's tweive minstrels, all clothed, for his honour and dignity, in sumptuous livery, with their virger to order their pipyngs and blowings. Then* were, besides, the chUdren of the chapel singing, at tunes, from the brown gallery ; so that, the doors being open, you might
have heard them through all that side of the castle ; and those, who sat afar off in the great haU, needed none other music. There also was Maister Henry, the ver¬ sifier, whose ballad of the Giant of Corn¬ wall was this night rehearsed to the harp by Richard, the King's harper, as was his famous Chronicle of Charlemagne, which lasted, till his Highness was well nigh weary, when he jocularly called out, hav¬ ing tasted of his golden cup, that Henry should have a butt of wine with his wages, if he would shorten his ballads by one-half, Maister Henry, who was a Frenchman, took this in good part, and, having especial care ever after to make his ballads nigber to too short than too long, became, in time, a notable rhymer. But let those 4 do so who can. Some are famous one way, some another ; for mine own part, I must lie circumstantial, or else nothing, as this " Trew Chronique" in due time must show. That night, the King played at " Check-
ere" with the Earl of Norfolk, on a board laid with jasper and chrystal, the check- men being of the same. Some said the king's and queens were of ebony, studded over with jewels, but of this I know not. But, the finest sight of all was the going of the chamberlain to the cupboard, ac¬ companied of three nobles of the highest estate in the realm, that were there pre¬ sent, (save the King's family) to receive the King's cup and spice-plates ; and then the bringing up of the voide before his High¬ ness. And, first, the usher, having assem¬ bled the King's sewers, their towels about their necks, with the four esquires of the body and the knights and esquires of the household, to the number of seventeen ; these, with divers other officers, being met at the cup-board, the Chamberlain took the King's towel, and, having kissed it, as the custom is, delivered it to the Earl of Norfolk, he being of the highest estate,
who reverently received the same, and laid it safely upon his shoulder. Then, the said chamberlain gave the gold spice-plates co¬ vered to the Earl of Hereford ; and then the King's cup of massive gold, covered also, to the Earl of Warwick. At the same time were given to the knights of the household the Archbishop's spice- plate and cup, covered also, to be carried up, by the space of one minute after the King's. And, certes, it was a goodly sight to see all these nobles and gentils marching up the great chamber (the minstrels play¬ ing the while), compassed about with es¬ quires, bearing great lights to the number of thirteen, especial care being taken, as t he manner all times has been at the voide, that the lights were odd in number. First, then, went the usher, with his torch and rod, making passage ; the chamberlain, vvith his chain and wand of
office ; then the five esquires, of the body, bearing wax-lights before the Earl of Nor¬ folk, with the towel ; then, three esquires about the Lord of Hereford, bearing the spice-plates ; then, other three before the Lord Warwick, bearing the King's cup co¬ vered; then followed one knight of the household, bearing a single torch ; so making up altogether the just number of lights. Amongst them went four knights of the household, well renowned for brav- ^ ery and noble bearing, with the Archbish¬ op's spice-plate and cup. When this array drew near to the King, he, standing up under his cloth of estate, which was rolled up high, with the young Prince Edward on one hand and the Archbishop on the other, the Chamberlain taking the covers from off the spice-plates, gave assaye unto the Earl of Gloucester. The King, before he took his spice, made a beck to the Archbishop, that he should
take his first ; and the knights having advanced, as they well knew would be seemly, the Archbishop forthwith obeyed. But, when the Chamberlain uncovered the cup, aU the minstrels in the chamber blew up louder than ever, and so held on till his Highness took the ypocras, so that every roof in the castle rung with joy. The King and Archbishop being served, his Highness's cup and spice-plates were again covered, but not so the Archbishop's. Then were the spice and cup carried to Prince Edward and the Earl of Corn¬ wall, by the knights ; to the bishops by the esquires of the household, and to the other estates by the esquires also. Which being done, his Highness forthwith departed for i( all night," the trumpets blowing before him. Then, were three healths drank, one to the King, one to the Queen, and one to the Prince Edward ; after which it were not meet, that the assemblage should vol. i. H
GASTON DE BLONDEVILLE^ remain, and straight the great chamber was avoyded of aU there present. The Queen, that night, sat in her bower with all her ladies. There were mynstrel- sy and dancing to the harp and viol. The Lady Barbara was the marveÜ of aU, that beheld her moving to the sound of viols like unto some sprite, rather than to a poor mortal. Prince Edward danced with her a round, and the Queen often honoured her with her pleasing speech. Sir Gaston, though he beheld her, showed not his wonted joy. He stood apart looking on, and, when her Highness spoke to him, he seemed nigh to senseless of the honour. The dancing being ended, Pierre, a Norman and the Queen's chief minstrel, apparelled in the guise of his country, sang some of his ballads on the harp, in his own tongue, which, albeit, they were not esteemed like unto Maister Henry's, yet did they not displease. The first tuning
was in words which have been thus ren¬ dered into English hy one, who had learned much of the new speech, not then familiar, except with some few. THE BRIDAL. Lightly, lightly, bounded the roe, The hind o'er the forest was fleeing ; The small birds tuned on every bough, In sun and shade their gleeing. And purple cups, and silver hells From the green leaves were peeping ; The wild-rose smiled in the mossy dells ; Nought but the thorn was weeping. And so bright in the sun its tears did shine, They showed like tears of pleasure ; And the airs of May, through the budding spray, Breathed joyance, without measure. For this was Isabel's bridal morn Who loved each bud and flower, The wild-wood shade, the mountain head, The deep vale's mead and bower.
And now was her festival gaily kept By lrøgled brook and fountain, From the low green bank, where the violet slept, To the blue hill-top and mountain. And lightly, lightly, bounded the roe, His footstep wing'd with pleasure, And small birds sang from every bough, Welcomes beyond all measure. At the end of this ballad, the minstrel rang out his harp in full joyance ; and then, falling note by note, be dropped into a faltering murmur, as of deep sorrow, and so continued for some space, till those who heard him, perceived the witch of me¬ lancholy stealing upon them. The Queen, deeming such strain unsuit¬ able to the time, commanded him to change the measure, and sound forth one more gay, a lay of Provence, her native land, whither she knew lui had been for his learning; but be, enthralled by the magic
of his own mood, loving not to be com¬ manded, stiU hung his head over the harp, listening to that pleasure-full melancholy and heeding nothing but its sweet sound. At last, being made to know fully her Highness's will, he sang the song of a Troubadour; for, though he loved liest the ditties of Normandy, his own land, there was scarce one of Provence, which he had not gained ; and the Queen did not let him forget them, so often did she command those, which she affect¬ ed best. And now he sang forth to his harp a " roundel" in the Provençal tongue, made hy a knight of the "Order of Fine Eyes." They, wht) then heard him, would have thought he loved :my thing less than melancholy, so light and débonnaire was the music he rang out ; and many could hardly keep their steps from dancing to that gallant measure. But it lasted not long; for, making a
pause and looking wistfully at the Lady Barbara, he struck forth, on a sudden, some of his deepest tones, with a wild yet solemn grace, such as brought tears into the eyes of many a fair lady, and darted dread into the heart of one there present. It seemed as if the shadows of prophecy were moving over the strings, and calling from them some strange and fearful story yet to be. And then again did the har¬ per's voice steal trembling forth, as do the moon's beams, when pale clouds pass over, saddening, but not fully obscuring their brightness : yet might every one hear plain¬ ly all his words. Here it is done into English by the same hand ; but the verses be not all divided into equal numbers :— I. О er the high western wolds afar, Glimmer'd some lights of yesterday ; And there, one bright, hut trembling star Among the streaky shadows lay,
The traveller's lonely warning. But soon the winds, that sing day's dirge, Did o'er that star the shadows urge, And hung the night with mourning ! ir. " What steps on the waste are heating?" He Hstened not long on the ground, 'Ere he fearfully heard a sound, As of trampling hoofs retreating : Antl a dismal cry and a foot draw nigh ; " Stand ho !" 'twas an irmed man passed hy : But he spoke no sound of greeting, And seemed like a death-shade fleeting. III. O'er the lone mountains riding, He gallop'd by gloomsome ways, Where night-mists were abiding, Round the witch of evil days : Her name is written on the wind, That speaks in cliffs and caves conmvM. List there when the waning moon goeï* down, And thou 'lt hear the call her spirits own ; But as they pass, hold a chrystal glass, Or thou'It sorely rue the wild witch-tone.
IV. O'er the lone mountains riding-, From a distant land he came, No step his dark step guiding ; But he thought lie saw a flume, That bright, or dim, would sport awhile ; Then vanish, as in very guile ; He heard, as he passed, the witch -паше sound ; And his startled steed, at a single bound, Bore him away from that evil ground. v. с But o'er tho mountains pacing ι As fast as he can lieo, Strange steps his steps are tracing, And a shape he cannot see ; And, though he flee away, so prest, Whether to north, or smith or west, Toward tlte past, or coming day, (So dim the night he muy not say) Still oft by fits did ghastly gleam, A corpse-light, all unknown to him. VI. He folio wed the light o'er deserts wide, Down in deep glens, where wild becks wail ;
He followed by darkened forest side ; íle followed with dread, though link'd in mail Till it stayed before an iron gate, Where battled turrets kept their state, O'er towers so high and massy strong, They seemed to giant-king belong. VÌI. Sir Adomar looked him all around : Turret on turret hung on high, Shaping black lines on the dim sky ; Sir Adomar looked him all around ; Nought, save this castle, could he spy, Though, heavily clanged a death-bell's sound ; And in each pause of the shuddering blast, Moans were heard as of one from 'neath the grotta viu. Le struck on the gate with his good sword : " Ho î wardour, ho !" hut never a word Return'd the wardour from within. " The storm is loud, the night h dark, I hear from the woods the dog-wolf hark, Up, wardour, up ! it were a sin To turn a traveller from your tower, At such a lone and dreary hour ; A Saracen would let me in !" u α
IX. The wardour was watching through the loop, How many were of the stranger's troop. He had left his torch in the cullis' har, Ajid it let down a light on the lonely night, Tliat showed him harnessed, as for war. His coat was mail, his helm was steel ; His visor did his look reveal ; Yet o'er his brow it cast a shade, That made the wardour more afraid. Than did the crimsoned plume above, Or the mighty grasp of his iron glove. ν He would not let the stranger in, Till one, awakened by the din— One whom the wardour need obey— Seeing a lonely knight stand there, Bude the wardour nought to fear : He feared still, hut he said not Nay : Yet iie would not ope the portal gate To an unknown knight, without his state ; For neither squire., nor page, he saw : He bade him then to the postern draw. x. The knight dismounted at the call ; The porter let him through the wall ;
He turned the weary steed to stall, And led the knight to the lordly hall. I* the lordly hall, so wide and dim, One drowsy squire awaited him. The ashy wood lay, white and cold, On the raised hearth, where late was tolti, With fiery eye and accent loud, The deed of martial prowess proud ; Where late was told, in whispers low, Some tale of terror and of woe, The while each listener bent his head, Nor lost a word the trouveur said ; Till fear crept o'er each nerve and vein, That late had swell'd to martial strain ; And shadows crept along the wall, Such as the sinful soul appal : Till each , who heard, look'd round with dread, And saw some phantom of the dead. XI. Now silent was the hearth and lone, Save that a stag-hound slumbered there. The tables in disorder were, With relics of the evening fare ; The household to their rest were goma
And now no light was seen but one, The light that led the stranger on ; That show'd above steel armour gleaming^ And many a dusky banner streaming, From the black rafters of the roof, In the night-wind, fiu aloof, Like to some flitting phantom seeming ; And, stalking o'er the rushy floor, It showed the knight where steps of gore Had stam'd it. e green, with foot-prints red. And the stag-hound, as the knight passed by, Sent forth a mournful fearful cry. с V ] XII. The drowsy squire the stranger led ; (The wardour to his post was sped.) They traversed the hall in silent march : At the end was a door in a mitred arch, Tlu knight stood before that mitred door, And gazed ou a warrior shape above, Tli at seem'd to watch the passage o*er. In his altered look strange passions strove ? The armoured shape leaned on its sword, And downward bent its steely face, As jealous who below might pace, Or .about to speak the challenge-word ;
And it seemed the very form of one, The knight perforce must look upon. хш. Thus, while he stood in wonder-trance, The squire upheld the torch on high. Viewing the guest with watchful eye ; And marvelling what strange mischance So eheck'd his step, and fix'd his glance :— " Sir knight, why gaze you on that steel ? It is a baron's good and bold ; Had he been here, no welcome cold Would he have shown a stranger-knight, Who trusted to his towers at night." XIV. The spell of fant'sie ioos'd awhile, The knight return'd a grateful smile, With thanks for this so courteous style; And, then with thoughtful accent said. While yet he stood, that shape before, '* The armour some resemblance had To that of a dear friend no more ! A friend !"--he paus'd,— ŕť a friend long dead !" This, while he said, his colour fled. The squire seem'd not to note his pain. But, with fair speech, began again
Excuse to make for slender fare, That it was night, and, not aware Of honour'd guest approaching there,, The menials to their rest had gone ; A chamber should be fitted soon. His squire and page should welcom*d be ; Kight well he longed that squire to see. XV. The wearied knight a gesture made, And looked his thanks, but nothing said ; Save that, for rest alone he prayed. He sighed, as through that guarded arch, And vaulted gloom, he held his march ; And there, before his doubting sight, Glided again a pale sad Hght, Full often he had seen with fear, Yet more he felt to meet it here. Then came they to an iron door, And the knight beheld that flame no more. It opened to a second hall, Where warriors frowned upon the wall ; And ladies smiled in portraiture. With downcast eye and look demure. An umbered flash the red torch threw, Athwart each warrior's steadfast brow ;
And hardly might the gleam declare A haron grim from iady fair. XVI. There is no need that I should tell, What hasty fare the stranger took ; Nor hovv the squire, with silent look, Watched, wondering, what liud him befell ; So strangely gleamed hi.s hollow eyes, From forth the lifted heaver's shade So wan his lips, like one that dies, So few the words and thanks he paid I XVII. Though round the hall his looks would steal, Not well did torch or lamp reveal The portraiture of warriors grim, Or noble dames hung there so dim ; Their frowns and smiles were lost to him. But once, when that he turned his head Where the fix'd torch a gleaming shed, A sable form, ill seen at most, Went gliding up a »tair, on high, Posbcd through an open gallery, And through a door-way there was iost, Tliat seemed to lead to antient rooms, Such as where silence dwells, and gloom».
The knight, he felt a sudden chil!, Though nought he said of what had sped ; But tl**e spicy draught he deeply qimíTd, Whenever the page his cup did fill. And from his spirits chaced the ill. xvm. The night-cheer o'er, the page hă on The stranger to his resting-place. He led the way, that form had gone : On the high stair he stood a space, Waiting the knight's reluctant pace, Then, with mute reverence, marshalled him Through many a gallery, long and dim, Where helmets watched, in order grim ; Through many a c: iu.;ber, wide and lorn, Where wint'ry damps had half withdrawn The storied paintings on the wall. Electra^ o'er her brother's urn, There bent the head, and seemed to mourn ; Tliere, too, as meet in room and hall, Troy*s tale* ami Hector's piteous fall : Here Priam's Court, in purple and pall, * The « TA of Troy" appear» tö imve been a very fa¬ vourite subject ia .ancient tapestry. It uccui·* often in old cuîides, and îs meoţioned twice in this " Trew Clirouique,^ a« Bdoniiog the walìs of stately chambers.
Its golden splendour now had lost ; But Helen, on the rampart stood, And pointed to the Grecian host, Out-stretching to the briny flood. Here Hector's wife sat in her bower, Waiting her lord's returning hour ; And liroidering 'midst her maiden train, While her infant played with silken skein. There—but it boots not that I say, What stories once,, in long array, Lived on those walls, now ghastly clay. XIX. The knight would oft, as he strode by, Cast on their shade a searching eye ; And pause, as lisťning some drear sound, That rose within the glimmering hound : And start, as though some fearful sight Passed along this gloom of night ; But, at a lesser winding stair, (The long drawn chambers ended there,) When to that narrow stair he drew, He th* .ght a robe of mourning hue Went fleeting up that winding way ; No glimpse had he of shape or ray ; No foot he heard the stair ascend.
Yet still that seeming garment passed, As though some fiend, with evil haste, Did up that lonely tower wend. XX. The knight, he stood on the step below— tL Whither, my young page, dost thou go ? Who dwells within this lonely tower, Passing with speed, in sable weed- Passing with speed, at this dead hour ?" li Nohody, save the raven-crow, Dwells within this lonely tower ; And here, Sir knight, is your resting-bower !" *' But in this tower I may not rest, Till I know who that stair has pressed ; Did you not see that black weed wave?" ' Yes, knight, I saw the raven's wing, v 4t up that wall with sudden spring : л hark ! you now may hear him crave !" XXI. *' It is not courteous, that my bower Should be within this ruin'd tower !" " But see, knight, 'tis not in decay ; The storm hath blown a bar away, And the raven through the loop doth stray ; His nest is wet on the battlement grey :
Your chamber is a stately room, Hung round vvith work of choicest loom ; And erst it was the resting-place Of our dear Lady Baroness, Before she went to stranger-land. My lord yet strays on foreign strand. The chamber has another stair, heading to many chambers fair ; But no stop goes by night so far, Since my lord baron went to war." XXÏI. The page stept on with torch before, Far as that stately chamber's door. <( Page ! lift that light—fain would I know, Whither that second flight doth go?" iť It goes to a battlement up on high, And to a turret perching by." " Doth none keep watch on that turret high ? " None, but the raven with his cry ! Your rest, Sir knight, he will not break ; To traitors only doth he speak. They say he scents the new spilt blood." Upon tliti stair the raven stood ! He turn'd his dark eye on the knight, And, scream nig, upwartl winged his flight. The wondering page looked back vvith fright,
And met the stranger's fiery glance ; Then., hardly daring to advance, Lingered he at that chamber-door ; t( On," said the knight, " with torch before !" Scarce was the page the threshhold o'er, When check he made, and pale he turn'd ; Dim and more dim the torch-flame burn'd. The knight look'd on, but nothing saw, That might explain this sudden awe. xxui. A spacious chamber there was spread, And, for his rest, a stately bed ; Fresh rushes on the floor were strewn ; Faint on the arras'd walls were shown The heroes of some antient story, Now faded, like their mortal glory. Another form, as dark as doom. Stood within that chamber's gloom, Unseen by those who entered there. His cause of dread the page thus said : u Methought I saw, within that chair, The baron's self, my very lord ; I saw it, on a true man's word : I saw my lord return'd from far, Arrayed, as he went forth to war I
He fixed his very eyes on me, But looked not, as he wont to look. Yet now no living shape I see, And know that here he could not be ; For, long since, he these walls forsook : Yet is it strange such visions pale. Should o'er my waking sight prevail." xxiv. f< Whose are these antient walls, I pray ?" The sullen stranger 'gan to say ; " Sir, know you not these towers and halls Watch where the foaming Conway falls ? Who should these walls and towers own ? And the wide woods and forest round, Even to Snowdon* s utmost bound, Save the brave lord of Eglamore ?" The knight explained his ignorance, He was a wanderer late from France, The page surveyed him o'er again ; He thought the wily knight did feign : A deadly hue was on his cheek ; His looks spoke more than words may speak. Yet to the page, though much it told, He read not all it might unfold.
XXV. The knight perceived his doubting thought, And drew a badge forth from his breast ; Some noble Order's golden crest, Upon a field of silver wrought. " This badge," he said, " with blood was bought." He turn'd with haughty frown away. The page did not more doubt betray ; But service offered to undo His casque and linked harness true ; But the stranger gravely said him Nay, And refused that night to disarray. xxvi. Wondering, yet fearing to demand, Why to these towers from distant land, The knight had come, without his train, Pondered the youth his doubts again ; Again, as though his thoughts he read, The knight look'd sternly down and said, " My squire and my foot-page I missed At night-fall, when the woods betwixt. But they perchance may shelter find, From this bitter-blowing wind, In the deep hollow of some hill, Till the dawn break, and the storm be still."
XXVII. i( But the wolf bays in the blast afar ; Sir knight, how may they scape such war r I hear him now—he nearer howls ! Mercy ! mercy í save their souls !" " Hark !" said the knight, and stood aghast ; It was no wolf-howl in the blast ; It was a blood-hound's dreadful bay, The stranger heard, with such dismay— The blood-hound at the tower below ; That over pathless hill and dale, Had tracked a murderer in the gale, And came to claim his master's foe. While listening to the lengthen'd yell, The stranger seemed to hear his knell " A blood-hound loose, and at this hour ! Your rest, sir knight, had ill been kept ; Nor one within these gates had slept, Had I been in my distant tower," The page he lighted a lamp on high ; The stranger stifled scarce a sigh, That heavily for utterance pressed. He heard the page's steps descend. And go where the long chambers bend, Down to the halls, and tlť outer walls.
The page knew not the chance he ran ; He was marked with the blood of a murder'd man ! xxvm, The knight, he listened in silent dread, ТШ now, the blood-hound's voice was stilled ; But soon a low voice near him sped, That every nerve with horror thrilled. He looked the way that lone voice came, And saw, by the lamp's tall spiring flame, A portraiture on the wall beneath, Of noble dame, that seemed to breathe. Robed in sable weeds was she : The gleam fell on that lady's brow ; There, written dimly, you might see, The characters of hopeless woe. XXIX. Soon as that lady's face he saw, All other dread his heart forsook ; He gazed with fixt and frenzied awe, And vainly tried away to look : For to his fearful sight it seemed, As thougii her eyes on his were bent ; And, where the pale flame wavering gleamed, As if her varying cheek were blent
With lights and shades of death ; While round her lips a grim smile drew, And the rose paled that on them blew ; And, with faint lingering breath, " Prepare," she said, " thy hour is nigh ! Unpitying, thou hast seen me die ; Unpitied be thy mortal sigh !" XXX. He heard the words—the words alone ; He heard not that deep solemn groan ; He heard not the clang of the 'larum bell, Nor from the gates that horn-blast swell ; Nor heard the many-trampling hoofs, Nor voices calling in the gale, And ringing round the castle roofs, Till they made the 'battled raven quail ; Nor heard the funeral shriek, that broke Through every hall and lofty tower ; He heard alone the words she spoke. XXXI. Nor saw he in the court below, By the torches' umbered glow, Borne upon his bleeding bier, With wounds unclosed and open eyes, A warrior stretched in death draw near ; Nor heard the loud and louder cries, VOL. Γ. Τ
This piteous sight of horror drew From every friend and vassal true. But he knew that voice at his chamber-door;, And straight the witch·*veil of glamour Falb; and his wonder-trance is o'er. He hears his summons in that sound ; It is the bark of the true blood-hound. True to his murdered lord is he ; He has traced the steps he could not see- Traced them o'er darkened miles and miles? O'er glen and mountain, wood and moor, Through all their swift and winding wiles, Till he stopped before his master's door, And bayed the murderer in his bower. XXXII. The cattle gates vvere strait unbarred, And he sprang before his bleeding lord ; lie passed the page unheeded by, And tracked the stranger's steps on high ; Till at the door, that closed him in, Loud and dread became his din. The doors are burst, and the spectre-light Betrayeth the form of the blood-tracked knight : He was armed all over in coat af mail, But nothing did steel that night avail ; He fell a torn corpse, beside that chair, Whereunto the page did late appear,
By the dark glamour-art revealed, His murdered lord with Iance and shield. Tlie murderer fell, and his death-wound found In the terrible fangs of the true blood-hound.
Here the voice of the minstrel ceased ; and, after striking a few notes of his harp, full and deep, he rested with a look of sorrow. His eyes dwelt on the Lady Barbara—but she heeded him not ; but sat with head inclined, as if stiil listening to his dismal tale. There followed a dread bilence in the room, as of expectation of that which was to follow. Some there were, who said the ditty was already ended ; yet they would fain have heard something of the pitiful b L·» tory of that un¬ happy lady, whose portraiture was in the tower-chamber, and would have known what was the guilty motive of the knight against the Lord of Eglamore ; and how it chanced he came so unwittingly to his ι 2
castle. Others there were then present, who, having noticed the young Gaston de Blondeville to be ill at ease, the while the minstrel sung, and being, per¬ chance, already moved by the merchant's strange accusation, scrupled not to think the story touched him nearly ; and that Pierre rested, not because Iris ditty was at an end, or from weariness ; but that he doubted whether it would be well to proceed to the second part. However this may be, he needed not have stayed his strain, for Sir Gaston was no longer in the chamber. Whether Pierre knew this or not, he began once more to strike upon the harp ; when, on a sudden, the king's trumpets were heard blowing up near the stair ; and anon, his Highness entered the bower, it being al¬ most tune that he should go to his rest for " all-night," There was no more harping ; Pierre
tuning not up his second fit ; and belike, if his Highness had been there at first, he would have bidden him to shorten his ballad by one-half. The King looked about for Sir Gaston ; and, espying bim not, asked wherefore he was not there ; but, before any answer could be given, the knight had returned, and now approached his Highness. He was then commanded to dance a round with the Lady Barbara, and he obeyed ; but many there noted the sadness on his brow, though his steps were light and gay- A more pleasureful sight could not be than the Queen's bower, as it was at that time, where she sat in estate, under a cloth of gold, her ladies standing about her chair, and her maidens on either hand, below the steps of her throne; and two young damsels of surpassing beauty and riehly bedight, sitting on the first step, at
her feet ; the same, that were used so to sit, when her Highness kept state in the great hall at festivals. Behind them, half encircling the throne, stood twenty household esquires, holding great wax torches, right richly beseen in the king's livery, and proud to wear it, gentils as they were, as I said before, and of ancient families in the countries from whence they came. The arched roof was curiously wrought in that fashion, which King Henry had newly brought into favour; and, besides these lights, a great crystal lamp, that hung from the roof, shone over the cham¬ ber and upon the goodly assemblage, as they looked upon the Lady Barbara, passing so winningly in the dance. That night, the Earl of Richmond bore the Queen's spice-plate, and Sir Philip de Kin- ton her cup. When the Lady Barbara had ended
her dance, the Queen called her to her chair ; and, making her take of the sweet¬ meats from her own plate, spoke com¬ mendable words to her, as did his High¬ ness King Henry. Then the Queen, turn¬ ing to the Lady Gloucester, took from her hands a girdle, richly beset with jewels, and, clasping it on the Lady Barbara, kissed her, and bade her wear it ever, for her sake and for her honour. Her High¬ ness then stretched out her hand to Sir Gaston, who, kneeling, put it to his lips. " May you, Sir knight," said her High¬ ness, "as weU deserve this lady, as she deserves this token of my regard !" Then, the King said many gracious things, and seemed so merry of heart, that he made ail around him gladsome; till, the Voide being ended, he went forth with the Queen, the trumpets blowing before them ; and the chamber was then speedily avoided for all night.
While these things were passing in the chambers of estate, there were divers wassailings and merriments making in other places of the castle. In the great haU were feasting and revelling, but not of estate. There were tumblers and jug¬ glers and morrice-dancers and mimicks and mummers, with pipings and blowings, that made the roofs ring. The monks at the priory heard them afar, while at the last even-song, and long after ; and weU I wote, that had it not been the King's castle, there had been some rebuke, as indeed due, for such noise made. The Prior in his chamber sat alone ; listening, I guess, in gloomy mood to the revelry ; and, all that night, only Edmund the monk and mass Peter with him: he came not forth to mid¬ night-song. But now I must return, and so must ye that hear, or read, to the castle. In
the hall there was a dancer on stilts, play¬ ing the while on a recorder ; there were dancers on one leg, and dancers upon tlie head ; but that which most rejoiced many of the beholders, were the disguisings and the quaint antics of the mummers. There came a whole troop, some wearing tlie heads of asses, some of bulls, some of calves, some of cats, who brayed and kicked, bellowed and tossed, scratched and mewed, to the very life. Others, like stags and hares, hounds and apes, kept not so pertinently to their pretended natures, but marched on with solemn state, as much as might be, hand in hand, as if they had been loving friends and neighbours ; yet each with a dagger stuck in his girdle. And others again, with fool?' girdles and belis banging to them ; tossing their heads, and cutting such strange capers, to the noise of pipes and drums, as made the sides of many to
shake with laughter, and roused up every hawk on perch there to shake his bells in concert. But ail this was child's play, though it was often done before the worshipfullest estates, in comparison of the sayer's art ; which, when he could be heard between whiles, when the loud revelry paused and held breath, was marvellous to hear : and, as soon as those mad-heads caught the ords of that tale-teller, sooth to say, they soon were stiU and hushed, as though no living soul but he breathed there ; lis¬ tening to his dismal tradey, with tears in their eyes, or quaking for fear of the strange things he told them. He, the wluie, with solemn visage, showing as though he himself believed all the mar¬ vels he related, and not showing roguish smiles, as some do, kept on always to the far end of his long tale: though some learned clerks would oft-times comment
to their neighbours upon his marvels, as if he had purported lofty matter worth their notice, *nd did not merelv strive to while an idle tide away. In other parts of the castle were those gentils and honest gentlewomen, that, mis- liking the loud revelry of the hall, drew together in chambers apart ; and delighted themselves with histories of times past, the sad hopes of lovers, or the deeds of brave knights, or otherwise in singing and harping, after their own manner. In the lower hall too was feasting, and the mirth did not stop short of the " Kuchane," so that every man to the low¬ est degree was joyous ; and each chamber and tower rung with song, or laughter, save the prison tower of the poor mer¬ chant. He, as he lay on his paUet-bed, heard those sounds of music and jollity, in confused uproar rising through the courts, while his heart was stricken with
fear and sadness; for, whether he were right or not in believing Sir Gaston to be the murderer of his friend, it is certain, that he had seen his friend murdered, and that too, as he had said, in the woods of Ardenn. He was, at this time, far from his home and friends, and had been travelling, over these parts, a lonesome stranger, along the foss-way from Lincoln, southward; having been on his merchandize into the north seas, and having landed on the eastern coast. Coming again to that place, where, a few years back, he had buried his friend, the remembrance of him broke out in fresh grief; and, hearing that the king was coming to keep festival in Ken¬ ilworth, he resolved to break the matter to him ; as well as to adventure to tell him, the times were such it was no longer safe to journey in any part of his kingdom. The most audacious robberies, certes,
were then committed at noon-day with impunity ; nay, the very thieves them¬ selves feared not to be seen walking about, little attempt being made to seize them, or, in any wise, to suppress these scan¬ dalous outrages, Not only then did tiie sad faU of his friend, but also the fearful condition of the living, urge the merchant to make the truth known to the king. With this design he had rested iit Kenilworth, but not at the house where he had formerly suffered such affliction; and, on the king's arrival, had gone forth in the crowd to behold him, though he had not intended to present his petition in that time of turmoil. But, when he saw near his Highness, riding as it were in the top of favour, the very man, whom he thought to be the slayer of his kins¬ man; when he beheld that look, wbich he felt to dart into his heart, and to re¬ vive there aU the horror he had felt at the
aspect of the murderer, at the moment when his friend had been stricken down- then it was, that, overcome by the strength of his feelings, he dropped down senseless in the castle court, as hath been related. And now, what had he gained by his courageous demand of justice ? Suspicion, contempt, fear, grief, a prison, and, per¬ haps, death· Yet did he not repent the effort he had made, so honest was his grief for the fate of his kinsman ; so much was his mind possessed with the notion, that he had accused his very murderer; so confident was he that he was perform¬ ing a duty; and, what is more, so sure was he, that to perform his duty in this world is the wisest, the most truly cun¬ ning thing a man can contrive to do. Whether his suspicions concerning the knight were just or not; these, his con¬ clusions touching his own conduct, none
but fools, or villains, that is, none but fools—will deny. Thus he iay on his pallet, alike deprived of sleep by the jollity of others and by his own grievous reflections. A lamp burned beside him, but it served only to show the forlornness of his condition, in tliis high and distant tower. Sometimes, he would rise and look through his grated window upon the inner court of the castle, listen¬ ing there awhile to the distant min¬ strelsy and to the confusion of number¬ less voices, footsteps and closing doors, that rose from many a chamber below. Anon, a torch-bearer would pass the court, a page, perhaps, or a yeoman ; and would show the gloomy towers above and the steps of the guest he led at their feet. But, this passed, nothing could the pri¬ soner see, save here and there, a lamp burning through a casement of glass (and
a goodly show there was of such windows now in this castle) like stars through a clouded sky; but mostly the glorious beams of the great hall, that struck through the windows and lighted the air above. Once he heard the trumpets blow, and thought the King was coming forth, and once he fancied he saw, in the person of one who foUowed a torch-bearer, Sir Gaston himseU'. Then turned he from the casement, looked no more, and fell upon his pallet. At last, every distant sound grew faint¬ er ; the noise of the dancers ceased ; then the minstrelsy sunk low ; the voices of the hall revellers became few ; he heard less frequently the doors opened and shut; and then he heard the fastening of bolts and bars : and, afar off, the castle gates closed for the night; and soon all grew still, as though no living creature inhabited there.
And thus it kept, until the way te piped his second watch in all the courts. Then flio qfi-fanív^i 1 ' яглсй äT*d lonkiTio* ясуят through his grate, saw him well, by the light his groom carried, piping the hour. And, when the man had finished his saye, he went round the court, his boy-groom holding up the torch, while he tried every door, and found that aU was safe. By this Hght too, he perceived the wardour's men on guard; but no living being else was seen. The windows of the great hall were dark ; and, the torch being gone, no¬ thing glimmered through the night, save one great star, which wizards say is evil It stayed, at his hour, right over King Henry's lodgings; but for whom it watch¬ ed, who was there that might tell ? The prisoner knew the star, and all that was thought of it, and he betook him to his pallet groaning heavily. He had not long been there, when, as
he thought, a voice near bim spoke his name. Now, there was a small grate looked out from his chamber upon the stair; and thence the voice seemed to come. The prisoner, raising himself from his paUet, turned, and saw there the figure of a man passing away. He kept his eyes fixed, for some space, upon the grate, but the figure appeared no more, and he sunk again on his pallet. The voice, faint and passing as it was, had thrilled him with dread. Whose it was, wherefore it had called him by a name known but to few, and had then passed away, without communing with him, he tried in vain to understand ; yet seemed it not wholly new to him. END OF VOL. 1. LONDON ; PRINTED BY S. AKD R. BENTLKV, DORSET-STREIiT.
