Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Manfroné: or, The one-handed monk: a romance
MANFRONE.
CHAPTER XVtL
JeVOS AIrINA's senses wfre on the eve of deserting her, when the duca, alarmed by the sudden disturbance «nd cries he heard, hastily quitted tlie apartment She listened to his receding paces, but liad not the power to open her eyes. Carletta, who from an adjoining apart¬ ment had tremblingly listened to the dreadful resolutions of the duca, now ventured to come forth and endeavour to comfort her beloved mistress, so pro- ???. ív. u videntiaUy,,
vİdentially, thougii perhaps only for a short time, preserved from death. Rosalina lay almost motionless on the floor ; the feeble panting of her bosom, as she with difficulty respired, alone told she existed, for her countenance was as wan as the silent dweller of the tomb. " My dear mistress !" said Carletta, as kneeling by her side she gently rais¬ ed her beaci —** Oh that I should ever live to 4 see this day! How ???!, howo unnatural a father, to raider miserable so dear, so affectionate a daughter !" RosaHna here uttered a deep sigh, and sjtawly opened her languid eyes.— " Is that you* Carletta?" said slie : . e is. my father gone ? Am I indeed stiU iu existence ? Oli, merciful Heaven ! have pity on me, and end at once my mi¬ serable
semble life ; but lèt it not be by tho hand of a parent ! Spare him the guilt» of so horrible a crime to answer for at the dreadful day of retribution !" ç< I pray the saints to s soften his hard heart !" said Carletta. if Do, dear signo¬ ra, endeavour to compose yourself; you sigh so piteously, it breaks my heart to¬ bbar you." "Ali, poor (Marietta l you will soon lose your mistress. No matter, I shall theni be happy in heaven," « Do not talk so, t entreat you," said Carletta weeping, " but try to rouse yourself. Let us leave this horrid chamber, and hide outselves from the duca." u Alas! I have scarcely strength to- R 2í move/ 1
move," said Rosalina; " the dread of death has almost annihilated me." " Take a little wine, ¡agnora," said Carletta, as she raised a glass to Ro¬ salina's lips ; '* it will help^to revive you. 1 know of a place in the chambers above where we are sure of being secure, and perhaps in a short time his passion wiU abate." " Alas ! I fear there is little safety for ?? in the casteUo^'said Rosalina; " every part would soon be explored : but if I am so fortunate as to be capable of walk¬ ing, I have hopes that I should then es¬ cape the horrible death that awaits me." *' I hope you will, signora," said Çar- letta ; " you are stronger now : take a little more wine. Holy mother ! do not tremble so."
Poor
Poor Rosalina's efforts at last con¬ quered the dreadful perturbation of her mind, and leaning on Carletta, she left the chamber. " If my strength does not fail me," said she, " and 1 can once reach the monastery, I am certain there of being protected. Have you courage, Carlet- ta, to accompany me through the sub¬ terraneous passages, for I know a way that leads to it, but without your as¬ sistance I shall never be able to traverse them?" " Alas, signora ! I will never be se¬ parated from you ; and if the cruel du¬ ca sees us, I hope he will kill me first, and perhaps the sight of my blood would quiet him, and he might spare you." " I trust I shall not have so great a ? 3 proof
proof of your attachment," said Rosa¬ lina, " though I believe you would in¬ deed part with your life to save mine. Our way lies through father Griin^ldlVs chambers, and if he is there, or the doors are fastened, I know of no other way that leads to the passage below."" - The trembling pair now stopped at the eastern suite of apartments occupied by the monk : the outer door was open ; they listened, and not hearing any noise, they entered the first diambèr, and with cautious steps crossed it; the next room' ivas also empty, and in tliat was the wellrknown panel which communicat¬ ed with the entrance to the vaults be¬ neath. Rosalina, as she east her eyes around, beheld lying on the couch a sable mask; and Carletta, when she saw it, imme¬ diately saidr-r-" There, signora, you see I was
I was right ; that was the very mask which the monk wore when I told yon I saw him—Oh, how it frightened me! I am sure I have never been able to for¬ get it since ; for whenever I look at his tall figure, 1 always tremble as if it had but just happened. Ah í Pietro used to say that there was something very strange in the pains he always took to hide his face, and to eat alone ; and so I thought too, for those who do right need never be ashamed of shewing their faces." Rosalina was too agitated to attend to the ready speech of Carletta, and having touched the secret spring, the panel opened, and she passed through, # and Carletta following her, she again closed the panel. Her success hitherto had greatly con-. tributed to cheer her woe-worn bosom, and her strength returning, she proceed- B 4f ed
cd with somewhat quicker paces down the steps, and along the vaulted pas¬ sages, which drearily echoed to flick hasty paces. When she arrived at the postern whieh opened near the northern cloisters of the monastery, Carletta drew back the fas¬ tenings, and they emerged from tlie dark subterraneous recesses beneath CoK redo. The convent of Santa Maria was go¬ verned by an abbess who had long been famed for her piety. She was now on the verge of eternity : her thoughts and actions seemed already to partake of the purity and benevolence of sainted spi¬ rits. To her Rosalina directed her trem¬ bling steps, and as she entered the Go¬ thic archway that led to the parlatory of the convent, and heard the iron gates closing behind, she almost washed that they
they might for ever shut her from a world from which peace and happiness seemed to have fled for ever. Within these walls dwelt tranquillity, holy me¬ ditation, and uninterrupted repase. Re¬ ligion, with awfully sublime and smil¬ ing countenance, seemed to invite her to fix her residence in those hallowed abodes, where she would avoid a father's dreadful anger, wean her thoughts from Montalto, whom she had so little hopes of ever being united to, and gradually render herself worthy of eternal happi¬ ness. Her resolutions to do so were quickly formed, and shed a mournful tranquilUty over her agitated bosom. She was at length informed that the abbess desired to see her 'm her own apartments, to which Rosalina proceed- B 5 ed,
ed, accompanied by the nun who brought her the message. w You seem to be very unhappy, sig¬ nora," said the nun : u has any thing happened, for we heard that the cas-, teUo was in danger of being attacked?" " Alas ! I do not know," said Rosa¬ lina, sighing, " whether it has been or not; my own calamities have so great¬ ly absorbed every other consideration, that I am ignorant of that circum* stance." w There is little happiness in the world, dear sister," said the nun affectionately ; " I was the victim of misery, before these walls kindly enclosed me from the tur¬ bulent cares and anxieties of Hfe ; since that period I have hardly known an un¬ happy hour."
" I almost
t( I almost envy you," returned Ro¬ salina ; " but soon I hope that like you I shall devote myself to the duties of re¬ ligion, and be happy." They now arrived at the apartments of the abbess, where the nun leaving her, she entered, and was received irt tlie kindest manner by the venerable mother. " Welcome, fair daughter," said she. " I ought to chide you for not oftener seeing me ; but Why are your cheeks so pale ? what has happened ? I am all anxi¬ ety till I know." " Holy mother, I am come to you for protection : the tale of my sorrows is long—part indeed is already known to you ; but the rest—oh, how mise¬ rable I am at being obliged to expose ? (i ??
my fathers dreadful and outrageous passions, which have endangered my life!" ** Your life, my poor Rosalina î Thank Heaven you are safe !" said the abbess. ** Here you may divest yourself of fear-, but another time acquaint me with the particulars, for I see your spirits are un¬ able to the task." " You must not refuse the request I am going to make, holy mother," said Rosalina, " for I feel that if you should, I shall yet be unsafe, and a stranger to happiness. I wish never to leave these walls—to devote myself to Hea¬ ven. I shall then be safe from my ene¬ mies, safe from a father's deadly wrath ; and knowing that Montalto then can never be mine, I shall endeavour to for¬ get that I had ever loved : permit me then
then instantly to make those irrevocable vows of seclusion wiiich will sever me from the world." " My dear daughter," said the abbessv " I can hardly wonder at your present request, when I consider the motives that have induced you to make it. Be¬ lieve me, I long have sighed at your un¬ happy situation, and in my prayers you were not forgotten. But I should be wanting in the friendship I owe the me¬ mory of your siiin ted mother,, and have for you, my dear Rosalina, if I consent¬ ed to a wish so hastily formed, the con¬ sequences of which you have not had time to consider. If, however, you do not alter your resolution before the third day, I will acquiesce to your wishes; but without your having time for reflec¬ tion, I must decline giving my assent. Jn the meantime, be assured that you are perfectly safe while under my pro- teetion.
teetion. Remember, my dear dauglr- ter, that a life of religious retirement does not give happiness to all : some are formed for the active scenes of life, for social duties; to them the seclusion of a convent would be a continual torment. Such instances are by no means un- frequent, and I should always most se¬ verely regret if you, Rosalina, should at any time hereafter repent of your vows." Such was the resolution of the abbess* and Rosalina having remained some time longer in converse with her, at length retired to the apartment which she had ordered to be prepared for her young friend, and where Carletta was permitted to attend her. Though the duca's conduct to Ro¬ salina bad been such as totally to ba¬ nish filial love, yet she eould not even now
now consider him in any other light than a parent, and she sat down to write to him to acquaint him with her inten¬ tions, and to assure him of her sincere forgiveness for the dreadful deed he seem¬ ed so fully resolved to perpetrate. In doing this, the frequent tears often ef¬ faced the letters she slowly formed with - her trembling hand, which was scarcely able to guide her pen. The following were the contents of her letter :—
ROSALINA DE RODOLPHO TO THE DUCA DE RODOLPHO. J?rom the Convent of Santa Maria. " This is the last letter you will re¬ ceive from your unfortunate daughter while she belongs to the world. Alas? am I so deeply immersed in woe as to be obliged to tell a parent, a father, that
that I have fled from him in order to prevent the perpetration of the most dreadful of crimes? Surely it was not so, and my senses deceived me. Oh, grant, kind Heaven, that it was but a dream ! How gladly would I return, and seek a father's blessing ! But still I hear your enraged voice denouncing curses on the woe-claimed Rosalina—see your sword upraised to shed my blood ! But praised be Heaven tliat you did not! No more will I wound your peace by my presence—no more will you be disturbed on my account. To-morrow I take the veil—to-morrow I shall be secluded for ever from the world. I shall not seek to palliate my offences : but as sure as every word, thought, and deed of mortals is known to the Ruler of the Universe, so certain it is that my intents in being united to Montalto was to render you secure against the efforts of a much-wronged enemy. A dangle ter,,
fer, I will own, ought not to seek to counteract the designs of a parent ; but with respect to tlie information I gave to Montalto, perhaps I had a right to do so. It is true I am indebted to you for my being—but did not he often pre serve my life? and from that circum stance he had a right to share the duty I owed a father. Love does not now guide my words, for I must endeavour to forget that I ever loved : but that t have a parent shall never be absent from ray thoughts, and whenever I prostrate myself before the altar, that you may be happy here and hereafter, my dear father, shall be the constant prayer of your Rosalina." Such was the letter which the duca received, and which affected him in the manner we have described, and made him
him instantly resolve to proceed to the convent of Santa Maria, and endeavour to dissuade his daughter from her inten¬ tions, which %vould destroy his new- formed hopes. Arrived at the convent, he was con¬ ducted to the parlatory, which was divided by a gilt screen of curiously wrought iron, where the professed were allowed to con¬ verse with their friends, who occasionally visited them. When RosaHna was acquainted that the duca wished to see her, she trembled and turned pale. But the abbess, to whom she immediately repaired on re¬ ceiving the intelligence, besought her to compose her agitation, and by no means to refuse to see her father, adding, that the screen would effectually pre¬ vent him from using any violence to¬ wards
wards her, and that in all probability his intention was to endeavour to be recon¬ ciled to her. With a slow hesitating step, Rosalina at last entered the apartment, and be¬ held the duca hastily traversing the other end. He stopped when he bzw her, and approaching the screen said—** Forgive, my dear. Rosalina, my late dreadful in¬ tentions ; believe me, I have most sin¬ cerely repented of them. I feel I am n father, and hope you will consider me *o, when I promise sincerely tbat my fiiture conduct shall be such as will make you happy ; and as a proof of it, I here pledge my solemn promise, if you will leave the convent, to consent to your union with Montalto—nay, more, will even exert myself to forward an event whicii will make you happ) r , and be some amends for my late un¬ kind treatment, I ask your forgive¬ ness,
ness, my child—do not refuse your far¬ ther Ρ Rosalina melted into tears.—" My fa¬ ther," she said, " you have your Rosa¬ lina's forgiveness, her love, duty, obe¬ dience, every thing that a child can ren¬ der toits parent : I could withstand your commands when harshly given, but when you are kind I could give up my exist¬ ence, if so doing would be of the small¬ est benefit to you." " I was not wrong;' returned the ducav with pleasure in his countenance, " when I placed a reliance on the gentle com¬ plying heart of my Rosalina : yes, my chUd, you are far dearer to me than ever, and sorry indeed am I that I have beeu so unworthy, so cruel a father to such a deserving girl." u Do not think of it, my dear father," said
said Rosalina ; " all the past is forgot. I wish to give you an early proof of my compliance to your wishes. ShaU I re* turn to tlie castello with you?" " Do, dear Bosalina;" said Rodolpho, " but first aoquaint the abbess with your intentions. Believe me, I long to em¬ brace you, and shew the world that I can prove myself a kind parent." Rosalina flew to tlie abbess and related all that had passed, while the joy and de. light she felt was visible in her counte¬ nance. " I congratulate you, my dear Rosa¬ lina;* said the good mother, " on the prospect of felicity which I trust you have now in view. You now, my child, are no doubt glad that I resisted com- jplying with your wishes yesterday."
Most
" Most assuredly I am, holy mother; but when 1 made my resolutions I had little idea of ever again enjoying the affection of a parent : your kindness to me shaU be the constant subject of :ny grateful thoughts." Rosalina then taking leave of the ab¬ bess, hastened to her father, and in a few minutes was tenderly embraced by him ; and when on the way to Colredo, he re- jieatedry assured her of his intentions of making Montalto acquainted with his % ompliance to their -union. Carletta accompanied her mistress, and the greatest delight prevailed amongst the domestics of the casteUo when they understood that RosaHna was returned ; Rodolpho, too, appeared to be happier than he had been for some time ; and the inhabitants of Colredo, on whose pale countenances terror and dismay were so
so lately depicted, now wore a gay and joyous look. Grimaldi alone seemed not to partake of the generpi hilarity, for when ac¬ quainted with the return of Rosalina, and tliat the duca had consented to the long wishedrfor nuptials with Montalto, he uttered,not a word, but kept himself in the retirement of his apartments, not even emerging to congratulate the duca on the recovery of his daughter. From tbe traits of his character and disposition whidi have hitherto been de¬ lineated, it is. probable that Iris dark savage mind was brooding plans of re¬ venge, for it wiU be seen, that as he not unfrequently excited others to acts of savage cruelty, it was very unHkely he would tamely bear the insinuations of the duca, whcu he hinted tiiat he had some
some design of his own in the advice Avhich he gave him, The duca, that lie might assure hk ^daughter of the sincerity of hk inten¬ tions, determined as soon as possible to commence the pleasing work of peace and friendship, in whidi he was no less anxious than RosaHna, while Carletta partook of the joy of her mistress, for then she would be united to Pietro. Rodolpho was so completely disgusted with the conduct of Grimaldi, that lie never approached his residence, or even condescended to make any inquiries about him. He determined, on the second day from the arrival of his dr ghter, to send a message to Montalto, expressive of his ieetoigs excited by his conduct, and to offer
offer to repair the breach and end all ani¬ mosity by giving him his lovely daugh¬ ter. Such was his intention ; and he fondly in idea beheld the accomplishment of his hopes : but the future is veiled from our sight—predestination belongs only to the Supreme Disposer of events, and oftentimes he smiles on weak-minded mortals, who, blind to the events which the next moment may produce, build airy structures of fancied happiness, which are often destroyed, almost before •they are formed, by the blasts of disapa tpointment
vol. iv, ? CHAP-
CHAPTER XVIII.
How transitory, how delusive are hu*. man joys î when we think we hold the phantom happiness in our.grasp, it v&- nishes î Always in pursuit, yet we never attain it : from the court to the cottage, if we contiuue our search, we shall find that happiness is rarely known. True felicity, indeed, is not to be enjoyed on this side the grave; and this deprivation is for the wisest of purposes, for our mundane affections would be so great as to exclude idi wish, all longing after heavenly delights. The misery we en¬ dure below awakens all those delightful anticipations of a future recompence for the
the anxious cares and miseries cf lite, which urge us to continue its totbome paths. Still, however, we fondly look forward, and ki fancy see the ak-fbrmed gorgeous temple of human happiness rising stately before us—we sec its wide- folding portals open to receive us~ when, alaal we suddenly awake, and find it was but a mere delusion of tho brain—a delusion which made us mind¬ less of the wide-yawning gulf, on whose dreadful brink we totter, and often are lost. What various roads do mankind take in the pursuit of pleasure, and what va¬ rious forms does it assume, accordmg to their capricious turns of fancy ! Some place their delight in the accumulation of riches, in honours, in the gratification of sensual appetites; some in torment¬ ing their own species ; and a few in acts of charity and benevolence. Not of thk ? 2 las
last was the monk-—he seemed to take pleasure in acts of cruelty and black and horrible revenge : such was his de¬ light, and which indeed the pages of this work contain too many sad üb Stances o£ Fame, with her many tongues, soon brought to the delighted ears of Mon¬ talto the resolution of the duca di Ro¬ dolpho, before he had expressed it to him ; and anxious to see his adored Ro¬ saHna, he repaired to the chapel of Santa ???, where it may be remembered she bad promised to meet him, before she took her leave to return to Colredo, on the memorable night which witnessed the destruction >®f the tower. Gentle spirits of love and sympathy! ye who wake the souls tender emo» tions, and ye who render it sensible of the joys and sorrows of those around you,
yon, teaching the breasts in which ye deign to dwell to be joyous with the gay, and never to behold the fast-flow*- ing tears of misery without mingling them with your own, and seeking to alleviate the woes of others ! assist me to describe the happiness whieh both Montalto and Rosalina felt when they met! Now, too, that they no longer feared the resentment of a father, or were tortured with eruel doubts and fears, what sweet anticipations of hap¬ piness dwelt in each bosom! Alas! could either of them have foreseen the events of a few hours, how different would have been their sentiments! But Heaven conceak from the eyes of mortals the volume of fate; the evils of the present are sufScient, without foreseeing una¬ voidable calamities. RosaHna communicated to Montalto the intention of the duca to propose ? 3 the
the affiance to him tlie succeeding day, and which was indeed generally known throughout the castello, for the duca did not conceive it necessary to con¬ ceal what would so shortly become pub¬ lic. " To-morrow, then," said Montalto, as lie parted from RosaHna at the por¬ tico of the chapel, * to-morrow I shall bave the blessing of again seeing you. Sweet expectation ! How long will the intervening hours appear! But they inust roll on, and the happy moment wffl at last arrive." When Rosalina was gone, he stood matching her graceful form as she pro¬ ceeded to tbe castello; and when its ponderous walls hid her from his view, he sat down on the marble bench to en¬ joy the cool breeze which glided o'er tbe tremulous bosom of the lake. The leaves
leaves of the aged pines and larclies rustled against each other, and the fra¬ grant lily bent its lovely head as the gen¬ tle zephyr passed along ; light and airy clouds slowly moved their fleecy forms in the wide aerial expanse ; and as the scenes of nature faded to the view, ima¬ gination, with aH her train, suppHed the vacancy of sight. The soul of Montalto, calm and fuU of content, communicated its repose to its mortal habitation, and the happy lover, slumbering, became unconscious of what was passing around him—became unconscious of a dark savage form that hung over him, and who, putting his hand within the folde 4>f his mantle, drew from thence a dag¬ ger !— Ah! where was then the guardian spi¬ rit which watches over the safety of the virtuous ? Was he far distant, or em¬ ployed on some more important mission, ? 4 that
that he did not protect the sleeping Montalto, and turn away the hand which now grasped the instrument of his de¬ struction ? Twice was the murderous dagger up. ^raised, and twice did it drink the blood of Rosalina's fond lover !~~Groaning, he sunk on the pavemeat, and the shades of death encompassed him. The crue! perpetrator of this ??* barons act was on the point of repeat¬ ing the blows, when a hasty footstep was heard approaching through the aisle of the chapel, and unseen he slunk away, and concealed himself in the fo¬ rest. A monk who had been praying in the chapel, alarmed by a groan which hollowly echoed through the pile, has¬ tened to the portico from whence the sound
sound had proceeded, and found the bleeding body of Montalto. Life was ebbing fast from the deep wounds ; the powers of speech were already gone, and^ the assassin seemed to have been suc¬ cessful in his dark purpose. The monk raised up the senseless^ form, and, tearing off his garments, found the wounds: he endeavoured as well as he could to stop the effusion of blood ;. and having alarmed the inhabi¬ tants of the monastery by his repeated calk, the monks, hastenirig to the place, soon bore tlie unfortunate Montalto to a couch, and sent to the marchese to acquaint him with the almost hopeless condition of his son.. The attentive care of the monks soon prevented the effusion of the stream of life ; and as it slowly glided through his veins, Montaito*s senses returned, and« ? 5 opening
opening his languid eyes, he was endea¬ vouring to speak, but was restrained by the monks, who were fearful that the least exertion would cause the Mood to flow, and render their endeavours of no avail. Great was the grief of the marchese when he arrived, and saw the lament¬ able situation of bis son, and which he immediately ascribed to the well-known perfidy of the duca di Rodolpho; and though he had hitherto been restrained, both by his son's entreaties, as wdl as his affection for him, and the wish he entertained of seeing him happy in the possession of Rosalina, yet now he deter¬ mined that nothing should stop his re» venging himself in the severest manner. Although it was almost impossible at that early period to form any opinion respecting Montalto, yet such of the fa- thers
thers who had made the cure of wounds their study, thought favourably of his situation ; and the marchese beijug very anxious to have him conveyed to his own casteUo, botb on account of his be¬ ing more carefully attended when under his own inspection, and also of his in¬ tended hostilities against the duca being kept from his knowledge, which would be much easier to effect there than iu the monasteryi—a circumstance whidi he feared would retard his recovery, because it would awaken aU his anxieties respect¬ ing Rosalina. As soon, therefore, as tiie morning dawned, he had his son placed upon a lit¬ ter and conveyed by lus domestics to his castello, and then turned all his thoughts on .revenge. His people were hastily sum¬ moned to prepare for the dreadful busi¬ ness of war, who, with tbe party sent by count FloreUi, formed a numerous army. ? ? Montalto,
Montalto, who was placed in a remote part of the castello, where the trumpet was not heard, nor the loud neighing of the impatient war-horses, remained in total ignorance of his father's hostile intents, or, feeble as he was, he would hmb endeavoured to leave his couch to dissuade him from attacking the duca ; or, if unable to do so, his anxiety might have cost him his life. He remained all that day so extremely weak from loss of blood as to be scarcely able to speak, but his wounds seemed to promise fa¬ vourably. In the meantime the marchese, full of rage, approached the walls of Col¬ redo, whose ibhabitimts seemed to be in the greatest consternation. He liad be¬ gun to wind up the rocky ascents to its lofty walls, when a hasty messen¬ ger demanded α parley, which being granted, the duca di Rodolpho ad¬ vanced
Vaneed without auy attendants, and thus addressed the marchese:— ** That your intents are of a hostile nature, marchese, there can be no doubt. ; but before we begin the work of stern résistance, I would know the reason of your appearing in arms, since by your late noble comportment I had augured so favourably of you and your son as to determine, as a hostage for our future friendship, no longer to withhold my consent to the wished alliance between our children. 1 * *' Dissimulation ill becomes the duo» di Rodolpho," returned the marchese ; #é deep indeed were your plans, but Heaven, I trust, will not grant them success. Either 1 or you this day will cetise to live. Shame on you, duca, tø act the murderer, and seek the life of my son ! At his request I had forgotten my
my own wrongs, and though able to choose my revenge, yet I forbore on his account, because he loved your daugh¬ ter: now the tie is broken, and if he lives, he will, I trust, learn to forget the offspring of his deadly foe." 44 If he lives !" said the duca : " what then has befallen him?" " Does Rodolpho forget the events of last night ?" returned the marchese. 4 " By Heaven, marchese, I know not to what you allude, when you mention your son and the events of last night t You speak mysteriously to me" f* What then, duca, do you mean to deny that you are ignorant of the base ' attempt that was made on bis life ? It is needless to declare your innocence ; for when had he an enemy but yourself?" ** Now
* t Now by the holy rood I swear," said the duca, " that I am ignorant of the deed ! Some foul and bitter enemy hath laid it to me. You know me better, marchese, than to suppose I would stoop so low as to ?1??? my acts; but if farther confirmation is wanting, know that this very morning I intended to propose to you the affiance between our ftmilies, instigated so to do by your treatment of my people, who when ill advised I sent against you. But your son yet lives, you say ; then I will go alone, unarmed, and appear before him : if he taxes me with the crime you impute to me, my fife and person will then be in your power, but tf not satis¬ fied with mai a proof of my innocence, declare it now, and you shall see Ro¬ dolpho will resent the imputation.— Yes, you may subdue me, but the prize you will gain will be the smoking ruins of
of Colredo's towers, covering the dead bodies of their defenders." " My nature delights not in such sanguinary revenge, duca," returned the marchese. " I could indeed wish to believe you innocent, because I know bow firmly my son's affections are placed upon your daughter. I shall be satisfied with the proof you offer to give. Re¬ turn then with me to my casteUo, and if Montalto is not your accuser,, neither wiU his father be." " Marchese^" returned Rodolpho, " Γ wish to be m amity with you, and will instantly accede to your wishes ; and if you wish it, Rosalina shall accompany meJ* "Alasi the sight you will witness," returned the marchese, " would be too agonizing
agonizing for her gentle frame to bear ; but if he recovers, RosaHna may here¬ after shorten the hours of his confine* ment." The duca now called to his people to bring him his steed, and when he was readyy he rode by the side of the mar¬ chese at the head of his troops, and pro¬ ceeded towards his residence, greatly to the astonishment of the inhabitants of the casteUo, who, in total ignorance of the cause, were wholly at a loss to ac¬ count for his conduct. But the duca, conscious of his inno¬ cence, and more anxious every hour for the union of his daughter to Montalto, was not alarmed at putting himself in the power of the marchese, ,for after the proof he had received of his noble behaviour, he felt himself perfectly se* cure. When
When they arrived at the castello, and the marchese had conducted the duca into the chamber were Montalto» lay, he was evidently shocked to behold his pale countenance and hollow listless eye. " The duca ài Rodolpho," said the marchese to his son, ** in order to do away the suspicions I entertained of his being the cause ©f your present situation, has come to deny the charge to yourself: tell then, my son, who it was that has acted this deadly part to¬ wards you." " I know not," faintly returned Mon¬ talto: " the deed was done whilst I slumbered beneath the portico of Santa Maria, but I am certain of the duca's innocence." * I have some reason to believe that the
the intended assassin is not unknown to me," returned Rodolpho; *' and if I am right in my conjectures, I wUl deliver him into your power.* " Your so doing, duca," said ther marchese, w wUl place me under an obligation to you. Your conduct, and Montalto'« reply, have assured me of your ignorance of this cruel act : on his account do I forget tlie injuries I have received; and Rosalina shaU unite us all in amity." " Such, I trust, wffl be the result," said Rodolpho ; " and as you are satis¬ fied of my innocence, I wil instantly return, and endeavour to find if my suspicions are rightly founded ; and if they are, before this time to-morrow the intended assassin of Montalto shall be in your power. Melancholy indeed will be the painful task I shaU have to per¬ form^
form, to disclose to Rosalina the sad event which has befallen him: but I trust his wounds are not dangerous— and when he is able to leave his cham* ber, I will permit her to see him." u That indeed will be » comfort to me," said Montalto ; " and your pro· mise, duca, I trust you will be mindful of, for it has animated me beyond ex* pression." " You may depend on me," said the duca; " for now I shall be ruled by the sentiments of my own breast, and not by the counsel of others, whkh has hi¬ therto been my ill fate." Thus sayingr he took a friendly leave of the marchese and hk son, and de¬ parted, revolving in his mind, on his journey to Colredo, what inducement ihe monk could have in seeking the
life of Montalto, for it was on him his suspicions fell And he resolved, as soon as he saw him, to tax him with it; and should it be so, to seize and deliver him to the marchese. Rosalina, who had heard of the hos¬ tile approach of the marcbese, and that Jier father was gone with him without any attendants, felt rather anxious for his safety, and ascending the batte¬ ments, long waited for his return, and at length was greeted with seeing him approaching .hastily to the casteUo. She met him at ihe gates, and whUe her intelligent countenance spoke her joy on his return, her features were soon overspread with melancholy, when she beheld the agitation so plainly depicted in his; and as soon as he had dis¬ mounted, she silently foUowed ?? tø JJie hall, 4< Rosalina,'*
" RosaHna," said the duca, tenderly* *' have ytm seem Montalto since tiie night ¿be rescued yo»?" ··' I #aw him last night," ste replied^ Hushing. ** bast night? Indeed J What, ia 4he chapel of Santa Maria?" said the 4uca : " «t wlmt time did you leave him?" 44 ft wm, ï think," returned RosaHna» -** about sm hour after vespers. But you seem agitated, my dear father; has ?? thing happened to Montalto ? Pray do not kæp me in suspense, but fet me know the worst " w Do not alairm yourself so,^ay 4 dawgIv· ter ; nothing has happened bit what I trust a short time will rectify. Montalto vpas wounded." ?&?'?.?
Here the duca sprung forward to assist the trembling Rosalina, who, un¬ able to support herself, was sinking on the floor, while her senses, unable to bear uf> against the indescribable emo tions of horror which she endured, were deserting lier. Carletta and the other female domestics were summoned ? her asbistance, and with their care, and the repeated declarations #f the duca that Montalto's life was in no danger, she began slowly to revive; but her frequent tears shewed fhe greatness of lier grief, and her sighs confirmed it Rodolpho did all he eould to comfort her, and even promised in a day or two to take lier to see her lover. This jpromfee served to allay tfie poignancy of her gyief ; and as soon as she was able, she slowly proceeded to her apart- jnents, intending to write to Montdto a few lines expressive of her deep sorrow, and to acquaint him with her fathers
fathers promise of permitting her to see hira. The tìuca immediately proceeded to the apartments of Grimaldi, which he found liim slowly pacing, and instantly accused lum of having attempted to murder Montalto. *'And wholiasgiven utterance toso «vile a falsehood besides yourself, duca, for this tale could hardly be of your own invention?" returned the monk, in a tone of voice which told .the passion that •raged in his breast. " My own surmises, monk;* said the duca; " my knowledge of your hatred io Montalto ; your dislike to his being united to Rosadina, ant! my acquaintance with your revengeful disposition." i4 Your surmises, then, duca, were wrong
wrong—your knowledge of my hatred to Montalto equally so ; but not so the dislike whicii you say I had to his being united to your daughter—that arose from my anxiety respecting the duca di Rodolpho; I could ill brook to see you stoop so low as to offer your daughter when you had refused her. You accuse me, too, of being re¬ vengeful ; of whom have I been revenged but of enemies ? Was it not at my in¬ stance that the Hfe of the marchese was preserved, as well as that of his son ? Such -acts are far from being proofs a revengeful disposition. To ensure whose safety was Sebastiano destroyed ? A r ot surely the monk Grimaldi? he could have no interest in such a deed; but the man he then called his friend would have been endangered by his existence, and he fell ! Could the bones of Astol* pho speak—could the voice of Theodora be heard from the tomb—could all the vol, iv. ? accusing
accusing voices be heard which one day will be raised against the duca di Rodolpho—tliey would stun his ears with their long dreadful recitals of his remorseless, bloody, and revengeful dis¬ position." Tlie duca started and turned pale, but the monk, after a &hoft pause, con¬ tinued— " I know of no one more likely to have perpetrated this deed you would impute to me than yourself; for who is safe from the frequent gusts of your out¬ rageous passions, when, had but a few moments more time been allowed you, Rosalma would have perished by her fatlier's sword ?" 4 < Peace, monk !" vociferated the duca, ** nor torment me with recapitulations øf my deeds ! And who are you that üare
dare to thus insultine —you whose mys¬ terious behaviour excites general ob- servance—you who for some unknown reasons veil your features ? But be care¬ ful, monk, lest I forget my promise, and tearing away that cowl, see the face of my tormentor, which he is so indus¬ trious to conceal." 46 It would not surprise me," returned Grimaldi, " if the duca di Rodolpho broke his promise; I have expected such a violation of my solemn vows long before this: but the crime will revert heavily on you, for though you may suppose yourself safe within your castle walls, the vengeance of the church will reach you, and the power of the holy inquisition wffl make you tremble." The duca was sUent,for he well knew that the inquisition was a power which n $ made
made exen kings tremble, and but for that fear, his passion might perhaps have prompted him to acts of violence which he would in all probability have sorely repented of. « I will not," said he, " answer for my conduct if you protract your stay within these walls, nor shall even the dreaded power of the inquisition withhold my arm: thou knowest, monk, I fear not death." " I know you fear not to inflict it on those who stand in the w r ay of your ambitious views," returned Grimaldi — J * Astolpho and Sebastiano are evidences ofthat," " Dost thou again dare to repeat their names ?" said the duca, his hand grasp¬ ing his sword. " By Heavens, I could this
this moment open a passage for thy dark soul ! Provoke me not again, monk, or thy life si tail answer it." Grimaldi was silent; he stood motion¬ less, and apparently untcrrified before Rodolpho ; his gaze seemed fixed on the ground. The duca viewed his gigantic form for some moments, and then left the chamber, secretly determining to find out who the monk was, before many more days had elapsed.- He had not proceeded many paces be* fore he began to consider that he had done wrong to irritate the monk, who was in the possession of all his secrets, some of which were of a nature which shunned the glare of - day ; and he thought it would be better if he en¬ deavoured to calm the storm he had raised. With this idea he slowly re¬ turned; and when he had approached n 3 Grimaldi'r
Grimaldi^ apartment, he stopped and listened to his slow footsteps as he paced its confines. The door was partly open, and as he looked through the aperture, he saw the monk, whose back was turn¬ ed to him ; his cowl was thrown back, and he waited anxiously till he should move, when he might see his features, whieh he had wished to do from the first moment of their meeting : but the monk's caution disappointed him, though his curiosity was mueh more excited, for when he turned round, a sable mask veiled his countenance; and the duca leaving the place to prevent being seen, soon altered his resolution, for what he had proposed to do in the moment when he was agitated by his fears, his proud and haughty spirit now made him inca¬ pable of; he however determined the next morning to pacify the monk, which he doubted not eould be easily effected, and then passed on to his apartments. It
It was now the hour when Uu* mn .»asing to bhine on this hemisphere, »aves the clouds tinted with hi» radiant »cams, and the moon slow rising in the ast shews her pale form- Rodolpho hrew himself on a couch, and antici- ¿røring the time when Hosalina would he Montaltos bride, began to form vision¬ ary schemes of satiating his restless and ambitious dispositioin to effect which he little cared for the cries of the wife deprived of her husband, or the mother of her son, perhaps her sole support and comfort ; these were ideas whieh never disturbed his rest. To increase his forces, he determined to depopulate his terri¬ tories, and then with the aid of the mar¬ chese, and the count lforelíi, he Httle doubted but that he .should be a more powerful claimant for the principality of Manfroné, than any of the neighbouring rule* s who might attempt to seize the vacant beat. r> 4 Such
Such were the ideas whieh agitated the bosom of the duca, till the shades of evening increased the lustre of the moon, and nature was sunk in silence and re¬ pose ; he then sought his pillow, and, fa¬ tigued by the exertions of the day, en¬ deavoured to close his eyes in peaceful slumbers; but in vain, for the remem¬ brance of his cruel deeds, which the monk's conversation had brought more forcibly to his recollection, tormented him till long after the castle bell had told, in iron notes, tlie division of night and morning; then, and not till then, could sleep weigh down his eyelids, and for a few short moments blunt the un¬ ceasing sting of conscience.
????-
CHAPTER XIX.
Rosalina, when she had reached her apartments, sat down and wrote the following lines to Montalto :—
H DEAR FRIEND OF MY HKART, ** Are our griefs never to ter¬ minate in this vale of sorrow? is the pros¬ pect of happy hours which was so bright¬ ly opening, excluded our view for ever, by the sable clouds of fresh calamities ? What enemy can it be who thus invi¬ sibly haunts our steps?—who has en¬ deavoured to deprive you of your Ro¬ saHna, and me of my Montalto ? Alas ! ? 5 how
how do my tears flow when busy fancy depicts you to my view, suffering from the anguish of your wounds! When we last met, how happy we were ! We thought, fondly thought, that the season of sorrow was past—that a sweet tran¬ quillity would attend our future days : how changed, alas! is npw the scene! But I will not despair, for my father has assured me that your life is not endan¬ gered, and has promised that I should see you in a few days. Perhaps he has only done tías to comfort me, Alas! how mach do I need consolation ! He has behaved most kindly to mc, but comfort will be a stranger to my bosom till you are recovered. Let my messen¬ ger be acquainted witb the state of your health, and rest assured of the unalter¬ able affection of " Rosalina "
Such
Such was the billet which she hastily penned with a trembling hand, and im¬ mediately sent by a domestic; and then to rest her weary frame, reclined on a couch ; but ber anxiety respecting Mon- talto prevented sleep from composing her agitation, and she soon after arose, and sitting at the casement, watched for the return of her messenger. Night had some time ruled the he¬ misphere before the welcome sound of his horse's feet was heard on tlie draw¬ bridge, and soon a packet was deliver* ed her by Carletta, who had hastened to the courtyard to receive it: it con¬ tained a few lines from the marchese, assuring her that his son's life was not considered in danger, and that her kind attention in writing had greatly de¬ lighted him ; and concluded with hoping, that as soon ag he was able to leave his D & couch,
couch, she would make him happy by her presence. This letter, as it convinced her that the duca had not represented Montalto'« situation more favourably than it really was, whicii she feared he might have done to assuage the greatness of her grief, contributed much to her comfort ; and full of hopes and happy anticipa¬ tions, she closed her eyes in sleep. But the fearful visions of the night blustering around, deprived her of the composing influence of the somnific deity, and when it was past midnight, terrified by a dream, RosaHna suddenly awoke; the particulars pf her vision rested not iu her memory, but the effect it had on her long remained. The moon dimly gleamed through her casement, she arose ; and beheld her encircled
encircled in mists, and at times to¬ tally obscured by passing clouds; the wind was high, and howled mournfully through the forest below ; the melan¬ choly owl was heard from her cheerless residence in the hollow of some time- worn tree, and tbe croaking raven, perched on the battlements of Coiredo's towers, gave to the blast his harsh dis¬ cordant notes. Rosalina's melancholy increased — a heavy weight seemed to oppress her bo¬ som, which she ascribed to her dreams and the cheerless scenes which the grey dawn gave to her view, for now a heavy rain descended from the clouds, which, borne on the strong bosom of the blast, dashed against the casement ; she again sought her couch, but sleep was far dis¬ tant from her. Thus heavily rolled the hours till the sun
sun broke on the dreary scene and drove away the stormy clouds. Rosalina was sitting at the casements her thoughts fixed on Montalto, and in endeavouring to form conjectures of their enemies, when suddenly a confused noise was heard in the corridor which led to her chamber ; she started from her seat, and listened ; the steps seemed approaching^ and at length she heard the voice of Carletta calling on her* Terrified and confused with her sud* den anticipations of some fresh calamity, Rosalina liad scarcely strength to draw back the fastenings of the portal, when she beheld a crowd of the domestics, whose pale countenances shewed how greatly they were agitated. ** Good Heavens !" said Rosalina, "what is the matter? what has hap¬ pened ?" " Oh,
" Oh, signora ! my dear mistress !" sob¬ bed Cariem at length, for the others seemed struck dumb with terror. *■ Oh, the duca ! the duca !" " What of my father ?" said Rosalina ; ·' speak, some of you—you alarm me ; I will go to him !" " Oh no! no!" said the domestics; #i pray, do not go ! it is so horrible α sight !" " A sight, Carletta!" said the pale Rosalina : ** let me know the worst, I conjure you, if you have any friendship for me." " Oh, signora ! the duca is—is mur¬ dered !" said tlie weeping Carletta. Hardly conscious of what she was doing, RosaHna flew to the apartment of
of her father, followed by the attendants, and rushing in, beheld a sight which for a while rendered her speechless and immoveable. The breathless body of the duca lay stretched on his couch ; the bosom was bare ; a dagger ivas deeply planted in the breast, the hilt of whieh was en¬ circled by the ghastly fingers of a skele¬ ton hand, and the clothes of the bed were dyed with the blood of the unfortunate Rodolpho. Such was the horrible view which presented itself to tlie distended gaze of Rosalina : by the side of the couch stood the padre Grimaldi, who had been made acquainted with the murder of the duca the moment the deed was discovered by his domestics, and had immediately hastened to him ; but it ivas too late to attempt any means for his recovery»
recovery, for death had for ever claimed his mortal part. Rosalina, unable to support the dread¬ ful sight of a murdered parent, fainted in the arms of Carletta, when Grimaldi turning round, he reprimanded the at¬ tendants for permitting her to enter the chamber, and directed her to be conveyed to her own, and the proper means to be used for her recovery. Slowly they conveyed away the grief- stricken maid ; and when she was gone, the monk, stretching forth his hand, dis¬ ent wined the fingers from their bony grasp, and drew forth the dagger, which he attentively examined, and apparently started. " There is some deep mystery in this/* said he; ** this dagger is the duca's, and we|| I remember to have seen him wear
-wear it. Were the castle gates securely fastened last night, and the private sub¬ terraneous passages ?" w I can answer for that, father," said the castellain, " for I secured them my¬ self -----" " Then the murderer must be within the walls of Colredo: go instantly, and direct that no one liave egress from them on any pretence—we must not rest till he is discovered." His directions were instantly com¬ plied with, and the next step was the examination of the guard who held their watch in the corridor whicii led to the duca's apartment; but as they were all well known to be his most faithful and long-tried soldiers, it was impossible to impute the crime to them. Silence
Silence and dark suspicion now reign¬ ed in Colredo : each regarded the other with distrust, and feared to speak their sentiments. The gates were closed— every part of the immense pile under¬ went frequent examinations—but no¬ where could the assassin be discovered. To attempt to describe the emotions of Rosalina for many hours would be impossible : yet as soon as she was sen¬ sible of her situation, she evidently en- deavoured to combat with her feelings, that she might be able to take the proper steps to find out the murderer of her father. This was no time for grief—her duty as a daughter called for her utmost energies. She sent for Gri¬ maldi, who immediately attended her, and in a faltering voice requested the particulars of the sad scene she had wit¬ nessed.
The
The monk complied with her wishes, and concluded by stating the means he had taken to discover the perpetrator : that it must have been done by some one well acquainted with the secret com¬ munications of the casteUo was certain, for he was assured that the fidelity of the guard could be relied on.. " But the horrid skeleton hand, fa¬ ther ! will not that afford some clue to your researches ?" w I think, signora, that the late duca informed me of some circumstances re¬ specting an attempt which was made so ne time back to carry you from your apartments, and that the person, who¬ ever he was, being attacked by him, lost his hand ere he effected his es¬ cape. This is a circumstance 1 have deeply considered, and am confident, front
from the hand being placed on the dag¬ ger, that it must have been done by him —probably out of revenge." " It must be so indeed, father," said the sighing Rosalina; " but surely it would be easy to find the w r reteh out if he is in the castello?" ** Do you know of any private com« munications with the duca's apartments? 1 * .asked the monk. " No," returned Rosalina ; " I never heard of any ; but as the castello abounds with them, it is more than probable that there may be some" " My reason for asking that ques¬ tion," said Grimaldi, " is because the assassin eould not have passed the guard. He must therefore have found some of those concealed passages, and thus have effected
effected his purpose without fear of ob¬ servance, and probably by this time has completely eluded our search—indeed his escape before proves him well ac¬ quainted with the interior of Colredo. Nothing, however, shall be omitted to find out who it was—of that you may rest assured." 44 I thank you for your intentions, father," said RosaHna, weeping, " and shall leave to you to make the neces¬ sary regulations for the interment of my father, as I mean to proceed in¬ stantly to the convent of Santa Maria, where alone I can hope to find security from the secret attempts of my enemies, as I shall doubtless be their next ob¬ ject ; and I am convinced, on reflection, father, that you wiU be of the same opi- »ion* 44 No, indeed I am not;* replied tbe monk,
monk, * ¿ for would it not be most re¬ prehensible for you to leave tbe cas- stello before the remains of the duca were consigned to the silent tomb : your future relatives will doubtless mark your present conduct; and would it not give them an ill opinion of your filial duty, thus to fly the remains of your father^ when in a few hours the last proof of our love will be paid to liim? But if, indeed, you fear to stay here, I will in that case hasten the sad ceremony, and tbe evening after to¬ morrow shall be appointed for it. The next day you may retire to the convent, and, in the society of the sisters, haply find a relief fur the sorrows of your bo- ??" " Let it then be as you think best, father," returned Rosaline. " If indeed there was no danger in my stay here, I certainly would not have thought for a moment
a moment of retiring to tbe convent till the last sad rites were concluded.*' ** For so short a time,** said Grimaldi. " I should hardly think there was any, for whoever it is that has assassinated the duca di Rodolpho, he will not ven¬ ture to approach the casteUo till the ge¬ neral alarm excited by hisatrodous deed has ceased, and peace again is restored ; then, in the fancied security that will reign within these walls, he will natu¬ rally conclude that he would more easily be able to effect his further schemes, if indeed he has any," " That he has," said Rosalina, * 4 can be a matter of little doubt, if you call to mind the late attempt that was made on me when the tower was destroyed Indeed there is every reason to believe that the person who endeavoured to ef¬ fect timt deed was the intended assassin of
of Montalto, and the murderer of my father; his next attempt will therefore be against rae." " Your opinion and mine perfectly co¬ incide," returned Grimaldi; " therefore, ¿after the interment of the duca, or even before, if you should still wish it, after what I have advanced, I would certain¬ ly advise your removal to Santa Ma¬ ria." *< No—I am resolved to remain here till then," replied Rosalina, " at all events, as I should be most unwilling to shew the slightest disrespect to the memory of my parent." ** Is there smy thing you wish rae to do ?" md the monk ; " your desire shall be attended to, if in my ability to per¬ form it." val. iv. as " I thfuik
" I thank you for your attention, fa¬ ther," returned Rosalina — " 1 should wish the marchese di Montalto to be informed of the sad events of last night —his advice and assistance would pro¬ bably be of service to me." " In common prudence/' replied the monk, " I should advise you to avoid making him acquainted with it» for should it come to the ears of his son, his anxiety respecting you will doubt¬ less retard his recovery—and the counsel of the marchese can be of no service now ; but this I only submit to you¬ you will act as you think best" " Then I will defer it," said Rosalina, " for a few days, at least till I have taken my residence at the convent*, Montalto then can have no fears for my safety."
Grimaldi
Grimaldi then left the apartments, and immediatdy ordered the necessary preparations to be made for tbe inter- - ment of the duca. RosaHna mourned incessantly the loss cf her father : she had always loved him, even wben his conduct to her had been harsh and cruel ; and had be ceased to exist on that day when be bad threat¬ ened to destroy her, she would have shed tears at iiis death. But now, to be taken of£ when he had conducted himself so kindly towards her, and seem- ed to mske her Iiappiness his study, in- creased her sorrows. She had indeed nowhere now to look for consolation but to Heaven; and when alone, she frequently entered her oratory, and there directed the fervent pious petitions of her spotless soul to the bright residence of the All-powerful.
? 2 Carletta
Carletta w&tched over Rosalina with unremitting attention: she sat by the side of her couch during the night, and seldom left her in the day ; but she wit¬ nessed the wakeful hours of her sad mistress, for sleep never closed her eyes -—her cheeks were pale and thin«—her strength was decreasing, and melancholy seemed to have claimed her'for her own. The evening at length came when the remains of the duca were borne to the chapel of Santa Maria, there to be deposited in the cold bosom of the tomb. Thougii hardly able to walk, yet Rosa¬ lina prepared to attend the mournful ce¬ remony ; and sadly sighing, leaning on two domestics, she followed the silent train. Tlie chapel, dimly illumined with torches—the long procession of monks, who
tvho entered by pairs into the grand aisle, and ganged themselves round the grave—the costly emblems and honorary trophies of the duca, borne by the sol¬ diers, who trailed their pikes on .the ground-^and the view of the bier, on which lay his ??? remains—all exhi¬ bited a scene whicii struck cold to the heart of Rosalina, and her tears rolled unceasing front her swollen eyes. The service at length commenced; the deep-toned voices of the monks chanting the requiem, joined to the softer strains of the nuns, rose in grand and solemn chorus to the vaulted roof. The abbot performed the service, but his speech was often interrupted by the sobs of Rosalina, unable to restrain her grief. 4Vhen the service was concluded, and the remains of Rodolpho committed to ? 3 the
the earth, RosaHna returned to the cas* telfo, and in the retirement of her chain** ber gave free Vent to her sorrows. Thus perished the duca di Rodo!* pho, imkmented by every one except lys daughter : cut off in the midst of his offences, with all his long catalogue of crimes unrepented of*—no atonement made with offended Heaven for the sable deeds performed in his days of nature, how trembling—how full of horror—* how confused wffl his guilty soul appear before the awful seat of judgment, when he hears the dread« ful punishment which awaits the mur¬ derer 1 How quickly do the years whicb compose the short date of human exist¬ ence roll away! Time is ever on the wing, and each moment gives a soul to eternity ! each moment witnesses the last
last %hs of some one around us ! Yet, such is the vanity of human beings, tliat they take no warning from the depar ture of others, to prepare for the inevi¬ table journey they will soon be called on to perform, but delay it from hour to hour, from day to day¿ and, thinking all mortal but themselves, at length forget to repent of their errors, when death pays his dulling visit, and ends the busy scene of life for ever ! Or if, when on the bed of death, when we behold the swift approach of the relentless power, we look back on the sinful actions of our lives with re¬ gret, and endeavour to make ? hasty atonement for them, how futile must be such a repentance ! Caused by fear, how unavailing with Him who knows the mmt retired secrets of the human breast î Grimaldi the next morning, in the E 4 course
course of his conversation r ith Rosa- una, told her that as nothing now pre¬ vented her removal to the convent, he would impart her desire to the abbess, and let her know, as soon as possible, her answer. With this promise he de¬ parted, and she prepared for her rem©- vaL By the death of her father Rosalina became possessed of Colredo and the domains attached to it ; there were there¬ fore many things which called for her immediate attention, such as acquaint¬ ing the marchese with the past events, which she instantly resolved to do, and also to dismiss the troops who remained in the castello, that they might return to their long expecting families. The ambitious views of the duca had almost exhausted his coffers, andthe vast expence of so targe an establishment would,
would, by the above prudent measures, be avoided : the further direction of her affairs she determined to confide to the marchese, who, she was well convinced, would consider her interest in whatever he did. When Grimaldi returned, which was not till the day was far gone, he inform¬ ed Rosalina that he had seen the abbess, who expected her the next morning. " And why not this evening, father?" said Rosalina ; " you know my anxiety to leave these walls, where danger lurks unseen." ** You have from me, daughter," said the monk, " the answer of the abbess, who doubtless had her reasons for ap¬ pointing the period I informed you of for your removal—perhaps some apart¬ ments were to be prepared for your re- E 5 ception ;
ception; however, the cause I know not. Have you written to the mar¬ chese?" " I have, father, and have also deter¬ mined on some arrangements which I wish to take place directly, respecting the dismissal of the troops." u Such a step convinces me of your prudence," repHed Grimaldi ; " but the marchese —has he answered your letter ?" w I have not as yet sent it," repHed Rosalina; ** I waited for your return be¬ fore I closed it." " You bad then better let it be con¬ veyed to-morrow morning—*tis too late now," repHed the monk. " I am sorry, daughter, that I caused you to delay the forwarding of it"
w To-
" To-morrow will do equally as well," replied Rosalina ; " it will, besides, save Montalto from an uneasy night." After some further converse, the monk departed, and Rosalina wasleft once more to her sad ruminations.
e 6 CHAP.
CHAPTER XX.
Rosali na was thus obHged, much against her wish, to pass another melancholy night at the castello. She was not, however, under any fears for her safety, for the monk had promised to direct that a guard should be placed in the passages that led to her apartments. Carletta would have remained with her, but that faithful attendant was already so much fatigued v/ith the many sleepless nights she had lately passed, that Ro¬ salina desired her to retire to rest—a command which she, finding her en¬ treaties
treaties of no avail, reluctantly complied with. Left to herself, RosaHna took her station by the casement, and viewed the bright planet of night, as it conti¬ nued its wonderful course in the re¬ gions of air: she thp**ght of her mo¬ ther, the hapless Theodora--of her fa¬ ther, so lately gone—and, as if busy memory delighted to torment her, of Montalto. t She arose from her seat, and to dis¬ pel her unquiet thoughts, walked about the room, listening at tirces to the clash of arms which wcs beard from the castle courts, when ?? eentinels were relieved by theit comrades, and tiie long hollow tones of the bell, as it told the departing hours of night. Rosalina felt no inclination to retire to
to rest, and she again placed herself at the casement; the moon, attended by myriads of scintillating stars, shed their bright lustre over the clear azure of heaven; the waters of the lake of A- bruzzo seemed hushed to repose; not a cloud was to be seen ; the leafy sum¬ mits of the dark forest scarcely moved to the light breath which passed over them. The distant mountains appeared tipped with silver, and the grey walls of the monastery below brightened to the view ; scarcely a sound was heard ; night now stood in her noon, and view¬ ed at equal distance her steepy rise and her declining race; nature seemed to pause in her great and wonderful works, and to give peace to tbe warring ele¬ ments ; sleep resting on the eyeUds of mortals repaired their toil and care¬ worn frames, and the restiess passions of mankind for a whUe slumbered; even the warbling bird of night bad ceased
ceased to tune her love-laboured song, and no midnight sound called drowsy Echo from her holknv caves. * Far beyond those rolling planets;* thought Rosalina, " is the bright abode of my sainted mother: there, uncon¬ scious of the miseries of her child, she tastes heavenly joys, the reward of her virtues. Oh, if the spirits of the dead are ever permitted to wander on tbe earth, surely it would be in such a night as this ! Would that I could see the airy form of her who first embraced me in her fond maternal arms, and taught my infant tongue to lisp her name ! But no ! the cares and miseries of mortals reach not those hallowed regions, nor are they permitted to know what passes on earth, else their happiness would be destroyed. — And thou, røy father, where, alas! is thy immortal spirit? Hast thou atoned for
for thy crimes ? hae Astolpho suppli- cl^ed for thy forgiveness? Oh, if the prayers of rhortals offered up in thy behalf ean procure thee pardon, each hour would thy daughter fervently peti¬ tion for it—each hour should masses be performed for thy soul's repose—at mid¬ night should the voice of intercession arise from the chapel where thy mor¬ tal remains are for ever laid : but, alas t the hired supplication can be of little avail!" Such were Rosalina's melancholy thoughts, from whicii she was inter¬ rupted by the low sounds of the passing bell of the monastery: mournfully did Echo repeat the sad tones which an¬ nounced a soul to be on the verge of its departure from its mortal abode. " Some one approaches eternity/ 1 thought Rosalina — " a spul is now struggling
struggling for liberty ; soon it will burst from its narrow confines, and fly ta adore its Maker: with what contempt will it then look upon the mouldering tenement whieh so lately contained it, when mixing with the angelic ehoir, it joins in tuneful symphonies and so»gs of praise ! Dilated in its ideas, it will, from the immeasurable heights of hea¬ ven, look down on this globe, and won¬ der that so small a space contained it ; but much more will it wonder that the short and momentary stay it was con¬ strained to make in it was not wholly devoted to the praise and worship of Him who can never be sufficiently adored : how contemptible will then ap* pear sublunary grandeur, high sounding titles, and all the little pageantries of state which agitate human ideas, and give rise to the baneful passions whieh taint the soul !—Hark ! the bell ceases, and
and now the frailty of mortality ? evinced! Such is the end of all: how happy or how miserable it is, depends on ourselves ; and in a few revolving months the period of my dissolution will arrive, when I shaU be called on to ren¬ der up an account of the deeds of Hfe. Methinks that death's dark shades seem to lose their horror the nearer we ap¬ proach, and form an inviting covert for the wretched, for there peace for ever dwells ; no jealousies, no broils torment us; the poor, the prisoner, the mourner fly there for relief and lay their bur¬ dens down; death is the great privi¬ lege of human nature, and life without it would not be worth the taking. But yet he ever flies those who wish for him, and though certain in his ap¬ proach, he most delays it where most he is sought." Rosalina's melancholy increased every moment;.
moment ; she felt that indulging sudr mournful reflections in her present state of mind was rendering her incapable of supporting her allotted portion of ex¬ istence with that patience and resig¬ nation to the will of Heaven whicii it was her duty to do; and having no in¬ clination to retire to her couch though it was past midnight, she took up a vo¬ lume whose pages contained many an eventful tale, traced by the legendary pens of days long since past, and by be¬ ings who now slumbered in the grave. The book had been a present to the unfortunate Theodora from the good abbot of Santa Alaria, and Rosalina, independent of the narratives it con¬ tained, took a pleasure in perusing its contents, because she had whiled away many a cheerless hour with their aid, and her thoughts and eyes were em¬ ployed on the same subjects wMch had once
once excited her beloved mother's at¬ tention. She turned over the leases some timé before she could fix on a tale for her pe¬ rusal, when the singular title of one at¬ tracting her notice, and not recoliecting^ that she had ever read it, she trimmed her lamp. RosaHna continued the pe¬ rusal of the volume tiU the dock of the castello liad sounded the soHtary hour of morn, and the moon no longer shed her lustre over the hemisphere, for the vapours and exhalations from the earth veiled her bright form. From her casement she could just distinguish througli the mist, the cen¬ tinél on the walls below, resting motion¬ less on his battle-spear. He perhaps, né longer mindful of his duty, was oppress¬ ed by the heavy influence of sleep ; or re¬ calling
calling to Ms mind the past busy scenes of his Hfe, the loss of some beloved com¬ rade, or some memorable encounter, when of those who went forth in the morning, full /rf Hfe, elate with the hopes of success, almost confident of victory, he alone perhaps was left to 'bring back the sad tale of their defeat, while ?? the companions of his toils were heaped on the plain, deformed by ghastly wounds, whose sanguine cur¬ rents stained the drooping verdure. Such were her reflections when a noise in her apartment made her turn round, and to her astonishment shr» saw tiie portal open, and the monk Grimaldi enter. *' Good Heavens, fether!" she ex¬ claimed, somewhat alarmed, ** what brings you here at tbis time of the night ?" u You
" You are in danger, signora," said he ; * you must instantly leave the cas¬ teUo; the soldiers are mutinous—they are now assembling in the eastein hall ; their purpose is to plunder Colredo, and if their rapacity is not satiated, your life may answer it. Haste then with me to the convent, for there only can you hope for security." M Send instantly to the marchese, fa¬ ther ; acquaint him with my danger ; he will, I am confident, instantly arm his people in my defence." " It would be fortunate if I were able to do that," returned the monk, M but the gates are in their possession ; our only means of escape lies through the subterraneous passages, «nd when you are in safety at the convent, you may then let the marchese be acquainted with
-wíth the situation of affairs here: the moments are precious, signora ; you must bastily determine whether you go or stay." " I shall eertainly not hesitate in re¬ pairing to the <!onvent, fatiier," said Ro¬ saHna, M and as soon as my attendant is ready, I will accompany you." w You do not consider, signora, the danger there is of our being discovered ; besides, I have brought only one man- tie, which you must cover yourself with ; Carletta's fears may overcome her cau¬ tion; the time too she will take to be ready will subject up to the greatest danger." Rosalina suffered herself to be per¬ suaded, and taking the garment iiom the monk, hastily threw it over her; she then followed his slow mid cautious footsteps
footsteps along the corridor, and was ^greatly surprised at not seeing the guard there whose steps &he had heard dur¬ ing the night ** I peredve you are astonished, sig- jekot," said the monk, €t at this alarming proof of what I have told you ; for doubtless when tbey saw me pass ju$t now» they concluded I was coming to inform you of the conspiracy, and are therefore gone to join the others: we must be hasty; tbis way leads to my apartments, througli whidi there is a comn^nication with the passages be¬ low." Rosalina began to be much terrified. and in her haste to leave the castello. did not notice that all the doors through which they passed appeared to have been thrown open purposely for them, the trap-door and sliding panel were also
afeo drawn back ; but when after some time they had traversed the gloomy passages below, tbe portal which opened towards the northern doisters was like¬ wise ready opened for them, she ob¬ served it to the menk, who said in a low totte— " I forbore, Rosalina, to notice to you this extraordinary circumstance ; but I have nty fears that our intended flight is discovered : we wifl stay here a few moments and listen before we proceed further, and are rendered visible by the faint gleams of the moon." At this moment Rosalina started, fo* slie distinctly saw the form of a man gliding at some sliort distance from her behind the low underwood; she was silent, but pointed out to GrimaWi tfaef cause of lier terror. vol. iv, f "I saw
" I saw tlie object of your fears," said the monk, *' but I trust we are yet un* observed * in the dark covert ot 1 the por¬ tal he will not be able to discover us 5 you see he is now going towards %h& monastery, probably witb a view to sur¬ prise us there. As soon a§ he is at some distance, we will leave this place, and winding beneath the rocks, enter the chapel gate which fronts the lake. You now see, signora, how fortunate it was that you did not bring Carletta with you ; so many of us must have been observed." Rosalina, still keeping her eyes fixed on the man, at length saw him bend his way towards the monastery ; and when he was no longer visible, she proceeded with Grimaldi benfath the lofty rocks on which tiie castello was ejected, every moment gating around with sensations of
øf the most lively terror, expecting to be seiaed by the insolent soldiery. Her fears, however, were not realized, and they reached the rocks which were nearly opposite to the portico of the chapel; but before she emerged from the protecting shade, she cautiously looked to the dark recess formed by tho huge columns, and again saw the same figure moving behind them. The monk seemed perplexed what course to pursue, but at length he said—· " To attempt to enter the chapel now would be madness; we will therefore continue proceeding among these rocks, which lead fo the shore of the lake, and there stay till the search which now seems to be making for you has ceased;* Rosalina, full of terror, silently fol- f 2 lowed
lowed the monk through the rugged paths made in the pocks, after looking back to see if she was followed, till at length she came in view of the lake, on the margin of which, to her astonish¬ ment, she beheld a boat, ¿md a mm sit¬ ting in it 44 We are favoured by fortune," said Grimaldi; "¿this man wffl doubtless for a trifling remuneration convey us to the opposite side of the water, and we shall tlien be in security." Suspicion for tbe first time now glanced in Rosalina's mind : the singu¬ lar circumstance of ? man at tbat time of night being in the boa<^ proved that there was some preeoneerlfcd plan in view, arid she resolved to refuse to enter tiie vessel, but in such a manner that Grimaldi should not imagine she had any suspicion of the rectitude of his in¬ tentions,
ten tions, though for what end he wished to convey her from Colredo was yet u mystery. *' I think we had better return to ttte chapel," said RosaHna ; ** the man may now be gone, and I shall then be soon in safety, but if we pass to the other side of the lake, our return might be at¬ tended with danger." . * It is impossible to return now," md the monk hastily. " You had better in¬ stantly step into the boat, and if we cannot get to the monastery, we will go to tbe residence of ÍÄte irørcjbese, where yon wiH be sure of protection." <# No, father," returned RosaHna; " let what wUl happen, I will instantly re^ turn." u That must not be," replied the F S monk ;
tnonk ; ' t if, Rosalina, you will not be prevailed on to take the prudent step wiiich idvise, I shall be necessitated to compel you, Nay, start not, signora ; my determination is made, and which hereafter you will thank me for." *' Your conduct, monk," said the ter¬ rified Rosalina, assuming all tlie compo¬ sure she was able, " convinces me tliat your intents in bringing me to this spot are of a dark and base nature, and that you have fabricated the tale of the sol¬ diers being in arms merely to draw me from the protecting walk of my castello ; but you shall find yourself foiled in your endeavours, for if you dare to at¬ tempt to-detain me, my cries shall alarm the watchful centinek, and their honest fury may cause you dearly to repent of your present insulting comportment " * The season of dissimulation is past," returned
returned Grimaldi. tí My plane have succeeded, and you, Rosalina, are in my power." " In your power! Oh, IleaV'ena pro¬ tect mei What shall 1 do—where shall I fly ?" " You may make yourself easy o?i that head," said the monk, " for your des¬ tiny is fixed : nay stay," said he, rudely seizing her arm, seeing that she ivas on the point of hastening away, " you go not lienee." Rosalina's entreaties and screams were of no avail; she struggled to free her¬ self from the grasp of the monk, and at length succeeded, and as fast as she was able she ran along the path which led back to the castello, the monk following her; but she had not proceeded far when she saw the ??? who had caused f 4 hvr
her iîo much alarm advancing directly towards her. " Oh, whoever you are/' said the hap¬ less maid, " protect me, I beseech you, from the vile monk ! My gratitude shall be unbounded." The man replied not, but caught her in his arms, and throwing a mantle over her head, bore her back to the boat, in which be placed her, while the monk followed, and seating himself by her side, held fast her hands, that she might not remove the mantle, whieh prevented her screams from being heard. Tlie boat now swiftly cut the yielding- waters, and when the men had rowed for some time, the mantle was taken off her face, and the unfortunate Rosalina looking around, beheld herself far dis¬ tant from the shore, and far beyond the reach
reach or hope of succour; CoIredo'& lofty turrets appeared to decrease in size and height, while the opposite shore rose darker to the view. She was silent, for her cries now would be useless, for no pitying friend, no guardian of the inno«· rølt,, was near to afford her aid.
l 5
?И??-
CHAPTER XXI.
TfïF mild beams of the morning glim¬ mered on the summits of the western hills before the boat reached the oppo¬ site shores of the wide*spreading 'waters- of Abruzzo. Rosalina, when she had conquered the first emotions of the deep terror which had seized her, began to reflect on her situation: that the monk was her enemy was manifest, but still she thought it hardly possible that it could be bim who had committed such atro¬ cious* acts as had lately been perpe¬ trated ;
trated ; she therefore was sometimes in¬ clined to believe that he was tlie agent of the person who had so mysteriously escaped frøm the castello with the loss of his hand ; at other times, that he wm ignorant of those circumstances, and aeted from the impulse of some horri¬ ble intent, which he had formed against her peace. Full of her fears, she raised her eyes to the blue vaulted canopy of heaven, and fervently implored the pro¬ tection of the Almighty in her helpless state. Scarcely able to move, Rosalina was helped out of the boat into a carriage that was waiting on the shore: the monk followed, and soon the lake ef Abruzzo was lost to the view, for tlie carriage rolling rapidly along, en¬ tered a dark and gloomy glen, where tlie faint gleams of morning feebly pene¬ trating the overhanging trees, scarcely F 6 rendered
rendered the drivers able to see their way. Grimaldi spoke not r wrapt up in his long monkish garments,, and his fea¬ tures, as usual, concealed by a cowl, Ro¬ salina conjectured that he was sleep¬ ing; she turned her thoughts towards her escape, but alas L there ivas at pre¬ sent but little prospect of that; ex¬ cepting her persecutor and bis agents, she had not seen a single person,, or even a sign of the habitations of man, in the gloomy roads through whicii they passed. She was sometimes on the point of addressing tlie monk, rf demanding the reason of his conduct; but her fears restrained her, for she trembled whenever she beheld him : but though seemingly surrounded by dangers, and in the hands of her enemy, Rosalina dkl not give way to despair; übe fondly hoped that there wouid soon occur
occur some opportunity of escaping; and as indulging her grief would only weaken· still more htr fragile frame, and render her incapable of the least exertion when an opportunity might offer, she endeavoured to compose her agitation, and to comfort herself with the fond hope that her prayer« *, ould not be unheeded* The carriage now emerging from tlrc deep vale which it had been some hours in passing, entered on an exten¬ sive piain^ RosaHna surveyed the coun¬ try before her, but nowhere did a passing peasant meet her gaze. The sun now glared fiercely from his me¬ ridian altitude,, and the mules seemed weary, and almost unable to proceed, StiU, however, they advanced, till at length, having gained the outskirts of a small wood, they stopped, and un¬ harnessed
harnessed them. The monk then foi· the first time broke his long silence, by desiring Rosalina to alight, which she tremblingly complied with, and he fol¬ lowed her. Some provisions were then spread on the ground by the men, and Grimaldi entreated his hapless captive to partake of them. u Do not give way to your grief, Rosalina," said he; "it is unavailing: you will know me soon—I wish to be vour friend." ** My friend !" said Rosalina ; " restore me then to my home, and I will con¬ sider you as such." ** What, to the arms of Montalto! Xo, Rosalina—never, never will you imáin
«gain behold him. Whether he reco¬ vers of his wounds or not, he is for ever lost to you." tr And what good," said Rosalina, * can result from your detention of me?" " You will know," replied Grimaldi, *' when you arrive at your journey's end." Disdaining to ask any more ques¬ tions, and the name of Montalto hav¬ ing roused all the tender emotions of her heart, which she had endeavoured to suppress, Rosalina turned aside to conceal her tears from the relentless Gri¬ maldi, and long remained indulging the weighty sorrows of her bosom, unheeded and unpitied. it was near sunset when the mules
were
were sufficiently refreshed to proeeed on their journey, and Rosalina- was again seated by the monk. The beauty id the romantic scenery which she now beheld would at any otlier period have delighted her: but the cascade roar¬ ing amidst the piles of huge mis¬ shapen rocks, sparkling in tbe rich tints d tlie declining sun-—the luxuriant plains which we$e stretched around the vast mountains, along whose bases lay their winding road, lost their beauty when busy thought recalled her to her hapless situation* Rosalina gazed ai? iously around I1G14 hoping to see some village or city which lying iil· t hek route, might give her hopes of effect¬ ing her escape; and as the last gleams of the setting sun brightened the dis¬ tant prospect, she beheld the spires of some buildings that seemed to be on the verge of the horizon, which every moment contracted to the view,, t ill the shade?»
shades of night shed their murky veil over the face of nature. After travelling near an hour in dark¬ ness, the carriage at len*r f h stopped at a small hovel, of a wretched appear¬ ance, at the door of whicii one of the men repeatedly knocked before he could gain the attention of its inhabitants. At length it was slowly unclosed by un aged female, who, in a shrill trem¬ bling voice, demanded what they want¬ ed ? But as soon as the man had spoken some words to her, in so low a tone of voice that tlie sounds became indis- tinct before they reached the ears of Rosalina, the woman hastily drew back, and the man entered the cottage. After lie had been there a short time. he came out, and telling the monk that every thing was ready, be assisted the trembling Rosalina to alight, and she went
went into the hovel, where she beheld the wretched inhabitant of it busied in preparing a fire. " I did not expect you to-night, sig* nora," said the woman, ** for his excel- lenza —I mean the padre, was quite un¬ certain when he should arrive; but I shall soon have the fire made, and get your suppers ready, for you must be fa¬ tigued after so long a journey." u It seems you know all concerning my wretched situation," said Rosalina : " if so, let me entreat you to aid me in iny escape, and you shall be amply re¬ warded." The old woman was going to reply, when the entrance of the monk pre¬ vented her, and she set about preparing their supper, sometimes, when she was able, stealing a glance at Rosalina, who, liotiein*;
noticing her manner, was not without hopes that she should be able to suc¬ ceed in prevailing on her to assist her to escape; and in that hope she par¬ took of the provision which was laid before her, for she was faint with fa¬ tigue and want of food, which her grief would not permit her to taste during tlie day. Grimaldi partook not of the repast; but when Rosalina had concluded hers, he told her she might retire to rest a» soon as she pleased, as they would set out on their journey before sunrise the next morning. Posalina, glad to have an opportu¬ nity of retiring, immediately availed herself of that permission, and left the room, preceded by the ancient hos¬ tess.
A scendili «í
Ascending a narrow flight of stairs, her conductress opened a door, which disclosed a small chamber, in one corner of which was a bed ; and Rosalina hav¬ ing carefully closed the door, thus ad¬ dressed her— *· You seemed as if you were going to answer my request when my per¬ secutor entered : let me entreat you now, in pity, to lend a favourable ear to it. Whatever the motives are which induced you to comply with the wish of my enemy in resting here for the night, whether dictated by fear, or from pecuniary considerations, believe mc, my friends are powerful enough to protect you ; and as for a reward| if you can procure my freedom I will double whatever the monk promised you. Reflect, you are on the verge oí the grave. Oh, enter not into eter¬ nity, I beseech you, with the horrible n flection
reflection of having been instrumental in oppressing the unfortunate; but let the pleasing idea of the good deed you will perform in procuring my lib* ration from my mysterious enemy, be present to console and comfort yon in the awful moment of your dissolution." The old woman appeared affected by tlie earnest entreaty of Rosalina. 4ί What you wish me to perform," said she, ** is, I fear, beyond my power to do ; for as hi.s exeellenza remains be¬ low, tho only way in which you can escape is through Ae casement, and immediately opposite to that is the car¬ riage, where the two attendants will probably stay during the few hours yon will be here. But as you are ig¬ norant of the country, there is little doubt of your being overtaken. Be¬ sides,
sides, the casement is so high that I sliouid think it almost impossible for you to reach the ground unhurt." " At least I can venture, good mo¬ ther, if you will afford me your assist¬ ance," returned Rosalina. " That I am not able to do, as his excellenza—I mean the padre, will won» der at my long stay ; but there is a rope beneath the bed, which you cau tie to the iron bars of the casement." " I thought I saw a town not far off," said Rosalina, * 6 at sunset — if 1 could reach that, I should be safe." " You might perhaps conceal your¬ self there for a short time," said the woman, " but in these parts you can never be safe. I have a son, who sleeps in
in tlie shed where the mules are; I will go to him, and try to persuade him to wait for you ; and if you should succeed in leaving the cottage unob¬ served, he will conduct you to Con¬ tarino, which is the name of the town you saw. I must now go : be care¬ ful, whatever you do, not to let it ap· pear that you acted by my advice, for if you should, my life would an¬ swer it." " Do not fear," returned Rosalina; " if Heaven is so indulgent to me as to iii vour my attempts, you shall be the immediate object of my generosity.' 4 The old woman now departed, leav¬ ing her lamp on the table ; and Rosa¬ lina, after having taken out the cord, and affixed it to the bars, and put what¬ ever furniture there was in the apart¬ ment
ment against the door, to prevent any one from entering, extinguished the lamp, tliat her design might not be suspected, and, almost breathless with expectation, awaited till she might ex¬ pect her conductors to be asleep, when she intended to commence her adven¬ turous undertaking, and free herself from the horrors whicii seemed to impend over her devoted head. She sat on the side of the bed for some time, listening attentively to tiie deep hollow tones of tlie monk's voice, as be was talking to the two men. Tîie confusion of the woman, who once or twice called him by the title of ex- celienza, did not escape her recollec¬ tion ; but in the agitation she was in, and the few moments she remained in the apartment, she had no time to in¬ quire who he was ; but perhaps if she had,
bad, the old woman might have been cautioned against making her acquaint¬ ed with that circumstance. She now heard the door below fas¬ tened, and from her casement beheld the two menseat themselves on a bench which wasimme diately below her. Ro¬ salina was greatly agitated ; for the night being warm, she concluded that they meant to pass there the few hours al¬ lotted them for repose, for they soon forbore to converse—one of them fell into a profound slumber, as his deep breathing announced, and the other soon after arose, and, getting into the car¬ riage, seemed to prefer it for hb noctur¬ nal abode. Thus was Rosalina left without hope, for she conceived it would be utterly impossible to descend from the case ment without awakening the man, who vol. iv. α would
would probably slumber there the re¬ mainder of the night. Nature was now hushed tö repose; no sound, save the distant barking of a dog, or the sonorous flight of the beetle, was heard. The sleeper below never once moved—the past fatigues had closely sealed his weary eyelids; the waning moon shed her dim light on the earth, and a few twinkling stars appeared in the heavens. Rosali¬ na now heard a light pace, and looking to the place from whence the sound proceeded, saw a peasant advancing from the back part of the house, whom she huracdiately concluded was the woman*» son, for he looked v 4 p at her casement, and then at the sleeper below. She attentively watched hira, und at length saw him sitting down at the root of a tree not far distant, apparently in ex* pectation of her combg. But
But Rosalina did not dare to make the attempt then, and waited another hour, in hopes that the man below would awake, and join his companion. In this she was, however, disappointed, and she began to despair, wben she was startled by heating the monk moving below. The idea tliat he w*a coming to her chamber almost rendered her un¬ able to stir ; but at length, to her great delight, she heard him draw back the fastenings of the door below, and pre sently öfter saw him walking in front of the cottage, and his form was soon lost to her view in the mrroianårøg mists of night. It now occurred to Rosalina that a favourable opportunity offered of leav¬ ing the cottage without fear of awaking the man on the bench, if she could remove the furniture she had piled against her door, and, pasang through ? 2 the
the room below, secrete herself behhid some tree or hedge till the monk re¬ turned. With a trembling hand she therefore hastily began the fatiguing employ, and had opened her door, when, to lier sorrow, she heard Grimaldls re¬ turning paces, and soon after the closing of the door below announced his having entered the cottage. She again looked out of the easement : the man on the bench "still seemed to sleep undisturbed by the movements of the monk ; and as her last and only resource, she resolved to trust to her good fortune, and run the risk of awak¬ ing him» fihe now, as silently as she was able, got out of the casement, and, holding by the rope, put her foot softly on the bench, whicii trembled with the agi¬ tation of her body ; the mm Was, how¬ ever,
ever, still undisturbed—and the next moment she stood on the ground. She then stepped lightly on, intending to go round tlie cottage, and so reach the* peasant ; but in doing this, she passed by a low casement, whicii was opeu r and at which, horror-struck, she en¬ countered the gaze of the padre Gri¬ maldi, whose cowl being thrown back* disclosed the sable mask he wore. The monk, starting from his seat, hastened to the door, and Rosalina fled towards the place where she had observed the peasant had seated him¬ self; but he was no longer there, and probably had fled on perceiving the ap¬ proach of the monk, through a dread of his resentment. He advanced nearer to her every moment, and at length caught her by her garments, as they waved in the wind.
q S Rosalina,.
Rosdîiia, exerting all her strength, at length succeeded in tearing her gar¬ ments from Us hold; but as ?? was struggling with him, what was her hor-» ror on perceiving he liad but one hand, and tliat his other arm was shorn at tho wrist! Her sensations at this discovery were far beyond the weak eflbrts ef the pen to describe. To her distended gaze, she instantly imagined, appeared the vile as- sailant of her honour, the intended as« sasein of Montalto, and, to sum up the horrid catalogue, the murderer of her parøit f She wildly shrieked at seeing the dis¬ membered arm, and, with a dreadful groan, fell senseless on the earth. The men, disturbed from their slum¬ bers by her screams, now approached the
the place where the monk was endea¬ vouring to raise her up, and quickly conveyed lier to the cottage, whither he followed, and the old woman being summoned, every means, was used to recall her fleeting senses. Slowly did the vital current creep along her veins ; but, with animation, her recollection returned; and when her languid eyes fixed their dim gaze on the monk, she started, and instant¬ ly closed them, whilst her convulsed frame shew r ed how deeply rooted was the horror she felt at the sight of htm, in whom she beheld the most bitter deadly enemy that ever existeil irr a human form. C1 was no longer at a loss to guess the motives of his taking her from the castello; but tlie horrible certainty of his intentions ago¬ nized her far beyond expression. Had Death then wrapped her in his chiil- o 4 inir
ing embrace, how would she have wel¬ comed his approach i how happy would she have been to have resigned her spotless ecml to its, Maker ! But her hour of dissolution was far distant, and the lovely victim to the inhuman schemes of a base wretch bowed with resignation to the will of Heaven. Her tender frame was weakened so much by her sufferings, which always were increased when she saw Grimaldi, that he began to fear that he should be deprived of his prey, and therefore kept from the chamber where she was. This had the desired effect; and, no longer tormented by his presence, her. youth and constitution prevailed, and she slowly began to recover. But though her corporeal sufferings ^vere diminished, her mental agonies decreased not : her eyes, once so lovely,
so
so bright, and full of expression, now robbed of their lustre, hollow, and con¬ tinually suffused in tears, were often di¬ rected to heaven, while her trembling lips slowly articulated the fervent prayer for pity. On the third morning, Grimaldi ven¬ tured to enter her apartment. She shud¬ dered at his approach* and her horror at seeing him was so great as to de¬ prive her of the power of speech. His design in coming to her was evidently to find if she was able to continue the journey, for He only staid a few mi¬ nutes, and then leaving the chamber, gave orders to the men to harness the mules.. It was in this interval that RosaHna entreated the old woman to inform her who her persecutor was ;, but she either was ignorant, or else had made a solemn Q 5 promise
promise not tø disclose that circum¬ stance, and Rosalina was summoned to the carriage before àie wa» able to be¬ come acquainted with what she so great- tv Âo*âvá>A tí\ Irauüixr Λ. J -WtWUMAVb* ??%*- ????-???· » . Again was she seated by the side of Grimaldi, who still concealed his fea¬ tures, atid the carriage proceeded along the luxuriant plains, evidently avoid¬ ing the towns and villages which now frequently appeared scattered over the fece of the country. At noon they stopped in the midst of a gloomy forest, where the beams of the sun but faintly penetrated: there they staid but a short time, and again pursued their journey. As Rosalina was surveying the ob. jects around, she saw at the verge-of the horizon in immense pile of build¬ ings,
ings, which was erected on the decli¬ vity of a huge rock : the setting sun was brightly reflected on the ease¬ ments, and his beams glittered on the surface of an extensive sheet of water which lay near it. She fixed her gaze on the castello or monastery (for one of them she concluded it was), till the winding of the road, and some objects that intetve neti as the carriage de¬ scended the ?? from whence she had beheld it, obscured.it from her sight. It was some time before she again had a view of the scenery around, but the mists of evening now veiled the distant objects. The carriage proceeded for some hours, till all was enveloped in darkness* when, as it slowly rolled down a gentle de¬ clivity, one of the men blew a horn. Rosalina started at the sudden sounds which were echoed around, when a g 6 fainter
fainter blast was heard at a distance, and the carriage stopped. The light of a torch now gleamed amongst the fo¬ liage in the vale below, and soon the trampling of horses was heard hastily approaching them. The mules were now unharnessed, and their places supplied by the horses which were brought up, and they again conti¬ nued their journey on a more level road. When the carriage again stopped, it was beneath an immense and gloomy archway; and on their entering it, a man hastened from a small portal with a torch, by the glare of which Rosa¬ lina saw at a distance a large portico, supported by a long range of columns, whose size far exceeded tbe Gothic soli¬ dity of the pillars of Colredo^ She was now informed that she was
at the termination of her journey. She trembled as she alighted, and, preceded by the man who attended with the torch, she slowly entered a portal on one side of the archway, and beheld an immense hall, the roof of whieh was supported by long row T s of columns, almost black with time, on whose vast turrets were hung ancient suits of ar¬ mour and faded banners, which ap¬ peared to Rosalina, as the gleams of the torch rested on them, to be drop¬ ping to pieces. At the extremity of this hall was a large flight of marble stairs, which she ascended, and when arrived at their summit, looked back, expecting to see the monk behind her ; but only one of the men followed, and her persecutor was not to be seen. When they had gained the gallery to whkh the marble steps jed, the man who
who was behind entered a corridor, and called out two or three times — M Jac¬ queUna !." A voice answered, and soon RosaHna beheld a female approach¬ ing, whose appearance well denoted the gloomy office she concluded belonged to her* She was tall, seemingly long past the meridian of life; her skin yel¬ low and shrivelled ; a few scanty locks hung over her wrinkled forehead, and her nose was thin and hooked ; in one hand she held some keys, and in the other was a lamp. She accompanied the men along art extensive corridor, at the extremity of which she opened a portal, which was fixed in a deep recess, and Rosa¬ Hna entering, sav: a large apartment, the furniture if which was ancient, but still retained traces of its former magnificence. On the other side of the
the room was a door, which was partly open. " These are the apartments, signora,'* said the female, " whidi we were or* tiered to conduct you to.-—Roberto," said she, turning to the man who car¬ ried the torch, *' put a Hght to those faggots: this part of the castello has been so long uninhabited that every thing seems damp. M The man having compHed, Jacque¬ lina set down her lamp on a table, and, telling RosaHna that she would soon bring her some supper, quitted the cham* ber with the two men, taking care to secure the door. Rosalina, left to herself, took a sur* vey of her apartment, which was now Hghted by the blading faggots on the hearth : two large casements were pkced under
under a gloomy arch, the panes of which were covered with armorial bear¬ ings; the floor was o^ marble, as were also tbe tables. Several paintings adorn¬ ed the walls, which, on examination, seemed to be the work of eminent artists. Between the casements was a large Venetian mirror, whose sur- tace, covered witb the <kmp vapour of the place, had long ceased to re* fleet any object. She now took up the lamp, and went into the next apartment, which wa$ of the same di¬ mensions as the first: its furniture wa$ a lofty canopied couch, the hangings of which were blue velvet, fringed with, gold. In this apartment were several doors, all of whieh Rosalina endeavoured to unclose, bat succeeded only with one, which opened into α small closet, evi¬ dently adapted for the purposes of re- lígioíu
ligion, for beneath the casement was a table, on which was placed a small cru¬ cifix of silver, a missal, and a rosary; the panes of the casement were adorned with a Madona, holding in her arms a lovely infant. Rosalina bent before the image of the Saviour of the World, and humbly in- treated for fortitude to bear up against the evils which surrounded her; and while thus devoutly employed, a glow of hope animated her woe-worn breast. She was at length interrupted by the opening of the door of the outer apart¬ ment, and rising from ber suppliant posture, took up the lamp, and entering it, saw Jacquelina busied in arranging her repast. " Your apartments, signora, command a lovely view," said the attendait '* This part of the castello is built on a cliff, which
which projects over the waters of Ce¬ lano : your tíme will be pleasantly pass¬ ed in viewing the prospects." " There ? little pleasure," said Ro¬ salina, with a sigh, s * in seeing the beau¬ ties of nature, when the greatest charm in life—-liberty, ? denied." * g Ob, you will soon forget the foss ef tliat, ¡»ignore," said the unfeeling attendant ; ** besides, I have orders to let you walk in the courts of this end of the casteUo, and all the eastern ram- parts, during the daytime ; so you can scarcely conceive yourself a prisoner; and you are to have, besides, whatever you may want, either of clothes or books." Rosalina replied not, but sat down to her repast, of which she sparingly partook, whUe JacqueUna waited, seem* ingly
ingly ill pleased with her office, and the taciturnity of her charge* When she was gone, and RosaHna left to herself, she felt but Httle in¬ clined to steep, for she was not with¬ out her fears that Grimaldi might en¬ ter her apartment during the night; and she well knew by sad experience, that his dark and savage soul would not hesitate to perpetrate the most hor« tibie crimes. It was now near the dawn of day, and Rosalina watched tlie vermeil tints of morning as they deepened into the glowing beams of the sun, which at length penetrated the casements of her apartment. Jacquelina had not misin¬ formed her respecting the view which they commanded, for nature seemed to have exhausted her arts to combine tbe lovely,
fevely, the picturesque, and the roman* tic, in the scene whieh now appeared before her, dressed iu all the radiant glow of morning. »' ! On one sride, at the opposite shore of the waters of Celano; whkh rolled' beneath the casement, Was φ vast? heap of huge rocks, over whose ctSggy sides* á cataract rubbed foaticring into them; and in the spray appeared all the glow¬ ing colours whieh adorn the 'mystic? bow that sometimes is seen in the he¬ misphere. At tlie bottom of these rocks appeared large caverns,* which stretch¬ ed their vast mouths apparently to re¬ ceive the waves which glided into them, and echoed back the roaring of the ca¬ taract in various gradations of sound. From this romantic view, the eye reposed on the luxuriant plains around ; the
■the^ nearer groves and distant forests that clothed the sides of the hills wbich rose from the margin of the river, form¬ ing a vast atrçphitlieatçe, whose irregu¬ lar heights were at length bounded by thejioriæon. The lowing of the herds ii> the pastures, the song of the fisherman who toilqd in the river, and the me¬ lody of tbe birds, soothed the sorrows 4>f Rosalina to a pensive melancholy, which she indulged till the entrance of Jaequelipa. She seemed surprised on finding Ro- plina up, and that she had not lain down during the night; but, however^ she scarcely spoke, st which circunrb stance her captive was not sorry, fot the manners of the ^ttendai>t, and the •ssttletl smile of inveterate malice th^t ????? appe$re4 in Ιψτ features, u < were
were unpleasant, and even disgusting to her. When she was taking away the morning repast, she asked Rosalina if she would like to walk on the walls? to which she assented, in the hope of finding some way of escape, or of learning who it was that had so com¬ pletely overthrown the fair structure of happiness which her imagination had formed. " You may then come with me now," said JacqueUna. Rosalina arose from her seat, må throwing on her veil, foUowed her at¬ tendant to the hall below, ftom whence she passed through the archway into a large court, which was apparently seldom made use of; for there the long grassr waved to thè gale, and the thistle reared
reared its lonely heed. She looked up, and viewed with astonishment the ross- sy walls of the towers, whose lofty em¬ battled mimmits far overhanging their base, seemed to bid stern defiance to the weak assaults of man, or the moro powerful hand of time. The walk were nearly bkck with age: and as she sigh¬ ing looked ?? tlie dark battlements, she could almost imagine them the dreary abode of the Fates, who lurked unseen within their deep recesses, and held their death-dooming debates. A long archway led her to the walls, where she again contemplated tbe lovely prospect whicb she had viewed froija the casements of her apartment. Leaning on the stone parapet, she looked below lier on the rapid wate¡$ of Cetano, whicb seemed to roll so far beneath the db% that she was apprehensive lest the pon¬ derous walls of the castdfo would bring down
down the rock on which they were erected into the river. The white sail gliding along the wavy- surfece of Celano attracted her momentary attention, but her thoughts Soon returned to the means of effecting her escape, which, alas! she was fear¬ ful was impossible, for no outlet met her vieW: the walls frowned on her wherever she turned her gáze toward the land side, and the hideous precipices and river rendered it impossible on the other. Her feeble frame would not permit her to Walk for any length of time, and she returned to her apartment, the door of which wasf locked by JacqueUna, who had been a close attendant* on' her steps. Scarcely had she recovered from her fatigue,
fatigue, when the door opened, and Gri¬ maldi entered, She started with horror at hk approach, but collecting all her re¬ solution, awaited with chilling expec¬ tation the developement of his inten¬ tions towards her. " Lovely Rosalina," said he, " would I could persuade you to bankh the fears which blanch your cheeks at my ap¬ proach !" " When I behold," said Rosalina firm¬ ly, " the destroyer of my peace, when I think of my own wrongs^—of the wounds of Montalto, and the murder of my father, is it so strange that my blood should curdle in my veins ? or do you think me so lost to filial duty, and to love, as to have banished all those feelings ?" " Talk not of love," said Grimaldi, vol. iv. h «« at
" at least when you mention the hated name of Montalto, for these walls shall for ever enclose you from his view. Remember, that by so doing you will accelerate his destruction. Yes, Rosa* Iina, it is now time to declare who I am, and, when you know me, you will not wonder at the deeds I have per¬ formed, to which I was urged by love, jealousy, revenge, and all the passions which, concentrating their influences in my bosom, would have made me per¬ form deeds, to which those I Save com¬ mitted are as the gentle searee-felt me¬ ridian zephyr to the hollow roaring blasts of night. One victim only has escaped, and that is Montalto : his existence, Ro¬ saHna, depends on your conduct ; trans¬ fer the love you have for him to me-— make me the possessor of your hand— whatever the imagination of man can form which would render you happy shall be done : refuse me, and dread the worst.
worst. View this dismembered arm; it WBS 1??? Dluvv Wiulii ??????? ????- pho's death: Avhenever I see it, my blood boils, and methinks I could dart into the midst of heffs fiercest flames to plunge 'again my dagger in his detested form ! You now know the fierce ungovernable passions you have to resist, and if you would know in whose breast they dwell, view him." This said, he cast aside his monkish garment, and disclosed to RosaHna the too Well recoUected dark ferocious fea¬ tures of the prince di Manfroné, so long supposed dead ! Imagination must fail in portraying the terror-stricken features of Rosalina, and the pen is not able to describe her feelings: she hid her frrce with her hands, as if the form before her had been that of some horrible spectral form, or demon h 2 of
of darkness, while her frame shook with the dreadful sensations which tortured her bosom, like the leaf of the aspen to the invisible element. " Doubtless," continued the prince, " you are astonished to behold one before you whom Montalto falsely re¬ ported as no more: it is true he had reason to believe it, for, whirling from the dizzy height of Salerno, the waves of Abruzzo rolled over my form; but at that moment one of my domestics who was on the shore saw me as I fell, and, plunging in the lake, dragged me to the land. I need not relate the adventures of that night, when I secretly entered your chamber: you know how I was foiled, but it was only for a time; I easily effected my retreat, and remained in a peasant's hut till my wounds were healed: it was there I nursed my w r eU-concerted plans
plans of revenge. I entered the mo¬ nastery, and by a tale deceived them as to who I was. My face I deter¬ mined they should never see, and im¬ posed on their credulity by affirming that I had made a vow to eoneal it from the world. While pondering in my mind how I should effect an en- trance into Colredo, I one day strayed on the margin of the lake which was beneath the western front, when as my eyes were cast to the ground, I saw my lost hand rotting in the bkst: I snatched up the bones, and, having carried them to my cell, solemnly swore that they should grasp the dagger whose point should be buried in Ro- dolpho's heart. Ckcumstances favour¬ ed my procuring an entrance into Col¬ redo, and of making my intended vic¬ tim imagine me his dearest friend : un¬ der that idea I made him the blind tool of my own purposes; all his people H 3 were
were destroyed in the attempt which I urged him to of endeavouring to grasp at my possessions. I amused myself for some ?1?? with ?? distress, and wbeii I had foiled him in every thing he undertook, t completed my pur¬ poses by bis deatli, and ? conveying you away. Tb# tower wm fired by my prdpr » bpt thete the unlooked-for $??? of Montalto prevented my plans ; but that #ct roused ?? vengeance, and he now suffers for |t. s ' ??? tpve I accounted fpr tbß mys¬ terious proceedings of the monk Gri¬ maldi. Now, Rosaline, you must make your election ; but be epefiil wtiile you do it thst ît wais npt pgatnst «iy ???, else pp^han^ f$soe ??? ? WP$ 9 which I would gladly avoid: forget, then, all that hm ppt-rrrgiw your free consent to what ym cannot «void—and be the prin¬ cess di Manfrojaé." RosaHna»
Rosalina during the speech of Man¬ froné had recovered the deep distrac¬ tion which had seised her; she saw that all im bopea of comfort on this side the grave were vanished for ever ; and, redsfess how long she continued on the earth, rød thetefore fearless of ex- dting the rage of the prince, she thus re^ plied— " And 'm it after the horrid detail that y w ??? given ??? that you can imagined Raulba «? stoop »km as to think with any other sensations than those of the greatest horror and disgust on the mm who has declared himself mt only m arøaasiu, but the assassin of ber father? If thk is tbe wny ttot the prince di Manfroné seeks to wo&Rmdina» he is mistaken, Ke* ver shaU my Ups give utterance to any words than those expressive of the ???? and detotetk* elated by ? 4 your
your conduct. Gladly would I enter the silent abode of the grave to avoid you ; but if that consolation is denied me, I would rather become an in¬ mate with the most disgusting reptiles that crawl the earth, than Hve in the highest state of worldly magnificence, and condemned to the misery of see¬ ing you. If you think, Manfroné, that in RosaHna you have to deal with a timid wavering female, you are mis¬ taken, for my resolution increases with the difficulties that surround me." '* That, Rosalina," said the prince, with a smile of malice and retenge, " I shaU try. I give you tül the third even¬ ing from this to decide on the course you wffl pursue, and if you do not then comply, I shall put your boasted reso¬ lution to the test" " Take my answer now," returned RosaHna,
Rosdina, " and produce your tortures ; you will find them of little avail. My determination of to-morrow will be the same as to-day, differing perhaps only in having increased during that space of time. My love is not transferable ; Montalto irrevocably possesses it^—you, prince, my detestation ; but you might soften the anguish you have caused me to endure, by giving me my Uber- ty, which you have so basely deprived me of." " Never while life exists," said Man¬ froné; " here is your abode forever ; to pass the confines of these walls is far be¬ yond your power: these are circum¬ stances which you must have time to reflect on. I will not listen to a hasty determination : at the time I have ap¬ pointed, you will see me again ; but I must repeat my caution to you not to ? S excite
exâte the rage pf a man whon> your death only woidd not appease." Rosalina made ?? answer, and Man¬ froné arose and Mt the apartment His last words, indeed, struck l^r with such terror that she append, for sowe time as if bereft pf her senses ; tews, a¡t last ??? tbe fevei? of her htm: though a ppirøtfu) on^ it w^ some consolation that now she knew the worst—her enemy stood confessed, hirt pn^wbonpt she ïtltle expected ever to, hμγ& ?&? bffe^ Happy wpnljd it hw# b^n foe Iper> iftt hßA 1??, a àj$?hr& deluda of tW taind, fo» sp, i#fâçd it at first ??????; |wt sop», atø&L s^e v$m top fe¿¿%/ aspreai of the tm^h, w<k th$t ? ? <rf Mmfmué ?? mirwj#us)y p^sejçvod ta nifi the brøl p| sfthar à^i^ bops, w& ??* whelm
whebn her in the deep abyss of misery and despair.
h 6 CHAP-
CHAPTER XXII.
Rosalina's mind rose superior to her misfortunes, an 1 she waited with firm resignation for the close of the third evening, which she concluded would witness her dissolution. Freed from any apprehensions of Man- froné's visiting her apartments before that period, she retired to rest at an early hour, and enjoyed an undisturbed re¬ pose till she was awoke by the entrance of Jaojuelina. She arose refreshed by her slumbers, and
and was somewhat surprised to find that her attendant behaved with much more respect than before, which she rightly conduded was her having been informed of the prince having offered her marriage, wbich indeed was a cir¬ cumstance Httle to be expected; but Manfroné now considering RosaHna as possessor of the estate and domains at¬ tached to Colredo, sought by an union with her to add them to his possessions, resolving, however, in case of her re¬ fusal, to get possession of them by force, a circumstance which he hod already made easy, by betraying the designs of Rodolpho to Sebastiano, who, as already related, easily surprised and destroyed his troops. In that instance his schemes succeeded almost beyond hisexpectatiorj, and Manfroné often smiled to think how easily he. had duped his enemies, and, turned their swords on themsdves.
JacqueUna
JacqueUna broughtsome clothes, which she aecef>ted, and also some books, which served to while away the melancholy hours ot her captivity, and prevent her from pondering on the probable consé¬ quences of her persisting in her refusal to comply with Manfroné's request. She walked in the morning for a long time over the silent courts and walls of the eastetto* and, encouraged by the re¬ spect and! attention which JacqueUna paid heie, asked many questions concern¬ ing the immense pifo of buildrnga "Wkat you b»re already seen, si^ nora,* said the woman, * is scarcely a fourth ef tile casteUo; but this, is the only pert which ft not inhabited, for the prince an* his officers occupy the whole of the other parts* whieh are much grander than these old towera You may see the north and western wings
wings from the extremity of yonder wall, but tins has the finest views, and the prince's father always resided here ; but when he died, the apartments were all shut up* and so continued till I was ordered to get those ready where you live. I believe that thk wing of the casteUo is not thought so safe as the others, for once, when it was attacked, the enemy contrived to get into it, but were every one slain, and buried under that vaat heap of rubbish you see near yonder archway." Rosalina shuddered when she looked on the burial-place of the unfortunate assailants, but aaxious to know how it v/as they had effected aa entrance, she asked tlie woman, who replied-^ " That beneath that wing were large caves whkh liad oommunicatioo with some of the towess, and the enemy had contrived
contrived to get into them without be¬ ing discovered, and so had opened a way immediately beneath the heap of earth by the ærch, where formerly there had been a small passage down to them, which, when they were slam, the prince commanded should be filled up with their bodies." During this conversation, Rosalina had advanced to the extremity of the wall, and was struck with surprise at the wonderful extent of the building, whieh presented a range of embattled walls and towers as far as the eye could reach. Those she now beheld were evidently the workmanship of later years, their structure being more mo¬ dern and less gloomy than the eastern wing. u Some of the caves below," said the communicative JacqueUna, fi were formed
formed into dungeons, where formerly the prisoners used to be kept ; but one stormy night the waters rose to an un¬ usual height, and entering the grates which were placed in the roek to give them air and light, they all perished." " Poor creatures !" said the pitying Rosalina ; " how cruel it was to put them in a situation where there existed a possibility of such a shocking event taking place !" u Oh, as to that, no one thought of them long, for in war there is but little time for pity. Death becomes familiar, analoji«™,, by being con. stantly in our view. The prince, how¬ ever, ordered that those dungeons should not be used any more. Perhaps, sig¬ nora, you would like to see the principal apartments which the late prince used to occupy ?" Glad
Glad to beguile the time, Rosalina followed her conductress, who entering the hall, turned into a large gallery which was ornamented witb full length portraits of the ancient possessors of the castello. Rosalina sighed when she viewed them, for she reflected that they existed no more on earth-^that their forms were fong since mouldered away ; må al! their haughty plans, their wide- spreading ambition, extensive territo¬ ries, må unbounded power, could not detain then* from the grave one mo* mønt longer than the poor peasant who dug it for them. Rosalina eould not forbear feeling a kind of awe steal over her as she trod the silent chambers which onee had r& sounded to the voice» of those who long since had ceased to be remamberøL Those
Those which ì^ad been the residence of ?? late prince were magnificently furnished; but time was destroying the beauty of tbe ^nbrøidered tapestry, tbe colours of tb¿ pmntipgs were fading, and the labours of the spider now co¬ vered those of the loom; every thing was enveloped in d$3t; but still they plainly evinced the grandeur of its for¬ mer possessor. When Rosalina returned again to her apartments, she sat down to the perusal of ??? of the books which had bsen brought her, apd thus passed the hours till the gloom of evening ob¬ scured the ehwœteya of the descriptive page. Often were ber thoughts fixed on Montalto, but knowing so well m she did the revengeful disposition of her cruel persecutor, all ideas of ever seeing him
him again were fled ; there was not the least gleam of hope that she should be able to escape from the casteUo—but amidst aH the horrors of her situation, Rosalina still confided in the goodness of Providence. The dreaded evening now approached. Rosalina trembled when its shades dark- ening the earth, confirmed the empire of night. She listened with fearful ex¬ pectation of hearing Manfroné advan¬ cing along the gallery ; but he came not. She threw open the casement, in order to hear the tolHng of the far distant clock, and there sat till its faint sounds announced the midnight hour. Still fearful of his coming, she remained there some time longer, when concluding that he was happily prevented from tortur¬ ing her with his presence, she retired to rest.
The
The next morning she ventured to ask of Jacquelina, if the prince was still in the castello ; and great was her joy indeed, on finding that in consequence of an insurrection in a dktant part of his territories, he had been obliged to go in person to reduce the mutinous to sub¬ jection and restore peace. Such a signal interference in her fa¬ vour, Rosalina could not help ascribing to the goodness of Heaven, and she be* gan to indulge the fond hope that even now she should surmount the difficul¬ ties whieh clustered around her; and thus comforted, her strength returned, and she every day grew more able to endure with fortitude her expected suf¬ ferings. Confident that she eould not escape, Jacquelina now no longer fastened her door, and she had free liberty to rove un¬ attended
attended over the silent haUs ånd courts of that part of thè eašteUo. Rosalina frequently availed herself of this Hberty, and during her Wanderings examined those parte Whieh she thought Would lead to some outlet; but in vain, for every place of egress was too securely fastened for her to hope to remove. A month had now elapsed, and still the prince did not return. RosaHna had recovered bee strength, and used frequently to lemahi the whole day on a projection of the rock, which com- manding a mote extensive prospect than any otlier port, she liked fo sit and read there, when not prevented by the heat of the sün. One evening, when tired of reading, she was leaning her arm on the parapet whieh terminated the rock ; perceiving a smaH boat approaching the casteUo, she
she kept her eyes fixed on it. till pass¬ ing beneath the rock, it was lost to her view. In thinking of lvfontalto she had to¬ tally fturg&t that ckeumsümee, and was going to leave the phce, when she heard a soft strain of music whieh appeared to come from below. She listened for a while, first astonished and then pleased with tìte sounds, till ati length the scenes arøund were enveloped in shade, and the music ceased. Still, however, she remained af lief station, looking down on the river ; but though unable to pe¬ netrate the vapours that rase from it, she heard the øm of the rowers dash¬ ing on the waters. The next evening àie again repaired to the place, md agtón listened to the pleering melody, whkh ???, as on the preceding
preceding night, tiU it was dark. When she returned to her chambers, she men¬ tioned the circumstance to JacqueUna; but she was unable to account for it, as there was no possibfflty of landing be¬ low, for the immense crags jutted far over the waters. The music was a great indulgence to RosaHna, and she waited impatiently for the next evening, when she intended again to listen to the soft, but melan¬ choly strains, which, meUowed by dis¬ tant and softly repeated by the sur- rounding echoes, seemed more the work of enchantment than the performance of mortals. The day proved extremely hot, and she staid in the casteUo till the sun was rapidly journeying towards the western waves: she then left her apart¬ ments, and had proceeded half way down the marble stairs, when she sud¬ denly
daily stotipcd, for to her terrified gasse appeared, when far remote from her thoughts, the prince di Manfroné, She trembled, and as fast as she was able retreated to her i apartments, whither she was foUowed by her per¬ secutor. *' It gives me "pleasure, Rosalina," said he, « to see the rose once more bloom on your lovely cheeks. May I trust that it is ? proof that you are willing to accede to my entreaties, and that you will consent to this being the bridal hour ?" ** You have yet to learn, prince," said Rosalina, who now had somewhat reco¬ vered from the terror his unexpected appearance had occasioned, " that time has no effect on my resolutions when once fix€*d; and with respect to you, vol. iv. ι they
they ^re the same as when we last met." " And you are determined not to ac¬ company me to the altar ?" said Manr frone, hk countenance gleaming with rage. " Such indeed are my resolves ; never shall a murderer«—the murderer of my father, call me bride ! I am ready to die, prince ! Hasten then the period of my dissolution, and Rosalina will thank you with her last breath." ** Then, as I have to youi«, listen to my determination, RosaHna. Beneath those towers there is a dungeon dark and fearful, from which th^ pleasant beams of the sun, or the dieering views of nature, are exduded—that shall be your residence for a week ; and at the end of the seventh day, if you are still
obstinate, I wiil gr^Hfy by %ce .the longings of ?? botora, imd then, Rosa¬ lina, you may die." Rosalina trembled, for at the men¬ tion of the dungeon she immediately concluded it was that where the un¬ fortunate captives perished, and the idea of having it for her dwelling was more than she could support with fortitude. The prince observed ihe sudden pale¬ ness which overspread her counte¬ nance. 4t You rnay easily avoid your horrible destiny, Rosalina, by consenting to be my bride." ** If there is no other alternative, Manfroné, that can $ave nie from sudi a cruel fate than that consent, let me be conducted to my dungeon. My soul, wure in its existence, smiles at ι 2 the
the sufferings you threaten my mor¬ tal form with. But do you not dread an hereafter? Do not the punishments which await crimes like yours shake your nature ? Or are you so hardened in sin, that you reflect not on the enor* mity of your deeds?" ** Revenge," returned the prince, " is the deity I worship; whatever are its impulses, them I implicitly obey. Re¬ ligion I consider as a mere bugbear, calculated to awe fools, and increase the revenues of crafty priests, who by their well-studied cant alarm the weak minds of mortals with tales of punish¬ ments hereafter, whicii they pretend to be able to obtain a remission of, and even set a price on the forgiveness of offended Heaven. I smile at these ridi¬ culous fandes. If the sóul is immortal, a spark proceeding from the Divinity, as they pretend, where can the harm be
be in obeying its dictates? or rather, would it not be criminal to refuse to do as it urges us? If such is the case, (and the world, we see, is not the effect of chance), and that when the body is no more, the soul still exists and returns to its Maker—can he find fault with his own works ? Np—the whole blame must He on himself, from whom pro¬ ceeds the ethereal essence which ani¬ mates our beings " RosaHna shuddered while »he listened to the speech of the prince, who again sternly demanded if yet she would re¬ lent, or that night be carried to her dungeon ? " No, prince," she repHed, " let me see my tomb, for such I am determined it shaU be. Pleasant will be the gloom which reigns within it ; and if tbe cheering views of nature are excluded 1 3 m)
my sight, at least there I shall not bt tormentéti with the sight of a being sd abandoned, so lost to Heaten as your¬ self" Manfroné grew furious : he started from his seat, and leaving the apart¬ ment, ordered Jacquelina to eall Ro¬ berto.—" I will, at least, tench you," said he, as he re-entbred the chamber, " to curb the insolence of your tongue, whieh but irritates me the more agninst yon. Is it, do yon think, after what I have undergone to have you securely in my power—after sustaining the Iosa of my hand, and listening to the insult¬ ing speeches of Rodolpho, that I will suflfer myself to be foiled in my pur¬ poses ? No, Rosalina ; do not deceive yourself with vain hopes thai I shall !t4£ttt, or that tiie gates of my casteUo símil ever be opened to pennit your egress. Not even my death should 1Î berate
liberate you, for with the last eftbrts ôf expiring nature would I give orders for your execution." Roberto now entered the apartment, and the prince ordered him to get ? lamp, which JacqueUna soon furnished him with, *' Now, Rosalina," said he to the trembling maid, "will yo« follow tlie domestic quietly to your dungeon, or ? forco to be used ? w " There needs no force, Manfrout?, when we act by our own choice," replied Rosalina, rising from her seat, and walk ing towards the portal. Tbe prince was evidently surprised at her resolution, and at tha£ moment felt a glow of shame at his own cruel conduct ; but a stranger to the smallest ι 4 resistance
tesistanee to his will, he determined that Rosalina should feel tl>e full weight of his rage* Roberto going before, descended into the hall, and erossing some of the court¬ yards, followed by the prince and bk lovely victim, stopped at the arch, by the side of which was the melancholy heap of earth whieh covered, the bodies of the unfortunate warriors. Rosalina had occasion for her forti¬ tude to support her at this trying mo¬ ment, for the man opened a small door which was concealed in a recess formed by two projecting columns, that sup« poi ted the arch, descended some steps, and SIanfroné bade her fellow him. t The steps were narrow, and slippery with the datnps,, and scarcely eould she prevent herself from falling; but at length
length arriving at the bottom* she found herself in a cave whose height and size the feeble lumen of Roberto's lamp would not permit her to discover. The man seemed to have been pre¬ viously instructed where he was to go, for crossing the cave, he stopped at a door, and having set down his lamp» he forced it open, for the bolts were rusted in their holds, and so corroded by the damps that they fell to pieces. RosaHna anxiously surveyed the in¬ terior; but, however, she was spared the misery of existing with the relics of the unfortunate brings who had perished, as Jacquelina had informed her, by the flowing in of the waters of the river. The dungeon was small, and at the further end was a grating, through which the breeze of evening blew cold and com- i õ fortlcss.
-fortlesi 1 What furniture had been in the dungeon was now rotting to pieces, and the prince ordered Roberto to bring some mofe; and ^ he was departing with his attendant, he said— 44 You see, Rosalina, that í am re¬ solved to do What I have threatened. I shall again see yon at thè expira- tiofi of thè Week; but if in tiie interim you sh&utd alter ybur imprudent re¬ solutions, the domestic Who will at¬ tend you with provisions will feith- fuliy bring to më uny message you may think fit to ëliargè hib with ; but as to any further indulgence than li couch ahd tHe coarsest fare, do not ex¬ pect it." ' Having* said th&, he retired from the place, and tiie door being dosed, Rosaline Was left iti fHë fpoomý diiíí- geon,
geon, listening to the melancholy dash¬ ing of the waves beneath the grating. Leaning on the rock, she looked through the bars, and beheld the waves of Celano, which flowed darkly under the rocks, when, as she was pensively reflecting on the melancholy hours she probably was doomed to pass in tliat horrific abode, she heard the music which h&d given her so much pleasure ; it appeared approaching her, but shortly after ceased, and she listened to tlie noise of the oars, and the rippling of the water, as the boat, swiftly gliding ^long, divided the waves. Roberto soon after entered, bringing with him a pallet for her to Ke on, and what she was truly thankful for, a lamp and a small supply of oil. As ??? as he had deposited his burden, 1 6 he
he left the place, having - carefully" se* cured the door. Innocence has no fearr. Rosalina, con* fiding in the protection of Heaven, re¬ tired to her humble pallet, and there slept, though the blast of night sighed through the bars of the*grating, and the waves hollowly beat against the rock. It wás near morning before she awoke. The moon gleamed brightly on the water, but soon retired at the approach of the sun ; and the gentle zephyrs of morn, impregnated witb the odours of delicious flowers, entered thç dismal re¬ sidence of Rosalinar i * ef /'At least," sa}tl ??, "though jthe terrifie roçjís which stretch far oyer my abodf t shut out from ?? sight the smiling beftutips of nature, they cannot deprive
deprÍ4 l e me of her sweet breath, which cheers and refreshes my senses. This is a comfort which my ruthless tormentor did not think of, or else it is likely he would have sought some means to ex¬ clude me from it." In the course of the morning, Ro^ berto brought hersome provisions, which, when he was gonej she partook of, and even ate with appetite ; but in prdpop- tion as the gloom of evening enteredher dungeon, her fears increased, for the tide was now rising, and the waves came so near the cavity of the rock in which the grating was placed, that, as they dashed against it, the wind blew the light spray on Rosalina: her fears, however, of t^e water entering the dungeon were happily without foun¬ dation. The music again approached; and while
while RosaHna listerted to it, she endea¬ voured to make her melancholy abode discovered, in order that she might im¬ plore the pity and protection of the people in the boat, who she thought might perhaps be able to rescue her. She therefore lit her lamp, and placed it before the grating, in the hopes that its rays, which fellone oh the dark rocks above, might attract their notice : but the receès in Which the grating was placed was either so far within the rock, or the niusidatis were so intent on their Ijfârmonious amusement, that she did not šuCe>ed ifi her attempt; and, after having remained their usual time, they retired. Hef day» Were ndW passed in the *hdancholy eínfiloyof watching the roll¬ ing waves, as they broke against the rugged exterior of her dwelling, and in viewing the rocks above, amongst the crevices
crevices of whicii glew a few aqueous plants. Four days had now elapsed, and the evening of the fifth hastily apprôifehtëd. The waves seemed unusually agitaled, and the gusts of wind that rushed into Rosalina's miserable $bode chilled her frame ; darkness soon covered each ob¬ ject from her sight, but the ldud 'roar¬ ing of the waters prevented her from being able to sleep. She lit her lámp, and, sitting on her pallet, anxiously awaited till the violence of the storco should abate ; but fcach succeeding wave seemed to be impelled with greater force, and her fears for her safety now began to assail her, for the water rising aboVe the grating drov& into her dun¬ geon, whieh it completely overflowed. Rosalina statted up, and ran to the fur¬ ther end for security; her lamp had been
been overthrown, and the oil was lost, so that, to add to the horrors of her situation, she was left in total darkness. The waves continued flowing in- at intervals, and she fully expected that before the coming morn, her eyes would be closed iit the wdcome slumbers of death. What a night of mieery was this for the unfortunate Rosalina to sup¬ port! How fong did it seem before the grey daw» dispelled the gloom, and disdosed her comfortless, situa¬ tion ! The storm» however, had now abated, and the danger which threat¬ ened her ceased^ but tiie waters of Ce¬ lano, whieh, when she last saw them, were dear, and disclosed to her view the rugged rocks over which they flowed, now disturbed by the storm, rolled along their dark waves, which . ceased
ceased to reflect any object on their sable bosoms. When Roberto entered, he seemed alarmed at the perilous situation of Rosaüna y and for. once looked on her with an eye of pity. , He requested her to go into the cave while he dear- ed away the water in the dungeon, which, when she entered, she was asto¬ nished at its immense size.. The. light of day entered it, from a long cfeft in the rock, whichy when she approached, she found neariy level with the wa¬ ter, and broad enough to permit any one to enter. This was a discovery of no small importance,* for if she could persuade Roberto to allow her the li¬ berty of walking there, jsbe might for¬ tunately attract the notice $f,the people in the boat, if indeed they should come again, which, if the weather continued stormy, she feared would not be the case,
case, for she had not heard them the last two evenings. When she returned to her dungeon, Roberto had finished his work, and, en¬ couraged by the mildness of hm looks, she thus addressed him :*— . u You see, Roberto, the danger 1 was in, and whieh it was not in my power to avoid, I do not believe it is the intention of tbe prince di Man¬ froné, cruel as his conduct is towards me, that I should perish in my dun¬ geon ; if therefore you wffl leave the door open, I shall be able to retreat to the cave when danger threatens me, and I will reward you for your acqui¬ escence to the utmost of my poor abi¬ lity;* Roberto hesitated for a moment, and then replied — " To be sure, signora, I do
ï do not think the prince would be angry vvith me for so doing, because, as you say, it certainly is very dange* rons, for we may expect stormy wea¬ ther now\ and it is equally as impos¬ sible for you to escape from the cave as the dungeon ; therefore, signora, I shall do as you request, only to-morrow evening, when the prince comes to you, as he said he would, be careful not to bè seerì in thé cave, and if you ivill proiurse that, I will not fasten the door." Rosalina, pleased at having so easily succeeded, readily niadé thé promise he required, dna, as a farther inducement, gave hintf \vhatever valuables she hap¬ pened tb have about her on the night she so unfortunately left Colredo ; and Roberto departed, well pleased with his treasures.
When
When he wae gone, Rosalina lit her lamp, in order to examine those parts of the cave which were enveloped in darkness, in the hope of discover¬ ing another outlet ; but her search was not attended with the wished-for suc- cesSr She awaked anxiously for the even¬ ing, in the hope of seeing the boat ap¬ proach, for she was pretty certain that the sounds of the music proceeded from that side of the rock in which was tlie chasm that gave light to the cave. But, alas! Rosalina was disappointed in her fond hopes : the boat never came, and when it was dark she retired discon- soktely to berceli, and laid her agitated frame on ber pallet. . The next evening was the dreaded one whieh Manfroné had appointed for
for his coming; and though the last night her dreadful situation had pre- vented her from enjoying a moments repose, her horrible anticipations of the deeds whieh the cruelty of Man¬ froné might urge him to perpetrate kept her wakeful then—her thoughts were a chaos of distracting ideas, and the sounds of the princds threats of the vengeance he would take seemed continually to vibrate in her ears. She had no hopes now of succour from the boat, for there was little prospect of its eoming, and if it did, it might be when Manfroné was with her, and in that ease she would not be able to at¬ tract their attention by means of her light. Such were her reflections during the night, and when the morning arrived it did not dissipate hér melancholy When
When Roberto came, he reminded her of the princes intention of seeing her, and again cautioned her not to be in the cuve, lest lie might incur his dis¬ pleasure for tbe liberty he allowed her. Evening was hasty in its approach. Rosalina often looked through the chasm, but the boat was not to be seen : she then seated herself disconsolately on the steps that led to the courts above, that she might have the earliest information of the dreaded coming of Manfroné, and in order to retire to her cell in time to prevent him from knowing his do¬ mestic's indulgence. Such was her situation, when a few plaintive notes from a lute gave notice of the approaeh of the boat. Rosalina started from her seat, and, hastening to the deft, saw it at a distance, and tbe men
men apparently lying on their oars, and making preparatie, is for their con¬ cert. Rosalina endeavoured, dangerous as it was, to make herself be heard, but the dashing of the waves against the rock prevented her feeble voice reaching them. Terrified lest the prince should approadi, she destateci, but taking lier lamp, held it as far out as she could, in hopes it would attract tbeir notice : they had now commenced their amusement, whicii doubtless prevented them from seeing her. A nake now made Rosalina leave her situation, and, trembling, she listened to the voice of Manfroné speaking to Roberto, seemingly at the entrance of the passage whieh led to the cave. As she knew that it would be some time bifore he eould descend, she agahi ven- tui ed
tured to approach the cleft ; and ste again holding her lamp there for a few moments, hastened back to her dun¬ geon, whicb she entered just as the light of the torch which Roberto car¬ ried flashed on the sides of the spiral staircase. The sound óf their feet shortly after convinced Rosalina that the prince and Roberto were in the cave, and she lis¬ tened to the words which Manfroné was speaking to his domestic, and his last sentence so greatly terrified her, that she felt herself scarcely able to stand, for he desired Roberto to await his coming at the door above, rs his stay there might probably be of some duration: such a step convinced her that he was determined to put his »threats in execution, and she sunk on her knees, and implored the protection of Heaven from his vile intents. The hope
bope that she might have attracted the notice of the boatmen now died away, for the music had ceased, and no sound met her ears but the dreaded paces of Manfroné towards her dungeon; and «oon the door was opened, and her bit¬ ter enemy entered. " Well, Rosalina, you have hitherto forced me to be severe, but I hope tliat your concession to my wishes will no longer render that necessary: reflect on tbe conséquences of your refusal, which will put you in a situation truly dreadful ; accept, then, the splendid title I offer you, and with it my hand and heart. If ere you are in my power— it is not in the ability of mortal to im¬ pede røy intents; why then will you hesitate—why will you provoke a man, the effects of whose vengeance you have seen so many fatal instances of?" vol, iv. ? " Yet,
" Yet, prince, they have hitherto fail¬ ed in alarming me, and I trust ever will : you reflect not that it is the black re¬ venge which dwells in your bosom which has rendered you in my eyes tîie most odious of men, and the longer you pur¬ sue that conduct, the mort those sensa¬ tions, so inimical to your wishes, will in¬ crease. If you had tried to persuade me to an alliance, and used lenient measures, it would have been the only way in which you could have hoped to suc¬ ceed with me ; but to be forced to an alliance is a mode which will never win Rosalina." " Then," said Manfroné, " I receive your final answer, and now, proud fair, I mean to possess the lovely habi¬ tation of your scornful soul; nor longer will I wait to reap the harvest of my toils."
Thus
Thus having said, he caught hold of the trembling Rosalina, and drag¬ ged her towards him : she screamed with affright, and long did she resist his dark intents; her agonizing sensa¬ tions gave her fresh strength, and by a sudden effort she disengaged herself, and, opening the door of the dungeon, fled to the farther extremity of the cave: but the prince was resolved to perpetrate the dreadful deed whicii had long been the subject of his medita¬ tions, and he hastily pursuedand brought her back. The strength of the hapless maid was fast decreasing, when sudd niy the blast of n horn echoed through the cave. The prince started at the sound —hasty footsteps were heard—the door of the dungeon was burst open—and Manfroné, drawing his sword, prepared to punish the unwelcome intruders; but an arm, far superior to his in skill and strength, with a death-dealing blow ? 2 hiid
laid his gigantic form on the ground, gasping for life.
CHAP-
CHAPTER XXIII. ■+4-?*4???????*??+*?:?*~??
Montalto rapidly recovered of his wounds, and y ? the expiration of the fourth day, was enabled to leave his couch. Perhaps the idea that his a- dored Rosalina would be permitted to see him contributed not a little towards the re-establishment of his health. The news of the assassination of the duca di Rodolpho soon reaehed the ears of the marchese ; but, fearful that it might distress his son, he carefully concealed it from him, till Montalto, K 3 anxious
anxious to see Rosalina, demanded of his father if he knew the reason that she had not fulfilled her prom ibe of see¬ ing him ? It was on the moinintr ofthat d;»\ that the marchese had heard the dis¬ tressing intelligence respecting Rosa¬ Hna from Carletta, who, having passi d many hours hi the greatest agony, and. after having inquired of every one con¬ cerning her dear mistress, at length determined to let liim know lier ab¬ sence; he scarcely knew how tí) reply to his soifs questions concerning her. for he well knew that should he hear of Rosalina's absen ??, his present weak state would not detain him an instant from seeking her. and he perhaps might fall a victim to his precipitate conduct; he therefore evaded, as long a.s he was able, any direct replies to his son's repealed questions, but at length
length informed him of the death of the duca, and, attributing the silence of Ro¬ salina to that mournful event, Montal- to's alarm on her account was appeased for a time, and his health became per¬ fectly re-established. The absence of Grimaldi at first was not noticed, because he had of late been so seldom visible, and it was sup¬ posed tbat he had gone to reside at the monastery ; but when the marchese learned that he had not been seen since the departure of RosaHna, he was greatly agitated, for it may be remem¬ bered that the circumstance of his refusing to marry RosaHna to him in the chapel of Colredo brought him acquainted with the person of Man¬ froné, which, to his astonishment, lie again recognized while in the monas¬ tery of Santa Alaria, after lie had con¬ cluded that he had perished in tlie lake. k' 4 It
It was evident to him that he luid taken RosaHna with bim to his castello, where he heard he now resided ; and when he thought that his sen was able to bear the afflicting inteUigence, he im¬ parted it to him as gently as he was able. The grief and rage of Montalto can¬ not be described.—** Alas î my father,** said he, " had you made me acquainted with the existence of the base prince di Manfroné» what evils might have been avoided I The death of the ducer — my wounds—and, above all, the hor¬ rible persfîcutkm which my adored Ro¬ salina now undergoes perliaps — but let me not ponder on a circumstance which would distract my soul, but, col¬ lecting alî our forces, let us instantly march and attack the wretch, and res» cue her.*
** Your
" Your grief makes you talk wildly, my dear son," said the marchese. — *· What are the forces we could raise, when compared with his numerous troops? Deeply, indeed, have I re¬ gretted not having informed you of the existence of Manfroné ; but 1 will repair my involuntary fault, which was occasioned by the many circumstances whieh, after sa long arr absence from my domains, engaged my time and at¬ tention, by immediately repairing to the dwelling of the prince, and seek by stratagem to effect what our forces. could not." tó No, my father," returned Mon¬ talto, " your years would ill suit with such an undertaking ; but this hour will I depart, and, taking with me a few trusty followers, destroy the venomous serpent in his den."
? 5
After
After much persuasion, the marchese consented to this plan, and Montalto, selecting two trusty domestics, and Pietro, whom he had taken into his service, set out on his adventurous un¬ dertaking. When he arrived at the residence of Manfroné, he learned that he was ab¬ sent from his castello; but whether Ro¬ salina was there or not, he was unable to discover. Pietro, disguising his fea¬ tures, mixed among the domestics of the prince, to endeavour to find from their conversation what Montalto so earnestly wished to know, and was well convinced that if she was in the castello they were ignorant of it. Montalto, then, imagining that Man¬ froné, fearful of leaving her behind him, had taken her to the province which he was reducing to subjection, hasten¬ ed
ed there, but still eould not hear any tidings of the adored of his heart. He then returned back to the castello, when he was informed by Pietro, whom he had left there, that he had been shewn the interior of the building by the do¬ mestics, and that if Rosalina was in them she must be in the eastern wing, as that part was not inhabited by any of the household, and the gates which opened to it were constantly kept shut. ** But I found," continued Pietro* " that som# one resided in them* for as I was prying about the castello* seeking out places from whence I could survey the courts and walls of the east¬ ern wing, I saw a female domestic at one of the casements. My inquiries respecting her were, however, fruitless, and, fearful of exciting suspic« n, I was silent." κ β Montalto
Montalto now felt almost certain that Rosalina was in the eastern towers of the castello, and many an hour did he employ in viewing their gloomy walls, but her loved form was denied to his longing gaze. He now procured a boat, and passing beneath the rocks on which they were erected, sought to excite her attention by the performance of some musicians whom he took with him, on pretence of enjoying the echoes among the rocks. In one of those visits, perceiving the aperture in the rocks, he determined to examine it, and accordingly, entering with Pietro, discovered the cave and the steps which led to the courts above ; but the door was too strongly fastened for him to break open, and whilst they were there, bearing tlie echo of foot-* steps, they retired.
It
It was on that same evening that Ro¬ salina was conveyed to the dungeon; and at the very time she was approach¬ ing with the prince and Roberto, did her tender lover listen unconsciously to her paces, but unfortunately ignorant of that circumstance, he left the cave and entered his boat. He was now, how¬ ever, well assured that the eastern towers were inhabited; and as he conjectured that the portal he had seen would pro¬ cure him admittance to them^ determin¬ ed to come some other evening and force it open. Having heard that the prince was re¬ turned, he was obliged to be more cir¬ cumspect in his visits to the rocks on whicii the towers were erected, for fear. of exciting suspicion* and delayed ex¬ ploring thera, in which he was also pre¬ vented by the stormy weather., Thus
Thus passed the time, when having provided the necessary implements, he one evening approached the rocks, when struck with a light which gleam¬ ed through the chasm, he hastened towards the place, and distinctly heard the screams of a female. His fears im¬ mediately suggested it must be Rosa¬ Hna, and in order to intimidate the wretch who was the cause of her ex¬ clamations, when he had leaped from the boat into the cave, he snatched up a horn, and blew that strong blast which made Manfroné start and let go hi& savage grasp of the almost senseless RosaHna. Pietro and the ©ther domestics imme¬ diately followed Montalto, who, directed by the cries, rushed to the dungeon, and in a moment sheathed his sword in the body of the prince,, while Rosalina re¬ cognizing
cognizing her lover, almost fainted with excess of joy, and hung with rapture on his arm. What a sight was this for the dying Manfroné! Frantic w«th rage, he col¬ lected his yet remahvng strength, and taking an opportunity, when unobserved by Montalto and Rosalina, was on the point of wounding them, when Pietro suddenly rushed into the dungeon, and seeing the danger of his master, has¬ tening to prevent it, unfortunately re¬ ceived the thrust intended for him, und in the next moment plunged his own sword in the heart of the prince, over whose senseless body he fell. Thus perished the prince di Man¬ froné, and such was the fruit of his savage schemes; justice overtook him at the very moment when he was ex¬ isting in their success ; and to add to¬ bis
his misery, saw those happy whom he had thought would never again have met iu this world. Gentle reader, reflect on the short¬ lived triumph of the wicked, and how dearly it is purchased. Seldom are they permitted to exult in the fruition of their wishes ; or„ if they do, they fall far short of their sanguine expectations. But whether they succeed or not, a certain punishment awaits them, and conscience with its sharp and deadly tooth destroys all their comfort in this world, till at length they sink unla- mented into the grave—the gates of eternal destiny open to receive thew guilty souls, and trembling they appear before the judgment-seat of Heavea without hope of mercy.. Tbe attention ©f Montalto was sud¬ denly directed to the unfortunate Pietro, in
in whose arm the sword of Manfrone still hung. He drew it gently forth, and raised him from the body of the prince. " We are in danger; 1 said Pietro; ** the moment the musicians you had hired understood your design was against the prince, whose vassals they are, they hastened into the boat, and row¬ ed away, intending to alarm tlie cas¬ tello." Rosalina turned pale at this intelli¬ gence ; but when Montalto, recollecting the portal above, determined to effect his escape that way, she tremblingly informed him that one of the prince's attendants awaited there his return. " If we can secure him," said Mon¬ talto, " he will, througli fear, or hopes of reward, shew us some way of es¬ cape.
cape. I wdll instantly make the at¬ tempt, for the moments now are pre¬ cious." Having said this, he called one of the domestics, and bidding the other go to Pietro and assist him, he took the prince's lamp, and ascended with Rosa¬ lina the steps, endeavouring to comfort her amidst her fears, for she trembled lest the gleam of happiness which now burst on her was on the point of being obscured for ever. When they had nearly gained the summit, Montalto advanced alone ; the door was opened by Roberto, who, when he saw a stranger approaching, struck with terror, fled; but Montalto soon caught him, and holding a sword to his breast, said— ít Shew me this instant a private way
way by which myself and friends ean escape: the prince is dead, you need not therefore fear his displeasure. If you refuse me r this moment you cease to exist ; but if you execute my wkhes faithfully, you shall be rewarded be¬ yond your most sanguine expecta¬ tions." There needed little to persuade a man to make an election between his destruction and the prospect of not only preserving his life, but also re¬ ceiving a reward ; and Roberto con¬ sented to endeavour to preserve them from the threatened danger, but at the same time represented the difficulty there was in the undertaking, as they must pass through the injiabited parts of the castello, all the portals which led out of the eastern wing being closed up, excepting the one whieh com-
communicated with the interior of ther building. Rosalina now advanced, and shortly after Pietro, whose wound fortunately ceased to bleed. Roberto preceding them, crossed some of the courts of the eastern wing, and passed through the iron gates which led to the other sides of the castello, when suddenly a confused noise was heard, and the light of several torches glared on the walls. 4< The men have betrayed us," said Montalto,extinguishing his lamp; "Man¬ froné 's people are now coming to search the subterraneous parts for us. Is there any place where we can hide? or must we perish in our defence here ?" The terrified Rosalina had run to Montalto
Montalto for protection, and was ob- Uged to support herself by him, for her fears rendered her almost unable to stand; every moment the sounds in¬ creased, and the voices were nearer ; and at length they saw a portal opposite to them thrown open, and a party of men, armed with swords and pikes, rush througli it. " Our only chance of escaping," said Roberto, '* is to hide ourselves behind those projecting columns near yonder arch till they pass. In their hurry to descend into the cave, they may not perceive us; and when they are gone we must lose no time in leaving the place before their return." Roberto's advice was followed, and a moment after the crowd rushed along, and darting down the spiral stairs, were soon out of sight Montalto then has¬ tily
lily emerged with Rosalina and his people, and closing the iron gates which would retard the return of the party» proceeded with Koberto along tlie cor¬ ridor. But they were not yet in safety, for a few more of the attendants now crossed their path in their way to »oin the others, and observing them, stopped and de¬ manded who they were. Montalto replied not, but resolutely nttaeked them, and the first that had advanced being slain, the rest retreated. In this encounter Roberto assisted him, for knowing that as he was seen with liim, his life would no longer be safe, chose rather to perish there, than risk bring taken. His services were not un- noticed, and Montalto encouraged him by his promises to -persevere.
The
The inhabitants of the casteUo were now in the greatest alarm : for ignorant of the numbers of the people who had got into the castello, and terrified by the exaggerated accounts of those who had fled, now assembled in the spa¬ cious area in front of the castello, and blew the war trumpet to summon every one to it. To this circumstance Montalto and his party were indebted for their escape; for the balls and corridors through which they were obliged to pass were all empty, and Roberto conducting them to a side postern, they emerged from the castello. It was now completely dark, and under tlie protecting covert of the sur* rounding shades they pursued their way, Roberto being their guide ; and before the morning dawned were far distant from
from the danger which they had so nar¬ rowly escaped. It was a fortunate circumstance that Pietro did not delay them, for thougii weakened by loss of blood, yet he was able to proceed as fast as RosaHna, whose fears would not permit her to tliink of rest till the heat of the sun made it necessary. The party who first descended to the cave found the breathless body of the prince yet warm ; every part was searched, but no one was to be seen; and they at length were returning with his remains to the portal above, when the men who had aFc; 4 nbled when summoned by the trumpet, having forced open the gates which Roberto bad fastened, meeting the others, took them for the assailants : and before the mistake was discovered, it was fatal to many
inpny. At lengtli peace was restorend, and the body of Manfroné, disfigured by being trod under foot, was found amongst the rest, and brought into the liall. Great exertions were macle to disco¬ ver who it was that had committed the deed, but no one could tell: parties were sent in search of them, but they fortu¬ nately did not succeed, and Montalto, with his adored Rosalina, and faithful attendants, arrived at Colredo, which was the nearest place of safety, and im¬ mediately sent a messenger to the mar¬ chese to acquaint him with their suc¬ cess. Great was the joy of the inhabitants of Colredo to see their beloved mistress, and when Carletta arrived (who had resided by desire of the marchese at his castello till lus son's success should vol. iv. ?. be
be known), it is hardly possible to con¬ ceive the extravagant joy of the affec¬ tionate domestic, and which perhaps was not a little increased by the presence of Pietro, whose wound was soon healed ; and now the casteUo di Coiredo, which liitherto had witnessed so many scenes of sorrow, no longer was the abode .of melancholy. Roberto, who had been of such signal service, was amply rewarded, and Pietro and Carletta were placed fer above de¬ pendence : but though RosaHna wished it, yet both of them refused to be united before that day which should witness her nuptials with Montalto, and which was unavoidably delayed on account of the recent death of the duca di Ro* dolpho. The tele of Rømellrøo, which Man¬ froné pretended to be # a recital of his own
own misfortunes, and gave to the ab¬ bot of Santa Maria, in order the better tomislead and keep bim in ignorance of who he was, was nevertheless found¬ ed on facts, and the unfortunate victim* to love did indeed still exist in a remote^ monastery on the inhospitable shores of Calabria; time, however, had blunted the edge of his afflictions, and the bur¬ then of life became at last easier to be 1 borne. At length the day arrived, so long: expected,, so much wished by all who 1 knew the virtues of the illustrious pair,. and the marchese, with the assistance of the comte FloreUi, left nothing un¬ done which could contribute to the* magnificence and splendour of the nup¬ tials. The halls of Colredo were superbly adorned in aU the splendid magnificence h % of
of that era in which the occurrences which comprise these eventful records took place. The several apartments and saloons of the immense pile were thrown open, and thronged with the friends of the deserving pair. At the time ap¬ pointed for the ceremony, RosaHna hav¬ ing thrown off her sable attire, and put on a Grecian robe, which was compressed to her slender waist by a zone of bril¬ liants, shewed the elegancy of her form ; her lovely hair, dispersed in braids and ringlets, after the Sidlian mode, was adorned with pearls, which displayed the beauty of her glossy tresses—entered the hall with the comtessa di Florelli. The elegance of her dress, and, above all, the blushing lovely wearer, created ge¬ neral admiration. Montalto at the altar received his beau¬ teous bride as the greatest earthly bless¬ ing Heaven could bestow. The cere- * mony
mony was performed by the venerable abbot of Santa Maria ; and as soon as it was concluded, the happy pair received the congratulations of the crowded as- semblv, who breathed their sincere pra) (n-s for the happiness and comfort of Montalto and his Rosalina. And successful were their wishes, for Heaven smiled on their union, and ne¬ ver did a pair enjoy more real felicity than they did. Ailer their marriage, Pietro was united to Carletta, and thus completed the happiness of the deserving couple, who, however, could not be per¬ suaded to leave the castello, but chose rather to attend on Montalto and Ro¬ salina, than to enjoy the independence in which they had been placed. Here the pen pauses : with its weak efforts it has endeavoured to delineate tbe vices of mankind, placing them in sudi
Such a glaring view with the hope of exciting in the bosom of the reader that horror and detestation/which must make him studiously avoid giving way to those turbulent passions that vitiate the mind^ and render it insensible to the charms of virtue ; and may thes** pages, which shew him vthe misery attendant on evil actions, in all his researches after wordly enjoyment and felicity, deeply impress on his mind, beyond the pre¬ vailing power of vice to erase, the ne« ver-Guling maxim, that " To be good is to be happy r
FINIST.
Primed by J. Sterling, Leadenhill-Strcet, London.
