Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The two mentors
'i И£
TWO 31EľíT0BSí MODERN STORY.
LETTER L FUCUAllD MUNDEN, ESQ. ГО EOWART» SAVILl E, ESQ. VOUNG MANÎ 1 take it very ill that I have not heard from you since you left London !—Do not í stand in the place of a father to you?—Nay, have I aot been more than & fat her to you: for I am no relation by blood, but your guardian only» and the friend of your deceased father? First, I released you from the harsh disci¬ pline of a pedagogue, and forbade him to lash you iuto learning, alias pedantry; which only serves to narrow and depress the spirit of a gentleman, or else to make him conceited and overbearing,—Secondly, I followed you with my good ofììees afterwards, to mitigate the fa- tieuf s of education, and to make you an accom* в
л
pU>hfd vhììì, with as httle tiouble to your»clt лч possible. Fiom my first kiHiwlcdge of you, I percei \ ed that theie were several obstat le*> iu the way ot mv wishes for you. First, an aspect of thoughtfulness and care, that gives you the air of a tradesman, instead ot the dégagée address of a fine gentleman ; and, secondly, that mean, sneaking quality of bd&hfulncss, which loses all your consequence in mixed company, and makes you appear like a school-boy trembling under the ferula. To remedy the last defect, I sent you to Westmin¬ ster School, which has generally been an effec¬ tual cure for it; and I hoped an acquaintance with the world would wear off the first. In the next place, I sent you to Cambridge, not to ftudy the mathftmtks t which are the ton of that place at this time ; no, nor yet the claries, which are quite out of fashkm: and still less theology, or the civil ¿rø. '-»-no» Edward, my de¬ sign was to introduce you to the acquaintance of the young men of fortune and fashion there, and to pave the way to your preferment in fu¬ ture, by making aa isteresi, with thero. From ÜW follfpi, I brought you to the (apitai t and introduced yo* into tbe world, recommend¬ ing yoti to a pokte circk of my friends there. feuü I saw tha &mt trajees upon you; and my
о ггк uds saw il .Паск«— Tins »dl not de* fo? n man of the w us id, said a certain nobleman; this ward of yours has the air of a college pedant!—What shall ît do with him, said P —Cirry the young m m into the company of women of taste and spirit, who know life and all ihe joys of it, said my friend. It is there he must receive the polish, the ton, the finishing stiokes of a fine gentleman. <ìive hnn lord Chesterfield's Letters to his Son ; let him study them closely, thev will do for hnn more than all your schools and universities.—I followed my friend's directions. lie introduced me to Lady Belmour, as tlie person best qua¬ lified to give you this polisk so much want* cd, and so indeepensably requisite. I carried you into lier company, that she might observe % nur pei son and qualifications; she spoke better <>f both than I expected. ţ Saville ıs a fine young fellow," said she; *' he wants only to * onver&c with our sex, and to receive his finishing fiom us ; «send him to me for one summer, and I warrant I will give you a good ассошД of him." I accepted her offer with proper acknowledg¬ ments. She did you the honour to invite you wah a paity of hci select friends to her countiy vat; a favour you received with the coldness of u Caithiitwu triai ; however, you obliged mi
4 şo far as not to refuse it; and that gave me some hopes of you. All these advantages have I thrown in your way» Edward ; but it depends upon yourself to make a right application of them. You do not want understanding; otherwise I would not rea¬ son with you, and account for every step I have taken for your service.—I loved your father; I I am inclined to love you. I have no children, nor near relations. Spell this, and put it together, if you have sense and spirit in you; but if you disappoint and disgrace me, look to it, Edward:—Your father was a man of spirit; he lived too fast for his health and fortune;—you have not yet begun to live at u//.—Open your eyes to the happiness tliat awaits you:—the world and all its charms are before you: they invite your senses to enjoy them; and you ought to swim in your proper element. Lady Beimour's house is the seat of pleasure : ~-the goddess of Love resides there in person ; may she touch and polish your heart, and bless you-with her kindest infíuence!— If you want money, let me know it; and your draft upon me shall be answered immediately.—Attend to Lady Belmouťs advice and instructions, ifrite to me, or let me hear from her, that you are Д
5 all that she wishes you to be', and I will call myself your most affectionate friend and guar¬ dian, KlCIIARD MUNBEľf»
LETTER IL T1I15 REVEREND MR. JOHNSON TO EDWARD SAVILLE, ESQ. DEAR SIR, The pleasure I took iu executing tlie office of college-tutor to you here, left an agreeable im¬ pression upon my mind.—The ingenuousness of your heart, and the sweetness of y/our disposi¬ tion, engaged my affections to you at the time, and have made me interested in every thing that has befallen you since. I have made en¬ quiry after your situation and conduct, and have gained intelligence of every step you have taken since you left college. Your Guardian—good heaven! what a guardian for a virtuous youth! •—finding you have not acquired the ton of fashionable life, nor the spirit of vanity and dis¬ sipation, has sent you to Lady Belmour to finish your education, and to give you what he calls the polish of a,fine gentleman. I am told moreover, that you have not yet disgraced the character you acquired in lhe ВЗ
h rarly part »f >our hft, that you have not qiutt(*d the path of virtue, and followed that of vire: 1 tit that jou are in the bituation oí the young iieicuhs, balancing between Vit t m aud ľha- Stíľľ. Fiom these circumstances I have fonmd a wiih isnd a hope, that 1 might bull hi* of юте .Mrvicc to y<*u; by ¿hewing \ ou ıh« <huigrrs that Hurrouiul you, and pointing out the path v hereby jo» may ţ srape thtin. You are ihroMii upon the ibhiiid of CaKpso,-—.-lit orders her oyniphá to fepiead their tods foi you, and to extrt all their wiles to ensnare you: nor is the goddess hcThtlf without ttîtriîCtiO'.is» Sensual pleasure is an enchanted cup, it in¬ toxicates the heart, and weakens the reason; while the soul is in tlie state of inebnation, all its nobler faculties are suspended, if not lost. The heart is insensibly corrupted and depraved, it loses by degrees all its finest perceptions, and at length becomes wholly immersed in granness auri brutality. Oh, Saville, w ль your heart made ior such a state!—Docs not your homt-t heart disdain the bondage?-— ï caimot behe\e thoje chains bit easy on \ou, till you tell nie they do. If my conjettuies and hopes arc well founded, write to me, and either encourage or forbid my future adint nitions. Lady Belmour is the Рп<Ке?ь of Venus, the
7 ii» the roíwťuícnt friend of both sexes,—»Sht. keeps a g. .img-Hcmte all the winter in London, and is viMted by people of runk and character, such as tins uge allows '>f :—in the summer she cut ľi«^ on her business in the country,—there she prov Hies mistresses for youths of quality und toi tune, and husbands for girls of fashionable educM'ou and doubtful virtue. Old jointured dowagers purchase young husbands, and tooth¬ less dutuids vounc wives, through her media¬ tion;— Ал eoiidcM-cnds to accept a considera¬ tion tor her pi oil ¡gate services. She has me¬ thodized pleasure into a system, and conduct's her offices u ith an air of decorimi and regula¬ rity, that conceals the deformity of vice from its deceived and captivated votaries. Beware, oh beloved and amiable youth, of her seducing arts 1 .—If you have hitherto avoided, make haste to escape them. If you have been betrayed into the snare, break your fetters be¬ fore habit has ritetted them upon you. I will pursue you with my friendship and counsel, till you refuse me with scoi n and con¬ tempt;—till I am yvcll assured, that you have given up your nobler hopes and virtuous pro¬ spects;— tili you become the voluntary votary of vice and folly, I yvill call myself your afltc- tionate friend, servant, and monitor, J.ntvjs Johnson. в 4
s
LETTER HL MR. SAVILLE TO >JR. JOHNSON. SI It ; 1 и л ve been most agreeably surprised by a letter from my worthy tutor and friend Mr. Johnson, and still more gratified by the con¬ tents, upon which J have often meditated with renewed pleasure. Is it possible, that the qua« lities he imputes to me can have given me a place in his memory?—Oh no! It is his en¬ larged and benevolent soul, that, in pity to my youth and situation, has induced him to exteud his hand to my assistance, in order to extricate me from the snares of vice and folly. Thus do wise and good men give consequence to those they instruct, in order to lead them into the paths of virtue. A man who thinks himself unable to overcome temptation, will sink into inactivity and despondency; and he who is encouraged to ^xert bis ability, will do it effec¬ tually. Yes, my tutor, my friend, my monitor; î ac¬ knowledge the generous artifice yuu have used with me, which has answered your kind inten¬ tion; by giving me credit with myself, you have encouraged me to aspire to your friendship, To whatever motive 1 am indebted for it, 1 re-
9 cove it as a gift from heaven. I have ofh n wi&hed for such a friend, though I hardly dared to hope such an one would be granted me. You have held up the hght of truth before my eyes, have shewn me the dangers that surround me, and directed me how to escape them. I embrace your friendship with my whole heart?—Continue, dear Sir, your generous rares for mc; I will be accountable to vou for m ν future conduct; I will acquaiut you with eveiy step I take ;—-both my actions and motives shall be open to your inspection; you shall be to me as a second conscience, and your admonitions bhall encourage or restrain all my undertakings. What Sylph, or what Genius, gives yo. intelli¬ gence of every thing that happens to nc ?—Ft ib a good spirit, I am certain, because \t is one of \ out familiars, lie tells you the truth, when he compares this mansion to Calypso's island; und yet I think it still more re&emblcs the Isle of Cyprus.—The nymphs and swains here breathe tiiat air of softness and voluptuousness which is so contagious to all who encourage its infiucna , I have h^cito resisted the charm; but how loi _ I should have continued to do so, is unceitain. My heart, at times, seemed ready to sive v -ty; but you have held over me the shield uf Mi¬ nerva; the enchantment is dissolved, and I feel myself delivered.
ÏO As the first proof of that ingeniioumess, which indeed is the only quality I presume to claim as my oum, I send you inclosed a letter I have lately received from щ vìrtmus guardian. My heart rkes with indignation, mingled with contempt, whenever I think on him and his instructions to me. His company and advice misled my father into courses which brought upon him both shame and sorrow. Upon his death-bed, he severely repented the sins and follies of a life spent un- profitably to himself and others. I have often wondered that he did »ot aiier &is witt, which gave Ш& man the care of my person and for¬ tune, who ever since has been labouring to con¬ tai anate my mind with his own vile principles. God of his goodness gave me a wise and virtuous mother, the greatest blessing a child can re¬ ceive. Her precepts were the guide of my childhood, ars d her remembrance will ever be sacred to me» My raother was the riera» of my father's irre¬ gularities, and she died praying for his reforma¬ tion. She also prayed that i might be preserved from the contagion of a bad example. My father laughed at her frayets, and predictions? and pro» phtckx, as he then called them ; and for several years entirely forgot ť/,f?íi, aud the deet saint that uttered them ; but in the days of his kst skhtess they rmhed into his memory, tu hi» bitter griet
II and regret, and reproached him with his past conduct. He then spoke of my mother as a sn* perlar hing; he lamented his cruel and ungene¬ rous behaviour to her; he exhorted mc to follow her example, and to avoid İm own ; by this cir¬ cumstance, my opinions and principles received their confirmation. She was taken from me too soon, or she would have been my director and monitor to this hour. But to supply her loss, Heaven has sent me a preceptor and friend in Mr. Johnson ; by his ad¬ vice and assistance. I trust 1 shall escape tlie la¬ byrinth of vice and folly, into which Munden and his emissaries have brought me. I will tell you, my dear Sir, all that has passed here lately, if you can think it worth your at¬ tention; when you shall be acquainted with ell the circumstances of my present situation, you will give me your advice upon it.·—If you judge it necessary, I will immediately burst the bands that keep me here, and come to you at Cam¬ bridge : but I have either convinced or persuaded myself, that though I dwell in the land of vice and folly, I am engaged in the service of virtue ; you shall decide on this subject. Write to me soon; give me your advice, in* st rue t ion, correction; I will receive them with submission and obedience.-—Assure yourself of » 6
12 my eternal gratitude for your friendship and protection to, dear Sir, your pupil, friend, and servant, Edward Saville. W H ll ll l ll I I Hi l l . 11 ι и—и—и. LETTER IV. MR. JOHNSON TO MR. SAVILLE. ПЕЛЕ SIR, Your letter gave me great pleasure, for it has shewn me that you have entered fully into my intentions, and that you accept me as your friend and monitor. I shall directly enter upon my office, and my first act of it shall be to forward the letter you inclosed me for Mr. Munden.* I am upon the whole well pleased with it, and take it as a proof of your sincerity, and a secu¬ rity for the steadiness of your principles, since you are neither ashamed nor afraid to avow them, when you are properly called upon. I do exceedingly desire to know all that has be¬ fallen you at Lady Beimour's; and how it is pos¬ sible that in the regions of vice you can be em¬ ployed in the service of virtue. ' Yovlï ingenuousness bids me hope every thing
ш that is right; but, if you should have deviated from tbe strait path of <mftur f you need aot fear to confess it to me, for you will oud me an indulgent friend, and not an austere cor¬ rector. My curiosity is excited to know whether Ca¬ lypso is indeed the enchantress I liave heard her described—how &he governs tbe pupils of her academy, how she sustains her consequence with them while she lures them into her tods.— Write every thing that you think will be either interesting or entertaining to me, without re¬ serve.—Be assured that you will meet 'with in¬ dulgence wiierever it is necessary* with appro¬ bation yvhere deserved, with advice where want- id ; for I am, with truth and sincerity, Dear Sir, Your affectionate friend and servant, Jarvis Johnson*
LEITEK V. MR. 3ÍUNDE1* TO LADY BELMOUR. MADAM, I presume to acquaint your Ladyship with » circumstance or two relating to the saucy boy I lately recommended to your notice and favour»*
fé *-4 wrote to Ыт & fetter full of fatherly adrice and- 4$cctim ; but the young puppy sets me at nought—tells me he is шит tkan I, that my ac¬ quaintance are not U hi» taete, that he is de¬ termined to be his omt master, and to cîıoose his Qiw friends, li he continues to treat me in this manner, I will фт him mp f&r ever, and choose some stranger to be my hrir f instead of the sou of my friend, I beg t© know your Ladyship's opinion of Saville, and to have your advice how to proceed with him. He has sense eaougfc—learning more than enough— *qtirii tmd gencnmtp, bui alt in tlie wrong pîaces.—Everv canting, whining, unfor¬ tunate wretch has the power to draw his money from him ; but he Is frugal to '¿fault in every gentkman -Ше expenee.— Ие has the spirit to bid defence to h» èest friend* and the mauvaise honte in good cw^.vay* 1Ы haa no ambition, nor yet the softei passions, or at least he has never shewn any signs ef them. Whenever I go about to penetrate into his cbftracter, he foils me in the attempt, and turns my owu weapons upon me. î depend upon your ladyship's penetratioa to discover how he is to be managed, and to let me know it; and && you speak of' hhn> so t
î$ shall act towards him, for I kuow your Lady¬ ship's discernment, and I rely upon your judg- m< nt. lam, Your Ladyship's most obedient servant, ШТЬ л. j*.-«-.- _ as -m·. %«f ** m* *ь A **
LETTER VI. LADY BELMOUR TO MR. XDÏW. Mr. MiiKDBN may rest assured that Lady¬ Belmour has always iu view the object of his care and affection, and follows Ыт with her at¬ tentions; she sees no reason to despair of making him ex ery thing that his friend wishes him to ее. After all, men are very imperfect preceptors} it is not by reason and document tliat the polish of life is required. See what qylwerd or Ьшжгат figures, the youth step from the school and col« lege into the world t— It is fc^ conversing with our sex they become accomplished; we cultivate the heart, and polish tlie manners, ЬЫп who have had sense and spirit enough to shake of the fetters of mlgur prejudice** faav$ ack&ow* Iedged the advantages they bave derived кот us, and have endeavoured to exteud then* t» others. There have been schools of this kind
16" both among tho ancients and the moderns, Greece had her Mpam\ Ijeontium, and Thais.' The accomplished Alcibíades was an example of Пщ benefits of this society. Rome had her Fiiltâa*« and Aurelia's. And Fra^ * had the glory to stand alone among the той. ·*.<*, in the reviving and improitng upon these polite aca¬ demies. From tlie days of the enchanting Ninon щ there has been a succession of ladies who have employed themselves in polishing the manners of the youth, and cultivating their hearts—We are at this day aiming at an imitation of their taste and elegance, but we do it badly; we have lost our own predseness and ceremony,, but we have not yet acquired the naketê and nonchn* lance of our accomplished neighbours. How¬ ever, as all improvements are made by degrees, there is great reason to hope that we may in time acquire them. The ferocity and bluntness of this country is giving way to the delicacy and refinement of the continent ; our language is daily impro /ing and polishing, our ladies have an air of ease and freedom^ they throw off the primness and reserúe of past times, and the re¬ straints of rigid systems, which inspire illiberal sentiments and manners.—In this state of ш« poved society I aspire to have my name descend to posterity, as one of those women of spirit, who lend their hands to forward the efforts of
I?* others; to emancipate the youth of both sexes from the ignorance and prejudices of Gothic time» and manners. Your pupil wears a veil of shyness and re¬ serve, through which it is difficult to penetrate: —no matter; we shall lind out the way to mak« him throyv it aside. The traveller, whom the wind and storm could not oblige to throw off his cloak, was induced by the warm sun to cast it away.—We will awaken his passions, the ani¬ mating sun-shine of love shall warm his heart, he shall throyv away the cloak, and we shall se« what kind of a man there is under it. Do not be impatient,—Leave the event to me,—I will be answerable for the success—-I will tell you every thing that is material rør you ţo know. I am obliged by your confidence and esteem, and will approve myself, Sir, Your sincere friend and humble servant, Amelia-Sofhja-Wilhelmina Belmoub.
LEITER VIL MR, SAVILLE TO MR. JOHNSON. MY DEAR MENTOR, I will now discharge my promise, by giving you a faithful account of all that has passed
dS during my v isit here: when you have the whole story before you, you will judge of the nutiire of my situation, the dangers and temptations that surround me, and of my ability and in¬ tention to escape them. A? soon as the king's birth-day was past, I received a summons to attend Lady Belmour to her country seat I was honoured witli a place in her own coach, with Sir George Richmore and Miss Klford, with whom he has a temporary conneskm.— We found several couples ready-paired in the auk (if yon will allow me the expression), and waiting our arrival, for none came but what brought his mate, or expected to find one here— Mr. Morris and Miss Barnham, Ыт. Lew^on and Miss Marshall, Sir John Lacy and Bliss Wil* son.-There was also a certain Mr. Armstrong, who seemed to pay his homage to our Lady Governess, and a Miss La Nouë, who, as I have reason to believe, wa« intended for my partnert several other p&irs were expected·—Parties of pleasure of all kinds were proposed, when the reinaiuder of the company should arrive* They were in raptures of joy at our arrival ; her Ladyship welcomed us with equal politeness aud vivacity. My dear friends, welcome to the land of wit, love, and liberty! enjoy yourselve» in your own way ; be happy here, and / tuast be so.
Tîî«y chatted, laughed, dam И, ъппщ, end 1 1 it d by е\игу v* ny to sliow their w u and their happiness; I was the only person that seemed iiibcnbible to tlie pleasures around me. This mansion is large and conyenient; it be¬ longed to a West India merchant, who »ived n* the great a)ie for about fifteen years; then sunk into ruin and obscurity, and died in the il« ct. His wife died boon after; his children were minors ; his fortune is m the hauds oi his creditors; and Ыь affairb cannot be settled till his eldebt son comes of age, who is now but in his thirteenth year, The assigneeb let this house to Lady Belmour» and it suits her purpose ex* actly:—she can accommodate a great aumbei of visitors: she keeps several carriages, astable of good horses, and many servants j for she makes it a condition, tlmt her guest« shall bring none, but be attended by those of her own choosing;*—but there is every accommodation that can be wished for ease, pleasure, and luxury. Her ladyship is a fine and a graceful y\oman, about forty years, but does not с!юоье to be thought so far advanced,— 4 ' ancient Vkdlu has young graces"*-*fat, but not unwiehh, just " ť aimable embonpoint ; '—easy and pohte m her deportment, with some wit, moie satu e, and e\ery tashioimble accomplishment.
20 She has an air of freedom and assurance bor¬ dering upon voluptuousness: when she is not pkased, it is tempered with haughtiness to those who hà\e offended her: at other times she as¬ sumes the nost insinuating air and maimer, and when bhe tries to please she is almost irresistible. There is an air of freedom and levity, and yet not absolute indecency in the conversations that pass here after dinner and .supper. The morning, every person spends as he pleases ; some ride out, some walk, some read ;—the ladies make working parties, or sometimes mu¬ sical ones; there is a music-room with instru¬ ment, »fall sorts, and books ofthe mon fashion· аЬ 1л compositions. Here you breathe the air of affluence, luxury, and voluptuousness; there is every incitement offered to every one of the senses in turn; I re- sisted them, and was for some time merely a spectator of the scenes before me. Lady Bel¬ mour behaved with the utmost politeness to me, and seemed to leave me at liberty to amuse myself as I thought proper. When she found that I took no particular no¬ tice of any person, but seemed to be reserved and abstracted, and to consider the company before me only as subjects for speculation, she be«an her attack upon me in the most artful manner. She asked me how I liked the coun*
íl try, her villa, her friends, the men, the vu-mfn, and at last Мьз La Noue ? I ansueied her briefly and coldly: and to tbe last qup^tnm, χ ery util She laughed scornfully ;— L· that your wav of commending a fine gii!, Sır?·— -Ws ^aıtl í, I think hei a fine young woman.—She put up hu lip;— ľeihaps yon do not admire a Brunette? what bt^le of beauty ib most to your taste ? —It ь not complexion, said I, nor the colour of the luut, οι the eye, that makes a woman attract* ing. —What ь it then? said bhe, smiling. It is the tout ensemble, which 1ь not easy to describe.— Yery well, Sir, it is easier to feci than to descrdfe; is it not?—I believe so, Madam.—Well, Sir, go on,—1 am entirely of yor 1 Ladyships opinion- No, not entinly, for yon do not like Miss La Noué. —I did not ьау so, Madam,—Xo, Sn, but your behavioui docs. How can vou see a fine girl, dibengaged, looking at you with eyes that speak nothing hke disapprobation or disdain, and yet pay no homage to hei charms r She has wit and ¡»pint аъ well аъ/ш·/»; and vou would find her capable of convening, and entertaining you, ii von would make an effort tv) speak to her.—I hdw no doubt of it, said I; the lady deserves all that your Ladyship says of her. But why ¡»hould you w Uh me to be particular m my notice to hcr ? — I wish it / Ridiculous idea ! You are the fosti. La Noué does not want ad-
O (J
mii егь .«*-I ilare *ay not, Madam; but ï have no pretensions. Go thy way, Cymon! thou hast a form, but no animation. Some of the company came to u% and biokc off the con terence. From this day Cahpso and her nymphs ev¬ erted all the arts of their profession to allure me into the snares of Cupid; and finding them in¬ effectual to subdue the stubborn heart that ie* sisted them, tbey set the men upon me, who ex¬ ercised their wit at every weapon of radlcry and ridicule, but all in vain, I wrapt myself up in impenetrable rosei ve, aud baiììed all their ettempts upon me, I declined most of the parties abroad ; I can always amuse myself at home. Sometimes I retired mto tbe library to read, at others into the music-room, and practised new lessons upon the harpsichoid : buf these sedentary amuse¬ ments afifceted my health and spirits; I began to find exercise necessary ; yet I would not go out m the parties, but ro*o early rn the morn¬ ing, aod walked or rode before breakfast. In one of my morning rambles I made an ac¬ quaintance with a gentleman farmer who was walking over his grounds ; and upon further knowledge I &nd him deserving of my friend¬ ship, f will give you a hasty sketch of hir Ыь- tory* 5
23 His name is Franklin, a man of genteel birth and education ; he inherited an essUte of about fiye hundred pounds a year; he married, for 1ovc, a woman without a shilling. Tliey set out in a stvle much above their fortunes, and ran out of bounds, till they were involved in debt«* and difficulties. Ju«*t as they were on the brink of ruin, a relation of Mrs. Franklin, who took no notice of her w bib* a poor unportioned girl, hearing she was well married, left her afortune of five thousand pounds, which restored them to competence and happiness. Mr. Franklin paid off his debts, cleared his estate, too! ·* farm into 'us own hand", studied agriculture and œconomy, aud was successful in bis practice of them: his wife turned her thoughts and at¬ tention to the domestic duties and virtues with equal зиесеьа; in the course often years they are become rich, happy, and respectable.. Mr. Franklin encourages me to cultivate his friendship; he begins to lay his reserve aside, lie rallies me on my situation; but be has given me a serious warning of Calypso and her nymphs; and I have convinced him of my ho¬ nour and principles. He seconds your admonitions, and offers me his advice or assistance whenever I shall find myself to stand in need of them. ï often call upon him iu mv morning excursions, and w«
$4 seem to be more and more pleased yvith each other's company. You will often hear of him in the course of my adventures here. I will now conclude thi« pacquet, and bid you adieu for this time ; but you shall soon hear further from, Dear Sir, yours faithfully, EmvAKi) Savilu:.
LETTER VIII. Mit. SAVILLE TO MR. JOHNSON. SIH, I shall now proceed in my narration vvithout further preface or apology. From the time I became accpiainted with Mr. Franklin, I used myself to call on him frequently; and his con¬ versation was a resource from the chagrin I re¬ ceived in mv disagreeable situation. After I had been here some weeks, two ladies came hither in a post-chaise from I------—-, of whom I must give you a particular account. Airs, Crosby is a woman of fashion in exer y sense of the word.— -She is lately separated from her husband ; for what woman of taste and spirit can bear the insupportable fatigues and restraints of conjugal duties and employments, to which her cruel husband would have confined her ? But
25
:-he hm found the way to burst the fetters, and ι eco ver her liberty. Iler companion, a M5i>s Jones, of whom I bave mucii to tell you.—W r e were bitting at tea w hen thebe ladies arriv ed :—-Lady Belmour re¬ ceived Mrs. Crosby with open arm», and con¬ gratulated herself and the company on such an acquisition to their society. bhe looked very coldly on Mbs Jones, and just nodded to her; but her chaperon obliged her to alter her behaviour. Let me, said she, have the honour to recon¬ cile Miss Jones to her friend and patroness; she is now sensible that Lady Belmour always deserved that title ; and I know your Lady ship's gtiterosity and greatness of soul too well, to think you harbour any resentment against poor Sukey fur her misapprehension ; receive her once agam under your protection. At your request, my dear friend, I yvill, said mv Lady; and, ; f it is not her own fault, «he shall find me still her best friend. She then embraced the young lady, who had tears in her eyes (as 1 imagined) from the consciousness of having oifcnded her. She courtsicd low, but was silent;—we sat down, and returned to our tea.—There was m Mibs Jones's deportment something different from the female* 1 had yet seen in this house* с
there was a decency in her manners, and an air of melani holy diffused over her countenance, wiiich rendered her more interesting to me than any person in the society. I was disposed to scrutinize her person and character; but Lady Beimour's eye intercepted mine whenever it wandered towards her; and seemed to sav, — you have no business to enquire after that girl,— 1 was the more inclined to observe both her and tbe ladies who called themselves her friends.— They seemed to treat the young woman with an air of superiority; they called her Sukey, without any addition; she seemed dispirited and humbled before them. Lady Belmour and Mis. Crosby were proluse in their professions of friendship to each other, aud in compliments upon the great and supet юг qualities they both possessed.—The woids, greatness of soul — high sentimento— -enlarged ideai — liberal minds, &c. flew about, and were as readily accepted as if deserved; and perhaps more so, for true merit is modest, and fearful of taking too much to itself : however the conversation this evening was really more rational and agree¬ able than I had heard since I came hither, and I ventured to take я more than usual part in it. The next morning I rose earlier than the rest of the company, went into the music-room, and čiu down to the harpsichord, where I played 1
й7 for two hours, without any idea of being over¬ heard. At length ï spied a white hand and arni "fon mv left shoulder, and started. It was Lady Belmour herself who surpiued me.—She has a remarkably fine hand and arm ; it then looked so beautiful that I was tempted to pav homage to П.— 1 v. аз stopped by a violent bur&t of iauehlcr, tli.it cheeked me, aud made me recol¬ lect that the tempter was at my elbow.— C pon mv wo ''d, Su, I did not think \ ou were so grfrtt a proficient m muwie' —I felt my seli contused and uneasy at this lète a tête. But she : tliey cd me Ьч her eas\ and familiar chit-chat.—Sit still, Saville, &aid bhe, and obli ле* me wi*h «mother lesson.—1 did «ч». Slie complimented me.— What a pits, saui ^he, tint \ou hide your talents as assiduously as others display the m î I w ¡sh you were nunc commun'cative to your fiienda« for tlieir sake«, and your own. You are with people who knowhow to distinguish ment, Sn ; but you are so ι evened, that you will not sniler them to ï now ч our \ alue. Пег λ\ϊ and manner weie so i.binuating, that I could not avoid ans\\eriug hei politeness She framed, she tlattciod me ; ^he tiicd to jjain mv entées. î a¡KÍ coníideiue. She usktd me how 1 hked Мг\ Ciosby and Miss Jones. My iiot.ee of the lattei did not раьь unob^eived. I ап-
2$ ewered in general terms, but with seeming frank¬ ness. She seemed to wind about me in order to «ain access to my heart: I was aware of her, and was upon my guard. Uur conversation was interrupted by Mrs. Crosby. I was desired to play again, was again applauded and solicited, till more company came in and summoned us to breakfast. I resumed my reserve, but kept an eye upon the grand enchantress, in oreler to find out what schemes the was forming for me ; and yet at times my heart reproached me with ingratitude for her politeness and attention to me. This day was chiefly spent in conversation, and we had parties of cards in the evening. Miss Jones was silent and melancholy. The next morning I rose with an intention to ride to Franklin's before breakfast ; but, going into the stable, tlie servant told me the horse was lame. I determined to take the air, so 1 sauntered about the fields for an hour, and then came round into the garden-grounds, and from thence went into a pavilion, at the end of the pleasure garden, where I surprised a lady, as she did inc. It was Miss Jones; she was leaning her head upon her hand, and weeping bitterly. She was very much confused at my approach ; she rose up, and offered to retire. I begged cardon for my intrusion, which I assured her was
20 ucuďntrd. and in^i>ted on leaymg her a* I iound ht r.—Sir. said she, I brg a fayonr '»f you?—Of me. Madam ï What c.tu I do for yo ι ' -—it is, Su, tliat you will ha* с the go^dne^s n"t to mention уош seeing me hue, and still less how you unind in··.-— í will not, Madam, you may dt pt· nd upon me, I am com crned, M.* i m, to see litat you art not quit t happy. I pcict ivt<i it yesterday. I u.^h it vvus m.mv powtr to idh - viate your sonow4;— -Λία^Ι í aid s-he, tbf ar/sc of my distress cannot be alitxiattd. — S n t К it nay, said I; all human woes may b«· mitijaitd; I sincerely pity you, for I believe your d ist t evä mitst arise from xtrtuous motive*.—She covered her face with both her hands.—Oh! Sir, said t»he, I believe you aie too good for this house. If I dared to tell you«—but what right have 1 to tiouble you ? Dear Madam, if I can be of any service to you, do not scruple to trust mc ? 1 am a man of honour, and as such-------Dear Sir, ехеиье me if I ask you one question—Are you any relation or friend of Lady Beimour's "—-Neither, Madam. -«—Well, Sir, I think extremely well of you, for your generous pity to a stranger,—I am obliged to vour good opinion, Madam ; but what a man must he be who can see an amiable woman in tear?, and not wish to relieve her distress? Oh, Sir, you àia too good to me, You с 3
so mentioned distress arising from virtuous motives. I would not for the world deceive or impose upon you. I dare not rank myself with the good; and yet I can truly say that my distress arises from virtuous motives. But, Sir, the hour of breakfast approaches. I must not be seen with you. I shall be suspected of—I know not what ; and you will be ridiculed on my account; lot us separate : perhaps another time an oppor¬ tunity may offer for me to communicate the cause of my distress, and ask your advice upon it.«— You do me honour, Madam; will you meet me here to-morrow morning at seven o'clock?— She paused,—I will, Sir ; I think I perceive in you a man of honour and principle. I will meet you, Sir; but let us not go in together,— Good-morning, Madam, I leave you this in¬ stant.—I did so, and went round the outside of the garden, and came in at the great gate. E. S. — I ill mm —————
IN CONTINUATION. MY curiosity was raised by the morning's ad¬ venture, and my mind was employed the whole day in reflecting upon it, and in coujectures upon the subject of Miss Jones's distress, which I made no doubt proceeded from Lady Belmour's de¬ signs upon her.
31 Sometimes I fancied this confidence of Miss Jones was only a scheme to draw me into an engagement with her; a minute after, I smiled at the suggestions of my fancy, and reflected that we are as often outwitted by ourselves as by others, wheu u e indulge suspicious of any kiud. I wished impatiently for tbe hour when I was to meet Sukey ; if she xv.w artful, 1 was pre¬ pared to ЬаШе hers, or her patroness's dount upon me. I го*?с early in the morning. I hastened t.. the pavilion with a book in mv hand, and saun¬ tered about for near an hour before she came thither. .At length I saw her coming tovar«;* me with a downcast eye and timid aspect. When she began to speak, it was in a low and tremulous voice. Sir, said she, I am afraid you will think me very free, upon so short an acquaintance, to trouble you with my story. Madam, you honour me by your confidence ; I shall be happy to do you any service that ir* consistent with my principles, which are not exactly conformable to those of the lady of this hojusc. —That is what purzles me, said she : you seem to kuow Lady Beimour's character, and yet I find you with her society.—I came not hither by iucliua tion,. Madam, but at the desire of a getitleman who calls himself my friend. I shall c4
52 not stay here long ; but, w*hiLt I do, I am a spectator, and not an actor in the Drama that is represented here. Tell me, » without scruple, how I can serve you ; I am already inclined tö be your friend, and I believe your story will confirm me so. Indeed, Sir, said she, I want a friend. I will at all events tell you the particulars of my un¬ happy situation, and then you yvill judge whether I am most to be blamed or pitied. My father and mother were upper servants in two noble families; my father by their interest .obtained a place in the customs. Their income was sufficient with prudence to support their family iu a decent and respectable .manner ; but tlie babit of imitating the manners of their superiors, in the way of life they had •seen, made them go to the extent of their for¬ tune, and sometimes exceed it. They also re¬ tained a kind of servility in their behaviour, which led them to do services of every kind to those who had it in tlieir power to make them certată returns. My poor father became at length sensible of the folly and danger of such a conduct; he is now pining under heartfelt grief and remorse for what is past; but my mother continues to act upon the same principles, though her daughter's ruin is one of the consc- .queuccs of it. She boasts of the friends she has
53 made, and the conveniences she derives from it. This way of thinking and acting is among the obligations she owes to Lady Belmour. I was the first-born of this marriage. Lady Belmour was my godmother : if she had promised and vowed, that I should nonkip the pomps and vanities of the world, and sacrifice every thing to them, she bad been a faithful sponsor ; for every precept of hers was directly opposite to those of the Catechism. She inspired me with the love of dress and pleasure ; she laughed me out of that natural reserve which is given by Heaven to be the guard of female virtue. She taught me to des¬ pise unfashionable doctrines and persons; she carried me to public places, and shewed me young women, who lived in all the gaieties of life, without any apparent means to support them. She told me that handsome girls might always make their fortunes, if it were not their own faults. Thus educated, thus prepared for turn, she threw me in the way of young mon of high tank and fortune, who were enprineipled in all that regarded our Sex. I was gratified by thé homage they paid rhe ; I look to myself all thé merit their flattery bestowed upon mè; I was intoxicated with vatiity, or I neter could have believed that Lord С« " ■ ■ ..... !■■ would make me his wife, espe- C5
İH chdìy after I had been hh mistress. Иг- } or- suaded me to put myself under hi& protection ; and Ladv Bdmour secondimi hb de^ums, I tell a victim to them. liere she covered her face, and wept.— Л tar Madam, proceed İ said I. I pity von yvith mv heart and soul ; indeed you are moie to be pitied than blamed.-—She resumed her nan ative,- — \ transi« nt dream of pleasure succeeded; but I soon алоке to real mUcry. My weak heart, and pei sérted judgment, believed in promises of с tanai constancy aud nei o f a di ug love. Alas! hov/ common the deception! and how common the too late conviction! In two months the ardour of his passion abated ; in another ho grew tned of me, and sought a new object of hib dcpiav \i apjV tite. During his occasional absences, the mistress of the ho ase where I lodged lent me some books to read, for I complained of being too much alone : among these were some that opened my mental eye, and shewed me the misery of my ¿ltualion : I was struck with horror aud remorse, and unavailing penitence. I got acquainted with this good woman, and opened my beai t to her : she taw and pitied my distress ; she lent me other books that spoke of pardon and peace to the returning sinner ,
35 these 1 eagerly studied, and made them my con* stant nnpanions. Win n Lord ("«———*— rttuiiH-d, î jtttivcd hun with coldncr -э and dihgust. He ciesirtd an explanation of thb behaviour, and I ga\e Imu ,, ,», ., > ^ » ι л л ^^.i. ......, - * ti., i^,, ft » жхЛ ^Uen İlli UHU <ť5 11' Ulti JLH.H C\4fCt ' . "I. t<..V<»¿»í« *« at mv scruple^ and at my реши nee.—Sukc\, pay& he, í intended to tome Lo an explanation with \ou, but yo-i have prevented me: take courage, mv gulí these fancier will ч>оп wear oil. 1 will send Lady Belmour to comiort yu'., and to do the otfice of a friend between u". I am glad to find that you are as willing to part ps 1 am. Adieu, my charmer'.—-Si* sa\mg, he went fioin me, and in an hou after Lady Bel¬ mour came. She enumerated the advantage^ aiding ironi ^ueh connections as these ; sani» that men weie fickle creatures, but their lor- tunes weie convrment to us; that we should bear Willi their faults, and make advantage bv f nen weaknesses, for in them lay our strength and wisdom. bhe then acquainted me that Lord O" · ..........- had deposited a bond of live huiuhcd pounds in her hands foi my use. which would effectually comfort me foi tu- ю&ч. A few more such qţ/turs as thi«, my tkav, salii «she, will make sour fortune, mid <c\ you abo\e the world,
tâ í made no reply to her arguments, but onfv begged her to give me the bond.—-No, my child, not yet, said she ; you are too young and igno¬ rant to act for yourself. 1 will keep it for 3011 ; and when I see a proper time, I will either sur¬ render it, or employ it for your hervite. I demanded the bond, and said 1 had earned it too dearly. She laughed.—You ¡diali go with me into the country in the summer, and then we shall talk further on this subject, said she,— She Mi me in the sullens, as she called it ; and said, when I was in a better humour she would see me again. She called again two days after; she made me a new proposal, as she called it, and a settlement, from another party 1 had not yet seen. I refused it with disdain. 1 asked for my bond, and was again refused. I was angry; we quarrelled; she called me sauce¬ box, and left me in wrath, saying, she would see me no more till I knew better the value of her friendship. I resolved to le^ve my lodging, to sell all my clothes and trinkets^ and with the money put myself into business > but my ap¬ pearance gave suspicions of my character. I desired the mistress of my lodgings to recom¬ mend me to any lady of character that wanted a companion ; she spoke to a widow lady, who took røe upon her word, and I joyfully went to her house. í had not been there many weeks,
sr before Lady Belmour found means to inform my motectrcss of my late connexion with Loid (;«, ι ■■; m consequence of which she di<- mi«sed me immediately, vvithout examining mto the particulais of my story and situation. I kept up my spii its till this event, and then they forsook mc. I went home to my father's house almost in despair. My father was moved with my distress ; but my mother reproached me wilh ingratitude to La« 4 ν Belmour, and toki me I must ask her pardon, before she would le- ceive me to her favour. Mrs. Crosby soon after visited my mother, and joined with her to persuade me to \ı«ût Lady Belmour with her, and that she would иье hor inti uence with her to forgive me, and to restore my bond. This argument prevailed with mt to come hither, for I knew there was no other method to recover it ; and if I could prevail on Lady Belmour to give it me, I have now an offer of enteung into business, in partnership with a woman of character. Since I came hither, Lady Belmgur has hinted to me, that my rcconcdiation with her depends upou an implicit obedience to all her commands; und that she has expectations upon me, which will soon be further explained, and that will put it m my power to make my own terms with her.
38 I dread this explanation ; I know too well her character and employment, I am tearful of being exposed to new attacks; of dangyrs, and perhaps insults, in this place; in which tase I have no friend to protect me from Lady Bei¬ mour's poyver. I am resolved not to enter into any new connexion; if I should find myself in this dangerous situation, I will fly fiom it; if I could depend upon any friend to favour my cicapo, I .should be less apprehensive and more easy. I would not for the world engage you, Sir, in any contest or difficulty. I have told you nothing but simple truth ; I seek not to conceal or ex¬ tenuate my faults or follie? ; I thank God, I have seen them early, and am determined to avoid them in future, and to lead a life of so¬ briety and virtue; but I am disappointed of tho wenn s to put my resolutions in practice, and re¬ inam at prcbent in a very disagreeable and pre¬ carious situation. I am afiaid of otlnrs, and I am afraid of my.\r?f; lest eithtr intere st or plea¬ sure should tempt me t«j rttum into the path I have but just escapeo, and habit confirm me tbe slave of vice during пи life. Here Miss Joncs ended her nairative, and with the greatest diliidence waited my ылЦепее upon it. Icomiorted ami re-assurid her; puied her misfortune*, und connnended Iun vii tutui? resolutions,
3.9 Τ promised to be her fnená and protector» it case sì e should want my assistance. We «ера - rated uf'er having a^iced to behave with the same distance and reserve as httlwrto m com- pan\, and to coiumuuicate to each other eveiy thing that we could discover in legarci to Lady Beimour's designe, upcm either of us. Some days after these mcidents, thcie arrived tvo gentlemen in an elegant post-chaise, with naming liveries. On the first view of it the ladies exclaimed, It is dear Mr. Livermore î I iun out to see tins welcome visuoi ; when 1 saw step out of the carriage a figure that е\сшч1 such an inclination to laugh as I could haidly &uppres£. He was dits^d m the ga\est and mosi eflemmatc st)lo, with a person that setali hib oinaments at oeiiance. A hioad red face, embroidered with large pimples with white hcadb; avvide mouth full of yellow straggling U cih, with an aftected ¡mule upon it; а с1ишьу pti son overdressed, with an air and тадшег that Ы ggarb all description. He walked аь U he w as dancing ; he hoped whea he spoke : il any man had strove to render aí- fectation dettÁÍaüic, he would have mutattd hitn* .This Adonis wa» accompanied by a Mr. Allen, his parasite : by their reception, \ou would have supposed they w eie the most beautiful and amiable among the cluldicn of men.
4ο From the time this cher mignon arrived here, I observed Miss Jones's countenance wore a veil of deep concern. Lady Belmour watched every turn of her eye, and every look that passed between her and me. I snatched a moment's opportunity, to say to her,—Meet me in tht pavilion to-morrow morning at six o 7 clock! The next morning I went, to my appointment, by five o'clock, and sauntered about for an hour, which I thought as long as three. At length the lady appeared.—Alas! Sir, said she, I am in- %-olved in a new perplexity. This coxcomb Liver- more.—This Adonis, said I—Well, Sir, this ac¬ complished favourite of Lady Belmour and Mrs. Crosby, encouraged by them, has had the as¬ surance to offer me a settlement, which I have answered with proper indignation and contempt. Lady Belmour laughed, sneeringly,—Pretty airs, Sukey ! and to rne that know you !—Yes, Ma¬ dam, so you do, tö my cost, I am sure.—Saucy slut! And so you think to pass yourself upon that novice Saville, for a piece of virtuous com¬ position! I see your aim, and I shall cross it. Indeed, Bíädam, you are mistaken ; I have tìù design upon Mr. Saville ; nor he upon me.-^ That I shall know more certainly hereafter; but, in the mean time, pray, Malanı, how do you intend to dispose of yourself ?—If, said í¡ your Ladyship would restore ше the bond in
41 v -i'ir possession, I would employ it ш tiade y and l»*ad a life more suitable to my inclination,— 1 behrve you lie, child î said she, haughtily,—« No, indeed, Madam ; I am serious in this mtcn- ♦ ion.—-Then you arc a, fool, said she, and cannot decern your own interest : but, to convince you that I do not mean to rob you of your / "operty, J will tell you my intentions ; I am still morr? your friend than you deserve ; I am endeavour¬ ing to procure you an establishment for life. -Mr. Livermore has made you a noble offer; he will share his fortune with you, while you сал retain his heart, and settle two hundred a year upon you for life. You refuse his proposal be¬ cause you do not like his person ; foolish pre¬ judice ! or else because you have other views t which 1 perceive plainly enough, for 1 am not to be imposed on by your Magdalen airs. As soon as you are engaged in a new con¬ nexion, I will put the bond into your hands, but not befoie; fori will not put it in your power to reproach me for what is past, nor yet to expose me and my society of friends to the animadversion of the ignorant, the malicious, uor the hypocritical part of the world, by making you independent of me. Soon after, Mr. Livermore came, and with all his affectation and grimace declared a passion for me, mid renewed iiis proposal. To Iktv«
42 mentioned a virtuous motive of refusal, would have been to speak an unknown language to him, and have brought upon me the ridicule and contempt ofthe whole Society: í therefore told him, as plainly as I dared, that his persou was not agreeable to me,—Ah, Madam, s.tid he, am I then so unfortunate аь not to please you? There are those, that—Excuse my sincerity, Sir, said 1, but 1 would rather give myself to a ploughman, than sell myself to a prince.—He shrugged, sighed, bowed— Ah crudele, ingrato, tyranno! adio, mio Caro!"- He danced out of the room backwards ; and, though my mind was strongly agitated, I could hardly restrain my laughter till he was out of sight; but 1 have been serious enough ever since. You are very ingenuous, said L I am this moment thinking how I can be of service to you. Lady Belmour thinks there is an understanding between you and me ; let u^ encourage this notion, it will prevent her forming other con¬ nexions for either of us. I shall enjoy great pleasure in deceiving her penetration, and at the same time assisting you. I shall own myself your protector; under this character 1 will de¬ mand your bond of her; when you huve it in your pos&ession, you may r employ it as you think best. We will leave this house together ; you shall pursue your own schemes, and you
4-3 mav depend upon my friendship,, and further ubsistance, if necessary ; for it is incumbent on me to convince you, it was not merely curiosity tiiat made me tuke a part in yvhat concerns you. She looked down, bowed, blushed, mid hesi¬ tated ; at last she spoke,—Oh, Sir! you are too good and too generous, to dereive or impose on any person ; İ am infinitely obliged for your good opinion, and for the friendship you oifer me : but, alas, Sir! neither you nor I can impose on Lady Belmour : she is as cunning as Lucifer ; sometimes I think she can read yvhat passes iu the hearts of people. She will discover your ar¬ tifice, and will either contrive to separate us, or else she yvill endeavour to bring our supposed connexion to reality. 1 warn у т ои of it now, Sir, lest you should hereafter think me in any degree accessary to her designs,—-My good girl, said I, I am pleased with your generous frankness ; it confirms my intention ; only take your part m it, and I will take all the blame that happens to myself; give me your hand upon it.-—She did so,—Let iih begin our plan directly; yve will walk together in right of the house.—Oh, Sir, saia she, you are not aware of the 'angers of this scheme ; if wc are been together, Lady Belmour will have her plots against us.—Let her see us, said I ; let them all see us, and make their re¬ marks, it will forward my design.-—But, Sir, if
и Mr. Livermore should resent ?—I should be di* verted, and would make him an objeet of enter¬ tainment to all the society; but 1 know he dares not. She came reluctantly into my relíeme. I took her hand, and led her in sight of the house ; we were soon observed, and shewn to tbe rest. They called us to breakfast ; I led ber to tbe company. Wc had looks, nods, and winks, thrown at us from all quarters. Lady Belmour seemed in doubt whether to encourage or separate us. She rallied me ; I returned it. She called me Cymon, and asked me if that was my Iphigenc or my Sykia ?-*No matter, said I, so long as it is not my Urganda. —She put up her lip. Mrs. Crosby took my part; she made Lady Belmour laugh off her anger. These sober fellows, said che, when their hearts arc touched tbe first time, are dragons in love and assurance. Finding me steady and undaunted^ she wished me joy on the discovery that I had a heart. I thanked her ; and said, I hoped she would let tne have the credit of the discovery. *Thc r^st congratulated me and Sukey; she looked con¬ fused and uneasy. Mr. L"vermore looked disdainfully at us, and turned all his attentions to Miss La Noué', who received them graciously. After the first open¬ ing, they let us enjoy ovr conversations quietly.
Ф5 After this project of mine had taken place. ï took a part in several parties of pleasure, an¿$ mode Sukey my companion in them. Öne day that we had been on an excursion, Lady Belmour met us at our return with a note in her hand, yvhich she was reading,·—My sprightly lads and lovely girls, listen to me! You are all invited to a rural ball on Thursday next.—We all gathered round о. r, and begged to know to yvhom we> were obliged for this invitation. A gentleman farmer in the next parish, said our lady, Mr. A. Collins by name, is lately come to the possession of an estate of about two hundred a year, by the death of an old batchelor, his very distant relation. This young man has notions in his head, that he ought not to live in obscurity, but be known and make a.figure among bib new neighbouis; to this end he is going to call them together, to celebrate his birth-day: he has done us the honour to invite us among the rest, and sends this note, which I shall read to you. *' Mr, Andrew Collins presents his most humble " respects and compliments to my Lady Bel- " mour, and all the gentlemen and ladies be- " longing unto her good family, and begs they **' will do him the great honour and favour to " give him their company to a farmer's dinner,
46 *' supper, and dance at Oak-Hall, on Thuisday, ** August 20." Now what say you, my children? Shall we go and give the farmer a lesson of good breed¬ ing? Shall wc show him how to act his pai t on the stage of hfe, and initiate him into the mys¬ teries of the goddess of fashion ? what say you ?·— What your ladyship pleases, was the general answer.—Well then, í say, let us go. I foresee much amusement, we shall meet there some of the saucy small genti y , who have had thcimpei- tiueuce to decline our society ; we will moitiiv them by our pohteness and hilantv, and we «-hall see some fine subjects to excicise our wit and Ыщюш upon. G и Is, wh tit ьау you to a gentle¬ man faimei ? ıs there any ot you that will «-et your cap at bun ?—Yes, I will, said Nancy Lb- ford. I elo not gwe my consent to that, said Sn George Richmore, her paramour; 1 cannot spai г Nancy this bummer, wluitevei 1 may do the ne\t. Be quiet, Sır Geoigy, said my lady, you shall nc t spod tbe girľs marriage; thou shalt have him, Nancy, if thou wilt, and 1 will manage it fpr fine. I know a person that would suit tho J armer better (looking at my friend bukev); buí Fhe bas thought proper to Later for herself, so I bhall leave her to her fate; but enough of this
47 * kind. Well, my boys and girls, hold yourselves in readiness against Thur&day. As yve walked into the dia wing-room, I said to Sukey Jones, So the poor farmer is already disposed of?—Aye, saitl she, and it might have been ma fottune, yuu iitul, it 1 ha'! occu more obedient.—Well, said I, let them go on at their peril ! All the evening after, we practised cotillions, aud other dane« t. m order to ыпрп/е the coun¬ tiy tolk at tanner Culhi^'- assembly. The morning after I ro -е eailv, and rode to Mr. Iiaiikhn'^. lie kindly lcpioached me witli ш\ long absence, and piezul me to stav and bleiktast w ith him; at Ыь lequtst I sat down with hnn and his faublv. lib wife is amiable ami obhuu»; bis (hilditn have the юье of htaltli upon their cheeks, and the smile ot in¬ nocence and peace befutni* ь their featuit s. í eiijoud the deai domestic circle, and partook ot tlieir happint ч Аь we weie sitting at the table, a gentleman came m v\hom I had ntvor öcen beiore. He came toiwaid m a genteel and familiar way, sa) mg,— Sit still, nxy good friends ; no ceremony with me, 1 insist, Mi. ГгапкЬп, I rejoice to see you well, and happy yvith your amiable family. ľraukhn шье, and took his hand ; Welcome, tltrice welcome home, dear Mr. Selb) ! I hope
ÍS ytm arc now come to fix among us!—I am, Sir : 1 have brought my happiness home with me, and shall have nothing to carry mc from you again.—You are then married to Miss Bennet: — No, I am not yet so happy. Our de..* mother wished us to be married at our owu village, and 1 could not refuse her any thing, but I hope it will not be delayed much longer.—Is Mrs. Ben- net to live with you at the parsonage ?—No, my friend, she and Miss Melcombe will reside at the house I purchased lately, and be our best neighbours; and your family 1 reckon as the next to them in our estimation.—I see a card upon your table ; have 3ЧШ not had an invitation to Collins's ball next Thursday ?—Yes; and so have you, I suppose г— Л г ои are right; and the ladies, are not they too invited ?—Yes, certainly; but they will not go, nor I neither.—And why, Sir ? —-Because Lady Belmour and her gang are. to be there; the foolish fellow thought he gave himself consequence by inviting them. I shall not carry our dear little girls into such company. —Take care of what you say, Sir, for this gentle¬ man is one of Lady Belmour's family.—No, surely !—Yes, certainly. But do not be frighten¬ ed : he is my friend! This is the gentleman whom I mentioned to Mr. Butler, your curate; and whom he mentioned to Mr. Jarvis. Say no more, Butler has told me all. Franklin, 3
vou mii^t inti'odu'C me.—1 rose, and Ьог/Ы, Franklin took a hand of each of us, and joined them.—Sir, said 1, 1 shall be happy to be of your acquaintance, if Mr. Franklin will answer lor nie. —Yes, said he, I will be your god-father to this gentleman, our rector ; and the worthy suc¬ cessor to our late excellent pastor, Mr. Bennet,— In the course of a very agreeable conversation it appeared, that Mr. Butler was the person who gave Mr. Johnson intelligence of the situation of one Mr. Saville, who resided at the island of Calypso. This circumstance set aside further ceremony, and in an hours time we became friends, and familiar ones too. I left this company with extreme reluctance, and they were as un willing to part with me, I tore myself away, aud came home but just in time for dinner. Lady Belmour interrogated me like a school¬ boy, and I made her saucy answers. My friend Sukey desired me to testify, that she knew nothing of my absence or return. I told her, I did not hold myself accountable to any body for my mo¬ tions.—LadyBelmour drew up,and looked stately. In the evening another coxcomb arrived here, LordS------, who paid his homage to Mrs. Crosbv. After this ball is over, you shall hear from mc o¿um; for this time 1 bid you adieu. Your?, faithfully, ι? Iv. Saville.
50
LETTER IX. ма. JOHXsox то mr. saville. I thank you, my dear Sir, for your communi¬ cations; the sincerity with which you paint every «motion of your own heart, as well as others, is truly amiable. The former part of your conduct is unexceptionable; but excuse me if I doubt the prudence of the latter. The scheme which you have so hastily formed, and begun to exe¬ cute, is attended with much danger to yourself, and may probably lead you into tlie labyrinth which you have hitherto avoided ; and give oc¬ casion to those who have set snares in your way to triumph in their success. Miss Jones is, by your account, an amiable young woman ; her modesty and ingenuousness have more charms for your untainted heart, than all the factitious graces of her competitors. This game of playing at making love generally ends in good earnest; I am doubtful whether this precaution will come in time to be of service to you. Be not, however, frightened at my remon¬ strance; tell me the worst that has happened, and I will advise you how to make the best of it, for you may yet recover, and be the stronger for your fall.
Òì I could say much on the subject, but 1 will wait your reply. If you are not fast bound in those soft fetters which seem light till you want to cast them off, leave Calypso'» bland, a ι. d hapten to your sincere «jid affectionate friend, Johnson.
LEITER X. :¿a. swiLi.l· то ма. Johnson. On* Wednesday, two WW members of our society- made their first appearance here, a Mrs. Watkins i nd a Miss FreewilL The former, a little deform - ed ligure, w ith all the affected aii s and graces that render beauty itself disgusting: she vv а ч patched md painted, trimmed, flounced, and furbelowed, till, as Tarquhar expresses it, you could not-see her head for her tail. The latter, apert, lively hőiden, just broke loose from a boarding-school, with so many natural charms, and so many ac¬ quired graces, that it was not easy to distinguish between them. There was, however, an attrac¬ tion about her, and I felt a degree of the mag¬ netism, till reason called me to account, and told me they were only sensual attractions, and that she had none for a cultivated mind. Before the arrival of this young enchantress, I was actually debating with myself whtthtr Susan Jones would not be an agreeable cornpa- D 2
52 liam ior me. I perceived in her a kind of pru¬ dery, more pleasing to me, than an open attack upon my heart; she looked as if she wished to please me, and yet feared to please too much. In the moments of cool and sober reflexion, I disdained the vile suggestions, and one glimpse of a retrospect yvith you, my dear Monitor, put them all to flight. My first interview with this lively girl turned tlie scale on her side ; my heart seemed to yvant only an object to fix its affections. Miss Free- yvill distinguished nie early; she enquired who and what I was. Lady Belmour introduced us to each other in form : she seemed to wish we might like each other; she spoke well of each to the other; and' told me that Miss Freewill had a very handsome fortune. I understood that this νουη" hőiden had eloped from the lady under vyhose care her guar¬ dian had placed her, and had taken her first btcp into life under the auspices of Mr. Wat¬ kins, who had brought her to Lady Beimour's, in order to introduce her into the best company. This fair lady pointed the artillery of her eyes directly at my heart. I perceived her attack, and was upon the defensive. Lady Belmour whispered me—Oh Saville! what an insensible wretch thou art! here were a girl worthy of the bornage of thv heart, which thou hast surrender-
53 ed to that unanimated prude, Sukey Jones.—I was disconcerted; but, recovering, I said, My heart refuses the election of another, it will choose its own mistress, and be its own moni¬ tor,—Saucebox I said she, be more civilized, or I shall give thee up to tby fate.—Notwithstand¬ ing the airs I assumed, I was not easy with my¬ self. I fnűnd myself exactly in the situation of the young Telcmachus, in tlie Island 'of Cyprus. Telemachus thought on his Mentor, a* one departed to the Elysian fields, and this encou¬ raged his weakness, as being freed from the re¬ straint of his admonitions: but I thought on my living Mentor, and it strengthened my résolu* tion, which before was in a tottering state. These reflexions awakened my mind, and put me upon my guard both against myself and those around me. The young enchantress seemed to take plea¬ sure in teazing me; the rest of the company took the hint, and encouraged her to persevere in doing so.—She asked Lady Belmour, Can Mr. Saville sing? can he play? can he talk?— They enjoyed my embarrassment. After dinner we all went into the saloon, music was calk d for—Can Mr. Saville dance?—No, said Lady Belmour, he can do nothing that lie is desired or wished to do; do not give yourself any trouble about such an insensible creature, my dear Mis$ d 3
¿H' FreewilL—Mrs. Ciosby rallied me upon my want of courage to ansyver so fair a challenger. I start ч1 up, bowed, and presented my hand to tlie lady. I had the good fortune to acquit myself to hers and the company's satisfaction. Tiie Syren danced charmingly. Several minuets were danced. I performed a second with my friend Miss Jones, who seemed pleased with my attentions. Miss Freewill tossed up her head with an air of contempt, for Sukey's minuet would not do after hers: but I remembered my situation, and thought it safer to contim.c my notice to hex. Ľ ly B* hnour commended my dancing.—I hope, said I, I have convinced your ladyship, and the company, that I do not always refuse their commands,—-You are a strange creature, said she, you can please if you will, but you are an humourist, and are not to be advised. I sup¬ pe te if I should call upon you to-morrow even¬ ing to dance a minuet, you will refuse me ?— Nu, Madam, I will not, if you give me that lady for my partner.—Well, said she, that is some¬ thing hke; 1 shall try you.—In the evening I was called out to a person who wanted to speak with me. Tt was Mr. Franklin's servant, who brought a letter from his master, which he was ordered to deliver to none but my own liando llie contents as follow;
òò
BEAU SIR, WE are informed that Lady Belmour intend** Mr. Collins the favour of recommending a part- ner for life, as well as for to-morrow evening, oí which you dropt a hint aho at our lust meeting. It is resolved^ on опт part, to v^arn him of bis danger, and to assist him to еьсаре it. The principal reason of my giving you thi. trouble is, to inform you that there will be mm*' grotesque figures at Farmer Collins's ball к» morrow, who are not entirely niikuovvu to yon, but you are desired not to 1-now, nur to j ·■ ■ at them, nor their bus.ne^ 'vi*, wer tv· pu¬ tite least hint. Perhaps there may be of this party son.f country girls, who might compare with any of Calypso's nymphs ; we will allow of your curio¬ sity in respect to them, for you cannot discover more than you know. If you behave to our satisfaction, you may- stand a chance to know and be known to them hereafter. So wishing you an agreeable partLer for the evening, I remain your fa'thful friend, and obedient servant, John Frankliv. Wednesday Afternoctt. ï put my letter carefully into a private pockci, and returned to the company: they were inqui- 1» 4
30 -jí.u, but í «yad( f* their 'pifien·». Mlŕ^Tiee- v* tli /út tid with me t\idc iitly, and htr foraard- ntbs -ла; the only «-bicld ogt.urst her attraction' To ay oíd the danger of her e\cs, I directed my attentions to Mibs Jones, who was treated rather cavalierly on my account ; í ďmccd with hei till Mipper-timc, aftei which we broke mio par- We sepaiated tarly; and yvent to our respec¬ tive apartments; icservmg ourselves for the monovr, «esa 1 ,, ι ..... gg ï tha WK you, my dear paternal friend, fojr your wise and seasonable admonition, it came in time for me; and yet it might have come too late, if something unforeseen had not interposed between me and the dangers you foieôaw. I have a long story to tell you, but must re* late ail the encumstances in the order m which they happened. I will begin with the rustic hall, of which I piomiscd an account. When yve ai rived at Colimas we were «>hcwn into a large old-fashioned v aiuhcotttd hal', well lighted, by а contrivance of fixing bw oj day all iound the room, and putting t andh s into them. Thcie was a great number of ouUu plank » lai 1 aci«>ss t haus at (on^eiiiont tĽ>Unu>, so as to make se its for all th« 1 company. 'lh»¿ accommodatioí , th'n^h r six, v^e ϋίΛ«
57 ш». nt. Bound every candle socket (¡и I may orii it) was a wreath of green, intermixed vvitn flow« rs, which had a goud effect. Our arnval seemed to put the house in a bustle; our best came and paid his compliment«, and ack.'.ow- ledţîed the honour th.it was dnin· huu, m a manner courteous», though awkyvuid. Ilo w\:s dieted in a handsome suit of betond niournm*ţ, and his hair very tolerably dressed, for which purpose a hair-drrsser was fetched from tbe tou n ofl -------; silk stocking-!, and every article of his dress in a sty le above hi* situation, and indeed ise looked as if he thought it added much ίο his cor.tequenre. After tbe first compliments, Lady Belmour, with the most polite ond insinuarme air and manner, took Collines hand lyvhkh was none of the bofte^i). and with ihe smile of a goddess *'iid, My dear Sir, will you give me have to iccommend a partner to vou for this evening ?—Collins bowed—lb-shed—he-n ited. <—1 saw iu a mom* nt that tt e ¿int had he* i n given.—Ma— M: — M ad urn— s ud he------- í — i— I—have consulted a friend who understands these matterà better tnan I do; and ! о has told nie, that it is custu'iu iy upon th-^e recamou*», to change parteers evi r- timet; and I intend, if youi Ladyship hus no objection, to hdlow his direction?—By all me«m.s, ansAcrcd oui 1 ady- .ship.—The jest of the company encored, By all I» 5
,ί ^ η pans.—»But Sır, said she, will you not intro¬ duc** us to tlie rest of your company ?—Madam, said he, I will bring them to you, for our par¬ lour is too small now the company is encreased. —die went out, and in three minutes returned, followed by a numerous company, composed of all the principal farmers, with their wives and daughters; spruce tradesmen; and small gen¬ try in the neighbourhood. We saluted them in the politest manner, aud desired them to be seated. Collins, by the assistances of his/Wen«? (whom I shall introduce to you by and by), acquitted himself very properly as master of the house., and the ceremonies also; the music was called for, a very decent band ; they played a piece or two by way of prelude,, and we were preparing to dance, when a knocking was heaïd at the out¬ ward door; it opened, and two couple of stran¬ gers made their appearance; the women were masked, the men painted and disguised; one seemed a sailor, the other а farmer of the lowest order. The latter came forward, and made an aukward bow before he spoke.—Hearing, said he, that Master Collins had a feast on this day, we made bold to come hither to see the enter¬ tainment, and to congratulate him on the in- €rease of his fortune. My name is John Ви1Ц my comrade's, Sam Bowling; these girls are ou^
¿9 sweethearts; that is enough to say about us. For the rest, we must trust to Master Collins's hospitality fur our welcome. Collins welcomed them with an air of ease aud freedom, tliat shewed he had been advertised of their visit. They took their places among the farmer's fami¬ lies. Tlie seeming farmer made a sign to Col¬ lins, and he ordered the music to play a minuet, Collins stept up to Lady Belmour: he begged that she would do him the honour to open lus ball, and to take out a gentleman whom she thought proper for her partner. My I*ady looked astonished at the politeness and propriety of tliis address (which I plainly understood as a part of the lessou he had been taught) ; she answrered, Then, Mr. Collins, I shall take no other than yourself. He bowed to the ground, took her handj and led her down with a very good grace, ¿md looked less abashed than could have been expected. But wot you well, the youth liad been in training a month before, under an itine¬ rant dancing-master, and was prepared to ex¬ hibit his person in a minuet, to the great asto¬ nishment of all his friends and neighbours» who stared incessantly, and could hardly believe tlieir own eyes. Collins walked his minuet, for it could not be called dancing, but seemed in continual fedr of blundering : my lady looked like the goddess of ρ 6
ease tmd plenty, and moved very grncefully. Any bodyi unacquainted with her character, must hťrve been prejudiced in her favour. She t>ehavcd with such politeness to Collins, as helped hhn through the part he was acting; and wbich he performed better than could be expected; he handed mylady back to her seat with treat applause; the poor fellow puffed and blowed, and wiped his face; he had worked him- "self into a violent perspiration, and it was some minutes before he recovered his voice or his courage. When he was able, he asked my Lady to tell him who should be taken out, and he should take it as the greatest favour she could do him. She was pleased with the ofïice, and called out Lord S ....... and Mrs. Crosby; they danced a very good minuet ; Sir George Rich- more and Miss La Noue ; Mr. Morris, and Miss Elford. Mr. Livermore and Mrs. Wat- iins! never did I see a couple more completely lidiculous ;* a smite or a simper sat upon the faces of the whole company. Mr. John Bull laughed without fear or ceremony; I edged towards him, to take a nearer notice of him.— Neighbours, said he, those figures there are a fine gentltman and afine lady f they are of use· to those who can observe what they see, for they make fashion and affectation as odious and con* temptibie as they ought to be. Look at them,,
6t and then you will learn to despise them, and such as imitate them !—I approached him; Have a little mercy, farmer, said I !—No, said he, I will have none, I am here, like the Clown in tlie old comedy, to point out folly and to chastise it. Look to yourself, young gentleman; if you de¬ serve my lash, you shall feel it,—Indeed ! said I. I will then- look about me, and know my company.—Be quiet, Saville,, said he, observe your directions, and get ayvay to your own com¬ pany.—I yvas about to reply, when I heard my¬ self called out.—Lady Belmour said, 1 noyv ex¬ pect the performance of your "promise.—With pleasure, said I; and immediately took out Miss Freewill, whose face glowed with apparent satis¬ faction. She danced capitally; I did my best, and yve yvere warmly applauded.—This minuets said Lady В —, makes amends for the last, in a whisper to me.—1 bowed, and yvent back to my friend John Bull.—Will you do me the favour to correct me, said I ?—Go your way, and do not be vain, said he.—I yvas again called ayvay to join in a cotillon, which was not too well per¬ formed ; after yvhich I went in search for the far¬ mer ; but, iustead of him, I met with the sailor. ft —lie took my hand; What cheer, brother ?—I do not knoyv yet, said I, till I am better ac¬ quainted yvith my company,—What, said he, are you so pleased with the farmer, that you have 1
62 nothing to say to his companion ?—Not till he has introduced me to him, said I,—Avast there ! I am his kinsman.—What of that?—You need not be ashamed to shake hands with a sailor; mind that, brother: perhaps I could shoyv you a tight little brig under my care, as well worth your attack, as any of those fine-rigged frigates there, with all their colours flying.—Perhaps so, said I; but, if I remember my instructions, I am forbidden to enquire too much.—You are very obedient, said he ; perhaps it was only designed to whet your curiosity. It is true, they are not to be gazed on by profane or vulgar eyes, but that should excite you the more.—You deal in paradoxes, said I. Show me to the rest of the company!—Not yet, said he; but when the fine folks are set into dancing, I will make a signal, and you may follow me out if you think it worth your while.—I shall expect it impatiently, said I.—While we were speaking, the forms were re¬ moving, and they were preparing for country dances. I saw Lady Belmour in conference with the farmer, who seemed not to spare her any more than the rest of the company. I got near enough to hear them, and observed that she had the address to elude all his arrows of wit and sa¬ tire, and retried them with stiperior courtesy and politeness. I heard him say—The deuce is in the woman ! Will you neither fight uor fiy ?
6S —Neither, said she, but I will stand my ground. I am sure that you are something above your appearance, and I will take my revenge on you for your impertinence, by commanding you to dance a minuet with me,—1 dance ! I play tbe monkev! Noti, trulv.— -liai kee,friend,said she; you must cither f ght orßy, in spite of your wit and satire. As a gentleman, I can take your reproofs, and respect your -intention; but as a cloun, I cannot submit to them, but will desire ьоте gentleman here to turn you out of the room: so now you know the alternative.—There is none, said he; í find myself obliged to accept your challenge; I respect your wit and polite¬ ness, and would be amongst the foremost to pay homage to it, if your heart were as good as your exteriors,—She bit her lip, and bade him caU to the musicians to play a minuet. I was all astonishment, and they soon had a large circle round them. The farmer danced in cha¬ racter, and made some extraordinary gesticula¬ tions; but at the conclusion he assumed the gen¬ tleman, and making a bow, thanked her ladyship for the honour she had done him, and at tliat instant I recognized my friend John Franklin in him. He came to me soon after.—! have made your governuess feel my lash;, and I should have said more to her, but her politeness checked me, and
elv her wit over-matched me—You are the first character here to-iught, farmer, said 1 ; but I am afraid you will become too remarkable, and be obnoxious to the displeasure, and peihaps the revenge, of some people here.— f fear no¬ thing, said he, my motive ib mv support; I came hither to keep my countiy neighbouis írom being dazzled by the fahe glare of faslron and folly. I have bhevvn them the reverse of the picture, and tbey look upon your lady Belmour with the contempt she <le-erves,—And do you think you are not known ?— í care not much, said he; but she and her crew don't know me; nor you of course,—'l here you are mistaken, said 1. You are my friend Frankhn.—Hush, said he; go to your company, or í will be even with you.— I give you leave, said I.—What tine girl is that you look out for your minuet ? ís ihat y our Miss Jones?—N', said I; it \i Miss Freewill; how do you like, her?— Ы.е dwnt еь too well lo pka«*e me, said he.—How :s lh<4 explained'—I would net for the world that л ntit-frcis, a sistir, or a daugh¬ ter of mme, danced so will.— And why so?— Because ¡die mast have lost the first bin a of virgin modesty, befoie she could exhibit 1ич- per¬ son to tbe utmost adwmť'gť. — Л tuicewìth mo¬ ralizing, said 1, I long to know your tnend the sailor, and to sec the girls you have m e barge. —You shall see tliem in due time, Savillt·;,
but nut go now and take a partner, the dance is begun. I saw Miss Jones without a partner; I went directly to her, and yve danced through it: after it was finished, í saw the sailor waving his hand¬ kerchief upon his stick. I excused myself to my partner, and followed him out directly, He 1Ы me into a distant room, where was Mr. Sel¬ by, Mr. Franklin, and the two lasses in mask*. I saluted them, and they welcomed me.—1 yvith you all success, my friends, in your laudable undertaking. We have succeeded, said Mr. Sel¬ by; the young fellow knows his danger, and is aware of it; and the good people of tbe village know how to estimate the fine people at the hall. You have done more than this, said I ; you have taught Mr. Collins how to acquit himself properly on these occasions. But leaving this Hihject;—Have I not a right, Mr. Franklin, to expect that you should gratify my curiosity, v. Inch you hase evidently intended to raise.— Explain yourself, snid Mı. St lhy.— Itisi that must explain, said Mr. Franklin; but first let me introduce yon to one who longs impatiently lo take your hi' inj. —So saying, he called back the sailor who was going out at the door: Sam Lihot ; «onn 1 hither rust! When instantly the sailor e.nne, and oíľeied me his hand.—This yui.Lg man, í ñJ 1·Ί;η Л δ, ь а ктчпип of mme,
66 who is desirous to be better known to Mr. Sa¬ ville. He is realty a sailor, as I am a farmer ; so that we can hardly be said to act a part in the Drama, for the characters are our own. We saluted in a friendly manner, and I then said, Still it remains to introduce me to the ladies. I expect that you make me amends for tlie suspense you have caused.— Now comes the explanation, said Franklin; I do confess that I have excited Mr. Saville's curiosity, but it is you, Sir, that must gratify it. I have given him leave to expect an introduction to our two girls here. Mr. Selby laughed. Surely there needed not so much ceremony to introduce him to two country girls, whom he must think unworthy of his notice, after the FreewiU's and Jones's who are contending for it.— -Spare me, dear Sir! said I, I profess myself an admirer of beauty, when adorned by virtue and simplicity of manners. JDo not prejudice these ladies against me; I am no favourite of any ladies here, nor have I any favourite amongst them, but I aspire to the favour of the worthies of the sex, and disclaim all other intercourse with it.—Mr. Selby smiled: Hear him, ladies; hear him! This is Mr. Sa¬ ville, whom I have told you of already. Sir, this is Miss Bennet, my wife elect; I mention this circumstance, that you may guard your
67 heart,—He laughed at this precaution, and then unmasked the lady, and shewed me a very smart and agreeable brunette; with an intelligent eye, and an arch smile, that said, I can be a wag upon occasion ! I begged her to think favourably of me, notwithstanding the company nhe found sne in. She courtsied gracefully and silently» Then Franklin took the other lady's hand, and led her to rae.— This, Sir, said he, is Miss Sophia Mel¬ combe, Miss Benneťs foster-sister, and tbe sister of her heart, who honours me with her company under my protection this night. She seemed to \mmask reluctantly; Franklin assisted her, and disclosed to my eyes the loveliest maiden they ever beheld ; a fair complexion, dark blue eyes» with long eyedashes; auburn hair, inclining to the chesnut; a smile that might have disarmed a tyrant, and such dimples as Love himself might point his arrows at; an air of the most perfect modesty, without any mauvaise honte; she looked intelligence, 'clicacy, and sweetness. I stood surprized like another Cymon, and could now have told Lady Belmour that I had really found an Iphigenc. I gazed so intently, that I paid my compliments aukwardiy, and with some con¬ fusion. She blushed at my gazings, and seemed to w ithdraw from my notice. I recollected my¬ self, and asked her to honour me with her hand in a country-dance.—No 5 Sir, said she, not after
such dancen as you have engaged this evei.mg.— I hope thb will not hinder m,j, Madam ?— No, Sir; excise mc, I bhall uot dance at ; 11.-— í ara very sorry foi it. I m. de the same offer to Miss Bennet, who also declined it verv pohicîv» They both spoke in praise of M its Freewilľs dancing, and said it was pity so fine a young idd·/ should have fallen mto such company. I p greed with them —Why, said Mr. Franklin, don*t you warn her r ť her danger ? does your knight-errantry extend no farther than to Miss Jones ?—I do not deserve that reproach, said I ; the case is very different. Miss Jones came hither against her inclination ; Miss Freewill came of her own accord, nay, èloped from her friends to come; the one is trying to escape the snares set for her, the other is running blindfold into them. To warn her, would be to rüse a hornet's ne4 about my cars. -—You say true, «ţaid Mr. Selby; but if that young l^dy is voi uncorrupted, one would w ish to bave her from rain.—Let the tnrmcr pve Ler а hint, said I; his assumed character will war¬ rant so great а liberty. — í will find an opportunity to do it, said he, ш the course of the evening,— Mr. Collins came in at this time ; he looked round mm, and was surp'ized to s^e me there.— He bowed. Sir, said be, yen are enquired after in the ball-room.—Mr. Selby said, This gentle-
mau ь our tuend·— Then, síid Mr. Collins, I may bpctik before him. Pray, Sir, where shall y\c have oui cold collection ? There are none of the pui Inurs bi¿ enough for the company. Let a tabk be :*pitad in this room, said Mr. Sclby, and let them rome m pai ties, a feyvat a time ; that yvdl be much better than the parade of a supper.— Л'егу \tell, said Collins, it shall be so then,—-He then appioached the ladies, and asked Miss Melcombe to take a dance yvith him· She made him the same answer she did to me. Mr, Franklin was going into the ball-room, and asked uf to go yvith him. I took him aside. —Tell me, baid I, v.ho is that angeli-" ---- Ile s niled.—She ıs a y ii цш w ıdovı .—A y n gm widow ! Yon have raised my curiosity, and you ought to gratify it.— -This is not the time for it, said he; but I will do it briefly. She was engaged to young Bennet, the son of our late rector ; he was a fine promising young man, yvho died ш his twenty-second year; which misfortune so ai~ lected our excellent pastor, that though in ap¬ pearance he was perfectly resigned, yet from that time las health declined. Mr. Selby now enjoys the living he wouhl have inherited; and he is the son and comforter of Mrs. Bonnet, who is one of the best of women. I must ask Mr. Selby to let you into the parti¬ culars of the family, and its past and present
7» situation ; and you must wait with patience the time and season for it, I will do so, said I ; but excuse my present curiosity ;«—Does Collins aspire to—-—To what ? To that elegant creature ? So, so ; what put this thought into your head ? -—Upon my word, your observation is hasty, and so is your apprehension. Let us stop here. However, I will tell you, she is above Collins's hopes and expectations ; her rank and family are superior to yours, Sir. Let this suffice at present ; let us return to the ball-room. I went back, and took my leave of him and the ladies. He said, I shall be glad to seo you, Sir, at the parsonage. I left them reluctantly, and returned to the ball-room» where I found Franklin talking to Aliss FreewilL I kept back, till he made me a sign to advance, and I then took his place. Miss Freewill sitting still ! said I, how is this ? —It is because I chose it, said she. That strange man has been talking to me, and saying the oddest things I—I dare say tliey were sincere at ¿к said I, for he speaks bold truths. Why he said some things that pleased me, some that mortified me, and some that frightened me. Do you think I may believe him ? What is your opinion of him! I think he assumes a low character, in order
π to be of service to some persons in this com¬ pany.—So I .bought; for he has a greet deal of wit, and as much satire.*— Truth, said !, has a harsh countenance to those who arc unused or кл- •williíig to converse with her.—So it seems, Sir ; for he tells me that I dance too well, and he does not like me for it; that it is immoral for a woman to dress too much, and to display her charms to all the world. He told me that I kept very bad company, and that, as a friend, he advised me to leave it as soon as possible. He said, I suppose you expect to be married ? Let me tell you that no man in his senses would marry a woman that had ever set her foot over Lady Beimour's threshold. In short, he gave such a character of the house I am now in, that I do not kaoyv what to think of my situation ; he said, that you were the only honest man in the family, and that I might appeal to you for the truth of what he said; and added, that he would not answer for you 9 if you staid there much longer, for the house was contagious» and the plague was easily catched.-—Now, Sir, what am I to believe ? Is Lady Belmour such a person as he describes Ì Is her house a school of vice and folly ? Pray tell me the truth.—I must beg, Madam, said I, that you will make a prudent use of what that worthy man ha* told you ; it ш but too true*
Ti Lord bless mcl said she; I \\&ъ told .she was one of the most polite and accomplished women in the world ; and that her house yvas the only place to finish a young person's education. To finhh it, indeed, said 1; her accomplish¬ ments and her insinuating maimers make her a dangerous friend. And you, Sir, what makes you stay here, since you do not approve it ?—I came here, Madam, at the desire of my virtuous Guardian ; and I continue here to serve a good girl, who is intangled in a disagreeable situation.— ¡Sliss Jones, 1 suppose Ì —The same. Are you not then (she hesitated) attached to Miss Jones ?—No otherwise than as to a de¬ serving woman. I would serve her, or you, Madam, or any other lady, without having any private interest in view; but this also is a secret, which I beg you not to divulge. You have stepped into the world rather rashly, but this visit will instruct you as much as many years ex¬ perience. Don't be discouraged; don't alter your behaviour, Madam ; let this subject rest awhile,, we will find an opportunity of renewing it hereafter. I see Lady Beimour's eye is upon us ; favour me with your hand, and let us go down this dance together.—I have but little spirits to dance, after what I have heard, said she.— Keep up your spirits, Madam ; all will end wclj,
73 and you will be wiser, and better, and happier for the escape you г лШ have.—«So saying, 1 whisktd her into the dance where we happened to be, and we seemed as active as any of the re?t. As soon as the dance was ended, we were summoned to the coììalton. 1 beckoned bukey Jones, and, offering an arm to each lady, con¬ ducted them iuto the parlour, aud seated them and myself at one end of ibi uUe. Lad\ Bel¬ mour bhouíod —Crosbv! luok at Saville, with a girl on each hand of him!—They both laughed aloud, and were joined by many of iheirown company,—Joy, joy to \ ou Saville ! happy fellow ! This ought not to be allowed, said Ик hmore. Saville, yon must spare one of the ladies, or admit another gentleman,—At the ladies plea¬ sure, said 1.—Xo, said Miss Freewill, í desire do more gentlemen here.—Nor 1, said Miss Jones; I desire no other protector.—Protector! aaid Lady Belmour; who would have thought it? *— Бе quiet, Lady Belmour, said I, and ict us alone! You are hard to be pleased; sometimes 1 take too little notice of the ladies, and toınc- times too much; 1 expected that you would have encouraged aud applauded me.—She shrugged, and said,—it is a strange mortal! I do not un¬ derstand him. I exerted all my spirits, and distinguished my» »elf at supper. 1 prated mce&bauly; the\ plied
H the with healths; but I had the address to answer them in fair water for the most part ; kept my¬ self sober, and passed for a strong head, and a spirited fellow. The farmer came among us ; he made many arch remarks ; and, affecting igno¬ rance of polite life and manners, he satirised them 'm the severest manner. He then remarked upon the alterations in the manners of the lower kinds of people, their absurd imitations of those in upper life, and their degeneracy in conse¬ quence. He gave master Collins some rules that made him look small ; and told him that he hoped he would see enough of high life to-night, ţo make him shun it ever after. I walked up to him ; Enough, farmer, said I î leave off while you are well ; this is a night of festivity.— î stand corrected, ansyvered the far¬ mer, and I say no more. After supper was over, LadyBelmour and her company adjourned to the ball-room, and the inferior gentry sat down to the same table ; we went to dancing again. In the intervals I sought for the two charming rustics, but they were sent home before we rose from supper, as Franklin whispered me. The carriages were ordered at one o'clock, but we did not get away till two. Collins waited on Lady Belmour to her coach. She had an air of chagrin under an assumed gaiety. As soon as
75 wc readied home, I retired to my apartment, and slept away the fatigues of the evening. On Friday we did not meet together till dinner¬ time. Lady Belmour seemed grave, and in the pouts. Miss Freewill was grown steady ; each seemed to observe the other. Sukey Jones very serious. Mrs. Crosby observed that we all looked fatigued, she recommended a «Talk in the air: after we had drunk our vrine, we adjourned into the garden. I took a separate walk ; my two female friends followed me,—-I rejoice, said I¿ to see you together ; let me recommend each to the other as more than mminal friends; it is my wish to be of service to you both.— Ah, Siri said Sukey, I fear there are snares laid for you and for mc too; Lady Belmour is contriving to sepa- iatß us.—I tell you, Sukey, said I, that I will over-reach her. Let her do mischief at her peril ! I will detect and expose her,—Ah, Sir, Lady Belmour is resolved to make Miss Fieewill think ill of me, and oi you.—»But thus warned, she cannot effect it, said L My dear Madam, what¬ ever you may hear and see, be assured that my friendship for Miss Jones is as innocent as that of a brother to his $istcr.~~l believe it, said she, and they shall not make me alter my opinion.— Lady Belmour threatens me, Sir, said Miss Jones, ж 2
76* —Lit her threaten, said I; we shall sec what will come of it. * Miss Freewill said, I have asked Mrs.Watkins how long she intends to stay here ; and she says ~—Why î are you tired of this family ?—No, said I; but you promised to make another visit be¬ fore you returned,—So Ί1, said she; but I must at least finish my week here f At our return to the house, Lady Belmour looked at mc with an air of threatening, yet affected to be extremely polite and agreeable, I saw »he was meditating miscnief, but I could not conceive what kiud of revenge bhe would take of me, for my cavalier treatment of her. We made parties at cards. Lady Bchuour ob¬ served tliat I was hoarse. I said, I had a slight cold, but I made no account of iL— Sukey, said ihe, in a voice louder than ordinary, take care of your friend! it in your office to nurse him.—- In what manner, Madam Ì answered she. I do not perceive that Mr. Saville is ill,enough to want my good offices, or I should certainly ten¬ der them.—What manner Ϋ said my^Ktdy: why by ordering some sack-whey for him when he goes to bed, and giving it yourself. I shall obey you, Madam, answered Sukey,— I laughed, and said, they were both too good to me ; for I really supposed it was only a jest. I played whist, and tpcot tbe evenmg m the
77 csual way. Finding my hoarseness increase, I retired early.—Lady Belmour said, Do not fasten your door, Saville, I shall see your whey admi¬ nistered myself.—Your Ladyship is very obliging, said I ; and, wishing them a good night, 1 re¬ tired to my apartment. I had a momentary scruple about fastening uiy door, but I thought it yvould make me ap¬ pear extremely ridiculous: she will not surely come to bed to me herself, said'l; and I think no¬ body else yvould have the assurance to attempt it. When I had been iu bed about half an hour, I heard the footing of several people coming my way; I had laid my sword behind my pilloyv, in case any of the men should affront me. I ex¬ pected their arrival with some impatience," and a foreboding of something disagreeable, though I knew not what. Presently the door opened, and Sukey Jones entered with a bason of whey, followed by Lady Belmour, and Mrs. Crosby with a candle in her band. At this shiht mv fears vanished; I sat up, and, laughiug, said, Ladies, you do me too much honour ; I am ashamed to give you all this trouble.—No compliments, said Lady Belmour, I always take care of my guests; I have more regard for you, .Saville, than you have yet deserved of me, but you yvill know your friends in time. —I began to make speeches, but •he stopped me,—-Come, -drink your whey, said £ 3
«he. Sukey, go round to the other side.—She did so, when Lady Belmour brought a small table, and set down her candle upon it ; then pulling Mrs. Crosby by the sleeve, they both hurried out of the room, slapped the door after them, locked it, and took the kev away with them, and then buibt into a hoi se laugh. Lady Belmour called out, Good night, ha\dlc! 1 thought it proper to leave your nurse to watt h you, and you are both very much obliged to ine. The Devil! said I; his cknen foot appeals at last. Sukey gat down on а с hair, and burst mto tears. 1 laughed,—Come, said I, it is well it is no -worse; take courage, my girl ! do not be afraid of me, and í shall not of you. Oh! said she, this blow was premeditated; but I dare not say ail 1 think, lebt we should be overheard.—Sit still a moment, said I; smct they have the key of the room, I think it w ill be proper to prevent their coming m agam. 1 jumped out of bed, put on my sto(kmgs, ьЬоеь, and night-gown, and went to the door, which 1 bolted on the inside. Now, said I, we aie sate from intrusion; í beg that you will accept oí the bed, and î will sit in the gieat chair,— Indťed í will not, said she. ï insist upon your going to- bed, and I wdl sit m the chair; you will increase your cold, and the fault will be laid upon vour nur&c — Nonsense! said I: if 1 had conjectured
79 the use she would have made of my cold, I would have concealed or denied it. However* as bhe has shut us up togethei, let us at least converse freely. Since you have scruples about going to-bed, we will sit up, and contrive how to battle the schemes of this old Messalina of ours. I carried the table round to the other side. Now, Sukey, said I, this table shall be the bar* rier between uş. 1 on this side, you on that; and now let me tell you the use 1 will make of this adventure. To-morrow I will avow myselt your protector, ami as such 1 will demand your hond of Lady Belmour. When that is obtained, you shall put iu execution the plan you have hinted at, but have never yet fully explained to me. Forget our awkward situation ; look upou me as a man of honour, and your friend ; and as such tell me what you purpose to do with yourself. After some prefacing, she told me she had a friend, the widow of a master's» mate iu the navy, who, being left with a small sum of money, and three children, set up a slop-shop in the Borough of Southwark; that &he had many friends in the navy who had made it a point to buy of her ; that her business was considerable, and she wanted an assistant; that she had oikred to take E 4·
se her as a partner, if she could bring two hundred pounds into the business.—If I get my bond, s tid she, I intend to put the tyvo bundled into this partnership, and with the rest buy stock into the three rer cents, whicli I am told is the best way of employing it. Very well, ъ'лч] ï, you bave thought very piudenilv how to cispose cf it, and if you want "ny fintili r a v. c tance cull upon me, for I am refcolvtd to be your fneud, m е\ету good sense of the word.—God ìeward yoti, Sir, said she ; but how shall I get ayvay from this house?—Leave that to me, said 1, I will con¬ trive an elopement for you, and be thought in¬ nocent of it myself.·—You pnmise well, said rbe, and I shall wait tiie pu form .nee. And now I will tell you as much as I know of Lady Beimour's intentions. She has told me seveial tunes that I was not open enough to her ; that there was something mysterious in your attachment to me, and threatened that »¿e would know before long what terms you and I w ne upon. Smce М.ь^ Fieewill came hither, slip has, been still moie displeased with rne. fehe told mc, what indeed every body sees, that Miss Freewill has a par¬ tiality for you, Sir; and said, that if i had not been in the xcay, you would have devoted your¬ self to her. fehe hinted, that she wished to pin- mote a marriage between you, whicli would
81 have been greatly to your advantage, had not such a tittle paltry slut as I stood in the way of her de&.igtľs for you. That she believed your cavalier behaviour to htr WTS owing to we; that she was cert »in you had imbibed a prejudice against her, and tlu t it could procted írom nobody but n e. h he con¬ cluded with saying, that she would oblige you to dei-laie you^elf shortly; if you prefeired me to Mbà ľieewilJ, every bod v should see and bear witness to Ц: if not, vou should bet me at liberty to netiv e other рюроъаЬ; but that neither of U4 should diccivc het, nor vet tr'Mt her impertí* int. 'i)/; and threatened a j umshment tor u^ both. \ ou now ч 4 е how Mie has executed lu r scheme, or at least а part of it ; and »t will be wisdom m vou to ^ ¡aid atMintt what remains.—Upon my word, Sukev, said 1, L.uiy Belmour is а at bolar of M>.tihia\ti\; ¡md -he has bi ought me into such a Mtuitu.n, ib. t I tvn no longer umani îndo¬ it nt m hf г Ьоч^е: bhe 1кь found rae employ¬ ment, » >Л í \ ill be_m this» coining dav to ече- cute wy [ím "i t-pciatiûïjs, i'" vou will promue w Lunuri me?- —Tnat I will, Sır; for you ¿ne .re bv ^e \K¿>í my dehveraiice makes me a part nt it. A c '-oon .'«t the dawn appeared, í ore-ned the riaitteis t ward», the La^t, and we both paid our h juiajre to the nsn san; admired his beauty L α
82 and magnificence, and did not forget our orisons to the Power who created that glorious lumina rv. This rising sun shall bear witness to our virtuous friendship, said 1, and remember it is to last as long as our Uvea ! We chatted upon various subjects till eight o'clock, at which hour Lady Belmour rapped at the door, I demanded, Who is there ?— A friend, said she: come, rise, und prepare for breakfast ! I winkt d at Sukey, to give iicr her cue. We shall not come down to breakfast, said I ; indulge ut so far as to send it into the room.—Oh, very well, said she, laughing, i yvill do soţ whenever you choose to have it.—In half an hour, ¡«aid 1, we will be ready for it.—She went laughing away to make her report.—Now, Sukey, baid I, bet your&elf in order, that you may not appear to have sat up all night. I will receive company in my night-gown ; and pray let us receive their compliments with a good grace.—Sukey shook her head, and looked silly; I did not look over- wise. When I heard the trampling of feet in the gallery, I unbolted the door; and in came Lady Belmour, Mrs. Crosby, and a servant maid, who brought the breakfast equipage. They both congratulated us maliciously, and enquired after my cold, which was rather worse than better. They laughed, and said a thousand impertinent things. 1 saluted them both, and
S3 ansvveicd them in their own way. At length they ïetired, saying, Get your breakfast, and wc will return again,—Lady Belrnour baid, I have a nuptial present for you.«—So, so, said I, tiie bond in coining,—Pholi, said bhe, somebody vìbC i& coming.—Presently entered a servant with Mis* JunesV portmanteau, hat-box, and atî the геЫ of her paraphernalia. I burst out a laugh¬ ing; Bag and baggage, said L—I cannot laugh, said bhe; it is a very serious, affidi .—I will make it ά jest before lhave done, said I, and so shall you; come, cat your breakfast, child!—lhave no btomuch to eat, baid she: what will this end in?—I said every thing to encourage her, but bhe could not refrain f ruin tears.-—Clear up your countenance, said I, here conies our governess, •—bhe came iu with Mis. Crosby, and, approach¬ ing Sukey, baid, I lejoice that you two are come to a right understanding. And now, Madam Sukey, 1 will restore the bond you have behaved so impertinently about; and I choose to do it before Mrs. Crosby, that she may bear witness 1 never intended to rub you of it. And yon, Sir, be plea-ed to know, that this pi ude received this from Lord C—, аь a conòidi ration tor four moitths cùhatiitation. Pour Sukey could not stand this attack ; she bur&t mto tears, and withdrew to the opposite window. I took the bond from Lady Belmourj Е в
8i lekt she should withdraw it.— í I we a little mcrcv r Lady Belmour, said I; Sukey has nev er deuhcd me, nor concealed any thmg it concerned me to Know. —Very y\ei!, Sir, then I hope you will rc- r,ard hei íí/Ymc (with a sneer she spoke it), bv nuking hci a handsome allowance. Sukey, stud I, will you leave that to me, 01 shall Lady Heimom make the tenus? She took courage to speak ;—Sir, I acknow ledge your pi o- tection, and I tiust to your generosity m all things. Then you are a fool, child ; but no matter, you will know the world btttei than to tiust it hereafter; and vou have behaved so ımpcıtınently in the last affair, that I do not desne tobe your trustee again. But, Sir, I expect a pn&cnt my¬ self upon this occasion, said fehe.—1 ha* e one m store for you, Madam, baid I; but you must wait 'á few days for it.—Oh, ns to that, said she, 1 leave it, as Sukey says, to your gchtionty. But now things are settled be tyv een you, I desire you will not play the fool yvith poor Trtewill; upon my life, Saville, that girl likes уоц too well! I hope not, Madam, said Í; 1 have not!» ng to charge myself wiih upon tliat voung b »is's account, ner will she complain of me.—I hud other itetcs for you, said she, out *ou aie a headstrong toy, and vull have eveiy t Uin g your
o S м.л vvp ν; I have given up the reint, nnd what riioi« cm 1 do to gam your good woidr— Only one tidug at this time, Ladv Belmour; th it is, order a servant to get my Ьогье repdv; I will take an airing before diivi*r, and I will írpcí you all at tin ее о 'clock.—Sep, sa id Lady Belmour. with what an an* be commands about bun; and ï am to take lus oukrs, as a rectipt in full for mv good offices'.—Come, said Air*. Crosbv, be w ι peace with him ; I think he has at quitted huiï" self svrprizitìgly weil, much better thin i ex¬ pected, 1 asbure you.—Your servant, hid es, said Í; 1 thank you for all vour (I hesitated) gtjJhtòs to inc.—Thev courtebie-d, I bowed; tvy laughed, I echoidthem; they retired, and 1 cxeerattd them in suitable language. While í was drcî»smg, » gave her instructions for her behaviour.—And what, said ¡she, must í sty to AL-& Fieewill.' 1 cannot look her in the luce.— Apropos, said I, 1 will write a note to her, and do vou ímd an ορροί tunity to iiive it her. I took my pen, and wrote as tollows: " Notwithstanding appearances, believe all that was said to you the evening before last,—· tlbtrtbt riiose of whom vou have been vvamed; a few ол\'> will explain what now appears inex¬ plicable : re .spec t viitueand herinends; there is nothing che upon earth respectable. Oiu.rox." HaviPj folded ai.d sealed this note, I bad
Sukey good-morrow; and went down stain, through the hall, and into the stable; mounted m\ hoise, and rode to Fiankim's as fd*t a» pos- tibie. I mad** baste to tell mv friend all that liad past since yve met at Coilms's assembly. ilv frequently interrupted me by his jest and raillery. Иь remai kb and enquiries at last raised my anger, and I began to swear to the U utli of mv alertions. —Hear mc, said Í, and be convinced of my y erari ty : Miss Jones and my *>elt arc iKJth revoked to kay e Lady Belmour'·-; but ίί we go together, you and ali the world will be¬ beye our coiHKMoii. í yv aut theiefore to fay our her escape, and to stay sonic time m th^ neigh¬ bourhood. I hoped to have found you enough my fneud to asbist me in thi> detign, but your behaviour discourager me. Am Ì to look upon you as my fi icnd or not r This affair yvill decide the question once and for ever. He took my hand, and assumed a serious air. —My Inend, you hay e taken my raillery too f ei iously; I admire, 1 applaud y our conduct, and will do ever) thing in my power to abbibt you in this affair. Listen to me m your turn! I will send my servant to I——, to take a place in tlie stage for Miss Jones, for any day that you bhall appoint, and then you must contrive th« manner of her escape; 1 will lund you ¿.servant, with a double horae, to convey her to I——, and you
$7 shall command me in any thing further that if tot your sei vice. Now are you batistied with me? 1 embiaeed him. Forgivi 1 me, dtar Fr.mkiiu, and accept mv thanks Let your hersant go tinn dav and t.tke a place for to-morrow; thi& night 1 \yill favour her escape, aud to-morrow I will look out for a lodging for myself.—1 uİll н- coHimend vou to om*, baid Franklin.-— You y\ill oblige me infinitely, said I; a t lean bed-cham¬ ber, and tlte u^e of a parlour, will be bufti< lent. —There is Mich an one at your servire, under thb roof', and you will do me a fay our by at- к epting it.·—Dear friend, i thank you; but i can¬ not eive you the trouble, unless you will alloyv me to make you an acknowledgmint. —Don't af¬ front me, Mr. Saville! I can atiord ns/ulter tor my friend, and hi¡» company shall repay me. Beside, I shall share in the disappointment of Lady Beimour's ¡snares, and enjoy her mortifica·' tion. I bhall communicate my pleasure to mv friend Selby : I shall introduce л ou to л worthy family, and you shall shaie in mv joys and comforts; you deserve the friendship and applause of all good men for your noble behaviour. 1 was transported with joy at the prospect he ©pencd to me, and s-ivv in the back ground more than was expressed. I talked ov er my scheme of
88 departure with new spirits, and seemed to tread upon air· I was impatient to return, that I might prepare for the execution of it. In short, I went back another man from what I came thither; got home within my time, drest, and prepared to meet the company at dinner. I came among them witii an «ir of giiety and humour, answered all their railleries, made my repartees witli spirit and vivacity. They complimented me upon the alteration in my behaviour; and Lady Belmour was effectually deceived, aud en¬ joyed her success. Miss Freewill looked serious, and seemed tc doubt every thing and everybody: I paid her particular attention, without neglect¬ ing Miss Jones, who seemed to take good omens from my apparent cheerfulness. Before we rose from table, I was told that a person desired to speak with me. I yvent out directly; it was Franklin's servant. He told me he had taken a place in the stage for London, and asked what time and place he should attend me with a double horse. I made htm follow me to, a place nearly under the.window of my apart- ment, and ordered him to mark the place, and be there by dawn of day. The stage was to set out at %\tl, and I allowed two hours for them to reach it« I bade him be diligent and secret, and I would reward his care and trouble. I teat him oft without letting him enter tlie
В9 house a second time. I went back to the com¬ pany,—Whom have you had to speak with you» Saville ? said Lady Belmour.—A servant of Mr. Franklin's, said I—Oh! that is а яг» acquaint¬ ance of yours, said she,—No, said I, it is more than seven weeks old.—A farmer in this neigh¬ bourhood ! said she.—A gentleman by birth and education, said I; a f armer by accident, or ra¬ ther by good fortune ; a friend of mine by choice and election.— She gave her head a toss, and looked disdain. I went on,-—My friend re¬ proaches me kindly for giving him бо* Httle of my company; lie desires to see me to-morrow,— And do you go ? said she.—I believe I shall, said I; but I have not made an absolute promise—You are quite a monarch, said she; your will 13 your. law.—Not absolutely, said I; it h ЩЩ^Щи the laws of humanity and civilization, as all king* ought to be. You will submit to no laws but your own, said she; and I must leave you to them, or have done with you.—I made her no further reply. We soon after rose from table, and began to break into parties; I took Miss Jones's hand, and led her aside,— Su Rey, said I, be cheerful; the hour of deliverance is at hand.— U it indeed f said she. How soon?—This night is the last that you stay iu this house, unless it is your choice to continue in it.— How can you make such 0 supposition?
m said >ϊκ'.~—! smiled, dnd whispered her. Take аь ορροί t unity ot retning up stans, pack up your things, and get ready to depart.—She answered, I understand you, Sir, ши! yvill obey you present¬ ly.—-Lady Belmour cate hed lier y\ ord.-— Obedient en ut ure f ?aid she,— Sukey blushed, aud with· drew, I took no notice, but proposed a yvulk us usual. Miss FieewiU avoided me, and seemed m the pouts. The iest of the company yvaiked, conversed, romped ш pairs, some danced upon the terrace, and v^rs one uiuuacd himself as he¬ ple used. Miss Jones came down to tru; wc made par¬ ties at cards; 1 took an opportunity to whisper her, Retire unobserved uftei supper.·—! was more lively than common. Lady Belmour took no¬ tice of my behaviour, and seemed pleased with me. I made several ironical compliments to her aud Mr«. Crosbv; they letörted yvith equal sin¬ cerity at least ; wit and gallantry (lew about, 1 was more at ease than I had yet appeared, and they ¿»cerned surprized at my pleasantry.—I fancy, Savait*, fcaid Lady В ■, you will hear from Mr. Munden soon; 1 wrote to him this day, to let him know how happy we all are,—1 have no doubt of your Ladyship's good offices upon all occasions, snidi; there will soon come a time ц hen I shall shew my gratitude m a proper manner. She exulted in her supposed success, and
ín I Siiid every thing that could lull into не- ( urity. After some time 1 rose up to retire» When í went into the chamber, í obset ved that the key yvas taken away, I asked Sukey who had it?—-Myself, said she; I took care of that ~ix hour? ago.·—That is well, baid i; give it me now,—I took it, and locked the door on the inside,—Now, said I, v\e are safe. I insist upon it, that you lie down upon the bed; I yvill nod in the great chair, and be ready to wake you at the hour appointed: after you are gone, 1 will take my героъе. —We had a contest upon thift point, but at last she consented to take somo rest. I took a book and read for some time; at last i fell asleep, and did not awake till be¬ tween two and three o'clock. I then opened the window, and looked for day-ligl\t. I un¬ locked and unbolted the door ; the noise awaken¬ ed my friend; she feared we were discovered; 1 -soou quieted her mind; she rose and got ready for her journey.—Now, Sukey, said î, a little if it icul courage is required; the opening the hall-door is all that I am in pain about; you inibi assist me yvith your hand, if necessary.—· boon after, our attendant appeared; he whistled softly. I beckoned yvith my hand, and pointed to the door. Now for it, said I. She trembled like a leaf; I encouraged her, but I felt a very disagreeable sensation myself. We took on' our
9? shoes; I t^ok the candle and went fir?t, Fol¬ low me boldly, said L Down stairs wc went; she earned our shoes in her hand. We came to the hall-dcor; she took the candle, and í went to vvoik to tídíc down a Lrge iron bar without noise; it was not a v try tibv job, hut at la«. t I effected *t. 1 made some no.se in unlocking the door.—Wc trail ! t lu ard, «..nd she.—-No malter, said I; you shall return no mote, and I feai no¬ thing for myr elf.—I opened the door, ajid beck¬ oned our assistant. Now, Sukey, said I, sit you down, and compose yourself; Robin aud I will go up stairs again and bring down your baggage. She would not be persuaded, but went out of the house directly, and stood by the horse, hold¬ ing tbe bridle. Robin and I went and fetched her baggage, creeping along hke housebreakers. While he was cording the portmanteau, and fastening it upou the horse, I took an anteluni¬ ate farewell of my friend SuL^y, and touched her lips, the first and last time; for then, as Yorick says, the victory was compleat. Take this pocket-book foi my &ake, said I, the con¬ tents will be of service upon voup joui ney. There is also a direction to my attorney, who will negotiate your bond for you, and employ your muucy: there v> a letter for him, which you must send to the penny-post. God blesa you/and adieu!
93 The grateful giri could not íjnak for tears; she knoeled down, she embraced my knees, she lifted up her clasped hand? to heaven, and looked a blt'bbing upon me, but she could not articulate a word. Robin mounted his horse; 1 H fu* d Sukey upon th*· pillion, shook her hand, and hade her once moje adieu. I told Robin to go softly, and attend to the lady's orders, and then return and appear at the same window, and 1 would К1.»Ь ч luni а ьцп to retreat or advance. I then returned into the house, fastened the door as before yvith some dillieulty, and then ι etu ed to my apartment unheard and unseen, bolted my chamber-door, and threw myselt npou the bed, y\herc I slept till past seven o'clock; when l was awakened by one ofthe ser¬ vants, who asked when and where I would break¬ fast? 1 bade her bring the breakfast up stairs in halfan hour: I then rose, drew the curtains all round the bed, and waited the maid's arrival. "Wh^ii I let her in, I made signs that the lady was asleep, and must not be disturbed, I told her to order the servant to saddle my horse di¬ rectly, and I would ride out as soon as I had breakfasted. I had intended to send my portmanteau to Franklin's by Robin, but had over-slept myself, and missed the opportunity. I dressed myself, put necessaries for present use into my pocket, 1
94 packed up my portmanteau, and locked it; then wrote a card and put upon it, with this inscrip¬ tion, * To be sent to Mr. Saville, by a person who will come for it/ I wrote alsu, upon a piece of paper which I left upon the table, in a larger hand than common. * This is to certify whom it may concern, that Mies Jones is gone to London, and that Mr. Saville is to be found at Mr. Franklin's in the village of S '"» ■ .' I then went down stairs very composedly; the ladies were not stirring; but I saw several ofthe men, and wished them a good-morroyv: they re¬ turned it, and I went into the stable, mounted шу horse, and rode to Franklin's; diverting my- веН bv the way with their surprize, and Lady Belino li's resentment at losing two of her scho·* lars, who had run away from her school. Franklin was at breakfast; he laughed hear¬ tily at my appearance, with my pockets stufied out like a smuggler. I gave him an account of the uighťs adventures, and my own elopement afterwards. He congratulated me in the warmest manner, commended my conduct, and welcomed me to his house, which he desired me to use as my own as long as I could make it agreeable to me. And now being escaped from the dangers and temptations that lately surrounded me, for which i return thanks to Heaven first, and next to the
ί>5 counsel of my most valuable friend, it is tuno that I should close this enormous pacquet, which I si »all send by the carrier from I----- «. Congratulate me, my friend ; I am in a vir¬ tuous and amiable family, a delightful resting- place, after a laborious passage through an en¬ chanted island full of doubts and dangers.
LETTER XL MU. SAVILLE TO MR. JOHNSOV. I shall not wait for the acknowledgment of my last pacquet to my dear friend, but proceed to give you, journal-wise, the continuation of my adventures here, Mr. Selby called here in the afternoon of the day I came hither ; we had a most agreeable eon versation with him. Franklin informed him of the state of my affairs ; and he gave his ap¬ probation of my conduct, as you, my friend, would have done, had you been present. He appointed the morrow to bring his elected, and her mother, and friend, to spend the day with Mr, Franklin, who desired, on his part, that he would likewise bring Mr. Butler, of whom I have made mention before ; and he promised to use his influence with him,—Mr. Butler, said Selby, is a singular character in this age ; I will give Mr. Saville some traits of him. He is a man of 5
deep learning, strict virtue, and invincible mo¬ desty, of austere manners, but of the most be¬ nevolent aud liberal heart, making allowances for every one but himself. His merit at college was very conspicuous, but his modesty frustrated the effects of it. He is poor, and, what is re¬ markable, he has no desire to be otherwise: a little, he says, suffices nature; and he has no superfluous vanities or appetites to feed. lie has some opinions that are not quite otthodox, but he does not impose them upon others ; and no¬ body discovers them by his sermons, which are plam and practical; hib tenets aie only known to his most intimate friends; a resident curacy ь the utmost of his ambition ; and the líbei ty of a better library lht.n he can afford to pui chase, is nil the luxmy be aspires to. Mr. Franklin now expressed to Mr. Selby some c«irprÌ2*ì at the delay of \m mam ige. — îtisin compliance with the request of our dear mother, said he ; she wishes us to wait till the year is completed, from the death of Mr. Bennet. I pay her tiie most implicit obedience ; ihe time of my noviciate h neaıly expired, and I hope within a month to be the husband of my dear 4ima Maria, and the happiest of íwn. In the mean time I am repairing the parsonage, and preparing to receive its mistress. My regard for her is of such a nature, аь will, I itust rathei
increase than dimmish with time and age ; may we be as happy as her excellent parents were ! and 1 caimot wish for greater earthly happiness ; but may it continue longer unbroken !—Our friend here, said Franklin, has shewn much cu·* riostty concerning the Bemut family, and still more about Miss Melcombe. I have promised to use my interest with vou, Sır, that it may be gratified.— Selby smiU d. I must first use mine with Mrs. Iknntt. But let Mr. Saville =ee a httle moie of us; he can haidly tell at present who* ther he likes m or not.—I declared that Iconici teil it with as much certainty as if we had been utpuiutod tor twenty y eais. Many lively things passed between ГгапкЬм лш1 Selby ; and 1 thought the evening too moit. though 1 wished impatiently for the morrow; «ud the nisţht seemed as much too Ion«. Mr*. l lankiin is a good wife and mother ; she is not a shining chaiactei in the comermtion wpy, but фе в all that a inan onditi ίο w ι* h for m dome? tie life , an evccllrnt manager withoïil any o.stenta- tious display of it; elegantly nvaf, without bemg a slave to hei house and J ш nit are; every thmg stands in the right place; every thing îsbiouaht in the nght season; you beai no scolding ot ser¬ vants; see no uneasiness in the mistress; the family husmees goes on as regularly as a good clock that keep? the time without your bein£ ι
m always setting it faster or slower. Every one looks easy and contented, and this I take to be a criterion of a well-conducted family. A good and plentiful table, but not covered with incite¬ ments to gluttony; plain food neatly dressed; good ale of tlieir own brewing, and wines of their own making, which I preferred to foreign produce, though Franklin insisted upon my drinkiug his port, which indeed was good, but I chose to conform to the family style in every thing. At length this impatiently expected morrow came, and brought in its train the family I so much desired to meet ; the hours seemed to move slower than usual till they arrived. You will, I know, expect a particular de¬ scription of these ladies, though I have given you a slight * xh of the young ones, and they shall therefore oe set aside till I have introduced Mrs. Bennet to your acquaintance. She is about íbrty -uve years of age, her aspect is intelligent, but the striking character upon it is benevolence, and a sweet complacency in her manner, that encourages you to converse with her, I think I could reveal every thought of my heart to her. She looks like the parent of all that approach her, and the two young ladies look up to her with equal love and reverence ; their eyes refei every question to her decision. It would be im¬ possible to discover which is the child of nature^
and which of adaption, unless you were told it, the regards and attentions are so equally dis¬ pensed and returned. Selby pays her che respect of a¿í>A, and she returns him the same attention, or rather more than she pays to her daughters, so let me call them, for no children can be more dutiful, no sisters more affectionate to each other. Miss Bennet is a charming young woman, but Miss Melcombe is an angel. The one you could wish to be familiar with, but the other you dare not approach too near; vvithout pride or vanity, she inspires respect ат α awe; а savage could not offer rudeness to her; ihe form of a Venus, with the chastity of Diana. She seems rather of a serious turn; Miss Bennet is more lively, though the friends they have lost were nearer to her blood, but perhap> not in aifection. But has that fair creature loved already? What then ? The object was doubtless worthy of her; yet I could wish she had never loved, and that I was destined to inspire her with the first idea of the tender passion. For, oh!'my dear friend, I feel that I do love her with the purest and at the same time the warmest passion. To you I have no reserves. I feel that this dear lady is my fate. I can think of no other object. I can speak of no other. Bear with me, pity r?
too nr, encourage my hope ! When I can recollect myself, I will take up my pen again. 1 said but lit îe, for my attention was wholly absorbed. I will try to recollect however some part of the conversation. Even' person present was highly agreeable to me; the day passed away too fast. I begged Mr&. Bemieťs permis¬ sion to pay my respects to her. ¡She answered; that she looked ci me as a member of ¡Mr. Franklin's family, and should be glad to see me with them. The reply was, methinks, rather ungracious; but her smiling and complacent manner concealed it from me at the time: upon reflection, I do not half like it. Franklin spoke handsomely of me, and recommended me to her favour; she commended his kindness and Hospi¬ tality to me. Selby had told her of my elope¬ ment from Lady Beimour's; the ladies all smiled at the circumstances; and Mrs. Bennet said, The conseque aces of the action must determine the merit of it; that it was pity so young a gen¬ tleman should be left without a guide at fus iirst entrance into life. Selby then told her, that I had chosen Mr. Johnson to be that guide, and that he had undertaken the office. She prai-cd this Mr. Johnson, and spoke highly of his cha*· racter and merits from report, foi she had nc
10Ï pei«o.ial knowledge of him. 1 wa-, aba-shed ..t the difficulties before me, for ï found l w a- to undergo a probation, before 1 could be admittf d to the honour of her acquaintance, antl icteivui in her iamily upon my owii account. Mi. Butler came just as wc wert titt ng rbvwi to dinner. He only returned the friendly s, hi- tations of the company, and ^poke no more t 1 the ladies withdrew mto the о ihe r parlour, i* к whispered me—We do not usually pai t ' T -uh 0 о ladies, but Butler will not talk İn their сос рчпу, —He then tried to make him speak. I thanked him for the good offices he had done me.' Ile ansyvered, That it yvas not he, but his friend Mr. Jarvis, who had yvritten to Mr. Johnson, and at his desire had informed him of my situation, I said, I was equally obliged to his relation, as the information came originally from him. After this introduction he went on; Selby drew him in, and made him converse uj on many in¬ teresting subjects; i\nd he spoke well upon all'. What a pity that a man of universal knowledge should lie under such a di c qualification. I find it is necessary to converse with ?nen, as well as books, to quality a man for an intercourse with the world: even a boy, . novice like myself, has more courage in a mixed company, than this man of genius and learning united. When we went to tea with the ladies, Butler
103 was mute again, and nothing but monosyllables could be got from him. Selby said, ï have dis¬ covered that Mr, Saville is a good scholai. <c shall come to see us at the parsonage ; and, Butler, y ci shall read lectures to иь both.— Franklin begged that he might be allowed to be present, and a day was fixed m the following week ior this purpo&e. After tea, a party at whist was made; I took every opportunity of recommending myself to the favour of Mrs. Bennet, whose character rose upon me every time she spoke; the young ladies threw oif some part of their reserve, and were perfectly agreeable. I considered this party as a perfect contrast to that 1 had so lately been engaged in. An agree* abie woman, whose conversation is seasoned with wit, and bounded by modesty, is an angelic creature, compared with one whose language is indelicate, and whose eyes assist the tongue in conveying loose ideas to the heart. I compared Mrs. Bennet with Lady Belmour; I looked on one with respect even to reverence, on the other with mingled indignation and contempt. If wo¬ men knew the interest of their sex, none would throw ofl at least the appearance of virtue and modesty ; a bold woman is shocking. This amiable family staid supper with us; they went away between ten and eleven· The ladies
IOS went in a neat post-chaise, which is intended to> serve the two families when divided ; Selby and Butler were their escort, attended by a boy m îi\ery. The day was too short for me, and the night was but a mental enjoyment of the past scenes. í slept not till day-hghU and с en now I enjoy the recollection at the distance of several days. In the morning I saunter about with Franklin, and observe his directions to his señante and workmen; i think I will endeavour to leain the theory of this farming business. When 1 have collected a sufficient stock of knowledge, I may take a farm mto my own hands, and live in the same style that Franklin does. If I could pro¬ cure such a helpmate as 1 have iu my mind's eye, what a paradise would that farm be to me ï But 1 have much ground to go ovei first. Thursday. Well, my friend, I have spent an agreeable day at the parsonage. Mr. Butler gave us a lecture bef л e dinner; we aie going through the classics again with new pleasure and alaci ity. Mr. Selby ıs every thing; the scholar, the clergyman, the farmer, the gentleman in turn, and shines in all these characters, without affectation in either. i hoped the ladies would have met us, but was disappointed. Franklin and I returned home to supper; he remai ked my disappouUment, and ΐ 4
104 smiled at it. Selby told me, he hoped f would find the way by myself to his house, when Mr. Franklin was otherwise engaged. I promised that I would yery soon show huu my ьепье of the favour.
Saturday Evening. Yesttiday ï teck a walk to the paisonage. Mr. Selby received me vi ith that friendly and familiar air which btimshts all reserve. I told lum the situation c f шу heart with regard to Miss Melcombe, and asked bis ^t erest with her and Mrs. Bennet. He paused, he hesitated.-—! wish, said he, to do you ser- мсе. I believe you aie woithy of that amiable gill; but ------lie stopped.— But what? said I. What objection can there be to your attempting to serve mc, even if it should not succeed ?— That young lady's situation is a particular one; 1 do not know whether Mis. Bennet will permit me to explain it; i yvill hov.evei аьк her pu mis¬ sion in your behalf. You seem likely to be a cold advocate, said Í, d.^couraged by his air and manner, it ьеспъ iu me thai you do not think me worthy of your friendship, or the dear lady's acceptam с — Τι ou are extremely mistaken, said be; 1 never bkt d a man so well, upon so short an acquaintance. I am going ю give y ou а proof of it, by *n\iUr¿
105 you to my wedding, which I hope will be cele¬ brated next week. \ on do me both honour and pleasure, said I ; I will be your brideman. But let me implore youi good offices with the lady.—Ihave a thought ior your service, said he. On that day, when Mis. Bennet vuil grant me almost any favour I can ask, I will beg of her leave to communicate to \ou the memoirs of the Bennet family. They include Miss Melcombe's histoiv fiom the hour ot l.cr bnih, and the} will expiam the pecuha- nty of her situation. 1 will make known your pietcnsious to Mrs. Bennet ; for 1 will have no clandestine couitships under my ïoof. Mis. Bennet must decide the important question; and she will do what is be-t lor vou both. Vou mav jud^e by what 1 have nov. said oi my frankness and sincerity.-—1 th<*nk vou foi both with my whole hearts said I; you have bound me to you by á t\e that can пели- be broken.—AiU r th..», I acquainted bun with the state of my fui tunc, as tar as i knew U m) self. I it turned home to dmiiei, and to my suipri c c n-uliu α caid ňom Lady Belmour ul tollov» í * Tt ι Jay * 4t Lad) Btlmour predente complimento to Mr. S vy die. Notwithstanding Ьь cav aber treatment tî hci and her fiends, she will be ¿dad of Ы&
i об* company to dinner to-day, to meet an old school-fellow, and to receive a pacquet'from Mr. Munden/' I really felt like a school-boy who expects chastisement.·—I will not go, said I ; let her send every day an invitation!—Mr. Franklin, laughed at my distress. I see, said he, she is trying to lure you back again.—And if ever I put myself into her power, said I, I deserve all that follows. I told him all that had passed between me and Mr. Selby, and he felicitated me. I expect, said he, an invitation to the wedding, and I think it will be a very proper introduction to your court¬ ship: we shall keep you among us, ï perceive,—· I am happily situated, said I, even to my hearťs wishes ; but I cannot continue with you, unless you will allow me to become your boarder.—AS e will talk of that hereafter, said he ; and led me into the dining-parlour, where I apologized for my stay. Mrs. Franklin received my excuse with a smiling countenance ; only saying, If the dinner be spoiled, the loss is your own, and you must bear it patiently. This card of Lady Beimour's dwelt upon my mind ; it seemed to me that she was contriving some scheme to entice me back to her house, lest I should tell tales out op school. I told Franklin so,—-Suppose, said he, she should
юг carry you off as her prisoner? She has spirit enough for an Armida, but I fear you have not gallantry sufficient for a Rinaldo* This morning, as I was sitting at breakfast yvith my friend and his family, a servant an¬ nounced a gentleman on horseback, who desired to speak yvith me. Shoyv him in by all means, said Franklin, laughing, and do not trust your¬ self out of doors with him : desire the gentleman to walk in. Presently the door opened; and who should appear but my old school-fellow George Clayton î we saluted with mutual free¬ dom and familiarity. Mr. Franklin desired him to be beated ; and said any friend of mine was yvelcome to use his house. Clayton looked hard at me, and smilede —You look, said h^, like the same Edward Saville yvhom I knew and loved at Westminster School ; your behaviour is like the same person : both are different from what I expected, from the account I have lately heard of you.— Explain, my friend, said I. From yvhom have you heard this account of me ?—He smiled. —»From Lady Belmour, said Franklin,—Clayton smiled again.·*What, said I, are you the school¬ fellow I was invited to meet ?~-The very same, said lie; but you would not trust yourself in my company.·—Yes, in your company, said 1, but »Ot in that of your society » Well, said he, every one has a right to choose
108 his company, — I was silent. Mr. ami Mrs. Franklin left the room to us : he threw a look at me, which seemed to say, How will you get out of this difficulty?—When they were gone, I collected myself and answered him. This charge, from a friend and school-fellow, deserves a serious answer. There are certain situations in v\hich politeness must give way to sincerity. She attacked me with all her arts ; I eluded them with all my skill. Finding that I was no easy victim, she threw oif the mask, and behaved with the most unparalleled effrontery. Lady Belmour first laid ceremony aside with me ; and í did the same by her. I left her house sans ceremonie, and in a way that I intended should show my contempt of her designs and her principles ; and I do not repent it. Clayton repeated,-«-Unparalleled effrontery ! Poor Lady Belmour ! Poor George Clayton! thou art one of this society so despised, so contemp¬ tible ; but which can however. retort the con¬ tempt it has received. I suppose some canting Methodist-preacher has converted thee, and thou hast condemned thyself to such society as he recommends.-—Stop there, Gee/gel said I; you never were more mistaken : Lady Belmour and her society are mm λ more likely to be converted to ¿Methodism than myself. At the decline of % profligate life, people are glad to
109 take shelter in implicit faith, and to embrace whatever is offered as a substitute for virtue, which requires labour and self-denial; while faith carries them by a short road to the hope, I might rather say the presumption, of future hap¬ piness. There are many different roads through life ; I have chosen mine, you have a right to choose yours. I see with concern it is not what I could have wished for you ; but I give you up to it, and break off this conversation, in which both of us have spoken too freely; let us excuse each other, and part like friends. Perhaps we may, baid he. Let us compro¬ mise; but I am sorry to see you so resolute. I hoped to prevail upon you to return with me to dinner at Lady Belmour' 4 ; must I give it up? —You muat indeed, Sir ; I will not again enter her house. If you would venture yourself with me, said he, I would pass my word for your safe return. I assumed a serious aspeet — \ ou are gomg to preach again, said he.—Not to you, Sir, said I,— Well, if I must give up my comniibsion, here, said he, taking a letter out of his pocket, here is something for you; it is from old Munden: you did not learn these precise notions from him, I am sure.—I took the letter, and read it. J shall enclose it to you m this pacquet; it con¬ tained a remittance of two hundred pounds iu I
tio Bank notes. I considered a minute, and then asked him to wait a little, while I yvrote a note to Lady Belmour. He again entreated me to return with him; and tried every crt, to no purpose. At last he threatened me with the vengeance of her Ladyship. He teazed me out of patience, and we parted with barely civility ; for he re¬ fused to carry either letter úr message with him ; and, had I not kept a guard upon myself, he had obliged me to cmarrel with him. He left me veî^ uich out of humour ; and when Franklin, returned, I related the whole of our conference to him. He applauded my be¬ haviour, saying, It was more difficult to stand my ground against raillery, than against temp¬ tation, passion, or any seduction whatever, and I considered what passed between me and Ciay¬ ton as the conclusion of my acquaintance with him and the whole society. Upon further consideration, I determined to write a note to Lady Belmour, in answer to her card to me, and to take a civil leave of her and fee* associates. She had been disappointed m her expectations upon my pocket, as well as my fGxmn, and I resolved to discharge all ap¬ pearance of obligation to her.; accordingly I sent the following note, enclosing a bill for thirty poinds.
ill * Mr. Saville presents compliments to Lady Belmour ; the same motives that impelled him to leave her house, prevent his accepting her polite invitation to dinner; he returns thanks for the civilities he received at her mansion, and b pfTíl h^»" яггрШяпгй nf th#» trine prwîosed^ being the consideration which her Ladyship dé- manded of him in return for her entertainment and good Q#rVe$, of which he shall always retain a perfect remembrance/ Sunday—I spent in the duties which I had too much neglected for several months past. Mr, Selby is devout and proper in his offices, without affectation, pedantry, or formality. Mr««. Bennet and her two daughters (so let me call them), were at church, and with them ano* ther young woman, whom they allowed to visit them, and improve by conversing with them; her name is Grove, a farmer's daughter, lately come to a pretty iortune by the death of a grandmother.—Franklin tells me she is laid out tor a wife for Mr. Collins ; and Mr. Selby does all in ids power to promote the match. In the evening Mr. Selby called upon us ; he delivered Mrs. Benneťs compliments to Mr. and Mrs. Franklin, and their guest, desiring their company to dine at her house on the morrow. We accepted the invitation with pleasure,—»But when, said Mr. Franklin, is your happy dayî— »
Ìi2 You shall know that to-monow, said he. Mr. Collins will be my other brideman ; Saville has offered, Miss Melcombe will be his partner; Bliss Grove, Co!bus's.—Do you knoyv, said Frank¬ lin, that Saville had a mmd to be jealous of Coilms's attention to Miss Melcombe ?—it is a proof of his penetration. Collins did actually make an offer of lumself to Miss Mek ombe. He was refused, but not with the pride and disdain that many fine women shoyv upon such occasions. île was told she yvas not a proper wiie for him ; but Mrs. Bennet commended his intention to marry, and asked hun to let her have the honour to recommend a w ife to him. She has since pointed out Dolly Gi оу e as a proper person. Collins thanked her, but said he must take some tune to get over his disappomtment with Miss Mtlcombe ; and he looks at her, as if unwilling to give up his hopes.—But he is refused, said I? .— Selby smiled, lie is absolutely.—Then I will Lope, said L I enclose Mr. Mundeiľs letter. Let me have the pleasure oí hearing írom you soon, And believe mc always most gratefully yours, K. SAVX1.LĽ.
Iľí
LETTER X ÍL MR. MUNDEN ТО MR. SA VILLI', MV DEAR БОУ, loua last letter was an impertinent one ; but I httve since heard, with great pleasure, that you aie come to a better way of thinking.—Lady Belmour is your true furnd; she excised you to me; she told me you would, in due Ume, be ail that 1 wished you. Her last confirms her prognostics concerning you. She says you are so much improved both in person and behaviour, that I should hardly know you. But you are an obstinate self-willed fellow, and will not suffer her to lead your choice in any thing, and so you have fallen m love as you thought proper, you young dog you 1 How¬ ever, I am glad that you have discovered yourself to have certain passions and propensities, and that you ran speak for yourself upon tome oc¬ casions; it will give you proper courage to speak upon others, aye upon all.—Now mind what I му, Edward, fur I am a vetet an in these ca^es. *~ Let this girl be y oui fiend, or your companion, or what you please, but don't h:t htr be youi ihiòtnss bidet d ; keep lier humble ?Aid ohcdiuit tu jour will and pk-aeuie,—Don't go (o make ber a settlement, loi that is to make hei inde*
Ibí» pendent of you, but make her more or less, ac» cording as she deserves of you. When you come to toyvn, 1 will teach you how to manage her ; in the mean time I send you a remittance of 2001. I suppo-e you will want to make the girl some presents, and you must also make an acknowledgment to Lady Belmour ; a bank note of 301. will be sufficient. When you come to London, I will settle accounts with you, and give up my trust—I should think a few years travel would be of service to you; we will speak of that and other matters at your return.—I hope yet to make a great man of you, Edward, and then I shall be proud of you, as the work of my own hands.·—'Present my best compliments to Lady Belmour and her friends ; and believe me, Your affectionate and sincerest friend, RiciiAitD Munden.
LETTER XIII. MISS JONES TO MR. SAVILLE. BEAR SIR, As you yvere my deliverer from a state of vice and folly, you have a right to be informed what use I make of my liberty. I am happy in the «îtuation w hich I mentioned to you. Your lawyer was so kind asto advance me two hundred pounds
115 upon my bond, and takes upon him to negociate mine yvith Lord C—™~»—; and this obligation I owe hkevvise to your goodness. Mrs. Searle, my r partner, has very good business, and she has many friends in the navy. I pass for a widow, and all her friends are mme also. Constant employment drives away disagreeable thought, and I feel myself happier than ever I yvas before ; and I hope to obtain that peace and tranquillity which attends those who are com- mendably employed. As often as I return thanks to my Creator for his mfmite mercy in rescuing me from a state of sin and foliy r , and giving me comfortable hopes of peace here, and happiness hereafter, I shall remember my benefactor both in my prayers and praises; and I will implore for him every blessmg that heaven can bestow. I am, dear and worthy Sir, Your most obliged and grateful servant, S. Jqnbs«
LETTER XIV. MR. JOHNSON TO MR. SAVILLE. »EAR SIR, I owe you many acknowledgements for the en* tertamment your pacquets have afforded me. I congratulate you on your victory, and on
П6 your defeat also, for you are absolutely a capti ve y though a voluntary one. The first time the heart is subdued is com¬ monly the crisis of our lives ; and the following part takes its character from this event. An early attachment to a virtuous and amiable woman cultivates and ripens every great and noble quality ; an attachment to a bad woman leads to a life of folly, vice, and misery. I would not wish a young man to marry so early as at your age ; but í would have him en¬ gaged in a courtship and correspondence with a woman qualified to be in time an amiable wife and mother ; I would have him meet with some difficulties, as an exercise to his patience and fortitude ; 1 would have him subdue them by his virtue and activity, and at length receive the re Aard of his courage and fidelity. What a for¬ tunate man are you, to fall into the acquaintance and obtain the friendship of sucha family! Ins not a very easy ihing for a good young man to choose a wiíe that is worthy of him.—The }oun/ > women of the present times are vc ry agreeable companions for an hour, for an afternoon's con¬ versation, for an evening's entertainment ; but for wives !—look at the wives of the great world î «—look at the husbands too, see—judge—reflect! and thank God you have escaped the danger of g fashionable wile, The pupils of folly and fop-
Л7 pci) слс terrible companions for life. I would rend thohc \oung men 1 love, iuto the country for a wife; and warn them not to make her too will acquainted with a town life afterwards. This Litter pai t of ray Ies¿ou may yet be in time for you ; and it is not certain that you may not want the formei : you have a great deal of ground to go over, before you are sure of Miss Mtlcombe. Study agriculture, studv economy ; both are nctessaiy, both wiil be beneficial when you are •settled for life. 1 respect Mr. Franklin, 1 love Mr. Selbv, î levere Мгз. Bennet and her amiable daughters; cultivate their hiend-hip and esteem, my young friend; dcbcrve their aneetion, and you will obtain it. Continue your nan am e to me; if it i* pos¬ sible, let me know the hbtory of the Beimet familv. E\ery tiling that \j interesting to you, will be so to your friend, Johssok.
LK'lTbll XV. MR. SAVILLC TO MR. JOHNSON. 1 hank }0u, dear Sir, for your paternal le - sons, they can never be unseasonable or unw ti¬ ce me to me.
118 At the conclusion of ray last, I told you î was engaged to spend the following day at Mr?. Benneťs; it proved a delightful one to me. Miss Melcombe plays sweetly; she speak? French, she reads Italian, she has been taught the elements of several sciences; but she con¬ ceals them with as much care as most ladies take to display them. My proficiency in music seemed to recom¬ mend me to the favour of the ladies Mr, Selby plays on tlie vi ilin, Mr. Franklin on the bas^- viol: wc played several trio's and quartetto's in the evening, and sung many songs, chiefly out of Handeľs compositions. The wedding-day was declared by Mrs. Bennet to be next Thursday, and all the company pre¬ sent were invited; we are to breakfa s t at Mrs. Benneťs, and to dine at the parsonage, Mr. Л. Collins is invited to meet us. On Tuesday morning I took a w.dk to the parsonage: the young ladie c were there, looking over the house. I was permitted to accompany them home with Selby. Miss Melcombe leaned upon my arm; and yet, though 1 had lier to my¬ self, I could not for my hfe begin the subject I most wished to engage her ear to listen to. I suffered this precious opportunity to escape me, waited on her home, and leit Selby at the bouse,-—happy man í —and returned alone to Mr. 3
lig Franklin's, accusing myself all the way of folly and false delicacy. Аз I was buried in these ruminations, two men came by on horse-back; they stopped, and called to me by name. It was Lord S— ■ ■ ■ ■ and Mr. Clayton, two of Lady Beimour's disciples. whom í have introduced to you before. I saluted them coolly, und yvas going forward ; but Ciayton called out—Do not run ayvay, Sa¬ ville; sufí'er me to say a few words to you, they shall not be of the hostile kind. I behaved rudely to you last time I saw you: I ask your pardon.—So saying, he jumped off his horse, and came and took my hand. I gave it him cheerfully, and yve walked together, he leading iiis horse. Lord S ....... ■ ■ said, Who was that divine girl that was hanging upon your arm this morning, Sa¬ ville? —A young lady who is under the care of Mrs. Beimet, said I; but not an acquaintance. for your Lordship or Lady Belmour.—I know tliat, said he, laughing. Come, Saville, do not be afraid of us, we are not so bad as you think us; we respect those v. ho are really virtuous women, though we make free with those who only pretend to be so. But pray, my good modest friend, answer me a ques¬ tion that I have long wished to ask you; What ίί your opinion of Miss Freewill ?—I will answer
V2f> you, said L I beiieve she is a virtuous girl, but an indiscreet one, I am glad to hear you say so, for—shall î confess it? I adore that girlî 1 love her up to marriage, if I was certain—*-«But, Saville, did you never make love to her, in jest or in earnest? —No, never, upon my honour ! but I paid her some attention, because 1 thought she deserved it,—-Thank you, Saville, you have set my heart at ease; I was confoundedly jealous n f you. She paid you some attention, though —too much for me. She speaks of you with emotion, and will not suffer any body to open their lips against you.—That is owing to her generosity, said 1 ; she defends an innocent man when he is unj usti y tra.duced t Pray, said Lord S ...... ■ -- , what is become ci Miss Jones? She is one of Mr. Saville's flock. Y'ou must enquire somewhere else, my Lord, said I. I have staid in this neighbourhood to convince every body; that I have uo connexion with Mibs Jones.—— A Joseph —yea, & Joseph t said Lord S — ; but that fine girl that I saw you lead to-day, who is she?—My Lord, you must excuse me. I wish, said Clayton, you would give me a ЫИ upon Miss Freewill.—I do not understand you, said L— A bill of credit, said he. Say that you know me; that I am an honest fellow, and
ш so forth.—Not í, indeed, Sir; make your ou« credit with her. We came to a style that led to Franklin'* house.—Gentlemen, bonjour f said I, and jumped over the style; they wished me a good day, and went their own road, I told Franklin my adventure, and worried myself and him with doubts and fears of I know not what. I wished Miss Melcombe had never been seen by Lord S—-. Franklin laughed at me.-—Surely, said he, in such a country as ours there is nothing to apprehend; are we not under the protection of the laws? what are >ou afraid of?—I do not know exactly, &aid 1; but wherever there i& something to hope, lucie L· ab yva) s something to fear. Friday. 'Ihe day i¿ come and g f mc, that was wished for so long. Selby ib happy, ubile X am in doubts and fears; however, my hopes rise in my heart's barometer. I am not hated, I am not rejected; 1 h<i\ e been heard with compla¬ cency, if not with pity. We met at Mrs. Ben¬ neťs, and breakfdbted there, aud f om thent e went to church. Thore was an air of sedate cheerfulness upon the whole company ; but none of the rapturous and riotous joy which blazes for a day and then expires. The excellent Mra, Bennet called upon her daughter tobe cheerful. Some girl·?, said «lie, think it neccsturv to bu¬ fi
122 hav*e as if they were averse to their own wislies. Detestable affectation í It is a very bad compli¬ ment to the bridegroom, to look unhappy or re¬ luctant upon these occasions,—I will endeavour to behave as becomes your daughter, Madam, answered the amiable bride,—Selby's eyes spoke his grateful sensibilities. We arrived at the church. Mr. Butler prepared for the sacred office; Mr. Selby offered his hand to his bride, she gave her*s with apparent pleasure. The office was performed ; the lady spoke out her part of it ; her mother, by a nod, encouraged her to do so. W r e all stood round the table. I looked a thou¬ sand tender things to my fair partner, and took courage to whisper softly to her, What a solemn office ! What sacred words ! How sweet to speak and to hear, between two hearts united and con¬ secrated by virtue ; they kindle my wishes and aspirations after the same happiness. Oh, that 1 dared to say my hopes ! She blushed and looked down. After the ceremony was concluded, we ad¬ journed to the Parsonage, and there renewed our congratulations and wishes for their happiness. Mr. Selby thanked Mrs. Bennet for the in¬ estimable present she had made him (she gave the bride at the altar).—My future behaviour shall show how dear it is to me ; it is my wish
in and hope to restore the blessings which time hae ravished from you, and to be your son iu every respect.—With pleasure, with pride, I ackuow- lédge my son í said fche.-—I have a particular favour to ask of my dear mother, said Mr. Selby, but it shall not hej ust fiow; she will give me her company alone to hear it.— She smiled : I caanot think what it can be, said she; however, it must be a very strange one, that I can refuse my sott upon this day. The bride smiled like an angel, but her joy ovcrñowcd at her eyes ; her mother embraced and blessed her. She held out her hand to Mihs Melcombe, who kissed it; she em¬ braced her.—My dear Sophia ! my other daugh¬ ter! my si-ter! naid the bride; will you receive a brother from me ? Mr. Selby then saluted her.— Let me be your brother at present, said he; per¬ haps hereaftei I may aspire to the honour of being you r fat her. Sophiasighed; the tear started rioni her eye.—How sweet to have a father! *.aid she ; and how unfortunate to be forgotten by him '.—Mrs. Bennet took her hand. Be com¬ forted, my child ; lieaven, iu lieu of that father, has given you a mother, a sister, and a brother ; and perhaps your father may one day recollect and acknowledge his child. Let us not think of any thing this day that can sadden our hearts,— Our conversation afterwards became general ; we walked in the garden before dinner; Mr. c2
Î24 Selby took Mrs· Bennet aside, and kept her some time ; after which he came and took my hand to lead me to Mrs. Rennet.—I have explained your pretensions, said he, to my mother ; you must now speak for yourself. I did so, but with more hesitation than I wished ; aud afterwards I took your last letter out of my pocket, and presented it to Mrs. Ben- net as a kind of credential, in respect to my proposal. She read it over.—It is, indeed, much in your favour, Sir ; but ï must bîume упи, my son, for giving Mr, Saville room to expect to see flip Memoirs of nur family ; yon see lie has raised the same expectation İn Mr. Johnson abo : they were never meart to be shewn out of the family, î do not see how it could well be avoided, said he. As to Mr. Johnson, you know bib cha¬ racter, and I should think you might allow him to see the Manuscript without one objection. To say truth, said Mrs. Bennet, it has le.·* im¬ propriety to trust him with it, than so t/evng a gentleman as him before us. I will answer, Madam, for Bír. Savings ho¬ nour ; I know he may be trusted. I pass my vord for him. Permit mc, Madam, said i ? to offer myself as & candidate for the dear lady's favour ; I will submit to any trial, to any time of probation, to Any conditions.·—But» Sir, Miss Мекюпфе has
V25 a father living.*— I will apply to him, if I may bo so happy to obtain your favour and recommen¬ dation. ' Well, Sir, it is my son's request ; I cannot re¬ fuse his warm exertion of his inilueuce in your behalf on this day. You shall read the papers ; you shall send them to Mr. Johnson, and he shall advise you and us. Mr. Selby expressed his joy and gratitude in proper terms. We returned to company, a r id our friends looks told us they were no stranger? to our business. I drew Miss Melcombe as-ide ; I made my confession with more courage than I expected; she heard me with complacency, she told me she had a.father, who had the oiJy ri^ht to dispose of her. She allowed me to visit her as a friend, and did not forbid me to hope for her favour. Mrs, Bennet took Mr. Collins and Miss Grove apart; she recommended them to each other. She seemed the Juno-Matrona; the arbiter and protector of conjugal happiness. At two o'clock we sat down to a well-ordered and plentiful dinner ; we sat some time after¬ wards. We played, we sung; everyone endea¬ voured to promote the happiness of the rest. At ten o'clock the ladies all retired, Mrs. Bennet and Miss Melcombe sit p t at the Parso¬ nage: we took the hint, and withdrew £ocn after, G3
126 wishing Mr. Selby a long continuance of his do¬ mestic happiness,·—Let us see you often, my dear friends, said he.—You may be sure of me, said I; you have bound me to you for life.—We came away at eleven. At my return home, I found a letter from Mr. Clayton, the contents as follows : Dear Sir, I beg your excuse for my past behaviour, and that you will grant me a favour, which will ac¬ celerate my happiness. It is, that з т ои will speak a word in my behalf to the charming Miss Free¬ will, to whom I have offered myself in marriage. She thinks and speaks of you in high terms, such as would make vcie mad with jealousy, if I did not believe ypu to be in love in another place. Forget my vanity and folly, and do an act of generous friendship for your old school-fellow and friend, Geoege Clayton* I sat down and wrote the. following answer immediately, for Mr. Franklin's servant to carry in the morning. Sir, I must beg to be excused as to the credentials you require of me ; I am not sufficiently ac¬ quainted with Miss Freewill to use so great a
127 liberty; nor with your conduct and character, ter be able to pass my word for your virtue to a lady, though I might for your honour to a gentle·' man. However, your resolution to marry, con¬ firms my hope of your becoming a good member of society, and I wish you success in your pre* sent laudable pursuit ; for, in my opinion, the path of virtue is the only road to happiness. 1 am, dear Sir, Your most humble servant, E. Saville. Saturday Jl^ir/nVg·« I have just received the precious manuscript from Mr. Selby ; it affords me sufficient subject for meditation of every kind. I am allowed to send it to Mr. Johnson.
LETTER XVI. MR. SAVILbE TO MR. JOHNSON. I can now tell you that I am aa bappy as a maa in a state of probation can be. I have been permitted to explain myself; to open my heart to the mistress of it. She heard me with complacency, though not with emotion ; she smiled upon ше, and checked the ardour of my declaration. I hope r said she, I am above affectation or,de~ с 4.
'12$ ceit. I would not raise hopes I do not mean to encourage ; our acquaintance is of a very late date : your character is not yet established, mine is hardly formed. I have made no resolution for or against marriage. I think it is the most eligible state, and that a woman stauds iu need of a protector through life. I think very well of you, Mr. Saville. Indeed I like your company too well to give up your acquaintance, unless there was a necessity for it. I blessed her for this declaration, and was going to express my gratitude as a lover. But she stopped me.—Do not interrupt me. Sir, I have premeditated what I am saying. I will re¬ ceive you as my friend, and as a candidate for my favour, but not as a contracted lover. We will be good friends, and remain upon this foot¬ ing for one entire year from the date of our first acquaintance. I sighed* Oh Sophia, this is an act of arbi¬ trary power; this is a cruel quarantine ! but what am I to expect at the end of this long, long probation ? in the course of this year, said she, we shall know each other's disposition, our vir¬ tues, and our faults ; is it not better that we should have a reason for our liking or disliking each other? Mr. Selby waited patiently his time cf probation. Well, my dear Madam, but at the end of the
129 year what am I to expect ?—Nothing certain, Sir; if we then like each other well enough to make a serious engagement, Mrs. Bennet will apply to my father for his consent, and then you will have my permission to make proposals to him. You knowhow I am circumstanced; and I am resolved to perform my duty to my pa¬ rent, hoyvever he may behave towards me. Hard terms, my dear lady! but such as I must accept, if I can obtain no better. I de¬ vote myself wholly to you, Madam, dispose of me as you please: yet I murmured at her insen¬ sibility; yve joined our friends, who were ap¬ prized of all that had passed between us. Sophia looked triumphantly; I rather deject¬ ed, Mrs. Selby challenged me; What Sir, are you dissatisfied with my Sophia; if so, I shall declare against you!—I submit, Madam, to her laws and yours,-—Very well, said Mr. Selby, then all is as it should be. Erom this time Sophia has treated me with more ease and freedom: she encourages me to behave as a friend, but yvill not hear a word in the style of a lover. In all other respects I am the happiest ofir.cn. Mr. Stluy has ' ecommended Mr. Butler to a curacy very near; he has given him a room in his own house, where he comes and goes when¬ ever he pleases, with frec access to a very good о 5
130 library, the late Mr. Benneťs, to which Mr. »Selby has made considerable additions. %metimes we read and converse with the learned, but oftener with the ladies, in the most delightful of all society, where the senses polish and improve each other. These, mv dear friend, are the true, because the rational pleasures, such as increase by re¬ flection. I have a letter from Miss Jones, which I en¬ close to you. I rejoice that she is likely to be so well established the remainder of her life, and hope the former part of it will be forgotten. As I have looked upon her as still in some degree under my protection, I am happy to be relieved from any further interposition in her affaira. But I do not perfectly understand what she means by putting myself upon my guard, and being awa?e of some impending danger to myself, or those I love. Adieu, my friend. í expect the return of my pacquet5 and a letter with your strictures upon it. , Yours sincerely, E, Saville*
mt
EPISODE. MEMOIRS Of WILLIAM BENNET, CLERK, §&Ώ HIS FAMILY. At the request of my dear children, I sit down to write thes" memoirs of the most interesting events of my life, for their satisfaction, and the benefit of our posterity. The virtues of our ancestors, are examples for us to imitate; their failings and defects are warnings for us to avoid them. We can only propose the example and the warning ; but the right application of both, depends on those who receive them. If the soil is prepared by due cultivation, it will bring forth twenty, fifty, or an hundredfold. May such be the increase in tho minds of my amiable and beloved children ! I am descended from a good family, which formerly lived in a state of affluence; but by the expences of our ancestors, and the increase of luxury, was reduced to a small es .ate, which. descended to an eldest son: my father was the younger brother; he was a clergyman of the church of England, who united the Christian. faith and morals, in his doctrine and in his practice, i am the younger of two sons; the extravagances and profligacy of the eldest (who died at twenty-five years of age, of the соще- α ó*
1J2 queiice of his irrtgular*ties) obliged my fiiher to restrain himself in his ex.] t net s for me, I eaily dedured my wishes towaidi the profcf-^ion of my father, whom I aspired to resemble in every ie- specr. My godfather, assisted lum m the ex¬ penee of an university education for me. I went through my studies there with credit and success; and afterwards took upon me the office of college-tutor to several youths of fortune and family. Among these was a young gentleman, whose name was Lucas, lie was bred up at Westminster School, where, by his riotous com¬ panions, he was early initiated into all the mys¬ teries of vice and folly, which aie but too well known to the youth oí the present age ; from thence he was sent to Oxford, where he made acquaintance with some young men of an en¬ thusiastic turn, who led him into the abyss of Methodism. A mind, convicted of sin, is glad to lay hold on any thing that will be accepted as a substitute for \n tue; but fn a short time after, his reason revolted against this implicit faith. From one extreme point he flew to tiie other; he lead the works of Bolingbroke, Hume, and Voltaire, and fancied himself convinced by their doctrine: he renounced the tenets of Chris¬ tianity, and became a profesad advocate ior IntuUlity. in this ¿tate I found him. I put into his
f 'J r. bands 'lillctson, Clarke, Sheilock, and Mr. 1<оекс'ь HeasonabloneSs of Christianity. By rea¬ soning upon them, 1 had tlie happiness to con¬ vince him of his errois in judgment, and to re¬ concile his u-asoii to his faith; and he once more owned lumself a Christian. lie publicly declared his obligations to me. I gamed much credit by his conversion. He wiote to his mother and told her how much he valued me. In consequence 1 received a most rollte invitation to accompany him into Staf¬ fordshire; my friend urged ше to accept it: a» d, with my fathei's permission, I attended him to his family seat, where I met with a joyful welcome from the family, which consisted of Mr. Lucas's mother, a respectable lady; Mrs. Horton, her sister; a woman-grown daughter of each ot these ladies ; and another young woman, a relation and dependant upon the family. Mr. Lucas ha<l been early spoiled, by the fond indulgence of his mother to her outy son. But he now professed a reformation of eveiy kind, and attributed all to my friendship, Mrs. Lucas offered mc presents of value, which I re¬ fused; and ^aid, that her son's friendship was i.iy best recompence. The ¿oung ladies weie both handsome and amiable. Miss Lucas was generally thought the finest woman. Miss Hor-
134. ton was much lower in stature; but whenever she spoke or smiled, she had a thousand inex¬ pressible graces about her mouth; her person seemed to receive new animation, and every word she spoke found its way directly to the heart. To mine, it spoke a language new and expressive^ and made an impression there, which neither time nor absence could ever erase. ï dared not declare my passion, but preserved a distance and reserve becoming my situation and late acquaintance. There was however a secret intercourse between us, though we seemed mu» tually afraid of each other. Mr. Lucas pre¬ sented me to all his neighbours as the chosen friend of his heart, and one to whom he owed great obligations. Our visit passed agreeably, upon the whole ; but I had two causes of pain at my departure; one, a too apparent attention of Miss Lucas to myself; the other was, the un¬ certainty of my situation with respect to Miss Horton. Soon after our return to Oxford I received a letter from Mr. Withers, with a proposal for me to accompany Mr. Lucas in his intended tour through France and Italy. I begged leave to decline this offer, as my father was advanced in. years, and declining in his health. This answer was not satisfactory. Soon after I received a letter from Mrs. Lucas, requesting 1
135 me, for her son's sake, to give him my company, She invited me to repeat my visit, and to settle the terms of our agreement, as soon as we could be spared from college duties. I sent this and the former letter to my dear father, and desired him to answer this proposal for me in whatever manner he pleased. My father declared against it in the strongest man¬ ner. He answered Mrs. Lucas's letter, declining the proposal; at the same time acknowledging her kindness and generosity towards me, and begging the continuance of her friendship and esteem for me. But to me he gave much stronger 4rø t sons for his refusal, ** I have seldom known a young man make a this Tour r said he, but he returned the worse 4t for it, either in principle» or practice, but most " commonly in both." After this admonition from my father, I per¬ severed in my refusal. Soon after, I was ho* noured with a letter from Miss Lucas, acquaint¬ ing me that her mother was not well enough to- write herself,, but that she requested me, by her. hand, to look out for her, and to recommend a proper person to be her son ? s companion; fov that he would not permit any person to assume the title of his governor. I acquitted myself of this commission. I re¬ commended a worthy young man of the name of.
Í3$ Bates, who gladly accepted the oifer. He ao companied Mr. Lucas and myself on a visit to his mother, where the ierms were settled, and every thing agreed. While we were there, Mrs. Luca?, who had long been in a declining state, died. Her son and daughter were deeply affect¬ ed by her death. Dunng íny second visit here, í explained my¬ self to Miss Horton, and solicited her favour. She received my address with modest confidence; she confessed it gave her pleasure, but she fore¬ saw a great obstacle in the way of our mutual happiness.—Miss Lucas loves you, Sir, said she; the has a good fortune, she has many fine q^^- lities; I shall be sorry to be a hindrance to your making your fortune. I assured her of my love* and of my honour; that if she would share my lot, whicli was likely to be an humble one, î would refuse the highest rank or fortune for her sake, We agreed to keep our engagement secret, till such time as I should be in a situation to marry ; and to conceal our mutual affection from the eye of observation« Miss Lucas behaved with the utmost attention and politeness to me, ï staid only till Mr. Lucas made the necessary preparations for his departure, which made our adieus very affecting on all sides, 1 accompa¬ nied him and his companion to Harwich, from whence he proposed $oing through Holland 5
137 and Flanders before he should make the tour of France. At parting he embraced me with tears in his eyes. I shall never forget the obligatioas I owe you, mydear Bennet; I shall fulfil my mothers ■request, and my own inclination, in giving you the fib t living that is vacant; I promise it to you, and you may rely upon my word. I made my grateful acknowledgments in suit¬ able terms; I recommended Mr. Bates and him to each otheťs care, and returned with a heavy heart to Oxfoid. During my stay with him, I received a letter from the gentleman who had been guardian to Mr. Lucas, which contained a formal proposal of Miss Lucas's hand and fortune, which he was authorized to make me; and acquainted me that the lady's fortune was full ten thousand pounds. My confusion was so great upon reading this letter, that my father desired to know the cause of it, I then opened my heart to him, and told him of my engagement to Miss Horton. —Thcie к lo room for a moment's doubt, said my fa¬ ther; even if your heart were not so deeply at¬ tached, an engagement of this kind is sacred. I am entirely of your opinion, Sir, said I ; I wiil write that I am engaged already, and can¬ not accept the proposal,—Then you will act like
138 an honest man, said he, and you may expect the blessing of heaven upon your engagement.—* I wrote accordingly, that my heart and my pro¬ mise were already engaged, and that I had not the shadow of a wish to be released from my vows.—I wrote also to Miss Horton, acquainted her with the proposal I had received, gave her a transcript of my answer to it, and referred my¬ self entirely to her pleasure in respect to the de¬ claring of our engagements,—I waited with im¬ patience, and not without uneasiness, for an answer to my letter; a thousand disagreeable apprehensions disturbed my mind : at length the expected letter came, and opened a new scene of action to me, which decided the principal events of my life. I transcribe it in this place. " Dear Sir, У^пг letters have produced strange effects; it was some time before I could compose my mind enough to give you an account of them. Our engagement is, indeed, declared; but I must go back to the time when my cousin was expecting your answer to her proposal. She threw out hints to my mother and me» that she had a treaty of marriage under consi¬ deration, and that she was certain both of us would approve her choice. At length Mr. Withers came, and brought
139 your answer; which produced a great alteration in Miss Lucas, yvho grew silent, reserved, and unhappy. She shunned our company, except at meals, and then withdrew soon after. Your letter to ine arrived a few days after, and I then understood perfectly the cause of her uneasiness. My mother begged her to communicate the cause of her concern to her; but she desired her to excuse her. She looked at me as if expecting me to speak to her. I looked down, bluthed, and kept a profound bilence. Whether my be¬ haviour raised her suspicions, I don't know; but one day, while I was walking in tlie garden, she went into my room, looked into my drawers, and found there several of your letters, but above all your last to me. This discovery roused her from her silent melancholy. She came down stairs, rang the bell violently, and ordered the servant to call me: *- Bid Miss Horton come to me." When I went into the parlour, her pas¬ sion exceeded all description. She called me traitor ! deceiver ! every thing that was bad. I guessed the matter presently; I pitied her, and endeavoured to keep my temper and my resolu¬ tion. I gave way in silence, and let her run herself out of breath. When my mother came in, she found us in this situation ; she yvas astonished past expres¬ sion, and could only say, What is tlie matter f
MO —Here, Madam ! see here what a daughter you have! what a friend I!, what a serpent I have fostered in my bosom, and now it stings me to death î —So saying, she gave my mother your I itter, and then sunk back into her chair. I besought my mother not to judge of mc hardly* that I could not accuse myself of any thing wrong, except concealing your addresses from her; as for the rest, I had not deceived or betrayed any one. That I had reason to com¬ plain of my cousin, for looking into my papers; but that she had been punished severely for it, and I forgave and pitied her,— Pity mc! said she ; am I fallen so low as to excite your pity r No, I hate, detest, and despise you ! Go from my house, I will harbour you no longer î My dear cousin, moderate your passion, and hear me; suffer me to tell my story, and to jus¬ tify myself* ï will hear nothing; I know enough : you have robbed me! —Robbed you, Madam! —Yes, robbed me ofthe only thing I valued upon earth : have you not stolen Benneťs heart from me?—· No, Madam, he made a voluntary gift of it to me, before you had any pretensions to it.— Don't talk to me : get out of my sight ! I shall go dis¬ tracted if you remain here !—My mother said, María, leave us; go to your own chamber, and I will come to you zoon.
Ul I left them together, and went up to my chamber, where I spent a wretched hour, ac¬ cusing myseif as if I had committed the greatest crime. At length my mother came to me; I threw myself at her feet, and begged her to hear me. I told her the whole of our connexion, from the very first hour that you honoured me with your notice. She heard me patiently and kind¬ ly ; bhe raised and embraced me. My dear child, be comforted, repose your sorrows in the bosom of your parent; this is an indiscreet connexion according to the world's judgment; but, if Mr. Bennet prefers poverty with you, to afiiuence with another, what right have I to refuse my consent? the heart will choose for itself; and if the attachment be founded upon virtue, it must be a crime to op- ropc it. I must'leave it to you to choose your own lot ; it is you that must abide by it. I gave my dear mother a thousand thanks and blcasings for her goodness; I told her the con¬ cern 1 was under for my cousin, and my vvibhes for her peace and happiness. My dear, we must leave this house directly; perhaps when this af¬ fair is blown over, she may wish to see me again; but you, I am afraid, she never will. I will take a proper leave of her, and if she will permit it, you shall do the same.—My mother's kincUiefe
Н2 calmed my ruffled spirits; she w'ent from one to the other all the day ; she tried to promote a re¬ conciliation, but my cousin would hear no rea¬ son. The next day my mother went to Mr, Styles's, a tenant of the family; she asked him to take us to lodge and board for some time. At my mother's return, we prepared for our departure : I begged to take leave of my cousin, but she refused to see me. I find it high time to conclude this letter. Di¬ rect to me as you will see in the cover; write to me soon ; restore my peace and tranquillity, and dispose of me as you please. M ari л HoRTosr." I read this letter with peat emotion, and then gave it to my fathei, and asked his advice how to proceed.—-There is but one way, said he ; write to Mrs. Horton immediately; offer this house as an asylum to her and her daughter.-— You are the best of fathers, said I ; and I can never express my sense of your kindness to me I -—You shall give me a daughter, said he, that shall be the comfort of my old age.— í flew to my father, I embraced and thanked him, more indeed by actions than words, for my joy rose almost to rapture,—He observed rae,— Ilarkee, young man! let me lower you a little : how aie you to maintain a wife?—Dear Sir, said I, she
143 brings me a little fortune of her own ; I shall get a double curacy; and your goodness will piece out a scanty income, till such time аз I can get some preferment.—And when is that to be ? said my father, smiling. Sir, I have a promise from Mr. Lucas.—My father shook his head.—You shall marry the lady, said he, and you shall be my curate, till you can do better. You shall be all my boarders, and you must pray for my life, that you may still have a house over your bead. Go, write your letters, and pursue the plan I have chalked out.—I wrote to Miss Horton in the terms of an accepted lover; and prevailed on my father to write himself to Mrs. Horton, as the invitation would come more properly from him. I told them I should only wait for their answer, and set out immediately to fetch them to my father's house. We received answers as soon as they could possibly reach us.—Mrs. Horton thought it was better for us to wait some time, till Miss Lucas's resentment should be abated, before we married. I was of a different opinion; that when once our marriage was celebrated, and there was no remedy, Miss Lucas would return to d right way of thinking. I wrote to Mrs, Horton, and told her she might expect to see me soon after the
144 letter, for I would be kept at that distance no longer. Accordingly I went over the week following,- and was received as I wished to be both by mo¬ ther and daughter; they told «ie they sent every day since tbey left the hall, to enquire after Miss Lucas* healths the answer was, Very well, but she saw no company. It was debated whether I should send in my own name, and whether I should not wait on her« Mrs. Horton wrote a conciliatory letter to Miss Lucas, saying, That finding her residence in that neighbourhood was disagreeable to her, she had accepted of an asylum offered by a friend, I thought proper to write to her my eel f, though against the advice and opinion of the ladies» My letter was as follows : M Madam, The respect I bear Miss Lucas, both for her own and her brother's sake, obliges me to pay her my compliments during my stay in her neighbourhood. I am extremely concerned that яэу engagement .to Miss Horton should have been the cause of a misunderstanding between such near and worthy relations, I honour Miss Lucas for her fine qualities, aud think I cannot; be deceived in my opinion of jier. I believe that
145 time and reflexion will restore her to those friends, whom misapprehension has driven to banishment. I could not be so near, and not let it be known to you, as I am not conscious o£ any action that requires to be concealed or disguised,—I shall at all times be proud to obey your commands in any thing in which you will accept my services ; and shall ever preserve a grateful remembrance of the friendship with yvhich I once was honoured« I am, Madam, Your most obliged and obedient Servant, William Be v n et." I staid three days after these letters yvere sent to the hall ; and finding there yvas no answer to be expected, my ladies and I set out upon our journey, and arrived safely at my native village and my yvell-known happy home. My dear father received us with so much cor¬ diality, as yvon the hearts of his two amiable guests. Airs. Horton's politeness, and my dear Maria's attentions, had the same effect on him. After a generous contest which shewed the high opinion each party had of the other, it w r as agreed that Miss Horton's fortune should be vested in trustees hands, and settled on her and her children. She and I left eyery r thing of this kind to our parents. An honest attorney made II
the wilting-; and ач soon as tb y w< tc fmj-ifd and executed, my father married me to my dear Maria, and made me the happiest of men ; ge¬ nerons by nature, frugal by necessity, vhe spared from herself to relieve the wants of other.-». She ne\cF spent a penny idly, nor bought any thing superfluous to adorn her person ; vet there was such neatness and elegance in her dress and manner, that any body would have given her credit for three times the money she expended. To my father and her own mother, the nuM dutiful and tender of children; to me, a most amiable wife, i doated upon hei , and ν et thought I could not love her enough. Sueh vas —Oh rather let me bless heaven that I can say, such is the woman who honoured me yvith her hand! such is the mother I gave to mv children ; such are the qualities a man should seek for, in the woman he chooses for Ьь com¬ panion through life. I will check my pen which knows not how to btop on this subject, and only utter the linai wish of my sou!, which is (if God to please) that İ may not survive this excellent woman,—I pro¬ ceed with my history. About three months after my marriage, I re- reived a letter from Mr. Lucas, in which he re¬ membered his former friendship, lie said, he had a strange letter from his sister, in which she
i obipîaın» d, that í had beh»\ed unh mtbomeîy to her, and made a difteience between her and her relations; (le^irin^ hun not to %1\е me tlie living he had promised, but keep it for one more woithv of it. lie said, ««he had told him no par¬ ticulars, «and thrirfoie he dcsned to h« αϊ them fiom mo. He desired me to write to him at Moutpeher, wheie he was at that time, and ihould stav some months on account of his health, \ which was not good enough to proceed to Italy, ï wrote an answer immediately, in which I guai ded the lady's honour as carefully as my own. I told him, that I had presumed to solicit M*ss Ilorton's hand, without consulting Miss Lucas; that she resented my behaviour; that I was actually married to his fair cousin ; that I rblied upon his fiiendship to reconcile us both to his sister, for yvhom I had every sentiment of Côteein and respect; and hoped his return would reunite us all. 1 ι eeeived an answer to this letter as soon as í fO'ild expect; find abo one from Mr. Bate», espies-mghis apprehensions for Mr. Lucas'b life, and feai ing a consumption. Mi. Lucas expressed himself to the same ctľec t, and 1 began ardently to wish for his return. I w i oie to urge him to come back, if his health ^ s not soon ie-eetabl\shed. I gave him some
ns écrions advice, and assured him of my warm affection towards Ыш. Mr. Bates aiiMvered this letter on his behalf; .said, that he wan in a place recommended for his disorder ; that he yvould not go to Italy, un¬ less» he were quite restored ; that his conduct had been prudent and regular in all respects; that he had freauentlv serious conferences with him ; that he repemed sincerely the follies and errors of his youth. I wrote agaiu to Mr. Bates, desiring him by all means to let Miss Lucas knoyv ihe situation of her brother: and wished him to come home directly, if he yvas able to bear the journey. Afterwards I consulted my wife and mother, whether it would not be better to give Miss Lucas immediate notice of her brother's danger ; it was thought proper to do so, but not under either of our hands. My father used the pen and wrote as follows : *' A warm and sincere friend to Miss Lucas, thinks it is his duty to advertise her, that her brother is in a very bad state of health at Mont- pelier ; that his malady is of the consumptive kind, and it is apprehended he is in some danger* He leaves it to Miss Lucas to make yvhat use she thinks best of this information; but in case a dreaded event had happened, before she yvas prepared, he could not have forgiven himself. TuitQCLZb."
ug We found ourselves more easy and satisnedf After we had given this information ; we en¬ quired what use yvas made of it ; and heard that Mbs Lucas wa" set out for the continent pre- -cntly after rocei* ing our It tter,—*Oh, said ΐ, that bhe had not banished her friend«* ! I would cherrfully have attended hfrto Montpellier, and have paid the duties oi friendship to both sistc ι and brother. Soon after the arrival of Mis·* Lucas at Mon f * pcher, Mr. Bates w rott. me word of this ev*nt , he supposed from whom she received the intelli¬ gence of her brother's illncs c ; he rejoiced that slie was present, to see that all kind of attention and care was paid to her brother, of whose re¬ covery there yverp but little hopes, I yvrote to Mr. Bates, and received his answers constantly, with an account of the progress of Mr. Lucas's distemper, and at last of Ins death. He died like a man, and like a Christian, be¬ queathed his whole fortune to his sister, but reminded her of his obligations to Mr. Bates and mc. Miss Lucas determined to bring his body home, to be interred with his ancestors, Mr. Bates attended it ; he cave me notice of his arrival. I yvent uniiuitcd, and attended the funeral of my friend. I set out the minute after, travelled &\i night, and came hastily home. и 3
J 50 it was full two months after the funeral, that one day, as I was in my study, my wife came to me with marks of surprize in her countenance. —My dear William, said she, prepare for a surprize—Of what kind, my love, said I r —Said she, There is a chaise and six horses now entered our yard ; a mourning one, witli two servants in mourning ; it can be but one person in the world. —Let us go, said í ; let us hasten to meet her ï I took her hand, and led her out. The servant came to meet us, to tell us that a lady was come into the parlour. I hastened thither; Alaria hung upon my arm. I felt somewhat confused! As soon as we entered the room, Miss Lucas ran into her cousin's arms, the tears flowed fast down her cheeks. Forgive me, Maria í my dear cousin, forgive me ! said she.—Maria could not speak; she embraced her cousin, she wept, but could not presently answer her. Miss Lucas repeated, Can you forgive me ?— Forgive you ! oh my cousin, my friend ! I have never ceased to love you!—Then you are an angel î but you always were my superior in every thing. I have never been happy since our sepa¬ ration; and I come now to ьеек your forgiveness, that I may be at peace with myself.—Don't say sol my dear cousin.' said Maria. I knew your heart could not res«nt always ; 1 knew it would return to mine; I knew you better than you did
lol yourself.—-You are too good, said Miss Lucas; but 1 have more pardons to ask,—turning to me. Not one word in that style, my dear Madam! Yes, one word, Sir ; Was it not you that ad- \ ised nie of my brother's situation ì —It was, Madam.—I knew ii could be nobody else. Oh, Sir, you have lost a friend !—She wept.—But I will restore another to you. I have seen щу faults, thank God ! and 1 live in hopes to amend them.—I begged her to say nothing that could occasion disagreeable recollections ; she became more composed. She asked for her aunt ; who had been preparing to see her without emotion. When she came to us, Miss Lucas ran and embraced her. After our first emotions were abated, she pre¬ sented each of us with a ring with her brother's hair, set round with brilliants ;—" By my bro¬ ther's order," said she. She said every thing generous and kind, and seemed to enjoy this reconciliation as the first , wish of her heart. My lather was surprized to see so fine a lady, and to hear her generous confession of her past faults : she said, it was the firbt happy hour she bad enjoyed, fioni the day her aunt and cousin left her house. After dinner, when the servants were with¬ drawn, bhe. said, 1 have but оде Uling more to и 4
152 say, my brother desired that I would give the two livings, as they should fall, to you and Mr. Bates ; the option shall be yours, Sir.—I offered to speak,-—I will receive no thanks, said she ; I only fulfil the desire of your friend, who blessed you with bis last breath. After this she seemed to recover her spirits. She spent a week with us, and behaved wi f h the greatest kindness and politeness to us all. Soon after Miss Lucas returned home, she was very pressing to her aunt to come over to her: Our dear mother was unwilling to leave us ; she delayed her departure till the summer. Miss Lucas continued urging her by letter, and gave such reasons as made it impossible to refuse her. " I am besieged, my dear aunt, said she ; the foitune I inherit is the occasion of much trouble to me : I am as much tormented with suitors as Penelope was of old. Mr. Withers is against me; he says it is my duty to marry, and en¬ courages new suitors as fast as I send away the old ones. " If my dear aunt will not come to me, I will shut up my house, go to a distant j* Л, change my name, and conceal ray fortuite, that I may enjoy my own comforts, and live after my own manner/' Mrs. Horton wrote in answer, " That she was preparing to wait upon her."
153 Mrs. Horton and Miss Lucas wrote in turn tó my wife, and informed us of every thing that passed with them. The year following brought forward a new series of events, tliat ended in the accomplish¬ ment of all our wishes. The first step towards it was, that one of the livings in Miss Lucas's gift became vacant. It was in an unpleasant situation, a lonely village, far removed from all our friends. The other living, was Miss Lucas's own parish» which she supposed would be more desirable to myself and my wife : if I chose to wait for that, I might depend upon it. I auswered her letter to this effect : *' That I was under the same obligation to Miss Lucas, whether I accepted or declined it ; that I should refuse any preferment, however advantageous, that could interfere with the duty and affection I owed to mydear father; and that all other considerations vanished before it. Secondly, that I had a predilection in favour of the dear village where I was born, and where¬ in I had spent so many happy years : that my father intended to use his interest with the pa¬ tron, for the next turn of the livina; of S—— for me; or, that if my father's application should not succeed, I yvould wait in expectation of her goodness, in regard to the other living; but that, h 5
154 whatever the event might be, she had bound me and mine to her, in an eternal bond of gratitude and obligation." This letter Mrs. Horton gave to her cousin ; she smiled on reading it. Tell your son, said she, that be is a proud man, and chooses to be obliged to any body rather than to me ; but tell him also, that I will yet be revenged on him. Bid him apply to the patron of the living of S—-, and let me know the result as soon as possible. She said this in a manner that shewed her real intention to serve me. My father applied directly to the patron of the living of S— ; he was a worldly-minded man, who thought of nothing but to make the most of every thing. He took some weeks to consider of the proposal, and then wrote to my father, " That though his father had given away the living to him» as a proof of his friendship, there was no reason why he should do it to his son; that times were altered, expences increased, and that he could not afford to give away things of so much value ; but, if my father would give him five hundred pounds for tbe next turn of the living, he might then resign it, and he would present it to his son ; but otherwise it should remain ás it was/' We were under some difficulty to relate this treaty to Miss Lucas, I wrote to Mrs, Horton»
L55 told her of this treaty, and that my father had an objection to the proposal of purchasing the next turn of the living for me ; that I bad given it up, and had turned my wishes and expecta¬ tions another way. My father received a letter from Miss Lucas immediately on the receipt of mine, desiring him to proceed no farther in this business. Generous, noble-minded woman ! said my fa¬ ther ; she will bave her revenge, and she shall take her own way. A few weeks after, my father received another letter from our patroness. " The business is done, Sir; you will resign your living, andT shall present your son to it; I have purchased the advowson, and will be patroness myself. Tell your son I shall pay him a visit shortly, and bring his mother with me, upon condition that her daughter will not detain her, but let her return with me." She came soon after. Miss Lucas enjoyed our satisfaction, but yet there seemed a cloud upon her brow at times. One day after dinner she spoke to us :—" I want to make known my present situation to you all, my dear friends ; but for my life I cannot tell the story myself. 1 will give my aunt Horton leave to do it, but it must be when I am not present. I will retire to my chamber, and leave her to tell you all that I u6
Î56 wïbh you to know."—So saying, she retired % and our curiosity being strongly excited, we begged my dear mother to gratify it, wiiich she did by relating what follows : " I need not tell you, my dearest children, that Miss Lucas has had many offers of marriage since her brother died ; she has refused them r upon a presumption that her fortune was their· principal object. I need not tell you that she ' has a noble, frank, and generous^ heart ; she has always said, " I would rather confer than receive an obligation; Γ had rather engage a man's gratitude, than that he should demand mine." " After this preface, t must inform you, that about three months ago a young gentleman, whose name is Valentine Lucas, paid a visit to our friend Mr. Withers. He told him that he had been informed, that a part of the family estate was entailed upon the male heir; that he was the person that had the right to claim it ; that out of respect to Miss Lucas's character, he was desirous to spare her every thing that could possibly give her uneasiness ; that he would submit his claim to the arbitration of some of tbe most eminent men of the law, if Miss Lucas would do the same. '* Mr. Withers was extremely pleased with the young man's person and address ; he enquired into his character and fortune. He heard tìiat *
157 he was of a small fortune, not more than three hundred a year; was bred to the iavv, just called to the bar, of good character and abilities, ard of great expectations in his profession. He made his report to Miss Lucas, who was at first a good deal surprized and disconcerted. Mr. Withers urged her to see the gentleman, and to hear what he would say upon the subject. H~ brought him to pay his respects ; the lady was pleased with his person and behaviour, which was exceedingly modest and respectful. Mr· Withers observed them both, and, at his return, had a long conversation with Mr. Lucas ; in the course of which, he asked him whether he should not like a compromise at the lady's expenee Ì The young gentleman urged him to explain his meaning. Why, said Mr. Withers, if I yvere a young man în your situation, I would try my fortune with the lady, cheat the lawyers, and share the estate with her only. * f Dear Sir, said Mr. Lucas, you surprize me I yvith my little fortune, how can I presume? ** If your fortune equalled hers, would you ad¬ dress her?— -Sir, I yvould, by heaven! said he.—* Very well. Will you give me leave to tell her so ? *—If, Sir,—if you think she will not be offended. í would not for the world that she should think me wanting in respect to her.—-These sentiments
158 are, the, mos t likely to make you esteemed by her, Sir. I know Miss Lucas has a generous, noble heart, and I wish her to marry ; I think she could not make a more proper choice.— Dear Sir, you transport me by your goodness ! " The next day Mr. Withers came and told the whole story to Miss Lucas. She was offended with him ; but the good old man urged her with so much eloquence and reason on his side, that he served his client effectually, and at length bhe consented to receive his visits, and to hear him speak for himself. 44 í seconded Mr. Withers in his remonstrances, telling her that she ought to marry. " The gentleman came to visit her; and the oftener lie came, the more merit we discovered in him : in short, he is very likely to succeed in his suit to her ; and she will, I make no doubt, confirm her own happiness when she completes his. She was resolved to provide for my dear children before she gives up her power over her own fortune. She has wanted to tell you this story, but had not the courage; but now» you have heard it, you will, I dare say, rather strengthen than weaken her resolution to marry/' We were overjoyed to hear of her intention, and, at her return to the company, we congra¬ tulated her on her resolution.
i¿9 She received our compliments with lindness and afitíUion; and hoped we would *hit hei ш Staíľordshire. bhe asked our pei mission to keep my mother with her till Ыт тли bige was over.—I behexe, said she, I shall keep my aunt tiil vou come to fetch her home. After a fortnight's staj , she returned home, and earned oui mother with her, whom w<» cheejfully spai ed, in hope she would soon take up her rebidence with us entirely. About a month after her return home, MihS Lucas made her lover happy. Mr. Witheis was the nuptial father, and seemed as much de¬ lighted as if he had married his own daughter, for he was interested m every thing that con¬ cerned the honour and happiness of Miss Lucas. After two months were elapsed, and my mo¬ ther made no mention of returning to us, my wife wrote to urge it, being desnous that she should be with her before she should be brought- to-bed; saying, she could live without her no longer. Airs. Lucas wi ote to my wife in answer. I transcribe a part of her letter to her. " 1 cannot resist your plea for your mother's return; but it disappoints my intention, which was, that you should have come to fetch her. Uowevci, if you will not giant me this favour, >ou mu.st a/wtket ; you must part with Mr, íítv¿- 5
160 net, and send him to conduct your mother home ; I have a reason for this request. Mr. Lucas is vciy desirons of being acquainted with your hus¬ band. This man assumes the authority of an husband, mydear Maria; he pretends to havs more generosity than myself. I shall not ex· plain myself fai ther: send your husband over, we will not keep him from you long, and will return him not worse than he comes ; oh that you would accompany him, and share the happiness of your friend ! Anna Lucas." I could not avoid going, though it was with great reluctance. I left my v> ife ; my father pro¬ mised to take care of her till my return, and to advise me of her health every post. At my arrival, I met with the mo c t cordial reception from Mr. and Mis. Lucas. I found him a modest, sensible, and amiable man; like minds are easily acquainted, and we soon be¬ came familiar friends. The second day after my arrival, he told me the parish where they re¬ sided had lost its rector, and offered the living to my acceptance. I answered as before, that I preferred my present residem e to any other ; for the same reasons as formei ly, that I yvould not acce pt any fai ther preferment, unless I could perform the duties of it.—Why 'then, said Mrs. Lucas, we must give it to Mr. Bate?, who at
idi present ib m α state of bananinem 4 ; at 1)----- -> —But I forgot (said she, lookm·» grave) that I am married: have I your kave, Sır, to do thl·^ —Mv dear angtl! said ht, don't ask my leave to dľ'pG'-e of \our own pmprrty. I adore your btnevolence ana jrnno4ty ! seldom, verv dom, do you pei form any thing that tun b ni'îKbd: but let me, in return, аЛ, ií I havı vour kne to do what 1 pi oponed? — Vou h<ıve, Mı; " I will contend with you upon this thttrc; i f U the only one, I trust, that we shall evt r cOiitend about."-— Ile bowed gracefully to her. Then turning to me, You must do us the favour, bn, as you don't accept this living, to accept tho perpetual advowson oí the living oí S ------ , пъ d donation oí friendship and îdationship from us both.—\o, Sir, said our cousin, fiom Mr. Lucas only; it is his own thought and his own proposal, and he bhall have the whole cre¬ dit of it.—I wa confounded at then geneiOMty, I ofieied to decline it, but they yyould take 1.0 denial. Mib. Horton and mvself expressed our giati¬ tude m the vy arment langu ige our hearts foug- gcbted. They stopped us short, saving. Our fiiendship was then lecompence.—The next day, at their desire, í wrote to Mi, liâtes to come over. I wiote also to Mr. Udson, the cui ate, eufľuinug mto the pamculais of his .situation,
162 and giving him reason to hope foi better &hortIv, —Our generous patrons enjoyed the pure and sublime pleasure, of making three faiĽuhe& com¬ pletely happy at the same time. Though 1 v> as happy in this respected and beloved fuiml., I giudged e\ery day 1 stayed; foi 1 longed to rå¬ turn to my dear Mana, who 1 knew icckouui the houre of my absence. They acknowledged the justness of our pica, and excused us for this time; saying, we should make them amends m íuture. Mr. Lucas said, 1 hope our fair cousin will bring you a son, to succeed you m your own living. I offer myself as sponsor for him, if you are not provided.—I thanked him for the ho* nour, and gladly accepted it.— Mrs. Lucas of¬ fered to be godmother; and Mr. Withers the other godfather.—It seems, said Mrs. Horton, that you are certam of a son, but if you should be mistaken?—Then, said Mr. Withers, we will reserve our*eh et for another time. We hastened home, being impatient to mett those dear and tender lrtend.s, who exj ectcd us with impatience at least equal to oui own. Their joy at our îe- turn rose almost to rapture; but my dear father's lookb weie a great ubateim-ut to mine ; he as¬ sumed a cheerful countenance, and btrove to conceal the ultei ation 1 1 om us all. İh encou¬ raged out joy, he uW e\ei> thn -¿ that could
Jü.î make us easy; he told me that my return hud made him well, and renewed his youth: But i think, William, said he, that i cannot part with \ou again; for it seems as if my health, as well as happiness, depended upon you. The tears started from my eyes. Oh mat it depended upon me, said I, to prolong that hie so dear to me í —I embraced him, and wept over him.—Why it does, baid my dear father; I will Ine as long as I can for vour sake; and if you did not wish it, 1 should not have lived so long as I have done. Come, tell us all that has hap¬ pened since our separation. I related our cousin s noble behaviour to us and to otheiS, and communicated the happiness I felt to my hearers ; and we united our blessings and prayers for our benefactors. At length my wishes and prayers were an¬ swered ; my dear Maria brought me a son within a week after my return home, to the inexpies- biblc joy of overs part ol my family. My dear father was so interested in this happy e\cnt, that he was continually visiting the room, that he might bee the child; several times in the day he looked at him, and seomed anxious after every thmg that related to him. My dear Mana nursed tlie child herself; and, happily, her health seemed to impiove m the dischai ge of the tender u hice.
1б4 My dear father's decline could no longer be concealed; I saw and lamented it, without power to prevent it. I besought him to have adv e from the most eminent physicians, lie smiled.—Do you think, my son, they ran renew my youth? I know my disorder, it it the lot of mortality; did you think I was immortal? ï have, lived long enough ; î see my children hap¬ py; you are well provided for; ï have nothmg more to wish or to hope for; I am willing to de¬ part when Heaven calls mc. Your sister's huf¬ band is not a man after my own heart, but I will discharge my duty Lo him and her; send for them, my son; ï will see them once more, and take a proper leave of them. I wrote immediately for them to come to us. Mr. Bloomfield, who had married my sister, was a wealthy farmer, a close, sordid, sehish man, who had but one thing in his head, whieh was accumulating »vhes. He had married mv sister for love, and af- terwards bragged of his generosity, and even re¬ proached her with her obligations to him. She was a quiet, harmless, inoíľensive woman; she did not contend with his imperious temper, but sunk into a state of acquiescence, obeyed him implicitly, and gave up every other wish, and every other friend. Upon this occasion he brought her to visit her father; but, instead of shewing any concern for
l'*·»
hım, this man enquired what he had done for his daughter; said, he had heard that some good fortune had fallen Uj hmi lately, and that he had bestowed it all upon Ьь son. You have been misinformed, said my father; a relation of my sor/ -5 yvife purchased the ad- \owson of my living for him. I did nothing more than resign the living a short time sooner than death yyould have taken it from me. I gave no money, I lost none, for my son would ne\er receive any part of the income of it so 1опц as I live. í have left mv own little fortune t usually for you and my son; the only distinc¬ tion i have made in his favour ib this: I have left hun all the furniture, plate, and linen of thib house, yvith the farming stock and utensils; and I hay e left him my executor, and residuary legatee, that you may not have it in your poyver to give him trouble. I think I have done yvhat justice requires; my heart is easy and satisfied; and it is not m your power to disturb the peate of my mmd, nor to make any alteration in it. This son of earth would have objected to my father's disposal of his property, but it was to no purpose. My ¡»ister showed a true filial concern and affection for her father; but was under so much restraint in her husband's presence, that -Лю shewed little attention to any person but himself*
16*0* My dear father died without pitin or regret ; 1 never left his piliow ; he expired in my arms, with his hand in mine. His last words yvere a blessing upon me and mine; and a pious resig¬ nation of his soul iuto the hands of its Creator. in the course of tin 1 same year, Mrs. Lucas intreated my mother to come over, to be pre¬ sent at her delivery, and to initiate her into the mysteries of J mio Lucina. This request could not be denied. Mrs. Hor¬ ton went over, and yvas present at the biith of a son and heir, who gave joy to his parents, and to all the friends of the family. At the end of a month, Mrs. Lucas yvrote to ask as a fa¬ vour, that we yvould come to fetch our mother home; we went accordingly, and carried our young son yvith us; we rejoiced with our friends upon these additional blessings, and spent a happy month with them, during which, I did the office of a friend to Mr. Bates: I married him to Mrs. Mary Mills, who was a distant relation of our cousin Lucas, and had been the super¬ intendant of her famiiy ever since the death of her mother. Mr. and Mrs. Lucas made the new-married pair many presents and procured them every thmg requisite to the comfort and convenience of their situation. We parted with great reluctance on all sides; us all of u& foresaw that our families increasing,
167 and the duties of my situation, would render it inconvenient to visit so often in future as we had done hitherto. We returned to our own home, and enjoyed the comforts that heaven had given us, in a con¬ stant and regular way of life, that afforded very little variety. The following year Mr. Withers died in a good old age, beloved and regretted by all that knew him. This year our mother declined going into Staffordshire; os she grew iuto years, longjour- nies became inconvenient and fatiguing to her; and, beside, her children grew more unwilling to spare her, and she did not like to lose so much of tlieir company. About three years after the birth of my son, my wife brought me a daughter, whom she abo nursed herself; and finding the child grow strong and healthy (more so than any she had yet borne) she suckled her longer than the usual tune, because it seemed to agree with both mother and child. 1 mention this circumstance, because it proved of great confequence, on the interesting event which happened soon after; which introduced iuto our family a most dear child, and, a& I hope, a future molher of it ; I yvill therefore be particular in my narrative of that event.
ït wat on the lòdi of October, 17 —, аь I war- sitting in the parlour vuth my wife and mother; they working at the noedie, I reading to them; a post-chaise stopped at our door. The servant came to us, and told us that a gentleman and lady desired to speak with me instantly, 1 went to the door directly; 1 saw there a young gen¬ tleman, whose countenance shewed marks of the utmost distress.«—I asked what commands he had for me? lie seized my hand, pressed it earnestly, and spoke. Dear Siri worthy gentleman! you are a clergyman, you must have humanity. Take pity on an unfortunate pair, who are in distress of a peculiar kind ! This lady, my dear wife, is iu labour; she was takeu ill upon the load, shv 1 cannot reach the place whither wc were going, aud where we were expected; it is full ten miles further; my wife has been in fits; she will expire on the load, unless your goodness will assist u& # Have pity upon us, and take us undei your roof, and God will reward your humanity î The gentleman's distress touched my heart ; it answered in his behalf, and dictated my reply. .—I ran into the parlour.—My love, said I, here is a call upon our humanity; a must distressful situation; come and assist rue to answer it— We hastened to the chaise ; the gentleman re· peated the particulars of the <лье m the accents of nature, oppressed with grief and tenderness.
My wife desired rae to assist him in bringing the lady into our house, I opened the door of the diaise; the lady was iti a fit; we lifted her out, íťnd carried her into the parlour; the servants came and olitred their assistance. We tried the usual methods to recover the lady; our mother oame to advisens. My yvife supported the lady in her arms, and every one strove to he of ser~ vice to herj the husband was in agonies of grief all this time. At length she opened her eyes; she looked round her, and then fixed them on her husband, and spoke,—Sly dear, ! am I at В —— ?—No, my life, said he, you are in an hos¬ pitable family, who have had the goodness to take us under their roof. We stopped at two houses before, and they refused to take us in; but yve have found the good Samaritan at last. God reyvard him and his tender wife!—She looked up at my yvife, yvho v;as bending over her, Л1у mother brought some wine ; she made .he lady take a little; the gentleman did the •¡«ime. Let us, said she, carry the lady up stairs, •vhile she is a little better.—Her husba'tid and myself did so, but she famted again yyhile we' were removing her. We left her in the hands ί of the women of our family, and fetched up stairs the trunk that contained their necessaries ; the gentleman paid tbe post-chaise, and sent it í away. r
170 Soon after, my servant returned with the good woman; she went directly up stairs; and I took the gentleman into tbe parlour, and a»ked him to give me the particulars of his situation, which he related briefly as follows. "Iara the only son of a man of rank and fortune; my father had chosen a wife for me, but my heart refused the election of another, and would choose its own partner fcr life. I am privately married to that dear woman whom you have seen with me; I was obliged to con¬ ceal it from my father, and therefore I secured her an asylum at a great distance from him against her hour of trial. Unfortunately I de¬ layed too long our journey thither, on account of some accidental hindrances ; but I hoped to liave been there to-night. Through that un- Ырру delaj we are subjected to this distress, which I ardently pray may have no bad conse¬ quences." I comforted him ia the best manner I could, and put him in hope that all would end happily. While we were talking together, my mother en¬ tered the room with the midwife, and their looks boded no good ending of this business, Tbe good woman said,—Sir, this lady's case is past my skill, she has been too long without proper assistance; you must send for some gen*
J71 tleman of the faculty, upon whose skill you can rely, for the lady is in very great danger. This account threw us back into all our fears again.—! took my horse directly, and rode as upon life and death: I was so fortunate es to rind the doctor at home, and brought him with me in less time than could have been expected ; telling him the case by the way. The tender heart of my dear Maria suffered greatly on this occasion; but she resolved to obey its dictates, to stay with the poor lady, and give her every comfort and assistance in her power. When I arrived with the doctor, ï carried Ыт directly to the lady ; I took the afflicted hus¬ band away, and left the doctor to the duties of his profession. In half an hour he came to us with a countenance of deep concern. Mr. Ben- net, said he, you have called me to an unfortu¬ nate business. í think it my duty to tell you that the lady is in the utmost danger. The husband threw himself in agonies at the doctor's feet; he assured htm of hie reliance upon him.—Save my wife, said he, and ask what you will for your reward.·—Reward, Sir, answer¬ ed he; I would freely give an hundred pounds to be as many miles another way; and tfcat any other man had the office and the reward ; but í will make an effort to save both the mother and ι 2
1Г2 child» and will act as a man who is accountable at a higher tribunal than that of the opinion of men.«—He went out of tlie room with tears in his eyes, and left us overwhelmed with grief and despair. It wae about two hours before we heard any tiling-Trent aboye; at length Mrs. Horton came into the room wi.t}\ her eyes swelled with weep¬ ing, and her Voice faltering.—The lady is deli¬ vered, said 6he;-both she and the child are ala e , but it is \&ry uncertain how long they will be so. Tiie gentleman rose up; he embraced my mother, and thanked her for her goodness. God re¬ ward you, Madam ! you have given me a glimpse of hope* My Lord I' says Mrs. Horton, for such I fmd you are, you should make us acquainted with your name and familyj you have no friends that better deserve your confidence. He told us that he was the only son of the earl of D ■ ■, and tliat his father knew no¬ thing of his marriage or his journey, but thought hjm at Jiis.*eat in Bedfordshire.—But, Madam, added he, дпау I ÄOt-see^my love?—Not at pre¬ sent, said she.—May I nöt see tlie doctori— I liave prevailed on him to stay till tbe lady is out of danger, or till . Oh don't, do not suppose it,,eaid he! I cannot bear the idea: she must not, shall not diel— It is our duty, S,ir, to resign
№ to the will of heaven. So saying, my mot he j retired, and left us in a state of doubt, fear, ana anxiety, which yet was too soon ended. I sat performing the useless office of advising a com- posure, which I could not attain. After som< hours spent in this manner, the doctor came to ns.—Sir, said he, to Lord В -------, jyour wife de¬ sires to see you once more; but yon mubt he composed, or you will disturb her last moment i. —lie began to rave again.—This will not do. Sir; you must not see her, unless you can com¬ mand yourself.—No t see her İ said he; who thai í hinder meí — L will, Sir, said the doctor; and ьо will every one in tbe houses—Well, but I vill be patient as a man can be; lead me to her!— We led him up stairs, and into the room. I was a spectator of the mournful scene; my wife was supporting the dying lady, her arm was under her head, and she held my Maria's haud to her lips. Mrs. Horton held the child, for the mother to take a last look of it. The lady spoke in a low and tremulous voice. You will be the mother of my child?—I will, said my wife, in a faltering voice, she shall be as dear to me as my own.—Thank you, my dear friend, God bless you !-~*The husband ran to the bed¬ side; he kneeled by it; he sobbed, but could not speak ; he took her hand with my wife's in it; she tried to turned that way, but could not,—► τ *» I и
17* Slie said, Farewel, my dear lord í take care of yourself. Do not grieve for me ; your father,your whild! live—long and happy. God bless—»bless, keep yuu!—-She fell into a fit with this exertion. We curried the distracted man out ofthe room, and she expired in a few minutes after. The husband was in agonies; he raved till his strength was exhausted, and then sunk into fainting fits. I begged the doctor to stay with us to take care of han.— I will bleed him, said he; I make no doubt he will soon recover; this kind of grief is not fatal; it is the silent kind, that preys upon the heart. —He bled the patient, we laid him down upon a bed ; I left my servant and a neigh¬ bour's son to watch with him, with orders to call mc if 1 was wanted. The doctor went away, and promised to call the next day; but my first care wae for thoee dearer to me than myself. ï went and fetched my wife and mother from the scene of death. í intreated them to go and take some repose; tliey retired together, and ** threw myself into an armed chair in the same room ; sleep kindly visited us all, and repaired in a de¬ gree the fatigue and vexation of the wretched night we had passed, 1 first awoke, stole softly out of the room, and tven t to visit my patient; who was somewhat more composed and ration«), but had many returns of passion, which were happily allayed by tears which ite shed pienti-
175 fully. I wept with him in silence; he pouretï forth his acknowledgment» for my tender sym¬ pathy! he vowed eternal friendship to me and mine, while he should live upon earth. I besougbt him to leave it to us to pay the last duties to his departed wife. I told him that my father had built a large vault for himself and family, and we would give our guest aplace in it; he embraced me with tears and thanks. He took out bis pocket-book, and put into my hand two bank bilk of an hundred pounds each: í offered to return one of them.—Keep them, my dear friend, »aid he, to answer incidental expences. Alas! I hoped to make a different use of them. I stepped out, and gave some necessary orders concerning the body ; and sent for proper assis¬ tants, in order to put things in tram tor a decent disposal of it. My w-iie and mother arose, and the family began again to put on an appearance of regularity. Lord B— refused dining yvith us, and kept his chamber, which I thought best for my friend's sake; but towards night, my wife had been missing some time, and, as I supposed, v/as attending to her children. I sought her all over the house. At last 1 found her in the uur- sery. I found her— oh disine benevolence! emanation of the Divinity ! first of Christian vir¬ tues!—I found her giving her own breast to the poor little orphan child, while the tears rolled x 4
губ down her cjieeks in compassion for it. I kneeled involuntarily to her as to a superior being.—Oh , Maria!—my angel wife ! This action is .worthy of thee, and few beside thee would have per¬ formed it. My love, said she, forgive my doing it with¬ out first asking your permission ! but 1 have pro¬ mised to be ά mother to this poor baby, and I mean to perform it religiously; it is high time that our daughter should be weaned; and I will preserve her diet for this child, as long as she has need of it, Excuse you! my love, said I; I adore you for it! I left her, to return to Lord B— . — My lord, saie 1 ï, your daughter will live; we have got her a nurse,— such a nurse, аз neither you nor I could ever have expected.—What already ? said he.—»I had much ado to make him under¬ stand or believe this news; but his tears and blessings spoke his gratitude for it. I consulted my wife and mother concerning the funeral; I advised Lord B— to depart first, but ho in¬ sisted upon attending it ; 1 waved it for the prü¬ ften t, saying, if you are üble, my lord.—Whun he first saw my wife, he kneeled to her; called her his guardian angel! his patroness! the mo¬ ther of his child! u Ì will find a way to show my sense of my obligations to you, Madam, ana
m to defray your expences for my poor infant."-*· On the day of the funeral, we kept in a back¬ ward room. Lord B—— attempted to visit the conn, but was not able. I sent to a neighbour clergyman, and begged him to perform the ser¬ vice of tlie church. I kept with Lord В- "—"" ; I amused him; and the body was carried out of the house vvithout his knowing it; he expected that I should offi¬ ciate, and wondered at the delay. When all was over, I told him; he thanked me, and blessed me, but had a violent ebullition of grief and passion upon it. The next day I took the liberty to advise Lord В ' to remove as soon as possible from the scene of his distress; he took it kindly, and pre¬ pared to do so. I oifered to account to him for the money he entrusted to my care, but he re¬ fused it.— My dear Sir, said he, don't think that ï mean this trifle as any return for my obliga¬ tions to you. Hear me, Sir: I shall be of age m a monthj and then I shall receive a legacy tiom an aunt; life is uncertain; I ought to do something towards providing for this poor child. 1 will deposit a sum in your hands for her use and benefit; the interest of it, you will accept for her board and necessaries. Don't say one word in answer; I have taken my resolution.— 8u\ said I ť it will be proper the child should bv ι 5
17*8 baptized.»—By alF means, said he.*-By whtfi name would fué have her fee called ?—By her dear mothers, Sophia Melcombe.—«Then you аопЧ choose she should be known to be you* daughter f— Noi at present, said he; as my mai*- riage was not known to my father, it i* better it should contkute a secret fôr some time longer. — r jfhut shall be as you please.*—After some fur¬ ther conference, we agreed to send to J ™ ........ 5эг a post-chaise, and thaf he should depart the> »ext day. 'Hie child was baptized;, the father earned it; he embraced and bfessed it. We teok a most affecting leave of Lord В ; he ^*s scarcely abi:e to speak a word. Jcbt emferaced me, threw himself into the chaise,, ared departed in a flood of tears, with his hat puHed ov«* his face ι he waved his hand aa long as be could see us, and we seemed as if we had parted with a near reratkm. After some day» we returned to tfee duties- of our station and employments. The little or¬ phan, by roy wife's tender caïe and offices be¬ gan to tilrive; and to promise tø reward amr humanity towards her. Tiie pleasure all our children afforded us, amply rewarded our cares for them. Abeut ten days after Lord B's depar¬ ture, we received tåe following fetter from him :. "Dear Sir, ** Wfeet* J reflect tafrø* &at »cenes lately pa%
İ79 my heart is overwhelmed with grief one whila, and presently after, it is raised by the most ar¬ dent gratitude ; 1 endeavour to dwell on this last sensation, and to overcome tbe first—When I think on tbe hospitality, generosity, sensibility, and goodness of you and your lad^—you seem like pitying angels sent by heaven to save mp from despair; surely there is not such another pair upon earth!—May heaven protect and re¬ ward you both here and hereafter!—But these are oply words; the feelings of my heart are unutterable towards you« Friend and brother of my soul!—accept the overflowings of a heart that would, but cannot express its love and gra¬ titude« " I have not yet seen my fother* as soon as I can do something better than talking, I will visit you; in the mean time my wishes and prayers shall be daily ofiered for you and your beloved family. " 1 am, your brother, friend, and servant, About a month after, I received a second letter. ** Dear Mr, Bennet, ** I will do myself the pleasure to wait on you one day in the course of the next week. I think ^very day a week till I see you al S—— : but, ιβ
180 alas! I must pass by the church, before ï са» liave the pleasure of embracing my friend. « ρ ___ » Within a week after I received this letter, Lord B- ■ came to S— : he embraced me with tears, but they seemed to flow 1 easy, and he soon got the better of them. The sight of his little girl gave him emotions of a joyful kind ; he almost stifled her with his kisses. He called her the likeness of his departed saint ; the pre¬ cious reliek ; his only comfort ! He thanked my wife in raptures of gratitude ; he paid his respects to my mother, whose tenderness he had not for¬ gotten. He remembered the servants ; to whom he had omitted, in his affliction, to make ac¬ knowledgments. I told him that his Loidship's beneficence had enabled me to make the requi¬ site acknowledgments to every person that had given their attendance in the hour of trouble; that we would now enjoy an hour of romfort to¬ gether, and look forwaid to happier times and prospects. He agreed with me, that it was right to enjoy the blesbings that remained, and suffer them to comfort us for those that were lost. We spent a cheerful evening, and were de¬ lighted with tlie politeness and amiable qualities of our guest. The uext day, as we were sitting after dinner^
181 laxa Б-— took out his" pècket-book.^-Sufi%r me, Sir, to enter upon the subject that is nearest my heart. This poor child's provision depends entirely upon me; life is uncertain; ï ought to do what is in my power for her, and I cannot be easy till I have done it* I have told you that I took hold, of a hint of my father, to let him be¬ lieve that I had some debts of honour, in order to prevent his farther enquiry into the use I should make of my legacy. I have not told an untruth; this is a debt of honour in the strictest sense. I shall deposit in your hands these bills for two thousand pounds, to be employed as yo*t shall think proper. The interest is to go for her board and necessary expences, and you must not oner to give me any account of it. I insist upon it, Mr. Bennet; you will affront me, by your saying a word in reply to this my fixed resolution! ■ Suffer me, my Lord, to say one word; not to disapprove of your action, it is at once just and generous; but to give you a bond for your secu¬ rity and the child's also. Ko, Sir, I will not accept it; if î should be taken ayvay, (a case I am providing for), and this obligation should be found, you will be liable . to repay it, and then í should have done nothing.
ш —Them Sir. said I, lei the bond be deposited № a third ftoarf,—No, I will not do ttø. Hav« I net seen, nave I .not felt the ¿effects of your g*od heart and principles? If í cannot trost yaw, whom can I tdy on! Bat I know my шап, and tiiat ш enough. Say no more; 1 fo*ow I am doing my duty, and учжашзС take y»ur share of the charge heaven im cuti aeted to o«r care« Let ns «ay no more. Me staid ten days with m, durmg vtMék Htm hß behaved like an affectionate friend and bro¬ ther to myself and family* We bad «ereral conversarne торт reSìgwub Stíttà moraî subjects; and I nad the satisfaction to find him well instructed in both respects. He returned in a poet-chaise, as lie came. I attended ¿um to 1 ....... * spent an evening with him there, and returned home the next day. From Loid B-~-'s departure, every thing in my family went on in the nsnal way ; tbe children grew and improved; my son began to speak anft to observe« and Ы anferded me a constant fund of delight and employment. Lord В ■ " went to France within a raontb after he left us. He wrote me several letter» from thence, but forbad me to answer Ibera tili be should return, when he would appoint a place ter me to direct to him. In one of ihem Ы »ays, u 1 shall not return i
t8$ to England tül titer Um 18th ef October, tist day 1 shall desabe to love &r\d friendships Ishalt send you my aseáttaticms upon- it/' Ие was as grød as his word, and «eirt me a *h«et <tf paper with hö recoîiectiona end «marks on the past events ; they wem fetidar, resigned, aod grate- fel, a»d raiee4 still higher my opinion of hi» principle«» Hb Lordship did aot return till th* spring following, nor tiM after fpequent end ur- g«at imfortunities írom the Ейт1 his father, who- gnew impatient to coacluée a treaty of marriage for him. Soou ofte* Int arrivai, bard В— - wrote td« neas følkrøs: ** Dear Sir» M I am at lengta returned to my matrimonial ¿astmy; the nooee baa been preparing ever since J have been absent« J could no longer refuse- the solicitations of a parent who really loves ma to ежсеша* The day after my arrival in town* be attacked me upon the subject» I told him* I was come borne with, a resolution to obey hira* and to sacrifice my wishes to bis.~*-No, my dear iOBfrSaidhej you.«hall not do that; though Mise Grantham is the lady I wish you to marry* though I am in actual treaty with her guardian* »ay, though I know it ha« been mentioned to> Ше lady, who has consented to wait your rcttm%
I8Í- arid would Hatéit to no other proposal ; notwith¬ standing all this, if you see any thing, upon a farther acquaintance with Miss Grantham, that gives you disgust, if you cannot overcome your .dislike to her, I have still another person in view,-—it is,Lady Mary C-—. " I replied, thai; I had no particular dislike to either of the ladies; that ï would see them both, and eudeavour to like her whom he recom¬ mended.«—Ah, that indifference! said he. But I will take such a consent as I can,obtain, be¬ cause it is my most ardent wish to see you mar? ried.— A few days after, the Earl carried me to an assembly where both the ladies were. Miss Grantham seemed actually confused at my ap¬ proach; it was evident she had been apprized of meeting me. I paid my respects to her, but was almost in equal confusion. My father watched every motion that I made, and I behaved to his satisfaction. At my return he asked me impa¬ tiently, which of the ladies I liked best ? I an¬ swered, Miss Grantham, past comparison ; she has more understanding, and less pride. " I am glad of it with all my heart, for I am sure by her looks that she lik" s you; she is sen¬ sible and prudent, and has a thousaud fine qua¬ lities, beside a large fortune. But when will you wait on her, B— ?—I answered, Whenever your Lordship pleases.~~He embraced me, and
185 was in raptures of joy. The very next d$f he carried me to pay my respects to^the lady; she is really a handsome, accomplished, and agree¬ able woman: my Lord has put every thing/« train, and I am in the high road to matrimony. I know you will appi ove my resolution; my heart at times revolts against a new engagement, but reason and duty are on my father's side, and I am determined to obey him. If I can possibly get away before İ am fettered, I will pay you a visit at S------; but I seem like an animal that is fastened to its cage, and cannot go beyond the length of my chain. " My heart beats towards you all, and parti¬ cularly to the poor little orphan ; I long to see and embrace her. " Present my affectionate regards to your wife and mother, and to the dear little ones; and believe me always " Your affectionate friend, «B------. " P. S. I send you some covers, to write to me often/' In a month after I received another letter as follows : " All is over, my friend; I am once more married ; my father is in extastes of joy ; my wife is pleased with mc ; she is really a woman
1 8ÍI of merit, and deserves my attentions. As soon as I can break away for a week* and make a decent excuse for my absence, I will see you : till when, give me credit for the continuation of my wishes and regards to you and yours, « В ------." We expected Lord В ........ ■■■»■ for several weeks in vain; and when we had given over all thoughts of seeing him, he dropt in upon из one day un¬ expectedly ; but such an alteration did we per¬ ceive in him, that we were almost ready to doubt if it was the same man : he was gaily drest, and his air and manner corresponded with bis clothes. However, beseemed rejoiced to see us; but yet niethought there was something of dignity aud distance about him ; something that said, I am your superior. He asked for the children^ with^ out particularizing ont from the rest. My wife ran to fetch them; she brought in the little or¬ phan; my son and daughter came yvith them; she gave the child to the father's arms; he luoked earnestly at it, and sighed. J t bas the mother's feature:! said he; I should kuow it among a thousand children.—I am glad of it, my lord, said I ; it will always be a claim to your paternal affection,—Yes, past doubt, said he.-— She can walk, my lord, said my wife, and be¬ gins to prattle. Come hither, my dear, and
18? lead her, said she, ьреакщд. m her son.— He came, and was proud to ieadl^r along th© room ; he called his sister to take the other hami. Lord В was deHghted.««My little friend» åaid he tO mv Son. which of vnıır tvn rnmna- nions do you love best?—Sir, said he, I love them both best,—How is that ? said lord B——. Why, Sir, tlds is my little sister, and this is my little wife,— Lord B^------ smiled : Tliat is very well explained; do you hear him, Mr, Bennet r— My lord, said I, don't think we have taught him this; upon my word the thought is his own!-* It is a happy one, said my lord : if I give my consent, 1 hope you will not refuse yours?—I will check him for it, my lord, in time.—Why then you are a prouder man than 1 ; for upon my honour I mean vvhdt I say! I shall think this little girl well disposed of, if you will engraft her into your iamily. She owes you the duty of a child already ; and, if the httle man hold m the same mmd, and the girl likes him, as I am sure ghe will, she caimot be any yvhere so well be¬ stowed. If yom" lordship holds in the same mind, saki I, we certainly can have no objection,—-Then gr«e me your hand, and it is a match. What say you, Madam ?«—I say as my husband does, said Mrs. Bemiet ; I am sure she is as dear to me as my own children,-—Why the« we are ail of on«
188 mind, said my lord; and I swear to you that this alliance will give me the greatest pleasure, and take much care from me. Sophia is your d-uigh- ter, madam, from this day forward. We had a good deil of pleasantry upon tins subject, and 1 brtW cleailvthat loid B—»was pleased to su í the < hild ort bis hands. However he bchav(d U#th with kmanoss and politeness to us all; be <>ί\> ìcd u* пишу pi esentò, but we de¬ clined them all. He spent four dd\s with us m high spirits, and tildi returncHiouip, telling me, bo would always send me coveit- to w ι ite to hım; and oe- sınng to be míormed, from time to tımeî of every thing interesting that should pass ш my family. From this time lord B^—— began to grow slack in his coirespundeuce with me; though he still preserved the same kindlier and poh tenet* in his manners and < j χ pression^ —" Let me know what passes m your family that is Idely to be щ- teiostmg to me. Tell me how all your ehildi t η ger forwaid, at vom leisure/' Wi'bhi a year alter his maniage he wiote to me,—"Congratulate me, dear Sn, on the birth of a son and heir ; it completes the happiness of my father, my wife, and myself."·—Ala-*, poor Sophia! said my deal' Mana, thou art of no consequence in the scale against a son; thou wilt
1Щ he forgotten by thy father; but thou wilt be 3till dearer to thy foster parents for this reason. I heard nothing from lord B— for seven months after. I then wrote to acquaint him that we intended to inoculate our children, and to ask whether he had any objection to -his Sophia being of the party; his auswer was; " I leave it to you, my dear Sir, to do the sanie for Sophia, as for your other children. I cannot disapprove any thing you propose; write to me when all is over." Towards the end of the same year he wrote again. %í í rejoice to hear that your children are all perfectly recovered, and in better health than gefoie. I am very happy in my married state; my wife is a very prudent and managing woman; ihe takes all trouble and care «from me* A ot»cond son is born to me, and í fancy myself α - person of great consequence, and am every day more satisfied with my situation." The following year my lord sent three lottery tickets.— -" for your three children, said I .*, to be equal sharer·* m each other's good or bad Jor¬ tane. My tune is so filled up, tiiat I cannot write ui otten a« formerly, but am ahvays yours/' •—One of the tickets came up a prize of a thou¬ sand pounds, of whicli I advised lord B——. To which he wrote a vciy ьЬохь bükt.
ISO ** I rejoice in the good fortune of your chddren ; let it fee equally divided between them. Re* member me to all your femily." I wrote to him as offöïi «s he «ent me covers, for he forbad me to write witlidtittheenu The coldness of his letters seemed to throw me to a greater distance ; 1 found it difficult b& speak to him with the same éa«e and freedom aa formerly. However, I dropt many hints of the alteration, of which he tmk no kind of notice. I gave him an invitation to come over. " Shall we never again see your <* lordship at S ....... ""» ? í am loth to believe you " have resolved against İt. I wish you to be " an eye-witness of the improvement of your 4t Sophia; allow yourself to see her, and you ** must love her." in my lord's answer to this fee says, ** I have nöt resolved against visiting you at & ■ ■ ■ » but my engagements will not allow me to fbt any time. Perhaps I may drop in upon you, when you least expect me. I do not forget those wiio have a constant titte to my affection; but my reasons against disclosing a certain secret gr©w every day stronger." In another letter» the following year, there was another remove. ** Уои will oblige me infinitely, my dear Mr. Beimet, if you will, in your future letters, omit the words, ymr 4ащЫег у and yawr Sophia; and
1$1 only speak of her as one of your own children. 1 know you will blame me, but I have my reasons for this precaution. It was now very clear to us, that my lord never intended to acknowledge lus daughter ; his wife had brought him four children, two of each sex. He had no mind that Sophia should claim any share of his fortune with these ; he had por¬ tioned her oif, and transplanted her into another family. The child was endeared to us by every circumstance of her birth and situation ; but she grew still dearer by the amiable qualities which she disclosed ; we knew no difference between her and our own, encept a certain tender com* passion that seemed to give her in many respects a kind of preference,-- My wife gave it as her opinion, that this child should have some ad* vantages in her education above our own. It is not impossible, said she, that she may one day be acknowledged as the child of a noble family ; ¿he may be raised to an higher station. I would not have her be thought unworthy of it, by those who respect external accomplishments above mental ones. I am not fond of boarding-schools in general. I prefer a home education for røy own daughter, hut I will enumre after one for Sophia î and whenever I hear of a proper one, î will send her for a few years» When she come» home to us at the vacation, we sbaB see and
im yudge of her improvementb, and ι he ν will be of service to our child, who loves her so well, that &he will endeavour to be hke Sophia in every respect. Our mother was of the same opinion ; and 1 left it entirely to them to act as they thought proper. , I sent ray son to a gentleman of excel¬ lent character, not only for learning, but for the strictest attention to the morals and manners of his pupils. Sophia was bent to a school recom¬ mended by a lady in our neighbourhood, whose daughters were -educated there. We missed the children exceedingly ; our daughter was for some time inconsolable, bnt our joy at their return made us amends for their absence. The affection between our daughter and Sophia became more observable : we knew not till this separation how much the dear t hild loved us all. Her sorrow at lea\ing us was affecting; my wife was hurt a- it,—We parted with tears on all eides, and reminded each othei ofthe next vaca¬ tion when we should meet again. At the ue\t Christmas, when we \wre all to¬ gether, and rejoicing in the dear ешЛс of do¬ mestic happiness; Sophia said, í have a request to make to my dear papa and mama, wiiich vuil make me very happy if it is granted; and it rel used, I shall be very miserable.—My dear
*93 ırhiîd, said my wife, what can thit be ? your eainebtnebs alarms mc.—The child ran and threw her arms about ray wife's neck ; she wept in her bosom.—-Speak, my love, said she ; and, if it be not very improper, it shall be granted. It is, Madam, that you will either send my dear Anna Maria to school with me, or else let me stay at home yvith her ; I cannot bear to leave ail those I love, and to be sent among those who do not care for me, nor I for them. I mubt consider of it, my dear ; it is not a question to be directly answered ; it ib of some consequence.—Only tell me that you are not angry with me, Madam; 1 am afraid you are?— No, my dear Sophia, I cannot be angry at a re¬ quest that bhews ьо strongly your affection to us, I yvill consult Mr. Bennet and my mother, and let you know our determination; but let my dear child be assured, that her happiness it> of us much consequence to us as our own ; be easy, be happy, my love, or else we shall nol be so. At our next evening's conversation, this sub¬ ject was discussed. I gave my consent that my daughter should return with Sophia to school : when it was declared, the dear children were equally rejoiced. My wife ordered that Sophia should be taught I'rcnch, music, drawing, and many other liungs 'hat are the embellishments of the female cha- к
19 * racter, and yvhich she thought unnecessary for the humbler situation of her own child ; but the affection of these tyvo children rendered her pre¬ caution useless, for whatever Sophia learned, she always taught to the sister of her heart. My son likewise grew a ñne youth, and vac¬ ali tliat my heart could wish both in person and mind. We kept up a constant correspondence with the Lucas family, and our friendship yvas never interrupted or abated. Mrs. Lucas brought her husband three sons, and tyvo daughters; they lived together in the most perfect harmony; they visited us tiiree limes in the course of ten years, and we paid them tyvo visits ; we rejoiced with each other on the pronusing qualities of our children, not one on either side had either defect or blemish* Lord В .........■■ had reâuceà his correspondence with me to very short limits ; once or sometimes trnke a year, very short letters ; and had not, for many years past, once mentioned Sophia as his daughter. Upon the death of tlie eail his father, I wrote him a long and serious letter. I remonstrated, as became my function, on tbe duties of the parent, and the cruelty of casting off an innocent and unoffending child ; and, lest he should think 1 had any view to aggrandise my «wa family by his аШшсе, I told him that the
195 day that restored lady Sophia to her family, should put an end to my expectations on my soiVs behalf. I received a short letter in answer r " You are very serious, my dear Mr. Bemiet. " I will not Just now enter upon the subject ; but " I will ere long tell you all that I think about it. " I forgive your remonstrance, it is in character. ťí I respect and love you the inore for it. I do *' not think I have done badly for mv charge, in " having put it under your and Mrs, Benneťs care, " I am, and ever will be, your friend, ¿cc. " D ------.'' în less than a month after this, I received the following, which wa° written iu a hand evidently disguised - ·* виц "You will -hoi try receive a usit bom ЛЬ, M« ìcombe, the ia ther of Miss Sophia Mek ombe, your clujrge; but vou are desired to know him ly no otUr nat'ic, as you love him or his daughter. " PiiiLosoraios." Tum kept us in continual expectation; we sent for the girls from school, and prepared our Sophia to see her father. One day the following week, as we were sitting in my 'tudy, my servant cam** to tell me й
1<К> gentleman was at the door ; but the gentleman followed him so close, that he had haidly time to announce him. I rose to meet Lord D——, who came forward and embraced me more af¬ fectionately than, I believe, I returned it ; for I was not pleased with him.—Where is Mrs. Ben- net ! said he ; where are the children f —In the parloyr, said I; but let me speak to you first alone! Not a word will I hear, said he, till I have seen them; but don't tell me which is So¬ phia; let me find her out.—He went out ; I fol¬ lowed him into the room, where my wife and children were sitting at their needle. I did not announce him ; my tongue refused to favour the deception. —Sit still, Mrs. Bennet, said he; sit still, young ladies; I will not disturb you.—lie went to each of the gii Is, and looked earnestly at both.— Ί hen taking Sophia's hand, This is she r said he, looking at me.—Let nature inform you, said I? it is said, she has done wonders 'm this way. I cannot be mistaken, said he ; this is icy child! The child fell upon her knejs to him; he raised, embraced her, and took her upon his knee; he looked earnestly in her face, till the child was abashed; she hid her face, and wept. My dear, said Mrs. Bennet, look up; it is your f at her /—»Lord D—folded her in his arms, the tear started in his eyes.—My child, said he,
w I arø your father, I feel that J ain ! look at rne, ?peak to mc, I long to hear your voice.—Give her a little time, Sir, said my wife: the child h abashed. Come to me, my Sophia!—The child ran to my wife, and wept in her arms. He then saluted my daughter, and seemed surprised at their stature and improvements.—I must be grown an old fellow, said my lord, to have such a tall daughter.—Sophia was just turned of eleven years ; my child was thirteen months older, but they were nearly ot the same height; my Anna was rather moie plump; Sophia was slender, and finely mnde. It was some time before she could take mu¬ rage to speak before her father; but the í *.t time she opened her mouth, he seemed to dey our her words—" The mothers voice exactly, sa:d he, it speaks to my heart/'-—I am glad of it. Sir, said L—lie smiled, It says more than all yoer eloquence, Sir, said he; but 1 shall reply to both at a proper tune.—My drar, said he, coire to mc ; what shall I give you? tell me it tlu: e ^ anv thing you want or wi.di Î— Nothing, s ir, said she; my good ineiids don't Ut me want any¬ thing; and they grant mc all my w'^he« —Sweet creature! said he, your goad frtcml· indeed!— Speak to her m French, Sir, siud Mrs. Bennet, she can answer you.·—Indeed! said he; 1 am afiaid you are at too great expenee lor her
w education.—No, indeed, said my wife, she can very well afibrd it, 'My love, tell your papa, thut ii he will send you a harpsichord, that is the ouït/ uèsh you have not been indulged in ; bot teli hım so in Funch,— She did so, and he wad delighted with her * he lephed in the same language, that he would send her one verv soon. ï was a bileiit spet lator ot this scene, and en¬ joyed tt Hucerel} , she shewed her father some of her drawings, and othei works.—Upon my honour! said he, she wants no accomplishments that could be given her m a higher station ; she has lost no Шие. I am glad, Sir, that you are pleased with what has been done for her, said I; our affection for her would be a sufficient inducement to us to do justice to her talents; she deserves it, for we ne\er have had any occasion to correct, or even to contradict her.—But you say nothing of your own daughter, said he.— î smiled, and repeated : Two lovely berries growing on one stem, A M d with two teeming bodies but one heart; 1 ík» to a double cherry seeming pai ted, And ι et an шпон it palliti« п. Shaï peai е. Charmina, f barmu g! saii ray Lord: sweet pan ol triciida!—lie took out l .ь pocket book ; lie give hb impubi "vo >/ '.I.-notcs.-—Now»
ıpîT sud Ь\ mv ^wret í^irí, к*ч?р one of these for ν out self, .'»ж! ïî" í* the other to your sifter, ι on cui hei so, uontMJU?—Yes ^if? alwavs, s .id Soj hia , but 1 do not know the value of u'ht·* oi »Ihm*. ÍĽ opened tl t m, and «ihcwc«! her— Tbi-i? that y pounds, and thb 1- tiunty.— 4 ophia rau to lip' companion, and "ave liei the thirtv. Λ f v Anna made a low courtly to my Lj^c}, ^i i { arı и d it to ber mother.—1 hoje yon will ί »Че this, mamma, tor I do uot want it, nor Him the use ot it.— Nor I neither, said Sophia, i*· ·' mamma, take mine too,—Lovely cieature*·* ь а. I he; I am delighted with them both.—With your leave, Sir, baid my wife, they shall both receive the money in small portion- tiom rne, 1 will be their Steward. But, mv Anna, you must not take the larger note though S >phia offers it, it t* a piooi that she loves you better than heibel! — That I do, indeed! said Sophia, and 1 give it her with all my heart.—-I hke that spmt, «aid my Lord; I gave it her on purpose to see whe¬ ther self was predominant m bei ; I am tians- ported to ьес that it is not. Next day, when tlie children were withdrawn, my Loid I) ■ entered upon the subject he bad only hinted at befon . Iam gom·;, Mı. Bennet, to reply to your ie- monstrance ¿ and to shew you that reason and îv 4
soo not caprice is the regulator of my conduct. Yovi are a man of sense, of learning, of a right Judg* ment in most things, but you have taken the •wrong side of the argument between us. Who knows better than you, that neither birth, nor title, nor riches, are the things that constitute happiness f You knoyv that it is oftener found in a middling station, than in those above or btloxv it ; you are yourself happy in this station, and have not a wish beyond it. I have placed my daughter in it : she is happy, she tells me so, and yet you want me to take her out of$t. Is this judging right f Suppose I were to take her from you, who love her so well ; ь.аа place her under the care and authority of a mother-in-law, who has^öîrr children of her own; do you think it would promote her happiness ? Alight it not destroy her peace, and mine too? beside a thousand petty distresses that attend on pride and parade, which this peaceful happy village is free from. Taking these and many other cir¬ cumstances together, my heart acquits me of cither want of care or affection for my child; and tells me I have provided in the bat manner for her happiness. Now, Sir, I have ansyvered your remonstrance fully, I believe ! I smiled, shook my head, and after a short pause, said—If I remain silent, your Lordship will think I am convinced by your argument ; I
201 must therefore reply to it. There is no argu¬ ment, however specious and plausible, that can supersede tlie eternal laws of nature and of reason. They ordain, that a father should take upon himself the care, the education, the protection of his child. If a man were at liberty to accept or to transfer any of the great duties of life to another person, he would be contented to perform most of them by proxy. Your child might have fallen into base and sordid hands, that would have devoured her property, insulted her person, and depressed the noble faculties of her mind. This will not there¬ fore acquit you of the duties of a father. You put me iu mind of those parents among the Greeks, who exposed those children whom they did not choose to bring up and provide for ; with this difference, however, that their law al¬ lowed of such a practice, but our divine law for' bids it, even if the heart should give a dispensa¬ tion for it. My Lord bent his brow.—Sir, said he, you are very severe upon me.—Truth, said I, appears to be severe to those who resist or appose her dic¬ tates.— Mr. Bennet, said he, these are liberties that you are not entitled to take with me. —I think otherwise, my Lord, that both truth and justice give me a title to use them upon this occa* ston; to say nothing of the duties of my Junction. к 5
202 —My Lord roce up in anger : he walked out of the room, and mto the garden. I am afraid, said my wiie, tliat you have of¬ fended him.—Perhaps so, said I, but I am per¬ forming a duty that I am called to.—*But for the dear child's sake ! said she,—Do not be frighten¬ ed, my love ; my Lord is a man of reason, he will recollect himself. Let me send Sophia to him, she will soften him more than all your reasoning,—That is right, said î; women know best where their strength lies,—And whea to use it properly."—! hope such women as you, my dear; but send for Sophia.-— She did so.—Sophia, said I, I luve offended your father, he is walking in the garden : go to him, my child; ask him to walk in; tell him that I have finished all that I had to say to hmn, and shall never more speak on the subject, unless he begins it. Can you remember, lov e r— She repeated what I had said.—She was gone half an hour, ana returned with her father; the traces of displeasure were still upon his brow. He desired the child to leave us for a few minutes. —Sir, said he, I have only one thing more to say; if you wish to be released from the care of the child, I will take her from you; and 1 aliali and some other place to put her in, for I shall not take her to my own house. Oh not for the world ! said Mrs. Bennet,. I
203 could not bear to part with my Sophia.—Not would I to any man living, but to her father ; said I, but if that cannot be, í will supply his place to her.—1 never yvished it otherwise, said my Lord. You, Madam, have a right to her, in preference to every body: but it seemed to me, that your husband wished to be rid of her.— No, my lord, said she, he did not, could not, wish it; let me be the mediator. Mr. Bennet has done what he thinks his duty; but as he can¬ not obtain his wishes, he yvill do what is the next kst for the child; he loves the child as well a? either of us do. —And I yvill love her то) e than eier, said I, if her father will allow me to do so. —Mrs. Bennet went to Lord D ------; she took his hand·—Will you permit me % my Lord ?■—Dis¬ pose of it as you please, most amiable of wo¬ men !—«My dear husband, said she.—I advanced, and gave my hand; she joined them.—Let this be the last debate on this tender subject, said she.—Be it so, said my Lord. We sat down, the children were called in ; aud thus ended the interesting subject. After dinner my Lord said,—I intended to have left you to-duy, but I will stay another" night for yuur sake, M idom, io convince you that all is foi gotten on my part ; honour mo with your good opinion, and 1 will endeavour tu deserve it.— On the morrow he departed: he К 'J
204· took a most affectionate leave of his daughter, whu did not stem ьо much atlected as himself; a very pohte one of me and the rest of my family. I was now fully convinced that Sophia yvould never be publicly acknowledged for his daughter. From this time my Lord wrote but once a year. Ile sent an harpsichord to Sophia ac¬ cording í υ promise, and advised her of it by a letter without any signature. lie made her no more presents afterwards, nor has since visited us, or shewn any desire to see or converse with his daughter ; but is reckoned a good husband and father to his second family, to yvhom all his cares and attentions aie devoted. The iollowing year was distinguished by two remai kable events m my family; the first was the death of Mrs. Hoiton. 1 felt her loss very much, and my wife still more. 1 was obliged to use every argument that religion and philosophy could suggest, to abate the excess of her gi ief. The children ¿ucceeded better; they dh ert ed iu Grief is more easily amused than reasoned away. She seemed fonder than ever of her two daugh¬ ters. I told her that heaven had most graciouoly ordained, that the rising generation should supply to us the loss of the foregoing one. Time, reason, and our childrens company, took off by degrees the edge of our grief, and restored mux rehch for society, Ws kept up a friendly
205 intercourse yüth most of the families in our own and the next parish, but had Uo very intimate' friendship wiih any but our cousin Lucas's iatiuly.» The second interesting event of this year was niy sending my son to Cambridge, He went ju^t befoie, to visit Mr. and Mrs. Lucas at theii ile- sire; and then eldest son yvent the year aftei, as a Commoner to the same College. My wife took the two girls from school the same year, and they became her inseparable companions, We used to long for the return of mv son from college, his presence completed our Ьарршслъ ; but m hib absence he yvrote constantly, and told ib слегу thing that happened to him. I demanded of him an account of all thost young men yvith yvhom he had acquaintance. He used to describe them to me, and I was al¬ ways watchful, for my son's sake, lest he should be led by improper company into errors m con¬ duct. He yvrote me word, that young Lucas was of an high, ungoy ci nable spuit; that he was not beloved by many ; that he kept up an appearance of civility to bun, on account of the itiutionship between their parents ; but that he expected so much homage and attention, that, if it was not out of respect to his parents, he should never go mto lub company.
30$ The year following he wrote,—" I have made a new acquaintance, and, if my father will allow it, a friend, his name Gerard Selby, a gentle¬ man of good birth, virtuous manners, and pretty fortune. He is two years above my standing, and knows much more of the world than I do ; and he is so kind as to give me advice in many things that I was ignorant how to act in. I have been obliged to him upon many occasions. I ask it as a favour to me, Sir, that you will per¬ mit me to invite Mr. Selby to come with me at my next vacation ; and then you yvill see and judge, whether my heart has made a worthy election of a friend. My best wishes and most affectionate regards attend my mother and the dear girls ; and, to my father, my hearťs duty and affections. V. Bľnnet." I had the happiness of hearing from my friends at Cambridge, that my son's behaviour and cha¬ racter were unexceptionable. I likewise heard an excellent character of young Selby; and I de¬ sired my son to invite him to visit из, in my name as well as his own. The young men came according to invitation, and their company made a considerable addition to the happiness of our little circle. Myself, my wife, and the tyvo dear girls, endeavoured to make the visit as agreeable as possible.
207 We sometimes read to the ladies, and at others conversed with them. We found young Selby aS amiable as his friend had represented him : the youth was an adept in music, he played on the violin; Miss Melcombe played on the harpsi¬ chord ; both she and my Anna-Maria sung very agreeably. In the mornings they walked, and sometimes the girls with them ; who now began to expect and receive marks of attention, from the youth of the other sex. In short, every hour was filled up delightfully, and the time passed away too fast for us. My wife and I began to observe the behaviour of the young girls, and also of our son. I asked her opinion, whether she thought that Valentine paid any particular attention to Miss Melcombe ? —I cannot say he does at present, said she; you know I have never spoken out concerning our wishes, but only by very distant hints. I think it better to yvait till his inclination unfolds itself, and then to give him hopes of succeeding by de¬ grees; I would uot have him be too secure,— All that 1 fear, said I, is, lest either of them should incline another way ; and I am actually afraid of this young Selby, who is very amiable. —I think, said my yvife, it would not be amiss to insinuate a hint of that kind to Valentine, and see what use he will make of it ; but it must be done with the utmost delicacy.**»! leave it \
208 to you, my love, said I ; only let me know the result. A few days after, 1 asked my yvife whether she had sounded her son on the interesting sub¬ ject.—I have, said she ; but he seems rather to avoid it. I told him, that his friend yvas a dangerous man to bring among young women. Suppose, said I, he should conceive a passion for either of your sisters, or either of them for him Ý We might be thought to have interested views, as the young man's fortune is superior to ours.—Don't be afraid, Madam, said he ; Selby is a man of honour, and will behave as such in all respects.—You seem very indifferent about it, Valentine, said I.—Perhaps 1 am not, said he,— Perhaps, said I, you may wish him to like one of them ?—Why not, Madam ? said he.—It is a mother's part, said I, to guard ail points, and to look to all contingencies,—Nobody can doubt your prudence, Madam ; but once again, you have nothing to fear.—You are very reserved to your mother, Valentine.—Excuse me this time, Madam ; the next visit we make here, I will be more explicit.—Perhaps it were better you were ao now, said I.—-Excuse me, my dear mother, my friend's secrets are not м/лс— That is true, said I ; and pray remember that my pre¬ cautions are sacred also : a mother fears every thing for the children of her heart.
ÜÖ9 Tl.ey are sacred with me, Madam, and ever r.haii be.—And so ended our conversation, from which I can gather nothing decisive. Daring this visit, I observed that young Selby paid great attention to Mrs. Bennet, more indeed than to the girls; he seamed perfectly sensible of Пег merit upon all occasions. Once he said, that the greatest happiness of a man's life, was to have a woman of merit for his wife.—You, Sir, aie a hapry man in this, and indeed inali 'jther respects. When the time came for the young men to re¬ turn to college, we parted with them with equal reluctance on all sides. After they were gone, we talked over every past scene of happiness, and often sighed over the recollections. At the next excursion from college, Mr. Selby urged my son to visit his uncle with hira. —It is a visit of duty, said he ; and when it is discharged, I will make you and myself amends by a more agreeable one to the dear village oí S— —. Mr. Selby's uncle was also his guardian ; he was more than of age, but his uncle had not yet given up his trust, nor settled his account. Young Selby went with a resolution to demand both. The old n .an had two daughters ; he was desiious that his nephew should marry one of them. In the course of this disagreeable visit, Mr. Selby 'b unele let lum knoyv, that he was not m-
SJØ elmed to settle accounts with him, until he was fissured that he would marry one of his daughters. Mr. Selby, finding himself pressed, spoke plainly his refusal—I am sorry, said he, to be obliged to expose the character and principles of my mother's brother r but you have made it necessary. Know, Sir, that I will throw off the fetters of ray childhood; and that i will пот put on the fetters of matrimony, but at my own time, and by my own choice, which, I assure you, xull not fall upon cither of your daughters, bo say¬ ing, he went mto the stable, and ordered the horses to be got ready; he then acquainted his friend witii all that had passed, and told him his resolution to go away directly. The old man endeavoured to detain then* ; but they took a civil leave of the ladies, and rode away directly. Selby was continually making comparisons between this visit, and that to us. Mr. Selby, soon after his return, employed a gentleman, eminent in the law, to bring his uncle to account, when it appeared that he had embezzled the greatest part of his income dur» ing his minority. This was what he expected ; but he determined not to expose his uncle to public shame and punishment. He therefore oilered, if he would only account for the last year, that he might not begin the world without current cash, he would give him a discharge for
jeu the rest. The estate yvas between four and rive hundred a year; his uncle could not have spent more than an hundred a year for him while «it «chool, and be had been alloyved two hundred инее he had been at college; in a minority of seven years, tuC ынп due was consicierai/te; uut this good young man cheerfully gave a discharge for it, rather than prosecute his mother's bro¬ ther. After this affair was finally settled, Selby was impatient to cc ue with my son to S—. The young men's joy sparkled in their eyes when they entered my house; young Selby rushed into my arms, as a son would to the most tender father». I swear to you, my dear Sir, said he, that I have not known so happy a moment as this, since I was last in this house. My son succeeded him, while Selby saluted the ladies, which he did in raptures of joy. Valentine seemed equally happy, and the girls appeared to make no diffe¬ rence between them. I determined within myself, to know both their hearts before they returned to Cambridge, Their behaviour was easy, frank, and affectionate to every person in the family ; Selby had most vivacity; Vakntine's charac¬ teristic was a sweet placklness of temper, which nothing could disce 'upose; with the greatest de- delicacy ot manners. My daughter was of a sprightly turn, and used to tnlhcn our conversa-
212 tions; Sophia Melcombe was more serious. My hart felt the merits of them all; and enjoyed the dear little social circle, round my table, with more inward satisfaction, than external expression ; and my dearest partner's joy roso to her intelligent eyes, and often ovei flowed them. Selby grew as dear to ns as any of the rest, and shewed us the same marks of affection. I had consulted my wife, and we both agreed tliat Sophia should be told every en cumstance of her birth and situation. Her father had not foibid it, because he did not think of it; other¬ wise he certainly would, as it was a part of his plan. She shed many tears at the relation; she thanked God for having given her such parent , in lieu of him who refused to own her. At the same time, my wife told her there was a part of her f at her' s plan, that she had not yet disclosed; and that she would wait till the time was ripe for «7.—-Sophia blushed ; she bowed to her, and said, I rely upor yuu, Madam, entirely, and am at your disposal. This looked as if she suspected the treaty of marriage. My wife said no more at that time. About a week after our scholars made their second visit, as 1 was sitting in my study, young Selby tapped at the door,—-Come ш, said ll-^-lie did so—Do I interrupt you, Sir?-—Not at all, said I; bit down, Sir, lam glad of your company.—lie seemed to havo
2Í3 something of importance to communicate. He blushed, hesitated, and looked confused. To relieve him, I began to talk of books, and to lead him into conversation. He collected him¬ self, aud turned the discourse on his own affairs. Again í turned the discourse on other subjects. He soon returned to his own situation. I then applauded his behaviour to his uncle, and said, that every thing 1 had seen or heard of him had increased mv esteem for him. Ah, Sir, said he, I do indeed aspire to your frienclbhip; but this is not all. I expect from you the completion of my earthly happiness.— Fromme; said!; explain yourself !— ï —I—I— wish to be one of your children, Sir; to call you my father, and »Mrs. Bennet my mother. In short, Sir, I wish to obtain your favour, and that of yaur daughter,—IVkkh of my daughters? said I, smiling.-—Oh, Sir, you cannot surely douht! Is not one of them engaged already? How do you know that ? said I,—There is but όμ way, Sir ; your son warned me before I en¬ tered the house—Indeed! said L—But, Sir, it was a needless precaution ; from the first week I was acquainted with Miss Bennet, my heart bad made its election, I was not then of age, nor yet sufficiently acquainted with my own cir¬ cumstances; but the moment I could come to nn explanation xäth you, Sir, I resolved to do it.
!¿14
I could not bc easy till í had opened my heart to you, and 1 trust in your goodness to treat it kindly and properly. My good young man ! said I, you are very- young to think on marriage, and my daughter is a mere child* I do not mean to marry at present, Sir; but, ior fear that any one should interfere between myself and my happiness, I thought I could not mention it too soon. Your fortune is too much above ours; my daughter will not have more than a thousand pounds; which is exactly what her mother brought me.—He looked displeased. Sir^ said he, would fortune have made any difference, in your choice of that excellent wo¬ man?—-! smiled. I have some reasons^ Sir, to think it would not, said I.—-Then do me the j?<. e - tibč to think I have the mme sentiments, and the шпе feelmgs*-*~Excu$e me, dear Mr. Selby; I am apprehensive that the world will think the ad¬ vantages too great em our side, in case this alliance should ever taks place.—The world shall not choose, my wife, Sir ; and I am known to have toomucA spirit to have one imposed on me.—My daughter is but just seventeen, said I; it is too early for her to marry, and I think for you too. — Ί agree to that, Sir; I would therefore make roy court to Miss Bennet, rather by silent assi¬ duities, than by words*—! røiiled, That is the
215 -same thing, Mr. Selby; lovers can converse by intuition. —He smiled; í believe that may be, Sir; but I would uot attempt it without your permission.—My dear youth, I am convinced of your honour, and of your merit in every respect. I am only afraid of your making an engagement, of which you might hereafter repent.— That is impossible, said he. But, Sir, hear my reasons for wishing to do so. A young man of good principles, whose affections are engaged, will say to himself, when under a temptation, how dare I do thus, or thus, when I am engaged to a woman of virtue, whose judgment must con¬ demn it ! Her idea will be hke a guardian angel, constantly attending me, and leading me to de¬ serve the crown of my felicity.—-My dear young man, I am charmed with your virtue and good sense, and am proud of such a conquest for my daughter. Let me, however, consult my wife; I do nothing without her concurrence—-I leave the deeibion of my fate in her hands and yours, Sir ; dtspt>se of me as you think proper. Make me your son, at your own time, and in your own manner, and I cannot but be happy,-* -Upon this he rose up, bowed gracefully, and retired. I was impatient to tell my wife of this expla¬ nation. She was overjoyed at it.·—We both agreed, th&tsome years hence it would be the mosi desirable alliance in the world.
'Ζ χ 6 We л ere both highly pleased ut our son 's prv* (ienc€ m warning Mr. Selby. Some time attor, as mv son was speaking to me upon the subject of Mr. Selby's allumée, and expressing the plea¬ sure he took ш the prospect of Selby's bemg united to our family by every tye oí io\e and friendship; I asked him smiling, if he had yet discoveied that he had а АсягЛ— -lie blushed; and smiled.—Seeing a volume of Coineille'> wurks before me, he turned to the Cid, and pointed to Rodngo's answer to his lather, Tout autre que mon Perel— Very applicable, young man, said 1; but how came you-so well ac- ¿uaiuted yvith Comedie ?—I will tell you, said he, bir ; Selby understands the modern lan¬ guages, and he is my tutor in them. 1 am a better Grecian than he, and sometimes he reads the old Greek authors yvith mc ; and thus we as¬ sist each other.—These are the mutual ady an¬ tages of virtuous friendship, said 1; and I am the happiest of fathers. Another day, as Mr. Selby and I were speak¬ ing of tbe Frent h writers, he mentioned the two dramatic pieces, le Pils Naturel, 'ind le Pere de jämille. Ile entered into a discussion of their beauties and detects.—In the first of these to- medies, the writt r supposes the principal inci¬ dents in a family history to be woven into a dramatic piece ; and, by ordor of the lather,of 5
ur it, th' piece to be represented ¡annually, in or¬ der to preserve the remembrance of the most interesting events. Nay* he orders this custom to be continued after his death, and an old gen¬ tleman his friend to supply the place in his exhi¬ bition» It is really surprizing to observe, how very natwally -evejsy circumstance is described and represented. According to your system, said I, aery family might furnish a dramatic entertainment out o£ tlie most interesting events tliat have happened in it,—I think s said Mrs. Bennet, that ours would afford a good suhteet, or perhaps tuo. This thought amused us, and yve pursued it the whole evening. To be rather more serious, said Mr. Selby, I really think, that if every father of a family would write down the principal events m it, it would be of иче to his posterity, and it would be a means to excite his children to good and laud¬ able actions, in order to be weil spuken of in the family history. You almost persuade me, aid Î, to u/?/t my oun, —4 wish most ardently that ^o^ uoultl, said Mì v Bonnet,—My son and daughfM*, and Мь üelby, all joined to persuade me f о шик t tal t it; and here, my dear cbildiui, ís the o/>gut of my present employment. h
UU After а motitin spent thus happiSy, we seemed more unwilling than ever to part with our friends. S was obliged to use tnauy argumeate, to røake us look forward to the time of meeting again, in order to suppor! the separation. Among others, I told them that I sliould renew the pleasures I had enjoyed, by writing them down; and they would be repeated to the ladies^ when I âhould read the story to them« The young men were delighted with tlie design. —■Let us take care, said Valentine, so to con¬ duct ourselves, iaat we may make a good ap¬ pearance in the History. —I depend upon you both, said I, to furnish me with suijjects for the continuation of it. We received their adieu; and the same day I began to write my family history, which I design to bring up to this period ; and to wait the deci¬ sion of some important events, before I proceed any farther. I am at this instant one of the hap¬ piest of mankind, in my present blessings and fu¬ ture prospects; which while I enjoy, I lift my heart in ardent gratitude and awful reverence to the Supreme Fountain of all my happiness; be¬ seeching him that I may never be so absorbed in earthly pursuits, as to lose sight of the Divine Bounty from whence I receive them ! All the good things that are distributed over the face of
Ы9 ffuV earthly globe» are but as $o many rktdete flowing from the inexhaustible ocean, of the power, the wud&m t aud íhegê&4®ê§s of God.
CONTIKVATION OF THB FASfIL* HÏSTORV» Mora 15, 177— Nrvbr, oh never, let mortal man boast of his happiness on this side of the grave î For vain, fleeting, and transitory is the state of hu¬ man felicity ! Let him who reads these sheets, be warned of tliis truth; and, having heard of my joys, let him listen to my sorrows. Yesterday, my darling, the son of my heart's wishes, was brought home in a state between life and death. He, and his friend and brother, Gerard Selby, crossed a water swoln with late reins ; they were carried down the stream some way; Selby's horse swam; his servant turned back, and called for assistance; but mv son's horse plunged, and was carried into a current. When Valentine saw the danger, he threw him- òeìf off, and endeavoured to swim to laud ; but lus strength failed, and he sunk once. At this instant Selby's servant came with several assis¬ tants; they got a boat that was fastened hard- by, and came directly to the place: my ьоп rose, and Selby's servant büized his hand, the 12
200 гШ took hold of his ciothfe*; they drew Ый1 into the boat, and broug^trttim over to the other side, where Selby wae already safely landed, and standing in agonies, waiting their arrival. My son was then hardly sensible of his situation ; they carried him to ¿he iirsţ house at hand, and used all poşsjbly means for his recovery. As soon as he could speak, he begged to be carried home immediately. Their clothes were to come after them by the waggon from Cambridge to I—, and they had no change of apparel ; the cottagers could not furnish them. Mr. Selby sent his servant forward for a post-chaise ; in the mean time they took off my son's clothes, and dried them as well as they could. The ser¬ vant had a wallet with two shirts in it, which enabled them to change their linen. The servant returned with the post»chaise as soon as possible. The gentlemen got into it, and the servant rode bis master's horse; in this manner they came forward to S· -·— ; the ser¬ vant came first, and prepared us to expect some fatal accident. In a moment our joy was changed to the most bitter grief. The young me» made the best of it, and assured us all was well ; but my son was se ill« that I thought pro¬ per to send to 1- ■ ■ for a physician. He or¬ dered hun proper medicines, and I sat up with him myself. He had very disturbed rest, еш!
22i was feverish all night. To-day he is sometbmg better, and my hopes are above my fears* Oh, gracious Heaven, spare my son ! or take my life instead of his; for in his, are included mine and his mother's ! March ϊδ. Λ dreadful night we have past} my son's fever run very high ; a strong deîîriumv Selby sat up with him. My heart is overwhelmed with grief and apprehension. My dear wife pre¬ serves her fortitude of mind; she comforts me; she looks cheerful. The girls are drowned in tears. I can write no more. March 17 ш A better night; quiet rest several hours. My family are assembled at breakfast.—Oh gracious Heaven, let me not presume ! let me not despair ! March 18. God be praised ! my dear son is out oí danger, if there be no relapse; the doctor pronounces it so. Let us icturn thanks to the Father of mercies! Mdrck 19. We are all joy and giatitude. We cannot speak to each other without tenis of joy. My ton lives; he comforts his parents; he thanks his friends. We hay e all been assembled in his room. We have paid our united thanks and praises to heaven. March 20. Tins day our hopes ore confirmed ; L 3
stn Шу son is easy and cheerful ; hrhas said a thou¬ sand tender and obliging things to every one of his friends. His heart is affected at our tender grief aod -solicitude for his recovery. Selby has resumed his cheerfulness ; he begins to be plea¬ sant yvith us ; he bas spoken to his Anna upon a tender subject; he calls Valentine brother, and Mrs. Bennet his mother. This day, as the two lovely girls approached my son's bed, he held out a hand to each of them. He begged his sister to be grateful to his dear Selby, for his kindness to him. He then let go her hand, and took Sophia's in both his own. He looked earnestly in her face, and said,—If I had died, you would have lost a brother; but if I Ike* you will find in me a lover, ardent and sincere. Henceforward you must give me hope thst I shall live for you, or else I aliali live to be unhappy. So saying, he kissed her hand, and drew her to the chair by bis bed-side. Sophia blushed deeply; the tears stood in her eyes. She sat down, covered her face yvith her handkerchief, and was silent. Selby said,—My p'ear friends, I beseech you to let your love scenes, be in the comic style! No more tragedy, for heaven's sake! After this, our conversation took a more cheerful turn, and we spent the remainder of the day as happily as we had done thv former vacations.
ш March 2 1. My son came down stairs. Be assumed an air of cheerfulness, and even viva- x'ity ; but his pale cheeks too plainly ehewed how- much he had suffered, and he was very weak, •However yve aH strove to be cheerful, and to encourage our лорсз anu wishes. March 22. We received visits of friendship and congratulation on my son ď recovery ; and the following day yve accompanied him on an airing. lie wa* apparently better, and very lively. Marck 25, My son is perfectly rec averea, but he looks palo and wan; he says he is cjaite well. Ileayrn be praised! April 20. A month is passed since the dread¬ ful accident. All is well, and my young men are preparing to return to college, λ' alentine will take bis degree, and Selby will be ordained, before they return to us again. The gitk- are as lively as birds, and we are determined not to fel.ow any signa of sadness at their departure. April 2o. The dear youth» are gone. We are all very low and dejected ; we assume airs of bratenja but they will not support us. The girls aflect reserve and distance; but I see and feel with joy, that their hearts are united. God preserve my dear children! And all things of worldly concern will be as nothing to me in the balance !
№tiy 1. Letters from our deer young men?. Valentine's was addressed to me ; Selby's to my wife. Both speak of their journey by shor4 stages, to favour Valentine's tender health. Selby's letter requebts the favour of cone* spending with my wife, unåtkrongk her with his mistress. My wife permits heî daughters to write to her sons. Tbe dear girls ase rather distressed how to address them. My Anna says she will mortify their vanity, lest they should be too secure. For want of other materials,. I will transcribe the young women's lettera* " Sirs, ** As you each thought proper to address your Jetter to both my sister and self', and from your friend as well as yourself, I shall reply to botk 9 ша perhaps for both ot us. So you think yourselves quite secure of us; and already begin to treat us as your subjects f Now it is my opinion that our history will bo %'ery dull and tiresome, unless some difficulties are thrown in the way, to excite your spirits, and enliven your imagination. I think you ought to have rivals to contend with, and perils to en¬ counter; and I would not have you be too cer¬ tain that you will not. Last Sunday Mr. J. Rowland, a bachelor щ
■£U5 -Our village, not above five ша forty, appeared at church in a new suit of light-green clothes; he made me a very significant bow, and^ am told he intends to offer me his person and fortune. Look to it, Selby ! you do not know what allure¬ ments may be in them. Nay, other folks have their admirers and their bows as well as /. And, once again, do not be too secure of us. You took us at a disadvantage in an hour of grief and compassion; but now that we have recovered our spirits, we do not intend to be so easily won. I leave it to Sophia to say what she pleases; she isa gentle soul, and loves to give pleasure rather than pain; I think there ought to be a due proportion of both.—~ Tell us that you are both well and happy, und we will keep up the bail with you ; but don't deceive us, in order to make us pity you; if you da, expect reprisals from A. M. Bennex." ** Gentlemen, " I conform to my sister Anna's address, and will say a few words to you both. She is a dear saucy girl ; but threatens more than she means to execute· í dare say your knowledge of her and of y ourselves, will enable vou to sup¬ port her resentment. I am much obliged for the books you sent me;
2:6 but I think the lady is an outrageous caquet. î tell my Anna that if she had been introduced into the great world, she would have resembled Mariáimé, in more than one respect. She threatens revenge for the sarcasm, as she calls it. I am very much concerned, that M. Marivaux did not live to finish it, and that no writer of equal merit has since attempted it. Mr. and Mrs. Bennet write ; so I leave family subjects to them. I earnestly wish to Lear that you are in perfect health, and that you think of your friends here, as often as they do of you. SorHiA Melcombe" May 20. A letter from Mr. Melcombe, as he chooses to be called, enquiring after my fami¬ ly: whether my children are not yet marriage¬ able, and whether I mean to fulfil my engage¬ ment. May 24. I have answered this letter; have claimed tbe agreement; have acquainted him with tlie late accident; with my daughter's engage¬ ment to Mr. Serby, and with tlie present state of my family. June IB. A letter from Mr. Lucas, with a iăesire to know my son 1 s opinion of his son's cha¬ racter and behaviour at Cambridge ; having heard complaints of his proud and arrogant be-
Üü7 bayiour tl»ere· In my answer, I begged to be excused giving particulars, as from my son's in¬ formation; but in genera], that I believe he is not misiiif'ormed. June 22. My yvife came to me in my study; übe enquired after my health and spirits; she tajked upon serious subjects, particularly upon resignation to the divine will.—Suppose,saic| she, your son were taken from you by a sudden strale, or by a lingering sickness ; which would be tlie most supportable? — My heart sunk within me· Ì fear, í fear! said 1, уоц have some bad news to communicate; is my son dangerously iUÝ—l hope not, said she; but you ought to arm your- želf with resolution.—Have you heard any thing particular, said í ? 1 am sure, my lo\e, this шг&* ing ıs not for nothing ?~~~ She drew two letters o^t of her pocket.—Let us read them together, $ai4 she; perhaps my fears may have magnİ^ed tiie danger.—-I read them ; and then threw them be¬ tween these leaves. Alas—I have not spirits to transcribe them. í will pray for patience and resignation; and •submit to the déposai of Providence in all things. TO MRS. BfNNE?. " ï cannot prevail upon myself to be silent pny longer, on a şnfcje^f tba¿ giye& me mftuite
2SS concern, though I know I shall communicate at least an equal share of it; but I dread the efiects of a surprize. My dear friend and brother Va¬ lentine, is in a very bad state of health, and has many symptoms of the c&nsumptke kind. I have had the best advice for him ; Ì have made him observe the regimen prescribed by Dr. H ..... ■■ ■ " . He rides out every day, he drinks asses milk, he takes every medicine that is ordered ; but, alas, I don't see miith amendment. 1 beg of you, Madam, to inform Mr. Bennet of these particu¬ lars, in the way that you think will be least alarming to him. I know your prudence and affection; I trust in your piety and fortitude. Î- waii your orders; and, upon the first sum¬ mons, İ wiH bring my patient home, if you think feis presence will give satisfaction to you or his father. 3 devote myself wholly to your service, and earnestly beg that you will look upon me as your son and servant, G. Selbt/ 5 TO Jf|S$ В EW HS ВТ. #l With what transport could I answer »y .dear Anna Mam's sprightly letter, if røy heart were at ease! <* Alas, beloved of my soul I there is no occa¬ sion to seek for ţfriis to encounter, for difficulties to overcome; when we reflect on the mcettem
UÜ9 tenure upon which poor mortals hold.their earth¬ ly happiness. Even at this moment, I perceive the approach of trouble and afflictions in which I fear distant* as well as present, evils.—Arm yourself, my dearest, with Christian philosophy, to withstand the approaching trial.— Your bro¬ ther and mine is, I fear, in a declining arø^.— »You will be called upon to be tlie support and com¬ fort of your father, mother, sister, and lover. 1 will be your associate in every act of piety and affection ; and* by sharing this burthen, endea¬ vour to lighten it to you all. " Let me ask your advice in a point of tm* portance. Do you think it will be less distress¬ ing to your revered parents, to see your brother, or to hear of him? I am yours and theirs en¬ tirely; let me know their pleasure, and I will immediately obey it. If I can perceive any fa¬ vourable symptoms, I will instantly inform you of it; but the disorder is evidently upon his lungs, and î fear is the consequence of the late unfortunate accident; and he is emaciated to a great degree in a short time. Perhaps my love may increase my fears above the danger; but I dare not attempt to conceal or extenuate them, to any part of your family. Favour me with an answer as soon as possible; tell me your parents determination, and I will hold myself in readi- aess to obey their summons, if they desire, as I
no suppose they will, to see their dear Valentinet otherwise 1 will here pei form every duty of love and friendship, for I am theirs and yours while I have- life. G. Sbìby." June 3Q. I have written to Selby, desiring him to bring my son to my arms with all con¬ venient speed, that I may see him as long aş heaven permits me to enjoy that happiness. July 9. I am now preparing to meet my trial; I expect my sons every hour. I will pray for composure and fortitude. July 12. I have seen my son and have read his sentence in his pallid countenance and ema¬ ciated body. All my famiiy are overwhelmed with grief; yet every one strives to conceal their portion, kst they should increase that of the rest. What a scene of tender grief, and speak¬ ing silence ! The dearest of women suppresses her emo¬ tions, and employs every art of soothing ten¬ derness to comfort her unhappy husband; she looks aud acts like a superior being. Excellent woman!—I will strive to imitate thee; and to take and give comfort, to all those who love me. July 20.—The greatest loss a human creature can sustain, is that of a promising child. W hen
Søl a parent dies, tlie child is comforted, because it is according to the order of nature; but when the child dies before the parent, the order of nature seems to be reversed. It is a great trial; but how can any transitory grief, hurta being assured of immortality r July 27.—There are no hopes of my son's re¬ covery; he knows his situation ; he has perform* ed aü those acts which our religion enjoins; he has taken the most affecting farewel of every one of his friends.—-He said to Sophia, *· May you, my beloved and contracted bride, meet with a husband every way my superior, I always had a kind of presentiment that we should never be mated, and for this reason I restrained myself in my behaviour towards you; I rejoice that I did *o; and hope it will lessen your regret for me. All of you join in comforting my father. Re¬ member, my dear parents, tliat tins is only a ■temporary separation. I ¿upe— 1 ecÄere—í arø certain we shall meet again !" 1 treasure up every word that falls from the lips of my angelic son.-—Alas I I know not how soon ------ August 1.—" The Lord gave, and the Lord *' hath taken away; and blessed be the name of " the Lord Г Here endetil the history^ the earthly hopes, and tlie nmne of Bennet.
&32
COÎTTINÜ ATION OF THE FAMILY HISTOEY BY G. SELBY. Mes. Ben n st gives røe her permission to re¬ capitulate the past melancholy events, so far a» to connect them with the succeeding part of the family history. Though the name of Bennet is lost, his posterity are not extinct, the hopes of his children revive, and they look forward to tlie blessings which Providence reserves for them. The death of the friend and brother of my heart, was a severe stroke to every person in the family. Though my soul was penetrated with grief, I was obliged to conceal it, and to be the comforter of the rest; this affliction sunk the deepest into the mind of Mr. Bennet, yet both he and his excellent wife strove to conceal their grief from each other. Mrs. Bennet ex¬ erted her ntmost resolution, and gave an exam* pie to the rest of iis. Mr. Bennet strove to do the same ; whenever his grief became too appa¬ rent, he used to retire into his study, and there implore Heaven to grant him fortitude and com¬ posure; but he lost his rest, and his appetite, and sometimes was sick and fainting. We made him take the air often, and I insisted upon per¬ forming his pastoral duties. Mrs. Bennet ob¬ served every turn in his countenance ; and used
233 «very method to amuse his mind, and restore his health. By her desire I wrote to the Earl of D——, informing him of Mr. V. Benneťs death, Mr. Benneťs state of health, and his daughter's en¬ gagement to me. in the last stage of Mr. V„ Benneťs sickness, Mr. Lucas wrote to his father, desiring that he might accompany his two eldest sons in a tour through Switzerland, and part of Germany. By Mr. Benneťs order, I gave him an account of the hopeless state of young Bennet-, and the si* tuation of the rest of the family. Afterwards, I wrote him word of the young man's death, and the effect of it upon his father. We now received letters of friendship and condolence from him. Mr. Bennet seemed to revive, and to exert all the resolution he was master of to overcome his grief. He continued to retire into his study several times in the day, and some¬ times staid several hours there. Mrs. Bennet and myself thought he was too often and too long alone; we hmted so much to him; but he assured us that the time he spent there, was the source of the amendment we perceived in him; and that both his health and spirils were the better for it. Öne day that Mrs. Bemiet was uneasy at his long stay there, I went and tapt at the doorj it
23Ф was a quarter of atı hour before I had any a»* swer ; at last I heard him speak in a falteriug voice that alarmed me. He opened the door, afld spoke imperfectly; he asked my pardon, and told me he had fallen asleep. After he was somewhat recovered, I led him into the parlour,. »nú told Mrs. Bennet the reason we staid so long; he looked so placid and cheerful, that she was quite sained. From this day we perceived a gradual altera¬ tion in Mr. Bennet; he grew heavy, sleepy, 1c- -thargic; he looked perfectly easy; but after eating, or whenever his attention was not kept $tp, he dropped asleep» Mre. Bennet soon observed it, and mentioned it ào rae. I could not deuy that î saw it as plainly· The event too weU justiåed our fears. We •ent for an eminent physician, aDd proceeded by his directions; but his distemper gained -ground. He wa.s easy and happy, unless when disturbed; and then he would beg us to leave him. I am well and happy, he would say; why do you interrupt me ! Once, when he saw Mrs. Bennet in tears, he seemed m great emotion.— Do not let me see you weep, he said; I csnnot bear it Í— Another time he said to her, lam going to leave you, wife of my soul! You must {give this living to Selby, and make him your «on.—Auoihvi vine, I am going to b^ happy;
why should you be wretched! We $bail meet again hereafter. Mr, Beimet died thirteen months after Ыш son, Never was man more beloved and la¬ mented ; the whole parish were present at his funeral, at which I assisted as chief mourner. I paid the sad last duties to my friend and my father, yvhom I loved as much as one human being could love another. This shock, though long expected, was se¬ verely felt by Mrs. Bennet, insomuch that her children were alarmed for her life; a life of in¬ finite value to them. Their attentions were so tender, that she could not but be affected by them. She promised them to wrestle witli her grief, and to look forward to the comforts that remained toher; to endeavour to live for them. After the first edge ofthe grief of the family was a little abated, I wrote to Mrs. Lucas, in¬ forming her of Mr. Benneťs death. She yvrote an answer, and conjured Mrs. Brunet, by their long friendship and near relationship, to leave the scene of her late sorrows, and come to her in Staffordshire; to spend some time there, till her grief should be softened by degrees, and her health established by change of air, exercise, and the company of her friends. She desired her to bring all her children without scruple, and htr own ser¬ vants to attend her. She besought her tö m%m
£3$ tio excuses, for that she would not accept my; and desired us to bring her without delay, for that she was certain her cousin's grief would not abate while she staid at S We ali seconded Mrs. Lucas's invitation, and besought Mrs. Bennet to accept it. it was with Ihe utmost difficulty we prevailed on her. I wrote to Mrs, Lucas, that a« soon as we had performed some necessary duties at S—, we would thankfully accept her invitation. Mrs. Bennet was obliged to attend to busi· ness, which in the very act turned her mind from the objects of her distress to these of her uffec* Hon* She was the executrix of the will. Just at this time, my good friend Mr. Butler took refuge t n our parish; he had been ill-used and pei secuted for his supposed opinions. As soon as I was inducted to the living of S , I engaged Mr. Butler to be my curate for one year, aud } rey ailed on a farmer in the parish to take lum into his family as a boarder. I next wrote to Lord D·——, by Mis. Benneťs order, and in her name, begging hnu to sulfer Miss Melcombe to continue with the lemains of the Bennet family. The young lady wrote also berseli, but yvith every precaution, lest she should ©fiend her haughty parent. It was as follows t " Sophia Melcombe, with every sentiment of duty ша obeditnee» reque&tş of the geatlemaa
«37 Ыш has hitherto been her guardian, that he will permit her to remain in that family, to which her heart is allied by every tye of gratitude and affection." Lord I ) " ......' " answered her letter, to Bfrs« Bennet; he lamented the loss of her husband and son ; he thanked her for her affection and care to his ward; he desired that she might con¬ tinue under her protection^ as long as it should be agreeable to ail the parties concerned. Sophia's fortune had been placed in the public funds by Mr, Bennet during her childhood ; and he ordered, by his will, that as soon as she should come of age, it should be surrendered into ber own hands. He had saved, and added to it, sufficient to make it full three thousand pounds. Every point relating to the executorship bemg settled, I conducted Mrs. Bennet and her daugh¬ ters to the house ot Mrs. Lucas« where she wa» most cordially received. I took up my residence with Mr. and Mrf. Bates, who treated me as ao old and intimate friend, or rather as the «on of Mr«. Beimet» llie lenient hand of time, the good offices of her friends, the piety and goodness of her own heart, enabled that excellent woman to reànm the excess of her grief within the limita of rea* sod; and her affection for hci remaking еШ*
2$t dreti, made her interested m aU that concerned them. Some months after Mr, Benneťs death, I ventured to solicit her to confirm roy engage·* ment to her daughter. She told me, she wished me to defer our marriage till the year was fully expired, and we should return to the village of S" - ™ .........· I shall not, said she, reside at the parsonage; I have a little house in my «ye, which I intend to purchase; ii shall be fitted up for Sophia and me; we will be your neighbours and friends, and we will share your hopes and comforts. The eldest Lamas, came to his parents house to take Ids leave, before he went on his travels. The second soa came also from a visit to a rela·· tion of his father's; he was au amiable youth, ши! the reverse of his brother in every thing, The elder brotàer took particular notice of Miss Melcombe* but in a manner that shewed he thought lie did her too much honour by it» She had an unfeigned dislike to him, and avoided bis company as much m possible. The second dkeeled his attentions to Miss Bennet, but in a manner the most engaging and polite. He lamented feer engagement tt» me, and determined to suppress his passion; hoping that time, ab- «ence, and travelling, would enable him to тйжшио к* He behaved as a friend aud bro-
3
«lier fø fåe } owned his wishes, but frankly re* signed all pretensions* The elder Luca* took an impertinent liberty with Miss Melcombe; she repulsed him, with áFj&žríF equal to his- own. He resented her disdain : he told her it ъ?т time for her to forget Valentine Bennet. She answered him, that she never desired ta forget Aim;—But, said she, if Valentine Bennet had never lived on earth* I could never have loved Valentine Lucas^—He was in a rage; he threat¬ ened revenge. She thought proper to relate the whole story to Mrs, Bennet; and this circumstance made us¬ tum our eyes homeward, thinking it best te put an end to our visit Mrs. Lucas was unwilling to consent to her departure.—You have not yet finished your year, my dear cousin, said she; and that was the time I proposed to· detain you here: I cannot consent to part with you, till it is expired. Mrs. Bennet hinted, that there were some circumstances that rendered it proper to abridge that term. Blrs. Lucas insisted upon knowing what they were. Her cousin could not refuse her ; she told her in confidence all that had passed. Mrs. Lucas was w.xed at her son's behaviour.
«—Would to God, said she, that ValenClfte could engage Miss Melcombe's affections! but i fear his behaviour has give» her a disgust to him. I will make him ask her pardon; and, perhaps, some time hence, when he has seen more of the world, and knows how to give others the saine consequence he takes to himself; he may become worthy of her favour· I sincerely wish к could be so* Miss Melcombe is the only person to decide this point, said Mrs. Bennet: I should wish to be excused interfering iu this matter. I think it would be better to let it rest; especially as .Mr. Vc Lucas depends on Miss Melcombe's keep¬ ing it from you, unless he should offend her again.—You say true, my dear cousin. Let it rest till Valentine returns from his travels; it is best thai in these еще* the heart should take its own сшгь*. I will be silent io regard to what you have told røe, aod leave the tevent to Pro* vidence· Mrs, Bennet thought it psoper that î should return to S' '■ ■..... t to prepare for her reception ; and tlie» invit« bei to come home. She gave Aie a commission feo purchase the house she de¬ lträd to have, for herself and Miss Melcombe. By tins time Ле melancholy year drew towards & vmcluswa. I recmeá Mn, Bemieťs orders
2İİ' to come^and conduct her and her family home to their beloved village; and I joyfully hastened to obey the welcome summons. At my arrival I found the young Lucas's were gone, which gave me great pleasure.-—Mr. Va¬ lentine had asked pardon for his behaviour to Miss Melcombe; but I understood from her that^ it was in consequence of a hint from his mother, that Miss Melcombe \vas descended from a fa¬ mily superior to his own. The lady understood it so ; and it gave her the highest contempt for him. Avgust 20. I made an acquaintance with Ed¬ ward Saville, Esq. an amiable atid accomplished young gentleman. After some time spent İn preparations, Mrs. Bennet was settled in her new habitation, and promised to complete my happiness as soon аь the year should be expired. September 21. May this day begin a new and auspicious ата! This day Gerard Sciby and Anna Maria Bennet, were united in the holy bands of marriage, in the parish church of S— « « ■... Mrs. Bennet gave, her daughter to me. Mr. Builer performed the ceremony. The same day Edward Savdle, Е.Щ. made a proposal of marriage to Miss Sophia Mekombe, in the ptebence of my revered mother and mv* '.Hi,
ч
2Ы
LETTER XVII. MU. SAVILLE TO MR, JÖHNS-Qïf. bilí εκ о of my'virtue and my happiness! to you I must disclose my grief: I am almost dis¬ tracted ! forgive me if I utter nonsense, phrensy, and extravagance 1 The charmer of my soul, the arbiter of my happiness, is lost, is carried oil! Oh, Heaven î Sophia Melcombe is stolen away from us. The dear creature was walking with Dolly Grove from Mrs. Benneťs ίο the parsonage ; two men watched them, till they came out of sight of any house; tbey then seized upon Sophia, and hurried her between them to a post-chaise at some distance; both she and her companion shrieked in vain for help. They did not attempt to detain Miss Grove : she came rmming to the parsonage out of breath; she Could not speak, butsatuown, and fainted away. Upon her recovery, she related the above par¬ ticulars, which have thrown us into a state of confusion and distraction. My apprehensions point out the author of this cruel mischief; that infernal woman, and her emissaries! Yes, 1 now uudeistand it,-— this is the revenge they threatened upon me; but I will hazard my life aud fortune to discover this mystery of malice.
243 îvïr. Stlby is gone tıp to the hall; he vriîT speak to that base woman ; he will hear what she says, and judge by her behaviour what share she has in this villainy. In the mean time, my horses are getting ready to pursue them. Young Elliott, of whom î have made mention before, came to Mr. Franklin's two days ago; he has offered his service to go with me, m pur¬ suit of the darling of every heart in this family. We shall go to I——, and take a post-chaise there; a lad whom I had lately hired, will at¬ tend us on horseback ; we shall travel night and day till we overtake them. Mr. Selby is returned ; he can learn nothing from the female magician of that inchanted cas¬ tle, She heard his story with seeming surprize. ■—Bless me í said she, how extraordinary this adventure ! how similar to what has happened to myself! This very morning, a young gentle¬ man and lady eloped from my house, I am ig¬ norant of their scheme, but I suppose they will be heard of on the other side of the Tweed.—- Mr. Selby was very serious with her: he told her, that Miss Melcombe's relations were peo¬ ple of distinction ; that they would call to a se¬ vere account, all that had any hand in this vile action. He soothed, he threatened her, but all in vain; she denied any knowledge of the action, or the persons concerned in it; but at m í»
244 the same time he saw in her eye a look of tri¬ umph and satisfaction, the malignant triumph of vice over exemplary virtue. lie left her m indignation, and nastcned back to ¡irqiiaint ns with the unsuccessful effort he had made. My mind presages, that Lord S— is the traitor who has carried away Sophia; and that Clayton and Miss Freewill, are the other pair. I will find them lning or dead. Honest Sam Llhott is my companion and comforttii. I shall write to Mr. Selby a minute account of evvry thmg, and he will transmit it to you till 1 can ünd leisure to unte to νου. My next Will be from London. Adieu, my heart's friend and monitor, Edward Saville.
LETTER XVIII. &ÏU SAVILLE TO THE REV. MR. SELBY. CüLbidcr, Menda j, 1% o*ctOi.Å. DEAR SIR, While the horses were changing, I bought a nuire of paper and a paper-cast, which now server* me as a desk to write upon, 1 have al¬ ready the satisfaction of knowing that I am in
245 the right track. î am now certain that Lord S — ■ " '' and Mr. Clayton are the traitors every circumstance confirms it. At a village called Ardleigh, three miles from Colchester, we met two pair of horses with the postillions; they yyere very hot, and it immedi¬ ately occurred to Elliott and me, that they were those hired by our adventurers. We stopped and questioned them. I put money into their hands, and they told me all they knew. They were hired at I ...... ; the post-chaises belonged to two gentlemen ; each had an additional pair of horses to his own. Each gentleman had a lady with him ; they all answered the description I made of thuu. One lady had on a riding-dress, that was un¬ doubtedly Miss Freewill ; the other had a lmen ¿">wn and coat, and a hat trimmed with green ribband. Too surely it was my angel Sophia, the true Simplex Munditiis. The men sayv but a glimpse of the ladies, for the bliuds were drawn up all the way. The relays nut them on Ardleigh 11 eat In We hastoued lull speed after them, in hope to over¬ take them ; but it seems they went on the back tide ot the town, we went the torv ard way, and they have agam got the start of us. We chung< d hoi se;» with ail possible expedition; andatala wc ìeuew our chuce.
ив Elliott longs to engage them, m his phrase. If I could but see them in the-offing, says he, ï warrant I would soon be up with them. IVitham. Again we have met the hack-horses on their return. Tlie artful villains always contrive to change horses, before they come mto the post- towns. They must have servants, to order and get them ready the moment they arrive ; but by speaking to the postilions, we shall go to the same "houses. Itrenfvuxtd. The horses belonging to these felons are left here; they have taken fresh ones to Ilford. The landlord of the White-Hart tells us, that one of the gentlemen is a Ix>rd, and the other a Baron- knight; one of them is brother to one of the ladies, -the other aiover of the other lady; that «he was going to steal a marriage with a man of low degree, but her brother prevented her ; and is going to carry them abroad, to prevent tlie story from being lcnown. Artful villains! this accounted for the ladies reluctance to go with them. He says, the ladies were lifted into the po5t- ehaises;· and the men bid the postilions drive like devils, for they should be late home. Oh (hat home, where is it to be found! I will have no home myself, till I know where that is.
247 lïftri. Confusion and disappointment ! The ravishers have again escaped us· We are tired and faint. I am almost in despair ; these men have or¬ dered their postilions to drive them to some place in the borough of Southwark ; the landlord is positiye to this circumstance. I have desired him to get intelligence of the place where they stop, and I will reward him amply for his trouble. I yvant litde food, and no rest, till I know that our Sophia is in safety. aSKitbwari. Intercepted, disappointed, fatigued in body •find mind ; mortified to death, and almost dis¬ tracted I Once within sight of the chaises ; my servant making signs to the postilions to hasten after them, when we were stopped by two or three cursed carts and drays in Whitechapel ; Elliott and I, urging, praying, threatening in vain, When these devilish impediments yvere removed. the chaises were out of sight. Our postilions yvent whipping and driving over London Bridge, and to the Sun Inn in the Borough: and now here we are, vvithout any chance of getting nearer to them. I yvould set out again directly, but Elliott and the servants are against me. I will not send yon a letter iu this state of uncertainty. I will vvalk out while the horses H 4
24S are getting ready. When I think of what Sophia may suffer, I am almost distracied. Oh that I could mett tbc villain that has stolen her away! S would ток my life to recover her, and punish him. Scutl-wark, J ý Ciazi, Тъыезу AfUrn&ùn, Here I am still, my friend ; but ï am quite another man than when I яроке with you last. Hope warms my heart, and bkls me commum* i^jite it* cheering inilueuce to all the friends of my dear Sophia. With the first ray of li^ht, I sallied forth Into the struct, hardly knowing whi^h way I went. I hud not gone far, before l ьо. w over a shop - door, the name of Searle* I instantly recoiîectcd tht name af Miss Jones's partuer in trade; ai id it occurred to me, that she might possibly be of service to me, by making enquiries after such persons as our fugitives, pid whether they were lodged ω the Boi ough. I asked Ibr Mrs. Лошч»; observing her hint, tliat ihr passed for a widow. Presently alter, I he rd her voice, J*&ymg, Wåo cm w^t im ihn* смгИ ? As so η аь -she saw ни·,, ът. -tt »p a kuul oi shout fur juv ,— -Mr. S.tviïk* İ how happy î am tu м-е y^u lier**, bu ! But, if i am nut mirtaktt., you do not look well oe>r happy ?—indeed I am ni'i*her, at ihis tum ; but 1 could not pass thb duor vvithout enquiiing^fteryour hcaltlt, M*cUui.
549 I -houîd have been mortified to tbe last degree if you had, Sir. Pray walk into the parlour.— No, Madam, I cannot now stay; I am in pur¬ guit of a villain, who has robbed me of all that i^ dear to me.—Robbed you of aH that is dear, did you say? h it a lady that you have lost, Sir?— Too surely it is; and ï have reason to suspect it is one of Lady Beimour's crew, that has carried her away. Farewell, Madam.—-Stay, Sir; per¬ haps I may be able to give you some tidings of hen—Would to heaven you could !—~Permit me to try for iL She smiled, and went on. u Whereas a gentleman and lady eloped from Lady Beimour's Feat yesterday morning; who« ever brings tidings of them, shall receive the acknowledgments of Edward Saville, Esq. beride the rewards of their own hearts. Am I right, Sir* "—I shook my head.—Your account is only in part, Madam : there were two pairs,—Right agam, Sir; there w*ie *o.—Dear Madam, be explicit. Do you know where they ar« 4 lodged ?— Nut absolutely, Sir; but I know one that can tell me.—-You ьигрмге and rejoice rne. Tell me ill you know, for 1 am on the rack of impatience. —Walk m then, Sir ; the shop İs not a proper place.-—She led mc into the parlour, and seated mt and herself. Now, Sir, you must have pitleuit tu hear mc explain how I e ame by u\j ш 5
250 »formation. I mentioned in my last letter to you, a gentleman, my good friend.—Your hus- fond, I presume r—No, Sir? but he visits me with that expectation. About a fortnight ago, this gentleman Mr. Barton, received a message fyom Ыт. James Marshall, who is a gentleman, as they call it, to Lord S— (do not be impa¬ tient, Sir ; you will nnd this preface necessary) «—Mr. Marshall was bred a sailor, and was ac¬ quainted with Air. Barton many years ago. He sent for my friend to a tavern bard-by; and after some conversation, and a profession of the highest opinion of his honour and integrity, he told him tliat he had pitched upon him to en¬ trust with a secret of great consequence ; and to execute a commission, whkh, when per¬ formed, would lay an obligation upon Lord —, as weU as himself; and obtain an ample recom¬ pense beside. He then told him, that Lord S—-, and a gentleman his friend, were to carry off two ladies with whom they were in love; and intended to many them. That they had resolved not to go to Scotland, lest they should he pursued by guardians or by rivals ; but they intended to go over to the Continent, and to marry there ; to conceal for a time their place of residence ; and, when it should be convenient, they would own their marriages, and return to their respectives homes.
5Ш They want a friend, said he, to provide them a ship, and to carry them over to Ostend, or to some other neutral port, I wish tiiat you, Sir, would undertake this commission,—-This com¬ mission, answered Mr. Barton, is out of my way ; I am now in the King's service ; and am resolved to continue iu it as long as I shall go to sea.—I am sorry for it, said Marshall ; but still you knoyv a great many persons in the trading vessels, you might easily find a man that would be glad of this employment.·—Why perhaps I might, said Mr, Barton; and since it will oblige you, I will make enquiry for you.—But you must go about it directly, said Marshall. I hope this elopement is to be with the ladies consent, said Mr. Barton ; otherwise I will have nothing to do with it.-—Oh yes, past all doubt, answered Marshall; the gentlemen are men of nice honour, and generosity also, and >ou may depend upon a handsome gratification for your part of the commission.—Well, í will try what I can do for you, and let you know my success, said Mr. Barton. After settling a mode of inter¬ course, they parted. Some days after this interview, Mr. Barton was h\ company with a young man, who was going to Ostend soon, as master of a trading vessel ; he proposed tins commission to him ; and he was willing to take the whole party, as m 6"
252 passengers aboard his ship. Mr, BaHon gave intelligence of this, to Mr. Marshall ; and he desired Mr. Barton to make an agreement yvith Capt. Dunton. Marshall gave notice to his Lord, and he prepared for the enterprize. Marshall hired a house at Blackwall, ready-furnished, where they are to stay tiil the ship is ready to saih They were expected there last night ; and Mr. Barton was there to receive them. Capt. Dun- ton is not yet come on board the ship; but Mr. Barton, is employed by him to attend the passen¬ gers, and settle th€ terms with them. Every thing is preparing on board, the ship for their re¬ ception ; but you are just come in time to lend your assistance, or else to frustrate their schemes. And now, Sir, I hope % have made you soms amends for my tedious preface—have I not ? My dear friend, said I, you surprise and re¬ joice me past expression !—I am the most fortu¬ nate of men to meet with you ! And I, Sir, ama fortunate woman, to be able to repay my bene* factor for his goodness to me, by a service of equal importance to himself» But really, Sir, I did not think that Miss Freewill had been of so much consequence to you.·—Mi6s Freewill ! said I; how could you suppose it? No, though I would serve any woman in distress, she is not the object of my affections.—Oh, then it is the other lady, I suppose. May I ask her name?-*
253 Miss Melcombe, said I; I hope you will one day know her, and be entitled to her friendship.«— But, Sir, are not tbe ladies carried away by their own consent?—One of them I can swear is not; and I have reason to think, the other is not consenting. But when can I see Mr. Barton?' Sir; yvhen he knows he has been imposed on by a false story, he will in justice to his own character, be yours and the ladies friend,—But when shall I see him?—Some time to-day, Sir, or this evening at farthest. I will send for him directly ; and then I yvill let you knoyv ; where are you to be found?—At the sign of the Sun, hard-by ; my friend and the servants- are waiting my return. I ran back to the inn, as jf I went through the air. Elliott was expecting me; he was surprised at the alteration iu my looks.—I led him into the parlour, and told him all that had passed. He took his part in my good fortune. We sent the chaise and postilions back to Ilford ; after yvhich I sat down with him to breakfast, with some satisfaction; and I am now waiting impati¬ ently for my friend Miss Jones's summons. South-warl, Wednesday Nun, I did not return to my inn, till a late hour last night ; but I yvill now velate what passed in the evening. I sat with my watch in my hand, counting the minutes till seven o'clock, when í
554 received the yvelcome message from my friend Susan Jones. Elliott and I ran thither in an instant; we yvere introduced to Mrs. Searle, Miss Jone?, and Mr. Barton. Mr. Barton ano- logized for accepting such an employment from persons of whom he had no better knowledge, and said, that he would not for the world be concerned in so base an uciion.—My good Sir, said I, it is in your poyver to make ample amends for what you have done ignoran tly, but without any ill design. Let us come to the point. Where are these worse than robbers to be found.—Stop a little while, Sir, and hear me ï You yvould seek them ; a quarrel yvould ensue ; you would fight them, but are you sure that you would get the better of them ? Perhaps you might be the sufferers; and the ladies might not be delivered after all. What then would you advise me to do, Sir ?— I am ready, Sir, to give you both my advice and assistance: I wisli as much as you do, to rescue tlie ladies; but í ysould do it yvith as little mis¬ chief as punible. Tliey were earned away by stratagem, and I would recover thent by the same means. 1 think it yvould not be difficult to effect it ; aud I offer you my assistance for this purpose. There is some reason in what you say, Sir ; but how then would you advise us to proceed ?
255 Why, Sir, I am trusted by the gentlemen ; ï can go to the house when I please ; I can carry two or three stout lads with me, and either find or make an opportunity to free them.—Listen to me, said Elliott : I will be one of these lads. I will watch an opportunity to speak to them ; Miss Melcombe knows me, and she will put herself under my protection ; and wheu I have got the prizes in my possession, I will sheer off, and bring them into any port you shall appoint. Very well, said I ; arid I will be of the party also. Avast there, brother, said he ; you are too well known.—Let me have the command of this expedition, said Barton. You shall both be upon the spot ; this young gentleman shall go to the house, and Mr. Saville shall hold himself in readiness to take charge of the ladies. I agreed to this proposal. Mr. Barton ad¬ vised that we should disguise ourselves as com¬ mon sailors, and that some of his lads should attend us; that we should go to Blackwall, lodge at the Memund, and wait there for his orders. The*>e preliminaries being settled, we spent the evening very sociably. I am now preparing for our expedition ; httvingput every thing in train. Here we are, my dear friend, waiting the
Q.%6 arrival of our friend Mr. Barton to begin our operations. Mrs. Scarle's shop furnished us with the ne¬ cessary accoutrements ; and here are a party of sailor-lads of us, all in the same uniform. I am Jack Robinson, at your service; Elliott goes by his own name ; for he is not known to the wretches, who are a disgrace to the name of gentlemen; two,clever brisk lads of Barton's crew, called Smith and Hardy, and my servant Tom Styles, make up the whole company. This Hardy is a clever young fellow ; he haß managed weil to gain admittance to the castle we are about to besiege, and to which we shall soon make a nearer approach* Hardy delivered his message to Mr. Marshal!, which was to inform him that Capt Dunton was expected at the ship in two da\s; or three at farthest. He added, My master Barton has sent three more hands for your service; they are at the Mermaid, where they will wait your orders, and obey your signais. Marshall was very much pleased with his offers of service; he told him that he might come to the house whenever he pleased ; or v if he liked it, he might lodge there, and the rest might fctay at the inn till they were wanted. / Elliott desires Hardy to introduce him to-tho
257 servants ; and then ï reckon, said he, that I bhall have gained the first step to our designed attack. Wednesday Night, 11 оСШ. The bailors are returned, shouted for joy of their success ; they have been well received in the kitchen; Hardy danced a horn-pipe; Elliott sung sea-songs; the servants enjoyed theú? com¬ pany; sailors only were always cheerful, they baid. Lord S—— shewed himself to them ; he thanked them for their assiduity in his service ; he spoke highly of his regard for Mr. Barton. He ordered Marshall to entertain them with whatever they liked best. They supped there, and then returned to the inn to tell me their success ; but Hardy goes back, and will sleep in the house ; he seems already a favourite in the family. Having thus happily begun our ope¬ rations, I will dispatch this letter by the post, for 1 know you will be impatient to hear of our proceeding. Mrs. Searle and Mrs. Jones have offered their house as an asylum to the ladies. I shall carry them thither ibr the present, and I will ever re¬ member their kindness. Accept and divide among you, the heart of your Epward Saville.
558 P. S. \ ou may direct to John Robinson, bai¬ lor, at the Mermaid, Blackwall.
LETTER XIX. ME. SELBY ГО EDWAIID SAVILLĽ, ESQ. BEAR SIR, Accept the united thanks and blessings of all my family, for your early and most welcome intelligence. You will know by your oyvn feel¬ ings what we have suffered. We entirely approve the method the worthy- Mr. Barton advi&es; proceed by stratagem by all means; and, if you should fail of success, my mother will write directly to the earl of D... « ......- , inform him of all that has happened to his daughter, and desire him to apply to the laws of the land for her recovery. In the mean time we wibh you to have the pleasure and the merit of her deliverance; aud we thank Mr. Elliott sin¬ cerely, Or his generous friendbhip and assistance. You will either send or carry the letter í in¬ close to Mis. Barclay, in Bloomsbury; she is mv mothcr'e lialf-$iäter. I hay e asked her pro¬ tection for our beloved Sophia. You will not be displeased with an introduction to Mrs. Bar¬ clay; she is a sentible, polite, and amiable wo¬ man. I think it likely that Mis. Bai clay will
23$ detain our Sophia some time, to ľecovsr her fatigues of body aud mind; and to give her a view of the capital, which she has never seen; and I think it probable, that you will take lodg¬ ings near them. I should say much more of our obligations to you, if I did not think that you already look for¬ ward to a reward equal to the service you are performing. Mr, and Mrs. Franklin unite m affections, prayers, and blessings, for you; with my wife and mother, and your sincere and af¬ fectionate friend, G. SübBY* LEITER XX, MH. SAVILLE TO THE REV. MTt, SELBY. Blackwell, Thursday» Tms morning our friend Elliott is gone with Hardy to take a survey of the enemy's fortifica- tiors; he will lay a plan, he says, to storm the castle, and take the garrison prisoners. He pro- mises to be back by dinner. Thursday Evening. Elliot was urged to stay to dinner; he ac¬ cept the invitation with seeming modesty and rehtctnnce; he has picked up the following pat« titular*«
йбо Marshall is chief manager; and Mrs. Ca¬ therine the liousekeeper is his adjutant; she attends the ladies, and watches all their mo¬ tions. Under this woman, is a cook, and a housemaid, both very ignorant and vulgar, and capable of nothing but obedience; one footman of Lord S-~—'s, another of Mr. Clayton's; they are all quite easy, and secure of not being de¬ tected. Catherine suffers only herself and the house¬ maid to approach the ladies; they live upon the first floor; the ladies* apartment is towards the garden ; but when the gentlemen insist upon their company, they go iuto the dining-room to them. Catherine says, they sleep together, and that they look pale, and complain of bad rest. She ridicules their delicacy. I can hardly bear the idea of their sufferings; if I were to meet either of the vil lians, I should trust their punishment to no other hands than my own.—1 could exe¬ crate them,—But words are of uo eflect:—I will speak by my actions. Hardy looks sweet upon the housemaid ; Elliott ogles Mrs, Catherine her¬ self; she looks at him, with contempt and dis¬ dain. Blackivatl, Friday. Elliott made another visit in the evening; he obsen ed the houf-c ; ne went into the gardon ¿
ям he says he has planned a fine manœuvre, but he will not tell me what, till he sees the success. Friday Νΰφπ. Elliott is returned in high spirits. I could hardjy get him to tell his tale ; which is as fol¬ lows: I went into the garden yesterday, in or¬ der to discover which room was the ladies" lodging.' This morning I took a long stick, tied my handkerchief to the end of it, mounted a tree, and waved it before the ladies' window: Hardy kept a good look-out the while. Presently I saw a pretty lady at the window; but ï cannot say whkh it was. I then lowered my flag; and, in¬ stead of it, fixed a piece of paper in a cleft iu the stick, which I had ready prepared for the opportunity; and put it close to the window» The lady opened İt, and took the paper ; upon which I put my hand to my heart, in token of my sincerity : then my finger upon my lips, to sig¬ nify my secrecy; then bowed my body, and waited her commands. The words written on the paper were these ; Be of good cheer, Relief is near. Нош after I saw two ladies, one of whom I im¬ mediately knew was Miss Melcomc ; tbey made signs for me to wait. Öne of them took a pen- 3
262 cil, and wrote on a slip of paper, which she fastened to my flag eis before : I joy to hear relief is near ; But joy with fear, until I hear What friends are near to give us cheer. Be you sincere, and meet me heie. I took the note, kissed my hand, and descended the tree ; ran into the house, and sat down with the servants for a few minutes ; drank a pint of ale with them, and then came away. I would not seem impatient, though I thought every mi¬ nute an hour, till I had brought you these good tidings. You will easily conceive my surprize and joy, at this good omen ; we are both elevated by it. We expect honest Barton this evening, and then we will consult him about the grand attempt : in the mean time I will write a note to Sophia, and copy it for yours and the ladies' satisfaction. TO MtSS SOPHIA MELCOMBE. " Two faithful and true knights-errant have engaged to deliver the fair damsels, who have been carried away by two false and treacherous villains. They are commissioned by Miss Mel¬ combe's dearest friends to guard her from in¬ sults, and to convey her to a place of safety, Anxious for her peace, they wish her to be well 1
2û$ assured that her companion is to be trusted; and whether she is detained without her own consent· Ifit be really so, they yvill also take charge of her, and guard her likewise to the same asylum. Be cautious, and burn this directly. You will hea i r further soon. Prepare to depart by the first op¬ portunity, which your true friends are watching to find, or make for your deliverance. E. Saville. S. Elliott." Elliot goes again after dinner, and will watch for an opportunity to give this note to Miss Melcombe. Friday evening. The note is delivered as the former was.—Sophia smiled ; and kissed her hand to Eiliutt.—Happy fellow! Captain Barton is come. Now for more ac¬ tive measures. The worthy man has given his advice as follows : Captain Dunton is come to his ship this day : it is his intention to invite the gentlemen to dine with him on board it to-morrow, and to enter¬ tain and make his agreement with them for their passage to Ostend. I shall be present; which will take away all suspicion of my being privy to your undertaking. Whilst we are all on board the ship, you must carry off the ladies. If you can get Marshall out of the way, you can easily ma*
20*4 nage Catherine ; and you may make the other servants believe, that you are sent by the gentle¬ men to entice the ladies on board the ship. Yo« must have chaises in readiness. Bravo ! bravo ! said both Elliott and I ; we will follow this plan exactly; antl if it should be frustrated, we will apply to the law for assistance to recover ike ladies. Poor Freewill ! I have hardly thought of her, my mind has been so engrossed by its mistress ; but she -shall share the blessing of recovered liberty. My dear Sophia will befriend her in¬ experienced youth, with her advice and assist¬ ance ; and she will reap the benefit of expe¬ rience, to conduct herself with prudence for the remainder of her life. Saturday Morning, I sat up all night: Barton went to-bed : Elliott threw himself across two chairs: Happy mani he can sleep any where. I have written a letter to Sirs. Barclay ; I have also written another note to Sophia. Elliott is gone to the house; Barton on board the ship ; Smith into the Borough for a hackney- coach, to wait by the hour: we tliought it better than to take a carriage of any kind from this place, lest it should be traced. Hardy is gone with Elliott to keep watch. Mr. Marshall will receive a penny-post letter this morning, acquainting him that a relation of
265 lás is in great distress, at a house of сопбпе^ ment in tlie city ; and wishes to see bira for half a« hour, on business of the greatest consequence. Mr. Barton gave us the name of his cousin ι who was the most intimate friend he had for¬ merly, and a sailor. Saturday, 11 oVlock. Elliott has delivered my note ; Sophia was waiting at the Window for him. She returned him another. *' S. M. has no doubt that her companion is equally deshous of deliverance with herself. She laments her former levity and inadvertency; both will be on their guard ; and wait patiently the moment that restores their liberty/* A note from Mr. Barton by a stout sailor just arrived : ** Dear Sir, " The bearer of this will be at your service* if you want another assistant ; keep him at the inn, as he will not be known at the house. The gentlemen have accepted the invitation, and will be here before three o'clock. Let Stokes, the bearer, watch their coming on board, and bring you notice. You know your signals, î shall appear ignorant, and so will my lad^; but I shall hope to see you very soon afterwards; Pray let me know where to find you. ï am your mo^t humble servant, 12 o'clock. « John Bartok/*
'Ж . ï have sent Stokes back to Mr» Barton with my address at Mrs. Barclay's; Г shall take lodg¬ ings as near her house as possible. As soon as we get to a. stand of coaches, I shall quit that we have hired, and take another to Bloomsbury, to avoid pursuit. Elliott ia gone back to the house; he and Hardy are upon duty, waiting for my coming to begin the attack. One o'Clock. Stokes is returned ; he is set upon the watch; and I am alone, counting the minutes by my watch, lime now moves with leaden feet to me* ( Two ¿Clock. Elliott has been here to tell me, that Marshall has told him he is obliged to go into the city, after his Lord is gone on board the ship. Every thing seems to favour our undertaking. I have sent Elliott back to his post; Stokes is watching the gentlemens going- on board the ship ; I am waiting for notice of Marshall's de¬ parture to visit his friend. Smith is returned wilh a coach; he takes his post on the box, and it drinkiug with the coachman ; but has orders to Ы cautious not to order too much liquor. Past 3 ¿Clock. The gentlemen are gone to íhe ship; Stokes is here waiting with me, to hear from the house; Hardy is this moment arrived with ordere for Stokes and Jack Robinson, alias Ыщше Satriiie, to come directly.
¿67 I íly this moment, to the charmer of my heart and to your friend, Mrs. Selby's sister, Mrs. Benneťs daughter. Saturday Night, It o* Civet, Sleomtiurj. Rejoice with me, my dear friends î Selby, Franklin, and your ladies! Miss Melcombe and Miss Freewill, are safe lodged at Mrs. Barclay's. I cannot now send particulars, but you shall have them soon. Heaven be praised for our èuccess! Before I go to rest, I send this by the post. I am this moment the happiest of men, and more than ever yours, Edward Saville.
LETTER XXL MR. SAVILLE TO THE REV. MR. SELBV. Sunday Evening· This day I have had the honour and pleasure to attend Mrs. Barclay and tlie ladies to church. I am going to drink tea at Mrs. Barclay's: if I come away in time, I will bestow an hour upon you; if not, you must wait till my spirits are subsided. Sophia calls me her deliverer. Every look towards me confesses her regard for me. She expects me at this moment,— I fly to meet her—adieu ! v 2
20*8 Monday Morning. I will now give you a detail of all that passed on Saturday. I went directly to the house, at Elliotťs summons by Hardy, and was admitted iuto the hall! where I waited some minutes, * which seemed so many hours. At length Elliott came to me; he told me the dinner had been carried up 'mto the ladies room, but they had scarcely eat a mouthful. I can now, said he, introduce you into the dining-room, without being seen by any body; and then you must en¬ tice the ladies down stairs, and you may perhaps steal out unobserved. Hardy is waiting upon the stairs—lose no time. I bade Stokes wait at the outward door, and prevent any body from going out or into the house; then followed Elliott up stairs, and went directly into the dining-room. The ladies were sitting at the table; at sight of me they started, and Sophia said,—Fellow, what brings you here ?—*T our easiness, lady, said 1; we are come to give you liberty. Do you not know me ?— She looked hard at me.—I am Saville, said I ; and this is Elliott; lose no time, but trust your¬ selves with us.—They both looked terrified, and each exclaimed, Mr. Saville! —1 took Sophia's hand; Have you got your bundles ready? said I; let usgo this moment!-—Elliott oifered his to Mi^s Freewill, saying, Fair lady, my hand,
йв9 heart, and life, are at your service,—We have nothing here, said Sophia, but what our be¬ trayers have provided for us. They trembled so, they could hardly stand. Kiliott and 1, said every thing to encourage them.«—Now is the moment of eliveranee, said I; let it not pass, I beseech you! have courage, dearest Sophia! hasten away this instant.— They rose up to go ; at that moment Catherine's voice was heard upon the stairs, calling Elliott to dinner: he answered, I am coming, Mis. Catherine !·—Instantly she burst into the room— Heyday! who have we here?—>A friend and shipmate of mine, Mrs. Catherine.—And what brings him here pray?—To speak to me,—In the ladies' apartment? said she; pray go down both of you this minuted or I will give orders io have you treated according to your deserts. «—Elliott winked at me,—This is no tíme for ce¬ remony, said I.—Elliott came behind Catherine, and put a handkerchief he had prepared over her mouth, I t ed her hands behind, antl then we pushed her into the inner room and locked the door upon her,·—Now this moment, said I; for life, love, and liberty !—We took ea< h our charge, and went down the stairs hastily, but with as little noise as possible. Stokes was at the street door ; Elliott called Hardy, and told Ыт where Catherine was.—You kuow your cue,,
¡*70 said he; see us set off, and then release her and alarm the servants.—We ran to the coach as fast as the ladies' fear would suffer them. Smith jumped off the box, opened the door, and put us in ; and then Stokes got up behind, and Smith and Hardy returned back into the house. The4adies were in great agitations; Sophia was ready to faint ; I supported and encouraged her« I then took proper notice of Miss Free¬ will, who seemed dejected and uneasy. After we were got past London-bridge, they both revived; and then began to enjoy their de¬ liverance, and to pay me their acknowledgments, »—You are equally obliged to Mr. Elliott, who likewise thiuks himself honoured and happy in being employed in your service,—Elliott an¬ swered for himself, and they thanked him for his gallantry in their service. We then informed them of every step we had taken since their de¬ parture, and explained all our contrivances ; aud I did not forget to mention our obligations to my friend Susan Jones, and her friend tbe worthv Mr. Barton. Miss Freewill was under evident dejection of spirits. Sophia called upon her to be cheerful; she burst into tears. Every one offered to com¬ fort and encourage her,—I am ashamed to ba uueasy at this time, it has the appearauce of ingratitude; buX with what føce can I intrude
myself into the lady's house where you are go¬ ing ? I am a stranger to her, and my behaviour must have an improper look. My dear companion in trouble, said Sophia. do not mention such a thing: if I am a welcome guest, my feìlo w-su íferer must be so too. Wait a few days, and consider of it; I have no doubt, that Mrs, Barclay will receive you with the same kindness as myself; if she does not, I will leave her house, and we will go to lodgings together. Spoken like yourself, said I; and I am sure Miss Freewill will agree to whatever you pro» pose.—-I will indeed, said she. When the coach stopped at Mrs. Barclay's, Poor Freewill exclaimed, Let me beg the favour of you all, not to let this lady know that I ever was at Lady Beimour's.-—We assured her that nothing should be said that could be construed to her disadvantage, We all made rather an awkward appearance at our introduction to this lady î I apologised for not waiting upon her be¬ fore, and gave my reasons for the delay; but she behaved with so much frankness and polite¬ ness, that she dissipated all our fears in a quar¬ ter of an hour,—-1 told her that Miss Freewill had been Miss Melcombe's companion in her compelled flight; aud explained the circum¬ stances of their detention. Sophia, in -the ten- derest manner, asked her protection for fr;r .v 4·
272 íímpauion and friend.—Mrs. Barclay pood bto[ ped her solicitation, by assuring her of the n.obt cordial vveìeome, and that she thought hci St. If honoured by the charge uf them both. ï begged Mrs. Barclay to permit her servant to ^et a lodging for Mr. Kiliott and myself, in the same street, Accoidiugly, he took a lod ;- mg for us within a few door¡s. We all supped tcgethei with the utmost cheerfulu^&b; my ser- vdiit came to us at nine o'clock, and we retired at eleven to our new lodgings, and left the ladies to their rest, which was equally welcome to 'ill of us. Miss Melcombe will inclose a letter in my cov* r. I congratulate your family, and myself also ; I am as happy as any man can be, in the present rituation oí ouraífairsj and always your sincere friend and servant, E. Saville»
LETTER XXII, MISP MĽLCOMBB TO MKS. BENNET. I demand the felicitations of my dear mamma and àiblcr upon this happy occasion !«—I am again restoied to my dear friends, and Ihey to me. i am equally obliged for Miss Freewill a-
273 myself.—Poor young lady! She is mortified that the gentlemen should know the house from whence she vva^ taken. My dear mamma will expect some account of our flight, captivity, and treatment from the men who thought proper to carry us off in so strange a manner. My surprise was so great, that it overpowered all my faculties. I was like a person in a fright¬ ful dream, who strives to call out but cannot speak ; to run, but cannot move a step : so did I endeavour to cry for help, but my voice fal¬ tered, and my tongue seemed to btick to my mouth. My ravisher perceived my inexpressible terror and distress; he asked my pardon for the step he had taken, he made me a thousand as* surances of honourable treatment. After some hours silent agony I was relieved by a shower of tears ; my courage revived ; and I resolved not to desert myself, and te hope that Providene** would vet make a way for my escape. But when I thought of the distress of my dear mamma and my beloved sibter, and the trouble I should give to the worthy Mr, Selby, yvho for their sakes would do every thing to recover me, my heart gave way to the tenderness of my aifections, and 1 shed torrents of tears. Lord S------left no¬ thing unsaid to comfort me; and I must do him thv justice to say, that his behaviour was respect* N 5
faî and delicate, from tbe first hour to the 1ай thai I was iu Ids company ; but he doubtless thought this the only way to make himself an interest ία my favour. I will not deny, my dear friends, that I thought of Mr. Saville often ; nay, I pre¬ mised my self that he would pursue, and pernapa rescue ше; but then I trembled at the encounter between him and Lord &■■»■■ э whkh I thought could not happen vvithout mischief, if not mur~ ther. Tbe Venetian blinds were drawn before all the windows of the chaise, and к drove s$ fast that I could see no objecte distinctly. We passed through the skirts of several towns, of which I know not the names ; but stopt not till we came to Brentwood, as 1 have since learned. Lord S "» told me I should soon meet with ti. femaW compasión, who he hoped would prove an agreeable friend,—1 made very little reply to any ifaing that be said. It is a young lady wdio is going upon the same excursion, said he, under the care of a friend of mine. He is also a friend of Mr. Saville^, who I believe is no stranger to you, Madam,—* 1 made no reply.—He proceeded : Mr. Saville, I suppose, has misrepresented me to you, Ma¬ dam ; аь he has prejudiced MUs Freewill against Mr. Clayton.-—I stai ted.—We are not professed takes fmd libertines, m he has called us ; we
WS respect women of virtue and honour* We hsp» resolved to forsake all others; and to attack ourselves to two such women« as might easure the regularity and happiness of thtr remainder øf our lives. Surciv* Sir. said L vou mast have entertained Strange opinions of these women of virtue and honour you talk of, if y ou could suppose tbey would be compelled to receive your addresses» Suffer me, Madam* to account for my opuuonl and my actions also, I had .»eard year t bante* ter before I saw you; Farmer Hobson'b daugb» ter, who was seduced iuto Lady Belmour** fa¬ mily, but whose principles were never totally corrupted, gave ше such a character of you, and of Miss Bennet, and of the exctHtnt wo¬ man her mother, that í ardent Ly wished for a nije educated under her maternal eve. Tiue poor gii"! deseryes your puy<—(tbe virtuous ат« ever the most ready to pity faUui «nuocetict)« She wept while she gave me this auruuut oî that worthy family; and wished berseli tfee meanest servant in it, rather than what she now wa·*. With infinite p6ea:*ure I >ee tbe tear t»f pity m Muss Melcombe*« eyt ; she и abeve tbetzufoient scorn oí prt tended virtue; she will notdwd*ui to hear, and to answer my hinj ~t \ua !—I co¬ loured with anger and ı*îfeo»imem; and f í е&ш s (i
S7İ еф, looked witii the scorn he described.<— W e proceeded : Hear tne , Madam, without prejudice. Thus pi cpared to love, t» revere yuu** l tm* you one. day in my walks; you were leaning upon Mr, b&viUe's arm.—(i turned feom hiro)-»-At that instant I thought I saw all the virtues personified, î saw hiúi afterwards: I enquired of fcirø con- rermug von; lie rriwsed to an^wtfr mv enquiñas; he refund Mr. Clapton his mteiest with Mis* Freewill. We were both convinced that he would stand m the way of our application to you both. This put us both upon other expedient*, and this compelled us to take the btep whu h at pre¬ sent gives you &o mtich offence, but «men I hope yo« will one day forgive, á not approve.—·! сайП€*Ц Sit, snier you to encourage that hopf ; it would be injustice :n me to give you toch hope*—You are very cruel, Mi&s Melcombe! but 1 will not give up my hope» after the steps I bav«? taàen ta İuihİ u. —The steps you hays takto are sot the way to obtain it, Sir. JKvery time he mentioned his expectations, I forbad ihem ; and kept up as much dignity and distance m I could assume. At length tht chaise drove into the yard of an ши; he tu a mannt f earned me iuta a bacÈ-roum, where I sa«« аь* ©ther gmtkrøao and lady. TV- gentleman sa¬ luted eacb other as deur Mid ultimate fnends ŕ
m they presented tbe lady and me to each others she had been weeping, and looked more dejected than I ; far my spirits were in some measure re¬ covered, and I resolved to be upon my guard. The gentlemen went out of the room and left ш together; but i heard them at the door» speaking to a third person. I comforted my companion, and gave her my best advice; to garene the same plan I had laid down for my¬ self; to behave politely to these men, and keep them by tlmt mean« at a greater distance than by reproaches or rudeness. She thanked me for my counsel, and promised to observe my direc¬ tions. I looked out at the windows,, which were only towards the stables, and saw a servant sta¬ tioned umler our windows. I yvent to the door, and there was another person; and went in again, fully convinced that every method was taken to prevent our escape. Soon after, dinner was brought in by one of their servants ; and none of the waiters were buffered to appear. Mr. Marshall, Lord S——'s valet, stood at the door», and the other servants brought the dishes in, followed by our tyrants ; who came, and with the greatest obsequiousness invited us to eat. We sat down in consequence of the plan we had concerted; but you may be* htve we bad not much appetite to our dinner«
Tbey seamed traosported to find nú so compliant* and redoubled their politeness towards ue. They paid ue a profusion of compliments, to which we made very little reply; and I told them, if they desired our conversation, they must speak upon such subjects as we could an¬ swer them. After the servants had dined, we were conveyed into the chaises, with the same precaution as before iato the house; and nobody bui their servants were suffered ta see us. We were both comforted by Ше hopes of each other's company and advice. Iu the evening l Helt my spirits sink as the day-light abated; and when the chaise drove ia!o a court, aud I saw high walls all round the house we were carried to, my heart gave way, and I felt all the horrors of my situation. W$ were conducted up stairs into a large dining-room, and from thence into a bed-cham¬ ber with a light closet in it. A woman of a bold ltod forward behaviour addressed us,—-Your gervant, my pretty ladies! You are welcome to this house í I am at your service to dress or mi- егш you, or any kiud of assistance you may have occasion for.—-We recewed her very coolly; and she seemed to think so; for she drew up, and looked saucy. &>ou afler y we were summoned to supper;
m we were fatigued both in body and wind, аа# begged their permission t*> retire. They did not offer tO detain us a moment ; but took leave of us very politely, and wished us good repose ; Assuring us, that the house, and every person in it, were devoted to our service. This bold woman (Catherine is her name) eame in soon after, and offered us her assist¬ ance ; we both refused it, and wished to remain by ourselves.'—In those drawers, said she, are everything you will have, occasion for; and when you will please to accept my attendance, if you ring that bell, I wäl wait on you. Till then I wish you a good night.—-So saying* she went out of the room, and locked the door after her. We then examined the lock, and found there was a bolt, and also a bar on the inside ; and having secured them, we went to-bed ; and our fatigue was so friendly to us r that it sent us to »est ; but we awoke early in the morning, and lay forming a thousand schemes and wishes for our escape* When Catherine tapped at the door, I opened it; she seemed surprized to-see us ready dressed without her assistance.«—! suppose, said she, I may let the gentlemen know you are ready for breakfast ?-~*We made her very short answers î
δ8Φ «nd shé seemed to think us very proud, to ». person of her consequence. When we were summoned to breakfast, we went immediately ; for I determined to give them no cause to complain of our want of politeness> lest they should use that as a pretent e for be¬ having otherwise to us. After compliments and breakfast were past, and the servants withdrawn^ Lord S— began to lay open his intentions. He made proposals of marriage to me, in the most express terms : Said, He knew I was not of age ; but that he would make such settlements as my friends could not disapprove.—-4 answered^ That ï had friends who would resent any ilk- treatment I might receive ; but that nobody had a right to dispose of me, without my own con¬ sent ; and that I never would give that by com¬ pulsion. Mr. Clayton said, That they were men of honour, and deserved to be treated with, upon fair and equal terms ; that tí ^y expected we would give their proposals a full and serious consideration, for that their fate and ours de¬ pended upon it. I trust that our fate and yours, are in better hands : to Heaven I commit them í the wicked¬ ness of men is counteracted by the yvisdom of Providence / to whom I appeal, and on whom I rely.
281 You are very serious, Madam, said Mr. Clay* ton.—I am so, Sir ; the case requires it ; my fate, it seems, is in the balance. He then talked of their honour, and their principles; and the benefits they" expected from our conversation. Poor Miss Freewill wept, but said little. They mentioned Mr. Saville, and the ill offices they supposed he had done them. I assured them that they were mistaken. Misss Freewill said the same ; that Mr. Saville had never attempted to bias her, for or against any person. He is a meddling, impertinent fellow, said Mr. Clayton ; and has behaved very ungrate¬ fully, to those who have treated him both ge¬ nerously and politely.—To Lady Belmour, I suppose ? said I.—He was ungrateful for her good offices,—-You do well, Sir, to justify your friend.-* -However, Madam, I perceive that your partiality for Mr. Saville, leads you to justify him, at every one's expenee,—Forbear, Ciayton ! said Lord S—, I will not believe Miss Mel¬ combe has any paitiality for him. It seems, said Miss Freewill, that Mr. Clayton thinks every body partial to Mr. Saville, and that he makes love to every body, for he is jealous of his favour with every one.—D-mn the fellow ! said Clayton, I hate to hear or to speak of him·
282
I am neither afraid nor ashamed to mention Mr. Saville, said I ; he is the friend of our sex, because he is a friend to virtue ; he may there¬ fore be said to be in favour justly with us all. The next day, finding us steady, Lord S ........— artfully threw in a hint, that if our friendship excluded them from the advantages they hoped from it, they should wish they had not brought us together.—Ciayton, more warm and less guarded, said, there were means to separate us. —Lord S — Ш « chid him; Clayton, you are wrong. «—To what end, said Clayton, is all this sub¬ mission ; wlien we receive nothing but disdain in return for-our politeness?—Again you are wrong, said Lord S——. Clayton muttered, This is only trifling, and gains no grpund,—They would fain have engaged us at cards; they proposed whist, quadrille, piquet, any thing ; we declined all. I thought any employment of this kind would lessen the distance between us. She told me, that her guardian was an old batchelor with strong pecu¬ liarities, who despised women, and hated trouble on their account; he had placed her with a family of his own relations, who were of low ex¬ traction and education. 'Ihe man thought ail female accomplishments superfluous, and treated them with contempt; tlie woman allowed her to read only books of devotion of her own choosing.
2S3 She used to carry her to the Tabernacle in an evening, when she had rather have been in com¬ pany with those of her own age and degree ; in short, by her account, if anyone had strove to make religion and seriousness disagreeable, and to drive young people from it ; this Mrs. Holden was the person for them to apply to. Miss Freewill had complained to her guardian ; she asked for liberty and for books. He ordered her a Bible and Common-prayer-book, a Ma¬ nual of Devotions, and a set of the Spectators ; which, he said, were all the books a woman had any occasion for.·—She liad conversed with young people of birth and fortune ; she had imbibed different notions of life and manners; she grew impatient of restraint, and determined to shake it oif. She made an acquaintance with Mrs, Watkins^ who loved the world, and the pleasures of it, too well to give them up as long as she could keep her bold of them. IVI iss Freewill made complaints to her; and she advised her to leave the Holdens the ürst opportunity. Soon after this iutimacy took place, Mrs. Watkins invited her to go a tour with her through tlie eastern counties; Lady Beimour's was the iirst visit they made.-~I see I was wrong, said she; I went from one extreme to the other; but if ever I regain
284 my liberty, I will apply to the lord chancellor, and ask him to place me in a proper situation. Every conversation we held with our ravishers, became more serious and nterestmg than the former. Lord S—— was offended by my stea¬ diness; and Mr. Clav ton grew out of patience with us- both. Thev began to threaten to separate us, ип1еяя we would show them more kindness, and give them some hope of succeeding with us. Our affair began to grow very serious, it was drawing to aerisi*; when on the Friday morning, as í was at the chamber-window, I saw a young man waving a handkerchief upon a long stick ; I made a sign with ray hand ; he then took off the handkerchief, aud put a piece of paper upon it ; jumped into a tree, and put the stick close to the window, I opened it softly, and took the paper, which contained only these words : ' Be of good cheer—relief is near. ï answered this hint in tbe same kind of doggrel ; and desired to know from whence I was to expect it.— My companion was overjoyed, and readily gave credit to the advertisement ; but 1 was fearful of believing too much.—Per¬ haps, said Í, this may be a stratagem to draw us into their plot ; and when we think to escape, * we may be forced on board a ship : did you eb- serve ? tlie <nan was drest as a sailor·
285 Tim thought took off the comfort I should otherwise have received. I grew more uneasy eyery hour. I slept none the night following; poor Fanny Freewill noyv had the advantage of me, for she encouraged hope of deliverance, and strove in vain to give me a share of it. The next morning happily dispelled my doubts and fears. Mr. Llhott delivered me a letter signed by himself and Mr. Saville, whose hand I had seen before ; and I then recollected Mr. Elliotťs features, and signified to him that I kneyv him. From that minute I recovered my hopes and spirits; and even our persecutors took notice of our altered looks. Lord S— was pleased that we had recovered our spirits, and hoped that time yyould reconcile us to our destiny, as he called it. He therefore redoubled his assiduities ; but Clayton was ill-humoured, and often urged Lord S ......... < to separate us ; saying, He had no hopes while yve kept together. I find that .Mr. Saville has given you a parti¬ cular account of every thing that passed without doors, therefore I shall not repeat yvhat you know already. You will conceive my disti ess, and you will judge of my joy at my escape, and of my giatitude to our deliverers. How much am 1 obliged to all my friends I to yu 1, my dear Mr. Selbv, for my kind and polite reception at Mrs. Barclay's ; bhe is a most amiable w oman ;
ø
there is an ease and freedom in her behaviour, that shews tbe difference between the manners of the capital, and those of the country. She was as well acquainted with us in half an hour, as some people would in half a year. I am still farther obliged to her on Miss Freewilľs account'; she is equally polite and hospitable to her. She insists upon our staying a week or two With her, to make her amends, as she politely says, for the care and concern we have given her. She will shew me every thing worth notice in London. Miss Freewill has been here more than once; but she will attend me also to some of the public places, if I will stay. This de¬ pends upon my dear mamma ; if she gives me a beckon with her pen, I will return home imme¬ diately ; but if she thinks it prudent and right to stay, she will signify heť consent. If I return soon, I will ask, as a favour of her, that she will permit me to bring Miss Freewill with me to stay a few weeks, till she can determine about her future residence ; she is at present very un¬ happy upon that subject. My mamma's good advice would now be of the greatest benefit to this young lady. Adieu, my dearest friends î I embrace you in my heart; and my warmest wishes and prayers attend you always, for I am ever yours, $q?iuà Mblcomb-e.
287
ÂjLjİ А. Гл1\ ΛΛΙΙΙί MR. SAVILLE ТО THE HEV. MR, SELBY. Finding that Miss Melcombe had written too much for one cover, I sallied out this day in pursuit of a senator to provide some more. I went to —-'s coiFee-house, where I met Sir James Τ ----- ~, an old school-fellow, who readily gave me half a domi. There I understood, that Lord S—— had but just left the coiFee- house, as 1 entered it. While Sir James was writing the covers for me, I sat down and wrote the following note for Lord S " Lord S ...........- may think himself fortunate, if he does not hear from the friends of Miss Mel¬ combe and Miss Freewill soon, in a way that would be disagreeable to him to answer : they do not mean to oppose \iolence to violence, nor to put thems* Kes upon a level with men who could act as he and his friend have done; but If Lord S' ■ " ■■■ ■ ■' and Mr. Clayton do not withdraw themselves out ol their reach, they will appeal to the laws of this country, to punish the offenders, and to hang out a warning to others. Anonymous/' î hope this threat will induce therø to pureae I #
288 tlieir intended trip to Ostend; and will free the ladies from any future attempts from them. I beg the favour of you, my dear Sir, to send all the letters I have yvritten since I left your house, to Mr. Johnson at Cambridge. I am under an engagement to acquaint him with every step I shall take. He will read them, and re¬ turn them to you again directly. Accept and distribute my warmest wishes and regards to your own family, and to Mr. Franklin's. I am always yours sincerely, Edward Saville.
LEITER XXIV. MH. SAVILLE ТО THE BEV. MR. SELBY. DEAR SIR, A w e w incident has risen to your adventurers, which occasions much speculation, without form¬ ing any conclusion.-—Samuel Elliott avows a passion for Miss Freewill.—This fair lady has been under great uneasiness of mind ever since she recovered ber liberty, without being able to determine what use to make of it.*—Mrs. Barclay most kindly offered to write to ber guardian, and to represent all the circumstances of her late excursion in the most favourable light : and abo to mention her objections to being at Mr«
t&9 Holdeu's ; and desire him to pennit her to choose a proper family for a young lady of Miss Free- will's fortune to reside in. This lady's mediation is accepted most thank¬ fully; she yvill write in her own name, and ex¬ pect an answer. I have spent an evening with honest Mr. Bar¬ ton, at Mrs. Searle's.—He managed admirably with his employers, and they actually believe him innocent of the ladies' escape. Hardy and Smith went and released Mrs. Catherine as soon as we were setoff; they made a· terrible report of an army of men, yvho came upon them, and forcibly carried off the ladies ; that Kiliott w:<3 bribed to take part with them; but for thei. parts they were incorruptible, and remained true: to their oyvn Master Barton. I ordered Mr. Burton to reyvard their fidelity, and all who were engaged in our service. Lord S was terribly mortified and grieved; but Mr. Clayton behaved likç a madman,—Capt. Dentou knows nothing to the contrary of our friend Barton's report ; so the truth is known only to our select friends. After this affair was discussed, Mr. Barton besought my influence with Mrs. Jones, to hasten ihe day of his happiness. He had served me too well, not to engage my services in return. I urged her to make an honest man happy, and secure a comfortable establishment for herst-lf. о
25Ю At length she promised to give her hand to Mr. Barton one day this month.—1 am to be ut the wedding.—-Her father will be there also.-— Airs. Searle will be married on the same day to a friend of Mr. Barton's. Their shop is to be transferred to the widow of another sailor, who is in low circumstances ; and these worthy sea¬ men give the stock in trade to her, for her outset, Our dear Sophia has recovered her looks and her spirits. With every sentiment of friendship and affection, I am, dear Sir, yours, faithfully, Edward Savílle. mø - Ί mli' Ίι uf '~ LETTER XXV. MBS. BENNET TO MISS MELCOMBE. With all the warmth and sincerity of maternal •affection, I congratulate the child of my heart <m her escape from her late danger, and on the recovery of her liberty ; I cannot wish to depriv e her of it so soon.-~-Enjoy it, my child, under the restraints of virtue and of prudence; wiiich I trust you will always retain, for your bosom friends and companions. Airs. Barclay is a proper person to introduce you to such pinces and persons as you would wish to know ; she is
sot polite, sensible, and friendly; and w ill have pleasure in performing the office of Chaperon to the sister and friend of Mrs. Seiby\ We are all under high obligations to Mr.Baville and Mr. Elliott. I leave our acknowledgements in your hands, my Sophia: I am certain they will have an additional value to Mr. Saville ; his merit with you is doubtless increased by his services; you will let me know when you choose I should acquaint your father with his generous offer, and ask his consent to your engagement. I shall be happy to serve you under the protec¬ tion of a man worthy of you : such a man I believe Mr. Saville to be ; but you must judge for yourself in this great artiele of life. Your companion shall be yvelcome to me, for as long as you please; my advice is at her ser¬ vice whenever she desires it. My daughter Selby writes, so I shall only briefly say what is necessary ; she desiree I will not anticipate her thoughts. God bless my dear child í and direct her steps in the paths of virtue and happiness! prays her tender parent, Млша Bennet,
ü'<>
2^2
LETTER XXVI. MRS. SELBY TO MISS MELCOMBE, HY DEAE SOPHIA, 1 no most seriously rejoice with you upon your happy deliverance ; and when I consider what might have happened, I shudder at the danger, and unite with my mother in returning thanks to heaven for your escape. After all flights of fancy, I wish your adven¬ tures may end in the usual way, matrimony and quietness. A country life, three fourths of the year at least ; and one more wish—Oh, that you may settle in this neighbourhood ! for how ..ball I bear to be separated from my Sophia for life ! My dear Selby is, if possible, more attentive to me since our marriage than before. Ие tells me he ought to make your absence as easy to me as possible, and to wean me from the ex¬ pectation of seeing yon always near me, to pre¬ pare me for our future separation. I put on airy of bravery; but my heart will be heard in its turn; it feels the absence of my Sophia, and dreads the continuation of it. I have uttered a wish to my Selby, that a way might be found to fi# you near us. He answers me mysteriously ;
ftm he even bids me hope it may not be impossible: but he will not explain this hope, tili it appears nearer its accomplishment. I embrace it, how¬ ever, in its present state ; and build deliglitful expectations upon it. It would give me too much pain, were I to tell you all ihat we suffered, during our uncer¬ tainty of your safety. My dear mother does not suffer isalf her tenderness for us to appear^ tmless in cases of emergency ; we wished, we hoped, we prayed for you, incessantly. Our prayers were heard. The generous and amiable Saville did not lose a minute in informino us of every step he took, and every ray of hope that he obtained; he virote the most minute parti- culai s to Mr. Selby; he knew that every thing concerning you, must be interesting. I give Mr. Saville all my interest with you, in return for his goodness to us ; I will second his wishes to obtain a short day of you : but take notic**, I have not yet told him so. But we must see you here shortly : we must have your wedding celebrated here ; and we will keep you with us as long as we have influence with you. How I long to return your good offices on my wedding- day! Mr. Collins and Dolly Grove go on swim¬ mingly. I reckon their nuptials may be cele¬ brated at the same time as yours» Dolly о 3
29* suffered much for you, and rejoiced with us at your deliverance. She sends her respeets and love to you. Mr. and Mrs. Franklin send their best regards to you: they excuse Mr. Saville's writing to them, as tliey suppose his attendance upon your ladyship, employs all the hours he can spare from duty and bubbles?. My mother «peaks for herself; I for myself and my hus¬ band; as Sophia's tenderest friends and relatives. Adieu, my dear sister and friend. J am ever yours, Anka Maeia Selby,
LETTER XXVII. »E. SAVILLE TO THE REV. Mft. SELBY. I shall continue my narrative to you, my dear Sir; and through you, to Mr. Johnson and Mr. Franklin My time is employed at present in the ladies* service. I therefore acquaint you all, that í have liad an interview with Mr. Munden ; which passed in passion and resentment on his part, with in¬ trepidity and resolution on mine. I desired him to settle his account with my attorney. He reproached rue with ingratitude to himself, insolence to LadyBelmour, treachery to Clayton» ani impertinence to LordS—.
295 1 defended myself against the first r In.» ige; and as to the opinion of Lady Belmour ana ln j r friends, I was perfectly indifferent—What did í propose doing ? He heaid I was gomg to be mar¬ ried to a giri of famiiy, but no foitune.—If I was, í hud a indít to п!еаяе mvself · w¿i£ mv an- swer.—Then I had nothing to expect from bun. I give up every expectation upon you, Sir; and every kmd of dependence on vou.-—Ile swoie cui sed, and abused me. I made him a low bow, and retired from a volley of execrations, lie called me back; but I ran out of the house, and shall not go there again presently. Miss Melcombe has seen the public streets and buildings that are best worth notice; these are our morning promenades : our evenings are spent in visiting with Mrs. Barclay, or else at public places. I leave it to Sophia to speak of them ; an engagement of this kind obliges me to conclude this hastily. I am ever yours faithfully, Edward Saville. LETTER XXVIII. MISS MELCOMBÜ ТО MRS. SELBY. Accept my hearťs acknowledgments, my dear mamma and sister, for your kind pacquet just received. Thü busy, hurrying, yet idle place, caiiLs my time away I can hardly tell how; but о 4
î forego every trifling business or engagement, and devote this evening to you and friend¬ ship. Mrs. Barclay has a very large acquaintance, among which are those of all the denominations ; and sometimes there is a mixture of these three characters in the same \ erson. Your people of fashion are the most inexplicable to me, and the least agreeable. They seem to me like people that are acting a part upon a stage ; they dis¬ claim and conceal yvhat is natural to them, and assume a character that is not so; the whim of the day, is their mirror of perfection ; by that they regulate their dress, their airs and graces, nay, even their phrases; and as this whim is subject to continual alteration, so their affecta¬ tion varies likewise ; and in the course of one year, nay, I dm told in less time, it shifts its course, and obliges its followers to resemble the fane upon our steeple, driven to and fro by every wind of fashion. I have sometimes thought myself in a foreign country. Surely, said I, these cannot be Eng¬ lish men and women ; women with the boldness and intrepidity of men 5 and men with the softness and effeminacy of women; both sexes embel¬ lished with such extravagance of dress and man¬ ners, as if ihey were vying with each other which should leave nature at the greatest distance : yet
3£>7 the eye which is shocked at this appearance at first, by degrees becomes familiarized to it. Thus much may serve for my opinion of fashion, and its votaries in general ; if I can find leisure, perhaps I may use my pen or my pencil* to give you a sketch or two of particular sub¬ jects. You knoyv I sometimes catch a flying likeness ; but you will think them caricaturas^ not realities. Miss Freewill has had a letter from her guar¬ dian, inclosed in one to Mrs. Barclay.—The olu yvretch declaims in low and common-place lan¬ guage, against the honour and utility of our sex. He is sorry he has any thing to do yvith us. He requires poor Fanny to return to Mr. Holden's ; and to stay there till she comes of age, yvhich is almost three years. What effect his mandate will have, 1 know not ; perhaps it may drive her to take the very step he thinks to prevent. She declares yvith great spirit, that she will never return to Holden'8. You have given your opi¬ nion on Elliotťs side; 1 will shew it to Fanny; but the men bhall not know it: yvho would have thought that my Anna would have spoken in fa* vour of an elopement : nay, would have advised a second? In your ear let me whisper, that í am persuaded, if she had any hopes of Mr. Saville, bhe would encourage no other lover ; she see* clearly that his affections are engaged, and sbŕ о 5
$9$ actually wants a protector. Elliott is an honest worthy young man, and has an ardent passion for her. She is not very delicate in her notions or sentiments. She has it in her poyver to make El¬ liott's fortune. Hers was originally thirty thou» sand pounds ; and there will be eight years mi- aority to account for, and a large sum in con¬ sequence to add to the principal. I don't know whether to wish this match to take place or not ; but I wish that may happen, which will be best for them both. * Mr, Saville's behaviour is unexceptionable ; un¬ der this conduct I can see that he relies upon my gratitude, to make him a dearer interest in my regard ; he seems more at ease with me, and yet î cannot complain that he encroaches upon my privileges. Shall I tell you a weakness of my fuoli&h heart ? Yes. I yvill not conceal one thought of it from my dearest friends. I have consented to prolong my stay in London, in order to indulge a foolish curiosity. I wish, I long to see my father í to see my brothers and sisters; to see any part of the family. My heart beats towards them, and an involuntary tear starts into my eye, yvhenever I think on them. I vainly wish that some accident may throw me in their way, or them into mine, I desired Mr. Saville to show me the part of the town where they live ; it is called Grosvener-
gqnare; ï went and walked round it. Mr. Sa¬ ville indulged me; I looked at the outside ofthe house, till I worked my passions into a, fit of tears. I wanted to see them go out, or come in; I confessed my weakness to Mr. Saville, and he kindly pitied and allowed for me; nay, he said,. he adored me for it. Oh could I present Mr. Saville to my father ! could I tell him what he has done for me ! he would then give me to him property, and I should not come to him as an alien to my family ; one of a fortune so in¬ ferior to what he may expect, that I should be under too much obligation for my peace. Vou will say I have a proud heart. I fear it is so ; but this is my whole ambition. Mr. Saville's estate is eighteen hundred a year; his father had mortgaged a pi..*t of it; but hh minority will have more than discharged the debt. Mr. Munden has told him so.—-He has been a good guardiau» in respect to his interest; though his morals are very exceptionable, and he might have ruined those of his ward. The more I know of Mr, Saville, the more 1 esteem him ; he !.ai an excel* lent heart, and as good a judgment; in short, if I could give him my hand upon equal terms, I should be ready to do it ; but my proud heart relucts against it 'in my present situation, and my fancy suggests a b.ope that 1 may one dny give it him with my father's approbation, and; о в
3Ö0 "ν en ι α* c oui ыц liais honoured by шь \ ré¬ gence. Мгь. Bai clay is a very agreeable woman, yet rot quite what 1 bhould expect fiom hei у caio and situation. She is fond of company and amusement 0 ; and has not those îesoiirccs m hct c cIf that my mamma has ш liei self, and en¬ deavours to give her children. Peihaps ï might set а л eat many more ladies, befoie I saw one hke my mamma. Perhaps I may be loo sev eie in my opinion of Mis. Bai clay, but m) uear friends vuîï excuse the unformed judgment of their Sophia. Mrs. Barclay told me " she lost her first lover in a voyage to Inďa. —With him (said she) were buried p11 the íeñard and tender emotions of my heart. I never felt the hke, for any man since. About ino years after, an advantageous match was proposed tome; my friendseiilai ged upon the comforts included in such an establish¬ ment. *' I pleaded my indifference; they made use of it as an argument to induce me to accept it. Sirice all mtu are indtilerent to you, why not accept our friend ? You have no bias agamst him, and every other argument b in his favour. Thus urged, I mariied Mr. Barclay, who was very fond of me for a lew months, which 1 e on- fess was not the happiest period of my mai ι ied
501 state; afterwards we sunk into a calm and tran¬ quil state of polite indifference; he followed his amusements, I mine; we both loved company, and always agreed in material points. " We lived twenty-five years together, with¬ out one quarrel. He was of an easy temper; mine was not bad. We always behaved with the utmost politeness to each other; and when he died, he left me the greatest part of his for¬ tune. " Ever since I have lived in fhe manner the most agreeable to me. 1 love a town life—so¬ ciety—amusement. I have always taken care to avoid excesses of every kind ; I live with¬ in my fortune; enjoy the company of my friends; and I bebeye am as happy as most people iu the general lot of humanity. 1 am contented with my situation, and that is as much as I expect, and, to say truth, more than most of tho&e I am acquainted with can say." How do you like Marriage Alamode, my Anna ?—-1 ď> not find it mudi to my taste; and yet this is one of the better kiud ; for I hear such stones- of marued people of fashion, as I bhould blush to repeat. They make no more of talking of erim. con. m common conversation, than uf the most ordinary ocean enees of the day .-—Continue, my dear iuends, youi wishes und pui\trţ> for me; 1 base found their good
302 effects in my past escape, and hope to do so in my future conduct and situation. Accept and distribute my love and good wishes among my good friends and neighbours around you ; always reserving the best part for your own family; my nearest and dearest friends. I am always yours most affectionately, Sophia Mklcombp.
LETTER XXIX. THE REVEREND MR. SELBÏ TO EDWARD SAVILLE, ESQ. DEAR SIR, You have obliged us extremely by your com¬ munications. The ladies present their acknow¬ ledgments for the pacquet just received, con¬ taining a short letter from you, and a long one from Sophia ; they will reply to hers, and 1 am very desirons of making a return in your own way, by telling you some news from this corner, ui which I think you will tuke a sliare in the satisfaction we propose to our&ehes. Our friend Juhu Franklin and myself have been ever since the late exploit of Lord S ------ and Mr. Clayton, contriving to rid our neigh¬ bourhood of your Lady Calypso, as you are
303 pîeased to call her. The seduction of farmer Hobsou's daughter, one of my own flock, author rizes me to use active measures, in order to pre¬ serve the peace and tlie morals of my own parish. Franklin and I have made strict inquiries into her conduct and her fortune; and what resources she has to support the great expenee she lives at : we find that she is deeply in arrears with all the people bhe employs. We design to draw up an агшу of bills in battle array against her, and she must either pay them, or be arrested, or íly the country. Most of the gentry you left there, have gone away; they are grown tired of th$ country, and sigh for tiie town and its various plea&vires and dissipations. We have bet, ш our attaek, by sending in the bille, and desiring bur to appoint a time to discharge them; if she re· fuses this, or if she is saucy, woe be to her î You are very happy in serving the ladies, and your attentions are not in« ffcctuaL I dare uot for my life tell tales out of school; I therefore only give a bint, that we uiv all your firm friends here; and when Sophia и turns to us, we shall speak a few words in your behalf that may be effectual to the completion of your wishes; m the mean time go on in your own way; I am convinced that with women worth obtaimng, de¬ licacy, silent asbiduitieb, and speaking silence, 'm the surest method of paying court tu them* 1
304 ïn regard to Elliott's passion, I know not what to say; it is not certain what kind of character his Dulcinea may be; she is young and giddy, he is too young to form her manners, his own are yet unformed. Elliott must judge for himself, Mr. Franklin writes to his kinsman; he and his wife wish him to succeed ; thev will offer to lend him money upon lawful interest, to be re¬ paid hereafter ; they are afraid the young couple should fall into bad hand?, and be ruined. Andrew Collins and Dolly Grove are engaged to each other; í have given the young man some useful advice, and he takes it properly ; he will discharge the ensigns of foppery, and become an useful member of society. In expectation of tiw denouement of your his¬ tory, I remain Your faithful friend and servant, G, Selbt.
LETTER XXX, MR. J. FRAM KMN TO MR. S. ELLIOTT. DEAR SAM, I rejoice to hear of your health, safety, and success; and particulari) ofthe piospect before you. May your attack be successful, and the
305 *hip a lawful pn?e! But, my dear lad, be cau- tfOtb how you proceed; and above all things, how you take up money upon interest. There are a kind of men, whose business it is to lend money upon usurs ; many unthinking young men have ruined their fortunes before they саше ίο the possession of them. If you marry directly, you must have mon< i y for your outset; but how must it be raised? Listen to me ! I will lend you a thousand pounds upon your bond; to carry lawful interest, and no more. Take care how you spend it ; per¬ suade your lady to come and board with us here, or else in some sober family in a country town. Loudon will swallow you up at a mouthful; you must not live there. I inclose a letter to Mr. Samuel Browning» your great uncle and godfather ; as soon as the fair lady has given you her promise, but not before, carry this letter yourself to him at Peck- ham ; tell him your story at the. same time, and mention your wants for the present moment, though you are certain of a handsome fortune in a few years. I hope he will make you a handsome present. As to your father, 1 know he can do nothing for vou ; his numerous family call upon him for all that he can .spare for their establishment in hfe. Say nothing to him till ail is o\er; I will excuse you to him.
306* Do not let this affair hang long in suspense, but finish it quickly one way or other. Carry her to Scotland ; and, as soon as you are fairly spliced, as you would call it, bring your wife hither; put her to school to Airs. Bennet and Mrs. Franklin, and let her learn the duties of a wife ; and to find her own happiness, in that of her husband and familv. I inclose this in Mr. Selby's cover to Mr. Sa¬ ville. I do not write to him till he does to me, I am the rather satisfied, because he treats Mr. Johnson, whom he calls his Mentor, the same. I inclose a bank-note for twenty pounds, lest you should want cash for common expences. Do you intend to continue in the service, or will you strike your name off the list? 1 advise nothing on this head; satisfy yourself, or per¬ haps your wife, who will then have a right to determine on this point for you. Vour cousin sends you her best wishes; she and the dear babes are well and happy. I shall take every opportunity to appro\e myself your faithful friend -md kinsman. John Franklin.
$07
LETTER XXXI. MR, ELLIOTT ТО MR. FRANKLIN. MY DEAR FRANKLIN, It is the pride and glory of my life to have so generous a friend and kinsman as yourself. I accept your kindness with all my heart. I thank you for your counsel, and I will sail under your command, till you think me able to ma¬ nage my own ship on the ocean of life. My little frigate has led me a brisk chase: she is a girl of spirit, and wants a good deal of firing to make her bring to; but she lowers her flag, my boy, and surrenders to me. Huzza, friends ! the victory is mine—Huzza!—1 proposed going full sail to Scotland; but Mrs. Barclay, who is in all our secrets, and who is as clever a woman as ever you knew, gave us better advice, as you shall hear.—Why should you go so long a jour¬ ney, when you can get manico just as well here, and as privately too ? Let the banns be published in my parish-church; nobody there knows who Samuel Elliott, single man, and Frances Free¬ will, single woman, are; it will be much Ььч trouble and expenee, and there will be xery little time lost, and every thing may be done ia the snug way, vvithout any suspicion till all ia, over.
308 Mr. Saville is my friend, and will be my bondsman. He has offered me his purse; he suffers me to be at no kind of expenee. I observe what you say respecting frugality. I would not injure my wife* and her children, by spending their money upon my сууп pleasures, for the empire of the sea! I yvill be her guard, her protector, and her steward; but never could I bear the thought of wasting her property : nay, I have too much spirit to be maintained at her expenee; I yvill not turn my back upon my pro¬ fession; my country has need of the service of all her children; I will not forsake her in the time of danger, which is also a time of glory for seamen, niy Fanny is a noble girl, she does not require it of me. Well, but yve have settled every thing. Mrs. Barclay has sent a hill to be published in the church on Sunday. On Monday Mr. Saville will have the goodness to give me his company to my godfather's at Peckham, and he will speak in my favour to him, which will support my application. Mr. Saville sends his love to you ; be says he will redeem your good opinion, and spend some time in your neighbourhood, as soon as we have finished our business. Both be and Miss Mel¬ combe will be present at our marriage: I see no reason why their own, might not be celebrated
309 at the same time; but I do not think he is half so brisk in his courtship as I am. My best love and gratitude attend yourself and famiiy. My respectful compliments to Mr, and Mrs. Selby, and Mrs. Beimet. # I am, my dear coufin. Your most obliged, and affectionate kinsman, Samuel Elliott. P.S. I thank you heartily for the twenty poLiud note. It is welcome to me, for I must be new-rigged for my new expedition.
LETTER XXXIL SUSS MELCOMBE TO MRS. SELBY. I make no doubt that the contents"of Mr. Elliotťs letter will soon transpire to the Par¬ sonage. He has gained the lady. Mr, Saville loves him with fraternal affection; he ealls him his brother and friend ; he is gone with him to Peckham, to confirm his application to his god* father. I did not intend to stir abroad till the»r re¬ turn; but Mrs. Barclay has engaged us in a party to the play to-night. Fanny Freewill teems more easy in her mind, since she has taken her resolution ; she says she saw it was impos-
SLO sible she could have a proper home but her own, or any protector but an husband. Monday Evmng. Oh, my dearest Anna! what an adventure! My heart is in great agitation ; hope, fear, and affection, take th* rule of it in turn. It is iu rain to go to bed ; I can have no rest till my mind ts more composed. When y?e came to the theatre, yve seated our¬ selves m a box ; the first row of which was taken and kept by a genteel servant. In the midst of the first act, two gentlemen came in, and seated themselves before us r one seemed between thirty and forty, the other a very young man, or rathei a youth, of a most amiable countenance, and genteel deportment. After the act was over, he turned towards us, looked earnesly at me, and soon after addressed me; asked me, how I hked the play, and said many polite and gallant things to me.—I told him I could not yet form my judgment of it; but that I had rather listen to the opinion of others, than give my own.—He chatted upon several peints ; at length he begged me to accept a seat u[ on his row. I excused myself, saying, I could not leave my company. Upon which, he offered the whole seat to Mrs. Barclay and her company, and offered to take theirs for himself and friend; she ac- jknowledged im politeness^ but declined accept-
ing it. The gentleman, his companion, seemed to think him too attentive to us, and gave him a look of disapprobation, The youth spoke t# him in a low voice; he answered in the same; but, being interested, I wished to catch a word or two. I heard him say, My Lord, I don't di 5 = approve your taste, she looks truly amiable. I blushed deeply, from a consciousness of hearing what was not designed for my ear. Luckily the cui tain drew up, and called for tbe attention of tıs alî. I followed the actors with my eyes and ears; but yet my heart gave me two or three items of another kind, Tins amiable youth, is called my Loid! What Lord'can it be?—What is that to me?—By degrees, this inv\ard monitor, drew my attention from the stage. I looked at my Loid attentively. It he should be —? Foolish buggestion!—but as soon as it gained admittance, it engrossed every thought, and every wibh —I was soon put out of suspense; a young gentleman m the pit called to him, My Lord В ------, are the ladies here to-night? He answered, ivo; they were prevented coming. My heart leaped in my bosom. It is my bro¬ ther, said I.—I was so much affected, that I was obliged to hold my fan before my face. The third act *I knoyv very little about, for my heart fluttered incessantly, and the tear ftarted in my eye. I was obliged to make strong
312 efforts to conceal my emotions. Lord B—— asked rae several questions; but what sort of answers I made, I know not. I was unhinged, and could attend to nothing but my own sensa¬ tions. Ihe library scene commanded my attention. Lord B- —-" had seen it before; but he observed my looks, and asked my opinion; I answered, It is interesting; but it is such a picture of hu¬ man nature, as I do not wish to see. In the interval between the fourth and fifth act, we had again a short conference, and I grew more and more pleased with him; my heart yearned to call him its brother. While Lord В was speaking to the gen¬ tleman, who as Mrs. Barclay supposes was his governor, 1 cast my eyes towards the upper boxes, and there whom should I see, but my late persecutor Lord S—! At sight of him, 1 felt an emotion of a very diiferent kind; my spirits failed me, my heart sunk, and I was ready to faint; I laid my hand upon Miss Freewill'^, who sat next. 1 exclaimed, Look, look, rheie he is!—»Who is therei said she. What is the matter ?—I still called out, Look there î It is Leni S——. —Where ? said she.—I pointed with my fan ; bhe was alarmed, but not so much as I was. She told Mrs, Barclay.*—Cannot we go home? said L —No, said Mrs. Barclay^ you
ál5 must stay Jill my servant comes.^—Miss Freewill held the salts to my nose ; my head turned round. -—Lord B ' ' - turned his head, and saw me pale and fainting. What is the matter with the lady ? said he.—Mrs. Barclay answered, that I was not well ; that the heat of the house overcame me.—I feared so, said he, for I have observed her change colour several times in the course of the evening.—Lord B'- » went out of the box; he enquired for Mrs, Barclay's servant, or his own; and he ordered that whichever came first should attend him; in the mean time Mrs. Bar¬ clay comforted and encouraged me.—Exert yourself, my dear, said she; try to get the better of this shock. If you go out of the house, it v, ill make a bustle, and draw the attention of the man you most fear; at present he does not observe us; bis attentions are directed to the lady with him. Take courage, my love! and wait with patience till our servant comes; as soon as the coach ís ready, I will attend you home.—I tried to get the better of myself; I changed places with the lady behind me; I re¬ tired from observation as much as possible ; Miss Freewill changed her place likewise. Lord В ------returned, and told иъ what he bad or¬ dered; and Mrs. Barclay paid my acknowledg¬ ments, for I was too much discomposed to pay attention to any thinç.
314 In the midst of the farce, while the audience were attentive to the feats of Harlequin Fortu¬ natus, Lord B——'s servant came; he offered ids coach to Mrs. Barclay and her company. She was going to decline it; but I said, Ώο, for God's sake, let me go!—The gentleman with Lord В ........ said, Do you mean to go too?~~- 1 do, said my Lord; but I will return to you di¬ rectly. He offered me his hand; my macaroni, Mr. Finnet, ofiered his to Miss Freewill; another gentleman attended Mrs. Barclay; and we went away directly, to my infinite joy. Lord B——* attended us home; he behaved with the utmost delicacy of attention towards me. When we got home, he stepped out, and handed me into the parlour : he thanked Mrs. Barclay for the honour she had done him, in accepting so trifling a service; he hoped she would permit him to call again to enquire after the lady's health ; at present he would not in¬ trude, as he believed I wanted rest after my fa¬ tigue. He then very politely withdrew, and left up all high in his praises. I then had leisure to recollect myself; I begged pardon for giving thtm so much trouble, and said I should not de- tire to go to the play again in haste. We sat and chatted till twelve o'clock, and 3
31ô then retired to our respective apartments ; but finding myself in no disposition to sleep, I re¬ solved to yyrite down my adventures of the evening, I will noyv go and solicit sleep to visit my couch, and wish that it may present to my mind's eye, the image of my amiable brother. Tuesday Morning. My wish was answered, I have dreamed of my father, my brother, and all the family ; I have been received into tlieir arms, and acknoyvledged for their relation. Oh that these ideas may be realised ! Tvesday Evening. Lord B—-· has been here to enquire after my health; he spent an agree¬ able hour. He wae extremely polite to my friendá, but he paid me very particular attentions. The rest of our party havt: called or sent to know how I do. We expect our knights-errant back to-morrow; I long to acquaint them with my adventure, and to consult Mr. Say ille about the use I may make of Lord B—'s acquaint¬ ance; I look upon it as the cribit of my con* nection with my father's family. Wednesday. Our two friends are returned aafe, well, and happy. Mr. Elliott has been kindly received and entertained by 1ш relation, lie made Mr. Elliott a present of bank-notes for five hundred pounds. The young man de¬ tailed his godfather to take the charge of settling the lady's fortune upon her in the be^t maimer,
316 as soon as it shall be in her power. Miss Free¬ will acknowledged his honour, and said, She would, without scruple, trust her fortune to his protection, with her person. Mr. Saville took me aside, and, -with a sup¬ plicating look, asked me if he was to have the mortification of seeing his friend made happy, without advancing a step towards his own fe¬ licity. I waved the reply, and told him something had happened that might perhaps lead to the subject hereafter. I wish to consult you as my assured friend, Sir.—You honour me, Madam, by your commands !—I then told him my ad¬ venture at the play, and the visit mat'followed it. He said, If it gave me pleasure, he would claim a share of it ; but as my father had shewn such^a steady resolution not to acknowledge me, he thought it was more likely to displease him, than to be of any service to me.«—Suffer me, oh Sophia.! to say one word in my own behalf! li you were actually married to a man of good character and competent fortune, I think it fai more likely that the Fari would take proper no¬ tice of you, than while you are single, and seem to stand in need of his protection. Let me avail myself of this occasion to urge you to be mine ; it is with pain that I have so long suppressed the dictates of my heart. I have been implicit
317 in my obedience to your commands; I have stood by, and seen others who set out after me in the race, reach the goal of happiness be¬ fore me. And now I urge for your own sake, as well as mine; cruel and indifferent as you are to me! I felt myself affected at this reproach. I he¬ sitated to answer him.—Unjust and ungrateful! said I ;· it is for your sake, as much as my own 9 that I yvish to be acknowledged for yvhat I am. —Is it indeed? said he, in the accent of joy; then I am ungrateful. Oh, my Sophia, forgive me, and accept my acknowledgements! It is the first glimpse of hope you have bestowed upon me for a long time : confirm it to me, my angel!— í cannot, said I, consent to be yours, till I have the hope that my father will accept the office of one to me. But I am sensible of your merit; I believe your affection for me is true and sincere ; and I can never forget my ob· ligation to you.—Speak not of obligation, said be; love acquits all obligation ; it is the only reward of a faithful heart» Give me then love for love, and I shall be laid under everlasting obligation to my adored Sophia. Our conversation grew too tender; I returned to the former subject.—Suffer me, Mr. Saville, to wait the event of this new adventure. I wish to make Lord B—— my friend ; his very parti- r 3
318 cular attention to me, may perhaps serve me hæ an excuse for coming to an explanation with him, I am almost tempted to hazard one, but I will do nothing rashly; if I should own myself his sister, I yvill recommend you to him as a brother; let this satisfy you for the present.-»» It shall satisfy me, Madam; 1 will wait уош pleasure: but let me assure you, not with any view to Lord D ..... «■ ...... 's favour towards you, or still less with any other expectations from him. I finished our conversation, and returned to company; but he seemed desirous to detain me longer. Mr. Elliott is making a pacquet to send to Mr. Franklin; I shall send this under the same in- closure. Let me hear from my dear friends at S 1 " ......■ ; every thing from them will be interest¬ ing to me· My hearťs best love, wishes, and prayers, attend you all ! I am yours ahvays and equally, SOPHIA MELCOMBE.
LETTER XXXIIL МЯ, S£LJHT TO EDWARD SAVILLE, ESQ. Ι а к delighted with the progress of your ad¬ venture % I am as happy as Irumanity is capable
319 of; but our quiet course of life furnishes no in¬ cident at present. Our attack goes on hopefully. Your lady go« vcrness is closely besieged, she cannot stir out of doors; she promises largely, but performs nothing. A day is set for the payment of her debts; if she fails, she knows the consequence. Sophia is pursuing a scheme of her own, I und; for my part I do not expect much from it : however, it will either be the means of obliging her father to acknowledge her, or it will put an end to her expectations from that proud family; either way it will make her mind easy about them. Mr. Johnson has returned my papers, with a polite note of acknowledgement, and a letter which he desires me to forward to you. After Elliott's wedding is over, I shall ask a question about your returning to us; t¿ü then, I use ray patience, and am satisfied by hearing $f your proceedings. I am, dear Sir, Yours sincerely and affectionately, e. selby.
LEITER XXXÍV. MR. JOHNSON TO EDWARD SAVILLE, ESQ. I thank you, my dear Sir, for the latest marks of your attention. A young man engaged m
то the most intei esting pursuit of his life, seldom thinks at all of distant friends; especially of those advanced in years, and who assume the office of Monitors. Every attention, under these circumstances, is of ten-fold value. I esteem it as such," and as the best proof that my counsels have been well received, and well remembered. î am in¬ finitely obliged by the communication of the memoirs of the Bennet family ; I remember the writer at College, he was a virtuous and amiable man; I loved him living, and I venerate his memory. These memoirs are as interesting to you, as to any part of his family. I look upon you as a member of it, by your engagement to the amiable Sophia, I hope your residence in London will not be much longer; the air of that place is not favourable to simplicity of manners,, nor yet to virtuous love. Let me advise you, and do you advise young Elliott, to remove from this place the fair part¬ ners of your hearts; the poison of it, works in¬ sensibly upon you and them ; carry them where they may breathe the purer air of virtue and simplicity. I wish to taste with you the sweets of the vil* j a g e of g ------* I love, I revere the Parsonage· house, both for its late and present possessors ; I must through you be acquainted with Mr,
321 Selby, his honoured mother, and amiable wife. My heart warms within me when I think on the history of these worthies; and all vanity and parade shrink to nothing in the comparison. The utmost happiness that human nature is capable of, is to be found in domestic life; those yvho seek it any where else will seek in vain; and those who cultivate social and domestic virtues, will not fail to find enough to syveetea all the cares and misfortunes to which this tran¬ sitory state is liable. When you are settled in this terrestrial Para¬ dise, I will visit you, and rejoice in your happi* ness. For the hastening of this period, you have the wishes, affections, and prayers, of Your faithful friend and servant, Jarvis Johnson.
LETTER XXXV. MISS МЕ1С0МВЕ TO MRS. SKt&Y. MY ПЕАН ÏR1KKD AKI» SISTER, I have brought myself into difficulties which increase upon me every day. Lord В calls here often; he wishes to be alone with me; lie Absolutely makes love to me. Every time he cornes, I am tempted to teU him how nearly I 9 5
3'¿¿
am related to him; but a certain fear, which proceeds from both love and duty to my father, restrains me. Mr. Saville and Lord В " have met several -times; he is jealous of my attention to Mr. Sa¬ ville; he asks who he is; I answer, my friend, and orm to whom I have agreat obligations.— Happy man í said Lord B*«~— r bow I envy him that distinction î I have been pressed to go to more public places? but I beg to be excused. My situation is critical; I hate a thousand fears, hopes, anx¬ ieties; I perceive that the crisis of my fate is ap¬ proaching. I think much, sleep little, eat less, and am in no pleasant humour, though I have nothing that ought to make me unhappy. I want to find out a way to come to an explana¬ tion with Lord В Amiable youth î how sincere, how affecting his partiality to me ! I must come to some determinaţii— my resolu¬ tion is taken—expect the result of it, I will Telate every particular of the interview with Lord B—. I have acquitted myself to my own satisfaction ; my heart justifies me, and î hope my friends will approve of my behaviour. í was alone when Lord B> came. I received him with ease and freedom, which encouraged him to declare a passion-for me, a first passion, which he had never before kit for глу woman*
52$ »«—Suffer me, my Lord, to interrupt you ; I ада engaged to Mr. Saville. I should have told you so before, but had not a proper opportunity.-«- lie lamented most pathetically his disappoint¬ ment.«—Hear me, my Lord; if I were not en¬ gaged, there Are a thousand reasons why I could never listen to your Lordship upon this subject; if I were only to mention your extreme youth, it yvould be sufficient; you are two years younger than I, but that is one of the least : let me in¬ treat you never to mention this subject more,— Cruel! said my Lord; why did you encourage my acquaintance, only in order to break my heart by your unkindness ?—" I will account for it, if you will honour me with your attention. From the first moment I saw you I formed a wish to be acquainted with you; I found you so ami¬ able, tliat my wish increased every time I saw you; my Lord, I aspire to your friendship; nay, it is necessary to my happiness; but, my Lord, it must be under the sanction of a father's per¬ mission. You are surprised; I must, 'm some degree, explain my pretension to the honour I now solku. The earl of D »........ ■ ■ >, your noblefa- ther, had a very intåmate friendship wi*h my pa- jents; I bavje received great and singular obli¬ gations from him." My voi^ falteied here; I wept.-^-Qood Heaven ! said my kord, you weep î Ob, t&at I were permitted to dry 4be tear» that ? 6
324 lall from those speaking eyes !—*He attempted to take my hand ; I withdrew it.— This visit, my Lord, is the crisis of our friendship; I delayed it, because I was unwilling to forego your com¬ pany; but your open declaration obliges me to hasten it: my Lord, you must tetl your father, that you have accidentally met with a young wo¬ man whose name is Sophia Melcombe; that she admired your person and qualities, and took pleasure in your company ; that, upon your so¬ liciting a higher degree of friendship and inti¬ macy, she thought it necessary to refer you to his Lordship; and that, if he will honour her with his permission to cultivate your friendship, she will esteem it one of the first blessings of her life.—My tears would accompany my words in spite of my resolution.·—What is that I seer said Lord В ..... "■■■"■■■; such kindness, mingled with such cruelty ! surely I am not hated !—No, my Lord, said I, you cannot be hated; you are formed to be loved and esteemed. I cannot explain my¬ self any further; it depends upon your father to decide this point for us both; it depends up¬ on him, whether I am permitted to see you any more. Will you have the goodness to give the Eail this piece of paper ? I have written my name here, to prevent mistakes. This paper will acquaint him who and where I am; the rest I leave to his Lordship's decision« Adieu 3 my
325 Lord! if ever we meet again, I shall be justified in every part of my behaviour towards you; and, if we do not, my best wishes and prayers will ever attend you.—I rose upon this, and went out ofthe room in tears; and left the dear youth in the same situation. He rung the bell soon after I went away. A» soon as he was gone, Mr. Saville came into the dining-room; I had retired into my chamber, and as soon as I had in some measure conquered my emotions, I went to him ; but they returned when I related to him all that had passed be¬ tween me and Lord B——·. Mr. Saville soothed and comforted me ; he kindly allowed for my weakness of spirits, and led to another subject, his favourite one, which you will easily guess without further explanation. When Mrs. Bar¬ clay returned, she perceived the traces of the emotions of my heart in my countenance ; I told her I had an interesting conversation with Lord B—■—, and probably we should see him no more. She rallied me, and so did Miss Freewill, upon it. They asked Bfr. Saville, if he approved my regard for Lord B—*-; I do, indeed, ladies, said he ; and will do every thing in my power to promote it.— -Nay then, I am sure, we have no¬ thmg to do with it, said Miss Freewill.—My re¬ gard for Lord B——, said I, can never interfere with Mr. Savilk's claim upon me»
32ß , í »m tortured with impatience, to hear what effect Lord B——'s report will liave upon his father. Good night to my dear ststçr and mo¬ ther. My fate now draws towards its crisis. I thank God my suspense will not last much longer! this day will put an end to it. Read here a note from the £arl oî D—. " Lord D-—— presents his compliments to ·* Miss Sophia Melcombe ; he will call upon her ,f at sex'en this evening, and desires she will re- ** ceive him alone, without any witness to their *' interview/' ï will see how this father behaves to me, and act accordingly. Saville exerts all his abilities and influence to encourage гог; I have told Mrs. Barclay that I am to receive a visit from a gentleman upon business of an interesting kind; and begged her permission to see him alone in the parlour. By no means, said she; the draw¬ ing-room is at your service. if I can be so happy as to receive a father's blessing; to receive a husband from his band; to embrace a brother; then will í think all my cares and anxieties amply recompensed- The Earl of D——» was punctual to his ap¿- poìiìtment; he was shown into tiie drawing- room, while I was pouring out щ heart befom
mı jny Supreme Benefactor» and imploring his blessing upon my hopes and wishes. When I thought myself duly prepared to meet my father, I went down to him with trembling limbs and faltering voice ; but with a heart strengthened by a firm reliance upon Heaven. My Lord was waiting for me ; he looked impatient for the in¬ terview. I courtesied very low, and was silent. He advanced towards me; he took both my hands in his own ; he looked earnestly in my face a minute, and then saluted me tenderly. We w f ere both silent. After a pause of some minutes he seemed to recollect himself.—Sophia Mel¬ combe, what brings you to London ? This address raised my spirits. I answered, My Lord, I did not come hither of my own ac¬ cord ; I was brought by compulsion.—How is that? said he; who could compel you,—If your Lordship will have patience to hear the story, J will tell you every particular.—Sit down, my child, said he; I am ready and willing to hear you,—My heart was softened by the kindness of his expression ; but I bad it be stout, and not give way to its own weakness. I told him first, the character and situation of Lady Belmour ; her endeavours to corrupt Mr. Saville's virtue; his leaving her house, and coming to Mr. Frank* lin's; his introduction to Mr, Selby's acquaint¬ ance, to all the Bennet family, and to me; tbe
3£$ resentment and threatened revenge upon him; Lord S—— and Mr. Clay ton's request to him, to introduce them to me, and to Miss Freewill ; his refusal to oblige them ; Lord S—— and Mr. Clayton's scheme against us, and the execution of it; our treatment by them at Blackwall; Mr. Saville and Mr. Elliott's pursuit of us; their meeting with Mr. Barton, and his information of the designs of our persecutors to carry us to the continent, and there oblige us to marry them ; the stratagems of ош friends, and its success ; Mrs. Barclay's kindness and hospitality, and her relation to Mr. Selby; her invitation to us to stay son. s time at he? house, before our return home. Lo r d D-~ heard me with parent attention till I paused.«-»-He said, My dear, I am satisfied of the truth cf the relation you have given me. i ara rejoiced at your escape, and for the friends you have made. I am obliged to th^m for their zeal and activity in your service., ï will speak of that hereafter; but how came you acquainted with Lord B~—?—I told him the story, ex¬ actly as it happened; and enlarged upon the pleasure I took in Lord B—'s company. I spake highly of his accomplishments; and still higher of the goodness of his heart. I then told •ny Lord %he particular notice he took of me; шй at kst his deckratioö of love to me; that í
dï9 found it necessary to appeal to his Lordship, as the person who ought to decide upon our regard for ea?h other; and that I had done this, in a manner which I thought yvould be most agreeable to his Lordship, ap 7 he seemed to make a point of keeping his relation to me, a secret from all his family. My heart gradually softened at re¬ citing these particulars, till at length I burst into tear*, and remained bilent. Lord D— drew his chair close to me; he embraced me,—My sweet child, why do you weep? you have acted with the greatest pru¬ dence : I applaud your behaviour, and I thank you for it t—" Oh, my Lord, it has cost me very dear ! an hundred times I have been tempted to declare my relation to Lord B « ..... » ■ '; I longed to call him brother; to claim an interest in him; and must I forego the sweet hope of enjoying his friendship ? mubt I be still an alien to him, though í know and love him, and though he loves me w,th equal affection?" I paused, and wept. —We will speak of this point hereafter, said my Lord ; in the mean time, tell me, who are these gentlemen that were so much interested in the behalf of the two fair ladies, as to run all hazai ds to deliver them ? give me some account of them. 1 answered, " Mr, Saville is a young gentle¬ man o'* good fortune and character, Mr. Elliott ii a lieutenant m the navy; he L kinsmau to Mu
330 Franklin, our good friend and neighbour in th« village of S ------."—Well, said my Lord, but how are these two gentlemen attached to the two ladies ; for I understand there must be some inducement to them, to engage so deeply in tlieir cause ? Do not blush, Sophia; but tell me which of them is your lover!—I looked down, and was confused ; but recovering, I said, Miss Freewill is an heiress of large fortune, which she intends to bestow upon Mr. Elliott; who is an honesti brave, and worthy young man.—She is s, girl of spirit, said my Lord, and I honour her fior it; but what of the other pair of lovers?— Why, my Lord, the case is reversed with them; Sophia is a poor girl of small fortune, and be¬ longs to nobody; aud the generous Saville, offers to make her the partner of his heart and fortune,—Bravo í said my Lord; but Sophia has some spirit too I see, and can feel herself under too much obligation.—lie smiled; but I looked very serious.—Come, my Sophia, open your heart to me: is Mr. Saville a favoured lover? if so f why have you not acquainted me with his pretensions before now ?—" My Lord, you judge rightly of my spirit; 1 thought myself under too much obligation: Mťs. Bennet has urged me to apply to you by her hand ; I was undetermined about it ; but this last obligation to Mr. Saville, had almost overcome my reluctance to apply to
sai your Lordhhip, when accident threw me in tlm way of Lord B—; and his attention to me led me to wish—" I stopped»—To wish what, So¬ phia ?—To wish, that I might present to him a brother and a friend worthy of him; and that I might claim a share in their friendship. Good girl I said my Lord; you have answered all my questions hitherto, with a frankness un¬ common in your sex ; you shall not be a loser by it; you have shewn me a noble heart, and I will place it to account here: (laying his hand on his bosom.) I must ask one question more, Sophia, and look that your answer is with equal sincerity: does Mr. Saville know, whose daugh¬ ter you are ?—I now trembled, hesitated, and was silent.—-Your silence answers me, said he : how dared you tell him my secret, without my permission ?—I tried to speak, but was some mo¬ ments before I could look up. I wept, and said, 4 * At length, my Lord, Mr. Selby obtained Mrs. Benneťs permission, to acquaint Mr. Saville with my birth and parentage: they thought Mr. Saville's generous proposal, deserved that he should know to whom he had oifered his hand and fortune» I am answered, said my Lord ; Every body is qualified to judge of my conduct, and to decide upon it against me; nobody appeals to me, nor sutlers me to decide for them—it is well·***! am
• 332 to contend with every body, and to submit t<* every one's reasons, against my own ; but I shall think of every thing, and judge for myseif. My Lord walked about in great discomposure· We were silent for several minutes. At last I threw myself at his feet, embraced his knees, besought his forgiveness, and his fatherly advk e and protection. While I was in this attitude, the door opened, and in rushed Lord B—. The Earl's features had relaxed; he looked softened; but upon his son's enti ance, they re¬ sumed their sternness.—Impertinent boy ! who sent for you?—Nobody, my Lord, said he; I came of my owu accord. What have I done to deserve so severe a rebuke ?—So, Sir, you too " are come to sit in judgment upon your father? —Oh, not so ! my Lord, but to humble myself at your feet; to implore your permission to visit this amiable young lady ; to esteem, to love, to adore her. The youth threw himself down, and kneeled beside me. We both wept, and looked with supplicating eyes up to my Lord D—. He looked at us, till his heart relented ; his lips quivered; his eyes overflowed.—There is no bearing this! said he; it calls me tyrant! can I spurn my kneeling children ? Oh God, I can¬ not do it! Oh my son; my daughter.—Your daughter! said Lord B—; is it possible! can this dear lady be my sister Í— I sobbed, and
333 famted away. When I recovered, I found my¬ self between my father and brother, with an ann of each round my waist.·—Sophia, my dear child, said my father.—My tears now relieved rae, and I spoke.*—Oh, my father! my brother! do you acknowledge your Sophia?—It is all over, said Lord D—— ; two children have in one minute, overset the purpose of many years. My son, this lady is indeed your sister, and my legitimate daughter; since I am obliged to acknowledge her, ï will not do it by halves.—I kneeled again; I blessed, thanked, and prayed for him. He raised and embraced me fervently.—Forgive me, my child ! I have not done you justice, but 1 will endeavour to discharge my duty better hereafter,—We all three wept, and renewed our acknowledgements. It was half an hour before we recovered from our emotion. Then Lord D» ......... related briefly to his son, the circum¬ stances of his first marriage.—" The punish¬ ment of my deceiving my father was severe, said he : it cost me the life of my wife/'—I took no¬ tice of the application of his own case, to that of his son. He told him in general terms the loss of my mother, and my being put under the care of Mr. and Mrs. Bennet.—** But I did not wholly desert my child, said he; I settled a sum >f money on her; I entrusted her to the care of læ best of me» and of women.
334 <f After t had performed my duties to my de¬ parted wife, I remembered those that 1 owed to a living father. After-a.year'e mourning, I mar¬ ried tlie lady wham my father had chosen for me; which was your mother, my dear В— ч I never had any reasunto repent this engage* meat, nor- í beUe^e has Lady Ό*******. When your sister was very young, I contracted her to the son of the worthy pair who took tlie charge of her; and by this tie, I intended to reward their tenderness to Sophia. When they grew up, the engagement was accepted by the parties concerned. Since that time, circumstances have varied greatly. Young Bennet died before his father» of the consequence of an unfortunate ac¬ cident, Mr. Bennet survived but little more than a year; his daughter is married into an¬ other family: and thus, by a series of accidental circumstances, Sophia has stood in need of a protector. She has found one m Mr. Saville, who has offered her his heart, hand, and for¬ tune, without knowing her birth and parentage. Was it not so, røy dear? or did he know them, before he declared himself your lover?" No, indeed, my Lord. Mr. Saville knew not my history, but in consequence of his offer to me.—Very well, my child; but I must injustice to myself assure you, that after what you ha\ e told me of this gentleman's gallant behaviour
3$5 tow ards you, í had resolved to pay my acknow¬ ledgments to him, and to make him some amend« for it; and this* before I came to a resolution, to acknowledge you publicly for my daughter.— I thank your Lordship for this generous assur¬ ance, which I receive wholly as your bounty, and not as any claim of mine.-—" My dear child, you have a lawful claim upon me; and I will never again give you cause to-doubt my affection. " But there is still a great difficulty in the way of my declaring you mine to all my family. Your mother, Sir, was proposed to fhe before I was married to Sophia's mother; I preferred her, and married her privately, to avoid the other lady. * " This is the true reason why I never had the courage to declare my first marriage; and this reason still subsists: for the date of Sophia's birth discovers the secret, which I have so long, and so carefully concealed from my wife. " Now you, my young counsellors, who have driven me to this dilemma, try if you can he!£ me out of it." Oh, my Lord, said I, this generous frankness overwhelms me with love and gratitude ! Per¬ mit me to answer it. I never wished to be a sharer in your rank and fortune; it was only your paternal affection, of which I so ardently dcbired to partake. It was the friendship of this
33$ amiable youth, that I aspired to, without the least view to any other advantages. My Lord, let the secret rest with those who already know it; honour Mr. Saville with youi notice and favour ; he will, I am sure, preserve it inviolably: I renounce all pretensions to your rank or fortune, only call me your child in pri¬ vate, and sometimes honour me with your pre¬ sence. These, my Lord, are all the wishes and all the hopes of your Sophia. Noble-minded Sophia ! generous child ! said Lord D " ■■ ; I acknowledge your merit, and your dutiful resignation to'me; but I must not be overcome by your generosity ; tlie time for concealment is past, and I will now acknowledge my child in the face of the world, and shew them that I am proud of her« Again I kneeled and kissed his hand. Lord В ' ■ poured forth his acknowledgements for his father's goodness to me; he offered to give up a part of wbat his father designed for him, to add to his sister's fortune.— í refused it, and told him I was rich in his affections, and desired no other wealth. Lord D ■ applauded us both, and ssid, This evening had given him such pain and plea¬ sure, that be could hardly sustain such strong emotions.
337 - Let us, my children, finish this interesting subject. Pray, my dear, where is Mr,. Sakille? My Lord, he lodges in this ¿treetj and is fre¬ quently here,—Perhaps he may be in the house at this moment—be so good to enquire ! I rang the bell, and the servant came in,—Is Mr. Saville below with the ladies?—He is, Ma¬ dam.-—Give my compliments, and desire him to walk upstairs. He withdrew. Mr. Saville came immediately. î presented him to Lord D ...... ■ - , who took his hand, and embraced him.—Sir, I am desirous to acknow¬ ledge my obligations to you on this dear child's account; for her obligations are mine,«-«-*' Let me intreat you, my Lord, not to mention that word again. If you honour me with your notice and approbation; if this dear lady deigns to listen to my vows, to accept the services *of my whole life, I shall think myself the happiest of men; I have nothing more to ask or wish." Yes, you have still a further claim upon me, and for God's sake, Sir, do not think me so in-* sensible, and hard-hearted, as to refuse to So·» phia the rights and claims of so deserving a child ! Let me have the pleasure of joining your hands. He did so; we both kneekïd to him, and he blessed us. We returned his blessings with tears.—Sir, said he, I know your generous offer; but Sophia has a right to a much larger <3
338 portion of my fortune,—I beg, I beseech you, my Lord, not to mention it; it is Sophia that I love for her own sake; I want no addition to her fortune. " A generous mind, Sir, should not accept all that a generous mind offers. I had my pri¬ vate reasons, Mr. Saville, for declining to own this young lady to my own family; they are now over-ruled ; I acknowledge her to all the world." .—Mr. Saville was overwhelmed yvith joy and gratitude, and could only express it in brokeu accents. As soon as the Earl quitted him, Lord B—— rushed into his arms; called him friend and brother, and hoped he would allow his claim* Saville was transported; he returned the dear youth's caresses, in accents of rapture. fiorii D— desired us to be composed, and listen to him.—There is one more person yvhom I wish to see, before I leave this house; it is the mistress of it. I will fetch her this moment, said Mr. Saville. He flew down stairs. While he was gone, Lord 0,.......,.,. said, Does Mrs. Barclay also know my secret? Do not be frightened, Sophia; I will not be angry with you any more. No, my Lord, said I ; I never told it to any ene, nor wished it known to any one, whom it àia not immediately concern.«—I am glad of it, fot I »ball have the pleasure to declare it my-
339 self,—When Mrs, Barclay came in, my Lord addressed her with respect and politeness. Ш thanked her for her kindness and hospitality to his child ; whom he again acknowledged in the fullest manner. She expressed surprise and pleasure; she congratulated me, and all the company present. It grows late.—He looked at his watch.—I must be going.—Mr. Saville, I shall expect to see you soon.—My Lord, I will do myself the honour to wait on you in a day or two. As soon as I can get the writings of my estates, I will deposit them in your Lordship's hands ; and beg of you to direct the settlements. I will accept the trust, Sir; and yvill deserve your confidence. He then saluted me affectionately, and wished me good-night. He took leave of Mrs. Barclay. Lord В —— did the same, Mr. Saville attended them to the coach; and at lus return, our com¬ pliments and rejoicings were renewed; Elliott and his Fanny joined us. We sat together till a late hour, and at last parted reluctantly. I shall send this letter by the next post; I cannot confine ray joy in my own heart, I must communicate it to my friends. Rejoice with me, oh my dear mamma Bennet î my hearťs beloved sister Anna! my worthy brothel Selby I
340 г I am at this moment the happiest creature in the world. I pray God to make me grateful and worthy of it. I am ever yours» SO -ΡΚΙΛ.
» rmnminri 4/WT7T lLi 1-Ľ.rt XaXVí. ЫП. SELBY TO EDWARD SAVILLE, ESQ. Joy to Edward Saville, my chosen friend and brother !—Joy to the lovely Sophia, my Anna's sibter and mine, and the daughter of my ho¬ noured mother, Airs. -Bennet ! We do nothing but gossip over our mutual congratulations, and repeat what we have said ten timeb before. Vou have no friends, no re¬ lations, that are more interested in your happi¬ ness, than those in the village of S——. Now to business.·—-The lady Calypso has left her ibland. She decamped silently last Thurs¬ day at night, and has escaped the storm that threatened her. The bailiffs were to have en¬ tered the house in a day or two, but she has prevented them, which I am not sorry for. I wish she may find friends among her disciples that will help her out of her troubles, I do not wish her to suffer tlie least distress, only just enough to awaken her to remor&e and repen¬ tance for her crimes·
Ul And now, my dear friend, I will open to you a favoui ite project of mme ; my wife and mother are in transports at the thoughts of it. If it be not agreeable to you, at least it will prove the sinceritv of our aneetion to v ou aud our deur Sophia. You have expressed a wish to settle in our neighbouihood; it is now in your power to do so.—I will, if you authorize me, apply to the as¬ signees of the late Mr. Play ford, tor the house Lady Belmour hai just quitted. They will bo¬ glad to dispose of it ibr the remaindei oí the children's» minority. Such ofthe goods -is were hers, I can purchase of her creditois*at a fair valuation; and in. that case you will have a house ready to receive you and your lady, as soon as you shall choose to leave London. Pray let me know your pleasure as soon as pos¬ sible, and I will not lose a minute m negociating this business for you. And now I have provided an house for you, Sir; I will try to obtain one for Mr. Elliott and his lady. I will use my influence to persuade røy mother to come and live wholly at the Par¬ sonage, and lot her house to Mr. Elliott. If both my schemes should succeed, I shall have drawn a circle of neighbours round me, that will form a rational soeiety, and be the happiest »pot of ground in the three kingdoms. Ч Л
342 What says my friend to this scheme of life ? has it any charms for him? or, has London given him a taste for her luxuries r and does Nature hold out her charms in vain ? I fear I shall not have the pleasure to join your hands ; if it could be, I should enjoy it most ardently; but if the father's presence will sanctify the union, I resign my wish cheerfully, and will re¬ joice at the transfer. My wife writes to Sophia*; but I send my re¬ spects to my aunt by your hands, and hope, when you visit us, she will accompany you ; and give me an opportunity of paying my acknow» ledgments to her, for her kindness and hospi¬ tality to my beloved friends. I am, dear Sir, yours faithfully. G. Selby.
LETTER XXXVII. MR. SAVILLK TO THE REV. MR. SELBY. МУ DEAR FRIEND, Your letter demands an immediate answer. I thank you most fervently for your wishes in my behalf î I accept your good offices, and beg that you will immediately begin your treaty for
343 Lady Belmoui's house. I am like one tran¬ sported on the wings of imagination into the regions of Arcadia. Oh, my friend, words can· not express my sense cf the delightful prospect you have opened to my view; hasten to realize it, and let me hasten to enjoy it ! I will give you some account of my interview with Mr. Munden. My last visit had left him in displeasure with me; and the traces of it, appeared on his countenance,—He said, What brings you here, Sir ? I thought you had done with me, as I have with you.—I answered, Duty and gratitude bring me here, Sir. Mr. Brere* wood informs me that I owe you many acknow¬ ledgments for your care of my fortune; that you have been a good guardian to me. My first care is to pay my grateful thanks to you. My second business is to inform you, t 1 л I am going to be married to a daughter ofthe earl of D—, and that í desire your permission to put the writings of my estates into his lordship's hands—Mr. Mun- den's features relaxed ; he looked astonished.— You are going to be married to the earl of D—'s daughter Î— *' Sir, Mr, Brereyvood shall be eoa** bled to satisfy you of it."«—WeU» Sir, I did not mean to infer that I doubted your veracity.— But—but—to say truth, I did not think you had spirit enough to look up to such an alliance. The daughter of Lord D——»I Yei, he has %
- 344 large estate and great interest, but then he bag a large family too—But then his interest! Yes, he may be of great service to you. Well, Sir, the writings are in Mr. Moreton's hands, Chan- cerv-lane; and you mav have them when you please. I begged him to give me an oi der to receive them from Mr. Moretón. He consented. He called for pen and ink, and wrote a note to Mr. Moretón. Then holding out his hand, Well, Edward, and so you wish to be friends yvith me ? —I do, Sir, but not with any interested view.-*· Well then, give me thy hand.—I did so—" Upon my soul, Edward, thou art improved ! Love makes a man. I see it plainly. If you will ac¬ quaint me with your proceedings—why-—you shall not repent it—that is all/' I told him I would soon wait on him again ; but that at this time I was in haste. I took my leave, and hastened to Chancery-lane ; saw the writings safe in Mr. Brerewood's hands; and then hastened ayvay to Southwark to the wed¬ ding, ihe ceremony was over before I arrived; aud I excused myself for not being present, bemg engaged in preparation for business of the same kind. A large company of the friends of the new-married pair were present. Mr. Jones was there; his daughter presented him to me; he thanked ще for the services I had rendered
045 by his daughter Susan, I stopped him shorti and said, I had more than equal obligation to her. The bride looked very serious; but the company were lively, and dispelled her melan¬ choly, of yvhich they knew aot the cause ; but I did full well. John Barton was in high spirits, and proud cf his bride; I told them of my own happy pro¬ spects, and of Elliotťs approaching nuptials^ and increased their mirth and festivity. I took an opportunity of informing the,bride, of Lady Beimour's situation ; and of Mr. Sel¬ by's endeavour to procure her house formes she rejoiced at both. ï shall often think of you there, Madam, said I; and I will hope one" day to see you there.·—Oh no, Sir! said she; never will I be seen there again; some ill-natured or unlucky person might recollect me, to my eternal confusion. Att my wish is-now to fall into a dif¬ ferent class of people, and never to be seen or known by any of the circle that knew me for¬ merly. I will endeavour to deserve my present lot, and to merit the worthy man who baa placed me in a.respectable situation. I honour you, Madam, for these sentiments ; I am certain that you will deserve your lot, and do credit to.> our husband. The wedding ioika insisted upon our dancing among them; we could not get away before twelve oTcleck, acx о 5
346 then without much difficulty, and with a promis« to visk them again. The ladies at Mrs. Bar¬ clay's refused to admit us, but sent us word it was time for sober people to go to bed, whither they were going; so we were forced to go to our lodgings, without paying our duty, and asking blessing. Sophia is making a pacquet to send to S—— ; but I will not wait for it, lest any thing should interfere between us una the treaty for the house. With the most grateful sense of your friend* ship and good offices, I am, dear Sir, ever yours affectionately, Edward Saviilk. тттттяттттшяттшжшЕвт u i nu 4M I »il J lill u ■■■ II. LETTER XXXVIII, MISS MELCOMBB TO MRS. SELBY. With a heart overflowing with happiness, your Sophia continues her narration. The day afte* the solemn interview, I received a note from the Earl himself, desiring to know how I did, after ihe emotions I had sustained. I returned an answer expressive of my duty and affection; the game day, Mr. Saville called on him in Grosve* »oi-Sfjuare, with the same tender enquiries. 3
mı On Thursday morning Lord B—-— called on me ; he said, he came by his own înclinaţia, and by his father's permission, to see how I was; and also to thank me for every part of my con¬ duct respecting himself. I answered Lord В ■ —* with assurances of my eternal gratitude and affection : our conver¬ sation was long ; in the course of it, I asked him if Lord D ■■ had yet mentioned me to his lady. I believe not, said he ; it is a task upon my father ; but I am certain he will per¬ form his promise to you. Lord B—- * asked me for the particulars of my adventure with Lord S ..... ; in telling my own story, I told that of my friend Frances; our deliverance; Mr. Elliotťs share of it; his pas¬ sion for Fanny; the consequences of it; and the present situation of these lovers. He desired I would introduce him to all my friends, that he might know them. Lord B—— staid till three o'clock before he departed. Lord D ........... has honoured me with a morn¬ ing visit. He made tender enquiries after my beakh, and expressed great satisfaction in every part of my behaviour; and likewise in the af¬ fection of Lord В * »"' " and me, towards each other. He then told me, that Mr. Saville \&à put
34S the writings of his estate into his hands, and t&at he had given directions to his lawyer concerning· the settlements. Mr. Saville is impatient to caU you his. I have consented to your union ;· and I hope you will not make unnecessary delay, my Sophia.—I bowed in silence. Lord D ' then took out a very handsome pocket-book—Take this, my Sophia; in it you will find what is wanting for the necessary preparation for your marriage. Mrs. Barclay will favour you with her assistance, so will your other friend ; she is a very fine young woman, and I like her spirit. I am desired to hasten you, in order that both marriages may be solemnized the same day .-»-My Lord, said I, that can hardly be.—He smiled; Not hardly, Sophia ! there is no hardship in the case; but gently* and kindly, and speedily, let it be! I know how you young ladies behave h> thesecases; but a father's wishes will, I know, prevail with you!—His wishes, my Lord, are commands with me. I know it, my dear girl,·— and especially, when his commands are the ac¬ complishment of your own wishes. -1 will soon introduce you to the rest of your lel&tions, but I must first make «mooth the way for you. I kissed his hand in thankfulness; 1щ emöracöd me, and took his leave lor the
549 morning. Lord D— — is a most engaging mm ţ I love, revere, and admire him, more than I can express. A noble present, my dear Anna! Bank-notes for five hundred pounds, for my preparations. Mrs. Barclay and Miss Freewill are in tran¬ sports at my father's kindness and geuerosity, and at his hurrying orders too. Mr. Saville has been here, and I have com¬ plained of his precipitation, and his cunning in getting my father on his side. He claimed the benefit of my father's influence, and the ladies declared in his favour ; every one is against me, and all resolved to promote this double ce¬ lebration. The coach is ordered, and we are going about these preparations. Mrs. Barclay is as much pleased with this bustle, as if * it was upon her own account. I am in raptures at the explanation of Mr. Selby's mystery: oh, my dearest friend! shall I indeed be so happy as to live within reach of you and my dear mamma ? shall I see you con»; tinually, advise with you, communicate all my joys and griefs to you, and share yours m re¬ turn ? This will be the crown of my happiness, and 1 shall havo nothing more to wish or pray for, but a heart grateful to heaven for such in¬ estimable blessings as are now in prospect be¬ fore me.
350 1 have just had a morning visit from Lord В- «- ■ >" , my sweet brother I how precious is every proof of his affection to me! After some agree· able conversation, he took a shagreen-case out of his pocket, and opening it, ï saw a very hand¬ some pair of bracelets; and in the centre of one of them, his own dear image, done by a capital hand.—Will you, my dear «uster, 4 şaid he, honour ше so far as to wear these for my *ake?—I ex· claimed, The honour is mine ! but the pleasure exceeds it greatly.—-He then kissed my hands, and bowed mot ι gracefully. I returned the same homage to the dear picture. He was delighted. ч -You will remember me when you look on this- shadow, said he.—1 do not want this to remind me of you, my Lord. You encourage me by your amiable goodness, said he, to request a favour iu return.-—Any thing in my power, my Lord, you may command.-—He bowsd; It is tliat you will «it to the same artist; and let me have the happiness to converse with your sha^ dow, when I cannot see the substance.·—You honour me too much, my Lord, but at the same tíme 1 will have another copy taken, for a dear friend of mine. How do not expect me to tell yon for whom tfek Mer copy is designed; I shall not tell you till some time hence, I cannot s*?y how long. My Lord B—■*·— said a thousand polile and
35 t obliging things to me, which encoo.aged me te ask him several interesting questions concerning his mother, his brothers, and sisters—Take no¬ tice, said he, that I insist upon the first place İn your aifections. My eldest sister, Amelia, is a fine girl, but she is proud and high-spirited; the younger, Louisa, is not so handsome, but more amiable; you will love her, and she you a she is my favourite. Äly brother George is like Amelia, proud and haughty, but generous and friendly. My youngest brother, Lionel, is & lovely boy, about twelve years old, and the dar* ling of all the family ; he is at school. Georg© has just got a commission in the array. I will say nothing of my mother to prepossess you; she is a good wife and mother, and very soli¬ citous for her children's future establishments But I believe I am the least ambitions of the fa** mily.— Mr. Saville came in before Lord В ..... ■ — went away; they were equally glad to meet each other; they conversed on several subjects, and I had the pleasure to observe the same good principles, and the same right judgment, in both. Lord В ...... stayed till near dinner-time, and then seemed to leave us reluctantly. Mr. Saville iscontinuallyhere. Mr. Brerewood called on Mr. Saville to-day: he tells him that Lady Belmour has thrown herself into tbe liber·
352 \ Йся of the King's Bench, and laughs at her creditors. Miss Freewill has shewn me some beautiful lockets of hair in various elegant designs; she has given me a taste for them, I must have something of this kind to present аз keep-sakes» for so she-calls them. She and I are to ex¬ change one of these trinkets; and I shall order something of this kind for Mrs. Barclay, . Lord D—— has written to Mr, Saville, de* siring him not to order an equipage; he hai? bespoke a chariot and horses for the parade of ©ur nuptials. Mr. Saville- has paid hi& acknow¬ ledgements; but he sa3 T s he will* have a plain coach, for um and convenience, and that our friends in the country may have their share of it. My heart thanks him for this thought, and шу friends will love him for it. I am going to fit clothes, an*, to spend time,· and more money at the shrine of Fashion; hut I look forward to a time of leisure and re- jSexic» when I shall endeavour to atone for the hours thus spent ; and employ tlie remainder of my time to better purpose. I will now con¬ clude this letter, with my heart's wishes and i€gard&to!»y dear mother and sister· Sophia*
35¿>
LETTER XXXIX. MtSS MELCOMBE TO MRS- SEtBY. I HAVE spent a whole morning in sitting formy picture. Lord В ■■■ ..... ■ attended us to Mr. ——, and came home with us; Mrs. Barclay asked him to dine with us; he accepted the invitation, and bent a note to his. father to excuse bis absence at home. In the evening he took his leave befcwa tea> saying, He had business of a particular kind, and perhaps might return again. In about an hour and half we heard a violent rap at the door, that bade us expect visitors« Mrs. Barclay had ordered her servant to deny her to ail chance visitors, and wondered who it could be. Presently Lord В-- ............ entered the room, leading a young lady of a most amiable aspect, and genteel person. He presented her to me by the name of Lady Louisa В ■■■■-■ ; and me to her by the appellation of Lady Sophia, which he bad never used before. W r c embraced each other, and made the usual compliments. Lord g. -----apologized to Mrs. Barclay, for pie^ent« ing his sister first to me. Lady Louisa paid bet complimenti» to Mrs, Barclay -and the еотрдлу
354. and Lord В— - led her into conversation with us. She is a fine young lady, not handsome, but perfectly genteeland amiable. She expressed a desire of being better acquainted with me, which I most sincerely returned. I said, My Lord, you can best inform me, yvhether I am likely to Jbave that honour and happiness.—-The ice is broke, said he: be not impatient, mydear sister; you yvill soon be presented to all the fa¬ mily; my father permits Louisa visit you with me this evening. A new dress is brought home, on purpose for me to appear in, when I am presented to Lady D" ....... I actually dread it. I fear I shall ap¬ pear awkward and confused before her, and even my modesty will lessen me in her opinion ; how¬ ever, I will exert all the courage in my power, and endeavour to behave with some spirit upon the occasion, as if I thought myself not unwor¬ thy to claim the right of a child in my own fa¬ ther. Lord B—— and his sister took their leave before supper, Mrs, Barclay is to have a grand rout to-morrow; I wish to be excused being at it, but I am not allowed ; all our company are to be present, and to be stared at as contracted lovers, for uvery body that comes here is told Qur litui» don. Mrs. Ikrcby calls me Lady Sophia; but I
have absolutely foťbad the title to be used by her, and all our own circle of friends; and I forbid it to all those in the village of S— ; I would only wish to hear it from Lord D—'s fa¬ mily, as it sets me upon an equal seat with my proud relations. Mrs. Barclay's rout is over, and I never de¬ sire to see another. As a spectator, I was entertained ; and could have laughed at the company's expenee, as very probably they did at mine. I was wicked enough tc take two designs in my pocket-book. I have copied them, and I send them for your enter¬ tainment : you will think their dress and air ex¬ aggerated, but you will be mistaken ; they are. only modelled by the standard of fashion. A note from tlie Earl of D——, with the sum¬ mons I both wish and fear. " Lord and Lady D—'s compliments to Mrs. Barclay and all her guests, and desire the favour of their company next Thursday to din¬ ner," Mr, Elliott complains of the sbwness of our proceedings, and I of their hastiness. Saville complains of my reserve to him ; and, in short, we are all dissatisfied. Oh, that this bustle was ail over, and I were with you at the Parsonage ! these men are never satisfied. Mrs. Barclay is the most obligiug of women; we give her an in*
Зоб fínitv of trouble; but she says, She takes plea^ sure in it, and she really appe?rs to do so. If I am "Ю happy to have a house of my own, I Fhall urge her to give me her company, and see me settled in it. Miss Freewill enjoys the parade of new clothes and ornaments, and she has no objection to a town life; but she has not had the advantage of a Mrs. Bonnet to instruct her youth, and to teach her how to distinguish between the real comforts of I;fe, and the vanities and parade of it. f have no merit in knowing better how to estimate them, for I only utter my mamma'* opinions iu my own words ; but her opinions are truly mme, and I hope will be so as long as I live. ι am called down stairs *,o receive my share of a visit from some ladies who profess a great regard for me, and are desirous of my company ; but who, if I judge rightly, will, in three davi after î leave town, forget that they ever saw me. Ada u for the present, my dearest friend. Sophia В—·—.
LETTER XL. MU. SAVILLE TJ MR. SELBY. ΚΓν ht .„it's ti*4»vure, my beloved Sophia, writes u ni'Tuully to Mr*. Selby; I shall therefore onl/
367 speak of such things as make no part of hef letters, I have seen Mr. Munden again : he was in a very bad humour, and wanted somebody to vent it upon; he questioned me concerning Lady Behntfur's past ai.d present situation: he said, Some enemy of her Ladyship's had stirred up her creditors to take the step they had lately taken, and he wished he knew who it was; peihaps I could inform him?—I said, "all that 1 knew was, that -she hatl been called upon to pay her j\M debts; that 1 sayv nothing surprising in it$ ior that though it was out of fashion iu London to pay tradesmen, it was htill customary m the country."—That is hke your saucy remarks, Sir; but Lady Belmour will find friends to assist her. She talks of disposing of the lease of her house theie, I hear.—So much the better, said I, for the village will have a happy riddaace of her. The settlements are getting ready under Lord I )—...... 's directions, and 1 am making every pre¬ paration lor the day that will fix me the happiest of men. ^ophiais employed m the saute manner. She resigns her will tu her noble rather, who iá now the kindest of parents; she consents to -¿we her baud to her adoring Saville; but still she b roki and reserved to me; fhe keeps me at the ;—* atťbt distance, and is offended if 1 use the h-ast ά тес of familiarity. I am mortified, and
$58 Sometimes distressed, at her behaviour.—Will you pity me, my friend ? or will you laugh at me?—I suspect the latter· You will tell me, that I am a self-tormentor; but if these thoughts arise in a too tender heart, how can I help it r My whole heart, and all its hopes and wishes, are absorbed in one pursuit, in my Sophia ; and if my love is returned w ith coldness and indifference, can I be satisfied— can I be happy? I open my heart to you: ad¬ vise me, comfort me, reprove me; 1 will be thankful for your admonitions. After all, Sophia gives me her hand freely ; she presented me to her father ; she acknow¬ ledged esteem for me. I will accept her hand with transport, and trust to my tender and af¬ fectionate behaviour to make me an intere^ in her heart. I hope soon to be enabled to teli you my happy day. I hope to spend my Christ¬ mas with you. Sophia wishes to return to liei dear village, and dearer friends; and her plei.- gure is a law to me. I am always, dear Sir, Yours, affectionately, Edward Saviiic*
359
LETTER XLI. MR. SELBY ТО EDWARD SAVILLE, ESQ. I answer your letter immediately, to acquaint you that I am doing all in my power for your service here, and that your last manœuvre is of equal use ; for Lady Belmour has actually the lease of the house in her possession, and may dispose of it to another, if she can make any advantage of it; therefore lose no time in ob* taining it. Offer her a premium, nay, offer to pay the arrears of the rent, rather than let it escape you ; at the same time, be careful to con· ceal your name ; let her not suspect you are the person. As soon as you have finished your treaty, let me know it, and I will take posses¬ sion for you. My yvife and mother will give me their assistance, to regulate your household, und prepare for your reception. And now for the other part of your letter. I am in doubt whether to reprove or to laugh at you—you deserve both; but, in my opinion, a serious reproof is likely to be of the most ser¬ vice, especially to a tender and sensible mind. Sophia acknowledges you to her father, as a favoured lover; she avows her regard for you ; ¿he consents to go with you to the altar. What more wo uld you have? Her behaviour is ex*
$$0 actly what it ought, to be; that delicate and charming retenue, is calculated to inspire you yvith that respect, which should ever attend a passion that is to be the foundation of the hap¬ piness of your future life. She is not the play¬ thing of your idle hours, but the companion and friend of your more serious ones ; the mis¬ tress of your house; the mother of your children —sacred and venerable ties! Those who ap¬ proach the altar with due respect, are the ηκχ -t likely to preserve sacred the vows they there make before the Great Author of their being and happiness. " With this lesson I concludo, end am alway i tours truly,
LETTER XLIL MISS MELCOMBE TO MUS. SELBY. Rejoice with me, my dearest Amia! One of the da) s í most dreaded is past. Yesterday was, upon the whole, a happy day to me; yet it was not without its ailav.—1 will give you particulars. About two o'clock Lord B—— came to fel· h me: he was richly dre&t, to do honour to me. and my friends; he is more amiable than hand-
364 some, but he looks benevolent, andh as the smile of an angel. He said every thing that could encourage me to meet his mother without fear. î was inquisitive.—lie bade me fear nothing, for that his father had found the certificate of his first marriage, till when, i ady D—— per¬ sisted in thinking me an illegitimate child ; and Lord D~----- was obliged to explain e\ ery cir¬ cumstance of time, place, and manner, w huh gave her some chagrin, but made her more com¬ pilable afterwards. I a^ked for further paiticular*?.—lie smiled.— Ah, Sophia! you are one oí Lye's daughter·. —I can only tell you what I saw and heard ; for I was present when the certificate was produce^. My mother frowned, and said theie was no oc¬ casion for me to be present.— í offered to л uli¬ tt row, but my fathei called me back, und ga\e the paper into my hand. Perhaps, Sir, =;ud ht , vou may ha\e doubt c , but this will cemmec von. My Lord, I want no other pioof than your word: I should be unpardonable to doubt what¬ ever you aftiim.— Methinks ^aid my mother, you need not eompinnent one parent, at an¬ other's expe w e —Th ι» t и not my intention, said í , but when you see my bister, and know her nerit, 1 am certam your Ladyship will excuse me,—My father behaved kindly and tenderly to к
Зв'2 us both. He praised my mother ; he spoke ten¬ derly of her children: and reconciled her by Ыч endearments, to himself, and to her son; an^ she has since been more easy and satisfied,— By this account, I found that Lord D—— had trouble enough to smooth the way for me, which was his own expression. Mr. Elliott and Miss Freewill, Mrs. Barclay and Mr. Saville, came to us, handsomely dressed for the occasion. For my part, I was surprised at my own figure in the glass, and thought it was some other person.-—This is not Sophia Melcombe, said 1 to my self. Who is it then ? Lady Sophia U——-. Oh, I am your Ladyship's most obe¬ dient humble servant ! But I do not hke you half so well аз my old acquaintane e. What then is beumie of Sophia Melcombt ? the beloved name, yvhich belonged to that amiable woman, who loved her husband well enough to .sacriate her Ife, to preserve the serret of her marriage. Ever dear, ever \ enet able, is that name, and that recollection; it ь enshrined in my memory, once and for ever. When our company were all ready, Loid ρ —_ terved that th« re weie five of us, which was one too many for the <oach. V'-U ym, my dear Mr. Saville, permit me to öbk the favour of my dear sister's company İn
30J th» dui iot with me? —My Lord, answered 3wr. tiaville, I ñeely resign her to you, and I am ne\ei more happy than «hen we are honoured wjth your company. Lord В ..... « offered his hand to me. Saville led Mis. Barclay, Elliott his misti ess, into the carriages; and we set off fur Grosvenor-squaie, I was in flutters all the way: Lord lì— said ever} thing kind and encouraging, but my heart was too much for my reason to govern. When we arrived at the house, I trembled exceedingly. Lord B — ■ turned my attention to every thing that £tl\ in our way ; he led me into the drawing-room—the Earl met us; he baluted me tenderly, and encouraged me.—Let me present my daughter to her mother, sani he. —So saving, he led me to hit Lady. 1 kneeled ro hei , she laised and baluted mc m ь iletice. —■ She ıs indeed a fine woman; but then is .1 pudu and dignity in her appearance that tnkc¡> mc with avı с and distunct*. Loi d D- .......— called Lad) Λίγη Ld —1 ¡iu^li to }ou а sibter vho de4i\e*» jour intnd-lııp. Louisa, baid he.—-She t aim and t ml r^cea int. 1 hope, said bhe, my dear чЧсг bu» bu will not recederne as л & ti angu. lembi. u» i iu ι αΐ- fcctionatel}, but was no* bit tu ui'u ,t uonL Tía rest oí oui coinpai s to luw* d >ч< , Loni D~— prev.nted thtni ail lo h . Lil·, \Λα> il-
364 ceiycd them politely, but with an air of distance aha superiority. Lord D— and his amiable son were the only speakers for some minutes. Lady Louisa placed herself next me, and took my hand in hers; and strove to give me courage and composure. Her sister looked rather stately, and seemed to scrutinize us with her eye. She is a very fine young lady; in point of beauty, the first of the family; but her looks thill you, and keep you at distance; she iá her mothei's likeness and favourite. Mrs. Barclay has that ease in her behaviour, that is the result of a constant intercourse with the beau-monde. She entered into a conversa¬ tion with the gentlemen ; for the ladies said but little. Just before dinner entered Mr. George В ......... * , my Lord's sec ond son ; he was announced to all the company, and to me particularly. He is a fine manly youth, with spirit and viva¬ city in his countenance; he is taller than Lord B— and of a darker complexion; black eyes, very bright and sensible ; he behaved very po¬ litely to me, and addressed me frequently in conversation. I thought he honoured me with looks of approbation, and seemed desirous of a farther acquaintance with me. Dinner shuffled us together, and seemed to open our hearts; we became more easv and familiar to each other.
3(1 j Lord D ------- tc зк pohte notice of me at table? ¿ud î began to recover my spirit* and courage. Lord I)------behaved veiy kindly to me; he insisted upon my drinking л serond glass of urne-. He bademe keep up my t-pint«·, κ r be had a d<sign upon me, that he would not explain just now, but would before I went away. He look great notice of Mr. ^avilie ; and ьо did Loid В -------. 'W hen we ro&e from table, v*e udjouiued mto the drawing-room, and began to convoite vith more ease and freedom, hnd D -----— a^ked Mj. Saville, whciehe jiroposeel to ìcbìrlc Î'Ueı hi·-marriage? Ho κ]>1κ d, That ho had always pi eiet red a countiy -litt for lib Им d abode, and only meant to visit London occa¬ sionally; that 1 was partial to the village where I had lived in the early part of my lifo, and to the worthy family with whom I re ided ; that he had the same partiality to both; that Mr. Stlby was a most amiable шап, and tiiat be had the same attachment to him, that 1 had to Mis. Sci by. For all these reasons, he v as deter¬ mined to settle there; and that he had jubt now an opportunity of it, by taking a boibe within a mile of the Parsonage. Lord В« ----- commended his resolution oí settling in the country ; he pointed out the dan¬ gers of а town-life. He praised my attachment ii 3
366 to my dear village and friends, and the prudent intentions of us both : he then enquired where was the house Mr. Saville mentioned? Mr. Saville gave him a brief account of Lady Belmour, her company, her character, her em¬ ployment : he then mentioned her debts, and her bemg obliged to leave that house m conse¬ quence; her posent ¡situation, and h s treaty with her by a third hand. Lord D—— wished him success; Mr. Saville described the house, and the country round it. Lord D ------ asked, yvhere Mr, S tvilla had his education? He gave him a brief account of it, and of his guardian, Mr. Munden. He told my Lord, tliat he h^d the happiness to have two Mentors employed in finishing his education. He described them both; he gave my Lord a Ittter he lately icrcived from Mr. Johnson, com- ir, ending bis choice of л nife, and of a country- hfe dbo. It is mi excellent ¡etter. Lord D——— rend it aloud, and admired every purt or it. Lady D— then took a share in the conver¬ sation; bhe said several pohte things to Mrs, Ban las , on tlie ьиЬр cL cf her protection to two youug laditib in otn* disti ebsed situation. Ľ, ι d D —— seemed to accept every word fiom hci, аь a favour to himself. Lord B—-«-
$67 mentioned the commencement cf las acquaint¬ ance yvith me; my alarm at the sight of Lord S ...... , and all that followed afterwards. The young ladies were interested in the whole conversation, for they had not before heard any particula! s of our late and present situation; they listened attentively, and seemed pleased with the information. I had little other share in it, than to acknowledge the kmd.icss and ge¬ nerosity of ail my dear friends. Lady D——■* asked if we chose to have cards. *—My Lord said, he begged permission to un~> ftwer for us in the negative, for thai hebat* pro¬ vided a différent entertainment for us. Mi. fa¬ ville smiled, and seemed to be in the secret. Soon after a servant came in, and told my Lord the gentlemen were in the library. My Lord arose.—Now I will explain myself: the gentlemen of the law have brought home tlm bettlcments, Mr. Saville; and we wiil take this opportunity to execute them. Sir, lead your elect wife into tho room ; and I beg that as many of her friends as choose it, will follow us. niy Lord offered his hand to Mrs. Barclay, and went first; Mr. Saville and I followed them; but I took Lady Louisa's hand, and said, Will yoer Ladyship do me the honour of your com¬ pany ?-«¿>be came directly. KihoU and his H 4
Fanny; Lord В ------- followed them; the rest stayed behind. Lord В - went, back to the drawing-room, and soon returned with his brother George. LadyD------, and her daughter Amelia, thought their presence too great an honour to us. This was a new trial of my courage, and I hardly know how I went through it. 'Ihe writ¬ ings were signed by the principals and properly witnessed ¿aid executed; and I rejoiced when it was over. The lawyers withdrew ; and afterwards Lord Ю-'- — r. lid, Now, my good friends, beiore we separati, let us fix. the d«v for these two pair of lover, 1 - * omplete then happiness.—God bless your Lore, jhip.' said Elliot; I have delayed my wedding above а weeb, that I might see my fnetidb made, happy the same day I am; and now I hope theie is nothing more to wait for.—No¬ thing in the world, Laid Lord D«------; let me have the pleasure, to ..ppoint the day.—We were dl silent.—1 ¿hall ■ me a day in the next week, and I hope the kdi *s will make no ejection; Mr>. Bat clay, you must ^¡ve me your influence with them. Let it be .sxt Tuttday, Savıl 1* took my Lord'fe band, and kissed it in raptures; Lihott clapped Ins haiu'b, and bhoutcd for joy; he kii ed ¡ay Lord's hand also.—Moderate y ou: ;<*y, my «.hild rcn, i?j*.d my I.e:ü, mid I o'on iø
36*0 me. I will give orders for the wedding-day f s en» tertaiumcut; it ¿hall be at the St. Alban's tavern; I will meet you at church in the morning, and I will do the office of a father to both these young ladies; will you, madam, accept me?—My Lord, says Mi*b Freewill, it is an honour I could not expect; but I receive it with due gratitude and respect.—My Lord saluted us both, and the rest of the men present had the assurance to follow his example. We did not get away till one o'clock ; and when we got home the gentlemen were very un- gov ernable, and we had much ado to send them home. At last Fanny and I maile our escape up stairs; and Mrs. Barclay soon after followed us, after schooling the men, and turning them out of doors, as they called it. Thus, my dear friend, the most important day of my life к n.\ed—join your prayers for my happiness ? I shcdl soon have a third name to add ίο tlu. t of youi Sophia» m— iw. fca*i ii ι ii m i mi iiii i iihh* ijjhih»h m^_j; LETTER XHIL MR. SAVILLE TO THE REV. MU, Sf.LBY. So i»h í a has written a loni'. Hier to Mrs. St lb v. î asked her some questions toi'ceri.iiig tbe eon¬ ii. 5
370 ents;*" she blushedj and seemed jealous of my curiosity.—Pray, Sir, said she, do you expect to see the contents of my letters ?—By no means, madam, said I; 1 only wish to know what you have written, that 1 may not repeat the same circumstances to our friends.*—Well, Sir, lhave told them all that passed yesterday, soy ou need not repeat any part uf it.— -ï am answered, ma¬ dam. Lord D ------ makes her fortune six thousand pounds in present; and gives me leave to expect it to be mhât' ten, at his decease. Her jointure is six hundred a year; and all tiie money she brings, goes to portion the younger children of our marriage; my Lord and 1 are mutually sa¬ tisfied. Mr. Brerewood has happily fluUhed his treaty with Lady Belmour. 1 ¡bend you the kase by the coach to I- ■■....., and you will take pc «session of the hou¿e for me, and do whatever you think recessury for our reception. To any other man 1 bhould apo¬ logi/e for the trouble 1 give you; but our ac¬ knowledged and confinat d friendship warrants my call upon you, and the study of my future life shall be to enjoy and return it. Commend me to the ladies, to Mr. and Mrs. Franklin, ίο all who к now me in your circle ; tell them 1 am baj'py, You know our day; let your congratu-
37t lations add to our felicity. Your thrice happy friend, Edw.iiid Saville*
jj'jj IL·^. ÄL1V, WISS MELCOMBE TO MRS. SELBY. One more letter, my dearest Anna Maria, while I am my own mistress, and can do as I please. Men aiemcroachers, mydear: already my time is claimed by tbe ma£ter of my destiny; he grudges me tbe hours I spend m conversing with my friends, and is jealous of my ι egard to every one but himself. Miss Freewill has ι eeeived two curious letters, under cover, by Mis. Barclay's former direc* tion to a coffee-house in the city: one from hef guardian, ordeuug her on the receipt of it to re* turn home immecuitely to Mrs. Holdeiľ»; that he will pay her no money till she is under their protection; and that, if she dues not return home soon, he will advertise her m the public papers. The other trom Mis». Holden, in a vul¬ gar but canting and tawmng style, persuading her to retus n, und put herkelt undei hei motherly idug, w lit í е Фе may be safe iiom tiif, dangel \ and temptation» of this wicked woild;. proffl4* к (»
372 Ukg that she fehall have an apartment to herself, and a servant on purpose to attend upon her ;·, and her guai dian will allow her fifty pounus a year for pocket-money, and to make ducks and drakes of: she bids her consider what a disgrace- it will be, to have her name at full length in the public newspapers; and desires she may know where she is, that she may either come and fetch her, or else appoint where she may meet her on the road. We have gossiped and laughed over these leiters, and Fanny is resolved to make a spirited reply to them. She hus fulfilled her promise, as you shall judge:— " I Frances Freewill do acknowledge the re¬ ceipt of two very impertinent letters from Mr. Marsden and Mrs. Holden, to which I am de¬ termined to give full and satisfactory ansuers 'm the public papers, one day in the next week."— London, Nov. 1779' The men are uelighted with Fanny's spirit; and Mrs. Barclay says it is an excellent reference to the papers, where they will read the account of her marriage. Elliott »s in raptures with her; İte admires every word in the note, and says there never was any thing so clever, in so small a compass. Mr. Brerewood drank tea with us. The let¬ ters were shewn to him, and the answer likeww·
373 he asked Miss Freewill many particulars con¬ cerning her father's will;—she never saw it. He intends to get a sight of it in the commons; and to inquire how far her guardian's power ex¬ tends, both with regard to her person and for¬ tune,—Mr. Brerewood is a very sensible and po¬ lite man; Mr. Saville has told you of his ma¬ nagement, with regard to Lady Belmour.—I am overjoyed that the treaty for her house is con¬ cluded; I long to go thither, and to taste th« pure and tranquil pleasures of the country, and to enjoy the society of my dear friends at S------. Expect me there as soon as I can get away with the approbation of my dear and honoured fa¬ ther; I think he is the dearer to me, for having been so long unkind, and so lately restored to me. Heaven grant me a deep and grateful sense of the blessings that surround me !—My two bro¬ thers have called upon me for a morning visit of an hour; they politely said, they would not en¬ croach upon our time, which îhey supposed was employed in preparations for next Tuesday. Why is my heart huivy at times?—I wish you was with me ; i yvish my mamma was here ; or rather that I was with you, and that my brother Selby was to perform the sacred ceremony that fixes my destiny for life. The incomparable Richardson has well observed; " that in tht I
374 midbt of happinsss, the sighing heart will remind us of imperfection." Assist with your prayers and wishes, Your sister aud friend, Sofiiia. g=ig ....... " ■ .1, „l',L ..... l l .,i ι туг-рро vt tr MR. SELBY TO EBWAÄ» SAVIbLE, ESQ, Under this cover you will receive the congra¬ tulations of all and each of your avowed friends at the Parsonage; accept the united wishes, prayers, and blessings of this house, for your present and future happiness! Joy to Edward Saville and his beloved Sophia ! long and mu¬ tual may it be î My mother and wife both will write on the occasion. G. Selby* I cannot suffer this day to pass over, with¬ out adding my congratulation to those of the other friends, of my dear Sophia, and her be* loved Saville,— Joy, joy, joy, to you both! We shall celebrate the weddings here; we have a wedding cake. Mr. Franklin's family are with us, and we will have our share of tlie pleasure of this auspicious day. Mr. Collins and Miss Grove wci** marøcd laai
375 Thursday; they will be with us iu tlie evenmg» and we shall drink to your happiness.—Joy to Mr. and Mrs. Elliott; joy and our best wishes! ■—My mother leaves her house to them this day; they may take the furniture as it stands, or hire it with the house.—But what have I todo to prato of business on this day f—away with it?—Let me mention only my present joy, and my future wishes.—May your next letter fix tlie day of your return to us ! I long to embrace roy friend, to share her joy, to run over her house, and see that every thing there meets with her approba¬ tion. In impatient expectation of this happi¬ ness, I am yours most affectionately, Anna Μληιλ Selby.
LEITER XLVI. >1TI. SAVILLE TO THE EBV. MR. SELBV. May every kind wish and blessing from our dear friends at S—— be returned ьс venfold up«· on their own heads! Thus wish and thus pray, Edward Suvilk and lis beloved Sophia í With a heart ovciuowiog with happiness, I sit down to acknowledge every instance of your friend* fchip, my dear Air. Selby. I will endeavour to compose my mind, and j
Ô7Ó* give you some account of yesterday's events. í shall write at times, as leisure serves; for I ought to give you all a share in my happiness. I can¬ not pay you f> greater compliment than to deny myself the enjoyment of my Sophia's company, to converse with her friends and mine. Yesterday morning we met by appointment at St. * ■ — ■ ' Church. I carried Mr. Brerewood with our party ; Lord D— brought his two eldest sons and two daughters, a gentleman of the law, and a young gentleman and lady, the friends of his sop Lord B-~—-, and his daughters. The brides were adresse d charmingly, and looked charmingly; but Sophia's sweet coun¬ tenance wore a veil of timidity, which I strove to disperse by every tender and delicate atten¬ tion. I put her in mind of my dear Selby's happy day, and of our revered mother's lesson to her fair daughter on that occasion. She thanked me for reminding her; and said, She would keep her Anna's behaviour in her eye the whole day, and endeavour to imitate it. The other bride has more courage than Sophia; yet the behaviour of both was extremely proper, and did them credit in the eye of every beholder. The ceremony was happily performed; I leave åt to the ladies to rebite the interesting particu¬ lars. Lord D ——* claimed the right of a father to both the brides ; and mutual congratulations
37? were given and received iu the church! after which we adjourned to the St. Alban's Tavern, where a plentiful breakfast was prepared for us, which we all did honour to. After this refreshment, the compliments and congratulations yvere renewed. Lord D——· presented to Mrs, Barclay a fine diamond-ring, as a token of friendship; and an acknowledge¬ ment for her generous protection of both his daughters, he said. She received it politely, and observed, That Lady Sophia had already made her a present the most acceptable to her, in giving her her picture.—It was well judged of the dear girl, said my Lord; but Τ hope, Ma¬ dam, you yvill allow her father a place in the list cf your friends.—Lord D ------gave each ofthe brides a diamond-hoop to wear over the wed¬ ding-ring; which they received with proper ac¬ knowledgments, Elliott was half mad v ith joy and gratitude; he kneeled to Lord D ------, and thanked him a thousand times for the honour he did to his fair bride; and said, His Lordship's countenance, yvas a fresh obligation upon him, to strive to deserve his happiness. After our compliments were over, and we were seated; my friend Mr. Breievood arose, ami, bowing, siid, í will now beg leave to en¬ gage the attention of this honourable and happy company; I have brought something that l 1н*г ţ%
$78 will contribute to this day's entertainment.—We all gazed, and listened to him; and I wondered what he was going to say, when he drew a paper out of his pocket and proceeded in his oration, 41 I presume that this company are informed in general terms, that this young lady's guardian had abused the power her father's will gave him, over her person and fortune; that he placed tier in a family where she was impolitely treated, smd where her accommodations were in no re¬ spect suitable to her fortune. That in conse¬ quence she was disgusted and unhappy, and sought for acquaintance more agreeable to her; and at length was induced to put herself into the protection of another guardian* and indeed the most proper one, a worthy husband. I had a desire to inform myself of the particulars of her father's will, that I might know bow far her guardian's power extended; and also in hopes to be of some service to the young couple; who, as I supposed, might meet with some difficulties during the remainder of the young lady's mino¬ rity. Accordingly I searched the Commons; I found the will ; I took a copy of it, which I have aow brought with mc. But as reading a mil is ©ot the most agreeable amusement upon a wed¬ ding-day, I will only beg your patience while I read a clause, wbich perhaps may be the most шиалсШу one in iL '* í do order by this my
H will, that the said fortune shall be paid to my " said daughter Frances Freewill, upon the day " of her coming to the age of twenty-otm years, ** or the day of her marriage, which ever shall (t first happen/' And now I bhall claim a kiss of the bride as my reward. Here my friend concluded his speech. El¬ liott started up, ran and embraced him; called him his best friend, and swore he should have twenty kisses if he pleased. Every one of our little circle expressed our joy, and the congratulations were renewed. Lord B—— called us to order, but it was some ml» nutes before he could be heard. He thanked Mr. Brerewood for his intelligence, and desired that he would give the young people his advice how to proceed, I would advise, said Mr, Brerewood, that they should send to Mr, Marsden, a copy of Mr. FreewiU's will; and with it a demand ofthe sur¬ render of the trust, and an account of the in¬ terest of tha fortune, to be paid mto ther bands of a person whom they shall appoint for that purpose.—Very proper, said Lord D · —— » « ; whom will you choose to appoint?—'Elliott referred t<i his lady.—-She answered very properly, If you approve it, Sir, I tiiink nobody can he so proper as this gentleman, who has already approved l*im&clf our fiieud.—it ou give ше the gieatcsi
380 pleasure, Madam, answered Elliott; it was my wish, but I thought it right that the motion bhould be yours,—I am pleased with you both, said Lord D------; I am certain from this omen, that you will act properly in all other respects. — ï accept the employment, said Mr. Brere¬ wood : and I will act for your benefit to the best of my ability^»! will answer both for your abi¬ lity and integrity, said Edward Saville; and I rejoice with my friends on their falling into such hands. There is one thing more to be considered, said the Earl; I think that Air. Elliott ought to take the earliest opportunity, of settling his lad ν 's fortune, upon her, and her heirs; the generous confidence she has reposed in him, deserves that he should justify her choice of a guardian of her person and fortune, Elliott rose, and again kneeled to Lord D ------, My Lord, said he, you have been so kind to act as a father to this dear lady; will you, in that light, still act for her? Will you direct what should be done for her dvantage, and give instructions to this gentleman, Mr. Brerewood, to draw up writings for that purposer I will execute them witli all my soul; and shew you and all tbe world, that her fortune was not my principal motive, when í offered myself to her acceptance. I would only be her steward and her piotector ; but I would
381 not for the wrorld injure her, or her fortune. Ii your Lordship yvill be so good to take me under your direction, you will lay me under everlasting obligation. You are an honest, worthy, generous young man, said my Lord ; I love you as you deserve, and I yvill accept the trust.—I put myself into your Lordship's hands, answered Mrs. Elliott, and I thank God for having given me such noble and generous friends; and I will ever aekmnvledge Mr. Elliotťs generosity, and study to make him amends for it.— You have done that already, said he, and it shall be the business of my whole life, to shew my sense of the obligations you have laid upon me. Bravo í bravo ! said the Earl ; this is crue spi¬ rit, Yo must nominate your trustees, my dear Madam; and then we will leave what remains to Mr. Brereyvood.— If I durst presume, said she, I yvould name your Lordship.—You do me honour, Madam : I accept the trust ; and, if you alloyv me, I will take Mr. Saville for an¬ other ; and Mr, Brerewood shall be the acting person for your service. Mr. and Mrs. Elliott both made their acknowledgments; and Mr. Brereyvood took notes in his book, of every par¬ ticular. This event being of some con? uence, I hf.ve given you a minute account of it. But í shall
382 now take'my leave of you for th?* present. ï willi when I return, give you a brief account of the rest ofthe day ; at this time 1 shall only add, that 1 am happy past all expression, and that I am your friend and brother, Edward* Saviile.
LETTER XLVII. MR. SAVILLE TO Mil. SELBY. I vtiVL now acquit myself of my promise, and t$k% up the thread of my narration of what paseed on the happiest day of my life. Wc had a magnificent and well-ordered dinner, with the best wines that could be procured; the day was honoured as a festival, by every one present ; the ladies yvere alloyved to ι etire into anoiher room, where tea and coffee were ordet ed; we Boon followed them, by a general vote that there was uo bociety, no happiness, without them. Jjord D——· led the convocation, and wns the livehest person present: my inend Elliott w a« restrained by the persons of supenor iánk m company; or his joy would have shown ibeîf m a notous style; but he behawd extremely well, and did himself credit with e\ ery body After tea, we were summoned into u large toom well lighted, with a band of music in it. Ol oui en» 5
383 trance, tbey played one of Abeľs concertos î after which Lord D— desired Mr. Saville and his bride to open the ball ; they obeyed, but with some timidity before sueh judges ; however they came off with general applause. My Lord called upon the other bride and bridegroom, to dance a minuet; but Elliott begged to be excused, say¬ ing, he should only disgrace bis charming part¬ ner. I begged of Lord В ■ ■ ■' to supply his place, which he did with great readiness. It wa« an elegaut minuet indeed, and far exceeded the first: afterwards, Mr. George B——- and Miss Lorton, the young lady who came with her bro¬ ther at Lord B—-'s invitation; Lady Amelia and Mr. Lorton; Lady Louisa and Edward Sa* ville. We then danced a Cotillion! then Lord В ......... ■■ and his sister Louisa, danced the Minuet de la Cour. At Lord D —........' s earnest intreaty, Mrs. Bar* clay walked a minuet with him; after which we all went to country dances. At twelve we were summoned to supper; after which we thought it too late to return into the ball-room; it was agreed before we went to church, that I should resign my lodgings to Elliott and Ins bride, and that i should be allowed to take Fanny's place at Mrs. Barclay's; we returned home according to this happy allotment; but it was past two o\ lock beiore we arrived at our respective hornet.
384 Ön Wednesday we stayed at home, and en¬ joyed our greatest happiness in the society of our amiable brides. Airs. Barclay insists upon our eating at lier table all together, so long as we stay tu town. In the evenmg, I devoted a leisure hour to my dear friends at S—·; and Thursday-1 proceeded in my journal. I will now briefly recite our present engagements; and from them you will judge when you may expect to see us. On Sunday, we make our appearance at church; where we shall return thanks for our present blessings, and implore the benediction of Heaven upon our engagements; after which we are to dine at Lord D ------ 's, and probably spend the evening. On Monday I have (with Mrs. Barclay's permission), invited the worthy Mr. John Barton and his lady to spend the evening with us ; on that day, will be brought home an handsome 'piece of píate, wdiich I shall present to that friendly pair. We shall then take our leave of that worthy couple; but I shall never come to London with¬ out visiting tbem ; and I hope they will visit us in the country some time hence, when all the past is forgotten. On Tuesday Lord D—— and his family are to dine with \irs. Burclay r , and take leave of us fox this season,
335 Ön Wednefday I design to carry my рШе, my «mgel-wife, to pay compliments with me to Mr. efunden, and to take leave of him, and to call at some other "places. In the evening, Mr, Brerewood brings Mr, Elliott's writings, to be f igt ied and executed. On Thursday we shall rmish the preparatiomt for cur journey; and either that evening, or Friday morning, will see us on the road to S ------; where I already anticipate our recep¬ tion, in the arms of our dear and amiable friends. I fmd a few more particulars to add, before I close this letter. Mrs. Barclay accompanies us to our new habitation; she is our guest, and you must not be offended; the next turn is yours. Ix>rd 15 ------and Lady Louisa, are allowed to give us their company for one fortnight. I hear that Lord 8------ and Mr. Clayton are really gone over to the continent, and intend to go through the Low Countries before they return. When 1 recollect the whole of my past ad\ en¬ tures within the compass of* six months, 1 am struck with tite reflexion of what dangers I have escaped, and what happiness I have attained ; I bow my knee with awe and gt atitude to the Gra¬ cious Power who has enabled me to avoid the first, and to embrace the latter. Oh, my friend ! the pleasures of Virtue arc the only true plea- s
3S6 sures: ï put myself under her direction for the remainder of my life ; every neyv acquiicment iu her school, ehall only strengthen my resolu¬ tion to persevere in the pursuit of her rewards: and though I cannot attain to perfection, I will use my utmost endeavours to come as near it as human nature vvb\ permit me, Your friendship shall crown my felicity here, and assist me in preparing for a more periect state hereafter. Sophia salutes you all; with the happiest of men, Edwakd Saville, P. S. Mr. Brerewood informs me that Lady Belmour is in the greatest distress; she lias an¬ ticipated her income, and wants money for her < arreni expences. She has tried several of her disciples, but they turn their back upon lier. Kven Mr, Munden has refused to assist her; he praises my conduct, and condemns hers. Such aie the friendships of Vice and Profligacy! there is no ι eliancc but upon the friends of Virtue: if we were only to act with a view to our present happiness, there is no other dependence, either ш prosperity or adversity—Vntuo is> the only thing certain upon earth !
FINIS.
